READER,
THe great Work of them who are Ambassadors for Christ, to beseech men in his
stead, to be reconciled unto God, is to reveal the Will and Love of the Father,
in making him to be sin for us, who knew no sin, that we might be made the
Righteousness of God in him. The manifestation of the Excellency, Fullness,
Sufficiency, and absolute pre-eminence of that Righteousness, so wrought out,
from the Council of the Will of God, dispensed in a Covenant of Grace, is that,
which in the pursuit, and discharge of the Trust committed to them, they
chiefly, through the strength of God, do, or ought to lift up themselves unto.
In this Labor of the Gospel, has the Author of the ensuing Treatise, evinced
his Fellowship and Communion, by the travel of his mind, (accompanied with
those advantages of Abilities, and Learning, which make such undertakings
acceptable, and useful) which he has laid out therein. The persons, occasion,
and other circumstances, related unto, in this Discourse, I am utterly
unacquainted withal, but only by the light which concerning them, it self
holds out unto me; which being not a sufficient bottom for a Judgment of this
notoriety, I am not called, no more then desired to deliver my Thoughts
concerning them. Every man's work shall be made manifest, for the day shall
declare it, because it shall be revealed by fire, and the fire shall try every
man's work, of what sort it is. Of the Matter treated on herein, various are the
Thoughts of Learned Men; those doubtless seem to have the advantage, who walk
in a professed compliance with the design of God, to give the Son of his Love,
with his Love and Grace in him, the pre-eminence in all things. To deliver my
Thoughts concerning the severals, argued, and disputed in this Treatise,
neither the minute of time, whereunto for this expression of my self I am
confined, will admit me, nor does my present aim require: [Especially
considering that I have at large delivered my self to the main Head of the
whole, in my Book of the Perseverance of the Saints, and Answer to Mr. John
Goodwin on that subject, now almost cleared off the Press.] For the present, I
shall only say, That there being too great evidence of very welcome
entertainment, and acceptance, given by many to an almost pure Socinian
Justification, and Exposition of the Covenant of Grace, even amongst them, into
whose hearts God seems to have shined, in some measure, to give the light of
the knowledge of his glory, in the face of Jesus Christ, all solid, learned,
sober, endeavors, for the Vindication, of the absoluteness freedom,
independency, and pre-eminence of that Grace in Jesus Christ, whereby we are
saved, will doubtless find acceptance with the Children of Gospel-Wisdom, and
all that love the glory of him that bought us. Amongst such Labors and
Endeavors (Christ an Reader) I commend to thy consideration, the ensuing
Treatise, and commit thee to the Lord.

Westminster* Nov. 7. 1653. JOHN OWEN.

VINDICIAE Justificationis Gratuitae. Justification without Conditions; OR The
Free Justification of a Sinner, Explained, Confirmed, and Vindicated, from the
Exceptions, Objections, and seeming Absurdities, which are cast upon it, by the
Assertors of Conditional Justification: More especially from the Attempts Of
Mr. B. Woodbridge in his Sermon, Entitled [Justification by Faith] Of Mr.
Cranford in his Epistle to the Reader, and of Mr. Baxter in some Passages,
which relate to the same Matter. Wherein also, the Absoluteness of the New
Covenant is proved, and the Arguments against it, are disproved. By W. AIR,
Minister of the Gospel, and Pastor of a Church in the City of New Sarum.

Romans 3.24. Being justified freely by his Grace, through the Redemption that is
in Jesus Christ. Dei gratia non erit gratia ullo modo, nisi gratuita fuerit
omni modo, Aug. de pec. Orig. l. 2. c. 24. LONDON: Printed for R. I. and are to
be sold by Edward Forest Bookseller in Oxford. 1654.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE PARLIAMENT OF THE Commonwealth OF ENGLAND.
Most Noble Senators.
THe design of this Dedication, is not to call in your help and assistance to
the Cause here depending, it being sufficiently guarded by a higher power, to
wit, By that Living Word Heb. 4.12. 2 Cor. 10.4, 5.
, which is sharper then any two edged Sword; and which is able by it self, to
overthrow and dissipate those deep and subtle Reasonings which men oppose
against it. That Doctrine which is armed with the Authority thereof, will be
sure to stand, though men oppose it; but that which is destitute of this
support, will be as sure to fall, though men protect it: Although I think, you
to be as fit, as any company of men upon the face of the Earth, to umpire
Differences of this nature; knowing that many of you have (...) (...) Clem.
Alexand. VI. Strom.
Senses exercised to discern between Truth and Error; yet to be Judges in
matters of Faith, is an honor which I dare not give you, and which I hope you
dare not take. Indeed, as you are Christians you ought to judge for your
selves, and not (like those Horns, which gave their power to the Beast) give up
your Faith to the Votes of others; how Godly, or Learned soever they are
accounted; but to make your own Judgments in Matters of Religion, a Rule or
Standard for the Faith of others, and to compel them to believe, what you
conceive is Truth, were to assume a power more then God; who though he does
effectually move and persuade Gen 9.27.
men's hearts, yet he does not necessitate them to believe, and embrace the
Truth; whose example may instruct us, that Religion ought to be propagated by
conviction, and not by compulsion Religio est suadenda, non ^^genda.
. It is remarkable, that they who ascribed unto Magistrates a Definitive and
Coercive Power in Spirituals, have (when Magistrates would not serve their
turns) denied the power, which they have in Temporals; refusing (contrary to
the Rules of Christ 1 Timothy 2.2. Jere 29.7. Rom 13.1.
) to own them, pray for them, or to yield obedience to their lawful commands;
as if none must hold the Sword, but such as will use it, to fight their
quarrel, and to effect that by force of Arms, which they themselves cannot do
by strength of Argument. Though (blessed be God) we now have the countenance
and protection of the Magistrate; yet we seek not to engage his power to
extirpate, or to cut off them, that do differ from us. We desire no other
liberty for our selves, then what we are willing should be given unto our
Brethren, Viz. To believe and worship God according to the Light, which he has
given us, humbly to declare our Judgments in Matters of Faith, and with
meekness to Reason out the things, wherein they and we do differ, from the Word
of God.

For my own part, I look upon it as a special Mercy (for which we ow suitable
acknowledgements, both to God and you) that although we live in times, wherein
the Truth is opposed, and blasphemed more then ever before; yet the Faithful
have liberty to write and speak in defense thereof: We may remember when it was
not so. I wish that all Orthodox Christians, and especially our University
Worthies, (who have more leisure and far greater helps for such Polemical
Exercises, then their Brethren abroad) had more Zeal to improve this Liberty
for the advantage of the Truth. The Authors of most of those Errors and
Blasphemies which have been lately started, are but little more to be faulted,
then they that do profess the Truth (I mean such as are endued with Gifts and
Abilities) who suffer them to walk abroad without check and control; seeing
there is no Error whatsoever, but the Scripture affords us variety of Weapons
to wound and slay it. We cast the blame upon Magistrates, because they do
suffer them, (nor can I excuse their connivence at any of those Evils which are
contrary to the Light of Nature) yet I fear the greatest share of this guilt
will lie at our doors who are the Ministers of the Gospel, whose office
(without controversy) it is, To contend for the Faith, to convince
gainsayers; and by sound Doctrine, Jude 3. Tit. 1.9, 11.
to stop their mouths, who teach things which they ought not. It is but a
slender discharge of our Duty, to cry out against Errors and Heresies, and
never show and convince men what Truth and Error is, such loose and general
Invectives do never advantage, most times they wound the sides of Truth;
whereas, if the Trumpet gave a more certain sound, and Ministers did prove
those things to be Errors, which they brand with this name, their pains would
much more succeed to the profit of their Hearers, they would be better armed
against such dangers.

Your late Resolves to emit a Declaration, For giving fitting Liberty to all
that fear God within this Commonwealth; for the better preservation of the
mutual Peace of such as fear God among themselves, without imposing one upon
the other; and to discountenance Blasphemies, damnable Heresies, and Licentious
Practices (in Answer to the Petitions of the Congregated Churches in the
Northern Counties) I am persuaded, have exceedingly rejoiced the hearts of all
the Faithful throughout the Land. Now I humbly offer it to your considerations,
whether it be not a necessary expedient to preserve the mutual peace of
Christians; straightly to prohibit, under fitting penalties, the giving names of
obloquy, Jude 9.
or railing accusations (such as the Archangel durst not bring against the
Devil,) and the imposing of slanders, upon one another. I see not how any
manner of good can be expected from this Practice; me thinks men's Arguments
might be as keen and nervous, though their Language be sober, beseeming
Christians, and civil Men. Such names, they do not convince, most times they
harden those that are misled. But then the mischeifs that come by it, are not
a few: I know nothing that does imbitter the spirits, and alienate the hearts
of Christians from each other, so much as this; and which is worse, the Truths
and Ways of God are not seldom, nor a little clouded by this means. For usually
the names of the vilest Errors and Heresies, are made the Badge and Livery of
the choicest Truths.

The Discourse before you, does instance in one, the title of ANTINOMIAN (which
was originally the character of loose and licentious Libertines) i^ by some of
our new Doctors, appropriated to them, who have most faithfully managed the
Protestant Cause, against the Papists, and in the chief Points which are
depending between them; to wit, Our Justification by Christ alone, without
Works and Conditions, performed by our selves; and our full and perfect
Deliverance from the Curse of the Law. Though there is no true Christian, but
will rejoice to suffer shame, for the sake of Christ; yet by these arts, the
Ignorant and Simple have their ears stopped, and eyes shut against the Word of
Life; for few have so much courage, as to look into that which is generally
branded with an evil name: So that in a short time, a few nicknames shall do
us more hurt, then Fire and Faggot did heretofore.

The Lord therefore keep these purposes in your hearts, till you have fulfilled
them, and enable you to perfect the Work which you are called to; that the
Truth may spread, and Godliness flourish, that Righteousness may be equally
administered, and Wickedness (especially in High Places) severely punished; that
Learning (whereof there is so great use, both in Church and State) may be
encouraged; and Peace (if possible) be restored unto us.

For the effecting hereof, I doubt not, but you have the earnest Prayers of all
the Faithful throughout the Land, I can assure you, of him, who is

Yours Honors most humble Observer, W. Air.
The Fourth day of the Nineth Month. 1653.
TO My Dear Flock in the City of NEVV-SARUM, unto which, God, and their own
Choice, have made me an Over-seer.
Loving, and Beloved Brethren,
IT was a frequent saying in the mouth of Luther, That after his death, the
Doctrine of Justification would be corrupted. A few years last past have
contributed more to the fulfilling of his Prediction, then all the time that
went before: Can there be a greater evidence of men's Apostasy from this Article
of our Faith, then their branding of the Doctrine it self, with a mark of
Heresy? Though our Adversaries are grown more subtle to distinguish, yet they
are as wide from the true Doctrine of Justification by Christ alone, as the
perverters of the Faith in Luthers days. It is not easy to number up all the
wiles and methods wherewith Satan has assaulted this Foundation-Truth; he knew
it was too gross, to tell men, That they must be justified by Works, seeing
the Scriptures are so express against it; And therefore men's wits must be set
on work to find out some plausible distinctions and extenuations, a little to
qualify and and sweeten this Popish leaven, to take off the odium of the
phrase, and to rebate the edge of those Scriptures which usually are brought
against it. It is true (say they) we are not Justified by Works of Nature, but
we are Justified by Works of Grace; and though we are not Justified by Legal,
or old Covenant Works, yet we are Justified by Evangelical or New Covenant
Works performed by our selves; And again, works though they are not Physical
Causes (which no man ever affirmed) yet they are moral Causes, or Conditions
of our Justification; though they do not mer^ in a strict sense, by their
innate worth and dignity, yet in a large sense, and by virtue of Gods Promise
and Covenant, they may be said to merit our Justification and Salvation. Or if
these will not do it, the matter is dispatched, if Faith may be but taken in a
proper sense, the (...) credere fetches in all other works within its
circumference. But that delusion which is least apt to be suspected by
wel-meaning Christians, is the calling Works, or Inherent Holiness, by the
name of Christ, the success of this bait, we have seen of late in too many,
who have dallied so long with the notion of a Christ within them Grounded on
Col. 1.27 Christ in you the hope of glory. Whereas Christ in you is no more
then Christ preached among you. (...) is rendered among in the same verse.
, that they have quite forgotten, nay, some have utterly denied, the Christ
without them, that God-man, who is the only Propitiation for our sins.

How much cause then, my Brethren, have we, of continual thankfulness unto
our God, who in so general a defection has been pleased, to keep us that we
are not led aside with the deceivablenesse of this unrighteousness, and to
lead us to that rock which is above us? For how ever the world does account of
Pharisisme, yet they that have any acquaintance with the mind of God, know
there can be hardly named a greater sin V^x (...) est peccatum, quam
Justificationem, ex operibus quaerere. Twis. Vi^. Great. l. 1. p. 2. sect 2.
prope sinem*
, then the establishing our own^ righteousness.

It is the good pleasure of God (for which everlasting praise be given unto
him) to reveal those things unto babes, which are hiden from the wise and
prudent; The Gospel has been, and will be a mystery to the worlds end. Humane
reason cannot conceive how men should buy without money; or become rich, by
stripping and emptying of themselves; attain unto righteousness by renouncing
and abhorring their own righteousnesses. Hence it is that the Doctrine of an
unconditionate Covenant, and the Free Justification of a sinner, is looked
upon, by our learned Rabbis as such a foolish and ridiculous conceit. A great
Master Dr. Hammon^ Sermons, p. 144.
in our Israel speaks strangely of it. Unconditionate promises (says he) beget
only an irrational, fallacious, foundationless Faith, which the bigger it
swells, the more dangerous it proves. And a little after, he calls the Faith
and Hope begotten by such promises, A dependence on some fatal chain, (some
Necromantick trick of believing, thou shall be saved, and thou shall be saved)
nay, on Satan himself, some responce of his Oracle, etc. And not much before
Page 141.
, It is a miracle (says he) that they who believe this Doctrine of
unconditional Pr^mises, are yet restrained from making this so natural a use of
it, from running into all the riots in the World. I remember a good Note of
his, from John 7.48 At an Act Sermon in Ox^n.
, That the greatest Scholars, are not always the soundest Christians. We see
Christianity is not Book-Learning, nor is Faith attained to, by strength of
parts. I should (might I be so bold) humbly ask this Learned Doctor, Whether
the Faith and Hope of all the Saints, we read of in the Scripture, were an
irrational, fallacious, and foundationless Faith? Now let him show us any one
of them, that in his addresses unto God, did ever plead a Conditional Promise^
That of Hezekiah, 2 King. 20.3. is of a peculiar consideration: I remember
Luther calls it, Stulti loquium Hezekiae Enarrat. in Psalm. 45.
. Others that excuse it, say, That Hezekiah draws his Argument, not from his
own works, but from Gods; he reasons from what God had done for him, that he
would do more, and bestow the mercy which then he needed Mr. Caryl on Job.
. But besides him, from the beginning of Genesis, to the end of the Revelation,
we do not find that any of Gods people have used any other plea unto God, or
have had any other support for their Hope and Confidence; then his free
promises of Grace and Mercy; not only the woman of Canaan, the Publican, and
such as they were; Matthew 15 22. Luke 18.13. and 23.42. Genesis 18.27. and 32.9,
10. Number. 14.18, 19. 2 Samuel 23.5. 1 Cor 4 4. Phil 3.9.
but Abraham, Jacob, Moses, David, Paul, etc. have all of them, Fled for refuge
unto these promises; their Faith never knew any other bottom or foundation
besides this. Is it an irrational thing to receive life, as a gift, and not as
wages? It were very strange, if the Mercy and Faithfulness of God, should not
be as sure a Foundation to rely upon, as our own Works? I will be bold to say,
Whosoever do build upon other Foundations, besides the free Promise of Mercy,
they will have no better success, then he who built his house upon the Sand,
Matthew. 7.27. They may (perchance, when it is too late) experiment the fallacy,
they have put upon their own souls. The Doctor is as much mistaken in the use
of the point, as he is in the Doctrine; to say, That the natural use of it, is
to run into all the ri^^s in the world; he might have taken notice where the
Holy Ghost makes another use of it, Tit. 2.11. Luke 1.74. 2 Cor. 7.1. And right
reason would have suggested, that the freer the Promise is, the more is the
love and bounty of the Promiser shown: Now Love naturally begets Love*
Publicans (says our Savior) will love those that love them; Matthew 5.46. Luke
7.47.
and can a man believe so great a benefit, as the free remission of his sins,
and not love him that has remitted them? Possibly a man that has received
this Grace, but in the notion, may draw such untoward conclusions from it; but
for any true Believer to sin upon this ground, is as impossible, as that light
should become darkness, 1 John 3.3, 9.

I must confess, the loose and unev^n walking of many Professors, has given
too much occasion unto Adversaries to Blaspheme this Doctrine: And though it be
unjust in them, to charge the faults of Professors upon their Profession; yet
you cannot but see how much it concerns them, who have hope of Salvation,
through Christ alone, to vindicate the honor of this Grace, and by their
exemplariness in well-doing, to put to silence the ignorance of foolish men. The
vindication of this Doctrine lies as much upon private Christians, as it does
upon Ministers; the strongest Arguments against it, are but the Suppositions,
and Consequences of carnal Reason, which are soonest confuted, by a holy
Conversation; in which respect illiterate men may be irrefragable Disputants,
and women may nonplus the learned Doctor. And therefore whilst I am in this
Tabernacle, I shall not cease to stir you up, by putting you in remembrance of
these things, though you know them, and are established in the present truth.

Some of you know, how unwillingly I undertook this Public Employment, being
more inclined to the Truel, then the Sword; to build up my Hearers in their
most Holy Faith, then to engage in Controversies against Oppos^rs: And truly,
nothing could have induced me to it, but the tendency of the Work to your
Edification; that the simplicity of the Gospel may abide amongst you, and that
you may stand fast in the Truth which you have received, being able to answer
the cavils of them that do oppose it. It was not least in my eye, That our
honest Neighbors, who (by the evil arts of some that affect pre-eminence) have
been prejudiced and disaffected toward us, may see, and satisfy themselves,
Whether we believe and contend for any other Faith, then that which was once
delivered unto the Saints; for surely, they will have but little comfort in
separating from us, without a cause: I must needs tell them their account at
last, will not be with joy, who have rejected the counsel of God against
themselves.

Whatsoever success this Discourse may find with others, I doubt not but it
will be an acceptable service unto you. I desire, that it may provoke you, to
be more instant in Prayer for me, that ^tterance may be given me; and that my
Labors in the Wo^^ of the Gospel, may be more successful unto you, and to all
others that do partake of them: Which will be the greate^^ joy on ^arth unto
him, who is

Yours in the nearest Bonds, W. Air.
The Third day of the Ninth Month. 1653.
TO THE Christian Reader.
FRIEND,
IF thou know me, and how many Burdens do lie upon me, I dare say, thou do
not expect an Apology for the tarriance of this little piece: For though,
considering the work, thou might have had it much sooner, yet by reason of
my much sickness, daily services in the Ministry, and the cares of my Family,
(which are not ordinary) though I had finished it eight months since, it was
not likely thou should have had it now. However, If any shall upbraid me, as
Ecchius did Melancthon, when he delayed to Answer an Argument he had put unto
him Id vero non est laudi dandum, si extemp^re respondere nequeas. Cui
Melancthon, mi Doctor non quaero meam gloriam hoc in negotio sed veritatem.
Melch. Adam. in vit Melanct. ^. 339.
, It is not praiseworthy (says he) if thou do not answer it presently: I
shall say to him, as Melancthon to the Doctor, I seek not my own praise in this
matter, but the truth; and perhaps it may succeed more to the advantage of the
truth, that it was delayed.

I lately met with a passage, which fell from the Pen of a Leading Man Mr.
Baxter in his Epistle before his Directions for comfort.
in these times; whereof I held it necessary to give thee my thoughts, to
remove the prejudices (which probably it has begotten against this discourse.
There is (says the Author) a very judicious Man, Mr. B. Woodbridge of Newbe^y,
has written so excellent well against this Error, s^il. Justification before
the act of believing, or without conditions; and in so small room, being but
one Sermon, that I would advise all private Christians to get one of them; as
one of the best, easiest, cheapest preservatives against the contagion of this
part of Antinomianism. It is far from me to envy the praises of Mr. Woodbridge,
being ready to give a more ample Testimony to his personal worth: I do freely
acknowledge, that in natural and acquired parts for his time, he is like Saul
amongst the people, higher by the head and shoulders, then most of his
Brethren: However, that commends not the cause he is engaged in. It is not to
be wondered at, that Mr. B. has given this superlative encomium to Mr.
Woodbridges Sermon, he knew well enough, that it would rebound upon himself,
Mr. W. being a son of his own Faith; and this notion of his, but a spark from
out of Mr. Baxters forge. I suppose Mr. Baxters praises or dispraises, are not
greatly regarded by sober-minded Christians, who have observed how highly he
magnifies J. Goodwin, with others of his notion, and how slightingly he
mentions Dr. Twisse, and all our Protestant Divines that differ from him. How
excellently Mr. W. has written of this matter, will appear to the impartial
Examiner of this Surveigh. Learned Men have held, that the best way to demolish
Error, is to build up Truth; as to drive out Darkness, is to let in Light; Now
M. W. though he endeavors to prove no Justification before Faith, yet
throughout all his Sermon, he never so much as hinted, how or in what sense we
are justified by Faith; the Explication whereof, according to the sense of our
Protestant Writers, would have ended the matter: For the Question depending
between us, is not so much about the time, as the terms, and matter of our
Justification, to wit, How, and by what means we are made Just and Righteous in
the sight of God? Which, we affirm to be, by the perfect Righteousness of
Christ alone, which God does impute unto us freely, without Works and
Conditions performed by us; though we have not the sense and comfort of it, any
otherwise then by Faith. The Antecedency of our Justification in foro Dei,
before Faith, is but a Corrollary from this Position; and Mr. B. acknowledges
it to be a necessary consequence, from the imputation of Christ's Active
Obedience Aphor. p. 46.
, which has hitherto been the unanimous Tenent of our Protestant Divines; and
Mr. Norton Answer t^ Pinc^en.
of N. E. thinks it no less then Heresy, to deny it. His advice, unto all
private Christians to buy one of these Sermons, argues rather his conceit of
himself, then his charity to them; that he dares take upon him the office of a
Universal Dictator, to prescribe not only to his Kedermisterians, but to all
private Christians what Books they shall read. Whether Mr. Woodbridges Tract
may be called the best, amongst none good, that are written against this Truth,
I shall not dispute. But that it is such an easy piece for all private
Christians to understand, I do very much doubt, though the men of Kedermister
(who I fear are fed but with little better food) can swallow down such choakly
meat, as his Paradoxes and distinctions of Faith, evidencing Axiomatically, or
Syllogistically; Of Justification Impetrated, and Exemplified; Of our working
actively and passively; Of Promises in the Covenant, which are not parts of the
Covenant, but means to bring us into Covenant, etc. yet unto other private
Christians, I dare say they are like Herring bones in the throat, and not a
whit more intelligible then a Lecture of Arabeck. The next motive, he has his
upon, probably may take with many, the cheapnesse of the book which he does
commend; but if the price and the profit were put together, I dare say the
Buyer will confess that he has given a great too much. He buys poison too
dear who has it for nothing. As for the title of Antinomianism which he
bestows upon our Doctrine, it is no great slander out of Mr. Baxters mouth,
with whom an Antinomian, and an Anti-Papist are termini convertibles. Let him
show us any one Church or single person accounted Orthodox till this present
age, that did not hold some, yea, most of those Points which he calls
Antinomianism, and I will openly acknowledge I have done him wrong; otherwise,
let him be looked upon as a Slanderer and Revil^r of all the Protestant
Churches, who under a show of friendship has endeavored to expose them to the
scorn and obloquie of their Enemies. Mr. B. (the better to engage his Reader)
tells him his Doctrine is of a middle strain Ibid.
; as if all the Reformed Churches, had hitherto been in an extreme, in this
fundamental point of our Justification. It is like, he thinks the Papists are
much nearer to the line of truth, then any of them. But in earnest is Mr.
Baxters Doctrine of a middle strain? I am sure he gives as much unto Works and
less unto Christ then the Papists do; He makes Works, by virtue of Gods
Promise and Covenant, to be the meritorious causes of Justification and
Salvation, and in no other sense do the Papists affirm it. I must needs say, I
never yet met with that Papist, which calls Christ a sine qua non (i. e. a
cause which effects nothing) of our Justification: But I shall desire the
Reader for his better satisfaction to parallel Mr. Baxters Doctrine with these
ten Positions of Bishop Gardener See Act. and Mon. 2 vol. p. 52^. and ^. Joys
first Ans. to Winch. in prin.
, which ^e endeavored to maintain against those blessed Martyrs of Jesus
Christ, Barns, Hierome, and Garret, who sealed the contrary Doctrine with their
dearest blood.

1 The effect of Christ's passion has a Condition, the fulfilling of the
Condition diminishes nothing from the effect of Christ's passion.

2 They that will enjoy the effect of Christ's passion, must fulfill the
Condition.

3 The fulfilling of the Condition, requires, first knowledge of the
Condition, which knowledge we have by Faith.

4 Faith comes of God, and this Faith is a good gift. It is good and
profitable for me to do well, and to exercise this Faith, Ergo, By the gift of
God I may do well before I am justified.

5 By the gift of God I may do well toward the attainment of Justification.

6 There is ever as much Charity toward God, as Faith; and as Faith
increases, so does Charity increase.

7 To the attainment of Justification, is required Faith and Charity.

8 Every thing is to be called freely done, whereof the beginning is free, and
set at liberty without any cause of provocation.

9 Faith must be to me the assurance of the Promises of God made in Christ, if
I fulfill the condition* and love must accomplish the condition, whereupon
follows the attainment of the Promise according to Gods Truth.

10 A man being in deadly sin, may have Grace to do the works of Repentance,
whereby he may attain to his Justification. Never did the child (says G. Joy
G. Joy Rejoynd. fol. 1.
) so lively resemble his own Father, as these Articles do express the Bishop
of Romes Antichristian Doctrine.

And as for his choice Notion of Justification by Works, as they are our New
Covenant Righteousness; I find it was a shift of the Papists long ago. The
said Doctor Barnes Tr. of Justif. by Faith alone
having cited this passage out of Bernard Sup. Cant. Sermon. 67.
[I do abhor whatsoever thing is of me, etc.] See (says he) Bernard does
despise all his good works, and takes him only to Grace. Now had he no works
of the New Law, as you call them? I shall not trace Mr. B. any farther, there
being now in the Press (as I am informed) a large and full answer to his
Paradoxicall Aphorisms, by a faithful Servant Mr. Crandon of Fawley in
Hampshire.
of the Lord Jesus, a workman that needs not to be ashamed; though I heartily
wish that the work may provoke others unto shame, who have more strength,
leisure, and far greater helps for such undertakings then Country Ministers. I
dare say, that they who sat at the stern in our Universities heretofore such
as Reynolds, Whittaker, Davenant, Prideaux, etc. would never have endured to
see so many Popish and Arminian books (far more dangerous then the Ranters
blasphemous Pamphlets) show their heads but would have sent forth their
Antidotes to correct their poison. I do speak the more freely to stir up
others of greater abilities then my self, to undertake this cause, least it
should suffer overmuch, through my weakness in managing it. We were wont to
say that if a man does plead for the King, all is to be taken in good part; the
design of this Discourse, was to plead the cause of the greatest King, that no
flesh might glory in his presence, who of God is made unto us Wisdom,
Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption; though the Advocate has not
helped the Cause, yet the goodness of the Cause may excuse the Advocate. I
shall desire thee to read without prejudice, and either to read all, or none,
for that which is curtaild in one place, is more explained in another. If thou
reapest any good from what I have written, I know thy returns will be according
to my hearts desire, Praises unto God, and more fervent prayers for

Thy Servant in the Work of the Gospel. W. AIR.
The Third day of the Ninth Month. 1653.
Justification without conditions; OR, The Free Justification of a Sinner
justified.
CHAP. I. Showing the occasion of this Discourse, and the rise of the
Controversy which is here debated.
SInce it has pleased the Lord to reveal the riches of his Son unto me, and to
make me a Steward and Dispenser of this Grace unto his People; the chief design
of my Ministry has been to bottom my hearers upon Christ alone 1 Cor. ^.11.
Matthew. 16.18. Ephesians. 1.20, 21: Isa. 28.16.
, that they might have no confidence in the flesh Phil. 3.3, 9.
, but in that perfect and everlasting Righteousness which he has wrought: For
which end it has been my care frequently and clearly to demonstrate to them,
both the sole-sufficiency, and efficiency of Christ in the work of Man's
Redemption; that he is able to save unto the utmost Heb. 7.25.
, and that no work of ours, either before or after our Conversion, does share
with him in the glory of this achievement. In a word, That there is no cause
(...). Heb. 5.^. Causa nostr^ cum Deo reconciliationis, nisi unica statuitur,
nulla est. Calv. Opusc. p. 317. If you give not all, and fully, and alonely to
Christ, you deny Christ, and the Holy Ghost. Doctor Bar^^ Martyr, Tr. of Justif.
without God concurring with the precious and invaluable merit of his Blood, to
present us holy, unblameable, and unreprovable in the sight of God. Which
truth, as it shines clearer then the Sun, throughout the Scripture, so it
appears unto me to be of greatest moment, when I consider the concernment
thereof, both to God, and Christ, and to the precious souls of Gods Elect: I
know nothing that gives so much glory unto God and Christ, as to proclaim him
the only Savior Hos. 13.4. Isai 43.11. and 49.26. and 60.16. John 5.23. Acts
4.12.
; and that besides him there is none other, that we ow the whole work of our
Salvation from the beginning to the end unto Christ alone; and surely, there is
no point in the whole Doctrine of Godliness, which contributes so much to the
Peace, Security Tutius vivimus quando totum Deo damus.
, and Fruitfulness of the Saints, as this does: It affords the greatest
encouragement to sinners to believe, to believers to hold fast their confidence
firm unto the end, and to serve God with a willing mind, in Righteousness and
true Holiness all the days of their life.

. 2, Now though this truth be so evident, and my intentions in pressing it,
such as have been mentioned, yet it has happened unto me (as unto many of my
betters) to be mistaken, and by some of my own Profession, who insinuated into
the people, That I taught a new Gospel, made Faith and Repentance to be
needless things; for no other reason, that I know of, but because I dare not
give them that honor which is due to Christ, in making them concauses with him
in procuring our Peace with God, and in obtaining our Right and Interest in all
the Benefits which he has purchased; for they themselves are my witnesses
(would they speak their knowledge, as to matter of Fact) that in all my
Exercises, though usually something of Christ be the Doctrine which I handle,
yet the use that I make of it, is to press men unto Faith and Holiness: Nay, I
challenge all my Adversaries to say, that ever I positively spoke so much as
one syllable to lessen the esteem of Inherent Holiness, though I am not ashamed
comparatively to say as the Apostle does, That I count all things Omnia quae*
nunc Christianus and Apostolus ago and habeo -- Non solum opera ante
justificationem facta, verum etiam quae post justificationem fiunt. Zan. in
Phil 3.8. Acts 24.16.
but loss and dung, that I may win Christ Jesus, Phil. 3.8. But otherwise, I
thank the Lord, if I should speak slightingly of Holiness, my own practice
would condemn my Doctrine; For herein I exercise my self, to have always a
conscience void of offense toward God, and toward men.

. 3. It is needless to give the Reader an account of all the Oppositions which
I have met with, in the course of my Ministry; nor are they worth the
mentioning, seeing (as the Apostle Heb. 12.4.
speaks) I have not yet resisted unto blood, I shall only acquaint him with
the rise of this present Difference, which happened about three or four years
since upon this occasion, handling those words, How shall we escape, if we
neglect so great salvation? Heb. 2.3. in the weekly Lecture, which I Preach in
this City, I proposed this Question, Why the Gospel, and not the Law, is called
Salvation, seeing Life and Salvation is the end of both? One Reason which I
gave in Answer thereunto, was, Because the Law promises men life but
conditionally, upon condition of their Perfect Obedience; which condition no
man is able to perform, and consequently no man can attain unto Life and
Happiness by means thereof; but the Gospel reveals a Salvation which is freely
given unto Sinners, which God bestows upon such as have neither money to buy,
nor worth to deserve it. This led me to speak more largely of the Difference
between the Law and the Gospel, the First Covenant, which is a Covenant of
Works, and the Second, which is a Covenant of Free Grace. Concerning the
latter, I laid down this Thesis, That in the New Covenant there is no condition
required on our parts to entitle us to the blessings of it. One Corollary which
I drew from hence, was, That Faith is not the condition of the New Covenant. I
cannot without too much tediousness rehearse my Explications of this
Proposition, and I do the rather forbear it now, because in the process of this
Discouse I shall have more opportunity to rescue my sense of them, from some
common mistakes. I shall only inform the Reader of one Reason which I then
gave for proof of the last Position, to wit, That Faith is not the condition of
the New Covenant, and particularly of our Justification (which as Mr. W. calls
it, is the Special and Noble-blessing of the New Covenant) in regard that our
Controversy concerning Justification before Faith, grew first from thence. The
Argument was to this effect. If Faith be the condition of our Justification, it
must follow, That men are Believers before they are justified, (for the
condition must be performed, before the benefit which is promised thereupon,
can be received.) But men are not Believers before they are justified; the
Scripture witnesses, that the Subject of Justification is a sinner, or ungodly
person, Romans 4.5. and 5.8, 10. Now the Holy Ghost never calls Believers ungodly
or wicked, but Saints, Faithful, Holy Brethren, Children of God, Members of
Christ, etc.

. 4. The next news that I heard, was, That all the Pulpits in the Town were
filled with invectives against my Sermon. I must confess it surprised me with
no little wonder, knowing that I had delivered nothing but what was consonant
to the Scriptures, and wherein I was sure I had the suffrages of many godly and
learned men, and those too, that are reputed amongst the more manly sort of our
Protestant Divines. But that which I mused at most, was the usage of a Neighbor
Minister, who though he heard not my Sermon; and although by reason of a like
mistake, he had solemnly promised me not to clash against my Doctrine, until he
had first conferred with me about it; yet shortly after, without giving me the
least hint of his dis-satsfaction, he publicly complained to the people, what
dangerouis Errors had been lately vented amongst them, suborned the words of
the Apostle, Gal. 1.8. to pronounce me cursed, and charged the people not to
hear them that do teach: (1) That the New Covenant is not conditional; (2) That
Faith is not the condition of the New Covenant; or (3) That Justification goes
before Faith. To let pass those odious Nicknames which my Neighbors, and
others (who have been invited hither to disaffect the people toward my
Doctrine) have frequently bestowed upon me (as Antinomian, New-Declarative,
Troubler of Israel, etc.) which troubled me the less, when I remembered what
Luther says, Luther on Gal. ^, 29.
He that will Preach Christ truly, and confess him to be our Righteousness,
must be content to hear, that he is a pernicious fellow, and that he troubl^th
all things, etc. And a little before, The faithful must bear this name and
title in the World, that they are Seditious and Schismatics, and the Authors
of innumerable Evils, etc. And in another place, viz. on Gal. 5.11 Paul (says
he) takes it for a most certain sign, that it is not the Gospel* if it be
preached in peace. But that which grieved me most, was, That Satan had gotten
such an advantage against my Ministry; for those insinuations prevailed so far
upon the people, that many of my wonted hearers fell off, and re^^ained from
coming to my Lecture, for fear least I should persuade them to believe some
other Gospel* then that which is revealed in the Scriptures: And how to remove
this offense, so unjustly taken, I could not devise; for though I made things
never so plain in Public, thither they would not come; or if I had gone to
them in Private, it had been but to little purpose, they being possessed (as
one of them most uncharitably told me) that I had a design to vent new Doctrine
in Public, and to blanch it over with a fair construction in private. It came
into my mind (as the most likely expedient to vindicate both the truth and my
self) to desire those Reverend Ministers, who sometimes came unto my Lecture,
That if they were dis-satisfied with what I had delivered, they would be
pleased publicly to declare it, as soon as Sermon was ended, and show me
wherein I had swerved from the truth. I hoped that by this means, we should
have a clearer understanding of one another, and the people would be the better
satisfied, when they had compared their Exceptions, and my Answers together.
But hitherto I could never obtain this favor from them, though some of them
have taken the Liberty to clamor lustily against me, behind my back, and when
I was safe enough from giving them an Answer.

. 5. About April last (which was Anno 1652.) I came unto the Wednesdays Lecture
in this City, where I heard a stranger Mr. Warren of Hough^on in Hampshire.
(whom I knew not) let fall sundry Passages, which I conceived to be very wide
from the Orthodox Faith, as well as contrary to the Doctrine which I had lately
delivered in the same place. It sounded harshly in mine ears, That the Elect
themselves (to whom Christ was peculiarly given by the Father before the
foundations of the world; for whom Christ gave himself a Sacrifice of a sweet
smelling savor, whose sins he bare in his Body on the Tree, even to a full
propitiation) had no right or interest in Christ, nor any more benefit by his
death, then reprobates, till they did believe; and that they are but dreamers
who do conceit the contrary. I know not what could be spoken more contradictory
to many plain Scriptures, which shall be mentioned anon, more derogatory to
the full atonement which Christ has made by his Death, and more disconsolatory
to the souls of men, in laying the whole weight of their Salvation upon an
uncertain condition of their own performing: And therefore after the Exercise
was fully ended, I desired the Minister that Preached, that with his leave, and
the patience of the Congregation, I might remonstrate the insufficiency of his
Grounds or Reasons, to uphold the Doctrine he had delivered; three of which I
took more especial notice of. One was drawn from the parallel between the first
and the second Adam, As men (said he) are not guilty of Adams sin, till they
have a Being; so the Elect have no benefit by Christ, till they have a Being;
whereunto he added those old Philosophical Maxims, Non entis non sunt
accidentia, and, Accidentis esse, est inesse. Another was, That where there is
no union, there can be no communion; but there is no union between Christ and
the Elect, before they believe: Therefore the Elect have no communion and
participation in the benefits of Christ's death, before they have a Being, and
do believe in him. The proof of the Assumption was managed thus. The union
between Christ and the Saints is a personal union, which cannot be supposed
till their persons have a Being. A third ground (upon which he laid the
greatest stress) was to this purpose, The Elect have no benefit by Christ
before they do believe, because God has made a Covenant with his Son, That
they for whom he died, should be admitted to partake of the Benefits of his
death, by Faith.

. 6. Whereunto my Replies were to this effect. I told him that I conceived his
first Allegation made very much against him; For if the Righteousness of Christ
does come upon all the Elect unto Justification, in the same manner as Adams
sin came upon all men to condemnation, as the Apostle shows it does, Romans 5.
Then it must follow, That the Righteousness of Christ was reckoned or imputed
to the Elect, before they had a Being, and then much more before they do
believe in him; for it is evident that Adams sin came upon all men to
condemnation, before they had a Being; for by that first transgression (says
the Apostle, verse. 12.) Sin entered into the world. And more plainly, Death
passed upon all men: The Reason follows, because in him, or in his loins, all
have sinned. Now as in Adam the (...), that is, All that shall perish, were
constituted sinners, before they had a Being, by reason of the imputation of
his disobedience to them; so in Christ the (...), All that shall be saved, were
constituted righteous, his obedience being imputed unto them by God, before
they had any Being, otherwise then in him as their Head and common Person. Mr.
Burges of Justif. p. ^80, ^86.
There is a late Writer who tells us, that there is not the same Reason for the
imputation of Christ's Righteousness to all the Elect before they believe; as
there is for the imputation of Adams sin unto his posterity before they have a
Being; Because (says he) the issues of the first Covenant fell upon Adams
posterity in a natural and necessary way, but the issues of Christ's death do
come to us in a supernatural way. But this Reason seems to me to be of small
validity; for the issues of Adams disobedience came not upon his posterity by
virtue of their natural propagation; for then his sin should be imputed unto
none, until they are actually propagated; and the sins of other parents should
be imputed to their posterity as much as Adams, because they descend as
naturally from their immediate Parents, as they do from Adam; so that the
issues of Adams sin may be said to descend to his posterity in a supernatural
way, i. e. By virtue of Gods Covenant which was made with him as a common
person, in behalf of all his posterity; and in the same manner do the issues of
Christ's obedience descend unto Gods Elect, by virtue of that Covenant which was
made with Christ, as a common person, in their behalf; and therefore unless
they can show any Proviso, or restriction in the second Covenant more then in
the first, why life should not flow as immediately to the Elect from Christ's
obedience, as death did from Adams disobedience, the Argument will stand in
force. But to return to my discourse with Mr. Warren: I added, That those
Logical axioms, non entis, etc. have no force at all in the present
Controversy: It does not follow that Christ's Righteousness cannot be imputed
to us, before we have an actual created Being, because accidents cannot subsist
without their Subjects; for as much as imputed Righteousness is not an accident
inherent in us, and consequently does not necessarily require our existence.
Christ is the Subject of this Righteousness, and the imputation of it is an act
of God. Now the Apostle has observed, That God in justifying, and imputing
Righteousness, calls things that are not, as if they were, Romans 4.17. As the
Righteousness of Christ was actually imputed to the Patriarks before it was
wrought; and our sins were actually imputed to Christ before they were
committed; so I see no inconvenience to say, That Christ's Righteousness is by
God imputed to the Elect, before they have a Being.

. 7. As to his second Reason before mentioned, I excepted (as I conceive but
justly)

1. Against his calling our union with Christ a personal union, which seems to
favor that absurd notion See D^. Chambers Animadvers. Sect. 11.^.
, That a believer loses not only his own proper life, but his personality
also, and is taken up into the Nature and Person of the Son of God. Divines do
call our union with Christ, a Mystical and Spiritual union, because it is
secret and invisible, to be apprehended by Faith, and not by Sense or Reason;
but the Hypostatical or Personal union is proper unto Christ, in whom the
Divine and Humane Nature do constitute but one Person.

2. Against his Assertion (proposed Universally,) That there is no manner of
union between Christ and the Elect, before they do believe; for though there be
not that conjugal union between them which consists in the mutual consent
Consensus facit matrimonium.
of parties, yet is there such a true and real union, that by means thereof,
their sins do become Christ's, and Christ's Righteousness is made theirs. God
from everlasting constituted and ordained Christ, and all the Elect to be (as
it were) one Heap or Lump, one Vine, one Body or Spiritual Corporation, wherein
Christ is the Head, and they the Members; Christ the Root, and they the
Branches; Christ the First Fruits, and they the residue of the Heap Heb. 2.11.
He that sanctifies, and they that are sanctified ( i. e. they whose sins were
purged by his blood) are (...), whereunto some do make (...), others (...), to
be the Substantive. Vid. Jun. Paral. l. 3.

God by his Election from Everlasting ^^amed a new body of Humane race (opposite
to the first, whereof Adam was the Head) and appointed Christ to be its Head,
Diodat. on Ephesians. 1.4. All our Divines do define the Catholic Church to be
Ca^^s Praedestinatorum, The whole company of Gods Elect.


. In respect of this union it is, That they are said to be given unto Christ,
and Christ to them; to be in Christ, Ephesians. 1. That they are called his Sheep,
his Seed, his Children, his Brethren, before they are Believers: And by virtue
of this union it is, That the obedience and satisfaction of Christ, descends
peculiarly to them, and not unto the rest of mankind. But here I was assaulted
with an Objection, which the Reverend Minister of the Parish was pleased to
move from Romans 16.7. Where Paul speaking of Andronicus and Junia, says, They
were in Christ before me: From whence he would infer, That none are in Christ,
or united unto Christ before they do believe. Whereunto I returned no Answer,
but humbly desired him to leave the manage of the Conference unto him that had
Preached: I did the rather pass it over, in regard there is so little
difficulty therein; for it is evident, the Apostle speaks there, not of their
Spiritual union with Christ, which is invisible to man, for God only knows who
are his, but of such a a Being in Christ, as is by External Profession and
Church Communion See Diodate on Romans 16.^
; in which respect the whole visible Church is called CHRIST, 1 Cor. 12.12. And
Hypocrites, as well as the Elect, are said to be in Christ, and to be Branches
in him, John 15.2, 3. And thus it is acknowledged, that one is in Christ before
another, according as they are called, and converted, whether really or in
appearance: It does not follow that the union of the Elect to Christ is
successive, or that it is an act done in time, depending upon conditions
performed by them.

. 8. To prevent the like interruptions, I desired the Preacher to vouchsafe us
the proofs of his third Ground (which in his Sermon he had but barely asserted)
scil. That God has made a Covenant with Christ, that the Elect should have no
benefit by his death, until they do believe; which I have often heard affirmed,
but never proved. Whereunto he replied, That I should produce some Scripture
which says, That the Elect have actual benefit by Christ, before believing;
wherein, if I had failed, it had been but a weak proof of his Assertion, for he
having the Affirmative, the Confirmation of it lay on him. However I readily
condescended to his demands, and proposed an Argument to this effect. They with
whom God has declared himself to be wel-pleased and reconciled, have actual
benefit by the death of Christ: But God has declared that he is reconciled
unto, and wel-pleased with all those for whom Christ has died, Ergo. To
confirm the Assumption which was then denied, I alleged Matthew. 3.17.
(intending to have added diverse other Scriptures, as 2 Cor. 5.19. Romans 5.10,
etc. when I had made out the force of the former place,) This is my beloved
Son, in whom I am well pleased. From whence I reasoned after this manner; If the
wel-pleasedness of God, which is here declared, were not terminated to Christ
personal, but to Christ mystical, then God was wel-pleased with all his Elect,
(who are Christ mystical) when this voice came from Heaven, and consequently
before many of them do believe: But the wel-pleasedness of God here declared,
was not to Christ personal, Ergo. Here Mr. Good an Innkeeper of this City put
me that Question, which Mr. Woodbridge has mentioned, Page 21. Whether God
were wel-pleased with unregenerate men? To whom I did not Reply, as Basil did
unto Demosthenes, the Clerk of the Emperors Kitchen, when he affronted him for
opposing the Arrian Faction, (...). Wishing from my heart, That all the Lords
people were Prophets; that private Christians would labor for a more explicit
Faith in the Grounds of Religion: And therefore I answered, That this and other
Scriptures do plainly declare, That he is wel-pleased with his Elect in Christ,
whilst they are unregenerate; though he be not pleased with their
unregeneracy, or any of their actions in their unregenerate estate. Then Mr.
Woodbridge interposed, That the place aforecited did not prove the actual
reconciliation or wel-pleasedness of God toward his Elect, but only that he
was wel-pleased with the person of Christ; or if we will extend it unto men,
that then the meaning was, I will be wel-pleased, or I am wel-pleased, when I
am wel-pleased, whenever it is: Whereunto I returned no Answer, but desired
the Congregation to judge how well this gloss did agree unto the Text. I am
wel-pleased, i. e. I will be wel-pleased. To say God is not wel-pleased, when
he himself says expressly, That he is, is not to interpret Scripture, but to
deny it; such a liberty to alter Tenses and Forms of Speech at our pleasure,
will but justify the Jesuits Hosius, l. 3. de Auth. Scrip. Pighius, l. 1. de
Hier. Eccles. C^san. in Epist. ad Bohen. 2 and 7.
blasphemy, That the Scriptures are but a Leaden Rule, and a Nose of Wax, which
may be turned into any Form. In regard there were so many Speakers at once, to
avoid confusion, I proceeded no farther in that Conference.

. 9. The next day Mr. Warren came unto my Lecture; and after Sermon was ended,
though he had nothing to except against my Doctrine, yet he offered me some
other Arguments to confirm his own, scil. That the Elect have no benefit by
Christ, till they do believe: To which I returned such Answers, as I conceived
expedient, to clear the truth; without giving him the least offense in word, or
gesture, that I was aware of, notwithstanding the provocations I received from
him, both in the Language he gave me, abusing those words of our Savior,
Matthew. 26.54. To compare himself unto Christ, and me unto Judas, etc. And in
the challenges he made, to Dispute, Write, etc. whereunto I was willingly deaf,
least our Doctrinal Differennce might prove a Personal Quarrel. His Arguments
and my Answers I shall here omit, in regard the same were urged by Mr.
Woodbridge with much more strength. The scanning of whose Book is my present
intendment.

. 10. On the Wednesday after (about half an hour before Sermon began) I was
informed that Mr. Woodbridge was to Preach. In regard he was none of the
Lecturers, I concluded he had abode in Town, and procured a turn purposely to
blow the Coals, which Mr. Warren had kindled, and to foment the prejudices of
the people, both against the truth, and my self. And therefore having begged
direction of God, I was pressed in my spirit to go and hear him, and to bear
witness to the truth, if it were opposed; and I bless the Lord his strength and
assistance was not wanting to me. Had Mr. Woodbridge faithfully related the
procedure of our Conference, I had not put my self to the trouble of this
Reply. But seeing he has represented my Judgment in this point, with the
Grounds thereof, in so ill a dress, I shall endeavor to set those things
strait, which are cast by him into such a crooked frame: And that I may omit
nothing which makes for him, and against my self, I shall give the Reader my
sense of his whole Book. But before I proceed to the examen of his Sermon, I
must crave leave to premonstrate the Reasons of my Practice in this Public
Conference.

CHAP. II. A Digression, concerning the proposing of Questions, and reasoning
with Ministers publicly about the Matter of their Sermons.
IT may seem strange to some, that I should so publicly except against my
Brethrens Doctrine, seeing it has been so seldom practiced in our
Congregations; and therefore I shall by way of Apology offer them the Reasons
that moved me to it.

1. I did no more then what I have often desired should be done to me, if any
were dis-satisfied in the Doctrine which I had taught. Hanc veniam damus,
petimusque vicissim. And of all men, Mr. Warren had least reason to be offended
with it, who had practiced the very same thing in another place At Rums^y
Toward one Mr. Symonds whom he charged with sundry Errors, a^ soon as he had
ended his Sermon, and desired the people not to believe a word which Mr.
Symonds had taught, how justly I cannot tell.
; unless he be resolved to take that liberty, which he will not give.

2. Having a Ministry committed to me in this place, by the appointment both of
God and Man, I looked upon it as my duty, to witness against those Errors that
entrench so nearly upon the Foundation, as I conceive this does, which I have
engaged against. But some will say, I might have discharged my Conscience at
another time, and with more deliberation. I must confess, I have always highly
esteemed that saying of Aristides, who being demanded by the Emperor to give a
sudden answer, unto something propounded, Replied, Do you ask to day, and I
will answer to morrow: And the like of Melancthon Melch. Adam. in vit. Melanct.
p. 339.
to Ecchius, who had put him a knotty Argument, Cras tibi respondebo. Indeed
sudden Answers are seldom sol^d, especially in weighty matters. But the case
here was such as would not admit delay; for I knew the greatest part of the
Hearers (whose prejudices by this means were strengthened against me) would not
vouchsafe to come at another time* when I had more opportunity to speak unto
them. I dare say, that all that were present at Mr. Woodbridges Sermon, knew
that he had levelled his Discourse against my se^f; now if I had kept silence
then, and shown my dislike of his Doctrine at another time, what ever I had
said, would have been but little regarded; my Adversaries would have given
forth, that I had spoken that behind his back, which I was not able to
maintain unto his face.

3. The Points which these Ministers hand^ed, were Controver^al; and surely
Controversies are much better managed in a Conference between the Parties
dissenting then in a continued Discourse, when the same man shall frame both
Arguments and Answers to his own advantage.

4. I see no inconvenience at all, that can come of this practice, but rather
very much good, were it more generally received in our Congregations; That if a
Minister do deliver any thing that is dubious, he should be desired after his
Exercise is ended, to clear and explain it; or if any thing contrary to truth,
he should by sound Doctrine be convinced thereof; which if it were done with
that meekness and gravity as becomes Christians, without ^eering, railing, and
such like personal provocations, it would very much tend unto godly edifying.

. 2. And (first) on the Ministers part, it would make them more studious, and
careful to weigh and ponder what they do deliver in Public; were this course
more frequently used, many would not do the work of the Lord so negligently as
they are wont to do it, and especially when they think there is none that heeds
them, or that durst to gainsay their crudest notions. Then (secondly) on the
peoples part, it is a singular means (1) to increase their knowledge, and to
maturate their judgments in the Articles of our Faith; for it is far easier to
judge and discern of controverted Points, when they are debated in way of
Conference, then when they are delivered in a continued Discourse; especially
seeing the Speaker is seldom so ingenuous, as either rightly to search, or to
urge the strength of his Adversaries Tenants. (2) To confirm and establish them
in the truth, which they have already received, for Nihil tam certum, quam quod
ex dubio certum. Men abide by those truths which they have thoroughly tried. (3)
To hinder the spreading of many dangerous Errors which are sometimes vented in
our Public Auditories, and which the common people are ready to swallow
without chewing. (4) To prevent sundry mistakes which are occasioned through
the obscurity, ambiguity, or narrowness of men's expressions.

3. Though custom has not brought it in credit amongst our selves, yet is it
not any novel practice.

1. We find that the Jewish Doctors (as bad as they were) gave liberty to the
people, publicly to ask them Questions for the better understanding of the
Doctrine which they taught; they would never else have allowed our Savior,
Mal. 2.7.
being but a Child of twelve years old, to have asked them Questions, and to
make Answers and Replies to what they spoke, as they did Luke 2.46, 47. For at
another time when he did something which was unusual, they took him up with a
quo jure, By what authority, etc. Matthew. 21.23. It is observable, that this was
done in the Temple, and not in a private House, and when a great Congregation
was present; For (says the Text) all that heard him, marvelled, etc.

2. We have the example of the Apostles to justify us herein, whom we find as
frequent in Disputing, Arguing, and Reasoning with them that opposed the truth,
as in their continued Discourses amongst the people, Acts 6.9. and 9.29. and
17.2, 17. and 18.4, 19. and 19.8, 9. and 15.7. amongst themselves.

3. We have also the practice of the Primitive Churches, going before us in
this particular. In the Church of Corinth, not only one, but any one (except
women) was allowed to speak in the Public Assemblies, for the edifying of
himself, and others, 1 Cor. 14.29, 31. See Verse. 26. Upon which Text
(especially) it was, that Archbishop Grindal grounded the Exercise of
Prophesying, which he, with the consent of the other Bishops, set on foot in
the Province of Canterbury, as appears by his Letter concerning that Matter
unto Queen Elizabeth; the reviving of which, would not be the meanest piece of
that Reformation which has been attempted.

4. Paul's dealing with Peter is very considerable, Gal. 2. the Text says, ver.
11 See Luther on Gal. 2.11.
. That he withstood him to the face, and verse. 14. that he reproved him before
them all, i. e. before the whole Congregation, though it were for a matter of
fact, yet will it not follow, that we should be more indulgent unto Errors in
Doctrine; no doubt, but Paul would have dealt as roundly with Peter, or any
other, if he had taught any thing contrary to truth, we see his zeal for the
simplicity of the Gospel. Verse. 5. To whom (scil. the false Apostles) we gave
no place, no not for an hour, that the truth of the Gospel might continue with
you.

5. It is more then once charged upon us Ministers, that we should convince
gainsayers, and stop their mouths, who teach things which they ought not (not
by procuring the Magistrate to put them to silence, but) by sound doctrine, i.
e. by clear and demonstrative Proofs from the Holy Scripture, Titus 1.9, 11.

6. And lastly, If every Christian ought to give a Reason of the hope that is
in him, as it is enjoined, 1 Pet. 3.15. and as it was wont to be publicly
practiced in the Primitive Churches Vid. Beza in Matthew. 3.6.
; much more ought a Minister of Christ (who should be apt to teach, 1 Timothy
3.2.) to be willing to satisfy his hearers concerning the Doctrine which he
has delivered.

All that I have heard objected against this practice is of little moment. As
first, some have alleged, That the Disciples came privately to our Savior to
ask him Questions, Mark 10.10. Mark 9.28. To which I Answer.

Answ. 1. Though it were in a house, Answ.
yet it was before all his Disciples, some did put to him these Questions
before the rest; and I suppose, That they who dissent from us in this matter,
do look upon all that come unto our Churches to be Disciples. 2. The Negative
is weakly concluded from the Affirmative: It does not follow, That because they
came unto him privately, therefore they might have asked him these Questions in
a Public place; seeing our Savior never forbad them to do this thing, before
the people: Surely, he that so readily made answer to all the Cavils of his
enemies, would not have refused to satisfy the Doubts, Cases, or Questions of
his own Disciples, wheresoever they had put them to him. 3. Though Questions
which are merely for private satisfaction, should be privately proposed, yet
such as tend to the edifying of others, and to the clearing of such things as
are openly delivered, are most conveniently moved in the Public Assemblies.
But 4. what is this instance to a Ministers witnessing against false and
Erroneous Doctrines which are vented amongst the people committed to his charge?

Object. 2. Others have alleged, That the Apostle reprehends 1 Timothy 6.5.

Answ. True, and justly too! But will it follow from hence, Answ.
That all Public Disputations, and Reasonings about matters of Faith, are
perverse Disputings? Was the Apostle to be charged with perverseness when he
reasoned both with Jews and Gentiles, as his manner was? Those perverse
Disputings, verse. 4. are called strifes of words; but such is not the matter
which we do differ about, which on all hands is confessed to be of very great
moment.

Object. 3. Some have objected that prohibition of the Apostle, Receive him
that is weak in the faith, but not to doubtful Disputations.

Answ. 1. The scope of the Apostle, Answ.
was not to prohibit Disputations concerning matters of Faith, before such as
are weak, but to exhort stronger Christians to be tender and charitable to
their weaker Brethren, whom he would have them to receive, scil. Into Church
Communion, and to own in the Fellowship of the Gospel, although they were not
so fully informed as themselves in the Doctrine of Christian Liberty,
concerning the distinction of Meats, days, and other Mosaical Observations: Our
Translators in the Margent render the last Clause, Receive him -- not to judge
his doubtful thoughts, q. d. Do not judge him an unbeliever, because of his
Doubts and Scruples about these indifferent matters; or do not perplex and
entangle him with Niceties, least his Faith in the main be utterly subverted:
There is a vast difference between those adiaphora, which the Apostle speaks
of, and the points which are in difference between us* Epistle to the Reader.
(Mr. Cranford says well) That these Controversies concerning our
Justification, are no strife about Goats Wool. 2. This prohibition makes as
much against Preaching of those points which do stumble the weak, as against
the discussing of them by way of a Conference whatsoever is necessary to be
taught the people, is as necessary to be tried and examined by them.

It has been also alleged (which does cast the greatest odium upon this
practice) That these Public Disputations do thwart with those Precepts which
require us to seek and follow after Peace, as Romans 12.18. and 14.19. and 15. 2.
Ephesians. 4.3.

Answ.
Ans. For my own part, I see not the least contrariety between andthem. Zuingl.
Tom. 2. fol. 302.
It was the Judgment of a great Divine, Haec unica eaque sola via est, qua ad
concordiam proxime perveniri potest, etc. This is the one, and only way,
whereby we may most suddenly attain to concord; if whatsoever things may be, or
are commonly said for any Opinion, or against it, be truly propounded in the
Churches; so that the people be allowed free judgment in all things, etc. In
my Opinion they take a wrong course to make Peace, that go about to stop men's
mouths, and never satisfy their Judgments; for from hence innumerable
Discords must needs arise. Me thinks Christians (who are sensible of their many
mistakes) should not be so strait laced, as to resolve to be at Peace with
none, but such as will jurare in verba, Say as we do. A late Writer says well,
Mr. Baxter.
Why may not Christians and Scholars write plainly against one another
Judgment, with a loving consent? So say I, Why may we not Reason against each
others Opinions in a friendly manner? Malum per accidens non destruit bonum per
se.
But (2) if Discord and Dissension should arise by this means, yet is it not a
Natural, but an Accidental Effect thereof: And thus the Gospel it self does
sometimes cause disturbance, as our Savior foretold, Matthew. 10.34, 35. But is
the Gospel to be charged with these Dissentions? Or ought we therefore to
forbear to Preach the Gospel? The proper cause of these Dissentions are men's
own corruptions; it argues monstrous pride, when men cannot suffer their
Opinions to be discussed land examined by the Word, but strait ways their
Passions are up in arms, and hold them for their Enemies that do differ from
them; It is a sign they are more tender of their own credit, then of the truths
of Christ. 3. Though Peace be a Jewel of great price, yet that Peace is far too
dear which costs us the loss of Truth Pax est omni bello tristior, quae
veritatis, and justitiae ruina constat.
, I mean of any Saving, Necessary, and Fundamental Truth. For though in some
lesser points, In quibus salva fide qua Christiani sumus, ignoratur verum, as
Augustine speaks De Pec. Orig. cap. 23.
, we may for peace sake have our faith, or persuasions to our selves, Romans
14.22 Dissidiis magnis and controversis, non sunt redimendae mire^ istae
veritates. Acont. Stratagem (...)
. Yet sure in those great and weighty matters of the Gospel, which are either
Foundations, or else are adjacent to the Foundation (as these Controversies
about Justification are, it being articulus stantis aut cadentis Ecclesiae, as
Luther calls it) we ought not out of love to Peace, to betray the Truth. It is
better that Offenses should come, then that any vital truth should be lost or
imbezelled Utilius scandalum nasci permittitur, quam ut veritas relinquatur.
Greg. hom. 7 in Ezekiel. ex Aug. Jam. 3.17.
; it is far more eligible to have truth without peace, then peace without
saving truth; The wisdom which is from above, is first pure, and then
peaceable. All those Precepts which do call for Peace and Unity, are bounded
with a salva fide; as that Romans 12.18. If it be possible; now Id solum
possumus, quod jure possumus, nothing is possible, but what is lawful; so that
if we may with a good Conscience, and without treachery to the truths of
Christ, we ought to live peaceably with all men. So Romans 14.19. it is not
barely, Follow after peace; but peace and the things which make for
edification, it must be an edifying, and not a destroying peace; such as may
promote, and not h^nder the building up of the Church. Vid* Romans 15.2. and 1
Cor. 14.29. The unity we are bid to strive for, Ephesians. 4.3. is the unity of the
Spirit E^ enim sola ecclesiae pax est, quae Christi pax est Hilar. Gen 49 5.
and not like that of Simeon and Levi, who were Brethren in iniquity. For as
one Dr. Reynolds*
observes well out of Basil the Great, If we once shake the simplicity of the
Faith, Disputes and Contentions will prove endless. 4. If Christians in their
Public Disputes, do so far forget the Rules of Sobriety and Moderation, as to
betake themselves to those carnal Weapons, of Jeering, Scoffing, and Reviling
each other, it is an iniquity to be punished by the Judge, because it tends so
directly to the breaking of our Civil Peace, and is more scandalous in them,
then in any others. Would the Civil Magistrate Interpose himself so far, as to
be the Moderator of our differences in this behalf, these Public Debates would
be of singular use.

CHAP. III. Being a Surveigh of Mr. Woodbridges Title Page, wherein the Opinion
he opposes, is cleared from the Aspersion of Antinomianism.
IT is a common saying, Fronti nulla fides. We may no more judge of Books by
their Titles, then of Strumpets by their Foreheads; or of Apothecaries Drugs by
the Inscriptions of the Pots which do contain them, whose outsides many times
are Remedies, when the inside is stark poison Ti^^li remedia, ^^^ides ve^ena.
. The natures of things do not always answer the Names and Inscriptions which
are put upon them. We read of Pompey, that he built a Theater Cum titulo
Templi; and of Apolinarius the Heretic, That he had a School Cum titulo
Orthodoxi. Nestorius also veiled himself (...). Montanus, who would have our
Savior to be (...), assumed unto himself the Title of Paracletus; nay, Apelles
the Painter drew his filthy Strumpet, Cum titulo Veneris, with the Inscription
of a Goddess, that so he might more easily bring men to the adoration of her.
There is nothing more common, then for men to adorn their Errors with the Robe
of Truth, and to deform the Truth with the Rags of Error. I hope therefore,
that the Reader will be more wary, then to judge of this man's Doctrine by the
specious Title, which he gives his own, or that black mark wherewith he has
branded the Opinion which he does oppose.

He calls his own Opinion [ Justification by Faith] and the Doctrine he
opposes, an [ Antinomian Error] both which may be understood Per antiphrasin,
for Justification by Works, and an Evangelical Truth. As for his own Opinion,
he had more fitly styled it [ Justification by Works] taking Faith as he does,
in a proper sense, and attributing no more to Faith, then to other works of
Sanctification, which in his sense do morally qualify men for Justification,
and Salvation. I cannot think him a hearty Advocate for Justification by Faith,
who holds, That we are not justified till the day of judgment; which I am
credibly informed this Author has Publicly maintained, since he Preached this
Sermon At Broughton before many Ministers, etc.
: But how ill his Book does deserve this Title, shall appear in discussing the
parts of it.

. 2. And as for the imputation he has cast on our Doctrine, (which he calls an
Antinomian Error) I doubt not, but it will redound more unto his shame, then
unto ours. It has been an old continued practice of Satan, to blast the truths
and ways of God with odious Nicknames, purposely to deter the simple from
looking into them; as few men will come near to a house which is marked for the
Plague. It were easy to fill a Volume with those opprobrious Terms and Titles,
which in all ages have been cast upon the Truth, and the Professors of it. Sure
I am, Satan has gained no small advantage by these Hellish means. Tertullian
observes, That the Christians were hated and persecuted for no other crime, but
the crime of their Name Nominis crimen. Tert. Apol.
. So there are many things in these days generally decryed, that are only
guilty of an evil name. I doubt not but there will be found many a precious
truth in those Bundles of Errors, which have been heaped together by some
Godly-men in this last age. It Is but an easy Confutation to cry out Error and
Heresy; and this I have often observed, That they who are most liberal with
these loose invectives, are generally sparing of solid Arguments.

Whether the Opinion which Mr. W. opposes, be an Error, sub judice lis est;
How well he has acquitted himself in the proof of his charge, we shall see
anon. For my own part, I dislike not his or any other man's Zeal against Errors
and Heresies, provided they will allow that liberty unto others, which they
assume to themselves; to witness against that which they conceive Erroneous. I
cannot be persuaded by all that Mr. W. has yet said, That this Tenent of
Justification in foro Dei, without Works or Conditions performed by us, is an
Error, much less an Antinomian Error. If we may judge of it, by those general
Diagnosticks, which Divines have given us to discern between Truth and Error, I
am sure it has the complexion of a saving truth: That Doctrine which gives
most glory unto God in Christ, is certainly true, and the contrary is as
certainly false. Let that (says Bradwardine) be acknowledged for the true
Religion, which gives most glory unto God, and renders God most favorable and
gracious unto man Quae Deo ho^orabilior, paci amicabilior, homini favorabilior.
. Now let such as are least in the Church judge, which Opinion gives most glory
unto God; Either (1) that which ascribes the whole Work of our Salvation to the
Grace of God, and the meritorious purchase of Jesus Christ; or (2) that which
makes men Moral causes of their own salvation; which ascribes no more unto
Christ, then the purchasing of a new way, whereby we may be saved, if we
perform the terms, and conditions required of us. If the former in his
Judgment be Antinomianism, I shall freely profess, That by it alone (though he
call it Heresy) I have hope of Life and Salvation. Acts 24 14.


. 3. I am sure he is greatly mistaken, if he derives the descent of this
Doctrine from the Antinomians, who were a Sect of Libertines, or carnal
Gospellers, which appeared in Germany soon after the Reformation began, scil.
about the year 1538 Hoc anno prodi^t secta eorum qui dicuntur Antinomi. Sleid.
Com. l. 12. fol. 159.
. The Ringleader whereof was Islibius Agricola, the Compiler of the Interim;
they merited this name of Antinomians by their loose Opinions, and looser
Practices, against whom Luther wrote several Books, and Calvin bitterly
inveighed in his Instr. Adversus Libertin. who (as I shall show anon) are no
Enemies to the Doctrine which I do here maintain. That sort of Christians in
former times were called Eunomians, from Eunomius their Leader, of whom Saint
Augustine De Haeresib. c. 54.
gives us this Character, Fertur usque adeo fuisse bonis moribus, inimicus ut
asseveraret, quod nihil cuique obesset quorumlibet perpetratio ac perseverantia
peccatorum, si hujus quae ab illo docebatun, fidei particeps esset. i. e. It is
reported, That he was such an Enemy to all goodness; that he affirmed, though a
man did commit or lie in any kind of sin, it should never hurt him, if he had
but that Faith which he taught. Of the same strain were the Gnostics, who for
their filthy lives, were called Coenosi, The dirty Sect. Fide and Operib. c.
14. lb. q. 76. in Octoginta tribus quest.
Augustine observes, That there were many of this spirit in the Apostles days,
as the Nicholaitans, the Disciples of Simon Magus, Basilides, Valentinus, who
abused some passages in the writings of Paul, to be as it were Panders to the
flesh; who because the Apostle had affirmed, That a man is justified by Faith
without works, concluded, That if men did believe, Etiamsi male operarentur,
and facinorose, flagitioseve viverent, Though they lived never so wickedly,
they should be saved: Which filthy Dreamers (as Jude calls them) occasioned the
Epistles of James, Peter, John, and Jude; the chief scope of which is to show
the unsoundness of that Faith, which does not work by love, and that they are
not Believers who do not bring forth the Fruits of a holy life. Now me thinks
Mr. W. should have more charity, then to rank his Antagonists with such filthy
Swine.

. 4. Mr. W. is not ignorant, I dare say, that many Godly Learned Men have
asserted the Justification of Gods Elect, in foro Dei, before Faith, who were
never accounted Antinomians. I am sure Mr. Pemble has hitherto been known by
another name; I mention him the (...) because he was Divinity Reader in that
Society Magdalen Ha^l in Oxon.
, where I my self, and this Author (for a while under me) had our education. In
his Book of the Nature and Properties of Grace and Faith, he delivers his
Judgment to this effect, Vind. Great. p. 21. and 23.
That the Elect, even whilst they are unconverted, they are then actually
justified and freed from all sin by the death of Christ; and God so esteems of
them as free; and having accepted of that satisfaction, is actually reconciled
to them: And a little after; Our Justification in Gods sight, was purchased for
us by Christ, long before we were born; for it is in vain to think with the
Arminians, That Christ's merits have made God only Placabilem, not Placatum,
procured a freedom, That God may be reconciled if he will; and other things
concur, but not an actual reconciliation: No it is otherwise, Full satisfaction
to Divine Justice is given and taken; all the sins of the Elect are actually
pardoned. This was concluded upon, and dispatched between God and Christ, long
before we had any being, either in Nature or Grace; yet this benefit was ours,
and belonged to us, though we knew not so much, till after that by Faith we did
apprehend it, as Lands may be purchased, the Estate conveyed, and settled on an
Infant, though he know nothing of it, till he ^ome of age. Mr. Rutherford, I
dare say, was never suspected to be an Antinomian, yet in his Exercit.
Apologet. (a Book which Mr. W. in my hearing heretofore, has extolled to the
skies) he has said as much as any of us, against whom Mr. W. has levelled
this opprobrious name: Rhaetorf. Exercite Apologet. pro Great. p. 45.
Sanc prius quam electus credit, cessit, etc. Verily (says he) before any of
the Elect do believe the wrath of God, and all the effects of his wrath are
removed from their persons by virtue of Christ's satisfaction: And near the same
place he speaks to this purpose, Page 43.
Though we are not justified passively, or terminatively (i. e. The gracious
sentence of God is not terminated in our Consciences) till we do believe, yet
our justification actively considered, as it is in God (who is the only
justifier) was complete and perfect, before we had a being; and in this sense
Faith is not the Instrument of our Justification. Dr. Twisses Judgment in this
point is sufficiently known. The Righteousness of Christ (says he Vind. Great.
l. 1. p. 2. Sect. 25. ^. 5. p. 197.
) was ours, before we did believe; ours, I say, in respect of right, because in
the intention both of the Father, and the Son, it was performed for us; though
not in respect of possession and enjoyment, because we have not the sense and
knowledge of it, whereunto we do attain by Faith -- For Faith coming (which the
Spirit of God works in our hearts) the love of God to us in Christ is then
perceived and acknowledged. Whence it is, That the Righteousness of Christ is
said to be imputed unto us by Faith, because we cannot know and discern that it
is imputed to us but by Faith; and then we are said to be justified with that
kind of Justification and Absolution from sin, which breeds peace in our
Consciences. Where he also gives us two Arguments to prove, That Justification,
in foro Dei, goes before Faith. Was this famous Doctor an Antinomian? Of all
men Mr. W. (who is now entered upon his Labors, and reaps the Harvest of that
Seed which the Doctor with much sweat and many Prayers has sown at Newbery)
has least reason to account him so. I must needs tell him, He will not honor
himself, by aspersing the name of this blessed man. If Mr. W. had consulted
with the Writings of his own forefathers, I suppose he would have given the
adhearers to this Doctrine more civil language. Mr. Parker his Grandfather (a
man whom his Enemies Quem nos juvenes admi^ari soli^i, etc: Crakanth. Log.
Praedic. ubi.
admired for his Learning and Piety) in his Book Descensu Christi ad inferos,
has this excellent passage Lib. 3. sect. 30. p. 59.
, Justificatus Christus dicitur cum resurrexit, 1 Timothy 3.16. Nosque in eo
resurgente justificati, Romans 4. ult. quia ist^ solutio, i. e. Suscitatio
patris, actualis justificatio fuit, illius quidem a peccatis aliorum pro quibus
satis dedecit; Nostrum vero a peccatis propriis pro quibus ille vadimonium
praestitit. i. e. Christ is said to be justified when he rose from the dead, 1 Timothy 3.16. And we to be then justified in him, Romans 4. ult. Because that
discharge, to wit, His Fathers raising him from the dead, was an ACTUAL
JUSTIFICATION of him from the sins of others, for which he had satisfied; and
OF US from our own sins, for which he became a surety. It does not a little
justify them, that drove away this Reverend man from his Native soil, that a
Grandchild of his own, a Minister, and a Minister in these times, should
brand him with Heresy.

. 5. To these might be added many more, who have not hitherto been known by the
name of Antinomians. Mr. Calvin says, That our Justification, in respect of
God, does precede our Faith Fides porro ita^ justificationem, praecedit, ^t
tamen Dei respectu sequatur, Calv. Antid. Conc. Triden^. Sess. 6. p. 282.
. Zanchius in his Explication of the Epistle to the Ephesians, upon those
words, Chap. 2.5. [ He has quickened us together with Christ,] says, That all
the Elect, who are the Members of Christ, when he by his death, had expiated
their sins, were freed from the guilt of eternal death, and obtained a right to
eternal life. Chamier has much to this purpose, Nobis potius est
persuasissimum, etc. We are most certainly persuaded, that our sins are
pardoned before we do believe; for we deny that Infants do believe, and yet
Infants have their sins forgiven Cham. Panstrat. Tom. 3. l. 13. c. 10. sect. 18.
. And a little before, viz. Chap. 6. of the same Book Cap. 6. sect. 4.
, I deny (says he) that Faith is the cause of our Justification, for then our
Justification would not be of Grace, but of our selves; but Faith is said to
justify, not because it effects Justification, but because it is effected in
the justified person. And in another place to the same purpose Lib. 22. c. 12.
sect 5. and ^ect. 9*
. Faith does neither merit, obtain, nor begin our Justification; for if it did,
then Faith should go before Justification, both in nature and time; which may
in no wise be granted, for Faith it self is a part of Sanctification; now there
is no Sanctification, but after Justification; Quae re and natura prior, which
is really, and in its own nature before it. Alstedius in his Supplement to
Chamier says Lib. 2. c. 11. sect. 6.
, That Faith concurs no otherwise to Justification, then in respect of the
passive application, whereby a man applies the Righteousness of Christ unto
himself; but not in respect of the active application, whereby God applies
unto man the Righteousness of Christ, which application is in the mind of God,
and consequently from eternity. Dr. Macouvius, Professor of Divinity at
Franeka, has a whole Determination to this purpose Disputat. An. 16^2. Disp.
17.
, to prove that Justificacation actively considered, or as it is the act of
God, blotting out our sins, and imputing the Righteousness of Christ unto us,
goes before Faith: Indeed he makes it to be, not an immanent, but a transient,
declared act, which the Lord did, when he first promised to send his Son to be
our Mediator, Genesis 3.15. Though one of our late Writers Mr. Baxter in Append.
p. 147.
mentions this Doctors Opinion, with much contempt and oscitancy, calling his
Assertions, Strange, senceless, and abhorred (which is the less to be regarded,
seeing he usually metes out the same measure unto all men else, whose notions
do not square with his own mould, as to Dr. Twisse, Mr. Walker, and them that
hold the imputation of Christ's active Righteousness, whom he calls A sort of
ignorant and unstudied Divines, etc.) Yet, as he has merited fairer usage
amongst Christians for his other Labors: So, I dare say, his Arguments in this
particular, will not seem so weak and ridiculous, as Mr. Baxter ma^^ them, to
an indifferent Reader that shall compare them, with the Exceptions which he
has shaped unto them; sharp Censures are but dull Answers. Dr. Ames his
Col^eague Ames Med. l. 1. c. 27. sect. 9.
, says no less, who in his Marrow of Divinity, having defined Justification to
be the gracious Sentence of God, by which he does acquit us from sin and death,
and account us Righteous unto life, he says, That this sentence was long
before in the mind of God, and was pronounced when Christ our Head arose from
the dead, 2 Cor. 5.19. And in another place Omnes illi pro quibus Christus ex
intention Dei sati^fecit, sunt Deo reconciliati. i e. In favorem salutiserum
aliquo modo restitu^i, Antisinod. p. 164.
, All they for whom Christ, in the intention of God, has made satisfaction,
are reconciled unto God. I might produce many others that are of eminent note*
who have asserted, That all the Elect are reconciled and justified before they
believe. Now were all these Champions of Truth, a pack of Antinomians and
Libertines? Has Mr. Woodbridges humanity no better language to bestow upon
them? If he shall say, he does not mean them, yet his reproaches do fall upon
them; for if Titius be an Antinomian, for saying, That the Elect are justified
before they do believe; Sempronius is an Antinomian, who affirms the same.

. 6. Mr. Burges (a man somewhat profuse in this kind of Rhetoric) seems
willing to excuse some of those forementioned Divines, who have asserted the
Remission of sins before Faith Treat. of Just. p. 177.
, because they did it in a particular sense to oppose the Arminians, who
maintain a reconciliability, and not a reconciliation by the death of Christ.
But I believe he is not ignorant, that Divine Truths are not to be measured by
men's intentions; let men's ends be never so good, they cannot make Error to be
Truth; or if they are never so corrupt, they cannot make Truth to be Error. Nor
do they, whom he calls Antinomians, assert Justification before Faith, in any
other sense, then in respect of the absolute and immutable Will of God, not to
deal with his people according to their sins; and in respect of the full
satisfaction of Jesus Christ, who by that one offering of himself, has
perfected for ever, Heb. 10.14.
them that are sanctified, i. e. them whose sins are purged by his blood. I
could show how frequently he and others have wounded some of our most eminent
Divines, both for Learning and Piety, through the sides of Antinomians: Mr.
Burges in his Book of Justif. p. 219. calls it An Antinomian Similitude, to
say, That as a man looking on the Wall through Red Glass, conceives the Wall to
be of the same color; so God looking upon us in Christ, sees nothing but the
Righteousness of Christ in us, and no sin at all: Which Similitude is used by
Dr. Reynolds in his Excellent Treatise on the 110 Psalm Page 450.
, where he does plainly assert that Doctrine which Mr. Burges condemns for
Antinomianism. Mr. Baxters Character of an Antinomian, will bring all our
Protestant Writers under this censure: For with him they are Antinomians, who
hold, (1) That our Evangelical Righteousness is without us in Christ, or
performed by him, and not by our selves Aphor. p. 109* 111.
. Or (2) That Justification is a free act of God, without any condition on our
part, for the obtaining of it Ibid. p. 169* 170.
: Or else (3) That Justification is an Immanent act Ibid. p. 173.
, and consequently from eternity Ibid. p. 93.
, which was the Judgment of Alsted, Pemble, Twisse, Rutherford, etc. Or (4)
That we must not perform duty for Life and Salvation, but from Life and
Salvation; or that we must not make the attaining of Justification or
Salvation, the end of our endeavors, but obey in thankfulness, and because we
are justified and saved Saints Rest. p. 14. Append. p. 100.
, etc. Now let any man who is moderately versed in our Protestant Writers, but
speak, on whom this Arrow falls. I might instance in many others, but I will
not put the Reader unto so much trouble.

. 7. My business at present, is to acquit this Doctrine of Justification in
foro Dei, before Faith, from Mr. Woodbridges charge of Antinomianism. And truly
I wonder, that he should give it this name: For 1. It has not the least
affinity with the Antinomian Tenants, which as they are related by Sleiden,
were, That the Law is not to be Preached to bring men to Repentance, or unto
the sight of their sins; That what ever a man's life be, though it be never so
impure and wicked, yet he is justified for all, if he does believe the Promises
of the Gospel Ipsi vero statuunt, quaecunque tandem sit hominis vita, and
quantumvis impura, justificari tamen cum, si modo promissionibus Evangelii
credat, Sleid. loc. su^. citat.
: So that they held the necessity of Faith, (such as it was) they made it (as
our Adversaries do) the condition of Justification. 2. Antinomianism is such an
Error, as does oppose, or is contrary to the Law of God: But surely, this is
not such, it offers no manner of injury unto the Law; seeing that whenever
the Elect are justified, they are not justified without Righteousness, and such
a Righteousness, as does fully answer the Law of God, in respect both of the
satisfaction and obedience, which it does require. We say, that God cannot
justify a person without Righteousness, for then he should do that himself,
which he forbids to us, and professes his detestation of, Exodus 23.7. Isa
5.23. Deuteronomy. 25.1. Prove. 17.15. If God could have dispensed with his Law in this
behalf, Christ needed not to have died; the end of his coming was to bring in
Everlasting Righteousness. Whomsoever God does justify, they have justice one
way or other; for otherwise, the God of Truth should call darkness light, and
evil good; they whom he accounts just, are just and righteous: But yet we
say, That Faith is not that R^ghteousness, that makes them so, either in whole
or in part; but the perfect Righteousness of Christ, which is put upon them.
Now to say, That God imputes this Righteousness unto men before they believe,
is no ways contrary to the Law, seeing the Law prescribes not the rules of this
imputation, it is altogether besides the cognizance of the Law: So that if it
prove an Error, it must be an Anti-Evangelical, and not an Antinomian Error.
But I doubt not, but I shall be able to acquit it from this, as well as from
that other imputation.

CHAP. IV. Containing some Animadversions upon Mr. Cranfords Epistle to the
Reader.
MR. W. for the better grace of his Book, has obtained a Commendatory Epistle
from Mr. Cr. wherein some things are delivered contrary to truth, and most
injurious to them, whom Mr. W. has made his Adversaries. Its true, he begins
his Epistle with a deserved Commendation of the Doctrine of Justification. That
it exceedingly illustrates the glorious riches of Gods Free Grace, and
magnifies his Justice, is the only support of comfort to a wounded Conscience,
takes away from man the cause of boastings, and is altogether above the
invention and credulity of Reason. Wherein I do cordially concur with him,
accounting it (as Luther did) the Sun which enlightens the Church, Vid. Luth.
in Psalm. 130.
the Paradise and Heaven of the Soul; therefore it was not without cause, that
our first Reformers so earnestly contended for it, it being (as they have well
observed) the sum of the Gospel, Calv. in Romans 1.17. Luther Sup.
and of all the benefits which we have by Christ; the principal point of the
Doctrine of Salvation, the pure knowledge whereof does preserve the Church. How
much short of them in this particular, is the zeal of some amongst our late
Reformers, who have scoffingly called it, the Antinomians common place? Mr.
Cranfords Testimony therefore to the singular excellency of this Doctrine, is
so much the more welcome, seeing there are so few that have it in a right
esteem; though as he (and much more as Mr. W.) has stated it, the beauty and
luster of it, is not a little obscured. It loses all those praises which in
Mr. Cranfords Parenthesis are ascribed unto it. For (1) how does the riches of
Gods grace appear, if our Justification does depend upon terms and conditions,
performed by us? For as Mr. Walker Socinian. p. 2^4.
has noted, Whatsoever is covenanted and promised upon a condition to be
performed, is not absolutely free, nor freely given. They are not justified by
Grace, who are justified upon the performance of conditions. (2) What support
is this for a wounded Conscience, to tell him that is conscious of his extreme
weakness, and inability, That God will forgive his sins, if he do perform such
and such conditions; which he is no more able to do, then to remove a mountain?
Mr. Calvin has well observed, Nisi fidem tremere ac vacillare volumus Calv.
Inst. l. 3. c. 2. sect. 29.
, etc. That unless we would have our faith to be always wavering and trembling,
it ought to rest only upon the free promise of Grace in Jesus Christ; And he
gives this Reason for it, Quoniam conditionalis promissio, etc. Because a
conditional promise which sends us to our own works, promises us life no
otherwise, then if it were placed in our own power. Nor (3) does this take from
men the cause of boasting; Boasting (says the Apostle) is not excluded by
works, Romans 3.27.
call them by what name you will, either Legal or Evangelical; if they are our
works, they give to us occasion of boasting; Romans 4 4.
for to him that works, the reward is not reckoned of Grace, but of Debt; a
work or condition whenever it is performed, makes the thing covenanted, a due
debt, which the performer may demand, and the promiser is bound to give. (4) It
is not above the invention and credulity of Reason, That God should justify a
Righteous man, but that God should justify sinners, and merely upon the
account of another righteousness; as heretofore it seemed foolishness both to
Jews and Gentiles, so ever since it has been a stumbling block to the wisdom
of the flesh; it is such a mystery as will never contemper with the most
rational principles of the natural man. Hence have arisen all those jarrings
and contendings against this truth, in regard of its disproportion unto carnal
Reason, which believes no other Gospel, but hoc fac and vives.

. 2. The Doctrine of the Gospel (says Mr. Cr.) concerning the Justification of
a believing sinner, is plainly delivered in the Scripture. But by his favor,
the Scripture no where calls Believers sinners, nor yet makes Believers the
adequate subjects of Justification. It is most true, That all Believers are
justified, and it is as false that men are Believers, before they are
justified: An unjustified Believer, and a justified Sinner, are expressions
palpably guilty of Self-contradiction. We read in Scripture of Gods justifying
the ungodly Romans 4.5.
, reconciling the world 2 Cor. 5 19. i. e. Homines ex ^oto mundo electos ad
salutem. Vid. Estium in loc. Electos vocat mundum, non solum quia in mundo, sed
de mundo sunt, natura nihil aliud quam mundus erant, i. e. Peccatores, damnati,
ac inimici Deo. Vid. Ferum in Joh. 3.16.
, and enemies to himself Romans 5.8, 10.
, and of his quickening them that are dead in trespasses and sins Ephesians. 2.1, 5.
. Now Believers (as has been hinted Sup. cap. 1. sect 3.
) are never called ungodly, or enemies to God; they are no where said to be
dead in trespasses and sins; they have their name from their better part, and
from that esteem that God has of them, who beholds them holy and righteous,
without any spot or blemish of sin Cant 4.7. Psalm. 51.7. Col. 1.22. Ephesians. 5.27.
.

. 3. In the next place Mr. Cr. gives us in a List of all the causes which do
concur unto our Justification; in the enumeration whereof, he will find the
Author he commends at a greater distance from him, then those whom he opposes.
He may, if he please, compare his Doctrine with Mr. Baxter^ Notions (whom Mr.
W. follows at the very heels) These. 56.26, 73, etc. in his Aphorisms, who
denies, That Christ's obedience is the material, the imputation of his
Righteousness, the formal cause of our Justification, or that Faith is the
Instrument, by which we do receive it; he plainly ascribes the same kind of
causality unto Christ, and Faith making them to differ only secundum magis and
minus; that Christ is the sine qua non principalis, and Faith the sine qua non
minus principalis (he might have listed sin in the same rank; which too, is a
sine qua non of our Justification;) That Faith and works in a larger sense, are
meritorious causes of Life and Blessedness. Now we say with Mr. Cr. (1) That
God is the efficient cause, or the only Justifier; that he has no motive or
inducement, but his own Grace and Love, to will not to punish us, and to give
to us his Son, through whom we have Redemption^ and Deliverance from the curse
of the Law. Deuteronomy. 7.7. Romans 3.25. John 3.16.
We say too (2) that Christ is the only meritorious cause of our Justification
(taking Justification pro re volita, for a transient effect of the Will of
God,) that Jesus Christ has by his death and satisfaction, fully procured and
merited our Discharge and Absolution from the penalty of the Law, which we
deserved by sin: For which cause, he is said to have purged our sins by
himself, i. e. Without the help and assistance of other means, Heb. 1.3
Excludere voluit omnia alia media vel adminicula, cum purgationis and praetium
and virtutem in Christo statuit. Calv. in loc.
. There are many who ore tenus in word do acknowledge, That Christ is the
meritorious cause of our Justification, that in deed do deny it: The Papists in
the Council of Trent Sess. 6. Can. 7. Bellarm.
say, That God is the efficient, the glory of God the final, the death of
Christ the meritorious cause of our Justification. But yet we know, that they
allow not this effect unto it, unless other things do concur on our parts they
say, That Faith, Charity, etc. do Impetrare remissionem, and suo quidem modo
mereri; Obtain, and after a sort merit forgiveness, though not by their own
worth and dignity, yet by virtue of Gods Covenant and Promise. Too many of our
Protestants (setting aside the word merit, which yet Mr. B. thinks may be
admitted) do tread directly in their steps; they ascribe as much unto works, as
Papists do. It is a poor requital unto Jesus Christ, to call him the
Meritorious cause of our Justification, and in the mean while to deny the merit
of his death, as to the immediate purchases thereof, and to ascribe at least a
partial meritoriousness to other things. (3) I shall go further with Mr. Cr. I
freely grant him (which I believe Mr. W. will stick at) That Faith is the
Instrument, by which we receive and apply the Righteousness of Christ unto our
selves, whereby the gracious sentence of God, acquitting us from our sins, is
conveyed and terminated in our Consciences. We say indeed, That Faith does not
concur to our Justification, as a proper Physical Instrument (which is a less
principal Efficient cause.) Mr. Rutherford says well Exercit. Apol. p 42.
, That Faith is not the Organical or Instrumental cause, either of Christ's
satisfaction, or of Gods acceptance thereof on our behalf. By believing we do
not cause, either our Savior to satisfy for our sins, or God to accept of his
satisfaction: Every true Believer is persuaded, That God has laid aside his
wrath and displeasure toward him for his sins, having received a sufficient
ransom and satisfaction for them in the death of his Son. Sed hoc fides non
facit, (says he) sed objectum jam factum praesupponit. Faith is a Receptive,
not an Effective Instrument, an Instrument not to procure, but to receive
Justification and Salvation, which is freely given us in Jesus Christ. It is
called an Instrumental cause of our Justification, taking Justification
passively, Alsted. in Supplem. Cham. ut sup.
not actively; or in reference to that passive Application, whereby a man
applies the Righteousness of Christ to himself, but not to that active
Application, whereby God applies it to a man, which is only in the mind of
God. Therefore Calvin Calvin in Joh. 6.29.
calls Faith, Opus passivum, a passive work.

. 4. Mr. Cr. proceeds, This Doctrine (says he) has in all ages been opposed
and obscured, sometimes by open Enemies, sometimes by professed Friends, and
such as would be accounted the great Pleaders for Free Grace. It is most true,
That this Article of Free Justification has, and will be a Bone of Contention
to the worlds end. It is the chief cause of all those contests and quarrels,
which have arisen between the Children of the Freewoman, and the Children of
the Bondwoman. Mr. Fox Epistle before Luther on Gal.
has well observed, It is so strange to carnal Reason, so dark to the World,
it has so many enemies, that except the Spirit of God from above do reveal it,
Learning cannot reach it, Wisdom is offended, Nature is astonished, Devils do
not know it, Men do persecute it. Satan labors for nothing more, then that he
may either quite bereave men of the knowledge of this truth, or else corrupt
the simplicity of it. It is not unknown what batteries were raised against it,
in the very infancy of the Church, how the Wits and Passions of men conspired
to hinder it; what monstrous consequences, were charged upon the Doctrine; and
what odious practices, were fathered upon them, that did profess it; never was
any truth opposed with so much malice and bitterness as this has been, and by
them especially that were most devout and zealous Acts 13.50. Romans 10 pr.
. But when it could not be withstood and stifled, Satan endeavored then to
deprave and adulterate it, by mixing of the Law with the Gospel, our own
Righteousness with Christ's; which corruption the Apostle has strenuously
opposed in all his Epistles, and more especially in that to the Romans and
Galatians; See Gal 5. pr*
where he excludes all and singular works of ours, from sharing in the matter
of our Justification: For the eluding of whose Authority, carnal Reason has
found out sundry shifts and distinctions, As that the Apostle excludes only
works of Nature, but not of Grace; Legal, but not Evangelical works; and that
our works though they are not Physical, yet they may come in as Moral causes of
our Justification. It is certain, That the most dangerous attempts against this
Doctrine, have been within the Church, and by such as Mr. Cr. calls Professed
Friends, who have done so much the more mischief, in regard they were least apt
to be suspected: Justification by works was generally exploded amongst us,
whilst it appeared under the names of Popery and Arminianism, which since has
found an easy admittance, being vented by some of better note, such as would
be accounted Pleaders for Free Grace.

. 5. Mr. Woodbridges Discourse (says Mr. Cr.) deals not with the Errors of
Papists, Socinians, Arminians, but with Antinomian Error. How unjustly our
Doctrine is called Antinomian, has been shown before; and Mr. Cr. may be
pleased to take notice, That Mr. Rutherford accounts the Opinion we oppose, the
very chief of the Arminians, Socinians, and Papists Errors about Justification,
to wit, That no man has his sins remitted before he does actually believe
Apologit. Exercit. p. 37. Arminianis nihil prius est in votis, etc.
. As for his Allegation out of Mr. Shepherd. Mark those men that deny the use
of the Law to lead unto Christ, if they do not fall in time to oppose some main
point of the Gospel, etc. It does not touch us, for we deny not the use of the
Law to bring men unto Christ; we look upon the Law, as the Ordinance of God, to
convince men of their sin and misery, and thereby to indear to them the Grace
of the Gospel, Gal. 3.22, 24. 1 Timothy 1.8.
We say with the Apostle, The Law is good, if men do use it lawfully. i. e. In
a way of subserviency, and attendance upon the Gospel, the better to advance
and make effectual the ends thereof. And as we deny not this use of the Law, so
neither does our asserting, That all the Elect before their conversion, and
Faith, stand actually reconciled to God, and justified before him, obscure the
Gospel. I doubt not but the judicious Reader will expect a better proof of this
charge, then Cranfords word. Have all those Reverend Divines before mentioned,
obscured the Gospel? What is the Gospel, but the glad tidings, that Christ is
come into the world to save sinners; that by his subjecting of himself to the
curse of the Law, he has freed them from the curse, who were given him by the
Father? How is this truth obscured, by our saying, That God did everlastingly
will* not to punish his Elect; and that in Christ he beholds them just and
righteous, even whilst they are sinful, and wicked in themselves? Do not they
much more obscure the Grace of the Gospel, who make it depending upon terms and
conditions, performed by us, then we, that affirm it to be free and absolute?
They that assign no certain and actual effect, to the death of Christ; or we,
that say (according to the Scripture) that all the Elect were thereby freed
from the Law, delivered from the Curse, reconciled unto God, made perfect and
complete in the sight of God? And therefore though Dr. Downham does call it, A
strange Assertion, I shall not be ashamed to own it: The Lord complains, That
the great things of his Law were counted strange, Hos. 8.12. We read in
Eusebius, That the Christian Faith (though it were from the beginning) was
called (...), New and strange. The multitude cast this aspersion upon our
Saviors Doctrine, Mark 1.27. and the Athenians upon Paul, Acts 17.19, 20. The
imputation of novelty and new fangledness, has been commonly cast upon the
truths and ways of God: Many things are new in respect of Observation, which
are not so in themselves See Bolton of Error, p. 147.
. We have known, that godly men have looked upon some things as very strange,
which in tract of time have been generally embraced. Dr. Downham, no doubt,
thought it strange, that any godly man should say the Angels of the Seven
Churches were not Diocesan Bishops; and yet I believe Mr. Cr. is not of his
Opinion. If it were the Doctors meaning, That this Assertion of Justification
before Faith, was never heard to come from the mouth of a godly man, before
Pemble; either his memory was very weak, or his charity was too much straightened.
He could not be ignorant of what has been alleged out of Calvin, Za^che,
Parker, Chamier; one of those passages in Chamier (before mentioned) is cited
by the Doctor in that very Book N. Cov. p. 136.
which Mr. Cr. quotes. He knew likewise, That all our old Protestant Divines
have defined Justifying Faith, to be a certain persuasion, and full assurance
of the pardon of our sins; from whence it must inevitably follow, That pardon
of sin precedes our Faith, for every object is before its act. And as strange
as it seemed unto this Doctor, he himself says Downh. of Justif. l. 6. c. 6.
sect. 9.
little less; for in answer to Bellarmine, (who would prove that a man may be
justified without special Faith) he grants, It is true in respect of our
Justification in the sight of God; which special apprehension, or application
of Christ (says he Lib 6. c. 4. sect. 5.
) though scorned by Papists, yet it is of all Graces the most comfortable, most
profitable, most necessary, most comfortable; for the very life of this life,
is the assurance of a better life; most necessary, because without this special
receiving of Christ, first by apprehension, and then by application we can have
no other saving Grace: How can we love God, or our Neighbor for his sake? how
can we hope, and trust in him? how can we rejoice or be thankful to him, if we
be not persuaded of his love, and bounty toward us? Most profitable, because
from it all other Graces do proceed, and according to the measure of it, is the
measure of them, etc. Doubtless, That Faith to which these properties do
belong, does best merit the name of Justifying Faith: So then according to this
Doctors Judgment, the Assertion is not so strange as true.

. 6. Mr. Cr. goes on, and much faster then a good pace, [ This Opinion (says
he) that the Elect are actually reconciled to God before they believe, is
confuted in this Treatise, and proved contradictory to Scripture, fit only (1)
to sow pillows under the elbows of profane men; (2) to overthrow the comfort
of Believers, destroying the ground, nature, and end of Faith.] How solidly it
is confuted, the Reader will see anon, when the weight of his proofs shall come
to be examined; I doubt not, but an impartial Judge will acquit it, both from
being contradictory to Scripture, or guilty of those horrid Consequences which
he has cast upon it. I marvel, that so rational a man (as Mr. Cr. is held to
be) should say, That all this charge is proved; part of which is not so much as
mentioned by Mr. W. (who is liberal enough of his criminations,) which makes me
to think, That he writ his Epistle, before he read his Author, or at least,
That he is a man that will be satisfied with slender Proofs against persons,
and Doctrines which he does not fancy. It is true, Mr. W. has endeavored to
obtrude upon us some ugly Consequences, which are as remote from our Doctrine,
as Earth is from Heaven. Mr. Cr. is not ignorant, how much peaceable and
prudent men have disliked this practice of wyer-drawing men's Opinions, and
raking absurdities out of them ( per nescio quas fidiculas consequentiarum, as
Bishop Davenant Adhort. ad pacem. c. 12. p. 153. Vid. Chiling-worths Answer to
Knots, p 39, 40.
expresses it) By small threads of consequencies, which they themselves do
disclaim, and abhor from their whole heart; whereupon says that Learned
Bishop, Good men ought to deal more fairly, then to fasten an Heretical sense
on other men's words, when the Writers themselves, which are the best Expounders
of their own words, can, and use to reduce them to a Catholic sense. Mr. Cr.
knows, That the very same Consequences are fathered upon the Doctrine of
absolute Election, Justification by Faith alone, and the certain perseverance
of true Believers. Faustus Rhegiensis.
The Semi-Pelagians of old would have forced this inference from Austins
Opinion of absolute Predestination: If Gods decree be absolute, Nemo vigilet,
nemo j^junet, nemo libidini contradicet, etc. The Papists say, It follows, That
if we be justified by Faith only, then we need not do good works. The
Remonstrants and their followers say See J. G. hi^ Animadversions on Loves
Speech.
, That if a Believer cannot fall from Grace, then need he not fear to commit
any sin whatsoever. Nor do these Consequences flow any whit more naturally from
our Tenent, then they do from these. Does it follow, That because all the Elect
are by means of Christ's death, actually reconciled unto God, and freed from the
condemnation of the Law, That therefore men may live as they list, that they
need not hear, believe, and obey the Gospel? How does this sow pillows under
men's elbows, or lull asleep in security, more then the Doctrine of absolute
Election? Seeing as all men are not elected, so neither are all men reconciled
unto God; nor can any man know, That he is elected and reconciled unto God, but
by, and through Faith; which Faith is wrought in men by the Preaching of the
Word, and does certainly produce a holy life Justificatus per filem, non potest
nisi deinceps just operari, Aug. Let a Believer sin if he can, Preston N. C.
p. 361.
.

. 7. I confess, I am yet to seek of the Reason of his other Deduction, That
this Assertion of actual reconciliation before Faith, overthrows the comfort of
true Believers, and destroys the ground, nature, use, and end of Faith* Is it
an uncomfortable Doctrine to tell men, That we are not sharers with Christ in
effecting of our peace with God, and in procuring the pardon of our sins; and
that Christ has finished this work before we knew it? Is it not much more
comfortable to poor souls, that Christ has absolutely, and by himself obtained
forgiveness for sinners, then that he has procured this Gr^^e but
conditionally, upon condition we perform such and such (...), for which we have
no strength or ability in our selves? Whence have the Saints drawn all their
comfort? Surely, not from Faith, or any other work of theirs, but by Faith from
Christ, and from the perfection and al-sufficiency of his Sacrifice: Not only
the Protestants, but the Papists themselves (though in the Schools they contend
for the dignity and congruity of works, that they are Moral causes, or
necessary conditions of Justification and Salvation; yet on their death beds,
they utterly renounce them, they) exhort men in distress of Conscience, to roll
themselves wholly* upon Jesus Christ. In a form prescribed for visiting of the
sick, the Priest or Minister was enjoined to put these Questions to the sick
party Vid. Bishop Ushers answer to the Jesuit, p. 568. Ib. in lib. de Succes.
eccles. p. 191.
. Do thou believe to come to glory, not by thy own merits, but by the virtue
and merit of the Passion of our Lord Jesus Christ? And do thou believe, That
our Lord Jesus Christ did die for our salvation, and that none can be saved by
his own merits, or by any other means, but by the merit of his passion?
Whereunto, when the sick person answered affirmatively, I do believe it; the
Priest is bid to exhort him, in this wise, Go to therefore, as long as thy soul
remains in thee, place thy whole confidence in his death only, have
confidence in no other thing; commit thy self wholly to his death, with this
alone cover thy self wholly, intermingle thy self wholly, wrap thy whole self
in his death, etc. Dangerous (says Bernard Bern. in Psalm. qui habitat. Ser. 1.
) is the habitation of those that trust in their own works: And in another
place Ubi tuta firmaque infirmis securitas and requies nisi in vulneribus
salvatoru^? Tanto illi^ securior habito, quanto ille por^utior ad salvandum, in
Cant. Ser* 61.
, Ubi tuta, etc. What safe ^est or security can the weak soul find, but in the
wounds of his Savior? As he is mighty to save, so dwell I there with most
safety. Parisiensis in his Book of Divine Rhetoric, Thou must beware (says
he) in thy striving with God, that thou do not build upon a weak foundation,
which he does; that trusts in his own works. Gerson often inculcates this Part.
1. Sermon. de nuptiis Christi. Tract. de distinct. vision. part. 2. de verbo Dom.
and part. 3. do Consolat. Theolog.
, That before the tribunal of God, we must only plead the merits of Christ:
Bishop Gardner Foxes Acts and Monuments, Vol. ^.
, though he would not have this gap to be opened to the people, yet he
acknowledged it to be the most comfortable Doctrine to such as were in his
condition, he being then on his death bed: Which is the more to be observed,
because in his life time, he had stickled so much for our Adversaries
Conditional Justification 3. Vol. p. 525.
. Bellarmine himself Bellar. l. 5. de Justif. c, 7*
, when he had written diverse Books for Justification by Inherent Righteousness,
in the end concludes, That for fear of vainglory, and by reason of the
uncertainty of our own works, Tutissimum est, etc. It is the safest way to
place all our trust in the Mercy of God, and of Jesus Christ; so that we may
say as Moses, Their rock is not as our rock, our Enemies themselves being
Judges, Deuteronomy. 32.31.

. 8. Mr. Cr. has not the least reason to charge us with destroying the Ground
of Faith; for the Ground of Faith is either Fundamentum Quod, or Fundamentum
Quo. Material and Personal, or else Doctrinal and Ministerial. We say with all
true Christians, That the only Material or Personal Foundation, whereupon a
poor soul can build securely for Life and Justification, is Jesus Christ 1 Cor.
3.11. Certum, propriumque fidei fundamentum Ch^istus est. Aug. Euchirid c. 5.
. Now the Doctrinal Foundation whereby our Faith is united to the former, we
affirm with Calvin Instit. l. 3. c. 2. sect. 7. and 29. Opusc* 318.
(and many more) that it is, Gratuita misericordiae in Christo promissio, The
free promise of Mercy; in opposition to those Conditional Promises which send
men partly to Christ, and partly to their own works; and therefore our
Adversaries are much more obnoxious to this Censure, of Destroying the Ground
of Faith, who allow it no other support, then Conditional Promises, whereby
men's hope and confidence is made to lean more upon themselves, then it does on
Christ; much more upon their own works, then it does upon his Righteousness.
The forementioned Author Si quantulacunque portio in opera nostra conferatur,
cate^^^ vacillabit fides. Call. Opusc. p. 280.

Fidei nulla erit certitudo, si operibus nitatur salus hominum. Ib. p. 282:

In hunc modum si distrahatur salutis fiducia, nihil poterit, quam vacillare;
quid hoc aliud est quam subvertere ab imo fundamentum? Ib. p. 317.


has well observed, That if our Faith does rely never so little upon our own
works, it cannot possibly stand fast; that soul will never attain to any settled
assurance of his Salvation, that builds his Faith upon such a sandy foundation.

. 9. The nature of Faith receives not the least prejudice by our Doctrine; for
if we define it (as most of our old Protestant Divines Melancthon, P. Martyr,
Calvin, Perkins, etc*
have done) Certa and indubitata persuasio; A firm and certain persuasion of
the favor of God, and the pardon of our sins, it confirms our Tenent; for men's
sins must be pardoned before they can believe it, or else of necessity they
must believe a lie. All men know that the object does precede the act, unless
it be when the act gives a being to the object: Or if we make it to be fiducia,
the trust or reliance of the soul upon Jesus Christ, it receives no small
encouragement from this consideration, That Christ has finished whatsoever was
necessary by Divine appointment, for the Justification of sinners, not
expecting the least condition to be performed by us for that end: Our Faith is
never so impregnable, as when it rests entirely upon Jesus Christ. And as for
the ends and uses of Faith (which are chiefly to give us boldness, and
confidence toward God; to purify our hearts, and to work by love, etc.) They
are all of them promoted and furthered by the Doctrine we teach; for what is
it, that gives us boldness toward God, but the merit and perfection of Christ's
sacrifice? whereby the mouth of the Law is stopped, the accusations of Satan
are all answered, and the justice of God is fully satisfied. Again, What other
means is there so effectual, to purify our hearts, to constrain us to love
him, etc. as the freeness, absoluteness and immutability of his love to us; who
whilst we were sinners, and enemies, reconciled us to himself by the Blood of
the Cross, and blotted out our sins, as if they had never been committed?

. 10. Mr. Cr. censure of Curcellaeus's Opinion, is just and seasonable, who
judges these Differences amongst Christians about Justification to be of so
small concernment, that they ought not to breed a controversy: For surely they
are none of those foolish questions and strivings, which we are bid to avoid;
if there be any point in the whole Doctrine of Godliness, for which we ought
(...), (as Saint Jude speaks) to contend earnestly. This challenges our utmost
zeal for the maintenance of it; seeing the glory of Gods Grace, the dignity of
Christ's Blood, and the comfort of our own souls lies at stake in the issues of
it; our life, peace, and everlasting Salvation is concerned herein: There is no
truth that the Apostle does so frequently press, and so earnestly contend for,
as this Article of our Free Justification; That no works of ours do concur to
the procuring of it. De Reform. Eccles. ad Interim.
Mr. Calvin has observed, That if we were accorded with the Church of Rome, in
all other points, save in this one particular, the distance between them and us
is so great, That it is impossible we should ever be reconciled: And I must
needs say, That I see no material difference, between them and our Adversaries,
about this matter.

. 11. Mr. Cr. in the close of his Prefatory Discourse, tells the Reader, Thou
art beholding to the Learned Author for the penning of this Tract; but for the
publishing of it to another. And Mr. W. has framed it in the form of a Letter
to a private Friend, that the Reader might guess, he had no hand at all in
publishing of it; whereas a near Kinsman of his, assured me, That Mr. W. in a
Letter to himself, had confessed that his Sermon came abroad by his own
appointment; which I do the rather believe, knowing his relation to the
Stationer, for whom it was Printed. However I am glad, that it is made public,
that this point may be the better cleared by a deliberate examination of the
utmost that can be said against it; only I wish, that this task had lighted
upon some other man, who has more leisure, and better abilities to undertake
it; that so precious a truth might not suffer, through the unskilfulness of a
feeble Advocate. How much the Reader is beholding to Mr. W. for Penning or
Printing of his Sermon, will appear in the issue of this debate.

CHAP. V. Wherein Mr. Woodbridges Introduction, Text, Doctrine, and Proofs, are
briefly considered.
HAving passed Mr. Woodbridges Outworks, we shall now proceed to survey the
Fort it self, which (in his own conceit) is built so impregnable, That nothing
consistent with the Scriptures, can be brought against it. How ever, I am not
discouraged from attempting it, knowing, That strong holds more unlikely to be
vanquished, have been laid flat and level with the ground, Lam. 4.12. 2 Cor.
10.4, 5.

In his Preface, he tells the worthy Sir, to whom he communicated his Notes,
That he will not trouble him with his Introduction to the Text; or the
Applicatory part of his Sermon. It was very little that he spoke in either; but
I well remember, that he began and concluded with a great mistake. In his
Introduction he told us, that the scope of this Epistle was to prove, That we
are justified by Faith, i. e. (as he explained it) That we are not justified in
the sight of God, before we believe; and that Faith is the condition on our
part to qualify us for Justification; whereas the scope of the Apostle (as
shall be shown more largely hereafter) was not to assert the time of our
Justification, but the matter of it; he intended not to show when, but
wherewith we are justified; to wit, not by Works, or Righteousness in us, but
by the Righteousness of Christ freely imputed to us; which we apprehend, and
apply by Faith Calv. de vera Pacif. p. 317.
. By taking Faith in a proper sense, as a condition required on our part, he
accuses the Apostle of Self-contradiction; who all along denies, That we are
justified by works; seeing Faith considered as a condition, is a work of ours,
no less then love.

In that part of his Application, where he addressed himself to unbelievers, he
told them, That Christ was not a High Priest or Advocate to them, and that they
had no Court of Mercy to appeal unto; which was all one, as if he had said,
Christ did not die for them; and that they had no more ground to believe in
him, then the Devils themselves; and consequently that their case was desperate
and irrecoverable, though final unbelievers have not Christ for their High
Priest; for he neither died, nor prayed for them, Joh. 17.9. Yet he performed
both acts of his Priesthood, scil. Oblation and Intercession, for all that were
given him by the Father, long before the Conversion of many of them. He laid
down his life, not only for those sheep that were called, but for those also
that were not then gathered into his fold, Joh. 10.15, 16. And in the
seventeenth of John, he says expressly, That he prayed not only for them that
did believe, but for them also that should believe in him. Verse. 20. Though it
be true, That Christ shed not his Blood for Reprobates, yet we know not who are
reprobated, until it shall be made manifest by their final unbelief. Indeed, we
cannot say to an unbeliever, That Christ did die for him; and we have as little
reason to say, That Christ did not die for him, seeing the Word does reveal
neither; and by affirming the latter, we do quite bar up the door of Hope,
which ought to be held open to the worst of sinners. Our duty is to declare,
That Christ is come into the world to save sinners, and to exhort all men every
where to believe him. We were as good bid the Devils to believe, as those for
whom Christ is not a High Priest; it is in vain for any to believe in Christ,
if he never prayed, nor offered up himself a Sacrifice unto God for them; but
seeing Mr. W. has not troubled his Friend with these passages, I shall not
trouble the Reader any longer about them.

. 2. That the Saints, or true Believers (under which notion he writes to the
Romans See Chap. 1.7.
) are justified by Faith; We do readily yield it to be a truth, it being in
terminis in the Text. I dare say, no man that is called a Christian, did ever
deny it; and therefore he might have spared his pains in transcribing any more
places of Scripture for confirmation of it. But I do much marvel, That so
learned a man as Mr. W. who pretends to be more then ordinarily accurate,
should take in hand a controverted Text, and never open the Terms, nor state
the Question which he meant to handle; for though it be a sinful curiosity for
men by Dicotomies and Tricotomies, Divisions and Subdivisions, to mince and
crumble the Scriptures, till it has lost the sense; yet surely, a workman that
needs not to be ashamed, ought rightly to divide 2 Timothy 2.15. (...) quid sit.
Bez. in loc. Full. Miscel. sac. l. 3. c. 16.
the Word of Truth, explain things that are obscure and dubious; and where
diverse senses are given (as he knows there are of this Text) to disprove the
false, and confirm that which he conceives is true.

. 3. There is a vaste distance between the Apostles Proposition [ a man is
justified by Faith,] and Mr. Woodbridges Inference, Ergo, Justification does in
no sense precede Faith. Justification by Faith, and Justification before Faith,
are not opposita, but diversa; though they differ, yet they are not
contradictory to each other: The Scriptures which prove the former, intend no
strife, or quarrel against the latter; in a word, The proof of the one, does
not disprove the other. The Scripture which he made his theme, Romans 5.1.
Therefore being justified by Faith, we have peace with God, etc, concludes
nothing at all against Justification before Faith; For (1) we may without any
violence to the Text, place the Comma after justified, (as thus) Being
justified, by Faith we have peace with God: This reading is agreeable both to
the Apostles scope, and to the Context. His scope here was not to show the
efficacy of Faith in our Justification, but what benefits we have by the death
of Christ Willet. in Romans 5 p. 235. Pa^aeus. Ib. prima effic^cia mortis Christ^
est justificatio. etc.
; the first of which is Justification, and the consequent thereof is peace with
God. Again, the Illative Particle ( Therefore) shows, that this place is a
Corollary, or Deduction from the words immediately foregoing, which ascribed
our Justification wholly to the Death and Resurrection of Jesus Christ, Chap. 4
ult. The Apostle thence infers, Being justified q. d. Seeing we are justified
freely, without works, by the death of Christ, by Faith we have peace with God;
the Lord powerfully drawing our hearts to believe this, we have boldness and
confidence toward God, the cause of fear being taken away; or as the Syriack
and vulgar Latin read it, Let us have peace with God; let us by Faith improve
this Grace, for the establishing of our hearts in perfect peace. Now according
to this reading, his own Text will give in evidence against him, That Faith is
not the cause or antecedent, but an effect and consequent of our Justification,
procured and obtained by the death of Christ. But (2) if we take the words, as
commonly they are read, the sense comes all to one, scil. That being justified
by Christ (who is the sole object of our Faith) we have peace with God; who by
the Faith which he creates in us, causes us to enjoy this reconciliation; by
virtue whereof, our Conscience is so firmly grounded, that we are not moved by
any temptation, or beaten down by any terror Diodat. in loc.
. The Work of Faith is not to procure our Justification, but to beget peace in
our Consciences. So then, the words being rightly understood, they neither deny
Justification before Faith, nor assert Justification by the act or habit of
Faith, which Mr. W. would conclude from thence.

. 4. The next Scripture, whose suffrage is desired against us, is Gal. 2.16. We
have believed in Christ, that we might be justified by the Faith of Christ.
Where (says Mr. W.) Justification is expressly made a Consequent of Faith. To
which I Answer (1) That this does no more infer, That we are not justified
before we believe, then that of our Savior, Matthew. 5.44, 45. Love your
enemies, etc. that ye may be the children of your Father in Heaven, 1. Pet. 2.9.
infers, That works do go before adoption, contrary to Ephesians. 1.5, 6. 1 John 3.3.
the phrase [ that ye may be] there, is as much, as that ye may be manifested
and declared; that ye may show your selves; Diodat. on Matthew. 5.45.
or, that all men may know, that ye are the children of God, by practicing a
duty so much above the reach of Nature and Morality. A like place we have, Romans
3.26. God set forth his Son to declare his Righteousness, that he might be
just. Now shall we hence infer, That God was not just before? Ut se sanctum and
justum declararet, seu ut gloriam justitia illustraret. Pa^ in loc.
or that Gods justice was a consequent of his sending Christ? Now if we can
understand that clause, [ that he might be just] That he might be known, and
acknowledged to be just: Why may we not as well take this of the Apostle, [
that we might be justified] in the same construction, that we might know that
we are justified, and live in the comfort and enjoyment of it: So that, not the
Being of our Justification, but the Knowledge and Feeling of it, is a
consequent of Faith. Things in Scripture are then said to be, when they are
known to be; so John 15.8. our Savior tells the Disciples, That if they did
bear much fruit, they should be his Disciples, i. e. They should be known and
manifested to be his Disciples, as Chap. 13.35. Our Savior is said at his
Resurrection, to have become the Son of God, Acts 13.33. Because, then (as the
Apostle speaks) he was powerfully declared to be the Son of God, Romans 1.3.
Again, things are sa^d not to be, which do not appear, as Melchisedec is said
to be without Father and Mother, etc. Heb. 7.3. Because his Lineage and
Pedigree, is not known; so we are said to be justified, or not justified,
according as this Grace is revealed to us. But (2) in the Text it is, We have
believed, that we might be justified by Faith; so that from hence it can be
inferred only, That we are not justified by Faith, before believing; and that
the sentence of Justification is not terminated in our Consciences, before we
do believe.

. 5. His next Proof is grounded upon the order of the words, Romans 8.30. As
glory (says he) follows Justification, so does Justification follow Vocation
unto Faith. Whereunto I answer, ((...)) That the order of words in Scripture,
do not show the order and dependence of the things themselves: The Jews have a
Proverb, Non esse prius aut posterius in Scriptura Salom. Jarchi. in Genesis 6.3.
. The first and last must not be strictly urged in Scripture; for that is not
always set first, which is first in Nature: If we should reason from the order
of words in Scripture, we should make many absurdities See Babing. on Genesis 4.^.
, as 1 Samuel 6.14. It is said that they clave the Wood of the Cart, and offered
the Kine for a burnt offering unto the Lord: And then in the next Verse it
follows, That the Levites took down the Ark out of the Cart; as if they had
clave the Cart before the Ark was taken down, which could not be. In 2 Timothy
1.9. it is said, God has saved us, and called us; yet I suppose Mr. W. will
not say, That men are saved, before they are called. So though Vocation be set
before Justification, yet it does not follow, that it precedes it in order of
Nature. (2) The Apostles scope here, is not to show in what order these
Benefits are bestowed upon us, but how inseparably they are linked unto our
Predestination; and that it is Impossible, either sin or affliction should make
them miserable, whom God has chosen. (3) I see no inconvenience at all, in
saying, That the Apostle here speaks of Justification, as it is declared and
terminated in our Consciences, which some learned men Mr. Owen. Mr. Kendal
against Goodwin, cap 4. p. 138.145.
do make the formale of Justification; and in this respect, I shall grant him,
That Justification is a consequent of Vocation.

. 6. Mr. Woodbridges next Allegation is from Romans 4.24. Righteousness shall be
imputed to us, if we believe. Ergo, It was not imputed before we did believe. I
answer, That the consequence is not necessary; for this Particle ( if) is used
sometimes declaratively: It does not always propound the condition, by which a
benefit is obtained, but sometimes it serves to describe the person to whom the
benefit does belong See Mr. Walkers Socinianism Discovered, p. 224.
. Descriptions are taken from Effects and Consequences, as well as from the
Causes or Antecedent Conditions: As for instance, If a man (says the Apostle)
purge himself from these, he shall be a vessel unto honor, 2 Timothy 2.21. The
Papists infer from hence, That a man is made a vessel of honor, by purging
himself, etc. Our Protestant Divines D. Sutcliff on Romans 11. p. 61.
do answer, That the place proves not, that a man is hereby made, or becomes a
vessel of honor, but that hereby he is manifested and known to be a vessel of
honor. So Heb. 3.6. Whose house are we, if we hold fast our confidence, and the
rejoicing of the hope firm unto the end. Which we are not to understand, as if
these things did make us to be the house of God, but that hereby we appear, and
approve our selves to be the house of God Dr. Jo^es on ^^e plate.
. This Conjunction ( if D^. Dow^^. of Justif. l. 7. c. 4 sect. 16. ^. 473.
) is many times annexed unto the Marks and Cognizances of such as shall be
saved, or are happy, which do show, Non propter quid beand^ sunt, vel servandi,
sed quales beati sunt, quales servandi. Not upon what conditions, but what
manner of persons are finally saved. I see no reason, but it may be so
understood in this place; his Righteousness is imputed to us, if we believe, q.
d. Hereby we may know, and be assured, that Christ's Righteousness is imputed to
us, that we, whether Jews, or Gentiles, are the persons to whom this grace
belongs; if God has drawn our hearts to believe, and obey the Gospel; in
regard that none do, or can believe, but such as are ordained to life Acts
13.48. and 2.47.
, and to obtain salvation by Jesus Christ. The Lord works Faith in none, but in
them, to whom he has imputed the Righteousness of his Son.

. 7. The other Scriptures he has brought, conclude as weakly against us, as
any of the former, as Acts 10.43. Through his name, whosoever believes in him,
shall receive remission of sins. And Acts 26.18. That they may receive
forgiveness of sins -- who are sanctified by Faith; with Acts 13.39. By him all
that believe are justified from all things, from which ye could not be
justified by the Law of Moses. To which (says Mr. W.) might be added,
multitudes of other places. I confess his Concordance would have furnished him
with many such places, but no more to the purpose, then these he has cited;
which though they affirm, That Believers are justified, yet they deny not the
Justification of the Elect, before believing. In the former it is, Whosoever
believes, shall receive remission of sins; it is not, By believing, we obtain
remission of sins, or God does not discount men's sins unto them, till they do
believe. The giving of remission, and the receiving of remission, are two
things; the former is Gods act, who is the only Justifier, the latter is ours;
the former is properly Justification, and not the latter; though it be called
so in a passive and improper sense. We know a Prince pardons a malefactor when
he gives his consent, That the Sentence of the Law should be reversed, and
confirms it with his Hand and Seal: This Pardon is valid in Law, and secures
the offender from punishment, though it come not to his hands for a good while
after. So a Father gives, and bequeaths an Estate to his Child that is an
Infant; which by the donation of the Father, belongs to the Child, though the
Child do not receive, and enjoy it, till he comes to age. So God was in Christ
reconciling the world to himself, not imputing their sins unto them; Though no
man does receive and enjoy this Grace, till he does believe; we obtain
remission of sins by Christ alone, but we receive it by Faith.

. 8. In the 13 of the Acts 39 the Apostle shows the excellency of the Gospel
above the Law; or the privilege of the Saints in the New Testament, above them
that lived under the Old Administration; Who (says he) are justified from all
things, etc. There was a cleansing and purgation of sin provided in the Law,
but not like unto that which is revealed in the Gospel Zech 13.1^.
. For (1) the Law did not cleanse them from all sins, for some sins it allowed
of no Sacrifice at all; as for Blasphemy, sins of presumption, etc. But now the
Blood of that Sacrifice, which is exhibited in the Gospel, cleanses us from
all sin, 1 John 1.7. Mark 3.28. (2) Those Sacrifices made them clean, but in an
External Typical manner, as To the purifying of the flesh, Heb. 9.13. they
could not make them perfect, as pertaining to the Conscience, Heb. 10.12.
Whereas the cleansing which is made by the Blood of Christ, is Spiritual and
Internal, It purges men's consciences from dead works, Heb. 9.14. They that are
purged herewith, have no more conscience of sin, de jure, if not de facto,
Chap. 10.2. They have the answer of a good conscience toward God, q. d. They
can plead not guilty, 1 Pet. 3.21. (3) The legal cleansing was by Sacrifice
after Sacrifice, Heb. 10.3. Whereas Christ by one Sacrifice, once offered, has
taken away all the sins of his people; or as it is in Daniel, has made an end
of sin: So that here is nothing at all of the time of our Justification, though
he affirms, That they that believe, are thus perfectly justified; yet it
follows not from this, or any other Text, That the Elect are not justified,
before they believe; and much less, That a man is justified by the gracious act
or habit of Faith.

. 9. Mr. W. Page 2. gives his Reader our Sense of these Scriptures. The only
Answer (says he) which is given to these, and the like Texts, is this, That by
Justification we are to understand a Justification in the Court of Conscience,
or the Evidence and Declaration of a Justification already past before God: So
that Faith is said to justify us, not because it does justify us before God,
but because it does declare to our Consciences, that we are justified. Now
because this report is very imperfect, I shall crave the patience of the
Reader, whilst I declare our Judgment a little more fully, concerning this
Matter, together with the Grounds and Reasons that do uphold it; and then I
shall return to secure this Answer against the Exceptions Mr. W. has made
against it. But first, I shall show the several Explications which Divines have
given of his Proposition [ A man is justified by Faith.]

CHAP. VI. The several Opinions of Divines, touching the meaning of this
Position, [A man is justified by Faith.]
THe Question depending between me, and Mr. W. is not, Whether we are justified
by Faith? which the Scripture frequently affirms, and no man that I know,
denies it; Papists and Protestants, Orthodox and Socinians, Remonstrants and
Contra-Remonstrants, do unanimously consent, That we are justified by Faith.
All the difference is, about the Sense and Meaning of this Proposition, A man
is justified by Faith. Whether Faith therein, be to be taken Properly, or
Tropically? For though there be great variety in Expression Vid. Stegm. Photin.
p. 739, etc.
amongst Divines, concerning this Matter, yet all their several Opinions and
Explications may be reduced unto these two heads. The first takes Faith in
sensu proprio, for the act, or habit of Faith; the other takes Faith metonymice
and relative, for the object of Faith, ( i. e.) The obedience and satisfaction
of Jesus Christ.

. 2. Our Protestant Divines (who have hitherto been counted Orthodox) do take
Faith in this Proposition [ A man is justified by Faith] in a Tropical and
F^gurative Sense; as thus* A man is justified in the sight of God, from all sin
and punishment by Faith. i. e. By the Obedience and Righteousness of Jesus
Christ, in whom we believe, and upon whom we rely for Life and Righteousness.
Nor is this any unusual Trope, either in Scripture, or in other Authors, to put
Habitum, vel actum pro objecto, as Romans 8.24. Hope that is seen, is not hope,
i. e. The thing that is seen, is not hoped for. Christ is oftentimes called our
Hope, our Joy, our Love, etc. because he is the object of these Acts and
Affections; when the same thing is attributed distinctly, both to the act, and
the object, it must needs be attributed to one, in a proper, and to the other,
in an improper sense; and therefore (says Dr. Downham Of Just. l. 6. c. 15.
sect. 2. Ib. p. 415.
) When Justification is attributed to Faith, it cannot be attributed in the
same sense, as to the death and obedience of Christ in propriety of Speech; but
of necessity it is to be understood by a Metonymy: Faith being put for the
object of Faith, which is the Righteousness of Christ, etc. And holy Pemble
Vind. Fid.
, If we list not to be contentious, it is plain enough (says he) that in those
places, where the Apostle treats of Justification by Faith, he means the Grace
of God in Jesus Christ, opposing Works and Faith; that is, the Law and the
Gospel, the Righteousness of the Law, to the Righteousness of the Gospel, which
is no other but the Righteousness of Christ. Thus (says he) Faith is taken,
Gal. 3.23. before Faith came. i. e. Before Christ came, and the clear
exhibition of his Righteousness: And in this sense (as another has observed)
it is used at least thirteen times in this Chapter, where the Apostle expressly
treats of our Justification before God. De fide and Justi. Cont. 2. fol. 47.
Albertus Pighius, though a Papist, was so far convinced of this truth, by
reading of Calvin's Institutions, that he acknowledged, If we speak formally and
properly, we are justified, neither by Faith nor Charity, but by the only
Righteousness of Christ communicated to us, and by the only mercy of God,
forgiving our sins.

. 3. Some of our Divines, who do utterly deny, That Faith in this Question is
taken sensu proprio, or that the (...) credere, or act of believing is imputed
to us for Righteousness, do yet ascribe an instrumentallity, or inferior
causality unto Faith it self, in our Justification before God. They say, That
we are justified by Faith instrumentally, and relatively; which terms, I
confess, sound harshly in my ears, but I hope, I shall be excused, if I do not
understand them, seeing a far learneder man Dr. Hammonds Letters to Dr. C^. p.
120.
then my self, has professed, That they were not very intelligible to him.
That Faith is taken relatively in this Question of Justification, to wit, For
the object, it relates unto; Christ, and his Righteousness, I do readily grant;
but that it justifies us Relatively, I cannot assent to it; for it seems to me,
to carry this sense with it, either (1) that Faith does procure our
Justification, though not by its own worth and dignity, yet through the virtue,
and merit of its object. As the Papists say of Works, That they do justify and
save us tincta sanguine Christi, being dipped in the Blood of Christ: Or (2)
that Faith, together with Christ its object, does make us just in the sight of
God; whereby it is made a social cause with the blood of Christ, which shall be
sufficiently disproved anon. Again, that Faith is a passive Instrument of our
Justification, to wit, such an Instrument whereby we receive and apply this
benefit to our selves, was shown before Cap. 4. sect. 3.
; but that it is an active efficacious Instrument to make us just and righteous
in the sight of God, is no part of my Creed. For 1. it seems to me a
contradiction to say, That Faith is not to be taken sensu proprio, but
metonymice, for the object thereof, and yet say, That we are justified by Faith
instrumentally; for it is not the object, but the act of Faith* which is an
Instrument: Faith considered as an Instrument, is taken sensu proprio, and
consequently the (...) credere, which they disclaim, must be said to justify.
2. Mr. Baxter Aphoris. 56. p. 219.
in my judgment disputes rationally against this notion. If Faith (says he)
be the Instrument of our Justification, it is the Instrument either of God, or
man; not of man, for Justification is Gods act, he is the sole Justifier. Romans
3.26. man does not justify himself; not of God, for it is not God that
believes. To which I add, that God neither needs, nor is capable of using an
Instrument in the act of justifying; for though he uses Instruments to declare
and reveal this Grace to sinners, yet not to will it to particular persons; the
acts of his will are not wrought by any Organ, or Instrument, without himself.
3. By making Faith the Instrument of our Justification, Justification is made
the Effect, and Faith the Cause; and so consequently, a man shall be said to
justify himself See Mr. Baxters Append. p. 121.
, whereas the Scripture every where ascribes our Justification unto God and
Christ, making us totally passive in this work, Romans 3.24, 26. and 8.33. Ephesians.
2.8. We can no more justify our selves, then raise our selves from the dead,
Ephesians. 2.1, 5. or then we could give our selves a being, when as yet we were not,
Verse 10. Man is so far from being the total, or principal Cause of his
Justification, that he is no cause at all; by ascribing the least causality, or
efficiency to man, in his Justification, we derogate from the Grace of God in
Jesus Christ.

. 4. Others do take Faith in a proper sense, as the Papists, Socinians, and
Remonstrants; amongst whom, though there be some difference in Expression, yet
they all agree in this, That by Faith in this Proposition [ A man is justified
by Faith] is meant the act or habit of Faith, or such a Faith as is accompanied
with faithful Actions. The Papists say, That Faith, and other inherent Graces,
though in their own nature they do not deserve Justification, yet through the
merits of Christ, and Gods gracious acceptance, they do procure and obtain the
forgiveness of our sins. Though they ascribe a meritoriousness to Faith, it is
but in a qualified sense. Faith (says Bellarmine Bellar. de Just. l. 1.
Quatuor ^ult. capit.
) does but Suo quidem modo mereri remissionem, after a manner merit remission,
scil. By virtue of Gods Promise and Covenant, who has annexed forgiveness unto
this condition. If a King (says he) does promise a Beggar a thousand pound a
year upon no condition, then indeed the Beggar does not deserve it; but if it
be upon condition, that he do some small matter, as to come and fetch it, or to
bring him a Posie of flowers, then he does deserve it, because the promiser is
bound unto performance: And in this sense Mr. B. These. 26.
ascribes a meritoriousness to works. But the chief difference between them and
us, lies in this: We say a man is justified by the imputation of Christ's
Righteousness; they, That we are justified by inherent Righteousness, or by
doing of Righteous Actions, such as are Faith, Love, Fear, etc. Ipsa fides in
Christum (says Bellarmine De Justif. l. 1. c. 17.
) est justitia. Faith it self is our righteousness; And that it does justify
us, impetrando, promerendo, and inchoando ^ustificationem. Arminius, and the
Remonstrants, though they have exploded the word merit, yet they attribute as
much to Faith, and faithful Actions* as the Papists themselves. Dico (says
Arminius Ep ad Hip. pol. and Resp. ad 31. Art. Art. ^.
) ipsum fidei actum, (...) credere, imputari in justitiam, idque sensu proprio*
non metonymice. The very same is affirmed by Vorstius, Bertius, Episcopius, and
the rest of the Remonstrants. Their Opinion in brief is this, That God in the
Legal Covenant required the exact obedience of all his Commandments, but now in
the Covenant of Grace he requires Faith, which in his gracious acceptance
stands instead of that obedience to the Moral Law, which we ought to perform;
Which (say they) is procured by the merit of Christ, for whose sake God
accounts our imperfect faith, to be perfect Righteousness.

. 5. Some of our late Divines (who seem to disclaim the Doctrine of the Papists
and Arminians) say the very same; who explain themselves to this effect, That
Faith does justify as a condition, or antecedent qualification; by which we
are made capable of being justified, according to the order and constitution of
God: The fulfilling of which condition (say they) is our Evangelical
Righteousness, whereby we are justified in the sight of God. Mr. B. is so fond
of this notion, That although in one place Epistle to the Reader before his
Saint^ Rest, p. 7.
he finds fault with the length of our Creeds and Confessions; yet he would
have this made an article of our Creed, a part of our Childrens Catechisms, and
to be believed by every man that is a Christian Aphoris. The^ 20. p. 109.
; so apt are we to smile upon our own Babes. Though I honor Mr. Baxter for his
excellent parts, yet I must suspend my assent to his new Creed. I shall prove
anon Cap. 9.
, That Faith is not said to justify, as an antecedent condition, which
qualifies us for Justification; but at present, I shall only render him the
Reasons of my disbelief, Why I cannot look upon Faith as that Evangelical
Righteousness, by which we are justified. I shall not insist upon it, though it
be not altogether unconsiderable, that this notion is guilty of too much
confederacy, with the aforenamed enemies of the Christian Faith; for though it
is no good Argument to say, That Papists, Socinians, etc. do hold this, or
that, therefore it is not true; yet it will follow, That such and such Tenants
have been held by Papists, etc. and unanimously opposed by our Protestant
Writers; therefore they ought to be the more suspected, and especially such
Tenants of theirs, as are the chief points in difference between us and them,
as this is. Our Brethren that have started this notion, do take Faith, as the
others do, in a proper sense, they attribute as much to the (...) credere, as
Bellarmine, Arminius, or any other. Faith it self (says Mr. B.) is our
Righteousness. There was never any Papist so absurd, as to say, That our Faith,
Love, etc. are perfect Legal Righteousness, but that God judicio misericordiae,
non justitiae, does account and accept of it instead of perfect Righteousness.
For my part I must confess, that I can see no d^fference between them, but in
Expression. The Papists do acknowledge the satisfaction of Christ, and that he
is the meritorious cause of our Justification Counc. Trent. Sess. 6. c. 7.
. They say indeed, That we are not justified by the Righteousness of Christ
imputed* but by a Righteousness inherent in us, or righteous actions performed
by us. And what do our Brethren say less less then this? But I shall not follow
the Parallel, any further.

. 6. The Reasons which turn the Scales of my Judgment against this notion,
That our Faith, or Faithful Actions are that Evangelical Righteousness by which
we are justified, Are

1. If we are not justified by our own works, then our believing* etc. is not
that Evangelical Righteousness by which we are justified; but we are not
justified by our own works* Ergo. The Assumption is written with a Sun beam
throughout the Scripture, Tit. 3.5. Not by works of Righteousness, which we
have done. Romans 11.6. If it be of Works, then were Grace no more Grace. It is
the chief scope of the Apostle throughout this, and the Epistle to the
Galatians, to prove, That we are not justified by works. The sequel of the
Proposition is as evident, Because Faith, and Obedience to Gospel Precepts, are
our works. It is man that believes and obeys, and not God, though we do them by
his help and assistance, yet they are our acts or works; so that consequently,
we are not justified by them in the sight of God. The Papists to elude the
force of this Argument say. That the mind of the Apostle was only to exclude
from Justification, works of Nature, and not of Grace; works which we our
selves do, by our own strength, without the help of Grace, and not those works
which we do by the aid of Grace. But Mr. Pemble answers well Vind. ^id. ^. 37.
; This distinction of works done without grace, and works done by grace, was
devised by one that had neither wit nor grace, being a mere trick to elude the
force of such Scriptures, as do indefinitely exclude all works from our
Justification, without distinguishing, either of the time when they are done,
whether before or after; o^ of the aid and help whereby they are done; whether
by Nature, or by Grace. Others say, that when the Apostle denies, That we are
justified by works, he means that we are not justified by the works of the Law;
but yet by works required in the Gospel, such as are Faith and Faithful
actions, we may be justified. To which I answer, (1) That the Apostle speaks
indefinitely; now the rule is, Non est distinguendum ubi Lex non distinguit: An
indefinite Proposition is equivalent to a universal. A man is not justified by
works, is as much as if he had said, A man is not justified by any works of his
own. (2) The Apostle excludes all works from our Justification, which do make
the reward to be a due debt, Romans 4.4, 5. Now the works required in the Gospel
(supposing it to be a Conditional Covenant) when they are performed, do make
the thing covenanted a due debt, which the promiser is bound to give, no less
then works required in the Law. (3) He denies expressly, that Abraham was
justified by faithful actions, which he performed by the help and assistance of
Gods Spirit, Rom 4.2. (4) They are the same works for the substance, which are
commanded in the Law and the Gospel; there is no Precept enjoined us in the New
Testament, which is not also commanded us in the Moral Law; though the Law does
not expressly command us to believe in Christ, yet virtually, and by consequence
it does: The Law requires us to believe whatsoever God shall reveal, or propose
to us to be believed; and consequently to believe in Christ* when God in his
Gospel shall reveal him to us. There is no reason therefore to interpret this
Proposition [ A man is not justified by works] He is not justified by Legal,
but by Evangelical works, seeing they are for substance one and the same. (5)
There would be no such opposition between Justification by Works, and
Justification by Faith, as the Apostle makes, if we were justified by
Evangelical works of our own performing. All his disputing about Justification
would amount but to mere Logomachy, or strife of words; for there was never any
man so sottish, as to think, that a sinner can be justified by Legal works,
unless the Law be mitigated, and the rigor thereof be in part remitted. The
Apostle does not dispute against Justification by works, which we cannot
perform; but by works, which men presume they are able to perform: He excludes
not only perfect works, but all manner of works that are wrought by us.

. 7. 2. If the Righteousness whereby we are justified, be a perfect
Righteousness, then we are not justified by our Obedience to Gospel precepts.
But the Righteousness, whereby we are justified, is a perfect Righteousness,
Ergo. The Sequel is evident, because our Obedience to Gospel precepts is
imperfect and defective, at least in degrees; we do not believe, love, and obey
so perfectly as we ought, the best of us may say with him in the Gospel, Lord I
believe, help thou my unbelief, Mark 9.24. And when we have done our utmost,
that we are but unprofitable servants, Luke 17.10. Now this imperfection and
defect in our Faith, and other virtues being defectus debiti in esse, is sinful
and culpable Quamdiu augeri potest charitas, profecto illud quod minus est, ex
vitio est. Aug. ep. 29. ad Hieron. Peccatum est, cum charitas minor est quam
debet. Id. lib. de perf. justif. ad 15.^
; for which cause our Savior oftentimes sharply reproved it, Matthew. 6.30. and
8.26. and 14.31. and 16.8, etc. And we are oftentimes exhorted to increase our
Faith, to abound in duties of Obedience, and to perfect holiness, Luke 17.5. 1
These. 4.1. 2 Cor. 7, 1. In this last place the Apostle hints, that the
imperfection of our holiness arises from the filthiness of the flesh and
spirit, and consequently it is a defiled, and sinful imperfection. The
Assumption (that we are not justified by an imperfect righteousness) needs not,
I suppose, any long proof; for surely, God will not account that for perfect
justice, which is not so indeed; for as the Apostle says well, The judgment
of God is according to truth, Romans 2.2. It is certain, God will not justify
any man without Righteousness; and it is as certain, That God will not account
that to be perfect Righteousness, which is imperfect and sinful; to say, That
God does not account our imperfect holiness to be Righteousness judicio
justitiae, but only judicio misericordiae, is a mere shift, which serves but
to set the attributes of God at variance between themselves, which in the
Justification of a sinner do kiss and embrace each other, Psalm. 85.10. When God
judges according to mercy, he judges according to truth; his merciful
judgment is a just, and a righteous judgment; the mercy of God is shown, not
in accounting a sinner perfectly righteous, for that Righteousness which is
imperfect; but in accounting to him that Righteousness, which is not his own,
the perfect Righteousness of the Mediator In this judgment of God, Justice and
Mercy do both meet; Justice, in that he will not justify a sinner without a
perfect Righteousness; Mercy, in that he will accept him for such a
Righteousness, which is neither in him, nor performed by him, but by his surety
the Lord Jesus Christ. Some of our Protestant Divines do call Inherent
holiness, Evangelical Righteousness, in respect of the principle from whence it
flows, A heart purified by Faith; and to distinguish it from that Legal
Righteousness, which Reprobates and Unbelievers have attained to, being but the
fruit of a Natural Conscience. I am sure it is no Protestant Doctrine, that
Inherent Sanctification (which on all hands is acknowledged to be imperfect and
defective) is that Evangelical Righteousness, whereby we are justified in the
sight of God; which must needs be such a Righteousness, as God himself sitting
on the Throne of his Justice can find no fault with at all, but does present
the person that has it, just and perfect before Gods Tribunal.

3. If the Righteousness, whereby we are justified, be the Righteousness of
God, then we are not justified by our Obedience to Gospel precepts; but the
Righteousness whereby we are justified, is the Righteousness of God, Ergo. The
Sequel is clear, because our Obedience to Gospel precepts, is not that
Righteousness which the Scripture calls the Righteousness of God. For though we
receive it from God, it being the gift of his Grace, yet it is every where
called ours; as our Faith, Matthew. 9.2, 22. Romans 1.8. Hab. 2.4. Jam. 1.3. Our
Charity, 2 Cor. 8.8, 24 1 Cor. 16.24. Philem. v. 1, 7. Our Hope, Phil. 1.20. 1
These. 2.19. Our good Works, Matthew. 5.16. Revel. 2.2. Our Patience, Luke 21.19.
2 These. 1.4. Revel. 2.2. and 3.10. and 13.10, etc. Now the Scripture does not
call these Inherent Graces ours, to exclude the Divine assistance in the
working of them, as if they proceeded only from our selves, the strength of
Nature in us or the towardliness of our own wills: The Jews who went about to
establish their own Righteousness, or Justification by their own works, did not
deny that these works are the gift of God; the Pharisee expressly acknowledges
as much, therefore gives thanks unto God for them, Luke 18.11 Agebat gratius
Deo, de sua justitia, proinde a Deo eam se habere credebat. Bell. de Justif. l.
1. c. 8.
. But they are called ours, because they are subjectively in us, and
instrumentally wrought by us; and in opposition to the Righteousness of Christ,
which is neither in us, nor performed by us; but is (as the Scripture rightly
terms it) the Righteousness of God, not the Essential Righteousness of God, as
Osiander supposed, but the Righteousness of our Mediator, God-man; which though
it be Inherent in the Humane Nature, and performed by it, yet is it truly
called the Righteousness of God, because it is the Righteousness of that
Person, who is perfect God: And thus the blood by which we are redeemed, is
called The blood of God, Acts 20.28. Or which is all one, The blood of the Son
of God, 1 John 1.7. The life which was laid down for us, was the life of God, 1
John 3.16. The death by which we are reconciled to God, is the death of his
Son, Romans 5.10. The Obedience by which we are constituted just, Romans 5.19. is
The Obedience of the same Son of God. See Gal. 4.4, 5. Christ's Mediatorial
Righteousness is called the Righteousness of God, to show the dignity, and
perfection of it, it being the Righteousness of so great a person, who is not
only Man, but God: And that we should not think it to be any thing in us from
God, it is sometimes called his blood, Romans 5.9. sometimes his obedience, Verse.
19. By the imputation whereof we are made the Righteousness of God in him, as
he by the imputation of our sins, was made sin for us 2 Cor. 5.21.
. And thus the godly learned, yea, and some of the Popish Doctors have
expounded the Righteousness of God, mentioned in the 1, 3, and 10 Chapters to
the Romans, of Christ and his Righteousness See Downh. of Justif. p. 130.
; which, says Cajetan, is called the Righteousness of God, Quia est in Deo
personaliter, sum quia est apud divinum tribunal vera justitia, ad differentiam
justitiarum nostrarum, quia apud divinum tribunal sunt velut pannus
menstruatus, etc. i. e. Because it is personally in God, as also, because at
Gods tribunal it is accounted Righteousness, and to distinguish it from our
Righteousness, which in the sight of God, is as filthy rags. There is nothing
more clear, then that our Obedience to Evangelical precepts, is not that
Righteousness of God the Scripture mentions; which is not inherent in us, but
imputed to us, being without us in Christ, God-man. The Assumption, That the
Righteousness whereby we are justified, is the Righteousness of God, is
undeniably proved from Romans 1.17. and 3.21. and 10.3. In which last place, the
Apostle shows, there is such an opposition betwixt Gods Righteousness, and
ours, in the point of Justification, That whosoever seeks to be justified by
his own Righteousness, cannot be justified by the Righteousness of God; and
therefore he himself professes, that in the Question of Justification he
utterly renounceth his own righteousness, desiring to be found in Christ's
Righteousness alone, Phil. 3.9. This Righteousness of Christ, which is out of
us in him, is properly called Evangelical Righteousness, because it is the
matter, or substance of the whole Gospel; the Gospel does reveal it, and not
the Law. Romans 1.17. If the (...) credere, or act of believing, were that
Evangelical Righteousness, by which we are justified, this Scripture would be
guilty of a gross Tautology, The Righteousness of God is revealed from Faith to
Faith; for then the meaning must be, our Evangelical Righteousness is revealed
from Evangelical Righteousness to Evangelical Righteousness, which is absurd.

. 9.4. If we are not justified by two Righteousnesses, existing (...) two
distinct subjects, then our Obedience to Gospel precepts is not that
Righteousness, whereby we are justified: But we are not justified by two
Righteousnesses existing in two distinct subjects. Ergo. The Sequel is
manifest, in regard the Righteousness of Christ is inherent in him, and
obedience to Gospel precepts, is a Righteousness inherent in us. The Scripture
sundry times declares, That we are justified by Christ, and his Righteousness,
Romans 3.24. and 5.9, 19. Now if we were likewise justified by our Obedience to
Gospel precepts, it would follow, That we are justified by two Righteousnesses
existing in two distinct subjects. But this is gainsaid in the Assumption,
which will be secured by this proof; If by Christ's Righteousness alone we are
made perfectly just, and righteous in the sight of God, then there is no other
Righteousness which concurs with his to our Justification: For what needs an
addition to that which is perfect? But by Christ's Righteousness alone we are
made perfectly just, and righteous in the sight of God; as these, and many
other Scriptures do witness, Heb. 1.3. and 10.14. Col. 1.22. and 2.10, 13.
Again, if we are justified partly by Christ's Righteousness, and partly by our
own, our Faith for Justification must rely partly upon Christ, and partly upon
our selves. Paul might have desired to be found in his own Righteousness; But
our faith and trust for Justification, may not in any part rely upon our
selves, Jere. 17.5. Phil. 3.3. Gal. 5.2, 3, 4. The Adversaries of Grace (as we
showed before) acknowledge, that it is the safest course to trust and rely
upon Christ alone, and to fetch the comfort of our Justification from his
perfect Obedience only.

. 10.5. That which overthrows the main difference, between the Law and the
Gospel, ought not be admitted; for the confounding of them will open an inlet
to innumerable Errors; nay by this means the Gospel it self will become a mere
cipher. The Apostle we see was exceeding careful to keep these Doctrines
distinct each from other; and therefore throughout all his Writings he still
opposes the Law and Grace. Works and Faith, our Righteousness and Christ's
Righteousness; instructing us thereby, how needful it is they should be kept a
sunder. But the making our Obedience to Gospel precepts, the Righteousness
whereby we are justified, overthrows the main difference between the Law and
the Gospel. Ergo. For herein (as Bishop Downham well ob^^^ves Of Justif. l. 1.
c. 4. sect 7.
) stands the chief Agreement, and Difference between the Law, and the Gospel;
they agree in this, That unto Justification, both do require the perfect
fulfilling of the Law; but herein they differ, That the Law requires to
Justification, a Righteousness inherent in us, and perfect Obedience to be
performed in our own persons; the Gospel reveals for our Justification the
perfect Righteousness of an other, even of Christ, which is accepted in their
behalf, that do believe in him, as if it had been performed in their own
persons. Now if Faith, and new Obedience be that Evangelical Righteousness
whereby we are justified, then does the Gospel also propound for our
Justification, a Righteousness inherent in us, and performed by us; and so
consequently there remains no material difference between the Law and Gospel,
especially seeing the same duties are prescribed in both. If any shall say,
That the Gospel precepts do not require such exact and perfect Obedience, as
those in the Law, their Assertion will want a Proof; nay, these and such like
Scriptures, do prove it to be utterly false, 1 John 3.16. Matthew. 5*44, 45. 1
Pet. 1.15, 16. A defect in degrees is a sin against the Gospel, as well as
against Legal precepts. To these I might add all those Arguments, which our
Divines have used against Justification by Inherent Righteousness; but this may
suffice to show, That Faith and Obedience to other Gospel precepts, is not that
Righteousness whereby we are justified in the sight of God.

. 11. Now briefly my sense of this Proposition [ We are justified by Faith] is
no other, then that which has been given by all our Ancient Protestant
Divines, who take Faith herein, Objectively, not Properly, and explain
themselves to this effect. We are justified from all sin and death, by the
satisfaction and obedience of Jesus Christ; who is the sole Object or
Foundation of our Faith, or whose Righteousness we receive and apply unto our
selves by Faith. Yet I say it does not follow, That it was not applied to us by
God; or that God did not impute Righteousness to us, before we had Faith: We
that believe, are justified by the Righteousness of Christ; it is no good
Consequence, Ergo We were not justified in the sight of God, before we did
believe; but now that we may (...), Speak the truth in love, I shall give the
Reader a clearer account of my Judgment, concerning this Matter, in the
following Chapter.

CHAP. VII. Wherein the Question about the time of our Justification is
distinctly stated; and these two Propositions [A man is justified before Faith]
and [A man is justified by Faith] reconciled.
THat we may avoid mistakes, I shall briefly declare, (1) What we do understand
by Justification? (2) What, by being justified in the sight of God? And (3)
when we are justified in the sight of God? As touching the first of these, It
would be but (...), a needless expense of time, to enter upon a large
discourse, concerning the signification of the word, and the difference between
Justification and Sanctification. We all know, that Justification in general,
is the making of one just and righteous: Now there are two ways, whereby a
person is made or constituted righteous, viz. by Infusion, or by Imputation.

1. By Infusion, when the Habitual Qualities of Righteousness are wrought in a
person, by any means whatsoever; and these habits are put forth in a universal
and perfect Conformity to the rule of Righteousness: And thus no man was ever
justified since the fall, for as the Apostle speaks, Romans 3.10. There is none
righteous, no not one; no man, whether regenerate or unregenerate, is righteous
with Inherent Righteousness, neither his Internal Habits nor External Actions,
are exactly commensurate to the rule of Righteousness; the Church
acknowledges, that her righteousnesses (i. e. Her best, compleatest, and
exactest Righteousness) were as filthy rags, Isa. 64.6. And the Apostle
accounted his own Righteousness but loss and dung, in reference to his
Justification, Phil. 3.8, 9. Ipsa justitia nostra ad examen justitiae divinae
deducta, injustitia est, sordet in districtione judicis quod fulget in opinione
operantis. Greg. l. 5. in 3. cap. Job.


2. By Imputation, or gracious Acceptance; as when God does not account or
charge a man's sins upon him, but accepts him as just and righteous, deals with
him as a righteous person, or as if he had never sinned: This latter is that
Justification which we are now treating of. God justifies a man, when he
accounts and esteems him righteous.

. 2. The next thing propounded was, What is meant by the sight of God? This
phrase is variously used. (1) Sometimes it relates unto the thoughts or
knowledge of God, as Heb. 4.13. All things are naked, and manifest in his
sight. i. e. God has a clear and distinct knowledge of all things whatsoever:
And thus a man is justified in the sight of God, when God knows and esteems him
to be just and righteous. (2) The sight of God relates more peculiarly to his
Legal justice; for although in articulo providentiae, in the Doctrine of Divine
Providence, Seeing and Knowing are all one, as Job 28.24. He looks to the
ends of the Earth, and sees under the whole Heaven. i. e. He knows and takes
notice of all things, both in Heaven and Earth; yet in articulo
justificationis, in the Doctrine of Justification, they are constantly
distinguished throughout the Scripture, and never promiscuously used the one
for the other. God is never said, to cover, blot out, or wash away the sins of
his people out of his knowledge, but out of his sight, Levit. 16.30. Psalm.
32.2. and Romans 4.2, 7. Psalm. 51.9. God sees their sins, for whom his Law is not
satisfied, Nehem. 4.5. Jer. 18.23.
In regard that his truth and justice does oblige him to take notice of, and
punish them for their sins. Again, He sees not their sins, for whom he has
received a full compensation; because it is contrary to justice to enter into
judgment against a person, who either by himself, or surety, has made
satisfaction for his offense Quod tegitur, non videtur, quod non vid tur, non
imputa^ur; quod non impatatur, non pun^etu^i: Jeron. in Psalm. 32.

Vid. Aug. in Psalm. 32. Si voluit tegere, noluit videre, etc.

See Mr. Reynolds his Similitude, Sup c* 3. sect 6.


. And in this respect God is said, not to see the sins of his people, which yet
he knows to be in them; which does not detract from his omnisciency, but
exceedingly magnifies his Justice, and that perfect atonement which Christ has
made in their behalf; so that all, that are clothed with the Innocence,
Righteousness, and Satisfaction of Christ, they are justified in the sight of
God. i. e. Divine Justice cannot charge them with any of their sins, nor
inflict upon them the least of those punishments which their sins deserve; but
contrariwise he beholds them, as persons perfectly righteous, and accordingly
deals with them, as such, who have no sin at all in his sight* (3) A late
Divine of singular worth Mr. Kendal against Goodw^n, cap. 4. p. 138.
, has another Construction of this phrase, [ In the sight of God,] who
observes that the word [ sight] though it be for the form active, yet for the
substance of it, it is rather passive; and therefore it is not attributable to
God, as it is to us, but in God it signifies his making of us to see; and we
are said to be justified in his sight, when he makes it, as it were, evident to
our sight, that we are justified. But with due respect to that learned man
(whom I highly honor for his worthy Labors) I conceive this phrase must have
some other meaning in this debate; for else, that distinction of Justification
in foro Des, and in foro conscientiae, (which has been made use of by all our
Protestant Divines, and whereof there is great need in this present
controversy,) would be but a mere Tautology; for though it be the same
Justification, wherewith we are justified in the sight of God, and in the Court
of Conscience; yet the terms are not equipollent and convertible, but do admit
of distinct considerations: though he that is justified in foro conscientiae,
is also justified in foro Dei; yet every one that is justified in foro Dei, is
not justified in foro conscientiae.

. 3. Now according to these several Senses which are given of this
forementioned phrase, it will be easy to resolve the third Query, concerning
the time of our Justification, when we were justified in the sight of God? 1.
If we take it in this last Construction, I shall grant, That we are not
justified in the sight of God, before we believe: We do not know, nor can we
plead the benefits and comforts of this Blessed Privilege until we do believe;
it is by Faith, that the Righteousness of God is revealed to us; and it is by
his knowledge (notitia sui,) that Christ does justify us, Romans 1.17. Isai.
53.11. 1 Pet. 3.21.
or inables us to plead, not guilty, to all the Indictments and Menaces of the
Law. But 2. if we refer it to the justice of God, (which I conceive to be the
most proper and genuine use of it) we were justified in the sight of God, when
Christ exhibited, and God accepted the full satisfaction in his Blood, for all
our sins; that ransom of his set them, Gal. 3.13. 1 John 1.7. Col. 1.22. Ephesians.
5.27.
for whom he died, free from the Curse of the Law, cleansed them from all their
sins, and presented them holy, blameless, and unreproveable in the sight of
God; so that the eye of Divine Justice cannot behold in them the least spot of
sin. This perfect cleansing, is the sole and immediate effect of the death of
Christ, in regard that no other cause concurs therewith, in producing of it. 3.
If we refer it to the knowledge of God, we were justified in his sight, when he
willed or determined in himself, not to impute to us our sins, or to inflict
those punishments upon us, which our sins deserve; but contrariwise to deal
with us as righteous persons, having given us the Righteousness of his own Son.
God does certainly know whatsoever he wills: Now God having from all eternity,
absolutely and immutably willed the Righteousness of his Son to all his Elect;
he saw, or knew them to be righteous in his Righteousness, even when he willed
it.

. 4. For the clearer understanding of the Point in question, I shall give in my
Judgment concerning it, as distinctly as I can, in three Propositions.

Fateamur ergo necesse est, justificationis nomen vary sumi, nisi velimus
existimare Apostolos a se dissentire, and pugnantia enunciare, etc. Whit. Cont.
1. q. c. 9.
, but more especially, Pro volitione divina, and pro re volita, (as the Schools
do speak.) (1) For the Will of God, not to punish, or impute sin unto his
people; and (2) for the effect of Gods Will, to wit, His not punishing, or his
setting of them free from the Curse of the Law. That Justification is put for
the effect of Gods will, or the thing willed by that Internal Act, to wit, Our
discharge from the Law, and deliverance from punishment, I suppose there is
none will question; the only scruple that can arise, is, Whether the Will of
God, not to punish, or charge sin upon a person, is, or may be called
Justification? I confess, to the end that I might not offend the weak Facile
est, imo and utile ut taceatur aliquod verum propter incapaces. Aug. de
persever. Sanct. c. 15.
, I have been sparing of calling this immanent act of God, by the name of
Justification, and the rather, because some gross mistakes have sought for
shelter under the wings of this expression. As (1) that absurd conceit, That
Christ came not to satisfy the justice, but only to manifest the love of God;
which yet has not the least countenance from our Doctrine, seeing that
notwithstanding the Will of God, not to punish his Elect, we say, That the Law
must needs be satisfied for their sins, no less then for the sins of others.
And (2) their notion, who upon this ground have asserted the Eternal Being of
the Creature, whereunto they were driven, because they could not answer that
Consequence, Justificatus est. Ergo Est; which holds not in terminis diminuent
ibus, whether a priori, as Electus est. Ergo Est; or a posteriori, Mortuus est.
Ergo Est. Yet I must profess, That I look upon Dr. Twisse Remissio peccatorum
si quid ditatem inspicias nihil aliud est, quam punitionis negatio, aut
volitionis puniendi negatio. Sit ergo peccata remittere nihil aliud, quam nolle
punire. A^ hoc nolle punire, ut actus immanens in Deo, fui^ ah aeterno. Vind.
Great. l. 1. p 2. sect. 25. and 1. in fol. p. 294.
his judgment in this point, as most accurate, who places the very essence
and quiddity of Justification in the Will of God not to punish. Mr. Kendal See
Kendals Vind. c. 4. p. 134. and 145.
, though he makes Justification to be a declared sentence, or transient act of
God, yet he grants, That Gods Will or Decree to remit our sins, carries in it a
remission of them tan^ amount; for who shall charge them on us, if God decree
to remit them? And again, This Decree has so much in it that looks so well,
like unto Justification, that is may be called so without Blasphemy. But I see
no inconvenience at all, but rather very much reason to adhere unto the Doctors
definition, That Justification is the Will of God not to punish. 1. Because the
definition which the Holy Ghost gives us of Justification, is most properly
applied to this act of God. It is a certain rule, Definitum est, cui convenit
definitio; that is Justification, whereunto the definition of Justification
does agree: The definition which the Psalmist, and from him the Apostle gives
of Justification, is Gods non-imputing of sin, and his imputing of
righteousness unto a person, Psalm. 32.1, 2. Romans 4.6, 8. Now when God wills
not to punish a person, he does not impute sin to him. The original words (both
in the Old and New Testament) whereby imputation is signified, do make it more
clear; for both of them do signify an act of the mind or will: (...) (which
is used by the Psalmist) is properly, to think, repute, esteem, or account Vid.
Pag^. Buxtorf.
, and the word (...) has the same signification Vid. Scap. Lex. ab
Arithmeticis desumitur, etc. Tar^ovius.
, it is usually applied to Accountants, who when they have cast up many sums,
do set down at the foot, what they do amount unto: So when a man has accounted
with himself the loss and benefit, conveniences, and inconveniences that may
accrue unto him, the result and issue of his deliberation, is significantly
expressed by this word, it notes a steadfast purpose and resolution, Quae quasi
rationibus subductis and explicatis conclusa est, it is opposed unto a doubtful
and uncertain opinion. It notes either the purpose, or determination of one
alone, or the consent and agreement of two between themselves, whereof
Camerarius Comment. in Romans 4.4.
gives us an instance out of Zenophon. This word is fitly used to signify this
immanent act of God; for though he does not purpose and resolve, in that manner
as men do, by comparing things together; or by reasoning and concluding one
thing out of another, yet are his purposes much more firm and immutable, Mal.
3.6. Jam. 1.17. Numb. 23.19. The Lord therefore did non-impute sin to his
people, when he purposed in himself, not to deal with them according to their
sins, when the Father and the Son agreed, upon that sure and everlasting
Covenant, That his Elect should not bear the punishment, which their sins would
deserve. The Remonstrants In Apol. p. 112. Nihil aliud est quam volitio aut
decretum, etc.
do acknowledge, That non-imputation, or remission of sin, is an immanent act
in God, Quam Deus in sua ipsius mente efficit. We are commanded to forgive one
another, as God has forgiven us; now we know that our forgiveness is
principally an act of the heart, As when a man purposes in himself, not to
take revenge, he does then forgive. But of this, we shall have occasion to
speak more largely in our Answer to Mr. Woodbridges first Argument.

2. That which does secure men from wrath, and whereby they are discharged and
acquitted from their sins, is Justification; but by this immanent act of God,
all the Elect are discharged and acquitted from their sins, and secured from
wrath and destruction, Ergo. The Assumption only will need to be proved, which
is abundantly confirmed (1) by those places which make mention of Gods
unspeakable Grace and Love toward them, from everlasting: For what is the Love
of God, but his velle dare bonum; his fixed and immutable Will to bestow upon
them the greatest good that they are capable of? Now, when God set his love
upon them, he said unto them, Live? Ezekiel. 16.6. This Will of God did secure
them from death and destruction; it was a real discharge from condemnation, But
(2) more plainly from the words of the Apostle, Romans 8.33. Who shall lay any
thing to the charge of Gods Elect. The Proposition is either a Universal
Negative, No Elect person can be justly charged with sin; or a Universal
Affirmative, All Elect persons are free from the charge of sin. Which way
soever we take, it is evident, That the Proposition is Universal. Now if this
privilege did belong only to Elect Believers (as some See Burges of Justif.
p. 186.
would limit the Text) the Proposition were false; for though all true
Believers are Elect persons, yet all the Elect are not Believers: It is as if
one should say, Omne animal is rationale, and to excuse it, say, That by Omne
animal, he meant omnis homo; and to prove the Expression Legitimate, should
allege that homo is often called animal, which is true, but very impertinent
to prove, that omne animal may be put for omnis homo.

. 5. All that I have yet seen alleged against this Member of the distinction,
That Gods will not to punish, is not Justification, is of little moment.

It is objected, 1. That hereby Justification and Election are

I answer, That it follows not, Answ.
they may be both of them immanent, eternal Acts, and yet not confounded: For
Election and Reprobation are eternal, immanent Acts, yet they are not
confounded. Indeed, all different immanent acts, are but one simple act in God,
in whose Decrees there is no Priority or Posteriority; seeing (as Hilary De
Trinit. l. 12.
speaks) Omnia penes Deum aequabili aeternitatis infinitate consistunt. Yet in
our consideration they receive sufficient distinction from their various
Objects, and our various Applicat^on of them: And thus Election and
Justification are distinguished. Election includes both the end, which is the
glory of Gods Grace, and all the means from the beginning to the ending
conducing thereunto. His will not to punish, includes precisely, and formally,
only some part of the means.

2. It is objected, That Justification imports ^ change of the Ab injusto ad
justum, which cannot be attributed to the simple and unchangeable Decrees of
God.

I answer, That if Justification be taken for the thing willed, Answ.
viz. The delivery of a sinner from the curse of the Law, then there is a great
change made thereby; he that was a child of wrath by Nature, has peace and
reconciliation with God. But if we take it for the Will of God, not to punish,
then we say, Justification does not suppose any such change; as if God had
first a will to punish his Elect, but afterward he altered his will, to a
will, not to punish them. The change therefore of a persons state ab injusto ad
justum arises from the Law; and the consideration of man in reference
thereunto; by whose sentence the Transgressor is unjust; but being considered
at the tribunal of Grace, and clothed with the Righteousness of Christ, he is
just and righteous; which is not properly a different state before God, but a
different consideration of one and the same person. God may be said at the same
time to look upon a person, both as sinful, and as righteous; as sinful, in
reference to his state by nature, and as righteous, in reference to his state
by Grace: Now this change being but imputed, not inherent, it supposes not the
being of the Creature, much less any inherent difference in the state of the
Creature; no more then electing love, makes any inherent present change: Though
the state of the loved, and hated, are different in the mind of God, yet not
in the persons themselves, till the different effects of love and hatred are
put forth.

That hereby we make void the death of Christ; for if Justification be an
immanent act in God, it is Antecedent, not only to Faith, but to the merits of
Christ; which is contrary to many Scriptures, that do ascribe our Justification
unto his blood, as the meritorious cause.

Answ.
To which I answer, That although Gods will not to punish, be Antecedent to the
death of Christ; yet for all, we may be said to be justified in him, because
the whole effect of that will, is by, and for the sake of Christ. As, though
electing Love precede the consideration of Christ, John 3.16. yet are we said
to be chosen in him, Ephesians. 1.4. because all the effects of that love, are given
by, and through, and for him: Gods non-punishing of us, is the fruit of his
death, yet his will, not to punish, is Antecedent thereunto.

Others say, we may as well call his will to create, Creation; and his will to
call, Calling; and to glorify, Glorification; as his will to justify,
Justification.

Answ.
We Answer. That there is not the same Reason for creating, calling, and
glorifying; all which do import an Inherent change in the person created,
called, glorified; which forgiveness does not, it being perfect and complete in
the mind of God.

. 6. These things being weighed in the balances of an equal Judgment, I
suppose the phrase would not sound so harsh, as it does to many; however, were
the thing it self granted, That there was in God from Everlasting, an absolute
fixed and immutable will, never to deal with his people according to their
sins, but to deal with them as righteous persons; this Controversy were ended.
For (1) Gods non-imputation of sin, to his Elect, is not purely Negative; as
the non-imputation of sin unto a Stone, or other Creatures, which are not
capable of sinning; but Privative, being the non-imputation of sin, realiter
futuri in esse, as the imputation of Righteousness, is, Justitiae realiter
futurae in existentia: The difference between these, is as great, as between a
man's will, not to require that debt, that shall, or is about to be contracted,
and his will not to require any thing of one, that never did, nor will ow him
any thing. (2) This non-imputation of sin, is actual, though the sin, not to be
imputed, be not in actual being; in like manner, the imputation of
Righteousness, is actual, though the Righteousness to be imputed, is not
actual: Man whose thoughts arise de novo, does non-impute, usually, after the
commission of a fault; but for God (who is without any shadow of change and
turning) so to do, is absolutely impossible; for as much as there cannot arise
any new will, or new thought in the heart of God See Kendals Vind. p. 134.
, (3) This act of justifying is complete in it self, for God by his eternal and
unchangeable Will, not imputing sin to his Elect, none can impute it; and he in
like manner imputing Righteousness, none can hinder it. Neither does this
render the death of Christ useless, which is necessary by the Ordinance of God,
as a meritorious cause of all the effects of this Justification; even as the
eternal Love of God, is complete in it self, but yet is Christ the meritorious
cause of all the effects of it, Ephesians. 1.3, 4. And therefore we say.

. 7. 2. That if Justification be taken (as most commonly it Nihil movet
voluntatem Dei nisi bonitas sua. Aquin. 1. p. q. 19. a. 2. ad 2. and art. 5. in
c.
(for the merits of Christ do not move God, to will, not to punish, or impute
sin unto us) yet is Christ the meritorious cause of the latter. It is from the
virtue of his Sacrifice, that the obligation of the Law is made void, and the
punishments therein threatened, do not fall upon us. By his death he obtained in
behalf of all the Elect, not a remote, possible, or conditional reconciliation,
but an actual, absolute, and immediate reconciliation, as shall be proved anon
Cap. 14.
. And in this respect, all that were given unto Christ by the Father, may be
said to be justified at his death, not only virtually, but formally; for the
discharge of a debt, is formally the discharge of the debtor. Their discharge
from the Law was not to be sub termino, or in Diem, but present and immediate,
it being impossible that a debt should be discharged, and due at the same time.
We acknowledge, That the effects of this discharge from the Law, may be said to
be sub termino, or in Diem: As for instance, from that full satisfaction and
perfect Righteousness, which Christ has performed, there arise these two
things. One is, The non-execution of the desert of sin (which we continually
commit) upon us: That whereas the Reprobate sin and upon their sin, the curse,
with all the evils included in it, is upon them: The Elect likewise sinning,
yet for Christ's sake, the curse, or evil of suffering, is not inflicted upon
them; which non-punishing quoad effectum, is forgiving, and not imputing sin:
And in this sense, God is frequently said to forgive, when he does not inflict
punishment; and in this sense also, he is said often to forgive. The other is,
The imputation of Righteousness, in the effects of it, whereby the effects of a
true and perfect Righteousness come upon the people of God; to wit, All good
things, both for this life, and that which is to come; yea, those things which
seem to be evil, and hurtful (as their falls and afflictions,) are ordered by
the overruling hand of a wise and powerful Providence, to work together for
good unto them. These effects are immediate, in respect of causality, though
not of time; for though God does not presently bestow them, but as he sees fit,
both for his own glory, and for their good; yet do they immediately slow from
the merit of Christ, in regard there is no other meritorious cause, that
intervenes and concurs therewith, in procuring of them. Notwithstanding we say,
That our discharge from the Law must needs be immediate, and present, with the
price or satisfaction that was paid for it, in regard, That it implies a
contradiction, a debt should be paid, and discharged, and yet justly chargable.
But of this we shall have occasion to speak more hereafter.

. 8. 3. Justification is taken for the declared sentence of absolution The
declared sense of absolution* and not improperly: For in Scripture phrase, (as
was noted before Cap. 5. sect. 4.
) things are then said to be, when they are declared, and manifested Non esse
and non apparere, aequiparantur injure.
; the declaring of things, is expressed in such wise, as if it made them to be;
whereof many instances might be given; a very plain one there is, Genesis 41.13.
Pharaohs chief Butler, speaking of Joseph's interpretation, Me (says he) he
restored, and him, i. e. the Baker, he hanged; whereas he did but declare these
successes unto them. So God is said to justify his people, when he manifests
and reveals to them: that mercy and forgiveness, which before was hidden in his
own heart, to wit, that he does not impute their sins, but contrariwise, does
impute Righteousness unto them.

Now the Lord at sundry times, and diverse ways has, and does declare, and
manifest this precious Grace unto his people; (1) More Generally, toward all
his Elect; and (2) more Particularly, to individuals, or numerical persons. The
former is done, (1) in the Word of God; and (2) in his Works and Actions.

. 9. First, God has declared his immutable Will, not to impute sin to his
people, in his Word: The Gospel, or New Covevant (being an absolute promise, as
we shall show anon,) may be fitly termed a Declarative Sentence of Absolution
unto all the Elect, to whom alone it does belong; the publication of the New
Covenant is their Justification. For which cause Maccovius Disp. 17. n. 22.
makes Justification to Commence from the first promise, which was pronounced
before the curse: So that if Adam had not been a public person, including both
the Elect and Reprobate, there had been no curse at all pronounced, save only
upon the Serpent, or Satan; in reference to this promise it was, that the
Apostle says, The Grace of God, 2 Timothy 1.9. and eternal life, Tit. 1.2. was
given to us, (...), which does not signify eternity, (as our Translators carry
it) but the beginning of time; it is of the same latitude with (...) 2 These.
2.13. some learned men Vid. Mead in Apoc. 14.6. Twi^. Vind. great. l. 1. p. 1.
c. 5.
have observed, that the phrase is most properly rendered ante tempora
secularia, i. e. ante multa secula, vel sub initio seculorum, to wit, in that
famous promise of the woman's seed, Genesis 3.15. Now what was that Grace, and
Life, which was given us in the beginning of times, but the Grace of Free
Justification, whereby we are made to stand just and righteous in the sight of
God? This Grace was revealed more clearly and distinctly in after ages, it
shined brighter and brighter, till the day spring from on high did visit us
Luke. 1.78.
. Whose coming made it perfect day, in comparison whereof former times were
obscure darkness, Joh. 3.19. Ephesians. 3.5. 2 Cor. 3.18, etc. And therefore Grace
and Life is peculiarly ascribed to the times of the New Testament, or the clear
exhibition of the New Covenant at the coming of Jesus Christ, 2 Timothy 1.10. And
the Gospel is said to cleanse and sanctify men ( i. e. to justify them, or to
purge them from an evil Conscience) John 15.3. and 17.17.

. 10. Secondly, God has declared his gracious sentence of non-imputing sin,
and imputing Righteousness unto his people in his Works and Actions, both
toward Christ, and toward themselves: In his actions, or dealing with Jesus
Christ, two ways. (1) In charging or transacting all their sins and iniquities
upon him, Isai. 53.6. 2 Cor. 5.21. 1 Pet. 2.24. The Lord thereby declared his
will and purpose, not to charge sin upon them, for whom Christ interposed
himself a surety: His imputing of our sins to Christ, was formally the
non-imputing of them to us; Gods accounting of them unto him, was a discounting
of them unto us; for they could not be accounted, or charged upon both, without
a manifest contradiction in the thing it self, and in the justice of God; as it
is, that a debt should be wholly accounted to, and discharged by the surety,
and yet the same debt afterward be justly accounted to, and charged upon him
that first contracted it. I confess, a debt may be charged both upon the
Principal and Surety, before it be discharged, though afterward to neither:
But the case was not so, between Christ and us; God did not take his Elect, and
Christ jointly to make satisfaction; or him, upon our failing; or us, upon his;
but transacted the whole debt upon him alone. Now, I say, the Lord laying our
iniquities, in such a manner upon Christ, singly, absolutely, and irrevocably,
he plainly declared thereby, that it was his will, never to lay them to our
charge.

(2) In that public discharge or acquittance, which he gave unto Christ at his
Resurrection; the Lord by raising him from the dead, and (as it were) setting
him free out of prison, openly declared, That he had received full
satisfaction, for all those sins which Christ as a surety had taken upon him,
viz. For all the sins of all the Elect. And for this reason (as an eminent
Divine observes Dr. Reyn. on Psalm. 110. page 524.
) the Lord sent an Angel to remove the stone from the mouth of the Sepulcher,
not to supply any want of power in Christ, who could himself have rouled it
away with one of his fingers; but as a Judge, when the Law is satisfied,
sends an Officer to set open the prison unto him, who has made that
satisfaction: So the Father, to testify, that his Justice was fully satisfied,
with the price which his Son had paid, sent an Officer of Heaven to open the
prison doors, and to set him free. Christ's Resurrection was a solemn judicial
act, whereby God the Supreme Judge justified both him and us See Cap. 3. sect.
4. Mr. Th. Goodwins Christ set forth sect. 3. c. 5.
, (1) Him, from all those sins which he had undertaken, whereunto our Divines
do apply these following Scriptures. Isai. 50.8, 9. 1 Timothy 3.16. Acts 13.35.
Heb. 9.21. (2) Us, from our own sins. The Resurrection of Christ, was (as Mr.
Parker says well) an actual Justification, of all them, for whom he became a
Surety; for (1) he was not justified from any sins of his own, being in himself
just and innocent, but from those sins which were charged upon him in his
death, which (says the Prophet) were the iniquities of us all, Isa. 53.6. If a
debt be discharged, it cannot without manifest injustice be charged again; the
discharge of the Surety, is the discharge of the Principal. God by acquitting
Christ from the guilt of our sins, did also fully acquit us from the same. (2)
Christ in his Death and Resurrection was a common person; as in his death he
was condemned for our sins, so in his Resurrection he was justified from our
sins: All the Elect were justified in his Justification; there is the same
reason for their Justification in Christ, as there is for the Condemnation of
mankind in Adam. Therefore (says the Apostle, Romans 5.18.) us by the offense
of one, judgment came upon all men to condemnation; even so (or in like
manner) by the Righteousness of one (Man, Christ) the Free-gift came upon all
men, (viz. All in Christ) unto Justification of Life.

. 11. Besides the General Declaration of Forgiveness, unto all the Elect, this
Gracious Sentence, is also declared to particular persons.

1. Externally, in foro Ecclesiae, by the Sacrament of Baptism, the Minister of
Christ, standing in his stead 2 Cor. 5.20.
, by Dipping or Pouring water upon a person, does in his Name, or by his
Authority, declare and publish the washing away of his sins by the Blood of
Christ: The principal thing which Baptism holds forth, is our Justification; it
was ordained for the remission of sins, Luke 3.3. and Acts 2.38. not to obtain,
or procure this benefit ex opere operato, but to declare, and obsignate unto
men, their interest therein. In Romans 6.3, 4, 5. we are said to be buried with
Christ in Baptism, and to be implanted thereby into the similitude of his Death
and Resurrection. The meaning is, That our Communion in the benefits of both,
is hereby ratified and confirmed to us. Upon this ground, I conceive it was,
That in the old Liturgy, persons baptized, are said, to be regenerated, or born
again Christus Justificationem dicit esse regenerationem, Melancth. in Joh. 3.
, i. e. Translated into a new state, viz. From the old Adam, into the new Adam;
From the power of darkness, to the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, Col. 1.13. Which
Baptism does not effect, but declare and seal; it having no other cause, but
the Grace of God, and the Merits of Christ, Tit. 3.5. 1 Pet. 3.21. 1 John 1.7.
The late Assembly in their Directory say as much, viz. That Baptism is a Seal
of the Covenant of Grace, of our ingrafting into Christ, of our union with him,
of our remission of sins, etc. It is strange to me, That they who say Baptism
is a Seal of our Justification, and hold that Infants (who have not Faith)
ought to be baptized, should deny, that Justification precedes Faith. Now
though this Declarative Sentence be but ministerial, and merely of order (like
the power of loosing, John 20.23, applied to Hypocrites) to the greatest part
of them that are baptized, whether they be Infants, or adulti; yet to all the
Elect (to whom the effects of the Covenant and Seals, do only really belong
Sacramenta in solis electis efficient quod sigurant. Aug. Communis est
Baptismus omnibus baptizatis, sed non virtus Baptismi. Lombard. l. 4. did. 1.
a. 6.
) it is real and absolute. It is no other then the Sentence of God himself,
declaring his non-imputation of sin unto them, and their deliverance from death
by Jesus Christ See Diod. on Acts ^.38.
.

. 12. 2. Internally, in foro Conscientiae, at their effectual Vocation, when
the Lord by the Preaching of the Gospel, does powerfully persuade their hearts
to believe in Christ; for the Elect themselves, before Faith, have no knowledge
or comfort, either of Gods gracious volitions toward them, or of Christ's
undertakings and purchases in their behalf: In which respect, they are said to
be without Christ, and without God in the world, Ephesians. 2.12. and Gal. 4.1. They
are compared to an Heir under age, who differs nothing from a Servant, though
he be the Lord of all: By Faith we come to see that everlasting love, wherewith
we were loved; and that plenteous Redemption which Christ has wrought for us;
for which cause, Faith is called The evidence of things not seen, Heb. 11.1.
And God is said thereby to reveal his Righteousness from Heaven to us, Romans
1.17. And to reveal his Son in us, Gal. 1.16. Now in this sense men are said to
be justified by the act of Faith, in regard Faith is the medium or Instrument,
whereby the Sentence of Forgiveness is terminated in their Consciences; which
is daily made more plain, and legible, by the operation of the Spirit Amos Mod.
l. 1. c 27. sect. 9.
, sealing, and witnessing unto them their peace and reconciliation with God
Ephesians. 1.13. and 4.30. Romans 8.16.5.5.
. Whereas unbelievers look on God as their enemy, and consequently all their
life time are held in bondage through the fear of wrath. A true Believer has
peace, liberty, and boldness toward God; he looks upon all the Promises, as
his own inheritance; interprets the Providence of God (even those which Reason
would construe in another sense) to be Fruits of Love, and not of Wrath.

. 12. Now because this Declarative Sentence, by Faith is like the name written
in the White Stone, Revel. 2.17. Which no man knows, saving he that has it:
Many whom the Lord does justify, are accounted by the world to be but
Hypocrites; others again are justified of men, who are not justified in the
sight of God Luke 16.15.
; the Lord therefore has another way of justifying his people, to wit, In foro
mundi, when he shall publicly, and in the hearing of the whole world,
pronounce that gracious sentence, Come ye blessed of my Father, etc. Matthew.
25.34. Whereunto some have referred those words of the Apostle, Acts 3.19.
Repent, and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out, when the times of
refreshing shall come, from the presence of the Lord. But who so pleases to
consult with Erasmus, Beza, and Ludovicus de Dieu upon the place, shall find
there is a great mistake in our English Translators, and that no such thing was
intended there by the Holy Ghost: I grant, that the sins of the Elect may be
said to be then blotted out, not that the remission of their sins shall be put
off, or is not complete, till the last day, and till they have performed all
the conditions required of them, but because this gracious sentence shall be
then publicly declared Diod. in loc.
, and shall bring forth its Eternal Effect of Life and Glory: And in this
sense, I conceive, those Scriptures may be understood, which speak of our
Justification, as a future thing, as Romans 3.30. and 2.13, etc.

. 13. Now though we have ascribed Justification unto several times or periods,
yet do we not make many Justifications: Declared Justification (whether it be
in foro Ecclesiae, in foro Conscientiae, or in foro mundi) is not another, from
that in the mind of God, but the same variously revealed; as an Acquittance in
the heart of the Creditor, and in a Paper; a pardon in the heart of a Prince,
and enrolled; is one and the same; this manifested, and the other secret; and
though there are never so many Copies written forth in several hands, they do
not make many Acquittances, or many Pardons, being but the Transcripts of one
Original: So though God does at sundry times, and in diverse manners declare his
well-pleasedness toward his people; yet is their Justification but one and the
same, which is perfect and complete at once, being his fixed, and immutable
will, not to deal with them according to their sins, but as Just and Righteous
Persons. By that which has been said, it does appear in what sense we assert,
The Justification of Gods Elect, before they believe: Now what little weight
there is in those Objections, which are commonly brought against this
Assertion, will be more manifest when we have examined Mr. Woodbridges
Treatise. Whose first quarrel against us, is, for that, (as he conceives) we
give too little unto Faith, P. 2. But as it is no disparagement to the Blood of
Christ, that it does not move, and incline God to love us, or to will not to
punish us; so it is no disparagement to Faith, to say, That it does not concur
with the Blood of Christ in obtaining our Justification; but that by
apprehending the Gospel, it reveals and evidenceth to us that Justification
which we have in Christ, the proof whereof, is the task of the next Chapter;
wherein I doubt not, but I shall be able, through the help of God, to put by,
all those wretched consequences which Mr. W. has endeavored to father upon
this Position, That Faith serves to evidence to us our Justification.

CHAP. VIII. Wherein Mr. Woodbridges Exceptions against our saying, [That
Faith, or the act of believing, does justify no otherwise, then as it reveals,
and evidenceth our Justification] are Answered.
THe first Charge which he brings against this Gloss (as he calls it,) is, That
it is guilty of a contradiction to the Holy Ghost. It is well known (says he)
that the Apostle in his Epistles to the Romans and Galatians, sets himself on
purpose to assert the Doctrine of Justification by Faith, in opposition to
Works. The Question between him and the Jews, was not, Whether we are declared,
to be justified by Faith or Works; but, whether we are justified by Faith or
Works, in the sight of God, or before God: And he concludes, That it is by
Faith, and not by Works, etc. Though all this be granted, yet it proves no
contradiction to the Holy Ghost, in our Assertion: We acknowledge that the
Question between the Apostle, and the Jews, was not about the declaring of our
Justification; nor about the time when we are justified; no, nor about the
condition, upon which we are justified; but concerning the matter of our
Justification, or the Righteousness, whereby we are justified; or by which we
are accounted righteous. Now the result of his dispute is, That we are
justified by Faith, and not by Works; but then the Question will be, How Faith
is to be taken, whether sensu proprio, or metonymico; whether we are to
understand it of the Act, or of the Object of Faith? We have showed before See
c. 6. sect. 2.
, that the Apostle in his disputes about Justification in these forementioned
Epistles, where he opposes Faith to Works, he takes Faith in a Tropical sense
for the Object, and not the Act of Faith; for else there had been no ground for
him to make any opposition at all, between Faith and Works; and in affirming,
That we are justified by Faith, he had contradicted himself in saying, That we
are not justified by Works; seeing Faith, or the Act of Believing, is a work of
ours, no less then love. And therefore, it is evident, that the Apostle, when
he concludes, That we are justified by Faith, and not by Works, understands by
Faith, the Object thereof, to wit, Righteousness imputed, and not inherent
Paulus fidem accip^t, Romans 4.^. non pro opere, sed pro objecto fidei -- Nomine
autem operum intellexit Apostolus, non solum externa bona opera a lege mandata,
verum omnes etiam in^^rnas virtutes, and fidem ipsam ^uatenus opus est quod dam
intellectus and volun^atis, quod manifestum est cuiquam in ea Epistola (scil.
ad Rom.) mediocriter exercitato. Zan^h. de Not. Dei. l. 4. c. 2. These. 2.
; which, by way of distinction and opposition to the other, he calls the
Righteousness of God, because it is out of us, in Christ, God-man. The reason
why the Apostle calls the Object by the name of the Act, Christ's Righteousness
by the name of Faith, (besides the elegancy of the Trope) is because Faith
ascribes all unto Christ, it being an act of self-dereliction, a kind of holy
despair, a denying and renouncing of all fitness, and worthiness in our selves;
a going unto Christ, looking toward him, and a roulling of our selves upon his
Alsufficiency Nomen fidei and verbum credendi aperte docent, justitiam nobis
aliunde advenire* and eam in nobis realiter non esse; sed tantum ejus
cognitionem, sensum and effecta; opu^ enim fidei est ea quae extra nos sunt
apprehendere -- Hac igitur vel unica loquutio, per Fidem, seu Fide nos
justificari, satis esse deberet ad evincenium, nos non justificari opere, aut
virtute aliqua in nobis existente, c^qu^ n^^ ips^ fide, ut virtus and opus est,
sed re quae ex^^^ nos posita est. Favore scil. Dei and justitia Christi.
Zanchius ubi supra.
: So that in the Apostles sense, we deny not, That Faith justifies in the
sight of God; Faith (I say) taken objectively, to wit, For Christ and his
Righteousness; it is for his Merits and Satisfaction alone, that we are
accounted Just and Righteous, at Gods Tribunal. But if Faith be taken properly
for the Act of Believing, we say indeed, That it only evidenceth that
Justification which we have in Christ. Nor is this any contradiction to the
Holy Ghost, who ascribes our Justification in the sight of God, to Christ alone.

. 2. Next he calls it, A most unsound Assertion, That Faith does evidence our
Justification before Faith. Is the Apostles definition of Faith, Heb. 11.1.
Faith is the evidence of things not seen; An unsound Assertion? Though some do
ascribe more to Faith, then an Act of evidencing, yet I never met with any one
before, that did totally deny this use thereof. All the knowledge that we have
of our Justification, is only by Faith, seeing it cannot be discerned by Sense
or Reason; either we have no evidence of our Justification, and consequently do
live without hope; or, if we have, it is Faith that does evidence it to our
souls. Now let our Justification be when it will, if Faith does evidence it, it
will follow, That our Justification was before that Evidencing act of Faith;
for actu^ pendet ab objecto, the Object is before the Act. But I will not
anticipate Mr. Woodbridges Reasons.

. 3. If (says he) Faith does evidence our Justification; it is either
improperly, as an effect does argue the cause, as laughing and crying, may he
said to evidence reason in a Child, etc. Or else properly; and thus either
immediately and axiomatically or remotely and syllogistically.

(1) Faith does not evidence Justification improperly, as the Effect does argue
the Cause. I shall readily grant him, that Faith does not justify
evidentially, as a mark, sign, or token, but as a knowledge, and adherence unto
Christ, our Justifier; Isa. 53.11. John 17.3. Phil. 3.10.
as that Organ, or Instrument, whereby we look not upon our Faith, but upon
Christ our Righteousness; and by the same Faith do cleave unto him. They that
make Faith a condition of our Justification, use it but as a sign, or as an
argument affected to prove, That a person is justified; seeing, that where one
is, the other is also; where there is Faith, there is Justification; and for
this cause innumerable other signs, and marks, are brought in to evidence this
sign; which are more obscure and difficult to be known, then Faith it self,
nay, which cannot be known to be effects of Blessedness, but by Faith; whereby
poor souls, either walk in darkness, live in a doubting, and uncertain
condition all their days; or else compass themselves about with sparks of their
own kindling, Isa. 50.10, 11.
and walk in the light of their own fire; fetching their comfort, from Faith,
and not by Faith, from Christ. Though I might fairly pass by this Branch of his
Dilemma, it being none of my Tenent, and favored more by his own, then my
opinion; yet I shall briefly give my fence of his Reasons, That Faith does not
evidence Justification as a sign.

. 4. His first Reason is, because then Justification by Faith, would not
necessarily be so much as Justification in our Consciences: A Christian may
have Faith, and yet not have the evidence, that he himself is justified: Many
Christians have that in them, which would prove them justified, whiles yet
their Consciences do accuse and condemn them. To which I Answer, 1. That Mr. W.
may be pleased to consider, how well this agrees with that passage of his, Page
15. Where he alleges the words of the Apostle, 1 John 3.20. to prove, That if
our hearts do condemn us, God does much more condemn us. 2. I should grant him,
That if Faith did evidence our Justification, only as a sign, or some remote
effect thereof, like other works of Sanctification, it would be but a dark and
unsatisfying evidence. 3. Whereas he says, That doubting Christians have
something in them, that would prove them justified; either it is something that
precedes Faith, or something that follows Faith, or else Faith it self. First,
Nothing that precedes Faith, does prove a man justified; secondly, Nothing that
follows Faith, is so apt to prove it, as Faith it self, because it is the first
(...). Clem. Alex. Strom. l. ^. Prosper. ad Dub. 8.
of all Inherent Graces; it is by Faith, that we know our Love, Patience, etc.
to be Fruits unto God; whereas some make doubting to be a sign of Faith, they
may as well make darkness a sign of light, it being in its own nature contrary
thereunto; and therefore it must be proved by Faith it self. 4. Though a true
Christian may have a doubting, accusing Conscience (as doubtless there is flesh
and corruption in their Consciences, as well as in their other faculties; and
there is no sin, whereunto we have more, and stronger temptations, then to
unbelief;) yet wheresoever there is Faith, there is some evidence of this
Grace; as in the least spark of fire there is light, though not so much as in a
flame: And the least twinkling Star gives us some light, though not enough to
dispel the darkness, or to make it day: There are several degrees of Faith,
there is (...) and (...), a strong Faith, and a weak Faith. Now the least
degree of Faith, carries some light, and evidence therewith; and according to
the measure of Faith, is the evidence, and persuasion of our Justification.

. 5. Secondly, He urges, If Faith did evidence Justification, as an effect of
it, then we might as truly be said to be faithed by our Justification, as to be
justified by our Faith. I see no absurdity at all, to say, That Faith is from
Justification causally, and Justification by Faith evidentially: That Grace
which justifies us, is the Cause and Fountain of all good things whatsoever,
both of Spiritual and Temporal Blessings, and more especially of Faith, 2 Pet.
1.1. Phil. 1.29. Yet does it not follow, That [ We must invert the order of the
Gospel, and instead of saying, Believe, and thou shall be justified; we must
say hence forward, Thou art justified, therefore believe.] (1) Because it is
not the privilege of all men, to whom we Preach, but only of the Elect of
God: And (2) because we know not, who are justified, no more then who are
elected; though Faith be an effect, or sign of Election, yet it does not
follow, that we must say to any, Thou art elected, therefore believe. (3) When
the cause is not notior effectu, we must ascend from the effect to the cause,
as in the present case.

. 6. Thirdly, He loads it with this seeming absurdity, That then it will
unavoidably follow, That we are justified by works, as well as by Faith; for
works are an effect of Justification, as well as Faith. (1) It follows
unavoidably from his own opinion: For if Faith be taken in a proper sense, for
the Act of Believing, it follows, That we are justified by a work of our own;
or, if Faith be the condition of Justification, it will follow likewise, That
we are no more justified by Faith, then by other works, as Repentance, Charity,
etc. Which Mr. W. and others of his strain Dr. Hammond* Mr. Baxter.
, do make the conditions of their supposed Justification; so that he is like to
father the Child, which he has sought to lay at our doors. (2) It is not
denied, That Works do declare, and evidence our Justification; where the
Apostle denies our Justification to be by Works, he speaks of our real and
formal Justification in the sight of God, which he affirms, is by Faith, scil.
Objectively taken, and not of the declaring or evidencing of our Justification;
which Saint James in his Epistle attributes to Works, in reference to men; and
other Scriptures to Faith, in reference to the Conscience of the person
justified, Romans 1.17. Galatians 2.16. (3) Though works be the effect of
justification as well as faith, yet it will no follow, that works do evidence
our justificationas well as faith does. (1) Because every effect is not apt to
evidence its cause; especially when the same effect may proceed from several
causes; as smoke is not so certain an evidence of fire as light and heat is;
because steems and mists are so like to smoke; so works do not evidence our
justification so clearly and certainly (...) Faith does, because works may
proceed from principles of natural ingenuity and morality, etc. as those
Heathens have performed. (2) Because every effect does not evidence to every
faculty a like, but this to one, and that to another; as for instance, form,
or Physiognomy does evidence a man to sense, but yet reason requires another
manner of evidence; so conscience requires a better evidence of our
justification then works can give: Work^ do evidence it in the judgment of
charity, and before men; but they do not evidence it in the judgment of
infallibility, or with that clearness and demonstrative certainty which the
conscience requires; conscience will need a better evidence then works can
give. Paul could plead his works before men, 2 Cor. 1.12. which yet he never
mentions in the pleas of his conscience toward God, and that which conscience
dares not plead before God, can be no good evidence unto conscience.

. 7. The other horn of his Dilemma will be frayd as easily as the former. Faith
(says he) does not evidence justification properly; for then it must do it
either immediately, and Axiomatically, as it is an assent to this Proposition,
[I am justified] or else remotely and syllogistically, by drawing a particular
conclusion of our own justification, out of general propositions. But Faith
does not evidence our justification Axiomatically, etc. For (1) There is no
such thing written, the Scripture does no where say, Thou Paul, thou Peter, or
thou Thomas art justified; Ergo, Justification cannot be evidenced by Faith
immediately.

Mr. W. here mistakes the nature of true justifying Faith, who (it seems)
conceives it to be a bare intellectual assent to the truth of a Proposition;
See Down. of Just. l. 6. c. 5. sect. 3. and Downs nature of Justification p. 10.
(such as Devils and Reprobates may attain unto) contrary to all Orthodox
Divines, who do place Faith more in the Will then in the Understanding.
Justifying Faith essentially include. 1. An assent of the understanding to the
truth of the Scriptures, revealing the sole-sufficiency of Christ for the
reconciliation of sinners, and the non-imputation of sin; as also the will and
command of God, that all men should believe in him alone for life and
salvation. 2, a Fiduciall adherence and reliance of the will upon the same
Christ, the understanding being made effectually to assent and subscribe to the
forementioned propositions, sub ratione very, the will is also powerfully
drawn to accept, embrace, and adhere unto Christ sub natione boni. Our Divines
Dr. Iackson o^ Faith, c^ 9^ an^ Down^ ut sup. Scientia affectiva Gerson,
do include both these acts in the definition of Faith making it to be
fiducialis assensus, or assensus cum gustu: such an assent unto the truths of
the Gospel, as that withal, the soul tastes an ineffable sweetness in the
same; and thereupon ^esteth, and relieth upon Christ for all the benefits of
his death. They make the principal act of Faith to be the reliance of the
heart or will upon Jesus Christ, and therefore they determine, that the object
of Justifying Faith is not a Proposition or Axiom, but Christ, and the mercy of
God in Christ Proprium objectum fidei justificantis est Christus, vel
misericordia Dei in Christo, non propositio vel axioma, Amesius Bellar. Enerv.
tom. 4. l. 5. c. ^. sect. 22.

Actus credentis non terminatur ad axioma, sed ad rem, fa^^entibus
s^^olasticorum clarissimis, etc. Ames. medul. Theol. l. 2. c. 5. sect. 24.


on whom, whosoever rests and roules himself, upon the call of the Gospel,
has a certain evidence of his Interest in Christ, and in all the treasures of
righteousness and remission that are in him; according to the degree of his
affiance, or his taste of sweetness in Christ, is his evidence or assurance of
his own interest and propriety in him; There is no sense that does apprehend
its object with more certainty then that of Tasting; as he that tastes honey,
knows both the sweetness thereof, and that he himself injoyes it; So he that
tastes the sweetness of the Gospel Promises, and of that precious Grace which
is therein revealed, knows his interest and propriety therein. It is observed
of Jonathan, 1 Samuel 14.27. When he tasted a little honey, his eyes were
enlightened; and the Psalmist exhorts us to taste and see how good the Lord is.
The soul that tastes, i. e. believes the Gospel, and the goodness of God
therein revealed to sinners, sees and knows his interest therein; for all
manner of sweetness, is a consequent and effect of some propriety which we
have in that good thing that causes it, unto which, the nearer our interest
is, the greater is the sweetness which we find in it: The Soul cannot taste
any real sweetness in Christ, and the Gospel, but must needs have some
evidence of his interest, propriety, and title to him. Now because (as Dr. Ames
observes) by this act of Faith, wherewith we rest and rely upon Christ,
proposed to us in the Gospel, we do immediately attain to the assurance of
this Truth [ that my sins in particular are pardoned by Jesus Christ,]
therefore some have seemed to speak as if this Proposition, [ I am Justified,
my sins are forgiven me] were the proper object of Justifying Faith. I shall
not stand to defend this Expression, though the Doctor does highly approve of
it Sicut Contar enus optime observavit. Ames. Bellar. Enervat. ubi sup.
; Nor will I quarrel with Mr. W. about his Expression, though I conceive his
term, Axiomatical is somewhat too narrow; for Faith may be said to evidence
our Justification immediately, though it does it not. Axiomatically, but
Organically, to wit, as it is the organ or Instrument whereby we do apprehend
and adhere unto Christ, by whom we are justified in the sight of God; the
latter term is more adequate to the nature of Faith, which is not only the
assent of the Mind, but the adhesion of the Will to the object believed. But I
shall yield him his term, and do say, that Faith may be said to evidence our
Justification Axiomatically, yet not by assenting to that which is not
revealed; but by assenting to, and withal, tasting and relishing, those
indefinite and general Propositions, Invitations, and Promises, that are held
forth to us in the Gospel, which by a secret and inscrutable work of the Holy
Spirit, are applied and made particular to the soul of a true believer See D.
^^ckson of Faith sect* 1. c. 9 n. 4. p. 147.

The Spirit makes the general Call particular etc. Shep. Sound believer. p. 222.


, for otherwise he could never taste any sweetness in them. So that Mr.
Woodbridges exclamation against a carnal, presumptuous, and soule-damning
Faith, is altogether impertinent, seeing we do not say, that a man is
justified by his assent to written, and therefore, much less to unwritten
verities: If Justifying Faith were no more then an Axiomaticall assent (as Mr.
W. seems to intimate it is) I see no reason, why all they, that have such a
Faith, as Devils and Reprobates, who believe with an historical assent, should
not be justified; this is really, the carnal, presumptuous, damning Faith of
the world.

. 8. His second reason against Faiths ev^dencing our Justification
Axiomatically, is nothing to the purpose [ The Faith (says he) by which we are
justified, is the Faith which the Apostles and Ministers of the Gospel are to
preach to the whole world, and to press it upon their consciences. Act.
20.21.13.38.39. But we cannot press upon every man in the world to believe
that he is Justified, etc.] Seeing we do not press every man to believe that
he is justified, though (according to our commission given us from Christ) we
do press all men to believe Rhetorf. Exer. Apol. ex. 2. c. 2* p. 228.
, 1. Assensu intellectus to acknowledge that there is a sufficiency of merit in
Christ for the Justification of Sinners; that they themselves are such, and
that it is impossible for them to escape the curse by any other means. 2.
Amplexu, vel motu voluntatis, to accept, embrace, and cleave unto Jesus Christ,
being infinitely better for them, then all the world besides. By this it will
appear, what little reason. Mr. W. has to charge us with pressing men to
believe a lie, seeing we require no man's assent to any thing, which is not
true. We do not press every man to believe, That he is justified, but to
believe, that there is a sufficiency in Christ for his Justification, and to
rely upon him, and him alone, for this Benefit.

. 9. So that there will be no need for Mr. Air to retract his Sermons as
falsehoods, which he has formerly preached against Universal Redemption: For
though the command of believing be to be pressed upon all men (in that manner
as has been shown) yet it will not follow, that Christ died for all men. It
seems Mr. W. is offended at those Sermons of mine, since he has had a smack of
Mr. B. notions, That Christ died conditionally for all men; yea, for the
Reprobates themselves; which though it be countenanced with the names of
Cameron, Testardus, and Amyraldus, and of some others, who are of great note
amongst our own; yet (may I have leave to speak my mind) I conceive it to be
very unsound: For 1. To say that Christ died for any, upon an impossible
condition, is to say, That he died in vain, at least so far, or in respect of
them, which the Apostle looks upon, as a gross absurdity, Gal. 2.21. 2. For
whom Christ died, he without doubt purchased Faith, and all necessary good
things. This the Apostle accounts unquestionable, Romans 8.32. He that spared not
his own Son, but gave him to death for us all, how shall he not with him also
freely give us all things? What is Mr. Woodbridges Judgment in this point, I
cannot tell, nor does it much matter that I should enquire. I need not inform
him what advantage they that are for Universal Redemption in the grossest
sense, do make of his Doctrine of a Conditional Justification, impetrated by
the death of Christ: It is the only (...) that they have to shelter their
heads withal; when they are pressed, That if Christ died for all, then all
shall be saved, because it must needs be, that Christ must have the purchases
of his death, John 11.42. Isa. 53.11. No (say they Dr. Ham. Vind. of Pract. Cat
p. 3, and 4. Quare etsi ^emo credidisset futurum, tamen fu^sse, ut finis mortis
Christi constaret, omnino credimus -- Christus exauditur semper, sive
salvantur, sive no^, quia orat cum ann xae sidei conditio^e. Corvin. in Mol. c.
27. sect. 1. and 4. Vid. c. 28. sect. 24.
) it will not follow, because some do not perform the condition required on
their parts. [These two Propositions, Christ redeemed all men, and yet the
impenitent, unbelieving, and reprobate World, shall never be saved by him, may
be easily reconciled; because the benefits of Christ's death are given upon
condition, not absolutely; and therefore they that do not perform the
condition, shall never be saved by his death.] It were easy to show that this
salvability, or conditional Salvation, is the very Corner Stone in the
Remonstrants building.

. 10. This passage puts me in mind of two absurdities which Mr. J. Woodbridge,
my Antagonists Brother, (who a while after came and preached over his Brothers
Arguments, with some small Additions) charged upon our Doctrine. The first was,
That it does necessarily infer Universal Redemption. Will it follow, That
because the Elect are justified in for^ Dei, before they believe; therefore all
men are redeemed, and justified? One may as well reason, Some men were elected
before they believed, Ergo All men were elected. Perhaps he will say, we cannot
press or exhort every man to believe, That he is justified, unless all men are
justified: There is no more necessity, that we should press every man to
believe that he is justified, then, that he is elected: This is pitifully
inconsequent. The second was, That it raseth the Foundation of all actions,
tending to the gathering and reforming of Churches; why should any be excluded
from Church Ordinances, if they are justified? (1) I must tell him, That I
cannot think him an hearty friend to the gathering and reforming of Churches,
who deserted a Congregation in New England, whereof he was Pastor, to become a
Parish Parson in the Old; and not only so, but has stood to maintain that
Parishes are true Churches In a Sermon at an irregular Ordination in Sarum,
where Ministers are ordained, not fixed to any Church; and some an hundred
miles distant from the place of their Ministry.
. It is like Barford in Old England, is (if not a purer Church) yet a better
Parsonage then Andover in the New. We are not much beholding to New England for
such Reformers. (2) If we may judge of a man's principles by his practice, we
should then believe, that he himself holds Universal Justification, at least,
within the bounds of his own Parish; for, as I am informed, he makes no
distinction at all in this behalf. I am ashamed to hear men to talk of
Reformation, who tread Antipodes to it; especially, when they have liberty to
follow the dictates of their Consciences. But (3) I had thought he had known,
that de occultis non judicat ecclesia; and that Election and Justification, are
not the rule of admitting persons into Church Communion, but their found
Profession, and suitable Conversation. A Reprobate, or unjustified person, may
lawfully be admitted into, and an Elect person may as lawfully be excluded out
of a Church. I dare not say, That the excommunicated person at Corinth, and
others under that censure, were not justified: The evidence we have of men's
Justification, is but the judgment of rational charity, and not of
infallibility. But enough of this, I shall return again to his Brother B. W.
who I suppose will not own such irrational consequences.

. 11. The other part of his contradiction, is, [ That Faith cannot evidence
Justification Syllogistically; to wit, By the discourse of Conscience after
this, or the like manner, He that believes, is justified, but I believe, Ergo,
I am justified. Now (says Mr. W. magisterially enough) I affirm, that it is
impossible for a man, by Faith, to evidence syllogistically, that he is
justified before Faith.] Though I honor him highly, I cannot rest satisfied
with his (...); but, what Reason does he bring for his confident affirmation?
[1. Because there cannot be found a medium before Faith it self.] Ans. Nor is
it needful there should. (1) It is sufficient, that Faith itself is the medium;
as thus, He that believes, was justified before Faith; but I do believe, Ergo.
The Major is proved, because his sins were laid on Christ, and thereby
non-imputed to him. (2) To imagine any other medium before Faith, is frivolous;
for that were to require, that Faith should evidence before Faith had a being.
(3) Why may not Faith be a medium to evidence our Justification before Faith,
as well as our Election before Faith? Seeing the same word which affirms, That
all Believers were elected before the Foundations of the World, affirms also,
That the Elect without exception are discharged, and acquitted of their sins,
Romans 8.33. Shall we reason thus, Our Election cannot be evidenced before Faith.
Ergo, We were not elected before Faith? Mr. Woodbridges Arguing makes as much
against evidencing Election before Faith, as against the evidencing of our
Justification before Faith: [ Because there is no sort of persons, of whom
ELECTION can be affirmed universally, but only such as do believe; seeing all
the world is distributed into Believers, and unbelievers; but ELECTION cannot
be affirmed of unbelievers universally.] It proves indeed, That neither
Election, nor Justification, are evident to us, before we believe; it does not
prove, That by Faith we cannot evidence syllogistically, that we were both
elected and justified, before we did believe. As for that mad Syllogism (as he
calls it) which follows; All unbelievers are justified, but I am an unbeliever,
Ergo. It is the offspring of his own brain, hatched on purpose to make the
matter ridiculous: But we must excuse the luxuriousness of his wit, seeing
Nullum est magnum ingenium sine mixtura insaniae. His other Syllogism, which he
has framed, to evidence Justification by Election, as thus, All the Elect are
justified. But I am elected; Ergo: was framed in the same mould. A mere man of
clouts, which he himself created, to show his valor in beating of him. We do
not teach men to evidence Justification by Election, but both Election and
Justification by their Faith, proceeding from the Effect to the Cause, as we
needs must, when the Effect is more evident then the Cause. Though I like not
the Argument, yet by his leave, the Major is so far from being utterly false,
that it is justified by the express Testimony of the Apostle, Romans 8.33. But
this is besides the purpose. That miserable circle into which he pretends the
poor, restless, doubting soul is conjured by our Doctrine, is but a vertigo,
and whimsie in his own Pericrany. We do neither bid men evidence their
Justification by their Election, nor their Election by their Justification; but
both Election, and Justification, by a steadfast adherence and reliance upon
Jesus Christ; and from thence, to reason out our particular interest in these
Blessed Privileges, as we do the Being of Causes, by the proper Effects which
flow from them.

. 12. His next Argument against Faiths evidencing Justification
syllogistically, if it be put into the scale of an impartial Judgment, will
appear as light as the former. It runs thus, [ If we are said to be justified
by Faith, because Faith does evidence Justification syllogistically, then we
may be said to be justified by Sense and Reason, as well as by Faith, which is
absurd.] This Consequence indeed is very absurd; for the conclusion is of
Faith, and so adjudged by the Schools, if the Major be of Faith; else this
conclusion ( I shall rise again from the dead,) were not of Faith, because it
is inferred, partly by Sense and Reason, as thus, All men shall rise again, I
am a man; Ergo, I shall rise again. Here the Major only is of Faith, the Minor
is of Sense; and yet the Conclusion is an act of Faith, and not of Sense. So in
this Syllogism, He that believes, is justified; But I do believe, Ergo, I am
justified. Though the Assumption be an act of Sense, or spiritual Experience,
yet the Conclusion is an act of Faith, because the Major is of Faith: For
though in both these Deductions, Sense and Reason are made use of, yet they are
but subfervient Instruments, and not the Authors of the Conclusion.

. 13. Mr. W. has added a third Argument, to prove, That Justification by
Faith* is not merely a Justification in our Consciences, which, I question not,
will prove as unsuccessful as the rest. But, by the way, I cannot choose but
take notice, that his spirit of contradiction is somewhat allayed: For hitherto
he has contended, That Justification by Faith, is not in any sense, a
Justification in Conscience; now he tells us, it is not merely a Justification
in Conscience; and if this will satisfy him, it is like we shall agree; for,
before we have shown, that when Faith is objectively taken, Justification by
Faith is Justification by Christ, and in the sight of God, and not only in the
Conscience. And therefore his suggestion in the Minor Proposition, That we
interpret the phrase of Justification by Faith, merely of Justification in
Conscience, is false and groundless. But let us weigh the force of his Argument
a little more distinctly; the sum of it then, is this, Justification by Faith
is not Justification in our Consciences; for then we should be concurrent
Causes with God, in the formal act of our Justification: The formal act of
pronouncing us just, must be attributed unto us, which the Scripture attributes
unto God alone, making us but passive therein, Romans 8.33. and 4.6, 8. To which
I answer, That the pronouncing of us just, is not the formal act of
Justification, but the imputing of Righteousness, and the non-imputing of sin,
which is the act of God alone; whereas the pronouncing of us just and
righteous, is in Scripture attributed to others besides God, and yet no robbery
is done to God: As for instance, the Minister of Christ pronounces the Word of
Grace, and Forgiveness, and therefore is said to remit and forgive sin, Whose
sins ye remit, they are remitted, Joh. 20.23. Is he therefore joined with God
in the formal act of Justification? Yet all Protestants grant him the office of
pronouncing Remission, though they deny him the power of giving Real Remission,
which would make him arrogate that, which is peculiar unto God: So, though we
say, That Faith does declare and reveal to our Consciences, the sentence of
Absolution; yet we do not thereby derogate from God, or attribute that to
Faith, which belongs to God. We grant, that, as to our Justification in the
sight of God, (which is properly Justification) we are merely Passive, we
contribute nothing at all, either Physically, or Morally, by way of Merit or
Motive, That God should account us righteous, and not impute to us our sins.
This work was done without us, and for us, by Christ with his Father See
Heilder. on 51. Psalm. Lect. 128. p. 604.
; it has no other cause, but the Grace of God, and the Merit of Christ. He,
and he alone, purged, and washed us from our sins in his own blood, Revel. 1.5.
Heb 1.3. Now in regard of our Passiveness in this act of our Justification, we
say, That Faith has no hand at all in procuring, obtaining, and instating us
in this Grace; for if we did any thing, though never so little, in order to
this end, we were not Passive, but Active: Yet we say, That as this gracious
sentence of our Justification, is revealed and terminated in our own
Consciences, so Faith has an Instrumental efficacy; we are therein (...)
agents with God, 2 Cor. 6.1. And the Spirit (...) bears witness with our
spirits, Romans 8.16. And therefore, though we are no where exhorted to justify,
or to make our selves righteous in the sight of God; yet we are oftentimes bid
to grow in Faith, and to press forward to more assurance in believing our
peace, and reconciliation with God, 2 Pet. 1.5. and 3.18. Romans 5.1. Pacem
babeamus. Vulg. and Sir.


. 14. This Concession of Mr. W. [That a man is wholly Passive in his
Justification,] gave occasion, to the first Argument I offered to his
consideration, it being, as I conceive, a flat contradiction to the chief
scope, and intendment of his Sermon, which was to derive to Faith, at least, a
Federal or Moral causality in our Justification. I am sorry I should have so
much cause to complain of his injurious dealing, not only in that unworthy
language he is pleased to give me, but in casting my Argument into another
form, then that, wherein I proposed it. In his report it runs thus [ If we were
altogether Passive in being justified, then we are justified before we
believe.] In which form, I confess it is obnoxious to more exceptions then one;
for besides the Grammatical part, which is very harsh, the Logical consequence
may be justly blamed: Though the consequent be true, yet it is not a true
consequence, it is not rightly inferred from the Antecedent: Though we are
Passive in our Justification, yet it does not follow from thence, That we were
justified before we believed. A man is Passive in the first act of his
Conversion, yet it were absurd to conclude; therefore a man was converted
before he had a Being, or ever heard of the Gospel. But the Argument, as I
proposed it, was as follows. If we are wholly passive in our Justification,
then our Faith does not concur to the obtaining of it, or we are not justified
by the act of Faith in the sight of God. But (according to you) we are wholly
Passive in our Justification, Ergo, Faith does not concur unto our
Justification, or we are not justified by the act of Faith. His Answer hereunto
I could not very well heed, by reason of my distance from him, and the rudeness
of some people (who do go for Professors) that stood about me; but as I
conceived, it was to this effect, That Faith does necessarily concur to the
Application of this Privilege; whereunto I replied, But the Application of
this Benefit is not Justification; the one being Gods act, the other ours. His
Answer in Print, we are sure, is authentic; let us see therefore, how well he
has now quitted himself from the guilt of this contradiction. 1. He calls the
Argument A childish Exception, a piece of witchery, and wonders it should
proceed out of my mouth. I must confess, I cannot but wonder to hear such
language from a civil man, much more from a Minister, and more especially from
one, who has sometimes owed me more respect; let the prudent judge, whether
there be any ground for this hideous clamor. 2. He shapes some kind of answer
to the Sequel, That though Faith be a formal, vital act of the soul in genere
Physico; yet the use of it in Justification, is but to qualify us passively,
that we may be morally capable of being justified by God. And again, Faith is
required on our part; which though Physically it be an act, yet Morally it is
but a Passive condition, by which we are made capable of being justified,
according to the Order and Constitution of God. Now here 1. I shall desire the
Reader to observe how much Mr. W. is beholding to a Popish Tenent (opposed by
all our Protestant Writers) to support his cause, which is, That Faith goes
before Justification, to dispose us for it Council. Trid. ^ess. 6. c^n. 6. etc
^. Bellar. de just. ^ 1, c. 12. etc.
, etc. Bellarmine Chamier Panst. ^. 3. l 22. c. 8. Ames Bell. ener. ^. 4. l. 5.
c. 4.
undertakes to prove that Faith does not justify alone; because there are
other things, to wit, fear, hope, love, penitency, a desire of the Sacraments,
and a purpose of amendment of life: all which (says the Jesuit) do prepare
and dispose a man for Justification as well as Faith. Against whom all our
Protestant Divines Willet contr. 19. ^. 991. Down. of Justif. l. 6. c. 7 ^. 10.
Pemble ^ind. fid. c. 4.
which my little Library has obtained, do unanimously affirm, That Faith does
not dispose, or prepare us for Just^fication; Now were they all bewitched as
well as we, who would not subscribe to this Popish Dictate? 2. I shall leave it
to the Reader to judge, whether my Argument, or his Answer does deserve this
censure, when he has weighed the reasons I shall give, That Faith cannot be
said to Justify by way of disposition, or as a passive condition, morally
disposing us for Justification.

CHAP. IX. That Faith does not justify, as a condition required on our part to
qualify us for Justification.
IN regard that the main Point in difference between me and Mr. W. lies at the
bottom of this Answer, I shall make it appear we are not said to be Justified
by Faith in a Scripture sense, because Faith is required of us as a passive
condition, to qualify us for justification in the sight of God.

. 1. That Interpretation of the phrase, which gives no more to Faith in the
business of our Justification, then to other works of sanctification, cannot
be true; The reason is, because the Scripture does peculiarly attribute our
Justification unto Faith, and in a way of opposition to other works of
sanctification, Romans 3.28. Gal. 2.16.3.11. But to interpret justification by
faith merely thus, That Faith is a condition to qu^lifie us for Justification,
gives no more to Faith then to other works of sanctification, as to repentance,
charity, and all other duties of new obedience; which Mr. W. and others of the
same affirmation, make to be necessary antecedent conditions of Justification.
Mr. B. includes all works of obedience to evangelical precepts, in the
definition of Faith These. 70.
, in which sen^e, I presume, no Papist will deny that we are justified by Faith
alone, taking it as he does, for fides formata, or faith animated with charity
and other good works. And therefore, Bellarm. De Justif. l. 1 c. 17.
disputing against Justification by Faith alone, says, that if we could be
persuaded, that Faith does justify, impetrando, promerendo, and suo modo
inchoando Justificationem (which is granted him, if Faith be an antecedent,
federal condition, disposing us for it) then we would never deny that love,
fear, hope, etc. did justify as well as Faith. Dr. Hammond Pract. Cat. p. 28,
30.
says expressly, That neither Paul nor James do exclude or separate
faithful actions, or the acts of faith from Faith, or the condition of
Justification, but absolutely require them as the only things by which we are
justified: Which in another place Vindic. Cat. p. 8.
he goes about to prove by this argument, That without which we are not
justified, and by which, joined with Faith we are justified, is not by the
Apostle excluded or separated from Faith, or the condition of our
Justification; but required together with Faith as the only things, by which,
as by a condition, a man is justified. But without acts of Faith, or faithful
actions, we are not justified, and by them we are justified, and not by Faith
only. Therefore faithful actions, or acts of Faith, are not by the Apostle
excluded or separated from Faith, or the condition of our Justification; but
required together with Faith, as the only things, by which, as by a condition,
a man is justified. It is evident that he, and other abetters to this notion,
attribute no more to Faith in our Justification then to other works of
sanctification, Now this was witnessed against, as an unsound opinion, a
pernicious error, and utterly repugnant to the sacred Scriptures, etc. See
Testim. to the truth etc. p 4 and 15.
by Mr. Cranford amongst the London Subscribers, December. 14. 1647, and by Mr.
W. himself (if I mistake not) amongst the Subscribers in other Counties. It
seems (by Mr. W.) they were bewitched when they gave their hands unto that
Testimony.

. 2. That Interpretation of this phrase, which gives no more to Faith, then to
works of Nature, I mean such as may be found in natural and unregenerate
men, is not true: The Reason is, because a man may have such works, and yet not
be justified. But to interpret Justification by Faith, that Faith is a
necessary antecedent condition of our Justification, gives no more to Faith
then to works of Nature, as to sight of sin, legal sorrow, etc. which have
been found in natural, and unregenerate men, as in Cain, Saul, Judas, etc. I
presume Mr. W. will say that these are necessary antecedent conditions in every
one that is justified; for if these be conditions disposing us to Faith, and
Faith a condition disposing us to Justification; then are they also conditions
disposing us to Justification, for causae causae, est causa causati, if these
legal works are conditions of Faith, they must be (according to Mr.
Woodbridges Tenet) conditions of Justification, and consequently they are in
eodem genere causae with Faith it self, quod erat demonstrandum.

. 3. 3 That by which we are justified, is the proper, efficient, meritorious
cause of our Justification; but Faith considered as a mere passive condition,
is not in the sense of our adversaries a proper, efficient, meritorious cause
of Justification; therefore we are not said to be justified by Faith as a
passive condition, or qualification required to make us capable of
Justification. The assumption is granted by our opponents, at least verbo
tenus, who do therefore call it a mere sine qua non (which Logicians make to
be causa ociosa and nihil efficiens Philip. apud ^eckern. Log. p. 152.
) and a passive condition to exclude it from all manner of causality in
producing the effect; though for my own part, I look upon conditions in
contracts and covenants, as proper, efficient, meritorious causes of the things
covenanted, which do produce their effects, though not by their innate worth,
yet by virtue of the compact and agreement made between the parties
covenanting. But of this we shall have occasion to speak more by and by: It
remains only that I should clear the major, that That by which we are justified
is the proper* efficient, meritorious cause of our Justification; which appears
1. By the use of these Propositions, by, and through, in ordinary speech, which
note that the thing to which they are attributed is either a meritorious, or
isntrumental cause of the effect that follows; as when we say a Soldier was
raised by his valor, it imports, that his valor was the meritorious cause of
his preferment; and when we say a Tradesman lives by his Trade, our meaning is,
that his Trade is the means or instrument by which he gets his living: So here
in the case before us, when it is said a man is justified by Faith, it implies,
that Faith is either the meritorious, or isntrumental cause of his
Justification; as if it be taken objectively, for Christ and his merits, it is
the meritorious cause of our Justification in foro dei; or if it be taken
properly for the act of believing, it is the instrumental cause of our
Justification in foro conscientiae. 2. From the contrary phrase, as when the
Apostle denies that a man is justified by Works, and by the Law, without doubt
his intent was to exclude Works from any causal influx into our Justification.
Now that which he denies to Works, he ascribes to Faith, and therefore
Justification by Faith, implies that Faith in his sense, has a true causality,
or proper efficiency in our Justification. 3 From other parallel phrases in
holy Scripture, where we are said to be redeemed, justified, and saved, per
Christum, per sanguinem, per mortem, per vulnera. All which do signify, That
Christ, and his sufferings, are the true, proper, and meritorious cause of
these benefits; and so it must be understood, when we are said to be
Justified by Faith; and not that Faith is but a sine qua non, or mere cipher in
our Justification: Faith objectively taken, is a proper meritorious cause of
our Justification.

. 4. 4 I shall make use of my adversaries weapon Nostra contranos dimicat
armatura, Jer. ad. Johan. Hieros.
of that very medium which Mr. W. last alleged page 8. That interpretation of
the phrase which makes us at least concurrent causes with God and Christ in the
formal act of our Justification, is not true, because our Justification in
respect of efficiency, is wholly attributed unto them, Romans 8.33.4.6.8.3, 24.
The internal moving cause, was his own grace; and the only external
procuring cause is the death of Christ; there is no other efficient cause
besides these: We can be no more said to justify our selves, then that we
created our selves. But to make Faith a condition morally disposing us to
Justification, maks us at least concurrent causes with God and Christ in our
Justification.

1. We should not be justified freely by his grace, if any condition were
required of us in order to our Justification for a condition (as Mr. Walker
observes well) whenever it is performed, makes the thing covenanted a due
debt, which the promiser is bound to give, and then as he infers, Justification
should not be of grace, but of debt, contrary to the Apostle, in Romans 3. and 4.

2. If Faith were a condition morally disposing us for Justification, we should
then be concurrent causes with the merits of Christ in procuring our
Justification; for the merits of Christ are not a physical, but a moral cause,
which obtain their effect, by virtue of that Covenant which was made between
him, and the Father; now by ascribing unto Faith a moral, causall influx in
our Justification, we do clearly put it in eodem genere causae with the blood
of Christ, which I hope Mr. W. will better consider of, before he engages too
far in Mr. Baxters cause.

. 5. That interpretation of this phrase which makes Works going before
Justification, not only not sinful, but acceptable to God, and preparatory to
the grace of Justification, without controversy is not according to the mind
of the holy Ghost; For as much as the Scripture frequently declares, that no
man's Works are acceptable to God before his person is accepted, and justified;
the Tree must be good, or else the fruit cannot be good, Genesis 4.4. Inprimis ad
Abel and postca ad munera propter cum; Deus non homines propter munera, sed
munera propter homines acceptat. Paris cap. de meritis. Ideo dicitur 1 R. 8.52.
oculi sunt a^erti ad preces servi, quia prius nos intuctur justificatos in
Christo, quam preces exaudit. See Ains. not: on Lev. 3.5.
Luke 6.43, 44. Mat. 12.33. Joh. 15.5. Nihil viriditatis habet ramus boni
operis, nisi a radice processit, qui est Christus.
That of Aug. is sufficiently known, Opera non precedunt justificandum, sed
sequuntur justificatum; the old orthodox doctrine taught in these Churches here
in England Art. 13. and Rogers thereupon.
was, that works before Justification are not pleasing unto God, neither do
they make men meet (i^ do not qualify, or morally dispose them) to receive
grace; and we doubt not, but they have the nature of sin. I could muster up a
legion of orthodox Writers to defend this Tenent, that no qualification, or act
of ours before Justification does prepare or dispose us for Justification. Nay
the Council of Trent Nihil eorum quae justificationem precedunt, sive fides,
sive opera, ipsam justificationis gratiam promeretur. Council. Trident. Ses. 6.
Can. 8.
confesses, that none of those things which precede Justification, whether it
be Faith, or other Works, do obtain the grace of Justification. But to
interpret Justification by Faith, that Faith is a condition which does qualify
us for Justification, necessarily supposes a Work, or Works before
Justification, which have not the nature of sin, but are acceptable to God, and
preparatory to grace, viz. the grace of Justification, which is most properly
called Grace. See Down of Just. l. 3. c. 1. and 2.


. 6. That interpretation of any phrase of Scripture which involves a
contradiction, is not to be admitted; but to say Faith is a passive condition
that does morally qualify us for Justification, implies a contradiction; Ergo,
The proposition is undeniable, and the Assumption is to me as clear; To be
both active and passive in reference to the same effect, is a flat
contradiction. Now that is active which is effective Efficiens est unde pendet
^ effectus.
which contributes an efficacy whether more or less to the production of the
effect. A condition, though in the Logical notion of it, it has not the least
efficiency; and therefore Aristotle never reckoned this sine qua non, in the
number of causes, yet in the use of the Jurists (as we are now speaking of it)
it is a moral efficient cause, which is effective of that which is promised
upon condition, Chamier has well observed Tom. 3. l. P 5. c. 5. S. 2.
That omnis conditio antecedens est effectiva, he that performs the least
condition imaginable for having of any benefit, is active and passive in
obtaining of it. We will look after no other instance then that which Mr. W.
has set before us: An offender against our Laws that is saved by his Clergy,
or by reading his Neck-verse, he is not passive, but active in saving of his
life, he may properly be said to have saved himself, his reading being not
only a physical act, but a moral efficient cause, which makes that
favorable law to take effect. To say he is passive, because he made not the
Law, nor sits as Judge on the Bench to absolve himself, is but a shift to
blind the eyes of the simple, seeing that when more causes then one concur to
an effect, the effect may be denominated from the lowest, that which does least
is an active efficient cause; nay in this case the Malefactor does more in
saving of his life, then either the Law or Judge; for though pro forma, he
acknowledges the grace of the State, and the courtesy of the Judge unto him:
yet as the Welch-man that was bid to cry God bless the King, and the Judge,
cried, God bless her father and mother who taught her to read, intimated he
was more beholding to his reading then to the courtesy of the Judge, for else
the Judge would have been severe enough, his mercy would have deserved but
little thanks. I must needs tell my Old Friend, Non loquitur ut Clericus. We
say such a man is Passive in saving his life, who is not required to read or
perferm any other condition, but receives a pardon of mere Grace: In like
manner he is Passive in his Justification, that does nothing at all toward the
procuring of i^; he that performs the least condition in order thereunto* is
not only Physically, but Morally active in obtaining this privilege. For
though he did not make the Law, by, and according to which he is justified; nor
pronounce the sentence of Absolution upon himself; yet he has a subordinate,
or less principal efficiency in producing the effect; nay, a learned man Mr.
Kendal against Goodwin, cap. 4* 141.
(whom I hope Mr. W. will not think more worthy to be derided, then disputed
with) tells us, That he that performs conditions for Justification, does more
to his Justification, then God, who made only a conditional grant,
notwithstanding which, he might have perished; but he by performing the
condition, makes the grant to be absolute: And truly (says the same Author)
whosoever makes Faith the condition of the New Covenant, in such a sense as
perfect Obedience was the condition of the Old, cannot avoid it; but that man
is justified chiefly by himself, and his own acts; not so much by Gods Grace in
imputing Christ's Righteousness, but more by his own Faith, which is his own
act, though of Gods work. God by making his supposed gracious conditional
promise, does not justify any man Ib. p. 140.
, for that makes no difference at all amongst persons: It remains therefore,
that man must be said to justify himself; for where there is a promise of a
Reward made to all, upon condition of performing such a service, he that
obtains the reward, gets it by his own service; without which, the promise
would have brought him never a whit the nearer to the Reward. Thus a man
justifies himself by believing, more a great deal, then God justifies him by
his promulgation of the conditional promise, which would have left him in his
old condition, had not he better provided for himself by believing, then God by
promising: as in the old Covenant, it was not Gods threat that brought death
upon the world, just so in the new (if it be a conditional promise) it is not
the promise that justifies a believer, but the believer himself.

. 7. Mr. W. may as well call the Blood of Christ a Passive condition in our
Justification, because it did not make the Law, nor pronounce the sentence of
Absolution; let the indifferent Reader consider, whether this be not (I will
not say a childish, but) an impertinent answer, which draws his former
Concession quite aside from the matter now under debate; for the question is
not, whether man did concur in making the Law and Rule of his Justification;
but whether he has any causal influx in producing the effect; or whether
before Justification, he can, or does perform any condition, to which God has
infallibly promised this Grace? Which (if granted) will conclude, That he is
not Passive, but Active in his Justification; when our Protestant Divines say,
That a man is Passive in his first Conversion: Their meaning is, That he can
perform no condition at all, to which God has inseparably annexed the Grace of
Conversion: So Cameron Came. Tom. 3 p 569.
expresses their sense and meaning, Vocatio nullam poscit in objecto
conditionem; For though a man before conversion do perform many natural acts,
which have a remote tendency to this effect, as Hearing, Reading, Meditating,
etc. yet for all we say, He is Passive therein, because these are not such
conditions, to which God has promised saving Grace: So though a man does never
so many natural acts, or duties, whereunto God has not immediately promised
this privilege, he is but Passive for all in his Justification; but if he do
perform any condition, to which Justification is promised, then he is active,
and consequently may be said to justify himself.

. 8. But says Mr. W. We do no more justify our selves, then we do glorify our
selves, it is God alone does both, and we are Passive in both, Page 8. And
again, It is God that glorifies us, and not we our selves; yet surely God does
not glorify us before we believe, Page 10.

First, I shall readily grant him, that we do neither justify, nor glorify
our selves; seeing that we obtain neither of these benefits by our own works:
From the very beginning, to the end of our Salvation, nothing is primarily or
causally Active, but Free Grace Reynolds on Hos. 14. Sermon. 4. sect. 18.
; all that we receive from God is gift, and not debt: Glory it self is not
wages, but Grace. For though it be called The recompense of Reward, Heb. 11.27.
yet that is not to be understood in a proper sense, as when the Reward is for
the Work, which may be two ways. First, When the work is proportionable to the
wages, as when a Laborer receives a shilling for a days work, here the work
does deserve the wages, because the work does him that pays the wages as much
good, as the wages does the worker. Now surely, no reward can come from the
Creator to the Creature in this way, because no man can do any work that is
profitable unto God, Psalm. 16.2. Job 22.3. and 35.8. Romans 11 35. The very
Papists will not say, that Glory is a reward in this sense. Works (says Bishop
Gardner Answer to G. ^^oy, fol. 20. b.
) do not deserve Salvation, as a Workman deserves his wages for his labor.
Secondly, When the work is not answerable to the wages, but yet the wages is
due by promise upon the performance of it; as when a poor man has twenty
shillings for an hours labor, though the work be not worth it, yet is it a due
debt, and he may challenge it as such, because it was promised him: In this
sense, neither is Glory a Reward; for under the New Covenant, Blessedness is
not to him that works, but to him that works not, Romans 4.5. We are saved by
grace, and not by works, Tit. 3.5. Ephesians. 2.5, 8. And says the Apostle, If by
grace, then it is no more of works, Romans ^1.6. But when Glory is called a
Reward, we are to understand it improperly, as when a thing is called a Reward
only by way of Analogy and Resemblance, because it comes after, and in the
place of the work; as the nights rest may be called the Reward of the days
labor, because it succeeds it. Thus is that of the Apostle to be taken* 2 These.
1.7. And thus the Heir inheriting his Fathers Lands, has a Recompense or
Reward of all the labor and service he has done for his Father; although he
did not his service to that end, neither does the enjoyment of that inheritance
hang upon that condition. In this sense, Eternal L^fe and Glory may be called
the Reward of our Works, because it is a consequent of them; not that our works
have any influence, either Physical or Moral to obtain it: All things being
given us, in, and for Christ alone, Romans 8.32. Ephesians. 1.3. And therefore it is
called by the Apostle A reward of Inheritance, Col. 3.24. Which comes to us not
by working, but by inheritance, as we are the heirs of God, and joint heirs
with Christ. If Glory were a Reward in a proper sense, we might properly be
said to save and glorify our selves, because we concurred to the Production of
this effect; but Mr. W. says well, It is God that glorifies us; Eternal Life
is called his gift in opposition to wages, Romans 6.23. 2 Timothy 4.8. It is solely
the effect of Gods grace, and Christ's purchase; though God does glorify us
after working, yet not for any of those works which we have wrought, though by
the help and assistance of his own Spirit.

. 9. But yet secondly, Though God does not glorify us before we believe, yet
it will not follow, that he does not justify us before we believe. For first,
if we take Justification pro volitione Dei, for the Will of God not to punish,
he cannot but know, there is not the same reason of an immanent act of God,
which is Eternal, and of a transient act which is in time; or secondly, if we
take it pro re volita, as it is the fruit and effect of Christ's death, it will
not follow, that because we have not Glorification before believing, we have
not Justification: For though all the Blessings of the Covenant are given us
freely, and not upon conditions performed by us, yet God has his order and
method in bestowing of them: He first gives us Grace imputed, then Grace
inherent, and afterward Eternal Glory. And thus some Benefits of the Covenant
are by some (though improperly) made conditions of the rest, because they are
first enjoyed.

. 10. That which Mr. W. adds, Page 10. and wishes may be seriously
considered, has been considered already, more then once. If (says he)
Justification by Faith, must be understood of Justification in our Consciences,
then is not the word Justification taken properly for a Justification before
God in all the Scriptures; from the beginning to the end, we read of no
Justification in Scripture, but by Faith or Works. Mr. E. (says he) when the
Scripture speaks of Justification by Works, understands it of Justification
before men; when it speaks of Justification by Faith, he understands it of
Justification in our Consciences: Now neither of these is Justification in the
sight of God, and verily neither of them of much worth in the Apostles
judgment, 1 Cor. 4.3. The Antinomians may read out their eyes, before they
produce us one Text, etc.] Had he reported my Judgment truly, there had been
no room for this Exception. I have said indeed (and by all that Mr. W. has
said against it, I see no reason to change my mind) that when the Scripture
attributes our Justification to Works (as in the Epistle of James) it is to be
understood of our Justification before men; when it ascribes it to Faith, Faith
is taken either properly, or metonymically; if it be taken properly for the act
of Believing, then it is to be understood of our Justification before God,
terminated in our Consciences, or as it is revealed and evidenced, to our
selves. Justification in Conscience, is Justification before God, as an
Acquittance in the heart of the Creditor, and in a Paper is one and the same;
this manifested, and the other secret. He that is justified in his Conscience,
is justified before God; and Faith apprehends that, which does not only
justify us in our Consciences but before God: Or if Faith be taken
metonymically for its object, then Justification by Faith is Justification
before God; for it is Justification by the Merits of Christ, to whom alone,
without works, or conditions performed by us, the Holy Ghost ascribes our
Justification in the sight of God; Romans 3.24. Ephesians. 1.7. and in many other
such places.

. 11. But (says Mr. W.) Justification before men, and in our Consciences, are
neither of them of much worth in the Apostles Judgment, 1 Cor. 4 3.] 1. I wish
that Justification with men, were of less account with Mr. W. He best knows,
whether Conscience of vindicating the truth, or popular affectation, put him
upon this engagement. I am sure, the former would not have tempted him to those
incivilities he has offered unto me and others, whom (I doubt not) but God
will know by other names, then he is pleased to cast upon us. If the later, or
a desire of ingratiating himself with some of my Opposers, did spur him
forward, though he has Justification before men (which yet I assure him is not
Universal, no not amongst many that do wish him well) I dare say, he is not
justified in the Court of Conscience, and if our heart, etc. 1 John 3.20. 2.
But does the Apostle account neither of these Justifications much worth? Let
Mr. W. judge in what account he had Justification before men, by what he says,
2 Cor. 1.12. 1 Cor. 9.15. And Justification in Conscience, by those blessed
Effects he ascribes unto it, Romans 5.1, 23. see 1 John. 3.21. 3. It is true, 1
Cor. 43. he says, That he cares not to be judged of man's judgment, or of man's
day V^d. Vorst. Para^^. and (...) dat. Annot.
. The meaning is, That he did not regard the sinister Judgments and Censures
of carnal Christians, who praise and dispraise upon light and trivial
inducements, like them Chap. 1. v. 12. Yea, (says he) I judge not my self, q.
d. I am not solicitous, nor do I enter into consideration what degree of honor
or esteem I am worthy of, amongst, or above my fellows. Now, what is this to
the purpose? What is this to the Justification of his person in the Court of
Conscience by Faith, or the Justification of his Faith and Sincerity toward
men by Works? I must needs say (with a very worthy Divine Mr. Owen against
Baxter,p ^1.
) That no small portion of favor consists in a Sense and Knowledge of the
kindness of God in its actings, terminated upon the Conscience; however Mr W.
is pleased to value it.

. 12. In his next Passage he gives us a Youthful Frolic, to show his
gallantry, like Mr. Baxters challenge Aphor. p. 93.
, Let the Antinomians show one Scripture which speaks of Justification from
Eternity. The Antinomians (says he, the Anti-Papists, and Anti-Arminians, he
means) may read their eyes out, before they produce us one Text for any other
Justification in Scripture, which is not by Faith, or Works. (1) Though the
Antinomians are so blind, that they cannot find one Text for this purpose,
yet he himself is such a quick-sighted Linceus, that he has discovered more
then one: For Page 23. he tells us of a threefold Justification, and yet
neither of them is by Faith or Works. I hope he has not read out his eyes to
find them out. (2) In what sense the Scripture asserts Justification before
Faith or Works, has been shown before; but (3) (if I may be so bold) I would
ask how long the Anti-Gospellers may read before they produce one plain Text
for any of those Dictates, they would thrust upon us, That Justification does
in no sense precede the act of Faith; that Christ purchased only a
conditional, not an absolute Justification for Gods Elect; that our Evangelical
Righteousness by which we are justified is in our selves; that the tenor of the
New Covenant is, If thou believe, etc. That God has made a Covenant with
Christ, that none should have any benefit by his death, till they do believe.
Cum multis aliis quae nunc, etc.

. 13. Mr. W. thinks he has sufficiently cleared the coast of this Exception [
That Faith in a proper sense is said to justify, in respect of its evidencing
property, or because it declares and applies to our Consciences, that perfect
Justification which we have in Christ.] But by his leave, it is like to be a
bone for him to pick, till the Index Expurgatorius has rased out those
Scriptures which ascribe our Justification unto Christ alone. For my own part,
I see no such cause he has to triumph, unless it be in the dejection of those
feeble consequences, which he himself has devised to make our Doctrine odious,
which we have shown before, are as remote from our principles, as the East is
from the West. I confess, neither he, nor I, are competent Judges in our own
cause; let the Godly Reader judge between us, and hold fast that which comes
nearest to the Analogy of Faith. I shall now address my self to s^an the force
of those Arguments he has brought to prove; That the Elect are not justified
in the sight of God before they believe.

CHAP. X. Wherein Mr. Woodbridges first Argument against Justification before
Faith, taken from the Nature of Justification, is answered.
HIs first Argument is drawn from the Nature of Justification, Which (says he)
is the absolution of a sinner from condemnation, by that gracious sentence and
signal promise in the Gospel. [He that believes, shall not enter into
condemnation.] The Argument he has cast into this frame, If there be no act of
grace declared and published in the Word, which may be a legal discharge of the
sinner, while he is in unbelief, then no unbelieving sinner is justified: But
there is no act of grace, declared and published in the Word, which is a legal
discharge of the sinner, whilst he remains in unbelief, Ergo. Whereunto I
answer, 1. That his Assumption is false; for the Gospel or New Covenant is a
published or declared discharge of all the Elect. The sum of which is, That God
has transacted all their sins upon Jesus Christ, and that Christ by that
offering of his has made a full and perfect atonement for them; whereby the
whole spiritual Israel, are really made clean from all their sins in the sight
of God, as of old, carnal Israel were Typically clean, upon the atonement made
by the High Priest, Levit. 16.30. Now though they cannot plead it before they
believe; yet is it a real discharge, because it frees them from condemnation:
As a Pardon granted by a Prince, is a legal discharge, though the Malefactor
does not know of it. 2. The Sequel or Consequence of the Major stands upon a
sandy bottom, a postulatum that will not be granted, to wit, That Justification
is the discharge of a sinner, by a published, declared act. We have showed
before, That Justification consists in the non-imputation of sin, and the
imputation of Righteousness, which is an act of the Mind, or Will of God. It
is a gross non sequitur, God does not declare his non-imputing of sin to his
Elect, before they believe, Ergo He does account and esteem them sinners. The
Question is not, whether this gracious sentence of Absolution, be declared; but
whether it be not in the Breast of God, before it be declared? or, whether this
immanent act of God does not secure the sinner from condemnation? If so! then
there is Justification, though there be no published, declared sentence. As
Gods saying in his heart, That he would never drown the world any more, Genesis
8.21. did sufficiently secure the world from the danger of an other deluge,
though he had never declared it; so Gods will not to punish, secures a person
from condemnation, though this security be not declared.

. 2. They are but feeble proofs, wherewith he has backed h^s Assertion, That
Justification is only by the promise, as a declared discharge. We are not
(says he, as if he sa^e in Pythagoras his Chair) to conceive of Justification,
as an internal immanent act of God, resolving privately in his own Breast, not
to prosecute his right against a sinner; but it must be some declared,
promulged act, etc. But why are we not to conceive of it, as an internal,
immanent act? Instead of proofs he gives us Illustrations, which may pass in a
Sermon, but are too weak for a dispute. As sin (says he) is not imputed, where
there is no Law, Romans 5.13. So neither is Righteousness imputed without Law.
Whereunto I answer, 1. Though men will not impute or charge sin upon
themselves, where there is not a Law to convince them of it, For by the Law is
the knowledge of sin, Romans 3.20. and 7.9. Gal. 3.19. Yet it follows not, but
God did impute sin to men, before there was any Law promulged, or before the
sin was actually committed: For what is Gods hating of a person, but his
imputing of sin, or his will to punish him for his sin? Now the Lord hated all
that perish, ere ever the Law was given. The scope of the Scripture alleged,
Romans 5.13. is not to show when God begins to impute sin to a person, but that
sin, in being, supposes a Law; and consequently, That there was a Law, before
the Law of Moses, else men could not have sinned, as it is confessed they did:
As the Law it self had a being in the Mind of God, so the issues thereof were
determined by him, before it was declared. 2. There is not the same reason of
our being sinners, and being righteous, seeing that sin is our act, but
Righteousness is the gift of God. A man is not a sinner, before he do commit
sin, either by himself, or Representative, which necessarily supposes a Law;
For sin is the transgression of a Law, 1 John 3.4. But a man may be righteous
before he does works of Righteousness, and consequently before any Law is given
him to obey. Indeed, if we were made righteous by our own personal Inherent
Righteousness, then our Justification would necessarily require a Law; for as
much as all our Righteousness consists in a conformity to the Law. But seeing
we are justified by the imputation of another Righteousness, what need is
there that a Law should first be given unto us.

. 3. Mr. W. goes on, [ As our condemnation is no secret act, or resolution of
God to condemn, but the very voice and sentence of the Law [Cursed is he that
sins;] ( and therefore he whom God in his Eternal Decree, has purposed to
save, may yet for the present be under the sentence of condemnation; as the
Ephesians, whom God had chosen to Eternal Life, Chap. 1.4. were yet sometimes
the children of wrath, Chap. 2.3.) So on the contrary, our Justification must
be some declared, promulged act, or sentence of God, which may stand good in
Law, for the discharge of the sinner against condemnation.] We say that
condemnation (being taken, not for the Will of God to punish, or to inflict
upon a person, the desert of his sin, but for the thing willed, or for the
curse it self) it comes upon men by virtue of that Law, or Covenant which was
made with the first Adam. So our Justification (being taken, not for the
Internal Act of Gods will, not to punish, but for the benefit willed to us by
that Internal Act, to wit, Our actual discharge from the Law) descends to us,
by virtue of that Law or Covenant, which was made with the second Adam: He
performing the terms of agreement between the Father, and himself, made the Law
of Condemnation, to be of no force against us, Gal. 3.13. and 4.5. Which New
Covenant, and not the Conditional Promise (as Mr. W. would have it) is called
The Law of Faith, Romans 3.27. And the Law of Righteousness, Chapter 9.31. It is
called a Law, because it is the fixed and unalterable Sanction of the Great
God; or else by way of Antithesis, or opposition to the Covenant of Works: The
Law of Righteousness, it being the only means whereby men do attain to
Righteousness, and are justified in the sight of God; and the Law of Faith,
because it strips men of their own righteousness Diodat. on Romans 3.27.
, to cloth them with Christ's, and thereby takes from men all occasion of
boasting in themselves; whereas, if men did attain to Righteousness by virtue
of this Conditional Promise, He that believes, shall be saved; they would have
as much cause of boasting in themselves, as if they had performed the Law of
Works. That saying of his, with which he closes this Argument, is wide from
truth, That every man is then condemned, or stands condemned in foro Dei, when
the Law condemns him; for then all men living are condemned, seeing the Law
condemns, or curses every one that sins; and there is none that lives without
sin. Either he must say, Gal. 3.10.
Believers do not sin, and then Saint John will give him the lie, 1 John 1.8.
or else, That Believers are not justified; which is contrary to the Scripture
last cited by himself, Joh 5.24. with a thousand more. In what sense the Elect
Ephesians were called Children of wrath, will more fitly be explained in the
next Chapter.

. 4. In the mean time we will add a few Reasons against the main support of
this Argument, That Justification is the discharge of a sinner, by a declared,
published act; to wit, by that Signal, Conditional Promise, He that believes
shall be saved. Which, when a man has performed the condition, he may plead
for his discharge. Against this Notion, I shall offer to the Readers serious
consideration, these following Arguments. First, If Justification be not by
works, then it is not by this or any other Conditional Promise, which is a
declared discharge only to him that performs the condition, i. e. That
works: But Justification is not by works Tit. 3.5. Romans 4.5.
, which we have wrought, but an act of the freest grace and bounty, Col. 2.13.
where the word (...) Verbum (...) ab ipsa gratia deduction, ut remissionem
gratuitam intelligamus ex part nostra, nullo pretio a nobis numerato. Daven.
in loc.
, which the Apostle uses to express the forgiveness of sin, ascribes it solely
to the Grace of God, without Works or Conditions performed by us.

. 5. Secondly, If Justification be by that Signal Promise (He that believes,
shall be saved,) then none were justified before that gracious sentence was
published, which was not till our Saviors Ministry in the flesh; nor was
there any sentence of Divine Revelation like it, which the people of God could
plead for their discharge from the Law, from the fall of Adam; until the
publication of that subservient Covenant in Mount Sinai (which is the tenor of
the Law of Works) the Lord never made any Conditional Promise, which they could
plead for their discharge, and absolution from sin; the promises to Adam, Noah,
Abraham, were not conditional, but absolute. Now, if there were no
Justification, till God had made some conditional promise, which men upon
performing the condition, might plead as their legal discharge, I marvel into
what Limbus* Mr. W. will thrust the Fathers of the Old Testament: For they that
were not justified, were not saved. But the Scripture gives us more hope,
showing that they were saved by the same grace, as we are, Acts 15.11. God
accepting them as righteous in Jesus Christ; who in respect of the virtue and
efficacy of his death, is called The Lamb slain from the foundations of the
world, Revel. 13.8. For though this rich Grace were not revealed to them so
clearly, as unto us, Ephesians. 3.5. 1 Pet. 1.12. Yet the Effects and Benefits
thereof descended upon them unto Justification of life, no less then to the
Faithful in the New Testament. The Argument in short is this. If the Fathers of
the Old Testament were justified, who yet had not any such declared discharge;
then Justification is not by a declared discharge; but the Fathers of the Old
Testament were justified, etc. Ergo.

. 6. Thirdly, If Justification be only by a declared discharge, then Elect
Infants insensible of this Declaration, and unable to plead their discharge
from any such promise, have no Justification, I hope Mr. W. is not such a durus
pater infantum, as to exclude all those from Justification that die in their
infancy, which he must necessarily do, if he makes Justification to consist in
that which they are utterly incapable of.

. 7. Fourthly, The making Justification a declared discharge, detracts from the
Majesty and Sovereignty of God: For as much as it ascribes to him but the
office of a Notary, or subordinate Minister, (whose work it is to declare and
publish the sentence of the Court) rather then of a Judge or Supreme
Magistrate, whose Will is a Law. And by this means Justification shall be
opposed, not to condemnation, but to concealing or keeping secret.

. 8. Fifthly, If Justification were by a Conditional Promise, as a declared
discharge, then it would not be Gods act, but our own; God should not be our
Justifier, but we must be said to justify our selves; For a Conditional
Promise does not declare one man justified more then another, but the
performance of the condition: So that a man should be more beholding to
himself, then to God, for his Justification.

. 9. Sixthly, We may argue a pari: Forgiveness amongst men is not necessarily
by a declared discharge, Ergo, Gods is not; for there is the same reason for
both; and therefore we are bid to forgive one another, as God for Christ's sake
has forgiven us, Ephesians. 4. ult. i. e. heartily, or from the heart, as the
Apostle elsewhere explains it, Col. 3.17. Not in word, or in tongue, but in
deed, and in true affection. Man's forgiveness is principally an act of the
Heart and Mind: A man forgives an injury, when he lays aside all thoughts of
revenge, and really intends his welfare that did the same; his heart is as much
toward him, as if he had not done it: And therefore Gods forgiving of a
sinner, is not necessarily a declared absolution. God may justify or acquit a
person, though he does not declare his reconciliation with him.

. 10. Mr. Woodbridge foresaw the force of this Reason, and therefore has
wisely laid in this Exception against it. Indeed to our private forgiveness one
of another, being merely an act of Charity, there is no more required, then a
resolution within our selves to lay aside our thoughts of revenge, etc. But the
forgiveness of a Magistrate, being an act of Authority, must be by some formal
act of Oblivion, etc. A Vote in the house is no Legal security to a Delinquent;
so then, Gods forgiveness being an act of Authority, must neither be an hidden,
secret purpose in his own heart, etc. but a formal promulged act. Answ. 1. I
see no reason why God should not have as much power to forgive, without a
promulged act, as man. It was a saying heretofore, Papa nunquam sibi ligat
manus; they that have supreme and absolute power, love not to have their hands
tied. I wonder therefore, that Mr. W. should be so bold as to limit God, and to
prescribe in what way and manner he must forgive sinners; I am sure, the Reason
which he gives, is of little force; for Gods forgiveness is no less an act of
Charity, then man's; as these Scriptures, Rom 5.8. Ephesians. 2.4. with many others do
sufficiently show. And though God in the act of forgiveness, may be looked upon
as a Judge, yet is he such a Judge, as proceeds by no other Law then his own
Will. And therefore (2) we say, That though the forgiveness of Magistrates be
by some published act of Oblivion, yet it does not follow, That God must
proceed in the same manner; because the promulgation of an act of Grace, is for
the direction and limitation of Judges, and Ministers of State, that they do
not execute the sentence of the Law. Now in the Justification of a sinner, God
has no need of such an act, because he is the sole Judge and Justifier
himself; and therefore the purpose of his Will secures the person sufficiently
though his security be not declared, and makes the Law of condemnation (which
depends wholly on the Will of God) to be of no force, in regard of the real
execution of it, whether he do plead it, or no; as in Infants, and doubting
Christians, whose hearts do condemn them; some of whom Mr. W. acknowledges to
be justified, Page 3. and 15. A Judge that has the Legislative power in his
own breast, needs no published Edict to absolve an Offender. Now God is such a
Judge, as does not receive, but gives Laws unto all. (3) The publishing of acts
of Grace, is for the comfort of the Offender, rather then for any need that the
Supreme Magistrate has thereof, as to the completing of his act; as for
instance, the Act of Oblivion was a real Pardon, when it passed the house; for
though Delinquents had no knowledge of their immunity from the penalties which
they had incurred, before it was published in Print, yet the Vote or Sanction
of the House did secure them from danger, and invalidate the Statutes that were
in force against them; otherwise Delinquents would be more beholding to the
Printer that published that act, then to the Parliament that made it: So the
publication of the New Covenant was for the comfort of Gods Elect, and not for
their security, in foro Dei.

CHAP. XI. Wherein Mr. Woodbridges Second Argument against Justification before
Faith, taken from our state by nature, is answered.
HIs Second Argument seems to be most weighty, which if it be put into a just
balance, will likewise be found guilty of a minus habens. The Argument runs
thus, [ They that are under condemnation, cannot at the same time be justified;
but all the world is under condemnation before Faith. Ergo, None of the world
are justified before Faith.] Here I shall (1) enter a Caveat against the Major,
which notwithstanding his confident Assertion [ that it must needs be true]
does not appear so unto me, unless it be limited with this Proviso, That these
seeming contraries do refer ad idem, I mean, to the same Court and Judicatory;
their I shall grant, That he who is under condemnation is not justified;
otherwise we know, it often falls out, that he that is condemned, and has a
Judgment upon Record against him in one Court, may be justified and absolved
in another; he that is cast at the Common Law, may be quitted in a Court of
Equity. Now the Law and the Gospel are, as it were, two several Courts and
Judicatories; they that are condemned in the one, may be justified in the
other; they that are sinners in the first Adam, may be looked upon as just and
righteous in the second: There is nothing more ordinary, then for Christians,
at the same time, to consider themselves under this twofold relation, to wit,
Their state by Nature, and their state by Grace. In reference to the former it
was, that Paul cried out, O wretched man that I am! and yet in the same breath,
he breaks forth into thankful Expressions for his escape and deliverance Rom 7*
24, 25.
. I doubt not but Mr. W. has heard many Ministers in their Confessions,
adjudge themselves sinful and wretched Creatures, and yet at the same time
plead their Righteousness and Adoption;though their translation from one estate
to the other, was not in that very instant: Romans 3.19.
The Law condemns all men living, for that all have sinned. The Law does not
consider men as Elect, or Reprobates, or as Believers or unbelievers, but as
righteous or sinners: Believers have no more advantage by the Law, then
unbelievers; the Law will not cease to threaten and condemn them, as long as
they live: It is true, Believers can plead their discharge, which others may
have, though they know it not.

. 2. But if Mr. W. do speak of an absolute condemnation, or of such as are
condemned by the first Covenant, and have no benefit at all by the second; we
shall then let go the Major, and arrest his Minor Proposition [ But all the
world are under condemnation before Faith.] For God does not condemn his Elect
Children, for whom Christ has died; the Holy Ghost witnesses that Gods will,
to wit, of good pleasure, was, That none of them should perish, or be
condemned; and if the Judge will quit them, who else shall condemn them Romans
8.33.
? To whomsoever God does will Life and Salvation, (his Will being absolute and
immutable) they are not liable to condemnation.

. 3. The Scriptures brought by him to prove his Minor, are forced to go beyond
the intention of the Holy Ghost, as 1 John 3.18. He that believes not, is
condemned already. He that believes not, is as much, as he that never
believes, or he that believes not at any time, as Chap. 8.24. If ye believe
not (i. e. not at all) ye shall die in your sins. The scope See Mr. Tho.
Goodwins Sermon on John 6.37.
of our Savior was to obviate those suspicions and jealousies which are
lurking in the hearts of men, as if God in sending his Son, intended not their
good, but only laid a design and ambushment for their further condemnation. It
is no such matter (says our Savior) God sent not his Son to condemn the
world, Verse. 17. It is an evident sign, that God had no such end in publishing
the Gospel, For he that believes, is not condemned; he knows that he is passed
from death to life; and he that believes not, i. e. that finally rejects the
Grace which is here offered, was condemned long before; viz. by the sentence of
the Law, and by the just judgment of God, proceeding against them, according
to the tenor of the first Covenant: So that God need not go about to entangle
men, who were before fast bound in the shackles of sin and misery; the Law
condemned them sufficiently, though their contempt of the Gospel will aggravate
their condemnation. Our Savior had no intent at all to show the state of the
Elect, before believing; but the certain, and inevitable misery of them that
believe not; by reason of the sentence of the Law which had passed upon them.

. 4. (2) His next Allegation is as impertinent as this, Verse 36. of the same
Chapter, He that believes not, the wrath of God abides on him. It is evident,
that our Savior speaks there of a final unbeliever, and not of an Elect person
before believing; the phrase of the abiding Notat constantiam and pevitissimam
rei adhaesionem. Camer.
of Gods wrath, is applicable to none, but unto Reprobates, who do perish for
ever: And to say that the place hints, there is a wrath of God which is done
away by believing, is but an attempt, to suborn the Spirit, to serve our turn.

. 5. (3) That which seems to speak most fully to his cause, is Ephesians. 2.3.
where the Apostle tells the Ephesians (whom God had chosen to Eternal life,
Chap. 1.4.) That they were by nature the children of wrath; even as others. To
which I answer, (1) That the Text does not say, that God did condemn them, or
that they were under Condemnation, before Conversion. (2) The Emphasis of this
Text (I conceive) lies in this clause [ by nature.] So then the Apostles
meaning is, That by nature, or in reference to their state in the first Adam,
from whom by natural propagation they descended, They were children of wrath,
they could expect nothing but wrath and fiery indignation from God: Yet this
hindered not, but that by Grace, they might be the Children of his Love; for so
all the Elect are, whilst they are in their blood and pollution, Ezekiel. 16.4,
8. The Lord calls them his Sons and Children before Conversion, Isai. 43.6. and
53.11. and 8.18. Heb. 2.9. For it is not any Inherent qualification, but the
good pleasure of God, that makes them his Children, Ephesians. 1.5. Romans 8.29. John
17.6. Believers considered in themselves, and as they come from the loins of
Adam, are sinful and cursed Creatures, as vile and wretched as the Devil
himself, though in Christ they behold themselves made righteous and blessed. It
is granted, That Elect Infants have the Righteousness of Christ imputed to
them, though they know it not; and I see no reason that can be given, why it
should not be imputed to the rest of the Elect before Conversion.

. 6. Although the Elect are freed from wrath and condemnation; yet in some
sense, they may be said to be under it, in regard that the Law does terrify
and affright their consciences, Romans 4.15. In which respect, it is called A
ministration of wrath, and of death, 2 Cor. 3.7, 9. The wrath of God has a
threefold acception in the Scripture Z^nch. de Not. Dei. l. 4. c. 6. q. r. These.
. 1. It signifies the most just, and immutable Will of God to deal with a
person or persons according to the tenor of the Law, and to inflict upon them
the punishment which their sins shall deserve: And in this sense, none but
Reprobates are under wrath; who for this cause are said to be hated of God. (2)
It notes the threatenings and comminations of the Law, Romans 1.18. Psalm. 6.1.
Hos. 11.9. Jonas 3.9* etc. (3) It notes the execution of those threatenings, or
the punishments threatened, Ephesians. 5.6. Luke 21.23. Matthew. 3.7. Now in the first
and third sense, the Elect never were, nor shall be, under wrath; God never
intended to deal with them according to the tenor of the Law; nor does he
inflict upon them the least evil, upon that account, Christ having freed and
delivered them from the Curse: But as wrath is taken in the second sense, for
the comminations and threatenings of the Law, so they are under wrath, till they
are able to plead their discharge and release, by the Gospel. The threatenings
of the Law, do seize upon and arrest their Consciences, no less then others;
and therefore the Law is compared to a rigid Schoolmaster Gal. 3.24.
, which never cease to whip and lash them, until they fly unto Christ. For
though he has freed them from the Curse, yet the Lord sees it fit they should
for a while be held under the Pedagogy and Ministration of the Law, that they
may learn to prize the Redemption which they have by Christ, Gal. 3.22. The
Lord, when he published the Law in Sinai (as the Apostle observes, Gal. 3.17.)
Did not repent him of his promise, made Typically with Abraham and his Seed,
but really with Christ, and the Elect in him: But (says he) the Law was added,
because of transgression, i. e. To discover their sinfulness and misery by
nature, and to render the Grace of the promise more desirable, Verse. 22. As the
Saints in the Old Testament were Heirs of the Promise, Gal. 4.1, 2.
had a real and actual Interest in all the Blessings of the New Covenant,
whilst their Consciences were whipped and scourged by this merciless
Schoolmaster; so all the rest of the Elect are partakers of the same Grace of
Life, though the Law does terrify and condemn them: The threatenings of the Law
do not show what is the state of a person toward God, or how God does account
of him; but what he is by nature, and what he has deserved, should be
inflicted upon him; which a man cannot choose but expect, and fear, till his
Conscience be secured by better promises: So that I shall not be afraid to say,
That the Consciences of the Elect before Faith, are under wrath, and not their
Persons; and though their Consciences do condemn them, yet God does not. But
against this Mr. W. has sundry Exceptions.

. 7. The condemnation they are under, is the condemnation 3.19. Answ. Answ.
That the voice or sentence of the Law, shows not who are condemned of God, but
who are guilty and damnable in themselves, if God should deal with them by the
Law, which is the scope of the Apostle, Romans 3.19, 20. That all the world might
become guilty before God. So indeed are all men considered according to what is
due by the Law, Psalm. 143.2. But the Elect as considered in the Grace, and
forgiveness of God, and the perfect satisfaction of Jesus Christ, are
discharged from this rigorous Court, their cause is judged at another Bar.

. 8. The condemnation of an unbelievers conscience, is Answ.
The testimony of an unbelievers conscience (...) true, so far as it agrees
with the written word; if it witnesses to a man any thing, which is neither in
the word, nor necessarily deduced from it; the testimony is false and sinful.
For understanding whereof, we must know, that there is a threefold act of
conscience about sin; the first, When it witnesses to us concerning the desert
of sin; the second, When it witnesses to us concerning the act of sin, or the
sins which we have done: the third is, When it witnesses to us concerning our
final state and condition before God. Now if Conscience does bear witness to a
man, concerning what he has done, and what is his desert in so doing, it does
but its duty, Romans 1.34. But if it tell a man, that for the sins which he has
done, he is a damned Creature, and must perish everlastingly; such a Conscience
is both penally and sinfully evil. The Conscience of an unbeliever accuses
truly, when it convinces him of sin; that Death eternal is the wages of it;
and that by the Law he can expect no other: But if it proceeds to tell a man,
that his case is desperate, and without hope, it pronounces a false sentence.
For though he be a Reprobate, and consequently the sentence is true in it self,
yet it is a false testimony in him, for as much as conscience witnesses that,
which it cannot certainly know; how much more is it a false testimony, when the
Conscience of an Elect person does make such a conclusion against himself, That
God has absolutely condemned him to Hell torments, it is false in it self, and
false in him: If it were a true sentence, it were then impossible he should be
saved; For condemnation (as Mr. W. confesses a little after) is opposed to
Salvation; and the Law says not Now cursed, but cursed for ever, Matthew. 25.41.
And therefore, I say, If the Conscience of any sinner, either Elect or
Reprobate, shall in this life, pass such an absolute and peremptory sentence
against himself, that the curse of the Law shall be inflicted upon him, he sins
both against the Law, and the Gospel. (1) Against the Law, by applying the
Ministry thereof to a wrong end, and not as God has intended it; for the Law
was not given ex primaria intention, to condemn men See Dr. Reynolds three
Treatises, p. 385.
, but to further and advance the Ministry of the Gospel; that men seeing what
they are by nature, and what they have deserved, might flee for refuge unto
Jesus Christ. Now when men, hearing the Curse of the Law, conclude, that surely
this must be their portion, and that it is never the nearer for them, that the
Son of God has shed his Blood for sinners, they sin against the Law; in regard
the end of the Law is to cause them to flee unto Christ; so that by making the
sentence of the Law absolute, they quite cross the design and intention of God
in giving the Law. (2) They deny the very tenor and substance of the Gospel, 1 Timothy 1.15. 1 John 5 10, 11.
which is, That in Christ there is life eternal for sinners; and for ought that
they can know to the contrary* for them, as well as for others.

. 9. Though we say, That the sentence of condemnation, which men pass upon
themselves in this life, is false and erroneous, yet are we innocent of those
ugly consequences which Mr. W. would thrust upon us, Of blinding men's eyes, and
hardening their hearts, and searing up their consciences, etc. Which are more
likely to follow upon an indiscreet application of the Law, and men's making the
voice thereof the definitive sentence of God, upon all Transgressors; which is
the ready way to make men quite desperate, and to harden their hearts in
unbelief. We hold it necessary* That the Law should be preached to unbelievers
in it^ strictness, rigor, and inexorable severity; that they may see there is
no hope for them at all, by the works of the Law; yet we would have it preached
as an Appendant to the Gospel, not to drive men to despair, but to believe, and
to flee to that Sanctuary which is opened in the Gospel; whereas if it be
published alone, and as an absolute sentence, it is a bar to Faith: For if God
does condemn men, who shall justify them? Christ's merits will not save them,
whom God does condemn; witness Reprobate Men and Angels, Unto whom there
remains no sacrifice at all for sin.

. 10. His third Exception is, That the condemnation with John 3.36. by the
abiding of Gods wrath upon him. Therefore we say, Answ.
no Elect unbeliever is condemned of God, because the wrath of God does not
abide upon him. The condemnation wherewith the unbeliever, i. e. The final
unbeliever is condemned, is indeed the abiding of Gods wrath, that is, he shall
die everlastingly, for it is opposed to everlasting life; but what is this to
the Elect, who are not final unbelievers?

. 11. His fourth and last is, That the condemnation of unbelievers John 3.17.
And surely the condemnation that is opposed to Salvation, is more then the
condemnation of a man's own conscience, etc. I answer, Answ.
1. That the condemnation opposed to Salvation, is damnation; and then by Mr.
Woodbridges Argument, the Elect, because they are sometimes unbelievers, must
all be damned. But 2. this rather shows (as I said before,) that, by him that
believes not, is meant, he that believes not at all.

CHAP. XII. Wherein Mr. Woodbridges third, fourth, and fifth Arguments are
answered.
HIs third Argument is drawn from the several comparisons by which
Justification by Faith is illustrated. Sometimes it is compared to the
Israelites, looking up to the Brazen Serpent for healing, Joh. 3.14. Numb. 21
8. As then, they were not first healed, and then looked up to see what healed
them, but they did first look upon the Serpent, and then they were healed. Even
so it is the Will of God, that whosoever sees, and believes the Son, shall be
justified, John 6.40. Sometimes Faith is compared to eating, and Justification
to the nourishment which we receive by our meat, etc. To which I answer, 1.
That comparisons prove nothing, unless they are framed by the Holy Ghost for
the thing in question. Now I utterly deny that it was the intent of the Holy
Ghost, in either of these comparisons, to show in what order, or method we are
justified in the sight of God. 2. The stinging of the fiery Serpents did
plainly shadow forth the effects of the Law in Conscience. The Law by revealing
the wrath of God, against all unrighteousness Romans 1 17. and 4.15.
, stings and wounds men's consciences Prove. 18.14.
; for which cause it is called, a fiery Law, Deuteronomy. 33.2. To wit, from its
effects, because it does, as it were, kindle a fire in men's bones; they have no
rest in their souls, until these wounds are healed Psalm 102.3. and 38.3.
. Now as the Israelites when they were stung by those fiery Serpents, found no
ease, till they looked up unto the Brazen Serpent: So the soul that is smitten
and wounded by the Ministry of the Law, will never find rest, till it looks
unto him, in whose wounds and stripes is the healing of sinners Isai 53.5. John
3.1^.
. 3. This very comparison does make against him; as the Israelites were alive,
when they looked upon the Brazen Serpent, or else they could not have seen it:
So they that ^^ok upon Jesus Christ, i. e. Believe in him, are spiritually
alive, or else they could not put forth such a vital act. It is said indeed,
Numb. 21.9. that when any man that was bitten, beheld the Serpent of Brass, he
lived, i. e. He was healed, or had ease from his anguish; so they that by Faith
look up unto the Antitype, they find ease and rest for their wearied souls;
they do then live, i. e. they have the comfort and enjoyment of that life,
which before they had in Christ. A man is said to live, when he lives
comfortably and happily Vita non est vivere sed valere. Non est beatus, qui so
esse non putat. See Eccles. 6.2.
.

. 2. 4. Mr. W. to make the comparison suit, has falsified the Text, Joh. 6 40.
The words are, It is the Will of God that every one that sees the Son, and
believes on him, may have everlasting life; it is not ( may be justified) as
he corrupts it. (5) Whereas he says, Faith is compared to eating, and
Justification to nourishment, Joh. 6.51. It is a mistake like the former, for
it is Christ himself, who throughout that Chapter is compared to bread and
food; whom by Faith we receive for our refreshment; consolation, and spiritual
nourishment.

. 4. His fourth Argument is drawn from the perpetual opposition between Faith
and Works; from whence he reasons thus. What place and order works had to
Justification in the Covenant of Works, the same place and order Faith has to
our Justification in the Covenant of Grace: But Works were to go before our
Justification in the Covenant of Works. Ergo, Faith is to go before our
Justification in the Covenant of Grace. I answer, That his Major is extremely
gross; I dare say, a more unsound Assertion cannot be picked out of the
Writings, either of the Papists or Arminians, then this is. That Faith (taking
it as he does in a proper sense) has the same place in the Covenant of Grace,
as works have in the Covenant of Works. That I have not charged him too high,
will appear to any one that shall consider these few particulars.

First, Works in the first Covenant, are meritorious of Eternal life; he that
does the works required in the Law, may in strictness of Justice, claim the
promise as a due debt, Romans 4.4. Was ever any Protestant heard to say, That
Faith and Faithful actions (which, as has been shown men of his notion do
include in Faith,) do merit Eternal life?

Secondly; Works in the first Covenant, are the matter of our Justification; he
that does them, is thereby constituted just and righteous in the sight of God.
Righteousness consists in a conformity to the Law, so that whosoever keeps the
Law, must needs be righteous: But now Faith is not the matter of our
Righteousness, God does not account men righteous, for their Faith; I confess,
he has Bellarmine and Arminius on his side, who say, that ipsa fides, or the
(...) credere imputatur in justitiam Vid. sup. c. 6. sect. 4.
, but the Apostle has taught us other Doctrine, Romans 5.19. That by the
obedience of one (i. e. of Christ) many are made righteous. And 2 Cor. 5.21.
That we are made the Righteousness of God in him.

Thirdly, If Faith has the same place in the second Covenant, as Works in the
first, Romans 2.2.
then must God account Faith to be perfect Righteousness, which is contrary to
his Truth and Justice: To say that Faith is perfect Righteousness by the second
Covenant, though not by the first, is but petitio principii; Legal and
Evangelical Righteousness, being one and the same, as to the matter of
Righteousness, though they are inherent in diverse subjects. The first Covenant
requires a Righteousness in us, the second gives and accepts a Righteousness
which is another.

Fourthly, If Faith has the same place in the second Covenant, as Works had in
the first, then were the second Covenant, a Covenant of Works, seeing Faith is
a work, and a work of ours: So that by this means the two Covenants should be
confounded, nor would the latter be any whit more of Grace, then the former.

Fifthly, This Assertion makes Faith to be not of Grace, because not from the
Covenant of Grace, seeing the Covenant it self depends upon it. How contrary
this Doctrine is to the sense of our Protestant Divines, has in part been
showed before Cap. 6. sect. 2.
, who till this last Age have taught, that these two Propositions [ A man is
justified by Works] and [ A man is justified by Faith] do carry meanings
utterly opposite to one another Vid. Calv. Instit. l. 3. c. 2. sect 2. Pemb.
Vind. sid. p. 24. in quarto.
. The one is proper and formal, the other is metonymical and relative. In this
Proposition [ A man is justified by Works] we are to take all in a plain and
literal sense, That God does account him that has kept the Law, exactly in all
points, a righteous person, and consequently worthy of Eternal life; but now
that other Proposition [ A man is justified by Faith] we must understand it
Relatively thus; That a sinner is justified in the sight of God, from all sin
and punishment by Faith, i. e. By the Obedience and Righteousness of Jesus
Christ, which we receive and apply unto our selves by true Faith.

. 4. Let us now hear what Mr. W. has to say for the defense of his Major,
which treads Antipodes to the current of all out Protestant Writers. If (says
he) the Minor be granted, the Major must be out of Question. I must confess, if
confidence did prove, here were proof enough. That which he adds, has as
little weight, as (1) Why should not, Believe in the Lord Jesus, and thou shall
be saved, ( which is the tenor of the New Covenant, Romans 10.6, 9.) plead as
strongly for the antecedency of Faith to Justification in this Covenant, as, do
this and live, does evince, that works were necessary antecedents of
Justification in the Old Covenant? Answ. Here he takes for that granted, which
will certainly be denied, scil. That, believe in the Lord Jesus, and thou shall
be saved, is the tenor of the New Covenant; for (1) it is no where called so,
(2) where the New Covenant is recited, as Jer. 31. Heb. 8. it runs quite in
another strain, it does not promise Salvation upon condition of Faith, but
Faith and Salvation, and all other Blessings, present and future. That Text
Romans 10.6, 9. is not the tenor of the New Covenant, for that requires
Confession as well as Faith, and then the Justification of the New Covenant
should be called Justification by Confession, as well as by Faith. The Apostle
there describes the persons that shall be saved, they are such as do believe
and profess the truth: His scope (as our Divines See Shepherds Sound Believer,
p. 230.
have noted) is to resolve that grand and important Question, How a man may
know that he shall be saved? You need not (says he) to ascend into Heaven, or
descend into H^ll, etc. to fetch Christ himself to tell you by immediate
Revelation, whether you shall be justified and saved; we have nearer and more
certain evidences; He that believes with the heart, etc. In this Scripture he
gives us two marks or characters of a true Christian; one Internal, known only
to the Christian himself, Believing with the heart; the other External, or
visible to men, Confession with the mouth: But of this we shall have occasion
to speak more anon.

. 5. (2) He urges, That Faith and Works have the like order to Justification,
in their respective Covenants, or else Justification by Faith, and
Justification by Works, were not opposed, as they constantly are in the
Apostles Writings, etc. We grant, that there is a true and formal opposition
between Faith and Works: The Affirmative, which the Jews pleaded for [ That a
man is justified by Works;] and the Negative, which the Apostle contended for,
[ That a man is not justified by Works] but by Faith, are as opposite as East
and West, and as impossible to be reconciled, as light and darkness: But then
Faith must be taken Objectively, and not Properly; for that which is formally
opposed to Works, is not the act, but the object of Faith, to wit, the
Righteousness of Christ, which we apprehend and enjoy by Faith, for if by
Faith, he had meant the (...) credere, or act of believing. there were no
opposition at all between Faith and Works, and the establishing of
Justification by Faith, will in no wise destroy Justification by Works; and
consequently (to use Mr. Woodbridges Expressions) there would be nothing but
falsehoods and equivocations in all the Apostles Disputations, against
Justification by Works: How easily might the Jews, and the Apostle, I will add
the Papists and Protestants, be reconciled? They say we must be justified by
Works, and these say we must be justified by Faith, which is a work of ours,
and such as includes all other works of new Obedience; an easy distinction
will salve the matter. We are not justified by Works, as they are conditions of
the first Covenant, but we are justified by Works, as they are conditions of
the second Covenant. We are not justified by Works, as they are our Legal
Righteousness, but we are justified by Works, as they are our Evangelical
Righteousness. Was it beseeming the gravity of so great an Apostle, to raise so
sharp a contest about a trifle, as the denomination of Works from the first and
second Covenant, when as the Works are the very same, in respect, both of the
matter and subject? Would not all men have censured his Writings to be but
strifes of words?

. 6. His fifth Objection is raised from 1 Cor. 6.11. Such were some of you, but
you are washed, but you are justified in the Name of the Lord Jesus. Where
(says he) there is an evident opposition between the time past, and present,
in respect of their Justification. And thence he argues, Now you are justified,
Ergo, not before, or before you were unjustified. To which I answer, (1) That
the words do not countenance this inference: He says indeed, that in times
past they were unsanctified, they had been Fornicators Idolaters, etc. i. e. As
vile and wicked as the worst of men, for which sins they deserved to be shut
out of the Kingdom of God, no less then they that are damned: He does not say,
that they were unjustified before Conversion; they were reclaimed or cleansed
from those sins, by the Preaching of the Gospel, but they were justified from
those sins, in, or by the name, i. e. The Merit and Righteousness of Jesus
Christ, which was imputed to them by God, whilst they lived in unbelief. But
(2) if any man will strain this consequence from the words, You are justified,
Ergo, You were not, whilst you lived in these sins; I shall then own the
answer, which he rejects with so much scorn and contempt, That they were not
justified before Conversion, either in foro Conscientiae, or in foro
Ecclesiastico; not doubting, but that I shall sufficiently clear it from his
Exceptions.

. 7. The first of which is, Why might they not be said to be I answer, Answ.
that there is not the same reason for a man's Sanctification before Faith and
Conversion, as there is for his Justification. For (1) to say, That an
unconverted person is sanctified, is, contradictio in adjecto; but it is no
contradiction to (...), That an ungodly or unconverted person is justified,
which is the expression of the Holy Ghost, Romans 4.5. Sanctification consists in
our Conversion, or turning unto God; but our Justification, in Gods accounting
unto us the Righteousness and satisfaction of his Son; the one is a work or act
of God done without us, 2 Cor. 5.19. but the other is the operation of God
within us. God cannot sanctify us without holiness, because he cannot do
contradictions; but God may justify us, if he please, without Faith and
Inherent holiness, because that, ex natura rei is no contradiction. Our
Sanctification flows from Faith, as the principle and motive of it, 1 John 3.3.
and 4.19. Gal. 5.6. But now our Justification has not that dependence upon
Faith, seeing that is Gods act, and not ours; though we are said to be
sanctified by Faith, yet not in that sense, that we are said to be justified by
Faith. Faith is Active in the one, but Passive in the other; it is only the
Hand or Instrument that receives our Justification, it is the principle or
efficient which operates and produces our Sanctification. (2) Though
Justification be sometimes taken for the declared sentence of Absolution in the
Court of Conscience; yet it follows not, that Sanctification should be so
understood; because the sentence of Justification is terminated in Conscience:
But Sanctification is diffused throughout the whole man, 1 These. 5.23.
Sanctification is not our knowing that we are sanctified, but the conformity of
our faculties, and their operations to the rule of holiness: So that his
Assertion, that [ Nothing can be alleged for Justification before believing,
which will not hold as strongly for Sanctification before believing] has
nothing but confidence to support it.

That the Justification they now had, was that which gave them right and title
to the Kingdom of God, which right and title they had not before they believed,
etc. For if they had this right before they believed, then whether they
believed, or no, all was one, as to the certainty of their Salvation; and they
might have gone to Heaven, though they had lived and died without Faith. Answ.
To which I answer, 1. That these Elect Corinthians had no more right to
Salvation after their believing, then they had before: For their right to
Salvation was grounded only upon the purpose of God, and the purchase of Jesus
Christ. Romans 6.23. 1 Cor. 2.12.
Salvation is a (...) freely bestowed upon us, and not a debt, or wages that
becomes due to us upon the performance of conditions. 2. It will not follow
from hence, That then they might have gone to Heaven without Faith; seeing
Christ has purchased Faith for his people, no less then glory, 2 Pet. 1.1. And
God has certainly appointed, that all that live to years of discretion, whom
in his secret Justification he has adjudged to life, shall have this evidence
of Faith, Acts 13.48. and 2.47.

W.) this evidence is of such necessity, as that if they have it not, they
shall loose that life to which they are adjudged, or no: If not, then whether
they believe, or do not believe, they shall be saved; if it be, then there is
no absolute Justification before Faith, and Justification, must be conditional.
Answ.
Ans. 1. By this Argument, not only Faith, but all other works of
Sanctification, and perseverance in them, must be the conditions of our
Justification; and consequently, we may be said to be justified and saved by
them. The Scriptures speak the same things of works, as it does of Faith, Mark
16.16. Prove. 28.18. 1 Timothy 4.16. Matthew. 24.13. Now let him consult with our
Protestant Divines, whether this be a good Argument, No man is saved, or
glorified without works, Ergo, Men are saved by works? 2. This reason makes as
much against absolute Election before Faith, as against absolute Justification:
He may argue as well, Faith is of such necessity, that they, that have it not,
shall loose the life, to which they are elected, or not: If not, then whether
the Elect believe, or not, they shall be saved; if it be, then there is no
absolute Election before Faith, and Election must be conditional, contrary to
many Scriptures, 2 Timothy 2.19. Romans 9.11. Mark 13.22. But 3. to the Argument, we
say, That Election and Justification are absolute, because they depend upon no
antecedent condition in the person elected and justified, not because they are
absolute without the consequents that depend upon them, so that notwithstanding
all that hitherto he has brought, the Opinion he opposes, will stand
unshaken. We shall now proceed to the Anascheuastical part of his Discourse,
and so weigh the strength of his Replies to those Arguments of ours, he is
pleased to mention.

CHAP. XIII. Wherein Mr. Woodbridges Answers to those Scriptures which hold
forth [An immediate actual reconciliation of sinners to God, upon the death of
Christ, without the intervention of Faith] are examined.
THe Texts which he has cited, as objected against him, are Matthew. 3.17. This
is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, viz. With sinners. And Romans 5.10.
we were reconciled unto God by the death of his Son. Which places were not once
mentioned in the Conference, that I had with him: The former I alleged in the
Discourse which I had with Mr. Warren (as has been shown before Cap. 1 sect. 8.
) to which I had added sundry others, had I not been inte^rupted by the
unseasonable (not to say, uncivil) interposing of this Antagonist, who then
cast in the Exceptions, which since he has Printed, with some enlargements.

Who gave himself unto death an Offering and Sacrifice unto God, of a sweet
smelling favor, Ephesians. 5.2. Whereunto I answer, Answ.
(1) That he opposes his single opinion against the judgment of all the
Interpreters that I have seen, without one grain of Reason to counter-ballance
them, as if he were, (...) Il. l.
, or as David, 2 Samuel 18.3. worth a thousand, such as Calvin, Beza, Paraeus,
etc. who do extend it unto all those, for whom Christ exhibited himself a
Mediator. It was the opinion of Musculus, Testimonium hoc Patris caelitus
terris illatum, declarationem habet voluntatis ejus erga genus humanum Musculus
in ^oc. apud Mar^orat.
, etc. That this testimony of the Father does manifest the Will of God toward
mankind. God (says Calvin Calv. Harm. ^in Mat. 3.17.
) by this testimony which he gave to Christ, declares he is a Father unto us
all. And a little after, Saint Paul does best interpret this Text, Ephesians. 1.6.
where he says, God has made us accepted in Jesus Christ. And again, In this
clause [in whom I am wel-pleased] he gives us to understand, that his love is
so great to Christ, that from him, it overflows upon us all. And Beza Beza
Majores Annot in loc.
more expressly, Significat enim Pater Christum, etc. The Father did hereby
signify, that Christ is he alone, whom when the Father beholds, he lays aside
all his wrath and indignation, which we deserved; and that he is the only
Mediator and Reconciler. Which (says he) will be better understood by
comparing this Text with Exodus 28.38. where we read, That Israel was made
accepted to God by the High Priests appearing for them in the presence of God;
which High Priest was undeniably a type of Christ. The word (...) (says he)
though in the use of Sacred, and other Authors, it has the signification of
the Present tense; yet here it may as fitly be rendered by the time perfectly
past. Ut declaret Pater se jam esse in filio hominibus reconciliatum: That the
Father might declare that he is already reconciled to men in his own Son; he
plainly alludes to Isai. 42.1. Sensus est, etc. (says Pareus Pareus in loc.
) The meaning of the place is, That this is my Son, for whose sake and merit, I
do lay aside all my displeasure against mankind, and do receive them into
favor. This voice does comprise the whole mystery of our Reconciliation with
God, by, and for the sake of Christ. To these we might add the suffrage of one
of our own Countrymen Ward on Matthew. 3.17.
. This voice was uttered in respect of us, because of old God was angry with us
for our sins, but now he is reconciled to us by Christ. And honest Ferus Ferus
in Matthew. 3.
(who was more a Protestant in the Doctrine of Justification, then many of
ours,) Haec verba nedum Christo dicuntur, sed and nobis, etc. These words were
not only spoken unto Christ, but unto us. Let him that has leisure look over
more See Dioda^e on Matthew. 3.17.
.

. 2. (2) It is against the scope of the words to limit them to the person of
Christ, they being a solemn declaration of Christ's investiture in the glorious
office of a Mediator; in which respect he is said to be a Son given, and born
to us, Isa. 9. And therefore this (...) of God to men, was at his birth
proclaimed by the holy Angels, Luke 2. All that grace or favor which at any
time was manifested to Christ, as a Mediator, was for their sakes whom he
represented, and to whom the benefits of his Mediatorship were intended. See
John 12.30. That Text Ephesians. 5.2. which Mr. W. alleges for confining of this
voice to the person of Christ, proves nothing less, where the Apostle shows the
effect of Christ's sacrifice toward us, thus, as when Noah offered up his
burnt-offerings to God, The Lord smelled a sweet savor, etc. Genesis 8.21. So when
Christ offered up himself a sacrifice of atonement, the Lord smelled a savor of
rest, and was fully satisfied for the sins of his people. (3) There is no
reason can be given, why those words should be terminated to the person of
Christ, Joh. 17.24, 2^.
seeing that God was never displeased with him, nor had our Savior any doubt,
or suspicion of it; and therefore it was altogether needless that God should
declare his well-pleasedness to him in his own person. (4) The well-pleasedness
of God is to be extended unto them, for whom Christ offered up his sacrifice;
but Christ did not offer up his sacrifice for himself, but only for sinners.
Ergo.

. 3. Well, haec non successit, alia aggrediamur via: his next Exception
therefore is, That if we should extend it unto men, the words prove no more,
then that it is through Christ, that God is well pleased with men, whenever
it be that he is well pleased. So that in his sense I am well pleased, is as
much as I will be well pleased with them, when they have performed the terms
and conditions required on their part. A gloss which (I dare say) was never
dreamed of by any Expositor before himself. Here (1) let the Reader observe how
bold he makes with the Holy Ghost; for when God tells us, he is well pleased,
to say no, he is not, now, but he will hereafter, is not to interpret, but
contradict the Scripture. (2) His gloss contradicts it self, for if our
reconciliation with God, does depend upon terms and conditions performed by us,
then it is not through Christ alone, that God is well pleased with men,
whenever it is; and Christ is at most but a partial cause of our
reconciliation.

. 4. But to render his Paraphrase more probable, he has cited diverse other
places, where (as he pretends) Verbs and Participles of the Present tense have
the signification of the future, Though (says he) the Verb in this place be not
the Present tense, but the first Aorist; though it be the Aorist, what is that
to the purpose, seeing (as every Schoolboy knows) the Aorists have the
signification of the Preterperfect tense, and not of the Future; and if that
enunciation will hold in the Preterperfect tense (as Beza grants) then is it
much more true in the Present tense. But to his Allegations I answer, (1) That
in most of his instances, there is no necessity to feign a change of Tenses, as
John 4.25. Messiah comes, i. e. The promise of the Messiah draws nigh to be
fulfilled. So Chap. 5.25. The hour is coming, and now is, etc. The dead did
then hear the voice of the Son of man, both in his own, and in his Disciples
Ministry. So 2 Cor. 3.16. the Verbs are most properly rendered in the Present
tense, When Israel shall, or does turn unto the Lord, the vail is taken away;
for as Cameron Vid. Camer. My^othe. in 2 Cor. 3.16. and v. 13 and P^ae^ect. in
Mat. ^9.3.
notes their Conversion to God, does not precede the taking away of the vail,
but both are at the same time. Romans 8.24. By hope we are saved. The enunciation
is true and emphatical in the Present tense; for in many other places the
Saints are said to be saved, and to have eternal life, whilst they are in the
body, John 3.36. and 5.24. and 6.54, 56. Col. 2.10. Ephesians. 2.5, 8. Tit. 3.5. 1
John 5.11, 12. They have here the beginnings, or first fruits of that
Salvation; the complement and perfection whereof, they as yet do wait for; they
have now the joy and comfort of their Salvation, thorough Faith and Hope,
because Hope looks upon the promises of God, not as doubtful but as sure and
certain, Heb. 11.1, 2. They are now said by Hope, or they shall never be saved
by Hope, for Hope that is seen, is not Hope; in the world to come they are
saved by sight, and not by Faith or Hope: So that Text 1 Cor. 15.57. is most
properly rendered, Thanks be unto God that gives, or has given us the victory
through Jesus Christ. For the Saints have already obtained victory over death,
and the grave, in Christ their Head. Romans 8.37. In all things we are more then
conquerors. And John 16.33. Be of good cheer, I have overcome the world. So
Heb. 10.35. Your confidence has a great recompense of reward, to wit, In the
present effects which it did produce, as inward peace, joy, etc. according to
that of the Psalmist, Psalm. 19.11. In keeping thy statutes, there is great
reward. But (2) if I should grant, what he desires, that in all these places
there were an Heterosis of Tenses, (for I acknowledge this trope is frequent in
Scripture) yet this great flourish will amount to nothing, unless he had shown
by the circumstances of the Text, or the nature of the thing, that it must be
so expounded here; for if men had liberty to feign Enalloges of Numbers, Cases,
and Tenses, at their pleasure, it were easy to elude the meaning of the
plainest Texts.

. 5. (3) Those words, Heb. 11.6. Without Faith it is impossible to please God,
do not conclude what he would have them, to wit, That God is not wel-pleased
with his Elect in Christ, before they do believe; for the Apostle speaks there
of men's works, and actions, and not of their persons. No man can please God
without Faith, no not Believers themselves; their Religious Services are not
pleasing to God, unless they are done in Faith, for bonum est ex causa integra
Dyonis. de div. nom. part. 4. cerca med.
, Now Faith is a principal ingredient in the Saints obedience; for if it be not
done in Faith, it is not done in love, Gal. 5 6. And consequently it is not
fruit unto God, Rom 7.4. Gods wel-pleasedness with his Elect, is the immediate
effect of the death of Christ, for that which raised a partition wall between
God and them, was the breach of the Law; now when the Law was satisfied for
their sins, this partition was broken down, his favor had as free a current, as
if they had not sinned: And therefore the blotting out of our sin, and our
reconciliation with God, is ascribed, solely, and immediately to the death of
Christ, as in many other Scriptures, so particularly, Ephesians. 1.6, 7. and 2.13,
14. Col. 1.20, 21. and 2.13, 14. 2 Cor. 5.19. God was in Christ reconciling the
world to himself; he did not only act toward it, as Mr. W. glossed those
words in his Sermon, but (says the Text) he did not impute their sins unto
them; for whom Christ died. The actual blotting out of sin (says Mr. Perkins
Vol. 1. p. 110. Edit. 1608.
) does inseparably depend upon satisfaction for sins, and satisfaction with God
does necessarily imply the very real and general abolishment of the guilt and
punishment of sin. That which makes our persons acceptable to God, is the
Righteousness of Jesus Christ; but now our actions are not pleasing, unless they
are conformable to the rule, and all necessary circumstances do concur; the
chief whereof, is Faith in the propitiation and atonement of Jesus Christ,
whereby their defects and obliquities are done away Levit. 17.^. 1 Pet. 2.5.
.

. 6. (4) Whereas he adds, That it was a poor answer which I gave to Mr. Good,
[ That God was well pleased with his Elect, whilst unregenerate, though not
with their unregeneracy.] 1. As far as it concerns my self, I shall subscribe
to his censure, I am poor, but he is rich, I am empty, but he is full 1 Cor.
4.8.
. But 2. he may be pleased to take notice, that a far richer man then himself,
in all kind of learning, both Humane and Divine, has given the very same
answer unto this question. Mr. Pemble Vind. Great. p. 19.
distinguishes between Gods love to our persons, and Gods love to our
qualities and actions: A distinction which (says he) parents are well skilled
in, who put a difference between the vices, and persons of their children;
those they hate, these they love, even when for their vices they do chastise
their persons. The case (says he) is the same between God and the Elect, his
love to their persons, is from everlasting the same; nor does their sinfulness
lessen it, nor their sanctity increase it, because God in loving their persons,
never considered them otherwise, then as most perfectly holy, and unblameable
in Jesus Christ, etc. It is a strange inference which he draws from my words,
That because I said, God is well pleased with the persons of his Elect, whilst
unregenerate, that afterward he is well pleased with their unregeneracy also:
He might as well impose this absurdity upon the Prophet, that because he says,
Ezekiel. 16.8. Thy time (to wit, of unregeneracy) was the time of love. Surely not
of their unregeneracy, but of their persons then unregenerate, that therefore
the Prophet supposes, that after their Conversion God did love their
unregeneracy, or that corruption of nature, which remained in them. Such
quibbles are unbeseeming serious Christians.

. 7. I shall add but a word to clear up the difference between the actions of
regenerate and unregenerate persons; And first, we say that the best actions of
unregenerate men are impure and sinful, which though they are pardoned unto all
the Elect for the sake of Christ, yet they are not acceptable to God, but in
themselves most abominable and loathsome in his sight, Prove. 5.8. Tit. 1.15.
Isai. 1.13, etc. Secondly, Though (as the Orthodox acknowledge) the best works
of the best men, have not in them that Inherent purity and holiness, which can
stand before God without the mediation of their High Priest Pronuncia^^
Catholici nulla^^dari in hac vita hominis peccatoris sanctificationem tantam uo
non habeat admixtum peccatum, and long absit a perfectione ad quam tendit.
Cham. tom. 3. l. 10. c. 3. sect. 9. Vae etiam laudabili vitae hominum, si
remota misericordia discutias eam. Aug. Confess. l. 9. c. 13.

See Dr. Reynolds on 2 Cor. 7.1: p. 325.


, yet they may be said to be acceptable and pleasing unto God, not only
comparatively, because they are better then the works of unregenerate men, or
then the sinful works of such as are regenerate; but absolutely, and that two
ways. 1. Abstractly and in themselves, or as they ought to be done; and thus
Faith, Hope, Love, etc. are acceptable to God, for they are that spiritual
worship and service which God looks for, and delights in, Joh. 4.23. Micah 6.8.
Gal. 5.5, 6. Phil. 3.3. And in this respect, a meek and a quiet spirit, is said
to be of great price in the sight of God, 1 Pet. 3.4. 2. Concretely as they are
acted by us, or do pass through our hands, and so they are acceptable to God,
as they are washed and cleansed in the blood of Christ, 1 Pet. 2.5. Our
spiritual sacrifices are made acceptable to God in Jesus Christ, or by his
taking away the sin and defilement, that adheres unto them Exodus 28.38. Apoc.
8.3, 4.
: Our High Priest does not procure the acceptance of those works, which in
their whole abstract nature, are sinful, such as are all our works before
Conversion, and the fruits of the flesh after Conversion, he obtains
forgiveness, but not acceptance for them: But now those works which come from
the Spirit of God, and are sinful only through the mixture of our corruptions
(as sweet water which passes through a sink) these he makes acceptable to the
Father, by taking away the imperfections and defilements that adhere unto them.

. 8. The next Scripture which Mr. W. has brought in, by way of objection
against himself, is Romans 5.10. When we were enemies, we were reconciled to God
by the death of his Son. To which he answers, That Christ's death was the price
of our reconciliation, and so it is through the death of Christ that we are
reconciled, be it when it will be that we are reconciled. Against this answer
of his, I shall offer these Exceptions. (1) It offers a manifest violence to
the Text, to say, That we were reconciled, is as much as we shall be reconciled
when we have performed the terms and conditions required of us. (2) If our
reconciliation to God, did depend upon terms and conditions performed by us,
then is it not through the death of Christ that we are reconciled unto God; we
should be more the cause, of our reconciliation, then Christ is; for he that
performs a condition, to which a benefit is promised, does more to the
procuring of it, then he that makes or obtains that conditional grant;
notwithstanding which, he is never awhit the near of the benefit, unless his
own act do concur. (3) The Apostle declares, That this reconciliation was made
when we were enemies; Ergo, Before our believing, or the fulfilling of any
condition on our part: For Believers are not enemies. (4) If his meaning were
no more then this, that it is through the death of Christ, that we are
reconciled, be it when it will, that we are reconciled; then this clause [ when
we were enemies] would be superfluous and redundant; whereas the main emphasis
of the Text does lie therein, as is evident from the gradation which the
Apostle makes, Verse. 6, 8, 10. (5) The Apostle in 2 Cor. 5.19. affirms, That
our Savior did not only pay the price of our reconciliation, but that God did
so far accept of, or acquiesce therein, that upon the payment of it, he did not
impute our sins unto us, i. e. he justified us; for the Apostle, Romans 4.
defines Justification to be the non-imputation of sin. (6) And lastly, That
which he grants, yields the matter in question, viz. The immediate actual
reconciliation of sinners upon the death of Christ; for if Christ by shedding
of his blood, paid the total and full price, for our deliverance from the curse
of the Law, then were we actually set free from the obligation of it; for when
the debt is paid, the debtor is free in Law; it is unjust to implead a person
for a debt which is paid.

. 9. Secondly, To illustrate and confirm his Answer, he makes use of Grot. de
Satis c. 7. p. 154. Oxon
Grotius his distinction of three moments, or periods of the Will of God; (1)
at Enmity, (2) Appeasable, (3) Appeased. 1. Before the consideration of the
death of Christ, God (says he) is at enmity with the sinner, though not averse
from all ways and means of reconciliation. 2. After the consideration of the
death of Christ; and now is the Lord not only appeasable, but does also
promise that he will be reconciled with sinners, upon such terms as he himself
shall propose. 3. After Intercession on Christ's part, and Faith on the sinners
part; and now is God actually reconciled, and in friendship with the sinner.
This Grotian and Vorstian Divinity is monstrous gross, which renders God as
changable as a fickle Creature, and palpably denies his God-like nature, scil.
His Simplicity, Eternity, Omnisciency, Immutability, etc. Arminius himself
Armin. disp. pub. de Not. Dei. These 51.
was more modest, then to affirm a change in the Will of God; nay, Plato Vid.
Aquin. p. 1. q. 19. art. 2. ad 3. and art. 5. in c.
was a more Orthodox Divine in this point, who said, That the first mover can
be moved of none, but by himself. The Will of God is not inclined or moved by
any thing without him, unto any of his acts, whether Immanent or Transient; for
that which is the cause of his Will, is the cause of himself; seeing that his
Will, is his Essence. The death of Christ does not cause any alteration in the
Will of God Vid. Twiss. V^nd. Great. l. 1. p. 2. digres. 1, 2, 3.
; his Merits are not the cause, why God does love us, or will to us the
blessings of his Covenant, they did not change God, ex nolente in volentem, ex
odio h^bente in diligentem Rhaeto^f. Apol. c. 2. n. 16.
, as Greevenchovius dreamed: And the Reasons are, (1) Because God is
unchangable, he neither cease to will what at any time he intended, nor does
he begin to will what he did not always purpose: (2) Because no reason can be
given of the Will of God, Aquinas says well, Nullum temporale Aquin. ^. p. q.
23. art 5. in c.
, etc. Nothing that has its being in time, can be the cause of that which is
eternal, for then the effect should be before the cause. Now that I may not
actum agere, I shall desire the Reader to consult what Mr. Owen Answ. to
Bax^er, c. 6. p. 36.
has said in answer to this notion of Gr^tius; whereof, if Mr. W. had
vouchsafed to take any notice, he might have seen cause enough to decline from
the steps of his admired Grotius.

. 10. Thirdly, he infers, That because the Apostle says, Verse. 11. We have now
received the atonement, or reconciliation. Ergo, Not before we believed. To
which I answer, (1) He might as well reason, that because the Apostle says, 1
Cor. 15.20. Now is Christ risen, Ergo, He was not risen before he writ that
Epistle; and from Ephesians. 2.2. The Spirit that now works in the children of
unbelief, Ergo, He did not work in them before. (2) If it be referred to our
receiving, or apprehension by Faith, it does not prove, that the reconciliation
or atonement was not made before. There is a wide difference between the making
or obtaining of reconciliation* and our receiving of it; though we cannot
receive or apply it to our selves any otherwise then by Faith, yet it follows
not, That God did not account it unto us before. The Typical Sacrifices made a
present atonement, much more the real, see Heb. 9.14.

. 11. Fourthly, He gives us his opinion concerning the immediate effect of the
death of Christ, Which (says Mr. Baxter) is one of the greatest and noblest
questions in our controverted Divinity; he that can rightly answer this, is a
Divine indeed. And no doubt but Mr. W. deserves the Bell in his account. Let us
therefore see what a glorious atcheivement he ascribes unto it. It is (says
he) through the death of Christ, that the promise of reconciliation is made,
by, and according to which, we are actually reconciled unto God after we do
believe; to wit, at the day of judgment, when we have performed that, and all
other conditions required of us; which in sum, is, as if he had said, That the
death of Christ procured no certain or immediate effect at all: For
notwithstanding his death, it is possible that none may be saved; for things
obtained under condition, are as to their accomplishment altogether uncertain;
for the condition may be fulfilled, or it may not be fulfilled. The utmost
which hereby is ascribed to the death of Christ, is, That he has obta^ned a
salvability for sinners, or a way whereby they may become their own saviors;
which in the old Popish English is, That Christ has merited that we might
merit Eternal life, or as the Remonstrants have refined the phrase, His death
has made God placabilem, but not placatum. A shift (says Pemble) devised
merely to uphold the liberty of man's will, and universal Redemption. Whereunto
the abettors of this notion do hie them apace.

. 12. But against it, I shall oppose these considerations. (1) The Scripture no
where ascribes this effect to the death of Christ, That he died to obtain a
conditional grant, that we by performing the condition, might be reconciled to
God, but to obtain peace and reconciliation it self. Daniel does not say that
Messiah shall be cut off to obtain a promise, but to make an end of sin, etc.
Chap. 9.24. Nor the Apostle, that Christ by the blood of the cross, has
obtained a conditional promise of reconciliation, but that he has made peace,
Col. 1.20. broken down the partition wall, Ephesians. 2.14. delivered us from the
curse, Gal. 3.13. And our Savior in that of Matthew. 26.28. (which Mr. W. cites)
does not say, That he shed his blood to procure a conditional promise, whereby
all men may obtain remission; but for the remission of the sins of many, i. e.
of all the Elect. (2) If Christ by his death obtained only a conditional
promise, then was his death no more available to the Elect, then unto
Reprobates, no more to Peter, then it was to Judas; whereas the Scripture shows
us, That the effects of Christ's death are peculiar only to the Elect. See John
10.15, 16, 26. and 17.9, 20. (3) If Christ by his death obtained but a
conditional promise, then do men more for their Salvation, then Christ has
done; for he that performs the condition, does more to his Salvation, then he
that obtained the conditional promise; notwithstanding which, he might have
perished. (4) It makes Christ to have died in vain, at least, without any
determinate end, in reference unto them, for whom he died; seeing that
notwithstanding his death, it was possible, that none at all might be saved.
And thus (as Mr. Owen has noted Answer to Baxter, p. 8^.
) he is made a Surety of an uncertain Covenant, a Purchaser of an Inheritance
perhaps never to be enjoyed, a Priest sanctifying none by his Sacrifice; a
thing we would not ascribe to a wiseman in a far more easy undertaking. If Mr.
W. shall say, that Christ is certain, that the Elect will perform the condition
required, we shall demand whether this certainty does arise from their wills,
or his will. If he say from their wills, and his foresight of their well using
of their natural abilities to fulfill the condition required, he shakes hands
with Papists and Arminians, who make our Election and Redemption to be ex
praevisa fide: A conceit that has been confuted over and over; if from his own
will, because he has purchased Faith for them, then he obtained more by his
death, then a conditional promise.

. 13. Fifthly, The ground whereon he builds these Assertions, is a very sandy
foundation, to wit, That the death of Christ was not solutio ejusdem, but
tantidem; not the payment of that which was in the obligation, but of something
equivalent; and therefore it does not deliver us ipso facto, but according to
the compact and agreement between the Father and him. I answer, (1) Whether the
death of Christ be solutio ejusdem, or tantidem, as it is a satisfaction or
payment of a debt, so the discharge thereby procured, must needs be present and
immediate; for that a debt should be paid and satisfied, and yet justly
chargeable, implies a contradiction. But (2) Mr. W. might have thought we would
expect a better proof then his bare word, That the death of Christ is not
solutio ejusdem, seeing the Holy Ghost shows, First, That Christ was held in
the same obligation, which we were under, He was made under the Law, not an
other, but the very same that we were held in, Gal. 4.3, 4. Ergo, he paid the
same debt that we did ow. Secondly, That the Curse, or punishment which we
deserved, was inflicted upon him, Gal. 3.13. The whole wages or curse that is
due to sin, is Death; and this Christ under-went for us, Heb. 2.9, 14. Isai.
53.4, 5. What is it to die, or to bear chastisement for another, but to undergo
that death which the other should have undergone? If it be objected, That the
death which we deserved, is Eternal, such as the damned endure; our Divines
have answered long ago, That Christ's death was such in pondere, though not in
specie, in potentia, though not in actu: The dignity of his person raised the
price of his temporary sufferings to an equipollency with the other. Mr. Owen
Ib. p. 30.
says well, That there is a sameness in Christ's sufferings with that in the
obligation in respect of Essence, and equivalency in respect of the Adjuncts or
Attendencies. Thirdly, The laying of our sins upon Christ, Isai. 53.6.
subjected him to the same punishment which our sins deserved. Fourthly, If God
would have dispensed with the idem in the first obligation, Christ need not
have died; for if the justice of God would have been satisfied with less then
that penalty threatened in the Law, he might as well have dispensed with the
whole: So then his inference, That the death of Christ does not deliver us ipso
facto, (being destitute of this support) will fall to the ground of its own
accord.

. 14. M. W. grants, That if the debtor himself do bring unto the creditor, that
which he ows him, it presently discharges him, but the payment of a Surety
does not. And why not? Amongst men there is no difference, so the debt be paid,
it matters not, whether it be by the Principal, or his Surety, the obligation
is void in respect of both: The case is the very same between Christ and us.
Secondly, This Exception makes the payment of Christ, less efficacious for the
discharge of our debt, then if it had been made by us, whereas it is infinitely
more acceptable to God, then the most perfect righteousness performed by us.

But (says he) the payment of a Surety is refusable] Not after that he is
admitted by the creditor, and taken into Bond with, or for the principal
debtor. It is true, God might have refused to be satisfied for our debt by a
Surety; but seeing he ordained his Son to be our Surety, and entered into
Covenant with him from everlasting, to accept his payment on our behalf; the
debt which he has fully satisfied, cannot be charged again, either upon the
Party, or Surety, without manifest injustice.

But the Father and the Son have agreed between themselves, that none should
have actual reconciliation by the death of Christ, till they do believe.] Show
us this agreement, and we will yield the cause. As for the Scriptures which he
has mentioned, they speak of no such thing, John 6.40. This is the will of him
that sent me, That every one which sees the Son, and believes on him, may
have everlasting life. This Text, and others like it, do only show who have
the fruition and enjoyment of the benefits of Christ, to wit, they that
believe. The other Text, Gal. 5.2, 4. is palpably abused to serve his turn. The
Apostle does not say, Without Faith Christ shall profit us nothing, but if we
join any thing with Christ as necessary to attain Salvation, we are not
Believers, or true Christians, our profession of Christ shall profit us
nothing; and the reason hereof is, because these two principles cannot be mixed
See Di^^* on Gal 5.2.
. A man's righteousness before God, is either all by Works, or all by Christ;
and therefore, whosoever attributes any part thereof to Works, he wholly
renounceth Christ. At the sixth Verse he attributes that to Faith, which he
denies unto other Works. In Christ Jesus (says he) neither circumcision nor
uncircumcision avails any thing, but Faith which works by love. But as the
Godly learned Vid. Perk. and Calv. in loc.
have well observed, the intent of the Apostle here, was not to show what it is
that does justify, but what are the Exercises of Divine Worship, in which
Christians should be conversant. He does not say, That Faith working by love,
is available to us before God, or in the sight of God, but in Christ, i. e. In
the Church Sarcer. apud Marlorat. in loc. and Perkins.
, or Kingdom of Christ, which consists in Righteousness, Peace, and Joy in the
Holy Ghost; though neither Faith, nor Love, are available to justify us, yet
they are available, i. e. Acceptable to God as acts or duties of Spiritual
Obedience, they are the only acceptable service which we can perform to God.
The last place he has mentioned, is as little to the purpose, as the rest, 1 John 5.11. He that has not the Son, has not life. True! he does not say, That
all who have not Faith (except final unbelievers) have not the Son, or any
benefit by him.

. 15. But (says Mr. W.) if our Adversaries could prove, That it was either the
Will of God in giving his Son, or the Will of Christ in giving himself to the
death, that his death should be available to the immediate and actual
reconciliation of sinners, without any condition performed on their part, it
were something to the purpose; but till this be done (which indeed can never be
done) they were as good say nothing. Had not prejudice cast a mist before his
eyes, the Scriptures which have been brought already, would be proof
sufficient. What clearer Testimony can be desired of the Will of God, and of
Christ in this point, then those Sacred Oracles which show us, First, That
Christ by the Will of God, gave himself a Ransom and Sacrifice of a sweet
smelling savor unto God, in behalf of all the Elect, Joh. 6.27. Heb. 5.10. and
10.9, 10. Secondly, That this Ransom was alone, and by it self, a full adequate
and perfect satisfaction to Divine Justice, for all their sins, Heb. 1.3. and
10.10, 12, 14. 1 John 1.7. Thirdly, That God accepted it, and declared himself
well pleased and satisfied therewith, Matthew. 3.17. Isa. 42.1. Insomuch, that
God has thereupon covenanted and sworn, that he will never remember their
sins, nor be wrath with them any more, Isa. 43.25. and 54.9, 10. Fourthly, That
by this Ransom of his, they are freed and delivered from the curse of the Law,
Gal. 4.4. and 3.13. Our Adversaries say, That he paid the price for their
Redemption, but with no intent that they should be immediately and absolutely
freed Baxters Append. p. 152.
; which is often, boldly affirmed, and as slenderly proved. But why not
immediately and absolutely? There is (says Mr. W.) a compact and agreement
between the Father and the Son, when he undertook to be our Surety, that his
death should not be available for the actual reconciliation of sinners, till
they have performed the terms and conditions required on their part. Sed hoc
restat probandum; and I am persuaded will, till the worlds end. Let them show
us this Covenant and Agreement, and we are satisfied; till this be done, we
shall think our proofs sufficient; and that the force of those Allegations is
no whit invalidated by this Crude Assertion. I confess I have heard much talk
of this Suspensive Covenant, but hitherto I have not had the hap to meet with
that Author, that has attempted to make it forth; though I might justly be
excused from the labor of proving the Negative, seeing that it lies upon our
Adversaries to clear it up, That there was such a compact and agreement made
between the Father and the Son, that his death should not be available to the
immediate reconciliation of sinners, but only upon conditions performed by
them. Yet because I intend not any other Reply, and that Mr. W. may see I do
not dissent, because he has said, and not proved it; which in controverted
points, were ground enough; I shall offer him the Reasons, which as yet do sway
my Judgment to believe the contrary.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Covenant between the Father and the Son, concerning the
immediate effects of Christ's death.
THe Reasons which persuade me to believe, That there was not any Covenant
passed between God and Christ, to hinder the immediate and actual
reconciliation of Gods Elect by his death, and to suspend this effect thereof,
upon terms and conditions to be performed by them; but contrariwise, that it
was the will both of God and of Christ, that his death should be available to
their immediate and actual Reconciliation and Justification, without any
condition performed on their part, Are, as follows.

First, There is no such Covenant does appear, Ergo, there is none. Non est
Scriptum, Ergo, There is no such thing; has hitherto been counted a good
Argument amongst Christians: It is not possible (says Damascene Damas. de ^id.
Orthod. l. 1. ^. 2. and Iod. Clictov. in loc.
) (...), etc. To speak ought of God, beside the things which are divinely
manifested in the Old and New Testament. If there be any such Covenant, let our
Adversaries show it, and until they do, we shall rest securely in the Negative;
they must pardon us, if we yield not up our Faith to unwritten Verities Omnes
sciant, nemini quicquam, quam quod scriptis probaverit, esse credendum. Cod. l.
1. Tit. 18. leg. uni^. Great. Valentinian. and l. 3. Tit. 1. leg. ^. Constant,
.

Secondly, The Covenant made between God and Christ, was, That upon giving up
of himself to death, he should purchase a Seed like the Stars of Heaven, i. e.
All the Elect of God, Isa. 53.10. And our Savior Christ after that he had
tasted death to bring many sons unto glory, boasts and glories in this
achievement. Heb. 2.13. Behold, I and the children, whom God has given me.
Ergo, It was the Will of God, that his death should be available for their
immediate reconciliation; for they could not be the children of Christ, and the
children of wrath at the same time.

. 2. Thirdly, If it were the Will of God, that the death of Christ, should be
the payment of our debt, and a full satisfaction for all our iniquities, then
was it his Will that our discharge procured thereby, should be immediate; but
it was the Will of God, that the death of Christ should be the payment of our
debts, and a full satisfaction for our iniquities. Ergo. I suppose the
Assumption will not be questioned; for though the word satisfaction be not used
in Scripture See Bull of the Covenant. p. 276, etc.
, yet the thing it self is plainly signified in those phrases of Redemption,
Atonement, Reconciliation; and in like manner, all those places which declare
that Christ died for us, and for our sins, and offenses, do imply the same;
scil. That the death of Christ, was the payment of our debts, and the
punishment of our sins; that thereby he satisfied the Law for all those wrongs,
and injuries we have done unto it. Now the Sequel is evident, If God willed,
that the death of Christ should be a full and satisfactory payment of our
demerits, then he willed that the discharge procured thereby, should be
immediate and present; for it is contrary to Justice and Equity, that a debt
when it is paid, should be charged either upon the Surety or Principal; and
therefore though God did will, that the other effects of Christ's death, as it
is the meritorious price of Faith, Holiness, Glory, etc. should be sub termino,
or in Diem, not Present but Future; yet he willed, that this effect of it, to
wit, our discharge from sin, and the curse, should be present and immediate;
because it implies a contradiction, that the same debt should be paid, and not
paid; that it should be discharged, and yet justly chargable: As when a man
that is a Trespasser, or any one for him, pays a sum of money, which is
sufficient both for discharge of his trespass, as also for the purchase of a
piece of Land: From the trespass his discharge must be present, if the
satisfaction be full, though the enjoyment of the Land may be in Diem, as the
Vendee and Purchaser can agree; the Case before us, is the very same. The death
of Christ was both a price and a ransom, it served both to pay our debts, and
to procure our happiness; he did thereby purchase both our deliverance from sin
and death, and all those Spiritual Blessings, present and future, which we
stand in need of. The discharge of our debts, and deliverance from punishment,
must needs be present and immediate upon the payment of the price, though those
Spiritual Blessings be not received till a long time after, as God and Christ
shall see it fit to bestow them on us. To this I shall add a fourth.

. 3. Fourthly, If nothing hindered the reconciliation of the Elect with God,
but the breach of the Law, then the Law being satisfied, it was the Will of God
that they should be immediately reconciled; but nothing hindered their
reconciliation with God, but the breach of the Law. Ergo. It was sin alone that
made a distance, or separation between God and them, Isa. 59.2. For which cause
it is compared to a cloud or mist, Isa. 44.22. to a partition wall, Ephesians.
2.14. It lay as a block in the way, that God could not ( salva justitia) bestow
upon them those good things intended toward them in his Eternal Election. The
only cause of Christ's death was to satisfy the Law; he did not die to procure
a new Will or Affection in the heart of God toward his Elect, nor yet to add
any new thing in God, which does perfect and complete the act of Election, as
Wallaeus seems to intimate Apud Rhaetorf. Apol. p. 39.
: But that God might save us in a way agreeable to his own Justice, that he
might confer upon us all those Blessings he intended, without wrong and
violation to his holy Law; for God having made a Law, that the soul which
sins, should die, the Justice and Truth of God required, that satisfaction
should be made for the sins of the Elect, no less then of other men; which,
they being unable to perform, the Son of God became their Surety, to bear the
Curse, and fulfill the Law in their stead. God might will unto us sundry
benefits, which he cannot actually bestow upon us without wrong to his Justice:
As a King may will and purpose the deliverance of his Favorite, who is
imprisoned for debt, yet he cannot actually free him, till he has paid and
satisfied his Creditor. So though God had an irrevocable, peremptory Will to
save his Elect; yet he could not actually save them, till satisfaction was made
unto his Justice; which being made, there is no let or impediment to stop the
current of his Blessings. As when the Cloud is dissolved, the Sun shines forth;
when the partition wall is broken down, they that were separated, are again
united: So the cloud of our sins being blotted out, the beams of Gods love have
as free a passage toward us, as if we had not sinned. Now that Christ by his
death removed this let and hinderance, the Scripture is as express as can be
desired, as that he made an end of sin, Dan. 9.24. Blotted it out, etc. Col.
2.14 Diodate on Col. 2.14.
. Took it quite away, (as the Scapegoat, Levit. 16.22.) John 1.29. And slew
the enmity between God and us, Ephesians. 2.16. See Verses 13, 14, 15.

. 4. Fifthly, If it were the Will of God, that the sin of Adam should
immediately overspread his posterity, then it was his Will that the
Satisfaction and Righteousness of Christ, should immediately redound to the
benefit of Gods Elect; for there is the same reason for the immediate
transmission of both, to their respective subjects Vid. Sup. cap. 1. sect. 6.
; for (as the Apostle shows, Romans 5.14.) both of them were heads and roots of
mankind. Now the sin of Adam did immediately overspread his posterity; All
men sinned in him, before ever they committed any actual sin, Romans 5.12, 14.
And therefore the Righteousness of Christ descended immediately upon all the
Elect for their Justification, Romans 5.17, 18.

Sixthly, If the Sacrifices of the Law were immediately available for the
Typical cleansing of sins under that administration, then the Sacrifice which
Christ has offered was immediately available, to make a real atonement for all
those sins for which he suffered. The reason of the consequence, is, because
the Real Sacrifice is not less efficacious, then the Typical, Heb. 9.14. But
those Legal Sacrifices did immediately make atonement, without any condition
performed on the sinners part, Levit. 16.30.

. 5. Seventhly, If it be the Will of God that the death of Christ should be
available, for the immediate reconciliation of some of the Elect, without any
condition performed by them, then it was his Will, that it should be so for all
of them; the reason is, because the Scripture makes no difference between
persons in the communication of this Grace, The free gift (says the Apostle)
came upon all men, i. e. In omnes praedestinatos August.
, to Justification of life, to wit, by the gracious imputation of God. But it
is the Will of God, that the death of Christ should be available for the
immediate reconciliation of some of the Elect, without conditions performed by
them, viz. To Elect Infants, or else they are not reconciled, and consequently
they cannot be saved.

Now if any shall say, That God has a peculiar way of reconciling and
justifying Infants, or of communicating unto them the Benefits of Christ's
death; let them clear it up from Scripture; let them show us the Text that
says, God gives Salvation unto Infants in one manner, and to men in another;
to the one freely, and to the others, upon conditions. If they say, Infants
have the Seed, or Habit of Faith, the Scripture will contradict them, which
affirms, (1) That they have no knowledge at all, either of good or evil,
Deuteronomy. 1.39. And that they cannot so much as discern, between the right, and the
left hand. And if so, how can they, who conceive not of things Natural,
understand those things that are Heavenly and Spiritual? And therefore (says
Augustine Epist. 57.
) If we should go about to prove, that Infants know the things of God, who as
yet know not the things of men, our own senses would confute us. And can there
be Faith without knowledge? (2) That Faith comes by hearing of the Word
Preached. Romans 10. Now Infants either hear not, or if they do, they understand
not what they hear: We have sufficient experience, that no Children give any
testimony of Faith, until they have been taught and instructed. Elect Children
(which are afterward manifested to be such) are as obstinate and unteachable
as any others: As for the instance of the Baptist, that he believed in his
Mothers belly, because it is said, Luke 1.41. That he was filled with the Holy
Ghost, etc. it does not prove it; for (as one observes Downs of the Faith of
Infants, p. 199.
) it is not said, Credidit in utero, but only, exultavit, which exultation or
springing, Divinitus facta est in Infant, non humanitus ab Infant; And
therefore it is not to be drawn into an example, or urged as a rule to us, what
to think of other Infants. But if any shall say, that Infants do perform the
conditions of Reconciliation and Salvation by their Parents; then it will
follow, That all the Children of believing Parents, are reconciled and
justified, because they perform the conditions, as much for all, as they do for
one: But I suppose no man will say, That all the Children of believing Parents
are justified; we may as well assert works of supererogation, as that one is
justified by another Faith Ezekiel. 18.20. Hab. 2.4.
. That any Infants are saved, it is merely from the Grace of Election, and the
free imputation of Christ's Righteousness; of which, all that are elected, are
made partakers in the same manner.

. 6. Eighthly, If it were the Will of God, that Christ should have the whole
glory of our reconciliation; it was his will that it should not in the least
depend upon our works or conditions; because that condition, or conditions will
share with him in the glory of this effect; and our Justification would be
partly of Grace, and partly of Works; partly from Christ, and partly from our
selves: Nay, it would be more from our selves, then from Jesus Christ; seeing,
that notwithstanding all that he has done for us, we had been eternally
miserable, unless we had also contributed our own endeavors. How derogatory
this is to Christ, and contrary to the Scriptures is sufficien^ly man^fest.

Ninthly, If it were the Will of God that his people should have strong
consolations Heb. 6.18.
, and that their joy should be full 1 John 1.4.
, then it was his Will that their peace and reconciliation, should not depend
upon terms and conditions performed by themselves. For (as was noted before
out of Calvin Sup. cap. 4.
) it is impossible that any soul should enjoy a firm and settled peace, whose
confidence toward God is grounded upon conditional promises; and, Romans 4.16.
says the Apostle, our Salvation is by grace, to the end that the promise
might be sure unto all the seed; implying, that if it depended never so little
upon our works, we could not be sure thereof, and consequently, we must
walk in darkness and see no light.

. 7. Tenthly, If it were the Will of God that the death of Christ should be
available for the reconciliation of his Elect, whilst they live in this world,
then it was his Will that it should procure for them, immediate, and actual
reconciliation without the intervention of those conditions supposed to be
required of them; and the reason of this consequence is, because they cannot
perform all the conditions required of them till their last breath, this being
one, that they must persevere to the end; and the nature of conditional grants
is such, that the benefit cannot be had, and enjoyed, till all the conditions
are performed: So that if the reconciliation of the Elect, did depend upon the
conditions pretended, they should not only not have reconciliation before
Faith, but not before death; which is contrary to innumerable Scriptures, which
do declare that the Saints are perfectly justified, and so immutably
reconciled unto God, that nothing shall be able to separate them from his love;
though their Sanctification be imperfect; yet their Justification is as full
and perfect as ever it shall be; it does not grow and increase as the other
does, but is perfect at first See Hildersh. on Psa. 51. lect. 128. Ames. med.
s. 1. c. 27.
; And therefore baptism which seals unto us the forgiveness and washing away
of all our sins, not original only, but actual also, is administered but once
in all our life time; to show that our Justification is done all at once, at
the very first instant, wherein the righteousness of Christ is imputed to us,
Ezekiel. 16.8, 9. Act. 13.39. 1 John 1.7. Col. 2.13, 14.

. 8. Eleventhly, If it were the Will of God that the death of Christ should
certainly and infallibly procure the reconciliation of his Elect, then surely
it was not the Will of God that it should depend upon terms and conditions on
their part; because that which depends upon future conditions, is, as to the
event, altogether uncertain Omnis conditio in casu mincertum tend^t.
, it is possible it may never be, by the nonperformance of the condition. But
this has been alleged before.

Twelfthly, If God willed this blessing to his Elect by the death of Christ,
but conditionally; then he willed their Reconciliation and Justification, no
more then their non-Reconciliation, and Condemnation; and stood as it were
indifferent to either event; but doubtless his heart was more set upon it then
so: see John 6.38, 39. John 17.21, 22, 24. The consequence is clear, for if he
willed their Justification only in case they should believe, and repent; then
he willed their Damnation in case they do not believe, and repent; and then it
will follow that he willed their Justification, no more then their Damnation;
nay, most probably; he willed it less, because we are more prone to
Infidelity, then we are to Faith; and to hardness of heart, then, we are to
repentance. I add to this.

. 9. Thirteenthly, If God willed unto men the benefits of Christ's death upon
any condition to be performed by them, it will follow that God foresaw in them
an ability to perform some good, which Christ has not merited. Conditional
reconciliation necessarily supposes Free Will. For either God willed it unto
men upon a possible, or impossible condition; not upon an impossible condition,
for that is inconsistent with the Wisdom of God; if upon a possible condition,
the possibility thereof arises either from Gods Will, or from Man's; it is
possible, either because God will bestow it, or because man can perform it.
Our adversaries, cannot mean it in the former sense, for God will bestow upon
us nothing, but what Christ has purchased; and Christ has purchased nothing,
save what God has promised in his Covenant. Now Mr. W. denies that the promise
of Faith is any part of the Covenant, or any effect of it, p. 32. and others
that are for this conditional reconciliation look upon it as a ridiculous
conceit Anne conditionem quis seri^ and sapienter prescribet alteri sub
promisso praemii, and paenae gravissimae comminatione, qui eam in eo cui
prescribit efficere vult, haec actio totae iudiora, and vix scoena digna est.
Rem Apol. c. 9. p. 105. a.

Nihil ineptius, nihil vanius quam fidem merito Christi tribuere si enim
Christus meritu^ est fidem, tum fides conditio esse non poterit* c. 8. p. 95.


, that God should promise men Salvation upon a condition, and that he should
work this condition in them, and for them; so that in the upshot, we shall be
beholding chiefly to Free Will, an opinion so absurd that in all ages it has
been exploded by humble and sober minded Christians, it being palpably contrary
to the Scriptures which show that every man by nature is without strength, dead
in treaspasses and sins, that we cannot so much as think a good thought, that
it is God who works in us both to will and to do of his own good pleasure. If
any shall say that God did will, that by Christ we should have Faith, and after
that, reconciliation; Though this be granted them, it will follow
notwithstanding, that our reconciliation is an immediate effect of the death of
Christ (as Mr. Owen has invincibly proved in his answer to Baxter, p. 34.) and
then all the controversy will be, about Gods order and method in conferring on
us the effects of Christ's death; and whether God does enable a man to perform
good works, before his person is reconciled to God. Some Reasons for the
Negative have been given before.

. 10. Fourteenthly, If God did will that our sins should be accounted unto
Christ without any condition on our part, then it was his Will that they should
be discounted unto us without any condition, and the Reason thereof is, because
the charging and accounting of them unto him, necessarily includes our
discharge; the imputing of our sins to Christ, was formally, the non-imputing
of them unto us: Gods accounting of them unto him (as has been shown) was a
real discounting of them from us, for they could not be accounted or charged
upon both, without a manifest contradiction in the thing it self, and in the
Justice of God. But God willed that our sins should be accounted to, and
charged upon Christ, without any condition performed by us, for he actually
suffered for them, before we were. Ergo.

. 11. To these Arguments from Scripture, I mighr add many plain Texts, which
do declare that our reconciliation, is the actual and immediate effect of
Christ's death, as Col. 1.14. Ephesians. 1.7. We have redemption [not, we shall have]
the forgiveness [or non-imputation] of sins according to the riches of his
grace [not according to any condition performed by us] he having obtained
eternal redemption for us, Heb. 9.12. And 2 Cor. 5.18, 19. (a place which we
have often mentioned) the Apostle shows that Christ by his death, made such a
reconciliation for us, as that God thereupon did not impute our sins unto us,
which was long before any condition could be performed by us. Elsewhere, That
Christ by himself purged and expiated our sins, Heb. 1.3. and afterward set
down, as having finished that work, chap. 10^12. Now sin that is fully
purged, and expiated, is not imputable to the sinner. The same Apostle adds,
that Christ by his sacrifice has for ever perfected all them for whom it was
offered, Heb. 10.14. And in another place, that he has made them complete, as
to the forgiveness of their sins, Col. 2.10, 13, 14. In Romans 8.33, 34. He
argues from the death of Christ to the non-imputation of our sins, Who can lay
any thing to the charge of Gods Elect, it is God that justifies, it is Christ
that dyed; whereas notwithstanding sin would have been chargeable upon them,
and they, condemnable if the death of Christ had not procured their discharge,
without the intervention of any condition performed by them.

CHAP. XV. Wherein Mr. Woodbridges Replies to the second Objection ( as he calls
it) concerning our being Justified in Christ as a common person, are examined.
THe Argument was proposed by me at the time of our Conference, in this manner.
They that were in Christ as a common person, before they believed, were
Justified before they believed; But many were in Christ, as a common person,
before they believed, Ergo: Mr. W. denied both Propositions. The major I proved
in this wise: If Christ was justified before many that are in him do believe;
then they that are in him, were ^^stified before they believed. But Christ was
justified before many that are in Christ do believe, Ergo. His answer hereunto
(as I remember) was, I deny all: And therefore the Assumption was confirmed
from Isa. 50.8, 9. in this manner, Christ was justified at his resurrection,
but that happened before many of them who are in Christ as a common person do
believe. Ergo, That Christ was justified at his resurrection, is clear from
this Text, He is near that justifies me, etc. Which words (I said) were
uttered by the Prophet in the person of our Savior, in the time of his
greatest humiliation, who comforted himself with this, that the Lord would
shortly justify him; which was to be done at his Resurrection See M. Goodw*
Christ set forth sect. 3. c. 5.
, when the Lord publicly declared to all the world, that he was acquitted and
discharged from all those sins which were laid upon him, and which he, as a
Surety undertook to satisfy. The sequel of the major was also proved by this
Enthymem. The acts of a common person do belong unto them, whom he represents;
whatsoever is done by, or to a common person, as such, is to be attributed to
them in whose stead he stands; and therefore if Christ were justified, all that
were in him were justified also: For seeing that he was not justified, from his
own, but from the sins of others; all they whom he represents were justified in
his Justification: Whereunto he replied, That Christ was not justified
according to the tenor of the New Covenant, which did lead us to that discourse
of the New Covenant which is afterward mentioned, of which in its place.

. 2. We shall now take a view of his Replies to this Argument, which we find in
his printed copy. And 1. he distinguishes of a threefold Justification, (1)
Purposed, (2) Purchased, and (3) Exemplified; all which are before Faith; So
then by his own confession, Justification in a Scripture sense, goes before
Faith; Which is that horrid opinion, he has all this while so eagerly opposed.
It may be he will say as Actualis peccatorum remissio and justificati^ absque
fide, etc. nemini contingunt.
Arminius does, that neither of these were actual Justification, which were a
poor put off; for as Dr. Twisse Vind. Great* l. 1. p. 2 sect. 25.
observes, Omnis Justificatio simpliciter dicta, congruenter exponenda est, de
Justificatione actuali; Analogum per se positum stat pro famosiori significato:
When we speak of Justification simply, there is no man but understands it of
actual Justification. And first, That which he calls Justification purposed in
the Decree of God, is real and actual Justification; for if Justification be
Gods will not to punish, or to deal with his Elect according to their sins (as
both the Psalmist and Apostle do define it) then when Gods Will was in actual
being, their Justification was actual: It is absurd, to say, That God did
decree or purpose to will any thing whatsoever, his Will being his Essence,
which admits no cause, either within or without God. (2) We have shown before,
that, Justification being taken for the effect of Gods Will, to wit, our
discharge from the Obligation of the Law, it was actually, because solely, and
absolutely obtained by the death of Christ; there being no other cause out of
God, which concurs to the producing of this effect.

. 3. The third Branch of his distinction, Justification exemplified, is,
terminus redundans, a member that may well be spared; for (1) there is not the
least hint thereof in Holy Writ; the Scripture no where calls our Savior, the
example or pattern of our Justification. For though he is proposed to us as an
example in acts of Moral Obedience See Reynolds ^3. Treat. p. 4*10.
, yet in his works of Mediation, he was not so; in these he was not an
exemplary, but a meritorious procuring cause; an example is proposed to be
imitated, and therefore we are frequently exhorted to imitate our Savior in
works of Sanctification Matthew. 11.29. Joh. 13.15. Phil. 2.5. 1 Pet. 2.21. ^
John 2.6.
, but we are no where bid to imitate him in our Justification, or in justifying
our selves. It was needless he should be a pattern of our Justification; for
this pattern must be of use, either unto us, or unto God: Not to us, because we
do not justify our selves; not unto God, because he needs no pattern or
example to guide or direct him. (2) He that pays our debts to the utmost
farthing, and thereupon receives a discharge, is more then a pattern of our
release: Our real discharge is in his, as our real debt was upon him. And
therefore his Grandfather Parker Vid. Sup. c 3.
said well, That Christ's Resurrection was the Actual Just^fication, both of him
and us. (3) If Christ were only a pattern and example of our Justification,
then was he justified from his own sins, and consequently was a sinner, which
is the most horrid blasphemy that can be uttered. The reason of the consequence
is evident; for if Christ were but a pattern of our Justification, then was he
justified, as we are: Now we are justified from our own sins, which we our
selves have committed, and therefore his Justification must be from his own
sins, or else the example and counterpart do not agree. (4) This expression
intimates, that as Christ was justified by performing the conditions required
of him, so we are justified by performing the conditions required of us; which
in effect makes men their own Saviors, as before. (5) He recedes very far,
both from the meaning and expressions of all our Orthodox Writers, who do
constantly call our Savior a common person, but never that I find, the
exemplary cause of our Justification. I shall only refer the Reader to what
his Grandfather Parker Park. de descens. l 3. sect. 49, 50, 53.
has written of this matter, who has copiously and learnedly proved both from
Scripture, and the Fathers, That Christ no less then the first Adam, was made a
common person by the Ordination of God, and his own voluntary undertaking; who
took our sins upon him, as if they had been his own, and for the same made full
satisfaction to Divine Justice, and consequently received as full a discharge
in our behalf. (6) This expression of his, savors rankly, both of Pelagianism
and Socinianism. The Pelagians as they made the first Adam a mere pattern and
example, in communicating sin to his posterity; so they made the second Adam
but the pattern and example of our reconciliation. Those words, 2 Cor. 5.18.
Who has reconciled us to himself [by Jesus Christ] they expounded, by his
Doctrine, and by his Example Vid. Estium in loc.
, i. e. By our obedience to his Doctrine, and by imitat^ng his example. The
Socinians do speak the same Language Socin: part^ 1. de Servat. c. 2, 3, 4.
, Christus ideo servator noster dicitur, quod salutis viam nobis annunciavit;
quod salutis viam nobis confirmavit, miraculorum patratione, sanguinis
effusione, resurrectione a mortuis, quod vitae exemplo viam salutis nobis
ostendit. Christ is therefore called a Savior, because by his Life and
Doctrine he has showed us the way of Salvation, and by his Miracles and
Sufferings has confirmed the same Steg. Photin^* Disp. 24 q 3.
. I am sorry to hear the Language of Ashdod, from the mouth of a Protestant
Minister.

. 4. The excuse which he gives, for calling our Savior, the exemplary cause of
our Justification, rather then a common person, is both fallacious and
impertinent. [ I use (says he) the term of an exemplary cause, rather then of
a common person, because a common person may be the effect of those whom he
represents, as the Parliament of the Commonwealth.]

1. It is fallacious dealing, under pretense of giving a more significant term
to leave out that, wherein the force of the Argument lay: He seems to intimate,
that the phrases are of equal latitude, that an exemplary cause, does express
as much as a common person, which is clearly false; for the act of the
Exemplar, is not the act of the Imitator; as the act of a common person, is the
act of them whom he represents, which in Law, is accounted as if it had been
done by them. Parents and Superiors are examples to their Children and
Inferiors, they are not common persons, as Adam was to all his posterity, In
whose loins (says the Apostle) we all sinned; and in this respect, he is made
a figure of Christ, Romans 5.14. Whose Righteousness is accounted unto them, for
whom he died; Verse. 15, 17, 18.
as Adams sin was accounted unto us, when as yet we were not.

2. It is impertinent, for though Christ be not the effect of them, whom he
represents; yet that hinders not, but that his discharge was theirs, no less
then if he had been chosen by them. I can see no reason why the act of God,
constituting and appointing his Son to be the Head, Surety, and Common Person,
to all his Elect, should not be as effectual for the communication of his
benefits to them, as their own choice and election: We did not choose Adam to be
our common person, and yet his sin was imputed to us; so though we did not
choose the Lord Jesus to stand in our stead, that is no reason why his
Righteousness and Satisfaction should not be accounted ours.

. 5. The instances he has brought from our Personal Resurrection, and Inherent
Sanctification, to render this Argument absurd, have not the least force to
conclude against the efficacy, of Christ's Satisfaction, for our immediate
discharge from sin and wrath. It does not follow, that because we did not
personally rise with Christ, and were not inherently sanctified in his
Sanctification. Ergo. We had not in his Resurrection an actual discharge from
the guilt of sin; there is not the like reason for these. For to our actual
discharge, there needed no more then the payment of our debt, or satisfaction
to the Law of God, but our personal resurrection necessarily supposes both our
life and death. Again, our Inherent Sanctification cannot be without our
personal existence, and the use of those means which God has appointed for
that end; but our Justification is wrought without us, and for us, Though
Christ has fully merited our Sanctification and Resurrection to glory (in
which respect we are said to be crucified with him, and to be risen with
Christ) as well as our Justification, yet it is not necessary that these
benefits should be communicated to us at the same time, and in the same manner.
It is no such absurdity to say, Christ has purchased our Resurrection, though
we are not risen, as to say, Christ has purchased our discharge, and yet we
are not discharged; for (as has been shown Cap. 14. sect. 2.
) to say a debt is discharged, and yet that it is justly chargable, implies a
contradiction. Let the Reader judge, whether the Assertion that follows, be not
much more confident, then solid. [ No man living can show any reason of
difference (as if he were master of as much Reason, as all men living) why we
may not as justly infer, that our Resurrection is passed already, because we
are risen in Christ; as that our Justication is passed before we believe,
because we are justified in Christ. Enough has been said to evict the
disproportion of these consequences.

. 6. 2. His next distinction, is, That Justification is either Causal and
Virtual, or Actual and Formal; We were (says he) causally and virtually
justified in Christ's Justification, but not actually and formally.] Our
Protestant Divines do generally place the formale of Justification, in the
non-imputation of sin: Now if our sins were formally imputed unto Christ, even
to a full Satisfaction, they could not formally be imputed unto us also, unless
a debt discharged by a Surety, can be justly reckoned unto him that did first
contract it. It is true, a debt may be imputed both to Principal and Surety,
before it be discharged, but after to neither: It is granted by all Orthodox
Writers, That our Savior by giving himself to death, made full satisfaction to
the utmost farthing, for all the sins or debts of Gods Elect. Now, I say, the
discharge of a debt, is formally the discharge of the debtor, unless we speak
of an outward formality, such as is by an Acquittance, which serves, but either
against the unfaithfulness of the creditor, who otherwise would deny the
payment, or else against the ignorance of the debtor; who being not at the
payment, might still look upon himself as a debtor, and liable to all the
consequences of his debts. In this sense, our Formal Justification is by the
gracious sentence of the Gospel, terminated upon our Consciences; but
otherwise, intrinsecally and formally, the payment of our debt is our real
discharge. I shall grant him, That the death of Christ does justify us only
virtually; but yet I affirm, That the satisfaction in his death (being
performed, and accepted for us) does justify us formally; for the actual
payment of a debt, is that which formally makes him that was the debtor, no
debtor. And therefore, Christ dying for us, or for our sins; his reconciling us
to God, and our being justified, are Synonima's in Scripture phrase, Romans 5.8,
9, 10.

Object.
Object. But against this, some have alleged that of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5.21.
where he says, That Christ was made sin for us (...), that we might be made
(he does not say, that thereby we are made) the Righteousness of God in him.
Whence they would infer, That the laying of our sins on Christ, is only an
Antecedent, which tends to the procuring of our Justification, and not the same
formally. Answ.
Whereunto we Answer, (1) That this phrase [ that we might be, or be made] does
not always signify the final, but sometimes the formal cause: As when it is
said, That light is let in, that darkness might be expelled; where the
immission of light, is formally the expulsion of darkness. (2) Though the
imputation of our sins to Christ, and of his Righteousness to us, do differ;
yet the imputation of sin to him, and non-imputation of it unto us, is but one
and the same act of God; which was, when God was in Christ reconciling the
world unto himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them, before the word of
Reconciliation was given; and therefore before they believed, Verse. 19. (3)
Though the imputation of our sin to Christ, and so the non-imputation thereof
to us, have an antecedency in respect of imputation of Righteousness to us, yet
it is of nature only, and not of time. For though it be objected, That we were
not then, and therefore Righteousness could not be imputed unto us, yet it
follows not: They might as well object, Our sins were not then. Ergo, They
could not be imputed unto Christ; whereas in this business of Justification,
Romans 4.17.
God calls things that are not, as though they were. But if Mr. W. had shown
what it is that formally justifies us, besides the satisfaction made in Christ's
death, somewhat more might have been spoken to it.

. 7. The close of this Paragraph is such a dirty puddle, that I intended to
have stepped over it in silence, seeing it is so hard to touch pitch, or
pollution, and not be defiled with it; but yet for their sakes that do not know
(...), I shall stay the Reader a little, whilst I wash off that dirt, which he
has thrown upon me, and others. [ They are credulous souls, I will assure you,
that will be drawn by such decoyes as these, into Schism and Faction, to the
hardening, and discomforting of more hearts in one hour, then the Opinion it
self (should it obtain) will do good to, while the world stands.] I dare not
allow my self (...), or to pay him in his own coin, having persuaded my heart
to follow better examples, even his, who when he was reviled, reviled not
again, 1 Pet. 2.23. And theirs, who being reproached, returned blessing, 1 Cor.
4.12. In these few words, there are a heap of slanders packt together, both
against my self and others, and (which is more grievous to be born) against the
truths and ways of God, which we adhere to. 1. They that do embrace this
Doctrine which I have taught, are aspersed with credulity and levity. I do
verily believe there is not one of my charge, but is able to say as the
Samaritans, John 4.42. We believe not, because of thy saying; for we have heard
him our selves, etc. I dare say, they are better settled, then to be shaken with
the sophistry of this Assailant. I am sure, both they, and many more, will bear
me witness, how frequently I do admonish them, of taking up matters of Faith,
upon trust and credit: it being Idolatry in a high degree, to give the most
Spiritual Worship of God, viz. Our Faith, to a weak and sinful man. He that
believes a truth upon a Humane account, is no better Christian, then he that
does believe a lie. Let the prudent judge, whether they are not more justly
obnoxious to this censure of abusing the credulity of simple souls, who will
not endure that their hearers should bring their Doctrines to the touchstone.
The tyranny and usurpation of the Popish Priests, is far more excusable, then
the affected domination of some of ours; for they believe, that their Church is
infallible, and cannot err; ours confess, that they are fallible, and may
err, and yet expect subscription to their Dictates, no less then to the Canon
it self: It is held a piaculum to question, or debate, what ever they say. 2.
It is but an unhandsome character, he has given my Arguments, which he calls
decoyes. The Apostle, I take it, has Englished his French, Ephesians. 4.14. The
sleight of men, who lie in wait to deceive. I dare say he knows me better, then
in cold blood to accuse me of driving on such a devilish trade, as wittingly
to deceive men's precious souls: And therefore, I shall call in no other
Compurgator then his own Conscience.

. 8. As for his charge of Schism and Faction, I am not careful to answer it,
being the usual foam of passionate men, who when they want Arguments to
convince fall to downright railing Rationibus victi, dentibus vincunt, Bas. ep.
^0.

Haeretici argumentis victi calumnias meditantur. Athan. Istae sunt
haereticorum machinae, ut convicti (...) perfidia, ad maledicta se conferant.
Hier. Apo. cont. Ruff^^.


; Schism (says a learned man Hale^ tr. of Schism.
) in the common manage of the word is a mere Theological Scar-crow, wherewith
they who uphold a party in Religion, seek to fright away others from enquiring
into, and closing with that which they do oppose: Both this and the other are
most frequently in their mouths, who are deepest in the guilt that is imported
by them. Ahab by his sins brought down Plagues and Judgments upon Israel; yet
he calls Elijah, the troubler of Israel, 1 King. 18.17. Athalia was the chiefest
Traitor, and yet she was the first that cried out Treason, 2 King. 11.14*
Tertullus was the Orator of the tumult, yet he inveighs against Paul, as a Ring
leader of Sedition, Act. 24.5, 6. the Church of Rome, which has fallen from
the purity of the Catholic Faith, brands them for Schismatics who refuse to
continue in the same Apostasy. Amongst our selves the late Innovators aspersed
all those with Faction and Schism who would not prostitute their Consciences
to the Wills of men; and to this day ignorant and profane persons think all
them to be Factious and Schismatics who live more strictly, and religiously
then themselves. I must needs say, they are less to be blamed* seeing
Professors and Ministers do give them such an evil example.

. 9. I confess though in common use, Schism and Faction are but ridiculous
terms, yet the things themselves are real evils; the one being an offense
against Civil* and the other against Ecclesiastical peace. If this Author had
shown wherein I had offended against either of them, I doubt not but I should
have cleared my self at a just Tribunal. For 1. I have ever been so far from
factious Combinations, or attempting any thing against the Civil Peace, that
(as I verily believe) it has not been the least cause of my troubles, that I
have always prayed for, and pressed subjection (...) Romans 13.1.
, to the ^owers in being; had others of my calling done the like, the
disaffections of the people against the present Government had not been so
great as yet they are in these parts. 2. As for Schism, I know no ground that
he has to charge me with it; for Schism cannot be, but where communion is, or
ought to be held: now to my best remembrance, I never refused to hold Christian
comunimon with any person or persons, with whom by the Rules of Christ I
conceived I ought. It is true, we receive not all within that Parochial circuit
wherein we live, unto communion in Church Privileges; because either they
refuse to make Profession of their Faith, and to declare their subjection to
the Ordinances of Jesus Christ: and so they separate from us, and not we from
them; or else they are such as in their practices do contradict the profession
which they seem to make, like them Tit. 1.16. And as for Members of other
Churches, we are ready to give them the right hand of fellowship, unless the
person, or the Church to which he belongs, lies under the guilt of any public
scandal See Mr. Cottons way of the Churches, p. 78^ etc.
. If he does accuse me of Sch^sm, because I have refrained going to some
Lectures that are preached in this City: I doubt not but the wise will be
satisfied with a just Apology. I do not conceive that Christians are bound to
frequent every Lecture that is preached near them; the obligation to this Duty
must needs be determined by Christian prudence; and we ought to follow that
which we conceive has the greatest tendency to Edification. Now I confess I
have rather chosen to deprive my self of that benefit, which sometime I might
enjoy, then to wound my Conscience by keeping of silence when I hear the Truths
and Servants of God declaimed against Dr. Jackson Treat. of the Church, cap. 14
(a man large enough in the point of communion) grants, that there is just
cause to separate from the communion of a visible Church (our practice does not
amount so high) when we are urged or constrained to profess or believe some
points of Doctrine, or to adventure upon some Practices, which are contrary to
the Rule of Faith, or Love of God; and in case we are utterly deprived of
freedom of Conscience, in professing what we inwardly believe, for which he
cites 1 Cor. 7.23. Ye are bought with a price, be ye not Servants of men; For
(says he) although we were persuaded that we might communicate with such a
Church without evident danger of damnation; yet in as much as we cannot
communicate with it upon any better terms, then Servants and Bondslaves do
with their Masters, we are bound in Conscience, and religious discretion, when
lawful occasions or opportunities are offered, to use our Liberty, and seek to
our Freedom, rather then to live in bondage. Let them allow us that liberty
(which we offer to them) to discuss and examine the Doctrines which they do
deliver, and if they shall be found erroneous, to profess against them, I
shall not often decline such opportunities.

. 10. But says Mr. W. the contending about this matter [ will harden and
discomfort more souls in an hour, then the opinion it self will do good to,
while the world stands] 1. It seems he is of Curcaelleus his mind, that the
matter in question is of so small concernment, that it ought not to breed a
controversy: I marvel then, he should offer himself a Champion on either
part, especially in a place where he had so little to do, and where his
humility might suppose there were others as able as himself to defend the
notion which he stickles for. No man will imagine that he engaged in this
controversy upon conscientious principles, if he judges the Point in question
to be of little moment. For my part I cannot look upon that as such a trifle,
which does so nearly concern the glory of Gods Grace, the virtue and efficacy
of Christ's Blood, upon which alone poor Souls can with confidence and security
build their hopes of Eternal life. 2. I have showed before, that the Doctrine
it self is guiltless both of hardening, and discomforting the souls of men,
and if these effects do ensue the pressing of it in a Christian way, they are
accidental, and consequently ought not to be charged upon the Tenent. I know
none that are discomforted by these Debates but such as the Apostle speaks of 2 Timothy 3.7.
Who are ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the Truth.
For having pinned their Faith on the sleeves of others, they are jealous of
their credit, least they should be thought to have builded on a sandy
foundation.

CHAP. XVI. Of Mr. Woodbridges Answer to the third Objection, which he has
framed concerning our being in Covenant with God before beleiving.
THis last he scoffingly calls the great Argument, which as he has proposed it,
was none of mine. We fell upon our discourse of the Covenant See before, cap.
15.
, upon his saying that Christ was not justified according to the tenor of the
New Covenant; whereunto I replied; If the New Covenant were made with Christ,
then Christ was justified according to the tenor of the New Covenant; But the
New Covenant was made with Christ, Ergo. He denied the Assumption. But by the
way let me give the Reader the Reason of the Sequel, which is as follows; The
New Covenant contains all the Promises which God has made to the Head and the
Members, both to Christ Personal, and to Christ Mystical; the same Covenant is
conditional to him, and absolute to us; a Covenant of Works to him, but a
Covenant of Grace to us. Now if it be one and the same Covenant, by which
Christ and we are Justified, (though in a far different manner) scil. he by
Works, and we by Grace, he by his own Righteousness, and we by his; then his
Justification was by virtue of the New Covenant, that we are justified by. We
read but of one Covenant that was made with Christ, by, and according unto
which he was justified, when he had paid the debt which he had undertaken.

To confirm the Assumption, That the New Covenant was made with Christ, I
alleged (1) the Judgment of the late Assembly, who in their larger
Catechism page 7^
have laid down this Proposition, in terminis, The Covenant of Grace was made
with Christ as the second Adam, and in him, with all the Elect as his seed.
First he denied the Allegation, (though I believe at another time he would have
taken my word for a greater matter) I desired Mr. C. an Assembly man, (who sat
next unto him) to declare, whether it were not so; but he refused to speak,
though I urged him twice: Had he remembered the words of our Savior, John 8.37.
I dare say, he would not have refused to perform so just an office: At length a
Gentleman Mr. R. H.
that stood by (one of the Parish Elders) ingenuously acknowledged, That I had
truly alleged it. Then Mr. W. denied their authority, saying, It was a Humane
testimony. I accepted his Answer, and desired the people to remember what Mr.
W. had told them (knowing that many present would receive it sooner from him,
then they would from me) That the Authority of the Assembly, is but Humane, and
not Divine, and Infallible; and consequently, That their Votes, and
Determinations, are of no greater force, then the Proofs and Reasons which do
confirm them. And therefore, I immediately offered him Divine Authority, in the
Argument following: If they with whom God did make the New Covenant, when it
was first revealed and exhibited, were in that federal Act or Relation, the
types and figures of Jesus Christ, then the New Covenant was made only with
Christ. For that which is attributed to a person, as a type, or figure, belongs
properly and peculiarly to the Antitype. But all they with whom the New
Covenant was made, when it was first exhibited, were in that federal Relation
the types of Christ, Ergo. The Minor was proved thus, The New Covenant was made
with Abraham; but Abraham in his federal Relation, or in receiving that
Covenant, was a type of Christ, Ergo. Whereunto (if it had been needful) I had
added diverse other Instances; as of Noah, Phinehas, David, etc. who in the
respective Covenants, which God made with them, were also types and figures of
Jesus Christ. The Covenant made with Noah, Genesis 9.9. was, (as our Divines Iun.
orat. 2. de foed. novo. Rivet. in loc. Quamvis faedus illud videatur tantum
spectare praesentem vitam, tamen altius conscendendum est ad rem significatam;
est enim foedus gratiae, etc.
have observed) the Covenant of Grace; and that Scripture it self does make it
manifest, Isai. 54.8, 9. Now Noah in receiving the Covenant, was a type of
Christ; for it followed immediately upon the offering up of his Sacrifice,
Chap. 8. v. 20, 21. which clearly signified, That all the effects of Gods
Covenant are procured for us, by that Sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor,
which Christ has offered, Ephesians. 5.2. So Phinehas his Covenant concerning the
everlasting Priesthood, Number. 25.12.13. was the very same which was confirmed by
oath unto Christ, Psalm. 110.4. it was made with Phinehas as a Typical Mediator,
because he stood in the gap, to turn away Gods wrath, Verse 11. In like manner
the Covenant made with David, was the Covenant of Grace, 2 Samuel 23.6. And
therefore it is called The sure mercies of David, Isai. 55.3. Now that David in
receiving that Covenant, was a type of Christ, is evident from Acts 13.34.
Psalm 89. verses 3, 4, 19, 20, 24, 28, 34, etc. But I must return to Mr. W. who
denied the Major, viz. That the Covenant made with Abraham, was the New
Covenant; which I proved in this wise. If the whole New Covenant be comprised
in this one promis^, I will be thy God, and the God of thy Seed, then the New
Covenant was made with Abraham: But the whole New Covenant is comprised in this
promise, I will be thy God, etc. Ergo. He answered, I deny all: I replied to
him, That the Sequel is evident; forasmuch as this promise is the sum of the
Covenant made with Abraham, Genesis 17. And the Assumption is acknowledged by all
Divines Haec promissio, Ero Deust^^s, etc. b^evissimae quidem verbis, led sensu
ampliss^m^, ad hanc ^^im ^efern^tur omnes quae in scripturis spaersae su^t
promissiones, ^raese^im quae sunt de salute eterna, etc. Zanch. de Not. Dei. l.
^. c. 5. q. 2. s^ct. 5. Hoc foedere, justificationis gratia conti^e^ur Pisc.
Anal. in Gal. 3 6. Cum multis aliis.
that ever I met with; nay the Apostle himself calls it the Gospel, Gal. 3.8.
If my memory fail not, he affirmed, That the Covenant made with Abraham, was
only concerning temporal blessings as the Land of Canaan, etc. whereof
Circumcision was a Seal. I well remember, That upon his often affirming, that
the New Covenant made with us, is, this Conditional promise, If thou believe,
thou shall be saved; I offered him this Argument, to evict the contrary; If we
are in Covenant, or do partake of some benefits of the Covenant before we do
believe, then that conditional promise is not the New Covenant; but we do
partake of the same benefits of Covenant, before we do believe. Ergo. The
reason of the Sequel, is, because the cond^tion must be performed, before the
benefit, which is promised upon condition, can be received. The Minor was
proved by a medium, which Mr. Rutherford Nihil falsius est dogmate ist^
Arminian^, ^eminem diligi in Christo, nisi actu existentem in ^o per fidem, nam
per and propter Christum datu^ Spiritus Sanctus, per cujus gratiam credimus,
Joh. 7.36. and 1^.16. Exercit. p. 38.
makes use of, for the same purpose. The Spirit which works Faith, is given us
before we do believe; but the Spirit which works Faith, is a blessing of the
New Covenant, and given us by virtue of the Covenant. Ergo, We do partake of
some blessings or benefits of the New Covenant before we believe. He denied,
That the Spirit which works Faith, is given us by virtue of the New Covenant,
which I proved from the Tenor of the New Covenant mentioned, Heb. 8.10. I will
put my Laws in their mind, etc. and they shall all know me. He denied, That
this was a promise of the Spirit which works Faith, but rather of the Spirit of
Adoption, which follows Faith: That it is a promise of the Spirit which works
Faith, was proved from John 6.45. where our Savior, having shown that none do
believe, but by a Divine and Supernatural power, No man can come to me, except
the Father draw him, he adds, It is written in the Prophets, they shall be all
taught of God, i. e. God will give his Spirit unto all that are ordained to
life, which shall enable them to believe: The places in the Prophets, where
this is written, or promised, are Isa. 54.13. and Jere. 31.34. which is cited
by the Apostle, Heb. 8. Then he denied, That this was the New Covenant made
with us; whereunto I replied, The New Covenant which is made with Spiritual
Israel, is the Covenant made with us; but this Covenant is made with Spiritual
Israel, Ergo. His Answer was, I deny all; Though the Major be as clear as the
Sun, That all the Elect, whether Jews or Gentiles, are Spiritual Israel, or the
Seed of Abraham. See the Ninth, Tenth, and Eleventh Chapters to the Romans, and
Gal. 3.26, 29. And the Assumption is in the Text, This is the Covenant that I
will make with the house of Israel in those days, etc. And therefore I
rejoyned, Contra negantem principia, non est disputandum; and so our Conference
brake off. I have here given the Reader a true Narrative of our Discourse
concerning this matter, wherein I take the Lord to witness, I have not
wittingly concealed, or added a syllable, to vary either from his sense, or my
own.

. 2. I shall now return to his Printed Discourse, and take things in the same
order as they lie before us. The Argument, as he has formed it, runs thus: If
we are in Covenant before we believe, then we are justified before we believe;
but we are in Covenant before we believe, Ergo. Wherein (1) he blames the
Proposition; For (says he) though it were supposed that we are in Covenant
before Faith, yet it will not follow, That we are justified: His Reason is,
Because the blessings of the Covenant have an order and dependence one upon
another, and are enjoyed successively one after another. But by his favor, the
Sequel is not invalidated by this Reason; for though a man be not sanctified,
and glorified before Faith; yet if he be in Covenant with God, i. e. One of the
Elect, to whom the Grace of the New Covenant appertains, he is certainly
justified: For (1) God from all eternity, did will, not to punish his Elect
ones; which (as has been shown) is real Justification, it being forgiveness in
the heart of God: Or (2) taking it for an effect of his Will, Justification is
the first benefit that does accrue to us by the death of Christ. God has
promised from thence forth to remember the sins of his people no more, Isa.
43.25. and 54.9. and in Ezekiel. 36.25. He first promises to cleanse us from all
our filthiness, (which must be meant of our Justification; for by
Sanctification, our inherent filthiness is not perfectly cleansed in this
life,) and then to give us a new heart. And Chap. 16. he first says unto the
Soul, Live, (which is the sentence of Justification) and then he adorns it with
the precious gifts of his holy Spirit. It is sufficiently known, That the
generality of our Protestant Divines, in comparing the blessings of the
Covenant, have given the precedence to Justification; some have ascribed to it,
a priority of time, but all of Nature, before the rest, Perperam and absurd
prorsus inter effecta Sanctificationis numeratur Justificatio, quae illam
natura praecedit, etc. Justification (says Tilenus Syntag. p. 2. c. 45. These.
38.
) is most absurdly made an effect or consequent of Sanctification, which in
nature does go before it: A man cannot be sanctified, until he is first
justified; for the tree must be good, before it can bring forth good fruit.
Bishop Downham New Cov. p. 289.
accounts it a gross error, to say, That Sanctification goes before
Justification; For (says he) Sanctification is the end and fruit, etc. So that
if they have right to any benefit of the Covenant before Faith, it must be to
Justification; for Faith is a part of Sanctification, and the same thing cannot
be before it self.

. 3. (2) He denies the Assumption, viz. That we are in Covenant with God, or,
that we have any right and title to any blessing of the Covenant, before we
believe: But before he will give his Reasons for the Negative, he is willing to
hear mine for the Affirmative. This seeming civility, ushers in a notorious
slander, That [ I was so obstreperous in our Conference, that I would not give
him a fair hearing,] which has been sufficiently disproved in another place
See the Epistle to the Reader before my Sermon, on Psalm. 45.6.
; nay, his own mouth did acquit me, in the close of that discourse, before (I
belive) a thousand witnesses. I wonder, though his Conscience was asleep when
this fell from his Pen, that his memory should fail him Oportet -- esse memorem.
: Me thinks he should have been more tender of his own reputation, then to
contradict himself, though he had a desire to blast mine; but, as if it were
not enough to mis-report my actions, he takes upon him the office of God, to
judge my heart. I believe (says he) he is resolved to give it unto no body
else, whiles the judgment of the cause must be left to the people. Yes to
himself, or any one else, when I have an occasion for the like essay. I am sure
he has not found me heretofore, of so morose a spirit, as not to weigh and
yield unto better reason; he is no fit champion to defend the Faith, who is so
much a stranger to the rules of Charity, which thinks no evil* but hopes the
best 1 Cor. 13.5, 7.
. I confess, I am yet to seek for the Reason of his next clause [ whilst the
judgment of the cause must be left to the people.] One would think, that he
who leaves the judgment of his cause unto the people, should be most willing,
they should have a fair hearing of whatsoever can be said, either pro or con,
or else he cannot expect their Votes should be for him. The people are apt to
think he has the better cause, whose mouth is stopped. But perhaps it sticks in
his stomach, That in our Conference, I desired the people to weigh and judge of
some interpretations of Scripture, which were given by him. It was far from my
thoughts to refer the decision of the Question unto most voices, either of
Ministers, or people. The Judgment desired, was that of private discretion,
and not of public determination; though the latter ought not to be usurped by
Min^sters, whose Reasons, and not their Votes, must satisfy men's Consciences;
yet the former ought not to be denied to the meanest Christians, who are
required to judge for themselves Job 5.27.
, to prove 1 These 5.21.
, and try 1 Ioh. 4.1. Acts 17.11.
, the Doctrines which are brought unto them. Now why this expression should be
faulted, I see no cause, unless men would have the people to content themselves
with an implicit Faith, such as the Romanists do allow their disciples, who
use them as Babes, which must swallow whatsoever their Nurses do put into their
mouths Vid. Dave^. de judice, etc. ^.16^.
. The Church of Christ (says Optatus) is rationabilis, she has the use both
of Natural and Supernatural Reason. Did Christians more generally see with
their own eyes, make use of that Light and Reason which God has given them,
they would never acquiesce in many of those Dictates, which are imposed upon
them: will any man that has a spark of Reason believe that [ I am] does
signify [ I will be.]

. 4. Well, now he has heard my Reason, That we are in Covenant, or have a
right and title to the blessings of the Covenant before we believe, because
some benefits of the Covenant, to wit, the Spirit which works Faith, is given
us before we believe: What has he to say against it? 1. He undertakes to
explain (that which is plain enough) the word [ Give] as that it is taken (1)
for constituting, or appointing, and (2) for the actual collating of a benefit,
so as that it is received, and possessed by him, to whom it is given. 2. He
tells us of sundry ways, how the Spirit is said to be given (1) Essentially, (2)
Personally, (3) Operatively. All which, is nothing at all, to the matter in
hand; but serves merely to raise a dust to blind the unwary Reader. The terms
need neither distinction nor explication, being easy enough to be understood
by the weakest capacity. When we say, That the Spirit which works Faith, is
given us before we believe; none can well imagine that we meant it of Gods
purpose, or decree to give the Spirit* but of the actual sending, or bestowing
of him; nor yet of an Essential, or Personal giving of the Spirit, so as to be
Hypostatically united to us as the Godhead of the Son is to the Humane nature;
though some godly men Cottons answ. to Baily. p. 36.
, have affirmed, that the person of the Spirit dwells in the Saints, from those
Texts, John 14.16, 17, 26.15.26. 2 Timothy 1.14. Romans 8.11. 1 Cor. 6.19.3.16. Yet
none (that are sober) ever affirmed, that the person of the Spirit, dwells in
us in such a manner, as to make us one person with himself, or to communicate
his personal Properties to us; so that I may say of this Argument, as Maldonate
of a certain Text in the Gospel, hic locus facilior esset, si nemo cum
exposuisset, it had been more plain and perspicuous, if these distinctions had
been omitted. I see not how a man could imagine any other sense then this, That
God according to his gracious Covenant does in his appointed time, give, or
send his Spirit, in the preaching of the Gospel, to work Faith in all those
that are ordained to life; So that the Spirit is the cause, and Faith the
effect. It matters not how he is given, whether Personally or Operatively; for
if the Spirit which works Faith be given us by virtue of the New Covenant, then
some benefit of the Covenant is bestowed upon us before we believe; Quod erat
demonstrandum.

. 5. Though the Spirit be not given us (as he says) one atome of time before
we believe; yet that weakens not the force of the Argument; it is enough for my
purpose that it has a precedence in order of nature, though not of time; and
that Faith is not before the Spirit, for then Faith is not the condition of the
Covenant, (seeing the condition goes before the thing conditioned) and
consequently, that conditional Promise If thou believe, etc. is not the tenor
of the New Covenant: Either he must say (1) That the Spirit does not work
Faith; and that it is a work of Nature, to wit, of our own Free will, contrary
to innumerable Scriptures. Or (2) That the Spirit which works Faith, is not
given us by virtue of the New Covenant; which was disproved by comparing. Joh.
6.45. with Jer. 31.34. and is contrary to those Scriptures, which affirmed that
all spiritual blessings are given us in and through Christ, Ephesians. 1.3. Romans
8.32. Or (3) that there is some other condition of the Covenant, besides and
before Faith, as they Dr. Ham. let. to Dr. Cheyn. p. 118.
that make (...), ingenuity and towardliness of nature, the condition of
conversion, or (4) that there are two New Covenants; one absolute, and the
other conditional; one, wherein Faith is promised without condition; the other,
wherein all things else are promised upon condition of Faith; of which more in
its place.

. 6. Whereas he charge me with often abusing that received maxim, Posita
causa ponitur effectus. Leting pass his uncivil language, I say (1) that in
our discourse, I did not so much as mention it nor at any time else, but with
such cautions and limitations, as Artists Keck* syst. log. p. 145.
give, understanding it of causa proxima and completa; and then I conceive
causa posita in actu, the effect must necessarily follow. (2) I cannot see that
it is any abuse to apply it to the death of Christ, in effecting our
Justification, or deliverance from the curse; his death and satisfaction being
the adequate and immediate cause thereof, for when the debt is paid, the
obl^gation is no longer in force. (3) Though I understood this maxim never so
well, it would little advantage Mr. Woodbridges cause, That Faith is the
condition of having the Spirit in our first conversion, unless it would prove
that the cause is produced by its immedate effect.

. 7. That which follows is altogether impertinent, as a man (says he) does
first build himself an house, and then dwells in it, so Christ by his Spirit,
does build, organ^ze, and prepare the Soul to be an house unto himself, and
then by the same Spirit dwells in it immediately. What is this to prove, that no
man has interest in the Covenant, before he believes; or that the Spirit,
which works Faith, is not given us before Faith? We grant that Christ by his
Spirit does (...) Heb. 3.3.
build or prepare the Soul to be his house, and then dwells in it 2 Cor. 6.16.
Joh. 14.23.
, vouchsafes more sensible effects of his presence; but is not that organizing,
preparing act of the Spirit, one benefit of the Covenant? and is not the Spirit
in that act, the cause of Faith? if so! then we have an interest in the
Covenant before Faith, for he that has jus in re, doubtless has jus ad rem;
when we have the benefits of the Covenant, it cannot be denied but we have a
right and title to them. I find that Of Justif. p. 183.
Mr. Burges mentions this answer, but (says he) it is not safe to go this way,
for that grand promise, Ezekiel. 36.26. Does evidently argue the habits or
internal principles of grace, are before the actions of grace.

. 8. His next passage gives us little evidence of a heart prepared, and
organized by the Spirit of Christ, it being false and slanderous, This (says
he) is that which I would have spoken publicly in answer to the Argument, if
Mr. E. had not been beyond measure obstreperous. (1) I dare say such as know
Mr. Woodbridges tongue and forehead, will not easily believe, that he would be
hindered from speaking his whole mind: But (2) my innocence in this matter has
been cleared by persons See the Ep. before my Ser.
more worthy to be believed then Mr. W. especially when be speaks in his own
cause. (3) I shall add, that I verily believe, he then spoke near as many
words, I am sure, as much to the purpose, as this which he has Printed; I well
remember some passages which are here omirted, as that saying* anima fabricat
sibi domicilium, the Soul forms the Body, and then dwells in it; as the soul
works first efficiently, that afterward it may act formally, so does the
spirit in our conversion, etc. (4) If he spoke no more it was his own fault;
for all that were present, do know, that the only answer I could get unto
diverse Syllogismes was, I deny all: But this he intended, rather to vilify me,
then to excuse himself.

CHAP. XVII. Concerning the Covenant, wherein Faith is promised, and by virtue
whereof it is given to us.
MR. W. in the next place, propoundes this Question, Whether Faith it self be
not given to us by virtue of the Covenant made with us? Which he answers
negatively, Faith is not given us by virtue of the Covenant made with us, but
by virtue of the Covenant made with Christ; His Answer implies, that there are
two distinct Covenants of Grace, one made with Christ, and the other with us;
which will need a clearer evidence, then yet he has given us. We deny not, but
Faith, yea, and all other blessings are promised in the Covenant, which was
made with Christ, the promise of giving him a seed, and that this seed shall be
blessed, does include no less; All the Promises, both of this life, and that
which is to come, are but so many explications, of the grand promise, Genesis
12.3. All the Nations or Families of the Earth [i. e. all the Elect, whom God
has chosen out of every kindred, Rev. 5.9.
and tongue, and People, and Nation,] shall be blessed in him* Mr. W. should
have proved that these Promises were not made with us in Christ; he should have
showed us any other Covenant made with the Elect, then that which was made with
Christ. We say with the Apostle, that all the Promises of God are yea and amen
in him, 2 Cor. 1.20. and with the late Assembly, that the Covenant of Grace was
made with Christ and with us in him, With him actively, as the person that
performed all the conditions, upon which the Promises thereof are grounded;
with us passively, as the persons to whom the benefit of those Promises does
belong See M. Kend. vind. c 18. p. 7.
. If one man promise another, that in case he shall bear so many stripes,
endure so long imprisonment, or perform any other condition, be it what it
will, he will then take care of and provide for his children, does not this
promise which was made with the Father, most properly belonging unto his
children? The case is the same between Christ and us; he performed the
conditions, and we receive the benefits of the New Covenant; the same Covenant
is made with both, and consequently Faith is given us, not only by virtue of
the Covenant made with Christ, but by virtue of the Covenant made with all the
Elect; which might be further proved by many Reasons.

. 2. 1. If there be but one Covenant of Grace, which is made both with Christ
and us, then Faith is given us by virtue of the Covenant made with us: But
there is but one Covenant of Grace, Ergo. The Sequel is undeniable, I doubt not
but our adversaries will grant, that Faith is given us by virtue of the
Covenant of Grace; and the Assumption is as evident, that there is but one
Covenant of Grace; though there are many promises, yet is there but one
Covenant: For as much as all the promises have the same ground and foundation,
scil. the merit and purchase of Jesus Christ; and therefore they are said to be
yea, and amen in him. The Scripture makes mention but of two Covenants; the
Covenant of Works; and the Covenant of Grace; the former was made with the
first Adam, and his Seed; the other with the second Adam, and his Seed, and is
commonly called the New Covenant. I confess this latter has been variously
administered in the times of the Old and New Testament: In which respect it has
been looked upon by some, as two distinct Covenants, and distinguished by the
names of the Old and New Covenant. But this controversy is easily reconciled,
if it be considered, that the Old Covenant is sometimes put for the promise
veiled, and sometimes for the vail it self. (1) When it is put for the vail it
self (as doubtless it is, when it is said to have waxen old, and to vanish, to
be changed, abolished, disannulled Vid. Calv. Inst. l. 2. c. 2. sect 4.
, etc. Which things cannot be affirmed of the promise, which is an Everlasting
Covenant, and always remains one and the same) it may be said to be a distinct
Covenant from the Covenant of Grace, exhibited in the times of the New
Testament. But (2) when it is taken for the promise veiled, there is no doubt,
but it is the same in substance with that in the New Testament; for though this
Grace was then but darkly revealed, and as it were covered out of sight by the
Mosaical Administration, yet it brought upon them the same Righteousness and
Salvation, which is now enjoyed by the children of Faith, Acts 15.11. John
8.56. Gal. 3.8. and Heb. 11.14. But be the Old and New Testament
Administration, one, or two Covenants, it matters not much to our Question; it
lies on Mr. W. to prove, that there are two New Covenants, or two distinct
Covenants of Grace in the times of the New Testaments; one made with Christ,
and another with the Elect; one, in which God does promise us Faith; the other,
in which he does promise, all other Blessings, that follow Faith; which, I
suppose, he will find to be somewhat difficult.

. 3. 2. If Christ merited nothing for himself, but only for the Elect, then
all the promises made to him do belong to them, or the Covenant which was made
with him as Mediator, is made with them: But Christ merited nothing for
himself, Ergo. The Minor is the unanimous Tenent of our Protestant Divines, who
have sufficiently cleared it from the Scriptures. And for my own part, I see
not what can be rationally excepted against the consequence of the Major; for
if he merited nothing for himself, then all the promises made to him, do belong
to others: In this regard he is called The Mediator of a better Covenant, Heb.
8.6. and the Mediator of the New Covenant, Chap. 12.24. Now a Mediator does not
act for himself, but in their behalf, whose Mediator he is. I suppose Mr. W.
will not deny, but Faith is bestowed upon us by virtue of that Covenant whereof
Christ is the Mediator: Now Christ is Mediator of the Covenant made with us,
and not of a Covenant, made singly and particularly with himself, for a man
cannot properly be called a Mediator for himself. The Apostle is express, That
we obtain Faith by the same means, whereby we obtain all good things else, to
wit, By the Righteousness of Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 1.1. Ephesians. 1.3. Romans 8.32. So
that consequently it is one and the same Covenant, by virtue whereof, Faith,
and all other Spiritual Blessings are bestowed upon us. I add therefore.

. 4. 3. If Faith be given to us by virtue of that Covenant, whereby
Justification, Sanctification, Perseverance, and Glory, are bestowed upon us,
then Faith is given us by virtue of that Covenant which is made with us; But
Faith is given us by virtue of the same Covenant, wherein Justification,
Sanctification, etc. are promised and bestowed upon us, Ergo. Neither Sequel
nor Assumption, do need any proof: In the same Covenant wherein God promises
to cleanse us from our filthiness, to cause us to walk in his ways, etc. He
promises to circumcise our hearts, to write his Laws in our inward parts, and
that we shall be taught of God (i. e. Made to believe, John 6.45.) Ezekiel. 36.25,
etc. Jere. 31.34.

. 5. 4. If Faith be given to us by virtue of that Covenant which was made with
Abraham, and his Seed, then is it given by virtue of the Covenant made with us:
For the same Covenant which God made with Abraham, is made with all the
faithful to the end of the world; and therefore they are called the children of
Abraham, Gal. 3.7, 29. Now God in promising to be his God, and to be a Sun, and
a shield, etc. promised also to give Faith, whereby the Refreshing Beams of
this Sun are conveyed into the soul, and this shield is managed for our best
advantage, Ephesians. 6.16.

5. (Which was the medium I made use of, at our Conference) If Faith be given
us by virtue of the Covenant made with the House of Israel, then is it given us
by virtue of the Covenant made with us; for the House of Israel is the whole
company of Gods Elect, who are therefore called Spiritual Israel, Romans 9.6. But
Faith, or the Spirit which works Faith, is promised in the Covenant made with
the House of Israel, Jere. 31.31. Heb. 8.19.

. 6. Whereunto Mr. W. answers (1) by way of retortion, If Mr. E. (says he)
will urge the words of this Text rigorously, they would prove more then he
would have: I hope there is no hurt in that, though the place does prove more,
that does no whit invalidate its force, as to the purpose for which we alleged
it; but what is that, which it proves more? It is manifest (says he) that this
Covenant contains a promise of sending Christ into the world, to die for our
sins, as the Apostle proves, Heb. 10.14.15, 16. So that we may as well infer
from hence, that we are in Covenant with God before the death of the Mediator,
as that we are in Covenant before we believe; and then his death shall serve
not to obtain all, or any of the blessings of the Covenant, but only (as the
Socinians) to declare and confirm, etc.

If he please to admit of a Reply, we say, (1) That he mistakes the inference,
that was drawn from hence: The Proposition to be concluded, was not, That we
are in Covenant before we believe; but, that Faith, or the Spirit which works
Faith, is given us by virtue of the Covenant made with us, which is
sufficiently secured by these Texts; for if by the House of Israel be meant,
all the Elect (as undoubtedly they are) and the Spirit which works Faith, is
promised in the Covenant which is made with the House of Israel, then the
Spirit, and Faith, are given by virtue of the Covenant which is made with us,
we being in the number of Gods Elect. (2) It is not so manifest (as he
pretends) that these Texts do contain a promise of sending Christ to die for
us. The promises here mentioned, do express only what benefits do accrue to us
by the Death of Christ: I grant, that this Covenant supposes the Death of
Christ, as the only meritorious, procuring means, by which these benefits do
flow down unto us; and therefore it is said, In those days, or after those
days, meaning the days of the Son of Man, when the Messiah, whom God had
promised, should be exhibited; which in Scripture are called, The last days,
the last times, and the world to come, etc. Though the Apostle mentions the
Covenant, Heb. 10.15. it is not to prove, That God would send his Son to die,
but that being come (as these believing Hebrews acknowledged, though they saw
not the virtues of his death, as to the abolishing of other Sacrifices) he has
offered up a perfect Sacrifice, Verse 10, 12, 14. and consequently they needed
no other Sacrifice to take away sin; for otherwise God had not made such ample
promises, in reference to the times of the Messiah, as you find he has, Jere.
31. That he will remember the sins and iniquities of his people no more, etc.
For (says the Apostle) when there is such a full remission, there needs no more
offering for sin, Verse 18.

. 7. 3. Though we should grant him that this Text, Jere. 31. contains a promise
of sending Christ; what were this to the purpose, to weaken our inference, That
Faith is given by virtue of the Covenant made with us? May not God in the same
Covenant, promise both Christ and Faith? But (says Mr. W.) it will follow
then, that this Covenant was made with us, or that we were in Covenant with
God, not only before we believe, but before the death of Christ. I am so far
from looking upon it as an absurdity, that I shall readily own, and acknowledge
it as an undeniable truth, That the New Covenant was made with all the Elect in
Christ, before the foundations of the world were laid See Dr. Reynolds on Psalm.
110.4.
; it being, the fixed and immutable Will of God, concerning all those good
things, which in time are bestowed upon them; and therefore it is called an
Everlasting Covenant; 2 Samuel 23.5 Genesis 17.7. 2 Chronicles. 13.5. Psalm. 89.34. and
28. Isa. 54.9. and 55.3. Jere. 33.20.
. not only a part post, but a part ante; as it shall have no end, nor be
changed: So it had no beginning, God having from all eternity, immutably
purposed in himself, to bestow upon them all those blessings which they do
receive in time; yet we say there are more especially three moments, or periods
of time, wherein God may be said to make this Covenant with us; As (1)
immediately upon the fall of Adam, when he first published his gracious promise
of saving all his Elect by the woman's Seed, Genesis 3.15. The first Covenant being
broken and dissolved, the Lord immediately published that other Covenant which
cannot be broken; and hereunto (as has been showed) do those Scriptures
relate, Tit. 1.2. 2 Timothy 1.9. (2) At the death of Christ; because thereby all
the benefits willed to us by the Everlasting Covenant, were merited and
procured for us, the full price which was paid for them, was then exhibited;
for which cause, the New Covenant is called (...), a Testament, which was
confirmed by the death of the Testator Jesus Christ, Heb. 9.17. And the Blood
which he shed, the Blood of the Everlasting Covenant, Heb. 13.20. and the Blood
of the New Testament, Matthew. 26.28. So that his charge of Socinianism, does not
touch us; for though we do not say, That Christ procured the Covenant, or that
God should will to us those mercies which are therein promised; yet we say, the
effects of the Covenant, or the mercies themselves, were all of them obtained
by the Blood of Christ, as our deliverance from the curse, inherent holiness,
etc. (3) The Covenant is said to be made with men, when God does confer upon
men the benefits which are therein promised, or at least makes them to know and
understand their interest and propriety therein. Thus is that to be understood,
Isai. 55.3. I will make an Everlasting Covenant, i. e. I will fulfill my
Everlasting Covenant, or bestow upon you, all those mercies which I have
promised, and which my Son has purchased by shedding of his Blood. And thus we
grant, That God makes his Covenant with his people, when he gives them Faith,
when he enables them to lay hold of it, and to plead it at the Throne of Grace:
now though in this sense God may be said to take men into Covenant, when they
do believe, yet will it not follow that the Spirit and Faith are not given by
virtue of the Covenant which is made with us; so that his retortion is
pitifully unsuccessefull, it gives not the least wound to the cause which we
maintain.

. 8. The second branch of his Answer is, That upon a most serious perusal of
these Texts, I find them so contradictory to Mr. Eyres purpose, that I cannot
but wonder what he means to shelter his Opinion under the protection of it: I
must needs say, that after a most serious perusing of his papers, I cannot be
persuaded to be of his mind, to think that these places are contradictory to
the purpose, for which I brought them; but rather that they do give in full
evidence to the Proposition which I was to prove, viz. That the spirit, which
works Faith is given us by virtue of the Covenant made with us; But how does
Mr. W. prove the contradiction? We shall find (says he) in these words three
things of distinct consideration; the Conclusion of which is the only support
of this feeble Argument. I cannot but wonder (and so I dare say does the
impartial Reader) that Mr. W. should say the Text is contradictory to my
purpose, and yet confess, that it affords support unto my Argument; for though
no more then that, which he calls, the Conclusion of the Text does afford it
shelter, yet is that sufficient to clear it from the guilt of a contradiction.
But what are the three things which he finds in these Texts to ground his
charge on? 1. (says he) There is the matter and blessings of the Covenant on
Gods part, I will be their God and they shall be my People; in which words, as
many blessings temporal, and eternal are promised; so peculiarly pardon of
sin, etc. 2. There is expressed the bond and condition of it, on our part, and
that is Faith, which is signified in those words, of putting Gods Laws in our
minds, and writing them in our hearts. In these two things is the tenor, and
formality of the new Covenant; they that believe, the Lord will be their God,
and they shall be his People. But 3. (says he) there is also a promise that God
will work this condition, by which men shall have an interest in this
Covenant, and a right and title to the blessings of it; I will put my Laws into
their minds, i. e. I will give them faith; which Faith is not promised as an
effect of the Covenant already made, but as the means by which we are brought
into Covenant, and thereby invested in a right to all the blessings of it, etc.
should I grant all that he says, yet would it not one whit weaken our
Assertions, that this Covenant is made with us, who are meant by the house of
Israel; and that the Spirit which works Faith, is promised in this Covenant,
which Mr. W. cannot deny, though he would thrust it behind the door, saying,
that it is promised in the Covenant, but not as a part of the Covenant; I might
easily show, that there are not so many lines as mistakes, in this short
discourse; I profess I cannot but wonder at his boldness, that he durst for
his advantage to wrest, and falsify the words and tenor of the Covenant,
excluding the promise of Faith from the matter and blessings of it, which is
expressed more then once in these few words, as in this clause, ver. 33. I will
put my Law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts, by his own
confession: And in that also ver. 34. They shall know me, which our Savior
expounds of believing in him. But to take things as they lie.

1 We deny that the whole matter, and all the benefits of the Covenant on Gods
part are confined to these words, I will be their God, and they shall be my
people; for though omne bonum, est in summo bono, and when this promise is put
alone, it may comprehend as much as Mr. W. speaks, yet when other promises are
joined with it, it denotes on ^^^ticular blessing; either it relates to the
formal part of man's happiness, which consists in the fruition and enjoyment
of God, or the knowledge of our interest and propriety in him Dr. Stough. Ser.
on Ps. 4.6.
; Thus, I will be their God, is as much as, they shall know that I am their God,
and that they are my people Hos. 2.23. Cant. 2.16.
; Or else, I will be their God, etc. imports as much as, I will protect them,
and they shall worship me Calv. Diodate.
. But say this Promise be as large as Mr. W. would make it, though all
blessings temporal and eternal be more generally included in it, yet that
hinders not, but the other promises annexed thereunto, do also exhibit the
matter and blessings of the New Covenant Vid. Calv. i^ Jer. 32.38, 39.
. The same things often times in the Scripture are expressed, first more
generally, and then more particularly.

. 10. 2. It is apparently false, that in these words, I will put my Laws in
their minds, and write them in their hearts, is expressed the bond and
condition of the Covenant on our part; for the words are a promise, and not a
precept; the Lord declares what he himself will do for them. If Mr. W. sees a
condition in these words, he has found more then all the Divines that ever I
met with. Dr. Twisse (his Predecessor) in his Answer to Arminius's Preface
Sect. 8. not. 6.
, reciting the tenor of the Covenant, as it is in this place of Jeremy, Isa.
32. and Ezekiel. 36. challenges him to show vel levissimam mentionem conditionis,
Dr. Preston Sermon. 2. of Faith p 38.
speaking of the Covenant which God has made with his Elect, says, that it is
Absolute, and not conditional; for which he alleges this place of Jeremy,
Ezekiel. 36. etc. A learned man of the late Assembly in a Sermon before the
Parliament then sitting Mr. Strong Ser. on 1 Samuel 2.30.
, declared, That all the promises of the New Covenant are absolute, not only
citra meritum, but citra conditionem, without any pre-required conditions of
us; amongst many other places he cites this Text. Besides this, I might add
abundance more. But I believe Mr. Baxter is instar omnium with Mr. W. Now he
acknowledges Append p 41, 42.
, that this Text. with the like, does express an absolute Covenant. Mr. W.
might as well say, that the bond and condition of the Covenant on our part is
expressed in these words, they shall be my people, or in the other clause, I
will be their God, interpreting it by that of Hosea 2.23. They shall say, I am
their God; which one (I remember) would have to be the condition of the
Covenant on our part; so that according to their (...) Interpretations, the New
Covenant shall consist only of conditions, or of precepts imposed upon us,
without so much as one Promise of mercy to us; and consequently, the Covenant
of Grace shall exhibit no Grace at all; or at most, much less then the
Covenant of Works does. If the Lord had meant that these words, I will write my
Laws in their hearts, etc. should be the bond of the Covenant on our part, he
would have expressed it in such a manner, If my Laws be written in your
hearts, I will be your God; the words are plainly a promise of Sanctification,
which is one principal benefit of the New Covenant.

. 11. Whereas he adds, That God does here promise to work Faith, which Faith is
not promised as an effect of the Covenant, but as the means, by which we are
brought into Covenant; It being so crudely asserted, a bare denial might serve
the turn. But (1) I shall appeal to the indifferent Reader, whether it does not
sound very harshly, That the same words should be formally, both a precept and
a promise, and that God should require a condition of us, and yet promise to
work it in us? How shall we distinguish between precepts and promises? Mr. W,
may be pleased to consider, what some Grand Assertors of Conditions have said
thereof Sup. c. 14. sect. 9.
. (2) I would ask, whether this promise of Faith be not a part of the New
Covenant? All the promises of God do belong, either to the Covenant of Works,
or to the Covenant of Grace: It is no part of the Covenant of Works. Ergo, It
is a part of the Covenant of Grace. Now if the promise be a part of the New
Covenant, the thing promised is an effect of the Covenant; or a benefit given,
by virtue of it. (3) I would ask, whether the promise of Faith, be not an
effect of Christ's death? If it be, then is it an effect of the Covenant already
made; for all the effects of his death, are effects of the Covenant, which was
confirmed by his death; who, for this cause is called the Covenant, Isa. 42.6.
and 49.8. implying, That all the benefits of the Covenant, are the fruits and
purchases of his death; and that Christ has not purchased any thing for us,
but what is promised in the Covenant; the effects of the Covenant, and the
effects of Christ's death are of equal latitude. (4) The Scripture no where
affirms, That Faith is promised as a means to bring us into Covenant, or to
invest us with a right and title thereunto. That which gives men interest in
the Covenant, is the good pleasure of God, willing those blessings to them; and
the purchase which Christ has made in their behalf, who has performed
whatsoever was necessary by Divine constitution, in order to our having of
them. We grant, That Faith is the means whereby we come to know our interest in
the Covenant, and in all the benefits thereof: But their saying, That hereby we
have, or do obtain our interest and title to the Covenant, has not any ground
that I find in the Written Word. If any shall infer it from hence, because it
is said, Believe, and thou shall be saved; they may as well make Baptism,
Sanctification, Perseverance, etc. (to which the promise of Salvation is
sometimes annexed) means, to bring us into Covenant, or to invest us with a
right and title to the benefits of it, and consequently no man shall have any
interest in the Covenant as long as he lives, and till these conditions be
performed. To conclude, If the promise of Faith be a part of the Covenant, (as
has been showed) then is it not a means to bring us into Covenant, or to
invest us with a title to the benefits of it, because it is impossible that the
same thing should be the means, or cause of it self.

CHAP. XVIII. Wherein Mr. Woodbridges Exposition of the New Covenant,
(mentioned Jere. 31.33. and in other places) is further examined.
THe Tenor of the New Covenant, in the Prophet (whose words are punctually
cited by the Apostle, Heb. 8.) runs thus, This is the Covenant that I will make
with the House of Israel; after those days, says the Lord, I will put my Law
in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts, and will be their God, and
they shall be my people; and, etc. But now Mr. W. renders it thus, [ This is
the Covenant which I will make with the House of Israel; when I shall write my
Laws in their hearts, I will be their God, etc. or, This is the Covenant, which
I will make, says the Lord, that gives his Laws into their minds, and
writes them in their hearts, etc.] I know not what can be called wresting of
the Scripture, if this be not: If men may take the liberty, to chop and change,
to add or diminish from the Word, at their pleasure, nothing can certainly be
concluded thence; nay, the Scripture might be made a shelter for the foulest
Errors. It savors not of a spirit, that trembles at the Word, and believes that
threatening, Revel. 22.18. to make so bold with the Oracles of God. The word [
when] is neither in, nor agreeable to the Hebrew, or Greek Text, though he
would make his Reader believe, that it is in both. The Verbs in the first
clause, are not in the Present, but Future tense, as in the rest which follow.
Besides his Paraphrase, charge the Holy Ghost, with a gross tautalogy, if not
a flat contradiction. The time of making this Covenant is signified in these
words, [ After those days] which undoubtedly ought to be referred unto the days
of the Messiah, in opposition to the times before, when the Grace of this
Covenant was not so clearly revealed; so that it was needless he should add [
When I put my Laws, etc.] And if God makes not his Covenant with Spiritual
Israel, till he writes his Laws in their hearts, then the former clause [ After
those dayes] must either stand for nothing, or else imply a falsehood. In a
word, The unsoundness of this gloss, does appear from hence, that these words
are not only here, but in many other places, mentioned as a distinct promise
of the New Covenant, and not as a bare connotation of the time, or a
Periphrasis of the person, that makes the Covenant, as Mr. W. carries it. See
Deuteronomy. 30.6. Ezekiel. 36.26, 27. Jere. 32.38, 39. where that promise, which Mr. W.
calls, The matter or substance of the Covenant on Gods part, is put first, and
the other which he calls the Condition, is made as it were, the Consequence of
the former.

. 2. The Scriptures he has brought to countenance his new found interpretation
of the Covenant, will by no means shelter it; as Jere. 24.7. I will give them a
heart to know me, that I am the Lord, and they shall be my people, and I will
be their God; for they shall return unto me with their whole heart. [Where
(says he) the condition on the peoples part of the Lords being their God, is,
their returning with their whole heart.] The affirmation is not so clear, as
not to need a proof; that promise, I will give them a heart to know me, is (as
has been showed,) one principal blessing of the New Covenant, the immediate
effect whereof is, Men's returning unto God with their whole heart. Now to call
their returning unto God, the condition of Gods being their God, is as unhappy
a mistake, as his, That set the Cart before the horse. Could they have returned
to God, unless God had returned to them 1 John 4.10, 19.
? Are not Faith and Repentance, the fruits of our Reconciliation, by the blood
of Christ? God having given us his Son, has with him given us all things else,
Romans 8.32. Mr. ^alvin calls this blessing, of Gods being our God, Causam and
principium omnium bonorum, i. e. The cause and fountain of all other blessings;
and particularly, of the renewing of our hearts, and our returning unto God.
Now the consequences and Effects of a Blessing, are not the Conditions of it.

. 3. His next Allegation from Heb. 10.14, etc. has the fate, to fall as short
of the mark, as the former did. For the Apostles scope there, is not to show in
what order and method, the benefits of the Covenant are bestowed upon us, but
that there needs no other Sacrifice for sin, besides the Sacrifice which Christ
has offered; which he proves, because God in that Covenant, which he promised
to make with his people in the times of the New Testament, declares, That he
will not only give them a new heart, but their sins and iniquities shall not
be remembered any more. Now where there is no more remembrance of sin, there
needs no more Sacrifice for sin; so that the words expressed, are sufficient to
complete the sense without understanding of [ then he saith] or [ then it
followeth] which Mr. W. has added in the close of the sixteenth Verse. We may
take them as they lie, from Verse the fifteenth. Whereof (to wit, of Christ's
perfect Sacrifice, mentioned Verse. 14.) the Holy Ghost is a witness to us; for
after he, i. e. the Holy Ghost, had said before, This is the Covenant that I
will make with them, Pareus. Ion. s. D^. k^o^.
after those days, (to wit, of the Old Testament, which are now expired) The
Lord says, (viz. The Holy Ghost, who is the Lord Jehovah, and with the Father,
and Son, the Author of the New Covenant.) I will put my Laws into their hearts,
and in their minds will I write them; and their sins and iniquities will I
remember no more: So that I say, there is no need that either of those clauses
[ Then he says, etc.] should be foisted in between the 16 and 17 Verses. It
seems to me, That the Copulative [ And] is set as a bar, to keep it forth,
showing that the words in the 17 Verse, ought to follow immediately upon the
sixteenth. I grant that the promise of Remission, is one of the most special,
and noble Blessings, contained in that general promise, I will be their God;
yet it does not follow, that Regeneration or Inherent holiness is required or
promised, as the means or qualification, to obtain this Blessing. Pareus his
Note upon the place is very sound, That the Apostle here, does ground the
promise of remission of sins, Vid. Calv in loc.
upon that perfect oblation which Christ has offered, and not upon works of
Sanctification, which (according to Mr. Woodbridges Doctrine) is the immediate
principle, from whence it follows.

. 4. His next Assertion [ That in the New Covenant, the giving of the first
Grace, is always promised, not as a part of the Covenant, but as a means and
qualification on man's part, for his entrance into Covenant,] is justly
obnoxious unto more then one Exception.

1. The work of Conversion, or the renewing of our hearts, i^ unfitly called
The first Grace; For (1) to speak properly, the first Grace, is that, which is
Grace indeed Dow^h of Justif. l 3. c. 2.
, to wit, the Everlasting Love, Favor, and Good-pleasure of God toward his
people; for this is the rise and fountain of all those mercies, which we
receive in time, yea, of Christ himself, John 3.16. Or (2) if by Grace, we
understand the Fruits and Effects of this Grace, then certainly the precedenc^
or priority must be given unto Jesus Christ, for whose sake all other blessings
are bestowed upon us, Ephesians. 1.3. Or else (3) if by Grace we understand the
Fruits and Effects of Christ's death, or the benefits which are freely given us
for his sake, even in this sense, Inherent Sanctification is unduly put in the
first place, which is a consequent, both of Justification and Adoption, Gal.
4.5, 6. Though it be promised in that place of Jeremy, before Remission of
sin^, yet in other places it is put after it; as Ezekiel. 36.25, 26. Jere. 32.38,
39. The Reason why this promise is sometimes put first, may probably be,
because the Grace of Sanctification is most apt to affect our senses, we do
apprehend and perceive it, before we come to know our Justification.

. 5. 2. It is utterly false, That the giving of a new heart, is not promised as
a part of the Covenant; but as a means on man's part, for his entrance into
Covenant: For (1) the Scripture no where affirms it; and it is weakly concluded
hence, because it is sometimes mentioned, first in the recital of the Covenant,
which is all he has to pretend for this notion, seeing that in other places,
the promise of Sanctification, follows that of Justification; from whence he
may as well conclude, that Justification is promised not as a part of the
Covenant, but as a means to entitle us unto Sanctification; so that not only,
the promise of Faith, but of Remission also shall be excluded from being a part
of the Covenant. (2) The promise of a new heart, includes not only the first
act of Faith and Repentance, but the continuance and increase of these Gifts;
so that either he must say, that all the Promises of Sanctification, which are
included therein, are no part of the Covenant; or that the same promise is both
a means to bring us into Covenant; and a part of the Covenant, i. e. it is a
part, and no part. I must confess, that I never yet met with that man, who had
the forehead to deny, that the promise of Faith, and Repentance, is a part of
the New Covenant. (3) It seems to me an undeniable truth, that the promises of
Sanctification, as well as of Justification, are parts of the Covenant,
considering (1) that they have the same ground and foundation, to wit, the
merit and purchase of Jesus Christ; Christ has merited Faith and Repentance,
no less then remission of sins. Now whatsoever Christ has purchased, the
Covenant promises: All the effects of his death, are equally parts of the New
Covenant. (2) Both these promises have the same end and design, viz. The glory
of God. Faith and Repentance, are not promised only subserviently for our
benefit, but ultimately for the praise of his glory, Tit. 2.14. 1 These. 4.3.
(3) They are promised in the same manner, as distinct, and not as subordinate
benefits; he does not say, I will write my Laws in their hearts, that I may
pardon their sins and iniquities. But, I will write my Laws, etc. and their
sins and iniquities, I will remember no more.

. 6. 3. It sounds harshly, That God promises Faith, as a means on our part, to
bring us into Covenant; for if God does promise to bestow Faith, it cannot
properly be called a means on our part, it were a means on our part, if we
performed it our selves, and by our own strength, as the condition required of.
Adam, should have been. For the removing of this rub, I shall make it to
appear; that in the New Covenant, there is no condition required on our part,
to give us a right, and title to the blessings of it: But before we proceed, we
will give the Reader a brief account of those other Scriptures which Mr. W.
has alleged to prove, That Faith is promised, not as a part of the Covenant,
but as a means on our part, to obtain the remission of sins: All which I find
have the same misfortune as the rest, not to be able to bring forth the
conclusion, which his fancy has begotten on them.

That in Ezekiel* 36.25, 26* 27, 28. makes quite against him; for there the Lord
first promises to justify us, in those phrases of pouring out clean water
upon us, and of cleansing us from all our filthinesses, Verse 25* and then to
renew, or sanctify us, Verse. 26, 27. So that there is no color to infer from
hence, that Sanctification, or any part thereof, is promised as a means to
intitie us to Justification.

. 7. The other two Texts, are much to the same purpose, scil. Ezekiel. 11.19, 20.
and chap. 27.23, 24, 26, 27. where the Lord after he had promised unto his
people many particular blessings (as that he would give them a new heart, take
away their stony heart, make them walk in his Statutes and Ordinances, that
they should no more defile themselves with Idols, that David, i. e. Christ,
should be their King and Shepherd, that his Tabernacle should be with them* i.
e. He would dwell in them, and walk in them, 2 Cor. 6.16.) He tells them, That
he will be their God, and they shall be his people; from whence Mr. W. would
gather, That God promises Faith, not as a part of the Covenant, but as a means
to bring us into Covenant, that God may be our God. How rational this Deduction
is, let the Render judge, for if that promise, I will be their God, must be
taken exclusively; so that the promises preceding, are no part of the Covenant,
then the promises of Justification, Sanctification, Perseverance, etc. must be
excluded from being parts of the Covenant. If he says, that it only excludes
Faith, I would ask quo jure, what reason is there* that it should exclude
Faith, more then the other promises preceding? If it includes the rest, why not
this? But to draw to a conclusion, we say, that this promise, I will be their
God, and they shall be my people, may be taken, either (1) more generally, as
comprehending all good things whatsoever, as if the Lord after the enumeration
of many particular benefits, had summed up all in this. I will be their God, q.
d. They may expect as much good from me, as the living God can bestow upon his
people, even this that has been mentioned, and all things else; and in this
sense the promise of Faith, or the Spirit which works Faith, is included in it;
or (2) it may be taken more restrictively, as noting some particular benefit
and privilege distinct from the rest, as that they shall worship him, and he
will protect and provide for them; or else, that they shall not only have an
interest in God, but that they shall know it, and live in the comfort of it.

. 8. In the next place, Mr. W. offers me his service, to new mold my Argument,
and to cast it into a better form, as thus, They concerning whom God has
promised, that he will give them Faith, they are in Covenant before they
believe; but concerning the Elect, God has promised that he will give them
Faith, Ergo. But pace tanti viri, I shall not accept his courtesy, if he has
any mind to it, as I have framed it, the Law is open, he may try his skill;
only he may be pleased to remember, that these Texts, Jere. 31.8. Heb. 8. were
not brought to prove that we are in Covenant before we believe; but that the
Spirit which works Faith, is given by virtue of the Covenant made with us: As
for that Argument which from these Texts he has advanced against us, together
with the Auxiliaries, which he has placed in the rear, I shall presently
attend their motion, having first given in my evidence, to the cause depending,
That the New Covenant is not conditional, and that in it, God does not require
any restipulation from us, to entitle us to the blessings of it: The contrary
Assertion, I conceive, is the (...) of his whole discourse: For if there be no
condition, or restipulation required in the New Covenant, there will be no
need, to make Faith the mears of our entrance into Covenant, nor any absurdity
in saying that our Justification in the sight of God precedes Faith.

CHAP. XIX. Wherein is shown, That in the New Covenant there are no conditions
required of us, to invest us with a Right and Title, to the blessings of it.
BEfore I do give the Reasons of this Assertion, I must crave the Readers
patience, whilst I tell him (1) what I mean by the New Covenant, and (2) what
I understand by a condition.

1. By the New Covenant, I mean that engagement which God has laid upon
himself, to bestow on them for whom Christ has died, all good which is
commensurate to their nature, and by virtue whereof all blessings Corporal,
Spiritual, and Eternal, do flow down unto them. I call it an Engagement,
because God by promising makes himself a debtor, though not to us, yet unto
himself; being bound in justice to perform his Word and Promise. There are two
principal Engagements, which God has laid upon himself, in order to our
Eternal Happiness, to one of which all his promises may be reduced. The first
is that Covenant which he made with the first Adam in the time of his
innocence; wherein God promised us life, upon condition of our perfect
obedience: This is called a Covenant of Works, because the effects thereof do
depend upon our works; the promise is not in force, nor have we any right to
the Blessings, until all those works are performed which are here required. Now
this Covenant (says the Apostle) became weak through the flesh, i. e. It was
altogether unable to give us life, by reason of our default, and not performing
the condition required of us; we have no benefit at all by this engagement, and
therefore the Lord made another Covenant with the second Adam, that upon the
making of his soul an offering for sin, he would give unto his Seed, viz. All
the Elect, Eternal life, i. e. All good things whatsoever which they stand in
need of. Now this we call The New Covenant, because it succeeded in the place
of the other; and the Covenant of Grace, because all the effects thereof, do
flow down unto us, merely from the favor of God, and the merit of Christ. All
the mercies we receive, they are the fruits and effects of this engagement,
Zech. 9.11. It is the only plea we can use to God, both for the things of this
life, and that which is to come; and by virtue hereof, we may claim and
confidently expect from him all things whatsoever which we stand in need of,
and are good for us. Now I say, that Promise or Covenant by virtue whereof, we
obtain both Grace and Glory, good things, present and future, is not
conditional to us; I say, to us; for to Christ it was conditional, though to us
it be free; to him it was a Covenant of Works, though to us it be a Covenant of
pure Grace; there is not so much as one blessing does descend to us, but he
has dearly bought it, even with the price of his own blood; for which cause he
is called the Mediator, Witness, and Surety of the New Covenant.

. 2. 2. When we say the New Covenant is not conditional, we understand a
condition in its proper and genuine sense, as the Jurists use it, in reference
to men's contracts and bargains. A condition (says Dr. Cawel Interpreter verbo,
condition.
*) is a rate, manner, or Law annexed to men's acts (or grants) staying and
suspending the same, and making them uncertain, whether they shall take effect,
or no. And our English Papinian J. Cook on Littleton, l 3. c. 5.
, Conditio dicitur cum quid, in casum incertum, qui potest tendere ad esse, aut
non esse, confertur. To the same purpose, the Expositor of Law terms Verbo
Condition.
, A condition is a restraint or bridle, annexed and joined to a promise, by the
performance of which, it is ratified and takes effect, and by the
nonperformance of it, it becomes void, the person to whom it is made shall
receive no commodity or advantage by it: Hence is that Maxim amongst Lawyers,
Conditio ad impleri debet, priusquam sequatur effectus, i. e. The condition
must be performed, before the Grant or Promise becomes valid. In this sense we
say* The Covenant which God made with Adam was conditional, God annexed to the
promise of Life, the condition of Obedience. Do this, and thou shall live; The
stability, and success of that promise, did depend upon his performing of the
condition; he failing in his part, the promise became void. Now we deny, that
the blessings of the New Covenant, do depend upon this, or any other condition
to be performed by us. Lawyers do distinguish of a twofold condition, (1)
Antecedent, and (2) Consequent. The Antecedent condition being performed, does
get, or gain the thing, or estate made upon condition; the Consequent condition
does keep and continue it. As for instance, If I fell a man a Farm, on
condition he shall pay me five hundred pounds present, and forty shillings,
nay, be it but six pence per annum for the future; the payment of the five
hundred pounds is the Antecedent condition, which gives him possession of the
Farm; the forty shillings or six pence per annum is the Subsequent condition,
and that continues his possession; and if he fail in this latter, the Estate is
forfeited, and in Law I may re-enter upon the Farm, as if no such bargain had
been made between us. Now we say further, That the Blessings of the New
Covenant require not only no Antecedent, but no Subsequent condition to be
performed by us; there is nothing on our parts that procures our Right and
Interest, nor yet that continues and maintains our interest in them; The Lord
Jesus is both the Author and the Finisher of our Salvation; it is by, and
through him, that we are made Sons, and do continue Sons; are made Righteous,
and do continue Righteous; that we Obtain, and do Enjoy all the effects of the
New Covenant.

. 3. I am not ignorant that the word Condition is sometimes taken improperly,
for that which is merely an Antecedent, though it contributes not the least
efficiency, either natural, or moral, toward the production of that which
follows it: A condition properly taken, is a moral efficient cause, which
produces its effect by virtue of some compact, agreement, or constitution
between persons, omnis conditio antecedens est effectiva, a condition properly
so called, is effective of that which is promised upon condition. Now I say,
not only conditions in a proper sense, but all certain and constant
Antecedents (though they are not expressed or included in their Federal
constitution, so as that the Promise does depend upon them) may in a vulgar
sense, be called conditions of those things that follow them; and in this sense
our Divines do commonly call one benefit of the Covenant a condition of the
another; as that which is given first, of that which is given after. Thus Dr.
Twisse Vind. l. 1. part 3. sect. 7. ^. 1. and alib. saepe.
makes inherent holiness to be causa dispositiva, or the sine qua non, (not of
Justification) but of Salvation, or Glorification, because the one always
precedes the other: Many other do express themselves in the same manner. It is
evident that some benefits of the New Covenant in their execution and
accomplishment do follow others; though we have a right unto them all at once
(for as much as that flows immediately from the purchase which Christ has
made) yet we have not possession of them all at once, but in that order and
manner as God is pleased to bestow them: Christ has procured both Grace and
Glory for his Elect, yet he gives Grace, i. e. Gracious Quallifications, as
Knowledge, Faith, Love, etc. before he brings them to the possession of Glory;
in which sense, I conceive, it is that the Scripture annexeth Salvation unto
Faith, and other works of inherent Holiness, Matthew. 5. pr. Heb. 12.14. etc.
because these are certain and infallible Antecedents in all that shall be saved
See Down. of Justif. p. 471.
; none (who live to years of understanding) are saved, but they that do
believe the Gospel, and show forth the fruits of it in a suitable
conversation: If in this sense only, Faith and Repentance be called conditions
of the Covenant, to wit, because they are wrought in all those that do enjoy
the full effect of the Covenant, I will not contend.

. 4, Yet I think it fit rather to forbear this expression, (1) Because it is so
improper, to call a part of the Covenant, the condition of it, Chamier, though
he often uses the expression, yet he acknowledges that Faith is called a
condition, verbis minus propriis Tom. 3. l. 15. ^. 3. sect. 27.
; And a little after, Ib. c. 5. sect. 16
Fidei conditio, non est antecedens sed consequens, non est causa salutis, sed
instrumentum apprehendendi gratiam, i. e. Faith is not a proper antecedent
condition, but an improper or consequent condition, it is not a cause of
salvation, but only the instrument whereby we receive and apply it. Mr.
Rutherford himself, though he calls them Libertines and Antinomians, who say
the Covenant of Grace is not conditional, yet almost in the same breath he
has let fall these words Trial of Faith ^ 61.
: To buy without money, and to have a sight of sin, is the condition of our
having the water of Life, but the truth is, it is an improper condition, for
both wages and work is Free Grace. I confess improper locutions ought to be
borne with, when they serve to illustrate truth; but this I conceive does
exceedingly darken it. (2) Because of the advantage which the adversaries of
the Gospel do make of this expression; were most of the ancient Fathers now
alive, to see what use the Papists and others do make of their unwary sayings,
to patronize their Errors, I am persuaded, they would fill the world with their
retractations and apologies. Have we not cause then to be careful in this
matter, when we see so many profligated Errors, as Free Will, and Universal
Redemption, sheltering themselves under this expression? But (3) That which
moves me most, is compassion to our vulgar hearers; who when they hear men say,
that Faith, Repentance, etc. are conditions of the Covenant, understand it no
otherwise then in the most common acception, and as the term Condition is used
in reference to men's Contracts, and as Obedience was the condition of the first
Covenant; whereby, (as Luther has observed Com. on Gal. 4.
) they live still in bondage, not daring to take hold of the Promise, because
they doubt whether they have the condition; All their endeavors after Faith,
and Holiness are but mercinary and selfish, they would not do the work, but to
get the wages.

. 5. But this is not the matter, that is now in question, Our difference is not
about words, but things, The Reader I suppose is sufficiently informed in what
sense we deny, that the New Covenant is conditional, to wit, in that manner as
the first Covenant was, which was properly conditional: and this persuasion I
cannot but adhere to (notwithstanding all that I have seen or heard to the
contrary) That in the New Covenant wherein God has promised Life and Salvation
unto sinners, for whom Christ has shed his blood; and by virtue whereof they
do obtain all good things present and future, there is no condition required of
them to obtain or procure the blessings that are therein promised; For though
God does bestow upon us one blessing before another, yet he gives not any one
for the sake of another, but all of them (even to our final sitting down in
Glory) are given us freely for the sake of Christ; Glory it self is not only
not for, but not according to our works, as the principle or rule, by which God
proportions his reward, but according to his own Mercy and Grace. My Reasons
for the Thesis are.

. 6. 1. Because in all those places, wherein the nature or tenor of the
New Covenant is declared, there is not (as Dr. Twisse Sup. c* 17. sect. 10.
has observed) any mention at all of the least condition, as Jer. 31.33. Ezekiel.
36.25. etc. Hos. 2.18, 19, 20. in all which places, with the like, God
promises to do all in them and for them; upon the last of those Texts
Zanchius observes Tom. 5. fol^ in Hos. p. 42. and 55.
, Non ait si non resipueris, recipiam te in gratiam, and desponsabo, sed
absolute [ego te desponsabo] est igitur absolutissima promissio, qua sine ulla
condition promittit* Deus, s^ s^um populum, in gratiam recepturum, and
servaturum, etc. i. e. He does not say, if thou will repent, I will receive
thee into favor, and betroth thee; but absolutely [I will betroth thee etc.] It
is therefore a most absolute Covenant, wherein God, without any condition, does
promise that he will receive his people into favor, and save them. The same
Author in another place De natura Dei in meo. p. 491.
, speaking of the Covenant which God made with Abraham, Genesis 17.7. It is to be
noted (says he) that this Promise is altogether free, absolute, and without
any condition, which he proves by two Arguments, one of which is, Quoniam
nullam plane in verbis foederis conditionem legimus, i. e. Because in the words
of the Covenant we find no condition. And long before him that noble Champion
of Grace against the Pelagians, Prosper of Aquitan De Vocat. Genesis l. 1. c. 9.
(who lived about the year 445.) Manet prorsus and quotidie impletur quod
Abrahae dominus sine condition promisit sine lege donavit: The Covenant (says
he) is still in force, and is daily fulfilled, which the Lord promised unto
Abraham, without any condition, and established without a restipulation. Now if
any shall say that these, and such like Texts do not comprize the whole, but
only a part of the New Covenant, because God does not say, it is the whole
Covenant. I Answer, (1) That it is a mere shift, like that of the Papists
Bellar. apud. Ames T. 4. l. 5. c 4. sect 9.
against Justification by Faith alone, because the word [ Alone] is not found
in those Scriptures, which the Protestants do bring to prove it. Our Divines
answer, it is there virtually, and by necessary consequence, though not
formally or literally; So say I, when the Lord says expressly, This is my
Covenant; It is all one, as if he had said, This is my whole Covenant. Let our
Adversaries show us one place, where any conditional Promise is called the New
Covenant, either in whole or in part. (2) That which they would make the
Condition of the Covenant on our part, is expressly promised to us, no less
then any other blessing; and their saying that it is promised in the Covenant,
but not as a part of the Covenant, has been sufficiently disproved before.

. 7. 2. Because all those Covenants which God made to prefigure this Covenant,
were free and absolute, without any Condition; therefore the Covenant it self,
which was figured by them, is much more so: It is not to be questioned but the
substance has as much Grace as the shadow. Now I say in those tipicall
Covenants, which God made with Noah, Abraham, Phineas, David, etc. there are no
Restipulations Vid. Jun. orat. 2 de foed.
. The Covenant with Noah, does not run like that with Adam, Do this, and live,
but, I will not destroy the earth, etc. Genesis 9.11. I confess Rivet In loc.
says, the condition on Noah's part, was ut just, and intigre ambularet. But
(1) God does not say so; the Lord does not say, I will make this Covenant with
thee, if thou will walk uprightly. (2) This Covenant was made not only with
Noah, but with every living creature, Verse. 12. Now sensitive creatures could
not perform any such Condition. (3) If the benefit of that Covenant had
depended upon Noah's upright walking, then upon Noah's fall, V. 21. the World
should have been drowned again; as death entered into the world upon the
nonperformance of Adams condition. The Covenant with Phinehas, Number. 25. is not
like that which God made with Eli, which was but a conditional and uncertain
Covenant, 1 Samuel 2.30. So the Covenant which God made with David, concerning
the Kingdom, is not like the Covenant which he made with Saul, which was
quickly void, because it depended upon his obedience, 1 Samuel 13.13, 14. which
David's did not; and therefore the Covenant which God made with David, is called
The sure mercies of David, Isa. 54.3. God promised mercies unto Saul as well as
unto David, but they were not sure mercies Preston of Gods Immutab. p. 86.
, because they were conditional, they were promised upon conditions to be
performed by him; but the Covenant with David, was sure and steadfast, Psalm.
89.28. because it depended not upon conditions on his part; and therefore,
though he started aside as well as Saul, yet the Covenant made with him was not
thereupon dissolved, and broken.

. 8. 3. Because if there were any condition required in the New Covenant to
entitle us to the Blessings of it, it would not be a Covenant of pure Grace; so
that the asserting of conditions in the New Covenant, does by necessary
consequence overthrow the nature of it; for as Austine has observed, Grace is
not grace, unless it be every way free, and the Apostle before him, Romans 11.6.
If by grace, then is it no more of works, otherwise grace is no more grace; but
if it be of works, then is it no more grace. Our Salvation is ascribed to
Grace, not only inclusively, but exclusively, Ephesians. 2.8, 9, Tit. 2.5. All the
Blessings of the New Covenant are called Gifts, Romans 5.17, 18. and 6.23. and
gifts that are given freely, 1 Cor. 2.12. Romans 3.24. To give a thing freely,
and conditionally, are contradictories; he that parts with any thing upon
conditions, does as it were sell it. The works and conditions which men
perform, in the Prophets phrase, are their money. Isai. 55.1, 2. A condition
performed, makes the thing covenanted for a due debt, which the promiser is
bound to give; so that if the Blessings of the Covenant, did depend upon
conditions, they would not be of grace, but debt; and men by performing those
conditions, would be, at least in part, their own Saviors. Now what can be
imagined more derogatory to the Grace of God?

Object.
Object. True may some say, it would derogate from the grace of God, if we
attributed such a meritoriousness unto these conditions, as the Papists do unto
works; but we do not do so. To which I answer, Answ.
(1) That the Papists assert no other works and conditions to be necessary to
Justification and Salvation, then what our Adversaries do. (2) Neither Papists
nor Arminians do ascribe any more meritoriousness to works, then our opponents:
They grant there is such an infinite distance and disproportion between the
Blessing promised, and the conditions required of us, that in strictness of
Justice they do not deserve it, only expacto, seeing God is pleased to promise
so largely upon condition of so small a pittance of service, we may be said to
merit by performing the condition; and in this sense, Mr. Baxter Aphor. These.
26.
will tell you, That the performers of a condition, may be said to merit the
reward. The Papists never pleaded for merit upon any other account; Mr. Calvin
Qui belle se absurda omnia evasisse pu^arunt, cum dicerent, non intrinseca sua
bonitate valere opera, ad salutem c^merendam, sed expac^^ ratione. Calv. Inst.
l. 3. c. 17. sect 3.
observed long ago, how much they please themselves with this simple shift,
supposing that hereby they shall evade whatsoever Arguments are brought against
them: Though Mr. B. seems to mince the matter, calling his conditions but a
sine qua non, and a Pepper corn Aphor. These. 23. p. 127.
, etc. he attributes as much, if not more to works, then the Papists,
Arminians, and Socinians, have done; the Papists will not say, That works do
merit in a strict and proper sense. Smalzius Apud. Stegman. in Photin.
calls their fides formata, a mere sine qua non; and a known friend to the
Remonstrants Doctrine amongst our selves Dr. Hamm. 9 Ser. p 140.
, dubs it with no better name, then a slight, unconsiderable, despicable
Pepper corn, most pitifully unproportionable, to the great rent which God might
require, and to the infinite treasure of glory he makes over to us: And again,
That mite of Obedience, Faith and Love. But now Mr. B. goes a step beyond them,
in that he ascribes a meritoriousness to works, which the Arminians, and
Socinians have not dared to do. (3) I would ask whether the condition required
of Adam, were meritorious of eternal life? I presume no man will say it was, in
a strict and proper sense, there being no proportion between the work and the
wages; but yet that condition did lessen the freeness of Divine Grace: The
Grace of God was not manifested so much in saving man in that way, as in giving
life unto him freely. And therefore to put our Justification and Salvation upon
the same terms, must necessarily eclipse the Grace of God in the New Covenant.

Object. But some may say there is a great difference, the conditions required
of Adam were legal conditions; Object.
but the conditions which we stand for, and assert in the New Covenant, are
Evangelical Conditions. I answer, Answ.
That the sound of words does nothing at all alter the nature of things; all
conditions performed for life, are legal conditions: The precepts both of Law
and Gospel, have the same matter, though not the same end; but when Gospel
duties are made conditions of Justification and Salvation, there is no
difference.

Object. Yes, may some say, Object.
Evangelical conditions are more facile and easy, then the Legal were. Are
they so! Answ.
Let them consider again, whether it be more easy for a man that is dead in
trespasses and sins, to believe in Christ, to love God, to hate sin, to
mortify his lusts, etc. then it was for Adam in his innocence (when he had a
natural inclination to obey God) to abstain from the fruit of one Tree, when he
had a thousand besides, as good as that; there can be no condition imagined
more facile and feasible, then Adams was. But if it were so, yet would the
reward be debt, and not grace: As he that has his penny by contract, has as
much right to it, though he labored but an hour, as if he had endured the heat
of the whole day. We say, Gradus non variat speciem, it is not more grace, but
all grace, that does denominate the Covenant, a Covenant of Grace.

. 9. To these Reasons there might be added many more; which because they have
been mentioned before, upon another occasion, I shall not stand upon them.

4. Because all the pretended conditions of the Covenant, are promised in the
Covenant: Now it is absurd to make any thing a cause of itself, or a means and
condition whereby it is procured.

5. Because the asserting of conditions in the Covenant, attributes unto men a
power and ability to do good, not only before they are justified; but before
they believe: For if all the promises of the Covenant are conditional, then the
promise of Faith is conditional, and consequently a man must be supposed able
to perform some good and acceptable work to God before he believes, whereas
without Faith, it is impossible to please God, Heb. 11.6. Conditions in a
proper sense, do necessarily infer the liberty of man's will unto that which is
good; for as the Remonstrants do define it, A condition is a free act which we
absolutely may perform, or not perform, by Freewil not acted, by the
predeterminating grace of God. A Conditional Covenant and Freewil, are
inseparable; the former supposes the latter: Whether Mr. W. will own the
Consequence, I am not able to say; however, that there is no such power, or
ability in the Natural man to do that which is good, might be irrefragably
demonstrated from sundry Scriptures, as Genesis 6.5. Ephesians. 2.1, 2. 1 Cor. 2.14. 2
Cor. 3.5. Romans 7.18. Phil. 2.13, etc.

6. Because if the Covenant were conditional, no man in this life, could attain
to any assurance of his own interest in the blessings of it, but must live
always in a wavering and uncertain estate, as to the hope of eternal life; that
hope of Salvation which is built upon conditional promises, is (as Calvin
observes) always wavering and tottering; for conditional promises belong to
none, but unto them who have performed the condition: If remission of sins were
promised unto us, not absolutely but conditionally, as upon condition that we
do believe, repent, and persevere. Tum (says Rutherford Exerc. Apol. p. 36. and
34
) remissa nulla omnino peccata sunt in hac vita, etc. i. e. Then it must follow
that no man's sins are remitted in this life, no man is justified here, which is
contrary to many plain Scriptures, as Romans 4.10. and 5.1. and 8.30. Ephesians. 1.7.
1 Cor. 6.11.

. 10. 7. Because the Scripture shows, that there is the same proportion,
between Adams conveying sin to his seed, and Christ's conveying Righteousness to
his Seed, Romans 5.16. The imputation of Adams sin did not depend upon the
personal sinful acts of his posterity, so neither does the imputation of
Christ's Righteousness depend upon the good works and actions of Gods Elect; but
as by Adams sin, all his posterity became actually sinners, even they that had
not sinned after the similitude of Adams transgression, i. e. Actually in their
own persons; even so by Christ's Righteousness all the Elect to the end of the
world, are constituted righteous, before they have performed any works, or
conditions in their own persons.

8. Because if the Covenant were conditional, then Infants and Idiots, though
elected, could have no interest in any of the blessings therein promised, in
regard they cannot perform the conditions, upon which they do depend; and
consequently, dying without Faith, they must needs be damned.

. 11. ^. and lastly, If they to whom the Covenant belongs, had a right and
title to all the blessings of the Covenant, before their believing, and turning
unto God, then are there no conditions required on our part to entitle us to
the blessings of it. But they to whom the Covenant belongs, scil. the Elect,
had a right and interest in all the blessings of the Covenant before their
believing, etc. Ergo. The Assumption shall be proved in our Answer to that
Argument which Mr. W. has retorted upon us from Jere. 31. wherewith we shall
enter the lists in the next place.

CHAP. XX. Wherein Mr. Woodbridges chief Argument against the Absoluteness of
the New Covenant, is answered; and this Position [That God is the God of his
people, before they do believe and repent] rescued from his contradictions.
FRom the Scriptures before mentioned, wherein the tenor of the Covenant is
recited, Mr. W. has advanced this Argument against us, If God be not the God
of any, nor they his people before they believe, then none are in Covenant with
God before they believe; but God is not the God of any before they believe.
Ergo. As for the Proposition (says he) he is destitute of sense that shall deny
it; I say so too, if that clause of Gods being the God of any, be taken
comprehensively, and in its full latitude, for their having interest in God,
and in all the blessings which God has intended to his people; but if it be
taken for the actual enjoyment and possession of any one, or more, of those
blessings (as sometimes it is) he is as much destitute of sense that shall
affirm it; for then the sense of it, is this, If none do know, or have the
comfort of this privilege, that God is their God before they believe, then
none are in Covenant with God before they believe; this consequence is false;
for there is a wide difference between having an interest in God, and the
blessings of his Grace; and our knowledge thereof, or our enjoyment of those
blessings. Interest and Possession, are not equipollent and reciprocal; God may
promise some one benefit, in order to our possession, and enjoyment of others,
though not to give us a right and interest in them. We say, that by Faith we
have the knowledge and comfort of that reconciliation which Christ has made
between God and us, though we cannot say, that we obtain a right and interest
therein by Faith: Thorough Faith we come to know, that God is our God, though
our believing does not make him to be our God. But the Assumption, viz. That
God is not the God of any before they believe, is obvious unto just Exception,
which he has endeavored to prove after this manner; If God promise to give
Faith, that we may be his people, and he our God, then till that Faith be
given, he is not our God, nor we his people: But God promises to give Faith,
that he may be our God, and we his people, Jere. 31.33. Heb. 8.10. Ezekiel*
11.19.20. and 36.25, etc. and 37.23, 24, 26, 27. We have shown before, that the
Scriptures mentioned do utterly refuse to protect the Minor; and that all the
particular promises contained in them, are parts or effects of the Covenant,
and not means to bring us into Covenant. The having of a new heart does not
make God to be our God; but because he is our God, he gives us that blessing,
and all things else.

. 2. That God is the God of his people before they do believe, and are
converted, is evident unto me from these grounds.

First, If God be their God, whom he does peculiarly love, and whom he has
chosen, and separated to himself from the rest of mankind, then is the Lord a
God unto some before they believe; the consequence is clear, because God has
loved and chosen some in that manner from everlasting, Jere. 31.3. Ephesians. 1.4.
Now this was not an ordinary common love, such as he bears unto all Creatures,
but a peculiar distinguishing love, whereby he willed to them the greatest
good, even that (...) mentioned Ephesians. 2.4. See John 17.23, 24. But God is their
God whom he does peculiarly love, and has chosen and separated to himself,
Ergo. For what is it to have the Lord for our God, but to be appropriated to
God, to have such an interest in God, as others have not, to be the objects of
his special love? It was Isreal's prerogative above all the Nations of the
world, that they had the Lord to be their God; now the Lord became their God,
by setting his love upon them, and choosing them to be a peculiar people to
himself, Deuteronomy. 7.6, 7, 8. and by separating them from other people, Lev. 20.24,
25. The Lord, Ezekiel. 16.8. declares concerning spiritual Israel, that they
became his, whilst they were in their blood, that ere ever they were washed and
adorned (had any amiable qualities in them) he swear unto them, and entered into
Covenant with them; which swearing as it refers to spiritual Israel must be
understood of that Oath which he made to Christ, concerning the blessing of his
seed. The Prophet infers this their relation unto God from his everlasting
love, Jer. 31.1.3. The Apostle likewise Romans 8.31. grounds the Saints interest
in God, or their having God to be with them, upon his eternal and unchangeable
good will, toward them, even before he spared his Son to dye for them. So 2 Timothy 2.19. The foundation of God stands sure; the Lord knows them that are
his; Implying, that the election, and foreknowledge of God does make men his.

. 3. Secondly, If the Lord be a God, not only to his people, but to their seed
also, then is he a God to some before they believe; But he is a God not only
to his people who are called, and do believe, but to their seed who are not
called, and do not yet believe, Ergo. The Lord promised Abraham, that he would
be, not only his God, but the God of his seed; the seed of Abraham did not then
believe, yet the Lord styles himself their God. And the Apostle tells those
converts Act. 2.39. That the Promise was to them, and to their children: Now
what was that Promise, but Ero Deus tuus and seminis tui? If our opposers say,
That God was not the God of their children, until they were called, they will
be guilty of the same Tautalogy which they charge upon the Anti-pedo-baptists:
upon this ground it is, that the children of believing Parents are admitted to
baptism, before they believe; because God has declared, that he is their God.

. 4. Thirdly, They whom the Lord has purchased to be a peculiar people to
himself, have the Lord to be their God; But God has purchased some to be a
peculiar people to himself before they believe, Ergo. The major is evident, for
when a man makes a Purchase, he obtains a legal right and propriety in the
thing purchased; Quod venditur transit in potestatem ementis. And therefore the
Apostle concludes from hence, that we are not our own but Gods, because, we are
bought with a price, 1 Cor. 6.19, 20, The minor is undeniable, That God did
purchase us before we do believe, even when he gave himself (...), a Ransom
for us, 2 Timothy 2.6. he bought us (says the Apostle) with his precious blood, 1
Pet. 1.18, 19. thereby we were made (...), a peculiar people, Tit. 2.14. Though
he had not immediately upon the payment of the price, the possession of us, yet
thereby he obtained a right to us; we became his in right, though not in
enjoyment; It was here, as with a man that buys a Living, and pays down the
price, he has immediately a right to it, though he has not the present
possession of it; he may call it his own, though it be not in his hands.

. 5. Fourthly, If we recive all good things from God; yea, Faith it self, upon
this account, because we are his people, then God is our God before we
believe; But we receive all good things from God, even Faith it self, merely
upon this account, because we are his people, as Gal 4.6. Because ye are Sons,
God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son, into your hearts. They were Sons
before they received the Spirit of his Son. So Isa. 48.17. I am the Lord thy
God which teaches thee to profit, scil. By my word and works; by which means
men are brought to Faith and Repentance: No reason can be given why one man
profits by the Word, and another does not, but because the Lord is a God to
one, and not to the other; he has chosen one, and not the other, Act 13.48. as
many as were ordained unto eternal life, i. e. chosen and separated from the
rest of mankind, to be a peculiar people unto God; believed.

. 6. Fifthly, If none can, or do Believe and Repent, but they to whom the Lord
does manifest this Grace, That he is their God, then the Lord is our God before
we believe and repent; But none do or can believe and repent, but they to whom
God does reveal and manifest this Grace; Ergo. We choose him, because he has
chosen us; and love him, because he has loved us first, Joh. 15.16. 1 John 4
10.19. In Hos. 2.23. says the Lord; I will have mercy upon her, that had not
obtained mercy; and I will say to them which were not my people, thou art my
people, and they shall say, Thou art my God. I have observed that Expositors
generally, do take notice of the order of the words. As Mr. Buroughs Bur. on
Hos. 1 Vol. p. 674.
, God must begin with us, we cannot begin and say, Thou art my God; but God
must begin with us first, and say, You are my people. And Dr. Rivet In loc.
obs. 6. p. 101.
, Hic ord^ est considerandus, etc. The order of the words ought diligently to
be observed, It is God that begins and calls them his people: who being made
his people through Grace, do by Faith give their consent, and own him for
their God. And Zanchy Tom. 5. in Hos. p 57.
to the same purpose, The order of the words shows, That God does first
prevent us with his Grace, and makes us his people, then follows the assent of
our Faith, whereby we acknowledge and embrace him for our God. So that our
Faith, does not make him to be our God, but suppose he is so.

. 7. Sixthly, They to whom God is a Father, and a Shepherd, have the Lord for
their God; But God was our Father, and Shepherd before we believed, Ergo. All
the Elect are the Sheep, and Children of Jesus Christ. They are his Sheep, Joh.
10.15. I lay down my life for my Sheep, he laid down his life, not only for
them that were then called, but for them that were to be called afterward, so
ver. 16. Other sheep I have, which are not of this fold; The Elect Gentiles
were his sheep, before they were brought into his Fold, scil. the visible
communion of Saints. They are also called his Seed and Children, Isa. 53.10.
and Heb. 2.13. Behold I, and the children which God has given me: He speaks
of all those Sons, whom he was to bring unto Glory, ver. 10. So Jer. 3.19. Thou
shall call me, my Father; Their calling him Father, did not make, but suppose
him to be their Father, and in this respect he is called an Everlasting Father,
Isa. 9.6.

. 8. Mr. W. tells us, That he has only one observation to add, which the most
learned among the Jewish, and Christian writers, do often take notice of, and
that is this, [That God is never said to be our God in reference to his giving
of the first Grace, but only in reference to the blessing, which he promises
to them that have Faith] Heb. 11.16. He is not our God, that he may give us
Faith, but is every where said to give us Faith, that he may be our God, 1 Pet.
2.10. I acknowledge that Mr. W. is a learned man, yet I know it is much above
his reach to determine, who are the most learned amongst the Jewish, and
Christian Writers; who as yet has not looked into the tenth part of either: As
for the Jewish Doctors, I suppose no man will think them competent Judges of
Gospel verities; and I must confess, that too many of our Christian Writers
are leavened overmuch with a Jewish legal spirit; However if he had pointed to
the Authors that make this Observation, I should have weighed the grounds
whereon they lay it; the names of men, though never so learned, weigh lighter
then a feather in matters of Faith. If he took up his Observation upon trust
from Grotius (as I suspect he did) I shall presume once more, to advice him to
take heed of tampering with the Notions of that learned Apostate.

. 9. I have showed already that sundry Godly and Learned men are of another
mind, who exclude all manner of Conditions from the New Covenant, and
consequently do make Faith a part of the Covenant, and not the means to bring
us into Covenant; to which there might be added many more, as Luther In Gal
4.25. fol. 218.
, The Promises of the Law are conditional, promising life, not freely, but to
such as fulfill the Law, and therefore they leave men's Consciences in doubt,
for no man fulfilleth the Law; But the Promises of the New Testament have no
such Condition joined unto them, nor require any thing of us, nor depend upon
any Condition of our worthiness, but bring, and give unto us freely,
Forgiveness of sins, Grace, Righteousness, and Life everlasting for Christ's
sake, etc. Melancton speaks as fully to the purpose Melanct in Romans 3. Vulgo
in^^ginantur hom^^es evangelium esse promissionem conditionatem, at ab hac
imaginatione, adducendi sunt, etc.
, Men commonly (says he) do imagine that the Gospel is a conditional
Promise; but this conceit is to be rooted out of them. -- The Gospel offers
remission of sins and Eternal Life, without the Condition of our works. And
again Ib. in Romans 4.
, Our Obedience is neither the Cause, nor the Condition, for which we are
accepted before God. So P. Martyr Nos negamus Testamentum Dei de remissione
peccatorum, habere adjunctam conditionem loc com. de Justif. fid. sect 65 p.
387.
, We deny (says he) That the Covenant of God concerning the remission of
sins has any Condition annexed unto it. And Olevian Tota substantia fede^is
est si^e condition, D^. N. foed. sect. 1^
, The whole frame, or substance of the New Covenant, is without any Condition.
Estius puts this question Comment. in Heb. 8.10.
, How the New Testament can be called a Covenant, seeing it contains only a
most free promise, whereas Covenants do consist of conditions on both parts? We
may not answer (says he) that good works are the condition thereof, seeing that
works themselves are contained in the promise of the New Testament: But (says
he) the word [Berith] does not only signify a Covenant in a strict sense,
which consists of mutual conditions, but it single promise which is free from
all conditions; and such a Covenant is that which we call the New Testament,
viz. Promissio Dei prorsus absoluta and gratuita; to wit, That promise of God
which is altogether free and absolute. With him agrees Dr. Ames Coronis ad Col.
Hig Edit. 6. p. 400.
, who adds, That the New Covenant is more properly called a Testament, then a
Covenant; because a Will or Testament bequeaths Legacies, without any office or
condition of the Legatees. And Beza Beza in Gal. 3.14.
, The word (...) used Gal. 3.14. does not signify (says he) any promise, but
that which is altogether free, in which respect it is opposed to the Law; for
the promises of the Law have conditions annexed to them; and therefore the word
(...) whereby the New Covenant is signified, is better rendered Promise, then
Covenant. But to avoid proli^ity, I shall desire the Reader at his leisure to
peruse Junius his Second Oration De foedere novo, prefixed to his Enarrations on
the four first Psalms, who being so great a Linguist and Lawyer, his Judgment
in this point, ought the more to be regarded. It may be Mr. B. and Mr. W. will
place them but in the form of ignorant and unstudied Divines; Though they do,
it has been sufficiently confirmed, with the authority of a greater Doctor.
And if we receive the witness of men, the witness of God is greater, 1 John 5.9.

. 10. The Scriptures which Mr. W. has brought, do no whit help him, as Heb.
11.16. where it is said, God was not ashamed to be called the God of Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, who were believers; Ergo, (says he) God is not the God of
any, before they do believe: He might reason as well, a Father acknowledges
and stands by his son, when he is in distress, Ergo, He was not his father
before. The scope of the place, is not to show when God did become their
Father, but rather the faithfulness and condescendence of God toward his
people in their low estate See Dicksons Com.
, for though they were pilgrims and strangers in the world, hated, and despised
of all, yet God did own, and honor them. See Psalm. 105.12, 13, 14, 15. So that,
in 1 Pet. 2.10. (where the Apostle speaking to the Saints, says, In times past,
you were not a people, but are now the people of God,) is to be understood, in
reference to the external administration of the Covenant, and not the real
participation, or interest in the blessings of it: Indeed, in the first
consideration, none are the people of God, but they that do profess the fear
and worship of the true God, Micah 4.5.
who walk in the name, i. e. In the Laws and Ordinances of God. In which
respect the Elect before Faith, are said to have been without God in the world,
Ephesians. 2.12. And in this sense, all that do profess the truth, are the people of
God, though many of them are Hypocrites; who are therefore said to be of
Israel, Romans 9.6. Joh. 15.2.
though they are not Israel; and some that are but fruitless branches, are
notwithstanding said to be in Christ; which must be understood in respect of
external profession, and not of internal implantation. But in the later
consideration, none are the people of God, but they that do belong to the
Election of Grace, who are the Spiritual Seed, and Israel in truth: And thus,
all the Elect, whether called or uncalled, are the people of God; though before
conversion, they have not the comfort, yet they have a good right and title
unto all the purchases of Christ's death. God knows them to be his people,
though they know not, that he is their God.

CHAP. XXI. Wherein the remaining Arguments which Mr. Woodbridge has brought
to prove, That the New Covenant is not an absolute Promise, and that the Elect
have no right to the Covenant before they believe, are answered.
MR. W. toward the close of his Book, has cast in three, or four Arguments
more, for the confirmation of his Opinion, which he thinks superfluous. I might
(says he) spare the pains of further proof. And truly, I think so too, unless
he had bestowed his pains in a better cause: I must tell him, That when he has
said all that he can, in defense of this cause, he will at last sit down a
looser; for when the day shall come, which shall try every man's work of what
sort it is; this hay and stubble of man's righteousness, and men's pleadings for
it, shall be consumed to ashes; though I am persuaded better things of him, and
such as do accompany Salvation; In the mean time, I shall gladly hear the
utmost that he has to say, in the defense of his Opinion.

. 2. His first Argument, of this last rank, is grounded upon those words, Isa.
55.3. Come unto me, (that is, Believe in me, John 6.35.) and I will make an
Everlasting Covenant with you. Ergo, The New Covenant is not an absolute
promise, and none have any interest in the Covenant, before they believe. To
which, I answer (1) the Particle [ Vau] may be taken Illatively, (as in some
other places it is) thus [For] I will make an Everlasting Covenant; so that the
Covenant is the ground of our coming, and not e contra: Or (2) if we take it
Copulatively, as our Translators do, no prejudice can come thence, unto our
Assertion; for, I will make an Everlasting Covenant, is all one, as if he had
said, I will perform, or give to you, all other benefits promised in my
Everlasting Covenant, even the sure mercies of David, as the Apostle expounds
it, Acts 13.34. Those promises which are proposed conditionally by the
Prophets, are rendered absolutely by the Apostle; as for instance, that of the
Prophet, Isa. 59 20. The Redeemer shall come to Zion, and unto them that turn
from transgression in Jacob. The Apostle, Romans 11.26, renders it, Then shall
come out of Zion the Deliverer, and shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob;
implying that Faith and Repentance, are parts of the Covenant, which God will
give unto them, for whom Christ has procured them.

. 3. His second Argument is, That the voice of the Gospel, which is the
Covenant of Grace, is every where [Believe in the Lord Jesus, and thou shall be
saved] in opposition to the Covenant of Works, which says, [do this and live.]
Ergo, before believing, none have interest in the Covenant. We grant, that this
precept or exhortation, Believe in the Lord Jesus, is frequently found in the
New Testament, but that this does formally contain the tenor of the Gospel, or
New Covenant, we have before disproved. The Gospel properly and strictly taken,
consists neither in the precepts, nor promises of the New Testament, but in the
declaration of these glad tidings, that the promises which God made unto his
people in the Old Testament are now fulfilled Act. 13.32, ^^. Luke 1.54, 55,
69, 70. Acts 26.22, 23. Luke 4.18, 21.
; to wit, the promises concerning the coming of the Messiah, and the clear
exhibition of all the fruits and effects of his Mediatorship. So that the sum
of the Gospel is rather comprised in this 1 Timothy 1.15. Heb. 10.14.
, That Jesus Christ is come into the world to save sinners, yea, the chief of
sinners. That by his one offering, he has perfected for ever them that are
sanctified. Now they that are sent forth to publish and declare these glad
tidings, are to invite and command all men every where to believe in him whom
God has sent; assuring them in the Name of God, That all that do believe in
him, shall not perish, but have everlasting life: The command of believing,
with the promise of life to Believers, are parts of our Ministry, they are not
the tenor of the Gospel, or New Covenant. The Covenant whereof Christ is the
Mediator, is said to be better then the former, because it does consist of
better promises, Heb. 8.6. Now what those better promises are, he tells them
immediately out of Jeremy, I will put my Laws into their hearts, etc. wherein
the Lord promises all good things unto them, without the least restipulation
from them. It is said indeed, they that are called, i e. do believe, shall
receive the promise of the eternal inheritance. It does not follow, that their
calling unto Faith, was the condition whereby they obtained the inheritance; no
more, then because it is said, Chap. 5.9. Christ is the Author of Salvation to
them that do obey him. Ergo. Works and Obedience are conditions on our part to
obtain Salvation: Which places do describe the persons that are saved, but not
the terms or means by which they do obtain Salvation; they that are called do
receive, i. e. Enter into the promised inheritance; he does not say, that by
virtue of their calling, they do enter, or were invested with a right and title
thereunto; the repeating of his Consequence, is answer enough: They that are
called, shall receive the eternal inheritance; Ergo, None have any interest, in
the Covenant before believing, or the New Covenant is not an absolute promise.

. 4. His next Argument is to this effect, The Covenant of Grace is to be
preached to every man; but the absolute promise is not made to every man. Ergo,
The Covenant of Grace is not an absolute promise. Answer, The Argument is
faulty, both in Matter and Form; the Assumption should be, But the absolute
promise ( scil. of Mercy and Forgiveness, without Works and Conditions
performed by us) is not to be preached to all men, which is false. But we will
take things as they lie before us. The Covenant of Grace is preached to every
man, and every man called upon to fulfill the conditions of it, that he may
receive the blessings of it, which condition is Faith, Heb. 4.1, 2. Here is a
grain of Corn, in a heap of chaff: It is true, that the Gospel, or Covenant of
Grace, ought to be preached unto every Creature, Mark 16.15. Matthew. 28.19. But
it is not true, that the Preaching of the Gospel is to call upon men to fulfill
the conditions of the Covenant, or that Faith is the condition of it: The place
alleged says no such thing, the words are an Exhortation to sincerity and
perseverance in our Christian Profession, by a similitude taken from foolish
Racers, who by giving over before they come to the Goal, do lose the Crown. We
also have a race to run, there is a Crown set before us, and therefore we ought
to take heed, least by any means we fall short thereof; though no man shall
enter into the Heavenly Canaan without Faith, yet it follows not, that Faith is
the condition whereby we get an interest either in that, or the other blessings
of the Covenant. The Absoluteness of the New Covenant is no ways inconsistent
with the Preaching of the Gospel unto every Creature: For what is it to Preach
the Gospel? But (1) to publish these joyful tidings, That the Son of God is
come into the world to save men from their sins; that in the Sacrifice which he
has offered, there is plenteous Redemption for the chief of sinners. (2) To
press and exhort all men without exception to believe in him. 1. With the
assent of their minds, that all things which are written of him, chiefly
concerning the merit of his sufferings, and the efficacy of his death, are true
and infallible. 2. With the embraces of their hearts, to wit, With such
affections as are suitable to so great a good; and more particularly to trust,
rely, and roll themselves upon him, for all the purchases of his death; and in
so doing, confidently to expect the fruition of them in the fittest times. Now
the Absoluteness of the New Covenant is so far from being any impediment to
Faith, as that it affords men the greatest encouragement to believe, both to
cast themselves into the arms of Christ, and to put on a strong confidence of
inheriting all the promises, seeing that in their accomplishment, they depend
not upon Works and Conditions performed by themselves.

. 5. Mr. W. demands, (1) Whether there be an absolute promise made to every
man, that God will give him grace? Though there be not, yet are the general
promises of the Covenant, a sufficient ground for our Faith, for as much as
Grace therein, is promised indefinitely to sinners; which all that are ordained
to life, shall believe, and lay hold of? But, says Mr. W. is it sense to exhort
men to take hold of Gods Covenant, or to enter into Covenant with God, if the
Covenant be only an absolute promise on Gods part? etc. What contradiction is
there unto sense in either of these? For 1. what is it to lay hold of the
Covenant, but (as Benhadads Servants did by Ahabs words, 1 Kings 20.33. Exodus
34 6, 7.
) to take up those gracious discoveries which God in his Covenant has made of
himself to sinners, and to resolve with the woman of Cannan, not to be beaten
off with any discouragements? Which act of Faith is called The taking of the
Kingdom of Heaven by violence, Matthew. 11, 12. Which is, when a Soul
appropriates general Promises to himself in particular (...), Chrisost.
, And against Hope, believes in Hope. The Apostle calls it, Fleeing for refuge
to lay hold on the Promise, Heb. 6.18. which Promise, is the same which God
confirmed by an Oath, Verse. 17. Now we do not find that God did ever
confirm any Conditional Promise with an Oath, but only those Absolute
Promises of his Grace See Reyn: on Psa. 110. p. 385
, Isai. 54.9, 10. Psalm. 89 34, 35. As for the other phrase of entering into
Covenant with God, Though we never find it in the New Testament, that the
Apostles did exhort men to enter into, or to make a Covenant with God, yet I
conceive that it may be used in reference to the External Administration of
the New Covenant; Men may be said to enter into Covenant with God, when they
take upon them the profession of Christianity, and give up themselves to be
the Lords People. In this respect we may exhort men, as the Apostle does, To
give up themselves a living Sacrifice, holy, and acceptable unto God, and to
abide steadfast in the Covenant of God; or rather, as the Apostles phrase is, To
hold fast their Profession firm unto the end, Hebr. 3.6. It were absurd to
exhort men either to make, or to concur to the making of the Covenant of
Grace, which is his act alone, who shows mercy unto whom he will.

. 6. His next Interogative is a very strange one, he asks us, Whether if the
Covenant be an absolute Promise, it be sense, to accuse, blame and damn men
for unbeleefe, and rejecting of the Gospel? Was it ever known that men should
be counted worthy of death, for not being the objects of an absolute Promise?
By his favor, who did ever say* that men are damned for not being objects of an
Absolute Promise? We say, the condemnation of Reprobates does inevitably
follow, upon their not being included in that Covenant, which God has made
with Christ, or Gods not giving them unto Jesus Christ; but this is, antecessio
ordinis, non causalitatis; their exclusion from this Covenant, is but an
Antecedent, and not the cause of their destruction. Men are damned for not
believing that Grace which God has manifested to sinners, for not receiving it
with that esteem, and such affections as it does deserve; so that formally, the
cause of their damnation, is not their non-being objects of Gods absolute
Promise, but their disobedience to the Command of God. If he say (as the
Remonstrators have done before him. Credere jubet and fidei nullum objectum
ponit.
) That they are unjustly blamed and damned for unbeleefe, seeing they have no
Object for their Faith, no Christ to believe in; We shall Answer, That there is
a real Object proposed to their Faith, though there be no such absolute
Promise that God will give Grace to every man in particular; the Object of
Faith is the Written Word, and more especially the Free Promises of Mercy unto
wretched sinners, for the sake of Christ, which all men are commanded to
believe, both assensu intellectus, and amplexu voluntatis, and for their
unbeleefe they perish everlastingly. If he shall ask, Why God does command them
to believe in Christ, seeing he never intended they should have any good or
benefit by Christ? I must say with the Apostle, Romans 9 20. O man, who art thou
that disputest against God? We ought to look to his Commands, and not curiously
to search into his Councels, Deuteronomy. 22:29. We know that the Preaching of the
Gospel was ordained principally for gathering Gods Elect; now because
Ministers know not who are Elected, and who are not, It was necessary that the
offer of Grace, and command of Believing should be universal, which will be
embraced and obeyed by all that are ordained to life.

7. His fourth and last Argument against the absoluteness of the New Covenant,
is, If the Covenant of Grace be an absolute Promise, then no men in the world,
but wicked and ungodly men, are in Covenant with God. To which I Answer, (1) It
is very true, That the Covenant of Grace is made with Christ in behalf of
sinners, and none else, Matthew 9.13. The whole need not a Physician but the
sick. If men were not sinners, and ungodly, there would be no need at all of
the Covenant of Grace, the Covenant of Works would have been sufficient; either
it is made with sinners or none. (2) It will not follow, that when men are in
Covenant, or do partake of some blessings of the Covenant, that immediately
the Covenant cease; when we are in Glory, the Covenant shall not cease, for
the continuance of Glory is promised in the Covenant, no less then Glory it
self, for which cause it is called an Everlasting Covenant, So that his
inference is very irrational, If the Covenant be an absolute Promise, then
none but wicked, i. e. unregenerate persons are perfectly in Covenant with God;
It follows rather from his own opinion, for if the Covenant be a conditional
Promise, when the condition is performed, the Covenant is so far forth
fulfilled, and the Preformers of it, so far forth do cease to be in Covenant;
and so consequently, none but wicked men, i. e. such as have not yet fulfilled
the Condition, shall be the objects of the Covenant, or the persons to whom it
does belong. Or else it must follow, that none at all are perfectly in Covenant
with God; the Performers of the Condition are not, because the Condition being
performed, the Covenant is fulfilled, and thereby cease to be a Covenant; and
the non-performers of the Condition are not, for till the Condition be
performed, men have no right or interest in the blessings promised. By this
Sophistry a man may soon dispute himself out of the Covenant, and consequently
out of hope.

. 8. I have now (through the assistance of a good God, and the advantage of a
good Cause) followed Mr. W. to the end of his race. He seems weary of his
walk as well as I. It is (says he) beyond my purpose, and work, to follow
this pursuit any further, i. e. I have no more to say; for I dare say, if he
could have thought upon any thing else, either to color his own, or to vilify
the cause which he does oppose, he would not have held it in; his last Argument
sufficiently shows, he has pumped to the bottom. I must confess I am as glad
as he, that I am arrived so near to my journeys end; though the passage has
not been very difficult, yet I must needs say, it has been to me somewhat
(more perhaps then ordinary) troublesome, in regard I have so little time and
strength to bestow upon these paper conflicts. And therefore though my
adversary (who, I know, wants neither words, nor confidence) shall offer a
Reply, I shall not engage to make a Rejoinder: Having declared my judgment;
with the Reasons of it, I shall submit my self to the censures of the godly
Reader; beseeching the Father of Lights, to lead both him, and me into all
truth, and more especially into a fuller manifestation of our Free Redemption
by Jesus Christ.

. 9. But before I can take my leave of the Reader, I must request his patience,
whilst I take notice of a passage or two, in Mr. Woodbridges conclusion to his
Worthy Sir,

First, He tells him [ though it is likely, something is, or will be said
against my Sermon ( which at this distance I am never like to hear of*) yet
sure I am, that nothing can be answered consistent with the truth of
Scripture.] Concerning his Sermon, I have said no more in his absence, then I
was ready to have spoken unto his face, had the time, and the patience (I had
almost said the passions of some of his friends) given me leave; I confess I
had not made my Replies so public, had he not offered such open wrongs both
unto the Truth and to my self. His Bravado [sure I am, that nothing can be
answered, etc.] argues rather his conceit of himself, then the soundness of
the Doctrine which he would maintain; A bold face is usually the last refuge of
a bad cause, which the Advocate puts on to uphold his credit amongst the
simple, who are apt to think that he has the strongest Argument, who shows
the greatest confidence Ingenium hominu metiuntur ex audacia, and dextram
putant fronti geminam. Kend. Ep. ad Ac. Oxon.
. I remember Campian the Jesuit, in his Epistle to the Universities tells them,
he was as sure he had gotten the victory, as that there is a God, a Heaven, a
Faith, a Christ. I shall not answer Mr. W. as Dr. Whitaker does the Jesuit,
Pudet vanitatis jactationis arrogantiae tune audes promittere, etc. But I must
needs say that he talks at too high arate, and not as a man sensible, in how
many things we offend all; does he know as much as all men besides? Or can he
judge of men's Answers before he has heard them? Had Parker, Twisse, Pemble,
etc. nothing at all to say in defense of their Doctrine? Does he think this
Sermon such a solid piece, that all men living will be struck dumb therewith?
Though I am not conscious of deviating a syllable from the sense of the
Scripture in this Discourse, yet I dare not say, That nothing can be answered
unto what I have written; I shall say of my writings, as the Apostle of
himself, 1 Cor. 4.3. I know nothing in them inconsistent with the Scriptures,
yet are they not hereby justified: All that I desire is, that the Reader would
bring them to the Standard of Truth, and hold fast that which they shall find
agreeable thereunto. This I am as sure of as Faith can make me (whose
certainty is greater then that of Science) that the whole glory of our
Justification and Salvation ought to be given to the Grace of God, and the
Merits of Christ; which would not be done, if either of them did depend, and
were obtained by Works and Conditions performed by us.

. 10. Next he tells him, How sorry he is, for the breaches that are amongst us.
Truly, if he be not, I think he may, having contributed, not a little, to the
widening of them; for before his Sermon, we were upon the matter agreed,
concerning the point which is now in difference; we had oftentimes Friendly and
Christian communion; which ever since has been interrupted. It was not a
month before, that I had Conference privately with my Reverend Neighbor (my
first Antagonist) about this thing, who told me, That he held the New Covenant
to be Conditional, no otherwise, then in respect of Gods order, and method, in
bestowing the blessings of it. To whom I replied, That if he asserted
Conditions in the Covenant, in no other sense, we were agreed: And he knows,
that in the Letters which had passed between us, I had yielded as much, to wit,
That in improper speech, the Covenant may be called Conditional; though for the
causes before mentioned, I use not the phrase. And therefore, if any new breach
has happened about this matter, the guilt of it must rest on others, and not on
me. For my own part, I am not conscious in my self of the least breach in
Affection with any of my Neighbors; being ready to serve them in love, as
opportunity is offered; though some of them have used me spitefully, refusing
(as of old the Jews did toward the Samaritans) to have any dealings with me,
so much, as in Civil Affairs. I confess, I have forborne some of their
Lectures, because I would not, by my silence, give Testimony to that which I
know to be heterodox and unsound: And I thought good a while to desist from
making open Exceptions, until I had given a more public account of my practice
in this particular: For the future, I shall not put my self to the trouble of
writing more Books, unless it be to answer the Exceptions of my Reverend
Neighbor (who first engaged me in this Controversy) either against my Doctrine
or Practice: But if in any Congregation of this City (where a charge of Souls
is incumbent on me) I am present, when these Fundamental Truths of the Gospel,
are darkened and undermined by strangers, or others, I shall (God willing) put
on the Apostles resolution, (though the weakest and unworthiest of my Brethren)
Not to give place to them by subjection, no, not for an hour; that the truth
and simplicity of the Gospel may continue amongst us; and yet with due respect
unto all men's persons: Let any man do the like by me, I shall not account it a
breach of peace. If Mr. W. had any intent to heal our breaches, I must needs
say, he was very unhappy in the choice of Means. No prudent man will judge it a
probable way to compose differences, to use calumniating and opprobrious
Language toward them that dissent; or to lay unto their charge, such things as
they abhor. But to Mr. Woodbridges Prayer for Peace, in the close of his
Discourse, I shall add mine, both for him, and my self, That we may do nothing
against the truth, but for the truth.

Matthew. 11.19. Wisdom is justified of her Children.

FINIS.
The Printers Postscript.
SInce these Sheets were wrought off at the Press, the Author had neither
health, nor leisure to Revize them; I hope there are no such Errata, as can
disturb the Rational Reader, those that are, if thy Judgment does Correct
them, and thy Charity cover them, thou shall much oblige both the Author, and
me, to serve thee in all Christian Offices.

R. I.


