AN ELEGY Upon the DEATH of that Faithful Servant OF the LORD, And my Dear and
Never-to be-forgotten FRIEND Mr. JOHN WELLS, M^nister of the GOSPEL, who was
suddenly taken out of this V^le of Misery June 18. 1676.
HARK! Hark! you Heaven-bound-Souls, do you not hear
A fresh Alarm Tingle in your Ear?
A Cedar falls! A Star does disappear.
A Summons sent you to prepare for Death,
And show the fleeting state of Mortal Breath?
Man is a World, and Death's the Ocean found
Wherein that Worlds Inferior Pa^ts are drowned;
This Sea Encircles All; And, though as yet
God has set Marks and Bounds 'twixt us and it;
Still it does Roar, and daily Threatenings send,
And breaks our Bank whene're it takes a Friend;
But when our Prophets too are swallowed there,
It Is a sad Sign an Inundation's near.
Ah, how may we our Sodom fate bemoan,
And look for Fire when all our Lots are gone!
When storms of Vengeance are on Whirlwinds hurled,
To punish this our Sin polluted World;
Where is the Moses in the Gap to stand,
And with loud Prayr's disarm Jehovah's Han^:
The Shepherds thus Removed, who shall keep
From Wolves of Romulus, the scattered Sheep.
IN the Path of Duty how may we not stray,
When our best Guides so fast are took away.
Grave pious WELLS so suddenly was snatched,
As if an Ambuscade of Angels Caught
His Towering Soul, which longed for Heaven before,
And now is Crowned in Bliss for evermore.
Yet could not Death surprise him (though so nigh)
For 'twas his Practice, every day to dye.
About his Gospel-Labour* he was going,
Blessed Servant whom his Master sinds so doing.
Christ was his study, Gods Glory his Aim,
It was his Heaven to advance the same.
He was not like Wells without water, dry
And empty Readers of Morality.
But from his Lips Wells of Salvation flowed,
And every gracious Heart that heard him, Glowed;
By lively faith He being dead yet speaks,
And still his Works shall Praise him in the Gates;
Long since we know he fixed a steady Eye,
And Pointed others to ETERNITY.
Long since he taught enravish'd Saints to sing
Loud Hallelujahs to their God and King;
And now joins Consort in such Songs of Love,
With all the Quire of Seraphims above.
Original Corruption he displayed,
How Heirs of Wrath by Nature all are made.
Of The Holy Sabbath Learnedly he wrote
A Treatise that shall never be forgot,
That day he Hallowed both in's life and death,
And on the same Resigned his latest Breath;
Entering, Just when temporal Sabbath ceased,
Into a Sabbath of eternal Rest:
He was a Watchman could not well be blamed,
A Workman such as need not be a^ham'd.
No Proteus that could change to every shape,
No servile-spirited Preacher that could scrape
And Cringe to please the lusts of wanton men,
He would not say and straight unsay again;
But full of Truth and Power his seasoned words,
Did pierce iike Nails and Cut like sharpened Swords,
His Minister'al Accomplishments were rare,
His constant Pains, his Diligence, his Care
For souls in Holy Things, who can express?
He might have longer lived, had he lived less;
Oh melting Suppliant! whoever did know
His Prayers to Heaven without some Tears to go:
The secret Ravishings poor Souls have sound,
When from his Mouth the Word of Life did sound;
But --
^ings hold not Histories, who can rehearse
His v^st Perfection in a narrow Verse;
Take Virtues, Graces, Gifts, and all you can,
All were Concentred in this Holy M^n.
THE EPITAPH.
A Minister under this Tombstone lies
Enshrined, not Dead, for Virtue never dies.
Life's Great Example, one whose well-spent Days
Began with Goodness, and Expired with Praise;
His Lamp was ever Burning never Hid,
And when his Tongue Preached not, his Actions did,
His Body to Earth's Custody's Confined.
But Heaven (which always had) enjoys his Mind.
His Work was Preaching here, and so it is still,
And Preach his Name we hope for ever will.
FINIS.
LONDON, Printed (...)r B. H. 1676. 88.


