AN ELEGY On the DEATH of that REVEREND DIVINE, and Truly Pious, Humble,
Charitable Servant of Our Lord Jesus Christ, Mr. JOHN TURNOR, Late of
HATTON-GARDEN: Who Departed this Life the 18th. of February, and was Interred
the 22th. Day of the same Month, 1692.
An Orthodox Divine was he
And Clothed with Humility.
The Poor that thronged about his Gate
Methinks does now look dessolate.

AWAKE my Muse, I think I hear some cry
Oh! Where is Mr. Turnor's Elegy?
Is he forgotten that deserved so well?
Can you forbear the Truth of him to tell?
Stones could they speak, would echo forth his Praise
Unto the World, and how he spent his Days:
He is now a Saint in Glory with the Blessed,
A Man deserving Praise among the rest;
A True Ambassador of Christ our King,
Which now with Angels Anthems sweetly sing;
He every day redeemed precious Time,
And meditated often on things Sublime.
The Blessed Jesus he did much adore,
Admiring him in Saints that was but poor;
Reproving meekly them, that when astray,
Humbly directing them the Narrow Way
That leads unto Everlasting Life,
A Tender Parent, Indulgent to his Wife:
His Household he did guide with Prudence great,
A Man that never sat in Scorners Seat;
Fervent in Prayer, strong in Hope and Faith,
Most diligent in all, as Good Men says,
And Friend without Interest, or hope of Gain,
A Man afflicted with another pain:
His Heart in Heaven was, whilst on the Earth,
A Man Religious ever from his Birth:
His Talent he improved very well,
I know not any that did him excel:
Two Places he did build at his own Charge,
All for Gods Worship, Zion to enlarge.
Great Cause have I for to lament his Death,
Woe Day to me when he resigned his Breath:
Its self does speak, because I have the loss,
His Death does make me go by Weeping Cross:
But when I do consider his great Gain,
It much does palliate my heavy Pain.
Expounding Scripture, Catechize and Creed,
Young Persons he delighted for to feed:
He Is not Dead, but he is gone to sleep
I Will dry my Eyes, and will forbear to weep.
Each Mourning Saint hold up your Drooping Head
Dear Holy Mr. Turnor is not Dead:
He Is done his Work, he is gone to rest,
And we shall see him raised amongst the Blessed;
His Life and Conversation might all teach,
And far exceed Eloquence of Speech;
For what he Preached he Practiced with Delight,
A Man most Sincere, Humble, and Upright:
A Saint full fraught with Pious Charity,
A Self-Denier of Worlds Vanity;
A Spirit Meek and Courteous unto all,
Supporting them that ready was to fall:
The Sin of Covetousness his Soul did hate,
And would admit of Passion at no rate;
Not slack at all in Works of Piety,
He Holy lived, and Sweetly he did Die:
His pains were sharp, and hard for Flesh to bear,
But of repining he took special care:
He like a Lamb surrendered up his Breath,
And patiently submitted unto Death:
His Soul did long for to be fixed above
For to behold the Lord which he did love.
On his Deathbed he often did express
His Love into the Father, yea no less;
Praising of God for Blessed Jesus,
Who dyed on the Cross to ease us:
He did Adore the Father, Son, and Spirit,
And now with him a Kingdom does inherit;
And to Gods Kingdom he has made increase,
And is ascended to the Urn of Peace.
An Epitaph on the Worthy Mr. JOHN TVRNOR.
Honored Earth that does enclose
A Blessed Saint to take Repose;
For ever him thou can not keep,
Therefore we will forbear to weep:
Grief to his Flock, a Dolesome Day
When such a Shepherd was taken away:
So great a Light to be put out,
May humble Hearts that are full stout.
When Stars do fall that are so bright,
O how can we expect but Night:
He Is gone unto the silent Grave,
And yield Earth what Earth did Crave;
But time will come when you will see
That Holy TVRNOR raised shall be.
And one of them that raises first
A Spiritual Body with the Just;
Though in the Grave his Body sleep,
His Blessed Lord his Soul does keep;
And when the Trumpet sounds High,
And at Midnight there is a Cry,
And Jesus Christ aloud does call
Arise to Judgment great and small;
Then you his Flock his Face shall see,
And never more shall parted be.
London, Printed for Richard Baldwin, in Warwick Lane, 1692. 191.


