AN ELEGY, [SACRED] To the Immortal MEMORY of that most Renowned, Religious,
Prudent, and Victorious Commander, HENRY IRETON, Late Lord Deputy of IRELAND,
etc.
There let the Thunder roll then! And the Air
In startling summons to the World, declare
Heaven's righteous wrath! And be the growing Fate
Of Grief more great, 'cause inarticulate!
'Twas not unknown, his early thoughts did take
So much of glory, that he kept awake
Honor and Justice, and revived Fame
Bedridden, and speechIess but for IRETONS Name;
'Twas He, whose courage warmed her, when he stood
The English Shield, and through a crimson Flood
To Freedom marched; when Death was only seen
In showrs of Bullets to come storming in,
Untaught to cease, till Victory did rest
Her weary wings upon his plumed Crest,
The strength and safety to this State he brought,
The many Towns he won, the Fields he fought
Shall best express him, and sound always forth
The Height and Heat of his unequalled Worth,
And, making good his Tears with salter Brine,
The fiercer Shanon with the Thames shall join:
Ireland by wary Mariners eschew'd
As Saints do Altars drenched in humane blood,
By Him finds new Observance, and His Hand
Began the way, to expiate that Land;
So sure were all the Counsels which he gave,
As none but IRETON could sad IRELAND save,
And yet the Land so wild, the Air so ill,
That naught but IRELAND could our IRETON kill.
What Art can reach his Verue, to set down
With how much Courage he put off the Gown
To unsheath his sword, when, like a Lion, He
Fought to restore the English LIBERTY?
And still though active, yet no (...) Fate
Could tax his Sword as undeliberate;
For so discreet a Valor did command
His Wars, that, He being present, Fate might stand,
Or pass unknown, and we almost might be
Secure, to say, That Providence was He;
But Truth and safe Divinity has taught
To give a check to th^^ profaner thought;
For GOD was always with him, He aright,
Did gidde his Heart, and taught his Hands to fight,
So that in all his Wars there did appear
No fight of wrong, nor any sense of Fear;
But in a perfect harmony 'twas shown,
The Saint and Soldier could be both in one;
And his brave Army did so strictly live,
After the great Examples he did give,
That foreign Nations might with wonder see
How well Religion did with Arms agree;
And now those Wars expiring, and the high
And joyful sound of Union drawing nigh,
After he Truth and Freedom did restore
To Earth, He, finding he could do no more,
To Heaven ascended: where He first is seen
Next to his God, an armed Cherubin.
HIS EPITAPH.
Why weep you here? and take this Stone to be
In vain the Prison of Eternity?
Let your translated Piety and Love,
Look high and joyful on the rooms above,
In those great IRETON lives, the Heavens enshrine,
And court his glorious soul, which now does shine
More bright by Death: Yet weep! for yet this Tomb
Holds Natures chiefest Treasurer: would you come,
And all Perfections in one Volume see,
Here every Dust would make a History,
Which he that looks on, and not spares a groan,
Adds but more marble to His Buriall-Stone.
FINIS.
LONDON, Printed by J.C. and T.W. 1652. 30.


