AN ELEGY On the MODERN HERO, REDMON o HANLAN, Surnamed The TORY.
COme Gentle Muse, assist my pen
To praise the worthiest of men,
With whom, your ancient Heroes put
In balance, weigh not shell of Nut.
As for great Hanlan's reputation,
We shall evince by demonstration.
Of them, let Jason first be named,
For clean conveyance so much famed.
For whose each lock of Golden wool,
Bold Redmon has a thousand stole.
Nor did their owners escape so cheap,
He often took both Fleece, and Sheep.
Nay Mercury himself, though made
A God, for his great skill in the trade;
Compared, would look like Picaroon
To First-Rate Ship, or Star to Moon.
Next Hercules, about whose Club
Strange tales you tell, like those of Tub:
Would the unequal combat shun,
O're-match'd by his dead doing Gun.
For if with Blunderbuss compared,
Like all that met it, 'twoud have feared.
The force of this Achilles hide
Well tan'd as 'twas, would never abide.
Should lusty Blunder once assault him,
In spite of Fate it would have mauled him.
Hector; that of the Greeks made spoil,
As you and Homer keep a coyl;
Never bolder set upon his foes
Than he, who told them to their nose,
You must deliver up your Purse,
Or by my Shoul you will fare the worse.
Which said, if enemy seemed stout,
Soon half a dozen balls flew out,
And strait one Army fell to rout.
Which if our party no worse fared
Than losing Prize, and being scared:
For the famous Warrior was complete
In all that makes a General great,
Knew when to fight, when to retreat.
In which no Mountains, Rocks, or Woods,
Could stop his course, nor Bogs, nor Floods;
As often he manifested, when
Pursued by Floyd, and his six men.
Showing a pair of heels so light,
That some mistook it for plain flight.
But they are much mista'ne, alas!
And chiefly in the Millers case:
For though his men and he retired
With speed, after the Mill was fired;
Yet none must think the Count would run
From one old Miller and his Son.
Attribute then the haste was made
Only to fear of Ambuscade.
But death, although he ran so fast,
Has got the heels of him at last.
For which, the tears are numberless
That have been shed, as you may guess.
But to his friends one comfort's left,
Although he be of life bereft,
He shall not partake the common fate;
For neither Redmon's limbs nor pate
Shall under sordid rubbish lie
Forgot, but shall be placed on high,
Monuments of his Chivalry.
Where, if his shining Beard, and Hair,
Should like some new made Star appear,
(For Stars, in times past, Heroes were)
To all that dare his Rivals be,
They will portend black destiny.
3 December 1601

