A NEW DICTIONARY OF THE Terms Ancient and Modern OF THE Canting Crew.

In its several TRIBES, OF Gypsies, Beggars, Thieves, Cheats, etc.

WITH An Addition of some Proverbs, Phrases, Figurative Speeches, etc.

Useful for all sorts of People, (especially Foreigners) to secure their Money
and preserve their Lives; besides very Diverting and Entertaining, being wholly
New.

By B. E. Gent.

LONDON, Printed for W. Hawes at the Rose in Ludgate Street, P. Gilbourne at
the Corner of Chancery Lane in Fleet Street, and W. Davis* at the Black Bull in
Cornhill.

THE PREFACE.
BEfore I present the Reader, with the following Dictionary of the Beggars and
Gypsies Cant, I think it not amiss to premise a few Words concerning the
Beggars and Gypsies themselves, by way of an Historical Account, of the
Antiquity of the one, and the Universality of the other.

It makes not a little for the Honor of the Beggars, that their Original
according to some Accounts, is no less Ancient than that of Christianity it
self; for in the Opinion of Charron, as the Slaves went off, the Beggars came
in their Place. So much at least is granted, That the Jews who allowed of
Slaves, had no Beggars. What shall we say, but that if it be true, that the
Emancipating or Freeing of Slaves was indeed the making of Beggars; it follows
that Christianity which is daily employed in Redeeming Slaves from the Turks,
Ransomed no less than all at once from Pagan Slavery at first, at no dearer a
Rate, than the Rentcharge of maintaining the Beggars, as the Price and
Purchase of our Freedoms.

As for the Antiquity of the English Beggars, it may be observed, That the
first Statute which makes Provision for the Parish-Poor, is no older than Queen
Elizabeth; from which it may be fairly Collected, That they entered with us upon
the Dissolution of the Abbeys, as with them abroad, upon the Delivery of the
Slaves.

For the Gypsies, they and the Foul Disease have alike the Fate to run through
a Geography of Names, and to be made free of as many Countries, as almost there
are Languages to call them Names in; for as the French call the Pox, the
Italian Disease, they again give it to the Spaniards, as these to the French;
so the French call the Gypsies Boemie, or Bohemians, belike, because they made
their first Appearance in Bohemia of any Part of Europe; the Italians Name them
Zingari or Saracens, the Spaniards Itanos as we Egyptians; whether it be, that
the Italians give them the Turks, as the Spaniards give them the Moors, as
being both the next Neighbors to each; I take not upon me to Determine, only it
may be observed, betwixt the Complement of either kind, the Odds is no greater
than this, of giving a Nation a Clap, or of laying a brood of Bastards at it is
Door.

Though Holland has no Beggars, if the Dutch themselves are not the greatest
Beggars in the World; and Switzerland has no Thieves, if the Swiss who are
altogether Soldiers, are not the greatest of Thieves. Yet, I say, neither the
States that are without Beggars, nor the Cantons that are without Thieves, are
notwithstanding either the one or the other, without Gypsies. So as what they
want of Beggars and Thieves in point of Antiquity, the Gypsies claim above
both, in point of Universality.

But though Gypsies are found in all Christian Countries, yet are they not in
all Countries alike; their Nature and Genius being diverse, in proportion to
the Countries amongst whom they Stroul; so that the same Question remains upon
them, as is started of the Winds, as Universal Travelers as the Gypsies, that
it seems a Doubt, Whether they partake more of the Nature of the Countries
whence they rise, or of those through which they Pass?

Nor is it also new to meet the Beggars and the Proverbs together, for the
Fashion is as old as Plautus, who puts the Proverbs and the Jests in the Mouth
of his Slaves. And in the Character of Sancho Pancha, Cervantes has Trod in the
same Steps; in the History of Don Quixot, Sancho being distinguished no less by
his Proverbs, than his Ass. And between the Slaves and the Beggars, the
Difference is no greater, than between Fathers and their Heirs.

If some Terms and Phrases of better Quality and Fashion, keep so ill Company,
as Tag-Rag and Long-Tail; you are to remember, that it is no less then
Customary, for Great Persons a broad to hide themselves often in Disguises
among the Gypsies; and even the late L. of Rochester among us, when time was,
among other Frolicks, was not ashamed to keep the Gypsies Company.

A NEW DICTIONARY.
A B
A B
A Bram-cove, c. a Naked or poor Man, also a lusty strong Rogue.

Abram-men, c. the seventeenth Order of the Canting-crew. Beggars antickly
tricked up with Ribbands, Red Tape, Foxtails, Rags, etc. pretending Madness to
palliate their Thefts of Poultrey, Linen, etc.

A C
Academy, c. a Bawdyhouse, also an University, or School to learn Genteleman
like Exercises.

Accoutrements, c. fine rigging (now) for Men or Women, (formerly) only
Trappings for Horses. Well accoutred, c. gentilly dressed.

Acquests, and Acquisitions, the rights of Fortune purchased by Labor, Arts or
Arms, opposed to Hereditary and Paternal.

Acteon, a Cuckold.

Acteon'd, Cuckolded, or made a Cuckold of.

A D
A D
Adam's-ale, Water.

Adam-tiler, c. a Pickpocket's Camerade, who receives Stolen Money or Goods,
and scowers off with them.

Addle-pate, one full of Whimsies and Projects, and as empty of Wit.

Addle-plot, a Martinmar-all.

Adrift, loose. I Will turn ye adrift, a Tar-phrase; I Will prevent* ye doing me
any harm.

A F
Affidavit-men, Knights of the Post, Mercenary Swearers for Hire, Inhabitants
(formerly) of White Friars, now dispersed.

Aft and Abaft, toward the Stern, or hinder Part of the Ship.

A I
Aim, Endeavor or Design. To aim, or level at a Mark, he has mist his Aim or
End.

Air of a Song the Tune.

Air of a Face or Picture, the Configuration and consent of Parts in each.

Airy, Light, brisk, pleasant; also a Nest of Hawks. He is an Airy Fellow.

A L
Alabaster, mixed by all the knavish Perfumers with the Hair-Powder they sell,
to make it weigh heavy, being of it self very cheap, that their Gain may be the
greater, found destructive to the Hair and Health.

Alsatia White Friars.

Alsatia the higher, the same.

Alsatia the lower, the Mint in Southwark.

Alsatians, the Inhabitants, such as, broken Gentlemen, Tradesmen, etc. Lurking
there.

Allay, the Embasing of a purer and finer Metal, by mixing it with an inferior
or coarser Metal, as of pale Gold with a Silver-Allay, or of deep Gold with an
Allay of Copper; also whatever is used to qualify what is bitter or nauseous in
Compositions, as gilding of Pills, sweetning of Boluses, or Powders.

Aloft, above or over Head; also anciently an Upper-room or Garret, now more
used in Compounds, as Cock-loft, Hayloft, etc.

Altemall, altogether.

Altitudes, the Man is in his Altitudes, he is Drunk.

A M
Ambidexter, one that goes snacks in gaming with both Parties; also a Lawyer
that takes Fees of Plaintiff and Defendant at once.

Ambient-Air, Air abroad opposed to that pent and shut up in Wells, Vaults,
Caves, etc. Or else the outward Air in the House, opposed to that shut up in
the Cavities of Vessels, Glasses, Vials, etc.

Ambrol, among the Tarrs for Admiral.

Amphibious Creatures of a doubtful kind, or of a double Element; as a Bat is
between a Bird and a Beast; an Otter between a Beast and a Fish; and a Puffin
with the rest of the Sea-Fowl, between Fowl and Fish.

Amuse, to throw dust in one's Eyes, by diverting one from a serious Thought to
a pleasant one.

Amusement, a Blind or Disengagement from deep Thoughts to more Diverting.

A N
An Ark, c. a Boat or Wherry.

Anglers, c. Cheats, petty Thievs, who have a Stick with a hook at the end,
with which they pluck things out of Windows, Grates, etc. also those that draw
in People to be cheated.

Animal, a Fool. He is a mere Animal, he is a very silly Fellow.

Antechambers, forerooms for receiving of Visits, as the back and Drawing Rooms
are for Lodgings, anciently called Diningrooms.

Antidote, a very homely Woman, also a medicine against Poison.

Ancient, at Sea, for Ensign, or Flag.

Anticks, little Images on Stone, on the out side of old Churches. Antic
postures or dresses, such as are odd, ridiculous and singular, the habits and
motions of Fools, Zanies, or Merry-andrews, of Mountebanks, with Ribbands,
mismatched colors and Feathers.

Antiquary, a curious Critic in old Coins, Stones and Inscriptions, in
Worm-eaten Records, and ancient Manuscripts; also one that affects and blindly
doats, on Relics, Ruins, old Customs, Phrases and Fashions.

Antiquated Rogue, Old, out of date, that has forgot or left off his Trade of
Thieving, etc. also superannuated, obsolete Customs, or Words, such as are worn
out, out of use and Fashion.

A P
Apart, severally, asunder.

Apartments, Rooms apart, private Lodgings, inner Chambers, secret and
withdrawn from the rest. Recesses of the House opposed to the Ante chambers.

A R
Arack, an East-Indian Brandy, or strong Spirit drawn from Rice, and
(sometimes) Roes of Fish, best when old, much used in Punch, the double
distilled Goa most esteemed.

Arch, Rogue, Witty. Wag, Pleasant. Whore, Cunning.

Arms, to bear Arms, a Profession not unbecoming a Gentleman, for Books and
Arms are Gentlemen's Burdens.

Armor, in his Armor Pot-valiant.

Aristippus, a Diet-drink, or Decoction of Sarsa, China, etc. Sold at certain
Coffee-houses, and drank as Tea.

Arsworm, a little diminutive Fellow.

A S
Ascendant, Power, Influence, as, he has the Ascendant over him, or an Hank
upon him; also the Horoscope, or point of the Ecliptic that rises at one's
Nativity.

Assig, now used for Assignation, an Appointment or meeting.

Assuming, conceited, as, an Assuming Fellow, one that abounds in his own
Sense, and imposes it upon every Man else.

Assurance, Confidence, as, a Man of Assurance, one that has a stock of
Confidence.

A U
Aunt, a Bawd, as one of my Aunts, one of the same Order.

Autem, c. a Church, also Married.

Autem-mort, c. a Married-woman, also the Twenty fourth Order of the Canting
Tribe, Traveling, Begging (and often Stealing) about the Country, with one
Child in Arms, another on Back, and (sometimes) leading a third in the Hand.

Auxiliary-beauty. Dress, Paint, Patches, setting of Eyebrows, and licking the
Lips with red.

B
Babbler, a great Talker.

Backed, dead, as he wishes the old Man backed, he longs to have his Father upon
six Men's shoulders, or as his Back's up, he is in a fume, or angry.

Bacon, as he saved his Bacon, he has escaped with a whole Skin. A good voice
to beg Bacon, said in jear of an ill voice.

Badge, a mark of Distinction among poor People; as, Porters, Watermen,
Parish-Pensioners and Hospital-boys, Blew-coats and Badges being the ancient
Liveries.

Badgers, they that buy up a quantity of Corn and hoard it up in the same
Market, till the price rises; or carry it to another, where it bears a better.
Also a Beast for sport, Badger Eartheth, Lodges.

Badjob, an ill bout, bargain, or business.

Baffle, to worst, or defeat. A baffled Cause, worsted, defeated.

Baggage, a Whore or Slut.

Bagonet or Bionet, a Dagger.

Bail-dock, the place in the Court, where the Prisoners are kept till called to
be Arraigned.

Balsom, c. Money.

Balderdash, ill, unpleasant, unwholesom mixtures of Wine, Ale, etc.

Banbury-story* of a Cock and a Bull, silly chat.

Banditti, Highwaymen, (Horse or Foot) Rogues of any kind, now, but strictly
Italian Outlaws.

Bandog, a Bailiff, or his Follower, a Sergeant, or his Yeoman; also a very
fierce Mastive.

Bandore, a Widows mourning Peak; also a Musical Instrument.

Bandy, a play at Ball with a Bat; also to follow a Faction.

Bandy-legg'd, crooked.

Bang, a blow, to Bang, to beat.

Banillas, a Seed growing in a Cod, somewhat resembling a Kidneybean, on Trees
in the Indies, much used in Chocolate.

Banter, a pleasant way of prating, which seems in earnest, but is in jest, a
sort of ridicule, What do you banter me? i. e. do you pretend to impose upon
me, or to expose me to the Company, and I not know your meaning.

Bantling, a Child.

Barker, a Salesman's Servant that walks before the Shop, and cries, Cloaks,
Coats, or Gowns, what do you lack, Sir?

Barketh, the Noise a Fox makes at Rutting time.

Barnacle, c. a good job, or a snack easily got, also Fish growing on Ships
sides when foul, and a Brake for unruly Horses Noses, also the Gratuity to
Jockeys, for selling or buying Horses.

Barnadcles, c. the Irons Fellons wear in Goal.

Bar-wig, between a bob and a long one.

Basset. a Game at Cards.

Baste, to beat, as, I Will baste your sides Sirrah, I Will bang you lustily.

Bastonado-ing, a Cudgelling.

Batten, c. to Fatten.

Battner, c. an Ox.

Batter, the Ingredients for a Pudding or Pan-cake, when they are all mixed and
stirred together.

Battery, beating, assault, also, striking with the Edge and feeble of one's
Sword, upon the edge and feeble of his Adversaries.

Batter'd-bully, an old well cudgelled and bruised huffing Fellow.

Baubee, a halfpenny.

Baubels, c. Jewels, also trifles and Childrens Play-things.

Bawdy-baskets, c. the Twenty third Rank of Canters, with Pins, Tape, Obscene
Books, etc. to sell, but live more by Stealing.

Bawdy-batchelors, that live long Unmarried.

Bawdy-house-bottle, a very small one.

Bay-windows, embowed, as of old, standing out from the rest of the Building.
Stand at bay, as Deer will, when closely pursued, or being hard run, turn Head
against the Hounds.

B E
Beach, the Seashore. or Strand.

Bear-garden-discourse, common, filthy, nasty Talk. If it had been a Bear it
would have bit you, of him that makes a close search after what just Iies under
his Nose. As good take a Bear by the Tooth, of a bold desperate Undertaking. Go
like the Bear to the Stake, or hang an Arse. As many tricks as a dancing Bear*
or more than are good.

Beard splitter, an enjoyer of Women.

Beats, the noise a Hare makes at Rutting time.

Beating, striking the Feeble of the Adversary's Sword, with the Fort and edge
of one's own.

Beau, a silly Fellow that follows the Fashions nicely, Powdering his Neck,
Shoulders, etc.

Beautrap, a Sharper.

Beck, c. a Beedle.

Beetle-head, a heavy dull Block-head.

Beldam, a scolding old Woman.

Belle, a nice, gay, fluttring foolish Woman that follows every Fashion, also
fair.

Belloweth, see Roe.

Belly-cheat, c. an Apron.

Belsh, all Malt drinks.

Belweather, chief or Leader of the Flock, Master of misrule, also a clamorous
noisy Man.

Been. c. good.

Bene-cove, c. a good Fellow.

Bene-ship, c. very good, also Worship.

Bene-bowse, c. strong Liquor, or very good Drink.

Bene-darkmans, c. good night.

Benfeakers of Gybes, c. Counterseiters of Passes.

Benefit of Clergy, see Neck-verse.

Ben, a Fool.

Bennish, Foolish.

Beside-himself, distracted, beside the Cushion, a mistake, beside the Lighter,
in a bad condition.

Besom, a Broom.

Bestrid, Mounted or got up astride.

Bess, c. bring bess and glym, c. forget not the Instrument to break open the
Door and the Dark-lanthorn.

Betty, c. a small Engine to force open the Doors of Houses; also, a quarter
Flask of Wine.

Bever, an afternoon's Lunchion.

Beveridge, a Garnishmoney, for any thing; also Wine and Water.

Bevy, a company of Roes, Quails, etc. Bevy Grease. Roes fat.

Bewildred, at a stand or nonplus in Business, not knowing what to do, also
lost in a Wood.

B I
Biddy, a Chicken, also Bridget.

Big, choice Barley-making, the belt Malt.

Biggin, a Woman's Coif.

Biggot, an obstinate blind Zealot.

Biggotry, an obstinate blind Zeal.

Bil-boa, c. a Sword.

Bite the Bil from the Cull c. whip the Sword from the Gentleman's side.

Bilk, c. to cheat. Bilk the Ratling-cove, c. to sharp the Coachman of his
hire.

Bilk'd, c. defeated, disappointed.

Billeting. Foxes Excrements. Billeting of Soldiers, Quartering them.

Billet-deux, a Loveletter.

Bill-of sale, a Bandore, or Widow's Peak.

Billingsgate-dialect, Scolding, ill Language, foul Words.

Binding, securing the Adversary's Sword with Eight or ten Inches of one's one,
upon Five or six of his.

Bing, c. to go, etc.

Bing awast, c. get you hence. Bing'd awast in a Darkmans, c. stole away in the
Nightime. Bing we to Rume vile. c go we to London.

Bingo, c. Brandy.

Bingo-boy, c. a great Drinker or Lover thereof.

Bingo-club, c. a set of Rakes, Lovers of that Liquor.

Birds of a Feather, c. Rogues of the same gang; also, those of the same
Profession, Trade or Employment. To kill two Brids with one Stone, to dispatch
two Businesses at one Stroke.

Bird-witted, Wildheaded, not Solid or Stayed, opposed to a Sober-Wit.

Bit, c. Robbed, Cheated or Outwitted. Also Drunk, as, he has bit his Grannam;
he is very Drunk. Bit the Blow, c. accomplished the Theft, played the Cheat, or
done the Feat: You have Bit a great* Blow, c. you have Robbed some body of a
great deal, or to a considerable value.

Bite, c. a Rogue, Sharper or Cheat; also a Woman's Privities.

Bite the Biter, c. to Rob the Rogue, Sharp the Sharper, or Cheat the Cheater.

Bite the Cully, c. to put the cheat on the silly Fellow.

Bite the Roger, c. to Steal the Portmanteau. Bite the Wiper, c. to Steal the
Hand-kerchief. The Cull wapt the Morts bite. c. the Fellow enjoyed the Whore
briskly. He will not bite, or swallow the Bait. He will not be drawn in, to bite
on the bit; to be pinched, or reduced to hard Meat, a scanty or sorry sort of
Living.

Bitter-cold, very Cold,

B L
Black and White, under one's Hand, or in Writing.

Blab, a Sieve of Secrets, a very prating Fellow that tells all he knows.

Black-box, a Lawyer.

Black-coat, a Parson.

Black-guard, Dirty, Nasty, Tattered roguish Boys, that attend (at the
Horse-Guards) to wipe Shoes, clean Boots, water Horses, or run of Errands.

Blackjack, a Leather-Jug to drink in.

Black-Indies, Newcastle, from whence the Coals are brought

Blackmuns, c. Hoods and Scarves of Alamode and Lustrings.

Black-mouth, foul, malicious, Railing, or Reflecting.

Blacken, to blast or asperse.

Black-spy, c. the Devil.

Blank, baffled, downlook't, sheepish, guilty.

Bleak, sharp, piercing Weather.

Bleach, to whiten.

Bleaters, c. they that are cheated by Jack-in-a box.

Bleating-cheat, c. a Sheep.

Bleed freely, c. part with their Money easily*

Blemish, when Hounds or Beagles find where the Chase has been, and make a
proffer to enter, but return.

Blew-John, Wash, or Afterwort.

Blind-cheeks, the Breech. Kiss my Blind-cheeks, Kiss my Ar --

Blind-excuse, a sorry shift. A Blind Alehouse, or Blind Lane, obscure, of no
Sign, Token, or Mark.

Blind-harpers, c. Beggars counterfeiting blindness, with Harps or Fiddles.

Blind-man's-buff, a play used by Children blindfolded. Bluffed, contracted
from Blind-man's-buff, he that is Blinded in the Play.

Blind-man's-holiday, when it is too dark to see to Work.

Blind side, every Man's weak Part.

Bloated, Smoked Herings; also, one puffed or swelled with false Fat, and has
not a Healthy Complexion.

Blobber-lipp'd, very thick, hanging down, or turning over.

Block, a filly Fellow.

Block-houses, c. Prisons, also Forts upon Rivers.

Blockish, Stupid.

Blockstock, See Block.

Bloss, c. a Thief or Shop-lift, also, a Bullies pretended Wife, or Mistress,
whom he guards, and who by her Trading supports him, also a Whore.

Blot the Skrip and jark it, c. to stand Engaged, or be Bound for any body.

Blot in the Tables, what is fair to be hit.

Blot in a Scutcheon, a blemish or imputation upon any one.

Blood, 'twill breed ill Blood, of what will produce a misunderstanding or
Difference.

Blower, c. a Mistress, also a Whore.

Blowing, c. the same.

Blow-off-on the grounsills, c. to lie with a Woman on the Floor or Stairs.

Blown upon, seen by several, or slighted; not blown upon, a secret piece of
News or Poetry, that has not taken air, spick and span-new. To blow Hot and
Cold with a Breath, or play fast and loose.

Blow off the loose corns, c. to Lie now and then with a Woman. It is blowed,
c. it is made public, and all have notice.

Blubber, Whale-oyl, (imperfect.)

Blubbering, much Crying.

Bluffer, c. a Host, Innkeeper or Victualler, to look bluff, to look big, or
like Bull-beef.

Blunder, an Ignorant Mistake.

Blunderbuss, a Dunce, an unganely*Fellow, also a short Gun carrying Twenty
Pistol-Bullets at one Charge.

Bluster, to huff, a blustering Fellow, a rude rattling Fellow.

Boar, see wild Boar.

B O
Boarding-school, c. Bridewell.

Boarding-scholars, c. Bridewell-birds.

Bob, c. a Shop-lift's camrade, affistant, or receiver; also a very short
Periwig, and for Robert. It Is all bob, c. all is safe, the Bet is secured

Bob'd, c. Cheated, Tricked, Disappointed, or Balked.

Bob-tail, a light Woman, also a short Arrow-head.

Bode-ill, to presage or betoken ill. Also in Holland, a Bode is a Messinger,
attending the Burgo-Masters, and executing their Orders.

Bodle, Six make a Penney, Scotch Coin.

Boer, a Country-Fellow or Clown.

Boerish, Rude, Unmannerly, Clownish.

Boggs, Irish Fastnesses or Marshes.

Bog-houses, Privies.

Bog-landers, Irish Men.

Bog-trotters, Scotch or North Country Mosstroopers or Highway Men formerly,
and now Irish Men.

Boisterous Fellow or Sea, Blustering, Rude, Rough.

Boldface, Impudent. A Bold Harbor, where Ships may Ride at Anchor with
safety, a bold Shore where Ships may Sail securely.

Bolter of White Friars, c. one that Peeps out, but dares not venture abroad,
as a Coney bolts out of the Hole in a Warren, and starts back again.

Bolting, the leaping by one's Adversary's Leftside quite out of all measure.

Boltsprit, a Nose. He has broke his Boltsprit, he has lost his Nose with the
Pox.

Bombast-poetry, in Words of lofty Sound and humble Sense.

Bone, c. to Apprehend, Seize, Take or Arrest. I Will Bone ye, c. I Will cause you
to be Arrested. We shall be Bon'd, c. we shall be Apprehended for the Robbery.
The Cove is Bon'd and gone to the Whit, c. the Rogue is taken up and carried to
Newgate, or any other Goal. The Cull has Bon'd the Fen, (for Fence) or Bloss
that bit the Blow, c. the Man has Taken the Thief that Robbed his House, Shop,
or Picked his Pocket. He has bit his Blow, but if he be Bon'd, he must shove the
Tumbler, c. he has Stole the Goods, or done the Feat, but if he be Taken, he will
be Whipped at the Carttail. I have Bon'd her Dudds, Fagg'd, and Brushed, c. I
have took away my Mistress Clothes, Beat her, and am troop'd off. Boning the
Fence, c. finding the Goods where Concealed, and Seizing, he made no bones of
it, he swallowed it without Drinking after it.

Bonny-clapper, sower Butter-milk.

Booby, a dull heavy Lob.

Booberkin, the same.

Boon, a Gift, Reward, or Gratification.

Boon-companion, a merry Drinking Fellow.

Boot, a Scotch Torture, or Rack, for the Leg, is to draw to Confession.

What Boots it? What Avails it?

Booty-play, False, Cheating, also Plunder, he Bowls Booty, when great Odds are
laid, and he goes Halves, his Cast is designed by Bad.

Boracho, a But, a Drunkard, and a Hogskin.

Board, c. a Shilling, half a Board, c. Sixpence.

Bordel-lo, a Bawdy House.

Boreson or Bauson, a Badger.

Bottle-head, void of Wit.

Bottom, a Man of no Bottom, of no Bafis of Principles, or no settlement of
Fortune, or of no Ground in his Art. Let every Tub stand on it is own Bottom, or
every one look to his own footing. A Tale of a Tub with the Bottom out, a
sleeveless frivolous Tale.

Boughs, he is up in the Boughs, or a top of the House, of one upon the Rant,
or in a great Ferment.

Bounce, to boast and vapor. A mere Bounce, a Swaggering Fellow.

Bouncer, c. a Bully.

Bout, a Trial, Act, Essay.

Bowse, c. Drink, or to Drink, see Benbowse and Rumbowse.

Bowsy. c. Drunk. We Bows'd it about, we Drank damned hard.

Bowsingken, c. an Alehouse. The Cul tipped us a Hog, which we melted in
Rumbowse, c. the Gentleman gave us a Shilling, which we spent in Strong Dink.

Box, to Fight with the Fists. Box it about Boys, Drink briskly round. In a
wrong Bow, of one that has taken wrong measures, or made alse steps. A pretty
Box, a Complete little House, also a small drinking place.

B R
Bracket-face, Ugly, Homely, Illfavor'd.

Bragget, Meed, and Ale sweetened with Honey.

Brag, Braggadoeio, A vapouring, Swaggering, Bullying Fellow.

Brat, a little Child.

Branchers, Canary-Birds of the first Year.

Bravado, a Vapouring, or Bouncing.

Bravo, a Mercenary Murderer, that will Kill any Body.

Brawl, Squabble, or Quarrel. To Brangle, and Brawl, to Squabble and Scold.

Brazen-faced, Bold, Impudent, Audacious.

Bread and Cheese Bowling-green, a very ordinary one, where they play for Drink
and Tobacco. all wet, as it is called.

Bread and Cheese Constables, that trats their Neighbors and Friends at their
coming into Office with such mean Food only.

Breaking Shins, c. borrowing of Money.

Breast, in the breast of the Judge, what he keeps in Reserve, or Suspense.

Briers, in the Briers, in trouble.

Brook, he cannot brook it, bear or endure it.

Brickle, Brittle, apt to Break.

Bristol-milk, Sherry.

Bristol-stone, Sham-Diamonds.

Broached, Opinion or Doctrine, Published, Divulged.

Brimming, a Boor's copulating with a Sow, also now used for a Man's with --

Brim, or Brimstone, a very Impudent, Lewd Woman.

Brock, see Heart.

Brock's Sister, see Hind.

Broke, Officers turned out of Commission, Traders Absconding, Quitting their
Business and Paying no Debts.

Bromigham-conscience, very bad, Bromigham-protestants, Dissenters or Whiggs.
Bromigham-wine, Balderdash, Sophisticate Taplash.

Brother-starling, that Lies with the same Woman, or Builds in the same Nest.
Brother of the Blade, a Sword-Man or Soldier. Gussit, a Pimp, Procurer, also, a
Whore-Master. Quill, of the Scribbling Tribe. String, a Fiddler, or Musician.



Brothel-house, a Bawdy House.

Brow-beat. to Cow, to Daunt, to awe with Big Looks, or Snub.

Brown-study, a Deep Thought or Speculation.

Brush, c. to Fly or Run away. The Cully is Brusht or Rubbed, c. the Fellow is
marched off, or Broke. Bought a Brush, c. Run away: Also a small Faggot, to
light the other at Taverns, and a Fox's Tail.

Brusher, c. an exceeding full Glass.

B U
Bub, c. Drin^k. Rum-bub, c. very good Tip.

Bub, or Bubble, c. one that is Cheated; also an Easy, Soft Fellow.

Bubber, c. a drinking Bowl; also a great Drinker, and he that used to Steal
Plate from Publick-houses.

Bube, c. the Pox. The Mort has tipped the Bube upon the Cully, c the Wench has
Clapped the Fellow.

Buckaneers, West-Indian Pirates, of several Nations; also the Rude Rabble in
Jamaica.

Buckle, to Bend or give Way. He Will buckle to no Man, he will not Yield or Stoop
to any Man.

Buck, Great Buck, the Sixth Year. Buck of the first Head, the Fifth Year, a
Sore, the Fourth Year, a Sorel, the Third Year, a Pricket, the Second Year, a
Fawn, the First Year. A Buck Lodges. Rouse the Buck, Dislodge him. A Buck
Growneth or Troateth, makes a Noise at Rutting time.

Buck-fitches, c. old Leacherous, Nasty, Stinking Fellows; also He Polecats,
and their Fur

Buck's Face, a Cuckold.

Buck, Copulation of Conies

Bucksom, Wanton, Merry.

Budge, c. one that slips into an House in the Dark, and takes Cloaks, Coats,
or what comes next to Hand, marching off with them; also Lambs-fur, and to
stir, or move. Standing Budge, c. the Thieves Scout or Perdu.

Bufe, c. a Dog.

Buffcoat, a Soldier, or Redcoat.

Buffer, c. a Rogue that kills good sound Horses, only for their Skins, by
running a long Wyre into them, and sometimes knocking them on the Head, for the
quicker Dispatch.

Buffenapper, c. a Dogstealer, that Trades in Setters, Hounds, Spaniels* Lap,
and all sorts of Dogs, Selling them at a round Rate, and himself or Partner
Stealing them away the first opportunity.

Buffers-nab, c. a Dog's Head, used in a Counterfeit Seal to a false Pass.

Buffle-head, a Foolish Fellow.

Buffoon, a Great Man's Jester or Fool.

Buffoonery, Jesting or playing the Fool's Part. To stand Buff, to stand
Tightly or Resolutely to any thing.

Bugher, c. a Dog.

Bugging, G. taking Money by Bailiffs and Sergeants of the Defendant not to
Arrest him.

Busy-bodies, Pryers into other Folks Concerns, such as thrust their Sickle in
another's Harvest; and will have an Oar in every Boat. As busy as a Hen with
one Chick, of one that has a great deal of business and nothing to do

Bulchim, a Chubbingly Boy or Lad.

Bulls-Eye, c. a Crown or Five shilling Piece.

Bull-head, see Miller's Thumb.

Bull, an absurd contradiction or incongruity; also false Hair worn (formerly
much) by Women. A Town-bull, a Whore-master. To look like Bull-beef* to look
Big and Grim.

Bulk and File, c. one jostles while the other Picks the Pocket.

Bulker, c. one that lodges all Night on Shopwindows and Bulkheads.

Bulky, strong like common Oil, also of large bulk or size.

Bullet-headed, a dull silly Fellow.

Bully, c. a supposed Husband to a Bawd, or Whore; also a husfing Fellow.

Bully huff, c. a poor sorry Rogue that haunts Bawdy-houses, and pretends to
get Money out of Gentlemen and others, Rattling and Swearing the Whore is his
Wife, calling to his assistance a parcel of Hectors.

Bully-fop, c. a Maggot-pated, huffing, silly rattling Fellow.

Bully-rock, c. a Hector, or Bravo.

Bully-ruffins, c. Highway-men, or Padders.

Bully-trap, c. or Trapan, c. a Sharper, or Cheat.

Bum, a Bailiff, or Sergeant; also one's Breech.

Bumbast, see Bombast.

Bumbaste, to Beat much, or hard, on the Breech.

Bumble, Clothes setting in a heap, or ruck.

Bumfodder, what serves to wipe the Tail.

Bumpkin, a Country Fellow or Clown.

Bumper, a full Glass.

Bundletail, a short Fat or squat Lass.

Bungler, an unperforming Husband, or Mechanic.

Bung, c. a Purse, Pocket, or Fob.

Bung-nipper, c. a Cutpurse, or Pickpocket. Claying the Bung, c. cutting the
Purse, or Picking the Pocket.

Bunting-time, when the Grass is high enough to hide the young Men and Maids.

Buntlings, c. Pettycoats. Hale up the Mainbuntlings, c. take up the Woman's
Pettycoats.

Bunny, a Rabbit.

Bur* a Cloud, or dark Circle about the Moon, boding Wind and Rain; also the
part next to the Deer's Head.

Burlesque, Raillery in Verse, or Verse in Ridicule.

Burnish, to spread, or grow broad; also to refresh Plate, being the Trade of a

Burnisher, depending on Gold and Silver-Smiths.

Burnt, Poxt, or swingingly Clapped.

Burnt the Town, when the Soldiers leave the Place without paying their
Quarters.

Burre, a Hanger on, or Dependant.

Bustle, a Fray, Stir, Tumult in the Streets; also a Noise in any Place. What a
Bustle you make* What a Hurry or Rattle you Cause? Bustle about, to be very
Stirring, or bestir one's Stumps.

Butchered, Barbarously Murdered on the Ground, or Killed before his Sword is
out; also in Cold Blood.

Butter, c. to double or treble the Bet or Wager to recover all Losses: No
Butter will stick on his Bread, nothing thrives or goes forward in his Hand. He
knows on which side his Bread is Buttered, or the Stronger side, and his own
Interest.

Butter-boxes, Dutchmen.

Buttered Bun, Lying with a Woman that has been just Layn with by another Man.

Buttock, c. a Whore.

Buttock-broker, a Bawd, also a Match-maker. A Buttock and File, c. both Whore
and Pickpocket.

Buttock and Twang, or a downright Buttock and sham File, c. a Common Whore but
no Pickpocket.

Buzzard, c. a foolish soft Fellow, easily drawn in and Cullied or Trickt.

B Y
By-blow, a Bastard.

C
Cabal, a secret Junto of Princes, a seated knot of Statesmen, or of
Conspirators against the State in Counter-Cabal.

Cabbage, a Tailor, and what they pinch from the Clothes they make up; also
that part of the Deer's Head where the Horns are Planted.

Cabob, a Loin of Mutton Roasted with an Onyon betwixt each joint; a Turkish
and Persian Dish but now used in England.

Cacafuego, a Shite-fire; also a furious fierce Fellow.

Cackle, c. to discover. The Cull Cackles, c. the Rogue tells all.

Cackling-cheats, c. Chickens, Cocks or Hens.

Cackling-farts, c. Eggs.

Cadet, or Cadee, a Gentleman that Bears Arms in hopes of a Commission; also a
younger Brother.

Caffan, c. Cheese.

Cakehis, Cake is Dough, of a Miscarriage or failure of Business. The Devil
owed her a Cake, and has pai'd her a Loaf, when instead of a small, a very
great Disaster, or Misfortune has happened to a Woman.

Call, a Lesson, Blowed on the Horn to comfort the Hounds.

Caliver, a small Sea-Gun.

Call, c. a Cloak or Gown.

Cambridge-Fortune, a Woman without any Substance.

Cameleon-Diet, Air, or a very thin slender Diet.

Cameronians, Field-Conventiclers, (in Scotland) great outward Zealots, and
very squeemish Precisians.

Camesa, c. a Shirt or Shift.

Campaign-coat, Originally only such as Soldiers wore, but afterward a Mode in
Cities. See Surtout.

Canary-Bird, a little Arch or Knavish, a very Wag.

Cane upon Abel, a good Stick or Cudgel well-favoredly laid on a Man's
Shoulders.

Canal, a Channel, Kennel, Pipe, Passage, fine Pond, or small River.

Cannal, choice Coals, very Fat or Pitchy that Blaze and Burn pleasantly.

Canibal, a cruel rigid Fellow in dealing; also Men-Eaters.

Cank, c. Dumb. The Cull's Cank, c. the Rogue's Dumb.

Cannikin, c. the Plague, also (among the Dutch) a little Kan with a Spout to
pour out the Wine or* Beer, making it Froth As great as Cup and Cann; or as
great as two Inklemakers.

Cant, c. to speak, also (Cheshire) to grow Strong and Lusty; also to Kick or
throw any thing away.

Canterbury, a sort of a short or Hand-gallop; from the Road leading to that
famous City (of Kent) on which they Ride (for the most part) after that manner.

Canting, c. the Cipher or Mysterious Language, of Rogues, Gypsies, Beggars,
Thieves, etc.

Canting-crew, c. Beggars, Gypsies; also Dissenters in Conventicles, who affect
a disguised Speech, and disguised Modes of Speaking, and distinguish themselves
from others by a peculiar Snuffle and Tone, as the Shibboleth of their Party;
as Gypsies and Beggars have their peculiar Jargon; and are known no less by
their several Tones in Praying, than Beggars are by their whining Note in
Begging.

Cap, c. to Swear. I Will Cap downright, c. I Will Swear home. Or (in another
Sense) he may fling up his Cap after it* when a thing or business is past Hope.

Capitation Drugget, a Cheap, Slight Stuff, called so from the Tax of that Name.

Capricious, Whimsical* Fantastic, Freakish.

Captain-Hackum, c. a Fighting, Blustering Bully.

Captain-Queere-nabs, c. a Fellow in poor Cloths, or Shabby.

Captain-sharp, c. a great Cheat; also a Huffing, yet Sneaking, Cowardly Bully;
and a noted English Buckaneer.

Captain-Tom, a Leader of, and the Mob.

Captious, Touchy, Snuffy, apt to take Exception.

Caravan, c. a good round sum of Money about a Man, and him that is Cheated of
it; also a great Convoy of Arabian, Grecian, Persian, Turkish, and other
Merchants, Traveling with Camels from Place to Place; also a sort of Wagon.

Carbuncle-Face, very Red and full of large Pimples*

Card-Wool, to cleanse and prepare it for Spinning: Also a Game; a sure Card, a
trusty Tool, or Confiding Man; a cooling Card, cold comfort, no hope; a Leading
Card, an Example or Precedent.

Cargo, c. a good round Sum of Money about a Man; also the Lading of a Ship.

Carouse, to Drink hard, or Quaff heartily.

Carpet-road, Level and very good.

Carriers, Pigeons that will with safety, and almost incredible Swiftness
convey Letters from one Place to another, much used at Smyrna and Aleppo; also
Milk-womens Hirelings, or Servants, that carry the Pail Morning and Evening.

Carrots, Red hair'd People, from the Color of the well known Root of that
Name, whence came

Carrot-pated, used in derision.

Carted-Whore, Whipped publicly, and packt out of Town. The Cart before the
Horse, of a thing preposterous, and out of Place.

Cash, c. Cheese.

Case, c. a House, Shop, or Warehouse; also a Bawdy House. Toute the Case, c.
to view, mark, or eye the House or Shop* There Is a peerey, it is snitcht, c.
there are a great many People, there is no good to be don. It Is all Bob, and
then to dub the gigg, c. now the coast is clear, there is good Booty, let us fall
on, and Rob the House. A Case fro, c. a Whore that Plies in a Bawdy House.

Caster, c. a Cloak.

Cast, to Bowl. A bad cast, an ill laid Bowl, or at great distance from the
Jack. He is Cast for Felon and Dose, c. found guilty of Felony and Burglary.

Cat, a common Whore or Prostitute.

Catch-fart, a Footboy.

Catching-harvest, when the Weather is Showery and Unsettled.

Catch-pole, a Sergeant, or Bailiff that Arrests People.

Cat-in-pan, turned, of one that has changed Sides or Parties. Who shall hang
the Bell about the Cat's Neck, said of a desperate Undertaking.

Catchup, a high East India Sauce.

Caterwauling, Men and Women desirous of Copulation, a Term borrowed from Cats.

Cathedral, old-fashioned, out of Date, Ancient; also a chief Church in a
Bishop's See.

Catharpin-fashion, when People in Company Drink cross, and not round about
from the Right to to the Left, or according to the Sun's motion; also small
Ropes to keep the Shrouds, taut or tight, and the Mast from Rolling.

Catting, drawing a Fellow through a Pond with a Cat.

Catstick* used by Boys at Trap-ball.

Cattle, Whores. Sad Cattle, Impudent Lewd Women.

Catmatch, c. when a Rook is Engaged amongst bad Bowlers.

Cavalcade, a public Show on Horseback.

Cavaulting School, c. a Bawdy House.

Caudge-paw'd, Left Handed.

Caveating, or Disengaging, slipping the Adversary's Sword, when it is going to
bind or secure one's own.

Caw handed, awkward not dextrous, ready or nimble.

C H
Changeable-ribbon, or Silks, of diverse Colors, resembling those of
Doves-necks, or of the Opal Stone.

Chafe, in a great Chafe, a great heat or pet. To Chafe, to fret or fume.
Chafing, fretting or fuming, Chafing and fretting, being the same with fretting
and fuming, hence a

Chafing dish, that carries Fire.

Chaft, c. well beaten or banged; also much rubbed or bathed.

Chagrin, moody, out of humor, pensive, melancholy, much troubled.

Chalk, used in Powder by the Perfumers to mix with their Grounds; and also
scented Hair-Powders, being cheap and weighing heavy; found to Burn and destroy
Wiggs and all Hair in general.

Chanticlere, a Cock.

Chape, the Tip at the End of a Fox's Tail; also the Cap at the End of the
Scabbard of a Sword.

Character, a distinguishing Sign or Mark of Distinction, the same among Great
Men or Ministers, that a Badge is among Low and little People. As a Man of
Character, of Mark or Note, as Privy-Chancellors Judges, Foreign Ministers,
Ministers of State, etc.

Chare-women, Underdrudges, or Taskers, assistants to Servantmaids.

Char, a Task or Work. A good Char well Char'd, a Work well over.

Chates, c. the Gallows.

Chat, Talk, Prate.

Chatter, to Talk fast or jabber.

Chattering Fellow, a noisy prating Man.

Chatts, c. Lice. Squeeze the Chatts, c. to Crack or Kill those Vermin.

Cheap, Contemptible. How Cheap you make your self, how Contemptible you render
your self or undervaluevour self.

Cheer, good or bad, high or ordinary fare. How Cheer you? How fare you? Cheer
up, be of good courage, hence cheerful, or chearly, for one in Heart, or that
keeps up his Spirits; pretty chearly, indifferent hearty or lightsom.

Cheats, Sharpers, which see; also Wristbands or sham Sleeves worn (in good
Husbandry) for true, or whole ones.

Chicken, a feeble, little creature, of mean Spirit; whence a Chickenhearted
Fellow, or Henhearted Fellow, a Dastard.

Childish, Foolish.

Childing-women, Breeding.

China-Ale, From the well known East-Indian Drug of that Name, of which they
ought to put some, but they seldom do any into it, making it sweet only and
adding a little Spice.

Chink, c. Money, because it chinks in the Pocket.

Chip, a Child.

Chip of the old Block, a Son that is his Father's likeness; more particularly
the Son of a Cooper, or one brought up to the same Trade.

Chirping-merry, very pleasant over a Glass of good Liquor.

Chit a Dandyprat, or Dergen.

Chittiface, a little puiny Child.

Chitchat, idle Prate, or empty Talk.

Chive, c. a Knife.

Chop, to change, or barter.

Chopping-boy, a bouncing Boy. to chop up Prayers, to huddle thom up, or
slubber them over in posthast* A Chop by chance, a rare Contingence, an
extraordinary or uncommon Event, out of course.

Chopps, (of a Man) his Face (of Mutton) a Bone or Cut.

Chounter, to talk pertly, and (sometimes) angrily.

Chouse, to cheat or trick.

Chop*houses, where Both boy'd and roast Mutton (in chopps) are always ready.

Chub, c he is a young chub, or a mere chub, c. very ignorant or inexperienc'd
in gaming, not at all acquainted with Sharping. A good Chub, said by the
Butchers; when they have met with a silly raw Customer, and they have Bit him.

Chuck farthing, a Parish-Clerk (in the Satyr against Hypocrites) also a Play
among Boys.

Chum, a Chamberfellow, or constant Companion.

Church yard-cough, that will terminate in Death.

Churl, an Ill-natured Fellow; a selfish, sordid Clown. To put a Churl upon a
Gentleman, to Drink Ale or any Mault-Liquor immediately after Wine.

C I
Ciento, an old Game at Cards.

Citt, for Citizen.

Civil List, all the Officers and Servants in the King's Family.

C L
Clack, a Woman's Tongue.

Clammed, Starved, or Famished.

Clan, Family, Tribe, Faction, Party in Scotland chiefly, but now any where
else.

Clank, c. a Silver-tankard. Clanker, a swinging Lie,

Clank-napper, c. a Silver-tankard Stealer.

See Bubber, Rum*clank, c. a large Silver-tankard. Tip me a rum Clank a Booz*
c. give me a double Tankard of Drink,

Clap, a Venereal Taint.

Clapperclaw'd, beat soundly, or paid off in earnest.

Clapperdogeon, c. a Begger-born and Bred.

Clark, or Clerk, Scholar or Book-learned.

Clerk-ship, or Clergy, Scholarship or Book-learning, though of late the one be
more restrained to a Clergyman, and the other appropriate to a Clergyman's
Skill or Qualifications; because it may be heretofore, none but the Clergy were
learned, or so much as taught to Read. Hence the Benefit of Clergy, (or
Reading) and legit ut Clericus, in the Law, for him that could Read his
Neck-verse, like a Clerk or Scholar, when so few perhaps were Scholars or
Clerks, that every one that could but only Read, passed for no less: We say
still, the greatest Clarks (or Scholars) are not the Wisest Men: And the Scots
much to the same Effect. An Ounce of Mother-Wit is worth a Pound of Clergy, or
Book-learning.

Clawed off, lustily lasht, also swingingly Poxt.

Clear, c. very Drunk. The Cull is clear, let us Bite him. c. The Fellow is
Damned Drunk, let us Sharp him.

Cleave, has two contrary Senses under one Sound; for to cleave, (Verb Neuter)
is to cling close or stick fast, and to cleave, (verb Active) is to part or
divide; as to cleave asunder, when Cleft and Cloven.

Clench, a pun or quible; also to nick a Business by timing it.

Cleymes, c. Sores without Pain raised on Beggars Bodies, by their own Artifice
and cunning, (to move charity) by bruising Crows-foot, Speerwort, and Salt
together, and clapping them on the Place, which frets the Skin, then with a
Linnenrag, which sticks close to it; they tear off the Skin, and strew on it a
little Powdered Arsnick, which makes it look angrily or ill favoredly, as if it
were a real Sore.

Click, c. to Snatch. I have Clickt the Nab from the Cull, c. I whipped the Hat
from the Man's Head. Click the rum Topping, c. Snatch that Woman's fine Commode.

Clicker, the Shoe-maker's Journey-man, or Servant, that Cutts out all the
Work, and stands at or walks before the Door, and says, what d'ye' lack Sir,
what do you buy Madam.

Clicket, Copulation of Foxes, and sometimes, used waggishly for that of Men
and Women.

Clinker, c. a crafty Fellow.

Clinkers. c. the Irons Felons wear in Goals.

Clip, to hug or embrace. To clip and cling* of a close hug or fast embrace. To
Clip the Coin, to diminish or Impair it. To clip the King's English, not to
Speak Plain, when one's Drunk.

Clod-hopper, c. a Ploughman.

Clodpate, a heavy, dull Fellow.

Close, reserved, silent, not talkative, or open.

Close-confident, a trusty Bosom-friend.

Close-fisted, coverous, stingy, pinching.

Clotts, or thick dropps of Blood clottered or in clots.

Cloud, c. Tobacco. Will ye raise a Cloud, c* shall we Smoke a Pipe?

Clouds, or Cloudy-Sky in opposition to clear open Sky; as Clouds in Gemms and
Stones, to clear ones; and Clouded Face, to a clear pleasant one. Under a
Cloud, in disgrace, under misfortunes or disasters; Speaks in the Clouds, of
one that flies or soars in Talking above the common reach or capacity.

Cloudy, dark complexion'd.

Clout, c. a Handkerchief.

Cloy, c. to Steal. Cloy the Clout. c. to Steal the Hankerchief. Cloy the Lour,
c. to Steal the Money; also, in another Sense, to Cloy, is to Nauseate or
Satiate.

Cloyers, c. Thieves, Robbers, Rogues.

Cloying, c. Stealing, Thieving, Robbing; also Fulsom or Satiating.

Clowes. c. Rogues.

Clown, a Country-Fellow, also one very ill-bred or unmannerly, Being.

Clownish, rustical, unpolished, uncouth.

Club, each Man's particular Shot; also a Society of Men agreeing to meet
according to a Scheme of Orders under a slight Penalty to promote Trade and
Friendship.

Cluck, the noise made by Hens, when they set upon their Eggs to Hatch and are
disturbed, or come off to Eat, and also when they would have Eggs put under
them for that purpose.

Clump, a Heap or Lump.

Clunch, a clumsy Clown, an awkward or unhandy Fellow.

Clutch the Fist, or close the Hand, whence Clutches. I Will keep out of your
Clutches or Claws; the Clutches of the Parish, the Constable or Beadle.

Clutchfisted, the same as Closefisted.

Clutter, Stir. What a Clutter you keep? What a stir you make?

Cly, c. Money. To Cly the Jerk, c. to be Whipped. Let Us strike his Cly, c. let us
get his Money from him; also a Pocket, Filed a cly, c. Picked a Pocket.

C O
Coachwheel Fore Hind
Half a Crown. A Crown or Five Shilling-Piece.

Coals to Newcastle when the Drawer carries away any Wine in the Pot or Bottle.
To blow the Coals, to raise differences between Parties. He Will carry no Coals.
not be Pissed upon, or Imposed upon, nor bear a Trick, or take an Affront, or
tamely pass by any ill Treatment. Let him that has need blow the Coals, Let him
Labor that wants.

Cob, a Dollar (in Ireland.)

Cobble, to mend or patch.

Cobbled, bunglingly done.

Cobble-colter, c. a Turkey. A rum Cobble-colter, c* a fat large Cock-Turkey.

Cobweb-cheat, easily found out.

Cobweb-pretence, slight, trivial, weak.

Cock-a-hoop, upon the high Ropes Rampant, Transported.

Cockish, wanton uppish, forward.

Cockale, pleasant Drink, said to be provocative.

Cock-baw'd, a Man that follows that base Employment.

Cocker, one skilled in, or much delighted with the sport of Cock-fighting.

Cockney, Born within the Sound of Bowbell; (in London) also one ignorant in
Country Matters.

Cock-oyster, the Male.

Cock-pimp, a Supposed Husband to a Bawd.

Cock-robbin, a soft easy Fellow.

Cock-sure, very Sure.

Cod, a good sum of Money; also a Fool. A mere Cod, a silly, shallow Fellow. A
rum Cod, c. a good round sum of Money. A jolly or lusty Cod, c. the same. An
honest Cod, a trusty Friend.

Codders, gatherers of Peascods.

Cod's Head a Fool.

Codsounds, the Pith or Marrow in the Cod's Back, esteemed as choice Peck.

Cofe, c. as Cove.

Cog, to cheat at Dice, Cog a Die; to conceal or secure a Die; also the Money
or whatever the Sweetners drop to draw in the Bubbles; also to wheedle, as Cog
a Dinner to wheedle a Spark out of a Dinner.

Cogue, of Brandy, a small Cup or Dram.

Coker, c. a Lie, rum Coker, c. a whisking Lie.

Cokes, the Fool in the Play, or Bartholomew-Fair, and hence (perhaps) Coxcomb,

Cold, shy, or averse to Act.

Cold Tea, Brandy. A couple of cold words, a Curtain-Lecture. Cold-Iron,
Derisory Periphrasis for a Sword. In cold Blood, when the heat of War, or
Passion are over. The Matter will keep cold, it will stay a while, and not be
the worse for keeping.

Cole, c. Money.

Coliander-seed, c. Money.

Collation, a Treat or Entertainment.

College, c. Newgate; also the Royal Exchange.

Collegiates, c. those Prisoners, and Shopkeepers.

Collogue, wheedle.

Colquarron, c. a Man's Neck.

Colt, c. an Innkeeper that lends a Horse to a Highway-man, or to Gentlemen
Beggars; also a Lad newly bound Prentice.

Coltish, said when an old Fellow is frolicksom or wanton; or he has a Colt's
Tooth.

Colt-bowl, laid short of the Jack by a

Colt-bowler, a raw of unexperienced Person.

Colt-veal, very red.

Come, c. to Lend. Has he come it? c. has he lent it you?

Comical, very pleasant, or diverting.

Coming-women, such as are free of their Flesh; also breeding Women.

Commission, c. a Shirt.

Commode, a Woman's Head-dress, easily put on, and as soon taken off,

Common-garden-gout, or rather Covent Garden, the Pox.

Common Women, Whores, Plyers in the Sreets and at Bawdy-Houses.

Complement, the Ship's or Regiment's complete Number or Company.

Comfortable Importance, a Wife.

Conceited, a Self-lover, and Admirer, Wise in his own Opinion.

Coney-sitteth.

Confect, c. Counterfeit.

Conger, a Set or Knot of Popping Booksellers of London, who agree among
themselves, that whoever of them Buys a good Copy, the rest are to take off
such a particular number, as (it may be) Fifty, in Quires, on easy Terms. Also
they that join together to Buy either a Considerable, or Dangerous Copy. And a
great overgrown Sea-Eel.

Conjurers, Astrologers, Physiognomists, Chiromancers, and the whole Tribe of
Fortune Tellers, by the common People (Ignorantly) so called.

Consent, Leave, Approbation, Agreement. Affected by Consent, as one Sore Eye
infects the other, (unseen) because they are both strung with one Optic Nerve:
As in two Strings set to an Unison, upon the Touch of One, the other will Sound.

Consult of Physicians, Two, or more.

Content, a thick Liquor, made up in Rolls in imitation of Chocolate, Sold in
some Coffee-Houses.

Contre-temps, making a Pass or Thrust without any advantage, or to no purpose.

Convenient, c. a Mistress; also a Whore.

Convenience, c. a Wife; also a Mistress.

Conundrums, Whimms, Maggots, and such like.

Cony, a silly Fellow, a mere Cony, very silly indeed.

Cook-ruffin, c. the Devil of a Cook, or a very bad one.

Cool-crape, a slight Checkered Stuff made in imitation of Scotch Plad.

Cooler, a Woman.

Cool-Lady, a Wench that sells Brandy (in Camps)

Cool-nantz, Brandy. Cool Tankard, Wine and Water, with a Lemon Sugar and
Nutmeg.

Copper-nos'd, extremely Red.

Coquet, a flippant, pert Gossip.

Corky-brain'd Fellow, silly, foolish.

Corinthian, a very impudent, hardened, brazen faced Fellow.

Cornish-hug, a hard gripe, or squeeze.

Corn-jobber, an Enhancer of the Price, by early buying, monopolizing, and
sharp tricks. A great Harvest of a little Corn, a great ado in a little
Matter. He measures my Corn by his own Bushel, he muses as he uses, he thinks
me Bad because he is so himself.

Cornuted, made a Cuckold of.

Corny-fac'd, a very Red or Blue pimpled Phiz.

Cosset, a Fondling Child.

Cosset-Colt or Lamb, brought up by Hand, made Tame, and used to follow any
Body about the House.

Costard, the Head I Will give ye a knock on the Costard, I Will hit ye a blow on
the Pate.

Coster-monger, a Wholesale Dealer in Apples, Pears, etc.

Cot for Cotquean, a Man that meddles with Women's matters.

Cotton, they don't cotton, they don't agree well.

Cote, a sorry, slight Country House or Hovel, now a Cottage. Hence the
Compounds yet in use, of Dove-cote, Sheep-cote, etc.

Couchee, going to Bed I was at Court at the Couchee, I attended the King at
his going to Bed.

Couch a Hogs-head, c. to go to Bed.

Cove, c. a Man, a Fellow, also a Rogue. The Cove was bit, c. the Rogue was
out-sharp'd or outwitted. The Cove has bit the Cole, c. The Rogue has Stolen
the Money. The Cove's a rum Diver, c. that Fellow is a cleaver Pick-pocket.

Covey of Whores, a well filled Bawdy House; also of Partridges, a Nest or
Brood.

Counterfeit-cranks, c. the Twentieth Rank or Order of the Canting Tribe.

Counterfeit, a Cheat or Impostor. A Counterfeiter of Hands, a Forger. A
Counterfeiter of Persons, a Sham. Counterfeit Gemms or Jewels, Bristol-stones.
Counterfeits, for the most part exceed the Truth. Thus a Flatterer pleases more
than a Friend; a Braggadochio-coward thunders more than a Hero; a Mountebank
promises more than a Doctor, and a Hypocrite overacts a Religious Man, as a
Counterfeit Gem is often fairer than a True one.

Country-put, a silly Country-Fellow.

Couped up, Imprisoned, Environed, Surrounded, Pent up.

Court-promises, fair Speeches, or empty Promises without performances. Much
the same with Court-holy-water. Court-card, a gay fluttering Fellow.
Court-tricks, State Policy.

Course, or rather

Coarse, homely, ordinary, opposed to fine; as Coarse treatment, rough or rude
Dealing; Coarse fare, homely Food; a Coarse Dish, a mean one; Coarse or
Hard-Favor'd, opposed to Fair or Handsome. Of Course, of Custom; out of Course,
extraordinary, or out of the way; a Horse-Course a Race, also the place where
the Race is Run. A Watercourse, a Drain. Course of Law, the proceedings, at
Law. The Law must have its Course, or run freely. I Will take a Course with you,
I Will hamper ye, or stick close on your Skirts. A Course of Physic, an Order or
set Constitution of Physic, for a continuance or course of time. Course of the
Sun, Yearly or Daily, a Yearly or Daily Revolution. Course of he Moon, the
Circle of a Month.

Court-holy-water, Court Promises.

Cow-hearted, fearful or Hen-hearted.

Cows-thumb, when a thing is done exactly, nicely, or to a Hair.

Cows-baby, a Calf.

Coxcomb, a Fool; a silly Coxcomb, a very foolish Fellow.

Crabbed, sower, churls.

C R
Crab-lice. Cock, Male Hen, Female.

Vermin breeding in Moist and Hairy Parts of the Body.

Crack, c. a Whore.

Cracker, c. an Arse; also Crust.

Crackish, c. Whorish.

Cracking, Boasting Vaporing. Crackt-credit, Lost, Gone, Broken. Crackt-title,
Unsound. Crackt-brains, lost Wits.

Crackmans, c. Hedges.

Cramped, a weight with a string tied to one's Toe, when a Sleep, much used by
School-boies, one to another; also obstructed or hampered in any Business
whatever.

Crag, a Neck; also a Rock.

Cramp-rings, c. Bolts or Shackles.

Cramp-words, difficult or uncommon.

Crank, brisk, pert.

Cranksided-ship, that does not bear Sail well.

Cranked-shells or Stones, wrinkled or wreathed.

Crap. c. Money. Nim the Crap, c. to Steal the Money. Wheedle for Crap, c. to
coakse Money out of any Body.

Crash, c. to Kill.

Crash, the Cull, c. Kill the Fellow.

Crashing-cheats, c. Teeth.

Crazed, Mad.

Crazy, infirm or distempered.

Creatures, Men raised by others, and their Tools ever after.

Creeme, to slip or slide any thing into another's Hand.

Crew, the Coxon and Rowers in the Barge, or Pinnace, are called the
Boats-crew, in distinction from the Complement of Men on Board the Ship, who
are termed the Ships-company, not Crew; also an ill Knot or Gang, as a Crew of
Rogues.

Crimp, one that undertakes for, or agrees to unlade a whole Ship of Coals. To
play Crimp, to lay or bet on one side, and (by foul play) to let the other win,
having a share of it. Run a Crimp, to run a Race or Horse-match foully or
knavishly. He Crimps it, he plays booty. A Crimping Fellow, a sneaking Cur.

Crinkums, the French Pox.

Crispin, a Shoemaker, from the St. of that Name, their Patron.

Crispin's Holy Day, every Monday in the Year, but more particularly the Twenty
fifth of October, whereon the whole Fraternity fail not to lay they Hearts in
Soak.

Crochets in the crown, whimsies, Maggots.

Crockers, Forestallers, Regraters, see Badgers.

Croker, c. a Groat or Four-pence. The Cull tipped me a Croker, c. the Fellow
gave me a Groat.

Crony, a Camerade or intimate Friend; an old Crony, one of long standing; used
also for a tough old Hen.

Crop, one with very short Hair; also a Horse whose Ears are Cut.

Crop-ear'd-Fellow, whose Hair is so short it will not hide his Ears.

Croppin-ken, c. a Privy, or Bog-house.

Crop-sick, Stomacksick.

Crossbite, c. to draw in a Friend, yet snack with the Sharper.

Crosspatch, a peevish froward Person.

Crotiles, Hares Excrements.

Crow-over, to insult or domineer. To pluck a Crow with one, to have a bout
with him. Strut like a Crow in a Gutter, said in jeer of the Stalking of a
proud Fellow. The Crow thinks her own Bird the Fairest, applied to those that*
dote on their foul Issues. As good Land as any the Crow Flies over, with regard
it may be, to the Crow's being a long Liver; as no Carrion will kill a Crow, to
his being so hardy a Bird.

Crowder, a Fiddler.

Crown, the top of the Head or Hat; Imperial or Regal Crown. Where the Earth is
raised it is said, to be Crowned with Hills, in Poetry. The End Crowns all,
said both of the Event of Actions, and Finishing* of Works. In the
Crown-Office, Drunk; also to Crown, to pour on the Head.

Cruisers, c. Beggars; also nimble Friggats Coasting to and fro for Prizes, and
to carry Orders, etc.

Crump; c. one that helps Sollicitors to Affidavit-men, and Swearers, and Bail,
who for a small Sum will be Bound or Swear for any Body; on that occasion,
putting on good Clothes to make a good appearance, that Bail may be accepted.

Crump-back'd, Crooked or Huncht-backt

Crumplings* wrinkled Codlings, usually the least, but sweetest.

Crusty*beau, one that lies with a Cover over his Face all Night, and uses
Washes, Paint, etc.

C U
Cub, or young Cub. c. a new Gamester drawn in to be rookt; also a young Bear,
a Fox* and a Martern the first Year.

Cucumbers, Taylers.

Cucumber-time, Taylers Holiday, when they have leave to Play, and Cucumbers
are in season.

Cudgelliers, a Mob rudely armed; also Cudgel-Players.

Cuffin, c. a Man.

Cuffin-quire, c. see Quire-cuffin.

Culp, a kick, or blow, also a bit of any thing.

Culp of the Gutts, (Suffolk) a hearty kick at the Belly.

Cull, Cully,
c. a Man, a Fop, a Rogue, a Fool or silly Creature that is easily drawn in and
Cheated by Whores or Rogues. Cully napps us, c. the Person Robbed, apprehends
us. A Bob-cull, c. a sweet-humour'd Man to a Whore, and who is very
Complaisant. A Curst-cull, c. an ill-natured Fellow, a Churl to a Woman.

Culm, the small or dust of Sea-coal.

Cunning-shaver, a sharp Fellow.

Cup-shot, Drunk.

Cup of Comfort, as

Cup of the Creature, Strong-liquor. A Cup too low, when any of the Company are
mute or pensive. To carry one's Cup even between two Parties, to be equal and
indifferent, between them. Many things fall out between the Cup and the Lip, or
many things intervene between the forming and accomplishing a Design.

Cur, a Dog of a mungrel Breed, good for nothing.

Curle, c. Clippings of Money.

Currish-fellow, snapping, snarling.

Curmudgeon, an old Covetous Fellow, a Miser.

Currant-coyn, good and Lawful Money. Current Custom, a received custom, the

Current, Stream; also humor or bent of the People.

Cursitors, c. Vagabonds; the first (old) Rank of Canters.

Cursed, a cursed Cur, a sower, surly, snarling, fierce Dog; a Cursed Cow has
short Horns.

Curtals, c. the Eleventh Rank of the Canting Crew.

Curtailed, cut off, shortened.

Curtezan, a gentile fine Miss or Quality Whore.

Curtain-Lecture, Women's impertinent Scolding at their Husbands.

Cushion, beside the Cushion, beside the Mark.

Cut, Drunk. Deep Cut, very Drunk. Cut in the Leg or Back, very drunk. To Cut,
c. to Speak. To Cut been, c. to Speak gently, civilly or kindly; to Cut been
(or bennar) Whidds, c. to give good Words. To Cut quire whidds, c. to give ill
Language. A Cut or Chop of Meat. Cut and come again, of Meat that cries come
Eat me. A cutting wind, very sharp. Of the precize Cut or Stamp, a demure
starcht Fellow. No Present to be made of Knives, because they Cut kindness.
Ready Cut and Dried, or turned for the purpose. Not Cut out for it, nor turned
for it. To Cut another out of any business, to out-doe him far away, or excel,
or circumvent. I Will cut you out business, I Will find you Work enough. A Book
with Cuts or Figures; Brass or Wooden Cutts or Prints from Copperplates, or
Wood. A Cut through at House or Town, where sharp and Large Reckonings are
imposed, as at Gravesend, Deal, Dover, Portsmouth, Plymouth, Harwich,
Helvoetsluyce, the Briel, and indeed all Seaports, nay and Commonwealths too,
according to the observation of a late Learned Traveller in his ingenious
Letters published in Holland.

D
Dab, c. expert exquisite in Roguery a Rumdab, c. a very Dextrous fellow at
fileing, thieving, Cheating, Sharping, etc. Heii a Dab at it, He is well versed
in it.

Dablers, in Poetry, mere Pretenders.

Dace, c. Twopence, Tip me a Dace. c. Lend Twopence, or pay so much for me.

Dag* a Gun.

Draggle-tail, a nasty dirty Slut.

Damask the Claret, Put a roasted Orange slasht smoking hot in it.

Damber, c, a Rascal.

Damme-boy, a roaring mad, blusttring fellow, a Scourer of the Streets.

Dancers, c. Stairs.

Dandyprat, a little puny Fellow.

Dangle, to hang.

Dapper-fellow, a short pert, brisk, tidy Fellow.

Darby, c. ready Money

Darbies, c. Irons, Shackles or Fetters.

Darkmans*, c. The night, The Child of darkness, c. a Bell-man.

Darkmans-Budge. c, a House-creeper, one that slides into a House in the dusk*
to let in more Rogues to rob.

Dash, a Tavern-Drawer. A dash of Gentian, Wormwood, or stale Beer, a slight
touch or tincture of each, to dash or brew as Vintners jumble their Wines
together, when they sophisticate them. A dash of Rain, a sudden, short,
impetuous pouring down, to distinguish it from a soft Shower, or a sprinkling
of Rain.

Dastard, a Coward.

Dawn, Daybreak or peep of Day, as the Dusk is twilight or shadow of the
Evening. One may see day at a little hole, or discover the Lion by his Paw.

Dawbing, bribing; also ill painting or thick laying on of Colors: Hence
bedawb'd with Gold or Silver-Lace, when it is laid thick or close on.

D E
Dead Cargo, not a quarter or half freighted. To wait for dead men's shoes, for
what is little worth, or may never come to pass. To play or work for a dead
horse for a trifle.

Dead-men, empty-Pots or bottles on a Tarverntable.

Dear Joies, Irishmen.

Debauchee, a Rake-hel*

Decayed, Gentleman or Tradesman, broken.

Deckt-out, tricked up in fine Clothes,

Decus, c. a Crown or five shilling-piece. The Cull tipped me a score of Decuses,
c. my Camerade lent me five Pounds.

Deft-Fellow, a tidy, neat, little Man.

Defunct, dead and gone.

Degen, c. a Sword Nimm the Degen, c. steal the Sword, or whip it from the
Gentleman's Side.

Deists, against the Trinity.

Dells, c. the twenty sixth order of the canting Tribe; young bucksome Wenches,
ripe and prone to Venery, but have not lost their Virginity, which the upright
man pretends to, and seizes: Then she is free for any off the Fraternity; also
a common Strumpet.

Dequarting, throwing of the left Foot and Body backwards.

Dergin, a very short Man or Woman.

Desperate Fellow, fit for any lewd Prank or Villainy, desperate condition,
with out any hopes.

Devil-drawer, a sorry Painter.

Deuseavile, c. the Country.

Deuseavile-Stampers, c, Country-Carriers.

Dews-wins, c. two Pence.

Dewitted, cut in pieces, as that great Statesman John de Wit, was in Holland
Anno 1672. by the Mob.

D I
Diamond cut Diamond, bite the Biter.

Dibble, a poaking Stick to set Beans with.

Die like a Dog, to be hanged, the worst Employment a Man can be put to. Die on
a Fish-day, orin his shoes the same, die like a Rat. To be poisoned.

Dig* the Badger, dislodg him.

Dimber, c. pretty.

Dimber-cove a pretty Fellow.

Dim-mort, c. a pretty Wench.

Dimber-Damber, c. a Top-man or Prince among the Canting Crew; also the chief
Rogue of the Gang, or the compleatest Cheat.

Dimple, a small graceful dent in the Chin called in Ignoramus, Love's pretty
Dimple.

Din, c. what a din you keep! what a noise you make!

Dine with Duke Humphrey, to go without a Dinner.

Ding, c. to knock down. Ding the Cull, c. knock down the Fellow.

Ding-boy, c. a Rogue, a Hector, a Bully, Sharper.

Ding-dong, helter-skelter.

Dint, edge or force dint of the sword, edge of the Sword, dint of argument,
force or power of Argument,

Dippers, Ana-baptists.

Dipped, engaged or in debt, Land pawned or mortgaged. Damnably dipped, deep in
debt, He has dipped his Terra firma, he has mortgaged his dirty Acres. He has
dipped his Bill, he is almost drunk. The cull has dipped his Tol, c. the Spark has
pawned his Sword. The Dell has dipped her Rigging, c. the Whore has pawned her
Clothes.

Dirty Acres, an Estate in Land.

Dirty Beau, a slovenly Fellow, yet pretending to Beauishness.

Dirty puzzle, a sorry Slattern or Slut.

Disaffection, a disorder of any part of the Body* Disaffected to the State*
Malcontents or factious

Disgruntled, disobliged or distasted.

Disingenuous, or indirect dealing, opposed to dealing on the Square.

Disguised, drunkish.

Dismal ditty, a Psalm at the Gallows; also a dull Ballad, or filly Song.

Dive, c. to pick a Pocket.

Diver, c. a Pick-pocket.

D O
Doash, c a cloak.

Dock, c. to lie with a woman. The Cull Dockt the Dell in the Darkmans the
Rogue lay with a Wench all night.

Doctor, c. a false Die, that will run but two or three Chances. They put the
Doctor upon him, c. they cheated him with false Dice.

Dogged, followed close, waylaid. Agree like Dog and Cat, of those that are at
variance. Every Dog will have his day, none so wretched but has his good
Planet. An easy thing to find a Stick to beat a Dog, or it costs little to
trouble those that cannot help themselves. It is an ill Dog is not worth the
whistling after; or spare to speak spare to speed. He played me a Dog-trick, he
did basely and dirtily by me.

Dogged, Sullen, pouting, or in the Dumps.

Doggrel, a Term for the meanest and basest Verse; such as Ballads,
Bellmens-songs, and the like Meeter of snow-hill.

Doit* half a Farthing. Dutch Money, eight to a Penny, not a doit left, he has
spent all.

Doll, a wooden (...) to make up Commodes upon, also a Child's Baby.

Doltish, c. Foolish.

Dolthead, a Fool.

Domerars, c. Rogues, pretending to have had their Tougus cnt out, or to be
born dumb and deaf, who artificially turning the tip of their Toungs, into
their Throat, and with a stick making it bleed, weak people think it the stump
of their Tongue; one of whom being asked hastily how long he had been dumb?
answered but three weeks, this is the twenty first. Order of Canters, the Word
also signifing Madmen.

Dotard, An old drowsy Fellow come to Dotage.

Doudy, An ugly coarse hard favored Woman. She is a mere Doudy, that is, very
ugly.

Dover-court all Speakers and no Hearers.

Down-hills, c* Dice that run low.

Doxies, c. She-beggers, Trulls, Wenches, Whores, the twenty fifth Rank of
Canters; being neither, Maids, Wives, nor Widows, will for good Victuals, or a
very small piece of money prostitute their Bodies, protesting they never did so
before, and that mere necessity then obliged them to it (though common Hackneys)
These are very dextrous at picking Pockets (in the action) and so barbarous as
often to murder the Children thus got.

D R
Drab, a Whore, or Slut, a Dirty drab, a very nasty Slut.

Drag, a Fox's Tail.

Dragged, through the Horse-pond or Bog-house. Batlives and Sergeants are
served so that presume to arrest any Body within the Verge of the Court-royal,
or Precints of the Inns of Court.

Dragged up, as the Rakes call it, educated or brought up.

Dray, of Squirrels.

Drawers, c Stockings.

Drawing, Beating the Bushes after the Fox.

Draw-Latches, c. the fourth (old) Order of the Canting Tribe of Rogues.

Drawling in Speech, or dreaming of Speech when the Words are drawn out at
length, and keep as great a distance from one another, as if they were not all
of a Company.

Dreaming* Fellow, a dull, drowsy, heavy Creature. Drift, Design, Aim, Intent.

Drill, to draw in, and entice by degrees; also boring of Pearl.

Dripper* a sort of Clap, or venereal gleating

Dripping-weather, the same with dropping.

Dromedary, c. a Thief or Rogue, also a kind of Camel with two bunches on his
Back. You are a purple Dromedary, c. You are a Bungler or a dull Fellow at
thieving.

Drommerars, c. see Domerars.

Droppers, c. Sweetners.

Drop a cog, c. to let fall (with design to draw in and cheat) a Piece of Gold;
also the piece it self.

Drop*in-his-eye, almost drunk.

Droop, to fall away, to pine, to break with Age or Infirmity, a drooping bird
that hangs the Wing.

Drovers, Horse-leaders in Fairs, or Markets, and Graziers or Drivers of Beasts.

Drub, beat with a stick or Cable-end.

Drudge, or rather dredge, the way of catching Oysters; also a laborious Person.

Drumbelo, a dull heavy Fellow. Ameer drumbelo, a very Slug.

Drunk with a continuna do. de die in diem.

Dry blows, or dry-basting for Rib-roasting.

Dry-bob, a smart or sharp Repartee.

Dry-boots, a sly, close cunning Fellow.

Dry-drinking, without a bit of Victuals. Drywine, a little rough upon, but
very grateful to the Palate.

Dry youth, sharp, close* witty.

D U
Dub, c. a Pick-lock-key.

Dub, the Giger, c. open the Door. We'll strike it upon the dub, c. we will rob
that Place.

Dubber, c. a Picker of Locks.

Dubbed, Knighted.

A Duce, c. two Pence,

Duck-leggs, short-leggs*

Dudds, c. Clothes or Goods. Rum dudds, c. fine or rich clothes or Goods.

Dudd, Cheats won. c. Clothes and things stolen. Abram Cove has won (or
bit) Rum dudds. c. the poor Fellow has stolen very costly Clothes.

Dudgeon, Anger, Quarrel, Displeasure.

Duke of Exeter's Daughter, a Rack in the Tower of London, to torture and force
Confession; supposed to be introduced by him, sometimes (formerly) now not in
use.

Dullard, a heavy dull stupid Fellow.

Dulpickle, the same.

Dum-found, to beat soundly. I dumfounded the saucy Rascal, I banged his Back
tightly. In the dumps, troubled, chagrin, melancholic.

Dunaker, c. a Cowstealer.

Duncarring, Buggering.

Dunner, a Solicitor for Debts.

Dunn'd, teiz'd, or much importuned.

Dunder-head, a dull heavy Creature.

Dundering Rake, a thundering Rake, or of the Rank, one develishly lewd.

Dup, c. to enter, or open the door, dup the ken, c. enter the House, dup the
boozing ken and booz a gage, c. go into the Alehouse and drink a Pot.

Durance, a Prison.

Durk, a short Dagger, in use with the Scots, as Stilletto is with the Italians.

Dusk, or Twilight, the shadow of the Evening, as Dawn is Daybreak or peep of
Day.

Dust, money, down with your Dust, deposit your Money, pay your Reckoning. Also
in another sense, dust it away drink quick about.

Dutchified, in the Dutch Interest, or of that Faction.

Dutch-Reckoning, or Alte-mall, a verbal or Lump-account without particulars.

E
Eager, warm, or earnest in Debate; also sharp Liquors, as hard Beer, Wine
turned sour, etc. Hence the Compounds, Vinegar, Alegar.

Eagle, c. the winning Gamester.

Earnest, c. Part or Share. Tip me my earnest, c. give me my Snack or Dividend.

Easy, facil, supple, pliable, managable. He is an easy fellow, very silly or
soft, an easy mort, c. a forward or coming wench.

E B
Ebb-water, c. when there is but little Money in the Pocket.

E D
Edge-tools, as Scythes, Swords, and such as are set or ground, as Razors.
Knives, Scissors, Sheers, etc. to distinguish them from flat Tools and Tongs,
etc. it is ill jesting with Edge-tools or trusting unexpert Men with dangerous
things. Fall back fall edge or come what will.

E F
Effort, an Endeavor or Proffer, a Weak Effort, an Offer in vain.

E G
Egg one on, to prick him on, to provoke or stir him up. He Will be glad to take
Eggs for his money, or to compound the matter with Loss. You come in with your
five Eggs a penny, and four of 'em addle, of a Pragmatical Prater, or
Busi-body, that wastes many Words to little purpose. To leave a Nest-egg, to
have always a Reserve to come again. As sure as Eggs be Eggs. When nothing is
so sure. As full of Roguery as an Egg is is full, of Meat.

E L
Elbow-grease, a derisory Term for Sweat. It will cost nothing but a little
Elbow-grease; in a jeer to one that is lazy, and thinks much of his Labor. Who
is at your Elbow? a Caution to a Liar. He lives by shaking of the Elbow; a
Gamester.

Elonge, to stretch forward the right Arm and Leg, and to keep a close
Left-foot.

Elevated, pufft up; also raised to Honor, Dignity, etc. Above the common
Elevation, above the common Level.

Eminence a Rising opposed to a flat Ground, raised to an Eminence of pitch of
greatness; to make a figure, or be a Man of mark in the World, i. e. to be
conspicuous, as a City set on a Hill cannot be hid. His Eminence, the Title
given to a Cardinal.

E M
Empty-fellow, Silly.

Empty-skull'd, Foolish.

Empty-talk, silly, idle vain Discourse, more Noise then Sense.

E N
Ends, Aim, Design, Drift, and variously used in composition, as, Candle-ends,
Ends of gold and silver, Shreds of either. Cable-ends, finger-ends, for
extremity or utmost part of either. It Is good to make both Ends meet, or to cut
your Coat according to your Cloth. Every thing has an End, and a Pudding has
two.

English-cane, an oaken Plant,

English Manufacture, Ale, Beer, or Syder.

Ensnaring Questions Interrogatories laid to trap and catch one.

Entries, where the Deer have lately passed the thickets.

E P
Epicure-an, one that that indulges himself, nice of Palate, very curious and a
critic in eating.

E Q
Equip, c. to furnish one.

Equip, c. rich; also having new Clothes* Well equipt, c. plump in the Pocket,
or very full of Money; also very well dressed. The Cull equipt me with a brace of
Meggs, c. the Gentleman furnished me with a couple of Guineas.

E R
Eriffs, Canary-birds two years old.

E V
Evasion, a Shift, sly or indirect Answer.

Eves-drop, to be an

Eves-dropper, one that skulks, lurks at or lies under his Neighbor's Window or
Door.

E W
Ewe, or the White Ewe, c. a Top-woman among the Canting Crew, very Beautiful.

E X
Execution-day, Washing-day; also that on which the Malefactors Die.

Exigence, a special or extraordinary occasion, a pinch.

Expedient, a ready shift or trick to deliver one from any difficulty, or
danger near at hand.

Ey, of Pheasants, the whole Brood of young ones.

Eyesore, an Annoyance, whatever is grievous or offensive, an unwelcome dish
or guest. All that you get you may put in your Eye and see never the worse, a
pleasant Periphrasis or Round of Words, for getting nothing at all. It Is good
to have an Eye to the main Chance, or look to your Hits. What the Eye never
sees the Heart never rues: Or out of Sight, out of Mind.

F
Facer, c. a Bumper without Lip-room.

Face in Wine, the Color. A good Face, a very fine bright Color. To make a
Face, to make a show or feign; also to wryth contract or distort the Face in
Contempt or Derision. To set a good Face upon a bad Cause, or Matter, to make
the best of it. A good Face needs no Band, or no advantage to set it off. The
Broad faced Bird, or the Bird that is all Face under Feathers, a Periphrasis
for an Owl. Face about to the Right or Left, turn about. to Face Danger, to
meet it. Facing of the Sleeve, the Turn-up.

Facetious, full of Merry Tales and Jests, pleasantly merry.

Factitious, Bodies made by Art, as Glass, Paper, and all Compound or made
Metals, as Brass, Steel, Pewter, Latin, etc.

Fadge, it will not fadge or do.

Fag, c. to Beat.

Fag'd, c. Beaten.

Fag the Bloss, c. bang the Wench,

Fag the Fen, c. drub the Whore.

Faggot the Culls, c. Bind the Men.

Faggots, Men Mustered for Soldiers, not yet Listed.

Fair Roe-Buck, the Fifth Year.

Fair Speech, or fine Words. Fair-spoken, or Courteous. A Fair Day, or Fair
Weather. Fair in the Cradle, and foul in the Saddle, a pretty Boy, and a
hard-favor'd Man. Soft and Fair goes far; or not more Haste than good Speed.
Fair and far off; wide of the Mark. You have made a Fair Spech, said in
derision of one that spends many Words to little purpose. A Fair or Market for
Beasts. A Day after the Fair, a Day too late, of one that has out-stayed his
Markets.

Fall-a-bord, fall on and Eat heartily.

Fallacies, Cheats, Tricks, Deceipts.

Falter, to fail or more particularly a failure, or Trip of the Tongue,
entangled with the Palsy, produced also from excess of Drink, or Guilt.

Famms, c. Hands.

Fambles, c. Hands.

Famble-cheats, c. Goldrings, or Gloves.

Famgrasp, c. to agree or make up a Difference. Famgrasp the Cove c. to agree
with the Adversary.

Family of Love, Lewd Women, Whores; also a Sect.

Fangs, Beast-claws as Talons are of a Bird.

Fanning, or refreshing of the Trees or Woods with Wind. Fanning or refreshing
of a Close Room, opening the Windows. Fire-fanns, little Hand-Skreens for the
Fire.

Fantastic, Whimsical, Freakish, or Capricious. A Fantastic Dress, very
particular, remarkable,

Fardel, a Bundle.

Fardy, for Ferdinando.

Fare, Hire; also a litter of Piggs.

Farting-crackers, c. Breeches.

Fast-friends, sure or trusty.

Fastner, c. a Warrant.

Fastnesses, Boggs.

Fat, the last landed, inned or stowed of any sort of Merchandise whatever, so
called by the several Gangs of Water-side-Porters, etc.

Fat Cull, c. a rich Fellow. All the Fat is in the Fire, of a miscarriage or
shrewd Turn. Change of Pasture makes Fat Calves, of him that thrives upon
mending his Commons.

Faulkner, c. see Tumbler, first Part.

Faytors, c. the Second (old) Rank of the Canting Crew.

F E
Feat, strange, odd.

Feats of Activity, exercise, or Agility of Body in Tumbling, turning through a
Hoop, Running, Leaping, Vaulting, Wrestling, Pitching of the Bar, Quoiting,
etc. or Slights of Hand, Tricks, Legerdemain, etc.

Feats of Chivalry, Exploits of War, Riding the great Horse, Tilting,
Tournaments, Running at the Ring, etc.

Feather-bed-lane, any bad* Road, but particularly that betwixt Dunchurch and
Daintrie. He has a Feather in his Cap, a Periphrasis for a Fool. Play with a
Feather, of things that are gamesom and full of Play, as Kittens and Kids. To
Feather his Nest, to enrich himself by indirect means, or at the Expense of
others. Fine Feathers make fine Birds. Gay Clothes make fine Folks.

Feeble, the narrowest Part of the Sword-blade nearest the Point.

Feinting, or Falsifying, to deceive the Adversary, by pretending to thrust in
one Place, and really doing it in another.

Fence, c. to Spend or Lay out. Fence his Hog, c. to Spend his Shilling. A
Fence, c. a Receiver and Securer of Stolen-goods.

Fencing Cully, c. a Broker, or Receiver of Stolen-goods.

Fencing-ken, c. the Magazine, or Warehouse, where Stolen-goods are secured.

Ferme, c. a Hole.

Fermerly Beggars, c. all those that have not the Sham-sores or Cleymes.

Ferret, c. a Tradesman that sells Goods to young Unthrifts, upon Trust at
excessive Rates.

Ferreted, c. Cheated; also driven out of Holes and lurking Places, and hunted
as Conies, by a little, Fierce, red-eyed Beast. Hence Ferret-eyed: or Eyes as
red as a Ferret.

Fetch, a Trick or Wheedle. A mere Fetch, that is far fetched, or brought in by
Head and Shoulders.

Fetids, Vegetables, or Animals, rank and strong-scented; as Garlic, Assa
soetida, etc. Pole-cats, Foxes, Goats, etc.

Fewmets, Deers Excrements.

F I
Fib, c. to beat; also a little Lie.

Fib the Cove's quarrons in the Rum-pad, for the Lour in his Bung, c. Beat the
Man in the Highway lustily for the Money in his Purse.

Fickle, mutable, or changeable, of many Minds in a short time.

Fiddle, c. a Writ to Arrest.

Fiddle-faddle, mere silly Stuff, or Nonsense; Idle, Vain Discourse.

Fidlers-pay, Thanks and Wine.

Filch, c. to Steal.

Filchers, c. Thieves, Robbers. A good Filch, c. a Staff, of Ash or Hazel, with
a Hole through, and a Spike at the bottom, to pluck Clothes from a Hedge or
any thing out of a Casement.

Filching-cove, c. a Man-thief.

Filching-mort, c. a Woman-thief.

File, c. to Rob, or Cheat. The File, c. a Pick-pocket.

Fine-mouth'd, nice, dainty.

Finical, spruce, neat.

Finify, to trick up, or dress sprucely.

Fire-drakes, Men with a Phoenix for their Badge, in Livery, and Pay from the
Insurance-Office, to extinguish Fires, covering their Heads with an Iron-pot,
or Headpiece; also a Fiery Meteor, being a great unequal Exhalation inflamed
between a Hot and a Cold Cloud.

Fire-ship, a Pockey Whore.

Fireside, a Health to the Wife and Children.

Firkin of soul Stuff, a very Homely coarse corpulent Woman.

Fishing Bill, in Chancery, to make what Discoveries may be. Who Cries Stinking
Fish? or who dispraises his own Ware? Good Fish when it is Caught, of what is
not got so soon as reckoned upon. All is Fish that comes to Net, of him that
flies boldly at all Game. I have other Fish to Fry, I am otherwise taken up,
engaged, or have other Business on my Hands.

Fixen, a froward, peevish, Child; also a She-Fox.

Fizzle, a little or lowsounding Fart.

F L
Flabby, flimsy, not sound, firm or solid.

Flagg, c. a Groat; also a coarse rough Stone used in Paving. To Flagg, to fall
off, droop, decline, or fail; also to suspend or let fall a Suit or
Prosecution. The Flag of Defiance is out, (among the Tarrs) the Fellow's Face
is very Red, and he is Drunk.

Flam, a Trick, or Sham-story.

Flanderkin, a very large Fat Man or Horse; also Natives of that Country.

Flanders-fortunes, of small Substance.

Flanders-pieces, Pictures that look fair at a distance, but coarser near at
Hand.

Flapdragon, a Clap or Pox.

Flare, to Shine or glare like a Comet or Beacon.

Flash, c. a Periwig. Rum Flash, c. a long, full, high-priz'd Wig. Queer Flash,
c. a sorry weather-beaten Wig, not worth Stealing, fit only to put on a Pole or
dress a Scarecrow. Flashken, c. a House where Thieves use, and are connived at.

Flasque, a Bottle (or it is resemblance) of Sand, bound about with Iron, into
which the melted Metal is by Coyners and others poured; also a Pottle or five
Pints and half, that quantity, formerly of Florence, now of any Wine: A Box for
Gunpowder; a Carriage for Ordinance; an Archline somewhat distant from the
corner of the Chief, and swelling by degrees toward the middle of the
Escutcheon.

Flat, dead Drink; also dull Poetry or Discourse.

Flavor, Scent of Fruits; as Peaches, Quinces, etc. Or of Wines, as Rhenish,
Canary, etc.

Flaunting, tearing-fine. To Flaunt it, to Spark it, or Gallant it.

Flaw, a water-flaw and a crack in Chrystals, as well as a speck in Gemms and
Stones.

Flaw'd, c. Drunk.

Flay, to flea or skinn. He Will flay a Flint, of a mere Scrat or Miser.

Flear, to grinn. A Flearing Fool, a grinning silly Fellow.

Fleece, to Rob, Plunder or Strip; also Wool, the true Golden-Fleece of
England, a clear Spring, or Flowing Fountain of Wealth.

Fleet, swift of Wing or Foot, in flight or Course, used not only of Birds upon
the Wing, but of winged Arrows, resembling them in Flight.

Flegmatic, dull, heavy. A Flegmatic Fellow, a drows yinsipid Tool, an ill
Companion.

Flesh-broker, a Matchmaker; also a Bawd; between whom but little difference,
for they both (usually) take Money.

Flibustiers, West-Indian Pirates, or Buekaneers, Free-booters.

Flicker, c. a Drinking Glass. Flicker snapt, c. the Glass is broken. Nim the
Flicker, c. Steal the Glass. Rum Flicker, c. a large Glass or Rummer. Queer
Flicker, c. a Green or ordinary Glass. To Flicker, to grin or flout:
Flickering, grinning or laughing in a Man's Face.

Flicking, c. to cut, cutting.

Flick me some Panam and Cash, c. cut me some Bread and Cheese.

Flick the Peeter, c. cut off the Cloak-bag or Port-manteau.

Flip, Sea Drink, of small Beer. (chiefly) and Brandy, sweetened and Spiced upon
occasion: A Kan of Sir. Clously, is among the Tarrs, a Kan of choice Flip, with
a Lemon squeezed in, and the Pill hung round.

Flippant, pert and full of Prattle.

Flimsy, flabby, not firm, sound or solid.

Flocks and Herds, Flocks are of lesser Cattle, Herds are of Black Cattle, a
Flock of Sheep or Goats, and sometimes of Birds, as Pigeons; and in Imitation
of the Gregarious Creatures, Men, that are sociable, are said to follow and
flock after one another as Sheep, or to flock together to see Shows and
Spectacles.

Flog, c. to Whip Flog'd, c. severely Lasht.

Flogging-cove, c. the Beadle, or Whipper in Bridewell, or any such Place.

Flogging-stake, c. a Whipping-post.

Flogg'd at the Tumbler, c. Whipped at the Cart's Arse.

Flogging, c. a Naked Woman's whipping (with Rods) an Old (usually) and
(sometimes) a Young Lecher. As the Prancer drew the Queer-Cove, at the cropping
of the Rotan, the Rum Pads of the Rum vile, and was Flogg'd by the Rum Cove, c.
the Rogue was dragged at the Cart's tail through the chief Streets of London,
and was soundly Whipped by the Hangman.

Florence, a Wench that is roused and ruffled.

Florentine, a made Dish of Minced Meats, Currants, Spice, Eggs, etc. Baked.

Flounce, to toss, to fling and flounce, to fling and toss.

Flout, a jeer, to flout or jeer.

Flummery, a cleansing Dish made of Oatmeal boiled in Water to a kind of Jelly
or Consistence and strained.

Flush in the Pocket, c. full of Money. The Cull is flush in the Fob, the
Spark's Pocket is well Lined with Money. Flushing in the Face, a frequent
redning, occasioned by a sudden Question, surprise, and also from a distempered
Liver.

Flustered. Drunk.

Flute, c. the Recorder of London, or of any other Town.

Flutter, or Fly low, anciently to Flitter, hence a Flitter-mouse or Bat; as
much as to say, a Flying Mouse, as an Owl is a Flying-Cat.

Flyers, c. Shoes.

Flying-Camps, Beggars plying in Bodies at Funerals.

F O
Fob, c. a cheat, trick; also a little Pocket.

Fob off, slyly to cheat or deceive.

Fogus, c. Tobacco. Tip me gage of Fogus, c. give me a Pipe of Tobacco.

Foiling, the Footing of Deer on the Grass, scarce seen.

Folks, the Servants, or ordinary People, as Country-folks, Harvest-Folks,
Work-folks, etc. The Folks Bread or Pudding, for the coarsest Bread or Pudding.

Fool's Coat, or Colors, a Motley of incongruous Colors too near a Kin to
match, as Red and Yellow, which is the Fool's Coat with us, as Blew and Green
is with the French. A Fool's-Coat, a Tulip so called, striped with Red and
Yellow.

Fools-Cap, a sort of Paper so called.

Footman's Mawnd, c. an artificial Sore made with unslack'd Lime, Soap and the
Rust of old Iron, on the Back of a Begger's hand, as if hurt by the bite or
kick of a Horse.

Foot-pad, c. see Lowpad, for one Foot in the Grave, a Pariphrasis an old Man.
He has the length of his Foot.

Fop, Foppish, one that is singular or affected in Dress, Gestures, etc.

Foplin, the same, only younger.

Forebode, to presage, betoken or fore-show.

Foreboding-signs, tokens, Presages of ill Luck; as spilling of the Salt, a
Hare's crossing the Way; Croaking of Ravens; Screaking of Screach-Owls. Or of
ill Weather, either natural Signs or artificial; as, Aches, Corns, Cry of a
Peacock, Water-galls, Weather-Glasses, etc.

Forecast, contrivance or laying a design; Precaution, or the Wisdom of
Prevention, which is beyond the Wisdom of Remedy. To Forecast, to contrive, or
digest Matters for Execution.

Foreman of the Jury, he that engrosses all the Talk to himself.

Forestall, to antedate or anticipate.

Fork, c. a Pick-pocket. Let Us fork him, c. let us Pick that Man's Pocket, the
newest and most dextrous way: It is, to thrust the Fingers, strait, stiff,
open, and very quick into the Pocket, and so closing them, hook what can be
held between them.

Fork is often Rakes Heir, or after a scraping Father comes a scattering Son.

Forlorn-hope, c. losing Gamesters; also in another Sense, a Party of Soldiers,
etc. put upon the most desperate Service.

Fort, the broad Part of the Sword-blade nearest to the Hilt.

Fortune, a rich Maid, or wealthy Widow, an Heiress.

Fortune-hunters, Pursuers of such to obtain them in Marriage. A Creature of
Fortune, one that Lives by his Wits. A Soldier of Fortune, the Heir of his own
Righthand as the Spaniards call him. A Gamester of Fortune, one that Lives by
shaking his Elbow. He has made his Fortune, he has got a good Estate.

Fortune Tellers, c. the Judges of Life and Death, so called by the Canting
Crew: Also Astrologers, Physiognomists, Chiromancers, etc.

Foundered Horse, Lame. Ship at Sea* that sprung a Leak and Sunk downright.

Foundling, a Child dropped in the Streets for the Parish (the most able) to keep.

Foul Jade, an ordinary coarse Woman.

Foul Wine, when it stinks; also when unfine, or Lees flying in the Glass.

Fox, the second Year; also a sharp cunning Fellow. Fox'd, Drunk. He has caught
a Fox, he is very Drunk. An old Fox, after the second Year; also a subtle old
Fellow; also an old broad Sword. A Fox-blade, a Sword-blade with a Fox (or some
thing like it) Engraved on it, esteemed good Metal.

Foxkennelleth, Lodges.

Foy, a farewell or taking leave, usually a Parting-glass. To Pay his Foy, to
make his Friends Merry, before he leaves them.

Foyl-cloy, c. a Pick-pocket, a Thief, a Rogue.

Foyst, c. a Cheat a Rogue; also a close strong Stink, without Noise or Report.

F R
Fraters, c. the eighth Order of Canters, such as Beg with a Sham-patents or
Briefs for Spitals, Prisons, Fires. etc.

Fray, an Encounter, or Disorder. Better come at the latter end of a Feast,
than the beginning of a Fray. To Fray, to scare or frighten; also to break or
crack in wearing. Hence frail, brittle or soon broke; and when Deer rub and
push their Heads against Trees to get the pells of their new Horns off.

Freak, a Whim or Maggot.

Freakish, Fantastic, Whimsical, Capricious.

Freameth, see Wild Boar.

Free-booters, Lawless Robbers, and Plunderers; also Soldiers serving for that
Privilege without Pay, and Inroaders.

Freeholder, he whose Wife goes with him to the Alehouse; also he that has to
the Value of Forty Shillings (or more) a Year in Land.

Freeze, a thin, small, hard Cider much used by Vintners and Coopers in parting
their Wines, to lower the Price of them, and to advance their Gain.

French Gout, the Pox. A blow with a French Faggot-Stick, when the Nose is
fallen by the Pox.

Frenchified, in the French Interest or Mode; also Clapped or Poxt.

Fresh-man, a Novice, in the University.

Fresh-water-seamen, that have never been on the Salt, or made any Voyage, mere
Land-Men.

Fret* to fume*or chafe; also Wine in fermenting is said to be upon the Fret.

Fricassee, any Fried Meats, but chiefly of Rabbets.

Friggat well rigged, a Woman well Dressed and Gentile.

Frigid, a weak disabled Husband, cold, impotent.

Frippery, old Clothes.

Froe, c. for Urowe, (Dutch) a Wife, Mistress, or Whore Brush to your Froe, (or
Bloss,) and wheedle for Crap, c. whip to your Mistress and speak her fair to
give, or lend you some Money.

Frog-landers, Dutchmen.

Frolicks, lewd or merry Pranks, pleasant Rambles, and mad Vagaries.

Frummagem'd, c. choked.

Frump, a dry Bob, or Jest.

F U
Fuants, Excrements of all Vermin.

Fubbs, a loving, fond Word used to pretty little Children and Women; also the
Name of a Yacht.

Fuddle, Drink. This is Rum fuddle, c. this is excellent Tipple.

Fuddle-cap, a Drunkard.

Fulsom, is a Nauseous sort of Excess; as fulsom fat, loathsome fat, or fat to
loathing. Fulsom flattery, nauseous or gross Flattery laid on too thick; as
Embroidery too thick Laid on is dawbing with Gold or Silver-lace.

Fumbler, an unperforming Husband, one that is insufficient, a weak Brother.

Fumblers*Hall, the Place where such are to be put for their Nonperformance.

Fun, c. a Cheat, or slippery Trick; also an Arse. What do you fun me? Do you
think to Sharp or Trick me? I Will Kick your Fun, c. I Will Kick your Arse. He put
the Fun upon the Cull, c. he sharp'd the Fellow. I Funn*d him, c. I was too
hard for him, I outwitted or rook'd him.

Fund, or Fond, a Bank, or Stock or Exchequer of Money, or Moneys worth; also a
Bottom or Foundation. A Staunch Fund, a good Security.

Funk, c. TobaccoSmoak; also a strong Smell or Stink. What a Funk here is! What
a thick Smoke of Tobacco is here! Here Is a damned Funk, here is a great Stink.

Furbish-up, to Scrub-up, to Scowre, or Refresh old Armor, etc. He is mightily
Furbish'd-up on a sudden, when a Man not accustomed to wear fine Clothes, gets
a* good Suit on his Back.

Fur-men, c. Aldermen:

Fussocks, a mere Fussocks, a Lazy Fat-Ars'd Wench. A Fat Fussocks, a Flusom,
Fat, Strapping Woman.

Fustian-verse. Verse in Words of Iofty Sound, and humble Sense.

Fustiluggs, a Fulsom, Beastly, Nasty Woman.

G
Gad up and down, to Fidle and Fisk, to run a Gossiping.

Gadding Gossips, waygoing Women, Fidging and Fisking every where. A Gad of
Steel.

Gag, c. to put Ironpinns into the Mouths of the Robbed, to hinder them Crying
out.

Gage, c. a Pot or Pipe. Tip me a Gage, c. give me a Pot or Pipe, or Hand
hither, the Pot, or Pipe.

Gallant, a very fine Man; also a Man of Metal, or a brave Fellow; also one
that Courts or keeps, or is Kept by a Mistress, Gallant a Fan, to break it with
Design, or Purpose to have the Opportunity and Favor to Present a better.

Gambals, Christmas Gamballs, merry Frolicks or Pranks.

Game, c. Bubbles drawn in to be cheated; also at a Bawdy House, Lewd Women.
Have ye any Game Mother? Have ye any Whores Mistress Baw'd; and in another
Sense. What you game me? c. do you jeer me, or pretend to expose me, to make a
May Game of me.

Gamesome, Wanton, Frolicksom, Playful.

Began, c. a Mouth.

Ganns, c. the Lips.

Gang, an ill Knot or Crew of Thieves, Pickpockets or Miscreants; also a
Society of Porters under a Regulation, and to go.

Gape-seed, whatever the gazing Crowd idly stares and gapes after; as
Puppet-shows, Ropedancers, Monsters, and Mountebanks, any thing to feed the Eye.

Garish, gaudy, tawdry, bedawbed with Lace, or all bedeck't with mismatcht, or
staring Colors.

Garnish*money, what is customarily spent among the Prisoners at first coming
in.

Gaume, see Paume.

Gaunt, lank, thin, hollow.

G E
Gears, Rigging or Accoutrements, Head-gear the Linen or dress of the Head. In
his Gears, ready Rigged or Dressed. Out of his Gears out of Kelter, or out of
sorts. It wont Gee, it will not Hit, or go.

Gelt, c. Money. There is no Gelt to be got, c. Trading is very Dead.

Gentian-wine, Drank for a Whet before Dinner.

Gentry-cove, c. a Gentleman.

Gentry-cove-ken, c. a Nobleman's or Gentleman's House.

Gentry-mort, c. a Gentlewoman.

George, c. a half Crown piece. He tipped me Forty Georges for my Earnest, c. he
paid me Five Pounds for my Share or Snack.

G I
Gibbrish, the Canting Tongue, or Jargon.

Gig, c. a Nose; also a Woman's Privities. Snichel the Gig, c. Fillip the
Fellow on the Nose. A young Gig, a wanton Lass.

Gigger, c. a Door. Dub the Gigger, c. open the Door with the Pick-lock that we
may go in and Rob the House.

Giglers, c. wanton Women. Gigling, Laughing loud and long.

Gill, a Quartern (of Brandy, Wine, etc.) also a homely Woman. Every Jack must
have his Gill. There Is not so Ordinary a Gill, but there is as Sorry a Jack.
Gill-ale, Physic-ale.

Gillflurt, a proud, Minks. Gilt, c. a Pick-lock; also a Slut or light
Housewife.

Gimcrack, a spruce Wench; also a Bauble or Toy.

Ginger-bread, Money.

Gingerly, gently, softly, easily.

Gin, a snare or nooze, to catch Birds, as a Spring is to catch Hares.

Gingumbobs, Toies or Baubles.

Ginny, c. an Instrument to lift up a Grate, the better to Steal what is in the
Window.

Gipp, to cure or cleanse Herrings in order to Pickling.

Girds, Taunts, Quips Gibes or Jeers. Bitter Girds, Biting sharp Reflections.
Under his Girdle, within his Power, or at his Beck. If you are angry, you may
turn the Buckle of your Girdle be hind you, to one Angry for a small Matter,
and whose Anger is as little valued.

Give Nature a Fillip, to Debauch a little now and then with Women, or Wine.

G L
Glade, Shade.

Glance of an Eye, a Cast of the Eye; at the first Glance, at a Brush, or at
the first Cast.

Glanders, filthy yellow Snot at (Horses) Noses, caught from Cold.

Glare, a Glister; also the weak Light of a Comet, Candle, or Glowworm. To
Glare, or blaze like a Comet, or Candle. Hence Glore, as Pottage Glore, or
Shine with Fat.

Glaive, a Bill or Sword.

Glaver, to Fawn and Flatter. A Glavering Fellow, a False Flattering Fellow.

Glaze, c. the Window.

Glazier, c. one that creeps in at Casements, or unrips Glass-windows to Filch
and Steal.

Glaziers, c. Eyes. The Cove has Rum Glaziers, c. that Rogue has excellent
Eyes, or an Eye like a Cat.

Glee, Mirth, Pastime.

Gleam, a weak or waterish Light; hence a Glimmering or Twinkling of a Star.

Glib, Smooth, with-, out a Rub. Glib-tongued Voluble, ready or Nimbleto-ngued.

Glim, c. a Dark-Lanthorn used in Robbing Houses; also to burn in the Hand. As
the Cull was Glimm'd, he gangs to the Nubb, c. if the Fellow has been Burnt in
the Hand, he will be Hanged now.

Glimfenders, c. Andirons. Rum Glimfenders, Silver Andirons.

Glimflashy, c. angry or in a Passion. The Cull is Glimflashy, the Fellow is in
a Heat.

Glimmer, c. Fire.

Glimjack, c. a Linkboy.

Glimmerer, c. the Twenty second Rank of the Canting Tribe, begging with Sham
Licenses, pretending to Losses by Fire, etc.

Glimstick, c. a Candlestick. Rum Glimsticks, c. Silver Candlesticks. Queer
Glimsticks, c. Brass, Pewter or Iron Candlesticks.

Glow, either to Shine or be Warm, as Glowworm from the first, and glowing of
the Cheeks, or glowing of Fire, with relation to the last.

G O
Goads, c. those that Wheedle in Chapmen for Horse-coursers.

Goalers-Coach, a Hurdle.

Goat, a Lecher, or very Lascivious Person.

Goatish, Lecherous, Wanton, Lustful.

Gob, c. the Mouth; also a Bit or Morsel; hence Gobbets, now more in use for
little Bits; as a Chop of Meat is a good Cut. Gift of the Gob, a wide, open
Mouth; also a good Songster, or Singing-master.

God's Penny, Earnest Money, to bind a Bargain.

Gold-droppers, Sweetners, Cheats, Sharpers.

Going upon the Dub, c. Breaking a House with Picklocks.

Gold-finch, c. he that has always a Purse or Cod of Gold in his Fob.

Gold-finders, Emptiers of Jakes or Houses of Office.

Good Fellow, a Pot-companion or Friend of the Bottle.

Goose, or Goose-cap. a Fool. Find fault with a Fat Goose, or without a Cause.
Go Shoe the Goose. Fie upon Pride when Geese go Bare-legg'd. He Will be a Man
among the Geese when the Gander is gone, or a Man before his Mother. A Tayler's
Goose Roasted, a Red-hot smoothing Iron, to Close the Seams. Hot and heavy like
a Tayler's Goose, may be applied to a Passionate Coxcomb.

Goree, c. Money, but chiefly Gold.

Gossips, the Godfathers and Godmothers at Christnings; also those that are
noted for

Gossiping, much Idle Prating, and Tittle Tattle.

G R
Graces, or Ornaments of Speech. With a good Grace, what is Becoming,
Agreeable. Withan ill Grace, what is Unbecoming or Disagreeable.

Grafted, made a Cuckold of.

Grannam, c. Corn.

Grannam-gold, old Hoarded Coin.

Granny, an old Woman, also a Grandmother.

Grapple, to close in Fisticuffs or Fighting, Opposed to Combating at Arms-end;
also a fastening of Ships together in an Engagement with Grappling Irons, a kind
of Anchors (or resembling them) with four Flooks and no-Stock.

Grasp, to Catch and Holdfast. or press with the close Fist.

Grating, harsh Sounds, disagreeable, shocking and Offensive to the Ear.

Great Buck, the Sixth Year.

Great Hare, the Third Year and afterward.

Gratings, the checkered Work clapped on the Deck* of a Ship to let in the Light
and Air.

Green-bag, a Lawyer.

Green-gown, a throwing of young Lasses on the Grass and Kissing them.

Green-head, a very raw Novice, or unexperienced Fellow.

Greshamite, a Virtuoso, or Member of the Royal Society.

Grig, c. a Farthing; also a very small Eel. A merry Grig, a merry Fellow. Not
a Grig did he tip me, c. not a Farthing would he give me.

Grilliade, any Broild Meats, Fish or Flesh.

Grimaces, Mops and Mows, or making of Faces.

Grim, Stern, Fierce, Surly.

Grinders, c. Teeth The Cove has Rum Grinders, c. the Rogue has excellent Teeth.

Gripe, or Griper, an old Covetous Wretch; also a Banker, Money Scrivener, or
Usurer.

Griping, is an Epithet commonly affixed either to the Exactions of Oppressive
Governors, or to the Extortions of Usurers; Griping Usurers, and griping Usury
being as ordinary in English as Usura vorax in Latin.

Griskins, Steaks off the Rump of Beef; also Pork-bones with some though not much
Flesh on them, accounted very sweet Meat Broyled.

Gropers, c. blind Men.

Grotesque, a wild sort of Painting mostly used for Banqueting or
Summer-houses.

Grounds, Unscented Hair Powder, made of Starch, or Rice. see Alabaster.

Grownd-Sweat* a Grave*

Growse, Health-polts.

Growneth, the Noise a Buck makes at Rutting time.

Groyne, corruptly by the Tarrs for Coronna, a Seaport of Galicia in Spain.

Grub-street News* false, Forged.

Grum, the same as Grim, Stern or Fierce.

Grumbletonians, Malcontents, out of Humor with the Government, for want of a
Place, or having lost one.

Grumbling of the Gizzard, Murmuring, Muttering* Repining, Resenting.

Grunter, c. a Sucking Pig.

Grunting Cheat, c. a Pig.

Grunting Peeck, c. Pork.

Guard, of old Safeguard, now shortened into Guard, either for State, as Princes
have their Guards, or for security so Prisoners have theirs; also the Shell of
a Sword, and the best Posture of Defense.

Gugaws, Toies, Trifles.

Gull, c. a Cheat.

Gulled, c. Cheated, Rookt, Sharpt.

Gullet, a Derisory Term for the Throat, from Gula.

Gull-gropers, c. a Bystander that Lends Money to the Gamesters.

Gundigutts, a fat pursy Fellow. In the Gun, Drunk. As sure as a un, or
Cock-sure. Out of Gunshot; aloof from Dansger, or out of Harm's way.

Gunpowder, an old Woman.

Gust or Gusto, a right Relish, Savor, or true Taste of any thing. A Delicious
Gusto, Wines, Fruits, or Meats of a curious or pleasant Taste. A Gust of Wind,
a short, sudden, furious Blast, as we say a Dash of Rain, for a sudden, short,
impetuous Beat of Rain.

Guzzle, Drink.

Guzzling, Drinking much.

Gut-foundred, exceeding Hungry.

Gutling, Eating much. A Gutling Fellow, a great Eater.

Gutter-Lane, the Throat.

Gutters, the little streak in a Deer's Beam.

Gutting, An House, Rifling it, Clearing it. An Oyster, Eating it.

Gutts, a very fat, gross Person.

G Y
Gybe, c. any Writing or Pass Sealed; also Jerk or Jeer.

Gyb'd, c. Jerkt or Whipped.

Gybing, jeering.

Gypsies, a Counterfeit Brood of wandering Rogues and Wenches, herding
together, and Living promicuously, or in common, under Hedges and in Barns,
Disguising themselves with Blacking their Faces and Bodies, and wearing an
Antic Dress, as well as Devising a particular Cant, Scrolling up and down, and
under color of Fortunetelling, Palmestry, Physiognomy, and Cure of Diseases;
impose allwaies upon the unthinking Vulgar, and often Steal from them, whatever
is not too Hot for their Fingers, or too Heavy to carry off. A Cunning Gypsy, a
sharp, sly Baggage, a Witty Wench. As Tanned as a Gypsy, of a Gypsy-hue or
color.

Gyrle, see Roe.

H
Habberdasher of Nouns and Pronouns, Schoolmaster or Usher.

Hab-nab, at Aventure, Unsight, Unseen, Hit or Miss.

Hack, the Place where the Hawk's meat is laid.

Hack and Hue, to Cut in Pieces.

Hacks or Hackneys, hirelings. Hackney-whores, Common Prostitutes.
Hackney-Horses, to be let to any Body. Hackney-Scriblers, Poor Hirelings
Mercenary Writers.

Hackum, a c. Fighting Fellow, see Captain Hackum.

Haddums, The Spark has been at Haddums, He is Clapped, or Poxt.

Hag, an old Witch.

Hagged, Lean, Witched, Half-Starved.

Hagboat, a huge Vessel for Bulk and Length, Built chiefly to fetch great
Masts, etc.

Hagbut, a Hand-gun Three quarters of a Yard long.

Haggle, to run from Shop to Shop, to stand hard to save a Penny. A Hagler, one
that Buys of the Country-Folks, and Sells in the Market, and goes from Door to
Door.

Halfbord, c. Six Pence.

Half a Hog, c. Six Pence.

Half Seas over, almost Drunk.

Hamlet, c: a High Constable.

Hampered, caught in a Nooze, entangled, or embarassed in an intricate Affair.

Handy, Dextrous.

Handy Blows, Fifty-cuffs.

Handycrafts, the Manual Arts of Mechanic Trades. A great Twobanded Sword, a
swinging broad Sword. A great Twohanded Fellow, a huge swinging Fellow. Such a
thing fell into his Hand, of one that improves another's Notion, Speech, or
Invention. He will make a Hand of it, he will make a Penny of it, or make it
turn to Account. They are Hand and Glove, of Friends or Camerades that are
Inseparable, and almost to the same purpose, Clove and Orange. Change Hands,
and change Luck, or to Play your Cards in another Hand. The same Hand and Fair
Play, when they Play on without changing Hands. Many Hands make light Work. You
stand with your Hands in your Pockets, to an Idle Fellow that finds nothing to
do.

Hank, He has a Hank upon him, or the Ascendant over him.

Hanker after, to Long or wish much for.

Hanktelo, a silly Fellow, a mere Cods-head.

Hans-en-kelder, Jack in the Box, the Child in the Womb, or a Health to it.

Hard Drink, that is very Stale, or beginning to Sower. Hard-drinking, excessive
Soking, or toping abundance. Hard Bargain, a severe one. Hard-favor'd, Ugly,
Homely. Hard Frost, a Keen or Sharp one. Hard Case, a severe or deep
Misfortune, or ill Treatment. Hard Master or Dealer, a very near one or close.

Hare, the second Year. A great Hare, the third Year, Leveret the first Year.
To hold with the Hare and run with the Hound, or to keep fair with both Parties
at once. Hare-lipp'd, Notcht or turned up in the middle. Hare-sleep, with Eyes
a'most open. Hared, Hurried. Hare Seateth or Forms, the proper term for the
Place where she Setts or Lies. A Hare Beats or Tappeth, makes a noise at
Rutting time. He has swallowed a Hare, he is very Drunk.

Harking, Whispering on one side to borrow Money.

Harman, c. a Constable.

Harmans, c. the Stocks.

Harman-beck, c. a Beadle.

Harp-upon, a business to insist on it.

Harridan, c. one that is half Whore, half Bawd.

Heart, the Sixth Year, A Stag, the fifth Year. A Staggard, the fourth. A Brock
the third. A Knobber, the second. Hind Calf, or Calf* the First.

Heart Harbors, Lodges.

Heart Royal, having been Hunted by a King or Queen. Unharbour the Heart,
Dislodge him. A Heart Belleth, makes a Noise at Rutting time. A Heart goes to
Rut, the Term for Copulation.

Hartfordshire-kindness, Drinking to the same Man again.

Harthold or pretty Hearty, of good Courage, or pert Spirit.

Hasty, very Hot on asudden. The most Haste the worst speed, or Haste makes
Waste, of him that loses a Business by hurrying of it. You are none of the
Hastings, of him that loses an Opportunity or a Business for want of Dispatch.

Hatchet-fac'd, Hardfavor'd, Homely. Under the Hatches, in Trouble, or Prison.

Haut-bois, Oaks, Beaches, Ashes, Poplars, etc. Also well known and pleasant
Martial Music.

Havoc, Waste, Spoil, They made sad Havoc, they Destroyed all before 'em.

Hawk, c. a Sharper.

Hawkers, Retail News-Sellers.

Hawking, going about Town and Country, with Scotch-Cloth, etc. or Newspapers;
also Spitting difficultly.

Hay, a separate Enclosure of Wood Land, within a Forest or Park, Fenced with
a Rail or Hedge, or both. To Dance the Hay. To make Hay while the Sun Shines,
or make good use of one's Time.

Hazy Weather, when it is Thick, Misty, Foggy.

Hazle-geld, to Beat any one with a Hazle-Stick or Plant.

H E
Heady, strong Liquors that immediately fly up into the Noddle, and so quickly
make Drunk.

Headstrong, Stubborn; Ungovernable. A Scald Head is soon Broke.

Head-Bully of the Pass or Passage Bank, c. the Top Tilter of that Gang,
throughout the whole Army, who Demands and receives Contribution from all the
Pass Banks in the Camp.

Hearing Cheats, c. Ears.

Hearts-ease, c. a Twenty shilling piece; also an ordinary sort of Strong
Water; and an Herb called by some the Trinity, by others, Three Faces in a
Hood, Live in Idleness, Call me to you, or Pansies, an excellent Antivenerean.
etc.

Heathen Philosopher, a sorry poor tattered Fellow, whose Breech may be seen
through his Pocket-holes.

Heave, c. to Rob.

Heave a Bough, c. to Rob a House.

Heaver, c. a Breast.

Heavy, is either gross in Quantity, or slow in Motion, because ordinarily the
one is not without the other, and therefore we say, heavy Bodies move slowly. A
heavy Fellow, a dull Blockish Slug.

Hector, a Vaporing, Swaggering Coward.

Hedge, to secure a desperate Bet, Wager or Debt* By Hedge or by Style, by Hook
or by Crook.

Hedge-bird, a Scoundrel or sorry Fellow.

Hedge-creeper, c. a Robber of Hedges.

Hedge-grapes, very Crabbed, wholly unfit to make Wine.

Hedge-priest, a sorry Hackney, Underling* Illiterate, Vagabond, see Patrico.

Hedge-Tavern, or Alehovse, a Jilting, Sharping Tavern, or Blind Alehouse. It
hangs in the Hedge, of a Lawsuit or any thing else Depending, Undetermined. As
common as the Hedge, or Highway, said of a Prostitute or Strumpet.

Hell, the Place where the Taylers lay up their Cabbage, or Remnants, which are
sometimes very Large.

Hell-born-babe, a Lewd, Graceless, Notorious Youth.

Hell-cat, a very Lewd Rakehelly Fellow.

Hill-driver, a Coachman.

Hell-bound, a Profligate, Lewd Fellow.

Helter-skelter, Pellmell.

Hempen-widdow, one whose Husband was Hanged.

Hem, to call after one with an inarticulate Noise.

Homuse, see Roe.

Hen-hearted, Cowardly, Fearful.

Hen-peckt Friggat, whose Commander and Officers are absolutely swayed by their
Wives.

Henpeckt Husband, whose Wife wears the Breeches.

Herd of Dear or Hares, a Company.

H I
Hick, c. any Person of whom any Prey can be made, or Booty taken from; also a
silly Country Fellow.

Hide-bound-horse, whose Skin sticks very close, and tite like a Pudding Bag,
usually when very Fat.

Hide-bound-muse, Stiff, hard of Delivery, Sir J. Suckling called Ben.
Johnson's so.

Higglede-piggledy, all to gether, as Hoggs and Piggs lie Nose in Arse.

High Flyers, Impudent, Forward, Loose, Light Women; also bold Adventurers.

High-shoon, or Clouted-shoon* a Country Clown.

High Pad, c. a Highway Robber well Mounted and Armed.

Highjinks, a Play at Dice who Drinks.

Hightetity, a Ramp or Rude Girl.

High Tide, c. when the Pocket is full of Money.

Hind, the Plough-boy or Ploughman's Servant at Plough and Cart.

Hind, the third Year; Hearse or Brockets Sister, the second Year; Calf the
first Year.

Hip, upon the Hip, at an Advantage, in Wrestling or Business.

Hissing, the Note of the Snake and the Goose, the Quenching of Metals in the
Forge; also upon any dislike at the Playhouse, and sometimes though seldom in
the Courts of Judicature, upon any foul Proceedings. The like is don, also in
other larger Assemblies.

H O
Hob, a plain Country Fellow; or Clown, also the Back of a Chimney.

Hobinal, the same.

Hobbist, a Disciple, and fond Admirer of Thomas Hobbs, the famed Philosopher
of Malmsbury. Sir Posthumus Hobby, one that Draws on his Breeches with a
Shoeing-horn; also a Fellow that is Nice and Whimsical in the set of his
Clothes.

Hob-nail, a Horse Shoe-nail; also a High-shoon or Country Clown.

Hobsons-choice, that or None.

Hocus-pocus, a Juggler that shows Tricks by Slight of Hand.

Hodge, a Country Clown, also Roger.

Hodmendods, Snails in their Shells.

Hodge-podge, see Hotchpotch.

Hog, c. a Shilling; also see Wild Boar. You Darkman Budge, will you Fence your
Hog at the next Boozing-ken, c* do ye hear you House Creeper, will you Spend
your Shilling at the next Alehouse. A mere Hog or Hoggish Fellow, a greedy*
covetous, morose Churl* A Hog-grubber, a closefisted, narrow-soul'd sneaking
Fellow. He has brought his Hoggs to a fair Market, or he has Spun a fair
Thread. Great Cry and little Wool, as the Man said, when he Shear'd his Hoggs,
Labor in Vain, which the Latins express by Goatswooll, as the English by the
shearing of Hoggs. Hogg-steer, see Wild Boar.

Hogen-mogen, a Dutch Man; also High and Mighty, the Sovereign States of
Holland.

Hogo, for Haut Goust, a strong Scent; also a high Taste or Relish in Sauce.

Hold his Nose to the Grind-stone, to keep him Under, or Tie him Neck and Heels
in a Bargain.

Hollow-hearted, False, Base, Perfidious, Treacherous.

Holyday-bowler, a very bad Bowler. Holyday Cloths, the Best. Blind Mon's
Holyday, when it is Night.

Hop-merchant, a Dancing Master. To Hop, denotes the Progressive Motion of
Reptiles on the Ground, whence Grasshopper, and Answers to the Fluttring or slow
Flight of Insects in the Air; or Else the Transits or Leaps of a Bird from one
Perch to another in a Cage, or the Skips of a Squirrel from Tree to Tree and
Bough to Bough in the Wood.

Homine, Indian Corn. To beat Homine, to pound that in a Mortar.

Honey-moon, the first Month of Marriage.

Hood, the ancient Cover for Men's Heads, (before the Age of Bonnets and Hatts)
being of Cloth Buttoned under the Chin, not unlike a Monk's Cowl* Two Faces
under one Hood, a Double Dealer.

Hood winked, Blindfolded or Bluffed.

Hoof it, or Beat it on the Hoof, to walk on Foot.

Hookt, overreached, Snapt, Trickt. Off the Hooks, in an ill Mood, or out of
Humor. By Hook or by Crook, by Fair Means or Foul.

Hookers, c. the third Rank of Canters; also Sharpers.

Hopper-arst, when the Breech sticks out.

Horn-mad, stark staring Mad because Cuckolded.

Horse-play, any rude Boisterous sort of Sport. You must not look a Given Horse
in the Mouth, or what is freer then Gift? One Man may better Steal a Horse than
another look on. The Master's Eye makes the Horse Fat. An ill Horse that cannot
carry his own Provender. Set the Saddle on the Right Horse, lay the Blame where
the Fault is. The Cart before the Horse. A short Horse is soon Curried, a
little Business is soon Dispatched. The Gray Mare is the better Horse, said of
one, whose Wife wears the Breeches. Fallen away from a Horseload to a
Cart-load, spoken Ironically of one considerably improved in Flesh on a sudden.

Host, an Innkeeper or Victualler; also an Army. Hostess, a Land-lady. To
reckon without your Host: Or count your Chickens before they are Hatched.

Hot, exceeding Passionate, Hot Work, much Mischief done, or a great Slaughter.

Hot-cockles, a Play among Children* It revives the Cockles of my Heart, said,
of agreeable News, or a Cup of Comfort, Wine or Cordial Water.

Hot Pot, Ale and Brandy boiled together.

Hot Spur, a fiery furious passionate Fellow; also early or forward Peace.

Hotch-potch, an Oglio or Medly of several Meats in one Dish.

House of Call, the usual lodging* Place of Journey-men Tailers.

House Tailers, Upholsterers.

How, to a Deer.

Howleth, the Noise a Wolf makes at Rutting time.

H U
Hubbub, a Noise in the Streets made by the Rabble.

Huckster, a sharp Fellow. Hucksters, the Retailers of the Market, who Sell in
the Market at second Hand. In Huckster's Hands, at a desperate Pass, or
Condition* or in a fair way to be Lost.

Hue, c. to Lash; also the Complexion or Color. Hued, c. Lasht or Flogg'd. The
Cove was Hued in the Naskin, c. the Rogue was severe-Lasht in Bridewell. Hue
and Cry, the Country raised after a Thief.

Huff, a Bullying Fellow. Captain Huff, any noted Bully, or Huffing Blade. To
Huff and Ding, to Bounce and Swagger.

Hugger-mugger, Closely or by Stealth, Under board: To Eat* so, that is, to Eat
by one's self.

Hulver-head, a silly foolish Fellow.

Hum-cap, old, mellow and very strong Beer.

Hum and haw, to Hesitate in Speech; also to delay, or difficultly to be
brought to Consent.

Hummer, a loud Lie, a Rapper.

Hum, or Humming Liquor, Double Ale, Stout, Pharaoh.

Hummums, a Bagnio.

Humorist, a Whimsical Fantastical Fellow.

Hump-backt, Crook-backt. Hump-shoulder'd, or Crook-shoulder'd.

Humptey-dumptey, Ale boild with Brandy.

Hunch, to justle, or thrust.

Hunks, a covetous Creature, a miserable Wretch.

Hunting, c. decoying, or drawing others into Play.

Hunteth for his Kind, see Otter.

Hurly-burly, Rout, Riot, Bustle, Confusion.

Hurrican, a violent Storm or Tempest; also a disorder or confusion in Business.

Hurridun, see Harridan.

Hush, very still, quiet. All was Hush, a great or profound Silence. Hushed up,
concealed, or clapped up without Noise.

Husky-lour, c. a Guinea, or Job.

Hussy, an abbreviation of Housewife, and sometimes a Term of Reproach, as, how
now Hussy, or she is a Light Hussy, or Housewife.

Hut, from; a Term much used by Carters, etc. Also, a little House or slight
Abode for Soldiers, Peasants, etc.

Huzza, Originally the Cry of the Huzzars, or Hungarian Horsemen; but now the
Shouts and Acclamations, of any Soldiers, or of the Mob.

I
Jabber, to Talk thick and fast, as great Praters do, or to Chatter like a
Magpye.

Jack, c. a Farthing, a small Bowl (the mark) to throw at, an Instrument to
draw on Boots, hence Jack-boots; also a Leathern Vessel to Drink out of, and an
Engine to set the Spit a going. Jack in an Office, of one that behaves himself
Imperiously in it. Every Jack will have a Gill, or the Coursest He, will have
as Coarse a She. He would n't tip me Jack, c. not a Farthing would he give me.

Jack-adams, a Fool.

Jack-a-dandy, a little impertinent insignificant Fellow.

Jack Kitoh, c. the Hangman of that Name, but now all his Successors.

Jack in a Box, c. a Sharper, or Cheat.

Jackanapes, a Term of Reproach, a little sorry Whipper-snapper; also a well
known waggish Beast* As full of Tricks as a Jackanapes.

Jack-sprat, a Dwarf, or very little Fellow, a Hop-on-my-thumb.

Jack at a Pinch, a poor Hackney Parson.

Jack-hawk, the Male.

Jacobites, Zealous Sticklers for the late King James, and his Interest; also
sham or Collar Shirts, and Heretics Anno 530, following one Jacobus Syrus, who
held but one Will, Nature and Operation in Christ, Circumcision of both Sexes,
etc.

Jade, a Term of Reproach given to Women, as Idle Jade, Lazy Jade, silly Jade,
etc. As dull Jade, tried Jade, to a heavy or over-ridden Horse.

Jakes, a House of Office.

Jague, c. a Ditch.

Janissaries, formerly, only the Grand Signior's Foot Guard, chosen out of
Tributary Christians, taken early from their Parents, and perverted to
Mahumetanism, ever accounted their best Soldiers; but now any Prince's or great
Man's Guards; also the Mob sometimes so called, and Bailives, Sergeants,
Followers, Yeomen, Setters, and any lewd Gang depending upon others.

Jarke, c. a Seal.

Jarke-men, c. the Fourteenth Order of the Canting Tribe; also those who make
Countefeit Licenses and Passes, and are well paid by the other Beggars for
their Pains.

Jarrs, Quarrels, Disputes, Contentions.

Jason's Fleece, c. a Citizen cheated of his Gold.

Jayl-birds, Prisoners.

I C
Ice-houses, Repositories to keep Ice and Snow under Ground all Summer, as
there are Conservatories to House Orange Trees, Limes, and Myrtles in the
Winter. Break Ice in one place and it will Crack in more, or find out one
slippery Trick, and suspect another. When the Ice is once broke, or when the
Way is open others will Follow. Ice or Icicles, little pendulous pieces of Ice
under the Eaves.

I D
Idioms, Proprieties of any Speech or Language, Phrases or particular
Expressions, peculiarto* each Language.

Idio-syncrasies, peculiar Constitutions, or Affections, incident only in
particular to some Temperaments, as several Sympathies and Antipathies, as
different and unaccountable as the Variety of Gifts and Talents in Men.

J E
Jenny, c. an Instrument to lift up a Grate, and whip any thing out of a
Shop-window.

Jesses, short Strapps of Leather fastened to the Hawk's Legs.

Jetting along, or out, a Man Dancing in his Gate, or Going; also a House
starting out farther than the rest in the Row.

Jew, any overreaching Dealer, or hard, sharp Fellow. He treated me like a
Jew, he used me very barbrously.

Jews, Brokers behind St. Clement's Church in London, so called by (their
Brethren) the Tailers.

I G
Ignoramus, a Novice, or raw Fellow in any Profession; also, we are Ignorant,
written by the Grand Jury upon Bills, when the Evidence is not Home, and the
Party (thereupon) Discharged.

J I
Jig, a Trick; also a well known Dance. A Pleasant Jig, a witty, arch Trick.

Jigget, (of Mutton) the Leg cut off with part of the Loin.

Jilt, a Tricking Whore.

Jilted, abused by such a one; also deceived or defeated in one's Expectation,
especially in Amors.

Jingling, the Noise of Carriers Horses Bells, or Ringing of Money that chinks
in the Pocket.

Jingle-boxes, c. Leathern Jacks tipped and hung with Silver Bells formerly in
use among Fuddle caps.

Jinglers, c. Horse-Coursers frequenting Country Fairs.

Jingle-brains, a Maggor-pated Fellow.

Jiniper-Lecture, a round scolding Bout.

I L
Ill fortune, c. a Nine-pence.

Ill-mann'd, a Hawk not well broke, taught or trained.

I M
Impost-taker, c. one that stands by and Lends Money to the Gamester at a very
high Interest or Premium.

Implement, Tool, a a Property or Fool, easily engaged in any (though difficult
or Dangerous) Enterprise.

Importunate, Dunning, pressing.

Importunity of Friends, the stale Excuse for coming out in Print, when Friends
know nothing of the Matter.

I N
Inadvertency, any slip or false step, for want of Thinking and Reflection.

Inching-in, Encroaching upon. One of his Inches, of his Size or Stature. Won
by Inches, dearly or by little and little. Give you an Inch and you will take an
Ell, of one that presumes much on little Encouragement.

Incog, for Incognito, a Man of Character or Quality concealed or in disguise.

Incongruous, or an Incongruity; Treating any Person not according to his
Character, or appearing in any Country, without conforming to the Habits and
Customs of the Place, as teaching a General the Art of War, talking with an
Ambassador without his Language, or the help of an Interpreter, moving the Hat
to Turks, that never stir their Turbants, or calling for a Chair with such
Nations, as sit always crosse-legg'd upon Carpets.

Indecorum, any violation of the Measures of Congruity, in Story, Painting, or
Poetry, as introducing Persons together that are not Contemporaries, and of the
same Age, or representing them with Habits, Arms or Inventions, unknown to
their Times, as the Romans with Gunns or Drumms, which would be no less
Preposterous and Absard than Painting the Noblemen of Venice on Horseback, or
describing the West Indians before the Arrival of the Spaniards, with the
Shipping, Horses, and Arms of the Europeans.

Indulto, his Catholic Majesty's Permission to the Merchants to unlade the
Galeons, after his Demands are adjusted.

In his Ale or Beer, Drunk, though it be by having too much of that in him.

Iniskilling-men, famed for their Prowess, in the late Irish Wars; also the
Royal Regiment (of Citizens) in derision so called, soon raised, and as soon
laid down.

Ink, the Neck from the Head to the Body of any Bird the Hawk does prey upon.

Inkle, Tape. As great as two Inkle-makers, or as great as Cup and Cann.

Inlayed, well inlayed, at ease in his Fortune, or full of Money.

Inmates, Supernumeraries, who have no House or Being of their own, and yet are
no Members of the House or Family they Live in, from whom they differ in the
same Nature, as the Excrescences of Trees do from the Fruits either Genuin or
Grafted; as Misletoe of the Oak, Galls, etc. differ from the Mast or Acorns.

Insipids, Block-heads; also things that are tastless.

Interlopers, Hangers on, retainers to, or dependers upon other folks; also
Medlers and Busybodies, intruders into other Men's Professions, and those that
intercept the Trade of a Company, being not legally authorized.

Intrigues, Finesses, Tricks of War, or State, as Court-tricks, Lawquirks, though
in War they are rather called Stratagems.

Intriguing, Plotting, Tricking, Designing, full of Tricks and Subtilties.

Inveterate, either Enemies that are implacable and of long continuance, or
Diseases that are confirmed, deeprooted and riveted.

J O
Joan, a homely Joan, a Coarse Ordinary Woman, Joan in the Dark is as good as
my Lady, or when the Candles are out all Cats are Gray.

Job, c. a Guinea, Twenty shillings, or a Piece. Half a Job, c. half a Guinea,
Ten shillings, half a Piece, or an Angel.

Jobbers, see Badgers, Matchmakers, Salesmen, Stock-jobbers.

Jobbernoll, c. a very silly Fellow.

Jock or Jockumcloy, c. to copulate with a Woman.

Jockum-gage, c. a Chamberpot. Tip me the Jockumgage, c. give me or hand me the
Membermug. Rum Jockum-gage, c. a Silver-chamberpot.

Jockey's, rank Horse-Coursers, Race Riders; also Hucksters or Sellers of
Horses, very slippery Fellows to deal with.

Jolter-head, a vast large Head; also Heavy and Dull. To Jolt or Shake, jolting
or shaking of a Coach.

Jordain, c. a great Blow or Staff; also a Chamberpot. I Will tip him a Jordain
if I transnear, c. I will give a Blow with my Staff if I get up to him.

Joseph, c. a Cloak or Coat. A Rum Joseph, c. a good Cloak or Coat. A Queer
Joseph, c. a coarse ordinary Cloak or Coat; also an old or Tattered one.

I R
Irish Toils, c. the Twelfth Order of Canters; also Rogues carrying Pinns,
Points, Laces, and such like Wares about, and under pretense of Selling them,
commit Thefts and Robberies.

Iron-doublet, a Prison.

I T
Itch-land, Wales.

J U
ugglers, Nimble and expert Fellows at Tricks, and Slights of Hand, to
distinguish them from Tumblers, that perform Bodily Feats, or Feats of
Activity, by playing of Tricks with the whole Body.

Jukrum, c. a License.

Jumble-gut-lane, any very bad or rough Road. To Jumble, to shake much or often.

Justice, I Will do Justice Child, c. I will Peach or rather Impeach or Discover
the whole Gang, and so save my own Bacon; also in another Sense, I Will do you
Justice Sir, I will Pledge you.

K
Kate, c. a Pick-lock. It Is a Rum Kate, c. that is a Cleaver Pick-lock.

K E
Keel-bullies, Lightermen that carry Coals to and from the Ships, so called in
Derision.

Keel-hale, to draw by a Rope tied to the Neck and fastened to a Tackle (with a
jerk) quite under the Keel or bottom of the Ship.

Keffal, a Horse.

Kelter, out of Kelter, out of sorts.

Ken, c. a House. A bob Ken, or a Bowmanken, c. a good or well Furnished House,
full of Booty, worth Robbing; also a House that Harbors Rogues and Thievs.
Biting the Ken, c. Robbing the House.

Ken-miller, c. a Housebreaker. Friend John, or sweet Tom, it is a bob Ken,
Brush upon the Sneak, c. it is a good House, go in if you will but Tread softly,
and mind your Business. Now we have Bit, c. the House is Robbed, or the
Business is done. There Is a Cull knows us, if we don't pike he will Bone us, c.
that Fellow sees us, if we don't scour off, he will Apprehend us. Ding him, c.
Knock him Down. Then we'll pike, it is all Bowman, c. we will be gone, all is
well, the Coast is clear.

Keeping Cully, one that Maintains a Mistress, and parts with his Money very
generously to her.

Kicks, c. Breeches. A high Kick, the top of the Fashion; also singularity
therein. Tip us your Kicks, we'll have them as well as your Loure, c. pull off
your Breeches, for we must have them as well as your Money.

Kid, c. a Child; also the first Year of a Roe, and a young Goat.

Kidnapper, c. one that Decoys or Spirits (as it is commonly called) Children
away, and Sells them for the Plantations.

Kidder, c. see Crocker.

Kidlay, c. one who meeting a Prentice with a Bundle or Parcel of Goods,
wheedles him by fair Words, and whipping Sixpence into his Hand, to step on a
short and sham Errand for him, in the mean time Runs away with the Goods.

Kidney, (Beans) French. Of that Kidney, of such a Stamp, Of a strange Kidney,
of an odd or unaccountable Humor.

Kilkenny, c. an old sorry Frize Coat.

Kill-Devil, Rum. Kill two Birds with one Stone, Dispatch two Businesses at one
Stroke.

Kimbaw, c. to Trick, Sharp, or Cheat; also to Beat severely or to Bully. Let Us
Kimbaw the Cull, c. Let Us Beat that Fellow, and get his Money (by Huffing and
Bullying) from him.

Kinchin, c. a little Child.

Kinchin-coes, c. the Sixteenth Rank of the Canting Tribe, being little
Children whose Parents are Dead, having been Beggars; as also young Ladds
running from their Masters, who are first taught Canting, then thieving.

Kinchin-cove, c. a little Man.

King's Head Inn, or the Chequer Inn in Newgatestreet, c. the Prison, or
Newgate.

King's Pictures, c. Money.

King of all Beasts of Venery, a Hare.

King of the Gypsies, the Captain, Chief, or Ringleader of the Gang, the Master
of Misrule.

Kindly, Fruit, or Season, towardly. Kindness will creep where it cannot go.

Kinchin-morts, c. the Twenty seventh andlast Order of the Canting Crew, being
Girls of a Year or two old, whom the Morts (their Mothers) carry at their Backs
in Slates (Sheets) and if they have no Children of their own, they borrow or
Steal them from others.

Kissing the Maid, an Engine in Scotland, and at Halifax in England, in which
the Head of the Malefactor is Laid to be Cut off, and which this way is done to
a Hair, said to be invented by Earl Morton who had the ill Fate to Handsel it.
Kissing goes by Favor, I suppose another sort is meant by this Proverb than
the forementioned

K N
Knack, or Slight in any Art, the Craft or Mystery in any Trade, a petty
Artifice, or Trick like those upon the Cards. Knacks or Toies, a Knack-shop, or
Toy-shop, freight with pretty Devices to pick-Pockets.

Knave in Grain, one of the First Rate. Knaves and Fools are the Composition of
the whole World.

Knight Errant, the Knight or Hero in Romances, that always is to Beat the
Giant, and Rescue the destressed Damsel.

Knight-Errantry, Romantic and Fabulous Exploits, out of the common Road, and
above the ordinary Size, such as the wild Adventures of wandering Knights.

Knight of the Blade, c. Hector or Bully.

Knight of the Post. c. a Mercenary common Swearer, a Prostitute to every
Cause, an Irish Evidence.

Knight of the Road, c. the chief High-wayman best Mounted and Armed, the
Stoutest Fellow among them.

Knobber, see Heart.

Knock in the Cradle, a Fool.

Knock-down, very strong Ale or Beer.

Knock off, to give over Trading; also to Abandon or Quit one's Post or
Pretensions.

Knowledge is no Burden. Knowledge makes one laugh, but wealth makes one dance.

Knot, achoice Bird, something less than a Ruff.

Knotting, making Fringe.

L
Labourinvain, lost Labor, such as washing of Blackamoors, shearing of Hoggs,
hedging in the Cuckoe, etc.

Laced Coffee, Sugared. Mutton, a Woman.

Lacing, Beating, Drubbing, I Will Lace your Coat Sirtah, I will Beat you soundly.

Ladder, see Badger, first Part.

Lady, a very crooked, deformed and ill shapen Woman.

Lady-birds, Light or Lewd Women; also a little Red Insect, variegated with
black Spots.

Lag, c. Water; also Last.

Lag-a dudds, c. a Buck of Cloths. As we cloy the Lag of Dudds, c. come let us
Steal that Buck of Cloths. To Lagg behind, or come after with Salt and Spoons.
Lagg of the Flock, the Hindmost.

Lambaste, to Beat soundly.

Lamb-pye, Beating or Drubbing.

Lamb-skin-men, c. the Judges of the several Courts.

Lambs-wool, roasted Apples and Ale.

Lame Excuse, a sorry Shift or Evasion.

Land-lopers or Landlubbers, Fresh Water Seamen so called by the true Tarrs;
also Vagabonds that Beg and Steal about the Country.

Land-pirates, c. Highwaymen or any other Robbers.

Landlord and Landlady, Host and Hostess; also Possessors of Land or Houses,
and Letters out of either to farm or for Lodgings. How lies the Land? How
stands the Reckoning? Who has any Lands in Appleby? a Question asked the Man at
whose Door the Glass stands Long.

Lank, Gaunt, Thin, Hollow, Lean, Meager, Slender, Weak. Lank Ears of Corn,
very thin Ears.

Lanspresado, c. he that comes into Company with but Two pence in his Pocket.

Lantern-jaw'd, a very lean, thin faced Fellow. A Dark-Lanthorn, the Servant or
Agent that Receives the Bribe (at Court.)

Lap, c. Pottage, Butter-milk, or Whey. It Is rum Lap, c. this is excellent
Soupe.

Larbord, on the left side or Hand.

Lare-over, said when the true Name of the thing must (in decency) be concealed.

Largess, a Pittance properly given to Reapers and Harvest Folks, now used for
any petty Donative, or small Gratuity.

Latitudinarian, a Churchman at large, one that is no Slave to Rubric, Canons,
Liturgy, or Oath of Canonical Obedience, and in fine looks toward Lambeth, and
rows to Geneva.

Layd-up-in Lavender, when any Clothes or other Movables are pawned or dipped
for present Money; also Rodds in Pickle, of Revenge in reserve, till an
opportunity offers to show it.

Lawn, a naked Space in the middle of a Park or Forest, left Untilled, and
without Wood, contrary to a Hay, which see in it is proper Place; also very thin
Linen, formerly much Worn.

Layr, the Impression where any Deer has Harbored or reposed.

Leachers, Lascivious or Lustful Men.

L E
Leader Pate, a dull, heavy, stupid Fellow.

Leaders, the first Players, Generals of Armies, and Men of most sway in great
Councils or Assemblies; also the Fore-horses in Coaches and Teams. Who Leads?
Who begins or Plays first.

Leash, Three; also the String where with a Greyhound is Led.

Leather-head, a Thickskull'd, Heavy-headed Fellow.

Leather-mouth'd Fish, Carp, Roach, etc. having their Teeth in their Throats.

Leathern Convenience, (by the Quakers) a Coach.

Leaves, of a Tree, of a Book, of Doors, or Window-shutters, and of folding
Tables; I must turn over a new Leaf with you, or take another Course with you

Legerdemain, Jugglers Tricks; also Sharping.

Lesses, Boars Excrements.

Let Us take an Ark and Winns, c. let us hire a Skuller.

Let Us buy a Brush, or Let Us Lope, c. let us scour off, and make what shift we
can to secure our selves from being apprehended. Let him Laugh that Wins: Let
the World say what they will, if I find all well at Home. Let every Man meddle
with his own.

Leveret, the first Year, see Hare.

Levite, a Priest or Parson; also those of the Tribe of Levi, whose Inheritance
the Priesthood* (craft and all) was.

Levy, the Prince's, or any great Man's time of Rising.

Leystall, a Dunghill.

L I
Lib, c. to Tumble or Lie together.

Libben, c. a private dwelling House.

Libbege, c. a Bed.

Libkin, c. a House to Lie in; also a Lodging.

Libertines, Pleasant and profuse Livers, that Live-apace, but wildly, without
Order, Rule, or Discipline, lighting the Candle (of Life) at both Ends. A short
Life and a Merry one. Life is sweet. Life is half Spent, before we know what it
is.

Lickt, Pictures new Varnished, Houses new Whitened, or Women's Faces with a
Wash.

Lifter, c* a Crutch.

Light Fingered, Thievish*

Light-mans, c. the Day or Daybreak.

Light Friggat, a Whore; also a Cruiser.

Light Woman, or Light Huswife, Lewd, Whorish.

Light-timber'd Fellow, limber or slender Limbed; also weak.

Lilly-white, c. a Chimney-sweeper.

Linnen-armorers, c. Tailers.

Line of the old Author, a Dram of Brandy.

Litter, any thing clatter'd up, out of Place or Order, What a litter here is?
What a toss and tumble? Also a Litter of Cubbs, young Foxes; of Whelps,
Puppies, young Dogs.

Little Barbary, Wapping*

Little Fellow or Action, Contemptible, Base, Sneaking, Ungentleman-like.

L O
Loblolly, any ill-cookt Mess.

Lob-cock, a heavy, dull Fellow. In Lob's Pound, Laid by the Heels, or clapped
up in Jail.

Lobster, a Red Coat Soldier.

Lock all fast, c. one that Buys and Conceals Stolen Goods. The Lock, c. the
Magazine or Warehouse whither, the Thieves carry Stolen Goods to be secured;
also an Hospital for Pockey Folks in Kentstreet.

Lockram-jaw'd, Thin, Lean, Sharp-visag'd.

Loge, c. a Watch. I suppose from the French Horloge, a Clock or Watch. Filed a
Cly of a Loge, or Scout, c. Picked a Pocket of a Watch. Biting a Loge, or Scout,
c. the same.

Loggerhead, a heavy, dull Fellow. To go to Loggerheads, to go to Fisticuffs.

Lolpoop, a Lazy, Idle Drone. To Loll, to Lean on the Elbows; also to put out
the Tongue in derision.

Long-headed, Wise, of great reach and foresight.

Long-meg, a very tall Woman.

Long-shanks, Long-legged.

Long-winded Play Master, one that very slowly, heavily, or late Paies.

Looby, a lazy dull Fellow.

Looking-glass, a Chamber Pot.

Loon-slatt, c. a Thirteen Pence half Penny. A Loon, see Lout. A False Loon, a
true Scotch Man, or Knave of any Nation.

Lord, a very coorked deformed, or ill-shapen Person.

Lore, Learning or Skill in any Thing.

Louse-land, Scotland. A Scoth Louse-trap, a Comb.

Lout, an heavy, idle Fellow. To Lout, to Low like a Cow, or Bellow like a Bull.

Loure, c. Money.

Low Tide, when there is no Money in a Man's Pocket.

Low-pad, c. a Foot-Pad.

L U
Lubber. Lubberly, a heavy, dull Fellow.

Lud's-bulwark, c. Ludgate Prison.

Luggage, Lumber.

Luggs, Ears: Hence to Lug by the Ears. Ye can he make a Silk-Purse of a Sowe's
Luggs, a Scotch Proverb. To Lug out, to draw a Sword.

Lullaby-cheat, c. a Child.

Lumber, Rubbish, Trash, Trumpery.

Lumpish, heavy dull, drowsy.

Lurched, Beaten at any Game. Left in the Lurch, Pawned for the Reckoning, or
left at Stake to Smart for any Plot.

Lure, c. an idle Pamphlet; also a Bait. Throw out a Lure, to lay Bait.

Lurries, c. Money, Watches, Rings, or other Movables.

L Y
Lyome, the String wherewith a Hound is Led.

M
Mab, a Slattern. Mab'd up, Dressed carelessly, like a Slattern, of such a one it
is said. Her Cloths sit on her, like a Saddle on a Sow's Back. Queen Mab, Queen
of the Fairies.

Mackarel, c. a Bawd.

Mackarel-back, a very tall, lank Person.

Machiavilian, one wickedly or knavishly Politic.

Machines, Vessels full of Carcasses and Bombs, under Shelter or Covert of the
Smokers, to come close up under Walls, Forts, Fortifications, etc. being fixed
to Blow up the same. Also Engines or Instruments of diverse Arts, and Movements
upon the Stage.

Madam Van, c. a Whore, The Cull has been with Madam Van, c. the Fellow has
enjoyed such a one.

Mad-cap, a frolicksorn Person.

Made, c. Stolen. I Made this Knife at a heat, c. I Stole it cleaverly.

Mad Tom, alias of Bedlam, the Eighteenth Rank of Canters.

Madge-howlet, an Owl.

Maggot, a whimsical Fellow, full of strange Fancies and Caprichio's, Maggotty,
Freakish.

Maiden-sessions, when none are Hanged.

Mailes, the Breast-Feathers of a Hawk.

Main, great, excellent, choice, rare; also the Sea. Maingood, very good. With
Might and Main, Tooth and Nail.

Make, c. a half Penny.

Make-bait, a Trouble-House, or Mischief-maker, a stirrer of Strife, and maker
of Debate, a Boute feu, or Incendiary.

Malcontents, Disaffected to the State, out of Humor with the Government.

Malkin or Maukin, a Scarecrow, Dressed and Set up to fright the Birds. Also a
Scovel (of old Clouts) to cleanse the Oven: Hence Malkintrash, for one in a
rueful Dress, enough to Fright one. There are more Maids than Malkins, Mawks,
the same abbreaviated. Mawkish, a Wallowish, ill Taste.

Malmesey-nose, a jolly, red Nose.

Man of the Town, a Lewd Spark, or very Debaushe.

Manning, a Hawk, making him endure Company.

Mannikin, a Dwarf, or diminutive Fellow.

Mantles, when Drink is brisk and smiles; also when a Hawk stretches one of
her Wings after her Legs, and so the other.

Margery-prater, c. a Hen.

Marinated, c. Transported into some foreign Plantation; also Fish Soused.

Marriage-music, Childrens Cries.

Marks, the Footing of an Otter.

Marrel, a Bird about the bigness of a Knot, but not good Meat.

Martern, a Wild Cat, the second Year, called a Cub, the first. A Martern
Treeth, Lodges; Tree the Martern, Dislodge him.

Masons-mawn'd, c. a Sham sore above the Elbow, to counterfeit a broken Arm, by
a Fall from a Scaffold, exposed by subtle Beggars, to move Compassion, and get
Money.

Masons-Word, who ever has it, shall never want, there being a Bank at a
certain Lodge in Scotland for their Relief* It Is communicated with a strict
Oath, and much Ceremony, (too tedious to insert) and if it be sent to any of
the Society, he must, (nay will) come immediately, though very Busy, or at great
Distance.

Match or Make, the Copulation of Woolves.

Match-makers, a better sort of Procurers of Wives for Men, or Husbands for
Women, Maiden-head-jobbers, Virginity Sellers, Brokers, etc.

Mauled, swingingly Drunk, or soundly Beat.

Maunders, c. Beggars.

Maund-ing, c. to Beg, Begging.

Maundring-broth, Scolding.

Mawdlin, weepingly Drunk, as we say the Tears of the Tankard. What are you
Mawdlin you Rake? are ye' neither Drunk, nor Sober?

May-games, Frolicks, Plays, Tricks, Pastimes, etc. Do you make a May Game of
me? do you Abuse or Expose me?

M E
Mead, a pleasant Summer Drink, made of Water and Honey, Boiled, and Bottled
fine, in great vogue in Moscovy, where it is said the best in the World is made.

Meadites, a Faction of Quakers, that follow most, and are in the Interest of
Mead.

Meal-mouth, a sly, sheepish Dun, or Solicitor for Money.

Measure, the Distance of Duellers. To break Measure, to be out of the
Adversaries reach.

Mechanic, a Tradesman; also a mean, inconsiderable, contemptible Fellow.

Meggs, c. Guineas. We fork'd the rum Cull's Meggs to the tune of Fifty, c. We
Picked the Gentleman's Pocket of full Forty Guineas.

Mellow, a'most Drunk; also smooth, soft Drink.

Melt, c. to spend Money. Will you Melt a Board* c. Will you spend your
Shilling? The Cull Melted a couple of Decusses upon us, c. the Gentleman spent
ten Shillings upon us.

Member-mug, a Chamber Pot.

Mercury, Wit; also Quicksilver, and a Courant or News-Letter.

Mercurial, Witty; also one Born under, i. e. when that Planet is Lord of the
Horoscope or Ascendant at Birth.

Marcury Women, Wholesale News-sellers, who Retail to the Hawkers.

Metheglin, a strong Drink, made of new Wort and Honey.

Mew, when Deer cast their Horns; also the Place where the Hawk is set down,
during the time she raises her Feathers.

Meyny, the Folks, or Family-Servants. Hence Menial-Servant, yet in use, for a
Domestic or Family-Servant.

M I
Mifty, apt to take Pet, or be out of Humor.

Mill clapper, a (Woman's) Tongue. As Safe as a Thief in a Mill, a waggish
Periphrasis for for a Miller, who is a Thief by his Trade.

Milcb-kine, a Term used by Goalers, when their Prisoners will bleed freely to
have some Favor, or be at large.

Mill, c. to Steal, Rob, or Kill.

Mill-a-ken, c. to Rob a House, Milling the Gig with a Betty, c. Breaking open
the Door with an Iron-Crow. Milling the Glaze, c. Breaking open the Window*
Mill them, c. Kill them.

Miller, c. a Killer or Murderer.

Mill-a-crackmans, c. to break a Hedge.

Mill-a-bleating-cheat, c. to kill a Sheep.

Mill a-grunter, c. to Kill a Pig.

Mil-ken, c. a Housebreaker. Mill the Gig with a Dub, c. to open the Door with
a Picklock or false Key.

Miller's-Thumb, or Bull-head, a Fish with a broad Head, and wide Mouth, two
Finns near his Eyes, and as many under his Belly, and on his Back, and one
below the Vent, his Tail round, and his Body covered with Whitish, Blackish and
Brownish Spotts.

Mince the Matter, to tell it Sparingly or by Halves.

Miniature, Painting in little.

Minks, a proud Flirt.

Mint, c. Gold; also a late Sanctuary (in Sowthwark) for such as broke either
out of Necessity, or in Design to bring their Creditors the more easily to a
Composition. Hence Minters, the Inhabitants.

Miquelets, Mountaneers, (in Spain) or Spanish Rapparies.

Miscreant, alewd, wicked Fellow.

Mish, c. a Shirt or Smock.

Mish-topper, c. a Coat or Petticoat.

Miskin, a Dunghill or Lay-stall.

Miss, a Whore of Quality; also a little Girl.

M O
Moabites, Sergeants, Bailiffs and their Crew.

Mob, the Vulgar, or Rabble, Mobile, Mobility,

Mock-song, that Ridicules another Song, in the same Terms and to the same
Tune. A Mock-Romance, that ridicules other Romances, as Don Quixot. A
Mock-Play, that exposes other Plays, as the Rehearsal. A Mock-holy-day. To
Mock, or mimick another.

Moggy, in Scotch, as Peg in English, for Margaret.

Moil, to Drudge or Labor Hard. To Moil and Toil, to Slave at it. A Moiling
Fellow, a Drudge or great Painstaker.

Molinet, a Chocolate Stick, or little Mill.

Mongrel, c. a Hanger on among the Cheats, a Spunger. Of a Mongrel-race or
Breed, a Curr or Man of a base, ungenerous Breed.

Mood, Humor. In a merry Mood, or good Humor; in an ill Mood, or out of Humor.
Moody, Humorous.

Moon-eurser, c. a Linkboy, or one that under Color of lighting Men, Robs,
them or leads them to a gang of Rogues, that will do it for him.

Moon-men, c. Gypsies.

Moon-blind, a sort of Horses, weak-sighted.

Moppet, a pretty Moppet, a very pretty little Baby.

Mopsie, a Dowdy, or Homely Woman.

Mopeied, one that cannot see well, by living too long a Maid.

Mop'd, Mazed.

Mopus, c. a half Penny or Farthing. A mere Mopus grown become dispirited, dull
and Stupid.

Morglag, a Watchman's brown Bill; as Glaives, are Bills or Swords.

Morisco, a Morris or Morrice-dance, being belike some Remains of a Moorish
Custom with us, as the Juego de Toros, or Feast of Bulls is, in Spain.

Mort, or Death, is Blown at the Death of the Deer.

Morts, c. Yeomen's Daughters; also a Wife, Woman, or Wench.

Moss-Troopers, so called from the Mosses, wast Lands in Lancashire, as the
Bog-Trotters in Ireland, are from the Boggs there.

Mother, a Bawd.

Mother-midnight, a Midwife (often a Bawd.)

Mouchets, Patches for Ladies Faces.

Movables, c. Rings, Watches, Swords, and such Toies of value. As we bit all
the Cull's Cole and Movables, c. we Won all the Man's Money, Rings, Watches,
etc. Very Moving, prevailing, powerful, persuading.

Mountings, a Soldier's Arms and Cloths.

Mouse-trap. The Parson's Mouse-trap, Marriage. He watched me, as a Cat does a
Mouse, i. e. narrowly. A Man or a Mouse, a Prince or a Peasant. A Mouse in the
Pot is better than no Flesh, or something has some Savor. It Is pity to fling
Water on a Drowned Mouse, or to depress the Miserable. A sorry Mouse, that has
but one Hole, or a poor Creature that has but one Shift.

Mouth, a noisy Fellow. A Mouthing Fellow, a Bawling or Scolding Person. He
never Speaks, but his Mouth opens. Mouth half Cockt, gaping and staring at
every thing they see.

Mower, c. a Cow.

Mow-heater, c. a Drover.

M U
Muck, Money, Wealth; also Dung to manure Land.

Muckworm, a covetous Wretch.

Muckinder, a Child's Handkerchief tied by the side.

Muddled, half Drunk. To Muddle on, though so, yet to Drink on.

Muff, c. a Woman's Secrets. To the well wearing of your Muff Mort, c. to the
happy Consummation of your Marriage Madam, a Health.

Muffling-cheat, c. a Napkin.

Muggletonians, the Sect or Disciples of Lodowick Muggleton.

Mulligrubs or Mumps, a Counterfeit Fit of the Sullens.

Mum-for-that, not a Word of the Pudding.

Mumble, to Mutter or Speak between the Teeth.

Mum-chance, one that sits mute. He looks like Mum-chance that was Hanged for
saying of nothing.

Mum-glass, the Monument, erected at the Citycharge, in Memory of the dreadful
Fire 1666, which consumed the greatest Part of it.

Mumpers, c. Gentile-Beggers, who will not accept of Victuals, but Money or
Cloths.

Mumpers-Hall, c. several Alehouses in and about this City and Suburbs, in
Allies, and By-places, much used by them, and resorted to in the Evening, where
they will be very Merry, Drunk, and Frolicksom.

Mun-corn, half Wheat, half Rye.

Muns, c. the Face. Toute his Muns, c. note his Phis, or mark his Face well.

Music. It makes ill Music, of any unwelcom or unpleasing News. Touch that
String most which makes best Music, or that cannot be Harped upon too often
that pleases. The Musick's paid, c. the Watchword among High-way-men* to let
the Company they were to Rob, alone, in return to some Courtsey from some
Gentleman among them.

Must, new Wine, or Wine on the Lea. After Beef, Mustard, of a thing
preposterous, or out of Place; as we say, the Cart before the Horse.

Mute, when Hounds or Beagles run long without opening, or making any Cry; also
a certain dumb Executioner among the Turks.

Muting, the Excrements of a Hern or Hawk.

Mutter, to Speak inwardly and between the Teeth.

Mutton-monger, a Lover of Women; also a Sheep-stealer.

Mutton-in-long-coats, Women. A Leg of Mutton in a Silk-Stocking, a Woman's Leg.

Muzzle, c. a Beard, (usually) long and nasty.

M Y
Myrmidons, c. the Constable's Attendants, or those whom he commands (in the
King's Name) to Aid and assist him; also the Watchmen.

N
Nab, c, a Hat, Cap, or Head; also a Coxcomb. I Will Nab ye, c. I Will have your
Hat or Cap. Nim the Nab, c. to Steal the Hat or Cap. Nab'd, c. Apprehended,
Taken or Arrested.

Nab-cheat, c. a Hat.

Nab-girder, c. a Bridle.

Nanny-house, a Bawdy House.

Nap, c. by Cheating with the Dice to secure one Chance; also a Clap, or Pox,
and a short sleep. Nap the Wiper, c. to Steal the Handkerchief. You have Napt
it, c. you are Clapped Sir. To be caught Napping, to be Surpised, or Taken a
sleep.

Napper, c. a Cheat, or Thief.

Napper of Napps, c. a Sheep-stealer.

Nappy-Ale, very Strong, Heady.

N'are-a-face-but his own, Not a Penny in his Pocket.

Narrow, when the Biass of the Bowl holds too much. It Is all Narrow, said by
the Butchers one to another when their Meat proves not so good as expected. A
Narrow-soul'd Fellow, poor or Mean-spirited, stingy. Narrow or near search or
Escape, watch him narrowly or nearly. Of a Narrow or slender Fortune.

Nask, c. or Naskin, c. A Prison or Bridewell. The old Nask, c. the City
Bridewell. The new Nask, c. Clerkenwell Bridewell. Tuttle Nask, c. the Bridewel
in Tuttle-Fields. He Napt it at the Nask, c. he was Lasht at Bridewell.

Natural, c. a Mistress, a Wench; also a Fool.

Natural-children, Bastards.

Mr. Nawpost, a foolish Fellow.

Nay-word, a common Byword, or Proverb.

Nazie, c. Drunken.

Nazie-cove, c. a Drunkard.

Nazy-nabs, c. Drunken Coxcombs.

N E
Neb, the Bill of a Bird, and the slit or point of a Pen. She holds up her Neb,
she turns up her Snout to be Kissed.

Neck-stamper, c. the Pot-Boy at a Tavern or Alehouse.

Neck-verse, a Favor (formerly) indulged to the Clergy only, but (now) to the
Laity also, to mitigate the Rigor of the Letter of the Law* as in
Manslaughter, etc. Reading a Verse out of an old Manuscript Latin Psalter,
(though the Book now used by the Ordinary is the same Printed in an old English
Character) saves the Criminal's Life. Nay now even the Women (by a late Act of
Parliament) have (in a manner) the benefit of their Clergy, tho not so much as
put to Read; for in such Cases where the Men are allowed it; the Women are of
course sizz'd in the Fist, without running the risque of a Halter by not
Reading.

Negro Flat. Hawk Nosed, Hooked. Roman Raised in the middle like Kingston
Bridge.

Needle-point, c. a Sharper.

Neither-Vert, all sorts of Under-wood.

Neighborly, Friendly, Kind, Loving, Obliging. You Live a great way off good
Neighbors, to him, that is the Trumpet of his own Praises.

Nestlings, Canary-Birds, brought up by Hand. What a Nestling you keep, how
restless and uneasy you are. Nest of Rabbets.

Nettled, Teiz'd, provoked, made uneasy. He has pist upon a Nettle, he is very
uneasy, or much out of Humor. In Dock, out Nettle, upon the change of Places,
when one is no sooner out, but another is in his Place.

N I
Nice, squeemish, precise. More nice than wise, a Sir Courtly Nice, a silly
empty, gay, foolish Fellow.

Nickum, c. a Sharper; also a Rooking Alehouse or Innkeeper, Vintner, or any
Retailer. Nick it, to win at Dice, to hit the Mark, to Drink the pin to, or
button. Old Nick, the Devil. Nick and Froth built the Pie at Aldgate, sharping
in the Reckonings and cheating in the Measure built that (once) Noted House.

Nickum-poop, a Fool, also a silly soft, Uxorious Fellow.

Nick-ninny, an empty Fellow, a mere Cod's Head.

Nig, c. the Clippings of Money.

Nigler, c. a Clipper.

Nigging, c. Clipping.

Nigling, c. accompanying with a Woman.

Night-Magistrate, a Constable.

Night-men, Gold-finders, Tom-turd-men.

Night-rale, a Woman's combing Cloth, to dress her Head in.

Night-walker, c. a Bell-man; also a Light Woman, a Thief, a Rogue.

Nigit, a Fool.

Nigmenog, a very silly Fellow.

Nikin, a Natural, or very soft creature; also Jsaac.

Nim, c. to Steal, or whip off or away any thing. Nim a Togeman, c. to Steal a
Cloak. Nim a Cloak, c. to cut off the Buttons in a Crowd, or whip it off a
Man's Shoulders.

Nim-gimmer, c. a Doctor, Surgeon, Apothecary or any one that cures a Clap or
the Pox.

Ninny, c. a Canting whining Beggar; also a Fool.

Ninny-hammer, a silly Senseless Fellow.

Nip, c. a Cheat; also to Pinch or Sharp any thing. Nip-a*bung, c. to cut a
Purse. To Nip, to Press between the Fingers and Thumb without the Nails, or
with any broad Instrument like a pair of Tongs as to squeeze between Edged
Instruments or Pincers. Nipping Frost or Wind, Sharp or Cutting. To Nip in the
Bud, of an early Blast or Blite of Fruit; also to crush any thing at the
beginning.

Nipperkin, c. half a Pint of Wine, and but half a Quartern of Brandy, Stron
gwaters, etc.

Nipps, c. the Shears with which Money was will not to be Clipped.

Nit, wine that is brisk, and poured quick into a Glass; also a young Louse.
Nitts will be Lice.

Nizy, c. a Fool, or Coxcomb.

N O
Nob, c. a Head.

Nocky, c. a silly, dull Fellow

Noddle, a Head.

Noddy, c. a Fool. Knave-Noddy, a Game on the Cards.

Nokes, a Ninny or Fool; also a noted Droll but lately Dead.

Nol, Oliver. Old Nol, the late Usurper Cromwell.

Noggin, (of Brandy) a Quarter of a Pint.

A Noble, Six and eightpence. He has brought a Noble to Nine Pence, of one that
has reduced his Fortune.

Noise, used either of Harmonious or confused Sounds, Noise of Thunder, or of a
Mill, Noise of the Hounds, a Noise of Fiddles, of Trumpets and Drums, a Noise
of Swords, or clashing; make a Noise Tom, Hot Pudding-Pies.

Non-con, one that don't conform to the Church of England.

Nonjurors* Clergymen and others (Officers in the Army, Navy, etc.) That
refused to take the Oaths to King WILLIAM and Queen MARY, and were turned out
of their Livings and Employments.

Nooz'd, or caught in a Nooze, married; also Hanged.

Nose-gent, c. a Nun. As plain as the Nose in your Face, of a fair mark that
cannot be hid. He has a good Nose, of a Smell-Feast. He holds up his Nose, of
one that is Haughty, and carries his Head high. He is led by the Nose, of one
that is easily imposed upon. You make a Bridge of his Nose, when you pass your
next Neighbor in Drinking, or one is preferred over another's Head. Follow your
Nose, said in a jeer to those that know not the way, and are bid to Smell it
out, as we say to Smell a Post.

N U
Nub, c. the Neck.

Nubbing, c. Hanging.

Nubbing-cheat, c. the Gallows.

Nubbing-Cove, c. the Hangman.

Nubbing-ken, c. the Sessions House.

Nug, a Word of Love, as, my Dear Nug, my Dear Love.

Nugging-Dress, an odd or particular way, out of the Fashion.

Numms, c. a Sham, or Collar. Shirt, to hide the the other when Dirty.

Num-skul, a Foolish Person.

Nut-crackers* c. a Pillory. The Cull looked through the Nut-crackers the Rogue
stood in the Pillory.

O
Oaf, a Wise-acre, a Ninny or Fool, Oasish Silly.

Oak, an Oak, c. a rich Man, of good Substance and Credit.

Oats. One that has sown his wild Oats, or having run out of all, begins to
take up and be more Stayed.

O B
Oberon* King Oberon or little Oberon, King of the Fairies.

O F
Office. His Office, any Man's ordinary Haunt, or Plying-place, be it Tavern,
Alehouse, Gaming-house or Bowling-green. A cast of your Office, or a Touch of
your Employment. Be good in your Office, a Caveat to those that are apt to
forget themselves in it.

O G
Ogles, c. Eyes. Rum Ogles, c. fine, bright, clear, piercing Eyes.

Ogling, c. casting a sheep's Eye at Handsome Women. The Gentrymort has rum
Ogles, c. that Lady has charming black Eyes.

O L
Old-Coney, after the first Year.

Old-dog-at-it, good or expert.

Old-dog-at-common-prayer, a Poor Hackney that could Read, but not Preach well.

Old Harry, a Composition used by Vintners, when they bedevil their Wines.

Old-Mr-Gory, c. a piece of Gold.

Old Nick, the Devil.

Old Mob, a noted Hawker.

Old-Toast, a brisk old Fellow. A pleasant Old Cuff, a frolicksom old Fellow.

Oliver's Skull, a Chamber Pot.

Olli-Compolli, c. the by-name of one of the principal Rogues of the Canting
Crew.

O N
One in Ten, a Parson*

One of my Cosens, a Wench.

O P
Open-Arse, a Medlar; also a Lewd Woman.

Open House, or Open Doors, free for all Comers or Goers.

Open-handed, in Spending, opposed to closefisted. Open in Speech, to reserved.
Open-Sea when there is a free Trade, opposed to a Sea shut up in War, by
Pirates, Privateers or Embargo's of Ships.

Opiniator, an Assuming positive Fellow, an obstinate self-conceited Coxcomb.

O R
Orator to a Mountebank, the Doctor's Decoy who in conjunction with Jack
Pudding, amuses, diverts and draws in the Patients.

O T
Otter, an Amphibious Creature, betwixt a Beast and a Fish, a great destroyer
of Fish, affording much sport in Hunting. Otter watches, Lodges. Vent the
Otter, Dislodge him. An Otter whineth, makes a noise at Rutting time. Hunteth
for his Kind, the Term for their Copulation.

O V
Over-vert, all manner of High Woods.

Oversight, has two contrary Significations under one Sound, for an Oversight
is either the Care or Charge of, or Inspection into any Affair, or else an
Oversight Imports a Slip or Error committed in it, for want of due Care and
Circumspection. Over-shoes over Boots, or to go Through-stitch* Overdo, double
Diligence.

Oven, The Mother had never looked for her Daughter in the Oven, if she had not
been there her self before, or, she muses as she uses.

Out-at-heels, or Elbows, in a declining Condition, going down the Wind.

Outrun the Constable, to Spend more than is Got, or Run out of an Estate, to
run Riot.

Outside, that is the Outside, or utmost Rate.

O U
Owlers, those who privately in the Night carry Wool to the Seacoasts, near
Rumney-Marsh in Kent, and some Creeks in Sussex, etc. and Ship it off for
France against Law.

O Y
Oil of Barley, strong Drink.

O X
Ox-house. He must go through the Ox-house to Bed, of an old Fellow that
Marries a young Woman. The black Ox has not trod upon his Foot, of one that has
not been Pinched with Want, or been Hard put to it.

P
Pack, a Fardel or Bundle. Pack of Knaves, the worst of all the Pack, or a
Knave in Grain. Pack of Juries, Packing of Cards, Pick a Pack, Pack up your
Nawls and be gone, Packing of Parties and Elections. A common Packhorse, a
Hackney or common Drudge, one made a Slave of.

Pad, c. the High Way, and a Robber thereon; also a Bundle. Rum Pad, c. adaring
or stout Highway-man. Paddington-Fair, c. an Execution of Malefactors at
Tyburn; also a real Fair at the Village of that Name, near that Place. Goes
upon the Pad, or a Padding, c. Robbs upon the Highway. A Pad, an easy Pacing
Horse. Padds, worn by the Women to save their Sides from being Cut or Marked
with the Strings of their Petty-coats.

Pageant, a thing Dressed up and set out to make a Show. A Piece of Pageantry, a
thing that makes a Figure in a Show or Play, as Playhouse Kings and Generals
Strut and Stalk upon the Stage.

Pain, not in Pain, not in Care or Concern.

Painter, the Rope that lies in the Ship's Longboat, or Barge, always ready to
Fasten her, or Hale her on Shore. I Will Cut your Painter for ye, I Will prevent ye
doing me any Mischief; the Tar-Cant, when they Quarrel one with another. What
pleases the Painter, when any Representation in the Productions of his or any
Art is unaccountable, and so is to be resolved purely into the good Pleasure of
the Artist.

Pale of the Church, in or out of the Church's Enclosure.

Palled, Flat, Dispirited, or Dead Drink.

Pallet, a little Bed; also the Receiver of the Painter's Colors mingled, as
the Shells are of his several Colors unmingled; also one half of the Pale in
Heraldry.

Palm, the Attire of a Buck.

Paltry Fellow, a sorry, base, mean, contemptible Varlet.

Palliards, c. the Seventh Rank of the Canting Crew, whose Fathers were Born
Beggars, and who themselves follow the same Trade* with Sham Sores, making a
hideous Noise, Pretending grievous Pain, do extort Charity.

Pam, the Knave of Clubbs.

Pampered, Priest High-Fead. Horse

Panam, c. Bread*

Pantas, a Disease in Hawks.

Panter, c. a *Heart.

Pantry, Buttery.

Pantler, Butler.

Paper-Buildings, slight, Wooden, or old.

Paper-Skul, foolish, soft, silly.

Paper-Wars, Lettercombats.

Papers, Writings, or Deeds.

Paplar, c. Milk-pottage.

Par, Gold and Silver at a like Proportion.

Parasite, a Trencher-Friend, a mere Wheedle.

Parell, Whites of Eggs, Bay Salt, Milk and Conduit-Water beat together, and
poured into a Vessel of Wine to Cure it is Fretting, in order to Fine it, and
make it Drink up.

Parie, to put By a Thrust or Blow.

Parings, c. the Clippings of Money.

Parlous, or Perilous Man, a notable, shrewd Fellow.

Parsimonious, Near, Niggardly, Pinching, Stingy.

Pass, a Way, Lane, River, Leave; also condition. What a Sad Pass things are
come to? In what an ill State they are. That Shamm will not Pass, that Trick will not
take. Do the Waters Pass well? much in use at the Wells, do they Move as they
ought* To Pass upon one, to top upon him, or impose upon him; also a Term at
Billiards, when the Ball goes through the Court or Porch, it is said to pass.

Passage, a Camp-Game, with three Dice, Doublets, making up Ten or more, to
Pass or Win, any other Chances lose.

Pass bank, the Stock or Fund thereto belonging; also the playing Place Cut out
in the Ground almost Cockpit ways.

Pat, apposite, or to the purpose.

Patering, the Maundring or pert Replies of Servants. Patering of Prayers,
Muttering of them, from the thick Repeating of so many Paters or Pater-nosters.
No Penny, no Pater-nosters, no Pay, no Prayers.

Patrico, c. or Patercove, c. the Fifeteenth Rank of the Canting Tribe,
stroling Priests that Marry under a Hedge without Gospel or Common Prayer Book,
the Couple standing on each side a Dead Beast, are bid to Live together till
Death them does Part, so shaking Hands, the Wedding is ended; also any
Minister, or Parson,

Pateepan, a little Pie, or small Pasty.

Patrole, the Rounds.

Paume, when a Die or Piece of Money is hid in the Hand, to secure the Game, or
Wager. He Paumes it, he Cheats, or Plays Foul.

Paw, a Hand.

Pawn. To Pawn any Body, to steal away and leave him or them to Pay the
Reckoning.

Pay through the Nose, Excessively, or with Extortion.

P E
Peak, c. any kind of Lace.

Pearls* the little Knobs on the Bur (which see) of a Stag.

Peck, c. Meat.

Peckidge, c. Meat. Rum Peck, c. good Eating. The Gentry Cove tipped us rum Peck
and rum Gutlers, till we were all Bowsy, and snapt all the Flickers, the
Gentleman gave us so much good Victuals, and Canary, that we were all Damned
Drunk, and broke all the drinking Glasses.

Peculiars, Plants, Animals and Fossiles, proper and particular to some one
Country, and rarely if ever found in others, as English Scurvy Grass, Sarsa,
Sassafras and Guajacum, all West Indian Druggs; and so for Animals, English
Maistiffs, Irish Greyhounds. Barnacles, and Soland Geese peculiar to Scotland,
as Puffins, to the Isle of Man; also Parishes exempt from other Ordinaries, and
peculiarly belonging to the Sea of Canterbury.

Peculiar, c. a Mistress; also particular, private, proper.

Pedant, a mere Scholar, a Schoolmaster, a Man of one kind of Learning or
Business, out of which he is good for nothing.

Pedantry, a Learning and Skill of one Color.

Ped, a Basket.

Pedlars, Scoth Merchants; also English Retailers of Goods, that stroll from
Town to Town.

Pedlars-French, a sort of Gibrish or made Language, easy to be Learnt and
Understood, used by Gypsies, etc. Also the Beggars Cant.

Peeking Fellow, a mere Sneaks, one that peeps in every Hole and Corner; also a
thin, weaselfaced Fellow.

Peeper, c. a Looking-glass. Track the Dancers, and pike with the Peepers, c.
whip up the Stairs, and trip off with the Looking-glass.

Peepers, c. Eyes.

Peepy, c. Peeping, c. Drowsy, Sleepy. As the Cull Peeps let us Mill him, c.
when the Man is a Sleep, let us Kill him.

Peery, c. fearful, shy, sly. The Cull's Peery, c. the Rogue's afraid to
venture.

Peeter, c. a Portmantle or Cloak-bag. Bite the Peeter, c. to whip off the
Cloak-bag. Biter of Peeters, c. one that makes a Trade of whipping Boxes and
Trunks from behind a Coach or out of a Wagon, or off a Horse's Back.

Pea-goose, a silly Creature.

Peg at Cocks, to throw at them at Shrovetide. Gone to Pegtrantums, Dead.

Pel-mel, helter-skelter,

Pelt, a Heat or Chafe. What a Pelt you are in? what a Chafe your in? Also the
Dead Body of any Fowl the Hawk has killd.

Pelts, Beast Skinns.

Pelting-village, Blind, Obscure.

Penelope's Web, to do and undo.

Pennance-bord, c a Pillory.

Pennites, that Faction of Quakers that follow most and are in the Interest of
William Pen, the chief Proprietor and Governor of Pensylvania, a Country lying
betwixt Forty and Forty five Degrees of Latitude, in America, much improved,
and like to flourish.

Pennyworth. I Will fetch my-Pennyworth out of him, or make him earn what he
cost me.

Penny-white, said of her, to whom Fortune has been kinder than Nature.
Penny-wise and Pound-foolish, Sparing in a little and Lavish in a great Deal,
save at the Spiggot and let it out at the Bunghole. A Pennyworth for one's
Penny, for what is worth one's Money. To get a Penny, to endeaver to Live; to
turn and wind the Penny, to make to most of one's Money, ot Lay-it out at the
best Advantage. Pennyless, poor, sharp, bare of Money.

Penurious, pinching* hard, parsimonious, little.

Pentice Nab, a very broad-brm'd Hat.

Pepperd off, Damnably Clapped or Poxt. Pepper-proof, not Clapped or Poxt.

Pericranium, the Head or Skull.

Perking, the late D* of M. allo any pert forward silly Fellow. To Perk up, to
hold up the Head after Drooping.

Periwinkle, a Perruque or Periwig; also the same as Pinpatches.

Pestilent-fine, Tearing-fine.

Pet, a Fret. To be in a Pet, or out of Humor.

Peter Lug, Who is Peter Lug? Who let us the Glass stand at his Door?

Petrify, to turn to Stone.

Petrification, Concretions, either such as are hardened into Stone, by exposing
them to Air, as Coral; or by casting them into Cold petrifying Waters, as Wood.

Pettycoat-Pensioner, a Gallant, or one Maintained for secret Service.

P H
Phanatics, Dissenters from the Church of England.

Pharaoh, very strong Mault-Drink.

Phenix-men, the same as Fire-drakes.

Philadelphians, a new Sect of Enthusiasts pretenders to Brotherly Love, etc.

Philistines, Sergeants Bailiffs and their Crew; also Drunkards. I fell among
the Philistines, I chopped upon a knot of Drunken Fellows.

Phis, for Physiognomy, Face or Aspect.

P I
Picking, little Stealing, Pilfering, petty Larceny.

Pickthank, a Talebearer, or an Insinuator by any means to curry Favor.

Pickaroon, a very small Privateer; also a shabby poor Fellow.

Pickled, very Arch or Waggish. In Pickle, Poxt. Rodds in Pickle, or revenge in
Lavender.

Pig, c. Sixpence. The Cull tipped me a Pig, c. the Man gave me Sixpence.

Pig of the Sounder, see Wild Boar.

Pigsnie, a word of Love.

Pig-widgeon, a silly Fellow.

Pike, c. to run away, flee, quit, or leave the Place; also to Die. As he
Pikes, c. he walks or goes. Pike on the been, c. run away as fast as you can.
Piked off, c. run away, fled, broke; also Dead. To pass the Pikes, to be out of
Danger.

Pillau, a Hen and Rice Boiled, a Turkish Dish, but now in use in England,
France and Holland.

Pillory, a Baker; also a Punishment mostly heretofore for Beggars, now for
Perjury, Forgery and suborned Persons.

Pimp, the same as Cock-bawd.

Pimp-whisking, a Top Trader that way; also a little mean-spirited,
narrow-soul'd Fellow.

Pimlico, a noted Cakehouse formerly, but now converted into a Bowlinggreen, of
good report at Hogsden near London.

Pin, a small Vessel containing Four Gallons and a half, or the Eighth part of
a Barrel. To Pin himself upon you, or to Hang on. To Pin one's Faith on
another's Sleeve, or take all upon Trust, for Gospel that he says. Not a Pin
to choose, when there is little or no difference. Upon a merry Pin, or in a
pleasant Mood. Nick the Pin, to Drink fairly.

Pimginnit, a large, red, angry Pimple.

Pinch, to Steal, or Slily convey any thing away. To Pinch, to Cut the Measures
of Ale, Beer, etc. To Pinch on the Parson's side, or Sharp him of his Tithes.
At a Pinch, upon a Push or Exigence.

Pinch gut-hall, a noted House at Milend, so Nicknam'd by the Tarrs, who were
half Starved in an East India Voyage, by their then Commander, who Built (at
his return) that famous Fabric, and (as they say) with what he Pinched out of
their Bellies.

Pinch-gut-money, allowed by the King to the Seamen, that Serve on Board the
Navy Royal, when their Provision falls Short; also in long Voyages when they
are forced to Drink Water instead of Beer.

Pinpatches, a small Shel-fish very like a Snail, but less, Caught on the Ouzes
at low Tide, in Rivers near the Sea, and Sold cheap.

Picquant, a sharp Reflection; also a poynant Sauce.

Pink't, Pricked with a Sword in a Rencounter or Duel. He Pink'd his Doublet, he
Run him Through.

Piquet, a game at Cards.

Pit, c. the hole under the Gallows into which those that Pay not the Fee, viz.
6 s 8 d, are cast and Buried.

Pit-a pat, or Pintle de Pantledy, sadly Scared, grievously put to it.

Pitcher-bawd, the poor Hack that runs of Errands to fetch Wenches or Liquor.
Little Pitchers have large Ears, Children may over-hear, and discover Secrets.
The Pitcher does not go so often to the Well, but it comes home Broke at last,
of him that after many lucky Adventures or narrow Escapes, miscarries in the
End.

Pithy jest, or Sentence, that couches a great deal in a little room.

Pittance, a small Largess or petty Gratuity.

P L
Placaert, a Dutch Proclamation, or Order of the States.

Plad, Scotch striped Stuff.

Plaint for Complaint, he made his Plaint to me, or made his Complaint to me.
Hence Plaintiff and Defendant at Law, for Complainant and Defendant.

Planks, thrown out to save those that can Swim in a Wreck; also Flooring.

Plant, c. to lay, place, or hide. Plant your Whids and Stow them, c. be wary
what you say or let slip.

Plaster of hot Gutts, one warm Belly clapped to another.

Plate-fleet come s in, when Money comes to Hand.

Platter-fac'd-jade, a vere broad, ordinary faced Woman.

Plausible, smooth, specious, Taking.

Play it off, to play Booty; also to thorw a way, at Gaming, so much and no
more. He Plays it off, he Cheats.

Pliant, supple, flexible, ductile, manageable, Wax to every Thumb.

Plodder, a Porer in Records, Writings or Books, a dull Drudge, or hard
Student. A Plodding Lawyer, a Laborious Lawyer. A Plodding Horse, a good Drudge
or Pack-horse.

Pluck the Ribond, or Pluck Sir O -- n, ring the Bell at the Tavern.

Plump-in-the-pocket, flush of Money

Plyer, c. a Crutch.

P O
Poching, a sly destroying of Game, with Dogs, Netts, Snares etc. Contrary to
the Laws; also an Egg Boyld in Water out of the Shell.

Poke, a Bag, Sack, or Pocket. To buy a Pig in a Poke, or unsight or unseen. To
carry your Passions in your Pocket, or smother your Passions.

Poker, one that conveys Coals (at Newcastle) in Sacks, on Horseback; also a
pointed Porr to raise the Fire, and a Sword.

Polt on the Pate, a good Rap there.

Poltron, a Coward.

Poniard, a short Dagger or Stilletto.

Porker, c. a Sword.

Porters, Hirelings to carry Burdens, Beasts of Burden, or else Menial
Servants set to Guard the Gates in a great Man's House, of whom Dr. Done said
pleasantly, that he was ever next the Door, yet the seldomest Abroad of any of
the Family.

Portable, Pocketable.

Portage, Carriage of any thing, whether by Land or Water.

Posse Mobilitatis, the whole Rabble in a Body.

Post, Employment, Office, Station; also an advanced, or advantageous piece of
Ground: A Pillar in the Way or Street. From Pillar to Post, from Constable to
Constable.

Pot-hooks, Scrawls or bad Writing.

Pot-valiant, Drunk.

Pot and Spit, Boiled and Roast. A little Pot is soon Hot, of a little Fellow
soon made angry. The Pot calls the Kettle black A --, when one accuses another
of what he is as Deep in himself.

Poulain, a Bubo.

Powder monkeys, Boys planted at the Guns a Board the Ship, to fetch Gunpowder,
etc. in the Engagement.

Powdring-Tub, the pocky Hospital at Kingsland near London.

Poisoned, Big with Child.

Poyson-pate, red Hair'd.

P R
Prancer, c. a Horse.

Prancers-nab, c. a Horse's Head used in a Sham-Seal to such a Pass.

Prancers-poll, c. the same as before; also the Sign of the Nag's Head. Mount
the Prancer, c. get on the Horse's Back.

Pranks, Tricks.

Pratts, c. Buttocks; also a Tinder-box or Touch-box.

Prating-cheat, c. a Tongue.

Prateroast, a Talking Boy.

Precarious, what is Disputable and uncertain, as being purely at the Pleasure
and Courtesy of another.

Precaution, Forecast, or the Wisdom of Prevention, which is beyond that of
Remedy.

Precipitate, Rash, Headstrong, Unadvised, Inconsiderate, hurrying in Business.

Precisians, Strait-laced, Squeemish, Foolishly Scrupulous.

Preservatives. Antidotes to keep off, or prevent Diseases.

Priestcraft, the Art of awing the People, managing their Consciences, and
diving into their Purses.

Pretext, Show, Color, Pretense, or Excuse.

Prey, c. Money.

Prick, the first Head of a Fallow Deer; also a Skewer.

Pricker, a Huntsman on Horse Back.

Pricketh, the Footing of a Hare on the hard Highway, when it can be perceived.

Prickear'd Fellow, a Crop, whose Ears are longer than his Hair.

Prick-louse, a Tailor.

Pricked, decayed Wine, tending to Sower. The Prick and Praise of our Town, that
bears the Bell from all the Rest, in all Exercises, as Wrestling, Running,
Leaping, Vaulting, Pitching of the Bar, etc.

Priest-link'd, Married.

Priest-ridden, wholly influenced, and absolutely governed by that Tribe.

Prig, c. a Thief, a Cheat; also a Nice beauish, silly Fellow, is called a mere
Prig.

Priggs, c. the Ninth Rank of Canting Rogues, Thieves.

Priggers, c. Thieves.

Prigging, c. Riding; also Lying with a Woman.

Prigstar, c. a Rival in Love.

Priggish, c. Thievish.

Prig-napper, c. a Horse-Stealer; also a Thieftaker.

Priggers of the Cacklers. c. Poultry-Stealers.

Priggers of Prancers, c. the Sixth Order of the Canting Crew, Horse-Stealers,
who carry a Bridle in their Pockets, a small Pad Saddle in their Breeches.

Primero, an old German Game at Cards.

Prim, a silly empty starcht Fellow.

Princock, a pert, forward Fellow.

Princes-metal, a mixed Metal, betwixt Brass and Copper, and of a mixed Color
between both, not so Pale as the one, nor fo Red as the other, the late
Invention of Prince Rupert.

Prince Prig, c. a King of the Gypsies; also a Top-Thief, or Receiver General.

Prinking, nicely Dressing. Prinkt up, set up on the Cupboards-head in their
best Clothes, or in State. Stiff-starched. Mistress Princum-Prancum, such a one.

Print, the Treading of a Fox. To set in Print, with Mouth skrew'd up and Neck
Stretched out.

Prisme, a Triangular Crystal-Glass or Fools Paradise, that by refraction
reflects imaginary Blew, Red, and Yellow Colors upon all Objects seen through
it; also any Saw-dust.

Prittle-Prattle, idle impertinent Chat.

Proclamations, his Head is full of Proclamations, much taken up to little
Purpose.

Prog, c. Meat. Rum Prog, c. nice Eating. The Cull tipped us Rum Prog, c. the
Gentleman Treated us very High.

Projectors, Busybodies in new Inventions and Difcoveries, Virtuoso's of
Fortune, or Traders in unsuccesful if not impracticable Whimms, who are always
Digging where there is no more to be found.

Proling, Hunting or Searching about in quest of a Wench, or any Game.

Property, a mere Tool, or Implement, to serve a Turn, a Cat's foot; also a
natural Qu ality or Talent, and the highest right a Man can have to any thing,
Liberty and Property, two Inestimable Jewels. To change the Property, or give
it another turn, with a new Dress. or the Disguise of a Wig and a false Beard.

Proud Bitch, desirous of Copulation.

Prying Fellow, that is very curious to enquire into other Men's Secrets and
Affairs.

Provender, c. he from whom any Money is taken on the Highway.

P U
Puke, to Spue.

Pug, Pugnasty, a mere Pug, a nasty Slut, a sorry Jade, of a Woman; also a
Monkey.

Puling, Sickly.

Pummel, the Hilt, Handle, or round Knob of a Sword, or Saddle; also to Beat I
Pummel'd his Sides for him, I Beat him soundly.

Pump, to wheedle Secrets out of any one; also to drench, Bailives, Sergeants,
Pick-pockets, etc. Pumpt dry, not a Word left to say.

Pun, to Play with Words and Sounds.

Punch, Brandy and Water, with Limes or Lemon-juice; also a thick short Man.
Punch Nag, a short, thick, fat, squat, strong Horse

Punch-houses, Bawdy-houses.

Punchable, old passable Money, Anno 1695.

Punk, a little Whore.

Puny Child, weak little Puny Stomach. Puny Judge, the Junior or Youngest.

Pure, c. a Mistress.

Purest*pure, c. a Top-Mistress, or Fine Woman.

Pupil-mongers, Tutors at the Universities, that have many Pupils, and make a
Penny of them.

Puritans, Puritanical, those of the precise Cut, strait-laced Precisians,
whining (as Osborn says) for a Sanctity God never yet trusted out of Heaven.

Purl, Wormwood infused in Ale.

Purl-Royal, Canary with a dash of Wormwood.

Pursenets, c. Goods taken upon Trust by young Unthrifts at treble the Value;
also a little Purse.

Purse-proud, haughty because Rich.

Pursy, Foggy, Fat.

Pushers, Canary-birds new Flown that cannot Feed themselves.

Pushing-School, a Fencing School; also a Bawdy House. At a Push, at a pinch or
strait. At Push of Pike, at Defiance. Push-pinn, Childrens Play. To Push on
one's Fortune, to advance, or run it up.

Put. A Country-Put, a silly, shallow-pated Fellow. Put to it, Beset.

Q
Quacking-cheat, c. a Duck.

Quack, an Empirick, or mere pretender to Physic.

Quaffing, Quaff off, carousing, to carouse.

Quag, Quagmire, marshy moorish Ground.

Quailing of the Stomach, beginning to be qualmish or uneasy.

Quail-pipe, a Woman's Tongue; also a Device to take the Birds of that Name,
which are fine Food, the French esteemed the best; though both those and the
English are of a Currish Nature, and will beat themselves against the Cage,
sides and top, being with difficulty brought to Feed: Wheat is usually given
them, but Hempseed is a great deal better.

Quaint, curious, neat; also strange

Quaking-cheat, c. a Calf or a Sheep.

Qualified, Accomplished, Statesman, Soldier, Scholar.

Qualifications, Accomplishments that render any of them Complete; also
Conditions.

Qually-Wines, Turbulent and Foul.

Qualm, a Stomack-Fit; also Calmness, and the Cry of Ravens.

Qualmish, Crop-sick, queasy Stomackt.

Quarrel-picker, a Glazier; also a contentious Fellow, a Trouble Company.

Quarron, c. a Body.

Quarte, Nails of the Sword-Hand quite up.

Quarting upon the straight Line, keeping the Head and Shoulders very much back
from the Adversary's Sword, when one thrusts* with his own.

Quash, to Suppress, Annul, or Overthrow. To Quash the Indictment.

Queen, a Whore, or Slut. A dirty Queen, a very Puzzel or Slut.

Queasy Stomacht, Cropsick, Qualmish.

Queen Elizabeth's Pocket-pistol, a Brass-Cannon of a prodigious Length at
Dover-Castle.

Queere, c. base, Roguish, naught. How Queerely the Cull Touts? c. how
roguishly the Fellow looks.

Queere Birds, c. such as having got loose, return to their old Trade of
Roguing and Thieving.

Queere-bluffer, c. a sneaking, sharping, Cutthroat Alehouse or Innkeeper.

Queere-bung, c. an empty Purse.

Queere-clout, c. a sorry, coarse, ordinary or old Handkerchief, not worth
Nimming.

Queere-cole, c. Clipped, Counterfeit, or Brass Money.

Queere-cole-maker, c. a false Coyner.

Queere-cole-fencer, c. a Receiver and putter off false Money.

Queere-cove, c. a Rogue.

Queere-cuffin, c. a Justice of Peace; also a Churl.

Queere-cull, c. a Fop, or Fool, a Codshead; also a shabby poor Fellow.

Queere-degen, c. an Iron, Steel, or Brass-hilted Sword.

Queere-diver, c. a bungling Pick-pocket.

Queere-doxy, c. a jilting Jade, a sorry shabby Wench.

Queere-drawers, c. Yarn, coarse Worsted, ordinary or old Stockings.

Queere-duke, c. a poor decayed Gentleman; also a lean, thin, half Starved
Fellow,

Queere-fun, c. a bungling Cheat or Trick.

Queere-ken, c. an ill House, or a Prison.

Queere-mort, c. a dirty Drab, a jilting Wench, a Pockey Jade.

Queere-nab, c. a Felt, Carolina, Cloth, or ordinary Hat, not worth whipping
off a Man's Head.

Queere-kicks, c. coarse, ordinary or old Breeches.

Queere-peepers, c. oldfashion'd, ordinary, black-fram'd, or common
Looking-glasses.

Queere-prancer, c. a Foundered Jade, an ordinary low-priz'd Horse.

Queere-topping, c. sorry Commodes or Headdresses.

Quibble, to Trifle, or Pun. Sir Quibble Queere, a trifling silly
shatter-brainn'd Fellow.

Quidds, c. Money. Tip the Quidds, c. can ye spend your Sixpence.

Quietists, a Numerous and considerable Sect amongst the Papists, being against
Oral and wholly for Mental Paryer, Whiggs, Popish Precisians, or Puritans.

Quipps, Girds, Taunts, Jeers, etc.

Quirks in Law, Lawtricks or Subtilties.

Quirks and Quillets, Tricks and Devices.

Quod, c. Newgate; also any Prison, though for Debt. The Dab's in in the Quod, c.
the poor Rogue is in Limbo.

Quota, c. Snack, Share, Part, Proportion or Dividend. Tip me my Quota, c. give
me my Part of the Winnings, Booty, Plunder, etc.

R
Rabbet-suckers, c. young Unthrifts taking up Goods upon Tick at excessive
rates.

Rabbet, the first Year.

Rabbits, Wooden Kanns to Drink out of, once, used on the Roads, now, almost
laid by.

Rabble, the Mob.

Racket, a Noise or Bustle; also Tennis-play. What a Racket those Ramps keep?
What a busel these rude Children make?

Racking of Wines, Drawing them off their Lees into fresh Vessels.

Rack-rent, strained to the utmost Value. The Knights of Cales, Gentlemen of
Wales, and Lairds of the North Country, a Yeoman of Kent, at Rack-rent, will
buy 'em all Three. To lie at Rack and Manger, to live hard.

Rag, c. a Farthing. Not a Rag left, c. I have Lost or Spent, all my Money.

Ragou, a Relishing Bit, with a high Sauce.

Ragamuffin, a Tatterdemallion.

Rag-water, a common sort of Strong Water.

Rake, Rake Hell, Rakeshame, a Lewd Spark or Deboshee, one that has not yet
Sowed his Wild Oats, Rakish, tending to, or leaning toward that Extravagant
way, of Life. Rake, when the Hawk flies out too far from the Fowls; also so
much of the Ship's Hull as overhangs both Ends of the Keel; and to Trot a Horse
gently.

Ralph-Spooner, a Fool.

Raillery, Drolling. To Railly, or Droll. A Railleur, or Droll.

Rally, to Unite or embody broken Troops.

Rammish, Rank.

Ramp, a Tomrig, or rude Girl. To Ramp, to Play rude Horse-Play.

Rampant, uppish, over-bold, over-pert, over-lusty. A Lion Rampant, i. e.
rearing up his Forefeet.

Rangle, when Gravel is given to a Hawk, to bring her to a Stomach.

Ranging, c. intriguing, and enjoying many Women.

Rank, rammish, strongscented, as all the Fetids, either Vegetables or Animals,
as Garlic, Assa foetida, Polecats, Foxes, Goats, etc. And whatever is Stale,
Corrupt, or Tainted, and Stinks with long or careless Keeping. A Rank Lie, a
lewd or flat Lie. A Rank Knave, an errant base Knave. A Rank Whore, an errant
Whore.

Rank-rider, c. a Highway-man; also a Jockey.

Rank-wink'd, Hawk, that is a slow Fligher.

Rant, to Talk Big, High, or Boast much.

Ranters, Extravagants, Unthrifts, Lewd Sparks; also of the Family of Love.

Rantipole, a rude wild Boy or Girl.

Rap, to Swop or Exchange a Horse or Goods; also a Polt on the Pate, and a hard
Knocking at a Door.

Rapparies, Wild Irish Robbers, and Outlaws.

Rapper, a swinging great Lie.

Raree-show-men, poor Savoyards strolling up and down with portable Boxes of
Puppet-shews at their Backs; in short, Pedlars of Puppets.

Rascal, a base, vile Fellow, a Rogue.

Rascal-Deer, lean, poor, ont-lying Deer.

Rat, a Drunken Man or Woman taken up by the Watch, and carried by the
Constable to the Counter. To smell a Rat, to suspect a Trick.

Rattler, c. a Coach.

Rattling-cove, c. a Coachman.

Rattling Mumpers, c. such Beggars as Ply Coaches. To Rattle, c. to move off,
or be gone. We'll take Rattle, c. we must not tarry, but whip away.

Rattling, the Noise of Coaches and Carts; as also of Armor, or of Hail, or
Thunder.

Rattle-pate, a Hot, Maggot-pated Fellow. I Rattled him, I Rated him roundly,
and told him his own.

Rattleth, the Noise a Goat makes at Rutting time.

Ravilliac, any Assasin.

Raw-head and Bloodybones, a Ball-begger or Scare-child.

Rayn-deer, a Beast like a Heart, but has his Head fuller of Antlers.

R E
Ready, c. Ready and Rhino, c. Money in Possession.

Rebel-rout, the Rabble, running Riot.

Reaking, smoking or piping-hot, as Pies out of the Oven, Iron out of the
Forge, or Blood from a warm Wound. Hence perhaps the Reck, or Reaking, i.* e.
Smoke of the Clouds. I Will Reak my Spite on him, I Will be Revenged on him.

Rear the Boar, Dislodge him.

Rebus's, Words or Sentences that are the same backwards as forwards.

Recheat, a Lesson blown on the Horn.

Recorder, a musical Instrument; also a Law-Officer or Magistrate in Cities and
Corporations, their Mouth, or Spokesman.

Recreant, a Poltron, or Coward, one that eats his Words, or unsaies what he
said.

Recruits, c. Money (Expected.) Have you raised the Recruits, c. is the Money
come in?

Red-fustian, Clarret or red Port-Wine.

Red-letter-man, a Roman-catholic.

Red-rag, a Tongue. Your Red-rag will never lie still, your Tongue will never
be quiet.

Red-shank, c. a Duck.

Refugies, French and Vaudois Protestants, forced to quit their own and fly
into others Countries to have the Exercise of their Religion.

Refreshed, either as the Air is with Winds, when it Blows a Fresh Gale; or
artificially with the motion of Fanns, or opening the Windows to Fann a close
Room; or as Wines are with Snow and Ice; or by casting a new Gloss, on what is
worn out, Withered, or Decayed, in Bodies Artificial, as Embroidery by
Burnishing, or of Pictures by Varnishing, etc.

Rellif, Copulation of Hares.

Remember Parson Malham, (Norfolk) Pray Drink about Sir.

Regraters, Fore-stallers in Markets.

Repartee, a sudden smart Reply.

Republican, a Common-wealths-man.

Reserve, a Store or Hoard to have recourse to, upon a Push or particular
Exigence; a Nest-Egg.

Respost, having given a Thrust, to Receive one from the Adversary, before he
has recovered his Body.

Resty, Headstrong, Wayword, Unruly, Masterless.

Retailers, Parcel-traders or Dealers, petty Merchants, Hucksters, Chandlers,
Pedlars, etc. In Retail, in Parcel or small Sum, opposed to what goes in Tale
or Sum at Large.

Retainers, a Great Man's Followers or Servants, attending him (heretofore) in
Blew Coats and Badges, which were the Ancient Liveries, though little more
remains of it at present, save what is left among the Watermen. Hence the Word
Retinue, or Train of Attendance.

Reversed, c. a Man set (by Bullies) on his Head, and his Money turned out of
his Breeches.

Reward, what is given the Hounds, or Beagles by the Hands of the Hunts-man or
others, after they have finished their Chase, by the Death of what they pursued.

R H
Rhino, c. ready Money.

Rhinocerical, c. full of Money. The Cull is Rhinocerical, c. the Fop is full
of Money.

R I
Rib, or Ribroasting, a Dry-basting.

Ribbin, c. Money. The Ribbin runs thick, c. his Breeches are well lined with
Money. The Ribbin runs thin. c. he has but little Cash about him.

Richess, (of Marterns) a Company.

Rich face, a Red-face.

Ridg-cully, c. a Goldsmith.

Riff-raff, the Rabble or Scum of the People, Tagrag and Longtail.

Ridge, or row of Hills, extended in a Line.

Ridicule, to Railly or turn any thing to a Jest. To turn it all to Ridicule.
to make a Mock of it.

Rigging, c. Clothes.

I Will Unrig the Bloss, c. I will Strip the Wench.

Rum Rigging, c. fine Clothes. The Cull has Rum Rigging, let us Ding him, and
Mill him, and Pike, c. the Man has very good Cloths, let us Knock him Down, Rob
him, and Scour off.

Rill, a Rivulet, or small River.

Ring, c. Money extorted by Rogues on the Highway, or by Gentlemen Beggars. A
Ring, a Concourse of People for Wrestling, Cudgel-playing, etc. A Ring of
Hills, a round Circle of Hills.

Ring-walks, the Dewrounds made by Huntsmen, when they go drawing in their
Springs at Hart-Hunting.

Ripe, ready, come to maturity. Matters are not Ripe, not ready, or come to
Perfection.

Riveted, or Rooted Customs, or Habits; inveterate or confirmed Diseases*

R O
Roam, to wander far and wide from Home.

Roberds-men, c. the third (old) Rank of the Canting Crew, mighty Thieves, like
Robin-hood.

Rochester-portion, two torn Smocks, and what Nature gave.

Roe. A Fair Roe-buck, the fifth Year; a Roebuck of the first Head, the fourth
Year; a Hemuse, the third Year; a Gyrle, the second Year; a Kid, the first
Year; a Roe Beddeth, Lodges; a Roe Belloweth, makes a Noise at Rutting time.

Roger, c. a Portmantle, a Goose; also a Man's Yard.

Rogues, c. the fourth Order of Canters. A Rogue in Grain, a very great Rogue.
A Great-be-rogue, a sturdy swinging Rogue.

Romance, a feigned pleasant History. To Romance, to Lie pleasantly, to Stretch
in Discourse,

Romboyles, c. Watch and Ward.

Romboyl'd, c. sought after with a Warrant.

Romer, a drinking Glass; also wider.

Rook, c. a Cheat, a Knave. To Rook, c. to Cheat or play the Knave.

Rope. Upon the Highropes, Cock-a-hoop. Give him Rope enough and he will Hang
himself, he will Decoy himself within his own Destiny.

Rosy-gills, c. Sanguine or fresh-colour'd.

Rost-meat-cloths, Holiday-cloths. You cannot fare well, but you must cry
Rost-meat, you cannot meet with good Cheer, but you must tell Tales. To give one
Rost-meat, and Beat him with the Spit, to do one a Curtesy, and Twit or Upbraid
him with it. To rule the Roast, to be Master, or Paramount. Roasted, Arrested.
I Will Roast the Dab, I will Arrest the Rascal.

Rot-gut, very small or thin Beer.

Rovers, Pirates, Wanderers, Vagabonds. To Shoot at Rovers, at Random. To Rove
about, to wander idly up and down.

Rough, Unpolisht, Unmannerly, Uncouth. To lie Rough, in one's Clothes all
Night.

Round-dealing, Plain, Honest Dealing.

Round-summ, a Lusty-Summ.

Roundheads, the Parliamentarian Party in the great Rebellion, that begun 1641.

Rout, (of Wolves) a Company.

Rouse, (the Buck) Dislodge him.

Rawland-for-an-Oliver, to give as good as he brought.

Roysters, c. rude, Roaring Rogues.

R U
Rub, c. to Run away. A Rub, an Impediment, Obstacle, Hinderance, Stop, or
Difficulty. Rub on, to Live indifferently. Rubbed off, c. Broke, and run away.
Rub through the World, to Live Tolleraly well in it.

Rubbers, Two (and sometimes Three) Games to make up; also a Rencounter with
drawn Sword, and Reflections made upon any one.

Rub-rub, used on Greens when the Bowl Flees too fast, to have it forbear, if
Words would do it.

Rub-up, or refresh the Memory.

Rub-up, or Scower Armor, etc.

Rubs us to the Whit, c. sends us to Newgate.

Ruby-face, very red.

Ruck, a Bumble, or Heap.

Rud, a small Fish with a forked Tail, between which and the Roach, there is
much about the same difference, as between the Herring and the Pilchard.

Ruff, an old-fashioned double Band; also a noted Bird, and a Fish, Pope, like
a small Perch, and when the Hawk hits the Prey, and yet not Trusses it.

Ruffin, c. the Devil; also a Justice of Peace, and also an Assasin.

Rufflers, c. the first Rank of Canters; also notorious Rogues. To Ruffle, to
disorder any thing.

Ruff-mans, c. the Woods or Bushes.

Ruff-peck, c. Bacon. As the Ruffin nab the Cuffin queere, and let the
Harmanbeck Trime with his Kinchins about his Colquarron, c. let the Devil take
Justice, and let the Constable Hang with his Children abouthis Neck.

Ruffter-hood, a plain and easy Leather-hood worn by a Hawk, when first drawn.

Rug. It Is all Rug, c. the Game is secured.

Rum, c. gallant, Fine, Rich, best or excellent; also a West-Indian Drink
stronger than Brandy, drawn from Dreggs of Sugar for the most part, yet
sometimes from Fruits, and Rows of Fish; best when old, much used in Punch.

Rumly, c. bravely, cleaverly, delicately, etc.

Rum-booze, c. Wine; also very good or strong Drink.

Rum-boozing-Welts, c. bunches of Grapes.

Rum-beck, c. any Justice of the Peace.

Rum-bob, c. a young Prentice; also a sharp, sly Trick, and a pretty short Wig.

Rum-bite, c. a cleaver Cheat, a neat Trick.

Rum-bleating-cheat, c. a very fat Weather.

Rum-blower, c. a very Handsome Mistress, kept by a particular Man.

Rum-bluffer, c. a jolly Host, Innkeeper, or Victualler.

Rum-bughar, c. a very Pretty and Valuable Dog.

Rum-bung, c. a full Purse.

Rum-bubber, c. a cleaver or dextrous Fellow at Stealing Silver-Tankards
(formerly) from Public Houses.

Rum-cod, c. a good Purse of Gold, or round Sum of Money.

Rum-cove, c. a great Rogue.

Rum-cul, c. a rich Fool, that can be easily Bit, or Cheated by any body; also
one that is very generous and kind to a Mistress, and as

Rum-chub, c. which is (among the Butchers) one that is easily persuaded to
believe what they say of the Goodness, and also to give them an extraod'nary
Price for their Meat, a very ignorant Marketman or Woman, that Lays out a
great deal of Money with, and is Bit by them.

Rum clout c. a Silk, fine Cambrick, or Holland Handkerchief.

Rum-cole, c. new Money, or Medals, curiously Coined.

Rum-dropper, c. a Vintner.

Rum-duke, c. a jolly handsome Man.

Rum-dutchess, c. a jolly handsome Woman.

Rum-dukes, c. the boldest or stoutest Fellows (lately) amongst the Alsatians,
Minters, Savoyards, etc. Sent for to remove and guard the Goods of such
Bankrupts as intended to take Sanctuary in those Places.

Rum-doxy, c. a Beautiful Woman, or light Lady.

Rum-degen, c. a Silver-hilted or inlaid Sword.

Rum-dell, c. as Rumdoxy.

Rum-diver, c. an complete, or cleaver Pickpocket.

Rum-drawers, c. Silk Stockings, or very fine Worsted Hose.

Rum-dubber, c. an experienced or expert Picker of Locks.

Rumford-Lyon, a Calf.

Rum-fun, c. a cleaver Cheat, or sharp Trick.

Rum-file, c. as Rum-diver.

Rum-gutlers, c. Canary-Wine.

Rum-glymmar, c. King or Chief of the Linkboies.

Rum-ghelt, c. as Rum-cole.

Rum-hopper, c. a Drawer. Rum-hopper, tip us presently a Boozing-cheat of
Rum-gutlers, c. Drawer fill us presently a Bottle of the best Canary.

Rum-kicks, c. Silver or Gold Brocade Breeches, or very rich with Gold or
Silver Galoon.

Rum-mawn'd, c. one that Counterfeits himself a Fool.

Rum-mort, c. a Queen, or great Lady.

Rum-nab, c. a Beaver, or very good Hat.

Rum-ned, c. a very silly Fellow.

Rum-nantz, c. true French Brandy.

Rum-pad, c. the Highway.

Rum-padders, c. the better sort of Highwaymen, well Mounted and Armed.

Rum-peepers, c. a Silver Looking-glass.

Rump-and-Kidney M-en, c. Fiddlers that Play at Feasts, Fairs, Weddings, etc.
And Live chiefly on the Remnants, of Victuals.

Rumbling, the rolling of Thunder, motion of a Wheel-barrow, or the noise in
the Gutts.

Rum prancer, c. a very beautiful Horse.

Rum-quidds, c. a great Booty, or large Snack.

Rum-ruff-peck, c. Westphalia-Ham.

Rum-squeeze, c. much Wine or good Liquor given among the Fiddlers.

Rum-snitch, c. a good fillip on the Nose.

Rum-tol, c. as Rum-degen, the newest Cant of the two.

Rum-tilter, c. as Rumtol.

Rum-topping, c. a rich commode or Headdress.

Rum-ville, c. London.

Rum-wiper, c. as Rum-clout.

Run-ryot, to turn Spark, and run out of all; also when Hounds run at a whole
Herd of Deer.

Running-stationers, Hawkers, or those that cry News and Books about the
Streets.

Runt, a little, short, truss Man or Beast.

Runts, Canary-Birds above three Years old.

Runner, c. as Budge; also a Galley, or nimble Vessel, to make quick Voyages,
as also to escape Privateers, Pirates, etc.

Rup, a filthy Boil, or Swelling on the Rump of Poultry, Corrupting the whole
Body, Cured with Salt and Water.

Rustic, a clownish Country Fellow.

Rustygutts an old blunt Fellow.

Rutt, Copulation (of Deer.)

S
Sack, c. a Pocket. Dive into his Sack, c. to Pick his Pocket.

Sails, Hawk's Wings; also Windmill-wings. How you Sail about? How you Santer
about?

Salamander, a Bombvessel; also a certain Creature (said) to Live in the Fire,
and a Stone (lately) found in Pensylvania full of Cotton, which will not (as a
modern Author affirms) consume in the Fire; and a red-hot Iron to light Tobacco
with.

Sales-men, Brokers who sell Cattle for the Graziers to the Butchers, before,
and at the Beast-Market; also Sellers of ready-made Clothes.

Salesman's-dog, the same as Barker.

Sally, a fit of Passion, or Humor.

Salmon, c. the Beggars Sacrament or Oath.

Salt, Lecherous, Proud. To come after with Salt and Spoons, of one that is
none of the Hastings.

Salt-cel, a Rope's end used to Drub the Boys and Sailors on baord of Ship.

Salvages, Barbarous People, Inhabiting near the Seacoasts in the Maritim
Counties, who make a Prey of what the Sea has (in Pity) spared, Living upon the
Spoil of Shipwrecks.

Samlets, so called the Spring following after they are Spawned, and though then
but a little bigger than a Minnow, will (as Authors say) grow to be a Salmon,
in as short a time as a Goslin will to be a Goose.

Sandy-pate, one redhair'd.

Sap-pate, a Fool.

Saunter, to loiter Idly, a Term borrowed from those Religious Counterfeits,
who under the color of Pilgrimages, to the Holy Land, used to get many
Charities, crying still, Saint terre, Saint terre, having nothing but the
Holy Land in their Mouths, though they stayed always at Home.

Saucy, impudent, bold. More sauce than Pig. Your Sauce-Pan runs over, you are
exceeding bold.

Sawny, a Fool. He Is a mere Sawny, he is very soft, though (in Scotch) it is only
for Alexander.

S C
Scab, a sorry Wench, or Scoundril-Fellow.

Scamper, c. to run away, or Scowre off, either from Justice, as Thieves,
Debtors, Criminals, that are pursued* or from ill fortune, as Soldiers that are
repulst or worsted.

Scandalous, c. a Periwig.

Scandal-proof, a thorough paced Alsatian, or Minter, one hardened or past
Shame.

Shift the Scene, call a new Cause, or change the Discourse.

School-butter, a Whipping. I Shcool'd him, I chid him severely.

School of Venus, c. a Bawdy House.

Sconce, to build a large Sconce, to run deep upon Tick, or Trust.

Scotsh-hobby, a little sorry, scrubbed, low Horse of that Country.

Scotch-mist, a sober* soaking Rain.

Scoundrel, a Hedge-bird or sorry Scab.

Scour, c. to wear. To Scour the Cramp-rings, c. to wear Bolts.

Scout, c. a Watch.

Scowre, c. to run away or scamper. Let us Scowre, or we shall be Boned, c. let
us run away or we shall be Taken.

Scowrers, c. Drunkards, beating the Watch, breaking Windows, clearing the
Streets, etc.

Scrip, c. a shred or scrap of Paper. As the Cully did freely blot the Scrip,
and tipped me 40 Hogs, c. one entered into Bond with me for 40 Shillings.

Scrub, a Ragamuffin.

Scrubado, the Itch.

Scrape-all, a Money-Scrivener; also a miserable Wretch, or griping Fellow.

Screw, to Screw one up, to exact upon one, or Squeeze one in a Bargain or
Reckoning.

Scud, the course or motion of the Clouds, in Fleeting.

Scud-away, to Sail, Ride, or Run very fast.

Scumm, the Riff-Raff, or Tagrag and Longtail. Rake Hell and Skim the Devil.

Scut, the Tail of a Hare or Coney.

Scuttle, to run away; also a square hole to go down through the Deck.

Sealer, c. one that gives Bonds and Judgments for Goods and Money.

Season of Beasts, a Heart or Buck begins at the end of Fencer-Month, 15 Days
after Midsumer-day, and lasts till Holyrood-day. The Fox till Christmas, and
lasts till the Annuntiation of the blessed Virgin. The Hind or Do at
Holyrood-day, till Candlemass. The Roebuck at Easter, till Michaelmas. The Roe
at Michaelmas till Candlemass. The Hare at Michaelmas, till the end of
February. The Wolf from Christmas, till the Annunciation of the blessed Virgin.
The Boar at Christmas, and continues to the Purification of our Lady.

Second-sighted, such as (they say) can, and do see Spirits, Apparitions, etc.

Secret, let into the Secret, c. when one is drawn in at Horse-racing,
Cock-fighting, Bowling, and other Sports or Games, and Bit.

Seeling, when a Hawk first taken, is so blinded with a Thread run through the
Eyelids, that she Sees not, or very little, the better to make her endure the
Hood; also a sudden healing forced by the motion of the Sea or Wind.

Seraglio, a Bawdy House; also the Great Turk's Palace.

Seraglietto, a lowsy, sorry Bawdy House, a mere Dog-hole.

Setters, or Setting-dogs, they that draw in Bubbles, for old Gamesters to
Rook; also a Sergeant's Yeoman, or Bailiff's Follower, or Second, and an
Excize-Officer* to prevent the Brewers defrauding the King.

Sewet, Deer's Grease.

S H
Shabby, in poor, sorry Rigging.

Shabberoon, a Ragamuffin.

Shab'd-off, sneakt, or slid away.

Shaftsbury, a Gallonpot full of Wine, with a Cock.

Shag-bag, a poor, shabby Fellow.

Shallow-pate, a foolish, silly, empty Fellow.

Sham, c. a Cheat, or Trick. Cut a Sham, c. to play a Rogue's Trick.

Shamble-Legg'd, one that goes wide, and shuffles his Feet about. Shake your
Shambles, haste, begone.

Shameless, a bold forward Blade.

Shanks, Legs. There Is Shanks! there is ill Legs.

Shanker, a little Scab or Pox on the Nut or or Glans of the Yard.

Shappeau, c. or Shappo, c. for Chappeau, a Hat, the newest Cant, Nab* being
very old, and grown too common*

Shapes, said (often) to an ill-made* Man. Show your Shapes, turn about, march
off, be gone. Great in more Shapes, great in more Professions, or Capacities.
Great in all Shapes, great in all the Branches of any one, or more Professions:
As, great in all the Parts or Branches of the Law; (an universal Lawyer) Great
in all the Parts or Branches of Learning. (an universal Scholar)

Shark, c. a Sharper; also a Large voracious Fish.

Sharper, c. a Cheat, one that Lives by his Wits.

Sharp, subtle, ready, quick or nimble-witted, forward, of lively Apprehension;
also Poor and Needy.

Sharpers-tools, c. false Dice.

Sharp-set, very Hungry.

Shaver, a Cunning Shaver, a subtle, smart Fellow. He Shaves close, he gripes,
squeezes, or extorts very severely.

Shavings, c. the Clippings of Money.

She is with Cub, when the Fox has Young ones in her.

She*napper, c. a Woman Thief-catcher; also a Cock, (he) or Hen (she) Bawd, a
Procuress and Debaucher of young Virgins; a Maiden-head-jobber.

Sheep-biter, a poor, sorry, sneaking, ill-lookt Fellow.

Sheepish, (Fellow) bashful, peaking.

Sheep's-head, a Fool, a Block-head.

Sheep-shearers, c. Cheats.

Shie, coy, squeamish, cold, or averse.

Shock, a Brunt. To stand the Shock, to bear the brunt.

Shocking, what is offensive, grating, grievous.

Shop, c. a prison.

Shopt, c. imprisoned.

Shop-lift, c. one that Steals under pretense of Cheap'ning.

Shoe-makers-stocks, pincht with strait Shoes. No Man knows where the Shoe
pinches but he that wears it, or another's Cross like him that bears it. Who
goes worse Shod than the Shoe-maker's Wife? One Shoe will not fit all Feet, Men
are not all of a Size, nor all Conveniences of a Last. To throw an old Shoe
after one, or wish them good Luck in their Business.

Short-pots, false, cheating Potts used at Alehouses, and Brandy-shops.

Shot, Shotlings, large, lean Piggs bought to fatten. To Pay one's Shot, to Pay
one's Club or Proportion.

Shot 'twixt Wind and Water, Clapped, or Poxt.

Shoulder-clapper, c. a Sergeant or Bailiff.

Shoulder-sham, c. a Partner to a File.

Shove the Tumbler, c. to be Whipped at the Cart's Tail.

Shred, a Tailer.

Shrieketh, the Noise a Badger makes at Rutting Time.

Shrouds, burying Cloths, (now) Woollen, (anciently) Linen; also Steps or
Ladders (on board of Ship) to go up to the Topps.

Shuffler, a Bird like, but not so big as a Duck, having a broader Bill.

Shuffling-Fellow, a slippery, shifting, Fellow.

Shurk, c. a Sharper.

S I
Sice, c. Sixpence.

Sickrel, a puny, sickly Creature.

Siege, a Stool to set upon; also used by Physicians to their Patients. How
many Sieges have you had? i. e. How many Stools have you had? Upon taking a
Purge etc.

Simkin, a Fool.

Simon, c. Sixpence.

Simples, Follies; also Plants or Physical Herbs. He must be cut of the
Simples, Care must be taken to cure him of his Folly.

Simpleton, a silly Creature, or Tony.

Single, the Tail of a Heart, Buck or other Deer.

Singler, or Sanglier, a wild Boar after the 4 th Year.

Single-ten, a very foolish, silly Fellow; also Nails of that size.

Sir John, the Country-Vicar or Parson.

Sir Timothy, one that Treats every Body, and Pays the Reckonings every where.

Six and eight-pence, c. the usual Fee given, to carry back the Body of the
Executed Malefactor, to give it Christian Burial.

S K
Skew, c. a Begger's Wooden Dish. To look a Skew, or on one side.

Skew-fisted, awkward, ungainly.

Skin-flint, a griping, sharping, close-fisted Fellow.

Skinker, that fills the Glass or Cup. Who Skinks? Who pours out the Liquor.

Skipper, c. a Barn; also a Dutch Master of a Ship or Vessel.

Skip-jacks, c. youngsters that Ride the Horses for Sale.

Skip-kennel, a Footboy, or Laquais.

S L
Slam, c. a Trick; also a Game entirely lost without getting one on that side.

Slat, c. a Sheet.

Slate, c. a half Crown.

Sleeping House, without Shop, Warehouse, or Cellar, only for a private Family.

Sleeveless-errand, such as Fools are sent on, the first of April.

Sleeveless-story, a Tale of a Tub, or of a Cock and a Bull. To laugh in one's
Sleeves, inwardly slyly.

Slice, when a Hawk Muteth a great distance from her.

Slippery Trick, or Fellow, deceitful, as having two properties of Ice, smooth
and slippery.

Slot, the footing of a Heart.

Slough. a deep miry Hole.

Slubber'd over, Work slightly wrought, or huddled up in haste.

Slubber-degullion, a slovenly, dirty, nasty Fellow.

Slug, a drone, or dull Tool; also a Bullet, beat into another Shape.

Slur, c. a Cheat at Dice; also a slight Scandal or Affront.

Sly-boots, a seeming Silly, but subtle Fellow.

S M.
Smack, a Tang, or ill Taste.

Smacking-cove, c. a Coachman.

Smart-money, given by the King, when a Man in Land or Sea-Service has a Leg
Shot or Cut off, or is disabled.

Smart, witty, sharp; also pain.

Smatterer, one halflearned. A Smattering. a slight Tincture in any Skill or
Learning.

Smeller, c. a Nose,

Smelling-cheat, c. a Nose-gay; also an Orchard or Garden.

Smelts, c half Guineas. Tip me a Smelt, c. Prithee lend me half a Guinea.

Smirk, a finical, spruce Fellow. To Smirk* to look pleasantly.

Smiter, c. an Arm.

Smash, c. to kick down Stairs. The Chubbs, toute the Blosses, they Smash, and
make them brush, c. the Sharpers catch their Mistresses at the Tavern, making
merry without them, Kick them down Stairs, and force them to rub off.

Smock faced, fair Snout.

Smoke, to Smoke or Smell a Design. It is Smok't, c. it is made Public, all
have notice. Smoke him, Smoke him again, to affront a Stranger at his coming in.

Smoker, a Vessel to Blind the Enemies, to make way for the Machine to Play;
also a Tobacconist.

Smoky, c. Jealous. No Smoke but there is some Fire as no eeds but there is
some Water, of a thing that will out, because Smoke is a sign of one, and Reeds
or Rushes of the other.

Smug, a Blacksmith; also neat and spruce.

Smuglers, c. those that Cheat the King of his Customs by private Imports and
Exports.

Smutty, Bawdy.

S N
Snack, c. share or part, to go Snacks, c. to go halves or share and share
alike. Tip me my Snack, or else I Will Whiddle, c. Give me my share, or I Will tell.

Snaffle, c. a Highwayman that has got Booty.

Snaggs, large Teeth; also Snails.

Snappish, (a Man) peevish, quarrelsom; (a Dog) apt to Bite.

Snapt, Taken, Caught.

Sneak, c. goes upon the Sneak at Munns, c. he privately gets into Houses or
Shops at Night, and Steals undiscovered. A Sneaking Budge, c. one that Robbs
alone.

Sneaker, (of Punch) a small Bowl.

Sneaking, sheepish, or mean-spirited.

Snearing, flickering, fleering.

Snickering, Laughing in his Sleeve or privately.

Snilch, c. to Eye or See any Body. The Cull Snilches, c. the man Eyes you or
Sees you.

Snitch, c. Snitchel, c. a Filip on the Nose.

Snite, c. to Wipe, or Flap. Snite his Snitch, c. Wipe his Nose, or give him a
good Flap on the Face. Sniting, a Hawk's Sneezing.

Sniveling-Fellow, a Whining Fellow.

Snow-broth, Snowwater.

Snub, to Check, or Rebuke.

Snuff, Pet; also Tobacco taken in Snush.

Snuffle, to Speak through the Nose from a Cold or worse.

Snudge, c. one that lurks under a Bed, to watch an opportunity to Rob the
House.

S O
Sock, c. a Pocket; also to Beat. Not a Rag in my Sock, c. I have not a Farthing
in my Pocket. I Will Sock ye, c. I Will Drub ye tightly.

Socket-money, Demanded and Spent upon Marriage.

Soft, Foolish.

Sohoe, Seehoc, said aloud at the starting a Hare.

Soker, a Toper, or Fuddle-cap. An old Soker, a true Pitcherman. To set Soking,
to ply the Pot.

Soldier's-bottle, a large one.

Solomon, c. the Mass.

Son of Apollo, a Scholar. Mars, Soldier. Venus, a Lover of Women. Mercury, a
Wit. Parclement, a Lawyer.

Sooterkin, a Byword upon the Dutch Women, from a Maggot, or Fancy, that their
using Stoves so much, Breeds a kind of Animal in their Wombs, like a Mouse,
which at their Delivery skips out.

Soreth, the Footings of a Hare in the open Field.

Sorrel-pate, red Hair'd.

Sorter, (at the Post Office) that puts or Digests the Letters into Order or
Method.

Soul-driver, a Parson. He is a Soul, or loves Brandy. Of a Noble Soul, very
generous. A Narrow-Soul'd Fellow, a poorspirited, or stingy Fellow.

Souldiers-Mawn'd, c. a Counterfeit Sore or Wound in the Left Arm:

Sounder, a Company of Swine, or wild-Boars.

Soupe, Broth, Porridge.

Souse. Not a Souse, not a Penny. (French Money)

Sow's-baby, a Pig.

Sowse-crown, a Fool.

Sow-child, a Female Child. He has the wrong Sow by the Ear, or is in a wrong
Box.

Sour, Crabbed, Surly, Ill-conditioned.

Soil, when any Deer is hard Hunted, and betakes himself to Swimming in any
River.

S P
Spangles, c. ends of Gold or Silver.

Spanish-gout, the Pox.

Spanish-money, fair Words and Compliments.

Spark, a spruce, trim, gay Fellow. A lewd Spark, a Man of the Town, or
Debauchee.

Sparring-blows, the first Strokes to try the goodness of young Cocks Heels;
also those in a Battle before the Cocks come to Mouth it.

Sparrow-mouth'd, a Mouth o Heavenly wide, as Sir P. Sidney calls it.

Speckt-wiper, c. a colored Handkerchief.

Spider-catcher, a Spindle for a Man.

Spider's-web, the subtilties of Logic, which (as Aristo the Chiote said) though
artificial to sight, were yet of no Use.

Spill, a small Reward or gift of Money.

Spindle-shankt, very small-legg'd.

Spirit-away, as Kidnap.

Spiritual-flesh-broker, a Parson.

Spitter, a red Male Heart of a Year old.

Splenetic, Melancholic.

Split-fig, a Grocer.

Splitter-of-Causes, a Lawyer.

Split my windpipe, a foolish kind of a Curse among the Beaux.

Spraints, the Excrements of an Otter.

Spring a Partridge, c. People drawn in, to be Bit. To spring Partridge's, to
raise them. A Spring, a Snare, or Nooze to catch Hares, as a Ginn is a Snare
or Nooze to catch Birds.

Sponge, to drink at others Cost. Spunginghouse, a By-prison. A Spunging
Fellow, one that lives upon the rest and Pays nothing.

S Q
Squab, a very fat, truss Person, a new Hatched Chick; also a Couch.
Squinte-suego, one that Squints very much.

Squeek, c. to discover, or impeach; also to cry out. They Squeek beef upon us,
c. cry out Highway-men or Thieves after us. The Cull Squeek's, c. the Rogue
Peaches.

Squeeker, c. a Barboy; also a Bastard, or any other child. Stifle the
Squeeker, c. to Murder the Child and throw it into a House of Office.

Squawl, to throw a wry; also to cry a loud.

Squeemish, nice.

Squeeze, to gripe, or skrew hard.

Squeezing of Wax, being Bound for any Body; also sealing of Writings.

Squire of Alsatia, a Man of Fortune, drawn in, cheated, and ruined by a pack
of poor, lowsy, spunging, bold Fellows that lived (formerly) in White-Fryers.
The Squire, a Sir Timothy Treat-all; also a Sap-pate. Squirish, foolish; also
one that pretends to Pay all Reckomings, and is not strong enough in the
Pocket. A fat Squire, a rich Fool.

S T
Stag, Staggard, see Heart.

Stallion, c. a Whore-Master; also a Stone-Horse kept to cover Mares.

Stall-whimper, c. a Bastard.

Stalling, c. making or ordaining.

Stalling-ken, c. a Broker's-Shop, or any House that receives stolen-Goods.

Stale Jest, old, dull. Maid, at her last Prayers.

Stam-flesh, c. to Cant.

Stammel, a brawny, lusty, strapping Wench.

Stamps, c. Legs.

Stampers, c. Shoes; also Carriers.

Starched, affected, proud, stiff.

Start, (Drink) Brewers emptying several Barrels into a great Tub, and thence
conveying it through a Leather-pipe down the Cellar into the Butts.

Starter, c. a Question* I am no Starter, I shall not flinch, or cry to go Home.

Start the Hare, put her up.

Statues, either Images in Brass or Stone, or Men without motion.

Steenkirk, a Muslinneckcloath carelessly put on, first, at the Battle of
Steenkirk, afterward a Fashion for both Sexes.

Steppony, a Decoction of Raisins of the Sun, and Lemons in Conduitwater,
sweetened with Sugar and Bottled up.

Stern, the Tail of a Wolf; also the hind part of a Ship.

Stick*flamms, c. a pair of Gloves.

Stickle-bag, a very small prickly Fish, without Scales, a choice Bait for a
Trout. A great Stickler, a zealous Man in the Cause or Interest he espouses. It
Sticks in his Stomach, he resents it.

Stiff, Sti*ffrump, proud, stately.

Sting bum, a Niggard.

Stingo, humming, strong Liquor.

Stingy, covetuos, closesisted, sneaking.

Stitch, a Tailor.

Stitch-back, very strong Ale.

Stock-jobbing, a sharp, cunning, cheating Trade of Buying and Selling Shares
of Stock in East India, Guinea and other Companies; also in the Bank,
Exchequer* etc.

Stock-drawers, c. Stockings.

Stone Dead, quite. Doublet, a Prison*

Stop-hole Abbey, c. the Nickname of the chief Rendezvous of the Canting Crew
of Gypsies, Beggars, Cheats, Thieves, etc. Stop my Vitals, a silly Curse in use
among the Beaux.

Stoter, c. a great Blow. Stoter him, c. or tip him a Stoter, c. settle him,
give him a swinging Blow.

Stout, very strong, Malt-Drink.

Stow, c. you have said enough. Stow you been Cove, c. hold your Peace good
Fellow. Stow your Whidds and Plant'em; for the Cove of the Ken can cant 'em,
Take care what you say, for the Man of the House understands you; also to hoard
Treasure, or lay up Corn in Granaries or Drink in Cellars. Hence Stoward, or
Steward.

Strain-hard, to ly heartily.

Strait-lac'd, precise, squeemish, puritanical, nice.

Straping, c. lying with a Wench.

Strapping-Lass, a swinging two-handed Woman.

Stress of weather, foul weather at Sea. At a Stress, at a pinch.

Stretching, hanging. He Will Stretch for it, he will be Hanged. He Stretched hard,
told a whisking Ly.

Stretcher, the piece of Wood that lies cross the Boat, where on the Water-man
rests his Feet.

Strike, c. to Beg, to Rob; also to borrow Money. Strike all the Cheats, c. Rob
all you meet. Strike the Cull, c. Beg of that Gentleman. Strike the Cly, c. get
that Fellow's Money from him. He has Struck the Quidds, c. he has got the Cole
from him. He Strikes every Body, c. he borrows Money every where, he runs in
every one's Debt. A Strike, (of Corn) a Bushel.

Strip, c. to Rob or Gut a House, to unrig any Body, or to Bite them of their
Money. Strip the Ken, c. to Gut the House. Strip the Table, c. to Winn all the
Money on the Place. Stripts, poor, Naked. We have Stripped the Cull, c. We have
got all the Fool's Money. The Cove's Stripped, c. the Rogue has not a Jack left
to help himself.

Strommel, c. Straw.

Strowlers, c. Vagabonds, Itinerants, Men of no settled Abode, of a Precarious
Life, Wanderers of Fortune, such, as, Gypsies, Beggars, Pedlers, Hawkers,
Mountebanks, Fiddlers, Country-Players, Rope-dancers, Juglers, Tumblers, showers
of Tricks, and Raree-show-men.

Strowling-morts, c. pretending to be Widows, sometimes Travel the Countries,
making Laces upon Ewes, Beggerstape, etc. Are light Fingered, Subtle,
Hypocritical, Cruel, and often dangerous to meet, especially when a Ruffler is
with them.

Study, a Closet of Books.

In a brown Study, musing, pensive, careful.

Strum, c. a Periwig. Rum-strum, c. a long Wig; also a handsome Wench, or
Strumpet.

Stuff, Nonsense, idle, ridiculous, impertinent Talk.

Stuling-ken, c. as Stalling-ken, c.

Stum, the Flower of fermenting Wine, used by Vintners, when their Wine is down
or flat, to make it Drink up and brisk; also when they Brew, to make their
mixtures, (by putting them into a new Ferment) all of one Taste. Stumm'd Wines
are very unwholesom, and may be discovered, by a white Froth round the sides of
the Glass.

Stubble-it, c. hold your Tongue.

Sturdy-beggers, c. the fifth and last of the most ancient Order of Canters.

S U
Sub-beau, or Demibeau, a would be-fine.

Sub*bois, Maples, Birch, Sallow* and Willow.

Suck, c. Wine or strong Drink. This is rum Suck, c. it is excellent Tipple.
We'll go and Suck out Facas, but if they toute us, we'll take rattle and brush,
c. let us go to Drink and be merry, but if we be Smelt, by the People of the
House, we must Scower off. He loves to Suck his Face, he delights in Drinking.

Suckey, c. drunkish, maudlin, half Seas over.

Suit and Cloak, good store of Brandy or any agreeable Liquor, let down
Gutter-lane.

Sunburned, having many (Male) Children.

Sunny-bank, a good, rousing Winter-Fire.

Superstitious-Pies, Minced, or Christmas-Pies, so Nick-nam'd by the Puritans,
or Precisians, though they can Eat 'em; but affecting to be singular, make them a
Month or six Weeks before Christmas, or the Feast of Christ.

Supernaculam, not so much as a Drop left to be poured upon the Thumb-nail, so
cleaverly was the Liquor tipped off.

Supouch, c. an Hostess or Landlady.

Surtout, a loose, great, or riding Coat.

Sutler, c. he that Pockets up, Gloves, Knives, Handkerchiefs* Snuff and
Tobacco-boxes, and all the lesser Movables; also a Scullion or Huckster, one
that follows an Army, to sell Meat, Drink, etc.

S W
Swadlers, c. the tenth Order of the Canting Tribe. To Swaddle, to Beat lustily
with, a Cane or Cable's end. I Will Swaddle your Hide, I Will bang your Back.

Swag, c. a Shop. Rum Swag, c. full of rich Goods.

Swagger, to vapor or bounce.

Swallow, (Falsities for Truths) to believe them.

Sweets, the Dreggs of Sugar* used by Vintners, to allay the undue fermenting
or fretting of their Wine.

Sweetners, c. Guinea-Droppers, Cheats, Sharpers. To Sweeten, c. to decoy, draw
in, and Bite. To be Sweet upon, c. to coakse, wheedle, entice or allure.

Swig-men, c. the 13 th Rank of the Canting Crew, carrying small
Habberdashery-Wares about, pretending to sell them, to color their Roguery. A
hearty Swig, a lusty Draught. To Swig it off, to Drink it all up.

Swill-belly, a great Drinker.

Swimmer, a Counterfeit (old) Coin.

Swinging Chap, a very great one. Lie. Fellow,

I Swing'd him off, I laid on and beat him well-favoredly. He is Swing'd off,
damnably Clapped.

Swinish, (fellow) raking, greedy, gluttonous, covetous.

Swabbers, the Ace of Hearts, Knave of Clubs, Ace and Duce of Trumps; also the
Sorriest Seamen put to Wash and clean the Ship.

Swop, to barter or Truck.

T
Tackle, c. a Mistress; also good Cloths. The Cull has tipped his Tackle
Rum-rigging, c. or, has Tipped his Bloss Rum-tackle, c. the keeping Coxcomb has
given his Mistress very fine Cloths.

Taffy, a Welshman or David. Taffy's Day, the first of March.

Tables, a Game. Turn the Tables, make it your own Case.

Take the Culls in, c. Seize the Men, in order to Rob them.

Take-time, never to thrust but with advantage. Very taking, acceptable,
agreeable, or becoming. It Takes well, or, the Town Takes it, the Play pleased,
or was acted with Applause, or the Book Sells well. No doubt but it will Take,
no question but it will sell.

Talent, the same with Capacity, Genius, Inclination or Ability; also 375 l. in
Silver, and 4500 l. in Gold. His Talent does not lie that way, he has no Genius
for it, or his Head does not lean to it.

Tale-tellers, a sort of Servants in use with the great Men in Ireland, to Lull
them a sleep with Tales and Stories of a Cock and a Bull, etc. I tell you my
Tale, and my Tales-man, or Author.

Tall-boy, a Pottle or two Quart-pot full of Wine.

Talons, or Pounces, a Bird's Claws, as Fangs are Beast's Claws.

Tally-men, Brokers that let out Cloths at moderate Rates to wear per Week,
Month, or Year.

Tame-fellow, tractable, easy, manageable.

Tamper, to practice upon one.

Tant, Tantest, Mast of a Ship or Man, Tall, Tallest.

Tantivy-boies, high-Flyers, or High-flown Churchmen, in opposition, to the
moderate Churchmen; or Latitudinarians a lower sort of Flyers, like Batts,
between Churchmen and Dissenters.

Taplash, Wretched, sorry Drink, or Hogwash.

Tappeth, see, Beats.

Tariff, a Book of Rates or Customs; also another of the Current Coin.

Tarnish, to Fade.

Tar, Tarpaulin, a Seaman; also a piece of Canvas (tarr'd) laid over the
Hatches to keep out Wet.

Tar-terms, proper Sea-Phrases, or Words.

Tart-dame, sharp, quick.

Tartar, a sharper. To catch a Tartar, in stead of catching, to be caught in a
Trap.

Tatter-de-mallion, c. a ragged, tattered Beggar, sometimes half Naked, with
design to move Charity, having better Cloths at Home. In Tatters, in Rags.
Tattered and Torn, rent and torn.

Tattler, c. an Alarm, or Striking Watch, or (indeed) any.

Tatts, c. false Dice.

Tat-monger, c. a Sharper, or Cheat, using fase Dice.

Tatling Fellow, or Woman, prating, impertinent.

Taunts, Girds, Quips, or Jeers. To Taunt, to Jeer or Flout.

Taudry, garish, gaudy, with Lace or mismatched and staring Colors: A Term
borrowed from those times when they Trickt and Bedeckt the Shrines and Altars
of the Saints, as being at vye with each other upon that occasion. The Votaries
of St. Audrey (an Isle of Ely Saint) exceeding all the rest in the Dress and
Equipage of her Altar, it grew into a Nay-word, upon any thing very Gaudy, that
it was all Taudry, as much as to say all St. Audrey.

Tail, c. a Sword.

Tayle-drawers, c. Swordstealers. He drew the Cull's Tail rumly, c. he whipped
away the Gentleman's Sword cleverly.

T E
Teague-land, Ireland.

Teague-landers, Irishmen.

Tears of the Tankard, Drops of the good Liquor that fall beside.

Tegg, see Do.

Temperade, an East-Indian-dish, now in use in England, being a Fowl Fricasied,
with high Sauce, Blancht Almonds and Rice.

Temperament, an Expedient or Medium; also a due proportion of the four Humors.

Temple-pickling, the Pumping of Bailives, Bumms, Setters, Pick-pockets, etc.

Tender-parnel, a very nicely Educated creature, apt to catch Cold upon the
least blast of Wind.

Terce, the Nails of the Sword-hand quite down.

Tercel-gentle, c. a Knight or Gentleman of a good Estate; also any rich Man.

Terra-firma, an Estate in Land; also a Continent. Has the Cull any Terra
Firma? Has the Fool any Land?

That That or There, to Hare.

T H
Thwack, to Beat with a Stick or Cudgel.

The Dragon upon St. George, c. the Woman uppermost.

Thief-takers, who make a Trade of helping People (for a gratuity) to their
lost Goods and sometimes for Interest or Envy snaping the Rogues themselves;
being usually in fee with them, and acquainted with their Haunts.

Thorn-back, an old Maid; also a well known Fish, said to be exceeding
Provocative.

Thorough-cough, farting at the same time.

Thorough-passage, in at one Ear, and out at the other.

Thorough-stitch, over Shoes, over Boots.

The Three-legged-stool* Tyburn.

Three-threads, half common Ale, and the rest Stout or Double Beer.

Threpps, c. Threepence.

Thrumms, c. Threepence. Tip me Thrumms, c. Lend me Threepence.

Thummikins, a Punishment (in Scotland) by hard Squeezing or Pressing of the
Thumbs to extort Confession, which Stretches them prodigiously and is very
painful. In Camps, and on board of Ships, lighted Matches are clapped between the
Fingers to the same intent.

T I
Tib, a young Lass.

Tib* of the Buttery, c. a Goose.

Tickrum, c. a License. to run a tick, to go on the Score, or a trust.

Tickle-pitcher, a Tosspot, or Pot-companion.

Tiffing, c. lying with a Wench.

Tilter, a Sword, to tilt, to fight with Rapier, or pushing Swords, run a tilt,
a swift Pursuit, also Drink made to run faster.

Tint for tant, hit for hit, and dash for dash.

Tip, c. to give or lend; also Drink and a draught. Tip-your Lour, or Cole or
I Will Mill ye, c. give me your Money or I Will kill ye. Tip the Culls a Sock, for
they are saucy, c. Knock down the Men for resisting. Tip the Cole to Adam
Tiler, c. give your Pick-pocket Money presently to your running Comrade. Tip
the Mish, c. give me the Shirt. Tip me a Hog, c. lend me a Shilling. Tip it all
off, Drink it all off at a Draught. Don't spoil his Tip, don't baulk his
Draught. A Tub of good Tip, (for Tipple) a Cask of strong Drink* To Tip off, to
Dye.

Tipler, a Fuddle-cap or Toss-pot.

Tipsy, a'most Drunk.

Tiring, Dressing; also when a Leg or Pinion of a Pullet, Pigeon, etc. is given
to a Hawk to pluck at. Tiring-room, a Dressing Room. A Tirewoman, one that
teaches to Dress in the Hair, when in Fashion, and when out, to cut the Hair,
and Dress the Head.

Tit-bit, a fine Snack, or choice Morsel.

Tit-tat, the aiming of Children to go at first.

Tittle-tattle, foolish, idle, impertinent Talk.

Titter, to Laugh at a Feather.

Titter-totter, who is upon the Reel, at every jog, or Blast of Wind.

T O
Toge, c. a Coat.

Togemans, c. a Gown or Cloak. I have Bit the Togemans, c. I have Stole the
Cloak. It Is a Rumtogemans, it is a good Camlet-Cloak, Let's-nim it, c. let us
whip it off.

Tokens, the Plague, also Presents from one to another, and Farthings. Not a
Token left, not one Farthing remaining. Tom-fool's-token, Money.

Tol. Toledo, c. a Sword. Bite the Tol, c. to Steal the Sword.

A Rum-tol, c. a Silverhilted Sword. A Queertol, c. a Brass or Steelhilted or
ordinary Sword.

Tom-boy, a Ramp, or Tomrig.

Tom of Bedlam, c. the same as Abram-man.

Tom-conney, a very silly Fellow.

Tom rig, a Ramp.

Tom-thumb, a Dwarf or diminitive Fellow. Come by Tom Long the Carrier, of what
is very late, or long a coming.

Tongue-pad, a smooth, Glib-tongued, insinuating Fellow.

Tony, a silly Fellow, or Ninny. A mere Tony, or Simpleton.

Tool, an Implement fit for any Turn, the Creature of any Cause or Faction; a
mere Property, or Cat's Foot.

Top, c. to Cheat, or Trick any one; also to Insult. What do you Top upon me?
c. do you stick a little Wax to the Dice to keep them together, to get the
Chance, you would have? He thought to have to Topt upon me* c. he designed to
have Put upon me, Sharpt me, Bullied me, or Affronted me.

Tope, to Drink. An old Toper, a staunch Drunkard. To Tope it about, or Dust it
about, to Drink briskly about.

Top-diver, a Lover of Women. An old Top-diver, one that has Loved Old-hat in
his time.

Top-heavy, Drunk.

Topping-fellow, who has reached the Pitch and greatest Eminence in any Art; the
Master, and the Cock of his Profession.

Topping-cheat, c. the Gallows.

Topping-cove, c. the Hangman.

Torch-cul, the same as Bum-fodder.

Torcoth, a Fish having a red Belly, found onin the Pool Sinperis, in
Carnarvanshire.

Tories, Zealous Sticklers for the Prerogative and Rights of the Crown, in
behalf of the Monarchy; also Irish-thieves, or Rapparies.

Tossed, to name or begin a new Health. Who Tosts now? Who Christens the Health?
An old Tossed, a pert pleasant old Fellow.

Totty-headed, Giddy-headed, Hare-brain'd.

Tout, c. to look out Sharp, to be upon one's Guard. Who Touts? c. who looks
out sharp? Tout the Culls, c. Eye those Folks which way they take. Do you Bulk
and I Will File, c. if you will jostle him, I will Pick his Pocket.

Touting-ken, c. a Tavern or Alehouse Bar.

Tourn, Copulation of Roes.

Tower-hill-play, a slap on the Face and a kick on the Breech.

Town-bull, one that rides all the Women he meets.

Tower, a Woman's false Hair on their Foreheads. Towering Thoughts, Ambitious
Aspiring. To Tower, to sore on High. They have been round the Tower with it, c.
that Piece of Money has been Clipped.

T R
Trace, the Footing of a Hare in the Snow.

Track, c. to go.

Track up the Dancers, c. whip up the Stairs.

Tract, the footing of a Boar.

Train, a Hawk's or Peacock's Tail; also Attendants or Retinue.

Trajoning, when a Roe crosses and doubles.

Tansnear, c. to come up with any body.

Translators, Sellers of old Shoes and Boots, between Shoe-makers and Cobblers;
also that turn or Translate one Language into another*

Transmogrify, to alter, or new vamp.

Tranter, the same as Crocker.

Trapan, c. he that draws in or wheedles a Cull, and Bites him. Trapan'd, c.
Sharpt, ensnared.

Trapes, a dangling Slattern.

Trassing, when the Hawk raises any Fowl aloft, and soaring with it, at length
descends with it to the Ground.

Tree the Martern, Dislodge him.

Treewins, c. Threepence.

Trigry-mate, an idle She-Companion.

Trib, c. a Prison. He is in Trib, for Tribulation, c. he is laid by the Heels,
or in a great deal of Trouble.

Trim, Dress. in a sad Trim, Dirty, Undrest. A Trim-Lad, a spruce, neat, well
trickt Man.

Trimmer, a moderate Man, betwixt Whig and Tory, between Prerogative and
Property. To Trim, to hold fair with both sides. Trim the Boat, poise it. Trim
of* the Ship, that way she goes best.

Trimming, c. Cheating People of their Money.

Trine, c. to Hang; also Tyburn. Trining, c. Hanging.

Trinkets, Porringers, and also any little odd thing, Toies and Trifles.

Tringum-Trangum, a Whim, or Maggor.

Tripolin, Chalk, nicknam'd and used by the French Perfumers as Alabaster is by
the English.

Trip, a short Voyage or Journey; also an Error of the Tongue, or Pen, a
stumble, a false step, a miscarriage, or a Bastard.

Troateth, see Growneth

Trotters, Feet, usually Sheeps. Shake your Trotters, troop off, be gone An old
Trot, a sorry base old Woman. A dog Trot, a pretty Pace.

Troll-away, bowl away, or trundle away.

Troll-about, saunter, loiter, wander about.

Trolly-lolly, coarse Lace once much in fashion, now worn only by the meaner
sort.

Trollop. A great Trollop, a lusty coarse Ramp or Tomrig.

Trooper, c. a half Crown.

Trounc'd, troubled, Cast in Law, Punished. I Will Trounce the Rogue, I Will hamper
him.

Truck, to swop or barter.

Trug, a dirty Puzzel, an ordinary sorry Woman; also the third part of a
Bushel, and a Tray for Milk.

Trull, c. a Whore; also a Tinker's traveling Wife or Wench, and to trundle.

Trumpery, old Ware, old Stuff, as old Hatts, Boots, Shoes, etc. Trash and
Trumpery. For want of good Company, welcome Trumpery.

Trundlers, c. Pease.

Trunk, c. a Nose; also the body of a Tree, or Man, without Head, Arms or
Legs. How fares your old Trunk? c. Does your Nose stand fast?

Trusty-Trojan, or Trusty-Trout, a sure Friend or Confident.

T U
Tuck't, Hanged.

Tumbler, c. a Cart. To shove the Tumbler, c. to be Whipped at the Cart's Tail;
also one that Decoys, or draws others into Play; and one that shows Tricks with
and without a Hoop; a low Silver Cup to Drink out of, and a Coney Dog.

Tup, Copulation of Ram and Eve. Venison out of Tup*park Mutton.

Turk, any cruel hardhearted Man.

Turky-Merchants, drivers of Turkies.

Turkish-shore, Lambeth, Southwark and Roderhith-side of the Water.

Turkish Treatment, very sharp or ill dealing in Business.

Turn-coat, he that quits one and embraces another Party.

Turnep-pate, White or Fair-hair'd.

T W
Twang, a smack or ill Taste.

Tweak, in a Tweak, in a heavy taking, muchvext, or very angry.

Twelver, c. a Shilling.

Twist, half Tea, half Coffee; also a Bough, and to Eat. To Twist lustily, to
Feed likea Farmer.

Twit, to hit in the Teeth.

Twitter, to Laugh much with little Noise; also to Tremble.

V
Vagaries, wild Rambles, extravagant Frolicks.

Vagrant, a wandering Rogue, a strolling Vagabond.

Vain, Fond.

Vainglorious, or Ostentatious Man, one that Pisses more than he Drinks.

Valet, a Servant.

Vamp, c. to Pawn any thing; also a Sock. I Will Vamp and tip you the Cole, c.
I Will Pawn my Cloths, but I Will raise the Money for you. To Vamp, to new Dress,
Licker, Refresh, or Rub up old Hatts Boots* Shoes, etc.

Vampers, c. Stockings.

Varlets, Rogues, Rascals, etc. now though formerly Yeomans Servants.

Vaudois, Inhabitants of the Valleys in Piedmont, Subject to the Duke of Savoy,
famed for their frequent Rencounters with and Defeating of French Parties,
intercepting their Provisions, etc.

Vault, an arched Cellar, and House of Office. She goes to the Vault, when a
Hare (which is very seldom) takes the Ground like a Coney.

Vaulting-School, c. a Bawdy House; also an Academy where Vaulting, and other
Manly Exercises are Taught.

Vauntlay, Hounds or Beagles set in readiness, expecting the Chase to come by,
and then cast off before the rest come in.

V E
Velvet, c. a Tongue. Tip the Velvet, c. to Tongue a Woman.

Venary, or Venery, Hunting or Chasing Beasts and Birds of Venery, as, the
Heart, the Hind, the Hare, Boar and Wolf, the Pheasant, the Partridge, etc.

Venison, whatsoever Beast of the Forest is for the food of Man.

Vent, the fundament of Poultry and Fish; also a Bung-hole in a Vessel.

Vent the Otter, see Otter.

Vessels, several Pipes and Conveyances in the body, of the Blood, Seed, Serum,
or Urine, as the Bloud-vessels, Lymphaeducts, Spermatick Vessels, Urinary
Vessels, etc. Also Kitchin-Utensils, as Pots, Pans, etc. And of other Offices,
as Brewing, Washing Churning Vessels, etc.

V I
View, the Treading of a Buck or Fallow Deer.

Vinegar, c. a Cloak.

Virago, a masculine Woman, or a great twohanded Female.

Virtuoso, an experimental Philosopher, a Trader in new Inventions and
Discoveries, a Projecter in Philosophy.

U N
Unharbour the Heart, see Heart.

Unitarians, a numerous Sect holding one God without plurality or distinction
of Persons.

Unkennel the Fox, Dislodge him.

Unrig'd, Stripped, Undrest, and Ships that are laid up. Unrig the Drab, c. to
pull all the Whore's Cloths off.

Untwisted, Undone, Ruined.

Unwasht-bawdry, Rant, errant fulsom Bawdry.

Uphils, high Dice.

V O
Vouchers, c. that put off False Money for Sham-coyners; also one that Warrants
Gagers or under Officers Accounts, either at the Excize-Office, or else where.

U P
Uppish, rampant, crowing, full of Money. He is very Uppish, well lined in the
Fob; also brisk.

Upright-men, c. the second Rank of the Canting Tribes, having sole right to
the first night's Lodging with the Dells. Go Upright, said by Taylers and
Shoemakers, to their Servants, when any Money is given to make them Drink and
signifies, bring it all out in Drink, though the Donor intended less and expects
Change or some return of Money.

Upstarts, new raised to Honor.

U R
Urchin, a little sorry Fellow; also a Hedgehog.

Urines, Netts to catch Hawks.

Urinal of the Planets, Ireland, with us, because of its frequent and great
Rains, as Heidelberg, and Cologn in Germany, have the same Name upon the same
Account; also a Chamber Pot, or Glass.

U T
Utopia, Fairy-Land, a new Atlantis, or Isle of Pines.

W
Waddle, to go like a Duck.

Wag. Waggish, Arch, Gamesom, Pleasant.

Wag-Tail, a light Woman.

Wallowish, a malkish, ill Taste.

Wap, c. to Lie with a Man. If she will not wap for a Win, let her trin'e for a
Make, c. If she will not Lie with a Man for a Penny, let her Hang for a
Halfpenny. Mort wap-apace, c. a Woman of Experience, or very expert at the
Sport.

Wapper-eyed, that has Sore or running Eyes.

Warm, welllined or flush in the Pocket.

Warming-pan, an old fashioned large Watch. A Scotch Warming-pan, a
She-bed-fellow.

Warren, c. he that is Security for Goods taken up, on Credit, by Extravagant
young Gentlemen; also a Boarding-school and a Bawdy House.

Wash, After-wort; also Paint for Faces.

Waspish, peevish.

Water-Pad, c. one that Robbs Ships in the Thames.

Wattles, Ears; also Sheep-folds.

W E
Weak, Silly, half-witted.

Welsh-Camp, a Field betwixt Lambs-Conduit and Grays Inn-lane, where the Mob
got to gether in great numbers, doing great mischief.

Welsh-fiddle, the Itch.

Westminster-Wedding, a Whore and a Rogue Married together.

Wet-Quaker, a Drunkard of that Sect.

W H
Wheedle, c. a Sharper. To cut a Wheedle, c. to Decoy, by Fawning and
Insinuation.

Wheel-band in the Nick, regular Drinking over the left Thumb.

When we entered the Ken, we loapt up the Dancers, and Fagotted all there, c.
when we got into the House, we whipped up Stairs and Bound all the People there.

Wheatgear, a Bird smaller than a Dottrel, choice Peck.

Whether-go-ye, a Wife.

Whet, a Draught or Sup to encourage the Appetite.

Whet-stones-park, a Lane betwixt Holborn and Lincolns-Inn-fields, famed for a
Nest of Wenches, now de-park'd.

Whids, c. Words.

Whiddle, c. to tell, or discover. He Whiddles, c. he Peaches. He Whiddles the
whole Scrap, c. he discovers all he knows. The Cull has Whiddled, because we
would n't tip him a Snack, c. the Dog has discovered, because we did n't give
him a share. They Whiddle beef, and we must Brush, c. they cry out Thieves, we
are Pursued, and must Fly.

Whiddler, c. a Peacher (or rather Impeacher) of his Gang.

Whiggs, the Republicans or Common-wealths-men, under the Name of Patriots, and
Lovers of Property; originally the Field-conventiclers in the West of Scotland.

Whiggish, Factious, Seditious, Restless, Uneasy.

Whig-land, Scotland.

Whip-shire, Yorkshire.

Whipster, a sharp, or subtle Fellow.

Whip off, c. to Steal, to Drink cleaverly, to Snatch, and to run away. Whipped
through the Lungs, run through the Body with a Sword. Whipped in at the Glaze, c.
got in at the Window.

Whim, a Maggot.

Whimsical, Maggotish.

Whimper, a low, or small Cry. What a Whimpering you keep?

Whindle, a low or feigned Crying.

Whineth, see Otter. To Whine, to cry squeekingly, as at Conventicles.

Whinyard, a Sword.

Whipper-snapper, a very small but sprightly Boy.

Whip-Jacks, c. the tenth Order of the Canting Crew; Counterfeit Mariners
Begging with false Passes, pretending Shipwrecks, great Losses at Sea, etc.
narrow escapes; telling dismal Stories, having learnt Tar-terms on purpose, but
are mere Cheats.

Whirlegigs, Testicles.

Whisk, a little inconsiderable, impertinent Fellow.

Whisker, a great Lie.

Whiskins, c. shallow, brown Bowls to Drink out off.

Whistle, a derisory Term for the Throat. Wet your Whistle, to Liquor your
Troat.

Whit, c. Newgate. As five Rum-padders, are Rubbed in the Dark-man's out of the
Whit, and are pik'd in to the Deuseaville, c. five Highway-men in the Night
broke Newgate, and are gone into the Country.

White-liver'd, Cowardly; also Pale Visag'd.

White-wool, c. Silver.

White-chappel-portion, two torn Smocks, and what Nature gave.

Whow-ball, a Milkmaid.

Whur, the rising or fluttering of Partridge or Pheasant.

W I
Wicket, c. a Casement, also a little Door. As toute through the Wicket, and
see where a Cully pikes with his Gentry-mort, whose Munns are the Rummest I
ever touted before c. look through the Casement and see where the Man walks
with a Gentlewoman, whose Face is the fairest, I have ever seen.

Wicher-Cully, c. a Silver-smith.

Wide, when the Biass of the Bowl holds not enough.

Widows-Weeds, Mourning Cloths. A Grass-Widow, one that pretends to have been
Married, but never was, yet has Children.

Whores-kitling, a Bastard.

Whore-son, a Bastard.

Wild-boar, the fourth Year, at which Age or a little before he leaves the
Sounder, and is called a Singler, or Sanglier, Hogsteer, the third Year; Hog,
the second Year; Pig of the Sounder, the first Year. A Boar coucheth, Lodges;
Rear the Boar, Dislodge him. A Boar freemeth, makes a noise at rutting Time.

Wild-Rogues, c. the fifth Order of Canters, such as are trained up from
Children to Nim Buttons off Coats, to creep in at Cellar and Shop-Windows, and
to slip in at Doors behind People; also that have been whipped, Burnt in the
First and often in Prison for Roguery.

Wiles, Engines to take Deer; also Tricks Intrigues.

Wily, cunning, crafty, intriguing.

Willing-Tit, a little Horse that Travels cheerfully.

Willow, c. Poor, and of no Reputation.

Wind-fall, a great Fortune fallen unexpectedly by the Death of a Friend, or
Wood fell by high Winds, etc.

Wind-mills in the Head, empty Projects He Will go as near the Wind as another,
live as thrifty and wary as any one.

Win, c. a Penny. To Win, c. to Steal. Won, c. Stolen. The Cull has won a
couple of Rumglimsticks, c. the Rogue has Stole a pair of Silver-Candlesticks.

Windy-fellow, without Sense or Reason.

Wink, c. a Signal or Intimation. He tipped the Wink, c. he gave the Sign or
Signal.

Wipe, c. a Blow; also a Reflection. He tipped him a rum Wipe, c. he gave him a
swinging Blow. I gave him a Wipe, I spoke something that cut him, or gaul'd
him. He Wipt his Nose, c. he gulled him.

Wiper, c. a Handkerchief. Nim the Wiper c. to Steal the Handkerchief.

Wiper-drawer, c. a Handkerchief Stealer. He drew a broad, narrow, came, or
Speckt Wiper, c. he Pickt-pockets of a broad, or narrow, Ghenting, Cambrick, or
Colored Handkerchief.

Wire-draw, c. a Fetch or Trick to wheedle in Bubbles; also to screw,
overreach, or deal hard with. Wire-drawn, c. so served, or treated.

Wise Man of Gotham, a Fool.

Witcher, c. Silver.

Witcher-bubber, c. a Silver-bowl. The Cull is pik'd with the Witcher-bubber,
c. the Rogue is marched off with the Silver-Bowl.

Witcher-tilter, c. a Silver-hilted Sword. He has bit, or drawn the
Witcher-tilter, c. he has Stole the Silver-hilted Sword.

Within the Sword, from the Sword to the Right Hand.

Without the Sword, all the Man's Body above the Sword.

The Wit, c. Newgate.

W O
Woman of the Town, a Lewd, common Prostitute.

Womble te-cropt, see Cropsick.

Wooden-ruff, c. a Pillory, the Stocks at the other end. Hudibras. He wore the
Wooden-ruff, c. he stood in the Pillory.

Wood-pecker, c. a Bystander that bets; also a bird of that Name. In a Wood, at
a loss.

Wooly-crown, a Fool. Your Wits are a Wool-gathering, are in a Wild goosechace.

Word-pecker, one that play's with Words.

Worm'd out of, Rookt, Cheated, Trickt.

Wreath, the Tail of a Boar; also a Torce between the Mantle and the Crest.

X
Xantippe, a Scold; also the froward Wife of Socrates.

Y
Yarmouth-Capon, a Red Herring.

Yarmouth-Coach, a sorry low Cart to ride on, drawn by one Horse.

Yarmouth-Pie, made of Herrings, highly Spic'd, and Presented by the City of
Norwich, (upon the forfeiture of their Charter) annually to the King.

Yarum, c. Milk.

Y E
Yea and Nay-Men, Quakers.

Yearn, when Beagles bark and cry at their Game.

Yellow, Jealous.

Yellow-boy, c. Piece of Gold of any Coin.

Yeomam of the Mouth, an Officer belonging to his Majesty's Pantry.

Y O
Yoked Married.

Yorkshire-Tike, a Yorkshire manner of Man.

Z
Zany, a Mountebank's Merry-Andrew, or Jester, to distinguish him from a Lord's
Fool.

Zuche, a withered or dry Stock or Stub of a Tree.

FINIS.

