AN ELEGY OR, Copy of Verses, Lamenting the late Mortality of Two Godly and
Religious MINISTERS, Mr. T. H. of Bristol and Mr. J. G. of London. Who Departed
this Life September and October 1678.
When Death so bold in Levie's Tribe appears,
Who ever stops his sighs, or saves his Tears,
May by that sullen Stoicy declare
Much (I confess) of the Philosopher:
But such a senseless Carriage will express
But little of a Christian tenderness;
Which to a faithful Pastor, next should be
To that respect he pays the Deity:
For they are his Embassadors', and Men
For whom we cannot have too great Esteem.
Divines we should with Veneration treat,
As th'Angel-Guardians of our Souls Estate.
Nay we should love them too, and when they die
Should weep at least a Doleful ELEGY.
If this be true (as certainly it is;
For they inform us of Eternal Bliss)
LONDON! how many Seas of Tears do thou
To several late Deceased Pastors owe?
Men Orthodox, Auth entick, and Divine;
Of Lives unspotted, Piety sublime:
True to their Charge, and in their Dealings just.
Free in their Labors, faithful to their Trust.
Ready by wholesome Counsel to repair
The broken rest of Sinners in despair.
And by Salubrious Precepts to dispose
Established Souls to a more Calm Repose.
How many Tears, I say, do thou esteem
Thy self indebted for the loss of them?
Ah hoodwinkt World! were you not blind as Moles?
Did you but know the Danger of your Souls?
What Wolves way-lay you? You would sigh and groan,
'Soon as you heard your Faithful Shepherds gone.
One of the number, my Deceased Friend,
For sound Advice I gladly did attend.
And as I hope may modestly esteem
My Course to Heav^n advanced much by him.
I could have willingly my Fortune tried;
And given my All, in Case he had not died.
But at the effects of Death we vainly grieve,
There Is no place for Redemption nor Reprieve:
When we are once called, the best but idly sue,
Since at its Summons they surrender too.
"But they are but fallen asleep, they are not dead;
"Although they are gone from hence and burred.
"Therefore why do we mourn thus, and lament,
"As if we were past hope, and all were spent.
"God can raise Messengers a number more;
"And where there is but one, can make a score.
"Therefore let always now our Prayers call
"Upon the Lord above, for to let fall
"Abundance of his Spirit, that there may
"Be Gospel Preachers still increased each day.
The Seventh day Sabbath he stoutly did wtth-stand,
And firmly proved the First by Christ's Command.
And bright Examples, men were to obey,
And to keep Holy as the Sabbath Day.
In short, what ever the World could well esteem,
In Humane Nature, might be found in them,
They were both Pious, Humble, Learned, Lowly,
In Censures modest, Conversation holy;
Free to Communicate the best they had;
Nor only Ready to do Good, but Glad.
"Nor did these Holy Men ever forbear
"To bid their Pious Auditors beware
"That they did not into a Slumber fall,
"As Foolish Virgins, at the Midnight Call.
"But if I should their Virtues all set forth,
"This Paper must be boundless, as their Worth.
It is enough to say, whilst they did live,
They did Example to all Mankind give.
'Twill be our part to pay them due esteem,
And by our Godly Lives to follow them:
That when this Life ends, and our Glass is run,
We may submit; and say God's will be done. Acts 21. 14.
FINIS.
LONDON, Printed by Tho. James for Benjamin Harris 1678. WITH ALLOWANCE. 112.


