MEMENTO MORI

AN ELEGY On the Death of the Right Honorable JOHN Earl of RADNOR, Viscount
Bodmin, and Baron of TRVRO; etc. who Expired, July the 17th. 1685.
Moribus Antiquis Res stat Romana Viresque Enn apud Cicer, in lib. 6. de Rep.
SO falls an Aged Oak, which long has stood,
The Joy and Glory of the Humbler Wood;
Till with much Toil and with much Worship Sat,
It measures Earth in Service of the State,
Either for Shipwreck or some Noble Fate.
What a Carier of Honor have thou run?
What Wreaths each Moment of thy Life have wone?
Thy Life, which, though extended out in Length,
Was yet hemmed with Compactedness and Strength?
No Month, no Day, no Hour, no Minute free
From Thought and Labor could we find in thee.
Thy very Recreations were such,
We thought them Business, or full worth as much.
Yet still Devotion and Philosophy,
Had their due Hours allotted 'em by thee:
State-craft did never barr-out Divinity.
To this, the Hibernian Province sets it is hand,
Which Lord, Leiutenant of Ireland.
Thou with so much Praise did once Command
There, the Illustrious Bards will thee rehearse,
To After-ages in their Noble Verse;
Relate thee with each Grace and Virtue fraught,
Serene thy Looks, Serene thy Life and Thought;
With what just Care thou did the Timon hold,
Neither too Superstitious, nor too Bold:
And when they have said all which they can say more,
The'yll Curse their Language scandalously poor.
This will the Laws Municipal attest,
Who Thee their mighty Conqueror confessed:
That Ocean, which others Boundless find,
Was Coasted all and Fathomed by thy mind.
No private Creek escaped thy watchful Eye,
But thou the in-most Shores did all Epsy,
Where undiscovered Golden-Worlds might lie.
Even Senate-Precedents to thee did yield
A Fruitful Prospect in a Barren Field.
All this thou did devoutly for the Crown:
Thy Loyal Deeds entirely were thine own.
No base allay of Interest spoiled the Coin:
The Royal Stamp grew in [thine Heart] the Mine.
From Privy. Seal.
that High Place thine House no Riches bore:
Only thy self were wealthier than before,
In Conscious Satisfaction good Store.
Farewell, great man: And while our Councils stand,
Their Sense Collected by Judicious hand,
Summed up with Application, to attain
The Sacred Judgment of the Sovereign;
Then will our God-like Princes think of President of the Council.
Thee,
Vigor, Advantage, and Humility,
And Honor, thus, thy Everlasting Memory.
FINIS.
This may be Printed,

R. L. S. July the 23th. 1685.

LONDON; Printed by E. Mallet, in Black-Horse-Alley in Fleet Street, near
Fleet-Bridge, 1685.


