AN ELEGY ON THE DEATH of the truly Reverend, Learned and Pious, Mr. STEPHEN
CHARNOCK, July 27. 1680.
HOW sad a stroke, how deep a wound is this,
That yet we cannot tell how great it is!
But only our just fears conclude so far,
At best, 'twill not be Healed without a Scar.
Who can compute that loss, which no man dare
To say, that ever 'twill admit repair?
For that the World must not expect such Men,
No, nor the Church such Officers again.
Had but a sense of this possessed the Age,
A Book of Lamentations, not a Page
Would register our fate, and so transmit
At once the Memory both of him and it.
Such Tribute, it is not a few drops that can
Discharge, unless we weep an Ocean;
If that our Heads were Waters, and our Eyes
Fountains of tears, 'twould suit our Miseries;
And sure that Grief cannot burst into Excess,
Whose cause is such as can have no redress.
If but two such, as Poole and Charnock, be
In one year snatched by fatal destiny,
Three Nations, one would think, might well consent
To testify their own astonishment;
And if two Ages could to us restore
Blessings as great as those we had before,
The want of these we better might sustain,
And be content with those which yet remain.
But where is that Door of Hope, which should let in
Such comfortable thoughts; when the same sin
Which was the first Occasion of our Woe,
Has the like virtue to prolong it too!
Blessed Soul! You Are not at leisure now to mind
Our poor Estate, whom thou have left behind
Still gazing up to Heaven; tho our Heart
Be with thee too, and where thy Better Part
Is lodged already, there we Hope at last
To get ashore, when all these storms are past:
Mean while we need our Pilot; for we hear
The Winds are whispering, and the Clouds appear,
The Floods are moving, and without control
Proud waters ready to go over our Soul;
With Threatening voice Deep unto deep does call;
So great our Dangers are, Thine none at all.
Could we but see the Heavens opened, where
The joyful throng of Saints and Angels are,
We should then see, (tho all have perfect bliss)
How many Sheaves do there bow down to his:
How near to Christ's right hand he sits; his Crown
Of Glory, how it weighs the others down;
How few removes he is seated from the Throne
Above his Brethren, would then be known;
But when at last our Lord and Judge shall come
In Majesty, to pass our final Doom,
Then shall he sit upon the Bench, with those
Wh' as Christ's Assessors, shall condemn his Foes.
Consid'ring these Dark Clods of Earth, How bright
Does this Star shine among the Saints in light!
What sorry Gloworms at the most are we!
Weak Babes compared to such strong men as he!
While he was clothed with flesh (such withering grass)
Among Ten thousand He the Chiefest was;
Came not behind the best; but still, like Paul,
He Labored more abundantly than All,
Yea, and to better purpose; in some sense,
He justly might have the pre-eminence.
The foolishness of Preaching would commend
Religion and it self, if such a Friend
As he to both could stand up in his stead,
That we might think him risen from the Dead.
Even Fools and blind, the force of truth would make
Confess, no mere man ever better spoke;
And if those works hereafter should come forth,
Which are best able to express his worth,
To every Discourse annex we can,
Sure it is the Voice of God speaking by Man;
Something Divine must guide that Tongue and Pen,
Which soared thus high above all other men.
There is no Truth, of which his Papers treat,
But what they do adorn; and every sheet
As though it had let down from Heaven been,
Contains nothing common or Unclean.
No Sentence there, but what was so well weighed,
That it the speaker's rashness never betrayed;
So accurate each Word, that one might guess,
'Twas to pass through the Pulpit to the Press.
Reader, step back, and think, How clearly would
His Lines the Book of Providence unfold: His Sermons upon 2 Chronicles. 16.9.

How would some others both support his fame,
And put the sin of Unbelief to shame; Upon John 16.9.

To learn his Notions first, would soon invite
To know both God and Christ with more delight: Upon John 17.3.

On what firm grounds did he God's Being lay,
And leave the Atheist nothing more to say; Upon Psalm. 14.1.

With which design nothing could better suit,
Than next to open every Attribute;
Which having partly done, with much expense
Of Time and Pains, he closed with Patience; Upon Nabum 1.3.

Whereof he proved to this Unthankful Race
From God an Instance but for five years space;
Thus was his Public Work begun too late,
And He too soon, Gone to a sinless State.
LONDON, Printed by J. A. for Thomas Cockeril at the Three Legs over against
the Stocks-market, 1680. 120.


