(...) Conquer.

along with emblems of Death (hourglass, crossbones, etc.) part of outline of
tombstone which surrounds text
AN ELEGY Upon the Death of Mr. FRANCIS HOLCROFT, Who dyed the sixth, and
Interred this twelfth of January, 1691/2.
PRaises of him (when dead) are justly due,
Who living, was, by the grace of God, found true:
Faithful to Christ, and Useful in his Station;
Blessed, 1 Pet. 2.9.
and a Blessing made, to Christ's own Nation.
And as a great Ambassador for him,
Has wooed and won full many to come in, 2 Pet. 5.20.

Even from the East and West, Mat. 8.11.
and North and South,
Sit down at's Feet, and learn from Christ's own Mouth,
The care of Grace, sound Faith and Holiness,
And him before Men and Angels to confess.
Fearful of Sin, Mat. 10.32.
but fearless of all those,
Who are Christ's Enemies, Mat. 10.28.
and him oppose:
Whom neither Men, nor Devils could afright,
From sending forth's burning and shining Light,
In darkest Times and Places, where Death's shade
Had covered Souls, and them a Prey had made
To Sin and Satan, World, and Death and Hell;
He reasoned by the Gospel Light, to tell
In Zion, what the Lord had done for them,
And Glory give to God before Sons of Men.
A Fisherman he was, at Christ's Command
He cast his Net, and wandering made a stand
To see what Multitudes, Mat. 13.47, 48.
by Grace were caught,
Among which were many good, though some proved naught.
His Fellow Fisherman, God took first away,
Grief whereof, and other things, I Will not say
Brought down his Body and his Mind, to cease
And mourn in Silence, waiting Death's release;
Which God has granted unto him with Joy,
That gone he is, where is nothing to annoy,
Where rest he does from his fore Labors all, Rev. 14.13.

And where his Works most sure him follow shall.
He Is gained the Point and into the Harbor's gone,
Welcomed by Angels, and by Saints each one;
By Abel, Enoch, Noah, and the rest
Of the Fathers, Prophets and Apostles, blessed
With Vision of the Face and Sight of God,
And of the Lamb, whose Paths they following trod.
Oh! Jam. 5.11.
happy, happy Holcroft, thou'st endured
The Cross, Jam. 1.12.
and now the Crown to thee's secured.
And hence let the Ministers of Christ, learn to know
Their Times and Seasons, and improve them too;
And Work whilst it is their Day, for Night will come,
When no more Work can by them here be done. Eccles. 9.10.

And learn to bear and suffer much, for the Sake
Of God's Elect, who Christ his Body make.
And show their love to Christ, Joh. 21.5.
in feeeding's Flock,
Purchased by's Blood, Acts 20.28.
on Earth his only Stock;
And when their Work is done, and they appear
Before the Shepherd great, whose Sheep they are,
They shall receive a Crown of Life, 1 Pet. 5.4.
laid up
For them, Mat. 6.20.
where neither Moth nor Rust corrupt:
Oh! let us therefore be Courageous and Strong,
Our Working time is short, and Rest is long.
And what to our Charges shall be by the way,
Life, Liberty, Estate, Mat. 19.29, 30.
Christ will it repay
With a redundance of an hundred fold,
Now, and eternal Life, next World to hold.
And let the Flock of Christ, whose once he was
Learn to remember Sin, and purge their Dross.
Repent and turn to him, Isa. 9.13.
that smitten has
Their Shepherds, one, Rev. 2.5.
and other now by Death:
And let them look to him, Mal. 1.15.
whose the residue,
Of the Spirit is, Joh. 3.34.
who can them Pastors new
Raise up and give, according to's own Heart, Jer. 3.14, 15.

Knowledge and Understanding to impart;
To feed and lead them in right Paths of Peace,
And Truth and Holiness, well to increase
In Grace and Knowledge, till they come to see
The Face of him whose Pasture-sheep they be: Acts 20.32.

But let them pray 'th Lord of the Harvest great, Mat. 9.38.

That he may send forth such as may complete
The Harvest there, and gather in to him
The Remnant of's Elect, not yet brought in, John 16.16.

And edify the Body, till they come, Ephesians. 4.12, 13, 14.

To be complete in Stature and Union:
That henceforth they no more such Children be,
Tossed to and fro with Waves as is the Sea;
But holding Truth in Love full steadfastly,
May Faith and Order keep in Unity:
That so the Blessing great, which is kept in store,
May be on them; even Life for evermore. Psalm. 133.

Now to conclude, what is said of him that is gone?
It Is not the Man we praised, but Grace alone;
The Grace of God, which made him what he was, 1 Cor. 15.10.

'Bove others and himself: All Flesh is Grass.
It Is not the Man, for he was less than nothing,
But Grace it was alone, that made him something.
Therefore to God and Lamb upon the Throne,
Let Glory due be given by every one: Rev. 4.9, 16, 17.

To whom he was a Blessing in his day,
And let his Faults be buried in the Clay,
AMEN.
London: Printed for Will. Marshall at the Bible in Newgate-Street, 1692. Where
you may be supplied with a Book lately Printed, of Dr. Owins, Entitled, A
Guide to Church Fellowship and Order, according to the Gospel-Institution:
Wherein these following Particulars are distinctly handled: 1. The Necessity of
Believers to join themselves in Church Order. 2. The Subject Matter of the
Church. 3. The Continuation of a Church State, and of the Administration of
Evangelical Ordinances of Worship, briefly vindicated. 4. What sort of Churches
the Disciples of Christ may, and ought to join themselves unto, as unto Entire
Communion. Price 6 d. 188.


