AN ELEGY Upon the Death of SR. WILLIAM DAVENANT.
If those Great Heroes of the Stage, whose Wit
Swells to a wonder here, shall think it fit,
When Poet Lawreat 's dead, that he should ly
Twelve days, or more, without an Elegy:
I that am less, presume to undertake,
A short Memorial for their Credits sake.
DEath in the shape of a thin Poet's come,
To summon Davenant to Elyzium:
Sent for by strict Express, for to appear those
Upon the Stage of Tempe's theater.
His Voice compleats the Chorus among
Who sing the Numbers they themselves compose.
Now Davenant is arrived, the Fields and Plains
Resound unto his Welcome, Lofty Strains.
For every Poet there it shall be free
To raise his Joy unto an Ecstasy.
Imagine him encircled in a Sphere
Of those Great Souls who once admired him here:
First, Johnson does demand a share in him,
For both their Muses whipped the Vice of time:
Then Shakespeare next a Brothers part does claim,
Because their quick Inventions were the same.
Beaumont and Fletcher their Petitions join,
This, for clear Style, that, for his deep Design:
Tom Randolph asks a Portion amongst the rest,
Because they both were apt to break a Jest.
Shirley and Massinger comes in for shares,
For that his Language was refined as theirs:
Laborious Heywood, witty Brom, and Rowley,
The learned Chapman, and ingenious Cowley,
Ask their proportions as they have gained applause,
By well observing the Drammatick Laws:
Last, Sir John Sucklin says his Title lies,
Because they both (were Knights, and) writ concise.
Thus the Experienced Davenant did ingross
A Soul of Wit divided among those,
Whose pregnant Muses have, from age to age,
Fixed swelling Glories on the English Stage.
A Mirror of the World, that it might see
Virtues sweet looks, Vices deformity.
And all is in one moment gone, since now
The Laurels snatched from mighty Davenant's brow,
For ever withered must neglected ly,
TO impale the head of Nights obscurity.
But soft -- yon black Chymaera sure does bear
The Muse of Davenant through the yielding air;
Through clouds of Melancholy she is brought,
Clad in a weed of discomposed thought:
A pendent brow has hid her smiles, as if
It were a sable Vail, and not a Grief:
Her arms (without Bracelets of mirth) across:
And thus she does bewail her Davenant's loss.
"Engines of Fancy, crack, and now let loose
"Spirits of Ignorance, that shall reduce
"The World to its first Chaos, that not one
"But shall drink Lethe 'stead of Helicon.
Down with Parnassus, and thou Great Apollo,
Patron of Arts, I need not wish thee follow
This wrack of Time; for when it shall be said
With one poor moments breath that Davenant's dead
Thou will resign that happy place, and leave
Practice of Arts, and only learn to grieve.
See here Heroic Tragedy, hard fate!
None to assume her Crown or Robe of state.
Comedy wants a head, on which to place
Her worthy Wreath of almost fading Bays.
Now thou (Great Soul) art gone, who shall maintain
The Learned Issue of thy pregnant Brain?
Thy Lovers (now so different is their state)
Are both Platonic and Unfortunate.
Thy Cruel Brothers smooth designs shall be
Laid open to Times greater Cruelty.
Now Ignorance is loose, it is a wonder
If Madagascar do avoid a Plunder:
Since Rhodes it self will be besieged again,
Nor can great Numbers such a foe restrain.
How can thou hope that any should escape,
When on thy Wits it will commit a rape?
Since Davenant's dead, I can forget my birth,
And in that rocky substance of the earth,
I Will cut my passage deeper than the Seas,
And whisper something to the Antipodes
Shall raise Imagination to conceit,
There are no Gods, but Poets Lawreat.
The EPITAPH.
Here lies a Subject of Immortal praise,
Who did from Phoebus hand receive his Bays:
Admired by all, envied alone by those
Who for his Glories made themselves his foes:
Such were his virtues that they could command
A General Applause from every hand:
His Exit then this on Record shall have,
A Clap did usher Davenant to his Grave.
FINIS. 194.

