AN ELEGY ON THE GLORIOUS DEATH OF Col. John Okey; Who Suffered at TYBURN, the
19th. of April, 1662.
It Is best seen at Sunset, whose the Day was.
Though several Acts of thy Life ( John) might pass
Musters for good and brave; yet, who could tell
That thou would carry't through half so well?
Thou were retreated, and (forced to rally)
Did outdo all thy former Chivalry.
Thy Friends then have more cause to sing, than groan;
For, sure, as when thou were wont to go on,
GOD was with thee; so, art thou now with Him,
In being thus brought off, though Limb by Limb.
But why are not thy Quarters perched, like theirs,
Who proved i'th'close thy Fellow Soldiers?
The Cabbs would seem kind; but were wise, and did
Know they were safest, when OKEY was hid.
Nor did Sir Georg Downing.
thy Lay-Chaplain bewray poor Delf
For the discov'ry of thee, but himself
To be The Hangman.
Squire Duns small factor, and the High
And Mighty Lords o'th Low Lands to be nigh
The honor of making their Country free,
By giving't up (like ours) to Monarchy.
Next, how came thy last Harangue to disown
The Horridness, though not the Action?
The sense of that Guilt, which once made thee fly,
Did ill to leave thee, when thou were to dye.
Methinks I see thee busling up to say,
In spite of both the Sh'riffes (where, by the way,
When any Malefactor comes to bleed
For Theft, or what else is a Crime indeed,
Shall we read of an Executioner
Capitulating with the Thief, for fear
He should persuade the People that he died
For that, which Reason would have justified?)
If to have fled, be a Confession
Of Guilt, the Regicide (that now is grown
The only right) heretofore many a time
To Fields, Brooks, Walls, and Woods confessed a crime.
Methinks I hear thee again say, If to be
Condemned, make a man guilty, What was he
Whom we condemned? Or, if be unjustly
Did suffer, though condemned, why might not I?
He had (I Am sure) fairer play for's Life, then
Any of us three, being heard, and heard again:
While all that I was tried upon, amounted
To this, Whether the twelve picked men, accounted
Me the same Okey, which was of that Gang,
Such an Act meant, without hearing, to hang.
Well, let 'um hang ( John) such as are fast tied,
And mangle such, as are first mortified:
Let 'um persume the Roads with Garbage broiled,
And feast the Fowls with Flesh they never foiled;
Showing by their moderated Greatness,
How nobly they obtained what they possess.
Blessed (meanwhile) be those early Buds, that met
By thousands to attend thy Body; yet
Were fain to be mocked, lest, in the very Grave
Thy Mock-attainder should true Honor have.
England shall want Trees for Gibbets, before
Those Trees shall want the Fruit they lately bore,
Or, that Fruit Kernels, or those Kernels Earth
Wherein to roar, and whence to take new birth:
Till our Posterity arrive to the Fame
Of being born in an Orchyard of the same.
From such Beginnings GOD was pleased to bring
That Gospel, which now through the World does ring
In Sanguine Semen.
LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1662. 45.


