AN ELEGY Upon the most eminently Famous, and no less stupendous Pattern of
Constant Loyalty. The Right Honorable THOMAS Late Earl of CLEVELAND, Baron of
NETTLESTEED, Lord Lieutenant of the County of BEDFORD, Captain of his MAJESTY'S
Royal Band of Pensioners, etc.
WEep, Weep, an Elegy; for Clevelands hearse
Surmounts the common complement of verse.
His Actions speak his worth, His glorious name
Is all-sufficient to advance his fame.
Those things called Honor, Greatness, Birth, Estate,
Which hood-winckt Fortune does communicate
Promiscuously to all, were here designed,
TO enrich the palace of his noble mind.
A hoary frost had now bedeckt his head,
And Age proclaimed him fitter for his bed
Then toylsome war. When, Lo, a sudden change!
Rebellious Spirits through the Kingdoms range,
Preaching down Loyalty under pretense
Of pious zeal, and just obedience.
Fawning, false piety must the true destroy,
As the Palladium once had ruined Troy.
The Cheat discovered; these fierce Allarms
Seemed to this Hero like Medea's charms,
Practiced on Aetons age, which did renew
Nature's short snuff, and made his Taper new.
His loyal zeal brooks no delays, nor stands
On the Punctilio of great Commands
But readily prepares to live or die
With Highborn Rupert and his Cavalry.
Short while he had been there, till Chalke-grove Field,
(Where many a Trayter to his Fate did yield)
Gave signal proof of 's Conduct, Courage, and
What e're might court him, to some choice Command;
Nor was he long, for the first step he made,
Was to command the late Lord John's Brigade,
Which how he managed, Capredy can tell,
Where many hundreds with their Colors fell.
Let Abercromy, with his vapouring Rear,
Boast, if they can, of Cleavelands cornish cheer.
But Fortune frowning at his gallantry,
Designed him Prisoner at the second Newberry,
Where ne'retheless such courage he did show,
As struck amazement in his flying Foe.
The Forlorn beat, He pierced the Curiasseers
Routed some Foot, the Rest were fraught with sears,
To see their new-got men and canons lost.
Yet this success was on a sudden crossed,
For no fresh succors coming to supply
His scattered Troops, was forced to yield or die.
To the Tower he is sent, the walls though never so strong,
Cannot detain this Generous Spirit long,
He finds at length, revived hopes may bring
Honor and safety to his beloved King,
Therefore compounds for freedom yet remains
Fettered in Scriveners Bonds, the worse of chains,
These Sampson's cords, he quickly rent in sunder,
Although their forfeiture spoke in thunder
To his estate and him. He must to Court
Where e're it be, although he perish for it.
Hollands at home, if that his King be there;
He questions not the distance, dreads no fear.
To Court he comes, from thence to Scotland goes
Along with his Master to suppress his Foes:
At Loyal Worcester, He once more is taken,
And sent to the Tower, which, he had late forsaken,
Where he continued till the Kings return,
Preserving loyalty to enrich his urn.
What though the Usurper offers a reward?
If that his loyalty he would discard,
Ten thousand men at his command shall be
Estate and Person both at liberty;
Nor complement, nor freedom can prevail
To weigh his Anchor, 'lesse the King bids sail.
Thus did this aged Palm to Heaven aspire,
Weighty oppression mounting him still higher.
Lets then restrain our tears, and rather sing
Anthems of joy for him, of love to the King,
Whom he so truly valued even to death,
That, Pray for the King shared of his latest breath.
And now methinks, I really discover
Our Martyred Sovereign in the Air to hover,
Attended on by that true Royal Train,
Which most unjustly in his wars were slain,
To guard him nobly to his Civick Port,
Where none, but loyal Persons dare resort.
To Heaven, I mean, beyond the highest Sphere,
Millions of Angels bringing up the rear.
Epitaph.
Stop Passenger and take a view
Of what to loyalty is due,
Honor, respect, perpetual fame
Shall still attend this happy Name,
All which and more it is but just,
That we ascribe to Clevelands dust,
Whose uncontrouled Valor, Virtue, Grace,
Honor, and Loyalty, time shall never deface.
With Allowance. April 22. 1667. Humbly offered to his happy memory, By one of
his Late Majesty's truly Loyal, and really indigent Commission-Officers.



London, Printed by S. G. 1667. 50


