Vindiciae Catholicae, OR The Rights of PARTICULAR CHURCHES Rescued: AND
Asserted against that MERE (but DANGEROUS) NOTION OF ONE CATHOLIC, VISIBLE,
GOVERNING CHVRCH: The foundation of the (now endeavored) Presbytery. Wherein
by Scripture, reason, antiquity, and later writers First, The Novelty, Peril,
Scandal, and untruth of this Tenet, are clearly demonstrated. Secondly, All the
Arguments for it, produced by the Rev. Apollonius, M. Hudson, M. Noyes, the
London Ministers, and OTHERS: are examined and Dissolved. To the Parliament of
ENGLAND, and Assembly of DIVINES. By JOHN ELLIS Jun.

Gal. 5. 1. Stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ has made you free. Si
primat^m aliqu^m unius ^^^is agnesceret: Nonne i^ medium afferre debuit, unum
caput ministeriale membris omnibus praefectum, cujus auspicijs in unitatem
colligamur? certe aut Pauli oblivic excusari nequit, qui imprudenter, quod
maxim appositum erat, adeoque praecipuum in causa pratermiserit: aut satendum
est, rem esse a Christi Institutione alienam: imo APERTE FICTITIAM. Calv. in
Ephesians. 4. 11: LONDON, Printed for Henry Overton, and are to be sold at his Shop
in Popes-head-Alley. MDCXLVII.

To the High Court of PARLIAMENT of ENGLAND. To the Assembly of DIVINES. To the
Christian Magistrates, and Reformed Churches abroad.
Honorable and Reverend,
ALL that shall be prefaced unto you, is an humble suit for your prudent
consideration of the sequel. For if I have rightly collected; the opinion
contended with, represents you all guilty of Schism against the Catholic
Church; yea and of a higher crime, so many of you as have with hands lift up to
Heaven (of which number my self am one) engaged your selves in material
points of Reformation; not only without the Authority or endeavoring to have
the mind of the Catholic Church; but have also concluded and established
contrary to what it has determined in all those Assemblies which our Brethren
style the Representatives of it. General Counsels.
From which transgression the truth here pleaded does in that respect absolve
you: in the comfort whereof, I would here also leave you. But seeing there are
those, who would not only have the opposed Tenet embraced for a fundamental
truth in Church Government, cap. 5.. 3.
and propound it as a ground thereof; but that it should also be constituted
and established an ARTICLE of FAITH and Confession thereof; I crave leave to
add a supplication, and with all submission, do beseech you, that the
expedient of a great man about these affairs, in his advice for the restoring
of peace in the Church may be diligently weighed: Era^m. in praef. ad Hilarium:
The sum (says he) of our Religion is peace and unanimitie; Summa Religionis
nostri, pax est and unanimitas, ea vix constare poterit, nisi de quam potest
paucissimis definiamus, and in multis literum relinquamus suum cuique judicium,
propterea quod nigens sit rerum plurimarum obscuritas, etc.
of which there is little hope, unless those things that shall be enjoined as
matters of faith, be as few as may be; and that we leave men's judgments
free in many things; by reason that the obscurity in a number of them is
exceeding great, etc. How much less then such opinions, as are not only New
(in the sense now propounded) and controverted, but moreover appugned
constantly also, by the most eminent of our own party, (and is as inconsistent
with your Liberties, as Episcopacy, which you have condemned.) Withal I
presume you will not disdain the wisdom and practice of the most ancient
Churches after the Apostles times: we see all their confession of faith in that
brief called the APOSTLES CREED, and afterward the Nicene Creed; made by the
first General Council, and for the explication of the former; in how few
words is it comprehended, yea and the confessions of the Reformed Churches, and
our own 39. Articles are but brief and for the most part clear.

Austin says The Rule of Faith is common to the weak and to the wise. Ep. 57.
ad Dardan.
Which Ushers in the explication of one, Regulum fid^i pusillis magnisque
comm^nem, in Ecclesiam te^^nt.
almost as great, upon it: inferring, that (therefore) The Rule of Faith must
contain such truths ONLY, ^ Vshers answer to the Jesuit, page 418.
as are GENERALLY agreed upon, by the consent of all true Christians, and
without controversy.

Many things should not be rendered of the substance of Faith; for the denial
of which the crime of Heresy and Schism, and for the doubt whereof, the
penalty of rejection from the family, and work of the Lord must be inflicted.
Romans 4. c. 15,
The great Apostle every where exhorts, with all those who hold in the maine
the form of sound words, 1 Cor. 8. c. 10.
and yet are in other things diversely minded; Phil. 3. 15.
to preserve the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace. The Lord restore
the Churches to their just freedoms and keep them from using their liberty as
an occasion to the flesh, but by love to serve one another: And the same God
raise and uphold the spirit of all States and Magistrates to be Nu^sing Fathers
to them: and continue to return this your work of Faith, and labor of love,
seven fold into your bosom.

So prays An unworthy Minister of Christ, Son of the Church, and servant of
this State. JOHN ELLIS. Jun.

To the Pious and Ingenuous Reader.
TOuching my Call to this undertaking I shall give account in the following
Tractate: But the occasion of my falling on it, was my defense against Mr
Edwards, or rather the Author of the Letters, which he has published in the
first part of his Sanious Gangrena, where I being charged to have said in
public: That Popery would come in again under Presbytery as well as under
Episcopacy, if the Magistrate did not intervene. I distinguished of Popery
Doctrinall and Rective, or in point of Government; which latter I showed was
very probable (for the substance, though not the formalitie of it) to follow
upon the Presbytery on the ground that it is now endeavored, viz. A
Catholic Visible Governing Church, whereunto when I had written; it seemed
convenient to publish that argument alone; and because one of the Authors of
this opinion had invited me to deal in the point; I was obliged to reply to
him: but seeing others also had written on the subject, it had been an
imperfect opposition if I had not taken in the rest also: For I knew no
prohibition from replying to any: neither are the hands of any tied from
answering unto me (if they shall see cause) at least mediately. And let no man
be offended that so ordinary an instrument as my self deals with so many, and
so considerable Persons. The contest of one Paphnutius, and he a lay person,
with the whole (first and best) Council of Nice is vulgar. Gratian,
As also that of the Canon Law: one Laique if he speak scripture, his testimony
is to be prefered before the decrees of a Council. What ever distances there
may be in other respects, as years, learning, name, piety, etc. yet in Point
of truth he is on the highest ground, that has the advantage of that; as the
example of the young man Elihu, in Job, instructs us.

Now this I first publish rather then the former Answer, (delayed not for want
of innocence, but of opportunity, somewhat else impedeing also) as men assailed
by an adversary, and a Breach of sea at once; first stop the inundation that
will drown all, though the enemy in the mean time prevail the more.

The CONTENTS.
1. THe Occasion, and first Authors of the opinion of one Catholic Visible
GOVERNING Church. Together with the intent and scope of this Treatise: as also
the Authors call to this service. Chap. 1. Page 1. 2. The State of the
Question. Chap. 2. page 4. 3. The just prejudices and strong probabilities
against the former Notion. Chap. 3. page 10. 4. Demonstrations against it from
the efficient cause of Church Government, from the material, from the formal
and final. Chap. 4. page 19. 5. Answers to the Arguments produced for it, Chap.
5. 1. By Apollonius, page 33. 2. By M. Hudson, page 51. 3. The Reverend
Assembly, page 60. 4. M. Noyes, page 70. 5. The London Ministers, page 78. 6.
The Conclusion, Chap. 6. page 83. 1. Illatory, or by way of Corrollary. 2.
Hortatory to the Brethren of this opinion.
To the Reader.
Whereas I have reckoned (chap. 1.) Mr Randal [in his treatise of the Church]
among mine Adversaries, in the Argument I handle: upon better search I find
him not to be so; but to hold the Catholic Church, as others did, and my
self do, as by a marginall quotation I have made appear.

CHAP. I. The occasion and first Authors of the Question: Together with the
intent and scope of this Treatise. As also the Authors call unto this service.
SECT. I.
GOD having put it into the heart and hand of the Parliament of England, to set
upon Reformation of the Church as well as of the Commonwealth: they for that
end conveened an Assembly of such Learned and Godly men as they adjudged meet
for their direction in that work; and those of known different Judgments,
(Episcopal, Presbyterial, and Congregational,) that they might by their
opposition, the better discern what way of Church Government and Reformation
they should countenance and strengthen with their Authority. Now the Episcopal
way ^aving rendered it self odious by its imperiousness and otherwise, the
contest remained betwixt the other two: whereof the Presbyterian, being
practiced (in some things) in certain Reformed States and Churches (who were
partly constrained thereunto) there being some hints of Scripture also that
might be apprehended to look that way, Some other things withal concurring: got
place, either in the interests or affections, of a great part of the Assembly,
Parliament, City, and Ministers in the Country. Hereby also they were eyed the
more by the Churches abroad that were of that way, and had the opportunity to
improve their endeavors for their assistance. The Congregational way in the
mean time, though it wanted not Assertors very learned and godly, and of great
name in the Church, and had the advantage of an amiable pattern of it in the
new-English Plantations; and withal, the daily access and addition of the
most knowing and conscencious sort of Professors: Yet by reason of the former
disadvantages, it was not rendered so considerable among the Churches abroad,
as to depart from received Principles, or neglect to appear in the defense of
the former, for consideration of it. Hereupon the Walachrian Classis in Holland
(among others) being solicited by the Presbyterian party here for their
assistance: they appoint G. Apollonius, Pastor of the Church at Middelburgh, to
take on him this province, and having according to his principles acquitted
himself of that service; in a Tractate entitled [A consideration of certain
controversies which concern the Government of the Church of God, Considerat.
quarundam controvers. ad Regimen Ecclesia Dei spectant quae in Anglia
agitantur: Edit. 1644.
agitated in England] the approbate of the Classis is added to the book, and
published 1644. both in Latin and English. This Author observing as it seems,
that the assault on the way of the Presbyterian Government was like to be
strong; and fearing that the former basis and foundations of it, [viz. That the
Government of the Church was to be by the Elders, and they in equal power. 2.
That it is alvvaies convenient (if attainable) and sometimes necessary, that
Churches be associated and act in combination with joint consent. 3. That as
Princes and States have an Independent power within their own limits, so
Churches under the Government of one Prince or State, have no absolute or
necessary dependence on other Churches in point of Ecclesiastic Power and
Government, etc.] These grounds as was said, being doubted whether defensible:
the Author in the third Chapter of his discourse which treates [of the Visible
Instituted Church] betakes himself to a larger medium, and of all men (that I
know) of the Presbyterian, and almost of the Protestant judgment, he first
lays down this conclusion: Conclus. 3. 2.
That there is a certain universal outward Church, dispersed through the whole
World, The first Authors of this opinion.
described in the Scriptures, which in a certain visible Government does make
one only Corporation, Ministerial Church-body, or Political society: under
which all particular Churches, Classical, Provincial, and National (as it were
parts of the whole) are contained. Apollonius is followed herein by M. Hudson
in his Book written on this Subject [Intituled the Essence and Unity of the
Church Catholic visible:] Apollonius,
also by the Reverend Assembly of Divines, Hudson,
(as we shall see afterward) Again by M. Noyes a Minister of New England, The
Assembly of Divines.
in his book [intituled the Temple measured] and lastly by certain London
Ministers in their Tract [of the Divine Right of the Presbyterian Government]
by which it seems the Notion is so amiable, M: Noyes.
that there is as it were a kind of Ambition who should appear first, Ministers
of London,
in being the Authors or Owners of it: Though the truth is, this conceit (for
substance) has been before all these the Tenet of some others, whom it is not
any great honor to be followers of in this: as first the Papists generally:
also a few Episcopal men: as Crakanthorpe, M. Randall, and perhaps some others.
And it may be by some absolute Royalists (for that spirit must needs work in
Church affairs to some such opinion) I remember one of them being in conference
about Church Government, M. VV. sometimes of this Parliament.
acknowledged indeed the Church of Rome to have abused its power that way: but
conceived that it was necessary for the Catholic Church to have some one
standing Court and place of residence, whereunto to have recourse on all
occasions, and which might have authority over, and influence upon the whole:
to this effect was his discourse: which opinion cannot be avoided, if the
notion of one Catholic visible Church be granted, as shall appear hereafter.

3.
Now the scope of this Treatrse is not to unfasten the ground of all Church
combinations, and to lay a foundation for absolute Independencie. The
conveniencie and sometime the necessity of Classes and Synods for direction and
determination (and that by Divine Authority) is freely acknowledged (though not
with power properly juridical) yea, Prove. 15. 22,
I add, that Episcopacie it self was and might be maintained, as also
Presbytery, (if confined to a particular Church, and not subjected to superior
Ecclesiastical power, which was the most ancient way of it) without the notion
of one visible Catholic Church; and might both consist together in a
particular one. So that as neither Episcopacie nor Presbytery (absolutely
considered) are engaged to own the opposed Tenet; so neither does that Truth I
plead for, constrain me to oppose either, if within the forementioned limits.
My aim is the plucking up of that root from whence sprang the exorbitancy of
both, and what was worse then either. And as I am not obliged to oppose, so I
would not be interpreted to plead for the one or other. My business is to deal
with the subject of Church government, and that only in its exrent and limits.

4.
Now for a call to this service, though it challenge the most exercised
abilities, and that other more able hands have undertaken it (which I heard not
of, till these papers were almost in the Press) yet one of the M. Hudson.
Authors I reply unto, having done me the favor to invite me to a disputation
about the Argument, and afterward farther obliging me, by sending one of the
printed books to me (for which I am his debtor) with desire, that if I excepted
against any thing in it, I ^ould send my thoughts in w^iting to him privately:
I conceived my self particula^ly engaged to deal in this argument, and that not
privately, but publicly, because what I was to speak to, was published first.

CHAP. II. The State of the question.
THat we may know what we speak, and whereof we affirm, (as the Apostle
phraseth it) the true state of the controversy is to be expounded, Terms expl.
the mistake whereof is the rise of much of the dispute about this question.
For the clearer proceeding wherein, four or five Terms are to be explained:
First the word CHVRCH, Secondly, the Oneness, or unity of it, Thirdly, The
Universality, Fourthly, The Visibility, Fifthly, (that which is included in
the other) the power of it. Concerning the first,

The word CHVRCH, 1. Church.
is taken (as in other acceptations so) 1. Mystically and Essentially, for a
company of those that have owned the doctrine So Tilenus Syntag. These. de
Eccles.
of Christ. 2. Politically, as such a company are cast into one Society,
Calvine and other add Sacraments, and some Discipline: but these as notes, not
as formal causes of it.
Corporation, Republique or Body politic. And this again is considered
either Totally, as comprehending those in heaven also, Ephesians. 3. 15. the whole
family in heaven and earth: or partially, for those on earth only: and this,
either generally for all, as some would understand the word, (though we cannot
give an instance of this signification in Scripture) or particularly; for those
who live together in One place, and are associated into one body, called a
Particular Church, as the Church of Rome, Jerusalem etc.

The next Term is Oneness, 2. Oneness.
or Unity, which is 1. Essential and in Nature, such as is that of all
particular things in their general heads: (...)
all men as they partake of the common nature and essence of man,
(rationalitie, which is one) are in that respect called one Nation or Man^inde,
Acts 17. 26.
in the singular. 2. There in an accidental unity when the agreement is in
that which is not of the essence and nature, (...)
but adventitious to the things, as time, place, appurtunances, etc. as some
Spanjards, some French, some English may be one company, (...).
as by occasion they are met in one place, or as kingdoms and States at
general diets, or by mutual leagues become one accidentally, by such unions.

3. An Integrall or Bodily oneness (as I may so speak) when many particulars
are joined together, (...).
as one whole, and this is, 1. of a similer or Homogeneall body, whereof all
the parts are of the same nature with the whole and one with another, such as
is the oneness of drops of water in the Sea, and sands on the Shore, or ^. of
a dissimilar and hetrogeneall one; when the parts differ from the whole and
among themselves, and this is double, 1. Physical and Natural, as ^hen all
the parts and members make but one individual substance, as the head, feet,
trunk etc. are all one natural body. 2. Political or by way of moral
corporation, and Republique, when many single ones are bound up in one sociall
relation, as diverse persons into one family, several families into one
corporation, many corporations into one Common wealth: and this union again is
twofold, 1. Mystical, when things are one in some hidden relation, that is not
visible to the sense, as all families descending from some First house, such
are all the sons of Adam and of Abraham, all professors of the same faculty,
be they never so far asunder. 2. Visible and outward, when the union of all
parts is obvious and evident to the eye and sense, as the union of the members
in the body of man, or members of a society when they are met, and act visibly
together; as the City of London in Common Council, the Kingdom of England in
Parliament.

4. There is a Collective or aggregative oneness, which differs from the
former, in that this is only by collection, or gathering as an heap of stones
is one by being gathered together into one place: but in a body, whether
natural or politic, there is required moreover a mutual incorporation and
inward dependence on one another, etc. Thus of the second term.

The third is Universal or Catholic; It is taken 1. Properly, for that common
nature in which particular things agree, 3. Universality.
as common to them all. Rational creature, in the general, is the universal
nature in respect of all particular men. And in this sense, universality is
only a notion framed in the mind of man, Vniversalium fundamentum in rebus
forma in mente.
and collected from observation of several particulars, but has no real
actual being in time and place. 2. Improperly, for that which though it be a
single thing, (either natural or by way of relation) is yet in regard of the
wide spreading of its parts, called universal catholic and General: as we
say the Kingdom of England in general or universal does this or that, though
it be but one single Kingdom, etc. and in this sense that which is called
universal may have an actual being and existence.

The Fourth Term is visibilitie: 4. Visibility.
It is an accident or addition to the nature of things, as they are
perceiveable to the eye, or (in a large acceptance) by any other sense; the
subject whereof is always a corporal or bodily thing, representing it self as
one unto the sense.

The last Term (included, though not expressed) is Church power; 5. Church
power,
It is first Doctrinall; vix. Teaching Discussive, Determinative and concluding
(in points of controversy) by the Word.

2. Active: and this is either General and common: and answers to that power
that all men by virtue of the oneness of Nature, and oneness of the Law of
nature, have in order each to other. As 1. to take care of, and do good to one
another: to protect each other from violence, etc. 2. Properly Rective and
Iuridical: and this is either 1. Extraordinary, in some unusual cases: as
every man has power of life and death, in case of his own (otherwise
unavoidable) peril of life. Or 2. Ordinary: which is that which it is actually
and constantly endued with, and which it is daily to exercise as occasion
serves. And this again is 1. Imperative, or by way of command, and imposition
of truths, or duties in the name of Christ. 2. Coercive, and executive by
censure: by admonition and excommunication, or cutting off from the body of
Christ.

And thus far of the explication of the terms, State of the quest
now we come to the stating of the Question. And 1. negatively, what is not the
question. The doubt then is not 1. whether there be a company of persons in
several, or in all parts of the World, that diuisim and in their several places
do visibly, outwardly, and openly profess (for substance) the same faith,
seals, worship and Government, and so may be said to be one company, one
society, one congregation in Nature and Essence (i. e. Acknowledgement of the
same Faith) as we say the Turk or Turks are one company of men, because their
profession of Religion is one: though those of Constantinople and of Persia
have no dependence one on another, either Civil or Religious in point of
Government. Nor 2. is it the Quaere whether the several Companies or Churches
of this Profession as they are one in Nature, so also in Spirit and affection,
and thereupon in the engagement of mutual care one of another, and to take
notice what doctines are dispersed, what conversation used among the Churches.
Brethren of the same first Family are bound to do this, though they be every
one master in his own house. Nor 3. Is it doubtful whether such Churches may
voluntarily as occasion shall require, associate together for mutual
assistance, and act (in many things) by common and joint consent, as it was at
the first in the Church of Geneva. This the Scripture and the light of Nature
dictates, Baynes Dioces. page 21.
even then when the same Scripture and light of Nature reserves entire and
distinct liberties to the particulars, as in the present conjunction of England
and Scotland: Declar. H. Com. about the disposal of the Kings person.
And so in the conjunction of the Apostles and Churches at Jerusalem, Acts 15.
nothing was done there of particular Jurisdiction, as the decreeing of
Excommunication, or the like, to those that should be refractory: this was left
to the particular Churches. Now to these two latter, and not to the point of
Government properly so called, belongs those testimonies out of the Ancients,
alleged by Crakanthorp (to prove that all the Bishops jointly and severally
are set over the whole Church in common, Defensio Eccles. Ang. cap. 28.
and not the Pope only): for these Testimonies express only a general
obligation of duty and charity: not of special office. 4. Neither is it the
scruple whether all or most of the Churches in the world may not possibly
become occasionally one by their messengers in a general Council: though such a
thing never yet was, nor perhaps ought to be, of which hereafter. Thus of the
first four terms: In regard of the last, viz. the Power of the Church; the
question is not 1. whether an Association of Churches less or more, and
especially a general Counsel have not a power more then barely consultative, or
by way of mere Counsel and advice: Cotton Keys Kingd. H. cap. 6.
and whether they have not, so far as the object of their Commission reaches,
an Authoritative power, (at least virtual) from Christ to act.

In all Facul^ies there is a certain power given both by God and man to the
allowed Professors of them, to give Authoritative, not advice only, but
directions and rules, to which the Conscience is bound to submit, unless
special cause dissuade us: and this Authority is the more August and solemn,
though not greater, (or more or less vary not the kind) the greater the number
is, and the more public the manner of giving forth the precepts shall be. As
for instance: an allowed Lawyer or Physician, have not only ability to give
advice in point of estate or health, by virtue, of their skill, (which others
possibly may do materially as well) but have authority and legal power from
God and man, page 18.
to appoint, direct, determine and prescribe rules and ways to be observed in
both; to which the person ought to be obedient that seeks advice: and this the
more; if it shall be done by an Assembly of Lawyers or Judges, or College of
Physicians by public consent convened for that purpose: though neither the
one, nor other have power to compel the clyent or patient to follow their
directions, nor obtain they any new and superior power by being gathered; so
in the affairs of the Church of God. In doubtful cases; or upon occasion of
grosser errors and scandalls: Ecles. 4. 1^.
God has by or dinance (virtual) appointed recourse to others, especially
Churches, whose prescriptions, not disagreeing from the word, are to be obeyed,
not only because they are materially good, but formally theirs: that is, the
determinations of many of those, who are appointed by God for such offices in
their several places, so that their acting is the acting of Officers, but not
as Officers, (for such they are only in their several Churches) but yet by
reason of (...) relation, they are the more fit for that work, but do not act
in another and superior right and relation when assembled, and therefore have
not any power coercive more then before to constrain by Church-sure,
Excommunication etc. to their decrees. Neither do we find that the Apostles
themselves, when holding such a Council (in our Brethrens opinion) did more,
Act. 15.
then (in the Name of the Holy Ghost) Decree, and command; but did not impose
any such penalty by authority of the Council, upon the disobedient in the
particular Churches.

2. Neither is the question properly, what power the Catholic Church may
possibly have in unusual and extraordinary case or accident, and which in
ordinary it cannot do, nor is the proper subject of such power, as we saw
before in the instance of necessary self defense.

3. Yea further (ad hominem) in respect of the practice and condition of most
of those Brethren who plead this Catholic visible oneness of the Church: 2.
State of the Quest. in respect of the Patr. of this opinion.
The question would not be what power the Universal visible Church might have
(if possibly convenable) together; as it was at Jerusalem (in which case we
grant what is contended for) as what the parts of it have asunder, and without
endeavoring the joining with the other. For even in a Kingdom, though all the
Corporations gathered in one, have power over all particulars: yet not some of
these, much less a few of them asunder; which is the way our Brethren now
practice. None of these is the point in controversy.

But Secondly, It is positively this, viz. Whether the whole company of
Christians on earth, 2 State of the Quest. positively.
are in their ordinary and settled Church constitution, so one entire single
Commonwealth, Corporation and Congregation, as that of Right, and by the will
and appointment of Jesus Christ, it is the first subject of all Church power:
Apol. ubi supra.
by authority whereof, and commission from which all particular Churches act,
and to the determinations of the major part whereof, they are to yield
obedience (if not apparently contrary to the Word) and the Catholic governing
power whereof, Land. Min. Div. Right Presb. cap. 11. page 163.
resides immediately as in its proper subject under Christ, only in the
Ministers and Elders; and they not taken severally, but jointly as one entire
College or Presbytery: to whose charge severally and jointly, the whole and
every particular Church is committed etc, or more briefly: Whether the whole be
one Corporation, whereof the Elders jointly are Governors; and the members
governed.

CHAP. III. Just Prejudices, and strong probabilities against an universal
visible Governing Church.
IT is the custom of war to skirmish first, Levis armaturae militibus
velitare
and to begin with the lighter armed Soldiers: this method shall be here
followed: and first such things as render this opinion vehemently suspicious
and questionable. Whereof the first is; The NOVELTY of it: The saying of
Tertullian is received: Quod Antiquiss. Veriss. Truth is Ancient, and error
Novel: but M. Noyes would avoid this prejudice, where he says, that the
Fathers so predicated the unity of an universal Church, that they laid
foundations for an universal Bishop. I shall therefore endeavor to show the
Novelty of it, and first absolutely considered in it self. Secondly relatively,
and that first in respect of the Protestant, and then of the Presbyterian
party. 1. Absolutely. If we credit the Sea their praises apud Montag. Apparat.
Sacr. praefat: and D. VVheare de Meth. leg. Hist.
Centurists, the particular Churches in the first hundred of years after the
Apostles, did exercise all Church-Gouernment within themselves: Cent. Magd.
Cent. 2. cap. de Regim. Eccl. Tit. de private. Syn. de tit. de consoc. Eccles.
They did ordain and depose Ministers, admonish and excommunicate obstinate
offenders: held Synods or meetings, wherein they determined the affairs of
their own body: In doubtful cases they consulted with other Churches, not by
reason of their superiority, but upon the ground of common charity. But no hint
of this Catholic Governing body among them.

Object. But in occasions which concerned many Churches, they held that they
should be transacted in Synods and Councels: Object.
and they did accordingly in such meetings exercise superior power in the
particular Churches; Crakanthorp ubi supra.
as excommunication, ordination, deposition of Ministers, determining of
controversies etc. Besides several expressions of the Ancients imply as much.

To which I answer, Answ.
First, To the Synods and Counsels: That what concerns many, should be debated
by many etc. does not conclude them a Corporation, no more then the common
Treaties of Nations in things of joint concernment.

Secondly, Their exercising the acts above mentioned in their particular
Churches, and their acting these things in Synods were (it is certain) at some
distance of time: and seeing the former way of Government is mentioned first;
it may well be, that the latter came in as the discipline of Churches began to
be corrupted, and decline to WORLDLY POLICY: which happened in this first age
also, say the same Cent Magd. ubi supra in principio cap. de Reg. Eccles.
Authors.

3. It might be by Decree and judgment only, not by actual execution of such
things, as 1 Cor. 5. I have determined that when ye are gathered etc. and John
4. 2. Christ baptized more Disciples then John, though Christ himself baptized
not, but his Disciples.

4. Howsoever their practice in this (if it were at the same time, and not
after Discipline declined) must be expounded to be consistent with their other
practice within themselves, whereby they owned entire, (and of right)
Independent power from any other Church or Churches. So that in such united
Synods or Counsels, each Church might act its own power, though in union with
other; and all act as so many several and distinct Churches united; not as one
entyre universal body, in the nature and notion of it, different, distinct, and
superior to the particular Churches. So that being gathered, they had a larger
power, but not a greater nor another power as a general Council, but as so many
particular Churches or Elders congregated. They acted not as a Parliament, but
as a Dyett of so many Free-States. Or to take M. Hudsons own similitude. As a
heap of stones, have no more inward virtue because they are an heap, then if
they were each one by themselves; they have a larger, but not a more excellent
one, or of another kind; neither does the power of working, (what ever their
virtue be) agree to them first, bebecause they are an heap, but because they
are stones of such and such a nature. So here; They might excommunicate then,
but it might be from their own heap (as we may so speak) or Societies only:
not as out of the Catholic Visible Church also, unless per accidens; in as
much as he that is rightly excommunicated out of one Church, is really
excommunicated out of all (because they are essentially and mystically one, and
to go by the same rule) though formally he may not be so. As he that is justly
condemned for a Traitor in one of the Kings Dominions, is really and vertually
condemned in the rest: because these Domions are politically one in their head;
yet may they be Independent one from another in their proper Governments and
Rights, as was said above concerning England and Scotland.

Fifthly, It was but a voluntary association, or by right of Fraternity only,
and not of oneness of Corporation: which appears by astringing and confining,
even in after times, in some Counsels, the power of Bishops and Ministers, to,
and within their own Diocesses and Churches, so as to pronounce all the acts
they did elsewhere (unless by call or permission) void, Conc. Genesis 2. c. 2.
and of none effect. Conc. Antioch.
Whether it were judgment, Temp. Iul. c. 13.
ordination, excommunication, it shall be (say they) of no force: Conc. Sardic.
can. 19.
As the Councels and Canon Law are cited by Crakanthorp himself; Cause. 9. q. 2.
c. null
one of our adversaries in this cause. lib. 1, ep. 4.
So Cyprian says, that Stephan Bishop of Rome, put his sith into other men's
Harvest, when he endeavored by authority to restore two whom the Bishops of
Spain had deposed. Now if they had apprehended the whole Church to be but One
Corporation or great Congregation: and all the Bishops and Ministers to be over
this one Church in common: why then (though in regard that each man was
assigned by the Church to his particular place for the avoiding of confusion)
such acts out of their own Churches might be disorderly and irregular; yet
could they not be formally void: for that the whole Church, being committed to
each and to all; they had been within their charge, seeing they had an habitual
and fundamental right thereunto, as being Officers per se, and properly of the
whole Church, and not of any particular Church, but by accident only. And let
it be remembered; that these Constitutions were much later then the Churches we
spoke of before. This for Churches and Counsels. We come now to particular,
(and those the most eminent) persons: Let us hear themselves speak.

First CHRYSOSTOM: Sermon. 1. de Pasch. (...) etc.
The Sacrifice or Passover was to be eaten in one house, and not to be
conveied out: that is, the house is one that has Christ: and the many houses
of the Hebrews have but only one (...),
Power, Nature, and Condition, as the Churches throughout the World, and in
several Provinces being many in Numbers, are but One Church. Where he makes
them One in that they have One Nature and Condition, but says, they are Many
in number. Whereas this opinion makes all the Churches in the world to be but
one in number, in respect of Corporation and Government: as all the houses in a
City make but one single Corporation: and all the Corporations in England, make
but one single Kingdom. So that this Testimony; taking the distinction above
mentioned, of oneness in Nature of those, that are many in number: looks as
much, if not more, lib. 7. Strom.
on us, then on our opposites.

2. CLEMENS ALEXAND. (...).
There is absolutely but one Ancient and Catholic Church in the Unity of one
Faith: Instit. l. 4. c, 1.
whereunto agrees that of CALVINE: The unity of the Church consists in the
unity of the Faith, and (expressly against this universal visible Government)
he adds, it is not necessary that we see it (the Church Catholic) and that it
be visible, for preservation of that unity.

3. CYPRIANUS: when he professedly disputes the question about the unity of
the Church (passing by the corruptions added in this place, and some of his De
unitate Eccles, sive de simplicitate praelator.
Epistles, by the Papists) defines the unity of the Church by Doctrine and
Discipline: James corrupt: Fath.
and says, Perk. praepaer. prob. Scultet. medull. Patr. in loc.
This only is the cause of Schisms: Quod magistri Coelestis Doctrina suis
quod idem est Ecclesiae vivitas non servatur. That the Doctrine of our heavenly
Master, or which is ALL ONE, the unity of the Church is not preserved: and as
there is one God, one Christ, one Faith: so there is one Church, Insolidum.
one Discipline in it: one Bishopric, whereof in the whole every one has his
share: and as the Sun has many beams, Robur unum:
but one light; and the boughs of a Tree many, but one Trunk, so many
particular Churches, whereof (unum lumen, unum Caput, una Origo) one light, one
head, one original: in all which he makes the unity of the Church to consist in
oneness of nature, faith, spirit, head; not in number and Government. As the
leaves and boughs are not one in number, and in themselves, but in their
Original and Root: so are the Churches one in Christ, and the spirit, and
nature; though different in suppositum and Government.

4. HIERON. Vnum Altar dicitur, quod una fides and unum Baptism^ and una
Ecclesia.
It is called one Altar: as it is said one Faith, and one Baptism, Hierona^
Is. 10: 2^
and one Church: but faith and Baptism, are said to be one in respect of Kind
and nature, not Integrally, and numerally.

5. AUGUSTINE: He, speaking of the first Subject of the keys or Church power,
Tract. in Ioh. 124.
says, For all the SAINTS therefore that do cleave inseparably to the body
of Christ did Peter receive the KEYS of the Kingdom of heaven: because not he
alone: but (universa Ecclesia ligat solvitque peccata) the universal Church
does bind and loose sins. But that he does not mean jointly as one body or
Corporation; but severally, every Church by it self (and so the oneness of
the Church here employed, is in nature and kind, not in number) appears by what
he says in other places; as where repeating that about Excommunication. De
duodec. Abus. Grad. 1.
Mat. 18. If he hears not the Church let him be unto thee as a heathen: he
says: He who joyneth him to himself, which is after this order cast out, he
not permitting (being orthodox) by whom he is cast out (juris sacredotij
sancti limits Excedit) does violate the rights of holy Priesthood. He does
imply, that particular Churches did excommunicate within themselves, or the
universal Church distributively taken.

6. EUCHERIUS. lib. 3. Reg. cit. cent. 5. cap. 4, Tit* de Eccles.
The Church dispersed throughout the whole world: consists in one and the same
faith, and fellowship of Catholic truth: Dilatata per orbem Ecclesia, in una
eademque fide, and veritatis Catholica societate consistit: and tum innumera
sit multitude fidelium: unnm tamen Cor, unam habere animam, pro fidei and
delectionis societate, merito dicantur.
and vvheras there is an innumerable multitude of the faithful, yet they
rightly are said to have one heart, and one soul, in respect of their society
in the Common faith and love. Where all the universal oneness he implies it
of faith and love. This opinion then does not appear in prime and best
Antiquity, nor with any evidence in those that followed: so that till better
testimonies appear, we must say that it is therefore absolute new.

2. It is more new Relatively. 1. In reference to the protestant party; who
Generally (save very few excepted) have never owned it: but on the contrary
constantly opposed it, as shall be showed anon. But it is most new in regard
of the Presbytirians: these Brethren being the first we have met with: or, as
it seems, themselves either, for those they quote, make rather against them,
(as will appear afterward) certain it is, that Calvine whom they vouch as the
first restorer of that Government (though his was but a voluntary association)
as we saw before, gave evidence expressly against it.

Also Chamier speaking the sense of the French Churches as afterward must be
related: but we need not be sollicitous to prove this; seeing the Brethren of
this opinion confess this conceit to be opposed by the greatest part of the
protestant writers: as will appear in the fourth Argument. If therefore Novelty
and new light be a prejudice against other opinions, it cannot but reflect
suspicion upon this.

2. Another just prejudice against this opinion, 2. Prejudice, Dangerous*
may be, that it is of Dangerous Consequence. For if the whole Church that is
Visible and to be seen on earth, be one single Corporation or Kingdom; and the
first subject to whom all Government in Church affairs belongs, and in whose
right, and by power from which, all particular Churches do act: then of
necessity. 1. There must be Viniversal and General officers, and some one
above the rest, to whom the particular Churches may have continual recourse.
For all Corporations have officers, that are officers of the whole Corporation,
and over all, and not particular only: as not only the Constables of the
several Parishes, or Aldermen of cath Ward, but the Major also of the whole;
who has (though not a divided, yet) a distinct and superior power in order to
the Corporation, above the rest, though conjoined.

2. Seeing Christ has provided a seasonable and standing means, for the
continual exercise of the Government of his Church, that may be made use of as
occasion requires: therefore these officers must have always residence in some
one place, though they may also remove to another: they must have an actual
being and residence, as being the officers for the exercise of the power of the
universal Church. For it is impertinent to say, that it is sufficient the
universal Church meet by parties in several Countries and Ages: for the
meeting of officers of Corporations must be in one place and time; as the
Parliament, Convocation, Consistory, etc.

And it were notably vain to imagine that Christ has committed the government
of his Church first and chiefly to that body that should not meet six times in
sixteen hundred years: There are but four General C^^^cels received. The
first of which was three hundred years after Christ, the last above a thousand
years ago.
nay never; for there never was yet any universal meeting of the Catholic
Church nor its officers: though some Counsels have been called General,
because of the number of Bishops, unity of places from whence they have come,
and the Emperors latitude of Dominion that called them.

3. From hence would follow that very many particular Churches would be in
peril to be greatly damaged: seeing in appeals they must be adjudged by those
that are many thousand miles distant from them, and could not have perfect
Preface to M. Cotton, of the keys of the Kingdom of heaven* and Cyprian lib,
1. Epist. 3.
cognizance of the cause: nor in case they wanted information for their
guidance in judgment, could by reason of distance have it in time.

4. Great would be the vexation, charges, travel, etc. that would arise from
such a Court, as whereunto Appeals were to come: and yet such there must be, if
the whole Church be but one Corporation.

3. A third and fourth prejudice and probable exception against this opinion
is, It Is Papal, and Anti-Protestant. 1. Papal, not indeed in regard of the
height of it (as it refers the root and head of this universallity unto Rome
only) but in regard of the opinion it self: An universal visible Church: a
main ground of the former.

M. Hudson (and so M. Noyes) indeed would avoid this prejudice also, Page 10.
11.
but with Labor in Vain: He says he stateth not the question as the Papists
do: because they take Visible for Glorious: Catholic, for Roman: and subject
it to the Pope For 1. whatsoever the Papists add to the question, yet the
substance and substratum of it, is the same. In vain should they fix the seat
of it at Rome, and subject it to the Pope, if it might not be in it self one
Corporation and Republique. 2. Again they do not take visible for glorious: but
for that which is obvious to the sense: though they make Glorious an adjunct
thereunto. 3. They so fix the seat of the Church at Rome, and subject it to the
Pope (several of the most eminent of them) as that it is only in the absence
of a general Council, which they make above the Pope, as being the Church
Catholic Representative, as is showed elsewhere. But to return.

Bellarmine (de Eccles. lib. 3. cap. 11.) having related the opinion of the
Protestants, and propounded the Romish in opposition thereunto, viz. There is a
visible Catholic Church. He proves it by the same places, that the Authors of
this opinion do, to wit. Mat. 16. Upon this Rock I will build my Church: and
Chap. 18. Tell the Church (which though in that place he bring to prove it
Visible: yet it implies to make it universal also: for both these jointly
[Catholick, Visible] he was to prove in opposition to the Protestants) for as
they say this could not be meant of a particular Church, Bellarmines definition
of the Catholic Visible Church, compared with the definition of these Authors.
So he, that it cannot be meant of an invisible. And he defines it to be one
visible Church, or Congregation of men bound together by the profession of the
same faith, and participation of the same sacraments, under the government of
lawful Pastors, and especially, of that only Vicar of Christ on earth, the
Pontiffe or Bishop of Rome.

In the definition it is to be noted that he makes all believers but one
single Corporation or Congregation, (though divided in places,) under one
single Governent, under one visible head the Pope of Rome. In all but the last
clause (which is not Essential to the thing, though it be to those persons) the
definition agrees to the mind of the authors of the opinion here impugned.

And 2. It is Anti-Protestant, Instit. l. 4. c. 1. 5.
being opposed generally by them. Calvine disputing against the Papists, about
the unity and visibilitie of the Church, says (as was noted before) The
oneness of the Church consists in the oneness of faith. And for the
visibilitie, he says: It is not necessary for the preserving of this unity,
that we should see the Church with our eyes.

Chamier in his Answer to Hardings Argument against Jewel, De Oecum. Pont. l.
1. c. 8.
(Art. 4. Sect. 17. urging that Every multitude in it self one, did stand in
need of one Governor by whom it might be managed: but the Church visible,
Harding.
is in it self one) says: The Church as it is Catholic or Universal is not
one in it self, because it is one general, or universal, gathered and
aggregated of many particular Churches, as if one should say, the kingdom,
Vnum (...).
or a Kingdom, not this or that Kingdom, but Kingdom in general, the parts
whereof are all particular Kingdoms, the French, Spanish, English. For SO the
word CHVRCH being taken, it is compounded (mark, not constituted) of infinite
particular Churches, the Roman Constantinopolitane, etc. Now that which is one
in that sense, it is manifest that it needs no one governor: for not as to
every Kingdom there is a King, so to all Kingdoms there is one King, that,
that which is called Kingdom in General may have a being, and therefore not
in the Church, neither: as it is understood to be one collected of many
particular Churches: Is it necessary that one should be president. He evidently
both denies, and excellently refuteth this Catholic union, by this very
thing, because the Church is Catholic, therefore not really one, but
notionally only, as all the Kingdoms in the world are one in the nature and
notion of Kingdoms, but not one corporation, or one Government. And so before
him

Bishop Jewel in answer to the same Papist, Loc. citat.
(proving the minor or second part of the former argument, viz. That the Church
is one visible Congregation or society, because (as our brethren do) there is
one faith and Baptism, Hardings proof the same with these Brethrens.
one calling, so one Church: as Saint Paul says, ye all are one body and
members one of another: and in our Creed we all profess to believe one holy
Catholic and Apostolic Church) says, that whereas Mr Harding had proved the
major also, (...)
out of Aristotle's 12. book of his Metaphysics, out of Homer: Never did
Aristotle or Homer dream of this NEW FANCY, that one King should rule over the
whole world: And by consequence or that the whole world was but one Kingdom;
and so he implies it to be as ridiculous that all Churches should be but one
governing Church: and he adds what is (considerable in this Argument,
wherein reason is followed, rather then scripture:) His reason were better if
either Peter or Paul, or any Catholic Father had used it: and then cites
Austin, (de Doct. Christ. l. 3. c. 28.) who says, To attribute much to
discourse of reason in understanding scripture (haec consuetudo periculosa
est,) this custom is dangerous; (per scripturas enim divinas, multo tutius
ambulatur) It is far safer following of the Scripture. So that Bishop Jewel
conceives this against both scripture and Antiquity. Mr Rutherford also [due
right of Presbytery, page 231. titleing the page thus: How our Church has been
visible] makes it out only by this That in all Ages there have been some who
have held the same points with us in the main. Implying the visibility, M.
^utherford for preaching without special Ordination in some cases.
and by consequence, the oneness also to consist in oneness of Faith and
doctrine. But he has a little before (page 206.) a considerable passage (at
this time) about the call of our first reformers: and says that any
enlightened by the spirit of God, and members of the Catholic Church, should
teach, inform and help their fellow members, being seduced and led by blind
guides, is agreeable to the law of nature. Also that, In extraordinary times,
men may go beyond the ordinary path so the thing done be materially good. But
this by the way.

Lastly, the Professors of Leyden (cited for this opinion by Apollon. which is
much to be wondered at) do distinguish betwixt the Church Catholic and
particular: Synops. Th^s. de E^cles. N. 33.
and say, that The former is one in doctrine and faith, but the latter one in
discipline and government also. Evidently implying the universal Church not to
be one in Government, or not to be one Corporation. And thus of the third and
fourth inconveniences of this opinion, and so much also for the first general
head of exceptions against it, viz. the just prejudices, and suspicious
appearances of it, as being Novell, dangerous, Papal and Anti-Protestant.

CHAP. IIII. Demonstrations against an Universal Visible Governing Church.
HItherto have been handled the less Artillery, The Apost. uses the Metaphor,
Ephesians. 6.
and as it is hoped, not without success: The main Battery now follows: by
Arguments demonstrative, and such as necessarily conclude against this opinion:
1 Some undeniable suppositions premised.
and that this may be done, I premise as granted these principles. 1. That the
Author of all Ecclesiastic power in the Churches, is Jesus Christ; for unto
him all of it was committed, Matthew. 28.
and from him derived. 2. That he expressed, plainly enough, whatsoever was of
great consequence for the well ordering of his house; as for all other things
concerning the salvation of his people. 3. That the Apostles were appointed by
him to perfect by themselves, or Deputies whilst themselves were living,
either by precept or practice, whatsoever concerned the Churches in such
particulars. 4. That they accordingly did faithfully discharge this trust. 5.
That Christ and his Apostles in those their precepts and practice, are a rule
to all Churches to the end of the World. I am with you, (viz.) in observing
these things which I have commanded you) unto the end of the World. 6. That
they are our rule both negatively and positively: i. e. what they did not in
such and such cases when they had opportunity, we may not in the like: and what
they did, we must do so also, as occasion requires, and opportunity serves. The
former particulars are plain enough: the last not difficult: if these places
following, and the like be considered. Act. 15. 24. The Apostles charge the
urgers of Circumcision upon the Gentiles, not only because they taught such
Doctrine; but also because they taught it having received no such Commandment;
unless we understand those words as having reference to what those Teachers it
may be boasted: viz. That they had Commission from the Apostles for that
Doctrine. Chap. 7. 14.
Again, The Apostle in the Epistle to the Hebrews insinuates it to be
sufficient proof, that the Priesthood did not at all belong to the Tribe of
Judah, but of Levi; because the Scripture speaks nothing (says he) concerning
the former in that respect. Numb. 23.
The speech of Balaam implies as much and that other of the Prophet; Lam. 3. 37.
if the Lord have not spoken, Ier. 23. 21.
who can prophecy. Ezekiel. 13.
We know how the Lord thundereth against those who prophesyed, and the Lord had
not spoken to them; which yet we would have understood (as was said before)
with this caution, viz. not spoken, neither expressly, nor by near consequence,
in things of special concernment to the Church. 7. That the Government of the
Church of Christ (it being his house) and the knowledge of the first subject or
chief trustee to whom the keys of that house is committed, is of very great
concernment; and therefore to be laid down in Scripture: at least by such
evidence, as with moderate opening, to godly, knowing, and impartial men, may
comfortably be perceived. 2 Arguments,
These things premised: we come to the Arguments. The first whereof is taken
(negatively) from the Author and Founders of the Church: 1. Acausa efficiente,
1. Negativa seu deficiente, if we may so speak^ ^ection 1.
viz. The silence of Christ and his Apostles touching one Catholic Visible
Governing Church. This I conceive is not to be found in Scripture; unless by
such strayning of reason, as (we saw before) Austin says is dangerous in the
things of God. What is brought on the contrary out of Scripture, shall be
examined in another place, to wit, in the fifth chapter, when the Arguments for
this opinion (if God permit) shall severally be discussed: only for methods
sake, this being the joint for this Argument naturally to fall into, it is here
mentioned. The second Argument is from the same persons positively: to wit: 2.
Positiva sive contra dicente.
the contrary Institution of Christ and his Apostles, gathered plainly from
their Teaching and Practice. 1. If the keys of Government were given first and
fully with entire power immediately to a particular Church, then there is no
universal visible Governing Church (because that is therefore contended for as
the first subject of Government) but the first is true, therefore the latter.
The former is thus proved. All Church power was given first and fully to the
Church of the Jews: But the Church of the Jews was a particular Church, not the
universal; unless by accident: because so it was, that there was no other
Church state in the world at that time: unless we shall hold, as Ball trial
of separat. grounds, and others.
some do, that there were other societies of Believers that were not united to
the Jewish Church; as Job and his family, etc. but this is doubtful, I
therefore omit it. The Church of the Jews was a particular one. 1. It is every
where called One congregation. 2. All the Church in the chiefest Sex of it, met
together to solemn worship at one place, Exodus 28. ^^.
in the Temple three times a year constantly, and oftener as occasion served, in
Fasts, War, Thanksgiving, Consultations, etc. neither had they any thing to do
with those that joined not themselves to their body: as Cornelius Act. 10. A
believer, and yet one that Peter might not go to. And though it be granted, to
have been a Type of the Church of the New Testament, yet not as Catholic, but
as Congregational, as it self was: or else as mystical: for even our Brethren
deny that order of Governors to bind under the Gospel: though the Papists
contend for it.

2. The first Institution of the Church under the new Testament by Christ, does
give entire power of Government immediately to a particular Church, Matthew. 18.
If thy Brother offend thee, etc. Tell the Church, if he hear not the Church,
let him be as a Heathen. etc. Now this was a particular Church, for it was such
an one as one might complain to, and it was endued with entire power, even to
excommunication. 2. If the power and presence of Christ be so with a particular
Society, that Whatsoever they bind on earth shall be bound in heaven etc. and
this be given immediately to a particular society of Christians, then the
assertion is good, but so it is in that Chapter: When two or three are gathered
in my Name, I am in the midst: and so, as that what they bind on earth shall
be bound in heaven. etc. As by the coherence may be gathered.

Object. Object.
But this is meant of the Jewish Church.

Answ. Ansvv.
1. If so, the former Argument takes place. But 2. It is not Cartwright in lo^.
likely, for where is the Jewish Consistory called the Church? it is called by
Christ Matthew. 5. the lower Assembly, a Council: the greater Sanhedrin, a
Judgment, but not a Church. 2. He had chap. 16. spoken of his Church; and it
is like, had explained himself more fully about it: for all could not be
written, (as John informs us chap. 21. ult.) 3. In the former chapter Matthew.
18. 18. he gives the greatest Ecclesiastic Power to a Congregation of
Christians, Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven etc.
it is added immediately upon his precept of telling the Church, as the reason
of it; and to corroborate it; he assures them in the same place, that what they
should ask in his Name should be done: and to strengthen that, he promises,
that when they were gathered together, he would be in the midst of them. By
all which it appears, that he speaks of a particular Christian Church, and
which is to be noted, without any mention of appeal to a higher Judicatory, if
right should not be done there.

3. The first execution of the greatest act of entire power, was by admonition
and command of the Apostle himself, but not by his power, exercised in a
particular Church, without appeal to, or consulting of the universal Church,
(which they might have done, according to this opinion, the Apostles then being
surviving,) 1 Cor. 5.
viz. delivering one over to Satan: the Apostle says, when ye (of Corinth)
are gathered, and my Spirit (consent and approbation, or the holy Ghost acting
in you and me) by the power of our Lord Jesus Christ, not which he has
committed to me, but which is among you; for (besides that Paul (according to
this opinion) being but one of the Catholic Ministers, could not orderly have
excommunicated this man, without consulting with, or by authority of the rest
of the Apostles, Representatives of the universal Church, if the Catholic
Church be the first subject of Church power.) It is certain that Ecclesiastical
Power i^herent in any, cannot be delegated or transmitted over to another, but
of transmitting Apostolical power we read not.

4. If entire power were first committed to particular men, then not to the
Catholic Church, and so it was not the first subject of Church power, and so
not one visible governing Church; but entire power was committed to the
Apostles severally, and to all jointly, as has been hitherto confessed by all:
Ergo, etc.

Object. But the Apostles represented the Catholic Church?

Answ. 1. Not in all the power they received, Calvin.
for they might do that which all the Churches cannot, as constitute Articles
of Faith, etc.

2. They represented the Church, not as united, but as multiplied: for Paul had
as much power as any, and yet he was not personally united to them, as appears
Gal. 1. 17.

3. Howsoever they had no successors in Apostolic power, as neither had Moses
in his. Histor^ motuum (...). Page 8.
At the first planting of a Church, more power is to be used, then afterward is
needful: as our Brethren of Scotland allege, both for their having at the
first, and for not reteining General Visitors still.

5. If the first reproof from Christ's own mouth for the englect of exercise of
Church power, was directed to particular Churches alone by themselves, and not
to the combination of them, though near one the other; much less to the
universal Church: then particular Churches had entire Independent
Ecclesiastical power as single Churches, and not as parts of one visible
Catholic: but the former is true, from the second and third chapters of the
Revelation, where Christ's reproofs are directed to the particular Churches,
Videantur Geograph
and not to the Presbytery over all, or to the Catholic Church, though some
of these Churches were but 8. or 10. miles one from the other, and the furthest
but two hundred, (being all in the lesser Asia) and this after Christianity had
been about 70. years in the world: so that they had time to have combined or
united into an Universal, or at least into a National or Provincial society
or Classis, if it had been so taught them, by the Churchfounders, Christ and
his Apostles.

2. Sort of Arg. From the matter or members of this universal Governing
Church, 2. A materia, Sect. 2.
laying for ground what was noted before, viz. That every subject or agent that
has real and actual properties and effects, must some time or other have
existence and being as one; if one Natural then so; if one Civil, then must
they be as one body gathered into one place, as the Jewish nation, as we said
before, Corporations in their Halls, Kingdoms, in their Parliaments. p. 22.
This being undeniable (though Mr Hudson deny it, (against all experience and
reason) because It is sufficient (says he) that they are under one King, and
governed by the same Laws: but how should they be so, if they never met, at
least by their Deputies formally, or virtually, to yield to such a government;
not (as was proved before) any (clear) institution, left by Christ for such
incorporation.)

The 1. Argument is, 1 Ab ejus non existentia.
That which never had an actual being, and existence in the world, that
neither is, nor is the subject of Church power, much less the first: but this
Church Catholic [as such] never had a being, because it was never together
gathered into one place, neither in its members, nor in its Deputies: and
therefore can be one not actually, or really in it self, but by As M. R^ndall
speaks: otherwise an Episcopal man. Of the Chapter page 76.
imagination only, and conceit; Either in regard of the same oneness of kind
and nature that is betwixt Churches, or of relation they have to one head, and
in order to, and dependence on one rule or law the word of God. page 24.
As several Armies, (to use M. Hudsons similitude) gathered by Commission from
one General, in several parts of a Kingdom or of an Empire, or of the world;
and never yet brought together, nor intended so to be, but to abide under their
several particular commanders, one perhaps in England, another in India, might
be called one Army, in Regard of one Commission and one chief General. Yet such
a similitude will not here so properly serve, because the Oneness of the
Church is denied by our brethren to be such as is of an Army, where all are
under the command of one: the whole Church (and its Officers) are by them said,
to govern all particulars.

Object. But Mr Hudson says, Object.
1. That it is sufficient that the Church Catholic have existence and a being
in the particulars, as a heap of stones in particulars stones, the element of
water in the particular drops, Churches in particular families, and families in
particular persons, and whole things in their parts.

But it is much that this Author (or Authors, Answ.
a Man-Midvvife may be father also) does not see that his own similitudes
overthrows his opinion, and fully clears what is here asserted: for none of
these things were one, if they were not together in one place. Were it one heap
of stones, if one lay at M. Hudsons door, another at M. Calamies, (the licenser
of his book) which are many miles asunder: and another at a third man's.

Object. 2. But he says that the Catholic visible Church has sometimes met,
Object. 2.
as in a general Council, Page ^ad.
by their Commissioners, as a Ministerial Church Catholic.

Answ. 1. It is utterly denied that ever there was any general Council which
might be said to be the Catholic Church; Answ.
unto which, as himself seems to insinuate, the particular Churches sent their
Commissioners. For 1. They were never sent to all. It was the first general and
most famous, which was called by Constantine, Vid. Eus^^.
called the first Council of Nice, wherein there were 318 Bishops? but how many
places were there that were Christian, over whom Constantine reigned not? and
he sent but to those under his Dominion. 2. It is probable he sent not to all
neither (for after the Synod he wrote to those that were not there) but to the
most conspicuous places; now we know in a free and lawful Parliament of the
Kingdom, the smallest Corporations must be sent to. 3. He called for the
Bishops chiefly, if not only; and I hope our Brethren will not defend their
being the orderly Representatives of so many Churches as were under them. M.
Cartwright (on Act. 15. and Matthew. 18.) requires the presence also of the
people. 4. He, not they, assumed Governing Catholic power, at least Supreme,
Eusebius. de vit. Constable. l. 2. c. ^6. Scult. medul. in Anal. H. Conc.
in calling and dissolving the Council: he received the Papers, he concluded,
he dismissed the Bishops, etc. Moreover here the whole Catholic Church
Representative, if it were such, had one Visible head, and that not a Minister,
but a Magistrate (though afterward it turned to a Minister, in the Popes of
Rome) and so in our own Kingdom: It being granted that the whole Nation is one
Church; the Magistrate being Head of the Nation, declares himself Head of the
Church also: And this, or the other is like to be the issue of this opinion.

2. That Society whose members never can have an actual being [as such] that is
not to be defended either to be, 2. Ab impossibilitate existendi.
or to be the first Subject of Church power; But the universal Visible Church
can never have a being as such; that is, as one congregated united body,
consisting of the Elders (at least) of every particular Church. For what place
could be capacious to hold them; now it has been showed that they must all at
sometime meet so. Now the company, though but the Elders of each Church, would
be innumerable; for who shall exclude any Church from sending, that profess
the name of Christ, till excommunicated, and who shall do that. 2. If we shall
add to this, that no Church can delegate or commit to Commissioners their
Church power, it will strengthen much more the Argument, for thence it will
follow that they must all personally meet, etc.

A third sort of Arguments is from the Form and Nature of all bodies corporate,
3. A fo^ma.
which consists in order of superior and inferior: they are truly described in
that definition of Bellarmine before recited, a little altered: viz. A society
of men professing the same Faith (Laws) partaking of the same Sacraments ( 3.
oath) under lawful Pastors (common Magistrates) and especially under one chief
Priest (supreme Magistrate) Now in such a body, Sacramentum.
the nature and form, lies not in so many several men or families endued with
particular privileges of their own; and only coming together, and joining
their several interests and privileges to make up one aggregated privilege;
as a heap of stones of many stones; or a company of constables of many
constables; who have no greater or new power by being gathered, then if they
were but single: but the form and nature of a corporation is, that all are
bound in one single body, under laws and officers common to all, and that of
one place, distinct from others: and their officers made by the consent of the
whole, or by him or them that represents the whole: and are officers to the
whole, some above other, Officers of Officers; if the body be great, and one,
(for the time above the rest in place and power, at least in some kind and
respect (as the Speakers in the Houses of Parliament) besides the Officers of
the particular parts of the Corporation: as besides the Aldermen or Constables
of several Wards, there is the Major etc.

Object. If it be objected that Christ is the absolute King of his Church,
Object.
and that he has instituted his Corporation different from others, by that
place, Matthew. 20. 26. It shall not be so among you.

Answ. We say, Answ.
so has he made it different from other Societies in this also, My kingdom is
not of this world John 18. 36. with Romans 12. 2.
that it is not one single corporation, as a Kingdom of this World; but many
in number, though one in Nature. But if it must be one Corporation (though
Aristocratical, and as a Parliament, yet) then there arises these
inconveniences. 1. They must existe in some one place, at least at some time in
their own persons, and always in the persons of those who, in the absence of
the whole Society, are to be the Officers for the execution of the decrees of
the Catholic Church: and then if any Prince arise that is more potent, he will
make the seat of the universal Governing Church where he pleases, it may be at
Rome, as Constantine did at Nice, for a season. 2. Then must the whole Church
be governed by some constant and standing Officers, that are not Officers, but
of the whole (at least for the time they sit) as Corporations that are less,
are governed in ordinary by the Aldermen and Major or Bayliffes: Kingdoms in
absence of the Representative Kingdom, which is a Parliament (answerable to a
general Council, according to our Brethrens opinion) by a King and Council: So
must the Church by a Committee at least, and a Chayr-man. And these two are
further evident, in as much as whilst the Church Government had any appearance
of Universal: there was such a set company of Officers, and they had a certain
place of Residence, that they might be resorted to, viz. The Apostles at
Jerusalem.

3. There must be one common form of Faith, Discipline, Worship, and
Profession: in all particulars the same agreed on, and to be formally
propounded and taken as occasion shall require, by all the believers in the
World; and this form to be made either in a general Council, or by that
Representative Church or Presbytery.

4. Then all Churches must act from the Authority, and by virtue of Commission
from the Catholic Church, for they act in the name of the Catholic Church.
Apollon. c. 3. p. 41.
So the Assertors of this opinion Expressly: Hudson a page 25. quest. 2.
but then it follows unavoydably, that all particular Churches, whether
National or Congregational that shall innovate, change, and alter any material
thing in Doctrine, Worship, or Government, without the consent of the Catholic
Church, are Schismatics, and if they be resolute in it, against what might be
said to the contrary, they are HERETICS: as those have done, that have changed
in part, Doctrine, Worship, and that Government which those general Counsels
did own and establish: much more those, who have sworn to such alterations,
expressly against such things as the universal Church in those Councels did
decree.

5. Then all Magistrates are deprived of power of Reformation within their
Jurisdictions, before authority derived from the Church, either in General
Council, or from their Committee: And hence is that cited out of our own
Lawyers: Quod omnes tangit: ab omnibus approbari debet. That which concerns
all, must be allowed of all. viz. Declar. Parl. ex Flo^a and All.
That are of the same visible corporation.

6. Lastly, (That I may add no more) There must be a solemn meeting for the
election of such general Officers as are to govern the universal Church in the
absence of the universal Ministerial Representative Church: For if one
Corporation should choose Burgesses that should vote in the business of the
whole Kingdom, it would not be valid; if there had not been first an agreement
of the whole Kingdom in Parliament gathered, that these so and so chosen
should be Officers General, and have votes in the public.

Object. If it be said that Christ himself has appointed such General
officers, Object.
by appointing Ministers in every Congregation, and then Synods for public
occasions.

It is answered, This follows not: 1. Because an Officer chosen in one
particular Corporation, Ansvv.
as a Major or Alderman is not an Officer in the whole Kingdom; No though all
the Majors in the Kingdom were gathered together are they Officers of the whole
Kingdom, unless by way of distribution and as in relation to their several
places; and but remotely and by accident only to the whole Kingdom: so though
all the Corporations of the Kingdom were gathered, yet are they not a
Parliament, and supreme Court, simply because they are merely gathered
together; but it must be on former consent according to such Laws, whereby
they become a New and a Superior body to all the Kingdom, both jointly, (so
long as they continue a Parliament) and severally: much less should they have
any more power because they are many, but dis-joyned far asunder: So it is in
the Church.

2. They may be officers of Synods and Councels though never so general, and
yet not be officers general of the whole world, in point of jurisdiction, as
one entire body: Because their meeting does not make them a New body, nor give
them as such a body any superior juridical power (but only Consultative, and
Decretory) whether we look on any Scripture Precept or Practice of the Churches
in the New Testament.

3. It is denied that Christ has instituted any such Catholic Visible body,
or the Representative thereof: An Oecumenicall or General Council [much less
the abstract of it a Catholic committee or Presbyterie] and there is reason
for it: for the multitude of persons, difference of spirits, Languages, etc.
danger, and want of ground to Delegate from hand to hand, Ecclesiasticke Power,
would occasion great confusion, and such as God is not the Author of.

The fourth and last sort of arguments are taken from the end, 4 A fine,
the Authors of this opinion aim at, 1. (...)
from the Issue of the opinion it self, 4.
and from the true scope of Church Government. The former seems to be; either
to found the Right of such Presbyteriall Government as is now endeavored; and
to deprive particular Churches of entire power in themselves, or at least of
Independency in their Government from other Churches: or else it is to lay
Groundwork of a more effectual cure and remedy then hitherto, for all
distempers of particular Churches, whether national or other.

Touching the first; What will it profit if they gain by this notion, the
jurisdiction of the whole world for a while, and afterward loose their own and
others liberty? (and perhaps souls also: for the former being lost, truth will
be soon oppressed, as is to be seen in the Papacy) of which straightway. Again

Absolute Independency so as no other Church shall have any thing to do with an
erring or delinquent Church is disavowed, both in Doctrine and Practice, by the
greatest Patrons of that way in this Kingdom, and beyond the seas. Apollog.
Narrat. page 14, Cottons way of Churches. chap. 6


Concerning the second; All distempers of Churches, as far as the
Apostolical Churches were cured of them, have been healed sufficiently
without this opinion, yea and better then by those who have owned and practiced
this principle; for they have cured some, but made others greater and stronger
then they were before; as we see in the Church of Rome.

2. But whatsoever their aim be, 2. (...)
they should remember that the true end of Church Government, is not only to
avoid Confusion and Disorder etc. but also to preserve the Rights and
Privileges of particular Persons and Churches, to prevent Tyranny and invasion
that way, (evils that are as dangerous to the Church and as introductive to
Heresy as the former) unto which this opinion, in the Issue of it, opens a
wide gappe.

My Baynes, (whom the London Ministers quote with Honor) says, Dioces Trial
Q. 1. page 21. That those who subject themselves to a Presbytery, as being
under it by Subordination, may in effect as well be subject to an Episcopal
(and by consequence I say, to a Papal) Consistory.

For if the Church universal be one visible Governing body, a man will readily
conclude it must have universal Officers; and among many, there must be some
one chief: and Christ that has ordered this, The Anabyst^ of a Papists faith
upthis principle.
has surely designed by some intimation or other who this should be, and where
the seat of the Universal Church should reside: and then how readily will that
place of Matthew 16. Thou art Peter, etc. be understood to place it upon him,
and his successors: and then the question is, where he was Bishop; and because
the scripture says nothing, therefore Eusebius. l. 3. c. 1.
Ecclesiastical Writers must be credited, and then the place is Rome: and the
rather because 1. Their Faith was spoken of throughout the whole World. 2.
There was the seat of the Empire etc. So that this opinion if not in the end of
the Authors, yet in the Issue of the things, leads a man by the hand back to
Egypt and Babylon again, as it has done many.

If it be replied No; Object.
For that in this Universal body politic, all Churches and their Elders
shall be Equal, and so in the General Council conveened, whereas in the
Papacy all (is (...)) depends upon, and is referred to the Pope.

I answer, Ansvv.
1. (Besides what is said above) The Popes themselves in some actions,
insinuate that they are not supreme in their own personal relation, but as
the head, president, or chairman, of the Universal representative
Presbytery; which are the College of Cardinals representing the College of
Apostles (said to be the General Presbytery, representative of the Catholic
Visible Church) Hence the form of some Instruments in the Popes name,
De^^nsilio Reverendiss. Cardinal.
is: By the advice of the most Reverend the Cardinals, His Holiness decrees
such or such a thing: In Imitation of Kingdoms (which Christ forbids his
Church, as being of an other nature) where the Parliament represents the
Kingdom; and in their absence the King and Council represent them both: hence
perhaps it is, that in Proclaimations the form often is; We (says the King)
by the Advice of our Privy council, etc.

2. Papists of chiefest note, Gerson. Schola Parisienfis. Council constansien^^
Basiliense etc.
yea Popish Universities; yea Popish Counsels does assert a General Council
(which is nothing else, but an Universal Presbytery) to be above the Pope. So
that it may be really Popish, though all do not depend on, or be referred to
the Pope firstly and primarily. Now that this Catholic Visible Church, as our
Brethren have represented it, may degenerate or rather advance thereunto: let
it be considered that Papal Government it self had the like original.

It is granted even by Bishops themselves, Bishop Vssher ^t a conference ^^
Hatfield.
That the Bishop at first was but the PRESIDENT or Chaire-man of the
Presbytery or assembly of Ministers. Afterward partly by the Ambition of
those who were chosen to that place, partly by the sloth, flattery and
slavishnesse of the rest of the Ministers and people, all came under him. So
also at first each Church did all things among themselves, as ordain,
excommunicate, etc. Afterward they associated with the great Churches: in
time, what was of voluntary consent, became a necessity and due subjection. So
the Bishops of Rome, at first for civilities sake, because it was the Emperors
Seat, had the Precedence for a time, at length claimed it as due. So here if an
universal coporation, Se also the Centuries, Cent. 2. and 3. cap. de Reg.
Eccles*
there must be universal Officers; over these one President, or
super-intendent, or Chaire-man: he perhaps may have it for his life, if an
able man; and may obtain to act with a Committee as the representative of a
General council in their absence: and what hinders, but if another Boniface
and Phocas; Platin. in Bonif. 3.
An ambitious President and wicked Emperor meet, he may be made Universal
Bishop. Men are more loose in their Ecclesiastical then Civil Liberties: And
if this Government be not of God, he will leave it to corrupt it self, even
as the other did.

But Thirdly, Necessarily and of it self, it tends to the depriving of all
particular Churches of their Liberty; yea, though they should be National
Churches.

1. Because In them particular Churches are not left to their choice; but are
Bound by this opinion to associate and to send Elders to the Counsels and
Presbyteries; so the Reverend Assembly. L^eis infra citand.


2. Though they should not do it, yet are they nevertheless under the
Government of the Catholic Church, which is the first subject of Church
power: and so are bound to act according to the Letter or Plain sense of the
determinations of the Catholic Church, without adding, altering or detracting
in any Material thing, especially which might concern the whole Church; The
Church of Rome writing to Cyprian say, that what concerned the whole Church,
was to be determined by a general Council.
And then what will become of the Reformations of all the Reformed Churches.

2. In particular in respect of the Protestant Churches of Europe, 1. Because
they are much fewer then the other Churches of the world, that are in the maine
Orthodox, (as some whiles since a Cypr. Epist. lib. 2. Ep. 7
Presbyterian Writer has given in the account.) 2. Who shall exclude the
Popish and other Heterodox Churches from being members of the Catholic
Visible Church, Pagets Christianography.
till by a General Council they be heard, and excommunicated, or Non
communioned: And whether the major part of the Churches in the world will
consent to such an Excommunication or Non-communion is uncertain, and then
they must VOTE also: and so the Orthodox Churches will be the more over-borne.

Object. 1. But it may be it will be said, the throat of the cause is yet safe,
because it seems sufficient, that the major part of those that are of the same
judgment ought to govern the less. To which I reply, that in all
Corporations and Commonwealths, (as our Brethren say, the Universal Visible
Church is) not the major part of a Part; but the major part of the whole body,
are to rule the rest; and that not divided in several places at a distance,
but convened together, at least in some neernesse of place.

Object. 2. If it be said that by reason of distance of place, and multitude of
persons this cannot be done, viz. the collection of the Catholic Visible
Church. I answer and say, 1. Therefore such an opinion is not to be asserted
which unavoidably and necessarily enforces such a gathering.

2. That in respect of the Commissioners general, some for many Churches (which
the Authors of this opinion do, or must allow) it may be done for matter of
company or number.

3. Princes from one end of the world to the other, hold leagues and
correspondencies together: as does the Kingdom of England with Russia in the
North; and Persia in the East.

4. Rome governs in all parts of the world as a single corporation,
notwithstanding distance of place.

5. Lastly, The Churches of Europe at least, might have met for the
Reformations they have endeavored, as many of them did in the Synod of Dort
about Arminius.

CHAP. V. The Arguments for an Universal Visible Governing Church, with the
answers to them.
HItherto we have, as it were, battered and taken the Assailants Work: it
remains that we seize on their Ammunition and Weapons: Apollon. cap. 3. Sect.
1. and cap. 1. Rejicimus 1.
the opposite reasonings produced by them. And first to the Arguments of
Appollonius: who (by the way) I observe to give the cause in all particulars
but one or two, to those of the Congregational way: and well he could not avoid
it; seeing that the Churches of Holland, go by the same principles; except that
of the authority of Synods; and baptizing of all children: which latter, how it
stands with their denying Church Fellowship to all, ipsi viderint. But to his
Arguments.

The first is taken out of 1 Cor. 12. 28. God has set in the Church some
Apostles, 1.
some Prophets, some Evangelists, some Pastors and Teachers: which Church there
is said to consist of diverse and heterogeneal members; but the Ministry, the
Apostles, etc. are not given to any particular Church, and the Apostles etc.
were the Governors of the Catholic Church; Ergo, The Visible Catholic Church
is one Governing body under which all particular Churches are subjected and
contained

Answ. At the stating of the Question I premised the distinction of oneness in
Essence and mystery, and oneness in Integralls and Accidents. Hence I answer
1. That it is utterly a non sequitur, and inconsequent to say, because this
Scripture, and other like, speak of the Church as of one in mystery, Profess.
Leyd.
in nature, Disp. 40. These. 33.
and in essence, that therefore its one in Number, Aiun^; essentialem
communitat fide and fa^ra^m: constare: and hance esse ubi Regiminis, fom^a
inter se differunt.
or one Visible single body: that because the Church is somevvay one, therefore
Integrally, and by way of single Corporation Visible. Now the Apostle speaks of
the Church as one in Mystery and Nature, not Visibly, and in Number, appears
from Verse 13. Where he says, Ye are all baptized into one body, and been made
to drink into one Spirit. Now compare this with its parallel, Ephesians. 4. 4. 5.
Where the Apostle says, There is but one baptism, one faith: and so makes the
oneness of the body to consist in these, uniting the members to one Christ, by
one spirit, to one God. In which place two things are observable: First, That
as he says the Church is one, so he says Baptism is one, and Faith is one;
Shall we therefore say that there is but one single Baptism, or one single
Faith, visibly and integrally one in the World? Surely any man would answer
that the former are said to be one mystically, invisibly, and in respect of
their kind and Nature, because all true faith is of the same kind, and so all
true Baptism; but are as many several faiths in Number, and Baptismes, as
there are several believers and baptized persons. Secondly, That the oneness
of the Church essentially, consists in the oneness for kind of Faith, Hope,
Baptism: as also, in the oneness of its head, its spirit, and its God: which
does indeed make it one mystical body, but it does not conclude them to be one,
Visibly, Outwardly, and Externally: because some of these things wherein they
are one, are invisible, others not on earth: as the faith, the hope, spirit,
are invisible: God and Christ are not on earth visibly; and therefore the
oneness here mentioned, makes not one visible corporation on earth, and as one
to be considered, and to act. We willingly grant that this union Mystical does
imply an union Visible also, as much as may stand with the Institution of
Christ, and the edification of the Church: But neither Christ's institution, nor
the edification of the Church implies, but opposes such an Universal, Visible,
United Corporation, as we saw before. But of this more in our Answer to his
second Argument. Now to return.

As we say of the body, and of Baptism, Faith, Hope, etc. So in the like sense
we grant that the Church is one, has but one Worship, and but one Government,
viz. For Nature, and kind in the substantialls of it, or that general
platform of it Matthew. 18. and what else is to be gathered from the precepts
and practice of the Apostles: but as the Church is not one visible policy, or
corporation in number, so neither in the outward Government of it. For this as
other accidents follows the nature of its subject. So then, when the Apostle
says, God has set in the Church some Apostles etc. the Church must be taken
for one; not in regard of the outward or accidental state of it, but
indefinitely, and in regard of its inward nature and essence: that is, neither
as visible, nor invisible; nor as universal or particular: for all these are
outward or accidental to the Church.

Object. Object.
1. But he mentions Baptism, Apollo^. ubi supra.
various gifts, and members, diverse Ministries, as Apostles, etc. all which are
visible, therefore he means the Visible Church.

Object. Object.
2. And whereunto belong both Jews and Gentiles, yea all that are baptized; to
which also the Apostles, Evangelists, and various gifts are given; therefore it
is the Universal Church.

Therefore I give a second answer, Ansv.
I grant that he speaks of the Church, whether Visible or Invisible,
Universal or particular, but not of it in these respects: but mystically, and
totally, as comprehending those in heaven also; and this sense I will stick
unto. And it appears from the scope of the place, (the ^ucor in Mat. 13.
not attending whereof, has occasioned (says Bucer) great calamities in all
Ages to the Church, whilst men catch at words that make for their purpose, not
weighing the drift of the Author in such passages:) The Apostles intent there,
is plainly this: viz. to persuade the Corinthians to concord among themselves
(and with the believing Jews, as seems to be employed* verse 2. and 13.) and
contentedness in their gifts, and to the right use of them. Now for the
fastening of this, he lays for ground, that all Christians, whether Tryumphant
or Militant, are but one mystical body of Christ, 1 Cor. 12. 2^. explained.
verse. 12. and then teaches them that gifts, they are all from one Spirit for
mutual edification, and for the distinguishing of the members of one and the
same body, and that there might be no Schism or rent in the body about these
gifts, which are bestowed for the better uniting of it: that all members cannot
be in the same office, nor have the same gifts, but yet may be of the same
body, whereof the Church of Corinth was a part. This is all the Apostle aims
at here: And so also in that other parallel place, Ephesians. 4. 3, 4, 5, 6.
explained,
Ephesians. 4. 3, 4, 5. etc. His scope is the same, to exhort to unity among
themselves, and with the believing Jews whom they stood at a distance from, as
they from them (as appears in Peter's withdrawing from the Gentiles when the
Jews came, Gal. 2.) and this is employed Ephesians. 3. 6. The Gentiles fellow-heirs,
and of the same body: and verse 15. he extends it to those in heaven also: The
whole Family in Heaven and Earth: and having named the Church verse. 10. and
verse 21. he says in this Church should be glory to God world without end:
but then he must take the Church for the whole mystical body in heaven and
earth. And so when afterward chap. 4. he says there is one body,, and he gave
some Apostles etc. for the perfecting of the body, he must mean the whole, and
not that on earth only: for the body of Christ is not one part only, but the
whole, which must be perfected by union of Jews and Gentiles; those on earth to
be added to those in heaven. He takes the body entirely, not for the Visible
part only. Now in this Body, or in this Church as chap. 3. 6. or in this
Family in heaven and earth, as verse 15. He has set some Apostles, some
Pastors. Though these have exercise of their functions only, in that part
which is one earth, and in that part of it on earth which is visible: yet they
are placed in the whole.

Answ. 3. Should I grant (which I do not) that the Apostle, is to be
understood of the Church on earth, yet he speaks as well of a particular
Church, (when he says, God has set some in the Church,) as of the General.
Its evident; 1. If the word Apostle, (which alone grounds the objection) be
taken properly, in that he applies his speech particularly, though not
exclusively, to the Corinthians; ye are the body of Christ, (to wit ye are a
particular body) and members in particular, Apolles to Apollonius.
and so chap. 3. 21. 22. All are yours, whether Paul or Apollos (let Apolonius
note) or Paul, or Cephas, or life, or death, all are YOVRS; and ye
(Corinthians) Christ's, etc. where all are the whole Churches, and each Churches
in particular, as their occasions require; each in their order; some Universal
Officers which shall have power in Corinth, or any other Church; some
particular to each Church. So that the sense i^, He has given or set in the
Church: i. e. in this Church of Corinth, and so in that of Ephesus, etc. Some
Apostles, etc. as their need shall require: yet not therefore making them one
external society (among themselves) As some general Officers make not
England and Scotland one Kingdom.

2. If we take the word Apostle, Romans 16. 7.
as it is taken in some other places, 1 Cor. 4. 9.
and so may be taken here, for such Officers as were sent out with commission
from any Church upon special occasion, 2 Cor. 11. 13.
(which is the literal signification of the word) and is so taken 2 Cor. 8.
23. Barnabas and the rest, Hebr. 3. 1.
are called The Apostles of the Churches: Apoc. 2. ^.
and Phil. 2. 25. Epaphroditus the Apostle of the Philippians: according to
which; the sense would be; God has set some of Corinth in the office of
Apostles, some Prophets, as chap. 14. etc. and so the argument hence were
voided. But

4. Were it granted that the Apostle in these places means by the Church, the
Church visible Catholic: yet this opinion gains nothing thereby; for it does
not follow that because it was so then, and in respect of the Apostles, that
therefore it was to be so to the end of the world, and in it self.

Christ who is the King of his Church has the same liberty in his Kingdom
special; that God has over the world, which is his Kingdom general: Now at
one time the Lord would have the whole world almost, one Kingdom or Monarchy
under Nebuchadnezar, Jer. 27. 8. and threatens with heavy plagues that nation
that should refuse to serve him; giving this reason, that himself is King of
all Nations, verse. 5. which is also repeated again, Dan. 4. 22. so that the
whole world was one Kingdom upon the matter; yet it was not the will of God it
should always be so. In the like manner in Moses, the Church and Common
wealth affairs were chiefly under the Magistrate; but afterward they were
distinct, V. Trigland de potestat. Eccles. and civili cap. 12.
unless under those Kings that were Prophets also. So the twelve Tribes were
under Saul, David and Solomon, one Kingdom: yet it was of the Lord, that
afterward they were two: and afterward one again, after the captivity. So
likewise Christ takes the same power over his Church, when he saw it, for the
advantage of it; he set over it one Company of Officers, who ruled it in
common, viz. the Apostles, in relation to whom, the Churches were one, though
not in themselves; but that does not argue that he meant it should always so
continue after their decease.

It is a General rule in all proceedings, that things at their first
plantation and beginning need some things that afterward would be inconvenient,
as a Stick by a Twigge, a Bladder to him that swimmeth, a Standing-stole to a
child. So at the first constitution of the Jewish Church, God made Moses an
extraordinary Officer, so that he had no Successor so absolute till Christ's
time. So at the first erection of the Christian Church, Apostles and
Evangelists, which now are generally apprehended to be ceased. Yea also in
Scotland, Hist. mo^uum in Scotia Edit. 1641.
(as we heard above) at the beginning of their Reformation, they had certain
Officers in the nature of Bishops, whom they called Visitors, which the Author
informs us were then necessary; but the Church being settled, not now any
longer needful.

2. Nor were the Churches one in themselves, (as we said before) but one in the
Apostles, and that by accident also) as England and Scotland are one in the
King, because he governs both; but they are not therefore one Kingdom in
themselves considered.

But 3. Though we grant this, that whiles the Apostles were living, there was
one body of Officers over the whole Church, and so in respect of them the
Church might be said to be one GOVERNED body, yet I say, it was never one
GOVERNING body; for whiles the Apostles lived, the Universal Governing power
was committed to the Apostles only, and not with them to any other Officers,
or Churches; no and not to all the Churches together, but they with their
officers were all in subjection to them: and when the Apostles deceased, the
scripture speaks nothing of instating any other collected and united body to
succeed them in that Universal Government; no nor can it be gathered by
consequence: but the contrary, namely; that because the use of that Universal
power ceased, therefore the Office, Officers and subject of it.

Object. Object.
But Church government did not cease.

Answ. Ansvv.
That Kind or Way, of Church government did, that is an Universal one; but
there continued the Government still, though administered in another way, viz.
by way of Distribution, Each Church as a Church, (i. e. as having the
Essential notes of a Church in it, viz. The true Doctrine, or faith of Christ)
received that power for it self, though not in so eminent a degree, yet as
immediately from Christ, that all the Apostles had for all Churches.

6. But I may deny the former supposition, and rightly affirm that the
Apostles were not one joint Ministry: for besides, that each had entire power;
Eusebius: lib. 3. cap. 1.
some had one part committed to them, and some another, as Paul expressly
affirms, Gal. 2. 8. The uncircumcision was committed to me, Thomas ((...))
sortitus est Parthiam.
the circumcision to Peter. Hence chap. 1. he says, He went not up to
Jerusalem, to those that were Apostles before him; which he ought to have
done, if the government had been committed to the Apostles jointly, Andreas
Scithiam.
and not severally; whence also his going up thither, Ioannes As^am etc.
Act. 15. about the question of Circumcision, was not on this ground; but to
satisfy the Christians of Antioch, about his Doctrine, as consonant to that of
the other Apostles. On the former principle, he professes (2 Cor. 10. 13.
etc.) he had not intruded into another man's line; alluding, as it seems to the
shareing out of inheritances by line, (as Psalm. 16. 6.) for this reason, the
Epistles of Peter, James and John are called Catholic, because written to the
dispersed Jews throughout the several nations, as is the expression in the
entrance of those Epistles. Hence also Paul is sent from Jerusalem as not his
place, Act. 22. 18. And though sometimes he disputed with the Jews, yet it was
but as making way to the Gentiles, neither did he greatly prevail with them,
as appears, Act. 13. 40. 41. chap. 28. 16.

7. To conclude therefore, our reply to this Argument, If it follow not, when
we say, God has set in the World some Emperors, some Kings, some Princes,
some inferior officers and Magistrates: therefore the whole world is but one
Governing Kingdom, and all particular Kingdoms do but govern in the right of
the Kingdom of the world, in Common; the Officers whereof are the Kings of the
several Kingdoms, who being gathered together, or a part of them, have the
power of giving Laws to other Kingdoms, according to the Law of God and
nature, (which are the rules of all just Government) and this also to be done
by the Kings and Princes themselves, without any authority from, or any
dependency on the people, (unless for quietness sake, and as far as they see
cause:) If (as was said) this follow not: neither does it follow, that because
the scripture says, God has set some in the Church Apostles, etc. Therefore
the Church throughout the world is but one Congregation, to whose Officers
first, as the general Officers of the whole Church, not by way of
distribution, but as a Notionally (at least) collected body of Officers: the
power of Government is committed: by Authority whereof, and dependence upon
which common officers and body, Apollon. cap. 3*
the officers of every particular Church do act: Sect. 4. Asserimus. Ius divin.
of the Presbytery, p. 43. and cap. 11. p. 163.
and those without any dependency upon the concurrence of the people, as
cooperating and acting with them, unless for peace sake. By which means (let
it be observed by all sorts, The power being given, not to any one Church, but
to the whole Church, as one body; and not to the members with the Officers, but
to the Officers only) there is derived a very Transcendent power and
Authority upon every particular Minister; more then any Parliament Man has,
yea more then a King, (who is limited to his dominion) It makes every Minister
one of the standing Officers of the Christian world, to whom with his Colleagues
(not severally and by distribution, but jointly, and as one body) is committed
the Government of the whole Christian world, and managing of the Affairs of
the Son of God throughout the face of the earth. And so he is one of Christ's
Vicars General, (and not particular only, which I acknowledge every Minister
to be in his place) magnum surely, et memorabile nomen. But if this be so,
great reason is it that the Church of the whole world should choose these
Universal Officers, and so the Church of a nation the National Officers, etc.
by whom they are to be Governed in that which is of Dearest and highest moment,
viz. the precious soul: or else their condition is most sad. If every one that
can get a little learning and desires to live upon the Sweat and cost of
others; and to become a minister (though I profess that calling to be most
difficult on earth; and also, that the Lord has appointed that those that
preach the Gospel should live of the Gospel) and so being willing to submit to
such conditions as is required, shall have a friend, patron, or a purse to make
one; and come into the ministry and a living (which is the Kings Road, in some
Churches, and is the way whereby many of those who now are to be Presbyters
came in) he shall become a Parliament man, and joint Governor of the whole
Church on earth; by whose one vote, all the liberties and truth of Religion in
them may be destroyed: A glympe whereof we have seen in the Convocations or
Synods in our own Nation. This I say is sad; yea more sad then the condition
of men in their Civil Liberties In our own Kingdom: where none attains the
honor of being an universal Officer, a Parliament man, but by the consent
(formal or virtual) of all, or the major part of them: there having been a
precedent act by joint consent of the whole Nation, that persons chosen by the
free Vote of the major part of Corporations etc. should (if loyal) be Officers
pro tempore, to their own Corporations, and to the whole. But such agreement
has not been made, (no not tacitly) by the Catholic Church; nor no such
institution of Christ has appeared yet.

And these answers also are applyable to what the same Author has else where
from the word CHVRCH, Apollon. cap. 1. p. 8 Reijcimus.
as when he denies a Particular Church to be the proper subject of the
covenant of grace, and privileges of it; because says he, the CHVRCH to which
these promises are made, is perpetual. Jer. 31. 36. The strength of which
reasoning lies on this, that the word Church, and not Churches, is used in
these places; and so it is represented as one.

Answ. As if it were not common to call that perpetual which is so by
succession of those of the like Nature and Kind; because the Lord says Day
and Night shall not cease to the Worlds end; does it therefore follow that all
the essential properties of day or night do not agree to this or that
particular day? Is it not a rule in Nature and Reason, Arist.
that all the essential properties of general and common beings, are really
existent in the individual and partilars. Man is to continue on earth to the
end of the World, does not therefore the essential properties of man agree to
Peter or Paul, because they were not to continue.

His second and third Argument there, is; That a particular Church cannot be
the subject of the covenant of Grace: and consequently of Church power (for the
reason is the same) because the Church which has these is sanctified, is the
spouse of Christ, has the Law written in the heart of it: etc. but a
particular Church [as it is particular] cannot be said to be such.

Answ. But 1. It was never said that one particular Church is so the subject of
these, as that another is not.

Secondly, To speak properly, The Church not as visible, nor as particular, nor
as invisible, nor as universal, is the subject of these things, but as a
Church; i. e. A society of Believers: and under that nation, a particular
Church considered as a Church, has right to all, and is the subject of all
these. All are yours, says the Apostle to the Corinthians, whether Paul or
Christ. etc. So that this Author by adding this clause [as particular] has
praevaricated and altered the state of the Question.

His last Argument in that place, is from the Testimony of the Professors of
Leyden, and Amesius.

To which I answer, Disp. 40. These. 29, 30, 31.
That the former say nothing; but, that the covenant, Antibell. Tom. 2. l.
(...). 10.
and promises, and privileges, belong to true believers, and the invisible
Church, whether in a [particular Church] or dispersed through the world. So
that this Testimony seems rather to make against him. The other is expressly
against him, and speaks our very sense, yea and terms almost insomuch that I
wonder this Author is brought in as a witness: His words are, even as they are
cited by Apollonius himself: These things agree not to the whole multitude that
profess Christ, but only to those that are truly faithful: or they agree to
the Church militant, in respect of its ESSENTIAL Nature, which is proper to the
truly faithful. So then, not to a Church as Universal or particular, as Visible
or invisible, but as essentially a Church, which a particular Church may be. M.
Hudson.


And the former replies also will serve unto what the other Authors urge from
such like Scriptures and places: M. Noyes.
as 1. M. Hudson from Act. 8. 3. The London Ministers.
Saul made havoc of the Church, Assembly of Divines.
Gal. 1. 13. I persecuted the Church, 1 Cor. 10. 32. Give none offense to the
Church of God. 1 Cor. 12. 28. God has set some in the Church. 1 Timothy 3. 15.
That thou may know how to behave thy self in the Church of God. Also when it
is called the Kingdom of God, a Barn, a Draw-net, a Marriage: and because 1.
Cor. 12. the Church is said to be one Body, and one Woman, Apoc. 12. one
sheepfold, John 10. one Dove, Cant. 2. 2. All which* and other places wherein
the word Church is used, are to be understood, as has been evidenced, either
of the Church in respect of the nature and essence of it: as all believers and
Churches have the same kind of Faith, Doctrine, etc. or else as one mystical
and invisible body of Christ: but does not at all insinuate, much less prove:
that they are all one external and visible Corporation.

3. M. Noyes who uses the same places of Scripture as the other; as also Apoc.
11. 1, 2, 3. the Church is described as one City, one new Jerusalem etc.

Answ. That place is taken by great Expositors, to signify such a state as is
not yet in being; what it will be when that shall exist, is uncertain.
Secondly, We grant it to be one City and Kingdom as a mystical body: 1. In
respect of Christ the head. 2. In regard that all Churches in their several
places, walk by the same Laws etc. i. e. as essentially agreeing together, but
not visibly governing as one body.

4. The London Ministers part 1. page 3. who urge the forenamed place 1 Cor.
12. and that the Apostle makes the whole Church but one Organical body (a
contradiction to their assertion Praefat. p. 11. That the Church is a similar
body (which overthrows their present Tenent; for in a similar body all the
parts together have no more internal power then single; as in drops of water,
single Corporations, as single, though united in place.) So part 2. p. 66.
where also they say that Ephesians. 4. 4. Christ is considered mystically, not
personally; and if mystically, not visibly.)

Answ. First The Apostles scope, and then the supposition he goes on, are to be
eyed. The scope is to exhort to humility in great gifts, to contentedness in
mean gifts, and to love and edification by all gifts. The supposition he
grounds his Argument on, is the relation wherein believers stand, viz. of
members of one and the same body, s^il. of Christ mystically considered (as the
Ministers speak) but he neither expresses nor implies the visibility of this
body, or the outward oneness of it: if he mean the Catholic, and not the
particular Church of Corinth.

5. Lastly, The Reverend Assembly; who in the places above mentioned, quote
Ephesians. 4. 3. etc. To which Answer has been given above; and may again when we
come particulary to reply unto them.

And thus much in answer to the first Argument of Apollonius and others drawn
from expressions that speak of the Church as one: one body, house, Kingdom,
family, sheepfold, which is indeed the Achileum, or Fort Royal in this
Garrison; and which, if I be not greatly overseene, has been, by the former
weapons out of Christ's Armory absolutely taken and demolished.

The second Argument follows which is: Arg. Genesis 2.
There is certain Society and Ecclesiastical communion by divine
institution, and therefore a certain universal body: for there is a certain
internal fellowship and obligation to mutual offices, Ephesians. 4. 3, 4, 5, 6.
which does require an external and outward Society, and Commuion
Ecclesiastical, in exhorting, reproving, comforting, edifying one another --
and that fellowship which the members of a particular Church retain among
themselves, in a due proportion Churches Provincial and National ought to
keep -- by which communion Ecclesiastical, all National Churches do grow up
to one Universal Ecclesiastical body.

Ans. This reason no way concludes the intended proposition: I willingly grant
there is a mutual fellowship, and spiritual communion; which also requires an
outward communion in many respects, and particularly, in those named by this
Author, viz. exhortation, reproof, etc. And indeed, this was all the
combination that was in the most Primitive Churches: and such inward and
outward communion there is to be betwixt all good men, friends, brethren,
nations, etc. But this argues not that therefore they must be one body in point
of Government. Neighbor Nations are to retain this inward communion, and
outward, so far as may make for mutual good, and there may be a society or
league betwixt them, as betwixt Solomon and the King of Egypt, betwixt Solomon
and Hiram, King of Tire. So men of the same trade and profession in regard of
the same art, have an internal communion together, and this requires some
outward communion also, as occasion serves; but it no way concludes, that
therefore they must needs be one body or Corporation; Suppose some dwell at
London, some at York, some in England, and some in France. 2. It is also
granted, that the same Union that the members of a Church have one with
another, the same have the several Churches among themselves, IN A DVE
PROPORTION, which are the words of the Author; but this proportion is not
IDENTITIE, or samenesse of Relation; that is, it is not so near a relation, nor
gives that power that the former relation does. As the same relation that the
members of a Family have one unto another; the same in a due proportion have
particular families one to another; but no man will say that what the members
of a family, especially some of them, may do one to another; the same may a
Corpoporation of Families do among themselves, there is some neernesse, but not
altogether the same. And this also is sufficient for the second Argument. I
shall meet with it again anon in the first Argument of the Reverend Assembly.

The Third. Arg. Genesis 3.
There were certain meetings in the New Testament which did represent the
whole Church, and wherein the business of the whole Church was transacted, to
wit, the calling of an Apostle; which was a part of Ecclesiastical Discipline:
and there were the Pastors of the universal Church, for they were sent unto all
the world, Matthew. 21. 19. and therewere the brethren out of Galilee and
Jerusalem.

Answ. 1. I deny (with the Protestant Divines against the Papists) that there
is any Representative Church properly so called, or that this was one; it was
only at present a Particular Congregation whereof the Apostles were members,
though principal ones, but not yet actually instituted Officers, neither of
this, or the whole Church, which appears verse 4. 8. Tarry ye (says he) in
Jerusalem till you have received power from on high. But it was indeed that
first Church from whence all Churches were to be produced, and the Apostles
(especially) and the rest of these members were those, who were severally or
jointly to plant those Churches (for some members of this Church did plant
other Churches, and not the Apostles only, as is expressed chap 8.) as one man
that is father by generation of many Families; neither is an universal man, nor
does ever represent them; neither is he the Governor always of them, but for
a certain time only.

2. If it were the Representative of the universal Church, because the
Apostles, the universal Officers were there; yet it was their privilege, as
was showed above, to be the universal Officers, and that severally; so that
though the Churches were one body under one number of Officers then; yet they
having no successors in the latitude of their power, the Church now becomes
many: else you may as well conclude, that all the world must still be one under
one sort of Governors, because it was so in the time of Adam and Noah.

3. This act declares very small power in the Apostles or universal Church; for
they could not make an universal Officer; whereas every particular Church can
make its particular Officers: and this shows there was then no Catholic
government, properly such, but that was reserved to Christ alone.

4. If it conclude; it argues, that the Catholic Church is formally to choose
its Catholic Officers (for so they did) and to come together for that purpose.

5. It puts the brethren into great liberty and privilege, for they choose,
and the Apostles only put them upon the work, and prayed over it. But to avoid
this, elsewhere labor is used to prove that here were only the Apostles or
Elders in this election: quid non mortalia pectora cogis (Regni) sacra fames.

The second Argument there, is, that the business of the universal Church was
transacted, scil. the election of an Apostle.

Answ. Adam did represent all mankind, and transacted the affairs and
business of the universal Catholic world, both before and after his fall: so
likewise Noah and his family after the flood, Genesis 8. does it therefore follow
that the whole world should be but one Kingdom or Corporation.

It is usual for Kingdoms to send out Colonies into foreign parts, and to
give them power to become Commonwealths of themselves, without dependence,
unless voluntary, upon that Kingdom from whence they had their Original, as
New England. So fathers of Families yield their sons an entire government in
their own families, without necessarily engageing them to the families of
their brethren, further then mutual love and relations shall require. But
before the Colonies be sent out, the Nation from whence they arise, does
represent and transact the business both of themselves, and of all those
Colonies: and the father of the Families both represents and transacts the
business of the Families that spring from him: yet are both the one and other
afterward, without any absolute and necessary dependence either upon the one or
other. So in the matter of Christ's Church. The Church of Jerusalem was as it
were the mother to the rest; The Apostles etc. spiritual fathers, who
represented and transacted the affairs of all Churches that should flow from
that; but so, that when such Churches came to be planted, they showed by their
practice that the Apostles had instated them in entyre power, without any
necessary dependence on other Churches, whether single or combined, as is
evident out of the first and second chapters of the Revelation, noted before,
and other places.

3. The third particular is of little moment: for the brethren that are called
Galileans, verse. 11. were so by country; but now were by habitation and
dwelling, in all probability of Jerusalem. And howsoever, the thing is not
much material, seeing there was then no other Church or society of Christians
visible, but that at Jerusalem. Besides, the former answers take off this
also. And thus the first scripture, viz. from Act. 1. is answered.

The second follows out of Act. 15. 22. Apollon. ubi supra.
Where that Assembly of Apostles, Elders and Brethren, which by ordinary power
prescribed, Ecclesiastical Cannons and decrees to all the Churches of the
Gentiles, and by authority imposed them on them* this Assembly is called the
Church; but to do so could not be in the power of any Provincial or
National Assembly* much less of a Congregationall, but it is the Act of the
Catholic Church, which therefore this Assembly represented.

Answ. 1. The former answers touching the prerogative of the Apostles, and of
the mother Church, are equally applyable to this also.

2. It is not called The Church indefinitely, but with reference to THAT PLACE
scil. verse. ^
of Jerusalem, as by the context appears, for verse. 22. It Is said, It seems
good to the Church to send chosen men of their OWN company; but the whole
Assembly as constituted of the Church of Jerusalem, and the messengers of
Antioch, etc. is not called the Church.

3. It was not then the representative of the Catholic Church, as it was in
the first chapter; there being now other Churches planted, which were not
there by their messengers. Neither was the College of the Apostles there, the
standing and supreme Court of the Catholic Church, to which all Churches were
to appeal, and to whose judgment they were to stand; but every one of the
Apostles in the Churches they planted. For Paul as he went not up to Jerusalem
himself at first (as was noted above and therefore could not teach the
Churches any such duty of necessity binding them) so neither did he now either
himself or others therefore go up from Antioch to Jerusalem, Cartwright on
the place.
as if he had not plenary and full power to have determined the controversy;
but for satisfaction of the Brethren; who either were told by those that came
from Jerusalem, (as it seems by what the Apostles wrote in their letter, verse.
24. to whom we gave no such commandment: implying that those persons had given
out that they had such command from the Apostles) or else they desired the mind
of the other* Apostles also for further confirmation; Therefore does Paul go
up. Also in diverse of his Epistles, he joins Timothy, Sylvanus and Sosthenes,
etc. with himself; yea, and all the Brethren, Gal. 1. 1. as here the Apostles
joined the Elders and Brethren; yet these examples do not argue that the
Apostle, or the Apostles had not absolute power of themselves to have
determined the controversy.

4. It is denied that this Assembly did act by an ordinary power; for if the
Apostles presence made not the Assembly extraordinary: then was it but an
ordinary and particular Church, or two, or three partcular Churches at the
most; (there being many other Churches then planted, who had no Elders there,
nor were sent to, so far as is related,) and then it will fall out, either
that they did conclude and injoyne only Doctrinally, (though with authority)
or else that a particular and ordinary Church, or two or three Churches by
ordinary power may prescribe, and by authority injoyne Laws to all Churches
in the world, (...) petit il^e, cavento.
by way of Jurisdiction. It will not be easy to get safe from betwixt the
horns of this argument.

5. But it will not prejudice me to yield it an ordinary Assembly, for it is
granted to any Assembly of one Church or more, to do as much as is here
expressed this council to have done, viz. 1. To meet for the discussion of any
Doctrine that afflicts the Churches, especially if they be sent unto as these
were. 2. To confer scriptures together which concerns those points. 3. Light
appearing by the spirit of God and Scripture, they may represent their results,
M. Brinsley of Yarmouth: Sacred and sovereign Church remedy, page 45. says,
The other Churches though they were not bound formally, yet virtutually they
were, in regard of the equity of the decree. He implies it was not the
Catholic Church* for that would have formally and not virtually only have
bound them, according to his judgment.
as the will of God, and mind of the Holy Ghost, and so may 4. MINISTERIALLY
IMPOSE and enjoin to all other Churches what appears to be the clear mind of
Christ, as Paul did, 1 Cor. 7. having no express command: and as any of our
Brethren do when they preach the Word: Do they not injoyne obedience in the
name of Christ? but withal they disclaim having sole Jurisdiction, so as to
Excommunicate any alone by themselves, if they obey not: and yet they do the
former by Authority, because the Ministry of the Word is an Ordinance of God.

Object. But it was an Assembly representing the Catholic Church because of
the Apostles, who were the Catholic Officers, and the whole acted by the
ordinary power of the Catholic Church. Object.


Answ. 1. The Reason overthrowes the Argument: Answ.
For if it was therefore an Assembly of the Catholic Church, because of the
presence of the Apostles. Then if the Apostles had been absent, it had been but
the Assembly of a particular Church. And the Apostles when assembled alone, had
made an Assembly of the Catholic Church. So the universality or Catholicisme
of the Assembly, depended wholely and solely on the Apostles.

Or else secondly, The Apostles if alone out of this Assembly, neither
severally nor jointly, should have been able to determine and do what was here
done.

Or else thirdly, The Apostles in this Assembly did denude and strip themselves
of their Apostolical power (or at least suspend it it for that time) and acted
only as ordinary Elders of the Catholic Church: but then it would follow,
either, that that particular Church of Jerusalem was the Catholic Church (as
Rome is said to be) for there were messengers from few (if from more then one)
other Churches: Or that the Apostles though laying aside their being Elders of
the universal Church, (for that was their Apostleship) did yet act as Elders of
the universal Church: all which are ((...),) crasse interferings.

I think this Church acted 1. As the mother Church. 2. As having an access of
Authority by the presence of the Apostles. 3. As being the Church from which
the scandal enquired about, was conceived to arise. Neither does the joining of
the Elders and Brethren wholly take off the eminency and authority of the
Apostles above the rest (for their speeches only are recorded) no more then
Paul's joining others with him in his Epistles: though it do argue, that the
Church of Antioch had not that esteem of them as infallible alone. And thus
much also for that other place brought for confirmation of the third Argument,
[A Representative Catholic Church in Scripture.]

The fourth and last Argument is from the Testimony of some Reformed Divines;
Loc. Com. Loc. de Eccles. p. 458.
viz. Walaeus, and the Professors of Leydon. But the first speaks nothing for
him but what all acknowledge, and was granted above. scil. The Church says he,
may be considered two ways. 1. Universally, for the Church which by the
preaching of the Gospel is called out of the world, throughout the world, (...)
respectu.
which in a certain sense, or in some respect, may even be called Catholic: or
for a particular Flock, tied unto one place. In which sense I know none deny a
Catholic Church; it being one of the Articles of the ordinary Creed, that
there is a Catholic Church, that is; that the Church is now no longer bound to
any one place, as under the Jewish Government. But that the Church in respect
of the several members and societies of it, is dispersed over the face of the
earth. But this does no more conclude that therefore they are one Visible
Corporation, then when we say; Mankind is spread over all the World, that
therefore all men are one company or body politic.

2. The Professors of Leyden are against him; for they distinguish between a
Visible and particular Church, and between the Invisible and universal: Disp.
40. These. 27. These. 33.
and say, That a Visible Church is considered two ways, 1. As a company or
Society of one Town, City, or Province, which are united not only in the
unity of Faith and Sacraments, but also in the [Forme of outward Government] or
else it is considered as a certain Ecumenical and Universal body, dispersed in
several places throughout the whole World; Although THEY DIFFER IN THE
EXTERNAL FORM IT SELF OF CHVRCH-GOVERNEMENT Multum
and circumstantial Rites very much: yet agreeing in the ESSENTIAL UNITY OF
FAITH, and of the Sacraments. Whence that is common in Cyprian: Episcopatus
unus est, cujus a singulis in solidum pars tenetur. Which words evidently
destroy this opinion. For first they make the Essentialunion or form of the
Society and oneness of the Church, to consist in the oneness of Faith and
Sacraments. Secondly, They imply, That Government is one as it is in Christ,
but diverse as it is in several Churches, and in the hands of several
Officers; for so Calvine (in Ephesians. 4. 11.) expounds that of Cyprian: The
Episcopacie he gives to Christ alone, in the administering whereof, every one
has his part. Thirdly, And (which chiefly assaulteth the heart of the cause
for which it is brought by this Author) They make the very difference betwixt
the universal Church and a particular Church to be this, That they disagree in
the outward or visible form of Church Government; therefore in the sense of
the Professors of Leyden, the Universal Church is not one Governing Body, for
then the Government must be one, not only in Essence, Nature, and Kind, but
one in Number, Existence, single and Indivual being. And thus much for answer
in particular to Apollonius, who indeed has the substance of what has been
said for this opinion: others that follow, having taken his grounds, and
dilated them a little but not much strengthened them thereby, as will appear in
the sequel.

2. The next Defendant of this opinion is M. Hudson, 2.
cited in the first chapter: 2. M. Hudson*
his sense is the same, his words and expressions not so distinct as the
former. Before I come to his Arguments (such as seem to differ from those
before) 1. note that the Scripture he brings to signify the whole company of
the Page 1.
Elect, are the same in sense with those which he brings to signify one Page
13.
Visible Universal body: and so are they expounded (as I have done) by the best
interpreters, even those he makes use of. His first place is Ephesians. 5. 26. Christ
loved the Church, and gave himself for it, etc. This (says he) is to be
understood of the Elect. So also says Beza, but Beza parallels and make the
same in sense with it 1 Cor. 12. 12. 27. Ephesians. 1. 22. and Ephesians. 4. 15. 16. as is
to be seen in his larger notes on M. Hudsons second place cited for this Church
of the Elect, viz. Coloss. 1. 18. which place Meo quidem judicio de
Guhernatione loquitur. Calv. in Coloss. 1. 18.
Calvin understands of the Church as it is governed by Christ: So that these
places, if they be to be understood of the mystical body of Christ, and not of
a Visible Universal Body, then so are the other in the judgment of those
Interpreters. Besides Calv. Verum inter Christian, long ALIA est ratio. Neque
enim Corpus politicum (loquitur de Civili) duntaxat efficient, sed sunt
SPIRITVALE and ARCANVM Christi corpus. Sic. v. 17.
Calvin on that place whereon M. Hudson and the rest build their greatest
strength, 1 Cor. 12. 12. 27. does evidently make the Body and Corporation,
whereof believers are members, to be a spiritual and mystical one, and does so
distinguish it from the society and corporation they have as a politic or a
civil body of a Town or City.

2. This Authors definition does not reach the subject of his question, but
contains what is of all hands confessed, it is this. The Universal Visible
Church is the whole company of Visible Believers throughout the World.

Thirdly, He brings the description of the Church visible out of several
Authors; none of which (not Austins, nor Calvin's, nor Bullingers, nor
Kekermans, nor Zuinglius his, nor Gerards, nor Byfields, who all take Universal
in the sense now described, and not as M. Hudson.) but one or two speak to the
question: viz. Apollonius, and perhaps P. Ramus: the former of which was
pre-ingaged; and touching the latter, I refer the Reader to M. Beza's
judgment of him, and that (as it seems) with reference to this opinion. --
Predixi, quod in caeteris disciplinis-ausus esset, mox etiam in Theologia
tentaturum -- Quid non ille ante mortem molitus est, ut and in dogmatibus
quibusdam, and in tota Ecclesiastica Disciplina Gallicas Ecclesias inter se
COMMITTERET -- Vtinam ipsius scripta periissent, quandoquidem haec est mundi
INSANIA. Bezae Epist. ad Vrsinum in Organ. Aristot.

4. He acknowledges among other Authors Page 11*
Ames to be against him, and yet in the very Page 12.
next page, cites him as for him.

5. Yet those words of this Author which he cites, speak nothing for him,
Bellarm. E^ervat.
if compared with the Authors meaning: they are: We acknowledge a Catholic
Visible Church in respect of its external and accidental form, in its parts
(or members) both severally and jointly. Which is no more but this; that
Christians as they are single men, and as they are combined into particular
Churches, are visible. But M. Hudson might have known or remembered, that M.
Ames does expressly, and in terminis, reject an universal Visible Church in M.
Hudsons sense: his words elsewhere are: The Church since Christ's coming is not
one CATHOLIQVE, Medull. l. 1. c. 3^. n. 20. 21.
so as that all the faithful dispersed throughout the whole world should be
united in one and the same bond for outward relation) and depend upon one and
the same Visible Pastor, or Assembly of Pastors (or Presbytery, mark it:) but
there are so many Churches as there are particular Congregations. For although
the Church mystical, as it is in its members is distinguished into its subject
and adjuncts, as the English Church, the French, the Belgic: as we use to call
the sea by the name of the coast it beats upon, as the British, the Belgic,
the Baltic sea, although it be one and the same sea: yet notwithstanding
instituted Churches are several distinct species, or kinds, or single bodies
partaking of the same common Nature, as several springs, several schools,
several families; although perhaps many of them, or all, may be called one
Church in respect of some affection which they all have in commune. Like as
many Families of one and the same noble and eminent Family, are called by one
name, as the house of Nassau, or the house of Austria, which comprehends the
Emperor and King of Spain, who yet have no dependence in point of Government
one on another. Now we know who taxes somebody for this fault, M. Edw. Gangr.
part 1.
of citeing Authors for them, who are known to be in the main, against them.

6. His explication of his question both confutes his opinion, and also
contradicts plainly what he speaks of it. For he says, That the Church
Catholic visible is one whole body, page 20. 21.
all whose parts or particular Churches are alike, Totum Integrale similare.
and of the same Nature: And avouches for this purpose the authority of Ames*
who indeed says so. Now in a body all whose parts are of like nature and
quality, as so many drops of water, or stones in a heap: each part has the
same virtue and power that the whole, and all the parts together, (the whole
Sea, or whole heap of Stones) have no other kind of Virtue or power then one
drop, or one stone. Or to make it clear by another similitude, several
Kingdoms in the world, and several Corporations in a Kingdom, and several
families in Corporation, if they be all but members alike of the same
Kingdom, and not of a higher body, whereof when they are met, they may be
members, (as Kingdoms of an Empire, Corporations of a Parliament, Families of
a Corporation,) They should have no more nor greater power when met, then when
assunder? As a multitude of single men, that are not of a Corporation, though
they be met; yet have they not the more power then each one simply, for their
meeting; their meeting adds no power, unless they meet as members of a body
superior to them, when several.

2. This explication contradicts expressly what he adds in the same place,
(page 21.) and which is his opinion, that he would establish, viz. That the
Church, (Visible Catholic) is an Organicall, Ministerial Governing body;
that is; not such a body as is the element of water or air, every part whereof
is of the same nature, virtue and power in it self considered; but such a body
as a man has, which is distinguished by several members, some principal,
some less principal, some governing, as head eyes; some acting, as hands
fee^; some governed, as the body by the head eyes, etc. And such a body as all
Corporations are. Now this contradicts plainly the former, both opinion and
expression; for if the Church be a similar body, and all Congregations alike;
and the whole nothing differing in nature or constitution, or power from the
parts; then the Catholic Universal visible Church, is no more the Governing
Church, then a particular. As the whole sea is no more Water then one drop, nor
all men, if they be taken as single men, have no more or higher authority then
one man: nor all families then one family: nor all Corporations then one
Corporation.

We see that it is not one sort of men only that are obnoxious to
contradictions, both verbal and real. Besides, the Author he seem^ to follo^,
Mr Ca^drey, Preface to V^^dic. Clavium.
(viz. Apollonius) enterprets that place, Ephesians. 4. 16. The whole body fitly
joined together, to be meant of an Organicall Ministerial body differing in
members; which Mr Hudson expounds to be meant of a Similar and body whose parts
are all alike. Vide Caudrey ubi supra.
We see here also, that even persons of this opinion cannot agree among
themselves, shall we therefore say they know not what they would have, seeing
one would have one thing, another another? We must then reach out the same
ingenuity unto others, differing in like manner, that we stand in need of our
selves.

About his answers to the objections he brings against his opinion, Object.
we may note several things, as first, in his answer to the 1. Objection, he
says, That the dwelling in one Town where there is a Church, and being member
of another Church, is a kind of dis-churching that Church which is in the
Town where he dwells.

But the answer is ready according to his opinion; Ansvv.
for they remain still of the same integrall body, if the whole Church be but
one visible Congregation: and so we see what way by this opinion is made to the
scattering of particular Churches, Instance,
seeing men may remove, though not in dwelling, yet in relation at pleasure,
without danger of Schism; for they remain still of the same single (though
larger) body, as a man may dwell in one Corporation, and be a member of
another, yet he still abides a member of one and the same single Kingdom.

His 2d. Objection is, Object. 2.
That if all particular Churches be all one Church, they must all meet some
times.

His answer is, Ansvv.
1. No, It is sufficient that it have the same King, Laws, Spirit, etc. But
was there ever in the world such a Kingdom or Corporation, that the members of
it do not meet sometimes, if it be not a mere visible Monarchy, Instance*
as under Popery. If it have any liberty left to the subjects* they must meet
sometimes, at least by their Deputies, as the Kingdom of England in
Parliament, the Empire of Germany in the states of the Empire, etc.

His 2d. answer is, That the Church Catholic visible, has met in General
Counsels, as a ministerial Church (and mark, it is now ministerial and
heterogeneall, which was before similar and homogeneall) but this is replied to
above, where was showed, 1. That the most primitive Churches did not so act. 2.
That the whole Church did not meet in them. 3. That they either acted as a
similar body acts in the name of those, and within the Churches that sent them
each for their own, and all for all those, whose Deputies they were for ought
we have learnt yet: or else that they acted much by Regal power, as by
Constantines, in the Council of Nice, and others by other Emperors: and they
acted also in late Councels by Episcopal, Archiepiscopall and Patriarchal
power, and not as a similar body. 4. If those were the Catholic Church visible
representative: How dare any particular Churches at most but (if) national,
abrogate and swear against, the Ordinances and government established by the
Catholic Church. Let him mind this. Again he says, The power of a general
Council, or of the Catholic visible Church, is but EXTENSIVE, and the power of
particular Churches INTENSIVE: but 1. This overthrowes his tenet; for then the
Catholic Church has no more power in it self, and properly, but merely by
accident, then a particular Church. And 2. This plucks up his second Tenet,
viz. That this Catholic Church is the first Church, to whom power is given:
for if its power be extensive only, and not inward, It cannot be the first
subject of power.

The 3d. Object. He moves against himself is: Object. 3.
A visible Catholic Church must have a visible (Catholic) head.

His 1. answer is, Answ.
That it is sufficient that Christ is the head, though in heaven. But this is
altogether an unsufficient answer. For Christ is the Head invisible, and thence
our divines affirm his body the Church to be mystical also and invisible,
taken properly.

2. He says that The Church; in regard of the head, the government of it is
absolutely Monarchical, but in regard of the Officers it is Aristocraticall.
Instance.
But this answers not the objection: for be it Monarchical or Aristocraticall;
yet if the body be one visible Corporation, then must the Governors of it be
one visible, either person or company of men usually, or at sometimes
ordinarily meeting together, or at least to be considered as one body or
College of men, by whom this body is jointly and together, (and not asunder)
to be governed. And this is the force of Calvin's reason (on Ephesians. 4. 11.) though
applied to the Papacy. For if we must be one visible corporation, there must
be one visible governor, either person or society: which the Apostle
omitting, in that place where it was necessary to have been mentioned it, if it
had been an ordinance, cannot, says he, be excused.

His 4th. Objection is: Object. 4.
That if the Catholic Church be one visible body, it must have a visible
existence and being, as it is universal and Catholic; but universalls have
no being of their own, but they exist and have their being only in
particular; as Mankind in general has no being a part by it self from
single men, but has its being in them only.

His Answer is: Answ.
That all gathered aggregated, or collected bodies do exist and have their
beings so. As a heap of stones has its being only in the particular stones:
the water in particular drops: particular Churches consist of particular
families: and families of particular persons: and an Army in the several
Brigades, which yet are one, though they should never meet.

But this reply amounts not to an answer. Instance*
For no collected body that is made up of several things, has its being in
these things severally considered and apart, but as united altogether; it is
not a heap of stones if one lie at York, some at London, others in France,
Spain etc. So a Church is not a Church, or one company as the families are
several but as met together in one Assembly; and so an Army; Brigades may be
sent out of it, but if that part were never united to the Army by 1000. miles,
nor intended to be, and if they be not governed either by one visible head, or
by one visible Council of War, no man will say they are one Army: especially
if one be in England and the other in America.

Do we not say, The Parliament has had several Armies under several
distinct commanders in chief, who had no dependence one on another (as it was
a good while after the Earl of Essex had his Commission) and yet under the
command of the Parliament, and Laws Martial published by them. So Christ from
the Father by the Spirit is the governor of all Churches, which Churches have
no necessary dependence, further then that of mutual love spirit and law, one
on another.

His 5th. and last Objection is: Object. 5.
The Catholic Church may be by persecutions, etc. reduced to one
Congregation.

His answer is: Answ.
It may be so; but that in that one Congregation there remains all the Essence
and Privileges of the Catholic Church Visible, though it be but one single
Congregation at present, yea, that it has then more properly the notion of the
Catholic Church, The like has Apoll^nius.
then of a particular one, yea, though but of one family, as it was in Noah's
family in the Arc.

But we see what straights this Large conceit of the universal visible Church
does drive into; Instance,
for this implies what was denied before, namely, That the Church Catholic is
a species, or lower kind, and the particular Churches the severalls of it: for
else confounds Universal and particular together: making an universal thing
reducible to a particular, and this extendible to an universal.

2. How could it be Universal, but as containing the Essence; seeing in
respect of its visible and present being it is particular. In which sense,
every Single man is a Catholic and Universal creature, because he contains
in him the same Essence and nature that is in all men; and Adam should have
been so in a special manner, as being the first.

3. A particular thing does not therefore become an Universal one because it
is first in its kind and others that are produced from it, particulars.
Universality is a notion (though founded in Nature) not an existing thing, to
which any order of actual being can be attributed.

4. If the first in each kind have all the privileges of that kind whilst it
remains alone, it shall be a looser when it has company, if it then part
with them; unless it has somewhat as good in Lieu, which here appears not;
but the contrary.

5. It no way follows that because from one, many of the same kind may
spring, that therefore either this first (suppose a Family) must have
government over them all, or they over it, or over one another, whether jointly
or severally, unless they so agree, or there be an institution of one
superior to them all. Now how should it appear there has been, or ought to
be any such grant here; seeing there is no such record in scripture; and
besides has been the occasion of the rise of Papacy, Vid. Cent. Eccles.
as Mr Noyes acknowledges. And thus much of the things to be noted before his
Arguments.

2. Now the Arguments themselves follow to be answered: they are of two sorts,
1. Certain places of scripture. 2. One argument from reason. ^. Scriptures.
But seeing the former, almost all; run upon the word CHVRCH, set down
indefinitely, they have been replied to before.

His argument is; If particular Churches be visible, then there is an
universal visible Church, 2. One Argument from Reason.
for every particular or part, belongs to some general and whole; and such as
the particulars are, such the General: if those be visible, then this also.

Answ. More ^are should have been taken, then to use so lax a medium in so
weighty an Argument, as Mr. ^. in the License, acknowledges this to be. But to
the matter. There is great difference between Natural; and between
Metaphysicall, and ^ivill or Politic bodies. For in a Natural body, all
whose parts and members are actually and naturally joined and united together:
the whole is visible because the parts are visible^ but in a metaphysicall
body, or totum, or whole: that is, in Generals that are, by the reason of man
drawn from particulars, the case is far otherwise, the particulars are
visible, the General or universal invisible: Peter, James and John, are
visible, but manhood or man's nature (animal rationale) which is the Universal
agreeing to them all, is not visible: It is not to be seen with the eye. So
also in Civil bodies or Corporations, though the several men may be seen, yet
the Corporation if great, (an Empire, Kingdom, and large City) cannot be
seen, in it self: but in the parts, unless by way of representation, as in
Parliament, Common Council, etc.

But 2* The whole is visible because the parts are so; It is untrue, even in
the smallest bodies, but where the parts are actually united and joined
together; not where they are thousands of miles a^under: such a body (as a
body) cannot be seen with the eye, but it may be conceived, to be one in the
mind, by virtue of some agreement or other betwixt the members of it, or of
its union in some Visible head; but it is visible only in respect of the
several parts of it. Now in this sense, none denies the universal Church to
be visible: that is, that all Christians, who are one in respect of their
Religion they profess, are visible in the several places where they dwell.
But this is to prevaricate, and to prove that which is not in question. So that
this reason is not so much as probable* A causa necessaria aut effectur, and
contra.
if it be taken in the former sense; much less any necessary concluding
argument, and least of all a demonstration (which was promised by the Author.)
And in the other sense* it is besides the Question.

And thus much for Mr Hu^son's first Question, viz. ^ha^ there is a Catholic
visible Church.

His 2d. is: That this Church is the first subject of Ecclesiastique Power* But
because the proofs are much from the same places of Scripture which are
answered above, and the reasoning wholly on the same foundation: viz. that
^ivers things are spoken of the Church which cannot agree to a particular
Church as particular, which also was replied to before; I shall not after too
large a discourse already, add any more here, nor shall I need: for if I have
acquitted my self in the former discourse, in opposition to the notion of one
universal visible Church or Corporation; I need not contend whether it be the
first subject of Church power; for it having no actual being and existence at
all, it cannot be the subject of any power or act, (as non entis nulla sunt
attributa; so, non existentis nullae sunt operationes) only the Reader may
observe, that the root of all the mistake in the former, this author and the
rest, about these questions is: The radical mistake in this Question.
^ither the not distinguishing the Nature and Essence of the Church (in which
respect it has ^he names and things they urge, given to it) from the relations
of Universal and particular; which are notions, and accidental to it: and
confounding the Essence, and existence, the nature and the actual being of the
Church together; applying that to the particular being; as Particular; which is
spoken of them, being particular, but in respect of the common essence and
nature, not as particular. Or 2. Not differencing betwixt the mystical^ and
visible state of it; Compare Beza his exposition of 1 Cor. 12. and Ephesians. 4. 4.
with theirs.
much being said in the former respect, which they apply to the latter.

The third Defendant, or rather Assaylant, is the Reverend Assembly of Divines;
3.
Their Assertion is: The whole Church is but one made up of the Collection and
aggregation of all who are called out of the World by the preaching of the Word
to profess the faith of Christ in the unity thereof: 3. Assembly of Divines.
Their first Argument (employed) is this: Reply to the dissenting Brethren* to
the third proposit. p. 48. And Confession of Faith, cap. 25. n. 2, 3, 4.
From this union there arises unto every one such a relation unto* and
dependence upon the Catholic Church, as parts have to the whole, and are to
do all Christian duties, Arg. 1.
as parts conjoined unto the whole, and members of the same (that must be
single) Common wealth and Corporation.

Answ. Such is the advantage of Truth, Ansvv.
that the greatest abilities grow weak when they dash against it. It Is sensible
in this Argument and Authors of it. For it does not at all follow, that every
company of men that in some respect have an union together, and in that respect
may be conceived as one whole Brotherhood or Fellowship, should* herefore be
one commonwealth or corporation. For as was said before: the brethren or
families of the same first Parent (suppose of the house of Essex, Manchester,
or Fairfax) have an union of blood together, and in that respect are called the
House in the singular number (not the Houses) of such a Family: from which
union there arises to every one of that House, such a relation unto, and
dependence upon the House or Family in general, as parts have to the whole, and
are to do all such brotherly duties, as parts conjoined to the whole: yet does
it not hence follow that all these persons and their Families (which possibly
may be many) are therefore one corporation. The same might more evidently be
illustrated by the whole race of mankind, who are one in nature, one in
parent, one in office general (the government of the world and worship of God)
one in the common laws of Nature; one in the principal Governor: God is the
King of all the Earth etc. And from this union, there arises unto every man
such a relation unto, and dependence upon the catholic world, or mankind in
general, as parts have to the whole, and are to do all humane duties, as parts
conjoined to the whole of mankind: Hence the Philosopher, when rebuked for
giving an Alms to a needy, Arist.
but naughty fellow, replied: I give it ((...)) not to the man, but to
mankind: yet how will would the Honorable Assembly of Parliament take this
consequence from the Reverend Assembly of Divines; If therefore they should
conclude; that all the men in the world are but one commonwealth and
corporation: for then, as the former assertion, of the oneness of the Visible
Church, has made them Schismatics in the Church, and such also as have sworn
to be so: In like manner this inference would represent them seditious in the
world in the same degree, and with them, all particular Churches, Kings, and
Kingdoms likewise.

Object. But they say, Object.
That the union of the Church is nearer, and the relation closer, and
obligation strickter betwixt the members of the Church, then betwixt the
persons of men, because it is spiritual and heavenly.

To which is answered 1. That the relation and union seems to be equally near
and close in their several kinds: Ansvv.
Men as Men, are as much, and have as near an union, and are as much engaged
one to another, Christians, as Christians; and Churches, as Churches; though
the relation of Christians is more Noble and excellent; and the motives
stronger. As beasts are as much one in their kind as men, though the nature of
man be more excellent.

2. But be the relation of Christians yet closer; yet that is in Spirit, Faith,
mystical Union, etc. not outward and visible further then to carry on the
invisible, according to the Institution of Christ: But neither this, nor the
former, is by this notion countenanced, but the contrary, as has been
evidenced. There may be a Society in Faith, as there was in many parts and
persons where there was no oneness in Government: Job was not alone in the
World, some other Church God then had; and so he was one in the faith, and
profession, and kind of Church Administration with them; but not united in one
body of ou^ward government.

The place alleged for strengthening this Argument, viz. Ephesians. 4. 3, to 14, has
been ansvvered above; and implies no more but an essential or mystical union;
which necessarily implies an outward one in all duties in respect of the
substance only, not the subject of them; but prudentially and occasionally:
Such an union integrally (per modum suppositi, and subjecti) and by way of
oneness in a visible way of joint government; as shall be expedient for
edification; which ordinarily is best promoted, within such a society as may
(at least upon occasion) meet together in one place; or howsoever live together
in some neernesse at least. Which is the more evident; because the largest
Churches mentioned in Scripture did so, as the Jewish Church: (all whose Males
met thrice a year at one place; and whose whole Territory or Land was but
small, scarce the fourth part of England: and therefore might the better be one
entire Congregation or Church: but had they lived some at one end of the World,
some at the other, as Christians do; there is no likelihood they should have
been one Church Integral) and as the Christians in Jerusalem, and in other
cities; at the first plantation of the Gospel.

The second Argument: All the Ministers and officers of the Church are given to
the whole Church.

Answ. All the Magistrates and Officers of the World are given to the whole
world for the governing of it; but not to the world conjunctim, and as one
single Commonwealth or Corporation made up of several corporations and
Commonwealths; but divisim in respect of the several corporations and
Commonwealths. The places alleged for proof, 1 Cor. 12. 28. Ephesians. 4. 11. are
answered above, whither we refer the Reader.

The third Argument is drawn from the third, fourth, and fifth supposition
(page 48) When the Church was no more then could meet in one place, the
Officers governed them as one undivided body respectively: But their number
increasing, so as they could not meet altogether, they divided into several
Companies, which are in scripture called Churches: (to some one of which every
believer is bound to join himself) But these several Churches should not act
or work as if they were Independent Corporations, Every one to be of some
particular Congregation in the judgment of the Reverend Assembly.
but only as parts of Christ's body, and are all to regard the common good of
the whole, Ephesians. 4. 1. etc. and for that end are as much bound (if it may be) to
associate (into Presbyteries, etc. as particular men and families into
Churches, there being as much need of the one as of the other: and so as many
men or families make but one particular visible Church; so all particular
Churches by this association make but one Catholic visible Church Ministerial,
and Governing of right all the rest.

Answ. God and Christ have disposed and ordered the Government of the World,
Answ.
and the Church according to the several conditions whereinto the providence
of the one and the other has determined to bring them. When we are Children,
God has appointed one kind of government for us, viz. to be under tutors and
governors until the time of age, and then we are not so: when afterward a man
is disposed in marriage, though he have a relation to his Parent, yet not a
necessary dependence on him in point of government. So whilst a Family is but
one, it is governed as one body, by one or more Parents of Officers who in
point of government are one single body: but as was said, if this Family
multiply beyond the bounds of that first house, they are not now still to be
fancyed to be but one Catholic Family, to be governed in common. Take for
instance the Family of Adam or Noah; The whole world was but then one Family,
and governed by one man etc. shall we need to repeat the absurdity of the
consequence, if therefore we should conclude, that the several Kingdoms and
Nations are not therefore to act as Independent Corporations; but as parts of
the body Politic of the World which is Gods kingdom general. And yet there is
a relation betwixt all societies of men, as men, by virtue whereof they are all
to regard the common good of mankind etc. In like manner does Christ in his
Church: when believers are babes, he would have them the more absolutely to
subject themselves to their spiritual Parents: when grown up they have a
greater freedom, and are to be otherwise governed: the Apostle bids Timothy not
to rebuke an Elder, but to entreat them as Fathers, etc. So when the whole
Church was but one company, they were governed as such, and by one company of
Officers that had charge over them all, and every one particularly, according
to their several offices: As the Pastors to teach every one; the Rulers to
watch over every one; the Deacons to provide for every one etc. But this Family
of the second Adam, and second Noah (as Peter implies him to be) spreading into
many particular Families, 1 Pet* 3. 20.
and Nations: the Scripture never (I say never) represents them as one visible
body in respect of their outward Association and Government, but still speaks
of them as many: the Churches of Judea, which yet under the Legal government
was but one (the Church Act. 7.) pray, why this difference of speech; but to
confute this oneness visible of all Churches? When they are called the Church,
it reflects upon them as one in Faith, Spirit, kind of worship and Government,
as the place alleged Ephesians. 4. 1. plainly expresses. And yet I deny not that
these particular Churches are to have a regard to the common good of all
Churches, and not to act as if they were in relation to none but themselves;
and for this end also it is convenient and sometimes necessary, if it may be
done, to associate with other Churches for mutual assistance, and to meet in
Synods and Councels together, as did the Church of Antioch and Jerusalem, and
the Churches in the Primitive times. The kingdom of England, and so other
Nations are bound in some cases, to associate with other Kingdoms, and are
actually associated with them, as also was Solomon with the king of Egypt, and
Hiram king of Tire: but is England not to act as an Independent Kingdom; from
France, Spain, Scotland, or the Kingdom of Israel, or Independent (saving the
Articles of Association) for all See the House of Commons answ. to the Scots
papers, about the Kings person. Suppos. 7.
that.

They add in the same place as a prevention of an objection: That as the mutual
consent of particular men and families orderly into Churches gives them Power
and Authority, (Ecclesiastical) one over another, Object.
without destroying the liberty of such persons and families, but helping of
it: so also in this association of Churches, their mutual consent orderly
regulated, gives them a sufficient call for their Elders to exercise their
power of Elders, (over the Congregations in common) without impeaching the
liberties, etc.

But 1. This similitude does not truly represent these Brethrens opinion: Answ.
who hold that the Catholic visible Church is before any particular Church:
and is the first subject of all Church Power: and the mother out of which
particular Churches spring: whereas this similitude makes the particular
Churches to exist. First as mothers to the universal: this being according to
their expression, now nothing else but a collection or aggregation of them.
Secondly, This seems inconsistent with the former reasoning; for if by Divine
Right all particular Churches are but one universal and general Church or
Corporation, and all particular men and families: by Gods appointment are to
associate with some particular Church, then have the Churches right to this
common government, not from any consent, but from Gods institution: whether the
members or persons consent or consent not: yea, and hence is it that Churches
and Presbyteries may, by our brethrens principles, be excommunicated: for we
may suppose some Churches will not consent to such associations.

Objection If it be said, Object.
This consent grounds the relation to this or that particular Church with which
they shall associate.

I reply, Answ.
that this removes not the objection; for in general they are engaged unto
subjection to the universal Church, and the particular Church to which they
join is but a necessary condition, that they may the better be under the
universal discipline.

3. The case is not the same betwixt particular persons, and Families joining
into some particular Congregation; and the association of several Churches into
one body: much less of all into one general Commonwealth: For the former
instance plainly confutes it. A man or family is ordinarily bound to be of some
Kingdom, Commonwealth, or State; but it does not therefore follow that all
States or Kingdoms must needs be associated together into one general
Commonwealth: neither is the reason the same. For a whole Kingdom, State, or
Society is better able to defend it self against injuries, and to accomodate it
self with necessaries, than a particular person or Family; and what is wanting
may be sufficiently supplied by mere Voluntary, Arbitrary, and Temporary
Association in a Commonwealth; which in a Family or Person is not so.

4. It must not be said by rational men, that 1. All men are bound to
associate, and so all Churches. 2. They being associated are to be governed; by
others which are more then themselves; and yet their liberty is not diminished,
but strengthened: if the Reverend Assembly shall say, that their security and
safety may possibly be thereby strengthened, it might in some cases be
admitted. But surely, as the liberty of a particular man or family, is not the
same before he is bound to others, and afterward, though his safety may be the
more, so here.

5. How are we slidden from one Integral entire body, flowing from one Church
at Jerusalem etc. to a body made up of voluntary Associations. The Kingdom of
England is one entyre Commonwealth or body, corporate of it self
intrinsecally (politically:) the United Provinces are one by aggregations and
voluntary Association. But these two Reipublicks do greatly differ: now the
Church general is asserted by the Reverend Assembly, to be one Commonwealth,
and Body corporate; to whom as one, yea and as first, before all particular
Churches: The Officers, Ordinances, and Government of the Church is
concredited and committed.

Of like incompossibility is what is there added for illustration sake, viz.
That this joyneing is such as proceeds, Ex charitate, ex debito mutuae
societatis colendae: as is between Friends and Equals: Non ex debito
inferioris conditionis ad praestandum obsequium. As betwixt Masters and
servants: For what is this? (but Verba dare, rem auferre.)

The Honorable Houses of Parliament, and Assembly of Divines, Kingdom and
Churches of England: take their liberty now to reform the State and Church, as
they judge agreeable to Law, Reason, and Religion. This opinion by consequence
makes this Kingdom but a Depending Member of the Universal Monarchy of the
World; and does expressly affirm the Church or Churches in this Nation to act
but as such in respect of the Universal Church. Whence it inevitably and
evidently follows; that they ought to be in actual association with all the
rest of the Nations, and Churches of the World: these being an hundred times
more in number, have power at pleasure to over-vote them, and to govern them:
and yet must the Parliament, Assembly, the Nation, and Churches of this
Kingdom: even when actually so overborne, perhaps against their mind, and
wills, fancy and coneit themselves as free, and enjoying as much liberty as
now they do. May we not ascend by a predicamentall Ladder (Classibus
Vniversalium. Kek.) must it be by a Transcendent, even to Reason it self?

Another confirmation of this third Argument, Light of Nature.
is taken from the Light of Nature: which requires, say these Reverend
Gentlemen, that the means for (the edification of) Particular Christians,
should be as applyable to whole companies of them; unless Gods word has some
where forbidden it.

To which I return, 1. That this Light of Nature should not be too much urged,
for it will plead hard for Episcopacie and a Pope. (...), will bussle shrewdly
here. 2. That the method of the Light of Nature is to follow the Scriptures in
matters of Christian Religion, and not to move in them where the Scriptures
stand still, and are silent; hence I note in the ranging of the Arguments of
the Ministers of London in their divine right of the Presbytery: Divine right
of Presbytery, in the Analys. of the book.
that they place the light of Nature first, which though they do as intending
it for the lowest step, yet it is not justifiable to make it any at all in the
things of Christ; but where it has some precedent hint from Scripture. 3. The
light of Nature I have shown before, does make a difference betwixt the
necessity of associating of particular persons, and of Commonwealths (such as
the Church is said to be,) and differenceth also the associations of the one
and the other: making the former a necessary oneness and singleness of
Corporation and Government; but the other merely an arbitrary and temporary
friendship. 4. The Scripture has more to forbid all Churches to associate into
one body Universal Politic; then it has that particular Churches should be
entire body Politics or Corporations of themselves; seeing there is often
express mention of particular visible governing Churches, but none expressly of
an universal one. 5. I retort the way of reasoning; the light of Nature teaches
there is not the same reason betwixt particular persons, and Commonwealths in
this particular, and therefore not to be made all one, unless the Scripture
had commanded it.

The last particular which may seem to be (though not brought here by them for
that end) a confirmation of this Tenet, is (by occasion) alleged in page 61.
from the parallel of the Church of Christ with the Church of the Jews, to whom
the whole Tribe of Levi was given as their Ministry. 1. As to one body
together, when in the Wilderness. 2. To them as one body fixed, and dispersed
in Canaan. This is replied to before; I repeat now, That these being and living
together in one small Territory; and meeting all the Males three times a year
in one place, Jerusalem; at one meeting house, the Temple: does not argue the
Church scattered throughout the World to be therefore one: no more then because
one Kingdom may be one Commonwealth, and have Officers in common, therefore,
all Kingdoms must be one. 2. Besides; this instance engages all the Churches to
meet at some one place: to have one chief Governor besides the Elders in
common, with such other inconveniences as are usually urged against this
parallel.

We have done with the Arguments; one passage or two I shall animadvert upon,
and (with due respect) take my leave. Whilst they endeavor to maintain: That
it is not left free, but is a duty of every Congregation; to associate with
others: They say: All are enjoined to be of some Congregation; but when they
join to this rather then to that, the mutual consent between them and the
Congregation with whom they join, is that which immediately gives them that
special relation one to another, etc. From which I note: That here is employed a
liberty in particular Christians, to join to such Churches as they shall see
cause. If this be so, how is it that the violation of Parochial limits is so
insisted on (though oft-times manifestly prejudicial to edification, etc.) and
those who keep not unto their Parishes, presented and persecuted; and those
ministers that admit Christians of other Parishes, resented as the destroyers
of particular Congregations, and such who (novo and inaudito exemplo) gather
Churches out of Churches? Now it will not salve to say, 1. That at the first
constitution of Parishes there was such voluntary consent: seeing 1. Which
Parishes did so, does not appear: And secondly, In many, it is evident they were
cast into parishes by those who were lords of those Manors. 3. Neither is it
rationally probable, that the whole Nation to one man did voluntarily receive
the Gospel it self: seeing fraud and force (neither of which are voluntary
motives) were the tools of Popery, under which the conversion National was
made.

4. And though at first the union of such might be convenient: yet afterward it
may become an hinderance. Yet am not I for the drawing of any Godly, Able, and
faithful ministers people from him, who is for the substance of Reformation,
though with many defects in lesser things* Nor 2. will it be sufficient to say,
that when they choose to dwell in such parishes, that then they consent to be
of such a Congregation: for we know men do that on civil, and oft-times
necessitated grounds, as most convenient for livelihood; when yet they are
altogether unsatisfied either in the Minister or Congregation.

A 2. passage is p. 62. the several Congregations choose or accept their
particular Officers, and all the Congregation united, choose or accept their
common Presbytery: yet page 58. it is said their office is conferred on them by
the Church: either then, the common Presbytery is the Church when they choose
the Elders for the several Congregations; for they do but accept of them on the
matter; or else it was not a plain declaration of their minds, when they said
the Church chooses; or else this is inconsistent with the other.

The 4th Assertor is Mr Noyes, Sect. 4.
whose tenet is: That the Church of Christ on earth, Temple measured, cap. 1.
is one integral body visible, and has power to act in Synods and Councels
unto the end of the world. His 1. Argument is: The Apostle were members. 2.
Officers of the Catholic, not any particular Church. These are replied to
above. 3. They admitted members into the Catholic Church, Act. 1. c. 10. c.
16.
as the Eunuch and Cornelius, the Jailer, etc.

Answ. These persons were admitted into the Church or company of those who
profess Christ; and were made visible members of that society and corporation
which is invisible; as the Sacraments are said to be visible signs of
invisible Grace. The Church Catholic is visible in respect of its several
members and societies or Churches; but not in respect of its whole being, as
one Corporation. Society and Corporation, properly so called, differ. All men
are one society, but not one Corporation: so in the Church. Now according to
nature of the society, are the privileges: common society has certain common
rights: proper societies have peculiar ones. Now the Church in general is a
society to all the members, of which there belong certain common rights and
privileges; as Spiritual food, the word Sacraments, the right of government
in the general, etc. but this implies not, that it should be properly one
Corporation, no more then it concludes because mankind is a society, and
every one that is born, is already by his birth admitted a member of humane
society: and so into all the rights of men, as they are men, as to have right
to food, clothes, protection, and government in the general; that therefore
all the men in the world are one Corporation or Kingdom.

2. They were admitted by baptism immediately and directly into Christ and his
mystical body; but into the visible company only by accident. If there had
been but one believer on earth; Baptism had had its use and end.

Argum. 4. Christ is one visible head, etc. by virtue of his Laws, Ordinances,
Providence, walking in the midst of the Church, and of two or three gathered
together, as the King of Engl. is visibly King of Sco^l. though residing at
London in Engl. therefore the King being one the Church his Kingdom, is one too.

Answ. He cites in the margent * Epist. 83. page, 367. Ecclesia non est
Reipubl. non Arist^^ratia, sed regnum*
Beza: saying that The Church is not a common wealth, nor an Aristocracy, but a
Kingdom: and if so; surely Christ is the absolute monarch of it: But that
argues the Church to be one, in respect of Christ only, his spirit and laws,
but not at all in respect of its visible Government by it self; unless it be
proved that Christ has instituted on earth one visible single person or
society of men to govern as one company together, the whole Church on earth.

2. A King though absent from one place, yet is visible somewhere in his
Kingdoms, but Christ not personally visibly now.

3. A king of more kingdoms then one, though they be one as they meet in his
person, and in some respects, and have some common privileges; yet may their
governments be distinct, as England and Scotland. 4. As Christ is one, so God
is one, and as the Church is Christ's Kingdom, so is the world Gods Kingdom:
his Law of nature one, his providence governing one: but is it therefore but
one outward Kingdom?

Arg. 5. The Church of the Jews was a Type of the Christian Church: the great
Sanhedrin figured the Apostles, and general Counsels; they were many tribes,
but one Church. Arg. 6. Rev. 11. 1. 2. 3. the universal Church is represented
by one city, the new Iernsalem: and called the Church, Mat. 16. 1 Cor. 12. Ephesians.
4.

Answ. The Jewish Church was a Type, but not in all things, for then must we
have one visible high Priest, one Temple, must meet altogether there; etc. but
as these ended in Christ, so that national Church, till it be called the second
time. 2. That Church was but one single entire Congregation, there they met all
of them, thrice a year before the Lord, and the Tabernacle; called the
Tabernacle of the Congregation. 4. The Church and Commonwealth were one body *
See this Argu^. urged for the power of the Magistrate in Church affairs fully
answered by Trigland. de Civil. and Eccles. potestat. cap. 12.
as such: which I think Mr Noyes will not judge to hold in all nations. 2. To
that of one Jerusalem, I say, that it is questionable whether those places
speak of the Church, as it shall be before the coming of Christ or after. 3.
Whether they speak of the state of it before the calling of the Jews or after;
the latter is affirmed by several expositors; and they urge the word Jerusalem,
it shall be the State of the Jews: But 4. Howsoever, figurative and symbolical
places are not argumentative alone. 5. The Church is no mystical Jerusalem,
though not visible; neither does that vision argue it to be visible; no more
then the Holy Ghost his appearing in the shape of a Dove, conclude that the
Holy spirit is visible. Argum. 7. The mystical union of Brotherhood makes one
mystical body: Ergo the visible union one visible body.

Answ. It beggs the Question. For it is denied that there is such a visible
Oneness, as is the mystical: the mystical union Catholic is real: the
visible notionall only: So all men have a mystical union of nature, yet not in
outward government: nor would it be convenient they should.

Argum. 8. All natural grounds of fellowship in particular Churches in respect
of ordinary execution, bespeaks fellowship in one Catholic Church, in respect
of less ordinary. Brotherly union, Christian profession, the celebration of
the name of Christ, who is glorified more eminently in the great assembly; all
these are prevalent. The notion of a relation does cherish affection: pride,
and independency are inseparable.

Answ. 1. Does all relations of persons one to another, and obligations of
mutual duties in regard of those relations, argue that they must be one
Corporation, and one Government: The twelve children of Jacob, if God had seen
it good, might have been so many several Churches and kingdoms, and yet have
preserved unity, and done their duties of their relation of Brotherhood. Vid.
Cottens keys, chapter 6.
The twelve Apostles were independent in power one from another (see Gal. 7.
chap. 2.) yet were in relation one to another, and did perform all mutual
offices for the good of the whole.

2. As pride and independency are inseparable, so also pride and usurpation,
pride and invasion of the rights of particulars, under notion of a common
society; pride and Tyranny, which has its way paved in the Church by this
notion, as has been found by experience; and it is acknowledged by this Author
in this chapter to have been the occasion of the rising of the man of sin,
viz. some of the Ancients their high doting on the unity of the visible Church.

3. Some kind of Independency may be without pride; such as was in the
Apostles; and is in the several Kingdoms, and free States in the world:
(whereof New England the place of this Authors habitation is one) and all
kind of it, and an absolute independency is disavowed by persons of the
greatest note in that way; Apoil^g. Narrat. page 14.
as the Apologists expressly call absolute independency as a proud and insolent
title; so the Elders of New England, and particularly M. Keys of the kingdom
of heaven, cap. 6.
Cotton. This Author therefore should either have explained himself touching
Independency, or else have used some other expression, then that which he could
not but know, would be (ad salviam) indeed to the palate of some, but (ad
contumeliam) an addition to the pressure that others (good and sober men) are
oppressed with. But it may be the superstition of certain of the old Amamae
Epist, ad M. Marsenn. o^ymum serere cum convitiis.
heathen takes at this day; who in sowing some kind of grain, apprehended it
would grow the better, if it were done with reviling and reproaching each
other. I would willingly hope, that example of Tertullian is so well known to
Mr* Noyes, Hieron. De V. illustr. and ^ent. Mag. 3. c. 10. Tit. de Doctr
that no provocation from the Church should excite him to satisfy himself upon
it. Injuriae parentum ferendae sunt.

Argum. 9. The Covenant or profession of all Israel together, was to walk
before the Lord: 2 Chronicles. 15. 12. c. 34. 31.
And converts in the Primitive Church, promised to walk with all Saints, in all
the Ordinances: The Church is one City, having many gates; or particular
Churches, by any gate or Church entrance is had into the whole Church, etc.

Answ. 1. There must be difference made betwixt the state of the Jewish and
Christian Church; because they were jointly One Commonwealth, and one
PARTICVLAR Congregation, and not the universal Church, unless by accident, in
as much as there was then no other visible Church; except, as we said before,
we follow those who hold that Iethro, Job, etc. lived in those times; and were
particular Churches.

2. Whether the Covenant in the Primitive time ran in such a form, does not
appear to me: but for the sense of it, it may be admitted, according to what
has been often said; men are engaged, and may promise to do the duties of
their relations to those to whom they have any tie, and so in that respect are
one with them; and yet it follows not that this body is a visible body or
Corporation, it may be a mystical one; or it may be visible in some respect,
and not in point of Government: or yet the government may be visible in several
parts; but not as one in the whole. All the Apostles were engaged to assist one
another, yet did they not depend one on another in point of Government; as
after I had said this above, I found M. Cotton to have taught it before,
Cottons keys, chap. 6. toward the end.
whom then I had not read. All men are bound to offices to all men; Do good to
all men says the Apostle; are therefore all men one visible corporation or
body politic?

3. By one Church we are let into all Churches in respect of their essential
being, Rights, and common privileges, mystical union, etc. not in respect of
particular jurisdiction. A man that is borne of one Parent, is let into the
whole society of men, and all common Prerogatives; but not into the Rights of
each City, etc.

His 10. and last Argument, It is generally supposed that all Churches have
power to act together, and to expect power of Jurisdiction in a general
council. Calvin is express (Inst. l. 4. c. 8. and 9.) therefore the Church is
one visible body, else it could not so act. Operari sequitur esse.

Answ. 1. It has been granted that a company in some sense may be a visible
body or Corporation, in respect of some more common and lesser acts; but not
properly so, and in respect of the parts of Government and Jurisdiction
properly so called.

2. The acting of a general Council, yea though it were to the highest points
of Jurisdiction, as Ordination, and excommunication, may proceed on our
grounds, and not on the visible and integral oneness of all Churches into a
Corporation; for it may proceed on the ground of Voluntary association, and
communion of Churches, whereby all particular Churches are willing to unite
freely, and not of necessity, their power; and to act for the use of their
particular bodies, and in order to the whole; but not as being one incorporated
Reipublick; nor as having any new, or properly larger power (being met) as such
a body, but only by accident, as being aggregated and collected together.
After which manner was the first Presbyterian Church erected, ^aynes Dioces.
Trial. page 21.
viz. at Geneva, the several congregations uniting voluntarily, as so many
distinct bodies into one aggregated body. And as the Kingdom of England and
Scotland, and some free Cities in Germany upper and lower act together: which
neither makes a new or greater power in the assembled or general body, nor
destroys the entire power of the particular societies: in which sense our
opinion would admit of the power of a general Council: but I cannot own it;
because it is partly groundless in Scripture; partly impossible, and partly
dangerous in the thing it self, as has been observed above.

3. Not all acting together, nor all acts that in some sense may be said to be
acts of power, does imply an oneness of Corporation, or jurisdiction properly
so called. I have showed before that a College of Physicians may meet to
consult and give advice in point of health, which they have power by their
profession, and by the Laws to do: and the patient is obliged by the laws of
Nature, prudence and conscience; unless there appear a sufficient impediment:
but this neither argues that all these Physicians are of one College, yea or
Kingdom; nor that they have power to constrain the Patient to obey. Calvin in
the very chapters quoted by this Author, he lays down ground for the overthrow
of this opinion: Cap. 8, Sect. 9.
as where he teaches, That as the writings of men though godly, so neither the
authority either of particular Churches, or of the whole Church in general is
such, as was the authority of the Apostles, for they may not establish any new
Article of Faith, Sect. 11.
etc. And also answers diverse of the Arguments of this Author, and the other:
by affirming that the promises of not leaving the Church, of guiding it in all
truth, etc. (and so we might add all the other almost before mentioned) are
made NO LESS TO EACH BELIEVER, THEN TO THE WHOLE CHVRCH: which I desire may be
observed. cap. 9. sect. 2.
Again, He makes the authority of a general Council to depend on that promise:
Mat. 18.
When two or three are gathered in my name etc. And then says, That this as
well agrees to any particular company of Christians, as to a general Council.
2. It does not appear to me in those chapters that he ownes general Counsels
on any such grounds: nor do I see how he can, by what he says on Ephesians. 4. 11.
above cited. 3. If these Counsels he there approves did excommunicate etc. yet
he does not mention his approbation of them in those things, and we may
apprehend he might count such actions among those particulars of their failings
which he there enumerates.

2. After his Argument he makes the objection M. Hudson had done, Object.
viz. The whole Church has no visible head, Ergo, It is no one Visible
Corporation or body.

He replies to this 1. Particular Churches are visible Churches, Answ.
though destitute of Officers. But I Reply, should they be so, if they had not
one common bond of particular laws, administered by one person, or one visible
Society of Officers? 2. They may all meet as one visible body: the universal
Church then must either meet so, or else have some visible officers universal
over the whole.

Secondly he says, Christ is supposed the Visible Head in some respect.

Answ. But that is not the question, but what visible existent head there is on
earth, by whom it may appear one Visible body: As we saw before out of Calvin
on Ephesians. 4. 11. 2. How can we contain Christ visible properly.

3. He says, The Church is one so as to act ordinarily, as one, divisim,
dividedly, and yet by reason of the mutual consent in all Churches, one act of
power done in one Church, is by authority of the universal Church, and reaches
to all Churches as excommunication out of one, is excommunication out of all.

But 1. There was never any Society or Corporation, that acted as one dividedly
and in parts unless it did first act as one jointly together, and in a body,
wherein power was given to such divided bodies to act so, unless it were upon
some sudden and extraordinary accident that required immediate action before
the body could convene.

2. Every Society though it may act in parts, as a Kingdom in several
Corporations, and a Corporation in several Wards, or Halls, and Companies, yet
has it withal one common, ordinary and standing officer or officers visible
to govern in chief, to whom all maine causes are referred etc.

But 3. That the particular Church that acts in the right of the universal
Church by reason of mutual consent in all Churches, is not proved by that
medium: for mutual consent, may be voluntary and accidental, and so a figure
only: whereas he is to prove that all Churches are necessarily essentially,
by way of institution, and for ever to be one body, whether they consent or
consent not. But a particular Church acts, first, In the right of Christ, who
is the first subject of Church power, (Matthew. 28. 28.) Secondly, it acts in
the right of a Church, that is of a Society that has embraced the faith of
Christ, which, as a Church indefinitely and essentially is the next subject of
Church power, because we see such power committed to every Church: so we heard
even now, Calvin to expound that promise, Matthew. 18. when two or three are
gathered etc. Cottens keys. chapter ^.
which I find also the forepraised Author to have said before me, whom at the
writing of this above, I had not seen in the particular.

4. That he that is excommunicated out of one Church (if duly) is excluded out
of all: is not because the whole Church is one visible body; but because all
the particular Churches agree in nature, and essence of Doctrine, Worship and
Government, so that he that is unfit to be a member of one, is so of all:
because they all require the same essential conditions, as he that is cut off
by the hand of Justice, for violation of the Laws of nature, in one Common
wealth, is cut out of all, yet it does not follow that all men are one Common
wealth. Or as he that is outlawed in one Corporation justly, is outlawed in
all Congregations virtually, and upon the matter, though not directly and
formally, till he be so declared by them, if those Corporations go all by the
same laws (for substance) and government; though it does not follow that these
several corporations are therefore one, or under one general body, (which as
I take it is the case betwixt England and Scotland, See Dr Austin of
Allegiance, in Calvin's case.
where by reason of union under one King, though the governments remain
distinct, yet one that is borne in either Kingdom, is not an Alien, but a
Freeborn Denizon of both; and so by consequence (as I apprehend, for I may be
mistaken in a Law notion, and I bring it but for illustration) he that is
outlawed in one Kingdom cannot remain under the protection of the Laws of
the other: and yet the bodies are distinct in power and government, though not
divided wholly, but in some respect. So in the Church.

In the third and last place he comes to authorities: But here either he cites
those who are nothing for him, or when they dispute the point professedly, are
expressly against him; as his first Author Chamier: who though he say, that if
not every Pastor, yet all of them are set over the whole Church. yet when he
argues the point, he explaineth himself to mean all distributively, every one
in his charge, as all the Ma^ors and Sheriffs govern the whole Kingdom, but
not jointly, but severally: for he denies such an one visible universal
Church, Chap. 4.
as Mr Hudson acknowledged, and as we saw before.

The 2. Are other modern Divines, Chap. 4.
whom Mr Noyes would have not to consist with themselves, whilst they deny an
universal visible Church, and yet grants Judicial Power to Synods: But it
has been showed before, that this may be granted, though the other be denied,
etc.

The 3. Are the Fathers, who (he says) so predicated an universal visible
Church, they laid the foundation for an universal Bishop. If so; then let this
Author take heed he lay not a foundation to raise him out of the grave again,
Mr Cotton in his exposition upon the ^ialls.
in his Image, (as I have heard a Reverend Elder of New England called an
universal visible Church in respect of the Papacy) and to bury the liberties of
all the Christian Churches in his grave.

The 4. Author is Polanus, who says, the things of God are administered (
Synodali (...)) by the determination of the Synod; but are confirmed ( Regia
(...)) by the Kings authority. We allow the Power of determining ( with
Calvin above cited) according to the word of God to Synods, and are well
content and thankful that Kings will become Nursing Fathers to the Church.

The 5. and last are the Professors of Leyden, who say, that in the Synod is
the top of Authority, the unity of the whole Church, the establishment of
order. But they speak of particular Synods in particular Churches, And do not
subvert what was showed out of them above.

In fine, he acknowledges that the PAPISTS would build their Babell on THIS
foundation; which I think they well may, or somewhat like it; and so I remit
this Author to the Reverend Elders of New England, who are much more able to
deal with him; and of some of whom, he will hear about this Argument I
suppose very shortly.

The 5. and last that to my view have appeared in defense of this notion are
the London Ministers: 5.
Before I come to their arguments I shall (after the example of a Reverend
member of the Assembly) do right to some of both sides. Divine Rights in
Presbytery, in Epist. and* part 1. c. 1. page 3. and part 2. c. 8. page 65.
Principal men there are in those ways, and even of the Assembly it self,
whose judgments and practice have not been truly represented by the
Ministers in their Collation of the opinion of the Presbyterians and the
Independents. Mr Cheynell Rise of Socinians. page 65.
I will instance only in one present question. Preface page 13.
The Independents are said to hold no other Visible Church of Christ, but only
a single Congregation meeting together in one place to partake of all
Ordinances. But this is not their opinion. That it is essentially required to
the very being of a visible Church that it meet in one place, they hold it (de
been esse) for convenience, not absolutely necessary: now it is not ingenuous
to fasten upon a way or man generally, that which some (such as will be in any
profession) particular, and perhaps weak or passionate men may hold. 2. These
brethren observe not that themselves are in the whole fault of that which the
Independents own in this charge: scil. making no other a visible Church then a
single Congregation, for if the Brethrens opinion be true; the Catholic
Visible Church is made but one single Congregation or Corporation (though too
big to meet together, but in their Deputies.) For if it have the same visible
Laws, under the same visible order of Officers, and these Officers one visible
society or College, over each, and over the whole, then is it as much one
particular and single Corporation, as Stepny or Cripple-gate. Now on the
contrary for that opinion that is opposed to this, and said to be the judgment
of the Presbyterians: viz. that there is one General visible Church of Christ
on earth, whereof all particular Churches and single Congregations are but as
similar parts of the whole: There is not only no one Presbyterian could
hitherto be showed to be of that judgment, till the sitting of this Assembly,
(in favor of whom Apolonius wrote) but also diverse above evidenced to be
against it, and acknowledged so by the Authors of this opinion: Plain dealing
is the best policy: But to their arguments, 1. They urge the forenamed place,
1 Cor. 12. and say, the Apostle speaks of one General Church, because he says
[Church,] not Churches. 2. Because he speaks of it in such a latitude, as to
comprehend all gifts of the spirit, all members, all officers ordinary and
extraordinary, which cannot agree to a particular Church.

Answ. 1. We have showed that the Church taken essentially, is one: though
Integrally and in respect of its existence and particular government, it is as
manifold, as there are particular Churches. Now to the Church in the former
sense, are those things given, all men in essence and nature are one: to man in
this respects is given Governors and Government, arts and gifts, etc. must all
therefore be one Common wealth?

2. Or else, which I rather adhered to; the Church is taken in that place
mystically, for the whole society or family in heaven and earth, as was then
evidenced. 3. All these Officers and gifts were given to the Church of Corinth
immediately, though not solely and only. The light of the Sun is given
immediately to that particular place on which it shines, with all the
brightness and influence of it, but not solely. 4. In this superintendency
over the whole Church, whether severally or jointly, the Scripture has
instituted no Successors to the Apostles. 5. By Apostles might be meant the
chief Officers of Corinth.

A second place (and wherein they handle this subject more expressly) is part 2.
chap. 8. where their first Argument is drawn only from those places that name
the Church (indefinitely) as on this Rock will I build my Church. He has set
some in the Church Apostles, etc. And their second taken from such places as
compare all visible Professors to one [Organical body] which are some of the
same places they used in the first Argument, as 1 Cor. 12. We being many, are
one body: so Romans 12. 4. Ephesians. 4. 11.

Answ. 1. These have been replied to above. 2. They do not make the whole
Visible Catholic Church one [Organical] but one [Similar] body in our
Brethrens first assertion: But Organical and Similar are opposite, as was
showed in answer to M. Hudson, whom in this inconsistencie, opinion and
expression, they have either followed, or he some of them. 3. Next they
endeavor to prove that the word Ministry, Ordinances, and particularly
Baptism, are given to the general visible Church: (the method Mr Hudson used,
Moses mother was his Nurse also) whence it will follow; that there is a
General Visible or Catholic Church. Therefore I shall take this for a third
head of Arguments, and Answer to it.

1. The word Ministry, Ordinances, etc. all of them are given immediately to
every particular Church, where they are, and where there may be use of them;
though not solely: and the first two places quoted, speak immediately of the
Church of Ephesus; 1 Timothy 3. 15. Ephesians. 4. 11. 1 Cor. 12.
and the third immediately of the Church of Corinth; the fourth of the Church
at Rome. Romans 12. 4. to ^.


2. They are given to the Church, as one Essential or Mystical body. But no
way concludes they must be one Visibly, no more then the gifts of Reason,
Arts, Speech, the Government of Emperors, Kings, Princes; the order of
Inferior and superior members given by God to mankind: does prove that
therefore all men are one Visible, General Corporation or Commonwealth; or
Integral, Organical, Similar body, consisting of parts, as a similar body,
altogether alike: and as an organical body of parts heterogene, and nothing
alike: which even a plain Reader will perceive to be as uncouth Logic as
Divinity.

CHAP. VI. The Conclusion. 1. Corrollaryes. 2. A word to the Authors of this
Opinion.
ANd thus (by the assistance of God) an answer has been given (though it is
like they will not so be answered) to these Brethren: 1 Pet. 4.
And therein I hope I have spoken as the oracles of God, both for truth and
soberness. Sure I am, I have endeavored (though perhaps not without some
failing) to observe that of the Father (Worthy says * S* Amam. Epist. ad M.
Marsenu.
one, to be written on the chairs of all Divines and Disputants (uncialibus
literis) in Capital Letters:) We pursue not (says the * Nazians. Orat. 3^
(...).
Ancient) our opponents with reproaches and contumelies, as the most do,
sheltring the weakness of their Reasons and Arguments with revileing speeches;
not unlike the (fish) SEPIA, which Pli^. lib. 9.
they say, casts out a black inkie matter, whereby she avoids the fisher. But
that we make war for Christ, we evidence by this Argument, that we contend
after the MANNER OF CHRIST, who is meek, and peaceable, and bare our
infirmities.

Now from the precedent Tractate, 1.
when I have inferred a Corollary or two, and breathed out a Word of love into
our Brethr^ns ears and bosoms: I have done. As to the former.

1. If there be one Visible Universal Governing Church, Corroll. 1.
^hen the (now endeavored) Presbytery (consisting of the Presbyteries of the
whole World as one entire body, and claiming so by Divine Right, as on the
ground of one Catholic Visible Governing Church; has no foundation in
Scripture: and so is in that respect [ So Calvin (for the substance of the
thing) on Ephesians. 4. 11.
Ens Fictum] A DIVINE NOTHING.

2. There is no Visible Church or Corporation Ecclesiastical, Corroll. 2.
properly so called; and as the immediate Receptacle of Church Power; but a
particular Church (i. e. the Church of one place) though not as particular, but
as a Church indefinitely, essentially, and absolutely considered.

3. Then there are no universal GOVERNING Officers at large; Corroll. 3.
that being ordained in one Church, are Governors every where; no more then a
Major of one Corporation, is so in another; or that a Ruling Elder or Deacon of
one Church, has the same power in another, though perhaps in combination with
the former.

i. e. as from him, being an Officer.





power purely Ministerial, and properly Governing, because we find the
Apostles did preach and baptize whilst Christ was on earth; and before they
were endued with power from on high, to administer discipline and government:
and they say Ministerial power is of larger extent, and Governing power
restrained to a political body or Corporation.

2. Others say, that by virtue of the communion of Churches, all officers are
common amongst them (quoadusum, non quoad dominium) to use, though not to own
as theirs.

answer, viz. Factum valet, fieri non debuit. That the Vulgar Axiom holds
here: Things that are in themselves right, i. e in the Essential causes (matter
and form) good, and according to institution, though not proceeding by
standing rule in some externalls (as in the outward efficient, or minister, or
circumstantial manner of doing) are not therefore void formally. For instance,
first in natural things: Those creatures that are begotten both by generation
of their Dammes; and also by putrefaction, and heat of the Sun (as diverse
creeping things are) though the latter differ in the outward instrumental
cause, yet are they as true in their kind as the former: so the Serpent, the
Lice, the Froggs, etc. that Moses made before Pharaoh; and the Wine that Christ
made at the Banquet: were as true in their kind as those wrought by ordinary
causes. Exodus 4. 25.
So secondly in spiritualls, Zipporahs circumcising her child (though M. Mead
gives another Interpretation of it) The Circumcision administered by the
Idolatrous Priests. 2 Chronicles. 30. 11. 17, 18, 19, 20.
Jehojadahs, and afterward the Maccabees administration of Ecclesiastic and
Civil power, to wit, The Kingdom and Priesthood together: was valid. The high
Priests in the time of Christ had no orderly power, Josephus.
as being not the persons designed by God for that office, as not being of
Aarons line, nor coming in by a lawful way, etc. yet their Acts were valid, and
Christ present at them.

See Seld^^ of Tithes, cap. 6.
or merit Pardon) or Wealth and pride suggested (when some grown rich would not
sit so low as before) which are the common originalls of the multitudes of
Parishes, Sect. 3. and Papists petition to King Iame^, 16^4.
especially in Cities and great Towns. Thus of the Corrollaries.

2. In the next place; Sect. ^. Exhort to the Brethren.
for our brethren, the Assertors of the opposed Tenet. As a Bishop must be apt
to teach; so he must be willing to hear also; Tit. 1. 7.
for he must not be self-willed, nor soon angry with those that p^t him in
remembrance. On these footings, and the evidence of the truth now pleaded; I
take liberty, (with due respect unto the Persons and places of them with whom I
deal) to advance a step or two nearer to them, 2 John
and speak (in os ipsum) as the saying is, mouth to mouth.

There is a general and sad complaint (and that not without cause) of Novelty,
variety and danger of opinions. I shall not injure ye Brethren if I put you in
mind, that the opinion (in your sense at least) is ^ew Light, and cannot but
increase the differences and disputes exceedingly; Confession of Faith, c. 25.
n. 2, 3. 4.
especially when men shall be engaged to subscribe it as an Article of Faith;
or else be secluded from emploiment in the Church of God; which occasioned so
many controversies about Liturgy, cap. 3.
Episcopacie, Ceremony, etc. formerly. That it is like also to prove of the
greatest danger to the Churches and their Reformations: even your own; was
showed above. Now how incongruous is it, that those persons who have with so
much zeal inveighed against others for like things, should have the beam of
that in their own eye: And how imprudent would it seem to be, if men of repute
for wisdom and piety, should be so far transported, either with distaste to any
party, or fear of danger to their own; as to admit a forraigner (with intent
to evert their adversary, and secure themselves) who will prey on both. Now if
ye will needs maintain a litigious Title: can ye not live on the inheritance of
your Fathers? Presbytery has stood without this proppe; and it is not safe to
remove a building from its old foundation: this NEW piece put to the old
garment, is like to make the RENT: Episcopacy.
it proved so in the late Church Government. Whilst they held it ( Episcopi
^verint, se magis consuetudine (Ecclesiae) quamdispositionis dominica veritate,
Presbyteris esse majores. Hieron. in Tit. 1. 5.
ex usu Ecclesiae) by custom of the Church, as of old; or ( Quanquam enim
s^^undum Honorum vocabula, quae jam Ecclesiae VSVS ob^inuit, Episcopatus,
Presbyterio, major sit; tamen in multisrebus Augustinus Hieronymo minor est.
Aug. Epist. ^9. ad Hieron.
gratia Regis) by the favor of the Jewel, Whitguift, etc.
Prince; as of later days: they stood even in great storms, as we know; but
when they would settle it on a new bottom: entitle God to it immediately: it
was not long after the return of light, but (corvuit funditus) it came
tumbling down.

Withal, Let bitterness, and calumny in word and writing: such as a late
reproachful and ungrateful book unto our Honor. Reggius de stat^ Relig. in
Anglia. 1647.
Nation has: but especially injurious dealing (with orthodox, godly,
peaceable, and publicly useful Dissentients) be removed. For besides that
experience has hitherto lessoned us, that the wrath of man works not the
righteousness of God; Capita papaverum.
and hence all endeavor of the same will not do as yet; what is desired; let
it be remembered, Superstition and oppression the sum of Satan's Decalogue, as
Religion is of Gods.
that the Top-weeds that God will strike at till he has struck off, are
superstition and oppression. These ruined those who were in the chair before
ye, Kill not the man because he wears his clothes ill-favouredly, or perhaps
will go naked. Starve not the children though froward or wanton, if they will
take in but some wholesome food. Tithe not mint and cummine, and neglect in the
mean time justice and judgment to the souls of the Gospellesse people. Devour
not widows houses (by depriving their husbands and children of means of
livelihood, for very disputable matters, under pretense of prayer, government.
etc.

To close: Isaiah
There are who rejoice in such sparks as these, which themselves have kindled;
and in the curious (but combustible) Fabrics which they have raised on the
foundation: yet when they shall see the fire seize upon their work: and that
they must suffer the loss of it: though themselves be saved, and in that
respect they depart in peace; yet reflecting on their former damage, have this
from the hand of God, that they lie down in sorrow: But I hope better things of
many of them, and such, as not only accompany salvation; but as do precede a
full reward.

The END.

