A further Account of the Progress of the GOSPEL amongst the INDIANS IN
NEW ENGLAND, AND Of the means used effectually to advance the same.

SET FORTH In certain Letters sent from thence declaring a purpose of Printing
the Scriptures in the Indian Tongue into which they are already Translated.

With which Letters are likewise sent an Epitome of some Exhortations delivered
by the Indians at a fast, as Testimonies of their obedience to the Gospel.

As also some helps directing the Indians how to improve natural reason unto
the knowledge of the true God.

LONDON, Printed by M. Simmons for the Corporation of New England, 1659.

TO THE CRISTIAN READER.
Beloved Brethren,
AS it is the Ardent prayer of all that love the Lord Jesus in sincerity, that
his Kingdom may be enlarged, and the glorious l^ght of Psalm. 67. 3. 5. Psalm.
22, 27. 98. 3. Dan. 2. 35. Isa. 2. 18. Zeph 2. 11.
the Gospel may shine forth into all N^ions, that all the ends of the world
may see the salvation of our God, that the Stone cut out without hands may
become so great a mountain as to fill the Earth, that the Idols may be utterly
abolished, and the Gods of the Earth famished, and that all the Isles of the
Heathen may worship the only true God: So the strange and scarcely to be
paraleld concussions which have been in the world of late years, and so still
continue, may seem to be no improbable harbingers of the more glorious
manifestations of Christ thereunto, in answer to those desires of his servants.
For the Shaking of all Nations makes way for the coming Hag. 2. 7.
of him, who is the desire of all Nations. The wind, and the earthquake, and
the fire did usher in the still voice 1 King. 19. 11, 12, 13.
which sp^ke unto Eliah. When the Spirit came down upon the Apostles. there was
a sound as of a rushing mighty wind, and the house was shaken, when the people
therein Act. 2. 2.
were to be silled with the holy Ghost.

How much those winds and shakings which carried many good m^n out of Old into
New England have made way to (...) publishing of the name of Christ in those
barbarous pla^s, (...) the day of small things has not been altogether
despicable there, How the leaven of the Gospel does still continue to season
more of the lump, as it has by ma ny former publis^ed specimina been
demonstrated, so these papers now printed by the care of the Corporation for
New England, do give us further evidence and assurance thereof. And truly it
cannot but be matter both of abundant thanksgivings to God, to find poor
Americans speking the languag Isa. 19 18.
of Canaan, subscribing with their hand unto the Lord, and sirnaming themselves
by the name of Israel: and also of Isa. 44. 5.
great comfort and encouragement unto all those whose hearts the Lord has
stirred up, either here in a way of liberal (...), to honor him with their
su^stance, and to Prove. 3 9. Numb 15 19. Isa ^0. 9. Isa. 23. ^8.
bring their Silver and Gold unto the name of the Lord, that their mer^handize
may be Holiness unto him: or there, in a way of labor and service, setti^g
their heart and hand to sna^ch poor souls as brands out of the fire, to see
such a signal bl^ssing upon their pains and prayers, and such seeds of the
Everlasti^g Gospel come up in so barren and desolate a soil, making way unto a
plentiful harvest for those who shall after enter upon their labors. No
moneys, no s^udies will make a more ample return then those wbich are 1 Timothy
6. 17, 18, 19.
laid up in heaven, which are laid out upon building the house of God. If David
and his princes did praise the Lord, for that they were able to offer so
willingly toward the Erecting 1 Chronicles. 29. 14. Nehem. 4. 6. Exodus 35. 5.
Brierwood de ^ummis Indaeorum cap. 6
of a material Temple, for which was gathered one of the greatest sums, as
some learned judge, that we read of in any history, how much reason have we to
bl^sse God when he gives us hearts to offer willingly toward the building of
living and spiritual Temples, and when he l^teth us see so glorious a return
to our prayers, contributions, and labors in the conversion of many souls unto
God.

To the end that God may be glorified, good men* who have already furthered
this excellent work, may be comforted, and others excited and provoked to put
to their hand unto the advancement thereof, are these papers published, being
testimonies of the great zeal and care of our Brethren there to promote the
Gospel, and of the blessing of God on their labors, in the professed
subjection of many poor souls thereunto.

Two great works we find here further undertaken in order to that service.

The one some helps and directions to the Indians how to improve their natural
reason unto the knowledge of the true God. The reason why there is so short and
imperfect a specimen given of it is, because the ships came away from
New England, before any more of the Copy was wrought off from the press. It is
a work likely to be by the blessing of God of singular use to the natives
there, and a very proper and necessary course for those to take who would
convert and persuade Pagans to believe the Truth.

The Lord was pleased at the first preaching of the Gospel to confirm it with
signs and wonders following for the Mark 16. 20. Act. 14. 3. Heb. 2. 4.
more speedy planting of it by only twelve, and those possibly aged men, in so
many places of the world. And how far he may still bear witness thereunto,
not only by the holy lives of Christians, but by eminent and remarkable
providence, which may tantamount to miracles, I shall not here inquire. But
certainly here may be much use made of natural reason, to demonstrate unto
Pagans the falsenesse of the way they are in, and so to prepare a way for
entertainment of the Truth. Though the Doctrine of the Gospel be supernatural,
and not investigable by humane disquisition, being made 1 Cor. 2. 9, 10 Gal. 1.
12. Matthew. 16. 17.
known to men and Angels only by the Revelation of the Holy Spirit: yet when
it is revealed, the awakening of Legal impressions in the natural conscience,
will provoke men to attend, and prepare them to entertain it, when it shall be
preached unto them.

1. All men have in them a desire of Happiness, and an Aristot. Ethic. l. 1 c.
1.
aversation from misery.

2. All men more or less have some indeleble impressions Nulla gens est neque
tam immantueta, neque tam fera, q^ae non, etiamsi ignoret qu^lem habe re deum
deceat, tamen habendum sciat. Cicero de legibus, lib. 1. Deum agnoscis ex
operibus ejus Tuscul. qu. Q 1. Nulla gens ia^ fera, nemo omnium tam immanis,
cujus me^em non imbuerit dei opinio. Ibid. Senec Ep. 118.
of a Godhead, which cannot be utterly worn out, heathen Philosophers have
acknowledged that no nation in the world is so barbarous where the confession
and adoration of a Deity is not to be found.

3. There are innate praesensions of the Immortality of the soul within it
self, for Pluto in Phaedro, e^ apud Plutarch consolat ad Apollon Cicero de
senectute. Senec. Epist. 118. consolat ad ^^^b c. 28.
Heathen Philosophers have by the light of nature discovered and acknowledged
it.

4. There is a natural (...) or habit of moral and practical principles, and
consequently there are natural impressions of guilt and fear upon the
conscience, and tacit evidences of judgment due unto the workers of iniquity,
An Iuvenal. Tertull. lib. de Testimonio animae.
heathen Poet could say, Frigida men's est Criminibus, tacita sudant praecordia
culpa.

5. There being in all men a natural desire of Good, and a natural Testimony
of Conscience that God is the giver of it, so that when evils are upon them
which they cannot remove themselves, they naturally call out for a divine help
above them to give them deliverance; from hence it comes to pass, that there
are innate apprehensions of some Religion necessary, in order to the knowledge
and service of a God, as a requisite means to the obtaining of so d^sireable an
end as Happiness is.

6. Since it is exactly consonant to right reason, that he to whom service is
due, should direct and prescribe the way whereby he will be served (for to
serve another is to do that which he wills to be done:) It is therefore
necessary that the way of service and Religion be revealed unto us from God.

7. Because these premises are indelebly written in the minds of men by nature,
Therefore Satan not being able, as Prince of this world alone, to carry men on
in a quiet way Ioh. 12. 31. 16 11.
of wickedness, without some face of Religion and worship amongst them, has
invaded the name of a God, and made himself God of this world, and as a God,
has set up various ways of wicked worship consistent with his other 2 Cor. 4.
4.
principles and laws of wicked lusts, thereby to bind men the faster unto
himself, ut fiant mise^is delicta religiosa, as Cyprian speaks, that men might
be tied by their Religion unto wickedness.

Now the work of Christ in the Gospel is. 1. As he is Prince of righteousness
to destroy the lusts and works of Heb 7. 2. 1 J^h 3 8. Romans 9 5. Act. 14. 15.
the Devil. 2. As he is God blessed for ever, to abolish the Idols, to famish
the Gods, and to turn men from vanities unto the living God which made heaven
and earth.

This to do, we may in this manner proceed with an heathen who knows not God.
We may convince him by his own natural and implanted light.

1. That there is a God who is righteous and holy, who cannot be deceived, will
not be mocked.

2. That this God has implanted in all men a light and Romans 2. 14, 15
law of nature by which they are to walk.

3. That he, with whose soul we deal, has violated that light and law of
nature, and is thereby become a sinner. Romans 1. 29, 30. 3. 9. Romans 1. 32.


4. That sin is attended with guilt and punishment, and binds the sinner
over unto death and judgment.

5. That there is in him a natural desire to be delivered from death and to be
happy.

6. That he is not able by any strength or power of his own to free himself
from death, or to make himself happy.

7. That that way of worship and service which he trusts in for this
deliverance, will never ^e able to effect it for him. For the vanity of
Idolatrous and Satanicall worship may by evidence of Reason, and by the
inherent characters of impurity and absurdity within it self, be demonstrated.
By that way the Lord in Scripture usually does disprove it. Deuteronomy. 4. 28. Psalm.
115. 4, 8. Isa. 41. 24, 28. Isa. 44. 9, 20. Isa. 46. 1. 9. Jer. 10. 3, 11.
Habak. 2. 18, 20. Act. 14. 15, 17. Act 17. 23, 31. Romans 1. 23, 25.

8. Being thus brought into straits and extremities, and reduced ad impossible
very self-love, awakened by the spirit of bondage, will dictate unto a man,
when he is convinced of being uttterly out of the way, to inquire what he shall
do to be saved, and to listen unto that, which is by credible persons (...)
Acts 16. 30.
reported to be the right way.

9. Being thus persuaded to look into the Gospel, which is represented unto him
as the alone way unto salvation. He finds inherent characters of purity,
Sanctity, and spiritual beauty in it. He considers the miracles and
Martyrdomes whereby it has been confirmed (which he has no more reason to
distrust then the truth of any other history) He considers the prevalency of
it in the world by the ministry of twelve poor men, notwithstanding all the
persecutions which have been from time to time raised against it. He
considers the holy lives of the Professors of it, whereby the wicked lusts
which his impure religion allows, are shamed and rebuked. He considers the
nature of it wholly contrary to carnal and secular interests, no way complying
with, or giving the least countenance unto any sinful delights: so that it is
evident that it was not contrived or obtruded upon men by humane wisdom, or to
gratify any carnal design upon these and the like considerations being set
on by the finger of the holy Spirit, he is persuaded to believe 1 Pet. 1. 8.
Romans 15. 13. 2 Timothy 1. 12.
the Gospel, and by believing comes to reap those Joys and comforts as make
him know whom he has believed.

The other work which is set about in order to the premoting of the Gospel
amongst the poor Indians is the translating of the Scripture into their tongue,
and Printing it for their use, which as it is a necessary and an excellent
work, and a work of great labor (in consideration whereof the Reverend
Translator deserves great thanks and encouragement) so will it be a work of
cost and charges to provide paper, workmen, and letters for so large a work.
And therefore, as men, when the foundation of a goodly building is going about,
will lay a stone with their own hands, to show some bounty and encouragement to
the workmen who are to carry it on; so the laying of this foundation stone
seems to call unto all those whose hearts the Lord has made willing, to give
in their helping hand and cheerful assistance, unto a work tending so
immediately to the Salvation of souls and glory of that God, who has promised,
That they who sow bountifully shall reap bountifully, who will multiply their
^eed sown, and increase the fruit of their righteousness. Certainly if Christ
look on the supplies which are given to his poor brethren for their bodily
relief, as given to himself; much more will he accept and reward the
endeavors of those, who lay out their bounty, as he did his blood, for the
good of men's souls, and for the advancement of his kingdom. To his blessing I
commend you, and this excellent service

Yours, and the Churches Servant in our Common Lord. Ed: Reynolds.
1 April 1659.
This following Letter is sent from the Commissioners for the united Colonies
of New England in New England, and directed as follows.
For the much honored Corporation for the propagation of the Gospel amongst
the Indians in New England, these present.
Honored and worthy Gentlemen.
BY our last of 16th instant, we certified you of our purpose to send Mr
Peirsons Chatichisme by the first opportunity to be Printed in England; Since
which time; it is come unto our hands but upon further consideration in regard
of the hazard of sending, and difficulty of true Printing it; without a fit
overseer of the press by one skilled in the language; we have chosen rather to
have it printed here; and accordingly have taken order for the same; and hope
it will be finished within three months, we have sent you herewith the accounts
of this years disbursements in reference to the Indian work, and shall be ready
to attend your advice in any particular therein mentioned. Many charges will be
daily growing, but we hope there will be suffieient in Mr Ushers hands to
discharge the same till the Spring: and for after supply to carry on the work
be pleased to take notice that we have drawn upon you three Bills of Exchange
of one tenure and date for five hundred pounds to be paid to Mr John Harwood
for the use of Mr Hezekiah Usher, and have taken his Bill to satisfy so much
here, according to his former agreement with us, we pray you to take care it be
duly paid at the day, without which the work cannot be comfortably carried
on, it is our joint and unfeigned desires with you; that those gifts and
contributions may be improved according to the pious minds of the Donors; for
the promoting the knowledge of God in Jesus Christ amongst these poor Natives;
and we hope and believe there is a real good effect in several places, which
that it may daily increase to the bringing of many poor souls to heaven, is the
earnest prayer of

GENTLEMEN, Your very loving friends and Servants, The Commissioners of the
united Colonies. John Endicott President Simon Bradstreete Thomas Prence Josiah
Winslow John Winthorpe John Talcot Francis Newman William Lerte

Boston 22. Sept. 1658.
A Letter from Mr John Eliot directed unto Mr Richard Floyd Treasurer of the
corporation for New England.
To his much respected and Christian friend Mr Floyd Treasurer of the
Corporation for promoting Religion among the Indians in New England. these
present.
Christian Friend and Beloved in the Lord.
AFter Salutations in the Lord Jesus. I shall not trouble you with any thing at
present save this one business of moment, touching the Printing of the Bible
in the Indian Language, touching which business sundry of the Elders did
petition unto the Commissioners, moving them to further it, as a principal
means of promoting Religion among them. And God so guided (without man's
contrivance) that I was there when it came in. They moved this doubt whether
the Translation I had made was generally understood? to which I answered, that
upon my knowledge it was understood as far as Conecticot: for there I did
read some Conecticot is about 100 miles up in the Country.
part of my Translation before many hundred English Witnesses, and the Indians
manifested that they did understand what I read, perfectly, in respect of the
language, they further questioned whether I had expressed the Translation in
true language? I answered that I feared after times will find many infirmities
in it, all humane works are subject to infirmity, yet those pieces that were
printed, viz. Genesis and Matthew, I had sent to such as I thought had best
skill in the language, and entreated their an^adversions, but I heard not of
any faults they found. When the Commissioners ended their meeting, they did
commit the further consideration of this matter to our Commissioners, as I
understand, of whom our Governor is president. Therefore at the coming away of
this Ship, I repaired to the Governor about it. I proposed this expedient, for
the more easy prosecution of this work, viz. that your selves might be moved
to hire some honest young man, who has skill to compose, (and the more skill
in other parts of the work, the better) send him over as your servant, pay him
there to his content, or engage payment, let him serve you here in New England
at the press in Harvard College, and work under the College Printer, in
impressing the Bible in the Indian language, and with him send a convenient
stock of Paper to begin withal. The Governor was pleased to send for Mr
Norton to advise in it, who came and did heartily further it, whereupon the
Governor promised to write unto your selves, and propose the matter, which
also I do, and do earnestly entreat your assistance herein. And I beseech the
Lord to bow your hearts, and encourage you in promoting so good a work, so
profitable for the furtherance of Religion, which to further in the best
manner, I know is already the bent of your hearts, and your constant prayer and
endeavor, and thus committing you, and all your weighty affairs unto the
Lord, I rest

Yours to serve you in the Service of Christ. John Elliot.
Roxbury this 28 of the 10th 1658.
A Letter from John Endicott Esquire President of the Commissioners for the united
Colonies in New England to the Corporation here in ENGLAND.
For Mr Richard Floyd Treasurer and the rest of the Gentlemen of the
Corporation for the affairs of New England. these.
Honorable Gentlemen.
I Have been moved by diverse able and godly men here with us to propound unto
your pious consideration, whether it be not needful for the better instruction
of the Indians amongst us in the true knowledge of God, to get the whole Bible
of the old and new Testament, which is already Translated into the Indian
tongue, to be printed; Many here with us Divines and others judge it a thing
that will be acceptable to God, and very profitable for the poor Heathens. If
your selves do so esteem of it too, it will be necessary to provide paper and
letters and such things as may further the work, as also a Journey man Printer
to be helpefull under Mr Green our Printer to expedite the work. This is only
propounded to your serious consideration, which if God please to put into your
hearts to further, being so good a work; It will rejoice the hearts of many
godly ones here, and I doubt not of many there also. The rest of the
Commissioners being gone home to their own dwellings, and none left here at
Boston of the Commissioners but my self: and the Ship being ready to set sail
I have made bold to write these few lines unto you, and leave the issue of all
to God, and your godly wisdoms: Mr Eliot will be ready at all times to correct
the sheets as fast as they are Printed, and desires nothing for his pains. I
shall not trouble you further at this time, but shall desire the Lord so to
guide you in all your affairs, as God may have the glory of all, and your
selves comfort and peace. So prays

Your Unworthy Servant. John Endicott.
Boston the 28 of December. 1658.
Here follows another Letter from Mr John Eliot of New England, directed to
the Corporation, viz.
To the Honorable Corporation for spreading the Gospel among the Poor Indians
in New England. these present.
Christian Gentlemen, and much honored in the Lord.
YOur constant prayers and pains for the promoting of the Kingdom of Christ
Jesus in these ends of the earth, among these our poor Indians, is a work of
sweet favor unto the Lord: and your labor of love bestowed therein; shall be
assuredly rewarded, when the Lord shall say unto you (out of the riches of his
free Grace) Come ye blessed of my Father, etc. and, what you did unto them, you
did it unto me, and in that day, Blessed is the man who has his hands full of
such free will offerings. The Lord has given us this amazing blow to take away
my brother Mayhew. Mr Mayhew was cast away ceming over from New England, with
an Indian who was a Preacher amongst the Indians.
His aged Father does his endeavor to uphold the work among the poor Indians,
whom by letters I have encouraged what I can, and moved in his behalf, our
Commissioners, and they have given him some encouragement, so that the work in
that place is not fallen to the ground, I bless the Lord for it. As for the
work among us, I shall for the present be silent, for several Reasons, only
let the work it self speak. I am bold to present you here enclosed, with a
few notes which my Son and I gathered up, which were delivered by the persons
here named, in a day of fasting and prayer; out of which short notes you may
see what life is in the work. The very reason of my gathering up these notes;
was because my Son (who had not been at a fast among us before) was very much
affected with what they delivered, so far as he understood them, and when I had
communicated these notes to some, they were very well relished, and thereby I
was imboldened to present them to your selves, not knowing, but (if the Lord
please) thereby you may have more real information of their state and
progress, then by any thing which were meet for me to say. For my self I
feel my strength to decay, and I am not able to do and bear what I have done,
and although temptation may sometime breed waverings, yet my soul does desire
and believe, that I shall live and dye in the work. And as I have dedicated my
sons to serve the Lord in this work (if he please to accept them) so I do it
as they come up; and this year my second son having taken his first degree in
the College, I presented him also unto our Commissioners, and he is accepted
unto the work: which mercy my soul does greatly rejoice in, and I humbly beg
your prayers for them, that the Lord would bow their green spirits unto the
work, and enable them to overlooke the difficultyes and discouragements which
lie in the way, and thus committing you unto the Lord, and to the guidance of
his holy Word, I rest

Yours to serve you in the Service of our dear Savior. John Eliot.
Roxbury this 10th of the 10th, 1658.
Here follows a Brief Epitomy of such Exhortations as these Indians
hereafter named, did deliver upon a late day of fasting and prayer at Natick,
much more largely, 15th of the 9th month, 1658.
The causes of this fast were partly in preparation for gathering a Church, and
because of much rain, and sickness and other trials.

An Exhortation from Waban, an Indian,
The Text of Scripture he spoke of was, Matthew. 9. 12, 13. 12. But when Jesus
heard that, he said unto them, They that be whole need not a Physician, but
they that are sick.

13. But go ye and learn what that means; I will have mercy and not
sacrifice; for I came not to call the righteous, but sinners to Repentance.



I am a poor weak man, and know but little, and therefore I shall say but
little.

THese words are a similitude, that as some be sick, and some well; and we see
in experience that when we be sick, we need a Physician and go to him, and
make use of his Physic; but they that be well do not so, they need it not and
care not forit: So it is with soul-sicknesse; and we are all sick of that
sickness in our souls, but we know it not: we have many at this time sick in
body, for which cause we do (...) and pray this day, and cry to God; but more
are sick in their souls: we have a great many diseases and sicknesses in our
souls ^he instan^d, as Idleness, neglect of the Sabbath, Passion, etc.]
Therefore what should we do this day? go to Christ the Physician; for Christ
is a Physician of souls; he healed men's bodies, but he can heal souls also: he
is a great Physician, therefore let all sinners go to him. Therefore this day
know what need we have of Christ, and let us go to Christ to heal us of our
sins, and he can heal us both soul and body. Again, what is that lesson, which
Christ would have us learn, that he came not to call the righteous, but
sinners to repentance. What! Does not God love them that be righteous? Does he
not call them to him? Does not God love righteousness? Is not God righteous?
Answ. The righteous here are not meant those that are truly righteous, but
those that are Hypocrites; that seem righteous, and are not; that think
themselves righteous, but are not so indeed; such God calls not, neither does
he care for them: but such as see their sins, and are sick of sin, the Christ
calls to repentance, and to believe in Christ, therefore let us see our need
of Christ, to heal all our diseases of soul and body.

Delivered at the same time by Nishohkou, another Indian.
The Text he spoke of was, Genesis 8. 20, 21. 20. And Noah built an Altar unto
Jehovah, and took of every clean Beast, and of every clean foul, and offered
burnt offerings on the Altar.

21. And the Lord smelled a sweet Savor; and the Lord said in his heart, I
will not again curse the ground any more for man's sake; for the imaginations
of man's heart is evil from his youth, neither will I again smi^e any more
every thing living as I have done.



A little I shall say, according to that little I know.

IN that Noah sacrificed to God he showed himself thankful; in that he
worshipped God, he showed himself godly; in that he sacrificed clean beasts, he
showed that God is an holy God, pure and clean, and all that come to God, and
worship him, must be pure and clean: and know that we must by repentance purge
our selves, and cleanse our hearts from all sin; which is a work we are to do
this day. In that he sacrificed, it was the manner of worshipping God in old
time: but what sacrifices must we offer now? Answ. By that Psalm. 4. 5. Offer to
God the sacrifices of righteousness, and trust in the Lord. These are true and
spiritual sacrifices which God requires at our hands. Sacrifices of
Righteousness, that is, we must look to our hearts, and Conversation, that
they be righteous, and then we shall be acceptable to God, when we worship him*
but if we be unrighteous and unholy, and wicked, we shall not be accepted, our
sacrifices are naught. Again, we must trust in the Lord: for who else should
we trust in, we must believe in the word of God; for if we doubt of God, and
doubt of his word, then our sacrifices are little worth; but if we trust
steadfastly in the Lord then our sacrifices are good. Again, what kind of
sacrifices must we offer? Answ. We must offer such as Abraham offered; and what
sacrifice did he offer. Answ. see Genesis 22. 12. Now I know that thou fear me,
seeing thou have not withheld thy son, thy only son from me; he had but one
dearly beloved son, and he offered him to God; and th^n God says, I know thou
fear me, because thou have not withheld thy son: This was to sacrifice
indeed and in truth; so we must sacrifice indeed, and in truth, but God does
not require us to sacrifice our sons, but our beloved sins, our dearest sins:
God calls us this day to part with all our sins, though never so beloved, and
we must not withhold any of them from him: if we will not part with all, it is
not a right sacrifice: we must part with those sins we love best, and then we
offer a good sacrifice. Again, God smelt a sweet savor in Noah's sacrifice, and
so when we offer such worship to God as is clean, and pure, and sacrifice as
Abraham did, then God accepts our sacrifice. Again, God manifested his
acceptance of Noah's sacrifice, by promising to drown the world no more, but
gave him fruitful times and seasons. God has chastized us of late with such
raines, as if he would drown us, and he has drowned and spoiled a great deal
of hay, and threatens to kill our Cattle, and for this we fast and pray this
day; now if we offer a spiritual sacrifice, clean and pure as Noah did, then
God will smell a savor of rest in us, as he did in Noah, and then he will
withhold the Rain, and give us fruitful seasons.

These two before mentioned did exercise the fore part of the day (besides what
we did) the four next exercised in the afternoon. The first of which was Antony.

The Scripture which he grounded his exercise upon was Matthew. 6. 16, 17, 18. 16.
Moreover, when ye fast, be not as the Hypocrites, of a sad Countenance, for
they disfigure their face, that they may appear unto m^n to fast: Verily, I
say unto you, they have their reward.

17. But thou when thou fastest, anoint thine head, and wash thy face.

18. That thou appear not unto men to fast, but unto thy father that is in
secret, and thy Father that sees in secret, shall reward thee openly.



A little I Will speak, according to that poor little I know

THe Doctrine that Christ teaches us in these words, is the Doctrine of
fasting and prayer; and the duty we do this day, is to practice this Doctrine,
for God calls us this day to fasting and prayer. There be many causes of
prayer to God this day; as to prepare our hearts for Church, covenant, and
Ordinances, and to pray for the taking away our sickness, and these great
rains [here he did enumerate sundry causes of seeking God] But why must we
fast? Answ. That we might the more effectually mourn for sin. If any of you
bury a child or a friend, then you will mourn, and fast too, for if we offer
you meat, you will refuse it, yea you cannot eat, because your heart is so full
of sorrow: no matter for meat then, your tears, and sighs, and sorrows fill you
so, that you cannot eat; so that fasting is an help to mourning. Now this day
is a day of mourning, and what do we mourn for? not for a child or a friend,
but a greater matter; we must mourn for our sins, and we should be so filled,
and possessed with mourning for our si^s, that we should forget hunger, ye so
afflicted in our hearts, that we cannot eat though it should be offfered to us:
our hearts should be so full of sorrow, that we cannot be an hungry nor eat.
Again we fast that we might repent of our sins, and amend our lives, according
to that Matthew. 3. 8. bring forth therefore fruits meet for Repentance. This is
a day of Repentance, we must therefore fast this day, so as becomes
Repentance, therefore we must confess our sins, and we must mourn for our
sins, and we must forsake our sins, for these are works meet for Repentance.
Again, we must not be like hypocrites in our fasting, for they disfigure their
faces, and seem to men as if they mourned and fasted, and repented, but in
their hearts they do not so, and therefore God who knows what is in the
heart, and sees in secret, he does know their hypocrisy, and so he knows
our hypocrisy, if we come here, and appear to man as if we fasted, and yet in
our hearts we fast not, if we do not mourn and repent for sin, we do not fast,
God does not account that to be a fast. Again, such as fast an hypocritical
fast, they shall be sure to be rewarded, and what reward will God give to such
as fast like hypocrites? I answer, that you may see what the wages of
hypocrites is, Mat. 24, 51. shall cut him asunder, and appoint him his portion
with the hypocrites, there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, and this is
evil wages: and therefore let us be moved, to keep a right fast this day, by
repenting of our sins, and amending of our lives, and then the Lord will reward
us openly, if he see that our hearts are right before him.

The next that followed was John Sp^ene.

The Scripture he spoke of was. Matthew. 9. 14, 15. 14. Then came to him the
disciples of John, saying, why do we and the Pharisees fast often, but thy
Disciples fast not.

15. And Jesus said unto them, can the children of the Bridechamber mourn, as
long as the Bridegroom is with them, but the days will come, when the
Bridegroom shall be taken from them, and then they shall fast.



A little I will say, for I can say but little, for I am weak and know but
little.

THis is a Parable, as when young people are at a wedding, there is feasting,
and joy, and mirth, but no sorrow, nor mourning, nor weeping: So when Christ is
with his people, he brings joy and comfort with him, and fills their hearts
with comfort: but if he be angry, and depart from his people, and leave them to
afflictions, then there is sorrow, and mourning, and weeping, and fasting, as
it is this day with us; for we are called to fasting this day, because of the
great rain, and great floods, and unseasonable weather, whereby the Lord
spoileth our labors: our corn is much spoiled with the wet: so that the Lord
does threaten us with want of food; also our hay is much spoiled, so that God
threatens to starve and kill our Cattle: also we have great sickness among
us; so that many are dead: the burying place of this Town has many graves, and
so it is in all our Towns among the praying Indians. Also in our houses are
many sick, and a great many are crazy, and weak, and not well; God threatens
to kill us, and therefore surely he is angry, and what makes him angry? we may
be sure it is our sins, for we are great sinners. This day is therefore a day
of Repentance, of fasting, and of mourning. And what are we to do in this day
of fasting? Answ. We must search out all our sins, and with hearty Repentance
forsake them. And when we go about to search out our fins, we must remember
that there be three places where we must search for sin: First, in our hearts;
Secondly, in our words; 3ly, in our works and doings, and in all these places
we find too many, but especially in our hearts; for there be evil thoughts,
and the root sin [that is to say Original sin, for so we call it in their
language] and therefore it is a great work to search our hearts, and find out
the roots of sin: and if any do say it is an hard work, and I know not how to
do it: I answer, it is true, it is hard work, but therefore we must take so
much the more pains, and care to do it, as we do about hard works. If any
say I cannot tell how to find out my sins: I answer, we must this day pray unto
the Lord to help us to find them out, and to forsake them, for he knows them
all.

Again, another cause of our fasting this day, is to prepare us to make a
church of Christ among us: and if you say what must we do to prepare for
Churchestate. I answer we must repent of our sin, and make our selves clean, we
must get cleanness of heart, when we come near unto God, according to that
Mat. 3. 2. Repent for the Kingdom of heaven is at hand.

Again, to prepare us for church estate, we must pray unto God, to send his
Spirit into our hearts, because the Spirit of God will convert us, and purge
our hearts, and sanctify us, and teach us to pray, and comfort us, and will
never leave us, till he have brought us to the Kingdom of heaven (as you know
we are taught in our catechism) And it is the gift of God to send his Spirit
into our hearts, and Christ has promised to do it for us, as the word of God
speaks, Mat. 3. 11. I indeed baptize you with water unto repentance, but he
that comes after me is mightier then I, whose shoes I am not worthy to bear:
he shall baptize you with the holy ghost, and with fire. Where we see that John
did baptize them with water, but Christ does baptize them with the holy ghost
and fire; we desire to be baptized by man, and man baptizeth with water, and
that is a sign of Repentance; but we must look for the baptism of Christ, and
he gives us his Spirit, that is his baptizing. And when Christ baptizeth with
his Spirit that does more then water can do, for the Spirit does purge our
souls, and makes our hearts pure and clean.

Again, he baptizeth with fire, what i^ that? I Ans. not outward fire, but
spiritual, and it is a similitude, thus: what will fire do? I answer, you all
know what fire will do; for when your Tobacco-pipes are filthy, foul,
stinking, unfit for your use, you cast them into the fire, and that does not
burn them up, but burns up all their filth, and makes them clean and sweet,
and fit for your use. So our hearts are filthy, and unfit for Gods use, but
cast our hearts into the word, for there the Spirit is, and then the Spirit of
God will burn out all our filth and sin, and make us sweet, and fit for the
Lords use.

Another that preached, Piumbuhhon.

The Scripture which he did insist upon was. Matthew. 5. 1. ad 10. 1. And seeing
the multitude, he went up into a Mountain and when he was set his Disciples
came unto him, and, he opened his mouth, and taught them saying,

2. Blessed are the poor in Spirit, etc.



I will speak but a little, because I am a poor creature.

HEre we see that when Christ saw the Multitude come together, he taught them;
in like manner you all being come together, this day Christ teaches you, for
it is Christ, that teaches us all by his word, and these are Christ his words,
which I speak unto you, and therefore hear ye Christ this day, for all these
words of blessing Christ does speak this day unto this multitude.

1. For poverty of spirit, we are the most poor, feeble, despicable people in
the world, but let us look in what case our spirits be, for if our hearts be
answerably poor, and low, as our outward condition is, then we are in the way
to be made truly rich, for the Kingdom of heaven is promised to such as are
poor in spirit.

2. For mourning this is a day of mourning, and not so much for afflictions, as
for our sins, now if we do truly and heartily mourn for our sins, then the
blessing is promised to us and God will find a time and way to comfort us.

3. Again, They that be meek and patient are blessed, therefore those that be
froward and passionate and make strife, they are not blessed, and therefore we
have cause to mourn this day, for our often passions and fallings out, and
learn to be meek and patient.

4. Again, They that hunger and thirst after righteousness are blessed: This
is a day of hunger and thirst, and fasting for our bodies, that we might mourn
for our sins, but it is a day of feasting for our souls, and Christ does here
offer a great many blessings for our souls to feast withal, if therefore our
souls be hungry after righteousness and godliness, then we are blessed.

5. Again, God is merciful and commands us to be so too, and will therefore
bless those that are like unto himself.

6. They that are pure in heart are blessed, and this purity of heart the
Spirit of God works in us, when he comes and dwells in us (as we are
taught in our Catechism) and therefore Christ does bless them.

7. Blessed are the peacemakers, and who be peacemakers? I answer, that the
Devil is the maker of strife, and he is always so doing, sometimes in one
place, sometimes in another, and so he is laboring to do in all the Towns of
the praying Indians; but such as be wise and Godly will not suffer the strife
to continue, but will use such means as shall reconcile them, and make them
friends again, and this is a blessed work so to do.

The last that Exercised was Wutasakompavin, whom I formerly wrote of by the
name Poliquanum.

The Text he spoke of was, Matthew. 8. 2, 3. 2. And lo there came a Leper and
worshipped him, saying, Master, if thou will thou can make me clean.

3. And Jesus putting forth his hand touched him saying, I will be thou clean,
and immediately his leprosy was cleansed.



A very little am I able to say, and besides it is late (for it was very near
night)

THis day is a day of fasting and prayer for many causes, and one is for the
many sicknesses, and deaths among us, and this Text does show us the best
Physician in the world, and the best way of curing all diseases. Christ is the
great Physician, he healed many when he was on earth, and he healed this Leper.
This sick man came to Christ and worshipped him and confessed his power to heal
him if he would, which confession of his was so pleasing to Christ, as that he
presently touched him and healed him. So let us this day cry to Christ, and
worship him, and if we do it in faith then he will heal us.

Again, God does chastise us with rain, and spoyleth our Corn, and Hay, but
let us take he^d that in our hearts we be not angry at God, for God is
righteous, and we are sinners, let us be angry at our sins, and repent this
day, and go to Christ as this man did, and then he will bless us.

Postscript.
UPon these exercises I will animadvert a little. These things argue a good
favor of spiritual things in the speaker, and here is spiritual food for the
hearer. I do know assuredly that many Godly and savory matters, and passages
have slipped from me, and these expressions are but a little of a great deal.
I know not that I have added any matter, which they spoke not, but have let
slip, much which they spoke. I have clothed it with our English Idiom which is
the greatest difference which I have knowingly made, but their Idiom to them
is, as ours is to us. They have none of the Scriptures printed in their own
Language, save Genesis, and Matthew, and a few Psalms in Meeter, and I bless
the Lord they have so much, and such as see these Notes may easily observe that
they read them, and improve them, which puts my soul into an earnest
longing that they might have more zeal. I bless the Lord, that the whole book
of God is translated into their own language, it wants but revising,
transcribing, and printing. Oh that the Lord would so move, that by some means
or other it may be printed.

SOME HELPS FOR THE INDIANS SHOWING THEM How to improve their natural Reason,
To know the True GOD, and the true Christian Religion.

1. By leading them to see the Divine Authority of the Scriptures.

2. By the Scriptures the Divine Truths necessary to Eternal Salvation.

Undertaken At the Motion, and published by the Order of the COMMISSIONERS of
the United Colonies.

by ABRAHAM PEIRSON.

Examined and approved by Thomas Stanton Interpreter-Generall to the United
Colonies for the Indian Language, and by some others of the most able
Interpreters amongst us.

LONDON, Printed by M. Simmons, 1659.

To the Reader.
WHO have occasion to make use of this Book, may please to observe, that the
accute or long accent thus noted (a) signifies that the syllable over which it
is placed is to be pronounced long, the rest of the words be short, till the
like, or a circumflex do regulate the sillables following. Words of two
sillables most frequently be not accented at all, being commonly of equal
measure, and hardly mispronounced. Also, sundry times the prepositions in,
with, for from by, etc. be set after the Substantives in the Indian and before
them in the English, that so no harshnesse (this caution remembered) may sound
in either.

Likewise sometime a phrase is used in the Indian, which word for word can
hardly be rendered in the English; but then, and ever, care is had that in every
sentence, and within the limits of every stop, the Indian does truly answer the
English. The Lord pardon, accept, and give success, that this may be an help
toward the spiritual good of Indiansouls.

So prays A. P.

Some helps for the POshshe Airenamawetouwungash wutche Eansketambawg,
Indians, showing them how to improve Okkekood: munganauwaus ten auworchan
their natural Reason to know nejek* arumbauwe penauwuawunk wauhean webe
the only true God, and waugh wauwerhummat Mando Jehovah, quah werramauwe
the true Christian religion. First by Christianauwe routasowank. Negonne spe
leading them to see the divine Authority pummooawarianau nejekkenawmen Mandowe
touhkretassowunk
of the Scriptures wutche God wuskwhegansh. Neeseetetauwe
Secondly by the Scriptures the divine spe God wuskwhegansh mandowaious
werramauwungansh
Truths necessary to eternal querauhikkamuks re micheme kejahiitawunk.
Salvation.

Question Nattoohtemauwetoowunk.
How prove you that there is a God? TOohgodje koramen neh atta Mandouh

Answer. Anasquetauweten.

From the universal and constant agreement Wutche wewinnakommuk quah yeiache
werrawawunk
of all Nations, and persons wutche wame arkees, quah skeetambawg mittauhkuk
in the world, who are not void of terre, owwannak matta sauwai^oguk wutche
right reason and humanity. sompaio penauwawuk quah renoowunk.


For the things which are grounded Wutche ai akqusiks chawgwunsh wekakontamooawk
upon particular men's fancies skeje nanseeawk renwawk roytammoungansh
and opinions are not acknowledged quah watramawoytammoungansh matta
werramattaucomunks
of all men, and are wutche wame renawawk, quah wegonje
often changed but this notion that assowunnamanoosh: webe (youheoy^ammoouk) neh
there is a God is common to all men, nor is it changed Mandoo nannarwee re
wame renawawk matta assowunu^
by the changes of times; ooanas spe assowunnamoungansh quompaious;
therefore it must ar^e from regouche youh paughke mouche songeme wutche
some light, which is common to all chawgun noweta weq^-ai, teou nannarwe re
wame
men, and that light must be either ^ennawnwk, quah youh wequa-ai pahke mouche
nukquddee
from tradition which has flowed wutche af-hittewunk wutche pommochawashst
from the first parents of mankind to auwus wutche negon^k oushwawog (...)
all their p^sterity from age wamenej^k wuttansewu^gannooawk wutche
antseunganak,
to age who would notlye re antsunganak, ouwannak matta pepetruwagup
to the^rchildren in a matter re n ukkrasloowunganoas ^ame ischauwunganak
of so great importance; or from terre wu^chio rio shaio sharamanw^ganak; ux
wutche
an inward light implanted in the minds ramio^k w^quaai ramekezekekozzo ramee
utteoitummoounganoo
of all men by wutche wame rennawawk spe Jehovah
himself. And that such a light is in nagum. Quah neh nenar wequaai
utteamopetanguanau
every man naturally appears by wame nennawawk renampatiwe; mouskeme spe
the fears that are in all wez-sassawungansh teous utteampe anguanau wame
men when they have done that which they know rennawawk pokkatche rehit chawgun
waughtassoowawk
to be evil, though no man knows matchr^ewunk, mukko renna matta
waughtamn^oin,
and upon extraordinary quah skeje chechege moncharawanunguotush
accidents, as Thunder, Earthquakes, a harremuks, arra Paddaquahhum, Quequansh,
sights in the Air, blazing Stars, n azzenunguottush kesesuk terre, squarrug
arraksak,
etc. which shows that they know etc. youh kakkoodumchamo neh nejek wautannau
there is a power above the creatures, though mouche milkissoowunk ausin
keizhittishannuk, mukko
they see him not, who will punish sin, matta nauwah, ouwun bitch arroutautak
matcherewunk,
and can do it when he will, And quah om uttren hanrukkeque roytak. Quali
this is youh mutche God Jehovah.


Secondly, from the beginning of all things. Nezetatauwe, waske noujaiitch wame
aiakquiiks,
that have a dependant being. For teous uttahhenau rambatsen pummaiawunk. Wutche
the things which had a beginning could not be cause aiak quiiks teous
noujaiiggishhansh, matta hom waje
of their own being, for that which is not pummaiawunganoo, wutche ne matta
pummaynook
cannot act, nor could any thing matta hom remanoo chaugun, matta hom chaugun
be before it was therefore it must pummaio, askam pummay noshan, newutche
paughke
have its beginning from [mouchh]outahheamo noujaiewunk wutche chaugun
some other cause which is without beginning noweta perrewawhjaioohittit teou
matta outchinoh,
and therefore the first [mehchu noujaiewunk] quah ne-wutche negonne
being and efficient cause of all pummayawunk quah kezhuwan waje wutche wame
other being. unkatagganakpum mayawungansh.


There was a first man, and a first woman and Moh negonne ren, quah negonne
kerequabus, quah
a first in every kind of living negonn rame wame achabwehittawunk wutche
pumpamantajek
creatures, but that first man kezhittshaunak, webe youh negonne ren
and woman those first of quah kerequabus, quah youjek negonnijek wutche
all kinds living wame attchabrehittewungansh pumpamantejek
creatures could not make themselves kezhittishanak matta hom kezhuwawk
hogg^uwawwo:
therefore there was a first being, which negauche moh negonne pummayhuad, youh
absolute and independent sunkaio [sambio] quah webe negamo the wutchaio.
and rests upon nothing that was quah matta chetamssennomanah chaugun, noh moh
before them all, and made them all, a kam wame nejek, quah kezhuw ushan wanne
wame,
and upon whom all other beings quah skeje youh wame kat^aggansh pummayawugansh
depend. And this is korchetamsenak. Quah youh atta God Jehovah.


How can you know that there is a God, seeing Ob: Ten hon kuttawauhtaun ne atta
Mando maetax
you never saw him, nor can see him? kekenauwah, matta hom nauwo?

I know I have a reasonable An. Nouwauhtaun no wadjanaman penaunauwe
soul, though I never saw it, nor can mittachonkq, mukko matta ne nauwah matta
hom
see it. The soul were not a spiritual nauwo. Mittachonkq matta hom rasha
wrandowe
substance if it could be seen with bodily eyes, pummayawunk hom nau wit spe
hoggauwe skesuks,
and so no soul In like manner were not a Spirit quah rio matta outachonq. Rio
God matta rashauwandoo,
if he could be seen with bodily eyes and so om nau wit spe hoggauwe skesuks;
quah rio
no God. matta Mando.


But no man can fully know Ob: Webe ma^a howan noweta hom tabare wauhtawn
Gods nature, therefore no God? Jehovah riewunk [arandvit] negouche matta Mando?

It follows not for an An. Youh matta noskommoena^, wutche womarremugge^ee
(...) nature cannot fully understand arrumauit hommattatabaie wauhtawn
the things of an higher and more excellent aiakquiiks wutche sharamuggesee
quah arwenungesc^
nature, then it self. Beasts arrumbauit, ause nagamo hoggunk. Oppishshamok
cannot understand what man is, much hommatta wauhtauounau chawgun ren atta
share okkossisse
less how to plant and ^overn Commonweals ten reokkechan, quah soudamotauoan
kortasoodomoungansh;
or to become learned ux koodamanchan wnskwhaganakre,
or sail over the Seas, etc. For ux seboghomman akkommuk kathans, etc. Wutche
these things exceed their yous aiakquiiks [remuks] arrookawauwaunk nejek
capacities in like manner man seeing wauhtamma wunganoo rio ren nauwun ewo
himself to be made of a more noble nature hoggakezhean wutche arwenuguot
arrumbauwunk
then beasts, and that not of ausinre oppishimmok, quah youh matta wutche
him self, must ^eeds infer that he nagum hogga, pauhke moushe pakadoowun ne
howan
who made him superior to beasts, he kezhuwus uwaio arrookawah oppishim, ewo
no less above man, th^n man is above ausinre arrookawah renook arra ren
arrookawant
beasts; and therefore that the full knowledge oppishshim; quah negouche ne
tabaio wauhtawunk
of his nature wutche uwio arrandoit [arrumauwunk] ausin
exceeds man's capacity. errookawah renna kitchshantammoowunk.


Are there many Gods? or is there but one Q. Sharaog Mandoak? ux webe atta
papasaguun wah
true God? werramat Jehovah?

There are not many Gods, there is only one An. Matta sharaou Mandoak, atta
webe pasuk wah
true God. werremat Mando Jehovah.


How do you prove that there is but one true Q. To gouje koramen n^ webe pasuk
wah werremat
God? Jehovah?

Because the reason why singular An. Wutche waiaiewunk tohodje nansaiewok
things of the same kind are multiplied aiakquiiks wutche ansejekmuche nenar
kokkoodishah^awk
is not to be sound in the nature matta misskommauwauoan rame arumbauwunk
of for the reason arandoit] wutche God; wuche wajaiewunk
why such like things are multiplied is tohodje arsoauk aiakquiiks
kokkoodishheauk atta
from the fruitfulness of their causes: wutche hokkissegowunk wutche
wajaiwunganooas:
but has no cause of webe God matta ou^a^he wajaiewunk wutche
his being, but is of himself uwaio pummaiewunk, webe wutche nagum hogga
therefore he is one. negouche papasaqun.


2. Because singular things of Newutche nansaioaks aiakquiiks wutche
the same kind when they are multiplied, are nenar arak nantsejek
kokkoodrishshahettit, achabissoheawawk
differenced among them selves by yarau we nagamauwo hoggauwo weeche
their singular properties; but there nejek nanseas artumbauhittaw ungansh webe
much
cannot be found another God differenced hom matta skowah, unkatak Mando
achabizhean
from this by any such like propertyes. wutche youh spe chawgunsh arraious
achabissewungansh [arrambamuks.


3. Because its proper to God Newutche webe mohtantammim re Jehovah
to do whatsoever he wills; if there were many Gods they u^eein
hanharroytaks, hom sharehit Mandoak hom
might will contrary things, and one might be hindered by opperreworrantammock,
quah nejek hom wowotamhittawawk
another, so that he could not do what he rean chawgun rio matta hom re
kaddauwe^eatteou
would, which can not stand with the Omnipotency hom matta toukranah weeche
wame keiztauwunganuk
and nature of God. quah arrandoit Jehovah.


But may there not be many Gods: yet so that Ob. Webe hom matta sharaog
Mandoak: narraio ne
one o^ the chiefest and greatest of all? pasuk negonquassik quah oussewe kerik
wutche wame?

No, because the first being must An. Matta, wutshe nego^nne pummayhuad pauke
be absolutely Supreme mutche nagamo utse ousewe quonunguoso [sqonguoso
because he depends upon nothing, he rests wutche matta rambatsenno chawgun,
much
not upon any person but is alsufficient to matta howan^ kachetamsenno webe
wame tabbaio re
him self and to all things; and all nagamo hogga quah wame r^ aiakquiiks;
quah wame
things depend upon him that which is not aiak quiiks rambats'nnetankq' chawgun
noweta matta
absolutely chiefest and above all nagamo uts^ negonquasik quah arroukasso wame
cannot be God. matta hom Jehovah.


2. Because the Essential properties Wutche Mandowaious pummayauwous arwe,
of God are such as cannot be nunquesoungansh Jehovah nearrious ar matta hom
given to any more then one. me^ittonoush unkatagganak re ause pasuk.


What are those Properties which are Qu. Chaugunsh yous arwenunguesonngansh
teous moutantamminoush
peculiar to God alone? Jehovah webe ise?

There are many I shall instance in three which include An. Pha^itchch' nen
swanch mishom teous minnamok
the rest. unka^aggansh.


1. That all perfections are Neh wame arwenunquesoungansh uttamous
in him originally, and eminently as in rame ewo negonne, quah wuna shi auwe
a^h' rame
the first cause, from which heaven and earth negonne wajaiewunk, ten wutche
kesukq' quah ohke
and all things in them receive quah wame ajak quiiks rame nejek uttummonummok
what soever good they have that all nauweta chawgun warreguk uttahehit neh wame
perfection are in arwejanunguesoungansh uttamous rame Jehovah
infinitely the reason why the wame arroukawawe wajaiewunk to hodi^ pummayawunk
being and goodness of all quah wurregowunk wutche wame kei
creatures is limmitted is because the higwushannak sachwhungankauwo, atta
wutche waiiewund
cause whereby they exist has communicated spe teou poummaiomuauk maugamous
so much to them and no more, and youche re neiek quah matta wunk, quah
has made them capable of so much kei-heous neiek tabe attumminummin youche
and no more, but receives not quah matta wunk, webe Jehovah matta attumminummo
any thing from another, but is a Spirit chawgun w^tche (...), webe Rashshauunk
living in him self, or pompemantammin nagamo ewo terre, ux
of himself therefore God is not limmitted nagamo utse negauche Jehovah matta
sachwhungankauwo
his strength is infinite ewo milkissewunk wame arroukassomo
whatsoever he wills he does in heaven and earth hanharroytaks uttereen
kesukuk quah okkeak-ter^e
his knowledge is Infinite he knows ewo wewaughtauwunk wame arroukassomo
waugltaun
all things; he hears all the words, wame aiakquiiks; padak wame
ruwauwungansh,
and he sees all the works of quah wonaumen wame reungansh wutche
all men in all the world his Goodness wame renouh warn mittaukuk terre,
ouraiewunk
is Infinite he is exceedingly good, he goes beyond all wame arrokasso no
oussewe werrego, arroukan wame
in goodness he does good toward wahwo^regewunganak terre wauhwerrereat
rak'que
all creatures, the presence of God is wame keisheaus-h^nnak, tautereit Jehovah
wame
infinite, he is every where in all the world filling all arroukassomo wampsin
wame mittauk remassen wame
places, and goes not from place to place, as does ahapummuks, quah matta
ahantse au, arra rehit
the creatures his life is keizhittishannak uppomantammewunk wame arrouk
infinite, he is Eternal, without beginning, assomo, ewo much Micheme, m^tta
nenouj aious,
and without end. quah matta eakquino.


3. That the true God is perfectly Neh wauh werramat Mand^uh much ^onks
blessed in himself, Alsufficient of himself, wauwerrehea nagamo utse, Wame
tabaio nagamo
he needs not supply from an utse, matta querauhik quo airananamamauetounk paiu
other, For, wutche, Wutche,


1. He knows all things at once Waughtunk wame aiakquiiks, passukutte
and together in all the world, without quah nappe wawa mittaukuk terre, matta
keketokauanak
discourse by the infiniteness of terre, spe wame arroukawauwunk wutche
his Essence. ^wo Pummayawuk.


2. He wills most freely whatsoever Worrantammo oussewe narrauwe chawgun
is good, and so perfectly that whatsoever noweta warreguk, quah asonkkaiouwe
neh chawgun
he wills is good so far as he werrantammo much warreguk, rikqueque
arroytak,
wills it, and because he wills it, For quah wutche warrantammen, Wutche
Jehovah
is simply and Infinitely good. saioo quah wame-arroukowauwe werrego.


How do you prove that heaven and earth, and Q. Ten hom wutche koramen neh
kesuk quah ohk^, quah
all things in them have the Original wame aiakquiiks rame nejek out ahhenau
noujiewunk
of their being from wutche nejek pummayawungano wutche Jehovah?

This follows from what An. Yowh noskonsomo wutche chawgun
was said before, for we have proved arwamacup negonne, wutche norramananas
that God has his being neh Jehovah uttahe ewo pummayawunk
of himself, and is but one: therefore all nagamo utse, quah webe pasuk:
negauche wame


Postcirpt.
THere might have been much more printed, concerning the progress of this work
amongst the Indians, certified in other letters sent from New England, which
would be too tedious to insert, only the Corporation established here think
fit, that the following Certificate lately received (which gives an account
what proficiency two of the Indians now at the University in New England have
made in their learning) be printed, which is as follows (viz.) August 18.
1658.
THese are to testify to all men to whom these presents may come, that two of
the Indians that are trained up at the Grammer-Schoole in Cambridge of
New England, whose names were Caleb and Joel, were called forth upon trial at
the public Commencement before the Magistrates and Elders, and in the face of
the Country, and thereupon very little warning gave good contentment (for their
time) to them that were present, being examined by the Praesident of the
College in turning a part of a Chapter in Isaiah into Latin, and showing the
construction of it so that they gave great hope for the future of their
perfecting. Witness

Charles Chauncy,
Praesident of Harvard College, in Cambridge.




