Piae Iuventuti Sacrum, An ELEGY on The Death of the most virtuous and
hopeful young Gentleman GEORGE PIT Esquire:

Sen: Herc: Fur: Act: 3. Prima quae vitam dedit hora, carpsit.
Even that first hour wherein man lives,
Takes one hour from the life it gives.
Printed in the Year 1658.

To THE MOST VIRTUOUS AND THEREFORE MOST DESERVEDLY HONORED LADY, Mris ALICE
PIT, With all due Service and Devotion is humbly Dedicated the following
Elegy: At the Funerals of her only, and worthily Beloved Son Mr G. P.
MADAM,
SInce You can be so Charitably kind,
To let us share the Blessings of your Mind;
Since of the Comforts of your Womb, your Son,
You could allow me part; and still had done,
Had not our wretched lives cursed Mistresses
His Progress Feared, Envied our Happiness.
It seems But just, I should be sharer to,
As of your Joys before, so sorrows now.
Not then to joy with you, it had but bin
My Misery; 'twere, not to grieve, my sin.
That was my Priv'ledge, This my duty is;
That Gratitude Commands, Religion this.
Nor dare I mourn by halves, The whole man he,
Must wear noe party-colored livory:
Such as indeed the joy-dissembling Heir
Too often at's Father's funeral seems to wear;
when turn him inside out, you will easily find
Much differing colors in his cloak and Mind.
My sorrow's die'd in grain I only have
Just so much life as keeps me from the grave.
Your Bounty clothes the outward man in black,
His Death would not allow my soul to lack
Her Mourning-suit; who in respect to you
Has clad her Maid all in close mourning too
Your Goodness calls on one; and here you see,
My bold grief multiplies that one to three.
Upon the weak staff of a splitted Quill,
My Creeple Muse comes halting up the Hill;
And humbly at your feet does prostrate fall,
The devout'st mourner at this Funeral.
Your sorrows raised her from that Bed of ease,
Where she so long had hugged her own disease;
And had expired long siuce, a prey to death,
But that your sighs brought a supply of breath
Hearing your groans, she started up, and see
No Sun appear, she straight cries out- It Is he!
And with a trembling eye, roaving about,
At length she spies that mournful HARROVV out.
Seeing this The two tops are the Church and your house.
two-top'd Hill (for now there is odds
Betwixt your house, and that which once was God's:
Though these made one, 'till some more wise then we
Durst preach it Schism to live in unity.)
Seeing these tops two blackest clouds o'reshade
(God's frown the one, your sadnesle the other made:)
She calls it her Parnassus, and does run
In have, to take leave of her setting sun.
The Deity inspired her was your Son,
Whose virtues made your tears her Helicon.
But may this fountain soon run dry! that stream
No more occasioned on so sad a theme!
O rather may my Muses last breath be
Exhaled in this unwelcome Elegy!
O may she rather spend her rustic Rithme
Upon the reigning vices of the time;
And with her betters only reap these gains,
An happy Curse of Silence for her pains!
Had she not in this sin which she has done,
Served the sad mother more then happy son;
She had not in so deep a note sat down,
And groaned: But up to Heaven had flown
In lofty numbers; such as might become
The Sainted offspring of your happy womb.
I cannot blame your love, which did contrive
So many ways to keep this Flower alive:
Though in a lovely garden here he grew,
Made for such Flowers alone as he and you:
Though you did well those lawful hopes to nourish,
To see him in this garden thrive and flourish:
Though such endeavors with Religion stand,
Yet did your prayers still contradict your hand:
You wished him blessed, your own experience shows
That no man's so before to heaven he goes.
I know you grudge him not his early rest,
Nor think his blessing less, 'cause so soon blessed.
Who soonest goes this journey, runs his race
With as much ease as speed, and takes his place
Highest in Heaven; we who stay here behind,
Laden with sins and sorrows, we shall find
The entrance much more hard, and there must be
Content to sit lower by much then he.
This is your Blessing, that for seav'nteen years
You have possessed what now you lose with tears.
That heaven entrusted you with that rich prize,
In love of which it self did sympathize
With you and us: That you have been so long
His Nurse, 'till he can speak the Angels tongue.
And bears his part in that sweet quire, that siug
Loud Halleluiahs to their God and King.
May that bright Glory, which now Crowns the Son,
Attend the Mother when her race is run!
There may you meet where endless comforts may,
And shall mak't an aeternall Holiday.
Till when my altered Calender shall b^^
Two letters for this day in every year.
A black one for your loss, an other Red
To signify the happy day he sped
In Heaven; May all the virtuous family
Still live so innocent, so happy die!
May Heavens warm rays revive your joies and keep
Your Hopes awake, until your Bodies sleep
In peaceful Graves, and all your Souls do fly
In triumph up to Immortality!
ON The Early, but happy death, of the very Hopeful young Gentleman, my once
most dear, and Honored friend, GEORGE PIT Esquire: Dying of an haereditary
Consumption at 17 years of age.
THus flitting are our best of Joys, and this
The misery attends too early bliss;
To have a friend which I must lose! O bless
Me (Heavens) with no such fading happiness!
Whilst here I breath, O let me rather be
As free from friends, as Immortality!
So shall no dying joy to me bequeath
A living sorrow by its hasty Death.
" Sorrow has to the height its self improved,
" When we have lost what we can say we loved.
What shall I call my Passion then, who have
Buried more then one Heaven in his Grave?
I loved and lost, to tell you what, and when,
Were but to love and lose him over again.
Great Griefs are dumb, in these sad lines I show,
What it is my Grief would say were it not so.
What others might call words, here are but weak
Expressions, only signs that I would speak.
Could I speak out, my lines should have no end,
My Grief bee'ng more then words can comprehend.
And yet no wonder, if each sigh, each tear,
Falling upon his dust new-moulded were,
And unto us articulate now seem,
Rebounding from so Elegant a theme.
As Memnon's statue without soul or sense,
When warmed and moved by the powerful Influence
Of Heaven above, did seem in gratitude
To bless the power whence 'twas with life indu'd:
So may his shining soul, which now is gone
Triumphant far above the Stars and Sun,
Dart down a Courteous and enlivening ray,
To actuate our souls, as those our clay;
And make us such in^eed as he should have
All speaking monuments about his grave.
Till then, like one whose losses strike him dumb,
With this sad Paper on my breast I come,
And mourn before thy Hearse, such Griefe's expressed
Best by a silent tongue, and vocal breast:
For these sad words in these white sheets, they be
The walking Ghosts of my dead Poetry.
Which haunt thy Grave, the place which does enclose
More of my treasure then the world yet knows.
More then I have to lose again, and more
Then richest nature can again restore.
More then my hopes can aim at here, or can
Be recompensed in one that is merely man.
A treasure can indeed no more be lost
Then be forgot, it is but secured at most:
Since 't lies so safe, what is left, I Will cast all in;
This Mite-devotion of my widdow'd Pen.
Could sighs breathed out from sorrow's clouded nest,
(Call it thy living tomb or my dead breast)
Prevail and blow thee back again: or tears
Shour'd on thy Corpse raise a new spring of years:
Could Sobbes and doleful groans, sent from the heart,
(The last sad Gasps wherein our hopes depart)
Or be so powerful, as to mollify
The Fates, or make thee think it sin to die.
Thy friends, whom thy far-spreading death bereft
Of Joys, and senseless as thy body left,
Would borrow of surviving passion,
To antedate thy resurrection.
Could whitest Innocence with sweetness mixed,
Could Piety in Resolution fixed,
Could inward Grace in outward beauty set
As true Gold in a Gilded Cabinet
Could sweetest Inclinations in a mind
Not warped by favor, nor through passion blind;
Could (what is a miracle) a pious youth
Aged in Devotion and Religion's Growth,
Could each or all of these have set a rate
Upon a mortal, death might venerate,
And through religion be afraid to wear
Those sacrilegious spoils it now does here:
We had enjoyed him longer, and in him
Those virtues which so beautified the Gemme.
Were thou no more (sweet soul) but as of late
My dearest Friend, I durst expostulate
With death and sickness, and thus seem to be
In danger of a name in Poetry.
Could threats or flatt'ries, force or woo the Grave,
Only to take what aged nature gave:
Could dire Anathemaes belched out with noise
(The loudest thunder of a Poet's voice)
Fright death, and excommunicate disease
I Am sure thou had not bin so soon at ease:
I know not which had given more cause to have grieved
That now thou die'st, or then so many lived.
Were virtue but a name in thee, no doubt
Our words might swell so big as speak it out:
Or were our sorrow passion, Reason might
Enter the lists and hope to win the fight:
But it is above this strain we mourn, not one
Forced Sigh we have, strained tear, or modish Groan.
Such as the zealous Hypocrite puts on
When he should mourn for's lost Religion.
No mourners of the Post, whose Grief's a trade,
Who armed with Iron words, so come to invade
Death with their Execrations, murder fate
With Curses as profane, as then too late.
Our sorrow's Christian, and our verses be
Our due Devotion, no starched Elegy.
True, he whose dryer soul would boast a power
Beyond what is mortal, and forbear to shower
Down pensive tears upon thy ashes, must
Crumbling to ashes too, mix with thy dust:
None can but grieve for thy Mortality
Except a soul that is much more dead then thee.
And yet he only mourns aright, that shows
A soul as innocent as virtuous:
As thine, whose actions write instead of Grief
An harmless Comment on thy spotless life.
A life so good, so chaste, it seemed to give
Us a short taste of that which Angels live:
And what is most true in all Goods here we meet,
This was its Commendation, Short and sweet.
The fairest morning of a man, the dawn
Of an aeternall day; On's clay was drawn
The lovely'st picture of a lovely'r soul,
On this the Divine Image almost whole.
Man in his stature, in's form more then man,
In purest Innocence a Christian.
His nature soft, his body such as stole
From Heaven a lodging for so sweet a soul.
Nature (as in the Ermine) fairly drew
His duties' Emblem in his spotless hue.
Who so observed that rarest caution which
Appeared, when e're he was to pass the ditch
Wherein too many welter and lie drowned,
Choosing the softest not the firmest ground.
Would almost say more then in Complement
Nature, not virtue made him Innocent.
To see so young a soul stand all alone
In The world, as virtue 'twixt two vices, one;
Assaulted now by one, then by another,
And neither leare to one, nor cringe to the other,
Made me first see the business he had
For Heaven gave him no leisure to be bad,
Whose race with so great haste to Heaven was run
'Twas almost finished e're we saw't begun.
O pious soul! who know no parallel,
To die so young when yet thou liv'dst so well!
To see so choice a Gemme lie all alone
Amid st a crowd, and yet caught up by none
Must speak a virtue more then natural
Which struck that secret reverence into all.
To see so fair a flower often beset
With weeds and thistles, and to flourish yet
Retain it is Beauty and its sent, and be
Even guarded by 't's malignant Enemy,
Argues a vigor more then Earth can give,
And more then ought but Heaven Could receive.
Those pretty tempting bates which lie and hemme
Youth in, and prey on those would feast on them,
Could in his more resolved Countenance move
A smile at most, and of disdain, not love.
Those thundering Oaths, the highest Embloss'd Pride
Of brave discourse, which the swollen Deicide
Enam'lling all his talk with that rude grace
In a Bravado spits in Heavens pure face.
Spread such an horror over his soul, as't seemed
The tender'st part of what was thus Blasphemed,
So constant at's Devotion, as though
His soul did nothing but his Heaven know.
How easily went that soul to God, each day
Which made it thus it is task to learn that way!
For him to go to Heaven, 'twas no more
But trace the foot steps he had made before:
Knowing that he must run, that wins the Goal,
It was his care thus often to breath his soul.
What e're might bring to Heaven, to him 'twas all
Becomes so perfectly habitual
It was as hard for him to do amiss
As 'twas for others to obtain their bliss.
Where others with amazement gaze and spy
A Phancy'd luster which puts out the eye,
He saw, and seeing loathed, and loathing shunned;
Did not his reason; with his sense confound.
His words were such, as only his could be
Sweet perfumes breathed from that rich Spicery
Which did embalme his soul whilst here it lay
Buried within it is Sepulcher of clay.
He lived, as if his arrand hither were
To beg of each a passion, each a prayer.
So Heavenly were his soul's sweet motions all
To rest below had been unnatural.
So does that noblest element of fire
Fight with it is fuel and to heaven aspire,
And when that is vanquished, and it upwards gone,
Lives the more pure though after seen by none.
His busnesse here below was not to wast.
A life, or stay 'till some few minutes passed;
All that he came to do was this, no where
He had to leave's mortallity but here.
His blessed soul came hither but to show
That all that go to Heaven must this way go:
Had it been possible a soul should bound
So high without a fall upon the Ground,
Could man enjoy aeternall life, and not
First dye, then had he never been forgot:
Heaven would have prized such jewels much more high,
Then to expose them to each vulgar eye.
But since the purest Di'mond, e're it stand
The pride and Glory of a Noble hand
Must first endure the file, and not think much
TO abide the Lapidarie's ruder touch.
Even so his richer soul now safely set
In God's more wide and Glorious Cabinet,
( Enamell rich as those bright Orbs e're wore.)
Was here placed to be Cut and polished ore.
Such was his entertainment here, that day
Which first gave life, first took his health away.
Born but to practice his mortallity,
Only to learn how to be sick and dye.
Nature grew jealous at his birth, she saw
A face so sweet, so brave a soul, in awe
Of her own work she stood, and lest it should
Grow more then man, and deifie her mould,
She sent him not abroad, but as we do
Our Pris^ners; with his churlish keeper too.
His guard's a sad disease, which does essay
To stifle's soul in his infected clay.
And when she would have walked abroad, to view
What Nature made of old, or Art anew,
Clapped bolts and shackles on each faculty,
And made her life a death, who could not die.
Till leaning too too heavy on the wall,
It had so weakn'd, caused at length its fall:
And now the joyful soul escaped is
Into a fair aeternity of bliss.
O Happy soul, in this thy misery!
For having tried so long what it is to die,
Thou quickly did thy work, without all pain,
And go to rest aeternally again.
Whilst others drop or stumble in, Heavens gave
Him leave to walk softly into this grave.
Such Flowr's are not cut down, but drawn up hence
By their bright Sire's attractive influence.
No sudden raging Fever parched his clay,
And in an instant scorched his life away:
But, as wax in the Sunshine, when it has felt
That warmth, does rather sweetly yield then melt.
And seems to smile upon its kinder fates,
And to embrace the wounding rays, dilates
And kindly spreads it is self, and wooes it is death
Longing it is last embraces to bequeath:
So did his melting body yielding lie
Smiling upon the Courteous Cruelty
Of such a kind disease, which in each limb
Did seem to wast it self much more then him.
Who saw him breath his last would conclude thence,
He whispered Death in's ear to fetch him hence.
They seemd to strive which should yield first of these,
His feeble body or his weak disease,
He did espouse his sickness, was in love
With that which first could seat his soul above.
Angry with his Physicians, who did try
To kill the Death brought Immortality.
His sickness to his body was born twin,
As every soul since Adam to it is sin.
Such entire friends that both must be or neither
Since both were borne, both live, both dye together.
But why miscall we't sickness or disease,
Which is his Conduct to aeternall ease?
Which Heaven sent hither with him, lest when hurled
Now here, now there in a tumultuous world,
He might forget where 'twas his business lay,
This softly pulls, and tells him that is the way.
If ere it pinched so hard, as fetched a groan,
It quickly sends a slumber to atone.
The breach of friendship, as an early taste
Or soft praeludium to aeternall rest.
So like the sisters were in him, his breath,
Did only tell us which was sleep, which death,
His last successive breathings did increase
In such proportioned measures, that to cease
Did seem Impossible, what e're may be
The adverse dictates of Philosophy.
His breathings passed in such proportion
As each respected that aeternall one.
When by his long disease his patient breast
Did seem to be more then was fit oppressed,
And made us sometimes over apt to say
His spirit was as heavy as his clay,
We sinned against his piety which thus
Sequestered from's malignant dust and us
That purest soul, which up to Heaven was gone
In holy raptures of Devotion:
When e're we judged him to be sad or dull
'Twas absence but no heaviness of soul.
He was a study'ng whilst he here did stay
Only to make choice of a dying Day.
And 'twas no wonder, he dispatched so soon,
Who goes with the Sun, shall come to Heaven at noon.
'Twas not too soon to go when God did call,
His fruit was ripe before his flower did fall.
Angels could not too soon their Hooks here bring,
It Is ever Harvest, where there is such a Spring.
He saw but little, disliked more: the world
Unsettled, always round about him hurled;
To fix there, were not to stand still but reel;
Who would live to be broake on such a wheel?
Yet did he try Town, Country, and did see
Some Relics of an University:
But naught could force his stay: much more he might
Have seen, but strove to be at home ere night:
And now no wonder if such Flowers do fade
Set in so lean a soil, so cold a shade
As is the barren world that is here below:
No such fair flowers on such foul dung-hils grow.
Just blown he was when Heavens all-searching eye
In love with his beauty and his fragrancie,
Straight plucks him up, and gives him this new name,
A Saint inth' Bosom of blessed Abraham.
This is his name, And now whom I before
Did love and honor, I must learn to adore.
He now has happ'ly changed his mortal state,
And 'twas his aemulation, not his Fate:
That Death so early called a soul so chaste,
Argues his timely ripeness, not it is haste.
It was my happiness when I could call
Him friend, not startled at a Funeral.
But since it is more his bliss thus to acquaint
Himself with Angels, canonized a Saint
By Death's own hand, I must aesteeme it more
To be his vot'ry now, then friend before
He was not borne for us, alas we must
Not think such Jewels fitted for our trust
His Goodness was our loss, Heaven often spares
Less blessings for a greater term of years:
We measure Good lives not by years but hours,
It Is much that we can say, he once was ours:
That we once saw him is enough to boast:
And it is the noblest brag to say we have lost,
And yet we have not lost our Saint, unless
In an aeternity of Happiness.
We well may lose our selves in thinking how
Heaven is so mindful of poor things below,
As lend us so long his sweet presence, when
It self thus picks him out from other men.
So when the Glorious eye of Heaven does go
To view the wonders which we call below
We use to say he sets and falls, when there
He Is no less high or bright then he was here:
His course is one, and Constant, though we call
What our own Natural darkness is, his fall
He Is not of life, but we of him bereft,
The sorrows we have found, those he has left
Going to it all the morning, now at Even
We see him step over the Grave to Heaven.
All joy to thee in Heaven (blessed soul!) whilst we
Here weep and groan and pray to rest with thee.
It Is not thy fate that we thy friends bemoan,
It Is not thy death, not thy loss but our own.
We never shall find our joies again 'till we
Can die and lose our griefs in Heaven with thee.
But we disturb thy sacred dust, now close
Wrapped up securely in a sweet repose.
We not so prize thy soul, as hope to buy
It back by the cheap expenses of an eye.
Why should thou now from all thy joys descend,
Unblesse thy self, so to reblesse thy friend?
When we'd enjoy thee next, 'twill be a light
Task for thy sake to bid the world Goodnight,
We easily shall pass through the Grave and death
To come to thee, we'll run quite out of breath.
Such pious journeys still successful be,
He Is sure to go to Heaven that comes to thee.
Mors iter ad vitam.
An EPITAPH on the same.
Ask you, what is by this Marble meant?
Thus said the soul, which this way went.
Friend, I am gone,
There nothing lies but dust and stone:
Would thou be here?
Step in and leave thy body there.
Why at the door
Do stand and talk? I Am far before
Would be where I
Now happy rest? Dispatch and die
So shall thou be
that in thy self, thou seek'st in me.
Strike through this stone, make have to taste and know,
What I enjoy, but cannot tell thee now.
Another.
KNock not, but enter; why do fear?
His ashes sleep, his soul's not here.
What here thou see, this breathless dust
Lived seav'nteen years, Chaste, Good, and Just.
When here it could no better be,
'T went home to Immortallity.
This Grave, which by its death became
The sole surviver of the PIT. He being the last heir male of the family.
name,
Was left its Heir, 'till that day when
These ashes shall revive again;
And up to those blessed mansions sore,
VVhither the soul went long before.
FINIS.

