APPROBATIO.
REtractationes venerabilis viri JOHANNIS ELLIS libentissime perlegi, easque
proelo tradendas censui, ut iis qui Ecclesiam Anglicanam deseruerunt in
exemplum, qui revertuntur in solatium, qui firmi permanserunt in stabilimentum,
ipsi denique Retractanti in sincerae conversionis, ingenuaeque pietatis gloriam
vivant.

Quintilis 1. 1661. MA. FRANCK. S. T. P. R. in Xto P. GUL. Epo. Land. a Sacris
Domesticis.

Christi

Caroli

Luke: 15

St. Austin Imitated or Retractations and Repentings in Reference to the Late
Civil and Ecclesiastical Changes in this Nation by John Ellis

2. Sam: 19

1. Peter: 3.

Leges Angliae Verbum daej

Aliud fundamentum nemo Iaciat: 1. Cor. 3.



S. AUSTIN Imitated: OR RETRACTATIONS AND REPENTINGS In reference unto the late
CIVIL and ECCLESIASTICAL CHANGES in this NATION.

Wherein I. The GROUNDS Of Obedience to the CROWN Adherence to this CHVRCH
(In Doctrine, Worship and Government.)

II. An Answer to that Tractate, Entitled, Reasons showing the Necessity of
Reformation.

III. The Non-Obligation of the COVENANT.

Are Represented and Demonstrated.

In II. Books.

By JOHN ELLIS.

If we would judge our selves, we should not be judged of the LORD, 1 Cor. 11.

Videbunt omnes homines, quam non sim acceptor personae meae. Aug. Ep. 7. Marc.

LONDON, Printed by W. Godbid, and are to be sold by Timothy Garthwait at the
Little North-dore of S. Paul's. M.DC.LXII.

DEDICATIO. EGO Utrique Academiae Cantabrigiensi Matri, Oxoniensi alteri:
EARUMQUE Honoratissimis D. D. Cancellariis Reverendis D. D Procancellariis
Honorandis Collegiorum Praefectis Sociis
Dilectiss. bonae frugi Scholarib. universis Hasce Paginas In Poenitudinis
Symbolum Juventutis monitum Grati Animi (...).
L. M. D. D.

Non ita pridem Academiae, Superius memoratae, Alumnus Aulae S. Catharinae
Socius Civibus Cantabrigiensib. Lector, sive Concionator publicus.


JOHANNES ELLIS.

To the Well-affected Reader.
YOU may please to take notice, that being unexpectedly drawn forth into a
Disputation in Writing, touching Infant Baptism, by the Clerk of the Place unto
which I have reference (acted, it is like by some other heads) and engaged to
the publishing of my May Anno 1659. when neither the Sun, nor any Star of
Charl's- wain (if I may so speak) as then appeared.
Reply; having formerly marred, as the fruit, in great part of my Ministry, so
also Two The first a Sermon before the House of Commons, Feb. 22. 42.
Entitled, THE SOLE PATH to a SOUND PEACE: Containing some model of a
Reformation.

The other an Answer to Mr. Sam. Hudson: Entitled, Vindiciae Catholicae: Or
the Rights of particular Churches asserted: Containing a Defense of the
Doctrine of the Church of England, (as I take it) and other reformed; touching
the Non-visibility of the Catholic Church as Organical. In which Tractates
more pains was taken, and (excepting what I here retract) whereof perhaps, more
use might be made, then it may be is convenient for me to signify.


Treatises by the mixture of Apologies for the War and for Independency: I took
it as my part, being to appear again in Public; to Retract and recall (as I
had bewailed) my Mistakes in those Affairs. And accordingly before that
Treatise of Baptism: Entitled, THE PASTOR and the CLERK (because the Debate
was betwixt two such persons, in relation to the same place) I did then prefix,
in several particulars the sum of my Cogitations in that matter. In the last
Paragraph whereof, I promised (if it should seem convenient, and God were
pleased) a larger explication of that brief Palinodye. Which soon after drawn
up in Part, has ever since layen by. Till the last Summer, some Sheets of it
began to be printed (without my Knowledge) by the care and cost then of a Mr.
Tim. Thirscr.
Reverend Friend (and others whom he excited) into whose hand I had committed
them, for perusal. But finding the Eruption was somewhat precipitate; I caused
it to withdraw its hand again, for more Maturity and Growth. In the Traveling
toward the Birth whereof (though upon another occasion also) I was seized by a
dangerous Fever, which, with other Occurrences, has impeded it till now,
though often incited a fresh unto the communicating of it. For, non mihi
Tulliana illa Blanditur sententia, qua dictum est, nullum unquam verbum quod
revocare vellet, Aug. Epist. 7. Marcellino.
emisit; sed plane me angit Horatiana sententia: Nescit vox missa reverti. Hinc
est, quod periculosissimarum quaestionum libros (de Genes. scil. and de
Trinitate) diutius teneo quam vultis and fertis; ut, si non poterint nisi
habere aliqua, quae merito reprehendantur, saltem pauciora sint, quam esse
possent, si praecipiti festinatione inconsultius ederentur. I am not flattered
(says mine Author) with that Sentence of Tully; Never did he utter any word
which he would recall: But rather that saying of Horace, sorely troubles me,
viz.

A Word once out, although amiss it fall,
And fain you would, yet can you not recall.
Hence it is, that those Books of most difficult and perilous Questions (de
Genesis and Trinit.) I keep from coming abroad longer then either ye would or will
bear. That, if it cannot be, but that there will be some things in them, which
may deservedly be blamed; they may at ast be fewer, then they could have been,
if by a rash precipitancy, they had been unadvisedly published. But I have now
given way. Whereunto I am the more inclined, because it is a kind of
Confession of my Faith; Zanch.
Now jucundum and optabile est pio cuique viro, publicum and sempiternum suae
in Christum Fidei and pietatis testimonium in Ecclesia relinquere -- and ex iis
quae divina providentia mihi contigerunt, videbor quasi videre, me ad hanc
pugnam divinitus vocari; Because it is a comfortable and desirable thing to
every Good man, to leave a public and lasting testimony of his Faith in
Christ, and of his Piety, in the Church: And by the providence that have
fallen out; I seem to my self, to be called out by God unto this Service;
Epist. Dedic. ad Archiep. Ebor. Grindal. ante operis sui de 3. Eloh. partem 1.
as Zanchy has expressed it for me before hand. Now I did intend a much
briefer Tractate; and only to content my self, with a moderate account of the
reasons of my return, to my obedience to the Church and State. Excuse unto the
Reader.
But considering that it is required in one of my profession, that he should,
not only utter sound speech that cannot be reproved; Tit. 2. chap 1.
but also be able to convince the Gainsayer, I have been forced to be a little
copious. Yea, Quis leget haec? -- nemo hercule nemo?
But who a book so large will read
Of things, that are now gone and dead?
The War is past, and the Church is in reforming. Well; but yet a reason of my
Faith, Repentance 1 Pet. 3.
I am obliged to render. VVithall, for the honor of those that went before us,
and have 1 Cor. 7.
that they had also the Spirit of God. Besides, it is requisite to Evidence,
that those that have love this Church and Kingdom; yet to hate them they have
no Cause. Add hereunto. It Is not perhaps impossible, that some Eye, by Gods
direction, may fall on these Lines, who may thereby, not only with a more
steady foot, walk himself in the good and the old Paths, Jer. 6.16.
which I point at; but may be of Influence also, to cause others to do it
likewise, and not to suffer them to stumble in their ways from the ancient
ones, Jer. 17.15.
to walk in paths, in a way not cast up. Lastly, there is nothing new under the
Eccles. 1.9.
that which has been, may be again; to the prevention whereof, I have
endeavored to contribute somewhat in this Treatise. After some Recovery,
purging is most requisite: Nam quae in Morbis relinquuntur post crisin, Hipp.
l. 2 Aph. 13.
recidivas facere consueverunt; Dreggs of Diseases, if not digested or
expelled, do cause Relapses; Especially in such distempers as are malignant. Of
which sort (if any) are Schism and Sedition. Fare thou well.

September. 27. Anno Dom. 1661.
The Contents of this Treatise.
[The Chapters, Sections and Pages are referred to, as they are here Printed,
which sometimes (but not often) are amiss.]
LIB. I. Of the Civil Controversy.
CHAP. I. 1. OF the Right of Retractations allowable unto all men, 2. Evidenced
from the General Causes of Error, 3. and of some great Examples of them Ancient
and Modern. CHAP. II. How far only the Author declined; how he behaved himself
therein, and what awakened him unto Recovery. page 15. CHAP. III. What the
Author does Retract, both in General and in Particular. 1. The War, 2.
Independency. p. 24. CHAP. IV. Causes of the Authors falling; and first the
Negative. p. 28. CHAP. V. The Causes positive. And first in General. p. 39. to
58. CHAP. VI. Causes particular to each Controversy: And first of the War.
SECT. I. Cause general and privative. Not obeying the Spirit of God. p. 56.
SECT. II. Particular Motives to the War, with their Refutation. p. 58. to 83.
CHAP. VII. Reply to certain general Grounds for the War, [being the chief
heads of a Book, Entitled, Scripture and Reason pleaded for Defensive Arms.]
p. 90. to 106.
The Contents of the Second Book. Of the Church Controversy.
CHAP. I. Of Independency. SECT. I. THe Occasion of the Authors lapse into it.
p. 109. SECT. II. Causes. 1. Privative, viz. not obeying the particular Word of
God. p. 112. SECT. III. Causes Positive. p. 113. SECT. IV. The Contents of
Independency. p. 114.
CHAP. II. Of the Grounds of Separation. And first in general. p. 119. CHAP.
III. Particular Exceptions against the matter of the Premises. 1. Against the
Articles or Doctrine. p. 174.
CHAP. IV. Of Worship and the Directory thereof, the Common Prayer Book. SECT.
I. Of Worship. 1. In it self. p. 195. 2. In the Ceremonies. p. 196. SECT. II.
Objections particular against the matter of our Worship. p. 204. SECT. III.
Exceptions against the Body of the Common Prayer Book. SECT. IV. A Vindication
of the Compilers of the Liturgy, in this particular. p. 231. SECT. VI.
Exceptions against the Ceremonies. page 270.
CHAP. VI. Of the Assemblies, their matter and mixture. SECT. I. The means in
the Church of England, of preserving them from Corruption p. 266. (this number
and some following are to be looked for in the 6. Chap. of the Second Book.) p.
269. SECT. II. Causes Constitutive of the Church of England. p. 270. SECT. III.
Apostolical Churches vitiated, but no separation. p. 273. SECT. IV. The
Primitive Churches also. p. 275. SECT. V. The Reformed Churches. p. 280.
CHAP. VII. Of Discipline. CHAP. VIII. Of Government. 1. By the Ministry in
general, and 2. by Episcopacy in particular. Sect. 1. The Conditions requisite
to the constitution of a Ministry. p. 301. Sect. 2. Of Episcopacy. Its Right
and Title. p. 304. Sect. 3. Exceptions against the former Government and
Discipline. 1. Episcopacy established by Law in Engl. p. 325. Subsect. 2.
Whether Episcopacy be a different order from Presbytery. ibid. Subsect. 3. The
Question not of order but of Power. p. 332. Subsect. 4. Whether Ordination in
the N. Testament without a Bishop. p. 334. Sect. 4. Of the Book of Ordination,
Subsect. 1. Bishops Imposition of hands upon Deacons. p. 338. Subsect. 2.
Apostles choose Deacons. ibid. Subsect. 3. That phrase Receive the Holy Ghost
defended. p. 339. Subsect. 4. Consecration of Bishops and Archbishops. p. 346.
Subs. 5. Episcopal Jurisdiction. p. 349. Sect. 6. The Close of the Church
Controversy.
CHAP. IX. The Proof and Trial of these Retractations. CHAP. X. The Conclusion.
1 A Petition p. 367. The Elder Son, ibid. 2. An Admonition of Zanchy, p. 368.
3. The Prediction of his late Majesty, p. 370. CHAP. XI. Additionals.
The Scope and Protestation of the AUTHOR.
Containing also an Explication of the FRONTISPIECE.
MY aim is, to perform by way of Retractation, some small service Principi and
Patriae, to the King and to my Country. My allegiance to the one, and
engagement to the other, and my lapsing in both, so much obliging me. Now Psalm.
20.
the Kings honor is great in Gods Salvation. And Psalm. 144.
blessed are the people who have the Lord for their God: But Amos. 3.
how can two walk together unless they be aggreed. We 1 John 3.5.
must be like him, if we would see him as he is. Now God is a righteous God,
Psalm. 11.
his countenance will behold only the thing that is JUST. This was the end of
our Redemption, viz. Tit. 2.
to deliver us from the practice of all iniquity, and that we might live a
godly, righteous, and sober life. Now the the only rule of this righteousness
and justice, is the Tit. 1.
will of God. Which will is revealed either generally in the Scripture, and in
the Law of Nature: or particularly in the constitutions of every Nation, which
contradict not the former. Hence, D^. Sibbis. Souls conflict. cap. 17.
what is agreeable to Law, is agreeable to Conscience, said once the Lawyers
Casuist. Hence, also To. 13.1.
he that resists the Laws of particular Nations, resists the Ordinance of God;
and he, be he head or tail, branch or rush, (as the Isa. 3.
Prophet phraseth it) shall receive to himself damnation. Eccles. 10.
He that brakes this hedge, a serpent shall bite him; he that removes these
(foundation) stones, they shall fall upon him. Laws therefore, being the sacred
impress of the will of God, and the observance of them, the obligement and
security both of Majestrate and Subjects, of Prince and People; my only scope
is the vindication of them, especially, in hypothesi, and in reference to the
late controversies in this Church and State. Laws I say, Gods first (in
Scripture) as the foundation stone; and Man's as a firm superstructure
thereupon; as being by man, Gods own Law, and so avouched by him. Hence 1 Pet.
2.
that of the first teacher of the Gentiles: submit your selves to every
Ordinance of Man for the Lords sake. Laws I say; either formal or virtual,
express or by apparent consequence. The former two sorts of laws (Scriptural
and National) are the foundation of the Church among us, and the firmitude of
the Commonwealth, as is represented in the Frontispeice. Gal. 6.
And those that walk according to this rule, peace shall be upon them, and
mercy, and upon the Israel (and England) of God. For Psalm. 37.
mark the just man, and bebold the upright, the end of that man is peace. Vale.

RETRACTATIONS AND REPENTINGS. LIB. I. The Civil Controversy.
CHAP. I.
Of the Right of Retractations allowable to all men, evidenced from the General
Causes of Error. And of some great Examples of them Ancient and Modern.
Sect. I. Of the Right of Retractations.
COnsidering that sin and error are so near of kin, as that the (...) peccare
and aberrare. (...) errare and peccare. S. Jarchi in Judic. 20.16. and in Job
5.24.
names are oftentimes reciprocal; and that the voice of one touching the
former, is the truth in all: Ps. 51.
I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive me; who can deny
concurrence with him in that exclamation of his, in reference unto the latter;
Who can understand his errors? Ps. 19.
Cleanse thou me from my secret faults? And yet this was a man 1 Samuel 13.14.
after Gods own heart, in matter of Godliness. His son and successor, whose
heart was 1 King. 4.29.
enlarged, as the sand on the Seashore in point of wisdom, leaves posterity
this Apophthegme: Eccles. 1. ult.
He that increases wisdom, increases sorrow: To wit, for the knowledge of
his folly. Cic. Tusc. 5.
As the Ancient Sages were first styled (...), wise men; Afterward (...),
lovers of wisdom: Last of all, (...), plain fools; that is, they perceived
themselves to be so. Hence that of the (reputed) wisest of them: Socrat. ap.
Cic. in Academ. (...). Arist. Elenchi l. 2. c. 8
Hoc unum scio, me nihil scire; one thing I know, that I know nothing, viz. as
I ough^ to know.

Sect. II. The first Causes original of our obnoxiousness to Error;
The Rise, and first Original whereof, if we inquire Apostle of the Gentiles
will explain unto us. Corrupt Nature.
Who lamenting his surprisals, and being deceived (though not in Doctrine) even
after he was in the faith, (according to Aug. Retract l. 1. c. 23. etc. 26. and
ad Bonisac. l. 1. c. 10.
S. Austin's reformed judgment) lays the fault on the Romans 7.11.24.
body of death, or Law in the members, that is, on nature it self, as it is now
corrupted. And 1 Cor. 13.
elsewhere, he professes, That the most perfect here, do know but in part, and
see truth but as in a glass darkly. Implying in both, that, without especial
grace, we are by the principles of our very nature now, obnoxious to
imperfection in our judgments, to be imposed upon, and to err. Consonant
whereunto is that of Aug. de Civil. d. l. 22. c. 22 a principio. A second
general Cause, Ignorance.
him, (next unto that order in spirit and judgment;) rendering a nearer and more
particular cause of error: nam quod ad primam originem pertinet, omnium
mortalium progeniem fuisse damnatam. -- Quid aliud indicat horrenda quaedam
profunditas ignorantiae, ex qua omnis error extitit, qui omnes filios Adam
tenebroso, quodam sinu suscipit; ut homo ab illo liberari sine labor, dolor,
timore non possit. That at the first all man's posterity (says he) was
condemned. -- What else shows that certain horrible abyss of ignorance, from
whence all error does arise, which receives into its dark bosom all the sons
of Adam, so that a man without labor, sorrow and fear, cannot be delivered
from it. The nearer yet, 3. Cause, our Incapacity of the greatest truths.
and natural reason hereof, is given by the head of all Philosophers, (as the
Learned Hook. Eccles. Polit. l. 5. 71.
Hooker styles him) because says he, Aristot. Metaph. l. 2. c. 1.
(...). Because as the eyes of a Bat are unto the daylight, so is the eye of
our souls unto those things which are in themselves the clearest. But the
supernatural, 4. Cause, opposition unto spiritual things.
and nearest cause (in reference unto matters of Religion) is rendered by the
Apostle; 1 Cor. 2.24.
for that the natural man receives not the things that are of God, for they
are foolishness unto him. Error therefore and lability thereunto, being
congenious to our very nature, and not wholly cured by grace it self, without
particular protection; who shall forbid this common remedy unto this Universal
and Epidemical Disease of mankind, (especially where we have been contagious
unto others) Repentance and Retractation. Unless we force them on this
temptation, to cover their sin, to save their credit, and so bring that curse
upon themselves: Prove. 28.13.
He that hides his sin, shall not prosper. Oppose not therefore that of the
Apostle; Gal. 2.18. Object. Answ.
If I build again the things that I destroyed, I make my self a transgressor.
Unto which, Austins reply shall be my answer. Aug. Epist. 48. Vincentio ad
finem.
Confusio autem adduoit gratiam and gloriam, cum erubescit quisque de propria
iniquitate, and poenitendo in melius commutatur. Quod te facere piget, illa
perniciosa confusione superatum; ne tibi ab hominibus nescientibus quid
loquantur, objiciatur illa Apostolica sententia: si enim quae destruxi, etc.
quae si etiam dici posset in eos, qui veritatem correcti praedicant, in ipsum
Paulum primitus diceretur, etc. Honest shame (says he) brings grace and glory;
when any is ashamed of his own iniquity, and by repentance is changed to the
better. Which thou art loath to do, being vanquished with sinful and destructive
shame; lest by men, that know not what they say, there should be objected
against thee that sentence of the Apostle: If I build again the things that I
destroyed, etc. which if it might be applied to those, which being reformed, do
publish the truth; then it should first be verified of Paul himself, for whom
the Churches glorified God, Gal. 1. penul.
for that he now preached that Faith, which before he persecuted.

Sect. 3. Examples of Retractation.
But to come to some Instances and Examples of Error, 1. In general.
and of Retractation. And first in General. I have read this sentence either
in, or cited out of Phil. de Comines.
Philippe de Comines, (for the Book is not now at hand) viz. A Prince, or any
other man that has not been deceived, can be but a beast, because he discerns
not the difference between good and evil. Consonant unto that of the Ancient
now quoted: Aug. Epist. 7
Nullum unquam verbum, inquit, quod revocare vellet, emisit. Quae quidem laus,
quanquam praeclarissima videatur, tamen credibilior est, de nimium fatuo, quam
de sapiente perfecto. Nam illi quos moriones vocant, quanto magis a sensu
communi dissonant, magisque insulsi and absurdi sunt; tanto magis nullum verbum
emittunt, quod revocare velint; quia dicti mali, vel stulti, vel incommodi
poenitere, utique cordatorum est. That is, Tully says of the Roman, That he
never uttered any word which he wished were unspoken: Which commendation,
though it be very splendid, yet is it more like to be true of an absolute fool,
then of a perfect wise man; for those whom we call Idiots, by how much they are
farther off from common sense, and are more absurd and witless; by so much the
more, they never utter any word, that they will retract. For to repent of an
evil, idle, or inconsiderate speech, is indeed the part of a prudent and
cordial man; thus far he. And to come nearer to our own time and occasion. I
shall give you the vivid speech of one yet living, (for ought I know) Letter to
one of the Lords of the Council concerning the Declarat. of October. 13. 1655.
Whosoever (says he) has not been deceived in the current of these last
fifteen years, has been preserved from being so, by such an absence of
friendship, confidence and charity, and by such an enmity to mankind; by such a
measure of distrust, jealousy and villainy in his nature, that I had rather be
a dog then that man. I shall leave unto the Author his passion and
expressions; and only improve his notion as complying with the premises. But
particulars. Particular Instances.
We might fetch them from the whole rational creature, and from the top-branch
of it, the Angels. For those of them that fell, although malice, they will not
retract, The lapsed Angels.
yet there is no doubt but they do repent, though not with godly sorrow. And
what is Retractation but Repentance certified? Adam the first and flower of the
mere rational The first man.
but retract his error, (though the expression of it be not verbally set down)
else could he not have been capable of salvation; for it is only 1 John 1.9.
if we confess our sin, that God has obliged his faithfulness and truth to
forgive us. And though with the heart man believe unto righteousness, yet with
the mouth confession must be made unto salvation, says the Apostle. Rom 10.
Unto this head therefore of Retractation (not criticizing on the word)
appertain all the confessions of sin we read of in the Scripture. But Other
Script. Inst.
and you shall find them to be the choicest of the Saints.

Job Job. 1.
(like unto whom in his time, was none on retracts, Chapter 40.4, 5. etc. 42.6.
I have spoken words, (says he) which I understood not, therefore I abhor my
self, and repent in dust and ashes. 2 Samuel 23.2
David, David.
by whom the Spirit of God frequently spoke; he retracts; 2 Samuel 24.10.
I beseech thee, O Lord, take away the iniquity of thy servant, for I have done
very foolishly. Solomon, who 1 King. 10.23.
exceeded all the Kings of the earth, both in riches and wisdom, he retracts.
Eccles. 2.20, 21.
Cap. 1.17. Chald. Paraph. In Eccles.
and he calls his travel in wisdom, Solomon
madness and folly. And it is supposed that the whole Book of Ecclesiastes is
nothing else but his retractations, especially if we credit the Chaldee
Paraphrase, (but not that in the King of Spains Bible) who makes the ground of
it to be, that Solomon foresaw he should leave his wisdom and Kingdom to
Rehoboam. Some also might perhaps bring S. Paul himself near the matter of a
retractation, If not S. Paul.
as to the style of a Letter which he wrote to the Corinthians, the good effect
whereof, made him in the issue not repent, 2 Cor. 7.8.
though he says, 'he did repent. But because the Calv. in loc.
doctiss. interpres (as he is often styled) expounds the place otherwise, I
insist not on it. But without query, Gal. 2.11.
he by whose mouth the Gentiles first received Yet doubtless Peter.
(the denying of his Lord) but retracted, no doubt, an error, by his example
made much more dangerous, the withdrawing, namely, from the Gentiles in eating
bread, Gal. 2.
and compelling thereby the Gentiles to 'live as the Jews did, so betraying the
liberty of the Gospel. Which may be a note for those, who claim succession from
him, not to arrogate unto themselves an unerring spirit, Adversaries to
Retractation.
no not in Cathedra, as does the Bishop of Rome, the only enemy of all
Christians, unto retractations.

Examples in the Ancient Church.
But to come lower; S. Austin the best Learned of all Ancient Doctors (in the
judgment of the Church of England Homil. against peril of Idolatry, part. 2.
page 25.
he not only retracts himself, and wrote two whole Books of that argument,
whose spirit in this particular may in few be seen in that excellent Epistle of
Marcellinus Epi. 7. and libb. of Retrac.
( Ep. 7.) But also therein exhorts every other man that has been mistaken; S.
Austin.
secundas habeat parts modestiae, qui primas non potuit habere sapientiae;
that every such one should take the second boat of modesty and retracting, that
could not get the first of wisdom, by not erring. The reason is: Idem ibid.
nam nimis perverse seipsum amat, qui and alios vult errare, ut error suus
lateat; for he too passionately loves himself, that is willing others should
still wander, that his own straying may be unobserved. Yea, he admonishes [o]
Hieron of a revocation of his opinion, touching the controversy betwixt Paul
and Peter, Gal. 2. Aug. Ep. 9. Ad Hieron.
Arripe, obsecro te, ingenuam, and vere Christianam cum charitate severitatem,
ad illud opus corrigendum atque emendandum, and palinodiam, ut dicitur cane;
incomparabiliter enim pulchrior est veritas Christianorum, quam Helena
Graecorum, pro qua mill Heroes adversus Trojam dimicarunt. I beseech thee
(says he) take resolute hold upon an ingenuous and true Christian severity
joined with charity, for the correcting and amending of that work, and sing a
palinody or peccavi; for more beautiful incomparably is the truth of
Christians, then the Helen of the Grecians, for whom thousands of gallant men
fought at Troy. S. Jerome also (unto whom one while Erasm. gives the primacy
next the Scripture, S. Hierom. Ep. Ded. operib. Hierom. 1516. Ep. Ded. operib.
Cyp^. 1520.
though afterward Cyprian: in neither with too much judgment,) if that Epistle
be his, which is Ep. 8. Tom. 4. Edit. 1533. Paris. But in the latter Editions
it is the eighth of the ninth Tome: Hierome I say, has this religious
sentence, and gives us a fundamental reason, and his own example for this
practice, where there is just occasion, viz. Dicat unusquisque quod velit; ego
interim de me, pro sensus mei parvitate, judicavi melius esse confundi coram
peccatoribus super terram, quam coram Sanctis Angelis in coelo, vel ubicunque
judicium suum Dominus voluerit demonstrare. That is, Let every man say what he
pleases, for my part, I have, according to my small judgment, determined;
that it is better to take shame (to wit, by acknowledgement of our errors)
before sinners on earth, then before the holy Angels in heaven, or wheresoever
the Lord shall appear in Judgment. Thus far he.

latter times, greater men of the Reformation (after Luther) then Bucer and
Calvin, Modern Examples.
we have not. The commendation of the first we have from the Calv. Epist. Ded.
ante com. in ep. ad Romans S. Grynaeo.
latter in these words: siquidem vir ille, ut nosti, praeter reconditam
eruditionem, copiosamque multarum rerum scientiam, praeter ingenii
perspicaciam, multam lectionem, aliasque multas ac varias virtutes, quibus a
nemine hodie fere vincitur, cum paucis est conferendus, plurimis antecellit;
hanc sibi propriam laudem habet, quod nullus hac memoria, exactiore diligentia
in Scripture interpretatione versatus est. That man (says Calvin, speaking of
Bucer Bucer.
) as thou know, has besides abstruse Learning, rarity of knowledge, sharp
wit, much reading, and many other virtues, wherein he is excelled almost by no
man in our time, can be compared but with few, and exceeds the most; has
this peculiar commendation besides, that no man in our memory has with more
exact diligence traveled in the Exposition of Scripture. The superlative
encomium of Calvin himself, is rendered by one who in all things understood well
what he said, and was not a man that knew how to flatter, especially not him,
against whom he wrote (in point of Discipline) namely, the incomparable Hooker,
as he is commonly and deservedly styled. Hook. Eccles. Polit. in Prafat. Sect.
2.
For mine own part, (says he) I think him incomparably the wisest man that
ever the French Church did enjoy, since the hour that it enjoyed him. Calvin.
And again, Though thousands were beholding to him, yet he to none, but only to
God, the Author of that most blessed Fountain, the Book of Life; and of the
admirable dexterity of wit, together with the helps of other Learning, which
were his guides. Again, two things of principal moment there are, which have
deservedly procured him honor throughout the world; the one, his exceeding
great pains in composing the Institutions of Christian Religion; His
Institutions.

His Commentaries.


the other, his no less industrious travel for Exposition of Scripture,
according to the same Institutions. Now both these Authors (as indeed all
others) have had their water to their wine; as D. George Abbot L. Archbishop of
Cant. my honorable Lord and Master.
a great and grave Prelate of this Church would say. Bucer praesat. dedic. D.
Foxio Ep. Hereford. prefix. Comment. suis in 4 Evangel.
Bucer relates his former doctrine touching the Sacrament of the Lords Supper,
and his retracting of it again, and closes the Discourse with these words.
Habet R. P. T. and quicunque haec legent, ut in contentione Sacramentorum
pertractus sim, in ea me gesserim, and ab ea, Domini open ereptus sim; quaeque
ratio sit consilii mei, quae causa quod retractare in animum induxi, etc. Thus
have I given (says he) your Reverend Fatherhood an account, and all other men
that shall read these writings, how I was wound into these Controversies about
the Sacraments; How I carried my self in it; and how, the Lord assisting, I was
delivered out of it; and upon what grounds and reasons, I was induced to
retract. Which retractation was almost followed with a tretractation (as I may
so speak) for Bucer.
Zanchy has touching it these words. Bucerus post illam retractationem,
Defens. Admon. Neostadian. in ipso sine Tom. 8.
in posterioribus scriptis, clarius se explicans, idem docuit quod and nos de
corpore Christi, deque illius praesentia. That is, Vid. Scripta ejus Anglican.
Bucer after that retractation in his latter writings explaining himself more
fully, taught the same thing concerning the Body of Christ and his Presence,
that we do. Thus far of him. Touching Calvin, although Beza in vita Calv. prope
finem.
Beza in the Narrative of his life, says: Calvin.
In doctrina quam initio tradidit, ad extremum constans, nihil prorsus
immutavit, quod paucis nostra memoria contigit: That in the Doctrine which he
first delivered, he was constant to the end, and altered nothing; a privilege,
says he, that has happened but to few Divines in our time: Howsoever this
were so in Doctrine (although, some few things, not of the greatest moment,
might have admitted of farther consideration) yet in a point of Government in
the Church of Geneva, you may read him deeply retracting, Epist. S. Grynaei
Calvino: Fac esse quod tua unius gravissima culpa, res Christi sic labefactatae
sunt Genevae. That is, Calv. Epist. edit. 2. Sanctandr. p. 364.
Grant that by your most heinous fault alone, the affairs of Christ are so
ruined at Geneva, (for so Calvin had bewailed to Farel in an Epistle) yet in
this want of Ministers you ought not to lie still, whilst any place, though
never so small is offered. Calvin's Calvin.
own words unto Farel are: Siquidem, ut coram Deo and populo ejus fateamur;
imperitia, socordia, negligentia, errore nostri factum ex part esse, ut
Ecclesia vobis commissa, tam misere collopsa sit -- dignam fuisse nostram hinc
inscitiam, hinc incuriam, quae tali exemplo castigaretur: culpa nostra
corruisse miseram illam Ecclesiam, nunquam sum concessurus. Calv. Epist. to
Farel. Ann. 1538. p. 283.
The sum is, he distinguishes betwixt miscarriage by error, ignorance and
negligence (which he acknowledges, and the Lords correction of him for it) and
wilful guilt, and intentional mischief, which he denies to have been in that
affair; but retracting and lamenting we have him in the former. Add to these,
Ridley Bishop Bishop Ridley.
of Land, and one of the Learnedest of the Martyrs in Q. Marys time: Whom his
Answer to the Q. Commissioners, April 2. 1554. has these words: His notable
expression and protestation of Liberty to Retract.
These things I do rather recite at this present, because it may happen to some
of you hereafter, as in times past it has done unto me. -- God may open it
unto you in time to come. -- Therefore I Fox Act and Mon. in Q. Mary.
protest here publicly, that it may be lawful for me -- to add or diminish
whatsoever shall seem hereafter more convenient and meet for the purpose,
through more sound judgment, better deliberation, and more exact trial of
every particular thing. Nay, even Bellarmine himself, that wrote against all
Errants of his time, whether real or imagined, as if himself had been without
error, and whom our Contro. 1. Epist. Dedic. ad D. Cecil.
Whitaker styleth, Virum sane doctum, ingenio foelicem, judicio subtili,
lectione multiplici praeditum; and to whom being a Cardinal, and a Pillar, it
might be scandalous to alter any thing; Yet he has also the Recognition of his
Works, wherein he retracts several things he had formerly asserted, Bellarmine.
real and in effect, who whilst he writes for, Recognit. oper. prefix.
Editionibus recent.
(Cynthius aurem vellit and admonuit) undermines the main foundations of his
own cause, as might be shown. Yea, and the five Independent Br. themselves,
(that I may In a jealousy of our selves, Independents. Apologetic. Narrat. p
11.
we kept this reserve, to alter and retract (though not lightly) whatever
should be discovered to be taken up out of a misunderstanding of the rule, etc.
Now Coronidis loco, to set a Crown (with the conclusion) upon the ingenuity of
the former Company, His late Majesty.
We have His Royal Majesty Retractations, yea, even once and again. We must
(says he) without endeavoring to excuse, that, Kings Answ. to the Remonstr of
May 19. 42. p. 10.
which in truth was an error, Our going to the House of Commons. Again
elsewhere, having spoken of his consenting to the deposition of Episcopal
Government in Scotland, he says; If any shall impute My yielding to them as My
failing and sin, I can easily acknowledge it, etc. Icon Basilic. Medit. 17. p.
156.
Seeing therefore imperfection and obnoxiousness unto error, is not only as
the shadow to this body of death, always following of it; but also that the
best and wisest of men in all Ages, have judged it their parts to retract, and
deny their former judgments, if found erroneous; I shall conclude this first
point, touching the right, causes and instances of Retractations, with that of
the great example in this kind, so often quoted. Aug. de Dono perseverantiae
cap. 21.
Bonae quippe spei est homo, si eum sic proficientem dies ultimus vitae hujus
invenerit, ut adjiciantur ei, quae proficienti defuerunt, and perficiendus quam
puniendus potius judicetur. There is good hope of that man, says he, whom the
last day of his life shall find going forward (in the pursuit of truth) that
there may be added to the thriving man, what he yet wants, and he may be
counted worthy rather to be perfected, then punished.

CHAP. II.
How far only, the Author declined, how he behaved himself therein, and what
awakened him unto recovery.
Sect. I. How far the Author lapsed in the Church Affairs.
IT follows next to represent in short, how far only, I proceeded in my lapse,
what was my carriage therein, and by what means it pleased God (...), to stir
up the sparks of light for my arising. Of the first.

1 Samuel 2. Psalm 37.
There is a promise that God will keep the feet of his Saints, so that though
they fall, they shall not be cast off, for the Lord will put under his hand.
And that they shall hear a voice behind them, Isa. 30.
saying, this is the way, walk in it, when they turn to the right hand, and
when they turn to the left, according to that of the wise man, Eccles. 5. ult.
He that fears God, (namely, in sincerity) shall come out of them all. 1 John
3. chap. 5.
For he that is born of God, cannot sin, to wit, that sin unto death, and of
final Apostasy. The reason is, first, his seed remains in him, Job 19.
even the root of the matter, as Job speaks. And then again, 1 Pet. 1.
he is kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation, as S. Peter
utters it. All which, like as we have heard, Psalm. 48.
so have we seen, in the City of the Lord of Hosts, in the City of our God,
(the Church) that God will establish it for ever, Matthew. 16.
so that the gates of Hell shall not for ever prevail against it. For at my
receding from the Church, the many Conflicts of my spirit, brought forth this
protestation at my very first At Colch. Apr. 15. 1644. Artic. 3.
admission into that Company, The Authors protestation atentring into
Indepency. Which he notes, not as owning every expression in it, but as to
evidence his opposition even then to Separation.
viz. Causes and Motives of my present motion. First, Of coming off from the
way I have been in, 1. Negatively, what they are not. Not because the
Congregations of England are all false Churches, and the Ministers false ones,
and the Ordinances none. For I conceive first, that where any number of visible
Christians, have chosen expressly, or by consent a fit Pastor, and join in
spirit with him, and one with another, in the things of God, according to his
Word, though there be no express Covenant, nor Separation from the multitude,
for want of light in these things, they become a true Church, they having
thereby all the essential^ of one. Secondly, where God ordinarily and
plentifully works to edification, there must be something of a Church, for he
is not ordinarily present to edification, but in his house. 2. Positively what
they were; namely, an apprehension of more purity in Assemblies and Ordinances.
Secondly, Under what condition I desire to be taken on, scil. of a profession,
1. Of my acknowledgement of the Authority of Magistracy over all persons in
Civil Causes. 2. In Church matters, for the point of public exercise, so, as
not to raise tumults, and by force to obtain the exercise of Religion, 3. Of my
resolution to keep all communion in affection, and as much as may be in
Ordinances with the godly in the Parochial Congregations, though of different
judgment from my self. 4. Of keeping my mine eye and ear open to any light or
advice that shall be brought from the Word, though diverse from what now I have
in matter of gathering, and government of the Church and Ordinances thereof.

Sect. 2. How he behaved himself in it.
Accordingly indeed I did hold fellowship and communion in Ordinances with all
such particular Congregations, whilst I was in this way, and as a real proof
thereof I did Baptize my children, only in those the Parochial Congregations,
St. Peter's.
one in the place where I preached, and another in a neighbor Town; Lawford.
where I made also the like declaration, as appears by the testimony of the
then Minister of the place, Mr. John Edes
which I have by me under his hand. So that I never, blessed be God, proceeded
so far as Separation, much less to Anabaptism. But on the contrary, they would
say, that I was ground between Separation and Presbytery, as betwixt two
Milstons. Nay, I never came fully, and, as we use to say, cleverly off to
Independency. A proof whereof appears, in that I refused the Pastors Office
(the former being deceased) although desired, Mr. John W. sometime of Norwich.
and my self, after advice with some that way, for a time, was somewhat
inclined, but durst not close, till thoughts ripening by experience and
observation, I wholly declined it, as also the way it self (gradatim; and by
little and little) not continuing but two or three years, as I take it, for I
left communion before I left the place, and that I did, from my first closing,
Dated. October. 10 1648.
above four years, as appears by a Certificate of my dismission: Which leads me
to the last particular, viz. what occasioned my awakening and recovery.

Sect. 3.. 3.
What excited his Return.
I found my expectation of the beauty of holiness, in Unity, Order, and more
effectual edification in Faith, Love, Meekness, Patience, Temperance, Peace,
and Mortification, mainly frustrated. Fractions, confusion, breaches, doting
about fruitless endless Questions; time vainly spent in them. The Pastor (an
honest well-meaning man) despised. Covetousness, contempt of others, and, in
some, impurities, etc. growing, and injustice eminent. That it was fully
verified which Saltem apud se experti, quam multes malos pro pace Donati far
cogantur, impacatas illorum calumnias pace sua correctionis Extinguerent. Cont.
Parm. l. 3. c. 2.
Austin once said of their fathers the Donatists, that, Malos tantos toleratis,
sed nulla bona mercede, Psalm Aug. Cont. Donatist. Tom. 7. in ipso ingressu

Quia quod debetis pro Christo, pro Donato vultis far.
For Christ his peace no sinners you will allow,
But for Donatus you will bear enough.


So also, unless we would hear that for Independency's sake, that we would not
hear in the Assemblies Parochial for Unity's and for Christ's sake; there was a
necessity of Separation again, which also came to pass. Also I observed, that
almost all the companies of this way fell in sunder, or into horrible opinions,
or lewd practices, as well as ours. Besides, whilst we were in our vain
altercations on the Lords days, after the afternoon Sermon, our Families were
neglected. Withal, others in the Parochial Assemblies were deserted, both in
point of Pastoral offices, as also of other care, whilst they were looked upon
as people of another world. Moreover they were brought into a Maze, not knowing
which way to take, who to follow, nor whether they were in the way of salvation
or not, and so shaking the very foundations of their faith; a most horrid evil.
Add hereunto, I noted, that generally they were for maintaining of their way by
Arms, in case they had strenth; and that this contest had born a great part in
the confusion of the Nation. These and other the like ill f^uits, (though some
there were of a more sincere spirit, who for their virtues and piety I yet
honor, who yet had their tinctures not so warrantable) made me look further
into the root, which I have not only found, but I think also in the sequel
evidenced to be rotten, for, by their fruits you shall know them. Now renting
and tearing of themselves, of the Church, and Commonwealth, is the fruit of
thorns and thistles, Matthew. 7.16. illustrated.
not of Vines or Fig Trees, as our Savior long since forewarned.

I profess, I am more confirmed in my faith in Christ, by his Sermons than by
his Miracles, they are so convincing; Those were not in our view, These the
immutable truth of them we daily might, did we mark it, see. I have often
observed, with wonder, by what spirit he spoke (though little notice is taken
of it) when he did design some persons in the Church by whited Sepulchers, The
proof.
Matthew. 23.
and graves that appear not. Thereby noting both their nonappearance, and
their dangerousness, especially their swallowing faculty, as Agur, The Grave
says not, I have enough. Prove. 30.
This unsatiable spirit was singularly noted in the old Separatists the
Pharisees (for both the name signifies so (as well as expounding) and their
practice, Matthew. 9.11.
by condemning our Savior for eating with the common people) The Pharisees
also, Luke 16.14. Matthew. 23 14.
which were covetous (says the Text.) And, Ye devour widows houses. Aug. cont.
Parm. l. 3. c. 2.
Now, Potuitne gravius divinis eloquiis accusari Avaritia, quam ut idololatriae
demonstraretur aequalis, and ejus nominis appellaretur, dicente Apostolo, Et
Avaritia, Ephesians. 5.5. Col. 3.5.
quae est Idolorum servitus? potuitne majori poena digna judicari, quam ut
inter illa crimina poneretur, quibus obsessi regnum Dei non possidebunt?
aperiantur oculi cordis, ne frustra pateant oculi corporis: Could any thing be
spoken more to show the foulness of the sin of covetousness, than when the
Apostle calls it (twice) Idolatry? And could any sin be more sorely punished,
than by exclusion from the Kingdom of Heaven. Let the eyes of the heart be
open, lest those of the head see to no purpose. And it is to be observed of our
Savior also, how tartly, yet fully and most aptly he directs unto the
discovery of them, when he says, their fruit shall be like that of thorns and
thistles, Matthew. 7.
noting the rents and divisions they should make, and by that might be known.
Ibid.
And to the same effect in the same place he says: Their clothing should be
like that of sheep, but their work that of wolves, which elsewhere he says is
scattering and destruction. Joh. 10.
The same which Paul more plainly; Those who cause divisions, Romans 16.
contrary to the doctrine ye have learned, are such as serve their own bellies.
Which I assure you, some are well known to have, even unto Epicurism and
Excess, as our Savior speaks. Matthew. 23.25.
Upon consideration of the premises, though I did not renounce wholly, yet were
our meetings interrupted, and we remained socii sine societate, and brethren
without communion; till wearied with that spirit, and by occasion of the Siedge
(by the help of some of those, whom I had not wholly left, as Austin once, of
which afterward) invited thence, and withdrawn, being out of the crowd and
smoaks, I have had time and clearness to review things better. Which, through
Gods mercy, I have so improved, that it has produced in me both in word and
walking, now many years both verbal and real retractations, having felt that
true: Thine own wickedness shall correct thee, Jer. 2.19.
and thy back slidings shall reprove thee. Know therefore and see, that it is
an evil thing and bitter, that thou have forsaken the Lord thy God, and that my
feat is not in thee, says the Lord of hosts. So true is that, Brightm. in
Apocyl. cap. 3.20.
Si fugiatis hunc Christum, qui eum electis in nostris coetibus coenat, ac eos
vicissimi excip t, profecto nusquam invenietis. If you (says mine Author) fly
from Christ, who, with his Chosen, sups in our Assemblies (in the Church of
England) and again also entertaineth them; in truth you will find him no where.
This for the Church affair.

The next is that of the Commonwealth, how far I went in that.

Sect. 4. How far the Author proceeded in the Civil Controversy.
First, Never could I digest the opposition against, and attempts touching the
life of the King, though I took it down for a few days, but was not able to
concoct it, as shall be showed. Which leads me to the second particular, What
first did more especially open my eyes, and excite my spirit to a recognition,
in that particular also.

Sect. 5. What recalled him.
When the Army had the King at Causham by Redding, and moved openly against the
Lords and Commons in Parliament, I made a journey thither to satisfy my self
touching the grounds of their proceedings; and spoke with the persons of
greatest influence, both in the Army, and of the Ministry, some whereof I
found most earnest against them, Note.
because they acted beyond and against their Commission, who since have turned
tail, as I may so speak. But so little satisfaction I received, that from that
time forward I ever declined from the Army. Next, when that abhorred Conspiracy
for the death of our late Sovereign began to ripen, and was drawing near unto
execution? I my self with some others addressed our selves both unto the
General, and the L^eutenant-general Cromwell. The first we found civil, and, as
we thought, flexible; the other (I must now speak it) I plainly fell out, with.
And, though some way related to him, and having merited some good interest in
him, yet from that day I never spoke with him, nor did ever after come near
unto him, but reflected on him with horror. Gal. 1.20.
Behold, before God I lie not, and all that have ever known me this twelve
years day and upward can bear me witness. Yet for some few days after this (for
I speak, as I shall answer before the judgment seat of Christ) being
overpowered, 2 Cor. 5.
against my own judgment, by the authority of some, whose reason I preferred
far before my own, whereas I had before publicly appeared against that
unexemplified impiety; I was so weak, as to resile and recall what I had said in
the same place. But (which I desire the Reader to take notice of) I was soon
after so oppressed in my spirit, Note.
both with the sense of the horror of that act, the destruction of the King
(which I thought I saw to be fatal to the Nation, and an irrecoverable evil,
and such, in its proportion, as was the death of Christ our Lord and Savior,
unto Jerusalem) as also with my own gui^t, in recalling what I had well spoken,
that I cou d h^rdly keep from sinking in despair in my mind; and the spirits of
my body and my nerves were to resolved and loo^ened, that though I felt neither
cold nor pain, yet I could not lie in my bed without perpetual shaking, as if I
had had an ague: This brought restlesness and want of sleep with it, and so
into the peril of some further evil. But upon the reception of some Physic,
and withdrawing a little into the Country, through Gods mercy I recovered
that, but not my peace and inward quiet, Note.
until I had publicly again declared my return unto my former thoughts,
concerning the death of his Majesty, and with this Emphasis, That I must speak
it, though it should be the last I should ever speak unto them. And I was
afterward looked upon with such an eye, that I was in danger since to be laid
in prison there, (as they termed it) for Malignancy. And about that time, my
self and another Scholar of the Independent way (but of too good a spirit for
that Schism) did draw a Letter to have been presented to the General, Mr. Tho.
Waterh.
(but by my neglect omitted) by way of disswasion from that enterprise. And
this also may be a further proof of the integrity of my return to my
Allegiance, that I refused the Engagement, (which I desire may be noted)
although the Commissioners about it, sat in the same Town where I lived, and
yet do. And in my public Sermons in the Lecture At Alesb. Com. Bucks.
near where I live, I concealed not my spirit. Neither have any other in these
parts had, for the time above specified, any other conceptions of me. But the
greatest demonstration of all was, that Anno 1659. when, God is witsness, I did
not know, nor could foresee, any present ground to bel^eve, Note.
that I should live to see any change of the Government that then was; I
published the sum and heads of these Retractations (as was noted above, and as
they are in the next Chapter of this Treatise) for the discharge of my
consciene (though I knew it hazardous to my outward condition) whether I lived
or died. And I took, and do take great comfort in it, and humbly bless God for
the putting it into my heart, and giving me opportunity to perfect and publish
it, And necessitating me thereunto, by that contest about Baptism, and the
printing thereof, In which also, I hope, and have heard, that there has been
some service performed to the Church. Yea, at the publishing of this now, I am
not without manifold fears; so great sins committed against God, and so great
animosities among men, Matthew. 12.
that it threatens this Kingdom (divided against it self, and in great measure
from God) the danger of not standing. And I may come to answer for what I now
write. 2 Cor. 12.
But the Lord perfect his power in my weakness, and he grant, that the godly
sorrow which he has effected in my heart, 2 Cor. 7.
in the resentment of the premises, and which has wrought this repentance, may
never be repented of; nor that there ever be cause that I retract these
retractations, Amen. Yea, there may be those, who having lost me, may, by some
artifice, effect, that I shall lose those whom they think I now intend to win;
that so, being by both deserted, I might be ruined. But God, who sees their
plots, and my plainness in this affair, will, I hope, disappoint them. But if
he shall, for his glory, and my further mortification, permit them, I hope my
suffering shall be like that of Mephibosheth, (for even David may be abused) by
a treacherous Ziba for my Loyalty, 2 Samuel 19.27.
1 King. 2.
not like that of Shimei for my Apostasy. And that I shall never prove either
Qui Sacr. libros tradebanc^ ethnicis.
Traditor or Proditor, false to this Church, or faithless to my Country. Quia
qui in pace, militibus suis futuram praenunciat pugn^m, dabit militantibus in
congressione vict^riam. Because he that has warned his Soldiers of the
approaching Battle, Cypr. Epist. 2. l. 1.
will also in the conflict assist to victory. And, I may give them this taste
of my spirit, and his grace, That whereas upon his Majesty's return (by prayer)
I was often importuned to ask, and assured to have; I wiling^y let slip the
season, that I might evidence I did not follow Christ for the L^eaves, nor the
King for a Living. As also, that I might by the publishing this, (being not
only my retractation, but confession also of my faith) clearly be known, and
so no error personae, or ignorantia facti, be complained of afterward. Besides,
Providence has so disposed in outward matters, that I may in the state I am,
perhaps not uncomfortably subsist without much addition.

Sect. 6. Proof, that the Author went no further.
Now for close and confirmation, that my lapse was not so exorbitant (through
the mercy of God) as to my principles, in either of the former causes, I shall
subjoyn a passage touching each out of those my actings, which were most
eminent in these particulars; and first for the War. Sermon. on Judge 5.23. Jun 19
1642. at Trin. Chapter in Camb. Prove. 19.
In that Discourse wherein I gave Answer in the University unto Dr. Feams Book,
at its first appearance, there are these words. Object. 3. But the King forbids
this help, ( viz. by the War) and commands the contrary: Now where the word of
a King is, there is power, and his wrath is as the roaring of a Lion. Eccles.
8. Ibid.
And I counsel thee, obey the Kings commandment, and that because of the Oath
of God. verse. 4. Romans 13.
And who shall say to the King, What do thou? And, He that resists, resists
the Ordinance of God, etc. Answ. We are not to take notice of the Kings
commands as they look upon the public, but by his Laws, which are his
deliberate will -- and by those whom the Law has appointed interpreters of it.
And then indeed, when a King comes in his Laws, he is more than a man, for he
is the Minister of God, and whosoever resists, resists the Ordinance of God,
and he that resists shall receive to himself damnation. Object, 4. But the King
says, He proceeded according to Law; who shall judge? Resp. The same body
rightly gathered, that made the Law, i. e. the Commonwealth can best judge of
its own meaning. And seeing Law is not declared by the King but in his Courts,
and the higher Court being that of Parliament, we are to rest in their
declaration, unless we see manifestly to the contrary. By which passage it does
appear, that there was this especially that did misguide me, viz. The
misapplication of some true principles. First, That the Law of Nature allowing
self-preservation to a Nation as well as a Man; it might be endeavored in case
of necessity, as to particular Laws, illegally. Which is untrue; Romans 3.
for, We must not do evil that good may come thereof. Secondly, That the King
being always to be obeyed in his Laws declared in his Courts, and the
Parliament being the highest Court; therefore what the two H. H. did declare to
be Law, was so; wherein there was a doubble mistake. 1. That the two Houses
were the Parliament in exclusion of, and opposition to the King, (that I say
not a lesser part, for number of Lords and Commons; though enough in formality
of Law.) 2. That it was Law which they declared to be so, See the Declaration
of 2 H. H. November. 2. 1642. in answer to that of the Kings, May 26. page 22.
though no Law was showed, but a sentence out of Bracton, who wrote in Hen. 3.
in the time of the Barons Wars, and who in another place has the clean
contrary, as shall appear; and it may be a sentence or two out of some other
private Lawyer, against the constant sentence of Lawyers, and the known
practice of the Law and Parliaments. This for the War; that I might show, that
Law, the Authority of Parliament mistaken, and no private headiness, did
transport me. Next, for Independency: In the Tract I published on that
Argument, Vindiciae Catholicae cap. 1. p. 3.
there is this passage, Now the scope of this Treatise is, not to unfasten the
ground of all Church-combination, and to lay a foundation for absolute
Independency. The convenience, and sometime, the necessity of Classes and
Synods for direction and determination, and that by Divine Authority, is freely
acknowledged, (though no with power properly Juridical) yea, I add, that
Episcopacy it self was, and might be maintained, as also Presbytery (if
confined to a particular Church, and not subjected to Superior Ecclesiastical
power, which was the most ancient way of it) might both consist together in a
particular one. Again, The violation of Parochial limits, oft-times manifestly
prejudicial to edification -- yet am not I for the drawing of any godly, able,
page 69.
and faithful Ministers people from him, who is for the substance of
Reformation, though with many defects in lesser things. Again, But this is not
their (my own and some others) opinion, page 79.
that it is essentially requisite to the being of a visible Church, that it
meet in one place; they hold it (de been esse) for convenience, not absolutely
necessary. From which passages it is evident, first; That not such an
Independency as some practiced was pleaded for; but such as might agree, not
with Presbytery only, but with Episcopacy; and not only with a Parochial
Church, or the Church of a City, but such as might agree with a Nation also. As
indeed the Church of England, and other National Churches, are independent as
to right of Jurisdiction, from all other Churches. There being no such thing in
re, as an universal Visible governing Church (as I have, I think, evinced in
the Treatise above mentioned) but every expression in that passage I own not.
But to conclude, I repeat that of Bucer: Habet jam -- quicunque haec legent, ut
in contentionem -- pertractus sim, in ea me gesserim, and ab ea Domini open,
ereptus sim; quaeque ratio sit consilii mei, quae causae, quod retractare in
animum induxi. Thus have you (as says mine Author) how I was drawn into this
contestment; how I behaved my self in it; and how, by the mercy of God, I have
been delivered out of it; upon what grounds also and reasons I thought fit to
retract.

[The Chapter following was published in May 1659. verbatim (in the entrance of
a Book written by the Author in defense of Infant Baptism, entitled, The
Pastor and the Clerk *; when there was neither appearance abroad, nor
apprehension in his own thoughts, of that change of public affairs which
Providence has effected since) with this Inscription, A Retractation, or
Recalling, etc.]

CHAP. III.
What the Author does retract, both in General and in Particular.
1. THere having happened two very great alterations in the body of this Nation,
the one in the Church, the other in the Commonweal; and my self having been
not only involved and active in them publicly, but also in print engaged my
self for the defense of both: And having, since that, had my work brought to be
tried by the fire of what sort it was, and perceiving it to be burnt, and my
self to have suffered loss, yet saved (through the mercy of God, and holding of
the foundation) yet so, as by fire, through afflictions without, and the spirit
of conviction and bondage within: and having digested these considerations now
about ten years, because (nescit vox missa reverti) a word past cannot be
unspoken when we will; being now also in age, beyond half a Century, (the
season of attaining to some prudence, as the wise have thought. Aristot. polit.
lib. 7. cap. 16.
) And lastly, being now again to appear in public, after some twelve years
silence; I thought it my duty to follow his example, who having spoken words
that he understood not, Job 42.6.
did abhor himself, and repent in dust and ashes. Hieron. epist. 8. T. 4. Erasm.
And his, who was contented rather to take shame before sinners on earth, than
to be confounded before the holy Angels in heaven. And Irrideant me arrogantes
and nondum salubriter prostrati, and elifi a te Deus meus; Ego tamen confitear
tibi dedicora mea, in laud tua. Aug. Conf. lib. 4. cap. 1.
his also, who was willing to be derided of arrogant men, and such as were not
savingly dejected and humbled, whilst he confessed his own sin unto Gods praise.

2. Having therefore been excited to consideration of causes, by that method
which our great Master has directed us to, viz. to discern the tree, Matthew.
7.20.
and search the root by the proper fruits and effects of it; I have found, as
to my self, that I had indeed a zeal of God, but not according to knowledge;
and I do hereby retract and recall, repent of, and bewail whatsoever I have
either spoken or written for the fomenting of the late unnatural divisions in
the State and Church. And particularly. What I have said of the one in a Sermon
before the House of Commons, Febr. 22. Anno 1642. 1. The sole path to a sound
peace. 2. Vindiciae Catholicae.
as also what I have disputed for the other in a book, entitled, Vindiciae
Catholicae, in Answer to Mr. Hudson's Essence of the visible Church. Although I
do not hereby declare my self for his opinion. This Book was published Anno
1647.

3. My Engagement hereunto is, that having done more in the former than my
spirit can now own; and knowing, Aug. Ep. 7.
that he loves himself too perversely that is willing another should still err,
that his own wandering should remain undiscerned; I thought it my part to
acknowledge where I have been mistaken, Quanto enim melius and utilius, ubi
ipse erravit, alii non errent, quorum admonitu erroris careat. Quod si
noluerit, saltem comites erroris non habeat id. Ibid.
to those that have erred by me, that they may either return with me, or have
no longer a companion of me.

4. My encouragement is, the promise of him who cannot lie, namely; that he who
confesses his sin, Prove. 28.13.
and forsakes it, shall find mercy. And the prudence and piety of his Spouse,
and my indulgent Mother; Gal. 6.1.
who if any man be overtaken in a fault, is ready to restore such an one in the
spirit of meekness; 2 Cor. 2.7.10.
To forgive also in the person of Christ, and confirm her love toward such with
tenderness.

5. And my suit unto her is, (in all humility of mind) that she would strive
together in prayer unto God for me, Romans 15.30. Phil. 1.6.
that he that has wrought this good work in me, would stablish, strengthen me,
and perfect it until the day of Christ.

6. My scope in this is not to prescribe or define unto other men, but to
discharge my own soul. Neither to gratify any persons or party, farther than
they approve themselves unto God. Not to make way for any thing unto my self,
but peace with God and my own spirit; as also with those who call upon God with
a pure heart, Jer. 45.4, 5.
(in other things having perhaps, more uncomfortable aspects of future issues,
than to expect much settling). Neither is my scope to imply, that there was
nothing in the State or Church that needed Reformation; but to signify only,
that the Physic my stomach could not bear, whatsoever purging might be needful.

Caution.
7. By the premises I would not be thought, either so void of Ingenuity or
Religion, as not to acknowledge, that I do enjoy both the exercise of my
Ministry, (an unspeakable liberty Ejusque praedicationis plena libertas,
tantum est bonum, ut nullius vel lingua dicendo, vel men's cogitando satis
assequatur. Tremel. prefat. dedic. ad R. Eliz. prefix. ante suam Sir. T.
version.
) and the maintenance of my family thereby, through the favor of the persons
late in power, both Civil and Ecclesiastical. Besides considerable engagements
from certain others, different in their opinion from my self in these affairs.
All which I resent with gratitude and observance, yea, and with prayer also.

8. If it be objected, that I build again the things that I have destroyed, I
grant it freely; but add withal, that whosoever destroys (so in the Margin) the
Temple of God, 1 Cor. 3.17. (...).
and endeavors not to build it up again, him shall God destroy. Romans 13.
As the resisting of the Ordinance of God in the Civil State, procures to a
man's self condemnation.

9. Finally, What is here but briefly and jejunely touched, may (if God permit)
be more fully opened in convenient season. John Ellis.

Thus far was then published]

Touching the two former Tractates, Vindiciae Catholicae; or, The Rights of
particular Christian Churches asserted, in Answer to Mr. Hudson.
I may add this caution. That for substance they are both of them Orthodox and
useful, and such in the composing whereof, industry was used somewhat more than
ordinary. A few passages at the latter end of the Sermon, in reference of the
defense of the War against the King, I do here retract. And though I suppose I
have evinced in the other Tractate, that there is no Catholic or universal
visible Governing Church, and so laid ground for the Independency of the Church
of England, and other National Christian Churches; yet that new practiced
Independency, beginning at Separation, and collecting themselves thence into
small bodies, and afterward assuming a right of non-subjection to any Juridical
Superior Power Ecclesiastical; I do also recall by these presents, and retract.

CHAP. IV.
The Causes of the Authors falling; and first, the Negative, and such as were
not.
AS in the Creation, Genesis 1.
Negations did precede the formation of things, darkness before light, and
emptiness before repletion; And as in Procreation, privation goes before; So
the Apostle writing to the Churches, 1 Thessalonians. 2.3.
begins at Negatives, and what were not the causes of his preaching: Our
exhortation (says he) was not of deceit nor guile. Give me leave therefore to
imitate both Nature and Religion here, and to represent what were not the
motives of my falling. Lest any man should think, that corrupt designments,
either in respect of persons or of things, have tempted me. And first, for
persons, both those I have departed from, as also those I now adhere unto. No
personal offense at the one, or flattering notion of the other, have at all
provoked me. Neither despair of gaining by those now gone; nor hope of vintage
by these rising Luminaries, do attract or draw me. For I do not now begin my
Retractations; having then published them (as we saw above) when neither clowd
from heaven, nor vapor from the earth, did seem to promise any shower of
blessing. When neither Sun, nor Moon, nor Star appeared, but all hope that we
should be saved was even vanished.

Sect. 1. Neither distaste of, nor affection unto persons.
And first, for persons. To which I shall the rather speak; because there is
danger of falling into Scylla, whilst we would avoid Charybdis; and that a
Matthew. 23.18.
Proselyte may by Pharisaism and hypocrisy; become twofold more the child of
hell than he was by profaneness. Therefore that I may not seem to commit the
same error against some now, that was admitted against others before; I shall
represent my spirit and opinion touching persons of the side I have deserted;
and then of those, whom in these cases I return unto. Matthew. 5. 1 Pet. 2.17.
Gal. 6.
First, We are obliged to love and honor all men, though especially the
household of faith. St. Austin not only styles the persons he wrote against, or
had departed from, sometimes Dominis praedicalibus and dilectissimis fratribus
medaurensib. ep. 42. Dilect^ssimo fratri vinientio epist. 48.
honored, or reverend, or beloved brethren; but also expresses his ' spirit
toward them, which I desire may be mine also, in reference unto those I have
now reflected on. Illi in vos saeviant, qui nesciunt cum quo labor, verum
inveniatur, and quam difficile caveantur errores. Illi in vos saeviant, qui
nesciunt quam rarum and arduum sit, carnalia phantasmata, piae mentis
serenitare superare. Illi in vos saeviant, qui nesciunt cum quanta difficultate
sanatur oculus interioris hominis ut possit intueri solemn -- Illi in vos
saeviant, qui nesciunt, quibus suspiriis and gemitibus fiat, ut ex quantacunque
part possit intelligi Deus. Aug. contr. epist. q. voc. Fundam. cap. 2.
Pastrento, illi in vos saeviant, qui nullo tali errore decepti sunt, quali vos
deceptos vident. Ego saevire in vos omnino non possunt; quos sicut meipsum illo
tempore; ita nunc debeo sustinere; and tanta patientia vobiscum agere, quantae
mecum egerunt proximi mei, cum in vestro dogmate caecus errarem. Let them
(says he) rage against you, who do not know with what labor truth is found,
1. The difficulty of Truth.
and how difficult it is to avoid errors. Let them rage against you, who know
not how rare and hard a thing it is, to scatter fleshly fancies by the light of
a pious heart. Let them rage against you, who understand not how choice a thing
it is so to cure the eye of the inward man, that it may be able to behold the
Sun. Let them rage against you, who know not with what sighs and groans it is
effected, that even the back-parts of God may be known. Lastly, Let them rage
against you, who have not been deceived with any such error, as they see you to
be deceived with. For my self, I can by no means be violent against you, (he
means their persons, and the persons of those, that were not turbulent) whom I
ought now to bear, as I did then my self; and to deal with you in the same
degree of patience, that my friends did with me, when I blindly wandered in your
opinions.

2. Besides, the persons and worth of some, 2. The worth, and unworthiness of
persons on both sides. R. Hooker presat. ad Pol. Eccles. n. 2.
from whom I now decline, challenges all due respect, and some of those, whom
I now adhere unto as little. We should be injurious to virtue it self, says
Mr. Hooker, if we did derogate from them, whom their industry has made great.
Bucer acknowledges both the usefulness of the labors even of the very
Heathens toward Religion, and highly predicates the Religion and piety of some
of them. Neminem vero offendat, Bucer in Joh. 4.31. etc.
quod and Philosophorum laborem profuisse ad Evangelium puto: omnis enim
veritas a Deo est, and veritas sane plurima in scriptis Philosophorum and
Poetarum legitur. Jam quantulumcumque id fuerit, quod de veritate Philosophi
tradiderunt, ad Deum certe animos hominum attraxerunt, eosque ad Evangelium
praepararunt -- sed quid opus est verbis? Qui vel non in Cicerone, Cicero.
miram Dei solidaeque pietatis cognitionem agnoscit, eum necesse est ignorare,
quid sit and Deus and pietas. Let no man (says he) be offended, that I judge
the labors of the Philosophers to have been useful unto the Gospel, for all
truth is of God; and verily there are many truths in the writings of the
Philosophers and of the Poets. Now how little soever it were of truth that they
delivered, surely it drew the minds of men unto God, and by that, did prepare
them unto the Gospel -- But what need words? he that does not acknowledge even
in Cicero a wonderful knowledge of God, and of sound (he means serious, not
saving) piety; it must needs be, that he knows neither what God nor piety
means. Thus far he. St. Paul himself gives testimony to some of the Heathen
Poets, Ti^. 1.
and calls one of them a kind of Prophet, and also a true witness; and gives a
high Elogy of zeal to the Jews and Pharisees, Romans 10.2.
even then whilst he writes against them. St. Austin (in that notable Directory
of his for the study of Divinity, Austin 's Directory.
namely, his Books de Doctrina Christiana) commends a Book of one of his
Adversaries, and an Heretic (containing certain Rules for the understanding of
the Scripture) unto the reading of his hearers, and inserts much of it into his
own Tractate, and calls it, Elaboratum and utile opus, De doctr. Chr. lib. 3.
cap. 30.
an elaborate and useful work, Quod ideo dicendum putavi, ut liber ipse legatur
a studiosis, quia plurimum adjuvat ad intelligendus scripturas. Which I
therefore say (says he) that the Book it self may be read by the studious, for
it very much helps to the understanding of the Scripture. Our Lord and
Savior by his own example has instructed us, upon just occasion, to declare
our selves very freely against the vanities that be in men, whether vice or
error; and yet to exosculate and kiss their virtues, as it is said himself did,
He loved, or as Casaubon. in Marc. 10.21. ex Origin.
some read it, he kissed the young man, for the good things that he saw in him;
and yet inveighed against his covetousness. So did our Savior acknowledge what
was commendable in those Churches, whose Candlesticks, Rev. 2.2, 3 4, 5.
for the things he had against them, he was ready to remove; yea, in that
Church which he was ready to spew out of his mouth, Laodicea, chap. 3.16.
for it is said, He loved it. According to this, our late Sovereign, speaking of
some Ministers, against whom, about the late contests in Church and State, he
had conceived some displeasure, yet says of them: Whom I respect for that
worth and piety which may be in them. Eicon Basilic. Medit. 24.
Finally, My opinion of the persons of many of those whom I have left, and of
those whom I now cleave unto, both in the Civil and Ecclesiastical affair; I
shall represent in the words of one in repute with the best of both parties.
Who having effectually, and with full acrimony, written in a certain point,
against the Papists, concludes thus; Neque sic mihi succenseant viri inter
Papistas probi, honesti, honorati. Non enim in ipsos, Zanchi. de divortiis,
lib. 2. in ipso sine.
sed in ipsorum haec a me scribuntur religionem, propter quam unam religionem
fit, ut ill neque fratres a nobis appellari possint -- Cum interim non
diffitear, nec diffiteri possim, illorum permultos maximis dignos esse
laudibus; quod Dei sint timentes, quod aequitalis studiosi, quod honesti, quod
denique variis virtutibus ornati: sicut contra inter nostros quam plurimos esse
minime negamus; qui hac tantum de causa inter fratres censeantur; quod eandem
Christi puram religionem nobiscum profiteantur. Cum alioqui, nihil minus revera
sint quam fratres, propter innumerabilia, quibus scatent vitia. But let not any
worthy, honest, and honorable Papist (says he) be offended with me; for what I
have written is not against them, but against their opinions in Religion. For
which cause of Religion alone it is, that we cannot call them Brethren (he
means in a strict consideration) whereas in the mean time I do not den^, nor
indeed can do; but that there are very many of them worthy of the highest
commendations; as being men fearing God, studious of equity, just men, and, in
a word, adorned with many virtues. Whereas on the contrary, we cannot deny at
all, but that there are exceeding many of ours, whom for this only cause we
acknowledge for brethren: because they profess the same pure Religion of Christ
with us. Whereas otherwise, they are nothing less than brethren, by reason of
the innumerable vices wherewith they even swarm. Thus far he.

3. Personal Engagements.
3. But unto the personal worth, and useful labors of some, whom I recede from;
my own private engagements oblige me unto acknowledgment. Austin does confess,
that he obtained a place of employment and subsistence by the favor of the
Manichees, even then, when he desired to be freed from them; which was in part
my own condition: Aug. confess. lib. 5. cap. 13.
Ego ipse ambivi per eosdem ipsos Manichaeos vanitatibus ebrios, quibus ut
carerem ibam. I endeavored to obtain the place (says he) by those same
persons, that were drunken with the errors of the Manichees, and I went, that I
might be delivered from them. ibid.
Et veni Mediolanum ad Ambrosium -- Ad eum autem ducebar abs te nesciens, ut
per eum ad te sciens ducerer. And so I came to Millan unto Ambrose, unto whom I
was brought by thee, unwitting to my self; that by him, I might be brought to
thee (O God) on better knowledge. ibid.
-- appropinquabam sensim and nescivi. I did thereby draw near unto thee by
degrees, and knew it not. The like happened to my self also. For the absence from
those wanderers, and the privacy of the Country, and the urgences of the
affairs of the place, Note.
together with the unfaithfulness of those who failed in their engagement (to
do all offices for me in the Church affair but preaching) occasioned me, that,
as I was awakened before in the Civil affair; and wambled also in that of the
Ecclesiastical: upon farther consideration, reading, and prayer; God let me
hear a voice behind me, Isa. 30.
saying: 'This is the way, walk in it. So that though, through the desertion of
those, who should have assisted me (and promised so to do) I have been
considerably detrimented in my (...) condition, by the place they commended me
unto; Col. 3. 2 Cor. 4.
yet by this means my inward man, in true knowledge, as the Apostle speaks,
has been renewed day by day. What hand God will lead us home by is in his
disposing; sometimes by our own wanderings and sins; as Onesimus was brought to
Paul, Philem.
and my self to the opportunity of light by those, who were themselves in
darkness. But yet we must remember; Thou shall not abhor an Edomite, for he is
thy brother; thou shall not abhor an Egyptian, Deuteronomy. 23.7.
because thou wast a stranger in his land. From whence we learn, That
differences in Religion, must not obliterate the duty we owe to our natural or
civil relations, and such as have done us good, although by accident. This as
to persons.

SECT. 2. Nor hope of outward things.
2. NExt for things, and advantage worldly. I may usurp here, and I hope truly,
that expression of the Apostle above mentioned: Our exhortation was not of
deceit, nor of uncleanness, nor of guile; 1 Thessalonians. 2.3.
I may add, 'nor of gain, nor of vainglory. For I coveted no man's silver, nor
gold, nor apparel; But so spoke, not as pleasing men but God, who tries our
hearts. Neither at any time designed we flattering words, nor a cloak of
covetousness, God is witness, yea, and man also. For I neither endeavored nor
received, though offered, (as some things were) any thing material all that
time, either of advance or advantage; but was then, Note.
and am since, in much worse condition, than I was before I engaged that way,
and then those who did that party far less service. And this one thing may, I
hope, excuse me, though not a toto and wholly, yet a tanto and in part. Seeing
our Lord himself makes it a note of an honest and true meaning person, Joh.
7.18.
viz. that he seeks not his own honor or advantage, but of him that sends him.
This title of integrity and of an honest man, I had the honor in my younger
time, to receive from Dr. George Abbot, and Dr. William Laud, L. L. Archbishops
of Canterbury.
two Witnesses, that were prime and Primate, in their rank, of this whole
Nation, and upon that account was preferred by them both. Now, Principibus
placuisse viris, etc.
It Is not the least of commendations, that
We please such men as are both good and great.
And it were better for me doubtless to die, than to make either the opinion of
such persons, 1 Cor. 9.15.
or my own glorying on this behalf really void. For this is my comfort, the
testimony of a good conscience, 2 Cor. 7.12.
that in godly sincerity I have had my conversation in the world, and more
abundantly in both these affairs, wherein I hazarded all that was dear unto me.
'I am become a fool in glorying, but the occasion has constrained me. 2 Cor.
12.11.
Yet because not he that commends himself is approved, but whom the Lord
commends. 1 Cor. 4.4.
And though I know nothing by my self (as to any evil intendment) yet am I not
thereby justified, 1 John 3.20.
because God is greater than our hearts, and knows all things in them, better
than we do our selves. Psalm. 143.2.
Enter not therefore into judgment with thy servant, O Lord, for in thy sight
shall no man living be justified. I conclude these negative causes with that
memorable profession of Mr. Ridley, In his Answer to the Q. Commissioners,
April 2. 1554.
Bishop and Martyr, touching the change of his judgment from Popery unto the
Protestant Religion; Albeit (says he) plainly to confess unto you the truth,
in these things which ye now demand of me, I have thought otherwise in times
past than now I do; yet God I call to record upon my soul, I lie not, I have
not altered my judgment as now it is, either by constraint of any man or laws,
either for the dread of any danger of this world, or for any hope of commodity;
but only for the love of the truth revealed unto me by the grace of God, as I
am undoubtedly persuaded, in his holy Word, and in the reading of the ancient
faithful Fathers. Thus far he. And the same is my profession before the same
Person, and with the same solemnity that he appealed unto, and used therein.
The Negative causes are ended.

CHAP. V.
The causes positive, and the occasions of the Authors sliding: and first in
general.
SECT. I. God Almighty.
BUT because, Scire, est per causam cognoscere; (...). Anal. l. 1. c. 2.
We do then know, when we see the reasons and originals of things; those, of
my falling, I shall next design. They are colligible both from the dimensions
and Vbi's: upward, viz. and downward, outward and inward. God Almighty, though
he tempts no man, either by infusion of evil, or for evil ends; yet our
prayer against it, from him, does imply that, he does sometimes, and that
justly, lead into temptation. Hence that of the Father, Aug. Confess. l. 1. c.
2.
Bona mea instituta tua sunt and dona tua; mala mea delicta mea sunt and
judicia tua, i. e. What is good in me, is of thine appointment and donation;
what is evil, is of my sin and thy judgment. For though the Tempter be not
wanting, and, ipse diabolus suam quidem habet cupiditatem nocendi; facultatem
non nisi quae datur, vel ad subvertenda ac perdenda vasa irae, Aug. de Genes.
ad lit. lib. 11. cap. 12.
vel ad humilianda sive probanda vasa misericordiae: The Devil (as says Saint
Austine) has indeed a desire to do mischief, but power he has none, but what
is given him; either for the overthrow and destruction of the vessels of wrath;
or the humiliation and trial, of the vessels of mercy. And this God does for
gracious purposes. As first, for conviction, Eccles. 3.18.
that men may know themselves to be but beasts, as the Wiseman speaks. Next
for correction and humiliation. God shakes us, that the soil may come up, we
may see it and be ashamed. He draws out our corruptions by tentations, Deuteronomy.
8.2.
to humble and to try what is in the heart: Where, we have them both together.
And severally, 2 Chronicles. 33.31.
first for discovery. God left him (says the Text of Hezekiah) to know (or
make known) all that was in his heart. Next for humiliation hereby. It is said
of him (in the same place) that Hezekiah humbled himself, verse. 26.
after that his heart was lifted up. So true is that, Aug. de Civit. Dei. lib.
14. cap. 13.
Audeo dicere, superbis esse utile cadere in aliquod apertum manifestumque
peccatum, unde sibi displiceant, qui jam sibi placendo ceciderant. -- Hoc dicit
sacer Psalmus, Imple facies eorum ignominia ut quaerant nomen tuum Domine, Note.
etc. I dare be bold to speak it (says he) that it is good for high and
conceited men, to fall into some open and apparent sin; that thence they may
come to dislike themselves a little; who by being over pleased with themselves,
fell into transgression. And this is it, which the holy Psalm says, Fill their
faces with shame, Psalm. 83.16.
that they may seek thy Name, O Lord, etc.

SECT. 2. Satan.
2. AGain, although Satan, the first sinner, is virtually in every sin; yet
more specially in those formally he is; which in their Idea and nature, do
imitate his original. viz. Apostasy from, and rebellion against God and good
order, both in the Church and in the Commonwealth. Ephesians. 6. Joh. 8.
For these are more properly spiritual wickednesses in high places, and those
real lies against the truth, whereof he is the genuine father. Though the seed
of all sin be in us, yet the heat that excites it, and the moisture that
foments it, and the midwifry that brings it forth, in great evils, is more
formally from Satan. And where there is remarkable miscarriage of the
understanding, or eminent pravity of the will. Seldom is it, in such great
lapses, and, as it were, Matthew. 4.
from the pinnacle of the Temple; but that his hand is in it, who would have
cast our Lord and Savior thence first. Satan tempted David to number the
people. And, 2 Chronicles. 24. Joh. 13. Act. 5. 1 Cor. 7.
Satan having now put into the heart of Judas to betray him. And, Why has
Satan filled thy heart to lie to the holy Ghost? Again, Lest Satan tempt you
for your incontinency. Hence in great civil crimes among our selves, the form
of Indictment runs, That such an one moved by the instigation of the Devil,
etc. committed this or that. Quommodo Deus Pater genuit filium veritatem, Aug.
sic diabolus lapsus, genuit quasi filium mendacium. As God (says he) the
Father begat the Son, who is Truth; so Satan being fallen, has begotten, as it
were, his son also, which is Falsehood, for he is a liar, Matthew. 13.
and the father of it. The enemy then that sows these Tares is the devil.

SECT. 3. Outward Causes.
THe outward causes of my wandering, were answerable unto all the points of
Latitude, before me, behind me, on the right hand, and on the left. First, 1.
Before.
Before me; the seeming fairness of the way, and the appearing straitness of
the steps, of those who walked in it. And indeed, had the one been such as the
Map described; and the other such as those, who went out of Jerusalem in the
simplicity of their hearts, 2 Samuel 15.11.
(though to as ill an action) or those that at the first were such, had they
continued so; it might have been a temptation still, as it was then (malle
errare cum Platone) to choose, Cic.
namely, almost to wander with so good company, rather than to keep path with
other men. 2. Behind.
Again, Behind me. The dark, rugged, and new-cast ways, that some ironshod
cattle had both marred and stumbled in. Who seemed to verify that; Q Curtius,
l. 8. non long ab initio.
Male humanis ingeniis natura (he should have said corrupta) consuluit, quod
plerunque non futura, sed transacta perpendimus. That is, Nature, in some men,
has set their wits awry, in that, for the most part, they weigh not their
future, but their bypast actions. Now the former seemed to decline those
paths. Again, on the right hand: 3. On the right hand.
The success afterward of the one, Providence it self seeming to pronounce for
them, and that after solemn appeal thereunto of both sides. And on the
left hand, 4. On the left.
the dysasters and calamities of the other; See the several Declarations of the
Lords and Commons, especially the Speeches of Mr. Cromwell to both H. H.
representing it as fatal to all that espoused that Cause and Party. wherein I
forgot Eccles. 7.17. Isa. 8.10. Ezekiel. 14.4, 5.
that, There is a just man that perishes in his righteousness, and there is a
wicked man that prolongeth his days in his iniquity. That when we are directed
to the Law and to the Testimony; if we come before God with an idol, and appeal
of another designment in our hearts; the Lord may answer according to our own
hearts. And lastly, that sometimes His Majesty's Letter to Genesis Monk from
Breda, Apr. 4. 1660. Eccles. 5.12, 13. 5. Other Appendixes.
God has increased the confusion, by giving all the success that has been
desired; and brought that to pass without effect, which the designers have
proposed as the best means to settle and compose the Nation. It Is not therefore
always true, Victrix causa Deo placuit; for, 'I have seen riches kept for the
hurt of the owner, says Solomon. And, He begets a son, and there is nothing
in his hand.

5. Add hereunto, Engagements of acquaintance and otherwise, unto persons of
that party, and such appendixes. Which like smaller Rillets to the Stream,
though the wheel would have gone without them, yet did quicken and accellerate
the motion.

SECT. 4. Inward Causes.
4. BUt when all is said, that will be found true, Every man when he is
tempted, Jam. 1.
is drawn away of his own concupiscence and enticed; for God, he tempts no
man properly. And as touching Satan, he indeed filled the heart of Ananias to
lie to the holy Ghost, Act. 5.
but the fault is laid on the man himself, Why has Satan filled thine heart?
And for motives from without, whether things or men, it excused neither Judas
nor the Jews; Act. 4. Joh. 13.1.
that Gods counsel, Satan's motion, Cesars terror, and other things concurred
unto Christ's betraying. The reason is, because Gods decree of events,
constreins no man's will, nor prompts his reason, to use unlawful means. Job
13.7. Jam. 4. 1 John 5.
He does not need our lie or sin. The devil, if we resist him, will flee from
us. And if we have faith and grace within, we shall overcome the world without.

SECT. V. More particular Causes, but common to both Controversies.
BUt to come unto particulars. And though several might here be named, yet a
few shall serve, and such as tend most to admonition. And first, that which the
Apostle makes first in these kind of lapses. 1 Ungroundedness. 2. Conceitedness.

A young Scholar (as Mr. Tindal reads it) whether in years or judgment, if he
be in the Ministry, will be apt (to a second fault, 1 Timothy 3.6.
namely) to be puffed up, and so fall into the snare and condemnation of the
devil, 1. (...). 2. (...).
(that is, into his sin, to wit, of Apostasy, and sedition against God and his
Church) as the Apostle has it. And again, in the same Epistle, chap. 6.4.
speaking of an Heterodox Teacher, he puts them both together in one word, (for
(...) will bear both) and says, So in the Margin.
He is a fool, and proud, or proud, knowing nothing. Now we know, pride goes
before a fall, Prove. 16.18.
and objects us unto temptation and opinions. Quis his pollicitationibus non
alliceretur; praesertim adolescentis animus cupidus very, Aug. de Utilitate
credendi, cap. 1.
etiam nonnullorum in Schola doctorum hominum disputationibus superbus and
garulus, qualem me tunc illi invenerunt? Who would not have been persuaded by
their promises? especially the mind of a young man thirsty for truth; and by
the disputations of some men learned in the Schools, made proud and prating;
such a one, as they then found me to be, says St. Austin. I refuse not so
great a president. If objects then unto temptations of opinions, and that in
Gods just judgment (for He resists the proud. Jam. 4.
) And in his great mercy: Aug. de Civit. lib. 14. cap. 13.
Salubrius enim Petrus sibi displicuit quando flevit, quam sibi placuit, quando
presumsit -- For Peter (says he) was more savingly displeased with himself
when he wept, then when he was pleasing to himself and presumed, R. Hook.
Sermon of Pride, near the end.
etc. And if the blessed Apostle did need the corrosive of sharp and bitter
strokes, lest his heart should swell, with too great abundance of heavenly
Revelations; 2 Cor. 12.
Surely upon us, whatsoever God in this world does, or shall inflict; it cannot
seem more than our pride does exact, not only by way of revenge, but of
remedy. Says a learned and good man. Hence that of the Father noted above,
namely; That it is good for high and conceited men to fall into some manifest
sin, Aug. de Civit. l. 14. cap. 13.
ut tu eis placeas quaerentibus nomen tuum, qui sibi placuerant quaerendo suum:
That thou may please them when they seek thy Name, who pleased themselves in
seeking of their own.

3. Neglect of Reading.
3. Hence the neglect of using such helps, and following such directions, as in
the improvement whereof I might have been preserved. Negligence in study, 1. In
general.
and of the Ministry of the Word, must needs have had, like some ominous
Constellation, a sinister influence here. The Ministry is onus etiam Angelicis
humeris formidandum. 2 Cor. 2 16.
A burden that the shoulder of an Angel may shake under. Of which the Apostle;
(...); 'For these things sufficient, what man is there? for so the expression
may be rendered. Hence that of the same Author to all of this profession, 1 Timothy
4.13, etc.
(...). Which I mention in this form; because they were so commended unto me in
my younger years, by a learned, Mr. Sam. ward, sometime Preacher of Ipswich.
religious and elegant man, In an Inscription written with his own hand on his
works, ( works indeed, being elaborate pieces) with the donation whereof he was
pleased to befriend me. This for studies in the general. To come unto
particulars. And first the study of the Scriptures; of which, note what one
spoke, Homil. of the per^l of Idolatry, part 2.
(that was the best learned in them, of all ancient Doctors says the Church of
England, as was noted above.) Tanta est Christianorum profundit as literarum,
ut -- si eas solas ab ineunte pueritia, u^que ad decrepitam senectutem, maximo
otio, summo studio, meliore ingenio conarer addiscere, in eis quotidie
proficerem. Aug. epist. 3.
Non quod ea quae necessaria sunt saluti, tanta in eis perveniatur
difficultate; sed cum quisque ibi fidem tenuerit, sine qua pie recteque non
vivitur; tam multa, tamque multiplicibus mysteriorum umbraculis opaca,
intelligenda proficientibus restat; tantaque non solum in verbis, quibus ista
dicta sunt; verum etiam in rebus, quae intelligendae sunt, latet altitudo
sapientiae; ut annosissimis, acutissimis, Ecclus. 18.6.
flagrantissimis cupiditate discendi, hoc contingat, quod eadem Scriptura
quodam loco habet; cum consummaverit homo, tunc incipit. That is, So great is
the depth of the Scripture, and Christian learning, that I might every day
profit and gain more in them, though I should study them only, and that from
childhood even unto decrepit age; with full leisure, earnest intention, and a
better understanding than I have. Not that unto those things, which are
necessary unto salvation, Austin's Caution.
asscent is so difficult. But thus; that after a man has learned as much
thence, as may enable him to believe, (without which, we cannot live neither
godly nor uprightly) there remains so many things, so darkly involved in so
many veils and mysteries, that are further to be understood by him that would
go forward: And there lies hid so great a height of wisdom, not only in the
words wherein these things are uttered, but also in the things that are to be
known: That this will befall the most ancient, the most acute, and the most
studious Reader, which the same Scripture says in another place, viz. When a
man has ended, Austin explained.
he must then begin. Where, by the way, let it not offend the Reader, that St.
Austin calls the Book of Ecclesiasticus Scripture. Whereas, according to the
Doctrine of the Church of England, it is none of it, but Apocrypha only. For
the Canon of Scripture was taken by him strictly and largely, as the Artic 6.
of the sufficiency the Scriptures.
learned note. When strictly; he acknowledges, that there is no certain
Authority but in the Books received in the Hebrew Canon, whereof this is none.
Whitak. Controv. 1. Q. 1. cap. 4. and cap. 14.
Adversus contradicentes, non tanta firmitate proferuntur, D. Civit. lib. 17.
cap. 20.
quae scripta non sunt in Canone Judaeorum. In tribus vero illis libris
(Proverbiis, Ecclesiaste, and Cantico Canticorum) quos Salomonis esse constat,
etc. Against Opponents, says he, we cannot with so good security produce any
thing, that is not written in the Hebrew Canon. But in those three Books, which
it is certain are Solomon's, that is, Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, and the Song of
Solomon, etc. But this occasionally. And so much for the study of the
Scriptures.

Next. Touching the perusing of other good Authors 2. Other good Authors.
also, that the neglect thereof, does object unto error and seducement. I
remember, that when Mr. William Sedgwick Will. Sedgwick.
had fallen into that delirium touching the end of the world, to be terminated
by such a day: After the time was some while passed, certain Ministers
(Independent) meeting on other occasion, and among them my self; discourse
falling in concerning him. Mr. Bridge (as I remember) conceiving him to be
obsessed (a degree below possession) by a spirit, (communicated unto him by the
A woman near Ely that put this conceit into his head.
woman that possessed him with that delusion) and his understanding thereby
bowed down, as it were, (a thing to be well observed:) Mr. Sydr. Symson (as
rendering the cause of his lying open unto such temptations) said: That Mr.
Sedgwick had lived upon his fancy this seven years, and had neglected the
reading of the Scripture and other good books. Touching other Books; Note.
a friend of his lying in his Study at Ely, and observing he made no use of his
Library; asked in mirth, to give him his Books, saying; 'I see you make no use
of them. He replied; 'They were good Introductions; intimating, that he was now
beyond them. And for the Scripture, my self having some discourse with him
about his former mistakes, (which then he Atheistically justified, saying;
There was no other end of the world but this; just with Hymeneus and Philetus;
And that God had burnt up all corruption in him etc.) And speech falling in
about the Scripture, he said: 2 Timothy 2.17, 18.
He could have a glorious use of them, and he could be without them. Reading
surely, as it does enlarge our abilities. (An tu existimas, aut suppetere nobis
posse, Cic. pro. Archia. Poet.
quod quotidie dicamus in tanta varietate rerum, nisi animos nostros doctrina
excolamus. Can thou think (says Tully) that we can have material supply, to
speak daily in such variety of matters, if we did not increase our parts by
study.) So also it sharpneth our reasoning, to see both into words and things,
even in Religion it self. Ut de sermon rectius judicemus, Melanchton praefat.
in Hesiodum.
and ut dogmata religionis enarrare and explicare, quoties hoc poscit publicus
usus, possimus; vary subigendum est ingenium, and omnibus disciplinis
excolendum. That we may the better judge of the meaning of words, and be able
also to open and explain the doctrine of Religion, so often as the Public
calls for it. The mind is to be tilled several ways, and furnished with all
kind of learning, Psalm. 119.98, 99, 100.
says Melanchton. Lastly, It fixes our judgment. Hence David did not count it
vanity to boast: Thou through thy commandments have made me wiser than mine
enemies, for they are ever with me. I have more understanding than all my
teachers, for thy testimonies are my meditation. I understand more than the
ancients, because I keep thy precepts. Namely, I keep first, to the reading and
considering of them. Hence the Apostle charges Timothy, not to live upon his
own fancy; 1 Timothy 4.
but to give attendance to reading, to exhortation and doctrine, and to
meditate on what he read. Yea, and himself also, as appears, had read all sorts
of Authors, for he quotes the Greek Poets. So even when old, and, as himself
says, near his end, yet he gives order unto Timothy to bring him his Books and
Parchments, 2 Timothy 4.
in which perhaps his gatherings in his readings were. Aug. prolog. in lib. de
doct. Christ.
I conclude this point with that of the Father, finding such temptations in
some of his time: Quod per hominem discendum est, sine superbia discat, and per
quem docetur alius, sine superbia and sine invidia tradat quod accepit. Neque
tentemus eum cui credimus, ne talibus inimici versutiis and perversitate
decepti, ad ipsum quoque evangelium audiendum atque discendum nolimus ire in
ecclesias -- and expectemus rapi -- caveamus tales tentationes superbissimas
and periculosissimas, magisque cogitemus and ipsum Apostolum Paulum, licet
divina and coelesti voce prostratum and instructum, ad hominem tamen missum --
Quomodo enim verum esset, Templum Dei sanctum est, quod vos estis, si Deus de
humano Templo responsa non redderet? That which may be learned from man (says
he) let the Christian receive without pride; and let him, by whom another is
taught, deliver without pride, and without envy, what he has received. Neither
let us tempt him in whom we believe; lest being deluded with such fine and nice
conceits of the enemy, we at length come to refuse to go to Church, to hear the
very Gospel it self, but wait till we are inspired. Let us take heed of such
proud and perilous temptations; Note. Quakers in Austins time.
and rather consider that even the Apostle Paul himself, although dejected and
instructed by Christ's own voice from heaven; was yet for all that sent unto man
(namely, Ananias, for further information.) For how else should it be verified
which is promised, (viz.) That the Temple of God is holy, 1 Cor. 3.16.
which Temple are ye; if so be that God did not give forth Oracles out of this
humane Sanctuary. Thus far he. And that for the second point, neglect of other
Authors besides the Scripture.

Come we to the third defect in reading, 3. Controversies of the times
neglected.
viz. Not studying what might be said on both sides, And the controversies of
the times neglected. I remember that Dr. Sibs (a man Prove. 31. Dr. Sibbs St.
Austin's seventh Tome useful in these times.
whose works do praise him in the gate) the then Master of our College, on
occasion of certain opinions started by some at that time amongst us; commended
unto me the reading of Austins seventh Tome. God preserved me from that
infection (although I lived for some time in a Holland-like air (from whence
that wind blew) and near that w ter which was conceived to exhale some such
vapors) without that Antidote. But had I read then all that Tome; it had, with
his blessing, secured me against Independency; the one half of whose evil
consists in Dona^^sm and Sep r^tion. Against which St. Austin in one half of
that work strenuously disputes. Of one Tract whereof Bucer says thus:
Particularly Contr. Epist. Parmen. lib. 3.
Is locus hac maxim tempestate nobis singulari diligentia legendus and
perpendendus est. That is: That Treatise ( viz. St. Austins third Book against
Parmenian) is in these times especially to be read and pondered on, Bucer in
Matthew. 18.7.
with special industry. Thus of the third cause, neglect of Reading.

Now as the Beast, 4. Cause, Zeal unguided. Job 39.22, 28.
whose neck is clothed with thunder, as Job speaks, cannot stand still when he
smells the Battle, and if he want his eyes must needs do mischief, so that zeal
which I had of God, wanting the due conduct of knowledge; did indeed
precipitate as well as provoke me unto these actings. What the dire effects of
these two in conjunction would prove, our Savior before hand shows us, when he
says: that those who are acted by them, even then, when they persecute the
Saints to death, Joh. 16.2.
shall think they do God service. The Apostle himself was an example of it;
who, before conversion, was exceedingly mad against the Saints, Act. 26.11.
and persecuted them even unto strange cities. And after him his Scholar
Austin ( St. Austin studied Paul especially.
for St. Paul's writings at first he chiefly studied) acknowledges his
unguided zeal, Itaque avidissime arripui venerabilem stylum Spiritus tui and
prae caeteris Apost. Paulum. Aug. confess. lib. 7. cap. 21.
and the pernicious effects of it. Omnia illa figmenta and quaesivi curiose,
and attente audivi, and temere credidi, and instanter quibus potui, persuasi,
and adversus alios pertinaciter animoseque defendi. S. Aug. contr. Epist. quam
vocant Fundamenti, cap. 3.
All those fancies (says he) I sought after curiously, and heard them
diligently, and believed them rashly, and persuaded them to whom I could
earnestly, against others I defended them with pertinacy and passion. Thus he
of himself, whilst an heretical and schismatical Manichee.

5. Cause, Idolizing some persons.
5. St. Paul, a man as full of charity as of faith, yet did with great prudence
labor to take off from the Churches, the too great opinion they had conceived
of some persons. Nay, he spares not his friend Apollos, nor himself neither.
What is Paul (says he) or what is Apollos, but the Ministers by whom ye
believed? 1 Cor. 3.5.
That they might learn in them not to think of others above that which is
written. chap. 4.6.
Their idolizing of some, had been the occasion of the Apostasy of many. His
Pupil Austin puts this Lecture into practice; who in his writings against the
separation of his time, the Donatists and others, endeavors to undeceive the
people, and sets down the faults as well as the errors of those Schismatics.
One place for all, Vnde tantae turbae convivarum, ebriosorum and innuptarum,
Aug. contr. ep. Parmen. lib. 3. cap. 3.
sed non incorruptarum: innumerabilia stupra foeminarum, unde tanta turba
raptorum, avarorum, faeneratorum? Vnde tam multi per suas quique regiones
notissimi, tantundem volentes, sed non valentes Optati? If you be wheat and not
chaff (says he) whence is it that there is in Optatus (the Donatist or
Separatist) his faction, such a crowd of luxurious persons, drunkards,
unmarried, but not unmarr'd women; innumerable rapes and ravishments? whence
this throng, among you of oppressors, of covetous, of usurers? whence is it
that there are so many, who are well known in their several Countries, to be as
cursed Cows, though they have shorter horns. Matthew. 7.15.16.
But had our Savior been either understood or believed, the ravening Wolves
had never crept into the flock in their Sheeps clothing, but they would, if
observed, have been discerned by their fruits. interpreted.
Rending and tearing, as was said before, being a fruit of thorns and thistles,
not of the vine or fig tree. St. Paul attributes it to the folly and
negligence, Romans 16.17.
as well as the charity of the Romans; that they did not observe, that those
who caused divisions amongst them, contrary to the doctrine which they had
received, did but with flattering words and sweet preaching (according to Mr.
Tindals version) deceive the simple, and serve their own bellies. But yet I
must add that distinction here, which our Savior uses in another case; I speak
not of them all. Joh. 6.70.
But as the Sea, the more it flows on one side the channel, the lower it ebbs
on the other; so the immoderate preferring of some, does necessarily carry with
it the undervaluing of, and prejudice against others, With the contempt of
others.
better oft-times than the former. This appeared in the Corinthians and
Galatians; who by how much the more they doted on their new teachers; by so
much deeplier were they prejudiced against their old Minister and Apostle.
Insomuch that he could neither speak nor write, but he was taken either for a
fool, or a madman, or an enemy. 2 Cor. 10.10, chap. 5.13.
His speech is contemptible, say they. And, If I be besides my self, says he,
it is for your consolation, (implying, that they thought so of him, And, Gal.
4.16.
Am I become your enemy because I tell you the truth? Now the fruit of this
evil root, in my self, was; that I did not greatly mind what those of the
contrary part, either said or wrote, Whom if I had piously and considerately
heard and read, it had in all likelihood, either prevented, or recovered, my
falling, sooner. Eusebius. hist. lib. 6. cap. 6.
But not only Dionysius in the Historian, has taught us to become, boni
numularii, omnia Probantes, and quod bonum fuerit retinentes. Good
mony-changers, 'proving all, and keeping that which is good. But Austin himself
also has informed us, that a real adversary to the truth, may be read, so it
be warily, and with wisdom. Hence it is, that he commends the Rules of
Tichonius the Donatist unto the reading of all men, as we saw already: Quod
ideo dicendum putavi, ut liber ipse legatur a studiosis -- caute sane legendus
est, Aug. de doctr. Christ. lib. 3. cap. 30. ad fin.
non solum propter quaedam, in quibus ut homo erravit; sed maxim propter illa
quae sicut Donatista haereticus posuit. Which I therefore speak, says he, that
the book it self (of Tychonius) may be read by the studious, so it be warily;
not only in regard of those things wherein he erred as a man; but especially in
regard of those which he wrote as a Donatist. Job. 7.51.
But read he might be. It was the precipitancy of the old Pharisees, condemned
by one of themselves, when he came to some farther moderation: That they
condemned and judged a man, before they heard what he could say for himself.
This is that, which a Minister of the Gospel, above all men should observe; so
to walk in the very eye of Christ, as to do nothing by partiality. 1 Timothy 5.21.
This Canon therefore was transgressed.

6. Cause, Want of due reverence to the Church and State. 1. In general.
6. As the wisdom of Lawgivers is seen, not only in the matter, but the order
also of their Laws; so the Lord, with great prudence, placed that Precept first
in the second Table of his Laws, from whence directly or occasionally the
observation of the rest depend. Honor thy father and thy mother. The true
exposition of which, is contained in the first rudiments to be instilled into
children, but through that neglect, we want the efficacy of it being men, yea,
and Teachers also: viz. A neglect, Catechism in the Book of Common Prayer.
duly and heartily, to honor, and obey the King and his Ministers. To submit
our selves to all our governors, teachers, spiritual pastors, etc. That is, a
default in my reverence to the Church and Commonwealth, with the Governors of
both; was another, and an eminent cause of my prevaricating. For the
transgression of which commandment, as I deprived my self of the promise
annexed, so incurred I the threatening employed; so that had it not been for the
rich mercy of God, and clemency of others, my days might not have been so long
in the land of the living, as they have; Although I committed nothing by Law
criminal. Isa. 8.20.
To the ' Law and to the Testimony, says the Prophet. Which is not to be
restrained to the Scriptures only, (though so meant there) but unto all
expressions of the wisdom, goodness, and government of Almighty God toward men,
declared in the Laws, which are nothing else but (as I may so speak) copies of
those Attributes, and of Gods eternal Law, the first Original. Hence the
disobedience unto the Legitimate Governors, Administrators, and Expounders of
the Law of God, is made Rebellion against himself, and a presumptuous sin by
the Lord in Moses. And in particular, Deuteronomy. 17.2. In particular. 1. Our own
Church. R. Hook. Eccles. Pol. l. 5. 71.
touching the Church, the Laws, Governors, and body of it. That speech of one
does not want its weight (as none of his did) As becomes them, that follow in
all humility the ways of peace, we honor, reverence, and obey, in the very next
degree unto God, the voice of the Church of God wherein we live. And they whose
wits are too glorious to fall to so low an ebb; they that have risen and
swollen so high, that the banks of ordinary Rivers are unable to keep them in;
they whose wanton contentions, in the causes whereof we have spoken, do make
all where they go a Sea; even they at their highest float, may be constrained,
both to see and grant, that what their fancy will not yield to like, their
judgments cannot with reason condemn. Thus he. Which is not spoken to put the
spirit of bondage and blind belief, but the spirit of Sonship and Adoption into
men's breasts, in order to the Church, the spirit of filial and child-like, not
of slavish obedience. This for the Church. Then touching the Laws of our
Nation, 2. The Laws of this Nation.
it is to be observed, that there is so great a sacredness upon them, that the
Apostles both Intermination and Prediction has ever been verified, Romans 13.2.
that from the crown of the head to the sole of the foot, as the Prophet
speaks, the violation and resisting of them, and the legitimate Governors by
them, has proved a resistance of the Ordinance of God: and they that have so
done, have received unto themselves judgment from the Lord, for neglecting of
his good and wholesome Laws; In the Act for uniformity of Common Prayer.
As the Parliament phraseth it. Neither is this spoken in treachery to civil
liberties, or to make men slaves, but subjects. The Laws of these Kingdoms --
by an admirable temperament, give very much to subjects liberty, and happiness,
and yet reserve enough to the Majesty and Prerogative of any King, who owns his
people as subjects, Eikon Basil. M dit. 27.
not as slaves; Says his late Majesty. As implying, that the reverence of the
Laws, preserves both the People from Rebellion, and the Prince from Tyranny,
and both from ruin. Memorable to this purpose is the counsel of that pious and
peaceable man, Dr. Sibs, in a book of his, which a M^. H. Ward. The first, he
counted, A Treatise on Romans 8. entitled, Christ opened, etc. Dr. Sibs Souls
Constable ct. Edit. 1st. viz. 1635. page 364.
great wit counted the second next the Scripture, as to the argument it treats
on (he might perhaps have said the first.) The Doctors words are: The Laws
under which we live are particular determinations of the Law of God; and
therefore ought to be a rule unto us, so far as they reach. -- Law being the
joint reason and consent of many men for public good, has an use for the
guidance of all actions that fall under the same. Where it dashes not against
Gods Law, what is agreeable to Law is agreeable to conscience. Thus he. Which
passage, as it seems was not a present truth, or not a truth for the present
times, and therefore some did evirate, geld, alter, and enervate into this in
the following Editions (unless mended in the later) viz. The Laws under which
we live are particular determinations of the Laws of God, in some things of the
second Table. That which he laid down generally, they put a double restriction
upon. First, to the second Table. Again, to some things only therein. Then
they add an instance, which though it illustrates the Text, yet is it not in
the first Edition, viz. For example (says the following Editions) The Law of
God says, Exact no more than what is thy due; but what in particular is thy
due, and what another man's, the Laws of men determine. Thus far the Addition.
Now this wound being received by the Doctor in the house of his friends, A
wound received by Dr. Sibs in the house of his friend. Zech. 13.6.
(for so I understand) and when scarce cold in his grave; and his books being
in the hands of all men; what may we think Authors more ancient, in the hands
of enemies, and re-published, have met withal. Wherein we are the more to
observe the providence of God, who has made the Jews and Turks, Capsarios
nostros, Aug. Enarrat. Psalm. 40.
as St. Austin speaks; the faithful keepers of our Libraries.

7. 7. Cause, Not weighing Causes, so much as Persons and Appendixes.
But the more immediate spring of this irregular motion, was, the reflecting on
persons on both sides, and some appendant and concomitant things, as was noted
above; rather then unpartial weighing the causes themselves, as denuded of all
Patrons, Concomitants, and Appendixes. viz. What ground of the war? what plea
for Independency? The fallacy was, by arguing a non causa ad causam, and not
applying solid Logic to sound Divinity. St. Austins offer to his adversary is
good advice, Cont. Maximin. A^ian. lib. 3. cap. 14.
Scripturarum authoritatibus, non quorumvis propriis, sed utrisque communibus
testibus, res cum re, causa cum causa, ratio cum ratione concertet. Let matter,
says he, contend with matter, cause with cause, reason with reason, by
authority of Scripture, which may not be proper to one side, but common unto
both.

I am clear, One cause of the miscarriage in the late differences. Jam. 2.1.
that this has imposed on many on both sides, and in both causes, viz. that
men have had the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ in respect of persons, or at
the least of consequences; and have eye^ more the persons engaged, or wh^t
might be the issue of things, than the matters themselves. Romans 3.8.
But the Apostle prohibits a disproportion between the means and the end. We
'must not do evil that good may come thereof. Fiat justitia, ruat coelum.
Plutarch. in vita Aristid. n. 609.
We must do what is right, though heaven and earth go together. The Athenians,
though Heathen, yet in a certain case they rejected the counsel of
Themistocles, though useful to the Commonwealth, because it was not honest. It
was the occasion of the first sin in the world, Respect of person; for it was,
in gratiam uxoris, Genesis 3.
for the pleasing of his wife, in all likelihood. But our esteem of persons, is
best directed by the original rule. And there, prima secundae, the first
commandment with promise is, that we honor our father and mother; but which?
especiallv the Father of our c untry, and the Mother of our Christianity. The
King and the Church. And for effects and consequences, Matthew. 7.16.
our Saviors and the Apo^^les Philosophy and Logic (for Contr. Crescon. lib.
1. cap. 14 cap. 17.
Austin proves them to have used both) would have directed us, to make that a
vine, and not a thorn, whereof we expect grapes. Gal. 6.7.
If we sow to the flesh, and act on earthly grounds, we shall from it reap
corruption. I conclude this with that of the wiseman, Prove. 23.26.
My son give me thy heart; that is the end: And let thine eyes observe my ways,
there is the means. chap. 4.27.
Let thine eyes look right on, to the true scope. And turn not to the right
hand, or to the left, of unlawful means. If thine eye be single, thy whole body
shall be full of light; Matthew. 6.22.
if thine eye (and aim) be evil, thy whole body (of thy actions) will be full
of darkness, (and in darkness men do not walk even) said our Savior.

8. Cause, Negligence in Religious duties. Jam. 4.
8. In the next place, there was no doubt, either neglect of, or some other
defect in prayer and religious duties. For though the thing were not omitted,
yet it seems there was an asking and not receiving, which could not have been
(for he is faithful who had promised) but that there was an asking amiss. Heb.
10.
Now the promise cannot fail, T^t. 1. Jam. 1.
because God cannot lie, and the promise is, If any man lack wisdom, let him
ask of God, who gives (it) liberally. It has even by the light of nature been
discovered, that great miscarriages in judgment and practice could not happen;
but as a punishment for some neglect of God, as well as a sin against him. When
Alexander the Great had in a drunken fit slain Clytus (a man both of valor,
Curtius lib. 8. paulo ab initio.
and merit toward the King) after that he had spent all night in lamenting and
repenting; Scrutatumque number ira deorum ad tantum nefas actus esset, subiit
anniversarium sacrificium Libero patri non esse redditum st to tempore, itaque
inter vinum and epulas caede commissa iram Dei fuisse manifestam. Upon search
it was found, that the sacrifice to Bacchus was not performed in its season;
and therefore in his very benefits (wine, for so they reckoned) the table was
made a snare, and in drinking and feasting, slaughter being committed, the
anger of god was evident. Thus those Heathens. Matthew. 6.
Surely lead us not into temptation, as it is a necessary, so it should be a
daily prayer, and that with earnestness.

9. Add to this, some failing or other, 9. Cause, Fail in practice.
either in spirit and sincerity, or in practice and walking. For Good and
upright is the Lord, therefore he will teach sinners in the way; but so, that
we be tractable; Psalm. 25.8, 9, 10.
for the meek he will guide in judgment, and the meek will he teach his way;
that is, the plain-hearted, and those that walk with a right foot, and make
straight steps unto their feet. Heb. 12.
And all the paths of the Lord are mercy and truth, unto them that keep his
Covenant, Psalm. 25.
and his testimonies to do them. And what man is he that fears the Lord, him
shall he teach the way that he shall choose. As on the contrary, when we know
God, Romans 1.28.
and glorify him not as God, he often delivers us to an erring and unjudicious
spirit. 2 Thessalonians. 2.
And the not receiving the truth in the love of it, introduces frequently
strong delusions. The close shall be St. Austins, Diriget mites, In Psalm. 24.
diriges.
nec perturbabit in judicio eos, qui sequuntur voluntatem ejus, nec ei
resistendo, praepenunt suam. That is, He shall direct the meek, nor shall he
disturb them in their judgment, which follow his will, and do not by resisting
prefer their own.

The last of those general causes, which I shall name, 10. Cause (...).
of my backsliding, was, Being too busy without my sphere, 1 These. 4.11.
and in the things did not belong unto me. A practice consequent unto the
former negligence, as is implied by the Apostle, whilst he says; Do your own
business, and work with your hands the thing that is good. Psalm. 131.1.
It was one thing that preserved David from sedition, that he exercised not
himself in things too high for him, and above his place, but refrained his soul
as a weaned child. 2 King. 11.
Not but that Jehoiada the High-prie^^ may, according to his office, and power
given him, deal in the greatest affairs of a kingdom. Yea, and not only Zadoc
and Abiather the chief; but even also Ahimaaz and Jonathan the inferior
Priests, when regularly, may put their hand to save the Throne as well as the
Altar. But the case with me was different. I need not explain how. That
Prophecy, Take unto thee the instruments of a foolish shepherd, Zech. 11.15.
etc. was applied by one, late in power, unto the Ministers dealing in affairs
of State, Lieutenant General Cromwels Letter to the Speaker out of Scotland
Sept. 4. 1650.
when yet himself and party played their first and best game by their hands in
so meddling. He says, Such means will not be effectual, for the setting up the
Kingdom of Christ, and neglect, or not trust to the word of God, the sword of
the Spirit, which alone is powerful and able for the setting up that Kingdom:
and when trusted to, will be found effectually able to that end, and will also
do it. Thus he. Oh that so much had been said by him at the beginning of the
English, as it was at the beginning of the Scottish War. But then it would have
spoiled the sport, 2 Pet. 1.12.
and it seems, there is a present truth, as some apply those words of Peter,
not capable of any other moments of time, past or to come. But to return.
Johannes Funccius Johan. Funccius.
(that notable and good Chronologer) a Divine, also Chaplain and Chancellor
unto the Duke of Borussia, having as it seems, counseled some act that was
disgusted vehemently by the State; Bucholcer. Chronol. ad Ann. 1566.
they rested not, till they had his head that contrived it: who, as he went to
execution, gave forth this Distich: Disce meo exemplo, mandato munere fungi,
Et fuge, ceu pestem (...).


Which I have sometime thus rendered, Learn thou, by mine example, to apply
Thy self to thine own studies, and do fly,
As from the plague, that folly, mine of late,
Divines too meddling in affairs of State.


Somewhat like was that of Justus Jonas, Justus Jonas idem ad Ann. 1567.
the year following, which he gave forth as he went to the same calamity.

Quid juvat innumeros scire and evolvere casus,
Si facienda fugis, si fugienda facis.
What does it boot all cases for to know,
If duty thou omit, and sin thou do.
But he was of another Trade, to wit, a Lawyer.

I conclude this with the Apostles warning, 1 Thessalonians. 4.
that we study to be quiet, and to do our own business, 1 Pet. 4.
lest we suffer as evil doers, and busybodies in other men's affairs. The
Causes general are ended.

CHAP. VI.
Particular Causes, with their Confutation. And first, of the War.
SECT. I. Cause General and Privative, viz. Resisting of the Spirit of God.
AS touching particular ones, namely, those which induced me unto the civil
Controversy, and those which lead me to the Ecclesiastical. Concerning the
first, 1. In the Civil Controversy.
I closed with the one party in the civil contest for these causes, whereof the
one is General and Privative, the other Positive and Particular. The former was
the grieving or resisting the Spirit of God, from whom I received no small
concussion about this matter, especially at the coming forth of The resolving
of conscience, etc. Edit. Cambr. 1642.
Dr. Fearn's first book, in opposition to the Lords and Commons, in their
taking up Arms against the King. The authority of Scripture there urged (unto
which God had given me ever to bear an awful reverence) the Spirit setting it
on, exercised me more than all his arguments. But 1 being in heart inclined
unto the good things the other side proposed to be contended for; and 2 judging
his reasons might all be answered; and 3 apprehending it much concerned the
cause of God, and of his servants; and 4 my own reputation also being
pre-engaged; 5 and lastly, my place seeming to call for it, (I holding then the
public Lecture in Cambridge) I took all the former reluctance of spirit to be
only a temptation. and accordingly resolved to reply, On Judge. 5.23. on which
Mr. St. M. had preached before, of whose notions, that I know of, I made no
use. Mr. J. B.
which I did the next Lords day, after the publishing of that Book, wherein I
answered all that seemed material in that Book, and so answered it, That some
who were of the other judgment were pleased to say, that so bad a cause could
not be better pleaded. Upon this, I was solicited to the publishing of my
Answer. But coming to London, and finding another had done it before, but
especially my spirit working too and fro, betwixt resolution and fear, I did
suppress it. But that of Zachary has been fulfilled in me since: In that day
the Prophets shall be ashamed, Zach. 13.5.
every one of his vision, when he has prophesied. And blessed be God, who has
verified another also toward me, viz. Thou shall hear a voice behind thee,
saying, Isa. 30.21.
This is the way, walk in it, when thou turnest to the right hand, and when
thou turnest to the left. And blessed be his Name, that although I have been a
rebellious child (as it is in the first verse of that chapter) that would not
take counsel of him, nor cover with the covering of his spirit: yet he has not
cast me away from his presence, Psalm. 51.11.
nor taken his holy Spirit from me. Deliver me from bloods, O Lord, thou God of
my salvation, A Prayer.
and my tongue shall sing aloud of thy righteousness. The sacrifice of God is a
broken spirit; a broken and contrite heart, O God, thou will not despise. And,
Uphold me, O Lord, with thy spirit, then will I teach sinners thy ways, and
transgressors shall be converted unto thee. Lastly, Do good in thy good
pleasure unto Sion, build thou the walls of Jerusalem, then shall they offer
young bullocks upon thine altar. Amen. Sed irrideant nos fortes and potentes,
Aug. confess. l. 4. c. 1.
nos autem infirmi and inopes confiteamur tibi; But let great and ove^-grown
spirits laugh at this; let us that are infirm and poor in heart confess to
thee. Tota palea areae ipsius irridet eum, Aug. in Ps. 21. in Prefat. in Expos.
2.
and gemit triticum irrideri dominum. All the chaff of Christ's own floor laughs
at him, and the good corn laments its Lords derision. Thus of the general and
privative cause.

SECT. II. Particular Motives.
2. THe particular follow, and they were such as these. 1. 1. Propounded.
The excellency and necessity of the things held forth to be contended for, the
Laws namely, and the Liberties of the Nation, and that which made them both
most precious, Religion (Protestant) by them established and secured. 2. Next,
the credit that I gave unto the persons that did propound them, both for their
ability, and for their faithfulness. 3. A third was the awful opinion, that I
conceived of the power and authority of that place, from which they seemed to
issue, to wit, the Parliament. 4. That the exigences being such, there was a
virtual bond, by all Laws, to use remedies that were not usual. 5. and lastly,
That examples of the like had been in Scripture; among the Jews, in the
Primitive Church; the former against Antiochus by the Maccabees, the latter of
the Christians against Maximinus. Also in the Reformed Churches, as the French,
Holland, Scottish; and owned by our former Princes, and (then) present King;
defended also by our own Divines and Bishops, as Jewel, Abbot, Bilson, etc.

2. Replies unto them.
But all these, and such like, as applied to our case, being put into the
balance of the Sanctuary, in my eye, seem much too light. As touching the
first, my opinion and veneration of the Protestant Religion, 1. Religion.
the Laws and Liberties of the Nation, I hope is greater now than it was, as I
know them somewhat better. But touching Religion to be defended by Arms,
especially of Subjects, well spoke the Dantzikers, A notable speech of the
Dantzike^s.
in their material Letter to the Duke of Croy, (exhorting them to the like) May
27. 1656. Evidently it does appear (say they) how much the Roman Catholics are
incensed through this war, and that from thence no small persecutions, yea, the
greatest danger, may befall the Reformed Churches, Vid. Mercurius Politicus,
Jul. 3. 1656.
if God do not prevent it in his mercy. We do confidently believe, that no body
can think, or impute it to us, as if God took pleasure in Apostates and
Hypocrites, and as if he would have Religion promoted in casting off the lawful
Magistrate, Note.
and in the slender esteem of a well grounded government -- Call to mind how at
all times by Wars the spirits of men grow more barbarous and inhumane, Note.
and how the wars for Religion use commonly to extinguish Religion. Thus they.
Note.
Now I call God to witness upon my soul, that the sense of the dishonor done
unto the Protestant Religion, 2 Cor. 1.
working upon my heart, has been one main occasion of further examining the
grounds of those transactions, and of altering my thoughts. Homil. of
disobedience, part 4. page 300.
And particularly one passage in the doctrine of this Protestant Church,
expressed in the Homily of disobedience, did much affect me, of which anon.
This for Religion.

2. Then for the Laws and Liberties, seeing first, 2. Laws and Liberties.
that both Houses of Lords and Commons, in all their solemn addresses to the
King, and that in Parliament, and as such a Parliamentary body, 1. Style of the
H. H.
do usually style themselves thus, Your Majesty's most humble and loyal
subjects, the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled. In that Remonstrance,
which the King says, Kings Declaration Aug. 12. 1642. Remonstr. of the State
of the Kingdom, Dec. 15. 1642.
was the fountain of all the following mischiefs, The very first line is, Your
Majesty's most humble and loyal subjects, the Lords and Commons in Parliament
assembled. Next, the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy do declare, That the
Kings Majesty is the only Supreme Governor of this Realm, over all persons,
and in all causes, 2. Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance. 3 Eliz. cap. 1. Kings
Answer to the Remonstrance of May 26. 1642. Remonstr. of Lords and Commons,
Nov. 2. 1642.
Ecclesiastical and Temporal, and of all other his Dominions and Countries.
Yea, and every Parliamentman, before he can sit, is bound by Law to swear them.

Now this is not answered in my judgment, by a saying out of a Private Fleta.
lib. 1. cap. 17. de justitiariis substituendis.
Lawyer, that, Rex habet in populo regendo superiores, legem per quam factus
est, and curiam suam videlicet Comites and Barons. And by that other, that Rex
est major singulis, but minor universis. For the former Author has that
sentence and words out of Bracton, who has several times also the quite
contrary, as shall appear. Again, It is against the tenor and current of Law
and Lawyers, and the known practice of the Nation. Thirdly, It may bear an
other interpretation, namely, understanding the Law, either of God, who makes
Kings, Prove. 8.
or of men, made with the Kings consent, whereunto he has voluntarily obliged
himself, from which at first he might be free. And by the superiority of his
Court, their legal jurisdiction conferred on them by his approbation, for
decision of ordinary controversies, that may fall betwixt himself and his
Subjects, but not simply his superiors; first, because he calls it His Court;
now the owner is greater than the thing owned as such. Again, else the Earls
and Barons were the superior power to the King. Fourthly, This refers not at
all to the House of Commons, whereof neither Fleta, nor his Author Bracton, in
this sentence make any mention.

Remonstr. Nov. 2. 1642.
are not answered by saying, that this of supreme head and governor, over all
persons, in all causes, is meant of singular persons rather than of Courts, or
of the collective Body of the whole Kingdom: And that it is meant in Curia, not
in Camera; in his Courts, not in his private Capacity; and properly only in
his high Court of Parliament, wherein and wherewith his Majesty has supreme
Power. For first, Oaths speak comprehensively, both of Persons and Causes,
over all, and in all. So again, the humble and obedient subjects, is spoken as
from them, as the two Houses of Parliament, for so they say, assembled in
Parliament. Now if Subjects, then and there, sure Sovereigns or associates in
Sovereignty, they cannot be, the terms in the same respect are contradictory.
Thirdly, If the King be acknowledged to be the fountain as the Law and Lawyers
say he is, (of which anon) then both Laws and Courts flow from him, and thence
are called his Laws, his Courts; and so ordine naturae and dignitatis, both in
nature and dignity must be before and above both. His splendour is in his
Courts, but his Supremacy not only there, but in his person also, from whence
it was derived to his Courts. For there must be a First in nature, either the
King or his Courts; and if they be His Courts, then he made them, and therefore
in esse naturae before them.

Neither does it hence follow, as is there inferred, That then the King may
overruled all his Courts, Ibid.
even the Parliament it self, and so the goodly frame of Government should soon
be dissolved, and Arbitrary power brought in. For the King having both
consented and sworn to the Laws, and to the maintaining the jurisdiction of his
Courts acting according to those Laws, is not now in that respect sui juris,
and arbitrary in Government, but obliged both to God and man to act by Laws,
and to preserve his Courts unviolate. But if any Court shall assume a greater
power than the King and Law has given them, or act in opposition to that power
from whom they had their being, whilst he does not openly reject all Laws and
Government, much less when he does rationally, together with as many or more,
both of Lords and Commons (though excluded the formality of being in such a
place) judge, that he acts according to Law in the main of his proceedings: In
such case, and in such actings, they are not such a Court, nor are not
authorized with power from above, but act excentrically, and as private
persons, unto whom the Declaration grants the King to be superior. As the Army
having received Commission from the two Houses of Parliament, afterward turned
their Arms against them, which they could not do by their Commission, as also a
great fautor of their proceedings since, then spoke in my hearing, God thereby
perhaps representing to the Houses by the Army, their own failings toward their
Superior. And the Armies reasoning was on the like principles, viz. That they
were entrusted with power for the Kingdoms preservation; and that, the
Parliament degenerating, they must not see the Kingdom perish.

Neither may it be received, that if the Parliament may take account of what is
done by his Majesty in his inferior Courts, Ibid.
much more of what is done by him without the authority of any Court. For to
speak properly, the Parliament takes account, not of the Kings actions or
authority in his Courts, but of his Officers, and of their administration of
that authority; and this also by the Kings consent established by Law, whereby
they are enabled so to do. Or to speak yet more properly, The Parliament, that
is, the King, Lords and Commons; for the Parliament is not without the King, as
being the Head of it; but without, and in opposition unto him and the Laws,
they do not take such cognizance.

That they might much more take account of the Kings actions, that are done
without the authority of any Court; meaning the great administration of
Justice, and the raising of Arms: Seeing no Court is superior to its Author,
the King; therefore no Court can give authority to him, but he to them; nor can
they call him to account, for then they were his superiors, and had the Regal
Power, and himself should be no King, as is expressly affirmed in Mr. St. John's
speech against Ship-mony, of which afterward. Humbly represent to him they may
his miscarriages, and punish his Ministers, so it may be done without sedition,
and assuming the Sword, which is inseparable from the Supreme Power.

Ibid. page ult.
he is to be accepted for King whom the two Houses declare to be so, by the
Statute of 11 H. 7. that therefore much more they may judge in the great
question, what is the best service of the King and Kingdom: Whence also it will
follow, that they have the power of declaring Law in all cases: How, I say, can
this be received, namely, to argue from a power in doubtful cases, to a power
in cases that are clear in Law and reason, or sense. Secondly, when there is no
King actually, their power may be more, as the wife that has no husband.
Thirdly, The Declaration of Parliament does not give the King his title or
authority; but only declares, recognizeth, and acknowledges, that he had it
before. As for those assertions in that Declaration, Ibid.
viz. That the Sovereign Power resides in the King and both Houses of
Parliament. That the two Houses are judges, superior to all others. That the
Kings negative voice does not imply a liberty to deny, etc. because no Law is
produced, and that they oppose such as are known, as also the practice of
Parliament in this Nation: conscience is to seek for a foundation of assent
unto them. It is delivered as Law; that the King is the Mr. Pym's speech at the
attainder of the Earl of Straff^rd, p. 10.
Father, the Husband of the Commonwealth; he is the Head, they are the body.
Mr. St. John's speech at the same Attaind. p. m. 7.
That the Laws are the Kings Laws, he is the fountain, from whence in their
several channels they are derived to the subject. The case of Ship-mony, a
speech in Parliament, Nov. 3. 1640. page 12, 13. Note.
That he is the soul of the Law, in whose power it is ALONE to execute Law, and
yet not be constrained thereunto. That the Sacred PERSON of the King is
INVIOLABLE, and subject to no force or compulsion of any other -- and free from
any coercive or vindicative power. -- That this freedom is unsepar ble (from
the Person of the King) because no force can be used, but by Superiors or
Equals; and he that has Superiors or Equals is no KING.

Again, first, The Judges in Calv. case recited by D. Austin Allegiance not
impeached. cap. 1.
That allegiance of the subject is due to the King by the Law of Nature.
Secondly, That the Law of Nature was before any Judicial or Municipal Law, as
being written from the beginning in man's heart. Thirdly, That the Law of Nature
is immutable. Fourthly, That this immutable Law of Nature, Bracto^.
is a part of the Law of England. That Rex in regno parem habere non debet, cum
par in parem non habeat potestatem, multo fortius non habeat superiorem. The
King in his Kingdom ought to have no equal, because one equal cannot have power
over another, much less should he have any superior. Remonstr. Nov. 2. 1642.
Serg. Bradshaw at the sentencing h^s late Majesty.
v^z. That he is major singulis, minor universis, Greater then any one, but
less then all. For both the Statute is express: That this Realm of England has
been accepted for an Empire, governed by one supreme Head; unto whom a body
politic compact of all sorts and degrees of People, 24 Hen. 8. cap. 12. 4.
Declarat. of Parliament. Proposition in Parliament, Apr. 25. 4 Car. propos. 5.
Rushworth. Collect. p. 553.
are bound, next unto God, in a natural obedience. As also it is acknowledged
in full Parliament: First, in general, by the House of Lords: As touching his
Majesty's Royal Prerogative, intrinsecal to his Sovereignty, and betrusted him
withal from God: Ad communem totius populi salutem and non ad destructionem,
That his Majesty would resolve not to use or divert the same, to the prejudice
of any of his loyal people, in the property of their goods, or liberty of their
persons: is prayed by the Lords. And in particular by the Commons, Most dread
Sovereign -- We your dutiful Commons now assembled in Parliament -- we think it
is a meet and most necessary duty, being called by your Majesty to consult and
advise of the great and urgent affairs of this Church and Commonwealth,
Commons Remonstrance against the Duke. 4 Car. Anno 1628. Rush. Collect. page
631. Note.
finding them at this time in apparent danger of ruin and destruction,
faithfully and dutifully to inform your Majesty thereof, and with bleeding
hearts, and bended knees, to crave your speedy redress therein, as to your
wisdom ( unto which, we most humbly SUBMIT our selves and our desires) shall
seem most convenient. prerogative is intrinsecal unto his Sovereignty, and
betrusted to him by God, say the submit themselves and their desires to the
wisd^m of the King, say the House of Commons; even then when both Church and
Commonwealth were in apparent danger of ruin and destruction. And (to return
again unto the judgment of the Sages of the Law) the former Author says, That
the King is the most excellent Bract. l. 1. c. 8. Majestas Intemerata. page 38.
Bract. l. 2. de Acquir. rer. domin. c. 24. Stamf. r. 7. 11. Majestas
Intemerata. p. 32.
part of the Commonwealth, next unto ^od. Again, Dominus Rex habet ordinariam
jurisdictionem, dignitatem and potestatem super omnes qui in regno suo sunt --
Our Lord the King, says the same Bracton cited by Stamford, lib. 2. cap. 2.
Reasons of the University of Oxford against the Covenant, sect. 7. page 27.
Bracton, has ordinary jurisdiction, dignity and power, over all which are in
his Kingdom. -- And, ea quae jurisdictionis sunt and pacis ad nullum pertinent
nisi ad Coronam and dignitatem regiam, nec a Corona separari possunt. And that
therefore those things which are annexed to justice and peace, belong to none
but the Crown and dignity Royal; neither can they be separated from the Crown.

We have heard the testimony of Lawyers, yea, and of the Law it self; the
dialect also and speech of Parliament, and the judgment of those who have, not
by the way, Dr. Bilson of Subj. and Rebel. Part. 3. ed. Land. 1586. p. 277.
but, ex professo, handled this argument; with the full witness of one of which
number, and that an eminent one, I shall conclude this particular, who speaking
of the German Wars, and of their Laws and ours, says, Their States be free,
and may resist any wrong by the Laws of the Empire. -- The German Emperor is
elected, and his power abated by the liberties and prerogatives of his Princes
-- The Queen of England inheriteth, and has ONE and the same right over ALL
her subjects, be they NOBLES or others.

Now all the forementioned allegations, concerning the Person, Power, and
Prerogative of the King, and the subjection of all persons, and our allegiance
due by nature to him, being uttered as Law, and in Parliament, and cited by
those, that in the late contest appeared against him, are authentic. And the
the things being so as they came farther into my knowledge and consideration,
the same sense of the Laws, and my allegiance, as that before of Religion, did
concuss and shake me from the one, and setle me on the other side. And this to
the first Motive.

2. The Integrity of the persons, and their ability.
To the second, the integrity and ability of many of the persons inviting to
this contest, might be very great; yet all of them were not for it, as shall be
seen anon. Besides, Church, that a Council may, Artic. 21. Paphnut. Socrates H.
lib. 1. cap. 8. 3. Authority of the two Houses.
and have erred, even in things pertaining to God. And in the first and great
Council of the Primitive Church, in a very material point, they all erred but
one, and suffered themselves by him to be corrected.

To the third, the Authority of the two Houses, I did not then so thoroughly
consider, though I had some doubts (as was noted above) that they were the
Child, the King Spouse, the King the Husband; 1. Their Relation.
that they were the Body, the King the Head, as we heard above out of Mr. Pym.
Now these relations doubtless could not regularly act without, much less in
opposition to the chief relatum, unless in cases of infancy, alienation of
mind, voluntary absence, abdication of the Government, 2. Their Style.
and such like, of which more anon. Besides, we heard even now, themselves, in
Parliament, style themselves, His Majesty's most humble and loyal subjects, the
Lords and Commons in Parliament, in that Declaration, wherein they did not
only pare the nails, but even also pierce the quick.

3. Their Title and Power, whereon founded, and in what consisting.
Moreover, what power and authority they have, it must be by Law. Power public
and authoritative, I suppose, consists especially in three points; first, in
making Laws; secondly, in declaring Law; lastly, in executing Law. Touching the
first, Although the King, being the fountain of Law, it must primarily flow
from him, though into his Courts; yet it is condescended unto, and a share is
granted them, in making Laws, and protecting Liberties; Kings answer to the 19
prop^sit. 1642. page 12.
what that is, his late Majesty (you will say) has fully opened: In this
Kingdom (says he) the Laws are jointly made by a King, by a House of Peers,
and by a House of Commons, chosen by the People, all having free votes, and
particular privileges. The Government according to those Laws is trusted to the
King; 1 power of Treaties of war and peace; 1. Kings prerogative.
2 of making Peers; 3 of choosing Officers and Counselors for State; 4 Judges
for Law; 5 Commanders for Forts and Castles; 6 giving Commissions for raising
men, to make war abroad, or to prevent or provide against invasions, or
insurrections at home: 7 benefit of confiscations; 8 power of pardoning, and
some more of the like kind, are placed in the King. 2. House of Commons,
Next for the House of Commons, he says: Again, That the Prince may not make
use of this high and perpetual power to the hurt of those, for whose good he
has it, and make use of the name of public necessity, for the gain of his
private favorites and followers, to the detriment of his people. The House of
Commons (an excellent conserver of liberty, but never intended for any share in
government, for they do not administer an Oath.
or the choosing of them that should govern) is solely entrusted with the first
Propositions, concerning the levies of moneys (which is the sinews as well of
peace as of war) and the impeachment of those, who for their own ends, (though
countenanced by any surreptitiously gotten command of the King, have violated
that Law, which he is bound when he knows it to protect, and to the protection
of which they were bound to advise him; at least not to serve him in the
contrary. This for the Commons. Next for the House of Lords, he proceeds.

And the Lords, 3. House of Lords.
being trusted with a judicatory power, are an excellent skreen and bank
between the Prince and People, to assist each against any encroachment of the
other, and by just judgment to preserve that Law, which ought to be the rule of
every one of the three. Whence he adds, Since therefore the power legally
placed in both Houses, is more than sufficient to prevent and restrain the
power of tyranny, etc. Thus far the King. A share then they have in their
several degrees in the Legislative power, though neither supreme nor
coordinate, but subalternate, and by descent from the high unto the lower. 2.
Declaring Law. In his speech after his assent to the Petition of Right. Kings
Answer to the Remonstrance of the 19 of May, 1642. page 21.
Touching the next, the power of declaring Law; though the King do avow, That
the power of declaring Law be not in either or both Houses of Parliament
without his consent, and that the Judges are the interpreters of Law under
himself. Yet he says, We deny not but that they (the Lords and Commons in
Parliament) may have a power to declare, in a particular doubtful case,
regularly brought before them, what Law is; but to make a general declaration,
whereby the known rule of the Law may be crossed or altered, they have no
power, nor can exercise any, without bringing the life and liberty of the
subject to a lawless and arbitrary subjection.

Lastly, as to the execution of Law, or judging by it, This is not in any
other, 3. Execution of Laws.
but either in the House of Peers in Parliament, with the Kings consent, who
must sign all their capital sentences; or in the Judges and other Officers, by
Commission from the King, in whose name they all proceed. So then, the power of
government original and final, and of execution of the Laws, is in the King, so
far as is made known by the constant practice of the Nation. A power therefore
of resistance, publicly, and by Arms, how should they have, in opposition to
the King, who have no power of judging, or execution of the Law, but by
authority from him, and his consent formally expressed?

4. Their silence in point of particular Law.
Lastly, There was (though spoken of, and they urged to produce it) never any
Law shown, nor the Charter, or Custom, or Act named, that did either formally
or virtually imply a power of Government, and much less of Arms, without and in
opposition to the King, which might settle and satisfy the conscience. The
Barons Wars.
For some presidents in tumultuous times of some great men, will not be a fit
example for a Parliament. And some very few sentences of one or two Lawyers,
earth only, but heaven also.

Bracton writing in Henry the third his time, fol. 34. A.
when the Bar^ns had raised a Militia against the King, says indeed, Rex habet
superiorem, Deum scilicet, item legem per quam factus est Rex, item curiam
suam, viz. Comites and Barons, etc. That the King has a Superior, namely,
God; also the Law, whereby he was made King; also his Court, to wit, the Earls
and Barons. The like sentence verbatim almost is cited out of lib. 1. c. 17. de
justitiariis substituendis. Declar. L. L. Com. Nov. 2. 1642. page 22.
Fleta, that the King had in popul^ regendo superiores, legem, per quam f ctus
est, and curiam suam, viz. Comites and Barons, etc. But the former place in
Bracton (and so in Fleta) is not meant of the Court of Parliament, for there is
no mention of the Commons; but it follows in the same place, debent ei fraenum
imponere, they ought to bridle him; Dr. Fearns's Conscience satisfied, sect. 4.
page 17. 1248.
It is likely he spoke this in favor of the Militia raised against Henry the
third, (for then he wrote) and might call that Assembly of Earls and Barons,
then combined against the King, Curiam, the higher Court or Counsel. But he
contradicts this elsewhere, not only in that sentence, Rex in regno, parem
habere non debet, cum par in parem non habeat potestatem, multo fortius non
habeat superiorem; That the King in his Kingdom ought to have no equal, because
one equal can have no power over another, much less should he have any
superior. But also by other sentences quoted out of him above. Somewhat perhaps
like Cicero, sometime with Pompey, sometime for Caesar, as not a few have been
in our time.

Another also is cited, who says, 2. Fortescue. fol. 25. ^. By the fuller
answer to Dr. Fearn. page 3.
Ad hanc potestatem a p^pulo effluxam ipse habet, quo non licet ei potestate
alia populo suo dominari. That the King, by having this power flowing from the
people, is obliged so, that it is not lawful for him to rule over them by any
other authority. record, or custom, nor with any judged case, or Act of
Parliament, yea, contrary to the known process and practice of the Law, and
Acts of Parliament, and general sentences of Lawyers, cannot satisfy,
especially if we consider, that if such power had flowen from the people, yet,
as the King observes, it does not follow, that it must therefore return unto
them, 2. Answer to the Remonstr. of May 26. 1642. page 10.
at least when and in what manner they will. As in the case of the power of the
Husband, which first did flow unto him from the Wife, but may not be resumed
without breach of wedlock, 3. 24 H. 8. c. 12.
and that also adjudged lawfully. The Law is otherwise, which teaches us, That
this Realm of England has been accepted for an Empire, governed by one supreme
Head, unto whom a body politic, compact of all sorts and degrees of people, of
the Spiritualty, and Temporalty, are bound to bear, next unto God, a natural
obedience. And that by the Law of nature, and of the Land, we owe Allegiance,
as we saw above. Now this is not answered, Reply to Dr. Ferm's answer sect. 3.
page 18.
by saying, 'By the preamble of the Statute it appears so to be made, to
prevent appeals to Rome; and that by the supreme Head is meant such a one, as
is able to do all needful acts of justice, which the King in his natural
capacity cannot do, and therefore must be understood in his politic capacity,
which takes in Law and Parliament. For the whole body politic, whether
Parliament or People, are governed and made subject to this Supreme Head, and
do owe unto him natural obedience. And accordingly in His, not in the Houses of
Parliament's name, though sitting, do all judgments and executions of Law
proceed. The authority then of the two Houses of Parliament, is the authority
of the Body, not of the Head, by which, even it also must be governed, and
against which it may not oppose it self. 1 Timothy 2.
For as he said, I permit not a woman to usurp authority over the man, but to
live in subjection; holds betwixt the political Spouse and Husband also. (I
have done with the third.)

4. Case of Necessity.
To the fourth Motive the case of Necessity. We must here note Thesin, and
Hypothesin; the general and the particular state of the Question. 1. In Thesi,
and in general. It Is true, Pleaders for Regal power do acknowledge, that there
may indeed fall out some cases, wherein such designments may be warrantable. As
first, Abbot de Anti-Ch. cap. 7. n. 5. and 6.
in general, when per patrias leges licere judicarunt -- Hic vero politica res
agitur, Quid principi juris in subditos per leges cujusque reipublicae
fundatrices permissum sit, etc. When they might judge that it was lawful by the
Laws of their Country. Now here the Question is civil and political, namely,
What power is given to the Prince over his subjects, by the fundamental Laws of
each Commonwealth, etc. says the Bishop of Salisbury. Here Law is made the
bottom in general; but that Law must be produced that may be known. In
particular two or three cases are alleged, wherein only it is found
allowable. Non alias igitur populo in eum potestas est, Gull. Barcla. contr.
Monarchom. lib. 3. prope sin.
quam si id committat, propter quod ipso jure Rex esse desinat. Tunc enim, quia
se ipse principatu exuit, atque in privatis constituit, liber hoc modo populus
and superior efficitur, reverso ad illum scilicet, jure illo, quod ante regem
inauguratum in interregno habuit -- duo tantum (commissa) invenio -- duos
inquam casus -- Horum unus est, si regnum and Rempublicam evertere conetur, hoc
est, Aurel. Victor. de Caesarib. Sueton. cap. 49. and cap. 30.
si id ei propositum eaque intentio fuerit ut regnum disperdat, quemadmodum de
Nerone fertur -- and de Caligula. -- Talia cum Rex aliquis meditatur and
molitur serio, omnem regnandi curam and animum illico abjicit, ac proinde
imperium in subditos amittit, ut l. 1. and ult. D. pro. derelict.
dominus servi pro derelicto habiti dominium. Alter casus est, si Rex in
alicujus clientelam se contulerit, ac regnum quod liberum a majoribus and
populo traditum accepit, alienae ditioni mancipaverit, etc. And instanceth in
Baliol King of Scots, that subjected his Crown and Kingdom to Edward the first,
of England; then adds, Ejurationem spontalem excipio, de qua nulla inter
mortales dubitatio, which I need not English, Bilson of Subj. and Rebel. part.
3. edit. Land. 1586. page 276, 280.
because for substance the same is delivered before him by our own Bishop of
Winchester. I must confess, says he, that except the Laws of those Realms do
permit the people to stand on their right, if the Prince would offer that
wrong, I dare not allow their arms -- Cases may fall out, even in Christian
Kingdoms, where the people may plead their right against the Prince, and not be
charged with rebellion. Phil. As when for example? Theop. If the Prince
foreign form of the Commonwealth Laws established by common consent of Prince
and People, to execute his own pleasure: In these, and other cases which might
be named, if the Nobles and Commons join together to defend their ancient and
accustomed Liberty, Regiment, and Laws, they may not well be counted Rebels. --
I never denied that the people might preserve the foundation, But part 3. page
144. he says, It is the Popes Divinity, that Princes have their power from the
people, which, he says, they have from God.
freedom, and form of their Commonwealth, which they fore-prised, when they
first consented to have a King. -- I never said, That Kingdoms and
Commonwealths might not proportion their States as they thought best by their
public Laws, which afterward the Princes themselves may not violate -- In
Kingdoms where Princes bear rule by the sword, Princes will.
we do not mean the Princes private will against his Laws; but his Precept
derived from his Laws, and agreeing with his Laws; which though it be wicked,
yet may not be resisted of any subject with armed violence. Mary when Princes
offer their subjects not justice, but force, and despise all Laws to practice
their lusts, Not every, nor any private man may take the sword to redress the
Prince: But if the LAWS of the land appoint the nobles, as next to the King, to
assert him in doing right, and withold him from doing wrong; Note. If the
Laws appoint.
THEN be they licensed by man's LAW, and so not prohibited by Gods, to interpose
themselves for safeguard of equity and innocence: and by all lawful and needful
means to procure the Prince to be reformed, but in no case deprived, Note. Not
disinherit.
where the Scepter is inherited -- But he explains himself further in the very
next page, ( viz. That he meant still according unto Law.) The rest of the
Nobles (says he) that did assist them (the King of Navarre and the Prince of
Conde, against the King of France) if it were the Kings act that did oppress
them, and not the Guises: Note.
except the LAWS of the land do permit them means to save the State from open
tyranny, I will not excuse. And part 3. page 144.
elsewhere, I will not (says he) examine the Popes Divinity, ( Zachary, in his
answer to the German Legates, Aventin. lib. p. 299.
wherein he says, the people create their King, and the people may, when the
cause so requires, forsake their King: it is, you see, the Popes Doctrine) I
will not says he, examine the Popes Divinity, in that he says, Princes have
their powers of the people, which the Scripture says, they have of God. And
before, ( part. 2. p. m. 328.) This is the Supremacy which we attribute to
Princes, that all men within their territories should obey their Laws, or abide
their pleasure; and that no man on earth has authority to take their Swords
from them, by Judicial sentence, or Martial violence.

Howsoever, as I said,
those things before may be so in Thesi, and the matter absolutely considered;
yet being excited by the fruits to view all the roots again, I cannot satisfy
my conscience, that in Hypothesi, and in particular, hic and nunc, Note. Mr.
Pyms speech at the charge of the Earl of Strasford, page m. 5. Protection and
Alleg. 1. Parliament Testimony. Remonstr. of the state of the Kingdom, November.
15. 1641. page 26. 1. Bills p^ss'd by the King.
the case was such with us at the beginning of the war. And if there had been
any urgency to any of those cases, yet Mr. Pym whom all men know was no
passionate Royallist, says, If you take away the protection of the King, the
vigor and cheerfulness of Allegiance will be taken away, though the OBLIGATION
remain. Protection then and Allegiance are not such correlatives, as that they
do se mutuo ponere and tollere, as some would have. But to return. That the
case was not so with us, and that this may appear to have been no groundless
conceit of my own, I produce the two Houses of Lords and Commons: We
acknowledge (say they) with much thankfulness, that his Majesty has passed
more good Bills, to the advantage of the subjects, than have been in MANY AGES.
This for the matter of concessions. page 23. 2. Security to the Subject.
Next, for the Security, hear them again: The discontinuance of Parliaments is
prevented by a Bill for Triiennial Parliaments; and the abrupt dissolution of
this Parliament by another Bill, by which it is provided, it shall not be
dissolved or adjourn, without the consent of both Houses. Which two Laws well
considered, may be thought more advantageous than ALL the former, because they
SECURE a full operation of the present remedy, and afford a PERPETVAL spring of
remedies for the future. Thus the Parliament.

Sir Benjamin Rudyard his testimony.
Now secondly, That these considerations did then wo^k strongly upon the hearts
of some of their own Members, against engaging in the War, may be seen by a
speech (printed) of Sr. Benjamin Rudyards, In h^s Ep^st^e Dedicat^ry to him of
one of his Tr^ctates, among the rest of Mr. Rous's works.
to whose worth and piety Mr. Francis Rous, a member also, gives, upon his own
long and intimate knowledge, a very high elogy. He in that speech in the House
of Commons, July the 9. Anno 1642. page 2. says, Mr. Speaker, I am touched, I
am pierced, with an apprehension of the honor of the House, and success of
Parliament. The best way to give a stop to these desperate immenent mischiefs,
Sir B njamin Rudyard his speech in Parliament.
is, to make a fair way for the KING's RE^VRN hither; it will likewise give
best satisfaction to the people, and will be our best justification. And again.
page 3. Note.
If any man could have credibly told us, 1 that within three years you shall
have a Parliament; 2 that Ship-mony shall be taken away by an Act of
Parliament, 1. Acts passed.
the reasons and grounds of it so rooted out as that neither it, nor any thing
like it, can ever grow up again; 3 That Monopolies, 4 the High Commission
Court, 5 the Star Chamber, 6 the Bishops Votes, shall be taken away; 7 the
Council Table regulated and restrained; 8 the Forests bounded and limited; 9
that ye shall have a Triennial Parliament; 10 and more then that, a perpetual
Parliament, which none shall have power to dissolve without your selves: We
should have thought this a dream of happiness, yet now we are in the real
possession of it -- We stand chiefly upon security, 2. Security.
whereas the VERY HAVING of these things is a convenient fair security,
mutually securing one another. Then is MORE security offered, even in this last
Answer of the Kings, by removing the personal votes of Popish Lords, by the
better education of Papists children, by supplying the defect of Laws against
Recusants, etc. -- Wherefore, Sir, Note.
let us beware we do not contend for such a hazardous unsafe security, as may
endanger the loss of what we have already. Let us not think we have nothing,
because we have not all we desire; and though we had, we cannot make a
MATHEMATICAL security. All humane caution is susceptible of corruption and
failing. Gods providence will not be bound, Note.
success must be His. -- Every man here, is bound in conscience to employ his
uttermost endeavors, to prevent the effusion of BLOOD. BLOOD is a CRYING sin,
Note.
it pollutes a Land. LET US SAVE OUR LIBERTY AND ESTATES, AS WE MAY SAVE OUR
SOULS TOO. Now I have freely delivered my own conscience, I leave every man
freely to his.

Thus far that worthy Knight; and I have been told by one acquainted with him,
and that did sometime visit him in his last sickness, that he said, That some
of the most active men would not have been for the raising of Arms, but that
they had a strong opinion, Mr. Ham^. M^, Pym (and others) whom he named.
that the King had so little interest in the affections of the people, that he
would never be able to raise force to oppose them. One occasion of the War.
And that he (the said Sir Benjam^n Rudyard) did labor earnestly to dissuade
them from that conception, but could not.

Add hereunto in the third place, 3. Gods Testimony. Psalm. 111.
Gods own active testimony, as it appears against the courses pursued, which is
not lightly to be passed; for as the Psalmist says, He does so perform his
works, that they ought to be had in remembrance. For although the Word of God
particular determination of it unto our special condition by wholesome Laws, is
a sufficient light 'unto our feet, and lanthorn unto our paths; yet this Word
receives much illustration and confirmation, by works, both of nature (and
therefore these are joined with it in the Psalm) and of providence, Psalm. 19.
as Constantine the Great Observes, Eusebius. de vit. Constant. l. 2. c. 25.
viz. That believers had light enough by the Word to discern the true Religion
from the false, yet the working of providence in order thereunto did make the
matter much more evident. So in the present affair, Ends of the War defeated.
for whereas there were but two main things for which the War was undertaken,
Religion, and the Laws. God seems to declare his judgment concerning our
undertaking this way to defend them, providence defeating us in both, yea and
that both after full victory obtained, and quiet possession enjoyed: Whence you
may very reasonably believe, Kings Letter from Breda unto the General, April 4.
1660
that God is not pleased with the attempts that have been made, since he has
usually increased the confusion by all the success that has been desired; and
brought that to pass without effect, which the designers have proposed, as the
best means to settle and compose the Nation; as a better hand has notably
observed. 1. Religion.
First, for Religion, not only the infinite growth of all, even the most
horrid opin^ons, and sects and factions of such, denying not only the Lord
that bought them, 2 Pet. 2.
as the Apostle speaks, but the Principle it self, the Scriptures; together
with the contempt of Gods worship it self, as well as the established form
thereof, does abundantly show, de facto, that we have lost Religion; but above
all, that unparalled Act for Toleration, Proclamation for Tolerat^on Feb. 15.
1654.
that de jure we must lose it, does demonstrate. And the precedent thereof,
that Ordinance of the Lords and Commons, whereby the security of it, the
established Liturgy was removed, Ordinance of Lords and Commons, Jan. 3. 1644.
and the Act against Recusancy repealed, whereby the floodgates for opinions
and practices in Religion was thrown open; since which, that which was but then
in semine, is now in arbore, and that such an one, as all the unclean fouls
under heaven came and lodged in the branches of it. This for Religion. Then for
the Laws, and our Liberties contained in them; 2. The Laws.
first, the Court of Justice, (untruly so called) did de facto, and in deed,
extirpate that, Court of Justice.
and pluck it up by the roots, as seizing upon any man's estate, liberty and
life against Law, and upon arbitrary power, against the Great Charter. But
secondly, it is avowed by him, that of late assumed the Supreme Power, that all
our Laws and government was dissolved, and that he might do de jure and of
right what he pleased; so the other ground and foundation of the War, the Law,
was lost also. And because in this cause he is a very authentic witness, as
having been so deep an actor in the motion, we will hear himself speak, and
that in the face of the Nation, in an Assembly of it, which he called a
Parliament, that so God might openly show us what we would not see before: He
says, Note. Lord Protector's speech, Sept. 12. 1654. page 11, 13.
That those honest ends of our fighting were not attained and settled. Again, My
power (says he) by this resignation (from the convention of a few called by
himself) was BOVNDLESS and UNLIMITED. And upon the matter, ALL GOVERNMENT
DISSOLVED, all civil Administrations at an end. Again, page 19.
the Soldiery were a considerable part of the Nation, especially ALL GOVERNMENT
being DISSOLVED; I say, when ALL GOVERNMENT was thus DISSOLVED, and nothing to
keep things in order but the SWORD. Where, by the way, you may perceive, that
the mystery of this iniquity, even from the beginning, and before there was a
blow stricken, did work. For at the time when the Horses were lifting, Note.
and money and plate was brought into Guild Hall, discourse being betwixt him
and one I know, in my hearing, touching the final resolution of power: He
says, That if the King did not do his duty, 1. Resolution of Government in a
Levellers sense.
it descended to the Parliament; and if the Parliament did not do theirs, it
devolved to the People. Now, a few days before the death of the King, being
pressed in my hearing, 2. The application.
why the Army should act such a thing, and asked, if they were the judgment of
the Kingdom? He replied, Show me such a body of people in the Nation as the
Army is, that have not forfeited their liberties; and so implying, that they
might assume unto themselves the judgment of the Kingdom, (though in that case
the Kingdom it self could not judge, as was showed above out of Mr. St. John's
speech, because the Royal Person is exempt from vindicative justice.) So here
in this speech, all Government being, as he said, dissolved, the Army were a
considerable part of the Nation. Nay, by what follows, that there was left
nothing to keep things in order but the sword, he might have said as before,
That they were the only judgment of the Nation. But this by the way, though
not out of it. Again, in the former speech: The Judges (says he) thinking,
page 21.
that there was a dissolution of the Government -- did declare one to another,
Note.
The Judges.
that they could not administer justice to the satisfaction of their
consciences, until they had received Commissions from me. page 33. The Parliam.
And as touching the Parliament, and the Militia, the great Helena of our
Trojan War, The Militia, whether to be in Parliament.
whether it should remain in the King, or the Parliament have power of it, he
says, Whether the Parliament have not liberty to alter the form of Government,
to Aristocracy, to Democracy, to Anarchy, to any thing, if this [THE MILITIA]
be fully in them? Note.
yea, unto all CONFVSION, and that without remedy. Lastly, The Kings Negative
voice. page 34.
as touching the Supreme Magistrate, whose Person then he had usurped, he
says, I shall be willing to be bound more then I am, in any thing that I may
be CONVINCED of, may be for the good of the people; which point was like the
Armor of Hector, betwixt Ajax and Ulysses, at the beginning of the War.

Corollaries from the former speech.
Now from these expressions we may observe, 1. That the ends of the War,
Religion and Law, were not attained but perverted. 2. That the government of
the Nation was dissolved, in their judgment, and not settled. 3. Note.
That we were under an absolute arbitrary power. 4. That in his judgment, the
Parliament ought not to have the Militia in them. 5. And lastly, That the
Supreme Magistrate must be convinced in his own judgment, before he yield to
alter what (by right) he is possessed of; in reference unto all which, the War
was undertaken.

But to close this point, 4. Testimony of the Parl. grounds of the war, declar.
Aug. 3. 1642. of the grounds of the war.
and to leave it with some further authentic demonstration and evidence; The
two Houses of Parliament in their Declaration, setting forth the grounds of
their taki^g up Arms, published August 3. 1642. do represent only three sorts
of them, viz. 1. either some former miscarriages of the Kings Government; or 2.
some preparations on his part to War, with the incidents thereunto; or lastly,
his refusal to grant their petitions, especially that of July 16. 1642.
containing their desire of the Militia, the leaving Delinquents to their trial,
the Kings return, and concurrence with the Houses. Together with the result of
all these, the danger to the Kingdom in Laws, Liberty, and Religion.

Now for the first of these, the King had not only acknowledged the
dissolution of the Parliament before; of the unhappy dissolution of the last,
Former errors in Government.
says the King, by the uninformation and advice of some persons, looked upon
now under another character. Where they should remember, that some miscarriages
in government is incident unto all Princes, (yea, all Governors) whereof
Dioclesian makes a very serious complaint: Vopiscus in vita Aurelian. cit. a
Bucholc. Chronol. ad Anx. d. 304.
Nihil est (inquit) difficilius quam been imperare. Nam quatuor vel quinque
viri se colligunt, atque unum consilium c piunt ad Imperatorem decipiendum,
dicunt quod probandum sit. Imperator qui domi clausus est, vera non novit;
Cogitur hoc tantum scire quod illi loquuntur; Facit judices quos fieri non
oportebat; amovet a Republica quos retinere debebat. Quid multa? Bonus, cautus
and optimus venditur imperator. There is nothing more difficult (says he) than
to rule well. Four or five men associate themselves, and take counsel together
to delude the King; they advise what is to be done. A Note for Princes.
The Prince, who is shut up at home, knows nothing of the certainty of things,
but is constrained to know only that which they acquaint him with; He makes
(hereupon) those Judges whom he ought not, and removes those from government
that he should not. To be short, a good, provident and excellent Prince, is
bought and sold. Thus he. And the Parliament themselves were not a little
abused by their informers. Again the King acknowledges his failing in coming in
person to the house of Commons to seize the five Members, Kings answer to the
Declation of May 19. 1642. p. 10. Edit. Cambr.
and says, As if by that single casual mistake of ours, in form only, we had
forfeited all duty, credit, and allegiance from our people. We must, without
endeavoring to excuse that, which in truth was an error, our going to the
House of Commons. But besides King made real, both amends and security for the
future, not only by solemn promise, but by passing such Acts of Parliament,
that did not only remove the former grievances, but also secure the subject
for the time to come, as we saw above, both by the acknowledgment of the
Commons in the Remonstrance of the state of the Kingdom; among other things,
these, The Monopolies are all suppressed. That which is more beneficial than all
this is, page 22, 23, 24.
that the root of those evils is taken away, which was the arbitrary power,
pretended to be in his Majesty, of taxing the subject, or charging their
estates without consent in Parliament, which is now declared to be against Law,
by the judgment of both Houses, and likewise by an Act of Parliament (now the
Kings consent was there) -- The evil Counselors so quelled -- the
Star Chamber, the High Commission, the Co^rts of the President, and Council in
the North, are all taken away. The immoderate power of the Council Table is
ordered and restrained; we may well hope, that no such things -- will appear in
future times, but only stories, Note.
to give us and our posterity more occasion to praise God for his Majesty's
goodness, and the faithful endeavors of this Parliament. The Canons, and power
of Canon-making are blasted by the vote of both Houses; the exorbitant power of
Bishops and their Courts, are much abated; the Authors or many Innovations in
Doctrine and Ceremonies -- terrified; -- the Forests are by a good Law reduced
to their right bounds; the -- oppressions of the Stannary Courts; the
extortions of the Clerk of the Market; the compulsion of subjects to receive
Knighthood -- are by other beneficial Laws reformed. -- Many excellent Laws and
provisions are in preparation, which they there enumerate. Then a little before
they say, The discontinuance of Parliament is prevented by a Bill for a
Triennial Parliament; and the abrupt dissolution of this by another Bill.
Whence they truly collect, and profess, page 26.
We acknowledge with much thankfulness, that h^s Majesty has passed more good
Bills to the advantage of the subject, than have been in MANY ages. Thus they.
Now were not the former failings of Government sufficiently remedied? and the
fear of future is acknowledged here to be secured and prevented. No ground then
of the War for what was passed.

Come we to the second, Kings preparation for war.
The Kings preparations for War; he says they were first, they the contrary;
if it be hard to determine, perhaps it is not greatly material, seeing they
were very near one the other; and that argued both jealousy (I say a
jealousy) of intentions to destroy each the other, and actings to prevent it.
Now take it at the worst, that the King prepared first (which yet does not
appear) yet considering that he having granted all the former Acts
(acknowledged to amend the past, and secure the future) and they not
satisfying, (but high demandings and declarations still and actings) in his
conscience no doubt he did, as in reason he might, apprehend intentions (in
some) to destroy the Government, (as it has since come to pass) and the Laws
of the Nation: he might be induced thereunto by a consideration of his duty,
and doubtless was, seeing no other way, though often tried, would prevail. The
motions of the Houses, and specially of the Commons, did give occasion to him
to think of securing the Liberties from such intrenchings.

3. Not yielding the Militia, etc.
Touching the last, His not granting that Petition, and giving way to the
Militia, and rendering up those who adhered to him, and returning to London, and
concurring with the Houses, and disbanding his forces, and recalling his
Commissions of Array, and others Military: The rendering of the Militia had been
to depose himself of Sovereignty, whose especial ensign and security is the
power of the Sword. His giving up those who adhered to him, 1 Samuel 11.
had (in appearance) been to send Uriah for his faithful service to his
enemies. To return to London, was to object him to those temptations, which he
could not, nor perhaps any Prince ought to hazard himself unto, unless more
effectual order had been taken to prevent both contumely and danger, which is a
truth, howsoever flighted. To concur with the Houses at this time, had been to
have given up at once both his safety and conscience. The recalling his
Commissions, and disbanding his Forces, unless both themselves had done so too,
and also had declared their repentance for their provocations of him, had been
to strip both himself and Kingdom of necessary defense against those, whom he
had cause to think would invade both, as it proved afterward. So that by high
and extraordinary actings, to provoke the King to like undertakings, and then
to raise Arms, because he would not desert them without security, is, as if one
should by assault provoke a man to draw his sword, and then fight him, because
he will not put it up again, and stand to mercy.

4. No Law alleged for the war in particular.
But a fundamental error it was in that declaration, that held out the grounds
of the war, That no particular Law was alleged, to enable them to that way of
securing the Nation: For granting all to be as was suggested, yet only id
possumus quod jure possumus. Romans 3.
We may not do evil, as all actings above our sphere is, that good may come of
it. This should have been the chief ground for conscience to rest upon. Kings
Proclamation from York, Jun. 18. 1642. forbidding levying of Soldiers.
Whereas on the contrary, the King alleges diverse particular Laws for his
bearing of the Sword, as also examples of men, that have upon necessity, some
real, some pretended, taken the Sword, and though they have done service to the
King and Commonwealth by it, have been forced to obtain their pardon. There is
no need here to name particulars, the constant practice in the Nation
justifying the Kings sole bearing of the sword. Now to come to an issue, The
issue of the Quest.
The King as much fears the ruin of the Laws and himself, as the two Houses do
the Liberties and themselves, and their grounds we will suppose (though not
grant) are equal. The King is in possession, and by Law entrusted with the
Sword to protect both: The two Houses produce none. Then sure, as this should
have prevented resistance then, so, especially taking in what has followed,
ought it to provoke repentance now. And thus much in answer to the fourth
Motive.

SECT. III. Answer to the fifth Motive, Examples.
I Come now to the last, viz. The Examples in Scripture, and in latter times,
together with the approbation of such Examples, by our Princes and Bishops,
above alleged. To all which I answer, first, in general, Isa. 10
That we must apply our selves first unto the Law and to the Testimony; if they
speak not according to this rule, there is no light in them to guide us by. And
that in Examples, the greatest of all is the Captain of our Salvation, Matthew.
22.
who ever did precept and practice to give unto Caesar the things that were
Cesars; yea, Matthew. 17. ult.
for peace-sake, to give him that which was not his from some. All other
examples we must so follow, 1 Cor. 11.1.
as they follow him; Matthew. 26.52.
now he forbad to resist, for they that take the sword shall perish by the
sword; namely, if such to whom the sword is not committed, The Sword.
which must needs be the supreme Magistrate, the sword being the Ensign of
supreme power. Romans 13.
Hence that of the Apostle, The higher powers bear not the sword for naught;
they then are they who bear the sword. This in general.

2. David.
But in particular. 1. David's retaining a few men to guard himself (being
designed King) from the violence of private men, and from the sudden and
passionate assaults of Readiness distemper and malice, fleeing, and not fighting,
such as was the Prophet Elisha his holding the Kings messenger at the door, 2
Reg. 6.32.
who saw the King coming to change his sentence. 1 Samuel 14.45.
Also the peoples rescuing of Jonathan, not by any set contest or battle, but
by a friendly kind of violence. And the Priests thrusting Vzziah, being
leprous, 2 Chronicles. 26.20.
out of the Temple, but not resisting any of his Regal precepts, or such
forcible impressions. All these, and such like, are ridiculous-parallels to the
raising of an Army, and managing of a War. For though these examples show, that
there may be some kind of amicable or forcible resistance made to the person of
a King, in some private affairs, and in some particular occasions, (as David
might have held Readiness hands, if he had in the like manner fallen upon him, as
he did cast his Javelin at him; And Bathsheba no doubt might have resisted
David, (if he would have forced what he did persuade) yet these no way infer a
public and armed contest against him. 2. Keilah.
Secondly, David, if by temptation he would have resisted at Keilah, yet God,
by letting his friends become treacherous, kept him from giving of such a
precedent. As he did also keep him from fighting against his own Prince, 1 Samuel
29.
or else becoming perfidious, and ungrateful to his benefactor Achish (one of
which he must have done) by turning the spirit of the Lords of the Philist^ms
against him. 3. Cave of Adullam. 1. Sam. 24. and chap. 26.
But thirdly, when David was out of temptation, and himself, when power was in
his hand, once and again, and he exhorted by some as called by God to do it,
yet refused, and that with this reason, because he was the Lords Anointed,
Lords Anointed.
which is no more, but that he was Legitimate King; yea, his heart smote him
for but cutting off the lap, what would it have done if by war he had
occasioned the cutting off the life and head of the King.

For the Revolt of the ten Tribes from Solomon under Jeroboam: First, when
others can produce so set, 3. Ten Tribes. See 1 King. 11.29. chap. 12.24.
formal, and solemn a call thereunto as then was, and such an express
approbation afterward, In loc.
we may indulge them the opinion of Abulensis, who on these and other grounds
defends them. But secondly, 2 Chronicles. 13.5, 6.
they are expressly charged with Rebellion by Ahijah, who says, Ought ye not to
to know, that the Lord God of Israel has given the Kingdom over Israel to
David for ever, even to him and to his sons by a Covenant of salt? And Jeroboam
the son of Nebat, the servant of Solomon the son of David, is risen up, and
has REBELLED against his Lord. And thirdly, of this judgment are the very
weighty, and I think the most Expositors, Jews and Christians; Kimchi in 2 Reg.
11. Pet. Mart. in loc. Sanater in 2 Chronicles. 13.4. Calv. Instit. lib. 1. cap. c.
ult. ult. Hos. 8.4.
Jure damnatur populi (december Tribuum) rebellio, quod velut invito Deo, a
Davidis posteris desciverit. Justly are the people (of the ten Tribes)
condemned, because they would, as it were in spite of God, revolt from the
posterity of David, says Mr. Calvin. Lastly, of this judgment the Lord himself
declares he was, both by word and action; by word, when he says, They have set
up Kings, but not by me, they have made Princes and I knew it not. By action,
in that by this means he took both peace and true Religion from them, and
withal sent them into captivity long before the other, but never vouchsafed
them any public, visible, and particular return that we read of; Kimchi in 1
Reg. 11.39.
it being denied by their own, that the ten Tribes came back when the other two
did. I have done with that instance.

The fourth is Libnah, 4. Libnah, 2 Chronicles. 25.
a City of the Priests which revolted from Joram, because of his idolatry; but
this, as that of Edom; who revolted at the same time, they both being recorded
as a punishment only of Joram, for his revolting from the Lord God of his
Fathers; but no more commended then was Absolom's insurrection, which also was
by way of punishment; or Jeroboam's Apostasy, which was for the idolatry
Solomon. Again, it was not lawful for either Edom or Libnah so to do,
especially the latter, being a City of Priests, who should both have known and
taught, that defection from the house of David upon whom the Kingdom was
settled, Bills. part. 3 p. 106.
and separation from the Temple, to which the worship was annexed, was
rebellion both against God and man. But it is true too often, omne malum a
Sanctuario; that from the Priests the ill example of sedition and schism is
derived unto the people.

5. Maccabees.
5. Next, for the Maccabees, 1. Antiochus against whom they managed the war, and
others, were invaders not inheritors of the Kingdom. Aliens, not natural
Princes, to whom they owed no allegiance by birth, by laws, by oath, by
conquest, by succession, by protection. 2. Besides, there are of their own that
think the issue of that war proved bad, because the Maccabees went beyond their
calling. 3. Lastly, if Exitus acta probat, this must not be alleged by them,
that would finally thrive in such an enterprise, for this at the length
miscarried, and ended in the Roman servitude.

6. The Primitive Christians.
6. Touching the Primitive Christians under Maximinus. We are first to note that
they were not subjects to him, but confederates and friends. Moreover a war,
Eusebius. Hist. li. 9. cap. 7.
did arise to the Tyrant (Maximinus) against the Armenians, who even from the
beginning, were the friends and confederates of the Romans. These, who al^o
were Christians, and studious of Religion, the hateful Tyrant endeavoring to
force unto idolatry, and sacrificing to Devils, of friends made them enemies,
and of confederates, adversaries. subjects. Secondly, for other Christians that
might resist in those times, they might be, as some of them were, abetted by a
coordinate power: for each of the Emperors of the East and West, had their
dominion a part, and the one did not ordinarily middle with the other; yet the
Empire was but one, whereof the Emperors that were, had the general
protection, and might and did succor the oppressed, within the Dominions of
their Colleague, Eusebius. l. 9. c. c. 9, 10.
as Constantine did the Romans against Maxentius; and Licinius against
Maximinus; or if it were not so, yet were they coordinate Princes, not
subjects. This for particular cases; But for the general spirit and practice of
Christians Apologies are full of the solemn protestations of the Christians,
that though for number and strength they could, yet that it was not lawful for
them to resist. As may be seen by that of Justin Martyr. Apolog. 2.
God only (says he) we worship, but in other things, we are cheerfully
obedient unto you, whom we acknowledge to be Kings and Princes of men. And
Irenaeus, Lib. 5. Adv. Haeres. Valentin.
Cujus jussu homines nascuntur, hujus jussu and Reges constituuntur, apti iis
qui in illo tempore ab ipsis Regantur. Quidam enim illorum ad correctionem and
utilitati subditorum dantur and conservationem justitiae; quidam autem ad
tumorem and ad poenam and increpationem; Quidam autem ad illusionem and
contumeliam and superbiam, quemadmodum and digni sunt, Dei justo judicio in
omnibus supervenienti. By whose command (says he) men are born, by the same
command Kings are constituted, fit for those who in each time are to be
governed by them. Some of them are given for the amendment and profit of their
subjects, and preservation of Justice, but some for terror and punishment, and
rebuke; and some for mockery and contumely, and pride, according as men
deserve, the just judgment of God prevailing in all things. Thus he, by which
he implies prayer and patience, but no resistance. Tertullian likewise;
Apologet. cap. 30. (cap. 33. cap. 37.)
A quo sunt secundi (Reges) post quem (Deum) primi ante omnes, and super omnes
Deos. From whom (God) they (Kings) are second, after whom they are first,
before all, and above all Gods; that is, above all inferior Magistrates. In a
word, we may see the sense of Antiquity in this point, in him, Instit. l. 3. c.
3. 10. Aug. Contr. Faust. lib. 22. cap. 75.
from whom Calvin would have us learn it in all, viz. S. Austin. Ordo naturalis
hoc poscit, ut suscipiendi belli Anthoritas, penes principem sit; exequendi
autem ministerium milites debeant. Natural order (says he) requires this, that
the Authority of undertaking war be in the power of the Prince, but that the
soldiers owe the service of execution and management. And that they wanted not
either number or strength one of the former Authors gives us assurance.
Tertul. Apologet. cap. 37.
Si enim hosts extraneos, non tantum vindices occultos agere vellemus, deesset
nobis res numerorum and copiarum? If we would, says he, become open enemies,
and not secret revengers, would there be wanting to us the force either of
number or Armies? And so shows that the Christians filled all places; insomuch
that should they but have withdrawn themselves only from the rest of men, they
should have made a desolation in the world. And thus of the Primitive
Christians. Anticavalierism. 7. Reformed Churches.
So vain is it to say, that Tertullian was mistaken in their number.

7. In the last place, come we to the examples of the Reformed Churches,
particularly those of France and Holland, who are said to have defended
themselves by arms, as we have done; defended by our Writers, and Princes. For
Answer: First, we are to note, that though perhaps it should be granted that it
may be lawful in some cases for oppressed subjects to call for help unto other
Foraign and lawful power, because these powers are coordinate with their own in
respect of degree and dignity, and in such case, there is no violation of order
by the rising up of the inferior against his Prince;

Writers, Difference of Subject and Rebel, part. 3. page 279. Ed. Land. 1586.
nor patronized by our Princes, farther then the Laws and their case, as
represented by them did allow. If the Laws of the Land (says Dr. Bilson,
speaking of the French, the Scottish, and the Holland Civil wars) do not permit
them to guard their lives, when they are assaulted with unjust force against
law, we will never excuse them from rebellion. And a little after; for my part,
I must confess, says he, that except the Laws of those Realms do permit the
people to stand on their right, if the Prince would offer that wrong, I dare
not allow their arms. And another treating of the same example, says, Quarum
injuriarum atrocitates, Abbot. de Antichrist. cap. 7. n. 5, 6.
occasionem forte dederunt bello civili, dum vim vi propulsant tantummodo, qui
contra jus fasque indignissime habiti, id sibi per patrias LEGES licere
judicarunt: The horribleness of which injuries (says he) peradventure gave
occasion to the Civil war, whilst they do only repel force by force, and who
contrary to all right and equity were treated most unworthily; and did judge
that they might do so, by the Laws of their Country. And again, Hic vero
politica res agitur, quid principi juris in subditos per leges cujusque Reip.
fundatrices permissum sit; The question here, says he, is matter of Civil
policy, viz. What power the Prince has over his subjects, by the fundamental
Laws of each Commonwealth. So that we see they defended these actions of the
Protestants abroad so far only as they were legal. This for their cause. But as
to ours, the former Author shows it to be different. The German Emperor
(says he) is elected, and his power abated by the liberties of the Princes:
Bills. of Subj. and Rebel, part 3. p. 277.
(But) the Queen of England has one and the same right over all her subjects,
be they NOBLES or others. You see he makes our cause and case, Kings of Engl
laws and allegiance to differ from the former.

CHAP. VII.
Reply to certain general Reasons for the War.
Scripture and Reason for defense of Arms, a Book so called.
AND now to draw toward an end of this first point, the War. The defenses made
in the justification of the War, they are of three sorts; from Scripture, from
Law, and from Reason. Those from Scripture and Law have been replied to before.

SECT. I. Law.
TO those from Reason, laid down in the Book quoted in the Margin, a seven fold
error more especially has miscarried the Authors, (though men otherwise of
Learning and Piety) first in mistaking the word Law. They seem to take the word
Law to signify only the agreements, pactions and rules established by mutual
consent betwixt Prince and people, and make this only to be the ground of
subjection and of commanding. So that what is beyond it, is no way obligatory
either to be performed or suffered under, farther then necessity and the want
of power to resist does enforce. But they forget that there is another and
superior Law, viz. that of God's Sovereignty, oftentimes appointing an Invader
or an Usurper, or a Tyrant to rule for the punishment of a people. Whose will
only is the Law, and whom God will have obeyed by all subjects in things
lawful, and not resisted in things unlawful. So he appointed Nebuchadnezzar,
Jer. 25.15. not only to rule over the Jews, but over all the Nations there
mentioned, and they are enjoined to obedience unto him. So Hos. 13.11. Hos.
13.11.
Jeroboam and the following Kings over the ten Tribes, in his wrath, as himself
says; or even over all Israel, as Saul, who is understood to be pointed at in
that Text. And of their Kings it is expressly said, they should only be able to
cry out in that day, which, by their practice, 1 Samuel 8.18.
may be understood, that they should be allowed to do no other. For else, why
joined they not with David, or why did not David himself resist him, but always
fled from him? And the punishment of all those subjects that rebelled in the
ten Tribes may infer, that though their Princes were both Usurpers and Tyrants,
ruling by will, and not by Law, yet it was not lawful for their subjects to
resist them. Which I extend not further here, than to show their first mistake,
viz. That Law may be, not the municipal Laws of any particular place, but the
Supreme Law of God, touching the subjection and non-resistance of subjects
toward their Princes. So in the Roman Emperors, whose will was Law, (for they
permitted what they would only to be in force, and overawed the Senate, whom
they were obliged to act by, and for form-sake did) and yet even to Nero, one
of the worst of them, Romans 13.
the Apostle enjoins absolute subjection to all inferiors. And this Supreme Law
of subjects not-resistance, is signified by the Author of all government, in
his own word, by rule, and by example. By rule, Prove 24.21.
Fear God and the King, and meddle not with them that are given to change.
Where the word of a King is, Eccles. 8.2.
there is power, and who may say, What do thou? Prove. 8.
By me Kings reign, etc. And, Eccles. 8.4.
I counsel thee to keep the Kings commandment, and that because of the Oath of
God. These in the Old. In the New Testament, Matthew. 22.21.
Give unto Caesar the things that are Cesars, says our Savior. And, Let every
soul be subject; he that resists, Romans 13.
resists the Ordinance of God, says the Apostle. And, Submit your selves to
every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake, 1 Pet. 2.13.
whether to the King as supreme, etc. says the Apostle Peter. Tit. 3.1.
And, Put them in mind to be subject to principalities and powers, etc. 2. By
Examples of all we read of that were godly in the Old Testament. And in the
New; of Christ our Lord, who, though free, yet, lest he should offend, Matthew.
17.27.
paid where none was due. Of the Apostles, and of all the primitive Christians,
as we saw above. This therefore is their first mistake, not minding a more
superior Law of subjection, then, that of particular Nations.

SEECT. 2. Tyranny.
THeir second is about the nature of Tyranny. They say; it is not Gods
Ordinance, and therefore not 'commanded to be obeyed by the Apostle, Romans 13.
nor by reason, because there is no rational tie by Law; they are a terror to
the good, and tend to the subversion and Religion, Laws, and Liberty. But first
they should remember, that although a moral evil in any kind be not Gods
Ordinance, yet the application of it may, and often is Gods Ordinance. As the
setting of Satan to exercise his malice upon men, and upon his own elect
sometimes for their trial and humiliation, as he did upon Job; and the setting
up a King in his wrath, Job 1.
as we saw above; and the setting of Pharaoh over the Israelites, to whom he
gave no power of resistance, though they were not properly subjects. Secondly,
though Tyranny be not Gods Ordinance, yet the Subjection to it is his
Ordinance. Was not the invasion of Caesar, and reign of Caligula, Nero, and
others, a Tyranny, and yet the Apostle says, Obedience to it was Gods
Ordinance, and for their good. Government is, though tyrannically exercised,
which good there is almost in all Tyrannies. Yea and as was said before,
Government Tyrannical is Gods Ordinance by way of punishment and animadversion,
he being Gods Minister to execute wrath, even Gods wrath, Romans 13.
not only upon them that do, but those that have done evil; as also for the
trial of the faith and patience of his Saints for well-doing. That the Trial of
their faith, 1 Pet. 1.
which is much more precious than of gold, may be found glorious. This was the
saying of Tamerlane, Tamerlane
that most horrid Tyrant, but yet a truth; Interrogatus aliquando ab h^mine
Genuensi cur tanta crudelitate uteretur? Commotus ac veluti furens d storta
facie ac spirantibus ignem oculis, Aeneas Silv. in descript. Asiae Refer.
Bucholcer. Chronol. An. 1398.
respondit; Tu me hominem esse arbitraris? falleris, Ira Dei ego sum, and orbis
vastitas. Who being asked by a friend why he would be so cruel? He, being moved
with the question, and in a rage, his countenance distorted, and h^s eyes
flashing fire, answered; Do thou think me a man? thou art deceived: I am the
wrath of God, and the vastation and destruction of the world. Tyranny therefore
in this sense explained, is oftentimes Gods Ordinance. This is their second
error.

SECT. 3. Ground of Non-resistance.
THe third fundamental one, is their mistake of the ground of Non-resistance,
or patience, which they make to be only lawful power, and legal commands,
(taking still lawful and legal in their former sense also, according to
particular and municipal Laws.) But this, as it is a dangerous, so it is a
false position. For the true ground of Non-resistance of subjects, is first the
the nature of order; and secondly the prohibition of Gods Ordinance.

First, Order requires, that each keep his place, unless Author of order, which
is God himself, as Ehud, Barak, Jahel, and others were, Judge. 3. chap. 4.
in which case they were not subjects; as neither were the Israelites thieves,
Exodus 12.
when they borrowed the goods of the Egyptians and restored them not; nor
invaders of other men's inheritances in seizing upon the Land of Canaan; Josh. 4.
because in these cases they had the order of the God of order. Neither had
Abraham been guilty if he had slain his son, as he was not guilty in intending
it, for the same reason; but these are not for imitation. Now then, order
natural is, Romans 13.
That every soul be subject, and do not resist the higher powers, that is,
those that are higher than he in his own rank and place, for that tends to the
reproach of the God of order, and to the confusion of the whole body, if the
members will not be ruled by the head, whilst a head. As when an Army will not
be commanded by their superior Officers; or the inferior Orbs oppose themselves
to the motion of the higher ones.

The second ground of non-resistance in subjects is Gods Ordinance, who has so
enjoined, that every soul should be subject to the higher powers, Romans 13.
so long as they are higher, and in possession of power by right, either from
man or God, by special dispensation; those that by such dispensation are under
them, are to be subject. So the Apostle Peter, 1 Pet. 2.13.
Submit your selves to every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether to
the King as Supreme, etc. And, Put them in mind to be subject to principalities
and Powers. Tit. 3.1.
And this not only to the good and gentle, or to those that command just
things, and maintain Religion, Laws, and Liberties; but even to those that are
froward, 1 Pet. 2.18, 19, 20.
and that do afflict for well-doing. For so the Apostle, speaking to servants,
which by proportion holds unto subjects; both because every Master is a
Magistrate, but especially because the ground of non-resistance here, is not
the lawful power he had, neither as to the obtaining of it (for he might take
his servant by praedation, pyracy, or other unlawful ways) nor the lawfulness
of his commands (for the Apostle supposes the Masters to be such as punish for
well-doing) in which case, God did never give direct power to command, though
he have given indirect power for the trial of his servants faith and patience.
The Apostle, after he had required subjection to the King, and others under
him, 1 Pet. 2.18, 19, 20. explained.
in every Ordinance and command, comes in the same chapter unto servants with
the same precept, but with this further explication, which belongs to both,
that this subjection should be to the froward, that is, to the wicked, and for
not doing things they commanded against ^od; for so the sense must be also. The
words are: If a man for conscience toward God endure grief, suffering
wrongfully. You see it is ^ods Ordinance not to resist, though he suffer
wrongfully, that is, for things wherein there is no direct right to command;
which is the same with that of our Savior, Resist not evil, Matthew. 5.39.
explained.
but whosoever shall smite thee on the right cheek (which sure he has no right
to do) turn to him the other also. Which is to be understood especially with
reference unto Superiors, and comparatively, that is, rather than resist. Plead
a subject may, as Paul did, Act. 16.37. chap. 22.25.
against oppression of Magistrates, resist he may not, because God has in so
many places of his Word ordained otherwise; but least of all by arms, and in a
public way. What cases may fall out, wherein subjects may be no subjects, they
are very rare, and are spoken to elsewhere in this Treatise; but are far from
our case in this Nation, and so concern us not.

SECT. IV. A State, a Parliament, or inferior Magistrates.
THe fourth mistake of the former Authors, is, that they distinguish in this
question betwixt a Parliament, or State, or inferior Magistrates, and private
persons; granting defense unto the one, though denied unto the other, and so
would avoid the Scriptures as well as Reasons prohibition, not to resist the
higher powers. But first, they say, that a private person is not prohibited
resistance, but for want of strength, so not for conscience sake; a vile
position. If the power in a Parliament, or State, or inferior Magistrates, be
derived from a Superior, they have no power to use it against him, for it is
his, and theirs only by concession from him; nor is it conferred on them, but
with that intention for his service, not his opposition. If they use it against
him, it must be by some other superior power that has conferred other powers
upon them (and that must be some visible one too) for their very esse and
being, as such, a Parliament, State, or Magistracy, is wholly dependent from
him, who conferred those powers upon them. This for Reason. Then for the
Scripture they would so elude, by saying, That it does not forbid the Senate to
resist, if it did prohibit private persons, because neither Paul nor Peter
wrote to them, not being Christians. We must note, that the Apostle, Romans 13.
forbidding every soul to resist the higher powers, as being the Ordinance and
order of God, by and among men, 1 Pet. 2. explained.
must mean according to the known practice of those times, whether by Law, or
Custom, or Will of the Prince. Now if the Law did enable any to resist, as the
Senate or other, why then that is the higher power, for resistance is by the
Sword, Note.
and it is the higher power only that bears the sword; and so such resistance
should not be resistance to, but an execution of the higher power. If the Laws
formally or really gave no power; then, by this prohibition of the Apostle,
they could not resist, because none might resist the higher power. He speaks
distributively, every soul, that he might be understood the more
comprehensively, all together. And he speaks indefinitely, without restraining
or excepting, lest any should plead exemption. What the Senate did against that
Prince, under whose government they were, when the Apostle wrote to the Romans,
viz. Nero, by proclaiming him an enemy to the Commonwealth, proscribing of
him, and decreeing he should be punished more majorum: And what their power, or
the foundation of it was, and what their case, is not much material for us to
query; seeing the constitution, or at least the practice of their State and
ours, as they do, so they ought to differ, as much as Heathenism and
Christianity. And this for their fourth mistake, in placing any difference
betwixt inferior Magistrates and private men, in case of resistance beyond the
Laws, for in that respect they are but private men, as genera and species
subalternae respectu superiorum. But from the Thesis of States and inferior
Magistrates in general, they come

SECT. V. The coordinate power of the two Houses in making Laws.
TO the Hypothesis, and in particular, in reference unto the Government of this
Nation. They say, That the King is not wholly supreme, because as he has a
negative voice, so also each of the Houses of Parliament, and that he cannot
make, alter, or abrogate a Law of himself, but that they have a coordinate
power with him.

For answer. It were more for the personal advantage, no Laws, but that they
governed after their own judgment. It is therefore of concession, and a
departing from their advantage to have Laws, and to limit themselves by them,
for the better satisfaction of their subjects. Now although it be truly
affirmed by a present and reverend Pen, Dr. Sanderson L. Bishop of Lincoln.
Preface to B. Usher of the right of Kings, page 4.
That the justice of succession is the only right and proper foundation of
Government; wherein he was foregone by him, who says of succession, D. Hen.
Savilius praefat. ded. R. Jacob. prefix. operib. J. Chrysostom. Gr.
Quod si cui leve videatur, sciat eam rem tanti apud majores nostros fuisse
ponderis, ut non prius justum and legitimum Normannorum in Anglia imperium
fuisse arbitrarentur, quam Mathildis Davidis soror Henrico primo enupta regiam
nobis sobolem daret, ex antiqua regum Saxonicorum stirpe derivatam. Which
Succession (says mine Author) if it seem a small matter to any man, he must
know, that it was of so great weight with our Ancestors, that they never
thought that the Government of William the Conqueror, and the Normans, was just
and lawful, until Mathildis the sister of David ( Abnepos.
grandchild to Ethelred the Saxon King) being married to Henry the first,
brought us forth a Royal seed, derived from the ancient blood of the Saxon
Kings. Yet why may we not think, that some of our Princes originally might be
as free as another lately, who had no such such title either of Succession or
Conquest, professes himself to have been in points of Law and Government, Lord
Protectors speech September. 12. p. 11. and p. 13.
until he limited himself. I say (says he) the Authority I had in my hand
being so boundless. Again, my power again by this resignation was boundless and
unlimited as before. All things being subject to Arbitrariness, and a person
having power over the three Nations, page 14.
boundless and unlimited. Again. The Government -- limited me, and b^und my
hands, to act nothing to the prejudice of the Nations, without consent of a
Council, until Parliament, and then limited by a Parliament I did accept it --
I was arbitrary in power. May it not then have been in Princes as it was in
this Usurper and invader of the public Liberties. And indeed the
Coronation Oath seems to imply so much, Coronation Oath. [H. scrips. 24. Apr.
61. die Coronationis, casu non consilio, dum opus recognoscerem.]
wherein among other things the King is asked: 'Sir, will you grant to hold and
keep the Laws and rightful customs which the Commonalty of this Realm (
consuetudines quas vulgus elegerit, His Majesty's answer to the Remonstrance of
May 26. 1642. page 17. and 15.
) whether you expound it, have (or shall choose.) Which words do not imply a
force upon the King, It is for the ease of Princes, and satisfaction of
Subjects, that that unlimited power given by God to Princes, is bounded in all
places by Laws, with their own consent. Dr. Sandersons preface to Dr. Usher, of
the right of Kings, page 12.
but a desire of his engagement. Therefore the choice of Laws being not the
Princes, but the Peoples advantage and privilege, is left unto them, not as
implying a coordinate power, but a concession of liberty, ( not now to be
changed, because established both by Law and Oath) yet so, that the King
reserves to himself the power of a negative voice, Negative voice.
and of refusing to pass their Elections into Laws if he like them not. If it
be said, one house to the other, but not in order to the King, because he does
not propound Laws unto them, (his desi^es he may) but they to him. So that
there is no such thing as a negative voice in the Houses about the Laws in
order to the King, it is only in reference of the one House to the other. So
that to speak properly, according to the known practice of the Parliament, the
two Houses seem to have no coordinate share in making Laws, but in choosing
things to be made Laws, the King only making of them; for the Houses
acknowledge, Declar. Parl.
'That they are not Laws till the Royal assent. But I may not correct the King,
who says: in this Kingdom the Laws are jointly made, by a King, Kings answ. to
the 19 proposit. p. 12.
by a House of Peers, and by a House of Commons chosen by the people all having
free votes, and particular privileges: Nor do I, but explain what he must
intend. making of the matter of the Laws belongs to the two Houses; the
conferring of the form, Declar. Parl. in defense of that, May 26. 1642.
and giving them the esse and being of Laws, is from the King only, and so
acknowledged by the Houses, viz. That if he do deny, it is no Law without him;
Script. Reas. sect. 5. p. 64. Kings answ. to 19 Proposit. p. 19.
and so acknowledged by the greatest pleaders for the taking up of Arms. But
secondly, because his Majesty says a little after, We conjure you -- that you
allow us -- our share in the Legislative power, which would be counted in us,
not only a breach of privilege, but Tyranny and subversion of Parliaments, to
deny you. Which implies the other have a share also. I answer, That they have a
share, but derivative, not original, subordinate as subjects even in
Parliament, (for so they call themselves) not coordinate as equals. The wife
has a share in the government of the family, for sure she is more in point of
right relating to the government of it, than a servant; but it is not a
coordinate but subordinate power. The King would not be understood to confute
his Father, Himself, or the Laws. Not his Father, K. James's Law of Free
Monarchies.
who says. That the King is above the Law, as both the Author and giver of
strength thereto. Not Himself, who has several times avowed his Sovereignty,
though not his solitude; his Supremacy, though not his aloneness in government;
who at the time of publishing that answer, had drawn his sword to vindicate his
Sovereinty and prerogative. Nor was it his intent to confute the Law, which
makes him the fountain of justice, as we saw above; and therefore what waters
of power any else have, must needs flow originally from him. Thirdly the King
has said, he is no Lawyer, neither is it necessary that he should so be; if
then his Majesty out of zeal to content his subjects, should let fall any To the
19 Propositions.
expression in that answer of his so much insisted on, that might prejudice his
legal right, it ought not in duty, as it cannot in conscience, be improved
against him, contrary to the known practice of Laws and Parliament. It is true,
the two Houses say in their declaration of November 2. 1642. That the Kings
Sovereignty is in and with the two Houses. That they are the supreme Court,
whose determinations ought not to be questioned by the King. That the Kings
power is a trust from the people. That the two Houses may dispose of any thing,
of the King or Kingdoms. But seeing no Law is produced, a sentence of out
Fleta, above answered, is not sufficient to bottom, in my conscience, so high
assertions. To conclude, All that have share in Legislative power, have it not
equally, the King is acknowledged by the Oath of Supremacy, sworn by every
Parliament man before he sit, to be Supreme over all in these his Dominions.
Neither have they it originally, but by concession and grant, though now
setledly. But though they have this derivative power in Leg^slation, and in
some cases in declaring Law, so it be not against the known Laws; yet have
they none in execution of the Laws, much less the power of the Sword, further
then the King shall grant unto them: For which, though Laws were spoken of,
yet were they never produced. Though the King declare, That there is no power
in either or both Houses, Kings Answer to the Declaration of both Houses, in
answer to his Majesty's last Message concerning the Militia. p. 10.
upon any pretense whatsoever, without our consent, (says he) to raise any
part of the Militia of this Kingdom. Nor has the like been ever commanded by
either or both Houses, since the first foundation of the Laws of this Land. And
though he produce Proclamation of Jun. 18. 1642.
Acts of Parliament for his power, as 7 Edw. 1. and diverse others, together
with the known practice of the Nation.

SECT. VI. No means of Preservation.
SIxthly, they object, If no resistance be permitted to a State, Senate, or
inferior Magistracy, then is there no means left of preservation oftentimes,
which is against the Law of Nature, when force is offered, for that teaches and
allows, vim vi repellere, to resist force by force. But this rule is applicable
to particular private men; self-preservation from violence, is as much granted
by the Law of nature to them of right, as to a State, Senate, or Inferior
Magistrates. And what a gap is this to all disorder, if the bellua multorum
capitum should find this to be its strength?

2. Again, Id possumus quod jure possumus, if God and Naz. Orat. 1.
we have only Nazianzen's way of victory left, (...). i. e. I have one
medicine against all maladies, one way to obtain victory, viz. to die for
Christ; Du^lies of the profess. of Aberdeen to the Br. Answ. dupl. 2. n. 12.
Matthew. 26.
which he spoke, when in the time of Julian's persecution, the Christians were
more in number, and stronger of hand than the Heathens. Our Savior could have
prayed for twelve Legions of Angels, but he had no means to save himself from
ruin. Neither had the ten Tribes, when Jeroboam and others oppressed them; for
the means of resistance which they used proved at all no remedy; nor had the
Kingdom of Juda, 2 King. 16.
when mancipated and made subject by Ahaz unto the King of Assyria, which it
seems God owned; for afterward when his Successor, and the posterity of that
generation, rebelled under Hezekiah, 2 King. 18.
they smarted for it, and confessed it; though afterward, upon a barbarous
demand, they had a just cause of defense against him. All conveniences have
their inconveniences. In a free Monarchy, there is more safety, but there is
danger of some oppressions. Matthew. 19.
If the case be so with the husband and wife, free state. Resp.
First, capiat qui capere potest, those who are free may do so; but we are
obliged even by natural b^rth-right to this subjection, 24 H. 8. c. 12.
as the Act of Parliament says, and to the Laws of a free Monarchy. But
secondly, Hom. I^. B. Arist. Eth. l. 8. c. 12. Plat. de Regno. Plutarch. de
unius in Rep. Domin. Tom. 2.
I say with Homer, Aristotle, Plato, Plutarch, and other Ancients, and Modern,
yea, and with God himself, (who never governed his people any other way, not by
Aristocracy, or a popular State, but by some One, either temporary, as the
Judges were, or permanent, who according to the Laws exercised sole government,
even Samuel himself) that it is both the greatest safety, as well as the
greatest Honor, not only to a Church, but also to a Commonwealth, Isa. 49.
that Kings should be its nursing fathers, and Queens its nursing mothers. Quod
enim praestabilius est, Plin. Panegyr. Trajan. d^ct. a principio.
aut pulchrius munus deorum, quam castus and sanctus and diis simillimus
princeps. For what, says mine author, can be a more profitable or honorable
gift from heaven, than a moderate, religious, and God-like Prince, etc. But of
this elsewhere. But to be sure, Note.
after God did establish a settled government among his people, it was that of a
Monarchy, and that a free one too, as Ut humana gubernatio divinae quam
simillima sit. Ficin. Arg. in Plat. de Regno. 3.
coming nearest to the image of his own government. Lastly, It is very rare, if
at all truly to be exemplified (except perhaps in Caligula or Nero) that a
Prince will endeavor the ruin of the Commonwealth; of the Government indeed
he may, but not of the Commonwealth; for then, over what shall he reign, and
whom shall he govern? King John King John.
would have subjected the Kingdom to the Pope, as Ahaz did his unto the King of
Assyria; but both of them thought they did it to preserve, 2 King. 16.
not only their own interest, but also their Kingdoms, which they conceived
would be in peril to be ruined else. This for their sixth mistake.

SECT. VII. This will tempt Princes to become Tyrants.
I Come now to the last, viz. That if Kings do know their subjects are so
principled, as not to dare in conscience to resist; no, nor the State or
Parliament, it will open a wide gap to Tyranny and all oppression. But first,
it is certain, that God set up this Government Roman Emperors did know, that
the Christians were principled not to resist, both by the Scriptures, Justin.
Mart. Apol. 2. Tertul. Apologetic.
and their profession and practice; insomuch that Julian jeers them for it, and
says, they must turn the other ear. Yet Christ, who gave this precept, and the
Apostles, who also exemplified it, did foresee what ill use might be made of
it, but not so bad as of the contrary, viz. the permission of resistance.
Thirdly, Some Princes that knew their absoluteness, and professed it in
reference to accomptableness James for example; Law of Free Monarchies, Edit.
Land. 1616. page 200, 201.
Their obedience (the subjects) I say (says he) ought to be to him (their
lawful King) as to Gods Lieutenant in earth -- acknowledging him a Judge set by
God over them, having power to judge them, but to be judged only by God, whom
to only he must give count of his judgment -- following and obeying his lawful
commands, eschewing, and flying his fury in his unlawful, without resistance,
but by sobs and tears to God, etc. But yet in the same work he says, Law of
Free Mon^rch.
Albeit I have at length proved, that the King is above the Law, as both the
Author and giver of strength thereunto; yet a good King will not only delight
to rule his subjects by the Law, but even will conform himself in his own
actions thereunto, etc. So this Prince. And why should we think, that the
Author of such power, putting this consideration into the heart of him, does
not the same to fourth answer to the objection some would give from the
practice of Princes themselves, both Ancient and Modern, who might seem by
assistance to subjects to have thereby declared, that though subjects may not
resist, yet may they call for help of other Princes, as the case may stand. And
that the reason of the difference is, that in calling for aid to other Princes
no order is broken, being those powers are coordinate, though not in the same
dominions, and not subjects. And that one end and use of the power of Princes
is, that besides the protection of their own people, they might be the Lord's
Captain for the relief of other of his people, and has so in all ages been put
in practice, though sometime with not so desirable success; causes, and
carriages, and divine Providence swaying otherwise. But because this answer
does necessarily imply the lawfulness of resistance, indirectly, and by
consequence, for they are obliged to assist such help, therefore I shall not
rest upon it; but add to the former replies another answer, viz. That he who
has established these bounds to the Mount, Exodus 19.
that the people break not through, does also by his providence so rule the
hearts of Princes, which he has in his hands as the rivers of water, Prove.
21.1.
to turn them as it pleases him, that the thunder and lightning shall not
break out upon an obedient people; or if it do, it shall work together for
their good, Romans 8.
even the trial of their faith and patience, 1 Pet. 1.
that they may be found for praise, and honor, and glory, at the appearing of
Jesus Christ. Let no man therefore say, this is a putting the sword into the
hand of Princes to destroy their people, for then so did Peter, even in those
times when Masters had power of life and death; yet he bids them not to resist,
1 Pet. 2.
no not for conscience sake, though they were afflicted for well-doing. He
says indeed afterward, Who will harm you, if you follow that which is good?
Parallel to that of Paul, Paul expounded by Peter.
He is the Minister of God for good unto thee; that is, by institution: but if
he prove otherwise, yet he is Gods Minister to try our graces, to correct our
vices. We should believe God will stand by his own Ordinance in public, as he
does in those private ones betwixt wife and husband, betwixt servant and
master, so betwixt subject and Sovereign, though he suffer oppressions for just
causes in all. 6. And further, as none of the pleaders for resistance would
have their own subjects, wives or servants, do it to themselves by force,
unless in some personal acts of violence, to restrain them at the present from
some sudden attempt, so neither ought they admit it in themselves unto their
superiors. 7. And lastly, the contrary being known unto subjects, will open a
more wide gap to sedition and rebellion, by how much less wisdom, and more
temptations and inclination they have to change than Princes; it is mobile
vulgus. I conclude this with that Tetrastich, touching the Legion of 6666
Soldiers, Venant. Fortunat. Carminum. lib. 2. Carm. 15. Biblioth. patr. To. 6.
edit 1618. part. 2.
that without resistance suffered: Quos positis gladiis, armaret dogmata Pauli,
Nomine pro Christi dulcius esse mori.
Pectore belli gero poterant qui vincere ferro,
Invitant jugulis vulnera chara suis.
Rejecting swords, arms of St. Paul they take,
That sweet it is to die for Jesus sake.
And they who might by force have overcome,
Invite unto their throats the Tyrants doom.
Wisdom heweth her self out seven pillars, Prove. 9.1.
so has her opposite, which being ruined, the fabric wholly sinks; Script.
and Reas. for defensive Arms.
this, and such books I mean, which run chiefly on the former reasonings.

SECT. VII. Of obedience to Usurped Powers.
ANd now for conclusion of this first part of the civil controversy, these
Cautions may be noted. First, That our dispute concerning the war being such as
has been showed, Cautions concerning the premises. 1. What may be done under
illegal power.
does not impede, but that we may under even an illegal power be instrumental
for the prevention of public ruin, and for the preservation of the being of
a Nation: provided that he do it without all engagement or real efficacy to the
upholding of the usurpation. The reason is, that such things the lawful
Magistrate ought, were he in place, to do; and is presumed in reason willing to
have them done. Such as are, 1 the preservation of Religion, 2 execution of
Justice according to Law, 3 suppression of Tumu^ts against Law, 4 and
opposition of foreign enemies, properly so called. Although for my self, I
have not acted, though empowered, in any of them, that I know of, except
appearing once to understand the matter, when in effect I did declare against
it, and never appeared after. Again, it impedeth not (under correction) but
that unto irregular powers may be yielded such impositions, 2. What may be
suffered.
as the denial whereof would bring apparent ruin, and the solution whereof no
way recognize the authority exacting. Such, I suppose, was the obedience, that
Jehoiadah and other loyal subjects to the King, 2 King. 11.
rendered unto Athaliah, during those six years of her usurpation; and of some
of David's friends, 2 Samuel 15.
in the time of Absalom's rebellion.

And thus I have rendered an account of the motives of my access and recess to,
The conclusion of the first Argument.
and from the civil Controversy. I shall conclude it, with that place out of
the Doctrine of the Church of England, wherewith I was so much affected; it is
this: Though God does oftentimes prosper just and lawful enemies, Homil. of
disobed. part 4. p. m. 300.
which be no SVBJECTS, against their foreign enemies, yet he did NEVER LONG
prosper subjects against their PRINCE, Note.
were they never so great in AUTHORITY, or so many in NUMBER.

The End of the First BOOK.
RETRACTATIONS AND REPENTINGS. The Second BOOK. Of the Church Controversy.
CHAP. I.
Of Independency.
SECT. I. The occasion of the Authors Lapse into it.
AS touching the other Controversy, viz. about Church Government, and my
prolapsing into Independency, the Occasion was one, the Motives another. The
Occasion was, 1. The occasion.
that being by means of the former actings constrained, as I thought, to leave
the place of my employment, Cambr.
remaining idle (upon the matter) in that, London.
then, (sentina malorum) common-shore of corrupt opinions, I fell into that
snare. Often since reflecting on that of Solomon, Prove. 27.8.
as a bird that wandreth from her nest, ^o is a man that wandreth from his
place, obnoxious to every snare of the fouler, to every bolt of the shooter. I
have known several formidable examples in the Ministry of those, who, not
without very probable g^ounds, and weighty advice, have receded from their
places; provided, that they could eat their bread in them (though perhaps but
course) or not overpowered with other temptations or distractions.
Considerable are the words of Calvin to this purpose, Ita respicienda est
vocatio tua ut ab omnibus avocamentis sensus tuos omnes avertas. In Epist. ad
Philip. cap. 2. 21.
Licet alibi opulentius vivere: At Deus te alligavit Ecclesiae, quae tenuitur
modo te alat. Alibi plus honoris; sed eum tibi locum attribuit Deus, in quo
humiliter vivas. A ibi salubrius coelum, aut amoenior Regio, sed hic tibi
statio ordinata est. Optares tibi cum humaniore populo esse negotium: offendit
te vel ingratitudo, vel ferocitas, vel superbia: denique cum genio and moribus
Gentis minime convenit. Atqui luctandum est tibi tecum, and vis quodammodo
contrariis votis est afferenda, ut spartam quam nactus es, colas. Which passage
truly, I left un-Englished; but remembering it may do some good unto the The
Wives of Ministers.
weaker sex, it is this,. Thou art so to observe where God has called thee,
that thou must shut thine eyes from all enticements thence. Elsewhere thou
may live more plentifully, but God has bound thee to a Parish, which will
but keep thee sparingly. There is more credit to be had else where; but God
has assigned thee a place, wh^re thou must live obscurely. The air is better
at such a place, and the Country far more pleasant; but here thou are appointed
Sentinel. Thou could wish thou had to deal with a better natured people;
thou art troubled at their ingratitude, at their rudeness, at their pride and
insolency; in a word, thou can not away with the spirit an^ disposition of
the people. But thou must wrestle with thy self, and offer a kind of force to
all opposite affections, that so thou may adorn that Spouse to which thou art
engaged. Th^s far there. But the Sauce is not all Vinegar. He therefore adds in
the same place. Idem. ibid.
Eatenus concedendum est Ecclesiae ministris sua quaerere; ut non impediantur a
quaerendo Christi Regno: sed hoc modo, jam non dicentur sua quaerere, quoniam a
praecipuo scopo aestimatur vita hominis. Thus far (says he) it must be granted
unto Ministers to seek their own, so as they may not be hindered from seeking
the Kingdom of Christ. But on this account, they are not now to be said to se^k
their own, because we are to judge of a man's way by the scope and end he aims
at. Thus he. Conc. Nice Can. 16.
And the Council of Nice ^ath this Canon. Ne de civitate inferiori ad majorem
Ecclesiam transire quis ambiat, sive Episcopus, sive etiam alius Clericus. That
no man, be he Bishop or other Clergyman, should endeavor to go from a meaner
to a greater place or people. Council. Trid. Sess. 3. sub Jul. 3. Can. 5.
And there is reason for it, seeing it is seldom that he can sine magno suo and
Ecc^esiae incommodo gregem sibi concreditum relinquere, ac non sine Episcopalis
dignitatis diminutions: Leave the flock entrusted to him, without great
inconvenience both to himself and them, and without disgrace to his ministerial
function, Psalm. 92.
as the Council of Trent has it. But to return. God has promised to keep us
in all our ways, whilst we are in our way, 2 Samuel 11.1, 2.
we are under protection. Now, as was employed above, this degree of spiritual
fornication, is occasioned sometime as the other was in David. Desidosus erat.

The hand, that is not busy, will
Object the head to wandering still.
This for the occasion of my Lapse.

SECT. II. The Causes Privative.
BUt the Causes were, as in the former Controversy, partly general and
privative, partly positive and particular. The general was, that, as I had in
the former, through zeal without knowl^dge resisted the Spirit of God, so I
committed here the same error upon the same grounds, against the Word of ^od.
For why may I not call it the Word of God, which was first in it self a truth,
and that one of main concernment; and then spoken, when I was leaving my
relation, and, as it were, at Farewell (when words use to be of most weight)
and lastly uttered by Dr. Laud Arch-bish. of Cant. my honorable Lord and
Master.
one, whose place was in solemn manner to declare it. Although his person
should have been as bad as his; who prophesied, being the Joh. 11.51.
High Priest. It was this, viz. An Admonition to adhere unto the Church of
England, without turnig unto the right hand or unto the left. To which most
Sovereign counsel, if the Author's self, did not in all things correspond (as
some have published) he had therein, no servant of me; and yet he did confer
upon me no common favors. By virtue whereof I enjoyed the benefit of the best
part of my education, and preparation for the Ministry. Unto whom, living or
dead, I have not returned evil willingly. But on the contrary, being
solicited, and that with some kind of intermination, to be, and afterward
cited, as a witness against him, I appeared not. When the Lord Cromwell in Henry
the eighth's time, Fox Acts and Mon. in the life of Cromwell
was glaned at by one, for having been servant unto Cardinal Wolsey, he not
only did acknowledge it, but professed also his grateful memory of the
benefits he received from him. Because his Lordship may have with some, though
not meriting, the like resentment with the Cardinal. This for the occasion and
cause privative.

SECT. III. Causes Positive.
THe Causes Positive. First, 1. Of Recess from the Church.
I took offense at some things in the Church, in the Assemblies, the Worship,
and the Discipline; neither perceiving the beam in my own eye, nor the beauty
of that Spouse, that seemed black, Cant. 1.4, 14.
but was comely in the eye of Christ; no, nor the deformity of the Concubine,
that was but painted over. An adulterous spirit sees beauty in any, but his own
wife.

Next, 2. Of Access unto Independency.
I was taken (not undeservedly) with the good gifts and preaching that I
perceived in certain of the Independent way. And I did not well apply then,
what I had sometime done, viz. To mark those that caused divisions and
offenses, Romans 16.17.
contrary to the doctrines which I had received, and avoid them; because they
that are such, serve not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own bellies; and with
sweet preaching (so Mr. Tindal) and flattering words, deceive the hearts of the
Innocents. But the main was, a love to that beauty of holiness, in Order and
Ordinances, which they predicated and spoke so much of. Now, Aug. de utilit.
cred. cap. 1^.
Quis non his pollicitationibus non alliceretur, praesertim adolescentis animus
cupidus very. Who would not have been inveigled with these promises, especially
the mind of a young man thirsty for truth? As Austin once of himself, in
refeference unto the Manichees.

SECT. IV. Of the Contents of Independency, and in particular of the second and
third of them, viz. congregation, and non subjection.
The Ingredients of Indep. coll g ble out of the Apologetic. Narration of the
5. Br.
BUt to come nearer, and to particulars. There are three things in Independency
especially. First, separation, viz. from full and constant fellowship and
communion with the Parochial Assemblies. Secondly, Congregation, or collecting
and constituting themselves into another body. Lastly, Independency and
assuming or usurping of entire Ecclesiastical power into that body, so as to be
judicially and of right, subject unto none other; which is the esse and (...),
of Independency. Of the two latter ( viz. Congregation and non subjection) I
shall speak here, because I shall have occasion of much more large Discourse
about the former, namely, separation. And now for the (...), and that they do
so congregate, that is visible; for they do by a certain covenant constitute
themselves into a distinct body. And that they arrogate an Independency also,
Apologet. Narrat. page 23.
although in words they reject the name, saying, That proud and insolent title
of Independency was affixed unto us: yet in as much as they do in terminis
affirm; first, that any other particular Church has only power to declare non
communion with an offending Church. page 19.
Secondly, that a Classis or combination of Churches have no juridical power
over any particular one. Page 15.
page 17.
Thirdly, that the Magistrates power, is of another nature, though of use over
the Church; does it not follow (They also rightly denying a Catholic visible
Church) unavoidably, that as a Church, and as to Ecclesiastical jurisdiction
they depend on none, and therefore are Independent. That therefore such they
are, as to congregating and Independing, is beyond all contradiction. Now then
for the (...), and their grounds why they are so, to show the unsufficiency of
them, or which is all one, that they ought not so to do, is the next thing to
be evidenced. And it is not so hard, nor needs so long a proof, if we consider
their own grounds already yielded, and the unlawfulness of separation, which
shall, the Lord assisting, be cleared in the consequent, and which themselves
also seem to damn. For we had likewise the fatal miscarriages and shipw^a^ks of
the separation (say they) as Landmarks to forewarn us of those rocks and
shelves they ran upon. Apologetic. Narrat. page 5.
And would God it had done it, for the Independents have split upon the very
same divisions. First, then for their concessions.

If it be true, that all that conscience of the defilements page 6. Concessions
of Independents against Independency.
or of the unwarranted power in Church Governors exercised therein, did never
work in us any other thought, much less opinion, but that multitudes of the
Assemblies and Parochial Congregations thereof, were the true Churches and body
of Christ, and the Ministry thereof a true Ministry. Then doubtless, first,
their habitual Separation from such, (though in some acts rarely they did
communicate with some of them) was ipso facto unlawful, and a Schism evident.
This, the foundation falling, their superstructure of congregating into a body,
and binding themselves to that society (which implies a constant renunciation
of the former Churches) is as drunkenness to thirst; and their arrogating of a
self-sufficient and independent power, is as the fastening their iniquity with
cords of vanity. So that there seems no more needful for this place, then that
ex ore tuo serve nequam, Matthew. 25.
out of thy own mouth thou shall be judged. Do thou confess, that
notwithstanding any defilements in the worship, any usurpation
Church Governors, any page 6.
mixture in the Congregations, thy self constantly, and draw others from the
true body of Christ? Joh. 15.
Are not the branches, when broken off from the true Vine, cut off from the
Quicquid a matrice discesserit, seorsim vivere and spirari non poterit,
substantian salutis amittit. Cypr. de Simplic. prolator. p. edit. Erasm. 1520.
173.
juice, sap, and life of the tree? must they not needs wither, and in the end
be gathered to be burned? I end this with that knock of the Hammer of this
headless Schism, (for they are Independent) St. Austin, Hoc ergo Ticho^ius cum
vehementer copioseque dissereret, and ora contradicentium multis and magnis ac
manifestis sanctarum scripturarum testimoniis oppilaret; non vidit, quod
consequenter videndum fuit: -- Parmenianus autem ceterique Donatistae, viderunt
hoc esse consequens, and maluerunt suscipere obstinatissimum animum adversus
apertissimam veritatem -- quam ea concessa superari ab Africanus Ecclesiis.
Aug. contr. Ep. Parm. l. 1. c. 1.
Independents.
This (that the Church was not in Africa only, 1. their Inconsiderateness.
but diffused through the whole world) when as Ticonius had earnestly and
copiously discoursed; and, by many, weighty and evident arguments of the holy
Scriptures, stopped the mouths of the gainsayers: yet did not see, that which
by consequence did clearly follow. 2. Or their Obstinacy.
On the other side, Parmenian and the rest of the Donatists (the separation)
saw the consequence, and would rather assume a most stubborn resolution against
manifest truth, than by yielding to it, be overcome of the African (I may add
in reference to those we speak of, the English) Churches.

What kind of Independency is here condemned.
I must explain my self. All Independency of Churches is not denied. For then
we must condemn the Church of England, and other reformed, who do not act, as
acknowledging any superior body, on whom they do depend. But according to the
confession of this Church, every particular or National Church, Artic. 34.
has authority to ordain, change, and abolish Ceremonies, or rites of the
Church, ordained only by man's authority; so that all things be done to
edifying. So Article 57 The Queens Majesty has the chief power, -- unto whom
the chief government of all estates of of this Realm -- in all causes does
appertain, and ought not to be subject to any foreign jurisdiction. It speaks
of causes Ecclesiastical. Vindiciae Catholicae, or the Rights of particular
Christian Churches asserted.
Which kind of Independency I have elsewhere sufficiently, if I mistake not,
vindicated. But the Independency here opposed, is that; whereby Christians
being before incorporated as members into Congregations (such as themselves
also acknowledged to be true Christian Churches and bodies of Christ) do read
off themselves, and incorporate into new ones of their own, for the most part
small and inconsiderable. For the detecting further of which error, we are to
note one or two particulars. First, Ecclesiastical power may be lost.
we must distinguish between the original state of a Church, as it might be at
its first collection, and the after-condition of it, and present being. When it
was first gathered it might be free, as was the family of Jethro; Numb. 10.
but not so afterward, when incorporated with another Church. All the several
Heptarchies in this Nation, and many Provinces elsewhere, were once free and
Independent; does it follow they must be so still, or rend themselves from the
Kingdom, if they could, to be so again? By this, the 120 names that were the
Church in the beginning, should still have assumed their first liberty. Act. 1.
For we must note, that Ecclesiastical power, is as well disseasable as civil,
and may be lost (so, as it is not lawful to resume it) and that not only by a
voluntary concession, or providential falling in with other Christians, or
Churches; but even by force also. As if by public Edict, two or more Churches
should be constrained to unite into one. As in England, all the Christians in
one Parish are made members of that Church; and all the Parishes of that
Diocese one Diocesan Church; and all the Diocesan Churches one Metropolitical;
from whence they are aggregated, yea, incorporated into one National Church.
Now being thus joined together by God and good order, it is not lawful for
themselves again to put assunder. This is one of their fundamental errors, A
fundamental error of Independency.
to fancy a reducement of the Churches to their first infancy. Why attempt they
not the same in civil Societies, Commonwealths, and Kingdoms, yea, and
families also? there is the like reason, rule, and example, for the one as for
the other. The strange consequences of it.
And so this flabel of Schism in the Church, shall also be the bellows of
Sedition in the Commonwealth. For if Ecclesiastical original right of liberty
and independency cannot be taken away, neither can Civil; and then the
withholding it is but usurpation, no title; Conference at Hamp. Court, page
82. 1 King. 12.
and then, as there must be no Bishop, so no, etc. King James his inference. To
conclude, Look what right the ten Tribes of Israel had to separate from the
Church of their brethren, and to congregate and incorporate into one of their
own, and to make themselves Independent from any other; the same have these
Brethren. Neither do they seem to have any better, if so good, for there was an
appearing divine approbation of their recess from the Kingdom of Judah, and
their own reason prompted them to think, that this must imply a withdrawing
from the Church also. Now that they became Idolaters, first, that was
accidental. Again, they went not so far, Ezekiel 16.
as utterly to non-Church themselves, for God did still acknowledge them for
his people. Thirdly, the occasion of their separation seems to be more just
from the Church than the Commonwealth, 1 King. 11. and 12.
for by Solomon's apostasy it was filled with all manner of Idolatries. Lastly,
some of those that have begun at Independency, have proceeded as far in re and
deed, if not farther than they. For they have apostatized from all communion
with our Churches, or any Reformed; from thence to Anabaptism; from that to
Quaking; and so not only denying the Lord that bought them, Jude verse. 5.
as the Apostle speaks, but also the whole Scripture, and are become worse,
some of them, than Infidels and Idolaters, even plain Atheists. Whereof perhaps
some instances and examples of this kind might be given, if it were requisite
to name places and persons. By which things, and through their ho^rid
shipwracks by sub-divisions, providence asks the question now, as it did once
in another case of Apostasy from the Church, and their unsuccessfulness
thereupon; Jer. 2.17. Have thou not procured this unto thy self, in that thou
have forsaken the Lord? And, Is it not of the Lord, that the people weary
themselves in the fire for very vanity? And in them is fulfilled that; They
bite and devour one another, Gal. 5.
till they be consumed one of another. And as he said of such Christians of
old: Nullae tam infestae hominibus bestiae, Am. Marcell.
ut sunt sibi ferales plerique Christiani. There are no beasts unto man so
mortal enemies, as are most of that sort of Christians, implacable one unto
another. I conclude this with that of the Father, concerning their Ancestors;
Sic, sic necesse est, ut minutatim secti conscissique despereant, Aug. contr.
Epist. Parmen. lib. 1. cap. 4. in fine.
qui surorem animositatis suae, Catholicae pacis sanctissimo vinculo
praetulerunt. So, so is it just that they should, crumbling and cut in mamocks,
perish and come to nothing; who have before the most holy band of the Churches
general peace, preferred the swelling of their own high stomachs. Which leads
me to the first point of Independency, but last to be spoken to, viz.
Separation.

CHAP. II.
Of the grounds of Separation, with an Examination and Refutation of them. And
first in general.
TOuching Separation, I shall speak first in general, 1. In general.
and then descend to some more special causes of it. In general thus.

It has in it, The evil of separation.
of all the three ingredients of Independency, the most malignity, not only as
it arises from pride, scorn, and hypocrisy (the Sal, sulphur and Mercury of
this subterraneous body) but especially, because it suggests unto the hearts of
the common people that most horrid temptation, that they are not in a way of
life, and wherein they may be saved. This provoked the Apostle so in the like
case, 2 Cor. 5.13. Gal. 1.8, 9. chap. 5.12.
that they thought he was besides himself: And to curse the Authors of Schism,
and wish they were cut off. To declame against them, as those that served their
own bellies. Romans 16.17. 2 Cor. 11.
As false Apostles, and ministers of Satan. Yea, our Savior upon this ground
of separation and scattering of the flock, calls them wolves in sheeps
clothing; Matthew. 7. Joh. 2. 1 Timothy 6.
and thieves and robbers. The Apostle elsewhere, that they are proud, knowing
nothing, doting about questions and strife of words; that they count gain
godliness; and that the root of all this evil is pride, How we may know when
Separation evil. Ephesians. 4.
and the love of money, which is covetousness. That where there is professed,
one God, one faith, one baptism, one Lord, one Spirit, etc. those that persuade
separation from such, are cunning and crafty men that lie in wait to deceive,
with several other the like (...), high detonations and thundrings. Of it, what
the Ancients thought, we shall hear from Austin: Aug. contr. Epist. Parm. l. 3.
c. 2.
Consilia separationis, and inauia sunt and pernitiosa, atque sacrilega, quia
and impia and superba sunt. Thoughts (says he) of separation are vain and
pestilent, yea, sacrilegious, because they are ungodly and presumptuous. Tom.
7. part. 1.
And one half of a whole Tome of his, is on this Argument.

2. But more especially. Five things in the Church, pretended as grounds of
separation.
There are five things in the Church, from whence there might be pretended
ground of separation, viz. the Doctrine, the Worship, the Assemblies, the
Discipline, and the Government. Now there are against them Exceptions both
general and particular. First, generally, in no less than seven accusations.
First, that many things in them are unnecessary. 1. General exceptions against
them.
Secondly, inconvenient, and of ill consequence to the Church. Thirdly, for
their rise but human inventions. Or fourthly, at the best but Apocryphal, not
Scriptural. Yea fifthly, Popish superstitions, and taken out of the Mass Book.
Moreover sixthly, such as are not established by the Laws of this Church and
Nation. Seventhly and lastly, that there is an engagement for the removing or
reforming of them all in the late Solemn League and Covenant.

I might, for answer unto all these, as also to the particular exceptions
against any of the premises, and the matter of them, refer the Reader unto that
elaborate, and, in my judgment, unanswerable work of the learned Hooker. In
which Argument, I may truly say of him, Prefat. in Ecles. polit. n. 2.
as he does of Calvin in reference to his Commentaries and Institutions, viz.
In which, whosoever after him bestowed their labor, he gained the advantage of
prejudice against them, if they gainsaid; and of glory above them, if they
consented. So fully has he therein vindicated the Worship and Discipline of
this Church. Colon. in Compend. Calv. Inst. in prefat.
And therefore, (Quem tu studiosa juventus; Nocturna versate manu, versate
diurna,) To be commended to the diligent perusal of all that love the peace of
this Jerusalem. But because new pens must be apposed to Neoterick Opponents,
and my Argument engages me, I shall speak something.

SECT. I. Unnecessary.
TO begin with the first, viz. That many things in them are unnecessary. For
answer. private men, Private men.
and those in a lower station, to mistake in judging of the motions of superior
Orbs and Intelligences. A man that stands upon the Watchtower (and such are
public persons) sees what those should do, who are beneath him, Ezekiel. 3.17.
and what is necessary, better than a wiser man that is below. The reason is,
that men of inferior place are not assisted with the advantage of so much
information, with the presence and general view of so many things, nor
ordinarily with that measure of the Spirit, (as being to act both in a narrower
and a lower sphere) which God does usually, Public persons.
and as it were pro forma communicate unto men of higher place: who for the
good of mankind, and of his Church, does commonly furnish men according to the
places he calls them unto. 1 S^m. 10.6.
Saul being appointed King, was forthwith endued with another spirit. So the
High Priest, that crucified the Lord Jesus, Joh. 11.51.
uttered a mysterious and most precious Oracle, touching the extent of the
death of Christ, for all the children of God, scattered abroad in all Nations.
And it is expressly added, Being the High priest that year, as representing the
cause. And, a divine sentence (says Solomon) is in the mouth of the King,
Prove. 16.10.
his lips do not transgress in judgment. Now if he assisted the former, and
such like; How much more then is he the Author of those Laws (injoyning what is
necessary in his Church) which have been made by his Saints, endued further,
with the heavenly grace of his Spirit, and directed, as much as might be, with
such instructions, R Hook. Eccles. pol. lib. 3. sect. 9.
as his sacred Wo^d does yield, says my Author. And I may add, and several of
whom have laid down their lives for his truth.

SECT. II. Inconvenient, and of ill consequence.
A Second general Exception against the premises is, that they are
Inconvenient, and of evil consequence; first, scandalous to the weak, occasions
of silencing able Ministers, and of troubling many good people. To the first,
Scandal, what? Romans 14.21, 13. 1 Cor. 8.9.
scandal is not that, which some persons may be offended at, but properly that
which makes our brother to offend and stumble, as it is implicitly described
by the Apostle. Now the things we speak of, are for the keeping of them from
falling, and in the right way. If any will censure before he see and understand
the matter, we must object unto them the Apostles own practice; who did both
circumcise, Act. 16.3. with Gal. 2.3, 5.
and refuse also to circumcise; yea, and sacrifice too, as he saw it made for
more general edification: Though it could not be without offense to some, both
Jews and Gentiles, Act. 21.26.
and seemed unto them scandalous; insomuch that the Apostles at Jerusalem
persuaded him to use certain of the legal Ceremonies, and to sacrifice, for the
satisfying of some that were so prejudiced against him. To the second. 2. Able
Ministers silenced.
That the premises are occasions that some able Ministers not conforming are
silenced: They must remember, that it is not the goodness of the timber, nor
bigness of the piece that makes it useful for the building, but its fitness. If
it be knotty, or crooked, or otherwise unproportionable; a less and of meaner
stuff may do better. When the Apostle says, 2 Cor. 11.
that certain Ministers were transformed into Angels of light, does he not
imply, that they were men both of parts great, and piety very specious; and yet
for the rents that they made in the Churches, calls them the ministers of
Satan; and elsewhere wishes, Gal. 5.
that they were cut off. It is not the skill of a soldier, nor his courage, but
his obedience unto government, that makes him capable of an Office. Metal
without breaking, makes the Horse to cast h^s Rider. And St. Austin, Contra
Parmen. l. 1. c. 1.
when he commends Tichonius the Donatist, as hominem acri ingenio praeditum and
uberi eloquio: himself a man in^ued with a sharp wit, and fluent eloquence;
Romans 16.1^.
would not yet have had him his Colleague at Hippo, for men by sweet preaching
(as was noted before) may cause such divisions in the Church, that the brethren
may be warned to beware of them. And it will lie at their own, and not at the
Churches door, if their Talent have been wrapped up in a napkin. And it had
been better both for this Church and Nation, and for some of our selves
likewise, if, whilst we had such principles, we had been silenced, and asleep
also. To the last, v^z. That conscientious men are, 3. Conscientientious men
troubled.
for their unconformity unto these things, molested and troubled; I answer, And
well they may, both for their own good and others, whom by their example or
persuasion they might mislead: For if God may justly plague his people for
neglecting his good and wholesome Law, Act for the uniformity of Common Prayer.
(in these cases provided) as the Queen and Parliament imply, he will; It is as
good service done to men by penalties, to compel them to their duty in the^e
particulars, as to scourge a child to keep him from the fire. St. Austin being
once of the mind, that Schismatics and Heretics should not be punished; on
better advice, acquaintance with the Scripture, and by experience, Epist, 48.
and 50.
was brought to be of another mind, and wrote two large and elaborate Epistles,
to defend the lawfulness of the use of Laws to that purpose.

SECT. III. Humane Inventions.
THe third general Exception is, against the things we treat of, that they are
inventions humane, and from man only, The light of natural understanding, wit,
and reason, is from God; he it is, which thereby does illuminate every man
entering into the world. Rich. Hook. Eccles. pol. lib. 3. sect. 9.
If there proceed from us any thing afterward corrupt and naught, the mother
thereof is our own darkness, neither does it proceed from any such cause whereof
God is the Author. He is the Author of all that we think or do, by virtue of
that light which himself has given. And therefore the Laws which the very
Heathens did gather, to direct their actions by, so far forth as they proceeded
from the light of nature, God himself does acknowledge to have proceeded even
from himself, and that he was the writer of them in the table of their hearts.
In the second place, How much more then is he the Author of those Laws, which
have been made by his Saints? etc. says that praise worthy Author. When the
Disciples would have had our Savior to put the man to silence who cast out
devils in his name, Mar. 9.38.
and followed him not with them, our Savior rebuking of them, gives us this
useful Maxim in religious matters, viz. That he that is not against us is on
our part. Things not opposing of the Scripture, and intended for, and tending
to the furtherance of Religion, they are not humane notions; but the inventions
of men directed by Scripture in the general touching such things ( viz. 1 Cor.
14.
That all things be done to decency and edification) and guided by the Spirit
of God in such particulars. Observance whereof, rather then opposition thereto,
would represent a Christ's Disciple. The Feast of Dedication of the Temple, was
no injunction from the Lord; 1 Maccab. 4.59. Joh. 10.22.
But so useful an invention of man, that our Lord himself observed it.
Remarkable also to this purpose is the profession of the Learned Zanchy
touching things of this nature. viz. Zanch. Observe. in confess. suam. cap. 25.
Aph. 10, 11. ab initio.
Credo ea quae a piis patribus in nomine domini Congregatis, communi omnium
consensu, citra ullam sacrarum literarum contradictionem definita and recepta
fuerunt, ea etium (quanquam haud ejusdem cum sacris literis authoritatis) A
SPIRITV SANCTO ESSE. Those things (says he) which have been concluded and
received by the holy Fathers, gathered together in the name of God, Canons of
the Church, of what authority.
agreed on by common consent, and without any contradiction to the Scripture,
(although they are not of the same authority with the holy Scriptures) yet I
believe even those things to be from the HOLY GHOST. Thus he. Joh. 14. cap. 15.
cap. 16.
And it is not in vain that Christ has promised his Spirit to his people, to
guide them into all truth.

SECT. IV. Of the Apocrypha.
TO the fourth, that many things in the premises are but Apocryphal, and so not
Scriptural nor obliging. Now Touching the Apocrypha and its injunction to be
read in some parts in the Church, although all the Scripture be not read:
First, which Books in case my self did think as some others do, safer and
better to be left publicly unread; R. Hook. Eccles. pol. l. 5. sect. 20.
nevertheless, as in other things of like nature, even so in this, my private
judgment I should be loath to oppose against the force of their reverend
authority; who rather considering the divine excellency of some things in all,
and of all things in certain of those Apocrypha, which we publicly read, have
thought it better to let them stand as a list or marginal border unto the Old
Testament. And though, with divine, yet as humane compositions, to grant at the
least unto certain of them public audience in the Church of God. And if in
them there happen any speech, that sounds toward error; should the mixture
of a little dross, constrain the Church to deprive her self of so much gold,
rather than learn how by art and judgment to make separation? To this effect
very fitly from the counsel that St. Jerome gives unto Laeta, of taking heed
how she read the Apocrypha; as also by the help of other learned men's judgment
we may take direction. And let me add, that without such directions, Confer.
Hamp. Court. page 61.
King James said well, he would not have all the Canonical Scripture read.

But because some there are, who seem better to relish foreign judgments, than
those of their own Church; Expositio de sacr. libr. dignitate praefix. ante
Biblia Tigurin. sive Leon: Judae.
I shall recite first Bullingers opinion of those Books, and the public
reading of them, one of the Professors of the Church of Tigur; his words are:
Ego vero arbitror, salvo aliorum judicio, istos libros (Apocryphos) rectissime
Hagiographa dici posse, nimirum a sanctis viris de rebus Scriptos sacris --
quos quanquam non fint in Canone Hebraeo, Ecclesia tamen, quia sancta tradunt,
and Canonicis non contradicunt, recipit ac in sanctorum coetibus legit. I do
think, says he, saving other men's judgments, that these Apocryphal Books may
very justly be called holy writings, as being written by holy men touching holy
things: which though they are not in the Hebrew Canon, yet, because they treat
of religious matters, and do not contradict the holy Scriptures, the Church
does receive them, and reads them in the Assemblies of the Saints. Then he
produces the judgment and relation of Cyprian, Cyprian. expos. symb.
or Russinus (for the work is ascribed to both) in his Exposition of the Creed
to the same purpose. Where it is, by the way, to be noted, (out of the Text of
Cyprian or Ruffinus) first, that he reckons the Books of the Old and New
Testament, The Church of England receives the Canon of Scripture according to
the ancient Church.
exactly as the Church of England does. Secondly, that he says, that is
secundum majorum traditionem, and ex patrum monumentis: That it is according to
the tradition of the Church, and out of the writings of the Fathers. Whereby we
see the Church of England follows antiquity in reception of the books of holy
Scripture, more truly than the Church of Rome does. But this obiter, and the
way.

Again, Bullinger cites the judgment of Bibliander, Bibliander.
de opt. genere interpretandi Hebraica, whose words are: Ecclesiasticos libros,
etiam Hagiographa nominant and sancta scripta. Quae etsi non habent idoneam
authoritatem roborandi ea quae in contentionem veniunt, ut Canonici Scriptores,
non tamen rejiciuntur ut Apocrypha, qualis fuit prophetia Eldad and Medad, etc.
-- Ecclesiastici autem l^bri etiam in Scholam and auditoria fidelis populi
adm^ssi sunt, and tam venerandi multis, ut Judith etiam in ordinem canonicae
Scripturae a quibusdam reponatur. Which having the same sense, I forbear to
English. Only he says, that the Book of Judith was by some accounted
Scripture (I suppose he means Origin) which I think may as little claim that
privilege as any other.

Lastly, Bullinger goes over every book of them, and shows the benefit that the
Church may reap by the reading of them. And says, We may better learn the form
of Houshold-government out of Tobit and Judith; and the Ethics or rules of
good living, out of Ecclesiasticus and the book of Wisdom, than out of Plato,
Aristotle, and Xenophon: And the way of a religious Soldier out the Maccabees.
And of the first book of them he says. Ac tanti omnino hic liber est, ut boni
illo non possent citra jacturam carere. That it is verily of such worth, that a
good man cannot without loss be without it. Which is consonant unto that of
King James, speaking of the same book, Conf. Hamp. Court, page 61.
viz. Who showed the use of the Maccabees to be very good, to make up the story
of the persecution of the Jews, etc. And of the History of Bell and the Dragon
Bullinger says: Viderint autem qui eam historiam, pro fabula damnant, quibus
nitantur Authoribus: Ego video Historiam refertissimam esse multiplici fructu
and eruditione. Let them look to it, says he, what Authors they rest upon, who
condemn it for a fable: I observe it to be a History full fraught with fruitful
instructions: And he names what. In a word, his whole discourse on these books
is worth reading. And it is to be noted, that this was with the allowance of
the rest of the Ministers of Tigur, where this book was printed.

Necessit. Reform. page 20. Basilic. Doron.
But the authority of King James is by some Brethren objected against the
Apocrypha, viz. As for the Apocrypha books, I omit them, because I am no
Papist; and indeed some of them are not like the ditement of the Spirit of God.
Thus, say they, the King. But, it seems, time and reading had further ripened
the Kings judgment in that point. For afterward when he upon great occasion
solemnly delivered his judgment, Confer. Hamp Court, second. day confer. p. 61.
e Cathedra, in reference to the satisfaction of his whole Kingdom, this was
the result. His Majesty in the end said; He would take an even order between
both. Affirming that he would not wish all Canonical books to be read in the
Church, unless there were one to interpret; nor any Apocrypha at all, wherein
there was He explains himself presently, in allowing the book of Maccabees,
wherein he acknowledges some errors.
any error. But for the other, which were clear and correspondent to the
Scripture, he would have them read; for else (said he) why were they printed?
and therein showed the use of the book of Maccabees very good to make up the
story of the Persecutions of the Jews, but not to teach a man to sacrifice for
the dead, or to kill himself. Thus far the King, which if the Brethren knew,
they did not well to cover; and if they knew it not, and were not versed in the
most authentical books and writings of this nature, as that Conference is a
special one, they were not fit to deal in such an Argument. So also in the same
place of the same Conference, page 61, 62.
the King opened and defended a passage in Ecclesiasticus, one of the
Apocryphal books, objected against as unsound, and closes all with this salt
quippe to the opposers: What trow ye makes these men so angry with
Ecclesiasticus? by my saul I think he was a Bishop, etc. You see with what
judgment the Brethren have quoted the King against the Apocrypha, and yet as a
crowing argument they insist upon it.

Again, Hierom. Ep. ad. Laetam. Tom. 1.
St. Hieron is also produced as a witness against these books, viz. That he
should advise a Lady, say they, caveat omnia Apocrypha; that she should take
heed of all the Apocrypha. There are several causes of mistaking, and
mis-representing of an Author; as, 1 That men rest on Quotations, Causes of
misunderstanding and mis-representing of an Author.
and read them not themselves. 2 That they understand not the language and
Idiom of the writer. 3 That they weigh not his scope and drift. 4 That they
ponder not the context. 5 That they compare not one place with another. 6 That
they consider not the circumstances, time, place, etc. 7 That they consult not
others that may illustrate him. Then for misrepresenting him. 1 That they make
no bones of it. 2 That they conceit, they shall not be seen by every eye. 3 And
that when they be, they have a brow to bear it, so what they say may serve the
turn at present. It so fares here. For if the Brethren read the place they
quote in Jerome, it is sure they understood not what he meant by Apocrypha.
Erasmus therefore on the place shall teach them. Inscribuntur Petro, Paulo,
nonnulla ipsi Christo, Erasm. in Hierom ^p. ad Laetam. number. 79.
veluti epistola Jesu ad Abygarum regem. They are, says he, ascribed to Peter,
to Paul, and some to Christ himself, as the Epistle of Jesus unto Agborus.
Where you see, that Jerome did not mean by the Apocrypha only the Books joined
with the Old Testament; but those also, yea, those especially, that were
affixed to the New. Again, They did not weigh Jerome's scope; for it was only
to instruct a young Girl in reading in that place, not to show what the Church
might do, or did. Fourthly, They did not compare this passage with others,
where he expresses himself ex professo. As where he speaks of the Books which
bear Solomon's name (but are not his) used to be read in the Church, as
Ecclesiasticus, and the Wisdom of Solomon, he adds; Sicut ergo Judith and
Tobiae and Machabeorum libros, legit quidem Ecclesia, sed eos inter Canonicas
Scripturas, non recipit: sic and haec duo volumina legate; ad aedificationem
plebis, non ad authoritatem Ecclesiasticorum dogmatum confirmandam. Hierom's
testimony of the public reading of the Apocrypha.
As therefore (says he) the Church reads the books of Judith (one of those the
Brethren expressly except against) and of Tobit, and the Maccabees; yet not
counting them among the Canonical Scriptures; so let it read these two Books (
Ecclesiasticus and the Wisdom of Solomon) for the edification of the people,
though not for the establishing the Authority of the Doctrines of the Church.
Where there are three things to be noted. First, that these Books are
Apocrypha. Secondly, That they were read in the Church. Lastly, That they may
be so done.

Fifthly, They suppress the whole sentence out of which they quote that
particle; whence it would have appeared that he did not forbid her absolutely
the reading of them, but that she should do it warily, and with judgment. His
words are: Caveat omnia Apocrypha. Et si quando ea non ad dogmatum veritatem,
sed ad signorum reverentiam legere vo^uerit; sciat, non eorum esse, quorum
titulis praenotantur; multaque his admixta vitiosa, and grandis esse
prudentiae, aurum in luto quaerere. Let her take heed of all the Apocrypha (but
what he meant by them we heard above) but if at any time she will read them,
not for the confirming of the faith of doctrine, but for the reverence unto the
things intended in those writings, let her know; that they are not the works of
those whose name they bear; and that many corrupt things are mixed with them;
and that it is for the riper wisdom to seek gold out of the clay. Thus he. Even
as Paul advises the Thessalonians, to prove all things, 1 Thessalonians. 5. Matthew.
23.3. chap. 16.6.
and hold fast that which is good. So our Savior commands his Disciples to
hear the Scribes and Pharisees; but yet to take heed of their leaven. So Jerome
allows her to read them, but with discretion; without which, 2 Pet. 3.
even the Scripture proves a snare to the weak.

Now, notwithstanding all this, I am of the judgment of St. Hierom, of Ruffinus
(or Cyprian) above quoted, and of the Church of England, touching the nature
and use of the Apocrypha; yet may I not perhaps, oppose the evidence of those
Hieron. in prolog's variis. Whitak. de S. Script. Q. 1. Reynold. de lib.
Apocryph. Junius in Apocryph. Chamier. de Canone. Aliique.
learned men, who have endeavored to prove some of them fictions; yet such as
were intended, and are useful for Consicta sunt enim, sed in hoc consicta, ut
sacrum aliquid significent. Erasm. in epist. Hieron. ad Laetam n. 78.
edification. In which regard, my self not long since heard a great man of the
Separation SAY, (but he could not SEAL it by any evidence, though urged) that
the Common Prayer was Popish; but Romances were useful, though fictitious,
because they express virtue and vice to the height. If so, why then may not
the Apocrypha pass for Religious Romances, wherein the like is performed. Of
one of which St. Jerome. Hieron. prefat. in Judith. Tom, 3.
Accipite Judith viduam castitatis exemplum, and triumphali laud, perpetuis
eam praeconiis declarate. Hanc enim non solum foeminis, sed and viris
imitabilem dedit, qui castitatis ejus remunerator, virtutem talem ei tribuit,
ut invictum omnibus hominibus vinceret, and insuperabilem superaret. Receive ye
Judith (says he) the widow, an example of chastity, and with triumphant praise
publish her with perpetual commendations; for he who was the rewarder of her
chastity, has propounded her to be imitated, not only by women but by men
also. Who gave her also such grace, that she overcame him that was
unconquerable, and prevailed over him whom no man could vanquish. So that you
see, if those writings be useful in the Church, as that noble person said, that
express virtue and vice to the life; and that in the opinion of St. Jerome (no
weakling) some of these books do so; even in that respect they should not be
rejected wholly. And if the fore-quoted Authors please not; the next, I
presume, will, and they are (the Abomination of the Brethrens soul) the
Bishops; but yet in this point, and that is strange, will speak ad salivam, and
to their palate. Viz. in the Admonition prefixed unto the second Tome of
Homilies, done, no doubt, by the same Authors, that the Homilies were, Presat.
in Tom. 2. Homil.
and published by the same authority. In that admonition unto Ministers
Ecclesiastical (and it is a grave and godly one) are these words: And where it
may so chance some one or other (here is room you see) chapter of the Old
Testament, to fall in order to be read upon the Sundays or Holy Days, which
were BETTER to be changed with some other of the New Testament, of MORE
edification; it shall be well done to spend your time to consider well of such
chapters beforehand, whereby your prudence and your diligence shall appear, so
that your people may have cause to glorify God for you, and be the readier to
embrace your labors, to your better commendation, to the discharge of your
consciences and their own. To explain that, they meant all that was to be read,
except the New Testament, by the word Old Testament were needless. Now you see
that the Liturgy, the Calendar, the Rubric, does not so tie the Minister, to
syllables in every thing, but has left something to his discretion and piety,
and particularly in this, the reading of the Old Testament, and (if you
distinguish, ne dum) of the Apocrypha. So much for the fourth head of the
Exceptions, namely, that respecting the Apocrypha.

SECT. V. Of Popery, and the Mass Book.
To the fifth, viz. That the things mentioned do savor of Rome, that they are
Popish, superstitious, and taken out of the Mass Book. matter and form, the
substance and ceremonies, of the Doctrine, Worship, and Government of the
Church of England, is much more ancient than Popery, in the main of it; Yet
there are those that have a starting-hole for this, and a note beyond Ela,
Reas. necess. Reform. p. 63. Instance.
viz. That albeit some of the Rites and Ceremonies now in use, may be mentioned
in sundry of the Fathers, within the first six hundred years after Christ, yet
such mentioning of them is no evidence that they are not Popish, forasmuch as
Popery was in the egg, and the mystery of iniquity began to work, though under
other disguises, and under other names, even in the time of St. Paul himself, 2 Thessalonians. 2.7. 1 Timothy 4.1.
But if Popery be truly defined by St. Paul to be a departing from the faith,
it shall be evident, that these are no Popery. It is prudently uttered by King
James, Conf. Hamp. Court. page 75. Answ.
when the like was before him objected of some of these matters; That no Church
ought further to separate it self from the Church of Rome, (I may add, or from
any other Church) either in Doctrine or Ceremony, than she had departed from
her self, and from Christ her Lord and head. And indeed it is a Popish and
superstitious principle, to take nothing of those Churches that are opposite to
them, which is an issue of their pride and arrogance; R. Hook. Eccles. pol. l.
5.. 68. p. 368. Calv. Epist. ad Socinum. 1549. vid. Et Insti^. lib. 4. cap. 2.
11.
which some now imitate on the other side. Now it must be noted, 'Thot those
that hold the head, the confession of faith, do all join in the root, though
they separate above, and in the branches. Hence, Ecclesiam aliquam manner in
Papatu: There is some Church remaining in the Papacy, says Calvin. Others I
might name, but take Zanchy's (notable) word for all: Nescio quo singulari
beneficio Dei, hoc adhuc boni in Romana Ecclesia servari, nemo non vidit, nisi
qui videre non vult. Quod nimirum sicut semper, sic nunc etiam constans and
firma in vera de Deo, deque persona Domini nostri Jesu Christi, doctrina
persistit. Et Baptizat in nomine Patris, and Filii, and Spiritus sancti;
Christumque agnoscit, and praedicat pro unico mundi Redemptore futuroque
vivorum and mortuorum judice: qui veros fideles secum in aeternum vitam
recepturus, incredulos autem and impios in aeternum ignem cum diabolo and
Angelis ejus ejecturus sit. Quae causa est, cur Ecclesiam HANC, pro Ecclesia
CHRISTI etiamum agnoscam; sed quali? Qualis and ab Osea aliisque prophetis,
Ecclesia Israelis sub Jeroboamo, and deinceps fuisse describitur, nunquam enim
resipuit a suis fornicationibus. That is: I know not by what kind of special
mercy of God, Zanch. ep. dedic. ante confess. suam. Tom. 8.
but so it is, that thus much good remains in the Church of Rome, which every
man sees, but they that will see nothing. Namely, that, as always, The Roman
Church, what remains found in it.
so now, it persists firm and constant in the true doctrine concerning God, and
concerning the Person of our Lord Jesus Christ: And Baptizeth in the Name of
the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost. And does acknowledge and
preach Christ for the only Redeemer of the world, and he that shall be the
Judge of the quick and the dead. Who also shall receive unto himself all true
believers unto eternal life; and who shall reject unto everlasting fire, with
the devil and his angels, all unbelievers and wicked men. For which reason I do
in some sort acknowledge THIS for a Church of CHRIST. But what kind of one?
namely, such as the Church of Israel is described to be under Jeroboam, and
afterward by Hosea and other Prophets, for she never repented of her
fornications. Thus he. Some kind of Church of Christ then, it being; Hence it
follows, first, that all things in Popery are not superstitious; for if a
Church, there must be somewhat of the Spirit of God, and of Christ, in them,
Joh. 1. Joh. 16.
to guide and keep it in these truths. Else why do these Brethren read the
Popish writers, the Jesuits and Schoolmen, as some of them have the best spoak
in their cart from thence, and preach much of their matter and notions to their
people.

The superstition may be either in the opinion that they had of them, or the
abuse they made of them; individuo. As the flesh that had been consecrated to
an Idol, 1 Cor. 8.
even that very flesh might have been bought or eaten, by the strong and those
that knew the truth. As, God be praised, our people do in the things excepted
against; no man putting any confidence in them, but in Christ alone, observing
them only for order, edification, and decency.

Secondly, Reformers; both for preventing offense in respect of them abroad,
and for the regaining of the brethren of this Nation amongst us, misled that
way, as the Apostle says: I become all things to all men, 1 Cor. 9. ad fin
that I might by all means win some. If therefore, what could not be th^n, or
cannot be now, without danger in those respects left off, be retained still;
the doctrine of the Church in the mean time being fully opened and professed;
it is charity, not Popery; and wisdom (godly) not superstition. 'for we must
have respect unto the weak. 1 Cor. 14. Object.
Before we leave this. If it be objected, that the Church of Homily on
Whitsunday, part 3. Homily of Rebellion in several places, and in other
Homilies.
England does seem to hold the Church of Rome the seat of Antichrist, and the
Pope to be his very peson: It is answered, suppose it do so; Rome has
something in it of a true Church; 2 Thessalonians. 2.
else how should Antichrist sit in the Temple of God, which is his Church, if
the seat of Antichrist were not in some respects a Church. And that the Church
of England does acknowledge, that Rome has something of a Church in it; its
retaining the Baptism and Ministry of that Church, its not re-baptizing or
new-ordaining those that come to it from that, 2. The Mass Book.
does plainly show. This for Popery and the Church of Rome in general.
Secondly, for the Mass Book in particular. Cic. Joh. 1. De Justific. lib. 5.
cap. 7. sit tertia propositio. Missale Romans edit. Paris 1787. The Mass Book
against merits.
Let us see whether any gold be in Ennius dung, whether any good thing can come
out of Nazareth, and whether any truth and piety out of the Mass Book.
Bellarmine, who knew its meaning well, and in a cause wherein, if any where, he
should have passed it by, proves out of the Mass Book, that we can have no
trust nor confidence in our own work, and merits for salvation, but only in
the mercy of God. In which, as in the Master-vein, does run the lifeblood of
all Religion. The words are: Collecta in sexagessima.
Deus qui conspicis, quia ex nulla nostra action confidimus. Item Collect.
secreta dom. Adventus. 2.
ubi nulla suppetunt suffragia meritorum, tuis nobis succurre praesidiis. Item
In canone post consecration. in orat. prox. post comemorat. pro defunct. -- de
multi^udine miserationum tuarum sperantib. etc.
intra quorum, nos consortium, non aestimatur meriti, sed veniae quaesumus
largitor admit. That is; first, O God, which see, that we trust in no act
or work of ours. Again; Where we have no help of merits, do thou succor us
with thy assistance. Again, Admit thou us into their (the blessed Saints)
company, who art, not the esteemer of merit, but the vouchsafer of mercy.
Thirdly, It having been often evidenced by Jewel, in defense of the Apolog. and
others.
ours, that our Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and Government, is much more
ancient than Popery, (properly so called) although also usurped in some things
by Papists; what hinders, but as the vessels of the Temple, defiled by
Belshazzar both in drunkenness and idolatry, Dan. 7.
might return to their pristine use; so those things that were Christ's before,
De doctr. Christ. l. 2. c. 40.
but usurped by them, we may, tanquam ab injustis possessoribus in nostrum usum
vendicare; take our own goods out of theevish hands, as Austin, Austin.
of the truths uttered by the Heathen.

But lastly, (because the victory over Goliath was the more remarkable, the last
blow being given by his own sword) we shall retort the argument, viz. 4.
Because the Liturgy destroys Popery and Superstition.
That there ought to be no separation from the Worship and Liturgy, because
whilst the Common Prayer Book is of force, and neither deserted nor
transgressed; Popery, and that superstition on the one hand, as a flood; nor
Anabaptism and Separation, as a rotting distillation, on the other; can ever
come in upon the Church. And for this, though I have neither strength nor
armor, so specious or so massy, as they perhaps may have; yet I shall not
doubt to cast the Gantlet to any Champion of the Philistines. Such was the
judgment of that learned Prince, King James, related to by the Lord Archbishop
of Canterbury, Lord Abbot Archbishop of Cant. Letter, with K. James
instructions concerning Preachers, Sept. 3. 1622.
in these words: His Majesty therefore calling to mind the saying of
Tertullian; Id verum quod primum. (That is true which is first) And remembering
with what doctrine, the Church of England in her first, and most happy
Reformation, did drive out the one, and keep out the other, etc. He had named
before, Popery, Anabaptism, and Separation. I am not ignorant that Sancta Clara
has endeavored to reconcile even our Articles of Religion, with the doctrine
of the Church of Rome. But what communion has light with darkness, 2 Cor. 6.
and what concord has Christ with Belial, and what agreement has the Temple
of God with Idols? The new Jerusalem is four- square, the Harlot sits upon
Circles, ( Apoc. 17.9.
seven hills) can they quadrare circulum? But to return to the former. For
proof (at present) touching Anabaptism and Separation, there is no doubt of
that. And for Popery, the chief points thereof (as opposite unto the Protestant
Religion) are countervened there, as may appear by the Council of Trent, by
Bellarmine, and our Rhemists (the true Interpreters of that Council, as our De
S. Scriptura in presatione. Quia novus Papismus a vetere multum differt, quod
de omni causa Tridentinum concilium statuerit, imprim^s quaeramus, tum hujus
concilii fideliss. interpretes Jesuitas, and nostros etiam Rhemenses; and quia
Bellarminus has causas accurate, tractavit, illum quasi scopum proponemus.
Whitaker has it) if compared with it. To instance in a few particulars. The
first shall be that; Traditiones ipsas -- pari pietatis affectu and reverentia
suscipit and reveretur. That the Traditions of the Church are to be received
with the same affection and reverence, Council. Trid. Sess. 4. decret. 1.
as the holy Scriptures themselves. And so the worship of God may be farced
with them, 1. Traditions.
as well as with the reading and preaching the holy Scripture. Now the Liturgy
assigns nothing to be put into the worship but the Scriptures, either those
that are undoubtedly so, or else such as have been of great veneration and
antiquity in the Church, though not received into the Canon, R. Hook. Eccles.
pol. l. 5. 19.
and which in regard of the divine excellency of some things in all, and of all
things in certain of them, have been thought better to stand as a list or
marginal border unto the Old Testament; yet with this liberty, that where the
Minister shall perceive some one or other chapter of the Old Testament to fall
in order to be read, Admonition to all Ministers Ecclesiastical, prefixed
before the second Tome of Homilies. 2. Intercession of Saints.
which were better to be changed with some other of the New Testament of more
edification; he may do it. As was noted above.

The next may be, the Medium or Mediator of our worship, by whom it is to be
commended unto God. The Church of Rome join in commission with Christ the
blessed Virgin, the holy Apostles, the Angels, and the Saints departed. Our
Common Prayer, as our Savior in another place, Luke 1. Apoc. 5.8. Heb. 5.
shuts out all this crowd, and with the High Priest when he was to offer
Incense, which represented the prayers of the Saints, suffers no man to take
this honor to himself but Christ alone, in the close of the prayers adding this
basis to the support of all, and naming no where any other; and sometime
expressly excluding them by that bar [only] affixed unto Christ through our only
Mediator and Advocate Jesus Christ our Lord. Second Collect in the Letany, and
elsewhere. 3. Merits.


A third, the merit of our prayers and worship. The Papists we know, do
attribute so much to that, such a kind and number of them being said at such a
place, they shall merit the very merits of Christ, and properly deserve a
reward. And that not ex congruo, and of convenience only, but ex condigno, and
of strict justice. Good works (say the Rhemists, On Heb. 6.10.
and prayer and divine worship, is a principal one even with them also) be
meritorious, and the very cause of salvation, so far that God should be unjust,
if he rendered not Heaven for the same. But our Liturgy teaches us, that when
we have offered our alms, our prayers, yea, and have performed the very highest
of divine worship, the celebration of the holy Communion, in the close of all
to say: Thanksgiving after the Communion.
And although we be unworthy, through our manifold sins, to offer unto thee any
sacrifice; yet we beseech thee to accept this our bounden duty and service, NOT
WEIGHING OUR MERITS, BUT PARDONING OUR OFFENSES, etc. and many the like
passages. 4. The Sacrifice of the Mass. Council. Trid. Sess. 6. sub pio 4. c. 2.
A fourth particular shall be the Mass, wherein is pretended that the Bread
after Consecration being trans^ubstantiated into the very flesh of Christ, and
that elevated by the Priest with certain words; there is offered up a real
sacrifice expiatory for the sins of the living and the dead. Non solum pro
sidelium vivorum peccatis, poenis, satisfactionibus and aliis necessitatibus;
sed and pro defunctis in Christo nondum ad plenum purgatis rite offertur. And
again, Can. 1.
Si quis dixerit in Missa non offerri Deo verum and proprium sacrificum,
Anathema sit. That is, In the Mass is offered rightly, not only for the sins,
punishments, satisfactions and other necessities of the living, but for the
dead in Christ also. And, if any man shall say that in the Mass there is not a
true and proper sacrifice, let him be accursed. Contrary to this idolatry,
blasphemy and superstition; In the public form of Administering the Sacrament,
in the Prayer (Consecratory) in our Liturgy, whereby the Bread and Wine is set
apart for that holy use; Prayer before the distribution of the Sacrament.
The entrance is this: Almighty God our Heavenly Father, which of thy tender
mercy did give thine only Son Jesus Christ to suffer death upon the Cross for
our Redemption; who made THERE, BY HIS ONE OBLATION OF HIMSELF ONCE FOR ALL, a
full, perfect and sufficient sacrifice, oblation and satisfaction for the sins
of the whole world, and did institute, and in his holy Gospel command us to
continue a perpetual MEMORY of that his precious death, until his coming again.
Transsubstantiation. Artolatria. Communion in one kind, Council. Constant. Sess.
13.
What should I speak of Transsubstantiation, and of the worshipping of the
Host, whereas the Prayer Book teaches us to believe it is Bread and Wine
still, and to lift up our hearts to worship Christ in the Heavens. The
defrauding of the people of one half of the Sacrament, the Cup; (licet Christus
post coenam instituerit, and suis discipulis administraverit sub utraque specie
panis and vini hoc venerabile sacramentum, tamen hoc non obstante, etc. that
is) though Christ instituted this after Supper, and administered it unto his
Disciples under both kinds of Bread and Wine, yet this notwithstanding; They
forbid the Priest to give it so, under the penalty of Excommunication.

7. Sacram. Corruption of Bapt. etc. 5. Prayer for the dead. Council. Trid.
Sess. 9. sub p. 4. Decret. 1.
The multiplying of the Sacraments, the vitiating of Baptism by superstitious
ceremonies, of exorcising, with Cream, Spittle, etc. All which foul Spirits are
cast out by the Liturgy from our worship, with multitude of others. I shall but
name one more, (that you may tell them on your fingers.) And that is prayer for
the dead. Whereas the Church of Rome it self does teach, that there is no use
of Prayer for the damned, because Purgatorium pro eis tantum esse, qui cum
venialibus culpis moriuntur, Bell. de purgat. lib. 2. cap. 1. ad fin. A wise
distinct^on.
and rursum pro illis qui discedunt cum reatu poenae, culpis jam remissis:
Purgatory is for those only that dye in smaller sins, or in guilt of
punishment, the offense being pardoned. Now our Church excludes the use of
Prayer for any deceased. For those who dye excommunicate, they have no solemn
Burial. And for others who dye in the Faith and Fellowship of the Church, it
prays not; Form of Burial, whilst the earth is cast upon the body.
but first professes its Faith of their happy Resurrection. Forasmuch as it
has pleased Almighty God, to take unto himself the soul of our dear Brother
here departed, we therefore commit his body to the ground in sure and certain
hope of resurrection to eternal life, etc. Then professing against Purgatory,
it says; Almighty God, The Thanksgiving before the last Collect at Burial.
with whom do live the spirits of them that depart hence in the Lord, and in
whom the souls of them that be elected, after they be delivered from the burden
of the flesh, be in joy and felicity. Lastly, it gives therefore thanks: We
give thee hearty thanks, for that it has pleased thee to deliver this our
Brother out of the miseries of this sinful world, etc. Where by the way, let it
not offend, that this form is applied to all. Why the same form is applied to
all that are buried.
For first, it uses the word hope, not knowledge. Secondly, it is applied only
to those who dye visible members of the Church, and not excommunicated. So that
charity does not interpose its private judgment, where the Church has not
pronounced hers. To conclude the Br. must consider, that the Liturgy was
directed on purpose to oppose Popery: as was noted above. His Majesty
remembering with what doctrine the Church of England in her first and most happy
reformation, did drive out the one, and keep out the other, namely, Popery and
Separation, says his Grace of Cant. And thus much in answer to the fifth
general Exception, viz. Popery, Superstition and the Mass Book.

SECT. VI. Of the Non-establishment of the premises by law.
COme we to the sixth, viz. That the doctrine, the worship, the discipline and
government are not established by law in this Church and Nation. This I shall
reply unto in reference unto them all in general first, and then descend unto
the severals. 1. The Authors of the Book entitled, Reasons showing the
necessity of Reformation, etc.
And here, before I come to the matter it self, I must take leave to speak a
word unto these objectors. And it shall be in their own Language; namely, that
they are like to give a sad account unto God; or in a more Authentic one, that
they must look unto it for this their writing, As they will answer before God,
for such evils and plagues, wherewith Almighty God may justly punish his
people, for neglecting this good and wholesome Law, Act for uniformity of
Common Prayer.
viz. the Act 1 Eliz. 1. establishing the form of Gods worship. The obedience
unto which, and other (tending to the settling of Religion among us) has been
so much shaken by the form and appearance of truth and godliness, which their
Treatise has, without the power thereof, seemed to have. This to their
persons. 2. Their scope.
Next for their scope, they express it, not to be a reformation of the things
they except at, but a plain abolition of them; Z^nch. Epist. ad Cardin.
Letharing ib. 2.
whereas our Lord Christ (says the Cardinal approved by a chief man of our
own) did not destroy the Temple, but only purge it. Christus non destruxit
Templum sed repurgavit; ita ecclesiae in quas irrepserunt aliquot errores,
abusus, superstitiones, non sunt convellendae sed repurgandae; So the Churches,
says he, into which some errors, abuses and superstitions are crept, are not
to be plucked up, but purged. But it seems ubi dolor ibi digitus; the Kitchen
of the chief (supposed) Author of that Treatise, is like to be cooler for the
late restitution; having lost the Revenues of a good part of a Bishopric, as
it is said, which he had purchased. And it may be others of these Brethren are
ejected as they had ejected others. For these times are like those. Ruffin.
Hist. eccl. l. 1. c. 21.
Ea tempestate, foeda facies ecclesiae, and admodum turpis erat; non enim sicut
prius ab externis, sed a propriis vastabatur. Fugabat alius, alius fugabatur,
and uterque de ecclesia erat -- praevaricatio erat, and lapsus and ruina
multorum. Similis poena, sed impar victoria; similiter cruciabantur, sed non
similiter gloriabantur, quia dolebat ecclesia etiam illius casum, qui
impellebat ad lapsum. At that time the face of the Church was foul and uncomely
indeed; for not now, as formerly, the Church was destroyed by enemies, but by
her own; One is driven, the other drives him away, and both of them of the
Church. Offenses, and falls, and ruins there were of many. All were like
sufferers, but not all like conquerors. All were tortured alike, but all could
not glory alike; for the Church did lament even his fall, that forced another
to miscarrry, says the Historian.

But to leave the men, and to come unto the matter. 3. Their matter.
The premises are not established, they say, because there is Addition,
Detraction, and Alterations made in them, since the Originals and first
establishment. For Answer, Addit. Substract. Alterat.
persons, private or public. 2. Of things, lighter or more material; to apply
these. If the Alterations, Additions, or Detractions alleged, be done by
private hands, and in things of lesser moment, Misprisions in lesser things by
private hands.
the main continuing unviolate; It would be better thought on, whether such a
misprision (be it casu or consilio, unwittingly or willingly) ought to invalid
a public act. For then perhaps authentic Bible, nor any Lawyer a true
Statute-Book, because there are many faults do happen by the pen, and by the
press, which may have happened in the things we speak of. But secondly, In more
material ones, and by public persons.
etc. be made by public persons, or in things material; it must be considered
what powers the Laws do give unto them in these affairs; now it is certain, and
the Brethren acknowledge it, that until 17 Carol. 11. The King had freedom by
Law to appoint under his Broad Seal Commissioners for Causes Ecclesiastical,
Reasons for Reform. p. 51.
to amend whatsoever might be reformable in the Church. And in the Act for
uniformity of Common Prayer Act for uniformity of Com. Prayer.
at the end of it, it is granted unto the Queen, that if there shall happen any
irreverence in the service of God, by the mis-using the orders appointed in the
Common Prayer Book; she may by her Commissioners, or by the advice of the
Metropolitan, ordain further rites or ceremonies for the advancement of the
glory of God, etc. Several Acts in K. Hen. 8. Edw. 6. Q Eliz. particula^ly that
of 1 Eliz. cap. 1. Necessit. of Reform. p. 50.
Now by this and other particular Acts, that restored all Ecclesiastical power
from the Pope unto the Crown; And particularly by the Act of 1 Eliz. cap. 1.
wherein having first united and annexed all Spiritual and Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction to the Imperial Crown of this Kingdom, (they are the words of the
Brethren) it adds what power shall be given by commission under the Great
Seal to exercise the same in this following clause, viz. And that your
Highness, your Heirs and Successors, Kings or Queens of this Realm, shall have
full power and authority by virtue of this Act, by Letters Patents under the
Great Seal of England, to assign, name and authorize, when, and as often as
your Highness, your Heirs and Successors shall think meet and convenient, and
for such and so long time, as shall please your Highness, your Heirs or
Successors, such person or persons (being natural born Subjects to your
Highness, your Heirs or Successors) as your Majesty, your Heirs or Successors
shall think meet to exercise and use, occupy and execute, under your Highness,
your Heirs and Successors, all manner of jurisdictions, privileges and
preheminencies in any wise touching or concerning any spiritual or
ecclesiastical jurisdiction within these your Realms of England and Ireland, or
any other your Highness Dominions and Countries. And to visit, reform, redress,
order, correct and amend all such errors, heresies, schisms, abuses, offenses,
contempts and enormities whatsoever, which by any manner spiritual or
ecclesiastical power, authority or jurisdiction, can or may lawfully be
reformed, ordered, redressed, corrected, restrained, or amended, to the
pleasure of Almighty God, the increase of virtue, and the conservation of peace
and unity of this Realm. Now howsoever the Brethren would make this Act void,
after the Act of 17 Car. 1. (of which anon) yet the things we speak of being
transacted before, remain in force by virtue of that Act. And certain it is,
that not only the Kings themselves; but the Parliaments also, the Judges, the
Ministry, have always thought that by the King, some alterations might be made
by virtue of these Acts, without violation of Law, provided nothing were done
contrary to any thing in the Book contained, Preface to the Com. Praye^ Book.
especially when the King shall be supplicated by his people thereunto. Hence
the King in his Proclamation for the Authorizing of the Book of Common Prayer,
by occasion of the Conference at Hampton Court, (which having reflected on)
says: Kings Proclamat. for establishing the Book of Com. Prayer.
And for that purpose, (namely, to satisfy the scruples of some tender
consciences) gave forth Our Commission, under Our Great Seal of England to the
Archbishop of Canterbury, and others, according to the form which the LAWS of
this Realm in like case prescribe to be used, to make the said EXPLANATION,
etc. And it is also certain, that the same, not only Kings successively, but
also Parliaments and Judges, with all the other Magistracy, have taken all the
premises, viz. The Doctrine or Articles of Religion, the Worship or
Common Prayer Book, The Discipline and Government to be established by Law. Or
else how will the Brethren, or how can any other free the Kings from Arbitrary
Government; the Parliaments from betraying the public liberties; the Judges
from perjury and perverting Law; and other Magistrates from oppressing of the
people; if men have been punished for disobedience to these, if not established
by Law. But surely, we may more safely confide in the judgment of so many Acts
of Parliament and Laws; of so many Princes, By diverse Ministers of sundry
Counties, so in the title. K. Ja. Instructions to Preachers, 1622. Artic. 4.
Parliaments, Judges, Magistrates, then in the conjectures of certain Country
or County Ministers, what is Law. The rather, because this being a Prerogative
(Ecclesiastical jurisdiction) belonging to Sovereign Princes, is expressly
forbidden Ministers to meddle with, further then they are presidented in the
Homily of Obedience, and in the rest of the Homilies and Articles of Religion.
And besides that the declaring of Law in general is proper to the Judges; for
to you (says our [ Kings Speech at the Dissolution of the Parl. after his
assents unto the Petition of Rights.
] late Sovereign, speaking to the Judges in Parliament) only, under me belongs
the interpretation of Law.

But Thirdly, should we grant that according to the punctilio's and formalities
of Law, they should not be established by that of the Land; yet the Church has
its Law also; that whatsoever is imposed by the Governors thereof for
edification, Note.
agreeable or not repugnant to the Scriptures, especially if God and experience
have set their seal thereunto (as the premises have had) and that custom and
tract of time have given them prescription (which the Apostle after all
reasoning flies unto) if such things should be excepted against by others, 1
Cor. 11.16.
yet doubtless very improperly by those; 1 Cor. 9.1, 2.
whose seed of generation, and milk of infancy, and strong meat of riper age,
they have been in the Lord. Yea, I add and who by their profession and
subscripsion have been particularly obliged to them. But oftentimes it comes
to pass, that the watchmen themselves, who were appointed for the Safeguarding
of the Church, Sermon. before the H^ Com. Feb. 18. 1620.
prove in this kind to be the smiters and wounders of her, says the Primate of
Ireland. And no marvel; for, veteres scrutans historias, invenire non possum,
scidisse ecclesiam, and de domo Dei populos seduxisse, praeter eos, qui
Sacerdotes a Deo positi fuerant and prophetae, id est speculatores. Searching
the ancient Records, Hier. in Hos. 9.8. Tom. 6.
I cannot find, that any other have rent the Church, and have seduced the
people from the house of God, but they, who have been appointed Priests by God,
and Prophets, thar is, Watchmen, says St. Jerome. I have done with the first
Exception against the premises, viz. their non-establishment in general.

Subsect. 1. Articles not established.
COme we now to the particular proofs of their non-establishment, with replies
unto them. And first, 2. Partic. Except. against the establishment of the
premises.
the Doctrine, or the Articles of Religion, they are not say the Brethren
established, because neither does the Act (13 Eliz.) name them in particular,
nor so much as their number, but only the title page; nor is it known where the
original is enrolled. Necessity of Reform. p. 1, 2,
That this reflects gross negligence upon the then Parliament, if they laid
that foundation weak, upon which the whole fabric of Religion in this Church,
was to be raised. But Secondly, Do the Brethren imagine, that the Parliament
intended to establish titulum sine re, the title, and leave the matter
uncertain? Surely, not only that Parliament, but all since; The Princes also
and Judges ever since have taken the Articles as now they are, to be confirmed
then, K. Declarat. before the Articles 4 Car. 3.1.
and to contain the true Doctrine of the Church of England, who surely had good
assurance that they did accord with the original. Thirdly, Again, if all Acts
of State be void, whereof the originals are not extant, although confirmed by
Act of Parliament; what the inference may be, I leave to the Learned in the
Laws to judge; for my self, I take it to be a suggestion of a very dangerous
consequence. This for the Articles.

Subsect. II. Common Prayer Book.
NExt for the Liturgy or Common Prayer Book; That they say, is not established:
First, because it is not the same that was established by the Parliament, 1
Eliz. 2. And secondly, because if it were, yet it is not established by Law,
because that of 1 Eliz. 2. it self does not appear to be established neither,
because it is not agreeable to the Act, nor annexed to it, nor the original to
be found. 1. Com. Prayer Book of Q. Eliz.
To begin with the Book of Queen Elizabeth, and then to come to that now in
use. Touching the former, the Act of 1 Eliz. 2. touching uniformity of
Common Prayer, and Administration of the Sacraments, enjoyneth the use of that
Book, with the allowance of one alteration or addition of certain Lessons to be
used every Sunday in the year. Except.
And the form of the Letany altered and corrected, and two sentences only added
in the delivery of the Sacraments to the Communicants, and none other, or
otherwise from the Common Prayer Book, confirmed by Parliament in the fifth and
sixth years of Edw. 6. Now because the Book of Q. Elizabeth refers to that,
and that the alterations mentioned in that of Q. Eliz. from that of Edw. 6. are
not particularly named in the Act for conformity of Common Prayer; And because
the original Book of Edw. 6. is lost, and this of Q. Eliz. printed, differs
from that of Edw. 6. the Brethren infer, that the Book of Q. Eliz. is not
established, or not evident that Act. I might answer, That these being niceties
of Law, and the alterations insisted on either in Q. Eliz. Book, or in the
present one from that, many, or much material; And being generally God in the
comfort and edification of I said, answer viderint alii, let men of skill in
Law look to that point. But seeing I take their objections from Law to be
easily answerable; go to, let us try their strength.

The Parliament of the 1 Eliz. 2. Q. Eliz. Liturgy established.
did know that the Edw. 6. was abolished by an Act 1 Mar. 2. and mention it in
the Act. And that the Original was taken off the Parliament Roll, and so lost.
They did not think it necessary notwithstanding this, either to name
particularly the alterations made, or to annex the Book unto their Act. Now the
Q. and Parl. did judge that they had done enough to establish the Book; the
Brethren affirm not. Wherein, if they were right in their matter, yet not in
their modesty. But they are amiss there also. For the Parl. knowing the Book of
Edw. 6. to have been in all Churches, and in every man's hand; and themselves
allowing, not the original, which was lost, but the printed ones, with the
alterations they mention; it was most easy for any man to find, by comparing
the Books printed by this Act with those of Edw. 6. which were the alterations
the Parl. having named where they were, and concerning what. But because by
this it appears according to the judgment of these Brethren, that the Q. and
these Parl. then, were in matter of the greatest moment) the establishing of
the Doctrine and Worship, Articles and Liturgy of Almighty God, and means of
the salvation of men;) either so ignorant, that they understood not what was
requisite, to the full establishment of their own Acts; or so negligent, that
they minded it not as they should; And seeing all the Kings and Parliaments
since have swallowed their error; As also all the Judges of the Land, who do
not only sit in Parliam. to give advice, but also have judged in their several
Circuits the violations of those Books; And because the present and future
Parliaments may be subject to the like miscarriages; may it be prevented in a
better way, then by the Parliam. restoring to the Clergy the liberty of being
elected Burgesses? (lost, as I take it, but in Henry the 8 th. his time) and so
the Brethren may obtain places in the House of Commons, and the Parliament
enjoy the benefit of their guidance.

Elizabeth, Edward 6. viz. certain Saints days in the Calendar, 1 Saints days.
but in black letters, instead of others that were named in that of Edw. 6.
Secondly, certain Lessons of the Apocrypha appointed to be read, instead of
some out of the Canonical Scripture, which were before appointed in the book of
Edw. 6. For answer Saints days, it does not seem to hazard the bringing in of
new Holy Days; both because as the brethren acknowledge, they are set down in
black letters, those to be kept Holy Days in red; but especially because the
number of Holy Days is stinted, they are set down by name in the Liturgy, and a
prohibition of any other to be kept; so that as long as the book remains as now
it is, there can be no peril of that. It may be the change of names was,
because the days now put in, might be days of payment of money, or days of Law,
or perhaps unworthy persons names put out, and better put in their room, as Mr.
Fox did in that Calendar of his Martyrology. But this, whatsoever it be, makes
no alteration in the Service, or in the reading. Yea, but the alteration of the
Chapters does. 2. Apocryphal chapters.
To that therefore I say, that this alteration was done either casu and by
chance, or consilio and of purpose. And then either by private hands, or by
public authority, by the Queen, or Commissioners from her, according to the
clause in this Act, authorizing her for explanations. In all which respects; I
refer unto the general answer afore-going. But more particularly. (modestly) at
the Conference of Hampton Court, of which afterward.

To the Second. 2. Book of Common Prayer, a^ it now stands established.
The book of Common Prayer as it now stands as established, which the Brethren
oppose, as differing from that of Queen Elizabeth, in alterations, detractions,
and additions. For answer, first, in general. We must reflect on what has been
said above, viz. That alterations as have been made by Royal authority, by
commission under the great Seal, being made but for explanations fake, and
containing nothing contrary to any thing in the book contained, does not
derogate from the authority and establishment of the book; but such alterations
are confirmed, such power being yielded to the Kings of this Nation by the
Laws. K. James Proclamation for uniformity of Com. prayer.
And for that purpose gave forth Our Commission undes Our Great Seal of England
to the Archbishop of Canterbury, and others, according to the form, which the
LAWS of this Realm, in like case prescribed to be used, to make the said
EXPLANATION, etc. says the King, upon occasion of the alterations made at the
Instance of the Brethrens predecessors, at the Conference at Hampton Court.

But to come unto particulars, first, to the Alterations. 1. Alterations in the
Liturgy.
That of Holy Days has be^n replied unto, as also that of Apocryphal Chapters.
To which I add, R. Hook. eccles. pol. l. 5. 20.
That it cannot be reasonably thought, that we do thereby offer disgrace unto
the word of God. For in such choice we do not think, but that fitness of
speech, may be more respected than worthiness of matter. But this alteration
whatsoever it were; was made, as by the authority of the King, By whose means
the Apocryphal chapters were altered.
so it seems by the occasion of Dr. Reynolds anotations: For the King said;
That Dr. Reynolds should note those chapters in the Apocrypha books, where
those offensive places were, and bring them. But why do the Brethren appear now
so zealous for the reading of the Scripture, Conf. Hamp. Court, p. 63. Matthew.
15.
which they had almost laid aside in the public worship, for their own
traditions, i. e. for what they thought better, to deliver unto the people.

3. As for the alterations made for explanations sake, K. James explanation of
the present Liturgy.
by the King, at the suit of the Non-conformists at that Conference (now made
violations of the Statute, and essential alterations of the book) they were not
in any part of the substance of the book it self, not in any prayer, Not any
alteration in the matter of the Liturgy.
or Exhortation, and so in no one point either of Doctrine or Worship (let the
Reader note against the calumnies insinuated by these Brethren) but only in
some two or three words in the old Translation of the Gospels; And in a few
Rubricks, Hook. eccles. pol. l. 5. 19.
which are directions for the service. The words altered in the Gospels
(wherein the steps of the Latine-service-book have been somewhat too nearly
followed) they are these. 1. ' And Jesus said to them, Conf. Hamp. Court. p. 86.
to be put twice into the Dominical Gospels, instead of, Jesus said to his
Disciples. Though at the Conference it was answered, That for ought that could
appear by the places, Ibid. page 63.
he might speak as well to his Disciples as to the Pharisees. The alterations
in the Rubricks are. Ibid. page 86.
1. Before the general Absolution is put: or Remission of sins, which before
was only Absolution. 2. In private Baptism, the lawful Minister present;
before it was, then they minister it. 3. In the same Rubric: they procure not
their children to be baptized; before it was, they baptize not children. 4. In
that before Confirmation: Examination, with Confirmation of children, it was
appointed, but I do not find it was done. So that as the alterations of the
words of the old Translation were but two; so these in the Rubricks are but
three. And none of them in the very Text of the Liturgy it self.

2. Detractions from the Liturgy.
The second variation of the present book, from that of Queen Elizabeth, are
detractions, or takings away. But God wot they are scarce a number, but two,
and the present Book innocent of them, being both made in that of Queen
Elizabeth. The one is a Rubric (mark, nothing of the substance and Text, but a
Rubric only) after the Communion, containing an explication in what sense
kneeling is enjoined at the Communion. Kneeling at the Communion explained.
And the Brethren say it is an excellent and solid one, and so it is: but will
they then now kneel? First, negatively, it says, That the kneeling is not to
the Bread and Wine, Reas. for Reform. Ed. 2. page 3. of the inserted sheet.
for they remain Bread and Wine still. Secondly, Nor to any real and essential
Presence there being, of Christ's natural flesh and blood, for they are in
heaven and not here. But secondly and positively, this gesture of kneeling is
for signification of the thankful acknowledgment of the benefits of Christ,
given unto the worthy Receiver, and to avoid profaneness. Now I suppose this
Rubric might be omitted in the Liturgy, as being rather a Canon than a
Rubric. These serving chiefly for direction, how the worship is to be
performed. Not so properly for explication, though some of the Rubricks also do
explain. But none of them the chief Ceremonies, as the Surpliss, or the Cross
in Baptism; and therefore the exposition of these being omitted, the other
might be thought fit also to be left out, which would else have occasioned the
addition of the explication of them also, and of others, to the occasioning of
disputes rather than devotion, it being not so needful to explain there, the
Orthodox doctrine in this point being laid down in the Articles, and in the
Homilies. Artic. 28. Homil. of the receiving the Sacrament. Can. 30. Can. 18.
The explanation of Rites being thought fit for the Canons, as in ours the
explication of the Cross in Baptism, and of bowing at the Name of Jesus.

But secondly, this appears, that this Rubric does not to be appointed by
Parliament. For if you observe the first Edition of the Common Prayer Book of
5, 6 Edw. 6. (which is done in very good paper and print, the next being in
worse, as is usual in second Editions of books) you shall see room enough
vacant in the left page to have received that Rubric, but that is left bare,
and the Rubric is printed in a leaf by it self, and pasted on; Observed as we
were viewing, by my worthy friend, M. Tho. Smith, keeper of the public Library
at Cambr.
which is further cleared by the Errata in the first edition, the second having
none. In that first edition, the Rubric is printed after all the Rubricks, in
the other it is in order at n. 3. in another between n and o. which shows, that
it came after the book was printed off, and so not in that passed by the Act.
Now then, not being established by the Act, as it seems the Parliament of 1
Eliz. knew, they might omit it, and yet not be guilty of detractions from the
Book. A prayer omitted.
The next omission is, a prayer to be used in times of dearth and famine. But
seeng it cont^ins no other matter for doctrine, but what is in the prayer yet
standing for that occasion. 2 King. 7.
(The former draws an argument to prevail with God, from the miracle wrought by
Elisha in the famine of Samaria. And the latter yet standing, from the general
course of Gods providence, and from his goodness, which surely are more
immediate grounds of faith.) It is not at all material, especially seeing the
omission might be from the Press, and not from the Prelates. Now these two are
the only detractions of the book from that of King Edward, but neither of them
chargeable upon the present, but on the Book of Queen Elizabeth, which this
follows. It appears from the premises, that we have all the Liturgy that was
established, Text, Substance, and Circumstance, as in Queen Elizabeth's time,
and that Book of hers all that the other had, except these immaterial omissions
of one Rubric not established, and of one Prayer, another more pertinent still
remaining, two for the same thing in this case and place being not thought so
necessary. Though all now in the Liturgy be not by that act established, which
leads me to the last head of Exceptions against the present Book, viz. the
additions.

3. Additions to the Liturgy.
The Additions. For answer in the general, I refer unto what was said above.
Secondly, in particular. These additions are not annexed as part of the Book
that the Act established. But either as explanations of it, which, as we heard
above, the King has power to do. As are the Questions and Answers added to the
Catechism, Conf. Hamp. Court, p. 43.
at the suit of the Non-conformists, at the Conference at Hampton Court: Or
they are certain necessary Prayers, for the Kings relations, which must be
variable according to times, and the state of the Royal Family; and so not to
be established necessarily by Parliament, but put into this Common Prayer Book
because of daily use with it; yet not made parts of it, and therefore not
altering what was established by the Act. No more then the printing of the
Kings Proclamation for uniformity before it, is part of the Book, or then
diverse godly prayers at the end, devised by some good men.

But to come to the particulars. 1. Prayers.
The Prayers and the Questions in the Catechism; both which the Brethren
acknowledge to be useful, though with some particular exceptions against a
question or two. The Prayers added to the Book of King Edward, are one for the
Queen or King, another for the Bishops, a third for Queen Anne and the Royal
Progeny; which the Brethren acknowledge to be useful and necessary. They
acknowledge also, page 28. page 30.
that in the Catechism, somewhat of that kind to be useful and necessary,
though not that model. To collect then and conclude. It appears, that we have
the Book now as established in Queen Elizabeth's time, without alteration. 1
Except some odd days set down under other names. 2 Also perhaps some few
Chapters altered in the Calendar. 3 Two words changed in the old Translation. 4
And three or four Rubricks or directions explained. And all these, except the
first (names of days) at the request of the Non-conformists, the Brethrens
Predecessors in these exceptions. And no detraction of any Rubric, or Prayer,
or Exhortation, or line, or word, (in the text of the Book or otherwise) but of
a Rubric about kneeling that seems not to be established by Parliament; and of
one Prayer against famine, not of any consequence; with the addition of some
useful prayers, and some Questions and Answers, necessary for the enlarging and
explication of the Catechism; but not as part of the Book. But all this, so as
that no Article of the Confession, no point of Doctrine, no part of Worship is
altered. And yet the Brethren have raised such a hue and cry, as if the later
Bishops, yea, and Princes, not excepting Queen Elizabeth, had a design to
corrupt the Articles, to poison the Worship, to impose unestablished things
upon the conscience and liberty of the Subject, and to punish men for
disobedience thereunto. As if all Religion were pessundated, and Omnia in pejus
ruere, and retro sub^apsa referri.
All goes to ruin, Thames to Tyber flows,
The Assembly to a Convocation grows.
As if, as Paul's, by the Brethrens fautors, so the whole Church were like to be
an Augaean Stable. Well spoke Tertullian of their fathers: Prescript. adv.
Here Is. non long ab initio.
Scripturas obtendunt, and hac sua audacia statim quosdam movent: in ipso vero
congressu firmos quidem fatigant, infirmos capiunt, medios cum scrupulo
dimittunt. They pretend Scripture, says he, and by this their confidence, they
presently move some. In disputation they trouble those that are strong, they
take the weak, and send away the middle sort with doubting. I conclude, that
notwithstanding the exceptions of the Brethren; the Common Prayer Book, as well
as the Articles, Act for uniformity of Com. prayer.
is established by Act of Parliament. And that therefore, If any manner of
Parson, Vicar, or other whatsoever Minister -- shall preach, declare, or speak
any thing, in the derogation or depraving of the said faid Book, or any thing
therein contained, or any part thereof, and shall be thereof lawfully
convicted, shall forfeit etc. I have done with the second Head of Objections,
viz. The establishing of the Liturgy and Worship.

Subsect. 3. Discipline established.
Discipline, which they say is not established neither. The discipline not
established
They instance in the Episcopal Courts and Canons, the first whereof is
Jurisdiction. Now the Bishops are of age, Archbishop Whitgift against T.
Cartwright. Bishops Courts. Lord Cant. speech at the censure of Dr. Bastwick,
etc. in the Preface.
and the greatest in his time, does acknowledge, That they exercise their
jurisdiction in their Courts, by virtue of the Laws, and Commissions Royal
only. The next (in the same rank) goes farther, and upon occasion of such
calumny makes it his suit unto the King: and I do humbly, in the Churches name,
desire your Majesty, that it may be resolved by all the reverend Judges of
England, and then published by your Majesty, that our keeping Courts, and
issuing Process in our own names, and the like exceptions Namely, by T.
Cartwright and others.
formerly taken, and now renewed, are not against the Laws of this Realm, as
it is most certain they are not. Thus far he. What can indifferent men desire
more, then an appeal to all the legal Interpreters (the Judges) of that Law,
which they are said to violate; and to the supreme Judge, and springhead
thereof, the King. This for their Courts. The Canons of the Church. K. James.
As for the Canons. Because the King-craft of that Prince which did confirm
them (as himself calls it) is herein questioned; as if he understood not what
did touch his own prerogative and the Laws; for he by his Authority under the
Broad- Seal confirmed those Canons. I shall not take upon me the vindicat^on of
so great a Person, seeing he has a Grandson and Successor, our present
Sovereign, to do it for him, at whose feet and the Laws I shall let that lie;
the rather, because that point is like very shortly to be determined by public
authority. So much for Discipline.

Subsect 4. Of Government Episcopal.
THe last is Government, Episcopal namely; and here, 25 Edw. 3. Ann. 1350.
Necessity of Reform. p. 40.
illis adhaeret aqua; Themselves acknowledge and cite the Act, saying, That
whereas the holy Church of England was FOVNDED in the estate of PRELACY, within
the said Realm of England, by the said Grandfather ( Edw. 1.) and his
Progenitors, and the Earls and other Nobles of his said Realm, and their
Ancestors, to inform them, and the people, in the Law of God, etc. This then is
granted to be according to the constitutions of this Nation, Legal, which is
moreover known to all by this: That all Acts of Parliament since that
foundation, have given the precedence of Baronship unto the Bishops; the form
usually being, The Kings Majesty, with the assent of the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, does enact, etc. Nay, but though Episcopacy was established by Law,
17 Car. cap. 1. Office of Episcopacy ceased.
yet it is not so now. For the Act of 17 Car. 1.11. repeating the clause of the
Act of 1 Eliz. 1. which instals the Queen and her Successors with power of
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, the only ground of the Bishops authority and
jurisdiction, Reasons for necessity of Reform. p. 51, 52, 53.
and repealing that clause, did, besides the taking away their Votes in
Parliament, take also away their power, authority, and jurisdiction, and so the
very office it self of Episcopacy; whereupon the Ordinance of Lords and Commons
makes all their grants void since 17 Car. 1. because then their Office expired.

Parliament or Prince to take away the powers which are essential, and
unseparable from the Crown and Office of a King, which we see of right to have
belonged, and with praise to have been executed, not only in the Scripture,
both by Jewish and Heathenish Princes, (as by Nebuchadnezzar, by Cyrus, Dan.
3.29. Ezr. 6. Jon. 2.
by Darius, by the King of Ninive, etc. as well as by David, Jehosophat,
Hezekiah, and Josiah) but also in the primitive Church, by Constantine and
Parliament intended to countervene an express Article of the Confession of this
Church, Artic. 37. of the Civil Magistrate.
which having named the Queens Majesty, says, Unto whom the chief government
of all estates of this Realm, whether they be Ecclesiastical or Civil, in all
causes does appertain -- That -- prerogative which we see to have been given
always to all godly Princes in holy Scripture, by God himself. And in
particular, that it was not the then they were to take away the office and
ordinary jurisdiction of Episcopacy, appears evidently, in that the King he
asserts it to be a main cause of the war, Ei k^^. Basilic. Med. 9.
and of his own calamity, for that he would not consent thereunto. How often
(says the King) was the business of the Bishops, enjoying their ancient
places, Bishops Votes in Parliam.
and undoubted privileges in the House of Peers, carried for them by far the
major part of Lords. Yet after five repulses, contrary to all order and custom,
it was by tumultuary instigation obtruded again, and by a few carried, when
most of the Peers were forced to absent themselves. In like manner was the Bill
against root and branch brought on by tumultuary clamours, and schismatical
terrors, Bill against Episcopacy.
which could never pass till both Houses were sufficiently thinned and
overawed. To which partiality, while (in all reason, justice, and religion) my
conscience forbids me by consenting, to make up their Votes to Acts of
Parliament, I must now be urged with an Army, and constrained either to hazard
my own, A cause of the War, defense of Episcopacy.
and my Kingdoms ruin by my defense; or prostrate my conscience to the blind
obedience of those men, whose zealous superstition thinks, or pretends they
cannot do God and the Church a greater service, than utterly to destroy that
Primitive, Apostolical, and anciently Universal government of the Church by
Bishops. And the King has the like complaint Kings declaration to all his
loving subjects, Aug. 12. 1642. p. 8. print Cambr.
elsewhere. So that we see what was the mind and affection, the scope and
intent of the King and the two Houses, as then when that Act passed touching
Episcopacy. Whence it will follow, that as they had no intention, nor ever
consented to the Bill for it, to destroy the office; so neither did the Commons
think that it was so, by that Act of taking away their votes, or by recalling
of the former clause of 1 Eliz. 1. touching Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction: for
then they would not have prepared another Act for it, which never passed the
Houses whilst full, nor the Kings assent afterward, and so is no Law. It
remains therefore, that the intention of the Parliament in the repealing of
that clause, was only in reference unto the High Commission Court, or other
excentrical from the legal jurisdiction of Bishops, and raised only by the
Kings prerogative, yet of use whilst established; but removed, not for its
unprofitableness, as to prevent some greater inconvenience. It was their
jurisdiction in those cases, and upon such special commission from the King,
that there ceased, not their ordinary, legal, and per se Episcopal power of
government in this Church. By Act of this present Parliament for restoring
Episcopal jurisdiction.
As has been of late more authentically evidenced, Ordinance, that, especially
at that time, as it could at no time, cannot countervene a settled Law. Neither
have the Houses power to declare any thing against Law, as we heard above. Lord
Cant. speech ubi supra.
For close therefore, I repeat that suit of his; and do humbly in the Churches
name, desire of his Majesty, that it may be resolved, not only by all the
Reverend Judges of England, A supplication to his Majesty and the two Houses of
Parliament.
but by his Majejesty, and both Houses of Parliament, and then published by
them, that the Doctrine and Articles of Religion, the Liturgy and Worship, the
Discipline and Government, are not against, or besides the Laws of this Realm.
That so the Church-Governors may go on cheerfully in their duty, and the
peoples minds be quieted, by this assurance, that neither the Laws, nor their
Liberties, are infringed as Subjects thereby.

SECT. VII. Of the Obligation of the League and Covenant.
AGain, it is objected, that there is an engagement for the Reformation of the
Doctrine, Worship, Assemblies, Discipline and Government in the solemn League
and Covenant; therefore they are not to be adhered unto.

Subsect. 1. That the Covenant obliges not.
OMitting the elaborate and excellent pains of the University of Oxford in this
argument; Reasons of the University of Oxford, concerning the Covenant, 1647.
Duplies of the professors of Aberdeen, to the Brethr. concerning the Covenant,
1638. Dr. Lesly Bish. of Down in his Visitation speech, Land. 1638. 1. Argument
Because it is opposite to and after other Oaths, etc. Gal. 3.14, 18.
as also that of the Professors of Aberdeen in Scotland; And of the Bishop of
Down in Ireland, (the testimony of the three Kingdoms against it) I shall
propound only four Arguments to evince, first, the nullity of its obligation;
and then from thence collect what it binds yet unto. The Arguments touching the
former are: First, from the nature and order of this Oath. The second from the
power imposing of it; The third from the matter of the oath it self; The last
from the scope and end of its framing and imposing. First, from the nature and
order of this Oath. When there are two oaths touching the same things, and they
contradictory one to another; if the former be lawful and obliging, the latter
cannot be so too, but void and null, ipso facto. Hence it is, that our Apostle
proves the invalidity of the Ceremonial Law and Covenant being different from,
and in some sort opposite to the Covenant of Grace, because it was made four
hundred years after, and so could not make the other void. So this Oath and
Covenant, whereof we now speak, being contradictory (as shall be seen, and is
evident of it self) to former lawful Oaths and Engagements confirmed by the
Laws of the Kingdom, (as the Oath of Allegiance, Supremacy, Canonical
Obedience, Subscriptions to the three Articles, and Protestations) cannot make
those former of none effect; and is therefore void being taken, as it was
unlawful to take it, unless the Obligation of the former Oaths and Engagements
had been by the same, or superior power relaxed. As was done by Hermannus
Archbishop of Cullen to his subjects, Sleid. Com. l. 18 Ad Ann. 1547.
when he was no longer able to protect them. Which was not our case. Our former
Oaths and Engagements were agreeable to Law and Equity, both in their matter
and authority injoyning them. This contradictory to them, and by an inferior
power, yea, by such a power as had not authority to do it; which brings me to
the second Argument; 2. Arg. Because it was in posed by unsufficient power, in
opposition to the lawful authority.
namely, taken from the power, or rather the impotency of the imposers, as to
this act. It is proved above, that in the Government, the King is Supreme by
the Laws. But if he were but equal; yet in a coordinate power; if when one
desires to do his duty, and is well able thereunto; the other shall exclude
him, and act in opposition, not only to him, but also to the Laws established
by all; and impose upon the Subjects, who are not obliged but as it proceeds
from all; to submit and to accept of such impositions, if voluntarily, is a
threefold iniquity and injustice. excluded against his will liberty of the
Subject, who is not liable to injunctions proceeding from some, privilege of
that body and government, which is, that every member and state of it is to act
together with the rest. For the person now excluded, may perhaps afterward by
power or policy get the power to him, and then exercise that arbitrary power on
the other and the people, without the the other. Now apply this: If the two Houses
(supposing them to be such) have power to impose Oaths under penalties upon the
people; then has the King and Lords without the Commons; and the King and
Commons without the Lords. By which it appears, that voluntary taking of such
an Oath, does betray the Prerogative of the King, the privilege of Parliam.
and the liberty of the people. Seeing two powers, if coordinate, cannot
countervene, what is done and established for Law by all, (much less where one
is Supreme to the other two) So that the former Oaths and Protestations,
engaging for the maintenance of the Kings Prerogative, the privileges of
Parliam. and the liberties of the Subject; makes this Oath and Covenant come
clearly within the Verge of Perjury (so far as I can understand) as well as
Treachery, to all the three premised interests. Yea, and is expressly against
the great Charter, which provides, 9 H. 3. Magna Charta. Jud. Jenk. Vindic.
page 6. Aquin. 2.2. Q. 104. Art. 6. ad tertium.
that no Act of Parliament binds the Subjects of this Land without the assent
of the King, either for person, lands, goods, or fame. To conclude this
argument, from the power imposing it: Principes si non habent justum
Principatum, sed usurpatum; vel si injusta praecipiant, non tenentur eis
subdita obedire, nisi forte per accidens, propter vitandum scandalum vel
periculum: Governors, if they have not a lawful power, but an usurped one; or
if they command unrighteous things; the people are not bound unto obedience,
unless perhaps by accident, for the avoiding of scandal, or of danger, says
Aquinas. The former part of which cases has been evidenced here, the latter
shall be proved in the next. Thirdly, 3. Arg. Prou^ the matter of the Covenant.
1. Doubtful.
From the matter of this Oath and Covenant. And first, the doubtfulness of it;
not to insist upon that clause of swearing to preserve the Religion of the
Church of Scotland in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and Government; whereas
very few do understand what these are in Scotland, and so swear to they know
not what. For, it may be, there are errors in their Doctrine, Superstition in
their Worship, defect or tyranny in their Government, for ought many know,
which if so, they swe^l here to preserve them, so it be against the common
enemy. The same might be said for the privilege of the Parliam. both theirs
and ours, and liberties of the Kingdoms. Secondly, the equivocation of it. For
this, I shall insist only on that clause in the same first Article: According
to the Word of God and example of the best Reformed Churches. For it intends,
either that Scotlands Reform. is according to the Word of God and the example
of the best Reformed Churches; or is it self such an example. But Englands not.
2. Equivocation.
Now to color this, it equivocally put in that clause, as representing that
they meant only according to the Word of God. For proof of this; When the
Covenant was first published and began to be pressed, my self having, with many
others, doubt that the intention was to oblige us to the Discipline and
Government of Scotland; I addressed my self to two persons most eminent in
their several relations, Mr. Th. G. Mr. Al. Henders.
and as I thought, best able to resolve me. The former acknowledged that his
own scruples were the same with mine, but that he had given himself up unto the
Protestant Religion, and thereupon had taken it. The other told me, that they
did not particularly engage unto any Discipline or Government, but according to
the Word of God, as it was in the Covenant; with this gilding, the pill went
down. But soon after, the Scottish Government, etc. was pressed by virtue of the
Covenant, which made me then, or since, reflect on that of the Apostle:
whatsoever is not of faith, Romans 14. ult.
that is, of a man's own persuasion some way, is sin. According to that of one
of the Rabbis: Although thou have six hundred advisers, Apud Drusium in
Proverb. Rabb.
yet neglect not the counsel of thine own soul. And that of our late Sovereign
to His Majesty that now is: Never (says he) repose so much upon any man's
single counsel, Icon Basilic. M. dit. 27.
fidelity and discretion, in managing affairs of the first magnitude, that is,
matters of Religion and Justice; as to create in your self, or others, a
diffidence of your own judgment; which is likely to be always more constant
and impartial to the interest of Your Crown and Kingdoms, than any man's. And a
grave Divine, Dr. Sibbs Souls Confl^ct, cap. 17. page edit. 1. 366.
and good Casuist of our own, has in giving direction for light in difficult
cases, this expression: Where we have cause to think, that we have used better
means in the search of grounds, and are more free from partial affections than
others, there we may use our own advice more safely; otherwise what we do by
consent from others is more secure, etc. Not amiss therefore did he complain
that; Sym. Grynaeus Ep. ded. ante novum orbem Basil. 1555.
plerique mortales animi sui naturam, and ingenium parvipendentes, etc. est
enim sapientis solius Spiritum Dei in se invenisse: Most men are ignorant of,
and do undervalue their own endowments and judgments; because it is the part
only of a wise man to find the mind of the Spirit of God, which is in him, and
what he prompts us to. 3. Injuriousness to the Church of England.
A third evil in the matter of the Covenant is its injuriousness unto the
Church of England, and that in three respects: First, in regard of its honor.
It being not only the Mistress Kingdom to that of Scotland (this being a
feudatory of it; and the Kings of England having a just title thereunto, as
(amongst others) Nic. Nich. Bodrugan, alias Adams, of the King of Engl. title
to the Crown of Scotland, Land. 1546. Though denied by Will. Barclay, Contr.
Monarcbomach.
Bodrugan proves unto Edward the sixth.) But also is the elder sister, and
perhaps in some sort a mother to it in Christ. As having been in the Faith
before it. And not only receiving it first, but sealing it with ten bloods of
its Martyrs, to one in Scotland, so far as I have learned; But now as it seems
being old, must step as the younger sister or daughter shall please to lead it.
Secondly, it eminently injureth the Chapter of England, in respect of truth of
Doctrine, Worship, Government and Discipline; insinuating plainly, that it is
rotten in the head and foundation of Doctrine, in the heart and life of
Worship, in the nerves and sinews of Discipline, and in the bones and strength
of Government; which no true Son of the Church of England, can without
indignation reflect on. Thirdly, it strikes at the very being and safety of
it. For first, this will both nourish and breed Papists and Separatists, when
they shall consider, that by this Oath we have acknowledged that there is no
one part, Isa. 1.
wholly sound in this Church; but that from the crown of the head to the sole
of the foot, there are wounds, sores and putrefying corruptions. And being the
expressions are indefinite, they cannot tell what in any part is sound; nor
know what to cleave unto, and so are prepared for apostasy from it, 4.
Schismatic, illegal and oppressive to to the Government of the Church.
or confirmed therein. 4. This Covenant swears a Schism, and is an unjust
Oath, as it is injurious and oppressive, to the Government of this Church and
the express Law whereby it is established, to wit, Episcopacy (not to insist on
the ranking of it with Popery and Superstition.) The Church of England is
founded in Prelacy, says the Luws. Of which before. And the King in his Oath
swears to defend the Rights of this Church. Yea, this order is by the Laws (in
force before 17 Car. 11.) the very next the King himself in Parliam. for so the
style runs, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal. The right of Episcopacy out
of Scripture, Antiquity and the late Reformers, has been showed before; and
out of the Law of England also. Now to swear against a main point of the Law of
the Land, wherein we have the suffrage of the whole Church; and against that
order of men both under which, Bishops, as Cranmer and others, special
instruments of the Reformation.
and by influence whereof, we first received the Gospel; and several whereof
sealed it, in opposition to Popery and Superstition, with their blood, (Five
Bishops being burned, viz. Cranmer Archbishop of Cant. Ridley Bishop of
London, Hooper and Latimer Bishops of Gloucester and Wortester, and Ferrar
Bishop of St. David's) is such a piece of unchristianity, injustice and
ingratitude, yea, and perjury also in those that have subscribed the three
Articles, and taken the Oath of Canonical obedience; that I should wish mine
eyes a fountain of tears to bewail it, and my quill the pen of a more ready
Writer to describe it: Pudet haec opprobria nobis, etc.

What shame is it that this should spoken be,
And nothing to be said to the contray?
5. It is of most dangerous insinuation, 5. Of most dangerous insinuation
against the dignity, person and authority of the King.
in respect of the Kings Authority, Dignity and Person. First, To his Dignity,
in putting him after the Parliaments and Kingdoms, and yet put the Parliaments
before the Kingdoms, as if he were inferior unto both, whereas by our Oath of
Supremacy, we do acknowledge him to be over all persons within these his Realms
and Dominions Supreme Governor. And have in that, and in the Oath of
Allegiance, and in the Protestation, sworn and engaged to maintain his honor
and privileges. Secondly, It insinuates most imminent danger unto the Kings
Person and Authority; whilst it engages to preserve and defend the Kings
Majesty's Person and Authority, in the preservation and defense of the true
Religion and Liberties of the Kingdoms. Openly implying, that both the one and
the other may be deserted in case he do not, or seems to some, not to defend
true Religion and the Liberties. Thirdly, And for his Authority, we swear
obedience thereunto in the former Oaths indefinitely, without such limitations
as these are; whence these appears to be no less then a treasonable limitation.
6. It swears to betray and oppress contrary to Law, 6. Is oppressive of the K.
faithful subjects and true members of the Church. 7. It bettaies the Liberty of
the Subject in setting up an Arbitrary power against Law.
the Kings faithful Subjects, and the true sons of the Church; because they
would keep faith with the one and unity with the other, ( Artic. 4.) under the
names of Malignants and Hinderers of Reformation. 7. It owneth the Houses of
Parliament, in opposition to the King, to be the Supreme Judicatories, and
acknowledges a power in them of punishment to life and estate; which is a
betraying the Subjects Liberty: as also that they may punish as they judge
convenient, or a Committee from them. What is this, but to pluck up Magna
Charta by the roots, which gives this privilege, that no freeborn English man
shall be punishable in life, liberty or estate, but by a Jury of his equals?
etc. So that this is an erecting of an Arbitrary Government, and destructive to
the Fundamental Laws of the Land. The same error is committed in the fifth
Article, against those that should any way oppose this kind of union between
the two Nations. 8. In the sixth and last Article, 8. Obliges to a blind a
betting of all attempts in the pursuance of it. 9. Engages against Repentance.
it obliges to defend all those that enter into this Covenant in the pursuance
thereof; which, what it infers, cannot be foreseen, nor how far that clause may
be extended. 9. It engages against Repentance, which in an Oath of that nature
and newness, ought not to have been done, but that, juvat impiis, as well as
miseris socios habuisse -- It pleases them, that have the plague, to see
That others as themselves infected be.
10. 10. Hypocritical, blasphemous toward God, scandalous and dangerous to
other Churches and Nations. Prove. 24. Eccles. 10. Matthew. 22. Prove. 13. 1 Pet. 2.
Lastly, In the Epilogue and close of it. It is Horridly Hypocritical,
Blasphemous toward God, Scandalous and Dangerous to other Churches and
Nations. First, It is Horridly Hypocritical; in acknowledging that we profess
before God and the world our unfeigned desire to be humbled for our sins, and
the sins of these Kingdoms, against God and Christ his Son, etc. And yet at the
same time swear to dishonor both, and transgress the Gospel, which commands
obedience of Subjects to their Princes, especially in doubtful cases, the King
holding forth not force but law, as well as they, and (as I am persuaded) with
better evidence. Ezekiel. 20.27.
Secondly, It is most blasphemous and a high temptation of Almighty God; to
pray most humbly unto him to strengthen us by his holy Spirit, to live and dye
in opposition to the just Laws of the Land; in sedition against our natural
Prince; in schism against the Church; and in oppression and violence against
our innocent brethren. Thirdly, It is Scandalous to other Nations and Churches,
whereby through us, the name of God (as called upon and professed by the
Reformed) was blasphemed even among the very Turks, Ezekiel. 36.20.
yea, our Nation (the members of it) in peril wheresoever they came, as
Merchants and Travelers know. Lastly, Dangerous unto the same Churches. First,
As objecting them to suspicion of their Princes, as has appeared in the horrid
Massacres of the poor brethren in Piedmont.
the Duke of Savoy's Dominions since. Then by animating Holland, where an
insurrection being made in Rotterdam, or some Town thereabout, against the
Magistrate, the seditious cried out, that they were slaves, but the Englishmen
brave fellows. This is known, and I received it from a grave Minister, several
years since, of one of the Dutch Congregations in England. And thus much of the
third argument, taken from the matter of the Covenant.

I come now to the last, from the scope and end of it, 4. Argument that the
Covenant binds not, taken from the scope and end of it.
from whence the nullity of its obligation will be further evidenced. The
purpose was to strengthen and foment an unnatural civil war in the State, and
Schism in the Church; to maintain the body, a great part of it, against the
head; to unsettle the doctrine of Religion, the Worship, Discipline, and
Government of the Church; to ruin all those honest and upright-hearted
brethren, that were more tender of their duty to God and the King. Now had the
Oath been good in it self, and the authority sufficient that imposed it; yet
such a design being visible and declared, it were void by the very purpose of
it; much more when failing in those and other particulars, as has been
evidenced. It was forbidden to swear, Jer. 4.2.
The Lord lives, unless in truth, in righteousness, and in judgment; that is,
for righteous purposes, though the words were good. Paul would not circumcise
there, Gal. 2.5. 1 Cor. 1.
where he saw the ill use they meant to make of it; nay, he would not Baptize.

But it may be objected, that granting all this, Ob ect. Yet so far as it is
good, it binds.
and that from thence it follows, that it should not have been taken; or being
taken, that though in all things it binds not; yet in those that are lawful and
good, it being taken, and God solemnly invocated, as we shall answer at the
dreadful day of judgment, that we took it with a true intention in those it
binds. Not as any part of that Covenant.
To which I answer, by a twofold distinction. First, The Covenant is to be
considered either per se, and of it self, as a public National Covenant,
imposed by the power that then was: Or else per accidens, as there was
occasionally joined with it a personal and particular stipulation and oath of
every man for himself. Now in the former sense, and as the National public
Covenant imposed by such Power; in regard the Oath it self was contradictory to
former lawful Oaths, imposed by unsufficient power in opposition to the Legal,
and in the matter of it seditious, schismatical, and injurious, as also in the
scope and end: It is wholly void in the obligation of it. But in the latter
sense, as there was conjoined accidently therewith, a particular and personal
swearing of each man for himself, it may have an obligation in the sense of the
next distinction, which is. That this Covenant must be formally and entirely,
as such an Oath and Covenant in concreto, Any Record or Deed vitiated in any
one part, makes void the whole in Law, say the Brethren. Necessity of Reform.
p. 36.
and in the whole, containing such a body of Articles. Secondly, materially and
as having in it some particulars, that taken thence and by themselves, might
not be unlawful to swear unto. Now in the former sense, as any thing in the
Covenant is a part of it, as that public Covenant proposed by such Power, and
containing such illegal matter, as a whole, and body; so it all, and every
thing therein contained, is void, invalid, But accidentally. Bonum ex
inintegris causis, malum ex quolibet defectu. Dr. Sanders de juram.
and unlawful to be kept. Because if in a body of an engagement, any part be
unlawful, the whole is so. But in the other sense, as there happened by
accident to be in it some things lawful to be sworn unto, (as to preserve what
is good in one Church, and to endeavor orderly to reform what may possibly be
found amiss in the other, etc.) may, and does bind; but not as parts of that
Covenant, imposed by that Power, etc. but as a private and personal Engagement,
Ezekiel. 16.61. And as a private Oath.
Oath, and Covenant, and as made by a man in his chamber, obliging only by the
matters, and the invocation of the Name of God upon them, whereunto each man
was accidentally drawn by that occasion. The same obligation lying upon him, if
on any other occasion he had in his closet sworn to those things, and no
otherwise; nor with any reference at all to that Covenant. I conclude therefore
in reference to the Covenant, as that Covenant and Oath, it binds not neither
in whole nor in part.

But it may be further objected: out of Josh. 9.19.
That when Joshua and the Princes had sworn, though in a thing forbidden, they
took themselves obliged to keep it. First, it would be a good answer, ad
hominem, Calvin. in loc. Videmus itaque ut Nomen Dei bis prosanaverint, dum
praetextu juramenti pertinaciter desendunt, quod stultum promiserant. Tremel.
in loc. Deuteronomy. 20.10. Aug. Q. in Josh. cap. 14.
to return unto these persons the exposition of Calvin, whom in this Covenant,
particularly about Church Discipline, they do perversely imitate, (himself being
of another spirit) who says in this place, That the Princes did rashly to
swear, and foolishly to keep it; because the Oath was void ipso facto, being
against express prohibition of God himself. But others more agreeably judge,
the thing was not unlawful, seeing (though deceitfully) they did seek peace,
which the Lord elsewhere allows to be granted. Or as St. Austin; For the
honor of Gods Name, and the commendation of clemency, and, on Gods part, the
reward of their faith. I shall for close, propound the greatest examples
opposite in this argument; of an Oath, and about killing, both of them, as this
Covenant is (for that is the scope to maintain the War against the King and the
Church) namely, of two Kings, David and Herod; the one after Gods own heart,
the other after Satan's. Of the first: Video pium hominem and sanctum, Aug. de
decollat. Joh. Bapt. Tom. 10. page ed. lovan. 438. cap. 2.
in temerariam jurationem cecidisse: and maluisse non facere quod juraverat,
quam jurationem suam fuso hominis sanguine implere. I see a good and holy man
fallen into a rash oath and adjuration, and choosing rather not to perform,
what by oath he had pre-ingaged, than by the effusion of human blood to perfect
it, Says St. Austin. And of the other: Ubi videbat cruentum facinus, Idem
ibid. cap. 1.
ibi rursum timebat reatum perjurii. Ne Deum offenderet pe^erando, Deum
offendit saeviendo. Where he saw a bloody villainy, there he feared the guilt of
perjury; and lest he should offend God by forswearing, there he offended God by
cruel murdering; says the same Author.

Subsect. 2. What the Covenant obliges to.
THus far has been shown, that the Covenant, in reference to the performance
of the contents of it, binds not: Yet does it bind and oblige very strongly.
For, Ecce sanctus David, non quidem juratus sanguinem hominis fudit: sed eum
falsum jurasse negare quis poterit? de duobus peccatis elegit mi^us: sed minus
fuit illud in conparatione majoris. Nam per seipsum appensum, magnum malum est
falsa juratio. Behold holy David, Aug. ubi supra, cap. 3.
he would not shed a man's blood, though he had sworn it: But who can deny but
that he was forsworn? of two evils he chose the least. It was indeed the least
in comparison of the greater; but else of it self, false swearing is a great
sin; Says the same St. Austin. Now great sins do bind and oblige unto deep
repentance. As Paul in another case, 2 Cor. x2. ult.
I must bewail, says he, those that committed these lasciviousnesses, and have
not repented. Job 42.
We must, as Job did, after he had spoken words, that he understood not, to
God, even abhor our selves, and repent in dust and ashes. And with the blessed
Apostle, we must be humbled as often as we reflect upon it, and think the worse
of of our selves as long as we live, as he did for his sin, though not
committed in light as ours was: 1 Cor. 15.
I am not worthy (says he) to be called an Apostle, because I persecuted the
Church of God. So every one of us; I am not worthy to be called a Christian, a
subject of the Kings, or a son of the Church, because I entered into this
Covenant: But yet, with his comfort, and some kind of recompense where he had
cone the wrong, viz. Yet by the grace of God I am what I am; that is, a
penitent, and a convert; and as a token of it, I labored more abundantly then
they all, that had not so offended. As it is also prophesied in this cause some
should do. Eicon Basilic. Medit. 27. Prove. 24.21, 22.
And let us for the future fear God and the King, and not meddle with them that
are given to change (the government of Church and State) for their destruction
has come suddenly, and who foreknew the ruin of them both? i. e. those that
have both deserted God in his Church, and the King in the State and
Commonwealth. Prove. 1.10.
And if hereafter sinners in that kind entice thee, consent thou not; no,
though they should say, Come, we will have all one purse. For they lay wait for
their own blood, as we have seen. And let us not deceive our selves: one horn
of this dilemma will wound us: Either the Covenant is to be literally kept, or
else repented of. Remember, palliations, expositions, and evasions here will do
no good: Prove. 28.13. Psalm. 32. Numb. 32.23.
For he that covers this sin shall not prosper. And whilst we hold our peace,
our bones will consume through Gods heavy hand upon us. And our sin will find
us out. For there is no darkness nor shadow of death, Job 34.22.
where the workers of iniquity may hide themselves, says Elihu. And thus far
of the general exceptions against the Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and
Government of the Church of England; viz. That they are unnecessary,
inconvenient, humane inventions; Apocryphal, Popish, not established by Law:
And an Engagement and Covenant, for the removing or reforming of them.

CHAP. III.
Grounds of Separation, and Exceptions particular against the Matter of the
Premises.
SECT. I. Against the Articles or Doctrine.
2. Exceptions particular, against the matter of the premises. Independents
excepts not. Apologet. narrat. page 29.
PRoceed we now unto the Exceptions particular, namely, against the matter of
the Doctrine, Worship, Assemblies, Discipline, and Government. And, first of
those against the Articles or Doctrine. The Independent or dissenting Brethren
acknowledge, That in the review and examination of the Articles of our Church
(so are their words) our judgments (say they) have still concurred with the
greatest part of our Brethren; neither do we know wherein we have dissented.
Some Presbyters now do.
But certain of the Presbyterian Brethren do dissent, and object against them,
first, doubtfulness; secondly, error; thirdly, tyranny in the act requiring
subscription; Necessity of Reform. page 1. etc. 1. Doubtfulness.
and fourthly, defectiveness and imperfection. First, doubtfulness, because in
the book of Articles now printed, and ever since 10 Carol. 1. there is a
declaration of his late Majesty to the Articles, to this effect. 1. That those
Articles contain the true Doctrine of the Church of England, agreeable to Gods
Word. 2. That the Clergy upon just occasion may have liberty from the King,
Kings deelar. before the Articles.
under the Broad Seal, to deliberate on such things as make for the
establishment of the same doctrine; yet so, that no varying in the least degree
should be endured. 3. That no man should put his own sense upon them, but take
the Articles in the literal and grammatical sense; page 2.
whence the Brethren infer, that by this Declaration, no Minister shall have
liberty to interpret any one of these Articles. And therefore they will remain
doubtful. But first, per se, and in the Articles themselves; but per accidens,
and in reference to this declaration. Again, though they are proh^bited to put
any new sense, as the King speaks; or their own sense, as the Judge in Smiths
case; Necessity of Reform. p. 5.
yet are they not forbidden to explain the literal and grammatical sense. The
Scripture, in the fundamentals of salvation; also the Laws and Acts of
Parliament, are so to be taken; and yet Divines there, and Judges here, have
ever been allowed to open those senses, or else the one must not preach, nor
the other declare Law. Thirdly, when unto that liberty viz. That from the
Doctrine established, the least varying shall not be endured; and that nothing
shall be concluded contrary to the Laws and Customs of the Land; is there not a
fair assurance, that the present doctrine shall remain fixed; and that if any
heterodox sense shall be put upon them, it shall be lawful to oppose the
literal and grammatical sense, whether in the Article or Explication. Fourthly,
when the Declaration We will, that all further curious search be laid aside,
and these disputes shut up in Gods promises, as they be generally set forth
unto us in the holy Scripture: This refers especially to the seventh Article,
touching Predestination, etc. whose words in the latter part they are. Lastly,
Ministers are not prohibited absolutely from searching, but from that which is
curious,

The second exception is their erroneousness, 2. Error.
for on this the Brethren insist, though under the other covered head of
doubtfulness. First, because it is said, Not every deadly sin committed
willingly after Baptism, Artic. 16.
is a sin against the holy Ghost; they infer, that the Church holds the
distinction of venial and deadly sin, which is Popish. What if the Article
speak in the then received language, and according to such distinction, not
owning of it therefore in the sense held by the adversary, but using it for the
purpose they had in hand? viz. that, though all sins be deadly of themselves,
yet seeing some are greater than other; grant the worst, which they call deadly
sin, (as we usually express a great evil by that word, that it is a deadly one,
as a deadly grief, a deadly mischief.) yet is not every such, a sin against the
holy Ghost; especially when the Church has in other places so plainly declared
her self to the people, as in the Homilies, Catechism, and Common Prayer Book;
in the last whereof it prescribes confession of sins to be made twice every
day, by all the Congregation. Now it is not to be thought, that every one is
guilty of deadly sin every day in the sense expressed; so that the people are
in no great danger by that expression. And the Articles declaring, Artic. 11.
Artic. 22.
that we are accounted righteous before God, only for the merit of our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ. And that there is none other satisfaction for sin,
but that (offering of Christ) alone; and damning of all Purgatory, Pardons,
worshipping of Images, and Relics, and invocation of Saints, do declare they
count no sin in it self venial, but by the blood of Artic. 20. where because
it is said, The Church has power to decree Rites and Ceremonies, and authority
in controversies of faith: Because the Kings declaration, and the Act before
that, say, That the Articles must be taken in the literal and grammatical
sense; they infer, 'That if a Convocation declare any thing in the premises,
they must assent and subscribe in the literal sense, or be deprived. But I it
is not forbidden either by that Act, or the Kings Declaration, to enquire the
literal sense, and so to examine them nor 2 are they required by that
declaration, to subscribe to what a Synod shall conclude, in the literal and
grammatical sense of such conclusions or Canons; but only to the literal and
grammatical sense of the Articles. This therefore is a captious inference, upon
the Declaration and the Act. And so much more are their exceptions Article,
That whosoever, through his own private judgment, willingly and purposely, does
openly break the Traditions and Ceremonies of the Church, which be not
repugnant unto the Word of God, and be ordained by common authority, etc. But
are there not three or four Cautions in it, that should defend it from all
calumny? 1. That these Traditions and Rites must not be repugnant to the Word
of God. 2. That they be established by common Authority. 3. That a man do
transgress of his own private judgment. And 4. willingly, purposely. Yea and 5.
openly. This exception takes away the obedience to all Church-Laws, yea, to
all Civil Laws; they may as well except against subscribing, if any such Act
were, to the sense of this Article applied to the Laws of the Kingdom. As
suppose they should be enjoined to subscribe: That, whosoever shall, through
his private judgment, willingly and purposely, openly, break the Laws of the
Land, which be not repugnant to the Word of God, and be ordained by common
Authority; and to take these words of the Act in the literal and grammatical
sense, without putting their own private or new sense upon it, etc. Would not
such persons be thought unworthy to have any place in any Commonwealth, that
should refuse? And why then in the Church? surely they must be both (...) and
(...) men without yoke, and without use, (and that per (...)) that is,
pernicious unto all Societies, and men of Belial. 3. Artic. 35.
Their third exception is against Artic. 35. wherein is required the
subscribing to the Book of Homilies, as a godly and wholesome doctrine, and
necessary for these times. Against this they object, that there are false
doctrines or assertions in them. First, in Homilies is intended by the Church,
The Homilies, how to be understood in Subscription.
not in so punctual and verbal a degree, as is required unto the Articles, as
appears, because the Articles are to be distinctly and severally read, and the
expressions in them every one assented to; the Homilies not so, but only as
they agree with the Articles, which are the superior rule unto them. Not
therefore to every expression or sentence, no, nor doctrine nor assertion, if
any were contrary to the definitive doctrine of the Articles. All men know,
that there is a greater latitude of expression allowed to popular Sermons, as
the Homilies are, than to Articles. And the Brethren would have their Sermons
to contain necessary and wholesome doctrine; yet perhaps will not be so hardy
as to affirm, that they may not have uttered some sentences, not so true or
congruous, if exactly scanned; or that nullnm unquam verbum emisit (eorum
quisque) quod revocare vellet; as he said above. And lest there should any
inconvenience arise to the people (though now the danger is little, the
Homilies being so much, if not too much, laid aside) the Common Prayer and
reading of the Scripture publicly, together with preaching according to the
Articles, are provided as a remedy. Yea, which is more, if one Homily speak
less warily in any material point, it is corrected in another, as in the Homily
of Alms-deeds, seeming in one passage or so to ascribe some kind of merit unto
them (though it does not, taking the word properly) yet it explaineth it
beforehand in another, namely, in the Homily of Salvation, or Justification,
wherein that doctrine is excellently set forth; as also in the Homily of Faith.
So when in the Tobith is cited as Scripture, not only the Article does
regulate that expression, but every ones Bible also. Instructions to Preachers,
Artic. 1. Ann. 1622.
Besides, every exhortatory expression must not be called a doctrine, or an
assertion; but that which as a point, is purposely insisted on to be
maintained; of which sort I believe verily, the Brethren will never be able to
instance in any one out of the Homilies. And indeed, had they observed the
instructions of King James, (above mentioned) viz. That no preacher under the
degree and calling of a Bishop, or Dean of a Cathedral, or Collegiat Church,
(and they upon the Kings days, and Festival days) do take occasion by the
expounding of any Text of Scripture whatsoever, to fall into any set discourse,
or common place, (otherwise than by opening the coherence and division of his
Text) which shall not be comprehended and warranted in essence, substance,
effect, and natural inference, within some one of the Articles of Religion, set
forth 1562. or in some of the Homilies, Note.
set forth by authority in the Church of England, not only for a help for the
non-preaching; but withal for a pattern and boundary (as it were) for the
preaching Ministers. And for their further instruction for the performance
hereof, that they forthwith read over and peruse diligently the said Book of
Articles, and the two books of Homilies. This, I say, had they observed, the
sound, godly, and comfortable doctrine therein contained, might perhaps have so
endeared them, as not to be traduced by them so reproachfully; that I say not,
their peoples edification, the Kingdoms quiet, and their own peace, might have
been more then now it is, or like to be.

As to particulars: the instances they give are few in number (but two) and
weak in strength, to bear up so heavy a charge as false doctrine. The first is
out of the Homily of the time and place of prayer, part. 1. Particular
exception against the Homilies.
2. it is said, that therefore plurality of wives was by special prerogative
suffered to the Fathers of the old Testament -- because every one hoped and
prayed, that the blessed seed that should break the Serpents head, might come
of his stock. The Brethren except, As if every one did not know out of what
Tribe Christ was to issue? I answer, No; for these words may refer unto the
Fathers more ancient, before any distinction of Tribes were. Secondly, After
the distinction of Tribes, it was long before this truth was made known, and
not till the latter Prophets, if even by them understood of the people. The
next place is out of the Homil. of Alms-deeds, part. 2. page 160. The same
lesson does the Holy Ghost teach us in sundry places of Scripture, saying,
Mercifulness and almsgiving, purges from all sins, and delivers from death,
and suffers not the soul to come into darkness. -- The wise Preacher, the son
of Sirach, confirms the same, when he says, That as water quenches burning
fire, even so mercy and alms resists and reconcileth sins. Two particular
places excepted against.
Against this passage they have three Exceptions: 1. Against the expression,
reconcileth sins; excellent sense, say they: Well, we shall see how good theirs
will be anon. 2. Against the matter. 3. Against the proof of it: first, for the
matter, they say that a charitable construction of them may be wyar-drawn,
implying, they are not simply justifiable. But why did not the Brethren retain
so much ingenuity, (I say, not honesty) as to give the Homilies own explication
of them, which in that very page and the next, says, But ye shall understand,
How good works do away sins.
dearly beloved, that neither those places of Scripture before alleged,
neither the doctrine of the blessed Martyr Cyprian, neither any other godly and
learned man, when they in extolling the dignity, profit, fruit and effect of
virtuous and liberal alms, do say, that it washes away sins, and brings us
to the favor of God, do mean, that our works and charitable deeds is the
original cause of our acceptance before God; or that for the dignity or
worthiness thereof, our sins may be washed away, and we purged and cleansed of
all the spots of our iniquity: for that were indeed to deface Christ, Note.
and to defraud him of his glory. But they mean this, and this is the
understanding of those and such like sayings: That God of his mercy and special
favor toward them whom he has appointed to everlasting salvation, has so
offered his grace especially, and they have so received it fruitfully, that
although by reason of their sinful living outwardly, they seemed before to have
been the children of wrath and perdition; yet now the Spirit of God mightily
working in them, unto obedience unto Gods will and commandments, they declare
by their outward deeds and life in the showing of mercy and charity (which
cannot come but of the spirit of God and his especial grace) that they are the
undoubted children of God, appointed to everlasting life.

And a little after: The meaning then of these sayings in the Scriptures and
other holy Writings; How to understand the Script. and Fathers concerning good
works.
Alms-deeds do wash away our sins, and mercy to the poor does blot out our
offenses; is, That we doing these things according to Gods will, and our duty,
have our sins indeed washed away, and our offenses blotted out: not for the
worthiness of them, but by the grace of God, Note.
which works all in all. And that for the promise that God has made to them
that are obedient to his commandment, that he which is the truth might be
justified in performing the truth, due to his promise. Alms-deeds do wash away
our sins, because God does vouchsafe then to repute us as clean and pure, when
we do them for his sake, and not because they deserve or merit our purging,
Note.
or for that they have any such strength or merit in themselves. In which
words, a double account is given of those expressions in Scripture, which seem
to attribute justification and salvation unto good works. First, Because they
declare a man to be the child of God, and to be endued with his Spirit, and so
do evidence that his sins are pardoned. Secondly, Because God has unto
believers promised a reward unto his own graces, and especially that of Love,
and that which is ( prima charitatis deificantis filia eleemosyna, as
Theophylact calls it) the eldest daughter of divine Charity, Almes-giving. Then
which, what could be spoken more Orthodox, or more comfortable, I know not. But
secondly, Lest they should say these Answers are invented is delivered by our
Savior Christ and his Apostles. Matthew. 5.7. Chap. 6.14.
As where he says, Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy.
Again, If ye forgive, your Heavenly Father will forgive you (which proceeds
upon the same ground. Luke 11.41.
) Also, Give alms of such things as ye have, and behold all things are clean
unto you. Calvan Harm.
Which Calvin expounds in this sense. And in the next Chapt. Sell that ye have
and give Alms; Provide your selves bags which wax not old; Luke 12.33.
A treasure in the Heavens that fails not, etc. And that expression, Love
covers a multitude of sins; is used by the Apostle Peter, 1 Pet. 4.8. Gal. 5.6.
as well as James, to the same effect. And the Apostle St. Paul implies, that
faith only which works by love, to be effectual to obtain forgiveness of sins.
Jam. 2.
And St. James proves as well concerning love as faith, that if it have not
Almsgiving, it is uneffectual, as those words; If a brother or a sister be
naked or destitute of daily food, and one say, Go, be warmed, be filled, and
give him not that which is needful for the body, what does it profit? that is,
what proof of love is here? 1 Timothy 6.19.
And Paul exhorts rich men by good works, to lay up for themselves a good
foundation, that they may lay hold on eternal life; Explained.
There is a foundation of right, whereby we have title to eternal life, and
that is faith, if it be a living one: Foundation of salvation double. The right
of it such also.
And there is a foundation of assurance, and that is by good works. Again,
There is an original right, and that is by faith in the general promise, the
Covenant of Grace. And there is a collateral right, and that is by good works,
whereunto particular promises are made. Homil. of Amlsd. p. 161.
But, as our Author says, I know some men will not be contented with this
answer, and no marvel; for such men, can no answer content or suffice. I have
done with their Exception against the matter, Alms-deeds and the efficacy of
them.

proof, or the title of it rather: Chap. 4.10. Ecclus. 3.30.
That the Book of Tobith being cited for proof, it is said, that the Holy Ghost
did teach in sundry places of Scripture; and this Book named, whence they
infer: 1. That the Book of Tobith is here taken for holy Scripture. 2. That it
was indicted by the Holy Ghost. But for answer. When things seem double to the
eye that are single, it is an argument that either their optics or their
understanding is defective. In all other men's eyes, for a Book to be holy
Scripture, vice versa. But if they spoke that they did not think, if their
hearts were worse then their head, we may here retort upon them their own
reproach upon the Hom. excellent sense. Secondly, I answer with the Learned
Whitaker; De Sacr. Script. Q. 1. cap. 11.
Non est idem, esse canonicam Scripturam, and computari in numerum sacrarum
Scripturarum: It is not the same thing to be Canonical Scripture, Apocrypha,
how Script.
and to be counted in the number of holy Scripture. Computantur enim in numero
Scripturarum, quae cum sacris Scripturis leguntur ad aedificationem plebis,
etsi non ad dogmatum confirmationem. They are counted, says he, in the number
of the Books of Scripture, which are read with Scripture for the edification of
the Church, although not for the confirmation of Articles of Faith. The
Articles therefore having excluded these Books from holy Scripture, Artic. 6.
as themselves note.
and every ones Bible having it in the Apocrypha, that expression might be born
in a popular Sermon, though not in a determination in the Schools. But
Secondly, The Homily says, the Holy Ghost says Scripture. As if, Apocrypha,
how from the holy Ghost.
as he called it Scripture in a large sense, so he might not ascribe it to the
Holy Ghost in a like sense also; yet not as any truth (especially in matters of
Religion) may be so ascribed, but because it is so consonant unto those very
expressions which the Holy Ghost has in the undoubted Scripture, touching the
same matter, as we saw above, out of the Sermons of our Savior, and writings
of the Apostles. But Thirdly, (because I love plainness) What if I grant that
the Homily, being penned very early, and Books, at least in the Synod 1562. or
were confirmed by Parl. And whilst it was still in the peoples minds, (being
so formerly taught) that those Books Were Scripture; what if, to avoid offense
in a popular Sermon, the Homily spoke according to the then received opinion;
as the holy Evangelists and Apostles oftentimes follow the Greek Translation,
differing from the Hebrew, because it was generally received, and the errors
not such as overthrew the faith; Rome, our brethren of the Nation, and others
affected that way, may see we do not reject wholly those Books out of the
number of holy Scriptures in some sense, and as inditements of the holy Ghost
in such things as they have agreeable to Psalms and Epistles and Gospels after
the old Translation, not only for the cause now named; but also to be as a
picture of the face of the Church in its infancy here; that the growth of it
since, in knowledge and distinct understanding of things, might the better
appear. Though it must be avowed, that if any man, Galat. 1.
yea, or an Angel from Heaven preach any other Doctrine, than what is already
and then was established in the Articles, Homilies and Liturgies, let Lastly,
It is very probable, that the things not being of any dangerous consequences as
they stood, Ipsae quippe mutatio consuetudinis, etia^ quae adjuvat utilitate,
novitate perturbat Aug. Januar. Ep. 118. c. 5.
and the changing of them might be not only very difficult, (for some things
must have been much altered and detruncated) but also give occasion of calumny
to the adversary, and of scandal to the weak, it was thought better to let them
stand; lest it should be said, the Doctrine or Worship was altered, and not the
same as at the Reformation. Art. 37.
The last place they except against, is Art. 37. where the Queen being named,
and we enjoined to read the Articles as they are, we may not (they say) turn
the word Queen unto King: which Exception, because it foameth out their own
shame, Jud. v. 13.
as the Apostle speaks; representing them to be men of a captious and
quarrelsome spirit, shall receive no other answer.

But be the Articles true or false, 3. Tyranny in the Act, requiring
subscription to the Articles. Page 5.
they urge the repealing of the Act requiring absolute subscription unto them,
upon another ground, viz. Because (say they) if we may not subscribe without an
addition, (so far forth as the same Articles are agreeable to Gods Word) it
must needs be granted, that the Composers of them are admitted to be
infallible, and their Articles of equal authority with the Canonical
Scriptures: or else that the Statute intended to tyrannize over the consciences
of men, The Br. object. Tyranny to Q. Eliz. and the Parl.
which is not to be imagined. To this, first in general: If this Reason be
admitted; it does not only overthrow all constitutions that concern Religion,
whether made by Church or State, whenever any turbulent spirit shall fancy
them not to be according to the Word: And to all States and Churches.
But it condemns also all the Reformed Churches, yea, all the Churches and
Christian States that are or ever have been I think in the world. And
particularly, majorem in modum, and in a special manner, the Church of Geneva,
Chapter of Geneva requires conformity by Oath. Revel. 13.11.
and Calvin's Discipline, where they are obliged thereunto by oath. But to the
dilemma in particular; neither of the two Horns of this Lamb that speaks like a
Dragon, have any strength. Have they forgotten, or never learned that boys are
taught in the very rudiments of Logic and reasoning: Kek. Log l. 3. c. 12.
can. 7.
Quod per bonam consequentiam ex testimonio aliquo divino elicitur, id EANDEM
cum eo vim habet. That what by good consequence is drawn from Scripture, has
the same force that Scripture has. Did not our Savior and all the Apostles
prove their Doctrine so, unto those that received nothing from them but what
they proved? Do not the Brethren think their Sermons and this their Book ought
to be obeyed absolutely, and in all the points they have excepted? And indeed a
good consequence is nothing but a natural effect. Consequences.
And an effect is of the same nature with its cause; yea, (as one says)
nothing else but the cause in act, or at least the cause is in the effect: R.
Hook. l. 5.
so is Scripture in the true consequences of it. And yet subscription to such
conclusions do not argue the Authors to be infallible; but only to be eyes unto
the weaker-sighted to see the light by. Tert. Advers. Haeret.
Omnia quidem dicta Domini omnibus posita sunt, quae per aures judaeorum ad nos
pervenerunt. Gods Word is propounded unto all, but it comes to us by the ears,
and so by the eyes of others. And because men are called to subscribe, and not
children, who should have their eyes, their subscription only acknowledges
that the Church and State have taken a true sample from the original, leaving
this still as the standard, as prior tempore, ordine, natura and dignitate.
Such are all the true determinations of Judges, in reference to the Law: as
Deuteronomy. 17. They shall expound the Law to thee. And the disobedient there was
punished with death, for contempt of the sentence of the Church and State, and
yet their determinations were not of equal authority, but of equal force, with
the Law it self. So here.

Lamb or dilemma: That else the statute did intend to tyrannize over the
conscience, which, they say, is not to be imagined, Oportuit -- esse memorem:
Did not the Brethren in the very lines immediately going before acknowledge,
yea, urge it as an argument out of Sir Edw. Coke, who says, He heard Wray
Chief Justice of the K. Bench, Pasch. 23 Eliz. (quoting Dier 23 Eliz. 377. lib.
6. fol. 69. Greens case, Smiths case) report, that where one Smith subscribed
to the 39 Articles of Religion, with this addition, (so far forth as the same
were agreeable to the Word of God) that it was resolved by him and all the
Judges of England, that this subscription was not according to the Statute of
Eliz 13. Because the Statute required an absolute subscription, and this
subscription made it conditional. And that this Act was made for avoiding
diversity of opinions, etc. And by this addit^on, the party, might by his own
private opinion, take some of them to be against the Word of God; and by this
means diversity of opinions should not be avoided, which was the scope of the
Statute; and the very Act it self made touching subscription, hereby by of none
effect. Thus far their own quotation. So then it is evident by the words
themselves quoted just before, and by the sentence of all the Judges of
England, that the Statute requires absolute subscription; which if it do, they
say, it did intend to tyrannize over the consciences of men: So then Q. Eliz.
and that Parl. with all the Kings and Parliaments since that have confirmed
that Act were Tyrants. It concerns the present Parl. to vindicate their
predecessors in this point also. To what they add concerning men's subscribing
Subscription of young men.
and before their judgments be mature. It is answered, first, Those admitted to
the Ministry, though they may be as Timothy was, but young in age, yet they are
not to be Novices in knowledge. And Subscription is a good bond upon them, Use
of subscription.
both for the peoples good, and their own, to preserve them from novelties and
apostasy. But so that no man is engaged against the Word of God. I hope then,
they will not urge the obligation of the Covenant, upon those who have not had
time or solidity thoroughly to ponder and weigh all the Articles thereof in the
balance of the Sanctuary, and in the scale of the Law, as they phrase it.

To the last of this head. The liberty given to tender Liberty to tender
consciences.
is to be in things of lesser not of fundamental consequence, and in the
Articles of the Faith; for then, how should the Magistrate be custos utriusque
tabulae. How should the Prince perform his trust of the souls as well as the
bodies, estates and names of his people. How should there be one God, one
Faith, one Baptism in a particular Church, and we all with one mouth glorify
God. This is also against the practice of all Churches; we have no such
custom, 1 Cor. 11.
nor the Churches of God. Thus much in reply to their three general first
object. against the Articles. 1. Their doubtfulnesse. 2. Their erroniousness;
and 3. The exacting of subscription to them.

viz. Their defectiveness and imperfection. Defectiveness of the Artic.
Where the first Exception is that, Art. 6. it is said that; In the name of the
holy Scripture we understand those Canonical Books of the Old and New
Testament, of whose Authority there was never any doubt in the Church. The
Brethren oppose, that some Books and passages of the New Testament have been
doubted of, as the Epistle of James, the second Epistle of Peter. The Article
they say is defective, in not enumerating all the Books of the New Testament
(as it had done those of the Old, and of the Apocrypha) comprehending them only
under this expression, All the Books of the New Testament as they are commonly
received. These words of the Article, being the former contains no matter of
doctrine, namely those: of which there was never any doubt in the Church; and
the latter; All the Books of the New Testament as they are commonly received
being plain and evident, (all Christians now agreeing in the number of them
throughout Europe:) The exception against them might have been omitted, as
tending to raise scruples in the minds of the people; unless this Tract of the
Brethren had been presented in writing, and not published in print. But that
this scruple may not extend it self too far, I shall name such, as to my
remembrance have been at any time doubted of. They are the second Epistle of
Peter, See a very full Confutation of these doubts in Bellarm. de verb. D. lib.
1 cap. 16. and seqq. Tertul. Cont. Marcion. l. 4. Hieron. pro^em. in Epist ad
Titum. Eusebius. l. 3. c 3. Calvin says it was by the cunning of the Devil, that
the Epist. to the Hebrews should be doubted of, because it speaks so full y of
Christ's Priesthood.
the second and third of John, the Epistle of Jude, and by some, the History of
the Adulteress, John 8.1. the last Chapter of that Gospel, the Epistle to the
Hebrews, the Epistle of James, and the Revelation. But first, these doubters
were some of them Heretics, as Marcion, Tatianus, etc. Secondly, This doubt
did not spread it self in the Church, but was only of some private persons.
Again, It was before the Church had generally consented in them. The Churches
motives in receiving books of Scripture.
Which having the same grounds of divine authority for them, as for the rest,
both in regard of the 1 Antiquity, and 2 general reception of them; as also in
regard of the 3 consonancy of them, with the doctrine of all the other
Scripture; 4 and the enlargement and explanation of the same doctrine by them;
5 and further, the Presence of the Holy Ghost in efficacy by the matter of
them, thereby setting his seal unto them. Upon these and the like grounds, has
the Universal Church received them, as the other. I answer therefore in the
words of Bullinger, (Professor of the Church of Tigur) in this very argument:
De sacris libris and eor. dignitate Exposit. premiss. ante Biblia Tigurin.
Nec magnopere curandum existimo quod a quibusdam traditur, quosdam veterum
dubitasse de Epistola ad Hebraeos, de epistola posteriore Petri and Judae, de
epistola Jacobi and Apocalypsi: Quid enim ad nos quod pauci aliquot, suis
affectibus corrupti, de rebus certis and authenticis Authoribus dubitarunt.
Neither are we much to mind (says he) what is said by some, namely, that
certain of the Ancients did doubt of the Epistle to the Hebrews, of the second
Epistle of Peter, and of that of Jude, of the Epistle of James, and of the
Revelation. For what is it to us what some few, corrupted by their depraved
affections, have judged, concerning things certain, and these undoubted
Authors. Thus far he. Whence it appears, it might truly be said, there was
never any doubt in the Church of these books, because either the persons were
not of the Church, but Heretics that doubted, or else were some few perverted
judgments; it never came so far as to be a doubt in the Church. So much for the
first Exception.

The next is, they are defective, because the Articles Popery and Arminianism,
Predestination abused, universal Redemption, universal Grace, the manner of
Conversion and falling from grace; which King James procured the Synod of Dort
to confute, and for which the late Synod at London is so much maligned. To
this, first in general. always counted, both the wisdom and the tenderness, not
only of the English, but of the ancient Church, to make Articles of faith,
whereunto all, especially Ministers, Conf. Hamp. Court, p. 39.
must subscribe, to be but few. First, It being unfit to thrust into the Book
every position, negative (or affirmative) which would make the Book swell into
a volume as big as the Bible, and also confound the Reader, says King James.
When such questions arise among Scholars, page 40.
the quietest proceeding were, to determine them in the Universities, and not
to stuff the Book (of Articles) with all conclusions Theological. Secondly, The
better course would be, to punish the broachers of false doctrine, as occasion
should be offered. For were the Articles never so many and sound, who can
prevent the contrary opinions of men till they be heard. Thus the King. Ep. 57.
ad Dardanum.
St. Austin says, Regulam fidei pusillis magnisque communem, in Ecclesia
tenent. The rule of faith is common to the weak and to the wise. Hence my Lord
Primate of Ireland infers; That the rule of faith must contain such truths
ONLY, B. Ushers answ. to the Jesuit, page 417.
as are GENERALLY agreed upon by the consent of all true Christians. And
accordingly we see the Creed called the Apostles, the Nicene, the
Constantinopolitan, and Athanasian how short they are; now they were the
Articles of Religion of those times. The Articles of Ireland are larger, but
taken for the most part ad verbum, out of our Articles, Homilies, and
Common Prayer Book.

But secondly, why do the Brethren urge more Articles, James, Arminius, yet you
heard even now, he was averse also from having the contrary doctrines inserted
into the Articles, farther then they are already, for one of them (falling from
grace) was there the question. Conf. Hamp. Court. page 39.40.
And as opposite he was to the preaching of them to the people, as appears by
these words; That no Preacher of what title soever, under the degree of a
Bishop or Dean at the least, do from henceforth presume to preach in any
popular auditory, the deep points of Predestination, Election, K. James
Instructions to Preachers, Ann. 1622. Art^c. 3.
Reprobation; or of the universality, efficacy, resistibility, or
irresistibility of Gods grace; but leave those themes to be handled by the
learned men, and that moderately and modestly, by way of use and application,
rather than by way of positive Doctrine, as being more fit for the Schools and
Universities, than for simple Auditories. You see the King whom you quote, is
not of your mind. 4. As to the matters themselves, the Articles speak
sufficiently of them so far, as to clear what is most necessary in them. As the
eighth Article of Original sin, the tenth Article of Free Will, the seventeenth
Article of Predestination and Election; leaving what is disputable and
uncomfortable to be gathered from what is expressed. 5. As to the Assembly,
they are not condemned by all men for their conclusions in those points; but
for convelling and tearing up the foundations of many generations in As the
invisibility of the Catholic Church. etc.
Doctrine, Worship, and Discipline, without legitimate Authority, and for other
things, which need not here be named.

Their third instance of the defectiveness of the Articles that they speak
nothing of the creation, of providence, fall of man, of sin, of the punishment
of sin, of Gods Covenants, effectual calling, Adoption, Sanctification, Faith,
Repentance, Perseverance, of the Law of God, Christian Liberty, and liberty of
conscience, Religious worship, of the Sabbath or Lords day, of Marriage and
Divorce, the Communion of Saints, Church Government and Discipline, of the
Resurrection, or of the last Judgment. All which the Scripture teach as
necessary, and are comprised in the Apostles creed. That the Assemblies
Confession has all these, and that with proofs of Scripture, which the
Articles want. But they should consider, that a Confession of faith is one
thing, and a Catechism or a commonplace book to refer ones reading unto, is
another. If the Church shall think fit to compile one of these for the help of
young students, no doubt but all those shall be expressly treated on, though
perhaps not in the same form or titles. But to constitute a Confession of Faith
of all these heads, with the several Articles which the Assembly has
subjoyned, would doubtless have excluded many more from subscription, than the
Articles ever did. Especially where they have made that an Article of faith,
which never was a Protestant doctrine, viz. That the Church Catholic is a
visible and organical body; Assemblies Confess. chapter 35. Artic. 2.
whereas it is an article of our faith (in the Apostles Creed) and not of
sense: And that, which is laid as the foundation of the usurpation of the
Bishops of Rome, Bellarm. de Eccles. l. 3. c. 2.
by Bellarmine, (for either that, or somewhat like it, must follow upon that
ground) so that a fair Bridge is hereby laid from Thames to Tiber for his
Holiness to walk upon. A point universally opposed by the Protestant party,
except Peter Ramus, and perhaps one or two more, althongh of late owned by some
of them, of which Vindicia Catholicae, in answer to Mr. Hudson.
elsewhere. I instance in this, that, be it true or false; yet a point of this
nature, should not have been made an Article, for the not subscribing whereto,
men must have been rejected from the Ministry; others there are, that would
have stuck no doubt with many men, orthodox, able, and godly.

2. As to the things themselves, they are all in effect touched either in the
Articles, Articles of Ireland, Anno 1615. whence taken.
or the Homilies, (which are approved by the Articles) or in the Liturgy, or in
the Book of Ordination, a branch also of the Articles. And the Articles of
Ireland, which are more full in themselves than ours, and comprehend in
terminis most or all these heads, they are taken verbatim out of the books now
mentioned. And to give some instances; The Creation and Providence is mentioned
in the first Article of God, and in the Catechism in the Common Prayer Book,
And more largely in the Homily for Rogation week, part 1 and 2. The fall of
man, his sin, and punishment of it, professedly discoursed of in the Homily of
the misery of mankind, and is touched in the Articles, Artic. 9. and. 10. of
Original sin, and Free Will. Gods Covenant, may be understood in the Articles
of Justification, and Predestination, Artic. 11. and 17. and is discoursed on
largely in the Homily of Salvation. Effectual calling also in the same 17th.
Article, and more largely in the Homily of Faith. Where also of Adoption, as
likewise in the lesser Catechism in the Liturgy. Faith in the Article of
Justification by faith. Sanctification in the Homily of good works, and diverse
others. Repentance has a proper Homily for it. Perseverance is expressly set
down in the 17th. Article. Of the Law of God, in the Homily of the misery of
Man. And in the Catechism in the Liturgy, so far as concerns practice.
Christian liberty in the Articles of the Traditions of the Church. And the
Homily of disobedience and wilful rebellion. Religious worship is the subject
of the Liturgy, And of several Articles, and of the Homily of the time and
place of prayer. The Sabbath or Lords day, in the Homily of the time and place
of prayer. Of Marriage, both in the Homily of Matrimony, and in the Exhortation
at Marriage in the Common Prayer Book. Divorce, as a point of Law, is
discoursed in the Canons. Communion of Saints, is the ground of all
Exhortations to Unity, as the Homily against Contention and exhortation to
Charity, as love and good works. Church Government is the subject of Artic. 20.
and 21. of the authority of the Church, and of General Councils. And for
Orders, they are in the Book of Ordination. For the Rules, in the book of
Canons, and in the Rubricks in the Liturgy about Order, and in the Commination
there. Of the Resurrection, the Homily on Easter Day. And of the last Judgment,
in the Homily against the fear of Death. Seeing therefore, that most or all of
these heads, are either expressly treated on, or occasionally, either in the
Articles or branches of them, how say they, that they contain nothing of them?

Proofs to Confessions.
Lastly, for the proofs, added in the Assemblies Confession, not added in the
Articles; they know it is not usual to add Proofs unto Confessions, as may be
seen in the Confessions of the Reformed Churches, where they are rare. And even
lately their Brethren of the Independent way, published their Confession
without proofs. And unless it be that of New England, the Assemblies, and those
of the Separation; I remember not that I have seen any with frequent proofs.
And, if I mistake not, it had not been amiss, if the Assembly had kept the
Track, in this, in as much as the Proofs sometimes, do not infer the Article.
In a Catechism, or Sermon, or Dispute, they are more proper, than in a
Confession. Because that is a thing supposed to be grounded, not in this or
that place, but on the current of the Scripture. Besides, Proofs occasion
Dispute, which is abhorrent from the nature of a Confession. The places
alleged may be clear a proof, and yet not so to every less-intelligent Reader.
I conclude this discourse touching the imperfection and defectiveness of the
Articles, with that considerable passage of Erasmus to this purpose; Summa
religionis nostrae pax est and unanimitas, Erasm. presat. in Hilarium.
ea vix constare poterit, nisi de quam potest, paucissimis definiamus; and in
multis liberum relinquamus suum cuique judicium, propterea quod ingens sit
rerum plurimarum obscuritas, etc. The sum (says he) of our Religion, is peace
and unanimity; of which there is little hope, unless those things which shall
shall be enjoined as matters of faith, be as few as may be; and that we leave
men's judgments free in many things, by reason that the obscurity in a number of
them, is exceeding great. I have done with the first general head, the Doctrine
and Articles, wherein, as being the foundation, the more time has been
expended.

CHAP. IV.
Of Worship, and of the Directory there of, the Liturgy.
SECT. I. Of Worship.
THE next is Worship, 2. Worship, 1. In it self.
wherein the thing especially to be observed is Purity, as in Doctrine Truth.
Now the purity of worship, I take it, Purity of it, wherein consisting.
is defined by the matter whereof it is composed, the object whereunto, and
medium or mean by which it is directed; if these be right, the Worship it self
is pure. For the evidencing that ours is such, consider we it first in it self,
and then in the Appendixes of it, the Ceremonies. 1. In it self, That of the
Church of England such.
and so our Worship in the Church of England is directed only to the only
true God in the Unity of Essence and Trinity of Persons, the Maker and Governor
of all things. And the Worship which we tender unto him, is for matter
according to his will, as shall be proved. Lastly, it is by the only and alone
medium and mediation of God manifested in the flesh, the Man Christ Jesus; but
of the Creatures, (whether the blessed Virgin (although (...) and Mother of
God) or Saint, or Angel, we join none with him; as is to be seen in the
frequent closure of our prayers in the public Liturgy; The second Collect in
the Letany.
Through our ONLY Mediator and Advocate, Jesus Christ our Lord. Which is also
proved negatively; because there is in the Liturgy no prayer, neither directly
nor indirectly, to any but God himself, nor by any other but Jesus Christ. 2.
In the Ceremonies, which destroy not the substance of worship.
2. In respect of Ceremonies which are annexed to it. Now Ceremonies, being but
the appendixes and circumstances of Worship, either as ornaments or advantages
to it; unless they be such, as at least imply either another object, or person
to be worshipped than God; or another Mediator than Christ, and so a
contradiction to the worship whereon they hang; How should they destroy the
purity of worship? Perturb and trouble it they may by their multitude, or
unusefulness; but vitiate it they cannot. Now all our Ceremonies are so few in
number, and so explained, e^ther by Doctrine or Canon, or other public
writings for their Dr. Burgess, of the three innocent Ceremonies. See the form
of private Baptism and Can. 30. with the Rubricks. Mr. Ph. N.
innocence and use, that they seem not capable of the former evils, though
they had been all urged. But for the matter of our worship, the most weighty
men of the other ways, do not much except against it; I am sure I have heard
one of the best of them acknowledge lately; That there was nothing in the
Common Prayer Book for the matter of it, against the word of God. Now all
separation is a division, all division tends to dissipation. But to commit this
against a Church, whose worship is for the matter sound, and the Ceremonies not
opposite thereunto, because some of them have been abused formerly to
superstition, savours of worse then their weakness, 1 Cor. 10.25, 28.
who refused the meat, though in the shambles, because it had been once
consecrated unto an Idol. But rather take we his advice, -- misericorditer
igitur corripiat homo quod potest; Aug. contr. epist. Parmen. lib. 3. cap. 2.
quod autem non potest patienter ferat, and cum dilectione gemat atque lugeat,
donec ille desuper emendet and corrigat, aut usque ad messem differat
erradicare zizania, and paleam ventilare. Let a man therefore gently amend what
he may, and and what he cannot let him bear with patience, and lament with
love, until God from above do reform it or correct it; or defer, until the
harvest, the rooting out of the tares, and the winnowing of the chaff.

But in particular, the Ceremonies are but four especially. Bowing at the
naming Jesus. The Cross in Bapt. Keeling at the Communion; And the Surpliss in
reading Service.

Omitting what has been satisfactorily discoursed on these by others: as
Conser. Hampt. Court.
King James, Can. 30.
The Canons of 1603. Can. 30. Eccles. Polit.
Mr. Hooker, The three Innocent ceremonies. Hieron. in Isa. 45.23.
Mr. Burgess, and diverse more. I shall for the first, recite the Judgment of
Antiquity, represented by St. Jerome, on those words of Isaiah; By my self have
I sworn that every knee shall bow to me, etc. Hoc jurat, quod Idolis
derelictis, omne genu ei flectat, coelestium terrestrium, and infernorum: and
omnis per illum juret lingua mortalium. In quo perspicue significatur populus
Christianus. Moris est Bowing at the name of Jesus.
Quod Judaei mentis superbiam demonstrantes, omnino non faciunt. This he
swears; That forsaking Idols, every knee should bow to him, of things in
Heaven, in the Earth, and under the Earth; and every tongue of mortal men swear
by him; in which is clearly signified the Christian people; for it is the
custom of the Church, to BOW the KNEE to Christ. Which the Jews, declaring the
pride of their hearts, will by no means do. Wherein, Explained.
we may note two causes of refusing to bow at the naming of the Lord Jesus:
First, Jewish unbelief; and secondly, The like haughtiness and pride of spirit.
To which we may add in respect of some, I hope, a needless fear of superstition.

Touching the next, the Cross in Baptism; Although Cross in Bapt. Can. 30.
the late Authors of the Treatise of the necessity of Reformation have this
Exception: that it has not with its reasons, Page 60. Ed. 2.
added either Scripture or Fathers. Whereas it mentions both, though naming
none. By this reason, they may decline all the Articles, yea, and most
Confessions in Europe, which generally omit both, as being too paedantical for
a confession, or the Canons of a Church. Wherein also their iniquity as well as
unskilfulness appears. Who say of the Rubric explaining the use of the
ceremony of kneeling at the communion; Page of the inserted sheet, the third.
that the Compilers had solidly and excellently declared in what sense they
intended kneeling at the Communion; omitted in the Book of Q. Eliz. and yet
that, has neither Scripture nor Father alleged. But this pleased, because it
ministered quarrel against the present Common Prayer Book. I might refer for
more ample satisfaction to the exact diligence in this point also, of that
hyperaspistes of our Church in these matters Mr. Hooker. Eccles. Polit. li. 5.
65.
But give me leave to close with the testimony for the practice of it, and the
reason of that practice out of Austine, not only the Vulgar one: that we should
not be ashamed of Christ crucified; but one somewhat deeper. Ecce venturi estis
ad fontem sanctum, diluemini baptismo -- Aegyptiis insequentibus Israelitas,
Sermon. de Temp. 119. cap. 8.
similia erant vestra peccata, persequentibus, sed usque ad mare rubrum. Quid
est usque ad mare rubrum? Usque ad fontem, Christi cruce and sanguine
consecratum -- lancea perforatum est latus Christi and manavit pretium nostrum.
Ideo SIGNO Christi, signatur Baptismus, id est aqua ubi tangimini, and quasi in
mare rubrum transitis. Behold, you are coming unto the holy fountain, ye shall
be washed in Baptism. Your sins that follow you, are like the Egyptians that
pursued the Israelites; but how far? but unto the Red Sea. What is it unto the
Red Sea? As far as the Font, consecrated with the CROSS and blood of Christ.
Christ's side was pierced with a spear, and our redemption flowed out. Why the
Cross in Bapt.
Therefore Baptism, that is, water, where you are dipped or sprinkled, and as
it were pass into the Red Sea, is signed with the sign of Christ. Thus far he;
wherein he signifies both the use of it by the Ancient Church in Bapti^me. And
also the reason, that it might represent by what suffering and means, the
remission of our si^s by the blood of Christ applied in Baptism, was obtained
and brought un^o effect. I conclude this with Bucers judgment of this ceremony
as enjoined in our Liturgy. Signum hoc, non tam, In Script. Angl. in Censur.
Liturg. Angl. c. 12 de Sign. Crucis in front Baptizand.
quod est usus in Ecclesia Antiquissimi, quam quod est admodum simplex and
praesentis admonitionis Crucis Christi; adhiberi nec indecens nec inutile
existimo, si adhibeatur modo pure intellectum, and religiose excipiatur, nulla
nec superstitione adjuncta, nec elementi servitute, aut vulgari consuetudine.
This sign (of the Cross in Bapt. for of that he is passing his censure) not so
much, because it is of most ancient use in the Church, as because it is simple,
and of present admonition of the Cross of Christ; I think it neither undecent
nor unprofitable to be used. Provided it be rightly understood, and piously
received, without superstition or servitude to the very sign, or of common
custom. Thus far he.

The third is kneeling at the Communion. A ceremony which some most of all,
others scruple; Kneeling at the Commun. Matthew. 23.
and yet the Brethren now mentioned, who strain at every gnat, swallow this
camel very smoothly. For they say, the Rubric named above, has solidly and
excellently declared it. We will not refuse, nec ab host doceri, Phil 1.
to hear truth, though preached of strife and envy: as the Apostle speaks, the
rather, because it may also oil some other minds, exulcerated likewise. The
Rubric is this: The Rubric about kneeling at the Lords Supper.
Whereas it is ordained in the Book of Com. prayer, in the Administration of
the Lords Supper, that the Communicants kneeling, should receive the holy
Communion: which thing being well meant for a signification of the humble and
grateful acknowledgment of the benefits of Christ, given unto the worthy
receiver; and to avoid the profanation and disorder, which about the holy
Communion might else ensue; lest yet the same kneeling might be thought or
taken otherwise; we do declare; that it is not meant thereby, that any
adoration is done or ought to be done, either unto the Sacramental bread and
wine, there bodily received; nor unto any real and essential presence there
being of Christ's natural flesh and blood; for as concerning the Sacramental
bread and wine, they remain still in their very natural substances, and
therefore may not be adored; for that were idolatry to be abhorred of all
faithful Christians. And as concerning the natural body and blood of our
Savior Christ, they are in Heaven, and not here; for it is contrary to the
truth of Christ's natural body to be in more places then one at one time. This is
the Rubric; the doctrine whereof being definitively prescribed in the twenty
eighth Article of Religion; Artic. 28.
and diffusely for popular audience, handled in the Homily of the worthy
receiving of the Sacrament; Hom. of the Sacram. Tom. 2.
might without any great peril be omitted, especially as it seems not being
confirmed by Parl. as being sent when the Book was printed off, as we have
noted elsewhere. But as to the matter of that Rubric, seeing neither Scripture
nor Father is alleged, nor a third part so much spoken for satisfaction, as in
the Canon for explic. of the Cross in Baptism; why may not this as well as that
satisfy? The heads of which arguments for the Cross, in that Canon, being
these: Reasons for the Cross in Bapt. out of the Canon. Note.
1. The Apostles so far honored the name of the Cross, that under it they
comprehend Christ and all his benefits. 2. It began to be in use and reverend
estimation in the Primitive Chapter even in the Baptism of their children and
otherwise. The opposition to which would have been a note of an enemy of
Christ. 3. That though abused in Popery, yet being purged from the
superstitious opinions had of it there, and being of use as a token that we
should not be ashamed of Christ crucified; and as press-money to engage us to
fight under his banner against our spiritual enemies, it was approved both in
Ed. 6. time by the Martyrs and other Confessors, and by Bucer in his censure of
the Liturgy, and by the Confessions of the Reformed Churches. It being
cautioned, 1. Cautions.
That it is no part of the substance of Baptism. 2. That the child is both
baptized, and received into the Congregation, before the signing with the
Cross. 3. Because it is in it self indifferent, but being enjoined by
authority, ought not by private men to be neglected: which arguments, seem as
full for this, as did the former for the kneeling. But for kneeling at the
Sacram. we have also as in the Sea Goulart. Annot. in Cypr. lib. ad Demetr. ca.
19. and in Epist. 56. cap. 7. Hooker pol. l. 5. 58.
former, the suffrage of Reformed Churches in allowance, and in some cases in
practice also. The French Churches in their late Apology written by Monsieur
Joh. Daille: say, Thanks be to God we are not so ill taught, as to scruple the
Apolog. of the French Churches translated by my learned friend, Mr. Th. Smith.
Printed Camor. 1653. chap. 12.
receiving the Sacrament on our knees: Our Brethren of England never receive it
otherwise, and when we receive it with them, we do very readily conform our
selves to their order. Thus they; and this for that ceremony.

The last is, the Surpliss. Touching the Antiquity The Surpliss.
remitting the Reader to our forementioned Hooker Pol. l. 5. 29. Burgess of
the three innocent ceremonies. Conference H. Court.
Author and others; of the lawfulness and use, only thus much. That which had
once an Institution for such an end, and ever a usefulness natural thereunto;
cannot by any abuse or inversion, lose what it has from God and nature.
Although our fancies run never so strong in discourse, and reasoning in
opposition, yet can we not restrain nor take off our affections, but they will
move according to the activity of those objects, our senses let in unto our
minds. God appointed once the Priests in their Functions to use Garments for
honor and veneration; Exodus 28.
and among them this of the white and linen garment. We cannot say, that this
was more typical, then significative in general and exemplary. Some things were
of common reason and use then. White and light are not only the emblemes, but
the incentives also of purity and cheerfulness; as are the sadder colors, of
gravity and seriousness. All which, are necessary requisites unto Gods service,
and not only signified by such habits, but excited thereby also. If there were
no impressions upon our minds by such things, Joh. 20. Matthew. 17. Apoc. 1.
why appeared the Angels in white raiment? Yea, why our Savior Christ in the
Mount in that habit? And in his Glory as now in Heaven? But because that
contraries illustrate one another; Suppose we Josuah the High Priest in his
filthy garments ministering the holy worship; Zach. 3.4, 5.
would it not as much disaffect us as it did the Angel, who commanded that they
should be taken from him; Explained.
namely, as undecent for the Judge should ascend the Bench in his doublet and
hose only, less reverence surely would his office have, though no less
authority. We are men even in Gods service, as well as in civil affairs, and
cannot but receive impression in it, by the outward decency or uncomeliness of
administrations. As is also employed Cor. 14.40. That the Church of Rome has
abused the Surpliss, harlots affect sometime, the habit of the gravest Matrons,
that with the robe, they may gain also the reputation the Garment spotted with
the flesh, Church, rather then the Surpliss, yea, the Baptism and the
Priesthood which has been once polluted. This paves a high way to full and
plenary Separation. But of ceremonies enough.

SECT. II. Objections particular against the matter of our Worship.
Reas. necess. of Reform. Tit. 2. of Worship.
OF Worship in particular in respect of the matter of it, and the Exceptions
made against it, discourse we now. And here we have these former Brethren
Assailants also. Where we are first to note, that the very same and many more,
and more material exceptions have been taken by their predecessors in these
differences as by Cartwright, the non-Conformists at the Conference at Hampton
Court, and others. And Replies have been given Learnedly and largely by
Archbishop Whitguift, Mr. R. Hooker, Against Cartwright. Eccles. Polit. Conf.
H. Court. Burgess of the three Innoc. cerem. Aliique.
King James and several more. Of which Replies the Brethren take no notice, but
put Crambe centies cocta, objections, that by being often beaten, are grown
threed-bare; and yet as Interpolators and Brokers, furbish them up and hold
them forth for fresh ware. But to the matter, which before we come unto, we
must correct these correctors. And first for their unreverent and unchristian
Language, In the inserted sheet. p. 4.
reflecting on men who are with God, were instruments in the Reformation, and
laid down their lives to confirm it. It is a Proverb among some, Qui vitio
linguae laborat, non sanatur neque in hoc seculo neque in futuro. Proverb.
Rabb. ap. Drus.
That he that is affected with a distemper in his tongue, is not curable either
in this world, or in the world to come. Take a taste of their gall and
wormwood, The Br. revilings.
which they have given Christ to drink in his faithful members; namely, these
speeches: They abuse the people, yea, Inserted sheet page 6.
Magistracy, and God himself. Our bold Masters. False and a mere cheat put upon
the people of God. Taken out of the Mass Book. Apocrypha contains mere
delusions and lies. Priest, a mere superstitious and Antichristian name. p. 20.
Two Rubricks, blind guides that lead into the Ditch. p. 23. p. 24.
Nonsense or worse. Superstitious Antique Crossings. That saying, At what time
a sinner does repent, carries many to Hell. Te Deum taken out of the Mass Book.
p. 27.
To say the three children praised God in the fire, is a belying the Canonical
Text. Another lie to the Preface. The peoples answering the Minister, is
will worship. p. 28.
Because the Collects appointed for certain days, are to be read some days
after, it is said to be, p. ^9.
A horrible abusing of Gods name. That in the form of Baptism, it is said,
that the child by Bapt. receives remission of sins, p. 30.
is man's falsehood. When the children are said to perform their Covenants by
their Sureties; it is (say the Brethren) a mere tale. Touching which speeches;
p. 31.
if we may not say with the Apostle, Jam. 3.
That such rancorous ones proceed not from the wisdom that is from above,
which is pure and peaceable; but from that which is earthy, sensual and
devilish, even a tongue set on fire of Hell, discovering persons whose
Religion is vain: Chap. 1.26, 27.
yet surely we may affirm with another, That there will come a time, when three
words uttered with charity and meekness; Hook. Eccles. Pol. in Praefat. n. 2.
shall receive a far more blessed reward, then three thousand Volumes written
with disdainful sharpness of wit.

Next, Their rashness Their rashness
is also unexcusable, who to satisfy themselves upon their adversaries;
consider not that they expose the cause, and souls of the people to the common
adversary; by making these believe, they have served God all this while in a
Superstitious and Popish way; and that their Service Book is so corrupt, that
they will not know what to fix upon, and so overthrow the faith not of some (as
the Apostle speaks) only, 2 Timothy 2.
but of many. Again, I would have that charitable opinion of them, as to think
they did not act wholly against their conscience; if so; their headiness is the
more blameworthy, that they would engage in the face of the world, and to the
H. Court of Parl. in things, in which they were not sufficiently instructed. So
that they do justly incur that of Solomon. Prove. 18.13.
He that answers a matter before he understands it, it is a shame and reproach
unto him; as shall immediately appear. Inserted sheet p. 4.
They say, That sundry prayers are added, Inserted sheet p. 4.
not confirmed by Parl. which because an indefinite expression, might make the
common Reader think of many; Page 28. n. 6.
whereas themselves afterward mention the number and the prayers, viz. one for
the Queen or King, one for the Bishops, and one for Q. Anne and the Royal
Progeny.

That these Additions have emboldened some to make alterations at their
pleasure: Ibid. The Br. calumny of the Liturgy.
Another indefinite and boundless expression, leading the Reader into an
uncertainty, what to rest on as established. Whereas they have not instanced in
one line or word, in the body and text of the Liturgy it self (the Prayers and
Exhortations) that is altered from what was by Parliament established. They
proceed; for instance, say they, the Prayer for the Queen and Royal Family,
before the year 1627. began thus: Almighty God, which have promised to be a
Father of thine Elect, and of their seed. But now thus: Almighty God, the
fountain of all goodness. Which change, say they, was a great presumption, of
which no reason can be discovered, unless this: That the word Elect distasted
the favorers of Popish Arminianism. Now first again, oportet -- esse memorem.
Did they not say with this breath but now, that these were added besides the
Act; and might they not then be changed without presumption by the same
Authority that enjoined them? Again, this discovers their unsufficiency for
this undertaking; Lord Cant. speech in Star Chamber at the censure of Dr.
Bastwick, p. 27, 28.
not having read the most known and public books of these Arguments. As in
particular, that wherein this is fully opened, who did it, and upon what
occasion, and this delivdred at the famous Censure of Dr. Bastwick, Mr. Burton,
and Mr. Prynne. where it is shown, That the King did acknowledge, that the
Alteration was made by his special direction, as having then no children to
pray for. After this follows for fault in the matter of the Liturgy, a quarrel
with the old translation of the Psalms, Inserted sheet p. 4, 5, 6, 7.
Epistles and Gospels. Against these they allege in general: That being there
is a new autho^ised (and yet how authorized, if the Kings Proclamation do not
oblige without particular Act of Parliament, as they imply? page 62. Quaer. 4.
Insert. sheet, page 5. and 7.
) Translation, the standing of those parts of Scripture after the old, causes
scandal, they say, and makes sport for Pap^sts and Atheists, to find how much
our translations publicly used, do enterferre and jar; The variety of
Translations useful. Eusebius. H. l. 6. c. c. 15, 16. Hieron. de Script. n. 64.
and how corrupt some of them be. But surely the Church of God has been always
of another mind. And Origin much commended for his edition of the Hexapla, or
the Bible in six several editions, whereof five were in the same language, (
viz. the Greek) and some of them done by Heretics. St. Austin also writing his
Directory for Students in Divinity (de doctrina Christiana) speaking of the
variety of the Latin Translations out of the Greek, says: Aug. de doctr.
Christ. l. 2. c. c. 11, 12.
Ut enim cuique primis fidei temporibus in manus venit codex Graecus, and
aliquantulum facultatis sibi utriusque linguae habere videbatur, ausus est
interpretari. Quae quidem res plus adjuvit intelligentiam, quam impedivit, si
modo legentes non sint negligentes. Nam nonnullas obscuriores sententias,
plurium codicum saepe manifestavit inspectio, sicut illud, etc. In the young
times of the Church, if there chanced to fall into any man's hand a Greek copy
(of the Bible) and he conceited he had some little skill in both the Tongues (
Greek and Latin) he took the boldness to translate; which thing
notwithstanding, does more help than hinder understanding, if so be that the
Reader be not idle; for many obscure places are cleared by comparing of several
translations, as that of Isaiah, etc. In which testimony Usher Epist. ad L.
Capel de Textus Hebr. variantib. Lect. page 7.9, 10. Precipue vero p. 17.
As the Greek translation of the LXX it self (as now we have it) is not only
the worst that is, but ever will be, said the learned Primate of Ireland, and
implies as much in print: And yet of this did our Savior and the Apostles make
often use, without any scruple. And if the Papists were enemies absolutely to
variety of Translations, why with so great charge did the King of Spain
publish that splendid Edition of the Bible in so many languages? Phillip the 2d.
What the agreement is betwixt their books of public service, and the vulgar
Bible, is not material; seeing the common people have not allowance for the
reading of the Scripture. But in particular, there may be instances given,
wherein, if the literal sense of the Original is not better rendered by the old
Translation, even by that of ours excepted against; yet is it made more plain
and easy. Again, as some persons keep the measure of their childrens growth,
what if some weakness of translation be left, that the Church may perceive its
proceeding and going forward. Thirdly, that of St. Jerome, Neque enim nova sic
cudimus, Hieron. prefat. in proverb. ad Heliodor. Tom. 3.
ut vetera destruamus: We so take up new things, that we must not wholly
abolish the old; may be of use here. For accustomed things, though not the
best, are not always safe to be removed. Ipsa quippe mutatio consuetudinis,
etiam quae adjuvat utilitate, novitate perturbat. The alteration of custom,
though it help by its usefulness, Aug. Junuario ep. 118. cap. 5. idem. Hieron.
Epist. 10.
yet it disturbs by its novelty, as we saw above. As also the same Father in
the like case wrote unto St. Jerome; Movit, quiddam long aliter abs te positum
apud Jonam prophetam, quam erat omnium sensibus ibi memoriaeque inveteratum,
and tot aetatum successionibus decantatum. Factus est tantus in plebe, etc.
Something, says he, that thou have translated far otherwise in Jona the
Prophet, than was fixed in the minds and memories of the auditory, and by the
course of so many ages, now grown as it were a common song, did move till it
came to a tumult among the people, etc. Where they say; That three verses are
added in the 14 Psalm, not in the Greek of 72. but only in the Popish vulgar
Bibles; Insert. sheet, page 5. Object. Answ.
this is one of their usual mistakes. For first they are in the Roman and Paris
Edition of the Greek, and in many ancient Eastern Psalters, as is noted in
those Bibles. As also are they in that Edition so magnified by Austin, which he
followed in his Exposition of the Psalms. Aug. in Ps. 13.
But howsoever, they are Scripture, and are found altogether in Romans 3. as
themselves acknowledge. I might add, that they are also in that followed by
Jerome, Hieron. in Ps. 13.
if that Commentary upon the Psalms be his, which Bellarmine says is obscura
quaestio, a difficult Problem. When they add, Insert. sheet, page 6. Object.
Answ.
that the Translation of the Epistles and Gospels is as ancient as 25 Hen. 8.
and taken out of the Mass Book. This is added to make this Translation odious;
but sure they will grant, that the Epistles and Gospels in the Mass Book were
first taken out of the Scripture it self. But of the Mass Book in general we
have spoken above, and shown, that every thing in it ought not to be rejected.
Hook. eccles. pol. 5. 19. Conf. Hamp. Court. page 45, 46.
Lastly, for the particular places they name, some of them have been objected
and answered long since. And the difference not overthrowing either faith or
manners, there being also a correct translation for constant use appointed, and
these but only in the Epistles and Gospels, which are to be used not so
frequently; these faults moreover not being many, nor of any great consequence,
are venial. That of Hezekiah his destroying the brazen Serpent, might have here
been omitted having been so fully replied unto, and the disproportion shown by
a learned Pen so long ago. And afterward briefly by a learned King. Hook.
eccles. pol. l. 5. 65. Conf. Hamp. Court, page 73.
Of which Books and Answers, the Brethren take not the least notice, whether
out of ignorance, or want of ingenuity, may be left in medio without danger of
the Law, I hope.

Necess. Reform. page 18. 1. The Calendar.
Next, after the man that bore the Armor, comes the Champion himself; after the
inserted sheet, the solemn treatise, where the first title is of the Calendar.
And the Apocrypha to be read; In the Answer to the fourth general Exception.
of which above. To the particulars; if any thing sound toward error, or be
indeed dross, should that deprive the Church of the gold contained in the rest?
Do we not read of the Midwifes Abraham's twice, of Rachels stealing her fathers
Idols, and many other in Scripture? which ought Tob. 3.
of what either the daughter of Raguel, or Raphael the Angel, or Asmodeus the
evil Spirit, or Judith, are there said to have done or spoken. Jacob said, He
obtained the portion of Sichem with his sword and with his bow; much after
that sense that Judith there speaks, according unto Calvin's Exposition. Jus
victoriae ad se transfert, quasi divinitus sibi concessum -- quia in ejus
gratiam homicidis Deuteronomy peperceret. Calv. in Genes. 48.22.
Simeon and Levi might have a laudable zeal, as Judith speaks, and God might
use it in his secret counsel, and did so, to purchase a place for Jacob; And
Jacob own the Land as his conquest, though he detest the action. The like may
be said touching Judith's prayer; as no doubt Jahel had hers, before she cut of
Sisera's head, Judge. 4.
whom also she slew by the deceit of her lips, as well as Judith did
Holofernes. Genes. 30.
Did not Rachel and Leah with great Religion bless God, for the children that
they had made their husband Jacob beget upon their Handmaids. Times and persons
must be noted. And every thing in Scripture is not to be imitated. Else we
might say as the Brethren, Are not these gallant chapters, to be read in the
Churches? The examples then in Scripture must be interpreted by rule, and may
not also the Apocrypha?

The next Regiment assaulted by the Brethren are the Redcoats, the Rubricks (so
called, 2. The Rubricks.
because anciently written in red Letters) and are directions how to officiate
and read the Common Prayer Book; the first whereof is clothed, not with a coat
of Male, but of a Priest, at which they fire. They say, Priest is the old style
and title in the Mass Book. This Mass Book is the Gorgons head, wherewith they
terrify all assailants. But, was the Mass book ever in English? True indeed,
Fox Act. and Mon. in Edw. 6.
King Edward the sixth, for the appeasing of a rebellion told the Rebels so;
but that was not, as it was the Mass Book, but as it was a Prayer Book, as
little as might be, at that time, different. Besides, that prayer book is not
the same with ours now, for it has been reformed more than once since. The
Mass then never having been in English, the word Priest could not be taken
thence. Yea, but it answers to Sacerdos in the Mass Book, which signifies
Priest: Priest.
That Is the Brethrens translation, to avoid Presbyter out of the Mass Book,
whose evident derivative Priest is, with very little alteration. If this please
not, may one more ancient and more cheerful be admitted, viz.

Walter Mapes Arch-deac. of Oxf. in King John's time. M. S^r.
Sacerdos enim est cum sacra dederit;
Tunc vero Presbyter, cum ter praebiberit. i. e.
When sacred things he gives, he is a Priest;
A Presbyter, when thrice before the rest
He takes his Cup, and so begins the Feast.
etymology, for it signifies only an administration of holy things: nor in the
use; unless we shall say, that in the Primitive Church they owned a proper and
real sacrifice. These Brethren with the finger point us to take notice, That
they have seriously consulted Antiquity; page 47.
did they never in all their reading meet (amongst a multitude of the like)
with such a passage as this: Cum haec tanta ac talia and multa alia exempla
praecedant, Cypr. lib. 1. ep. 3.
quibus Sacerdotalis authoritas and potestas divina dignatione formatur, quales
putas esse eos, qui Sacerdotum hosts, and contra ecclesiam catholicam
rebels, nec praemonentis domini comminatione, nec futuri judicii ultione
terrentur, etc. Whereas these, such, so great, and so many examples have gone
before us (of the admonitions and executions of the judgments of God against
the despisers of the Priesthood) whereby the authority and power of Priesthood
is by Gods special providence established; what kind of men would thou take
them to be, who being enemies to Priests, and rebels against the Catholic
Church, are neither terrified with the Lords forewarning, nor with the
punishment of the judgment to come. And what more usual than that title among
the Ancients? yet without the notion of a proper sacrifice, and so may we. If
any superstition have been joined to it since; Act. 27.
yet what hinders, but that St. Luke may call the Ship by the usual name of
Castor and Pollux, although it had it from those Idols? Why must we needs
always (for often the Brethren acknowledge the Liturgy uses the word Minister)
declare our selves so far distant from those, whom in Religion we have left, as
that we will not use our Mothers tongue, because they once have spoken with it?
unless it be, that we have so delivered them unto Satan, that we will alienate
their minds from us and from the truth, lest at any time they should be
converted by it. Yet we refuse not the other title, that of Minister, so there
be no design in assuming it, as there may be in casting the other wholly off.
And may not that name, as much lower the Officers of God, if so be, that be not
done, even thereby already, (which perhaps discerned, has occasioned the
assumption of a more specious one, viz. that of Presbyter) as the other had in
it peril, either of pride or superstition. Although, to speak as the thing is,
what man is there now, especially Minister, (for whose direction the Rubricks
chiefly are) that reading of that word in the Liturgy, do so much as dream of
an Altar or a Sacrifice, but takes it only as signifying the Officer of holy
things in the Church. Certain it is, page 22.
Bucer, Melancthon, Pistorius in the Liturgy composed for Colen, do
indifferently use this word with Pastor and Minister. But enough have we
conversed with these Nominals. Next for want of fault in the things themselves,
they labor to find one in their opposition. Contradiction in the Rubricks.
That because one Rubric appoints the Collect, Epistle and Gospel to be read
all the week, that is appointed for the Sunday; and another Rubric runs thus:
The Collects, Epistles, and Gospels, to be used at the holy Communion;
therefore these were not intended to be read, but at the Lords Supper, and so
contrary to the other, when there is no Communion that appoints them to be read
every day.

But how does it follow, that because these Collects, Epistles, Propositio
particularis in materia non necessaria, aequipollet indefinitae.
and Gospels are appointed to be read at the Communion, that they may not be
read at other times? yea, the former Rubric appoints them. If there be a
Communion, they are to be read; if there be none, they may be read. That the
Communion was anciently administered every day in the Church of England, is not
proved by the Rubric after the first Exhortation at the holy Communion, for
there is none such there, nor any Rubric at all that I find. Yea, the Rubric
after the Collects at the end of the Communion, expressly says: Upon the
holy days, if there be no Communion, shall be said all that is appointed at the
Communion. Sunday at the least; as supposing there may be Holy Days in the
week, wherein there might be no Communion.

p. 23. n. 3.
Exception is further taken, that the general Confession before the Communion,
is permitted to be pronounced by the people. This (say the Brethren) gives
liberty to Lay or private men to officiate, 3. Confession to be pronounced by
one of the people.
at least in part, as to this Confession, which is a branch of the Office
peculiar to the Minister. Sometimes the exception is, that the Church or
Bishops tyrannize over the people, deprive them of all privilege
Ecclesiastical. Now it is a quarrel that it yields so much unto them. Aug.
contr. Parmen. l. 2. c. 13.
As do also those of the Lutheran Confession. Etsi laicus aliquis pereunti
dederit (Baptism.) necessitate compulsus; quod quum ipse acciperet, dandum esse
addidicit, nescio an pie quisquam dixerit esse repetendum. Nulla enim cogente
necessitate si fiat, Hieron. adv. Luciferian. Lumbard. lib. 4. did. 6. A.
did. 5. C. Baptizari. Ch^mait. Exam. part. 2. de Alsolutione.
alieni muneris usurpatio est, etc. i. e. Although a Layman, if he administer
Baptism, and it be not a case of necessity, he usurps another man's office. Si
autem necessitas urgeat, aut nullum aut veniale delictum est. The same is the
sentence of St. Jerome, as also of the School, and of the Canon Law. And of the
Lutherans also. But the Church of England for the abuses of that practice, has
removed it. Secondly, the unlawfulness of administrations man take this honor
unto himself, and be not called of God by the hand of his Church. But as the
habitual power is fixed on such persons, so may a temporary and transient one,
on any other by the authority of the Church. But Ecclesiastical power
Ecclesiastical power.
consists especially in dispensing and giving forth the things of God unto the
people, viz. The Word, Sacraments and Administration of the Keys in binding and
loosing, in Excommunicating and Absolving. Prayer is a more general and common
act, communicable also unto others. Fourthly, This particular Congregation, the
people, is therefore not unproper to be pronounced by one of them, especially
being allowed by the Church thereunto, as is Absolution the proper act of the
Minister, which following immediately upon the former, seems to point at the
peoples Confession before. But this the Church has left Arbitrary. Lastly, It
is not in use, and therefore

The fourth Exception. The four h Except.
That the same Collect should be said on certain Festivals, seven days after,
with the Word, as on this day. As if, as they jeered above, the Minister might
not change Queen for King.

The fifth Exception is against the last Rubric after the Communion; which
says, The fifth Exception. Rites and Sacram.
That every Parishioner shall communicate at the least three times in the year,
of which Easter to be one, and shall also receive the Sacraments and other
Rites, etc. Thus they recite the Rubric; And having made it for their turn,
they discharge three bruta fulmina against it.

First, That it is contradictory to the Exhortation before all present in the
name of God to come, etc. Then the former seems to dispense with Gods own
invitation.

Next, That Easter should be one; a reason is demanded; the same account that
Easter is, viz. the memory of the Resurrection of our Lord.

It is nonsense or worse (say these sensible men) to require that the people
should receive the Sacram. and other Rites thrice a year, as implying the
Popish Sacraments, or else Superstitious ceremonies, Antique etc. When the Lord
did three times enjoin his Ancient people to appear before him three times in
the year, Deuteronomy. 16.16. Exodus 23.14. and 34.24. with Levit. 23.38.
whereof Easter was one; yet he did not forbid their free-will-offerings: much
less do they that make this trine-appearance with an ad minimum, and at least.
More they desire and exhort unto, less they will nor permit. They dispense not
with Gods own invitation (who has set no precise time) do exhort the people
often in his name, and bind them to some frequency, if exhortation will not
serve.

1 Cor. 1.
Next, They that were not sent to baptize, but had Gal. 4. explained.
And when they do reprove those that observed times, and days, and months, and
years; As part of Moses Law obligatory to Christians, and upon some opinion of
righteousness thereby, in derogation to the All Sufficiency of Christ's
righteousness, Gal. 2. chap. 3. chap. 5. 6. 1 Timothy 6.
they do no more thereby forbid the observation of times, as invitements and
advantages unto piety; then when they exhort to be rich in good works, and lay
up for our selves a good foundation, that we may lay hold on eternal life; Romans
3.
do therefore forbid us to believe that a man is justified by the faith of
Jesus Christ, and that we are justified freely by his grace through the
redemption that is in Jesus Christ; Romans 6. ult.
but for eternal life it is the gift of God. When our Savior forbad to call
any he meant not to confute the Law, Matthew. 15.4.
nor his own reproof of the Pharisees; who made all things, whereby they might
gain, to be Corban; and so suffered not a man to help his father or his mother;
from (...) unto (...), is but a fresh man's consequence.

To conclude; That because our Savior in one sense, forbad to swear at all,
Matthew. 5. interpreted.
(upon viz. the Pharisees exposition and dispensation) and that whatsoever was
more proceeded of evil; he, ever meant to condemn himself, when he added Amen,
Amen; 2 Cor. 1.21. Revel. 10.6.
(which is literally more) or the Saints or Angels (both which we find to have
taken deep oaths upon great occasions) is a Quakers Logic. Again, Such is the
frailty of our memories, that standing memorials, we should not seriously mind
the things that do belong unto our peace. The use of solemn Festivals
And such is the hardness of our hearts, that unless these times be solemn, and
therefore can be but seldom (for familiaritas parit contemptum) we should have
little impression of them. Hence ever since we read of any instituted Church,
we find they had their stata tempora, not only hebdomadary, but yearly also.
Yea, nature did thus much dictate unto the Heathen, that besides those days of
the week, wherein they did some special worship unto their Idols, (the
footsteps whereof remain still in the appellations of them) yet they had also
their Annua solennia, yea, and Olympiads also, more rare and solemner. Now it
is not unknown, I suppose unto the Brethren, that why Easter to be one; seeing
every Lords day is in memory of the Resurrection? It is a question that should
have been put first to our Fathers, yea, our Universal Mother, who were more
concerned to answer; for they have told us: Illa autem quae non scripta, sed
tradita custodimus, Aug. ep. 118. ad Januar. c. 1.
quae quidem toto terrarum orb observantur, datur intelligi; vel ab ipsis
Apostolis, vel plenariis conciliis (quorum est in ecclesia saluberrima
authoritas;) commendata atque statuta retineri; The ant^quity of the four
solemn Feastivals.
sicuti quod domini Passio, and Resurrectio, and Ascensio in Coelum, and
Adventus de coelo Sp. Sancti, anniversaria solennitate celebrantur. That those
things which are not written, (in the Scriptures) but kept by tradition, and
which are observed throughout all Churches; we are thereby given to understand;
that they were instituted and commended unto us, either by the Apostles
themselves, or by some General Councils (who have a Sovereign Authority in the
Church) as the yearly celebration of the Passion, and the Resurrection, and the
Ascension of our Lord, and the coming down of the H. Ghost. Thus that Father,
of whom (as was noted above out of Calvin) we must learn, if we would know the
certainty of the judgment of Antiquity, and of our Mother the Primitive Church.

And particularly for Easter: The same Author gives us to understand; Chap. 1.
Aug. ib. cap. 7.
Nonnullos probabilis quaedam ratio delectavit, ut uno certo die per annum, quo
ipsam coenam Dominus dedit, tanquam ad insigniorem commemorationem post cibos
offerri and accipi liceat corpus and sanguis domini. That some are of opinion,
that the body and blood of our Lord should be offered (namely, by the Minister
to the people) and received upon one certain day in the year, namely that,
whereon he himself received it; which they do on a very probable ground, viz.
that the commemoration might be the more solemn. Which ground, holds with us in
celebrating the Communion both upon the day that Christ himself did, as also
upon that whereon we commemorate that action of his, whereby he applied the
efficacy of all his sufferings, Easter day.
his Resurrection; for he was delivered for our sins, and was raised again for
our justification. We do it therefore upon these days specially, Hom. 4. ult.
as well as on others, more ordinarily, viz. That the commemoration might be
the more solemn. But they aim at the root whilst they strike at one of the
branches, and are offended at the genus Festival times; besides the Sabbath, as
well as at Easter specially. Of which, to that of the Ancient Church related by
S. Austin, I shall only add that; They are the splendor and outward dignity of
our Religion; R. Hook. Eccles. pol. l. 5. 72. in fine.
forcible witnesses of ancient truth; provocations to the exercises of all
piety; shadows of our endless felicity in Heaven; on Earth everlasting Records
and Memorials. Wherein they which cannot be drawn to hearken to that we teach,
may only by looking upon what we do, in a manner read whatsoever we believe.

The last thing they object against this Rubric, is a mere calumny, and yet
they raise a great tragedy upon it. The Br. iniquity in citing of the Rubricks.
The Rubric will apologize for it self, if you give it leave to speak out; for
the Brethren stopped its mouth with the padlock of, etc. before it had done,
because they would confute what it never meant to say, its words at length are.
And shall receive the Sacraments and other rites according to the order of this
Book appointed; injoyning thereby, none other either Sacraments or rites;
Sacraments and Rites.
but that they that are, should be received according to the order of this
Book, and as they are appointed to be administered therein, and none other, or
otherwise, as also the words of the Act for uniformity of Common Prayer runs.

The sixth Exception is against the last Rubric before the Catechism, in order
to Confirmation, which is; Except. 6.
That no man shall think that any detriment shall come to children by deferring
of their Confirmation; he shall know for truth, that it is certain by Gods
Word, that children being baptized, have all things necessary for their
salvation, and be undoubtedly saved. The Objection is; that after Baptism,
they may commit many sins before they come to be confirmed, (which requires
some growth in understanding) whereof they cannot be pardoned without true
repentance, notwithstanding their being baptized, etc. choler from the stomach
ascending into the head do sometimes make dim the eyes, and as the God of this
world, sometimes by covetousness, sometimes by ambition, Luke 16.14. Joh. 12.
Matthew. 27.
sometimes by envy, and sometimes by other things darkens the mind: So it seems
to fare with these Brethr. whose eyes charity and duty would have enlightened
to have seen, that this Rubric went upon no such supposition, that the
children should come to years before they were confirmed, or else they could
not answer the Catechism; but upon this; that whereas under Popery (soon after
which this Book was compiled in part, and imposed) Confirmation was accounted a
Sacrament, namely, one of the seven, the being deprived whereof was counted a
damning thing; and therefore in case of extremity, was no less in their opinion
necessary then Bapt. to which end, they did oftentimes confirm children in
their infancy; this practice being by the Church removed, it was held necessary
to remove the doctrine whereupon it was built, viz. the necessity of
confirmation unto salvation. But this does no more fix salvation upon the
children that sin after Bapt. being come to years, if they repent not: then the
Apostle does fix it upon men who have received that ordinance, 1 Pet. 3.21.
when he says, that Baptism does now save us. Does this assure all men
baptized, of salvation, if they commit sin afterward without repentance? No
more does the other. But because the Brethren do seem to teach with their
finger, Prove. 6.13.
(as the wise man says some do) as if their fingers itched at that part of the
Rubric, that children baptized, have all things necessary to salvation, and
are undoubtedly saved: And ask ^he question, where that word is that says so,
which may indeed have reference unto the former clause, or to this either; I
shall endeavor to show them where.

First, (not to dispute the point here at large, In a Treatise Entitled, The
Pastor and the Clerk.
which I have done elsewhere) I take it for granted, that Bapt. is the seal of
the Covenant of Grace, by its succession unto, and proportion with
Circumcision, which was so, Col. 2. Romans 4.11, 12 Act. 2.38. Col. 2.11.
all which the Scriptures cited in the Margin will evince.

Secondly, That all believers being the children of Abraham (unto whom the
promise whilst in uncircumcision viz. that God would be a Father unto him, and
his seed after him unto all Generations) do inherit the promise of the Covenant
of Grace, Gal. 3.7, 17. Genes. 17.7.
as fully as he did, that is, for themselves and their posterity in the faith.

Faith and Bapt. constituteth a man in the esse and state of a Believer. As it
did Simon, Ananias and Sapphira, till their hypocrisy being discovered, they
were cut off from the Church.

Fourthly, That a child born in the bosom of the Chapter immediate parents should
be either very wicked or excommunicate, Ubicunque non prorsus intercidit, vel
extincta fuit Christianismi professio, fraudantur jure suo infantes, si a
communi symbolo arcentur. Calv. Epist. Knoxio, November. 1559.
is yet the child of the Church, and capable of Baptism, upon orderly care for
its due education in the faith.

Fifthly, That the children are as capable Subjects of seed of Grace; as they
are of the seed of reason, which all men grant they have, as appears in those
infants that were sanctified in the womb. And by those words of our Savior,
where he affirms, that even of those (for he took them up in his arms, Matthew.
18.
put his hands upon them and blessed them) does the Kingdom of God consist.
Now to these touching the Subject, Add but those touching the efficacy Baptism;
and according to my Logic, the conclusion of the Church of England is most
consequent; for Baptism does save us. 1 Pet. 3.2.
If we be not born of water and of the H. Ghost, we cannot enter into the
Kingdom of God. In the exposition of which testimony, current of Scriptures
speaking of the efficacy of Bapt. withholds my assent from the exposition of
Calv. Act. 2.38. Romans 6.3. Gal. 3. 1 Cor. 12.
Be baptized, says Peter, for the remission of sins. We are baptized into his
death, and by it put on Christ, and so are all baptized into one spirit. And,
arise says Ananias to Paul, and be baptized, and wash away thy sins. Now
surely he, who makes his Kingdom to consist Quum long plures in puerili atate
hinc rapiantur, -- significare juxta hic dominum voluisse credo, nullam omnio
hominum aetatem regno coelorum plures cives dare. Bucer in Matthew. 19.13.
much of these kind of Citizens; and that declared so much of his good will
unto them, having made them capable of that ordinance that furnishes those
that receive it, (and put no obstacle themselves to the force of it) with all
things necessary to salvation; what fault in the Churches argument? viz. This
Baptism affords all things necessary to salvation; but children are
baptized, and that of right; they are therefore, if so dying, undoubtedly saved.

Except. 7. Married to receive the Sacrament.
The seventh Exception is against that Rubric after matrimony, which says,
that the married persons must receive the Communion; the Brethren ask, what
necessity? A question somewhat too loose, for those who pretend to so much
piety. Why? for several reasons, it were enough, Bez. in 1 Cor. 7.6.
were it but for this: Cum alioquin and ipsum conjugium per se purum sit ac
honestum, tamen ipsius usus vix, aut ne vix quidem careat aliqua (...), sed
quae velo matrimonii obtegatur. Because, that though marriage of it self be
pure and holy, yet the use of it can hardly, if possible, be without some
irregularity, yet such, as by the ordinance of Matrimony is veiled over and
covered. And therefore at the first, when there is most danger, the stronger
obligations from the most solemn and sacred ordinances, have a necessary use.
Next, Scurrilously they enquire, if they do not receive, who shall be punished,
etc. When the Lord appointed that the children of Israel must dwell in Tents
once a year, Levit. 23.34.
in remembrance of their dwelling in the wilderness; yet it is said in Nehemiah,
Nehem. 8.17.
that they had not done it so till then, from the time they came out of Egypt.
Must we quarrel now with Gods own Law, because if the people would not do it,
it did not design who should be punished? Some punishments are appointed the
Magistrate; but withal there are some left to our own consciences, and to Gods
secret Judgment. It is much (upon this account) that the Rubric after the
Catechism escaped the Br. lash, which says, that all parents and masters shall
cause their ch ldren and servants to come to catechizing; which is as much
observed as the other. They may ask here also, who shall punish them? Even he
who will take account of every idle word and question. Matthew. 12.36.
Where they say, they are not bound to receive above thrice in the year, and
therefore not at marriage; Prove. 26.5.
So puerile a vanity, calls for the like answer. Have they never learned that
besides Propria quae maribus, there is also, Quae genus aut flexum variant?

The eighth and last Rubric they except against, is, The eighth Except.
Rubric after the Commun. of the sick.
That after the Communion of the sick where it is said, that in the plague or
other infectious diseases, when company cannot be had, upon special request of
the sick, the Minister may alonely communicate with him. Where first, their
supposition is, that the Minister is bound to visit every sick person of the
plague, and to give him the Communion if he desire it. Minister visiting the
sick of the plague.
Upon this they build a threefold battery of unchristianity, of opposition to
the other Rubricks touching the Communion, and particularly that of the sick.
Lastly, of inhumanity. shall, or must, but he may, it thereby being left to his
own conscience and discretion. Their Matthew. 25.
not against Christianity therefore; For I was sick, (he excepteth no disease)
and ye came unto me, what, only the people capable of this reward and blessing,
not any Minister? Then was Calvine weak, who would have gone to those visited
of the plague, Beza in Vit. Calv. ad Ann. 1542.
if the Senate (who were concerned more ways then one, in his life) would have
suffered him. Yea, and the Senate too who thought, that for these visited of
the plague there, Pastoris constantis ac seduli opera requireretur; that the
labor of a grave and diligent Minister was very requisite; and accordingly
Sebast. Castellio, though chosen by lot, refusing, Blanchetus another Minister
took it upon him. And how else shall we fulfill that Engagement, 1 John 3 16.
viz. that we ought to lay down our lives for the brethren. Neither Private
Communion.
that the very nature of the Sacrament requires a public administration. The
practice of it indeed so far as is recorded, we find to be with company; but
the nature of it is another thing: urgy in the Q. of the r.
that being an outward and visible sign, ordained by Christ himself, as a means
whereby we may apply the body and blood of Christ, and a pledge to assure us
thereof. Or it is not only a sign of the love, that Christians ought to have
among themselves (which is represented by the company and number) one to
another: ic. of Re^ 28.
but rather it is a Sacrament of our redemption by Christ's death; or. 10.16.
insomuch as to such as rightly, worthily, and with faith receive the same, the
bread which we break is a partaking of the body of Christ: and likewise the Cup
of blessing, is a partaking of the blood of Christ. This being so, it is not of
the nature and essence of the Sacrament, nor necessarily required to the
comfort and benefit of receiving thereof, that it be publicly, no nor with
company celebrated.

proof is as as weak taken from those Rubricks, that speak of the Communion
when company may be had; or of comforting the sick, if by any just impediment
the sick be deprived of the Communion. The lack of company is mentioned, as
one; which yet is no contradiction, although it be allowed that the Minister
alonely may receive with him. For this may well refer to the sick man's family;
for it is said, When none of the parish or neighbors can be gotten; but is
supposed those of his own house may; and if that cannot be, it may be an
impediment to the administration of the Communion. Unless it be, as the Rubric
says, upon special request of the diseased, and that the consolation appointed
for him, in case the former impediments do hinder the convenient
administration, do not satisfy his conscience, but that still he be
importunate for it, in such case he may, etc. where they put in, That unless he
truly repent of his sins, st.
and steadfastly believe in Christ, etc. which the Exhortation is to put him in
mind of, what good will he get by receiving the Sacrament? Famialism, as if in
case he do these, there were no need of the Sacrament. Thirdly, it is no whit
contrary unto humanity, as they affirm, but the quite contrary. But must a
Minister, page 26.
who has charge of many souls, venture, page 26.
adventure his health and life to gratify an infectious person, in that which
is not necessary to his salvation? say the Brethren. It must, but a may. must,
if called by God, through the voice of his Church, the sick person and his own
conscience. In case these concur, as it may fall out; or else he cannot be
Christ's Disciple, much less a Minister of his, as we saw above. The charge of
the souls belong more to the Church, and to God Almighty to take care of, than
to any particular Minister. What is that to thee, Joh. 21.
follow thou him. Fourthly, our Lord himself has intimated Luke 15. Object.
Answ.
that in some cases the Pastor must leave ninety and nine sheep to help one
that is lost. To that they say, that it is no way of necessity to the sick man's
salvation, it is unadvisedly spoken. For what if he may be saved without it; yet
if not with that necessary comfort that is requisite to the grapling with the
King of fears, it were both unchristianity peradventure and inhumanity to deny
it him, as the case may stand.

But secondly, such may be the sick man's temptations, weakness, that for want
of this special support his faith may fail him, and so he may fail of 1 Cor. 8.
Destroy not him with thy meat for whom Christ dyed. So, destroy not him for
want of thy meat for whom Christ dyed. For whatsoever God may do with him, yet
his blood, as the point may be, perhaps will God require at such a hand. Conf.
Hamp. Court, p. 17.
A peart Minister asked me (says King James) if I thought Baptism so
necessary, that if it were omitted, the child would be damned? I answered him
no; but if you, being called to baptize the child, though privately, should
refuse to come, I think you shall be damned. Buc. Script. Angl. Censur. Liturg.
cap. 22.
I conclude this answer with the censure of Bucer, touching the Communion of
the sick, and injunctions about it: Quae hic praecipiuntur, sunt Divinis
scripturis satis consentanea, communionem enim sumere domini, and de mensa
ejus, ad consolandum perturbatas conscientias non parum valet, si ea ut dominus
instituit sumatur. Those things (says he) which are here commanded (touching
the Communion of the sick) are sufficiently agreeing with the Scriptures. For
to receive the Lords Communion, and from his Table, does not a little avail for
the comforting afflicted consciences, if it be taken as the Lord has commanded.

SECT. III. Of the body of the Common Prayer Book.
3. Except. against the body of the Liturgy.
3. COme we now to their Exceptions against the body of the Liturgy it self, and
the matter of it. Where, like men that are rolling down a hill, the more their
brains as well as their body run round; so fares it here with the Brethren, who
did rail before, but now they rave, and are without bounds immodest. So true is
that, Eum qui semel verecundiae fines transiit, oportet graviter impudentem
esse. He that has once set himself beyond blushing, it concerns him afterward
to take a brow of brass. And that of the Apostle, 'Evil men and seducers shall
wax worse and worse, deceiving, and being deceived. 2 Timothy 3.
But to come to the matter. First, they do ominously, ad limen offendere,
stumble at the threshold; and fall too, but it is foully, upon the first sentence
of the Book, viz. At what time soever a sinner does repent him of his sin from
the bottom of his heart, Ezekiel. 18.
I At what time soever a sinner repents, etc.
Against which they object, first, for the name, that it is called a sentence
of Scripture. 2. The matter, that it is contrary to Scripture. 3. The effect,
that it implies a man may repent when he list; this occasions delay of
repentance, which carries many to Hell. First, to shake off these flies that
would blow this holy Sacrifice. And then to vindicate the Religious Compilers
of the Liturgy. To the first. And first for the naming it a sentence of
Scripture, when if it were true, say they, it is but a sense of Scripture
(which yet is more Hieron. in epist. ad Gal. c. 1. notum vob. facio.
) St. Jerome would long since have told them; Nec putemus in verbis Scripturarum
esse Evangelium, sed in sensu, non in superficie sed in medulla, non in
sermonum foliis, sed in radice rationis. Neither let us think (says he) that
the Gospel consists in words, Scripture is sense, not syllables. Matthew. 4.
but in the sense; not in the bone, but in the marrow; not in the leaves of
syllables, but in the root of its reason. For otherwise, says he in the same
place, the devil sometime quoted Scripture. And before him Athanasius, in the
defense of the Council of Nice. It being objected against the Council, that it
had used terms (as consubstantial and the like) not found in Scripture, he
answers: (...) -- (...). Let every one (says he) that is willing to learn,
Athanas. de Nicen. council. narrat. sive Quod illa idoneis sit usa verbis. Tom.
1. Tract. 15.
know, that although the very words be not in the Scriptures, yet have they the
mind of the Scripture, and do sound the same thing in the ears of those who
have their senses open unto godliness -- And that they are ignorant men that
think otherwise. If therefore it be the sense of Scripture, it may not be
unfitly called a sentence of Scripture. Neither is it any injury (as the page
27.
that the Apostles did the like in quoting the old Testament: for what think
they of this? For thus it is written by the Prophet; Matthew. 2.5, 6. Sense of
Scripture, sentence of Scripture. Mic. 5.2.
And thou Bethlehem in the land of Judah art not the least among the Princes of
Judah, etc. Whereas it is in the Prophet in words different, yea, quite
contrary. First, Different, viz. And thou Bethlehem Ephrata. Next, contrary;
Though thou be little among the thousands of Judah; (yet) out of thee, etc. And
there is added the word [For] which is not in the Hebrew. Wherein they
followed the Greek, which says, (...); they mistaking (...), ad existendum,
for (...), ad non existendum. Per contractionem.
So that there is detraction, contrariety, and a material addition, which
cannot be shown in the sentence impugned. And what think they of another soon
after? Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, Matthew. 4.10.
and him only shall thou serve. And our Savior says, It is written. Now in
the place cited it is in the first: Deuteronomy. 6.13. and 10.20.
Thou shall fear the Lord thy God, and serve him, and shall swear by his Name.
And in the second. 'Thou shall fear the Lord thy God, him shall thou serve, and
to him shall thou cleave, and swear by his Name. Difference enough you see. Is
this a belying of the Scripture too? And what think they of another? Then was
fulfilled that which was spoken by the Prophet Jeremy, Matthew. 27.9.
saying: And they took the thirty pieces of silver, the price of him that was
valued, whom they of the children of Israel did value, and gave them for the
potters field, as the Lord commanded me. Whereas both it is in the Prophet
Zachary (not in Jerem. Zach. 11.12, 13.
) and also runs thus: And I said unto them, If you think good, give me my
price: and if not, forbear: so they weighed for my price thirty pieces of
silver. And the Lord said unto me, Cast it unto the Potter: A goodly price that
I was prized at of them. And I took the thirty pieces of silver, and cast them
to the Potter, in the House of the Lord. Here is (...), variety of difference,
and yet I hope the Brethren will not deny, but that the Evangelist Matthew did
set down a sentence of Scripture. To shake hands and part. What think they of
that of the Apostle? It is written, As I live, says the Lord, every knee shall
bow to me, Romans 14.11.
and every tongue shall confess to God. Yet in the Prophet where it is written,
Isa. 45.23.
it is thus: I have sworn by my self, the word is gone out of my mouth in
righteousnese, and shall not return, that unto me every knee shall bow, every
tongue shall swear. Which difference is such, that the In a conference with my
self.
Quakers observe it as a ground of not-swearing; because what the Prophet said
of swearing, the Apostle turns confessing. A sentence then of Scripture it may
be, which is not the very words; as the the title of those sentences is, not
these words, but sentences.

To the second, that this sentence as set down in Ezekiel. 18. not naming any
verse; in the later Editions, the 21 and 22 verses are figured; but there is
ground also for the sentence, in the general context of that Chapter, and
particularly besides the former, in verse. 28, 30, 31, 32. Now let us see
whether there be any difference in sense, much less any contrariety. The
Prayer Book says: At what time soever a sinner does repent him of his sin from
the bottom of his heart, I will put all his wickedness out of my remembrance,
says the Lord. In the Prophet, verse 21, 22. thus: But if the wicked will turn
from all his sins that he has committed, and keep all my statutes, and do that
which is lawful and right; he shall surely live, he shall not dye. All his
transgressions that he has committed, they shall not be mentioned unto him: in
his righteousness that he has done he shall live. And verse 30. Repent, Ezekiel.
18.30, 31.
and turn your selves from your transgressions -- And verse. 31. 'Make you a new
heart and a new spirit. And then for the whenever, though employed unavoidably
in the former sentences; yet it is more than in terminis. Jer. 18.7. Jer. 18.7,
8.
(for even the Apostles cited Scriptures so, as that they compacted several
into one) At what instant I speak concerning a Nation and concerning a Kingdom,
to pluck up, and to pull down and to destroy it; if that Nation against whom I
have pronounced turn from their evil, I will repent of the evil that I
thought to do unto them. Now compare. At what time, says the
Common Prayer Book; in the Prophet Ezekiel it is, If he will turn,
indefinitely, excluding no time, which is equivalent unto whenever. And, ' At
what instant, says the Prophet Jeremy, that is more. Repent him of his sins,
says the Common Prayer Book; turn from all his sins that he has committed,
says Ezekiel, verse. 28. and, repent and turn your selves from your
transgressions, verse. 30. From the bottom of his heart, says the Prayer Book.
From all his sins, says Ezekiel, verse. 21. and, from all his transgressions,
verse. 30. which surely is the same with, from the bottom of his heart; which
yet is more clearly employed, verse. 31. Make you a new heart, and a new spirit;
that 'is, Repent you from your heart and spirit; as before he had exhorted to
repentance. I will put all his wickedness out of my remembrance, says the
Common Prayer Book. All his transgressions that he has committed, they shall
not be mentioned unto him, says Ezekiel, verse. 22. Now I shall leave it to
every man that has but two eyes, Reason and Conscience, to judge, whether the
Common Prayer Book has a title in sense more than the Prophet. page 26. Hebr.
4.7. chap. 3.12.
Yea, but it is dissonant from another: To day if ye will hear his voice. And,
Exhort one another daily while it is called to day. Therefore we must not defer
repentance; At what time soever, encourages men so to do. To day if ye will
hear.
As if both these sentences were not in the Old Testament as well as in the
New, and in both Testaments by the same Spirit. It Is evident by manifold places
of Scripture, that there is ever found place for true repentance, without
limiting of any time. Why are they not offended with our Savior, for speaking
of some that should be received at the eleventh hour? Matthew. 20.
And with the Evangelist Luke, for recording the repentance and acceptance of
the Thief upon the Cross? Luke 23.
And with the Prophet, or the Lord rather in the Prophet, Ezekiel. 23.
for calling to her to return that was grown old, not in ordinary sins, but in
Adulteries and Idolatry; namely, with a purpose of pardon if she would even
then repent. And, a broken and contrite heart, O Lord, says David, thou will
not despise; and his repentance was late, for his sin was toward the end of his
life, as Peter Martyr observes. Pet. Mart. in 2 Samuel 11.2.
One of the Martyrs hearing a Friar inveighing against the sins of the people
in this manner: O thou that have spent thy youth and strength in the service of
the devil, do thou think that God will now accept thee, when thou can sin
no longer? or to that effect, said: That had such doctrine been preached to
him, it would have cast him into despair when time was. Is there any dissonancy
in hastening men unto repentance, and warning of them, that they outstand not
the day of grace; and yet in the encouraging of them when they do repent?

To the third and last Exception, that this sentence, At what time soever,
implies, as if he could repent when he list; Repent when we list, etc.
and this occasions delay, which carries many to Hell. But by what Logic does
it follow, that if men are told, that that if they truly repent, the Lord will
forgive Ergo, They may repent when they list. The inference is fully as good
from Gods exhorting unto repentance, and is urged thence by some; because we
are exhorted to repent; therefore repentance is in the power of our own free
will. So, whenever you repent from the bottom of the heart, etc. Therefore
you may when you will. So that as the Brethren fell in with Novatus in the
former, by seeming to deny forgiveness, whenever a man repents from the
bottom of his heart; so in the latter with Pelagius, in concluding, Austin.
Tom. 7. part. 2.
from a suposition if we do, that therefore we may do it. Though indeed, he
went rather upon the command than supposition. Romans 2.
That the goodness of God (and especially that held out in the promise of
forgiveness) does lead unto repentance. Artic. Relig. 17.
Is not despair of mercy truly concluded to be a most dangerous downfall,
whereby the devil does thrust men either into desperation, or into
wrethchlesness of most unclean living, no less perilous than desperation. But
God may in mercy let these Brethren one day feel in their own consciences the
precious use of this sentence, What time soever, etc. And indeed there is age
enough in some of them before, and sin enough, I fear, to make them need it. In
Psalm. 31. In te Domine speravi.
Savanarola, to be sure, that learned and constant Martyr, having acknowledged
in the person of sadness and despair, objecting to him when he was very near
his end: Te scientia scripturarum ornavit, sermonem praedicationis in ore tuo
posuit, and quasi unum de magnis viris in medio populi te constituit. That God
had endued him with the knowledge of the Scriptures; and put the word of
preaching also into his mouth, and made him as one of the great men of his
time, (as En Monachus solers rerum scrutator acutus, Martyrio ornatus,
Savanarola pius. Chr. Pflug. ad Icon. Savanar. Ante compend. s. Philosoph.
excellentiss.
he was indeed) yet was glad to make use of this sentence, even in the words of
the Common Prayer, (though not out of it) to refresh his conscience in the sore
conflict under the sense of sin, wherein he was. Annon audivisti Dominum
dicentem, in quacunque die ingemuerit peccator, omnium iniquitatum ejus non
recordabor amplius. Have thou not heard the Lord saying, In what day soever a
sinner repents, I will remember none of his sins any more. But these perhaps
are but the prefaces; may not so much latent evil be within, as that their true
quarrel with this Scripture should be the same that theirs was in the Gospel,
with the good man of the house, Matthew. 20.
for making those that came in at the eleventh hour, and had wrought but one,
equal to them that had undergone the burden and heat of the day. And take it
ill that a poor sinner, at the last repenting from the bottom of his heart,
should be, as the Thief crucified was, with Christ in Paradise, as well as they
who conceive they have done God so so much good service? This for the first
General, the reply to the Brethren.

SECT. IV. A Vindication of the compilers of the Liturgy.
A Word now of vindication of the Compilers of the Liturgy; and first in
general, Script. Angl. Censur. Liturg. cap. 1.
and it shall be in the words of Bucer, censuring the whole order of the
Service till the Communion. In descriptione communionis and quotidianarum
praecum, nihil video in libro esse descriptum, quod non sit ex divinis literis
desumptum, si non ad verbum, ut Psalmi and Lectiones, tamen sensu, ut sunt
collectae. Modus quoque harum lectionum ac precum, and tempora sunt admodum
congruenter and cum verbo Dei and observatione priscarum Ecclesiarum
constituta. Religione igitur summa retinenda erit, and vindicanda haec
ceremonia. In the description (says he) of the Communion, (he means here
communion in prayer, for of the Lords Supper he speaks next) and in the
description of the daily prayers (in the Common Prayer Book) I see nothing set
down, but what is taken out of the holy Scriptures, if not verbatim, as the
Psalms and Lessons, yet in sense and meaning as are the Collects. And the
manner, or measure and order of these Lessons and Prayers, and the times are
very convenient, and appointed according to the Word of God, and the practice
of the most ancient Churches. Therefore this Service is to be retained and
defended in a most religious manner. Note.
How weak were Bucers eyes that could not see that beam, which our Brethren
stumble upon at the very threshold; nay, he could see nothing in all that part
of the Service amiss, even as it was then. But in particular touching this
sentence. The wisdom and piety of the Composers did appear therein, forasmuch
as they prudently considered, that there is nothing more necessary than the
publishing of the Gospel, The wisdom of the Composers of the Liturgy.
as being the power of God to salvation. And that this is nothing else, but the
offer of mercy to the penitent through faith in Jesus Christ. They considered,
that there is nothing draws to repentance more effectually, than the goodness
of God, and hope of pardon. Therefore being to propound the form of Confession,
and of Repentance; they propose this and other sentences, to excite them
thereunto. And because they would have the people to retain in their minds
these special places of Scripture for that purpose; and the words of Ezekiel
being somewhat long, they contracted the substance of them into this sentence.

No health in us.
There is no health in us. May we not reply, There is no Let the one help the
other. A third is, TE DEUM. Benedicite. i. e. We praise thee, O God. All thy
works praise thee. Answ.
the TE DEUM and BENEDICITE, which are said to be Apocryphals, and interrupt
the reading of the Scripture. So do also the Prayers and Exhortations in the
Liturgy. If there must be no interruption of reading of the Scripture, it must
be all reading, and no Liturgy. That falsehood that they would fix upon the
Preface of the Book, which they say would bear us in hand, Scripture.
that it is provided against, that the continual reading of Scripture shall not
be interrupted, lies in the falseness of their conception; for the Preface
takes the word Scripture in the sense, that sometimes the Fathers do in a
larger one, namely, and as was in use in the time when the Liturgy was
compiled, as comprehending those ancient Religious writings which, when
properly distinguished from those that are Canonical, as they are by the
Articles, (which are the rule to measure particular expressions by, that are
found in the Offices of the Church) then when they are so distinguished, they
are called Apocryphals, but largely often Scripture, and holy Scripture. As
Austin says, the books of Wisdom and Ecclesiasticus are called Solomon's, de
quadam similitudine, Retract. l. 2. c. 4.
for some likeness-sake. So are these also called Scripture, and holy
Scripture; yea, and sometimes Canonical, some of them, De doctr. Christ. lib.
2. cap. 8.
by St. Austin. But so, that aliter Hieronymus accipit vocabulum hoc,
Canonicus, aliter eam vocem Augustinus, Innocentius, and Patres Carthaginuenses
interpretanter. Otherwise does Jerome take the word Canonical; and otherwise
Austin, Innocent, and the Fathers at the Council of Carthage, says our
Whitaker. Contr. 1. Q. 1. c. 4.
And so I say, otherwise do the Articles of our Church take the word Canonical;
and otherwise, sometimes, the Prayer Book, and the Homilies. But of this more
largely above. In the answer to the fourth general Exception.
Secondly, These are brought in here, not as an interrupting of the reading,
any more than the singing of a Psalm (which though not express Scripture, might
be Exhortation or Prayer; for they are brought in by way of Hymn only, and are
sung also in some Churches. But in particular, they except first against Te
Deum, Te Deum.
We praise thee, O God, etc. that it is a piece taken out of the Mass Book, and
in Popish Churches usually sung. Thence brought in by Bishops into Protestant
Churches; but no where enjoined or warranted by any Law in force. That it shows
the Bishops are not able to give thanks themselves for extraordinary mercies.
That it is a superstitious formal dress, etc. To the antiquity of Te Deum
beyond the Mass Book, its reference unto St. Ambrose might be testimony. But
its being used there, or taken thence, does no more derogate from the matter of
it, than it does from the Psalms, Epistles and Gospels; or then it does from
the Doctrine of Free-mercy against Merits, which is yet there, and in the very
office of the Mass, as we saw above. In answer to the fifth general exception.
It is recorded as a reputation to the old Romans, that they disdained not, nec
ab host doceri; To learn even of an enemy, for we
In what is good, all friends and fellows be.


That the Bishops brought it in, does not argue want of ability to give thanks
themselves, but their want of self-conceit and singularity. They prudently and
modestly choosing to receive and close with what is good, and of general
reception; That they might declare their communion with all Christians in what
they might, and, fulfilling the Apostles prayer; Romans 15.
With one mind and one mouth glorify God with the rest of his Church. That it
is no where enjoined and warranted by any Law in force, Not established.
is more than they have charged the Book hitherto with, added to the body of
the Liturgy established by Law, page 28. n. 6.
but an Appendix, as themselves reckon, of three prayers, one for the Queen or
King, another for the Bishops, a third for Queen Anne and the Royal Progeny. 2.
Act uniform. com. pr.
Besides, it is also untrue; for themselves acknowledge, as it is in the Act
for the Uniformity of Common Prayer, that the Books of 5, 6 Edw. 6. shall be
established without alteration, except one sentence in the Letany, and the
addition of two in the Lords Supper, etc. Now it is evident that TE DEUM is in
King Edwards Books, and in the Book of Queen Elizabeth established by
Parliament, as we now receive it, with all the Kings, Parliaments, and Judges
since; and comprehended by Bucer in that Elogy of his before named, viz. That
all generally (till the Communion) was agreeable to Gods Word, and the use of
the primitive Church. Which form of Communion then, has been since reformed in
part, as he directed. So that Te Deum is as well established by Law, as any
other part of the Book. This gross reeling of the Brethren, does not it argue
now they were etcaetera? To the last, which touches the matter of it, viz. That
it is a superstitious formal dress, Seeing this is a high charge, not on it,
but on the Common Prayer Book also, yea, and on the Church of England, it
should have in particular been showed by the Brethren, wherein it is so, (for,
dolosus versatur in universalibus) This is the fruit perhaps of their
Law-studies, they have learned the course of Chancery, to charge heavy crimes,
and prove nothing. But shall I open this mystery of iniquity, to be suspected
in the breasts of these Brethren; they seem to be Socinians, and enemies to the
Godhead of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the Doctrine of the Trinity; both
which are there splendidly acknowledged and professed in the Hymn of Te Deum.
Mr. Cartwright, as it seems before, Dr Reynolds, and the rest at Hampton Court,
were ashamed to except against it, though they spared not where they thought
exception might with any modesty be taken. But, as I said, here is not only a
profession of the doctrine of the Trinity, and a kind of repetition of the
common Creed by way of Hymn; The special use of the hymn TE DEUM.
but a particular application of prayer unto our Lord Jesus Christ, which is
done in no other part of the Book so expressly, except the Letany and Communion.
This is the superstition, it may be feared, that the Brethren aim at, for other
there is none. We may now understand them, when they call it and other parts of
the Book Popish, superstitious, and Antichristian; namely in his sense, who
writing against the doctrine of the Trinity, and the Godhead of the Lord Jesus,
entitled his book, Antithesis doctrinae Christi, and Antichristi de uno vero
Deo. An opposition of the doctrine of Christ and of Antichrist, concerning the
one true God. To which the learned Zanchy making answer, shows, that for
strengthening our faith in the doctrine of the Godhead of Christ: Zanch.
epistol. dedic. ad Sturm. ante Resp. suam ad Arrianum (Tom. 8.) p. 6.
Ad hanc fidem in cordibus nostris servandam, fovendam, augendam, quam
necessaria est crebra ad Christum in coelo residentem, and pro nobis
interpellantem, mentis elevatio EJUSQUE ac patris invocatio -- a vera porro and
seria contemplatione personae Christi, and ab assi^ua beneficiorum ejus
commemoratione, and denique ab ardenti nominis ejus invocatione, quibus fovetur
fidos nostra -- separari non potest studium perpetuum resipiscentiae etc. --
sunt autem haec, meditatio, invocatio, resipiscentia, tria praecipua verae
fidei effecta, etc. For the nourishing this our faith (says he, in the Godhead
of Christ, namely,) in our hearts, and for the increasing and preserving of it,
Prayer to Christ necessary, for the strengthening of faith in him.
how necessary is the often lifting up our minds to Christ sitting in heaven,
and interceding for us; and as necessary is prayer to him and to the Father.
Now from the true and serious consideration of the person of Christ, and from
the continual commemoration of his benefits, and from the fervent calling upon
his name, whereby our faith is nourished, there can not be separated, an
endeavor of perpetual repentance. Three chief effects of faith.
Now these; meditation, prayers to him, and repentance, are the three chief
effects of faith, etc. Let the Brethren then cease to quarrel Te Deum as Popish
(for this doctrine has been preserved pure in the Popish Church, as we saw
above out of Zanchy) or else confess their own Antichristianism, In the answer
to the fifth general Exception.
that is their Arianism and Socinianism. Touching their exception in particular
against Benedicite, or, O all ye works of the Lord, Benedicite; or, O all ye
works, etc.
bless ye the Lord. It is first to be noted, as appears in the Books of King
Edw. 6. that this was appointed for Lent only, in the place of Te Deum; We
praise thee, O God; but since left indifferent. compages of them. What the
Title is in the Apocrypha needs not to be mentioned here, speaking of the
Common Prayer Book, bungling, and Mass Book, and belying the Canonical Text,
because it is said to be the song of the three childr. in the furnace, Dan. 3.
mentioned by Daniel; which yet may be well understood to be so, as Austin we
heard above, understood the Book of Wisd. and Ecclesiasticus to be called
Solomon's, ob quandam similitudine^, because of a kind of likeness: so. Ans. It
is no way probable, but that those 3. children did prai^e ^od in the midst of
the fire, which they saw he restrained from hurting of them, and might justly
take occasion to magnify God for his Works in the Creatures, in giving them
such virtues, and yet restraining them at his pleasure; and so if it were not
indeed, yet ob quandam similitudinem, for some likeness sake, it may not be
unsitly called so. But howsoever, who shall compare it, will find that it does
in all things follow the pattern of the Psalms above mentioned, and so of the
Scripture, and though Apocryphal, yet is a fit form of thanksgiving. But, as I
said, the Bunglings, and Mass Book, and lying, we leave them to the father of
lies, and to those his children that by imitating that Parent in calumny and
falsehood do merit to be his heirs. But yet God in his mercy give them
repentance, and pardon, and according to their Baptism (the form whereof they
do little less th^n blaspheme) 'make them the members of Christ, the children
of God, and inheritors of the Kingdom of Heaven.

SECT. IV. The Responds of the People.
THe fourth exception is against the Responds and Answers of the People to the
Minister appointed in the Prayer Book, excepting Amen. The Brethren say, Fourth
Exc^ption. The Respond^. P. 27, 28 n 4.
They have no warrant from the Word and are Will Worship, nor can be done in
Faith. That they interrupt the reading, contrary to the Preface, are taken out
of the Mass Book only, that there are above one hundred of them. To which are
added the Peoples answering the Confession of sins, Creed, and every other
Verse of the Psalms. But they omit the Principal, the matter and the use, of
which number. Though they may be so many in the whole, Number.
yet are they not all in one service, but so divided that they are neither
burdensome nor confused. interrupting of the reading, and the Mass Book,
Nowhere else.
That they are said to be no where else: If they speak of the substance of
them, argues their want of reading in Antiquity (which they would seem to have
seriously consulted) and of the practice of some in later times. Are there not
in the ancient Liturgies (mentioned by themselves) many Responds and Answers of
the People? Whether those Liturgies be theirs whose names they bear is, not the
question, but ancient they are; and the question is whether they had any such
answerings of the People; which every one by inspection may see they had. We
will cite but two Witnesses, the one Ancient, the other Modern. The first shall
be the Liturgy of Chrysostom. How often is repeated besides the Amen, (...),
Lord have mercy upon us; and (...), To thee, O Lord, we commend them. (...)
Lord vouchsafe pardon. And sometimes longer Responds than any of ours are and
the very same in sense; as at the Communion. The Priest, (...): Let us give
thanks unto the Lord: Liturg. Chrysostom. Tom. 6.
Then (...), the People: (...). It is meet and right to worship the Father, the
Son, and the Holy Ghost, the Trinity of the same, and undivided substance. And
a little after, (...). The People; (for so Chorus is taken also both in the
Poets, and, as we shall see straightway, in Neoterick Liturgies) Holy, holy,
holy Lord of Sabbath, Heaven and Earth are full of thy Glory. Hosanna in the
highest. Blessed be he that comes in the Name of the Lord, Hosanna in the
highest. And afterward the Priest and the Deacon having uttered their
sentences, (...) (...). The People; We praise thee, we bless thee, we give
thanks unto thee, O Lord, and we supplicate unto thee, O our God. Which are the
(words much of them) of one of the Peoples Responds at the Communion in our
Liturgy. Lib. Herma^i. Archiep. Colon. Reformation.
The next (for I omit other things) shall be that notable Liturgy called the
Book of the Reformation of Colon, compiled by Vid. Sleidan com. lib. 15. Ad
Ann. 1543. Against it, the Popish party wrote the Antididagma.
Bucer, one of our own Reformers, and Melancthon and Pistorius all
thorough-Protestants and men of eminency, as all know, in the Church. The Book
is so remarkable, that it has been translated into English (the Latin Copy I
follow) and it is a most useful piece for all those Ministers, that would
serio and in good earnest, feed the Flock of God, over which the holy Ghost
has made them Overseers. In this Common Prayer Book (besides the Symphony in
Doctrine in some things carped at by the Brethren in our Liturgy, of which
anon) there are several Responds and Answers of the People. Not here to insist
upon the Answers of the Sureties in Baptism in the name of the child. As
creditis, credimus; Answers of the witnesses in Baptism.
renunciatis, renunciamus; confitemini, consitemur. Do you believe? We believe;
Do you renounce? We renounce; Do you confess? We confess. Vultis, volumus. (As
in our own Liturgy, in private Baptism) 'Doest thou in the name of this child,
etc.) Will you? We will. Afterward. Pastor, Dominus vobiscum. Populus, and cum
spiritu tuo. 'The Lord be with you. The People answer, And with thy Spirit,
etc. and this several times. Then in the celebration of the Communion,
Sacerdos, sursum corda. Populus, Habemus ad Dominum. Sacerdos, Gratias agamus
Domino Deo nostro. Populus, Dignum and justum est. The Priest, (note Priest)
'Lift up your hearts. The People, 'We lift them up unto the Lord (the very
words we use.) The Priest, 'Let us give thanks unto our Lord God. The People,
'It is meet and right so to do. Again, in the Lent, and on Wednesdays and
Fridays in the use of the Letany. The People are appointed to answer the same
that ours are. O God the Father of Heaven, The Litany.
have mercy upon us. Spare us O Lord. O Lord deliver us. Hear us O Lord, and
the rest. Minister, O Lord deal not with us after our sins. People, Neither
reward us after our iniquities. Minister. Call upon me in the day of trouble.
People. And I will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me. Minister. Assist
us, O God of our salvation. People. And for the glory of thy Name sake deliver
us, and be merciful to our sins for thy Name sake. Minister. Lord show thy
mercy upon us. Chorus. And show us thy salvation. Minister. And enter not into
judgment with thy servants. Chorus. For in thy sight, shall no man living be
justified. Then for the other parts of the Service, Repetitions of the People.
Ecclesia tota canat symbolum fidei. Let the whole Congregation, sing or repeat
the Confession of the Faith. And for the Psalms and Hymns, Hic Sanctus
subjiciatur, quod ubi erunt clerici, ab eis canatur Latin, a populo vero
Germanice, Alternatim ter utrinque. Id vero quod addi solet, Dominus Deus
Zebaoth, and Benedictus, a Tota Ecclesia communiter canatur ac ideo Germanice.
Here let the Hymn Sanctus be added; which, if there be Clerks, they may sing it
in Latin; but by the People in Dutch (their natural Tongue. Repeating by
course.
) But let it be sung by course, three times by both sides. And that which is
wont to be added, namely, Lord God of Sabbath, and Benedictus, let it be
repeated or sung, by the whole Congregation together in their own Tongue. You
see by the Premises, not only that the Peoples bearing a part in the Service
is more ancient than the Mass Book: but also that our very Answers are so, and
used in other Liturgies than the Mass Book; so that we might justly let our
Brethren hear how the lie, and mere tale, would sound in their own ear; Psalm.
12.
but, their tongues are their own, 'and who is Preface of the Book, Preface
Com. Prayer book.
where it is said, For the preventing the interrupting of the reading of
Scripture, be cut off Antiphonies, Responds, Invitatories, and such like things
as did break the continual course of reading the Scripture. It is to be noted
that they do not say; Interrupting the reading.
that all Responds, etc. do interrupt the reading, or that they did cut off
all, but such as did; change and pertinency of matter, do help the reading. To
the fifth, 5. No warrant.
That such answering has no warrant from the Word, and so cannot be done in
faith, but is will worship. First, in general. If their meaning be, that we
must have Arrians of old, as was showed above, and with the Anabaptists now,
who urge that argument. But do thereby condemn the way of reasoning, used by
our Lord Jesus Christ, by his Apostles, and by all men, who have ever taken it
a lawful way from general grounds, to collect particular conclusions. And
indeed, to speak properly, without this, there can be no reasoning at all; for
that is nothing else. Secondly, It condemns all the none of which, every
particular can be found in rule or example in the Word. Thirdly, It overthrows
the very foundation of any form of public worship in all the parts of it, and
in each particular; how is it possible that from thence any Liturgy can be
drawn, if this ground be good, that every several must in particular be
warranted thence? Our Savior thought otherwise, Mar. 9.40.
viz. 'That what was not against him, was on his part. But in particular. That
there are responds in the public In particular.
it would be known by what rule of consequence, those who are allowed in sing,
confess, and pray altogether, (for their songs do contain all these) may not do
it also by parts and turns, as the Neh. 12.24.38.
Levites also did, both for ease and for solemnity, to praise and to give
thanks, says the Text, ward over against ward. And Ezr. 3.11 They 1 Pet. 2. 1 Samuel 18.7. The women answer by course.
by what rule may not the Spouse of Christ, the Church, and his People, who in
some sense are called Priests; and who are bound to worship him publicly in
spirit, be permitted orderly to express themselves unto God with Examples.
And for ground we must lay this, That solemn thanksgiving is not only a part
of worship, but the choicest also of it; for, He that offers me praise, Psalm.
50.
he honoreth me, says the Lord; that is, he honoreth me in a special manner.
Now then, Nehemiah two great companies, not of the Priests only, Neh. 12.31,
38.
but of the Princes, and of the People. The one went on the right hand, etc.
And ( verse. 38.) the other company of them that gave thanks, went over against
them, and I after them, and the half of the people upon the wall. Namely, those
that went on the right hand, mentioned, verse. 31. as Tremellius expounds it.
And in particular, to take off the scruple, it is said, ' verse. 43. That the
wives also and children rejoiced, so that the joy of Jerusalem was heard even
afar off. Now is it to be imagined, that these companies of the people
appointed to praise God; the women and children who helped; that the joy was
heard afar off: that these, I say, spoke nothing, but like beasts made a noise
Exodus 15.20.
and Miriam with the women (which is another, I think, unanswerable evidence)
who joined with Moses, in the song of victory over the Egyptians. And had the
burden of that hymn: for it is said expressly, that Miriam (and so the women)
answered them, (namely, the men:) Sing ye to the Lord, for he has triumphed
gloriously, the horse and his rider has he thrown into the Sea; which are the
words wherein Moses and the people had begun unto them, verse 1. So that not
only men, but women and children, 1 Timothy 2.
yet are in solemn worship admitted to bear their parts. Else how tedious would
it have been to the whole body of the people to stand like stocks, and have
neither part in the worship, nor means to excite their devotion. Hence also is
it, that not the Priests only, but Israel is said to Spring up, O well, Number.
21.17.
sing ye (or as it is in the Original, and also in the Margin of the Bible,
answer ye) unto it; namely, by way of respond, as the custom it seems was. What
appearance else has that Psalm, wherein, For his mercy endures for ever, is
repeated twenty six times, Psalm. 136.
even every verse of the Psalm (which by the way may check those who except
against the repetitions in the Common Prayer Book) but that it was the part
born by the people; though it is not denied, but that the Levites might go
before the people, and perhaps the Priests before them; as we saw above out of
the Liturgy of Chrysostom, the Priest, the Deacon, (who was in stead of the
Levite) and the people, followed one another in the public worship. Antistites
clara voce precantur, Aug. ep. 119. Janu. cap. 18. As with us the Minister, the
Clerk, and the People.
communis oration voce Diaconi indicitur. I have done with their exceptions to
this point. But, as I said, they omit the principal, which is the matter and
use of these answers of the people. They should have shown, that it was
different from the word; else what is agreeable thereunto may be made use of in
public by those, who are no where forbidden to do it, 2. Use of Answering.
especially when we have an implicit command for so doing. For if all things
in Gods worship be to be done that may further edification, then surely such
Answers ought not to be excepted against, which are so useful to that end. 1
They help the intention of the people, 2 they allay the peril of tedium and
wearisomness; 3 they engage to duty, as proceeding out of their own mouths; 4
and they excite and stir up their devotion. Whereupon the ancient Church was so
enamoured with them. Socrates, lib. 6. c. 8. reports, Socr. l. 6. c. 8.
that this custom was delivered to the Church by Ignatius, Antiochiae --
tertius ab Apostolo Petro Episcopus, qui cum Apostolis ipsis multum versatus
est. Not to ascribe much to his vision; this shows both the antiquity and the
veneration the primitive Church had of it. And the latter times being taught by
experience, have so carefully improved them. Both which we saw above, and more
fully represented by R. Hook. Eccles. pol. l. 5. 39. Austin. ad Januar. ^p.
119. cap. 18.
another. I conclude this with that excellent and useful, in this and other
like cases, sentence of S. Austin: Vna in his saluberrima regula retinenda. Vt
quae non sunt contra fidem, neque contra bonos mores, and habet aliquid ad
exhortationem Vitae melioris, ubicunque institui videmus, vel instituta
cognoscimus; non solum non improbemus, sed etiam laudando, and imitando
sectemur. In these things there is one wholesome rule to be observed, viz. That
those things that are not against the doctrine of faith, or piety of life, and
have any advantage to stir up to amendment of life, wheresoever we see them
appointed, or know that they have been so; let us not only forbear to blame
them, but also by praising and imitating let us follow them. But what if some
be offended at it? he answers: Si aliquorum infirmitas non ita impedit, ut
amplius detrimentum sit. Si enim eo modo impediat, ut majora studiorum lucra
speranda sint, quam calumniatorum detrimenta metuenda, sine dubitatione
faciendum. When the scandalizing of some need not hinder us.
If, says he, the infirmity of some do not hinder so, that it be rather a
greater hindrance. For if it so hinder, that there is hope of greater benefit
to the endeavors of the people, then harm feared by those that speak ill of
it, without doubt it is to be done. Repetit. Psalms.
Which I hope is our case. Lastly, to the repetition of the Psalms by course,
it is not commanded, but a custom, not observed by all.

Letany, whose faults so far as is common with the other, Against the Letany.
have been cleared above. To that of compiling it into one prayer: argues the
ignorance both of the nature of vehement and fervent prayer, such as the Letany
is; and of the infirmity of the people, of whom especially respect is to be had
in Gods service. Violent things cannot be held out long; Matthew. 11.12.
and it is the violent prayer that takes heaven by fo^ce, as our Savior speaks.
Now such prayers are like strong pulls, that require a breathing betwixt; or a
fresh whetting of the affections. Again, the people are lost in long and
continued prayers. Convenit in sacris actionibus, eam -- adhiberi moderationem,
quae conducit religioni populi excitandae, non praebeat prolixitate occasionem
aliquam negligentiae vel pio animi ardori minuendo. Liturg. Colon. de Baptism.
The repeating of Nightingale, to keep up their attention and devotion. To that
of leaving out of the Letany: From the tyranny of the Bishop of Rome, Tyran.
Bishop of Rome.
and all his debitable enormities. Though this quarrel is against Queen
Elizabeth, and her Reformation, Edw. 6. with this, which the Parliament judged
to be sufficient for the thing it self. Times and persons may so differ, that
Paul writing to the Colossians (says Chrysostom, I might add, Chrysostom.
prolog. ad Pauli epist. Coloss. 2. G^l. 4. Romans 14.
and to the Galatians) inveigheth severely against observation of Jewish times
and ceremonies; which yet he makes little of to the Romans; the times and
persons differed. The Colossians and Galatians had been long in the says, and
now put a righteousness and a necessity in those observations. The Romans were
but weak in the faith, and observed those things as religious exercises, which
yet they might have more conscience of than was requisite; but out of weakness
only, not out of conceitedness or carnal wisdom. So here. Effectual course was
to be taken to draw off the minds of the people from the opinion they then had
of the Bishop of Rome, which now being effected, we must take heed we go not to
the other extreme, by continuing of that prayer to alienate more and more those
amongst us affected to him, from our public service, which the Act against
Recusancy (not then made) does oblige them to frequent. Hence both the precept
of King James, Act against Recusancy.
prohibiting bitter invectives and undiscreet railing speeches against the
persons of either Papists or Puritans. Directions for Preachers, anno 1622.
Art. 5. Dr. Ush^r.
And the practice of those in Ireland (related in my hearing by the late Lord
Primate) not to inveigh against Popery it self, but (as the Kings words are)
modestly and gravely, (when they are occasioned by the Text of Scripture) free
both the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of England from the aspersion of
either.

Anne and the Royal Family, Additions of Prayers, etc.
only because not confirmed by Parliament, and therefore not to be used
without danger of Law, In the Reply to the sixth general Exception.
has been answered above. To the seventh Exception, That whereas the Preface
of the Common Prayer Book says, That things uncertain, vain and superstitious,
be cut off; and nothing ordained to be read, Preface Common Prayer.
but the very pure Word of God, the holy Scripture, or that which is evidently
grounded on the And that the Collects for Christmas day, and Whitsunday say,
That Christ's was born on this day, and that the Holy Ghost descended as on the
other, viz. Whitsunday; and these to be read seven days after. They say first,
Page 29. n. 7.
On what Scripture is it evidently grounded that Christ was born on this very
day? As also, that the Holy Ghost descended on that day, seeing it is a
moveable Feast, and that therefore it is gross lying to First, we must
distinguish betwixt things and the circumstance of them, which are especially
Time and Place. No thing, that is, no matter of Doctrine or point of Worship
(requisite to edification in faith and holiness) is appointed to be read, but
out of the very pure Word of God, or that which is evidently grounded on the
same. But as for circumstances of times, or names of places, they are not
either Doctrine of Faith, or Matter of the Worship, but Appendixes which vary
not the substance of the Book. 2. In particular. Collect for Christmas day.
On Christmas day they appoint these words: 'O God, who have given thy Son,
this day to be born, etc. First, they do not say, as the Brethren unfaithfully
relate it; this very day, then indeed it might have been doubtful; but, this
day, which admits a latitude, and does not bind the understanding to that very
day, it is sufficient, if it be so commonly, conceived and taken. Aug. Ep. 23.
ad Bonif.
Saepe ita loquimur, ut pascha propinquante dicamus, crastinam, vel perendinam
Domini passionem, cum ille ante tam multos annos passus sit -- Nempe ipso die
dominico dicimus, hod e Dominus resurrexit, cum ex quo resurrexit, tot anni
transierunt. Cur nemo tam ineptus est, ut nos ita loquentes arguat esse
mentitos, nisi quia istos dies, secundum illorum quibus haec gesta sunt,
similitudinem nuncupamus, ut dicatur ipse dies, qui non est ipse, sed
revolutione temporis, similis ejus. Thus we often speak (says the Father)
that, when Easter is coming, we say to morrow, or two days off is the passion
(Good Friday;) so on the Lords day, we say the Lord rose to day, whereas so
many years are passed since; wherefore is no man so foolish, as to say we lie
(the Brethrens words) because we call those days so by way of similitude and
likeness to those wherein such things were done. No lie then if we say this
day, or as this day, in Austins judgment, but only in the opinion of those,
whose like for folly had not then been. Again, Aug. Januar. Epist. 119. c. 1.
they might remember that even Antiquity did not celebrate it as an Article of
Faith. Noveris, diem natalis Domini, non in Sacramento celebrari, sed tantum in
memoriam revocari, quod natus sit. Thou shall know, says S. Austin, that the
day of Christ's birth is not celebrated as a Sacrament, but only as a memorial
that he was born. And therefore needed not such exactness in the very day.
Thirdly, the Church of England in saying this day, followed the steps of
Antiquity, which did so account. Nam ille (Joh. Baptista) natus est, sicut
tradit Ecclesia, octavo calendas julias, cum jam incipiunt dies minui: Dominus
autem natus octavo calendas Januarias, Aug. in Ps. 132. prope fin. Vid. ut de
Temp. Sermon. 12.
quando jam dies incipiunt crescere. For he ( John Baptist, says the Father)
was born according as the Church has delivered it, on the eighth of the
Calends of July (that is the twenty fourth of June) when the days now begin to
shorten; but our Lord, on the eighth of the Calends of January (that is,
December. 25. for the Calends must be reckoned backward, beginning at the first
day of the following month) when the days now begin to lengthen. Collect for
Whitsunday.
Fourthly, Touching that of Whitsunday, they do not say this day, as on the
Nativity, but as on this day; noting as S. Austin said above, not a Sacrament,
but a commemoration only, As on this day.
which is as much as if the Church had said, The memory of this benefit we
celebrate on this day, as if it had been done therein. Which is evident to be
the Churches meaning, because it needed not the Brethrens tuition to make them
understand, that Whitsunday is a moveable Feast, falling sometimes sooner,
sometimes later. Repeating the Collect seven days.
To the last, of repeating the Collect for these days seven days after, as if
this were a gross lying to God, and horrible abusing of God in prayer. I might
answer only that which was said above to the like exception, In answer to
their exception against the matter of the Artic. n. 6.
of not changing the Qu. name into the Kings; it foams out their own shame, and
therefore needs no other reply. But yet, that Rubric or Admonition which gives
liberty to change whole Chapters appointed, Adm. before 2 Tom. Homil.
does much more intend that men should speak sense.

Therefore with Angels.
Therefore with Angels and Archangels, etc. we laud and magnify, etc. They say
this is an uncertainty, if not an untruth, for the Scripture never speaks of
more Archangels than one, 1 Thessalonians. 4.16. That this one is Michael, P. 29, 30.
n. 8.
Jude, v. 12. to wit, Christ, Dan. 10.21. Revel. 12, 7. where it is said there
was a war betwixt Michael and his Angels, and the Dragon and his Angels.

These. 4.16. where it is said the Lord himself, namely the Lord Jesus, shall
descend from Heaven (therefore this is spoken of the Lord Christ) with a shout
with the voice of the Archangel; then this Archangel cannot be Christ, for he
shall descend from Heaven with the shout of this Archangel. Secondly, How does
it appear that this Archangel Michael mentioned in Jude, verse 9. that strove
with Satan about the body of Moses. Surely Christ needed not to dispute then
with the Devil, nor to pray, The Lord rebuke thee, he was yet God only, and
might (not being as yet actually Mediator) have punished him. And it is said,
'He durst not bring against him a railing accusation. (Remember Brethren, the
Devil must not be railed at: much less Gods Saints and Servants.) It Is not like
the language of Christ. Thirdly, How does it appear, that there are no more
Archangels than one? seeing first we read not only Ephesians. 1. of Principality
and Power, and Might and Dominion in heavenly places, which surely implies some
degrees in the Angelical Hierarchy, but also chap. 6. again, speaking of the
evil Angels (as it seems) he names Principalities and Powers. And in Daniel,
Dan. 12.1.
Michael is assigned as the Prince of the Jewish People; but there is also
mentioned the Prince of the Kingdom of Persia. Chap. 10.13.
And another is described to be in his body as the Beryl, and his face as the
appearance of lightning, and his eyes as lamps of fire, and his arms and feet
like in color to polished brass, and the voice of his words like the voice of
a multitude. Surely this seems to be an Arch and primary Angel. And he says
that Michael helped him, and he calls him one of the chief Princes (Angelical
namely) he does not say the chief only. Verse 13.
Calvin thinks it not necessary to understand Christ by Michael. Calv. in Dan.
10.6. and in cap. 12.1. Ezekiel. 1. and chap. 10.
And Mr. Brightman understands by Michael, Rev. 12.7. Constantine the Great.
Again, we read in Ezekiel of four living creatures, which he expounds to be
Cherubins, a distinct Order as it seems from the ordinary Angels, for this Type
seems to answer to that Revel. 4. of the four Beasts; but they were not the
ordinary sort of Angels, for these are distinguished from them, verse 11. And
all the Angels stood round about the Throne, and about the Elders, and the four
Beasts. Again, we read of Seraphims, Isa. 6.
as an order distinct again from the general one of Angels. Or if both
Cherubims and Seraphims be taken for Angels in general, Luke 1.19.
(which seems not to agree) yet we read of Gabriel Gabriel.
the Angel, that was sent on two the greatest Embassies, that ever were or
shall be, namely, to annunciate the conception of John Baptist, (the messenger
of the Messiah) and the conception of Christ himself; now surely the greatest
errands are performed by the greatest persons. Very reasonably therefore may we
think, that Gabriel was one of the very chiefest Angels. Rashly therefore and
without ground do the Brethren tax the Church for naming of Archangels, whereof
it has so many rational probabilities; and affirm their is but one, whereof
they have no proof, For our unworthiness, etc.
and this expression of it, viz. Those things which for our unworthiness we
dare not ask: They say, Why do we pray elsewhere, for ought else at all, seeing
we have the worthiness of Christ, and Gods promise, and his command. But the
Brethren might know, or remember, that this objection was urged long since with
more strength, v^z. That it savours of Popish servile fear, and not of that
confidence and reverend familiarity, that the children of God have, through
Christ, with their heavenly Father, says Mr. Cartwright. I shall give first my
own sense, lib. 1. p. 136. Hook. eccles. pol. l. 5.. 47.
and then refer to the answer returned by that learned Respondent. And first in
general. 1. General answer.
Two things there are, which we are more specially to endeavor to be
quallified with to prayer; first, deep humility; and next, lively faith. By the
one we shall with Jacob confess our selves less than the least of all Gods
mercies. Genes. 32.10.
By the other we shall, with St. John, 1 John 5.14, 15.
know, that we shall have the petitions that we ask of him. God he resists the
proud, but gives grace only to the humble, and those that have their whole
hope in the mediation of his Son. Joh. 14.
This makes returns of prayer sweet, God lovely, Christ precious, the heart
humble, the conscience peaceable; when we are nothing in our selves, 1 Cor. 1.
but Christ is our Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, Redemption, and in a
word, all in all. Col. 3.
Secondly, it is surely as lawful to acknowledge our unworthiness as our
blindness, but that they do not except against, which is in the next clause. 2.
Answer in particular.
But in particular, the prayers of the Church are so fitted, that they may meet
with the state and condition of all the members. Now in the Church, Aptness of
the prayers of the Church. 1 John 2.
there are not only old men in grace, and young men, but children also, as the
Apostle distinguishes. Of th^s last sort are those, who though they might
further ask, yet being pressed with their own unworthiness and sense of their
sins; they are in a manner discouraged, till they reflect on the worthiness of
Christ. Yea, the very best are subject sometimes to over much sensibleness of
their unworthiness in prayer, as also of the contrary, of their too much
goodness. R. Hook. Eccles. pol. l. 5. 47.
Let us now see what has been replied to this formerly, which since my
writing, having now read, I observe amongst other considerable things (as well
he considered what he wrote, if any other) this, That the very natural root of
unthankfulness is threefold ignorance, dissimulation, Three roots of
unthankfulness.
or pride. Ignorance, when we know not the Author from whom our good comes.
Dissimulation, when our hands are more open than our eyes upon that we receive.
Pride, when we think our selves worthy of that, which mere grace and undeserved
mercy bestows. Again, the very silence that our unworthiness puts us unto,
does it self make request for us, and that in confidence of his grace. With
which answer I end my reply unto this point.

The tenth particular against which they object, is in Remission by spiritual
Regeneration.
that Infants coming to Baptism may receive remission of their sins by
spiritual regeneration. The Brethren except: That remission of sins is not
received by or from spiritual regeneration, but by and from the blood of
Christ, Heb. 9.22. 1 John 1.7. But they grant, that remission of sins and
regeneration flow from one and the same fountain, and are both conveyed and
sealed in Baptism, seminally at least. Which words being before, have so
waylaid the other, that they do not only stop them, but destroy them. For if
regeneration and remission of sins, be both conveyed and sealed in Baptism; the
question only is, which is first and causal one to the other; or whether they
be both coordinate, and without dependence one from the other. Which doubt is
soon answered, if we consider, first; That Baptism of water, through the Word,
is made by our Savior the instrument of the new birth: Joh. 3.
Unless (says he) a man be born of water and of the holy Ghost, etc. And he
did sanctify and cleanse the Church, Ephesians. 5.
with the washing of water by the Word. And he saved us by the washing of
Regeneration, Tit. 3.
and renewing of the holy Ghost, says the Apostle. Ephesians. 3.
By Baptism we do put on Christ. And are by one spirit baptized into one body;
viz. that of Christ. Hence first, we partake of the new nature, are born to
God, and become his children; whereupon follows the remission of sins, by
virtue indeed of the blood of Christ; but this blood is not communicated out of
the body, nor to any but those that are members of it, and by the operation of
the holy Ghost, regenerated therein by Baptism. Matthew. 27.
Hence our Savior, before he gave the Cup at his last Supper, wherewith he
promised remission of sins, he premiseth; 'This is my Body, speaking of the
Bread first to be received; which the Apostle expounding, says: We being many,
1 Cor. 10.
are one bread and one body: And that the bread is the communion of the body of
Christ. That first; then the Cup, the communion of his blood, for the remission
of sins. Now we are baptized into this body, in this body we have spiritual
regeneration, or the new birth, Remission of sins by spiritual regenerarion.
and God now reckons us and owns us for his children, and being such; he
confers the blood that is in the body, for the forgiveness of sins. I am not
ignorant, that Adoption is made an effect or consequent of our Justification
and forgiveness of sins. But if we consider, that we must have union with
Christ, before we can have communion; and that this communion effects first our
regeneration and being born to God; we shall see that remission of sin is
consequent, as an effect thereof. We receive it by and from the blood of
Christ, but by the medium of Regeneration, this blood being sprinkled actually
on none but those that are regenerate, at least sacramentally, and in respect
of the outward application of the Covenant of grace; in which respect, all the
children of Israel (after Circumcision, Romans 4.11.
which was the seal of the righteousness of faith) were owned by God as
regenerate persons, were his children, and had the privilege of children, the
remission of sins. And hence it is, Communion of Saints, forgiveness of sins.
that in the Creed we believe first the holy catholic Church, and communion of
Saints; viz. conjunction into one mystical body of Christ, and then the
forgiveness of sins. Because to this communion and the members thereof, namely,
those that are born again, and of sons of Adam, are by Baptism and the holy
Ghost become the sons of God; is this privilege appropriated, that they have
the remission of sins. But that the Church ascribes forgiveness of sins, even
in this form of Baptism, to the blood of Christ only, appears in the prayer
immediately before the act of Baptizing, which runs thus: Almighty and
everliving God, whose most dearly beloved Son Jesus Christ, Prayer before
Baptism.
for the forgiveness of our sins, did shed out of his most precious side both
water and blood, etc. Then the Church shows how this regeneration is wrought,
Prayer after.
and what is the consequent of it, in the prayer after Baptism; namely, We
yield thee hearty thinks, most merciful Father, See the Artic. of Relig. 27. of
Bapt.
that it has pleased thee to regenerate this Infant with thy holy Spirit
(Baptism is but the instrument) to receive him for thine own child by Adoption,
(see, Adoption follows Regeneration) and to incorporate him, etc.

Secondly, It is usual in Sacramental speech, to understand Matthew. 27.
This Cup is the New Testament: Circumcision is the Covenant: Genesis 17.
This bread is my body. So here, spiritual Regeneration is Baptism, in the
meaning of the Prayer, by a Metonymie of the effect for the cause, because
Baptism is the instrumental cause of Regeneration. So that the meaning is but
this: That the child may, by Baptism (called spiritual Regeneration, Tit. 3.
as the Apostle calls it the Laver of Regeneration) receive forgiveness of
sins, as in Scripture that benefit is properly affixed, first unto Baptism; as:
Be ye baptized for the remission of sins. Act. 2.
And, Arise and be baptized, and wash away thy sins. And, They were baptized,
Matthew. 3.
confessing their sins; that is, in order to their washing away by Baptism. But
this derogates nothing from the blood of Christ, by virtue whereof (as being
the ordinance and instrument of its application) Baptism or spiritual
Regeneration, does produce remission of sins. As for that reproach the Brethren
cast upon this expression, as if it were man's falsehood, rather than Gods truth;
it savours of an affectation, rather not to loose somewhat an elegant
expression, than to receive the truth in the love of it, so pertinently held
forth in that expression. Now for close, let us hear two witnesses only to the
former Doctrine: viz. That we receive remission of sins by spiritual
regeneration, whether taking it for Baptism, or for the new birth; and that,
whether taken relatively, and as by this Sacrament we are born to God, and
become his children foederally, and by way of Covenant; or taken really, and as
it communicates the sap and spirit of the body and Vine unto us. First, one
recent, Calvine namely, who defining Baptism, Instit. l. 4. c. 15. 1.
says: Baptismus signum est initiationis, quo in ecclesiae cooptamur
societatem, ut Christo insiti, inter filios Dei censeamur. Baptism is the sign
of our entrance, whereby we are received into the society of the Church, that
being grafted into Christ, we might be accounted among the children of God. And
elsewhere: Salutis symbolum ac pignus dedit (Deus) in Baptismo, In Tit. 3.5.
nos in suam Ecclesiam cooptans, and inferens in corpus filii sui. Quare
Baptismus congruenter and vere savacrum regenerationis dicitur. And that
therefore, Bapt. is properly and truly called the laver of Regeneration. Thus
he. Now although he make the first particular benefit in Baptism to be
remission of sins, and afterward the grace of the holy Ghost; Jnst. l. 4. c.
15.. 5.
Yet seeing he makes our new birth to be effected in Baptism, and that it is
properly therefore and truly called the Laver of Regeneration, and that therein
we are first ingraffed into Christ's Body, and made the children of God; it
follows thence, that we receive remission of sins by spiritual regeneration.
Aug. contra Jnlion, l. 2. c. 3.
The other is Ancient, to wit Austin, who does in terminis express the same
which the Church has done in that Prayer. Lex quippe ista peccati; quae in
membris est corporis mortis hujus, and remissa est regeneratione spiritali, and
manet in carne mortali: Remissa scilicet, quia reatus solutus est in
Sacramento, quo renascuntur sideles. For this law of sin (says he) which is in
the members of this body of death, both is remitted by spiritual regeneration,
and also remains in the flesh that is mortal. It is remitted because the guilt
of it is discharged in the Sacrament, whereby the faithful are regenerated.
And afterward: Cap. 8.
Justificatio porro in hac vita, nobis secundum tria ista confertur. Prius
lavacro regenerationis, quo remittuntur cuncta peccata; deinde congressione cum
vitiis, a quorum reatis absoluti sumus; tertio dum nostra exauditur oration, qua
dicimus: dimitte nobis debita nostrae. Justification how conferred.
Our justification in this life (says he) is conferred upon us by these three
things: First, by the laver of Regeneration, whereby are all our sins forgiven.
Next, by our conflicting Thirdly, When our Forgive us our debts, etc. The
Church therefore in that Prayer has spoken both according unto truth and to
Antiquity. I dismiss that point. Come we to the next, which is their Catechism
touching the Sacraments; Eliz. 2. added in King James time. Page 30.
Touching Additions has contrary to any thing in the Book established. But
this might perhaps be a caution to his present Majesty, The Brethren caution
the King.
lest his indulgence in remitting of that Law, by his late Gracious
Declaration, be as well interpreted a violation of it, for there is no act for
that, whereas for his Grandfathers explaining, there was one. Next, in this
Paragraph is an Exception, against the Answer to the Question in the Catechism,
Except. touching the Sacrament.
How many Sacraments has Christ ordained in his Church? Answ. Two only as
generally necessary to salvation. For it may, say they, without racking, be
interpreted as a tacit admission of more, as, Marriage, holy Orders, etc. The
Apostle giving rules of speech unto Titus, Tit. 2.8.
warns him that it be sound, and such as cannot be condemned by the contrary
part. This rule therefore was here observed by the Composers of this Answer.
For they knew, that the word Sacrament in a large sense, was applicable to many
sacred things not only instituted in Scripture, but also in the practice of
the Church. Accordingly Austin in one of the places above cited says: Noveris
diem natalem domini, Januar. Epist. 119 cap 1.
non in Sacramento celebrari -- Agimus pascha. -- ad Sacramenti
significationem. Thou must know that the day of Christ's birth, is not
celebrated as a Sacrament. But we celebrate Easter under a sacramental
signification. Where he takes the word Sacrament to signify, the mystical
things wrought and pointed at in Christ's resurrection. Therefore to avoid
contention with froward spirits, the expression in the Catechism is so uttered,
that there is no occasion given, and yet the Doctrine secured; forasmuch as all
Sacraments properly so called, are generally necessary to salvation.

Their next Exception is, That whereas in the same Catechism it is demanded why
children are baptized, when by reason of their tender age they cannot perform
the Conditions required in Baptism, viz. Repentance and Faith? It is answered,
Yes, they do perform them by their Sureties; who promise and vow them both in
their names; which when they come to age, themselves are bound to perform. This
the Brethren say, is a mere tale. Jer. 13.
if the Leopard cannot change his spots, nor the Brethren their Black-more
language.) They add, for proof, That it was never read nor heard of in
Scripture, that one man either repented, or believed in the room and name of
another, whereby that other did receive all or any of the spiritual benefits
exhibited and sealed in either of the Sacraments. And it is not a vowing by one,
that another shall repent and believe, when he is not at present able to do
either, that can truly be said to be a performing of them: Thus the Brethren.
Wherein there is a double mistake; first, of the meaning of the Answer in the
Catechism, and then in viz. that there is an outward and visible sign (which
comprehends both the Element, and the Form and Action of baptizing) and an
inward and spiritual Grace. (Or, there is Sacramentum, as the Schools speak)
the outward and visible part; and there is, res Sacr^menti; that which is
inward and spiritual,) this helps us to an Answer; for accordingly it may be
said, of Repentance and Faith, required to this Sacrament. There is the inward
Repentance and Faith, or the res ipsa; and there is the outward repentance and
Faith, that is the profession of them. Now as to the partaking of the inward
grace, (viz. Christ and his benefits) there is required the inward graces of
repentance and faith; so for the outward part of it, the visible sign, it is
sufficient that there be the profession of these outward. Which yet, by a
Metonymy and figure, of the adjunct or sign for the thing signified, may very
truly (though figuratively) be called Repentance and Faith. Now this being all
that outward Baptism does require, (the outward repentance and faith, or the
profession of them) this may be performed by others in the name of the
baptized. The inward (so far as qualifies them for the Sacrament) they have
after the same manner as they have their sin or guilt) that is, by others. And
as the children of the Jews repented and believed in their parents. For
Circumcision was a Seal of the righteousness of Faith: and therefore not to be
administered to any but those that did repent and believe, Romans 4.11.
in Gods acceptance. Of which more in the next viz. in the matter of their
Reply; and that these things of which mention is made, 1. From Scripture.
may in this or the like cases, be performed by the Sureties for the children,
shall be shown from Scripture (God assisting) from Antiquity, and from later
times. First, We must here lay for ground that of the Apostle, viz. That the
old Church of the Jews, they did all eat the same spiritual meat, 1 Cor. 10.1.
etc.
and did all drink of the same spiritual drink, for they drank of the spiritual
Rock that followed them, and that Rock was Christ; and they were all baptized
with the same Baptism that we are, though by the hand of Moses in the cloud and
in the sea. Hoc posito, I say, if the repenting and believing of one man for
another were not sufficient, whereby that other did receive all the spiritual
benefit exhibited and sealed in the Sacrament; how comes it that Abraham's
conversion and faith availed for Ishmael; Genesis 17.
and the faith of his grown servants, for their children who were circumcised,
Romans 4.
which was a Seal of the righteousness of faith (for I take the Brethren not to
be Anabaptists professed, so as to deny that Scripture, to define the nature of
Circumcision in general.) And how could the children of a Proselyte
Anabaptists, that there were children baptized in those households that are
mentioned to be baptized in the new Testament. 1 Cor. 10.
And all the children of the Jews were in the cloud and in the sea (how that
was done Mr. Aynsworth, as I remember, somewhere shows, by comparing Psalm
77.17. the clouds poured out water, with this of the Corinths.) Now this could
not be, but that the Repentance and Faith of one is available for another. If
it be answered, Instance.
that these were the parents of the children. I reply, Sureties are but only
the Churches and the Parents assistants; and do undertake only upon the
supposition of the child's actual right as a virtual believer, to be of the
household of Faith, though not actually incorporated. So that the undertaking of
the Sureties, is only by way of deputation from the Church or Parents, and
goes upon supposition of their repentance and faith, by virtue whereof
(according to the Covenant, Genesis 17.
That God will be the God of his People and their seed after them) the Infant
has title to the Ordinance. So that it is so far untrue, that it is never read
or heard of in Scripture, that one man repented and believed in the room and
name of another, that it is ever so, and never read nor heard in Scripture to
the contrary. 2. Proof from Ant^quity.
Come we to Antiquity. Qua in re, satis pie recteque creditur, prodesse parvulo
eorum fidem, Aug. de lib. Arbit. l. 3. c. 23.
a quibus consecrandus offertur. Et hoc Ecclesiae commendat saluberrima
authoritas, ut ex eo quisque sentiat quid sibi prosit fides sua, quando in
aliorum quoque beneficium, qui propriam nondum habent, potest aliena commodari.
In which point (says Austin) we do rightly and religiously believe, that the
faith of those, by whom a child is offered to Baptism, does avail for the
child. And this commends the Sovereign Authority of the Church; that from hence
every one may perceive, what his own faith does profit him, seeing another man's
faith can be useful for the benefit of him, that has none as yet of his own
(he means actual.) Thus there. And elsewhere: Epist. 23. Bonifac.
Quando ad baptismum offeruntur (Infantes) parents tanquam fidedictores
respondent, and dicunt illos facere, quod illa aetas cogitare non potest, aut
si potest, occultum est. Interrogamus enim eos a quibus offeruntur, and
dicimus, credit in Deum? -- Respondent credit. Et ad caetera sic respondent
quae quaeruntur. When (says he) they (the Infants) are offered to Baptism, the
parents, as Undertakers for them, answer and say, that they do that, which at
that age they cannot think; and if they do, it is unknown: for we ask those by
whom they are offered, and say: Does he believe in God? They answer, He
believes; and so to the rest of the Questions they answer what is asked. Which
testimony of St. Austin, Questions in Baptism.
declares the antiquity of this custom of Interrogatories in Baptism. The
answer he gives there, unto the question made thereupon; viz. How could they
undertake for them so; namely, that they do believe, by virtue of the Sacrament
of Baptism which they receive, which is the Sacrament of Faith? he does in the
former part of the same Epistle more fully open; Regenerans spiritus in
majoribus offerentibus and parvulo oblato renatoque communis est; ideo per hanc
societatem unius ejusdemque spiritus, prodest offerentium voluntas parvulo
oblato. The regenerating Spirit (says he) in those that offer the child to
Baptism, and in the child offered and regenerate, is one and the same; and
thence by this fellowship in one and the same Spirit, the will of those that
offer it, does profit the child. And in answer to that which the Brethren
touch, that the witnesses are not always truly believers, he says: Spiritus
autem ille sanctus, Ib^d. Unbelieving Witnesses.
qui habitat in sanctis, ex quibus una illa columba deargentata charitatis igne
conflatur, agit quod agit etiam per servitutem, aliquando non solum simpliciter
ignorantium, verum etiam damnabiliter indignorum. Offeruntur quippe parvuli ad
percipiendum spiritalem gratiam, non tam ab eis quorum gestantur manibus --
quam ab universa societate sanctorum atque fidelium. Ab omnibus namque recte
offerri intelliguntur, quibus placet quod offeruntur, and quorum sancta and
individua charitate ad communicationem sancti Spiritus adjavantur. Tota hoc
ergo matter Ecclesia quae in sanctis est, facit: quia tota omnes, tota singulos
paxit. Now that holy Spirit which dwells in the Saints, (of which Saints, the
Dove that is covered with silver wings is founded by the fire of love) does
that which it does, by the ministry and service, not only of those who are
simply ignorant, but of those who are damnably wicked. For children are offered
to Baptism, and receiving of spiritual grace; not so much by them, in whose
hands they are carried, as by the whole society of Saints and Believers. For it
is truly understood to be done by all, who are all desirous that it should be
done; and by whose holy and undivided charity, the children are helped to the
participation of the holy Spirit. The whole Church therefore which consists of
the Saints, does it, because she wholly has brought forth all and every one.
Thus far he. And again in other places more plainly, though more briefly, as in
that vulgar one: Credunt and infantes. Vnde credunt? quomodo credunt? Aug. de
verb. Apost. Sermon. 14. cap. 19.
fide parentum. Si fide parentum purgantur, peccato parentum polluti sunt.
Corpus mortis in primis parentibus generavit eos peccatores: Spiritus vita in
posterioribus parentibus regeneravit eos fideles. Tu das fidem non respondenti,
and ego peccatum nihil agenti. Even Infants (says he) believe. Whence do they
believe? how do they believe? Why, by the faith of the Parents. If they be
purged by the faith of the Parents, they are polluted by the sin of their
parents. The body of death in the first parents, did generate them sinners. The
spirit of life in the following parents, has regenerated them faithful and
believers. Thou give faith to him that answers not, and I communicate sin
to him that acts not. Thus St. Austin. Wherein we see, that the repentance
and faith of one, is available for another, to the obtaining spiritual benefits
for them, viz. the faith of the parents; and if they fail, the faith of the
Church, and the faith of the Sureties, who are always the deputies of one or
both the other. And that they do perform by them repentance and faith, that is,
the profession of them. 3. Proof from recent times.
I shall add now one or two witnesses, of later times, as I promised, and close
this point also. Calvin, with all the Consistory of Geneva, in the Letter above
cited, makes the faith of the parents, or, in case they fail, the faith of the
Church, where the child is born, to be available, for its obtaining the
privilege of Baptism, and the spiritual benefits that come thereby. Calv. ep.
Knox. Ann. 1559. ep. 285.
Promissio [Ero Deus tui and seminis tui] non sobolem tantum cujusque fidelium
in primo gradu comprehendit, sed in mill generationes extenditur -- unde --
ubicunque non prorsus intercidit, vel extincta fuit Christianismi professio,
fraudantur jure suo infantes, si a communi symbolo arcentur. The promise [I
will be thy God, and the God of thy seed after thee] says he, does comprehend
the seed of the faithful, not in the first degree only, but to a thousand
generations. And therefore wheresoever the profession of the Name of Christ is
not wholly fallen and extinct, there, children are defrauded of their right, if
they be driven from the common obsignation and seal of it. Where we see, that
the repentance and faith of others, besides the parents, is available; and the
undertaking of the Sureties, does not give the right, but only for orders sake
and the farther engagement of the children when they come to years, is
superadded thereunto; as being continued from the custom first taken up, with
men that were grown before their Baptism. Continued, I say, both for the more
solemnity of that Ordinance, Use of answers in Baptism.
and for the use of the thing it self; both as it does represent to the grown
the obligation of their Baptism, and as it is an engagement upon the Infants,
when they come to years. I end with the practice of it in the reformed Church
of Colen, as it is in the Liturgy composed, as was said above, by Melancthon,
Lib. Reform. Colen. in Bapt.
Bucer, and Pistorius. In the form of Baptism, the title is, Interrogationes ad
susceptores and parents. 'The Questions to the sureties and the parents, (that
we may see, the sureties promised in the name of the Infant.) Renunciatis
igitur vestro and Infantis nomine diabolo atque omnibus ejus operibus? Respond.
Renunciamus. Q. Etiam mundo and concupiscentiis ejus? Resp. Renunciamus. Q.
Creditis in Deum Patrem omnipotentem Creatorem coeli and terrae? Resp.
Credimus, etc. Do you therefore in your own and in the INFANTS name, renounce
the devil and all his works? Answ. We renounce them. Q. Also the world and the
lusts of it? Answ. We renounce them. Q. Do you believe in God the Father
Almighty, Maker of heaven and earth? Answ. We believe. Where you see, the word;
in their own and the Infants name, being placed first, runs through all the
Answers, both touching repentance expressed by renouncing, and also faith
expressed by believing. And to clear it further in the same Liturgy, in the
form of Confirmation, in the Questions propounded to the children to be
confirmed, this is one: Ibid. in confirm. fol. 80. p. 2.
Interrogatio. Ergo placet tibi, ratumque habes, and adjutus spiritu domini in
eo perseverabis, quod tui susceptores nomine tuo ad sacramentum Baptisma
promiserunt and professi sunt, cum pro te renunciarunt Satanae, and mundo, and
addixerunt te Christo and Ecclesiae ejus in solidam evangelii obedientiam?
Resp. Haec rata habeo, and in eis juvante me domino n. Jesu Christo, permanebo
usque ad finem. That is: Question. Does it therefore please thee, and and do
thou account firm and good, and by the help of the Spirit of the Lord, will thou persevere in that, which thy Sureties (Godfathers and Godmothers) did
promise and profess in thy name, at the Sacrament of Baptism, when they did in
thy stead, renounce the devil and the world, and did consecrate thee to Christ
and his Church unto serious obedience? Answ. These I confirm as good and
binding of me, and by the help of our Lord Jesus Christ I will continue in them
unto the end. The doctrine therefore of that Answer in the Catechism of our
Liturgy, is neither new nor strange; but grounded on Scripture, and seconded by
Antiquity and the practice of the Reformed. 4. Proof from civil Contracts.
I might also for more plainness-sake confirm it, by proportion with civil
contracts. Wherein the undertaking of another is available for one that cannot
answer for himself. As when an estate does descend upon a child, with such and
such conditions, without which it cannot enjoy it; it being presumed, that what
is for its good, it will consent unto. By virtue of another undertaking for
it, the child obtains the estate. Conf. Hamp. Court, p. 65.
So in this very point, King James says; That Interrogatories were propounded
unto him, when he was crowned in his Infancy; which without undertaking of some
other could not be done, and without which answers, his Majesty could not
orderly have been Crowned. But enough of this point.

matter of the Liturgy: The Commination, p. 31.
viz. The Commination or recitation of certain Curses against impenitent
sinners, to be used diverse times in the year out of the Pulpit; to which
curses, being recited out of the Scripture, the people are enjoined, after the
example of the Church of the Jews, Deuteronomy. 27.
to say Amen. Which Discipline is to be used, till that ancient one of the
primitive Church, of putting notorious sinners to open penance at the
beginning of Lent, might be restored. Against this god^y order, the Brethren
send forth their Potest etiam accommodari (fabula de Gigantibus) ad hosts
Ecclesiae q. aut falsa doctrina, aut vi conantur labefactare veram religionem.
Sabin. in Metamorph. l. 1. Fab. 5.
Giants to bid battle to heaven; or as Goliath, to defy the Church of God: and
they cloathe him and arm him accordingly. The body of their Champion consists
of these members: Imprimis, That it is not warrantable in the worship of God,
That Ministers openly denounce curses upon all sinners. Item, That it is done
out of the Pulpit. Item, That it is to be done diverse times in the year. Item,
That the people must say Amen to the curses. The garb and clothing is like
his, for scorn and contumely; viz. A piece of inhumane and unchristian like
devotion, they say: And, A latter spawn of Antichrist in his Pop^sh services.
The Arms of these Titans; the Headpiece is, That it has no warrant in the
Word of God, nor in the practice of Antiquity confessed. The Breastplate, That
it is against the nature of the Ministry, the Tribe of Levi being excluded
from that service, and it being put upon others. The Sword, That it is
specially against the nature of the Gospel-Ministery, who are to bring glad
tidings of good things to the people. Lastly, the Shield, That this example in
Deuteronomy is peculiar to the Jews, to be done but once, and that neither in
public worship, nor in the place of it, but on Mount Ebal. One less piece, the
Neck-one, if you will; The people must not curse themselves. To begin with the
habit, the vile and contumelious language, wherewith these Conjurati coelum
rescindere fratres, Geo. l. 1.

Brethren that conspired are
With Per c^lum, Ecclesia, figurari solet. Interp. in Apoc.
Heaven it self to wage a War.
have clothed it.

The Philosopher reports of a certain wild Beast named Bonnasus, that being
pursued, Arist. d. part. Anim. l. 3. c. 2.
makes its best defense by casting forth its excrement, and therewith beraying
it self and adversary. And men do not love to talk with those who have a
stinking breath. But if the matter of this Commination be good, and use
profitable; it smells of the spawn of the Serpent, 1. Headpiece.
to ascribe it to the spawn of Antichrist. Come we to their Arms, Headpiece
first the warrant of the Word. Whatsoever is written, Romans 15. Form of Cursing.
(and if not restrained by some special caution, for our imitation also) says
the Apostle. Now the prescribed cursing, was no type of Christ, or necessarily
confined to that People; no more than the threatening annexed to the Ten
Commandments, (whereof those curses are only an explication) spoken indeed at
first to the Jews only, but with reference unto all men, so these
interminations also. If any Church or Nation shall find among the several Laws
of Moses, any one that they may judge useful for themselves, and the improving
whereof does not oblige to that polity, or tend to the darkning of the Gospel;
will those be against it, that sometimes urge all things to be done according
to the letter of the Scripture? Jer. 2.11.
God sometimes sent his people to learn of the Heathen, yea, of the very
beasts. Isa. 1.3.
These Brethren damn the Church of Antichristian spawn, for taking instruction
out of the Word of God, in a thing whose matter they cannot condemn, and of
whose use the Church has had experience. 2. Breastplate. Numb. 6.23.
To the Brestplate, That it is against the nature of the Ministry, whose work
is to bless; and therefore the Tribe of Levi were set among the Tribes that
blessed upon Mount Gerizim. Why then was Moses, a Levite, so much forgetful of
his Office, who Levit. 26. Levit. 26.
and Deuteronomy. 28. Deuteronomy. 28.
besides many other places, does spend whole Chapters almost, Psalms, but
denunciations of curses upon them: In the house, and in the field; when they
rose up, Deuteronomy. 28.
and when they should come in; upon them, and the fruit of their bodies, on the
fruit of their beasts, on the fruit of their labors, and upon all that they
should put their hand unto? This shows how seriously the Brethren have
consulted antiquity, the most ancient of all, the Archives of Almighty God, the
Scriptures. Inst. Answ.
But the next will show it more. For whereas they say, (which is indeed worth
the noting) Let it be observed, that Levi was none of them that were appointed
to curse, nor were they of that Tribe so much as among them. Wherein they
plainly show, that they do ad amussim, 1 Timothy 1.
make good that of the Apostle, viz. They will needs be teachers of the Law,
and know not what they say, nor whereof they affirm. For it is expressly said in
the place they quote: Deuteronomy. 27.14.
And the LEVITES shall speak and say with a loud voice, to all the men of
Israel, Cursed be the man, etc. All others are excluded from it, and this
service is put upon the Levites only, although their Tribe was on the
blessingside. seriously, consult this piece of Antiquity; or else like men in
haste, they forgot their errand; Bellarm. de sanctor. Beatitud. lib. 1. cap.
14. Tom. 2. Apoc. 22.9.
or like the Cardinal, who being to prove, that Sain^s and Angels are to be
prayed unto; brings that place where the Angel 'forbad John, and said, See thou
do it not. So this place, alleged by the Brethren, makes directly against
them. So true is that long since foretold of such persons: Their own tongues
shall make them to fall, Psalm. 64.8. after the Old Translation;
insomuch that whosoever sees them shall laugh them to scorn. Neither is their
sword, that of the Spirit; as if to curse, or rather to recite and read them
out of the Word of God, 3. Sword.
were dissonant from the ministry of the Gospel. Why read they then (though
they read but little in the public) those and such like Chapters out of the
Bible. Besides, did not our Savior curse? Woe, woe, woe unto you, Matthew. 23.
Scribes and Pharisees; which he having named once, repeats seven times in the
same Sermon. Unless woe be less then cursing. Matthew. 10.
And did not he teach his Disciples to do so, when he charged them to shake off
the very dust from their feet, as a testimony against them that would not
receive them. And does not the Apostle say, 2 Cor. 2.16.
that the Ministers of the Gospel are as well the savor of death unto death,
as of life unto life? Act. 13.11. chap. 23.3.
And did he not curse when he said to Elymas, Thou child of the devil? and to
the High Priest, God shall smite thee, thou whited wall? And of the false
Apostles, 2 Cor. 11.
that their end should be according to their work; and wished that the
Schismatical Teachers among the Galatians were cut off? Gal. 4.
Let them seriously consult the second Epistle of Peter, and that of Jude. But
secondly, to this Head. The Minister Ten Commandments, where it is said; The
Lord will not hold him guiltless, etc. What is this but a curse, express? And,
That thy days may be long in the land; which contains a curse implicit. The
old Divines, Old method of Preaching.
they were wont to teach, that Moses and John Baptist made way for Christ, the
Law for the Gospel, Repentance for Faith; as the needle for the thread. But the
Brethren know how to sow more easy pillows under all Ezekiel. 13.18.
elbows, Mar. 1.15. Act. 20.21.
as the Prophet speaks. Christ himself, and so Paul, did preach repentance
before believing of the Gospel, and represented the Curse, that they might flee
to the Blessing. But let us try what metal their Shield is of, whereby they
would defend themselves: viz. That was a service of the children of Israel, 4.
The Shield.
done but once, and that not in the public worship, nor the That no useful
thing to others, though first appointed to the Jews, was peculiar unto them,
has Nation assembled, is granted; yet it might be done by them more commonly
in a less troublesome way, and was in effect, by the Prophets afterward. And
that this was not done, as before, though not with so great a ordinary place,
it being not capable of it. But as Mount Horeb was the place of worship at the
delivery of the Law; so Ebal and Gerizim at this solemn sanction of it, by the
Blessing and the Curse. To the last piece, People necessitated to curse
themselves.
The people are hereby necessitated to curse themselves. Why do not the
Brethren enter an action at, (their profession) the Law for this, against God
Almighty; curse themselves; Numb. 5.19. Exodus 22.11.
as also in the suspected woman, if guilty; and any man that had concealed a
thing of trust committed to him. The end of which Ordinance viz. That you
(says the Commination) being admonished of the great indignation of God
against sinners; The use of it.
may the rather be called to earnest and true repentance, and may walk more
warily in these dangerous days; fleeing from such vices, for the which, ye
affirm with your own mouths, the curse of God to be due. But this ground, that
men must not Oaths, for, or before the Magistrate, lest they should curse
themselves. For what is an Oath, but an invocation of God, 2 Cor. 1. An Oath.
to witness upon our soul that we l^e not, (as the Apostle speaks) with an
adjuration and cursing of our selves, if we lie? We may hence perhaps see,
Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy.
why some of late have been so backward to swear either Allegiance or
Supremacy, because it is to be feared, some of them were true to neither. body
of the Book, where they say: That more might be said of sundry other
particulars in the Service Book. It is replied above, that more for number, and
weightier for substance, have been long since urged by others; and received by
godly and learned R. Hooker. The Disputants at the Conf. Hamp. Court, and
others.
men, their full answer. To which, in the like scruples, it were good that men
would betake themselves. K. James, page 47. of that Conference.
One of whom, after solemn hearing of all that the Brethrens more modest
Predecessors could object, Thus concluded: Alleging from Bartolus de Regno,
That as better a King with some weakness, than still a change; Note.
so rather a Church (and I add, a Liturgy) with some faults, (if such they were
as the Brethren note) then an innovation. And surely (says he) if these be the
greatest matters you be grieved with, I need not have been troubled with such
importunities and complaints, as have been made unto me; some other more
private course might have been taken for your satisfaction. And surely it would
make any man, as it did him, shake his head and smile. And thus far of the
matter of the Liturgy, as to the substance of Worship.

SECT. VI. Exceptions against the Ceremonies.
THe Appendixes follow, and they are Ceremonies; where their Exceptions against
them may be reduced unto two heads. First, against the Imposition of Ceremonies
in general. Secondly, against these in particular. Of Ceremonies in general.
page 38. page 37.
Touching the first, they say, That Ceremonies being things indifferent, can by
no command of Authority become necessary, especially if they offend tender
consciences. For proof whereof they allege the Apostles doctrine, and
practice. To the Assertion first, which is no less inconsiderately uttered,
than confidently affirmed, if generally taken. Absurdities of the Brethrens
Assert.
For so, it overthrows Civil bounds, National Laws, Divine and Ecclesiastical
Institutions. It overthrows Civil bounds. Might not the Brethrens Neighbor
Sirs, your Garden, your Orchard, your Close, your Land, were once indifferent
and common to all men; it is not the Authority of any Man or Law, that can make
that proper to you, and necessarily to belong to you, which Providence at the
Creation left common and indifferent for all men. On such a discourse as this
the Levellers go. And my self knew a man, that would therefore pay no rent to
his Landlord, saying; Why should not he have a house as well as he. Smile not,
Brethren, for the parallel fully holds; all Tenures were at first indifferent
and common. National Laws, for it is in it self indifferent, whether, for
example, theft shall be punished by restitution or imprisonment, or scourging
or death. Now when the Law of any Nation has appointed such a punishment,
necessarily to be inflicted upon such a Malefactor, he may upon this ground
say: The kind of punishment is indifferent, and no Law of man can make that
necessary without injustice. It everteth also even divine Ordinances. The Water
in Baptism, Bread and Wine in the Lords Supper, are before separation
indifferent and common: Therefore they cannot in particular by this principle,
be made necessary and obliging to be used. Lastly, (because they intend
Ceremonies in Religion) it takes away the ground of Ecclesiastical
Institutions, object is especially things in their own nature indifferent, as
times, place, persons, gestures, habits, etc. for what obedience can be
expected, where no Authority can make it necessary in such things? which leads
me to a Genesis
viz. That though no Law can alter the nature of things in themselves
metaphysically and abstractedly considered; yet it may and does alter the
obligation of practice about them; that what was free before to do or not, is
otherwise now. For example, It was indifferent, Paul would sacrifice or not,
Act. 21.
but after the Church had judged it requisite for him, he thought it his duty
now to do it. Again, it was indifferent for him to circumcise Act. 16. Gal.
2.3, 5.
yet according to circumstances he did it to Timothy, and would not do it to
others. To abstain from blood, and from things strangled, I suppose the
Brethren count indifferent, because the Every Creature of God is good, 1 Timothy 4.
and nothing to be refused; yet the Apostles for that time made it a matter of
necessity, to abstain from them. Act. 15.
Whether a Man pray uncovered, and the Woman covered, might seem indifferent;
but the Apostle, besides other Arguments, determines it, by the custom and
practice of the Church, as a matter necessary, to go that way he propounded. As
to that clause: Indifferent things cannot be made necessary, if they offend
tender Consciences, and are scandalous to good men. It is answered that, The
due performance of the Worship of God; And the general edification of all
Consciences, When scandal is not to be regarded.
by greater part of the Church, together with the taking away the scandal
Adversary for omitting these Ceremonies; is of more consequence, and ought to
be more eyed, by those in Authority, then the satisfying of a few, though good
men. Paul, no doubt, gave very great offense in sacrificing, in circumcising
Timothy, Gal. 2.5.
in not circumcising Titus, and in being stiff against it: Yet because the
more public and common good of the Church was concerned, his charity directed
him to love the Body, and tender the welfare of that, rather then of some
particular Members, though otherwise precious. This for their proposition, next
for their proof from the Apostles Doctrine and Practice. Their proof. Romans 14.
First, his Doctrine. All things indeed are pure, but it is evil to him that
eats with offense: See, to the like effect also, the Proposit. touching
Reform. of the Liturg. now in the Press.
And, it is good neither to eat Flesh, nor drink Wine, whereby thy Brother
stumbleth or is made weak. To take heed lest our liberty become a
stumbling block. But if one will use his liberty, and the other will take
offense, then his charge is, Let not him that eats, despise him that eats
not; and let not him that eats not, judge him that eats. 2. His practice.
If Meat make my Brother to offend, 1 Cor. 8.
I will eat no Flesh whilst the world stands, lest I make my Brother to
offend. But do these things prove, that things indifferent may not by Authority
be made necessary as to practice? Nothing less. For, the things the Apostle
mentions, were, as to any public Injunction by Authority then in being, left
free, no Law passed on them; And they were observed, according as Conscience in
some and Charity in others did direct. But are the Brethren able to show, out
of these, or any other places of the Apostles doctrine or practice; That after
Works, Gal. 2.
much less Ceremonies, but by the Faith of Jesus Christ; That they own but one
Mediator, betwixt God and Man, 1 Timothy 2.
even the Man Christ Jesus; That, decency, order, and reverence in the Worship
of God, 1 Cor. 14.
(to which they are enjoined) do judge that, such and such Ceremonies, (without
opinion of holiness in the things themselves, or of adding any substance to the
matter of the Worship) are useful to the better performance of Gods service,
and edification of his people, and not in themselves contrariant thereunto. Are
they able to show, that the Apostle, because either things are in themselves
indifferent, or because some would be offended at them; did in such a case
either by doctrine or practice encourage unto disobedience? I trow they are
not. To be sure, the places alleged prove it not, as has been showed; they
speaking only of such things, as on which no Civil nor Ecclesiastical sanction
had passed, but were in every man's liberty. And the Apostles doctrine and
practice, as we heard, prove the contrary; he referring to the custom of the
Church, 1 Cor. 11.
as a determination in things of themselves indifferent; and himself also
practicing diverse things, Act. 21.16. Gal. 2.
that without all question did offend many tender Consciences. Certain it is,
that things strangled and blood, were things indifferent, yet commanded as
necessary for the time, by the Apostles, Act. 15. So Circumcision, sacrificing,
etc. practiced by Paul, with offense to some. Thus of their general exception.

The next is against the Ceremonies of this Church, particular. Of the
Ceremonies in partic.
Against which they except these things: First, that they are not established
by Law: Secondly, that they are superstitious: Thirdly, that they are
scandalous: Fourthly, that they have been occasions of persecution: Fifthly,
they are burdensome for their number: And lastly, even by the consequence of the
Article 34. of the 2. Homily of the time and place of Prayer; by the very
Preface of the Common Prayer Book it self, and also the practice of the
Bishops; they ought to be removed. Touching the first, that they are not
established, they endeavor to prove first generally, in that the Common Prayer
Book is not established; secondly, particularly, because of the Book of 2. and
5, 6 Ed. 6. and the Act of Uniformity of Common Prayer. Touching the first,
that they are not established, In the Answ. to the sixth genesis Except.
because the Common Prayer Book is not established, has been answered above.
Touching the particular proof here; the Brethren do prevaricate not unpalpably,
and very undutifully traduce Qu. Eliz. and the Parliament that established the
Book of Common Prayer. P. 34.
For first, they say, that, However the Rubric before the Book (of
Common Prayer) printed in 1 Eliz. directs to use such Ornaments as were in
use in 2 Edw. 6. Ornaments of service.
yet that is no part of the Book of Common Prayer, which the Parliament of 1
Eliz. established; because the Book of 5. 6 Edw. 6. has no such Rubric (or
direction) and that Act of 1 Eliz. for Uniformity of Common Prayer, injoyns all
things to be done according to the Book of 5, 6 Edw. 6. and none other, nor
otherwise, therefore nothing according to the Book, of 2 Edw. 6. (which yet P.
39.
afterward they say is good Law:) So that they make that Parliament very weak
and inconsiderate C. Combs (if that word might be used in reference to so
awful an Assembly) that what they appointed in the very entrance of the Book,
by Rubr. they would establish, they did by the Act immediately overthrow. They
appoint such Ornaments, in the Book, unto the Minister, in Divine Service, as
was in use by Act of Parliament in the second year of Ed. 6. And in the Act
they conform the Prayer Book unto that of 5, 6. Ed. 6. and none other, or
otherwise. As if the former were not an Exception, and a Prov^so also in the
Act it Act for Uniformity, prope sinem.
Provided always (says the Act) and be it enacted, that such Ornaments of the
Church, and of the Ministers thereof, shall be received and be in use, as were
in the Church of England by the Authority of Parliament in the second year of
the Reign of King Edw. 6. until other order shall be therein taken (note) by
the Authority of the Queens Majesty, Note.
with the advice of her Commissioners, appointed and authorized under the Great
Seal of England for Causes Ecclesiastical, or of the Metropolitan of this
Realm. Which latter clause of the Act yields a farther Answer to the Breath viz.
that if those Ornaments were not otherwise established, either by the Act or by
the Liturgy, yet by this Act, Other Ceremonies.
if they be established by the Queen and her Commissioners, and so by the
following Princes, Q. has power to ordain Ceremon. Rites and Orders
Ecclesiastical.
it is sufficient. The like may be said for Ceremonies, Rites and Orders
appointed by the Book. That Act, immediately after the former words,
subjoyning: And also, that if there shall happen any contempt, or irreverence
to be used in the Ceremonies or Rites of the Church, by the misusing of the
Orders appointed in this Book; the Queens Majesty may by the like advice of the
said Commissioners or Metropolitan, ordain and publish such further Ceremonies
or Rites, as may be most for the advancement of Gods glory, the edifying of his
Church, and the due reverence of Christ's holy Mysteries and Sacraments. So that
here is establishment enough. Next they would prove that Page 38.
because the Common Prayer Book of 2 Edw. 6. is in some things referred to: And
particularly, as to Ornaments and Rites, both by the Rubric before
Common Prayer in the present Liturgy, and by the Statute of 1 Eliz. 2. So that
as to this point, ( v^z. of Ornaments and Rites, which they named, and as to
Ceremonies, for of those they are speaking, and instance in them presently) so
much of that Book is still in force by Law. But, that Book has expressly given
a liberty in some of the things here desired to be no further imposed, where in
the last page thereof (called, Certain Notes for the more plain Explication and
decent Ministration of things contained therein) it says, As touching
kneeling, crossing, holding up of hands, knocking upon the breast, and other
gestures, they may be used or left, as every man's devotion serves, without
blame. This (say the Brethren) is still good Law, etc. wherein they do as well
falsify as prevaricate; for neither the Rubric before the Common Prayer, nor
the Act for Uniformity, do name Ornaments and Rites, as the Brethren recite the
words; but Ornaments only. Now the word Rites, comprehends the Ceremonies also,
which are not referred to in this Act; but bounded in the Book it self, and
further liberty given to the Queen about them, as we saw above, out of the Act.
Again, they prevaricate; for they know, it was far from the meaning of that
Rubric they quote in 2 Ed. 6. when it names kneeling, crossing, and other
gestures, as things indifferent to be done or left, according to every man's
devotion: Far it was from them to intend, the Cross in Baptism, or the
kneeling at the Communion, or other gestur^s established in that very Book, and
by Act of Parliament, and the latter whereof they explain by Rubric, in the
Book of 5, 6. Edw. 6. But the Brethren know they meant these words, of such
other Crossings and Kneelings, and gestures, which were many in those times,
not appointed by the Book. So much for the ^stablishment. The superstitious.
Superstitious.
Thirdly, scandalous. Both which have been replied to above, to which I refer
for brevities sake only, because this Tract is grown far beyond what I
intended. The fourth is, they have been occasions of persecution to man^ able
and godly, peaceable Mini^te^s, and sober Christians. With reference to what
has been said above, I add, P^^^^^ble Minist^^s.
first, Touching the Ministers, that peac^^ble they are not, if like the
Brethren. Who first end^avour to inflame the people as well as Parliament, and
then to cast questions of difference between the King and Parliament, ^ag. ^^^.
^^^r. ^.
about Prerogative, and^ as they not obscurely do, by quarrell^ng the validity
of the Act, as not extending to Queen Elizabeth's Successors, in Ecclesiastical
Affairs; and the Kings Proclamation, till confirmed by Act; and reproaching the
Doctrine, Page 62. quer. 4
Worship, Discipline, and Government of the Church publicly. These are not
sons of peace, but of those who, as Solomon speaks, separate very friends; Pro.
16.28.
or as others read it, Separate the Captain or the Princes. For, Sunt qui
intelligant principem a suo populo, ut hic in illum rebellet, aut ille in hunc
alienore sit animo. Mercer. in loc. vid. et R. Kavenak. ibid.
There are (says mine Author) that by these words understand the separation
betwixt the Prince and the People, that they should rebel against him, and he
be disaffected toward them. This for the Ministers. Next for the godly and
sober people. Sober Christians.
Their calamity lies in following rather those, that delight to go over Hedge
and Ditch, Kings High way. But for their suffering, though the Father, Child
or Brother; yet we know some Members must suffer to preserve the whole. And
sometime the Parents are commanded to bring the son forth to justice, not
only for his vitiousness, but for his disobedience. Deuteronomy. 21.20.
And the Magistrate is sometime forced to punish those that have much good
worth in them, only for some disorder unto Government. And let no man reply,
that these are for vitiousness; Inst.
but remember, schism are reckoned among the fruits of the flesh, as well as
drunkenness whoredom. Gal. 5.
And that those whom Paul wished were cut off, were not vicious persons, for
ought appears, but schismatics. Ibid.
And that our Savior was Publicans and sinners, then religious, but
hypocritical Pharisees. Which is not written to discountenance Religion, but to
make it appear, that if we look not well to it, strictness may be mixed with
much hidden evil, as theirs was; Col. 2. 1 Timothy 4.
who yet were guilty, some of Will Worship, others of Doctrines of Devils.
Howsoever, no man's piety must irregularity and disorder; Jam. 3.17.
for the Wisdom from above is pure, peaceable, etc. The fifth exception against
the Ceremonies, is, That they are burdensome for number, insinuated, by the
citing a place of the Preface of the Common Prayer Book, which quoteth Ep. 119.
Januar. cap. 19. The number of Ceremonies in the Com-prayer Book.
Austin, complaining of this evil in his time, and saying it was worse then the
Jewish Paedagogy. But this no way comports with ours; which as they are
innocent and simple, and well explained; so are they few in number; as kneeling
in Prayer, and at receiving standing at the Creed, (for Cross in Ring in
Marriage; the Imposition of hands five, I remember no other; I am sure there is
none material else appointed. And but two of these in the ordinary service,
kneeling and standing, and but one in any of the other. Some few others there
are in Vestiments, and Bowing at the Name of Jesus, established by Canon; and
others, by custom, as the reading the Epistle and Gospel standing, and at the
Communion Table; (with some) the Vaylings of the Women to be Churched, out of
use; Psalm. 64.6.
which all amount to no considerable number. So that after they have searched
out (or searched for) iniquity (if they could find any in this particular) and
accomplished a diligent search, as the Psalmist complains; yet all these men
whose hands are mighty (in these kind of catchings) have found (upon the
matter) nothing; Ps. 76.5.
they have not found their hands able to fasten upon any number to make good
the proof of this accusation. Their last Exception is, that they ought to be
removed, by the consequence of the 34 Article of the Church, Except. ult. P.
32, 33, 35, 39. Ought to be removed.
and of the Preface to the Common Prayer Book it self; also of the second
Homily of the time and place of prayer; yea, and by the practice of the Bishops
themselves. Wherein, as before, they prevaricate and play false. For because
the Article says: That it is not necessary that Ceremonies be in all places
one; and that they may be changed; 1. By Artic. 34.
therefore the Brethren infer, they must be changed. But they should remember,
a posse ad esse, nedum, a posse ad necesse, non valet consequentia. That from
what may be to what is, much le^s to what must be, is no good consequence.
Again, for the Preface to the Common Prayer Book, 2. By the Preface of the Com.
prayer.
because it says: That many Ceremonies were removed, because some were abused,
superstitious, others unprofitable, others obscured the glory of God, others by
their multitude were burdensome: Hence the Brethren infer, That therefore those
Ceremonies, which the Compilers of the Prayer Book left, and were in their
judgments profitable, innocent, clear, few in number, must be removed also. To
make the Composers of the Book so simple, (as they did the Parliament that
established the Book) as to confute themselves. And to the third, (the second
part of the Homily of the time and place of prayer) they handled this word also
deceitfully, 3. By the Homily.
For the Homily, having complained first of those, who having profaned and
defiled their Churches with Heathenish and Jewish abuses, with Images, and
Idols, with numbers of Altars; with gross abusing and filthily corrupting of
the Lords Supper, with an infinite number of toys and trifles of their own
devices; to make a goodly outward show, and to deface the plain, simple, and
sincere Religion of Christ Jesus: Then the Homily says: 'Gods vengeance (as
for the former, so) has been and is provoked, because people pass not to come
to the Church, either through blindness, or else for that they see the Church
altogether scoured of such gay gazing sights, as their gross fantasy was
greatly delighted with; because they see the false Religion abandoned, and the
true restored, which seems an unsavory thing to their unsavory taste. As may
appear by that a woman said to her neighbor: Alas, Gossip, what shall we do
now at Church, since all the Saints are taken away, since all the goodly sights
we were wont to have are gone, since we cannot hear the like piping, singing,
chanting, and playing upon the Organs, that we could before? But (dearly
Beloved) we ought greatly to rejoice and give God thanks, that our Churches are
delivered out of all those things which displeased God so sore, and filthily
defiled his holy house, and his place of prayer. Which last words, the Brethren
refer to piping, singing, and playing on Organs. Whereas it is evident, that
passage has respect especially to that before, where it spoke of Images,
Idols, Altars, with gross and filthy corrupting the Lords holy Supper, and the
Gazeing sights.

such as they were wont to have; which was both superstitious for kind, and too
much for quantity. Matthew. 6.
He that forbad us to pray as the Heathen, either for babbling or length; did
not forbid us to pray soberly, and upon just occasion largely.

concreto and together, then singing is also condemned by the Homily, for it is
ranked with piping and Organs. Therefore it must be understood with the former
restriction, such singing as was then; and so such piping, such organing;
namely, such as took up so much time, and was fitted more to please the fancy,
than for godly delight, and spiritual excitation of the affection, and
edification.

Bishops, the Homil. were approved by Bishops, and by Princes and Parliaments;
who had Organs and singing in their Chapels and Cathedrals, besides the Royal
Chapel. And therefore cannot be understood to condemn that thing in Doctrine,
which themselves did allow in practice; unless we should compare them to him
Deletum in Autographo, repositum ab operis.
, who having an Altar in his Chapel, yet wrote strenuously for The holy Table,
Name, and Thing. This detorting therefore of men's words against their scope and
meaning, by the Brethren, savours of their folly, who, as he speaks, Job 13.7.
will lie for God; which he as little owns, as stands in need of.

To the last, The Bishops omitting the Pastoral Staff, which by the 2 Edw. 6.
he is enjoined to have in his hand, or to have it born by his Chaplain. First,
the Common Prayer in the Rubric referrs to that Act of 2 Edw. 6. only in
respect of ornaments to be used in the time of the Communion, Rubric before
the Confession of sins.
and other times of his Ministration; not to other things or times as this,
which is an ornament to themselves, which for humility's sake they have
omitted, and to avoid ostentation; but this is no example for othe^s to neglect
the things that concern the more immediate worship of God. In the former
things, the Law gives it as a privilege; in these, it puts it on as an
obligation. A Knight shall wear his Spurs and Sword; that is, he may: but, He
shall serve the King in his Wars; that is, he must. I shall end this discourse
with that which Austin ended his, de Ritib. Ecclesiae, concerning the
Ceremonies of the Church: Ep. 119. Januar. cap. ult.
Sic itaque adhibeatur scientia, tanquam machina quaedam, per quam structura
charitatis assurgat, quae maneat in aeternum, etiam cum scientia destruetur;
quae ad finem charitatis adhibita, multum est utilis, per se autem ipsam, sine
tali sine, non modo superflua, sed etiam pernitiosa probata est. Let us
therefore so make use of knowledge, as we would do of an Engine, by which the
building of Charity may be raised, which abides for ever, even when Knowledge
shall be destroyed. Which knowledge, when it is applied to charity, is very
useful; that of it self, without such an end and use, is not only found to be
a supersluous, but even a pernicious matter. Says this Father. I add, Vade tu,
and fac similiter. And thus we have found mighty and vehement informations, K.
James Proclamation for the uniformity of Com. prayer.
supported with so weak and ssender proof, as it appears unto Us and Our
Council, that there was no cause, why any change at all should be made, in that
which was most impugned, the Book of Common Prayer, neither in the Doctrine
which appeared to be sincere; neither in the Forms and Rites, which were
justified out of the practice of the Primitive Church, says King James. I
conclude with an Admonition, an earnest Suit, 1. An Admonition.
and an humble Supplication. My Admonition is to all, first, that they beware,
lest this Let not every wanton Wit be permitted to bring what fancies he list
into the Pulpit, etc. Dr. Ushers Sermon. before the Commons, Feb. 18. 1620. page
6. Exodus 32. Amos 8.11.
wantonness, arising from spiritual fullness, as it is in the bodily, ( They
ate, and drank, and then rose up to play) be not punished with a famine; not of
bread and water, but of hearing the Word of God, (either in the letter, or in
the saving power of it) and of enjoying his holy Worship. Next, That they would
apply to this, in its proportion, what one of the learned Professors of Tigur
has concerning the Scripture, on an occasion of the curiosities of some about
that: Quis enim alius in Scripturis praeter Dei cognitionem fidem and vitae
nostrae officium, scopus nobis esse vel possit vel debeat, non video; R.
Gualter presat. in 3. Tom. operum Zuinglii. What things we are to aim at in
reading of Scripture.
More then the knowledge of God, Faith, and the duties of our life; what other
end we should aim at in Scripture (I say, or in a confession of faith, and form
of Worship) I see not. Now these, by the Articles and Liturgy as they are, that
we have as plentifully enjoyed as any other Church, is acknowledged by other
Churches, as shall appear, and is on all hands owned. My earnnest suit is unto
these Brethren, 2. A Suit. Isa.
that now labor of this Book, that they would not travel to bring forth but
wind. That they would consider the water is now troubled on both sides, the
penny in the bottom will not be seen. That in paring of the nails too near,
there is peril of cutting of the flesh. And that if any thing, in it self
considered, may need amendment, yet as in some diseases, at least in some
remedies, Medicina est morbo pejor: The medicine worse than the malady.
Plutarch. de sanitat, inenda non procul a fine.
According to that of the Philosopher: Longissime a recta ratione absunt, qui
ejiciendorum e corpore redundantium humorum causa, qui familiares corpori sunt
and consueti, in corpus inficiunt coccos Gnidios, scammoniam, aliaque
medicamenta a temperie corporis aliena, and saeva: Accustomed humors, though
not so good, in the body, are yet better grapled with then scammony. 3. An
humble Supplication unto Authority. Isa. 49. Revel. 12.
My humble supplication is to those who are in power, (if so be that this voice
shall by any echo ascend their ears) That they would be, as it is promised,
nursing fathers unto this childbirth of the Church. That they would be as a
wall to this Vine, that it may grow up and flourish; and as a sense unto this
Vineyard (full of choice plants) both from breaking in upon it by odious
calumnies; and from others breaking out, and making it but a stalking-horse, to
shoot at further game. That they would preserve it sarta tecta, which has for
its matter the sacred Doctrine; for form, the divine Worship; for use, both a
Sanctuary for a godly soul, and a Bulwark against the lesser Vermin and
greater beasts of Separation and Popery. And in a word, has been consecrated
unto us, and came swimming in the bloood of Martyrs, and sealed by the holy
Ghost unto our hearts, and by the presence of God on our outward blessings.
Finally, Act. 5.6 Edw. 6. and 1 Eliz. 1.
That they would please to reflect on, and revive that, wherein the Kings most
excellent Majesty, the Lords Temporal, For establishing the Book of
Common Prayer.
and all the Commons in this present Parliament assembled, does in Gods Name
earnestly require and charge all the Archbishops, Bishops, and other
Ordinaries, that they shall endeavor themselves to the uttermost of their
knowledge, that due and true execution hereof (for establishing the Liturgy)
may be had throughout their Diocesses and Charges; Note.
as they will answer before God, for such evils and plagues, wherewith Almighty
God may justly punish his people, for neglecting this good and wholesome Law. I
have done with the two first, the Doctrine and Worship, the Articles and
Liturgy.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Assemblies, their matter and mixture.
SECT. I. The means of preserving them from corruption.
COme we to the third, that is the Assemblies, the impurity whereof is a grand
motive unto Independents and Separation, wherein the Church is clear; the guilt
must lie either on the negligence of persons entrusted, or the necessity of
times, and the condition of the Church. The Laws The Laws.
do meet with all both criminal and penal offenses and evils; if these be
executed, there can be no notorious offenders. And there are but two things
necessary to preserve an Assembly pure, Instruction, and Correction or
Discipline upon offenders. Now the Church has strictly appointed Catechism
through all the grounds of Christian Religion; prohibiting any to come unto the
Lords Table, Rubric after the Confirmation.
who cannot give an account of them; and for the better ripening thereunto,
has ordained confirmation as a preparative. And for Discipline, to preserve
the Congregation pure, the Rubric before the Order of the Holy Communion has
these words: So many as intend to be partakers of the Holy Communion, Rubric
before the Communion.
shall signify their names to the Curate, etc. And if any of those be an open
and notorious evil liver -- or have done any wrong -- the Curate having
knowledge thereof, shall advertise him in any wise not to presume to the Lords
Table, until he have openly declared himself that he has repented truly, and
amended -- and that he have recompensed the party whom he has wronged, or at
the least declare himself to be in full purpose so to do -- The same order
shall the ^urate use with those betwixt whom he perceives malice and hatred to
reign, NOT SVFFERING them to be partakers of the Lords Table, until he KNOW
them to be reconciled. Wherein you see there is full provision made for the
purity of the Church. The Authors of necessity of Reformation, page 48. say of
this Rubric for its fullness in point of Discipline: What is this, but as much,
and as high Jurisdiction, as any Bishop can use in that particular? this
Rubric has not served for a Plea at all seasons. Cases may so fall out,
Respons.
that summum jus may be summa injuria: and as in the Civil, so in the
Ecclesiastical Judicatories, there may be cause to fly to the Courts of Equity,
for the moderation of the rigor of the letter of the Law. But the intention of
the Church is plain: and if it can not always attain its end, yet, Est aliquid
prodire tenus, Independents Acknowledgement.
si non datur ultra. Yea, and the congregational Brethren themselves
acknowledge, That whatsoever defilements they apprehended in the Worship or
Government of the Church, yet it did never work in them any other thought, much
less opinion, but that MULTITUDES of the Assemblies, and PAROCHIAL
Congregations, Apologet. narrat. page 6.
were the true Churches and Body of Christ. And again in the same page: We
always have professed, and that in these times, when the Churches of England
were the most, either actually overspread with defilements, or in the greatest
danger thereof -- that we both did and would hold a COMMUNION with them as
CHURCHES of Christ. Which reminds me of a speech of one, in his dealing with
persons of these Principles: Aug. contr. Parmen. lib. 1. cap. 8.
Et adversum nos loquuntur and nobiscum loquuntur, and cum eos obmutescere
compellat veritas, silere non permittit iniquitas: that is, They speak against
us, and they speak for us; and when truth constrains them silence, yet their
iniquity will not let them hold their peace. But touching the purity of the
Assemblies, it is (no doubt) with the Church in this life, as it is with every
member of it, who (if sensible) has cause deeply to cry out with the Apostle,
under the sense of the mixtures of corruption, Wretched man that I am, who
shall deliver me from this body of death? Romans 7.
Would we have mixtures born with in our selves? if, Hanc veniam petimus, demus
vicissim; let us yield it to the Body: especially seeing we have for our
warrant, not only the state of the Jewish Church, which in its greatest
Apostasy was owned by the Lord as his Spouse, and the Members of it for his
Children. Where is the bill of your mothers divorcement? Isa. 50.1. Ezekiel. 16.20.
And thou have taken my children which thou have born unto me, and offered them
to idols. Neither is it sufficient here to say, Robins. Apol. for Separat. cap.
12.
That this Church was holy in Abraham, and also a typical one: for it was to be
holy in it self; and a real Church too, as well as typical; for they did eat
the same spiritual meat, etc. (1 Cor. 10.) And the Catholic Church comprehends
the Jewish, as well as that which is Christian properly, as is truly asserted
in the seventh Article of the Confession of the Church of England. We have not
only this president, but also the example of our Lord and Savior, who
communicated with that Church, and did not gather another out of it, till the
consummation of that Polity, and till they had declared themselves open
adversaries to the scope of Scripture both in Doctrine and Worship: In the mean
time, both going up to their feasts, and commanding his Hearers to attend upon
the Doctrine of their Teachers; Mat. 23.2, 3.
and himself living and dying a member of that Church: challenging them all,
John 8.46. exp.
if they could tax him of sin, that is, of failing in any duty that he owed to
the Church, as well as other things, which they would have readily done, had he
failed. We have, besides this, his Precepts and Directions in this very case;
That, namely, where the peril is, Mat. 13.37, etc.
that the Corn should be plucked up, it is his will that the tares should
rather be suffered to grow until the Harvest, which himself expounds to be at
the end of the World; which place is, with more mirth, Apolog. cap. 12. p. m.
90.
than either strength or modesty, derided by Mr. Robinson, in his Defense of
Separation: field is the World, yet it is only the World where the Gospel is
published; Resp.
and where the Corn and Cocle grow together, as those that are generated by the
Word; Verse. 47.
as evidently appears by the Parable of the Draw-net, which is said expressy to
gather both good and bad; and that the Separation should be made at the end of
the World. Again, when he says, That that Particle, Suffer them to grow till
the Harvest, Tares by our Savior; Resp.
it is answered, That it is impliedly repeated and expounded, in that he says,
The Harvest is the end of the World; having said before, that the Tares (if the
Wheat be in peril by their plucking up) should be suffered till then; there was
therefore no necessity of repeating that Particle. Excommunication, but of
final rooting out unto perdition; Resp.
This is begged, not proved, nor can be granted: For it is a general
expression, and may include all cutting off, in such case, either in this
World, or at the end of it. Lastly, whereas he says, Resp.
because the Members were constrained by Laws, whether they were good or bad,
willing or nilling, to embrace the Gospel; and that therefore this Parable is
not applicable to them.

SECT. II. Causes constitutive of the Church of England.
WE reply, That whereas unto the constitution of any thing in its proper Being,
there is required only two things; first, right matter; and secondly, the due
form: And the matter of the Church being, indeed, as he cries, A holy people,
Romans Corinth. Galat.
and sanctified in Christ Jesus; as by the Titles and Directions of the
Apostolical Epistles, and otherwise, does appear: The Form also being a
profession of repentance and faith (or the Covenant of Grace in Christ Jesus
owned) and an association thereby in the Society of Saints: Robins. ubi supra,
p. 81.
The Church of England will appear a sound Church in both, and not to be
separated from. First, 1. Matter of the Church of England.
for the matter of the Church, A holy people, and sanctified in Christ Jesus,
or visible Saints: We must here premise a twofold distinction; First, of the
Church, which is either mystical or visible; then of Saints, which are either
real or appearing. Now the matter of these Churches are correspondent to the
nature of them: The members of the Church mystical are real Saints only; the
members of the visible are Saints visible. Now a person visible in any
profession, A visible Professor.
is he who understands the general grounds of it, owneth them, and acts
accordingly, nor does any thing whereby the main of that Profession is
overthrown. Now the people of the Church of England generally, though in many
things they (and we, as Saint James speaks) offend all. James 3.
And this Principle is owned by other Reformed Churches: Epist. 284. page 322.
edit. 2.
The Church of Geneva, and Calvin among them, does acknowledge, That forasmuch
as men remain in the visible Church, till they utterly renounce the Profession
of Christianity, Church of Geneva's Judgment in this point.
we may not deny unto Infants their right, by withholding from them the public
sign of holy Baptism, if they be born where the outward acknowledgement of
Christianity is not clean gone and extinguished. [Vbicunque non prorsus
intereidit, vel extincta fuit Christianismi professio, fraudantur jure suo
Infantes, si a communi symbolo arcentur.] And this also is acknowledged in
practice, even by the Belgic Churches, Apol. cap. 12. Belgic Christian Church
Judgment also.
(which Mr. Robinson so predicates for the liberty they have;) for they also
Baptize the Infants of all; which surely they could not do, if they judged not
their Parents matter of the visible Church, and Saints by calling, in respect
of their outward profession. The general Profession of a Jew, though he should
do some things contrary, and of a Turk, and the partaking of those signs and
symbols, which are notes of that Profession, does constitute them such. Our
people therefore, owning the Christian Faith, and partaking of the Ordinances,
and living visibly under them, and not living so as if they did believe nothing
of their profession, though failing much, does constitute them visible Saints,
and the matter of a Church. If any be very exorbitant, the Discipline of the
Church, and the Laws of the Nation, which are a part of christian Discipline,
are to reform him.

2. Form of the Church of England constitutive.
Next for the Form; The profession of Faith and Repentance, and formal
covenanting. We are here to note, That there is a formal and a virtual
Covenanting, or rather a Covenanting immediately in our own person, or by a
Deputy (as in Law a man may answer by his Attorney;) So all the Churches of
England do formally make Profession of their Faith and Repentance, and enter
into Covenant at their Baptism; and do personally repeat it themselves in the
rendering account of their Catechism at confirmation, and before the Lords
Supper, which is the express Injunction of the Church; Rubric after
Confirmation.
if it be neglected, this is not to be imputed to the Church; though indeed,
for substance, it is not neglected, neither are any usually admitted to the
Holy Communion, but such as give an account of their faith, and are not
scandalous in their lives.

As for the Objection, That they were forced to this ibid.
Forcing to Religion.
That Christianity was received voluntarily in this Nation soon after the
publishing of the Gospel in the Apostles times, as may be seen in Tertullian,
and others of the Ancients; And that Popery was rather as a scab, or disease,
that came upon it long after; as may be seen by the Writers on our sides:
particularly in the learned Defense of the Apology of the Church of England by
Bishop Jewel; and in Doctor James Vssher, Archbishop of Armagh, his Succession
of the Churches, his Religion of the ancient British, his Answer to the
Jesuit, and other Writers. Secondly, We must note, England, whilst Popish,
yet held the Articles of the Faith, and so the substance of Christianity,
though much obscured, and countervened by other Doctrines; they were also
baptized, and did partake of the Body of Christ in the Sacrament, and therefore
were Christians; not nothing in Religion, nor yet Heathens, or Jews, or Turks,
and therefore in some respect right matter, as we heard before. Now the
Reformation and the Laws then were not to constrain them to a positive
Confession or Profession of Christianity (which constitutes the matter of the
visible Church, Note.
as we saw above) but to reject those Doctrines and Corruptions that had
obscured it: it was rather a restraint, then a constraint. Now for the forcing
those who own a Profession to perform their Duty in it, as to come to
Sacraments, etc. this is not a forcing men to be of a Religion, but to answer
the Profession of it. Thirdly, Grant it were so, they had at first been it; why
might not that force occasion true conversion, as it did in the Gibeonites?
Josh. 9.
and did in many of the Ancient Separatists, Aug. Epist. 48. ab initio.
the Donatists, in Saint Austins time. Nam de multorum jam correctione
gaudemus, qui tam veraciter Unitatem Catholicam tenent atque defendunt, and a
pristino errore se liberatos esse laetantur, ut eos cum magna gratulatione
miremur: qui tamen nescio qua vi consuetudinis nullo modo mutari in melius
cogitarent, nisi hoc terrore perculsi, solicitam mentem ad considerationem
veritatis intenderent, ne forte non pro justitia, sed pro perversitate and
praesumptione hominum ipsas temporales molestias, infructuosa and vana
tolerantia paterentur, and apud Deum postea non invenirent nisi debitas poenas
impiorum, qui ejus tam lenem admonitionem, and paterna ftagella contempserint.
That is, We do already rejoice in the correction of many, who holding now Truth
and Unity with the Church, are glad that they are delivered from their former
Error; who, by reason of custom, would never have thought of changing, unless
being terrified by their sufferings, did begin to bend their minds to the
consideration of Truth, lest they should both suffer here these afflictions
fruitlesly, and afterward find with God the punishment of wicked men, because
they did despise his gentle correction by the hand of the civil power. Thus he.

Bands; Civil and Ecclesiastical Bands. Robins. Apol. cap. 12. p 81, 82.
but those that are in a Parish, they are all of the Church, and have right to
Ordinances, yea, and compelled thereunto: And no formal Covenant to constitute
them Members of such a particular Church or Parish. It is answered, That where
a whole Nation is of the same Religion, as was the Jewish of old, and, by the
mercy of God, many others have been, and are, of which number our own, there
needs no other Formality to make a Christian a Member of this and that
particular Body, but their accepting him among them, and his practicing of
communion with them in the Ordinances and Worship of God. A freeman of the
Nation may inhabit any where without a new Formality, and enjoy the liberties
of a Subject: So he that is a member of the National Church. The distinction of
Parishes being by public Order, both Ecclesiastical and Civil, for the
preservation of men's civil Rights; And the better convenience of Edification;
And the preservation of Peace and Concord in both. And he which shall
contemptuously violate such Distinctions, and refuse communion in the Parochial
Church wherein he lives, the Word and Sacraments being rightly therein
administered, cannot avoid the crime of a Perturber of the Peace in Church and
Commonwealth; and as liable unto punishment, as he that makes a Hedge upon a
Common, which is both disorderly and injurious.

SECT. III. Apostolical Christian Church vitiated, but no Separation.
NExt come we to the Apostolical Christian Church, wherein the Doctrine was
more vitiated than in ours (till this late Apostasy since the War) the Worship
defiled, Manners corrupted, Discipline neglected, and Tyranny by the Governors
of the Church exercised; And no Separation that we hear of.

1. Touching Doctrine. 1. In Doctrine.
In what Parish of ours is the Resurrection of the dead denied, as was by many
in the Church of Corinth? In what Parishes of ours is the Doctrine of
Justification by the Works of the Law maintained generally, as in the Churches
of Galatia?

Then for Worship: 2. Worship. 1 Cor. 10.
Do ours partake of the Lords Table, and the Table of Devils? as did many among
the Corinthians. Are our Assemblies so confused as theirs were? so far, 1 Cor.
14.
that one might have thought them mad, as the Apostle says. Do ours come to
the Communion drunk; 1 Cor. 11.
And are so malicious one against another, that they will eat the Lords Supper
together, as at Corinth?

3. Manners.
Next, for Manners and life. Have we worse than Incest, Fornication,
Covetousness, Malice, Contentions, 2 Cor. 12.21.
unrepented of, as was in the Church of Corinth? And biting and devouring one
another, exercising the works of the flesh? Gal. 5. and Chap. 6. Rev. 2. and
Chap. 3.4.
Defrauding the Minister of his due, as in the Churches of Galatia? Permitting
of Idolaters, boasting of Gifts? being neither hot nor cold, as it was in the
Asian Churches?

4. Discipline.
As touching Neglect of Discipline. First, In the Apostles own Company: The
Ministers that should exercise Discipline, Philip. 2.
they all sought their own, and none the things of Jesus Christ. And the
grossest vices winked at, and fomented, as we saw before in the Church of
Corinth: 1 Cor. 5.
And should have been so still, had not the Apostle been living, and exciting
them to their Duty.

5. Government.
Lastly, Concerning Tyranny. We see what oppression the false Apostles used: Ye
suffer (says the Apostle) if a man take of you, 2 Cor. 11.10
if a man bring you into bondage, if a man devour you, if a man exalt himself,
if a man smite you on the face. By which words he touches the Tyranny, though
out of malice, against the Apostle, willingly submitted unto by the Church of
Corinth. And we know that Diotrephes exercised his Government with such
insolency, that he cast out whom he would, 3 Epist. John verse. 9 ^ Cor. 11.
admitted whom he would, opposed the Apostle John himself; yet no news of
Separation. And all this, which much excuses our Churches, even whilst
Virgin, and newly espoused viz. the Heathen: Persecution; and the Apostle
primitive Churches.

SECT. IV. The Primitive Churches.
TOuching which, I shall produce only a witness or two: whereof the first
shall be Cyprian, a man of rare sanctity, who preserved the integrity of his
conscience with the loss of his life; yet a severe enemy to Separation.

First, He acknowledges the corrupt mixtures of the Churches of his time and
place, and acknowledges the just hand of God in the Persecutions of those
times for it. His words are: Studebant augendo patrimonio singuli, Cypr. Sermon.
de lapsis 5. prope ab initio.
and obliti quid credentes, aut sub Apostolis antefecissent, aut semper facere
deberent, insatiabili cupiditatis ardore ampliandis facultatibus incubabant:
non in sacerdotibus religio devota, non in ministeriis fides integra, non in
operibus misericordia, non in moribus disciplina: Corrupta barba in viris, in
foeminis formafucata: adulterati post Dei manus oculi, capilli mendacio
colorati: ad decipienda corda simplicium callidae frauds, circumveniendis
fratribus subdolae voluntates: Jungere cum infidel bus vinculum matrimonii,
prostituere cum gentilibus membra Christi: Non jurare tantum temere, sed ad hoc
etiam pejerare: Praepositos superbo tumore contemnere, venenato sibi ore
maledicere: odiis pertinacibus invicem dissidere: Episcopi plurimi, quos and
ornamento esse oportet caeteris and exemplo, divina procuratione contempta,
procuratores rerum seculorum fieri; derelicta cathedra, plebe deserta, per
alienas provincias oberrantes, negotiationis quaestuosae nundinas aucupari:
Esurientibus in Ecclesia fratribus habere argentum largiter, velle fundos
insidiosis fraudibus rapere, usuris multiplicantibus foenus augere. Quid non
perpeti tales pro peccatis ejusmodi mereremur? 1. The state of the primitive
Church before Persecution in Cyprians time.
That is, Every one set their minds to increase their means; and forgetting
what Believers either did in the Apostles times, or should do at all times,
they felt themselves, with an incredible thirst of covetousness, to increase
their estates. No serious Religion in the Ministers, no faithfulness in
discharge of their places; no Mercy in Works, no Discipline in Manners. Men
[through pride] newfangled their beards: Among the women the face was painted:
Their eyebrows, after God had done his work, adulterated with colors. Crafty
plots devised to deceive men in bargaining, that meant plainly: Cunning shifts
to circumvent their brethren. The marriage bond entered into with Infidels, and
the Members of Christ prostituted unto the Heathen: Not only was there swearing
rashly, but moreover forswearing. The Governors with swelling pride contemned,
and with a venomed tongue reviled. The Bishops and Ministers, who should be
both an ornament to the rest, and an example, they, neglecting their Spiritual
Work, their Seats, their People, flew up and down the Countries, to Fairs and
Markets, for Gains sake. When the Brethren were empty with poverty, and hungry,
they would have full Bags; they studied to catch, by fraud and force, Lands and
Livings: Use upon Use, to increase their Principal. We that were such, for such
Sins what did we not deserve? Thus far he, as to the first point of corruptions
in the Church.

2. B^^ no Se^^^^n
2. Next, for his distance from Separation, notwithstanding all this. Various
are the Allegations that might be brought out of him: I shall mention one or
two. Si videntur in Ecclesia esse zizania, non tamen impediri debet aut fides
aut charitas nostra, (...) p^t 3. (...).
ut quoniam zizania esse in Ecclesia cernimus, ipsi de Ecclesia recedamus:
nobis imo laborandum est u^ frumentum esse possimus, etc. i. e. It should not
hurt our Faith and Charity that we see Tares in the Church, so as that we
should depart from the Church; but we must labor that we our selves be Wheat.
Again, elsewhere: Quantus arrogantiae tumor est, ^^b. 4. Ep. ^. p^^pe sinem.
quanta humilitatis and lenitatis oblivio, arrogantiae suae quanta jactatio, ut
quis aut audeat, aut facere posse se credat, quod nec Apostolis concessit
Dominus, ut zizania a frumento putet se posse discernere, aut quasi ipsi paleam
far and aream purgare concessum sit, paleas a tritico conetur separare: cum
que Apostolus dicat; In domo autem magna, non solum vasa aurea sunt and
argentea, sed and lignea and fictiliae, aurea and argo^tea vasa videatur
eligere, lignea vero and fictilia conterere, abjicere: Cum non nisi die Domini
vasa lignea divini ardoris incendio concrementur; and sictilia ab eo, cui data
est ferrea virga, frangantur. That is; How great a swelling of pride is it, how
great forgetfulness of humility and gentleness, how great a boasting of their
arrogance, that any man should dare, or believe that he can do that, which was
not granted, no not to the Apostles, to do! namely, That a man should think
that he is able to separate the Tares from the Wheat; or as if it were given to
him to carry out the chaff, and to purge the Lords floor, and so endeavor to
separate the chaff from the wheat: And whereas the Apostle says, But in a
great house there are not only Vessels of Gold and of Silver, 2 Timothy 2.
but also of Wood and of Clay; he would seem to select the golden and silver
ones, but to contemn and cast away the wooden ones, and those of clay; whereas
those of wood are not to be burnt, but in the Day of the Lord, by the flame of
divine scorching; and those of clay to be broken by him, to whom is given a Rod
of Iron. Thus far Cyprian.

The other witness (both to the mixtures of Church Assemblies, and to the
opposition of Separation notwithstanding) it is Saint Austin: who, as he wrote
whole Volumes on this Argument; so, for the first, 1. Corruptions of the Church
in S. Austins time. Epist. 64.
namely, the Corruptions of the Members of the Church, we have him often among
the rest. In an Epistle unto Aurelius, where he thus writes: Multas carnales
foeditates and aegritudines, quas Africana Ecclesia in multis patitur, in
paucis gemit, consiliorum gravitate and tua possit sanare. i. e. We hope, that
by grave counsel, and specially yours (speaking to Aurelius Bishop of Carthage)
God may heal the many carnal defilements and (spiritual) sicknesses, which the
Church of Africa (note, a National Church A National Church.
) labors of in many, but bewails in few. Again, a little after: Comessationes
and ebrietates ita concessae and licite putantur, ut in honorem etiam
beatissimorum Martyrum, non solum per dies solennes, quod ipsum quis non
lugendum videa^, qui hec non carnis oculis inspicit, sed quotidie celebrentur.
That is; Rioting and Drunkenness is accounted so allowable and lawful, that it
is solemnly committed in honor of the blessed Martyrs, and that not only on
their Festival Days (which yet who can see with spiritual eye, and not bewail?)
but even every day also. Again, in the same place: Tanta pestilentia est hujus
mali, ut sanari prorsus, quantum mihi videtur, nisi Concilii authoritate, non
possit. i. e. So spreading is this plague, that absolutely to heal it, cannot,
in my opinion, be done, without the Authority of a Council. This of Drunkenness.

Next, for Contentions and Deceits: in the same Letter he adds; De contentione
autem and dolo, quid me attine^ dicere? quando ista vitia non in plebe, sed in
nostro numero graviora sunt? Horum autem morborum matter superbia est, and
humanae laudis aviditas, qua etiam hypocrisin saepe ge^erat. That is; What
should I speak of Contention and Deceitfulness? seeing these vices are more
notorious in our Order? Now the root of these diseases is Pride, and thirst
after humane applause, which oftentimes does breed and beget Hypocrisy. Thus
he, of the vitiousness of Church Members.

^. ^et no S^para^ion
Now touching his vehemence against Separation notwithstanding, all those
Writings of his against the Donatists might be alleged. But the third Book
against Parmenian, touching this point, one of our first and great Reformers
says (Is locus hac maxima tempestate nobis singulari diligentia legendus and
perpendendus fuerit. (...) Man (...)
i. e.) ^^s a place that should especially in these times, be read with
diligence, and considered. And Calvin, alleging a passage out of that Book to
this purpose, introduces it with a (been ergo and prudenter Augustinus) 'well
and wisely spoke Saint Austin; Instit. lib. 4. c. 1. 5. 16.
and then cites a Plea very pertinent to our purpose. Aug. contr. Parmen. lib
3. cap. 1. a principio.
Cum omnis pia ratio, and modus Ecclesiasticae disciplinae, unitatem spiritus
in vinculo pacis maxim debeat intueri: quod Apostolus sufferendo invicem
praecipit custodiri, and quo non custodito, medicinae vindicta non tantum
superflua, sed etiam pernitiosa, and propterea nec medicina esse convincitur.
Illi filii mali, qui non odio iniquitatum alienarum, sed studio contentionum
suorum, infirmas plebes jactantia sui nominis irretitas, vel totas trahere, vel
certe dividere affectant, superbia tumidi, pervicacia vaesani, calumniis
insidiosi, seditionibus turbulenti, ne luce veritatis carere ostendautur,
umbram rigidae severitatis obtendunt, and quo in scripturis sanctis, salva
dilectionis sinceritate, and custodita pacis unitate, ad corrigenda fraterna
vitia moderatiore curatione fieri praecepta sunt; ad sacrilegium schismatis,
and occasionem praecisionis usurpant. That is; All just measure of
Ecclesiastical Discipline ought especially to have respect unto the Unity of
the Spirit in the bond of Peace: which the Apostle directs us to preserve by
mutual suffering one another: And which bond of peace not being kept, the
medicine of Discipline is not only supersluous, but pernicious, and therefore
no medicine at all. These sons of Belial, which not so much out of hatred of
other men's sins, as out of love to their own contentions, having entangled the
innocent multitude with their vaunting and vainglorious names, endeavor to draw
them wholly, or to divide them: Men swollen with pride, mad in stubbornness,
laying wait by slanders, turbulent in Seditions (O England!) lest they should
be proved to want the light of Truth, they hold forth the shadow of Severity
and Discipline: And those things which are commanded in the Scripture, saving
Charity and Unity, for the moderate Reformation of our Brethrens failings,
those things they abuse to sacrilegious and profane Schism, and to occasion of
Separation. Thus that place. And afterward he adds (which was noted above) Et
revera si contagio peccandi multitudinem invaserit, C^p. 2.
divinae disciplinae severa misericordia necessaria est: nam consilia
separationis and inania sunt, and pernitiosa, atque sacrilega; quia and impia
and superba sunt, and plus perturbant infirmos bonos, quam corrigunt animosos
malos. i. e. And truly if the contagion of sin have invaded the multitude, the
severe mercy of Gods correction is necessary; but the fancy of remedying it by
separating is vain and pernicious, yea, sacrilegious and profane; because it
is a wicked and proud conception, and does more disturb the weak that are good,
then correct the stubborn that are naught. And a little after concludes (as we
heard above) Misericorditer igitur corripiat homo quod potest; quod autem non
potest, patienter ferat; and cum dilectione gemat atque lugeat, donec aut ille
desuper aut emendet aut corrigat; aut usque ad messem differat eradicare
ziza^ia, and paleam ventilare. i. e. Let a man therefore correct gently what he
may; and what he cannot, let him bear, and with love bewail and lament, until
God from above shall either amend it, or rebuke it; or else defer till the
Harvest, to pluck up the Tares, and to purge away the Chaff. Thus far he,
touching the second particular, namely, Separation. And so I have done with the
Testimony of Antiquity.

SECT. V. The Reformed Churches.
I Come now to the Reformed Churches; two or three of whose Worthies I shall
produce as witnesses in this Cause: whereof the first shall be the last and
latest, one unto whom this Nation is much obliged for his Dedication of both
those Parts of his accurate and useful Labors for the Defense of the Trinity
of Persons in the Unity of the Godhead; Zanch. de Trib. Eloh. in Epist. deel.
utrique parti. Epist. ded. ad commit. Be^fo d. part. 2. praefix.
And for his wholesome Admonition to us, to take heed of the Socinian Leaven, in
questioning the Godhead of Christ, or of the Holy Ghost: And specially for his
Observation, viz. That the Eastern Churches were never overrun by the Turk,
till they were first overrun with Arianism. He, Lib. de divort. 2. in sine.
I say, in the close of all his Works, and as it were a sacred seal, leaves us
this Aphorism: Quamplurimos esse minime negamus, qui hac tantum de causa inter
fratres censeantur, quod eandem Christi puram religionem nobiscum profiteantur:
cum alioqui nihil minus revera sint quam fratres, propter innumerabilia quibus
scatent, vitia. i. e. We do not deny, says he, but that there are very many,
that for this cause only are counted brethren, because they profess the same
pure Religion with us; whereas otherwise, they are indeed nothing less than
brethren, by reason of the innumerable vices wherewith they swarm. Thus he. It
is then the Profession of the true Faith that makes a Brother; from whom then,
till ejected from and by the Church, we may not, in matters of Religion and
Worship withdraw and separate, although in private converse we may; because, as
Austin notes, this may be done without danger of Schism, but that cannot. Nam
in domibus suis quique boni fideles ita disciplinam suorum moderantur, Aug.
contr. Parmen. l. 3. cap. 2.
and regunt, ut ibi quoque obtemperent Apostoli praecipienti, cum ejusmodi nec
cibum simul sumere: sed non tam facile malorum multitudo, non potest a bonorum
commixtione separari. i. e. For in their houses all the Faithful do so order
the government of those that belong unto them, that they obey the Apostles
Precept, commanding, with such a one no not to eat; but not so easily a
multitude of bad men are separated from the mixture with the good, (as, to wit,
a bad member of a family may.)

The next shall be Calvin, whom some would make a Patron in their way of
separating; he discoursing of this point, among other vehement expressions,
has this: Instit. lib. 4. cap. 1. s. 9.
Vbi reverenter auditur Evangelii praedicatio, neque sacramenta negliguntur,
illic pro eo tempore neque fallax neque ambigua Ecclesiae apparet facies; cujus
vel authoritatem spernere, vel monita respuere, vel consiliis refragari, vel
castigationes ludere, nemini impune licet, multo minus ab ea deficere, ac ejus
abrumpere unitatem, etc. i. e. A true Church.
Wheresoever the preaching of the Gospel is reverently heard, and the
Sacraments are not neglected, there, for that time, there appears neither a
deceitful nor a doubtful face of a Church; whose authority they that despise,
or contemn its counsels, or reject its advice, or make sport with its
chastenings, they shall never escape unpunished, much less if they fall off
from it, and rend the Unity of it. And afterward: Sect. 16.
Quanquam autem ex inconsiderato justitiae zelo, haec tentatio bonis etiam
interdum oboritur: hoc tamen recipiemus, nimiam morositatem ex superbia magis
and factu, falfaque sanctitatis opinione, quam ex vera sanctitate, veroque ejus
studio nasci. The Cause of separation.
That is; Although this temptation does arise sometimes even in good men, by an
inconsiderate zeal of Righteousness; yet this we shall find, That too much
strictness does grow rather of pride and height, and a false opinion of
Holiness, than of true Holiness, or a true zeal for it. Thus he. And he does in
that Chapter, Sect. 14, 15, 17, 18, 19.
by examples, not only of the Church of the Jews, and in the time of our
Savior Christ, but also in the Apostolical Churches, demonstrate, That greater
Vices in Manners, and fouler Errors in Doctrine, to have been tolerated, than
are in those Churches that Separation is now made from. And adds this memorable
Note, viz. Quondam autem sacrum unitatis vinculum solvunt, nemo justani impii
hujus divortii poenam effugit, quin se pestiferis erroribus, ac teterrimis
deliriis fascinet. The punishment of separation.
i. e. But because they dissolve the sacred bond of Unity, no man shall escape
this just punishment, That he shall intoxicate himself with most pestilent
Errors, and most pernicious fancies. Thus he. The truth whereof with horror we
see at this day in the Anabaptists and Quakers, who first began with
Separation. But the whole discourse in that Chapter is well worth the serious
perusal.

The last Witness from these Churches, shall be his, Vide Sleid in. lib. 15. Ad
Ann. 1543.
unto whom, as the Foreign, so our own Church ows much of its Reformation: As,
besides his other Writings, appears in that excellent Liturgy of the Church of
Colen, composed by him, Melancthon and Pistemus, (of which before.) As also in
his censure of our own Common Prayer Book: he, as I said, Bucer. Script. Anglic.
in his Commentary on Zephany, Chap. 3. (it is at the end of his Exposition on
the Evangelists and the Psalms) has a vivide, practical, and experimental
Discourse most effectual to this purpose, part whereof is as follows: Indubie
haud temere factum est, Bucer. in Zeph. 3.15. etc.
ut nullum fere pietatis exemplum scriptura paulo magnificentius praedicet, in
quo non, uno Christo excepto, simul insignem lapsum notavit: Quam foede lapsus
fuit, Aaron, David, Petrus? sed ne Moses quidem perpetuo stetit, aut quisquam
sanctorum alius: Vult enim Deus and ex suorum infirmitate, bonitatis suae
gloriam illustrare. Equidem al quot novi, qui proximo sexennio, quo Evangelium
Christi mundus iterum coepit persequi, pro Christo mortem fortissime
oppetierunt, in quibus paulo ante vitam severiorem nemo non desiderabat: ita
tamen corda eorum timor Dei possederat, ut licet plus nimio carni per omnem
fere vitam indulsissent, ubi eo ventum fuit, ut vel negandus illis Christus
erat, vel semeltota caro igni tradenda, alacri vultu and confidenti pectore
mortis durissimos cruciatus, vitae admodum lautae, delicataeque, quam eis
mundus promittebat, protulerint. That is; Doubtless it is not without cause,
That the Scripture does not make mention scarce of any great example of piety,
Christ only excepted, who is not noted for some remarkable failing: For how
foully did Aaron, David, and Peter fall? Yea, Moses himself did not always
stand, no nor any other of the Saints: For God will, by the infirmity of his
Saints, take occasion to illustrate the glory of his goodness. Truly I have
known some within these six last years, wherein the world has begun again to
persecute the Gospel, who have courageously undergone death for Christ; in
whom, a little before, there was no man but could have wished a more sober
life: But the fear of God had so possessed their hearts, that though they had
too much indulged the flesh almost all their life; yet, when it came to that
point, that they must either deny Christ, or else deliver the whole flesh to
the fire at once, they did, with a cheerful countenance, and a confident
spirit, prefer the most cruel torments of death before a dainty and delicate
life, which the world proffered them. Thus he. And having mentioned others,
such who at that time of his writing did undergo most grievous sufferings for
the Truth, he adds: Vt enim mulier proba, and mariti sinceriter amans, millies
potius moreretur, quam pudicitiam prostitueret, aut maritum desereret; and
saepe tamen multa admittit, quae scit viro ingrata esse: Sic habent nonnunquam
and sanctorum mentes; a Deo deficere plane non possunt, vereque eum amant pro
omnibus; adhuc tamen violenti adeo sunt in illis carnis affectus, ut juxta
nihilominus multa designent, quae noverunt Deo displicere. As, says he, a
faithful woman, and one who truly loves her husband, would rather dye a
thousand times, than either prostitute her chastity, or forsake her husband;
and yet oftentimes does commit such things as she knows are displeasing to her
husband: So it is sometimes with the spirits of the Saints; from God they
cannot wholly fall, and him they love above all; yet notwithstanding, so
violent sometimes are the workings of corrupt nature, that they design and do
many things which they do know offend Almighty God. Hereupon he gives this
Caution: Ne igitur judicium de quoquam praecipitemus, probe animadvertamus, ubi
sedem sibi delegerit Spiritus Dei, qui vere illinc abesse nequit, ubi aures
sunt verbi Dei patientes; nam nati ex Diabolo, illud audire haud sustinent. i.
e. Let us not therefore rashly judge of any man, but let us well note where the
Spirit of God has chosen his seat, who cannot be really absent from thence,
where the ears can endure to hear the Word of God; for the children of the
Devil cannot bear the hearing of it. A main Cause of mis-judging our Brethren,
ignorance of the greatest sins.
Then he renders the original cause of these mistakes about Church Members,
namely, not rightly understanding which are the greatest sins and sinners.
Tenet quosdam error peruitiosus, ut sola ista crassa, splendide vestiri, laute
pasci, perpotare, scortari, opes studiosius colligere, foenerari, and hoc genus
alia aversentur. Interim arrogantiam, fastum, fastidium fratrum, languorem
circa quaestiones frivolas, factiones, blasphemias contra Dei verbum, Bucer
against Pharisees and Quakers.
obtrectationes contra Dei ministros: mendaciis credere, and temere credita,
tum etiam ex prava suspicione suggesta spargere, and hujus generis alia
nonnunquam pro virtutibus habeat; seque ter sanctissimos arbitrentur, dum
Stoico supercilio, caperata front, obscuratis faciebus obambulant, vilibus
vestiuntur, gravibus non verbis, sed tonitruis in omnes mortales detonant;
nihil non perditum and flagitiosum vociferantes. That is; But some persons are
possessed with a certain pernicious Error; That, namely, they abominate only
these gross things, To go brave, fare well, to drink, to whore, to get money,
to put to use, and the like: But in the mean time, as for arrogance, insolence,
prideful scorn of their Brethren, languishing about frivolous questions; yea,
factions, reproaches of Gods Word, slanders against his Ministers; giving rash
credit to lies, and when they have precipitately believed them, or else by
their own suspicion devised them, to spread them abroad; these and the like
they account for eminent virtues: And reckon themselves Pope-holy, when they
walk with a Pharisaical scorn, bent brows, dejected countenances, in a mean
garb; and not so much with grave words, as with thunderclaps, declaim against
all men, and cry out, That there is nothing but wickedness and ruin. Now if
any man take it ill of our Author that he thus writes, he will give you both a
reason, and evidence it by his further experience in both sorts now mentioned.
Quod expertus sum, and certa habeo animadversione exploratum, cur non ad
Christi gloriam, and fratrum admonitionem tester? What I have had experience of
(says he) and by observation do most certainly know, why should I not testify
to the glory of Christ, and admonition of the Brethren? Then he adds: Eorum qui
tam multi sunt in accusandis fratrum vitiis, quos quaelibet vestis paulo
cultior, quaelibet coenula lautior, quilibet sermo hilarior, tantopere
offendit, qui perpetuo de excommunicatione quaeritantur, perpaucos adhuc, ne
dicam nullos reperi, qui non insigni sui confidentia, intolerabilis fratrum
contemptu, and incredibili neglectus sui impatientia, nonnunquam and aliis
gravioribus malis laborent, and prope semper peregrinis dogmatis, quae tantum
ad schismata and nullam aedificationem conducunt, addicti sint. Jam and
HAERESIS opus carnis est, Hypocrites, Opinions, and Separation, worse than
profaneness.
and omnibus PERPOTATIONIBUS, SCORTATIONIBUS, ADULTERIIS long nocentius. As
for those (says he) which are so much in accusing the vices of their Brethren,
whom every garment that is a little more than ordinary handsome, 1. Men seeming
Religious.
every entertainment that is somewhat elegant, every word that is a little
merry, does so offend; and who are always complaining for want of
excommunication and discipline; of such spirits, I have found very few, that I
may not say none, who have not labored, with notable conceit of themselves,
intolerable contempt of others, and incredible impatience, if they were
neglected, yea, and sometimes of other more gross evils; but always almost I
have found them doting upon heterodox Opinions, which have tended only to
Schism and Divisions, but to no Edification. Now HERESY (by it he means
Opinions and Divisions now mentioned) is a work of the Flesh, as well as any
other, and is more pestilent than all DRINKINGS, WHORINGS, or ADULTERIES, by
far. Thus he. And then he gives you his Observation again of the other: Contra
deprehendi inter eos, quos illi propter vitam remissiorem and mundi opes, atque
splendorem quendam, ut ethuicos detestantur, quamplurimos qui ut se peccatis
obnoxios agnoscunt, ita sentiunt, and de se quam humillime, and de proximis
quam benignissime: candido pectore atque aequo judicio in omnes, semper sese
deteriores aliis arbitrantes: Christum quoque tanto ardentius amant, quanto se
eo medico plus opus habere vident: dumque merita illis crux fuerit impositae,
nihil est eis tolerantius, nulli etiam plus pro Domino periclitantur. That is;
On the contrary, amongst those, whom the other, 2. Men seeming loose.
by reason of the remissness of life that they have seen in them, and of the
worldly wealth and outward splendour, have loathed as Heathens, I have found
very many, who, as they do acknowledge themselves to be liable to many sins, so
they think most humbly of themselves, and most charitably of others: of candid
thoughts, and a friendly opinion touching all men, ever judging themselves
worse than others: And they love Christ so much the more earnestly, by how much
more they discern they need him to be their Healer: and when the affliction
that they have merited has been laid upon them, nothing could be more patient,
none hazard themselves further for the Lord. Thus far he. And after excusing
himself, and calling God to witness, that he does not hereby in the least
intend the countenancing of a loose, or discouraging of a strict life; and
praying that God would enable him, and all his people, to more exact Holiness;
he gives account farther of this discourse: Scripsi haec (novit Dominus) nulla
alia causa, quam ut monerem fratres, quibus datum est frugalius and severius
vivere, atque extrariis morbis esse liberis, primum ut diligenter Satanam
observent, ne cos internis interim infestet: and dum sinit externas istas
vanitates and delicias fugere, faciat eos internis, atque adeo long
nocentioribus addictos, hoc est sibiipsis placere, and condemnatione aliorum
sese oblectare, tum and inaniter in dogmatum novitate deliciari: ex quibus
postea aperte simultates and odia, tum factiones and sectae, ac indicibilia
Ecclesiae scandala. Deinde ne qualibet labecula offensi, timorem Domini
negligant, and apud quoslibet pervestigare. I have written these things (says
he) the Lord knows, These things not written to reproach Religion.
for no other cause, but that I might admonish my Brethren, to whom it is given
to live more frugally and strictly, and to be free from outward vices; First,
That they diligently observe the Adversary, lest he infect them with inward
ones: And whilst he suffers them to fly from these outward vanities and
delicacies, he make them addicted unto inward, and so far more dangerous evils;
that is, to please themselves, and to delight themselves in condemning others,
and then to be wanton in novelty of Opinions; from whence afterward do break
forth open malignities and hatred, then Sects and Factions, and unspeakable
scandals in the Church. Next, that they be not offended with every small fault,
and so neglect to enquire for the fear of God, even amongst any sort of men, he
goes on: Non paucis hodie cum damnato illo Pharisaeo, justificaetos publicanos,
horrendo supercilio rejiciunt, tantum quod eos vident, cum externis quibusdam
morbis conflictari. You shall see (says he) not a few, who, as the condemned
Pharisee, do, with an horrid and supercilious pride, despise the justified
Publicans, only because they see them conflict with certain outward vices. He
concludes: Postremo, ne ob Ecclesiae infirmitatem, quae in omnibus (proh dolor)
nimia est, dona Dei exhibita nobis, parum aestiment; eoque and ingrati erga
Deum, and studio emendandi quae jure offendunt, tardiores reddantur. Lastly, (I
have written this to admonish) left men should, because of the weakness of the
Church, which (alas) is too much in all, little esteem the gifts of God
bestowed on us; and so become both ungrateful toward God, and more unfit and
slow to remedy what is indeed offensive. Long quoque satius foret, centum
hoedos pro ovibus habere, and monendo eos operam ludere, quam unicam oviculam,
pro qua Christus mortuus est, ob peccatorum inquinamenta, in errore negligere,
nedum Satanae adjudicare. For it were better (says he) to count an hundred
Goats for Sheep, and lose our time in the admonishing of them, than for the
defilements of sin, to leave in its error the poorest Sheep of Christ, much
less adjudge it over unto Satan. Ne quenquam filiorum Dei quantumvis pusillum,
contemnamus unquam, sed omnia nostra intentissimo studio and diligentia ad
instaurationem sanctorum, maxim vero eorum quos infirmiores aliis videmus,
instituamus, sic referemus Christum servatorem nostrum, qui erga eos, qui
deterrimis morbibus laborabant, praecipua semper benignitate and sedulitate
medicum sese exhibuit: Sic gratificabimur unice patri nostro coelesti, qui
nulla re alia, nos se imitari aeque postulat, atque miserecordia and
benignitate. Illi sit gloria in secula. Amen. Let us not at any time despise
any of the children of God (says he) although they be never so feeble, but let
us improve all our endeavor, with most earnest study and diligence, to the
building up of the Saints, especially those whom we observe to be more weak
than others: So shall we represent our Savior Christ; who, in a special degree
of kindness and industry, showed himself a Physician to those who labored of
the most loathsome diseases: So shall we also in a singular measure gratify our
heavenly Father, who does require our imitation in nothing so much, as in mercy
and benignity. To him be glory for ever. Amen. Which is his close, and (as to
this particular) shall be also mine.

I come now to the last Evidence, touching the Matter and Members of the Church
Assemblies of England; viz. to evince, 7. Arguments, Experiences and Effects.
That they are such as ought not to be separated from; taken from our own
experience, testified even by those of foreign, both Habitation and
Discipline, relating both to our Ministers and People. They say, Praesat.
Annot. ^^^d^. Dieu in V. T. praefix.
our Divines, as to the practical Exposition of Scripture, do (palmam caeteris
praeripere) bear away the Garland from others. And for our People, That they
are (florentissimae Ecclesiae) most flourishing Churches, is testified, Letters
of the Princess of Turenne, and some Ministers, testifying his Maj^sties
constancy in Religion. Lo^d. 1660.
after many other of former date, now newly by certain of the French, both
Princes and Ministers, in their Letters to some of note in London, of both
ranks. And, if we credit the report of Travelers, even those that think our
Hedge is worse, yet they confess our Fruit is better: But I must remember, that
the old Courtiers were not wont to lay Wagers, nor make comparisons. Yet let me
add the Elogy of Diodate, the famous Professor of Geneva, in his Letter to the
Assembly at Westminster, printed An 1647. where, having represented and
bewailed the Calamities in those last years fallen upon almost all the Reformed
Churches, he adds, page 3. One only thing was wanting, namely, That
flourishing England, the very Eye and Excellency of all the Churches; Christ's
own choice, purchase and peculiar; the sanctuary of the afflicted, the Arcanal
of the faint-hearted, the magazine of the needy, the royal standard of good
hope. And again, page 11. 'May God restore your Kingdom, and restore your
Churches, to that high pitch of Holiness and of Glory, in which, on the Theater
of the Universal Church, they have hitherto excelled and out-shined ALL the
CHURCHES upon EARTH. It would be endless to allege all that have spoken to
this purpose: I therefore here cease.

This Argument from Experience Mr. Brightman uses against the Separatists, and
those who withdraw from the Lords Table. Brightman in Apocal. 3.20.
An pudebit eos illic discumbere, ubi vident Christum non pudere? An illo
sanctiores and mundiores erunt? sed quare se non convincunt suo ipsorum usu?
non possunt inficiari, quin prius in Christum crediderint, quam fecerunt a
nobis divortium. Vnde haec fides? An non ex praedicatione in nostra Ecclesia?
nunquid autem praedicare quis potest, nisi mittatur? Romans 10.13. Quid ergo
verbum propter labem aliquam externae vocationis tam perverse respuunt, cujus
vim divinam in cordibus sentiunt? etc. Are they ashamed (says he) to sit down
there, where they see Christ is not ashamed? Will they be holier and purer than
he? But why do they not convince themselves by their own experience? They
cannot deny, but that they did believe in Christ, before they made this divorce
from us. Whence had they their Faith? Was it not by the preaching in our
Church? But can any man preach, except he be sent? Romans 10.13. Why do they
therefore so perversely despise the Word, for some defect [supposed] in the
outward Call, the heavenly force whereof they feel upon their hearts?

What, he there immediately adds: Etiamsi fructus iste, non magis culpa liberat
depravationes nostras, quam vera proles adulterium. That is; Resp.
Notwithstanding this fruit (of conversion) does no more excuse our Corruptions
(he means in Church Government especially) than a true Child does Adultery.
This passage was both inconsiderately, and (as it employed) untruly spoken.
Inconsiderate it was; for the Separation, against whom he there writes, do
acknowledge, That they had their Faith and Grace indeed in the Church of
England; but, according to his own expression, Jo. Robins. Apol. for
Separation, cap. 12. p. m. 94.
that did no more excuse the Church, or prove it to be a true Church, than a
true Child does excuse Adultery, or prove that the Woman is a true Wife. They
retort his own Metaphor upon him.

But again, it was an unproper similitude, and untrue Christ does not stand in
relation to a Church, In what relation Christ stands unto his Church.
as a man does unto a woman, (by conjunction of whom there issues a natural
birth, whether their meeting be matrimonial or no; God therein operating
according to that course which he has settled in Nature, without respect unto
his positive Law in that case provided;) but Christ stands in relation to his
Church as a Husband to the Wife in spiritual and legitimate Matrimony, the bond
whereof is the Covenant of Grace; according to that of the Apostle, I have
espoused you as a chaste Virgin unto Christ. 2 Cor. 11.2.
And again, Ephesians. 5.23.
The Husband is the head of the Wife, even as Christ is the head of the Church:
wherein he implies, that he is the Husband also. Now the Child is not the
Husbands, unless begotten in Matrimony. To imply therefore, That there may be
Conversion by those who are no Church, were to make, as it were, the Spouse of
Christ an Harlot, a thing horrid to imagine.

But to return to our Evidence from the Fruits of our Church and Ordinances.
There is a demonstration ((...)) from effects, if they be so properly, and not
consequences accidentally only, which I say, to prevent that crambe, non
saepius cocta (and why was it not so of late, when great proof was taken from
success and issues?) careat successibus opto, etc. To this therefore we may add
those speeches, both of our Savior and our Apostle in this way of reasoning
from the proper effects, unto the causes. You shall know them by their FRUITS,
Mat. 7.16.
says our Savior. Do men gather Figs of Thorns, 1 Cor. 9.2.
or Grapes of Thistles? And the Apostle; If I be not an Apostle unto others,
yet doubtless I am unto you; for the seal of my Apostleship are ye in the Lord:
That is; Your Conversion proves me a true Minister of Christ. Gal. 3.2.
And elsewhere: This only would I learn of you; Received you the Spirit by the
works of the Law, or by the hearing of Faith? It was good consequence in our
Saviors and S. Paul's Logic, to prove a true Church and Ministry by the effect
of Conversion; and why not in ours?

On the contrary, the Assemblies of the Separation, 1. None, or rare conversion
in the Separation.
Independency, Anabaptism: First, negatively, No conversion is found, or rarely
in them, from profaneness to grace; but it is confessed by themselves.
Salvificam fidem and veram pietatem multorum cordibus in Ecclesia Anglicana,
Robins. Apol. cap. 12. p. m. 93.
per Evangelii praedicationem and ingenerari and foveri, absit ut vel negemus
nos, vel non eo nomine ingentes gratias Deo opt. max. and NOSTRUM ipsorum, and
aliorum respectu debitas fateamur. God forbid (says Mr. Robinson, of whom we
may well say, Contr. Parmen. l. 1. cap. 1.
as Austin once of Tichonius, viz. 'That he was a man, acri ingenio praeditum,
and uberi eloquio, sed tamen Donatista: i. e. endued with a sharp wit, and good
utterance, but yet a Donatist, a Separatist.) God forbid (says he) that we
should deny, but that saving Faith, and true Piety, is both generated and
maintained by the preaching of the Gospel in the Church of England; yea, we
give most vehement thanks to the great and gracious God in this respect, both
for OUR SELVES and others. They are generally converted before they fall to
those ways, and have an actual sense of Religion upon them, Habitual Conversion.
(for their habitual Conversion was in their Baptism, and in their relation to
the profession of Faith, under which they were born, upon which ground they
have a right unto Baptism, as we saw above out of Calvin. Epist. 285.
)

Secondly, Positively, There grow such sour Grapes, 2. The sour grapes of
Separation.
such Rents, Contentions, loose practices; especially these three, noted above
out of Bucer, Pride, Contempt of others, and Opinions. Add also what my self,
by long and much experience, have observed, (of which above.) Whose Prayers are
oft-times Prefaces to other matters, as our Savior has it: Mat. 23.14.
Not but that there are such among us also; but yet, as the Lord notes, A
proselyte unto such persons, becomes twofold the Child of Hell more than he
was before, Verse. 15.
as adding and coloring his corruptions with Religion, and yet perhaps himself
not seeing his hypocrisy, as he did clearly see his profaneness and his
danger before. They indeed do neither enter into the Kingdom of God themselves
(that is, the Church) nor suffer others to abide quiet in it, Verse. 13.
as our Savior in the same place. And may in this be compared unto Beggars,
that steal the children of others, and carry them about as their own.

England, seeing it cannot be showed to any purpose among them, (and yet if it
may be, How there may be Conversion in a Schismatical Assembly.
yet it is by that Doctrine and Worship which they had in this Church, and have
abused unto Separation) as Austin once of the Donatists: Quasi vero ex hoc
generet unde separata est, and non ex hoc unde conjuncta est. Aug. de Bapt.
contr. Donat. lib. 3. cap. 10.
Separata est enim a vinculo charitatis and pacis, sed adjuncta est in uno
Baptismate. Itaque est una Ecclesia, quae sola Catholica nominatur, and
quicquid suum habet in Communionibus diversorum a sua communitate separatis,
per hoc quod suum in eis habet, IPSA utique generat, non ILLAE. As if (says
he) those Assemblies did convert as they are separated, and not as they are
conjoined. They are separated from the bond of charity and peace (with the
Church) but they are joined in one Baptism (and so in the other Sacrament and
Administration of the Word.) Therefore there is one Church, which only is
called Catholic, and whatsoever it has in the Assemblies of those that are
separate from its Communion: by THAT which it has of its own in those
Companies, IT does beget and generate, A Summary of the former Arguments.
and not THEY. Thus he most truly. But (as I said) seeing Conversion is
acknowledged by them to be true and frequent in the England; seeing it is rare,
if at all, among (as such) and that of the worst kind also, 1. Against
separate Assemblies.
as we saw before: And the Apostle reckons fornications (which I have known
some among them to defend, under the notion of plurality of wives) variance,
hatred, heresies, seditions, Gal. 5.
among those works: And our own experience in this Nation of late days has
abundantly lessened us. Seeing, I say, this Parent, and the Ministers of it
their Fathers in the Lord, 1 Cor. 4.15.
as the Apostle says of himself to a Church, that cast him off, as these do
them. And lastly, Seeing they do so vilify, though some of them good words
with their mouth (as the Psalmist speaks) yet they curse with their heart; that
is, Apol. Narrat. page 6. Psalm. 62.4.
they labor the division and ruin of it; let them remember that, He that
curses his Father, Prove. 30.
and chaseth away his Mother, the Crows of the valleys shall pick out his eyes;
as they have done the eyes of some that way of late. Isa. 45.10.
For woe unto him that says unto his Father, what begettest thou? or to the
Woman, Ephesians. 6.12.
what have thou brought forth? There are spiritual wickednesses. Those that
said unto their Brethren, stand off, Isa. 65.5.
I am holier than thou were a smoke in the Lords nostrils all the day: Our Lord
and Savior declined those Separatists (for that may be the Etymology of the
word Pharisee, Mat. 9.13. (...) Separavit. Luke 18.9.14.
as we saw above) and did eat with the Publicans and Sinners: And the Penitent
one of them, went down to his house justified rather than the other.

I have insisted the longer upon this point, the matter and members of the
Assemblies; first, because in nature it is (primum essentiae and constitutionis
principium) the first thing in every being, as also because the adversaries do
say it is: Fundi nostri calamitas prima and praecipua, ex qua plerasque alias
oriundas crederem, i. e. Robins. Apol. pro separat. cap. 12. p. m. 92.
The main calamity of our Church; the first and chief from whence they believe
most of the other corruptions do arise; To which I have also adjoined discourse
touching the form of it also, namely, its covenanting with the Lord in the
professing and owning the Covenant of Grace, both in Baptism, and at riper
years, at Confirmation before admission to full Communion in the Holy
Sacrament; that so it might appear that the whole Essence of this Church is
sound, the causes constitutive, viz. the matter and form of it being so. I shut
up this touching the Assemblies, and our experience of the presence of God in
them, notwithstanding whatsoever matter and mixtures of them, with that of Mr.
Brightman, Brightman in Apoc. 3.20.
touched in part above, to the Separation of his time: Quamobrem redite ad
unitatem Ecclesiae, quae vos genuit and aluit; si fugiatis hunc Christum, qui
cum Electis in nostris coetibus coenat, ac eos vicissim excipit, profecto
nusquam invenietis. Wherefore, says he, Return ye again into the Unity of that
Church, which has both begotten and bred you up. If ye flee from this Christ,
who does sup with his Elect ones in our Assemblies, and again receives and
entertaineth them; assure your selves you shall find him no where. Thus Mr.
Brightman. A man otherwise, not over zealous for the Church of England. And
thus I have done with the first three things considerable in the Church, and
offenses, which have been occasions of separation to Independency, namely, the
Doctrine, the Worship, and the Assembly.

CHAP. VII.
Of Discipline.
4. Cause of Separation Discipline.
I Come now unto the fourth, to wit, the Discipline; wherein I shall endeavor
brevity, because of the former largeness, and because the Main is already
dispatched. First, Therefore to the persons we deal against, 1. The persons
for Discipline. Buc. in Zeph. 3. 20. page ult.
then to the thing it self; for the former: Certe ab Amica and fraterna
admonitione incipiendum est, hac pretermissa, de excommunicatione quaeritari,
plusquam Pharisaicum est, ne dicam Satanicum, says Bucer, that is; Certainly
man ought (in Discipline) to begin at loving and brotherly admonition; if this
be neglected, to complain of the want of Excommunication and Discipline, is
more than Pharisaical, that I say not Satanical. Thus he. Now with those that
depart for want of Discipline, they shoot with white powder, as they say, and
the Bolt comes before the Thunder; they separate and excommunicate the whole
Assembly before they see if they can reform it. 2. The Matter.


Secondly, For the matter it self: And first for the thing, then for the manner
and persons that have executed England as much Discipline both in Law and
execution (before Late-times) as is usually executable in so great a body,
either by the Laws of the Common Wealth, or the Canons of the Church; Civil
Laws in a Church are Church-Laws.
and seeing Church and Common Wealth are incorporated into one, as was that
first Church of God, the Jewish; seeing the work is done in the whole body for
the preservation of its being, and purity; what matters it by which of the two
hands. All the breaches of the Ten Commandments are punishable by Law: And
other things; as Ignorance, and other Scandals; or the same are taken notice of
by the Rubricks of the Liturgy, and especially by that before the Communion,
wherein the Minister has power given him, and is admonished to restrain the
scandalous. Next for the manner and persons by whom this Discipline is commonly
exercised. 3. The Manner.
The Judges and the Bishops Officers: what matters it, if the thing be as well
done, as is usual in so great bodies, as was said; and as the condition present
of the Church will bear. Though Christ himself baptized not, but his Disciples,
was it not therefore a right admission? John 4.2.
But these that depart for Discipline, it is oft-times for fear it should be
exercised upon them, being lawless in many things, 1 Timothy 5. Gal. 6.
and ungodly; and who themselves can hear none, as the Apostle speaks in the
like case. But if it were formerly left hand, and that not clean enough, if by
such as were not fit persons, either for their Calling, or Corruptions; there
may be a Sponge in that case provided. Authority from whence, not the Officer
by whom the thing is managed. Lastly, Though there should have been, or yet may
be, not only in the manner of the administration, or the Application and use of
it; but also much defect in the thing it self, as to the Discipline in this
Church; Calv. Inst. lib. 4. cap. 1. Sect. 15.
Verum quia non ita sedulo semper advigilent Pastores interdum etiam
indulgentiores sunt quam oporteat, vel impediuntur, quo minus eam quam vellent
severitatem exercere possint; fit, ut non semper submandantur etiam palam mali
a sanctorum Contubernio -- Verum etiamsi Ecclesia in officio cesset, non
protinus uniuscujusque privati erit, judicium separationis sibi sumere. --
Aliud est malorum fugere contubernium; aliud ipsorum odio, Ecclesiae
Communionem renuntiare. Yet because the Pastors do not always watch so
diligently, and sometime they are more indulgent than is meet; or they are
hindered, that they cannot exercise that severity, that they could wish; by
which means it comes to pass, that open evil men are not always removed from
the society of the Saints; yet although the Church be slack in its duty, it is
not therefore every private members part, to assume to himself the judgment of
Separation. It is one thing to fly from the society of evil men; and another
thing, through the hatred of them, to renounce the Communion of the Church,
says Calvin; with which dismiss, I should conclude this head of Discipline
also; but that the former Brethren, ne quicquam omnino intactum relinquerent,
that they might turn every stone, and shake all Foundations, forgetting that he
that removes (such) Stones shall be hurt therewith; Eccles. 10.
and that breaks the Churches hedge, a Serpent shall bite him; have also
charged this. Now Discipline Discipline.
is the Order of Church Government, for the preservation of the Doctrine, the
Worship, the Assemblies, and is as the Fense unto the Garden, or the Tower unto
the City; and is contained in certain Rules, Canons, and Ecclesiastical Laws,
for the preservation of Unity, Order, and Decency in the former particulars.
Necessit. Reform. page 54. The Canons of 1603.
Their exceptions are against the Canons chiefly, established in Convocation,
and confirmed by the Kings Authority, Anno 1603. They object especially their
Non-establishment by Law, their contradiction to the Laws, Why the Brethren
except against these Canons, is not here particularly answered.
etc. which discourse savouring more of the Hall of Westmin. than of the Abbey;
leave it I shall there to be decided. The rather, because it consists most of
Repetitions, (as they are better at those than at repentings, which is not
spoken to reflect on such repeatings as are grave and serious, for those are
commanded. Deuteronomy. 6.7.
) for Matters in immensum, so that the thought of it troubles my self, and more
the perusal of it may the Reader. As for the things they insist on, being of
that nature as they are; did my self think as the Brethren do, R. Hook. Eccles.
pol. l. 5. p. 20.
that viz. they might be illegal perhaps in some things, or inconvenient;
nevertheless as in other things of like nature, even so in these; my private
judgment, I should be loath to oppose against the force of their Reverend
Authority, who by their Place, Parts and Experience have cause to see further,
and have judged otherwise of them; Aug. ad Januar. Ep. 118. in fine ipso.
but rather take counsel of Austin unto Januarius, in the like Argument: Ut ea
quae proloquutus sum, serves quantum potes, ut decet Ecclesiae prudentem ac
pacificum filium. That those things which I have spoken, says he, thou
should observe, as much as may be, as becomes a prudent and peaceable Son
of the Church. But we may take up in this case most justly that complaint that
he has in the same Epistle; Idem. ibid. cap. 2.
Sensi enim saepe dolens and gemens, multas infirmorum perturbationes fieri,
per quorundam fratrum contensiosam obstinationem, and superstitiosam
timiditatem, quae in rebus hujusmodis quae neque Scripturae sanctae
authoritate, neque universalis Ecclesiae traditione, neque vitae corrigendae
utilitate ad certum possunt terminum pervenire; tantum quia subest qualiscunque
ratiocinatio cogitantis, aut quia in sua patria sic ipse consuevit, aut quia
ibi vidit, ubi peregrinationem suam, quo remotiorem a suis, eo doctiorem factam
putat, tam litigiosas excitant quaestiones, ut nisi quod ipsi faciunt, nihil
rectum existiment. I have often found (says he) mourning for it, and grieving,
that much of the unsettledness of the weak, is occasioned by the contentious
obstinacy and superstitious fearfulness of some Brethren; which in such things,
as are not determined by the Authority of the Holy Scripture; nor by the
tradition of the Universal Church; nor by the benefit of correction of life,
can ever come to any certain period; only because there is some appearance of
reason in him that fancieth so; or because he is used to do so in his own
Country; or because he has seen it so in his travels (which by how much the
farther they were off from his own Country, the more learned he thinks them
to be) do raise such litigious questions, that unless it be, what they do
themselves, they think nothing well done; Thus far he. I have done with the
Discipline.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Government by the Ministry in general, and by Episcopacy in particular.
SECT. I. Ministers.
^. Cause of Separation, The Government.
I Address my self now unto the fifth and last thing, the Government; under
which I comprehend the Ministry, as well as Episcopacy; both in their Calling
and employment.

First, The Ministry: To whose constitution it is required that he be orthodox
in Doctrine, able in parts, Conditions requisite to the constitution of a
Ministry.
innocent of life, examined by such as are in place so to do; that he be not
excepted against by the People, and solemnly consecrated by prayer and
imposition of hands thereunto. More we shall not find in Scripture necessary:
as by the consideration of 1 Timothy 3. and Tit. 1. Act. 14.23. with other places,
may appear. Now if unto all this, God do give evident testimony to his
Ministry, by his presence therewith, both on the hearts of his people, and
conviction of the adversaries, All of them observed in the Church of England.
Book of Ordination of Ministers. Book of Canons. Can. 34, and 35.
and by appearing for him otherwise: there is then a further seal of his
Ministry.

The former six Particulars are all observed in the Church of England, in the
ordering of Ministers, as by the Book of Ordination may appear, although
perhaps not with that exactness at all times, as might be wished.

And for the seventh and last, God has set to his seal in the plentiful
blessing of their Labors. It Is true, that one of the Ancients says, Cum ipsa
(plebs) maxim habeat potestatem eligendi dignos sacerdotes, Cypr. l. 1. ep. 4.
vel indignos recusandi. That the People especially have the power of choosing
good Ministers, or refusing those who are bad. He does not mean a jurisdiction
and authority, but a liberty of accepting or refusing, upon just ground
alleged touching their conversation; not as if the power, as People, and
distinct from the Ministry, were in their hands: for so he explaineth himself
in the same place; Vt plebe praesente vel detegantur, malorum crimina, vel
bonorum merita praedicentur. The people being present, that the crimes of those
that are evil may be discovered, and the merit of the godly may be declared.
And a little after, he expresses the same thing more fully, showing the Form
of Ordination of Ministers in his time: De traditione divina, and Apostolica
observatione servandum est and tenendum, quod apud nos quoque and fere per
provincias universas tenetur, ut ad ordinationes rite celebrandas, ad eam
plebem cui praepositus ordinatur, Episcopi ejusdem provinciae proximi quique
conveniant, and Episcopus deligatur, plebe praesente, quae singulorum vitam
plenissime novit, and uniuscujusque actum, de ejus conversatione prospexit.
That is; It is to be observed and kept as a divine and Apostolical Institution,
which is also held by us, and almost in all Provinces; That for the right
Ordination of a Minister, the Bishops of that Province do assemble unto that
people unto whom the Bishop (or Minister) is to be ordained, and that the
Bishop (or Minister) be ordained in the presence of the people, who do know
perfectly the life of every one, and perceives their actions by conversing
with them. But by this testimony it appears, That the Interest of the People
was a liberty, from their knowledge of the life of the person, to accept or
refuse; but that the Election was not wholly by them, but the Bishops (or
Ministry) were to regulate the Election; which he expresses in the Epistle
before also: Nemo adversum sacerdotum collegium quicquam moneret, Epist. 3. l.
1.
nemo post divinum judicium, post populi suffragium, post coepiscoporum
consensum judicem se non jam Episcopi, sed Dei faceret. No man (says he) would
(if the Brotherhood did obey their Ordinary according to the Institution of
Christ) move any thing (to wit, against the Bishop) after the Judgment of the
College of Ministers, after the divine Approbation, after the suffrages of the
People, and after the consent of the other Bishops, etc. But that the People
should have the power of Election of Ministers, Instit. l. 4. cap. 4. s. 12.
Calvin cites against it, and approves the Council of Laodicea. Can. 13. Est
equidem and illud (fateor) optima ratione sancitum in Laodicensi concilio, ne
turbis electio permittatur: Vix enim unquam evenit, ut tot capita uno sensu rem
aliquam been componat: ut fere illud verum est: Incertum scindi studia in
contraria vulgus. -- primum soli clerici eligebant, quem elegerant offerebant
magistratui -- tum ad multitudinem res deferebatur --. Aut si a multitudine
incipiebatur, tantum id fiebat, ut sciretur quem potissimum expeteret. Auditis
popularium vota, clerici demum eligebant. -- Hunc ordinem ponit Leo (Epist.
87.) expectanda sunt vota Civium, testimonia populorum, honoratorum arbitrium,
electio clericorum. That is; That truly, I confess, is with very good reason
decreed by the Council of Laodicea, (Can. 13. Popular Elections not allowed.
) That the Election of Ministers should not be permitted to the People. For it
hardly at any time comes to pass, that so many heads do with one consent
compose any business well: and that is commonly true which the Poet says: 'The
common people, being weak,
'To several Factions quickly break.
First therefore the Ministers chose, then they offered him to the Magistrate;
afterward the matter was brought to the people: or if the business began with
the people, it was only, that they might know whom especially they desired;
which when they understood, then the Clergy did choose. Thus Calvin.

Beza also, De Minister. Grad. cap. 23. Quod tota multitudo simul fuit
convocata, and suffragium tulit, nec essentiale nec perpetuum fuit. i. e. That
the People were called, and gave their voice, was neither of the essence of the
Call, nor perpetual. And with us, Book of Canons. Can. 31.
the Ordination of Ministers is appointed at four times of the year, at which
time Prayer and Fasting is enjoined; any that will are permitted to be present,
See the Book of Ordination.
proclamation made unto them to except against the persons to be ordained. And
no Bishop permitted to ordain any not of his Diocese, without Letters
testimonial, Canon 34, 35.
under pain of suspension. But if in this there may be any defect, or have been
abuse; yet we are to consider that of the Church of England, saying, That in
the Primitive Church, in the beginning of Lent, The Commination at the end of
the Liturgy, and at the beginning.
notorious sinners were put to open penance, and punished in this world; in
stead whereof, until the said Discipline be restored, which thing is much to be
wished, it is thought good, etc. may perhaps imply, that it would, if it might
without greater peril, reform some other things also, among which, this of the
somewhat more particular approbation, or acceptance of the people, if it
should be found necessary in respect of their Ministry, might possibly be one.
But I determine not; only I do from the premises conclude (seeing there is in
the Ministries Ordination in England all the essentials observed; and that God,
by his blessing of their Labors, and protecting of their Calling, declared his
owning of them, whatsoever defects may be imagined in their outward Calling,
Brightman in Apocal. 3.20.
) with Mr. Brightman, in the place above noted: Quid ergo verbum propter labem
aliquam externae vocationis tam perverse respuunt, cujus vim divinam in
cordibus sentiunt? Why do they, for some defect in the external Call, so
perversely reject that Word and Ministry, whose sovereign and divine power they
feel upon their hearts? I dismiss this particular, and pass to the other
Branch, touching the Governors of these, and their Regiment, the Bishops.

SECT. II. Of Episcopacy, its Right and Title.
IT is certain, ever since God had a formal and instituted Church, there have
been superior Ministers in it, distinguished also by some appellations from the
rest: As, the High Priests in the Jewish, and the Apostles in the First
Christian Church. 1. Scripture.
And it is as evident, that the Church cannot want such; by the need that the
Church of Ephesus, 1 Timothy 1.
and those adjacent, had of Timothy, and the Churches of Crete had of Titus:
Tit. 1.
For, Non minor est virtus quam quaerere, porta tueri: A Commonwealth has need
not only at first of a Magistrate, but ever after: And a Bishop is nothing
else but an Ecclesiastical Magistrate. And though times may require some things
or persons extraordinary, as the Church had Apostles at the first of unlimited
power; yet, as Calvin observes; Hoc Natura dictat, Epist. ad Reg. Polon. 1554.
Vnum ex singulis collegiis deligendum cui p^ecipua cura incumbat. Nature it
self, says he, teaches us, That in all orders of men some one must be chosen
unto whom the And this is the [esse] or substance of Episcopacy. Elsewhere he
gives the Comment. in Epist. ad Phil. cap. 1.1.
Fateor quidem ut sunt hominum ingenia and mores, non posse ordinem stare inter
verbi ministros, quin reliqui praesit unus. I confess (says he) as men's
spirits and manners are, Order cannot stand among the Ministers of the Word,
unless one be over the rest. But he would have, first, their jurisdiction
restrained, the name of Bishop common, and the limits of their Government
Poland, he acknowledges what the primitive Government was; and seems not to
disapprove it, as we shall see anon. And the best Independent extant has
expressed so much in my hearing, viz. D. T. G.
The Church would ever stand in need of such persons as Timothy and Titus. This
for Scripture.

Next come we to the Primitive Church, 2. The Primitive Church.
wherein the practice is known to be both most ancient and universal, Hierom
indeed (but without proof) being himself no Bishop, and angry sometimes with
some of them, and particularly with John Bishop of Jerusalem (and even with
Austin himself) a passionate man, Vid. Epist. Aug. 8. and seq.
and somewhat high in respect of his eminency for Learning, especially in the
Tongues, in those times, says; Hieron in Epist. ad Tit. 1.5.
Idem est Presbyter qui Episcopus; and antequam diaboli instinctu, studia in
religione fierent; and diceretur in populis, Ego sum Pauli, ego Apollo, ego
autem Cephae: Communi Presbyterorum consilio Ecclesiae gubernabantur. Postquam
vero unusquisque eos quos baptizaverat suos putabat esse non Christi: In toto
orb decretum est, ut unus de Presbyteris electus superponeretur caeteris; ad
quem omnis Ecclesiae cura pertineret, and schismatum semina tollerentur. That
is; The same is a Presbyter and a Bishop: And before that, 1 Cor. 1.
by the instinct of the Devil, Factions began in Religion; and these speeches
were among the people: I am of Paul, I of Apollo, but I of Cephas: The Churches
were governed by the common advice of the Presbyters: But after that every one
reckoned those whom he had baptized to be his own, and not Christ's: It was
determined in the WHOLE WORLD, that One chosen out of the Presbyters should be
set over the rest, unto whom the WHOLE care of the Church should belong, and so
the seeds of Schism should be taken away; Concerning which others have said:
there Adversary; next it proves the thing it contendeth against; (under favor
of so great a person) for Schisms began in the Church; and that one said, I am
of Paul; another, I am of Apollo; and that those whom some had baptized, they
counted their own Apostles time, Verse. 12, 13, 14, 15.
as Paul complains (Epistle to the Corinthians the first, chapter the first.)
And that he grants that it was decreed in the whole world, and that for
Episcopacy succeeded the Apostleship: And indeed from the end of their
institution it appears in Scripture, that they did so, as to the office, by
what name soever. For Paul says expressly both to Timothy and Titus: To
Timothy, that he besought him to abide still at Ephesus, that he might charge
some to teach no other, 1 Timothy 1.3.
and no Heterodox doctrine. And to Titus, that for this cause left I thee in
Crete, that he might stop the mouths of vain (that is, Tit. 1.5.
erroneous and schismatical) talkers; not only by word, and by example, but
also by authority. He so commands him to reject an Heretic, Chap. 3.
that is, excommunicate him, as may be conceived. And indeed we see by
experience in some Churches, those that are of latitude, where this Government
of late has been suspended; what factions have grown. As in the Netherland
Churches, about Arminius so far, that had not the Authority of the Magistrate,
and assistance of Neighbors interposed, those Churches, and that Republic had
been utterly ruined; what divisions are growing at this day among the Churches
of France some adhering unto the opinion of Amiraldus about these points,
others opposing of them. I hear with grief, and have been told that a Minister
of no mean note in that Church lately in London (and whom I could name) should
say that some Ministers of France should express so much, that had their
Churches full establishment from the Civil Power, they could not govern them
without Episcopacy, which it seems both Calvin, Beza, and of late Diodate
foresaw, of whom afterward.

By this Testimony it appears Episcopacy to have been of greatest Antiquity,
Universality, and of such Necessity for use, that without it the Churches could
not be preserved neither in Truth nor Unity. And though Hierome seem to imply,
that there was some times when the Churches were governed without it; yet,
unless he mean the time of the Apostles, who were themselves instead of it, no
time by his own words can be assigned when the Church either could or did want
it; neither does he name any certain time, or allege any Author, as he uses
to do in case of History; neither (under correction of men of larger reading)
do I believe he could: Seeing it is evident in the Ecclesiastical History, and
by the Monuments of the most Ancient Writers, that Episcopacy was contiguous
with the Apostles time, as appears by Ignatius, Policarpus, Vide Eus. Hist. and
Hieron. de Scriptorib. Ecclesiast.
Clemens, Irenaeus, and others. Whereas Hierome lived in the fourth Century
above three hundred years after Christ. It Is true, St. Austin (that mirror of
Modesty and Humility) writing unto this same Hierome, when he had received
some contemptuous expressions from him (as I said before, Aug. ad Hieron.
Epist. 19.
that Father was a little high) in answer to him, says, Quanquam enim secundum
honorum vocabula, quae jam Ecclesiae usus obtinuit, Episcopatus Presbyterio
major sit: tamen in multis rebus Augustinus Hieronymo minor est; Although
(says he) according to titles of honor, which now the USE of the Church has
obtained, Episcopacy be superior to Presbytery; yet in many things Austin is
inferior to Hierome. He says it is by use of the Church that Episcopacy is
above Presbytery; but he speaks of the name; Epist. ad Evagrium.
as Hierome had proved in that Commentary upon the first of Titus, and
elsewhere: but does not deny nor imply that the Office Use of the Church; Use
may be as ancient as the Apostles. Lastly, He knew with whom he was dealing,
and on purpose composed his expression to the qualifying of Jerome, Vide Epist.
ad Hieron. 15.
as appears in his other Epistles to him, he does not dispute ex professo this
point. Cyprian, the ancient of them both, in the place now cited, carries it
very far for the dignity of Episcopacy, ^^pr. lib. 1. Ep. 3.
and the eminency of one, both in Place and Authority. Having proved by many
examples, the preheminency of place, and duty of Obedience, by the Scripture,
given to the High Priests among the Jews, applying to the Bishop in a Christian
Church, he says, Cum haec tanta ac talia, and multa alia exempla praecedant,
quibus Sacerdotalis autoritas and potestas, divina dignatione firmatur, quales
putas esse eos, qui Sacerdotum hosts, and contra Ecclesiam Catholicam
rebels, nec praemonentis Domini comminatione, nec futuri judicii ultione
terrentur. Neque enim aliunde haereses abortae sunt, aut nata sunt schismata,
quam inde quod Sacerdoti Dei non obtempetatur, nec UNUS in Ecclesia ad tempus
Sacerdos, and ad tempus Judex vice Christi cogitatur: Cui si secundum
Magisteria divina obtemperaret fraternitas universa, nemo adversum Sacerdotum
Collegium quicquam moneret; nemo post divinum judicium, post populi suffragium,
post Co-episcoporum consensum judicem se, non jam Episcopi, sed Dei faceret;
nemo dissidio unitatis Christi Ecclesiam scinderet; that is, Seeing these so
great, such, and so many other examples have gone before, by which the
authority and power of the Priestly dignity is confirmed by Gods institution:
what kind of men do you think them, who being enemies of the Priesthood, and
rebels against the Catholic Church, are neither terrified by Gods threatenings,
nor yet with fear of the judgment to come. For, from no other cause do
Heresies arise, nor Factions in the Church have their beginning, than from
hence; that there is not given obedience to the Priest of God (he means the
Bishop, as the words following will show) neither is considered that, for the
time, there is but One Priest (namely chief, that ought to be) in the Church of
God, and for the time but one Judge in the stead of Christ: To whom according
to the Doctrine of Christ, did the whole Brotherhood give obedience; no man
would move any thing against the College of Priests (by whom the Bishops was
chosen) no man would make himself Judge, not now of the Bishop, but of God
himself, after that he has been chosen by the Divine Judgment, by the
suffrage of the people (desired) and by the consent of other Bishops
(confirmed) I urge this Testimony, being very ancient, Cyprian lived about the
year 250.
to show the judgment of Antiquity touching Episcopacy; namely, the
Institution, Use and End of it, viz. preservation of Truth and Peace in the
Church, as we saw before out of St. Hierome. Spur^ous testimonies (though
grayer-headed) I pass not at.

Yea and Hieron. himself elsewhere does imply, that a Bishop might ordain,
which a Presbyter could not do: Quid enim facit, excepta ordinatione, Hieron.
Epist. ad Evagr. Tom. 3.
Episcopus quod Presbyter non facit? that is, what does a Bishop do, except
Ordination which a Presbyter does not? thus he; but Ordination carries with it
some Superior jurisdiction. Since my writing of this, De Evangel. Ministerium
gradib. cap. 23.
I have consulted what Savania has observed upon this place of Hierome, on
Tit. 1.5. against Beza; and find that his cogitations are the same, much-what,
with mine (as indeed it is obvious to any one considering of it) neither do I
see cause to alter them, Savania. Beza.
for any thing I find in Beza his reply unto them, whose judgment in this
point we shall hear anon out of the same writing: And so I dismiss the
Testimony from Antiquity.

Proceed we now to the Judgment of the Reformed Churches, expressed by their
chief Writers, and even those who have erected another Government. Calvin (the
supposed Parent of Presbytery, 1. The Reformed Christian Churches, Judgment of
Episcopacy.
but he was only the foster Father, for Farel and Viret had before him
ejected Episcopacy at Geneva, or rather the Bishop) he, the ground being as it
were vacant, raised Presbytery, right of Episcopacy (for the substance of it)
from Nature it self; Calvin.

1. Hoc natura dictat, Unum ex singulis Collegiis delegendum, exi precipua cura
incumbat. Epist. ad R pol. 1554.

2. Fateor quidem, ut sunt hominum ingenia and mores, non posse ordinem stare
inter verbi Ministros, quin reliquis praesit Unus. Praes. ad duc. Witemberg.
ante Epist. ad Gal. Epist. ad R. pol. 1554.


then acknowledges the Necessity of it, for the upholding of the order of the
Ministry, from the disposition and spirit of men; both which we saw above.
Lastly, Though he dislike the appropriation of the name, and the largeness of
power, and the extent of their limits in that place of his Comment. upon Phil.
1.1. which was published Anno Dom. 1548. yet he grants the thing, as was
noted: And in his Letter to the King of Poland, written long after, viz. Ann.
1554. He represents, with appearance of Approbation; the practice of
Antiquity, in these words. Vetus quidem Ecclesia Patriarchas instituit, and
singulis etiam Provinciis quosdam attribuit primatus, ut hoc Concordiae vinculo
melius inter se devincti manerent Episcopi. Quemadmodum si h^d e, illustrissimo
Poloniae Regno unus praeesset Archiepiscopus, non qui dominaretur in reliquos,
vel jus ab illis ereptum sibi arrogaret: sed qui ordinis causa in Synodis
primum teneret locum, and sanctam inter Collegas suos and fratres foveret
unitatem. Essent deinde vel Provinciales, vel Urbanis Episcopi, qui
peculiariter ordini conservando intenti forent. Sicuti hoc natura dictat, unum
ex singulis Collegiis eligendum, cui praecipua cura incumbat: sed aliud est
moderatum gerere honorem, quatenus scilicet hominis facultas se extendit, quam
totum orbem terrarum immenso imperio complecti. The Ancient Church indeed
(says he) did constitute Patriarchs, and did appoint unto every Province a
Primate (or Archbishop) that by this bond of concord the Bishops might the
better remain united: Even as if now there should be one Archbishop over all
the famous Kingdom of Poland; not indeed one who should Lord it over the rest,
or arrogate to himself the Right which belongs to them; but who, for Orders
sake, should occupy the chief place in Synods, and should preserve holy unity
among his Brethren and Colleagues. Then, either provincial Bishops, or those
that should be in every City, who should especially be intent to preserve
Order; even as Nature does dictate this, That out of all Societies there should
be one chosen, unto whom the chief care should belong. But it is one thing to
bear moderate honor, and so far as a man's ability may extend [to govern] and
another thing to grasp the whole World in a boundless Government, (as the Pope
does, against whom he there disputes.) Thus far Calvin. Wherein we see he
would not dislike this Government by Patriarchs, Archbishops, and Bishops.
Epist. ad Cranmer. Ann. 1551.
And in his Letter to Archbishop Cranmer he says: Reverende Domine, vehementer
laudo, ut mature apud se religionem Angli constituant -- in quam rem,
praecipuae tuae sunt parts. Vides quid iste locus postulet, vel magis quid pro
muneris, quod tibi injunxit ratione, abs te suo jure exigit Deus: summa est in
te autoritas. Reverend Lord (says he) I do very much commend, That the English
do establish Religion betimes among them; in which affair your part is chief.
You see what your place requires, or rather what, according to the duty of your
office which he has put upon you, God Almighty, by a special title, does
require of you. Thus he, In the same Epistle (which I note by the way, and the
rather, because many of the Adversaries to this Government are touched by him)
he notes one cause of the imperfection of the Reformation, Calvin of
Impropriators.
as then, in England. Vnum tamen apertum obstaculum esse intelligo, quod
praedae expositi sunt Ecclesiae reditus; Malum intollerabile. That is; One main
Obstacle I understand to be, That the Revenues of the Church ^re exposed to
Rapine. He means, by being given unto private men. And of this sort are a great
number of Adversaries to Episcopacy. But to return: In the close of that
Epistle he thus expresses himself: Vale clarissime praesul, and mihi reverende
Domine. Farewell most excellent Prelate, and my reverend Lord. Whereby, you see,
he was averse neither from the thing (though with some mincing) nor the title
of Bishop and Archbishop. I have done with this worthy man.

Beza, who professedly wrote against Episcopacy; Bez^ de grad. minister.
Evangel. ad^. Seraviam.
yet, even in that Tractate, grants as much (upon the matter) as we have need
of. First, he makes good an useful ground in this and some other Controversies.
Nempe quod perpetuum and invariabile sit, Cap 23. p. 148.
quicquid Dominus instituit; falso nititur principio. That what the Lord
instituted, is not always unchangeable, as he proves by the Apostolical
Function, Miracles, prohibited meats for a time, which are ceased. essential in
Episcopacy, and perpetual, what mutable. Essentiale fuit in eo (episcopatu) de
quo hic agimus, Cap. eod p. 153.
quod ex Dei ordinatione perpetua necesse fuit, est and erit, ut in Presbyterio
quispiam and loco and dignitate primus, actioni gubernandae praesit, cum eo
quod ipsi divinitus attributum est jure, accidentale autem fuit quod Presbyteri
in hac (...) alii aliis per vice^ initio succedebant. ^ss^ntials of Ep^^copacy.
This was essential, says he, in this (Episcopacy, of which we are speaking)
That, by Gods Ordinance perpetual it was necessary, is and shall be, that in
the Presbytery some one, both in place and dignity chief, should be President
for the governing of action, with that power that is given unto him of God.
Thus he. 1. Here is Primacy. 2. Government. 3. Power, or Right. Now the
controversy betwixt him and Seravia, is, what that power is. But in the third
place, speaking of the Episcopacy we are now discoursing of, he says: Cap.
eod. p. 144.
Absit autem ut hunc ordinem, et si Apostolica and mere divina dispositione non
constitutum, tamen ut temere aut superbe invectum reprehendam: cujus potius
magnum usum fuisse, quandiu boni and sancti Episcopi Ecclesiis praefuerunt,
quis inficiari possit? fruantur igitur illo qui volent and poterunt: mihi tamen
religio fuerit non explicare quid hic requiram. God forbid (says he) that I
should condemn this Order, although not of Apostolical and mere divine
Institution, as if it were brought in rashly or proudly; whereof rather that
there was great use, so long as the Bishops were good and holy men, who can
deny? Let them therefore enjoy it, Note.
that will and can: But yet I make conscience to declare what I think defective
in it. Thus he. And whereas he does in another place call that Episcopacy,
which was by course and successive, Cap. eod. p. 142.
divine and Apostolical Episcopacy, and the other humane; yet he says, it is
not simply humane, but comparatively to the other. Priorem quidem ordinem, ut
qui initio, ac proinde Apostolis ipsis autoribus, vel saltem approbatoribus
vignerit, divinum: posteriorem vero humanum non simpliciter tamen, sed
comparate appellavero. But his Letters are extant (and (to my best remembrance)
I have heard my Lord Abbot, Archbishop of Canterbury, say, That he had the
autographa and Originals in his hands of Beza's Letters) wherein he does pray
God to continue Bishops to the Church of England: But, as I said, Note. Per te
datum est (Anglis) purae ac sincerae Evangel. doctr. integra professio, ad quam
si ecclesiasticae discipline. instauration. adjunxeris, etc.
his Epistles are printed. I end with that Prayer and Testimony of his, in his
last Writings, wherein, without any complaint for want of Discipline (as he had
done in his former Epistle dedicatory to her, of 1564.) or about the
Government, he thus closes his Dedication of his fifth Edition of his Notes on
the New Testament, 1598. to the Queen: R. tua M. novit, si qua est sub coelo
extera Civitas and Ecclesia quae de R. tuae M. and tot populorum tam faeliciter
sub ipsius imperio degentium salute and incolumitate, tum apud se laetetur, tum
ab omnium bonorum autore, soriis perpetuisque precibus petat, ut hoc perpetuum
esse bonum velit, eam esse Genevam. That is; That your Majesty may know, that
if there be any Foreign City or Church under Heaven, that, both in respect of
your Majesty's safety and welfare, and in regard of so many People that so
happily live under your Government, does both rejoice in themselves, and also
request with serious and incessant prayers, from the Author of all good, that
this may continue for ever; it is Geneva. If he had not, and the Church of
Geneva (for he speaks in its name) been satisfied with our Doctrine, Worship,
Assemblies, Discipline, and Government (at least in the main) he could not have
so spoken. I have done with this Author.

Diodate, Diodate, page 3. twice, and page 11.
in his Letter to the Assembly at Westminster, in his thrice repeated
comparative and superlative commendations of the glory of the English Church,
calling it the very eye and excellency of all the Churches: And that it was
(whilst under Episcopacy, for that time he relates unto) in that high pitch
and state of Holiness, and of Glory, that it did excel and outshine all the
Churches upon Earth, does sufficiently declare his judgment of that
Government; which also (it seems) he dissembled not at the Synod of Dort, as
appears by the margin of that Letter, D. J. B. late Head of Trinity Hall,
Cambridge. See page 286.
page 6. And it has been told to my self, by a person of credit, who was often
with him at Geneva, that he was wholly Episcopal.

Zanchy has delivered his judgment touching his Zanchy Tom. 8. Observat. in
confess. sua Aphor. 10, 11. capitis 25. ex Buce^o.
) But first, in his Observations on his Confession of Faith, he gives an useful
Theorem; viz. Fides mea (inquit) nititur cum primis and simpliciter verbo Dei:
deinde non nihil etiam communi totius veteris Ecclesiae consensu, si ille cum
sacris literis non pugnet. My Faith, says he, rests especially and
absolutely on the Word of God; Two grounds of Faith.
and then something also upon the common consent of the whole Ancient Church,
if it be not repugnant unto the Word of God. Then the Aphorism, Credo enim quae
a piis patribus in nomine Domini congregatis, communi omnium consensu, citra
ullam sacrarum literarum contradictionem definita and recepta fuerunt: ea etiam
(quanquam haud ejusdem cum sacris literis, autoritatis) a Spiritu sancto esse.
Quid autem certius, quam illos Ministrorum ordines (Episcopos Archiepiscopos
Patriarchas) communi totius Reipub. Christianae consensu in Ecclesia
constitutos receptosque fuisse. Quis autem ego sim, qui quod tota Ecclesia
approbavit improbem? etc. For I believe those things, which, by the godly
Fathers, being assembled in the Name of the Lord, by common consent, without
any contradiction unto the Holy Scripture, have been defined and received; that
those things also (although they are not of the same Authority with the Word of
God) yet, Useful and lawful decrees of of the Church from the Holy Ghost.
that they are from the H. GHOST. Now what is more certain, than that those
orders (of Bishops, Archbishops Patriarchs, which he had mentioned in his
confession, chap. 25. Aphorism 10, 11.) of the Ministry, have been instituted
and retained with the consent of the whole Christian Church. Now who am I, that
I should condemn what the whole Church approves? Thus he. Which is the more
to be noted, because these Observations of his were written after his
confession, and for declaration of it. Then having at large recited Bucers
judgment touching the same things; He concludes. Quid quod in Ecclesiis etiam
protestantium non desunt reipsa Episcopi and Archiepiscopi, Superintendents.
Episcopi sunt Archiep.
mutatis bonis Graecis nominibus in mala latina. Vocant Superintendentes and
Generales Superintendentes? Sed ubi etiam neque illa vetera bona Graeca, neque
haec nova male latina nomina obtinent, ibi tamen solent esse aliquot primarii,
penes quos fere tota est autoritas. Verum ubi de rebus convenit, quid de
nominibus altercamur. What? (says he) For even in the Protestant Churches,
Superintendents are Bishops and Archbishops.
there do not want Bishops and Archbishops in deed and really, but they have
changed the good Greek Names into ill Latin ones; they call them
Superintendents; and General Superintendents. And where neither the one nor the
other name is used; yet there are some chief men, in whose power almost all the
Authority does rest. Now seeing we agree in the thing, why do we contend
about Names. Thus far Zanchy.

But as it was said of Caesar, his battle with Pompey in his speech unto the
soldiers, he used this expression; Miles, fieri faciam, parce Civibus altero,
ad victoriam, altero ad gratiam; Soldier, said he, strike the face; spare the
Citizen: The one expression (says the Historian) was for victory, the other
for reputation. So our Author having said enough to secure the cause, for
Episcopacy, yet concludes, Non possum nostrorum zelum non amare, qui ideo illa
nomina oderunt, quia mutuunt, ne cum nominibus, vetus etiam ambitio and
tyrannis cum ruina Ecclesiarum revocetur; Yet I could not, says he; but love
the zeal, (though he had proved the thing against them) of our men, who did
therefore hate those names, because they feared that with the names the former
ambition and tyranny, to the ruin of the Church, would return also. But
himself did not hate those names, for he dedicates the first part of that his
famous work de Tribus Elohim, unto the Dr. Grindall Archbishop then of York,
Vide Epist. l. 2. Tom. 8.
with all his Titles, and has other Epistles also wherein he styles him, and
Bishop Jewel likewise, Bishops and Prelates.

5. Melancthon often; Valde reprehendimur a nostris, quod jurisdictionem
Episcopis reddidimus. Nam vulgus assuefactum libertati, Epist. l. 5. Ep. 15.
Luthe^o.
and semel excusso jugo Episcoporum, aegre patitur sibi rursum imponi illa
vetera onera, and maxim oderunt illam dominationem Civitates Imperii. De
Doctrina Religionis nihil laborant, tantum de Regno and liberate sunt
soliciti. Again, Cives tui ex Norico valde succensent nobis quod reddimus
jurisdictionem Episcopis. Fremunt and alii socii and indignantur Regnum
Episcopis restitui. Lib. 3. Ep. 178. Vito Theodoro.
Ego tamen etiam duriores conditiones arbitror nobis accipiendas esse propter
publicam Ecclesiae tranquillitatem and concordiam; sed FATALIS aliqua
necessitas urget Germanos. Again, Utinam utinam possim, non quidem dominationem
confirmare, sed administrationem restituere Episcoporum; Lib. 4. Ep. 104.
Camerario.
video enim qualem simus habituri Ecclesiam dissoluta (...) Ecclesiastica;
video postea multo intollerabiliorem futuram tyrannidem, quam antea unquam fuit
adhuc, nihil adhuc concessimus adversariis praeter ea, quae Lutherus censuit
esse reddenda, re been ac diligenter considerata ante conventum. Again, Quo
enim jure licebat nobis dissolvere (...) Ecclesiasticam, si Episcopi concedent
illa, quae aequum est eosco c dear? and ut liceat, certe non expedit, semper
ita sensitipse Lutherus. Quem nulla de causa quidam, ut video amant nisi quia
beneficio ejus sentiunt se Episcopos excussisse, and adeptos libertatem minime
utilem ad posteritatem. Again, Velim hoc tibi persuadeas, de me deque multis
aliis, nos optare, Ep. ad Episc. Augustine. Dupl. Aberd. 12. P. 115.
ut pace constituta, Episcoporum potestas sit incolumis, and hanc plurimam
prodesse Ecclesiis judicamus. We are (says he) much reproved by men of our
own side, because we have restored their jurisdiction unto the Bishops; For
the people being accustomed to liberty; and having once shaken off the yoke of
Bishops, can hardly endure those old burdens to be laid on their shoulders
again: But those who especially hate that Government, are the Cities of the
Empire. As for the Doctrine of Religion they mind it not, only of Lordship and
Liberty, they are solicitous. Again, Thy Townsmen of Noricum (says he to
another) are very angry with me, for restoring jurisdiction to Bishops; other
of our friends are in a rage also, and are highly offended that the Government
is restored to the Bishops. But for my part I think that even harder conditions
should be accepted by us, for the public peace and tranquillity of the Church:
But there is a kind of FATAL necessity that hurries on the Germans. Again, O
I would to God, I would to God, I were able to restore unto the Bishops, not
indeed their Lordly domineering (he means such as were exercised by some Popish
Bishops) but their jurisdiction and government; for I perceive what kind of
Church we are like to have, when the Church Polity and Discipline is
dissolved. Note.
And I perceive moreover a much more intolerable tyranny in the Church like to
arise, than hitherto has ever been; we have as yet yielded nothing to the
adversaries, Note.
more than Luther himself judged fit to be restored, after he had weighed the
matter with diligence and care, before the Convention. Again, By what right can
we lawfully dissolve the Church Government, whilst the Bishops will yield unto
us, what they ought to yield? And if it were lawful, yet surely it is not
expedient. And so Luther ever thought; whom, I perceive some do love for no
other cause in the world, but for that, they see by him they have shaken off
Episcopacy, and gotten a liberty no way useful unto posterity. Again, I would
have thee think (says he to the Bishop of Ausburg) and persuade thy self
concerning me, and many others, that we desire that peace being settled, the
power of Bishops may continue unshaken. And this their power, we judge to be
specially useful for the Churches. Thus he, as for the Tyranny he speaks of,
it happens to the Church, as to the State sometimes. For Example, The Keepers
of the Liberties of England, was a specious title, yet we know they left us
not a dram of Liberty indeed. So it is easy for Tyranny to arise in the
Church, under a new name, and a Wolf in a sheeps clothing. But as the former
Author says in the same place; Zanch. ubi supra.
Why contend we about Names, when, as he has truly noted; the Necessity and
Use of Episcopacy, as to the thing and office is acknowledged and improved in
all Christian Churches? I have done with Zanchy.

Let me subjoyn one more, and he of special note, Bucer. de Regno Christi.
lib. 2. cap. 12. page 67.
one of the English Reformers, though a foreiner, it is Bucer, whose praises
we heard above ( lib. 1. cap. 1.) Hear him once and again. First, Note.
in that book which he wrote and dedicated to King Edward the sixth, for the
special use of this Church, and Nation; and it were well it might be a little
looked into the more, whose Title is of the Kingdom of Christ: He says, Jam
ex perpetua Ecclesiarum observatione, ab ipsis jam Apostolis videmus, Visum and
hoc esse Spiritui sancto, ut inter Presbyteros, qu^bus Ecclesiarum procuratio
potissimum est commissa, Unus Ecclesiarum and totius sacri Ministerii curam,
gerat singularem, eaque cura and solicitudine cunctis praeat aliis. Qua de
causa Episcopi nomen, hujusmodi summis Ecclesiarum Curatoribus est peculiariter
attributum. Tametsi hi sine reliquorum Presbyterorum Consilio nihil statuere
debeant. Qui and ipsi propter hanc communem Ecclesiae administrationem Episcopi
in Scripturis vocentur -- Hi enim, sicut dignitate and demandata primaria
Ecclesiarum solicitudine, reliquos omnes sancti Ministerii ordines antecedunt;
ita debent voluntate and studio Ecclesias rite administrandi, prae omnibus
aliis flagrare, omnique facultate eas aedificandi praepollere: Now (says he)
by the perpetual observation of the Churches, Note. Episcopacy from the Holy
Ghost.
from the very Apostles; it seemed good to the Holy Ghost, that among the
Presbyters, to whom the care of the Church is chiefly committed; there should
be One, who should specially sustain the cure and Government whole sacred and
in that care and burden to be before all other: For which cause the name of
Bishop, is attributed more peculiarly to these chief highest Rulers of the
Churches, although they without the counsel of the other Presbyters ought to
establish nothing, etc Neither do they in England; for all is transacted in a
Synod, chosen freely by all the Ministers of the Nation, and confirmed also by
the Magistrate and Laity in the Parliament. Bucer in Ephesians. 4. Zanch. ^bservat.
in confess. suam cap. 25. Aphor. 10, 11.
Again, the same Author in Ephesians. 4. quoted by Zanchy in the place now cited,
as his Patron, in the defense of Episcopacy; where having ennumerated seven
parts of teaching, and applied them to the Ministry of the Word ( viz. 1.
Reading. 2. Interpretation. 3. Observation of Doctrine. 4. Exhortation,
Reproof, Consolation. 5. Caetechising. 6. Conference or Disputation. 7. And
lastly, Inspection how men profit, together with praise or rebuke, reward or
punishment) he adds; Cum itaque adeo multiplicem operam requirat Ministerium
docendi, plures etiam Ministrorum Ordines sunt huic Ministerio deputati (he
speaks of the Primitive Church) ac primi omnium Lectores, etc. Seeing, says
he, the Ministry of teaching, requires so many performances; there are also
several Orders of Ministers appointed to this office; and first of all Readers.
Which work having highly praised, he says of the English Church: De legendis
scripturis, gratia Domino, probe constitutum est in Ecclesia Anglicana, si
idonei modo constituerentur Lectores; That concerning reading of Scripture,
praise be to God, it is well ordered in the Church of England; if so be fit men
were chosen for that office. Which I note, by the way, that whereas this grave
Author, and all the Primitive Church made so high reckoning of public reading;
by our late Deformers it has been almost laid aside; And God must be heard but
in few, because themselves had things of more consequence to communicate, and
that beyond either measure for time, or modesty for the peoples patience, or
wisdom, considering their weakness. (I excuse not my self) forgetting that
nulli magis vacuos Lectores demittunt, Praefat. ad nota^ de Dieu in Vet. Test.
quam qui nimia copia obruunt; and that of my Host in Chaucer to the Parson
before his Sermon: Beeth' fructuous, and that in little space,

And to do well, so God give you his grace: Therefore as Sam. Ward. Happiness
of p^actice in the close.
another has it, and an elegant Preacher: Brevis Praedicatio, longa ruminatio,
actio perpetua. But to return to our Author. Speaking de Disciplina Clericali,
of the Discipline of the Ministry, he says: Tertia Disciplinae Clericalis
pars est, Subjectio peculiaris, qua Clerici Gradus, and Ministerii inferioris,
se subjiciunt illis qui sunt in ordine and Ministerio superiore. Hanc
Disciplinae partem docuit Dominus nos, and exemplo suo cum vult suos sic
committi invicem, and cohaerere ut membra in corpore -- subjicit sane,
unumquemque suorum aliis, a quibus tanquam a membris amplioris ac latius
patentis virtutis and efficaciae, custodiatur, moveatur and regatur. Idem
praecipit Spiritus S. Subjicimini invicem in timore Dei, Ephesians. 2.21. Ista itaque
considerantes sancti olim patres, eum in clero ordinem descripserunt, ut
caeteri omnes Clerici a Presbyterio singulari cura custodirentur and
Gubernarentur. Inter Presbyteros vero Episcopos, ut consul inter Senatores
Reipubl. ita hic primam, cum totius Ecclesiae, tam singulariter ordinis
Clericalis Universi curam gereret, atque custodiam -- constituerunt sancti
patres ut Episcopi cujusque provinciae, convenirent una cum Presbyteris, bis in
anno, deque Christi Doctrina atque Disciplina inquirerent. -- Ut hae vero
Synodi recte and ordine administrarentur, voluerunt illis praeesse and
convocandis and moderandis, Metropolitas, Episcopos cujusque Metropolis -- His
Metropolitanis Episcopis injunxerunt cur^m quandam and solicitudinem omnium
Ecclesiarum -- nihil judicii illis concessum erat, quod sua propria autoritate
exercerent in Ecclesiis, quae ipsae suos haberent Episcopos. Omne enim and in
plebem and in clerum udicium, erat penes suum cujusque Ecclesiae Episcopum and
Presbyterium: Episcopos autem judicabit Synodus -- Considerentur quae Cyprianus
ad Steph. Roman. de Martiano Episcopo Arelatensi, lib. 3. Epist. 13. tum illa
q. scripsit in Epist. 3. lib. 1. de destributa cuique Episcoporum certa gregis
portione; and quae praefatus est, and in council. Carthaginensi, ut scripsit ad
Quirinum. Porro, ubi orbis Ecclesiis refertus fuit, ac ipsi quoque
Metropolitani sua singulari cura opus haberent. Nec enim prout caeperant esse
plurimi, ita omnes pro suo loco, vel sapiebant, vel vigilabant (pauci enim
semper and in omnibus hominum ordinibus praestantes) Episcopis quibusdam
primarum Ecclesiarum aliquot provinciarum cura demandata est -- quos postea
vocaverunt Patriarchas, etc. That is to say. The third part of Discipline
Ministerial, Subjection of inferior degrees in the Ministry.
is special Subjection, whereby the degrees of the Ministry of inferior order,
do submit themselves to those that are in a superior Order, and Ministry. This
part of Discipline our Lord taught us by his own example [namely, among his
Disciple] for seeing he will have all his so to cleave together, The ground of
it.
as the members of one body; he has therefore subjected every one of his to
others, by whom as by members of more ample power and activity, they may be
kept, moved, and governed. And the same does the Holy Ghost command, Submit
your selves one to another in the fear of God, Primative Chapter practice.
Ephesians. 5.21. These things therefore being considered by the holy ancient
Fathers, they appoint this order amongst the Clergy, viz. that all those of
inferior order [as those he named before, Readers, Chanters, Deacons, etc.]
should by special charge be governed by the Presbytery, Presbytery.
and cared for. But among the Presbyters, or Ministers themselves, the Bishop,
as a Consul among the Senators of a Common Wealth, Episcop^cy.
so he should have the chief charge (and custody) care and government both of
the whole Church, and also more specially of all the Clergy Universally -- And
the holy Fathers decreed, that the Bishops of each Province should with their
Ministers or Presbyters meet twice in the year at least, Syn^ds.
and consider of Christ's Doctrine and Discipline, or Government -- Now that
these convocations might be administered the more orderly, they appointed for
the calling and moderating of them, Metropolitanes, Metropolitanes.
that is, the Bishops of every Metropolis or chief City -- To these
Metropolitanes they enjoined a certain inspection and care of all Churches [to
wit within their several Provinces] But they gave unto them no jurisdiction,
which they should execute in those Churches that had Bishops of their own.
Jurisdiction of the Bishops.
For all the jurisdiction, both over the people, and over the Ministry, did
belong to the Bishop of each Diocese, with his Presbytery. But the Bishops
themselves were judged by the Synod. Moreover, when the world began to be
filled with Churches, and the Metropolitanes themselves stood in need of
particular Government over themselves; for although they grew in number,
Patriarchs.
yet all were not according to their places, either prudent, or vigilant ( for
in all orders of men, Note.
those of worth are but few) the Fathers did commend the care of whole
Provinces together unto certain Bishops of the chief Cities, which persons they
afterward called Patriarchs. Thus far Bucer there. And after noting the abuse
of these powers, and the usurpation of them by the Bishops of Rome, whom he
calls Antichrist, (which I note to evidence that a man may be full for
Episcopacy, yea and Archiepiscopacy, and yet be as full against Popery, which
some should mark) he subjoyns what is very considerable in these times, viz.
At quia omnino necesse est, ut singuli Clerici suos habeant proprios Custodes
and Curatores, instaurenda est, ut Episcoporum, ita et Archidiaconorum,
aliorumque omnium, quibuscunque censeantur nominibus, quibus portio aliqua
commissa est custodiendi gubernandique Cleri authoritas, potestas; sed and
vigilantia and animadversio, ne quis omnino sit in hoc ordine (...). But
because, says he, it is altogether necessary, that every Minister and Clergy
man should have their proper Guardians and Governors; both the Authority of
Bishops, Bishops
and of Archdeacons, Archdeacons.
and of all As Metropolitanes, etc.
other officers, by what names soever they be called, unto whom any part of the
power of guarding and governing the Ministry is committed, ought to be
restored. As also watchfulness and observation* least any man whatsoever of
this profession, be without government, and not under rule. Thus far he. With
whose testimony, not only for his learning and piety (both which were eminent
in him) but also for his reference to this Church (as having been one of the
reformers of it) I close these Allegations and Witnesses. Vide Bucer. Script.
Anglican.
Only adding this; That had, the Reformed Churches beyond the Seas, observed
this counsel of these (their own) learned men; they had not given that
advantage to the adversary, by making a Schism in Government from the whole
Universal Church, scandalizing it also. Nor had they given occasion to those,
who out of true or pretended imitation of them, have brought Scotland, and by
it England (the glory and refuge of the Reformed Churches) and by both, Ireland
into those horrid confusions which have fallen upon them, upon that quarrel; as
is noted by Icon. Basilic. Medit. 17.
one who well knew; and is not denied by Ministe^s Reasons for Reformation.
1660. in the Preface.
others, who had no small activity in blowing those fires, some coals whereof
they have still retained, and by them attempted to kindle new flames, as is
noted by Kings Declaration. Oct. 5. 1660. page 7.
another Authentic Author.

And for those our Brethren, who had destroyed this Government among us; it is
to be feared it may be (in many of them) upon the like ground that the Rabbin,
says the Jew (the body of them, D. Kimchi in Isa. 53.9.
for so he expounds that Prophecy, which the Chaldee Version applies to the
Messiah, as we do) was slaughtered in the captivity, whilst he explains those
word: with the rich in his death: He says it was: (...) Not,
(...) But,


Which sentence, because it is in Rhyme, we may thus render, The Wether had no
fault, but that
His fleece was good, and he was fat.


Mark 12.7.
According to this; Come let us kill him, and the Inheritance shall be ours: As
it has appeared since.

SECT. III. Exceptions against the Government and Discipline.
THe Brethren, the Authors of the former Tract, Reasons of the necessity of
Reformation. p. 40.
except also against the Government and Jurisdiction of the Bishops. First,
That it is not by Divine Right in this Nation, but that, the Church of England
is founded in the estate of Prelacy, within the Realm of England by Law, and
authority of Parliament only. Where first we accept of their Concession.
Prelacy, Episcopacy established by Law in England. 25. Edw. 3. Anno 1350.
then (our Church Government by Episcopacy) is established by Law in this
Nation. Now if they have this office by Law, they must also have a power for
the Execution of it, as a Prelacy, that is; a superior order of men to govern
in Ecclesiastical Affairs, which is their jurisdiction, and power to exercise
Discipline. But the Brethren reply, Carol. I. 11. wherein their sitting in
Parliament is removed, and the power of the King to authorize Commissioners for
Causes Ecclesiastical; which was granted by an Act 1. Eliz. cap. 1. Reas.
neces. ref. Page 51.
And that there is not any branch or clause in that whole Act that gives more,
or other jurisdiction to Bishops, or any other Ecclesiastical persons
whatsoever. But Answer, unto this is given elsewhere in this Treatise;
therefore I leave it here, and come to that, which is more material, viz. The
Divine Right, at least by consequent of that function. Which having evidenced
so plentifully before, out of both Ancient and Modern Testimonies (and those of
some the greater Lights of the Reformed Churches.) And replied to the
Objections on the contrary; And particularly, because the Brethren do not here
oppose it; I shall need to say the less. Only take a verdict from one whom
some of the Brethrens opinion, cite as a witness, which is St. Cyprian. Which
will at once carry with it both the Divine Right, and also the inseparable
adjunct of it, though not a sole, yet a superior jurisdiction: For that of
sole jurisdiction seems a needless quarrel, seeing the Bishop does neither
exercise any part of it alone, but with others assistance; and without which
assistance he cannot orderly administer it. And the Church declares her self,
whilst she appoints in the ordering of Priests, and consecrating of Bishops
(one of the greatest Acts pertaining to Government) that there shall be other
also assistant to the Bishop in Imposition of hands. Though in that lesser
point of Confirmation of Children, and ordering of Deacons, it is not so
appointed, though not excluding it. But, as I said, Cyprian has these words:
Neque enim aliunde haereses abortae sunt, Cypr. lib. 1. Ep. 3. Vide and in
eand. sentent. ips. lib. 3. Ep. 1.
aut nata sunt Schismata, quam inde quod Sacerdoti Dei non obtemperatur, Nec
Unus in Ecclesia ad tempus Sacerdos, and ad tempus Judex vice Christi
cogitatur. Cui si secundum Magisteria divina obtemperaret fraternitas Universa,
nemo adversum Sacerdotum Collegium quicquam moveret, Let not the Reader
nauseate this once or twice repetition of this Testimony. Non Crambe bis cocta;
haec bis repetita placebunt. In Music, streins often repeat^d are; In mental
harmony, why is it a jarr?
nemo post divinum judicium, post populi suffragium, post Coepiscoporum
consensum, judicem se non jam Episcopi sed Dei faceret: Nemo dissidio unitatis
Christi Ecclesiam scinderet, etc. For from no other root (says he) either
Heresies spring, or Schisms do arise, than from this: That Obedience is not
given to the Priest or Minister of God (so he calls the Bishop by way of
eminency, as the words following declare) And that it is not considered, that,
there is for the time but One Priest, and but ONE JUDGE in Christ's stead. To
whom, if the WHOLE Church, according as the Scripture has appointed, were
obedient; no man would move any thing against the College of Ministers; no
man, after Gods sentence, the peoples suffrage (election or approbation) after
the consent of the other Bishops; would make himself Judge, not now of the
Bishop, but of God himself. In which Testimony, only by the way noting, that
populi suffragium, must be, according to Calvin's observation, not properly, an
Election (though in a large sense it may be called so, according to that of the
former Author elsewhere: Quum ipsa (plebs) maxim habeat potestatem, L. 1. Ep.
4.
vel eligendi dignos Sacerdotes, vel indignos recusandi. That the people have
chief right either to choose good Ministers, or of refusing those that are bad)
But either a signification of their desire whom they would have; or else an
approbation of the Election made by the Bishops, and confirmed by the
Magistrate. So Calvin. Instit. lib. 4. cap. 4. s. 12. Cap. 13. Laodic. Council.
Est quidem illud, fateor, optima ratione sancitum in Laodicensi concilio, ne
turbis electio permitteretur -- primum soli Clerici eligebant -- offerebant
Magistratui -- tum ad multitudinem res deferebatur -- Aut si a multitudine
incipiebatur, tantum id fiebat, ut sciretur quem potissimum expeteret. It is
(says he) I confess, excellently decreed in the Council of Laodicea, that the
election of Ministers should not be permitted to the people. But first the
Clergy did choose; then they presented him to the Magistrate; and lastly he was
propounded to the people, etc. But this occasionally only, to prevent
mistaking. As to the former Testimony of Cyprian; out of it we learn, First,
That the eminency of one Divine Institution. Post Judicum divinum. Secondly,
That he sole superior power of judgment in the Church, to whom all must be
obedient. I say not, he has a sole power absolutely, but a sole superior
power over all within his Diocese and Jurisdiction, by this Testimony
(whatsoever is to be said of the thing it self) according to the Word of God.
And indeed the liberty or advantage that Civil Laws give of exercising
Episcopal Authority, does not imply they have no other. The Church has taught
us they may concur. Will you -- such as be unquiet, disobedient and criminous
within your Diocese, Book of Consecrat. Q. At the consecrat. of a Bishop.
correct and punish according to such Authority as ye have by Gods Word; and
as to you shall be committed by the Ordinance of this Realm. (...)
Ecclesiastical whether in order or degree (which at present we dispute not) be
according to Scripture, as before has been shown; Government and Jurisdiction
cannot be separated from it; although the Laws should not confer any, yea
forbid it; seeing the Church cannot subsist without Government (which cannot be
exercised regularly without Bishops. Cypr. lib. 8. Ep. 3
) The same Cyprian, and in the same Epistle now cited; showing it to be the
design of Satan, in setting men to oppose godly Bishops, that so he may
destroy Discipline, and by that, the Church it self, says: Apparet quis
impugnet, non scilicet Christus qui Sacerdotes aut constituit aut protegit; sed
ille qui Christi adversarius, and Ecclesiae ejus inimicus. Ob hoc Ecclesiae
praepositum sua infestatione persequitur, ut Gubernatore sublato, atrocius
atque violentius circa Ecclesiae naufragia grassetur. Who it is, and upon what
design, that opposes Episcopacy.
It appears (says he) who opposes the Bishop; to be sure not Christ, who
either appoints or protecteth Bishops. But he who is Christ's adversary, and
his Churches enemy; for this end persecutes and infests the Church Ruler, that
the Pylot being taken off, he might with greater cruelty and violence make
spoil and shipwreck of the Church. Thus far Cyprian. And this here, for the
Right of this office in humane and divine.

SUBSECT. II.
THe next is, whether it be a distinct Order from, or a superior Degree above
the Presbytery, or ordinary Ministry. Whether Episcopacy be a different order.
Necess. Ref. p. 42.
Touching the judgment of the Church of England, in which point, there need
not be any great controversy, if men, that have little else to defend
themselves, were not too captious of words. Of which sort of controversies, the
Apostle gives warning, viz. 2 Timothy 2.14.
That we should not strive about words without profit. Ordination of Ministers
says: Preface to the Book of Ordination.
It is evident to all men diligently reading holy Scripture, and Ancient
Authors, that from the Apostles time there have been THESE ORDERS of Ministers
in Christ's Church; Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, which offices were evermore
had in such reverent estimation that no man by his own private authority might
presume to execute any of them. Where it is plain, that saying these Orders,
and then naming three, it is as much as if it had said; These three Orders,
which is the Exception the Brethren have against it. And because it calls
them presently Offices. But that alters not what it said before; for every
order is an office, and every office is in some order. Again, they evidently
prevaricate, for whereas they say that the passage. Almighty God -- which have
appointed diverse orders of Ministers in the Church, or in thy Church is in one
prayer at the consecration; namely, of a Bishop. It must be noted, that it is
three times in the book, viz. At the ordering of a Deacen, of a Priest, and
consecrating of a Bishop. Now applying this word in prayer diverse orders of
Ministers; to every one of those offices, Can any man in his conscience doubt,
but that they took them for several orders who compiled the book? and which
being confirmed by Parliament, and Convocation, 8. Eliz. cap. 1.
is the judgment of the Church of England in this point, although it does not
every time it mentions the Bishop, name order, but sometime Office and
Ministry. That the book calls the inauguration of a Bishop, Consecration of
Bishops.
not an ordering, but a Consecration, does not overthrow what they said in the
Preface, and in the Prayer; in both which the book speaks of them, as of
several orders, as we saw but now; for that word of Consecration is used for
honors sake only, as being the separation of a person to a more eminent
order. If the Brethren could make advantage of it, they might by the same
Logomachy, prove, that Bishops, Priests and Deacons, are consecrated also; for
the Title of the Book says: The form and manner of consecrating Bishops,
Priests and Deacons. Ergo Priests and Deacons are consecrated, as well it may
be said, as that Bishops are consecrated, therefore not ordered. This for the
judgment of the Church of England, and of the Articles (whereof the book of
Ordination is a branch) unto which the Brethren as it seems have also
subscribed. Artic. 36.
For revolting from which, Can. 38.
they have merited the censures of the Church, but that, they say, those Canons
have now no powder; but there may be some in making. If Linwood and Anshelme
say, Linwood constitut. Anshelm in Ph^l. 1.
that Episcopacy is not an order, distinct from Presbyters; we are to note,
that these and many streams like, have but one head, which when it issued out
this, was a little troubled, it is St. Hierom, whom in this they follow, and
whose words they use. Who being provoaked by John Bishop of Jerusalem, Ad
Evagr. Tom 2. and in Ep. ad Tit. 1.
took occasion warmly to make that a general note, which he had but from a few
particular instances, and the latitude of the word Bishop in Scripture. That
because there was not at that time any one so constituted at Ephesus, Act. 22.
when Paul left that Church; therefore there was not one afterward, when John
wrote his Revelation, and Christ sent the message to the Angel, especially of
that Church. To say that Angel was the company of the Ministers, Apoc 2.
is to beg the question, not to answer the proof. Also, because there was none
one while more specially designed by Paul at Philippi, or at least spoken to;
therefore, there was none at Colosse, when as the Apostle directs his speech to
be delivered to Archippus. To say there was no other Minister there, is to
avoid what can not by such evasion be escaped. Ephesus had a Bishop, or call
him what you will, a superior Governor to all the Ministers, 1 Timothy 1.
when Timothy was there; and so had the Isle of Crete, when Titus governed it.
Tit. 1.
When the Apostle admonishes the Hebrews to obey them that have the Rule over
them, Heb. 13. Act. 15. Gal. 2. 1 Cor. 3 5. 2 Cor. 3.6. Ephesians. 6.21. Romans 13.4.
cap. 15.8.
does it exclude the government of James, or of Peter, to whom Paul applied
himself as the pillars and rectors of that Church. A speech uttered to many,
does not shut out the precedence of some one among them. The word Deacon is
sometime applied to the Apostles themselves, and to the Evangelists. And to the
Magistrate; Luke 19.44. 1 Pet. 2.12.
and to ^hr st himself. So the word Episcopacy, sometimes signi^ies vi^itation
in general, in the Scripture; sometimes the offi^e of A ostleship. Act. 1.20.
And his Bishopric let ano her take; ^n^ sometimes the office of a Bishop or
Pastor, or Presbyter. 1 Timothy 3.
He that desires the office of a Bishop. But this latitude of the Word in
Scripture, impedeth not, but that the thing, now understood thereby, may be in
Scripture distinct from that of Presbyter, and is, in all those pla^es and
persons, where and who had jurisdiction over other Ministers, as the Apostles,
the Evangelists; and others such as Timothy and Titus were. But that Hieron,
even when he disputes upon the Word, was not so clear against the thing, Ep.
ad Evagr. in ipso fine.
appe^rs, in that he says; Presbyter and Episcopus aliud aetatis, aliud
dignitatis est nomen. Unde and ad ^imotheum, de ordinatione Episcopi and
Diaconi dicitur, de Presbyteris omnino reticetur, quia in Episcopo, and
Presbyter continetur -- Et ut sciamus traditiones Ap^stolicas sumptas de Veteri
Testamento; Q^od Aaron and silii ejus atque Levitae in Templo fuerunt, hoc sibi
Episcopi, and Presbyteri and Diaconi vendicent in Ecclesia. The name says he)
of Presbyter and Bishops; the one is a title of years, the other of dignity:
Whence it is, that in the Epistle to Timothy, there is mention made of the
ordination of a Bishop and a Deacon (by the way note, Consecration an
Ordination.
that Antiquity does name the consecration of a Bishop, ordination, which the
Brethren deny) but there is no mention there of the ordination of a Presbyter,
because that in a Bishop, a Presbyter, is also contained. And that we may
understand the postolical traditions, taken out of the Old Testament; Hieron,
judgment of Ep^scopacy, whilst he d^sputes against it.
look what Aaron and his Sons, and the Levites were in the Temple. Let the
Bishops, and he Presbyters, and the Deacons challenge unto themselves in the
Church; where first we have as much distinction yielded, as was Aaron and his
Sons, and the Levites; between the Bishops, and Presbyters, and Deacons.
Secondly, Apostolical, and grounded on the equity of the orders of the
Ministry in the Old Testament; so that it is agreeable unto Scripture, both

SUBSECT. II.
orders of Episcopacy and Presbytery; for the question is of the power, which
of men in the same degree is not always the same. When the same Father says
in the same Epistle. Quid enim facit excepta ordinatione, Ep. ad Evagr.
Episcopus quod non facit Presbyter? What does a Bishop excepting Ordination,
which a Presbyter does not? and where elsewhere he says; That imposition of
hands, or confirmation of the Baptized, was proper to the Bishops, though he
qualify it, by saying that it was done ad honorem potius Sacerdotis, quam ad
legis necessitatem, 'for the honor of the Priesthood (for so by way of
excellency he often, as also other of that time call Episcopacy, as we saw
above out of Cyprian) rather, than by necessity of the institution. 'And when
in the former Epistle, and elsewhere, he says: Ad Evagr. in T^t. cap. 1.
In toto orb decretum est ut unus de Presbyteris electus, superponeretur
caeteris, ad quem omnis Ecclesiae cura pertineret and Schismatum semina
toll^rentur: That it was decreed through the whole world, that one should be
elected out of the Presbyters, and set over the rest, unto whom the whole care
of the Church should belong, and the seeds of Schism taken away. Also,
Ecclesiae salus in summi Sacerdotii dignitate pendet: cui si non exors quaedam
and ab omnibus eminens detur Potestas, Hieron. ad^ers. Luciferia^. Circ. Med.
tot in Ecclesiis efficientur Schismata, quot Sacerdotes; unde venit ut sine
Chrismate and Episcopi Jussione, neque Presbyter, neque Diaconus jus habeant
baptizandi: The safety of the Church (says he) depends upon the dignity of
the chief Priesthood (so he calls Episcopacy) unto which unless there be
granted, an exempted, and above all eminent power; there will be so many
Schisms in the Churches, as there are Priests; whence it comes to pass, that
without the Ordination (^hrismate) and Authority (Jussione) of the B^^hop,
neither Presb^ter, nor Deacon has power to baptize. Which last words, exclude
the notion of this place, its being understood of Christ's. Again, Ut Pontifices
Christi, qui tamen rectam fidem praedicant, Ad Theophilum advers. Error. Jo.
Heroes. Tom. 2.
non Dominorum metu, sed Patrum honor reveremur -- non sumus tam instati
cordis, ut ignoremus quid debeatur Sacerdotibus Christi, etc. That we may
(says he) those namely, which preach the Orthodox Faith, prosecute such
Bishops not with the fear of Masters, but the honor of Fathers. For we are
not so swollen with pride, that we understand not what is due to the Priests
of God. Now in these places: Although he do sometimes imply Episcopacy to be
of divine Authority, as where he compares it to the office of Aaron. Sometimes
Apostolical, as where he says it of their Tradition. And sometimes
Ecclesiastical (but by the Authority of the whole world) yet in all, he
acknowledges such power in the Bishop to do that in the Church, that none
other may either in the nature of the thing (as the extirpation of Schisms,
which could not be done before) or in the right of Authority, as Ordination,
and imposition of hands; without which the Presbyters have no power at all, not
so much as to baptize. So that let Episcopacy and Presbytery differ in order or
in degree only; so long as some main parts of Jurisdiction can be performed
only by him, or not without his pre-eminent Authority; why struggle we with
that truth, and that sword of the Spirit, on which edge soever whereof we
fall, we are certainly wounded. The General is but a soldier (to use the
Brethrens own comparison) but may he not do something that a common soldier,
yea the whole Council of Commanders cannot do? So the Pylot in a ship, not
only for his skill, but for his place. Magistrates may be said all to be in
the same order, and to differ in degree one y; But what Protestant is so weak
of head, and wild of heart, as to top Tyburn for denying the Kings Supremacy.
It being granted that there is the same use of a Bishop in the Church as of an
Emperor, or Commander in chief in an Army (For the Church is an Army with
banners) as both Hieron, Cant. 6.4.
and the Brethren yield; the question is not in what ra^k or file, but in what
p^ace and power. Not what Name, but what Authority he has. But too too much
of this Criticism.

SUBSECT. III.
Necessit. Ref. p. 44.
TO that which the Brethren oppose, viz. That there are examples of Ordin^tion
in the New Testament without a Bishop, if the assertion were strong yet is the
proof weak. For the laying on of the hands of Simeon Niger, of Lucius of
Cyrene, and Mana en mentioned, upon Paul and Barnabas, Act. 13.1.
was no Ordination; for the one was an Apostle, and the other an Evangelist
before. It was but a special and solemn mission, Imposition of hands.
in which case, laying on of hands was usual in that Eam (ceremoniam) mutuati
fuerant Apostoli ex veteri gentis suae consuetudine. Call. in 2 Timothy 1.6. Heb. 7.
Nation, even by those who were not properly Ecclesiastical men, as Jacob laid
his hands upon Ephraim and Manasseth; and even among our selves, we often lay
our hands on the head of a child, when we pray God to bless him. This
imposition of hands therefore does not argue ^ur^sdiction in this place, but
the symbol of Blessing. For if it were, and that without controversy the less
is blessed of the g eater: Then must these Brethren be superiors to the
Apostle Paul and Barnabas, none of them being an Apostle themselves, which I
suppose the Brethren will not say. Mat. 18.
Our Saviors laying his hands upon the children, and blessing them, was
according to the custom, though with more than common efficacy and authority,
That afterward it was applied to Ordination, and by a Metonymy set for
Ordination it self, (...)
does not make it proper unto that, but makes that the more solemn by this.
Again, it might be said that these named in the Church of Antioch, were
Prophets, as the Text calls them, and Teachers, but such as were Apostolical
men, such as Barnabas, who afterward visited in his own name (being accompanied
by John, Mark, Act. 15.
for societies sakes) the Churches of Cyprus, and it is like, several others
also. So that such persons are sometime called Apostles; Romans 16.7.
Andronicus and Junia were of note among the Apostles. Titus and the Brethren
sent to Jerusalem are said to be the Apostles (so in the original) of the
Churches. And some were tried, 2 Cor. 8.23.
which said they were Apostles, but were not; Rev. 2.2.
which could not be understood of the Twelve, nor of Paul. Thirdly, What Numb.
23.
Else every man that sees such a thing as Phinees did, might do present
execution. Fourthly, What might be done, by such as Moses did consecrate,
before Aaron was instituted, but afterward it had been intrusion for him so to
do. Exodus 24.
And the young men did sacrifice before the institution of the Priesthood,
might they do so also afterward? 1 Timothy 4.14. Calvin in lo^.
That Timothy was ordained by the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery, The
text says: But Calvin says, that he rather thinks it was the office, than
the College of the Presbyters. But howsoever, yet this excludes not the
Apostles presence, who elsewhere says it was by the Imposition of his hands.
Yea so, 2 Timothy 1.6.
that huc magis inclinat conjectura unum tantum fuisse, qui manus imponeret:
That the conjecture leads, rather to think, that one only laid on hands
(though in the name of the rest) says Mr. Calvin. Sole O^din^tion.
Which may obstruct the Brethrens confidence, that say; there is no example in
Scripture of sole Ordination; but for this we contend not. To say that the
Ordination by the Presbyters, made him a Preaching Presbyter and Bishop (as the
Brethren do) and that of Paul made him an Evangelist; is to make him twice
ordained, which is not once proved, and therefore may as easily be denied. This
for that they produce out of the Gospel.

To what they say from Law, viz. That the Statute 13. Eliz. 12. binding all men
not ordained by the Ordination book to subscribe the Articles before the feast
of the nativity then coming, and the Brethren thence inferring, that the Law
did not intend to bind all to this form of Ordination. It is easy to see,
that the Statute refers to those then not ordained by it, but by other order,
or in other places; but is no cloak for any since.

What in the fifth place they add, that this affixing the right of Ordination
unto Bishops, does unchurch all the Protestant Churches; is a cast of their
office, which is to calumniate. For that is law and order in one place, which
is confusion or Schism in another. The Apostles Rule, 2 These. 3. Reformed
Churches.
That every man meddle with his own business, may be in some sense applicable
to Churches also. We know our own duty, we hope charitably they would do
theirs, had they the liberty we have, or the light. They condemn not us, we
despise not them; but give them the right hand of fellowship, and when occasion
serves we declare, that we are with them, and they with us one bread and one
body.

SECT. IV. Of the book of Ordination.
SUBSECT. I. Bishops imposition of hands on Deacons.
NExt, that they may mark out iniquity, and accomplish a diligent search for
it; and that so the nakedness of their Father and Mother (if any were) might in
no part be covered with the veil of charity or modesty, but exposed to the
contempt and scorn, of those in Gath and Askelon. They fall upon the book of
Ordination. But what Book? sure such as is written sententiis vivis, The book
of Ordination.
as the Jesuit spoke of Savanarola upon the Psalms. So composed for strength
of Doctrine, and piety of expression, that there is no religious heart can
think, but that they were guided in it by the very Spirit of God; and which did
the Brethren conscionably peruse, they would find, as we say, other fish to
fry, and instead of quarrelling with it, fall down, and ask God forgiveness for
their breach of what they promised, when they were ordained by it: But to the
particulars. Omitting their quarrel to the three orders, and the word Priest,
answered before. Come we to their exception against the ordering of Deacons,
which is, P. 45.
that the imposition of the hands of the Bishop alone upon them, is contrary to
Acts the sixth, where it is said, that They, and not one of them only laid
their hands on them. But, if it be of necessity, that at the ordaining of the
Deacon, there must be the hands of all the Apostles, or Minister or a Bishop;
for that was done by Paul's hand, as himself witnesses in Timothy; or at least
it will follow, that one Apostle, 2 Timothy 2.
if the rest were present, had not power to make a Deacon. Twelve laid their
hands upon every one. May not rather Calvin's opinion, above cited, he
admitted, viz. 'that one only did it in the name of the rest. Thirdly,
Apostles laid on hands, that therefore every Minister present with the Bishop
must do so too, unless they can show, that every private Minister does come as
near the dignity of an Apostle, as a Bishop does, who is a Governor of the
Church. Fourthly, It is well noted in the Articles that have grown, Artic. 25.
of the Sacrament.
partly of the corrupt following of the Apostles. The Apostles, and not one
only might lay on hands, because there were several to be ordained. And many
occasions did admonish them of Deacons were not in all points as ours, which
are admitted into the order of the Ministry: Why the sole imposition of the
Bishops hands is used in Deacons.
which because an inferior one, to represent the distinction of it, and the
dignity of the other, ( viz. The Ministry usually so called, or Priesthood) it
was thought convenient to impose the sole hand of the Bishop in the one; But
for more solemnity, not more efficacies sake, to adjoyn other Ministers to the
Bishop in the other.

SUBSECT. II. Apostles choose Deacons.
THey except secondly against that passage in the Apostles to choose into this
order St. Stephen, etc. whereas they say, Act. 6.
the Text says, it was the multitude. Now the Brethren say it was by order
from the Apostles. And it hinders not but that the Apostles might choose with
them, or if not, their approbation is their choosing, after the multitude had
made theirs. Where the Brethren say, that to say the Apostles chose them,
directly 'crosseth the Text: they give us a taste of their learning, and of
their Logic. With them it seems, subordinata and simul vera, are
contradictoria, and Jonathan and David mortal enemies.

SUBSECT. III. Receive the Holy Ghost.
BUt that which most offends (say they) is; N. 3. Receive the Holy Ghost.
that in the very act of ordaining (Priests or Ministers) the Bishop takes upon
him to give that, which none but God himself has power to bestow, where it
says, Receive the Holy Ghost, etc. which be the words of Christ himself to his
Apostles, without any warrant from him to be used by any other. Because in
other ministrations, where the words of Institution, in Baptism, in the
administration of the Lords Supper, etc. are first rehearsed; and then, at the
Act of ministering, a prayer is used, not a Magisterial use of the very words of
Christ himself in the first institution. For answer: Bishop is not to be laden
with this odium alone (if any were just) but the rest of the Ministers also
that impose hands with him, the Bishop for orders sake being but their mouth.
But to the matter. First; To the thing it self; next to their exceptions
against it. To the former; We must first remember that the Holy Ghost is
Christ's Vicar upon earth in the Government of the Church in general, Joh. 14.
chap. 15. chap. 16.
and therefore sent by him for that purpose. And particularly assumeth to
himself the calling of the Ministry. As, separate unto me, says the Holy
Ghost, Barnabas and Saul for the work that I have appointed them. Act. 13.2.
And take heed unto your selves, and unto the flock over which the Holy Ghost
has made you overseers, Act. 20.
says the Apostle to the Ministers of Ephesus. Whence it follows that no
Minister can be made, but he must Secondly, It is necessary also that he
receive the Holy Ghost it self, in the gifts and abilities of it, for the
discharge of this calling. For no man can say (that is, effectually teach) that
Jesus is the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost, says the Apostle. 1 Cor. 12.
And every spirit that confesses (that is, soundly preaches) that Jesus is
the Christ is of God. 1 John 4.1, 2. John 16.
For it is the Holy Ghost only that leads into all Truth concerning Christ.
Thirdly, The Ministerial hand, as in Baptism, and the Lords Supper, wherein, at
least unto the faithful, the Holy Ghost is conveyed. So as in respect of the
thing it self, the Holy Ghost is necessary to be conveyed to every Minister
that is to be ordained.

Sense of the words.
2. Next for the meaning of the phrase. First, we must observe; That the word
Holy Ghost here, may be person and gifts, or for his Authority, or both, by a
Metonymy. It is taken for his gifts, where it is said, John 7.
that the Holy Ghost was not yet; because Christ was not yet glorified. It is
taken for his Authority, when the Apostle says that, the Holy Ghost had made
the Ministers of Ephesus the overseers of the flock. Act. 20.
Secondly, we may expound the words by way of declaration, and solemn
pronouncing, as well as imparative, or communicative bidding. And the other
words may be so expounded also, according as in absolution, it is in one place
in the Common Prayer Book pronounced authoritatively, yet it is expounded to
be only a declaring and pronouncing. Now to apply the former: The word Holy
Ghost here seems to be taken for the Authority especially, of the Holy Ghost
to the exercise of the Ministerial function, As if it were said: Take thou the
Authority of the Holy Ghost, which he has appointed his Church to communicate
and dispense to persons worthy, for the Ministry of the Word (in binding and
loosing) and of the Sacraments.

3. To their exceptions. First, To the exception general it self, that this
form has no warrant. No warrant.
It is answered, Letter of the Scripture. And surely where there is no
incongruity in the thing, nor impediment from some other cause from using the
very words of Institution; there cannot be desired a better warrant. Now that
there is no such incongruity, nor impediment shall be shown in answering unto
the Reasons of the former exception; whereof the first is that, Proof.
none but God himself has power to give the Holy Ghost. But it hinders not,
but that what none but a superior Authority can have power to give originally,
may yet be given ministerially, Moses had power to consecrate Aaron, nor
Samuel to confer the Kingdom unto David, nor the Apostles themselves to give
the Holy Ghost but by delegation and commission. Which power, if, (as to that
right of the conferring the power and authority of the Holy Ghost to the
ordaining of a Minister) the Church ministerially has not (for without that
power it cannot be done) then must every Minister receive his authority and
outward call immediately from Heaven. Neither is repugnant hereunto, Lib. 1.
did. 14. cap. 1. Hic quaeritur. Aug. de Trin. l. 15. c. 26.
either that of the Master of the sentences: nor of Austin himself, whence he
has it, viz. Neque enim aliquis discipulorum ejus dedit spiritum sanctum.
Orabant quippe ut veniret in eos quibus manum imponebant, non eum ipsi dabant.
Quem morem in suis propositis etiam nunc servat Ecclesia: For neither (says
he) any of the Disc ples gave the Holy Ghost, but they prayed that he might
come on those, upon whom they laid their hands, but gave him not themselves,
which custom the Church even now retains in her Bishops. For our Church does
pray in laying on of hands, and with and under the words Institution, asks
also, before and after. What form of words the Apostles used in laying on of
hands, and conferring the Holy Ghost is not expressed, but unlikely it is that
they used none. Now those they used, whether they were those used by our
Savior, or others in form of praying, cannot be determined, nor therefore
their example urged in that, which our Church pretends not unto. But the
former will be more evident in other ministrations also. In Absolution, the
form is in the Liturgy, in the visitation of the sick. Imperative and
authoritative as I may so speak (and in a good sense so it is) by his authority
committed yet in the general absolution after the general confession, at
morning-prayer (by which the former must be expounded) it is expressed to be
but declaratory, by way of solemn and authoritative pronouncing; and with the
concurrence of prayer, for efficacy of such declaration. Almighty God who have
given power and commandment, to declare and pronounce to his people being
penitent, the absolution and remission of their sins, etc. In Baptism the Holy
Ghost and remission of sins is given, and that by the ministration and the
words spoken by the Minister. So also in the Lords Supper the body and blood of
Christ (sacramentally) is conferred by the words and action of the Minister;
none of which is in the power of any to bestow, but God only. Shall we
therefore except against the fruits of those Ordinances, or against the
Minister for pronouncing such expressly goes both before and after? The words
therefore take thou the Holy Ghost, do not argue an original, or an inherent
power, but Ministerial only; and so as not excluding a precatory virtue also.
This to the first Reason. The second is, because they were the words of Christ
himself to his Apostles; what to them? baptizing and teaching, and of giving
his last Supper. Have none therefore power since to administer these
Ordinances? Again, if no Minister can Holy Ghost, and his Authority, and this
Authority were proper only to the Apostles, because the words were spoken to
them, then is the Church deprived of the Holy Ghost ever since the Apostles,
nor has power to ordain a Ministry. The third reason is taken from the
parallel of other Proof.
wherein the words of institution (in Baptism, in the administration of the
Lords Supper, etc.) are first rehearsed, and then, at the act of Ministering a
prayer is used; not a Magisterial use of the very words of Christ himself in
the first institution. First it is untrue that there is any difference in this,
Ordination and Baptism, or the Lords Supper, for as in these, there goes
prayer before and after, So also in this of Ordination. But in the very act,
there is used a Magisterial (if the Brethren will have it so) or an
authoritative command, precept or imperative expression. In Baptism I baptize
thee in the name of the Father, etc. not a praying that he may be baptized.
The sense whereof is: I wash away thy sins, or as Ananias to Paul, arise and be
baptized, and wash away thy sins, Act. 22.16.
which is Magisterial and commanding. At the least it is an using of the very
words of Christ himself at the first institution, as near as may be, which the
Brethren deny to be lawful. So in the Lords Supper: It is not, in the very act:
I pray that thou may be one for whom Christ died, and that thou may feed
on him by Faith: But a peremptory assertion, that Christ died for him, and an
imperative command that he should feed on him by Faith. In neither the one
Sacrament nor the other, is there a prayer used in the very act of
administering. Neither were it unlawful if the former were in the Lords Supper,
Take thou the body of Christ, take thou his blood, which some have used, But
that our Church for the avoiding of Superstition has been forced to use other
words. The Germane and Dutch Churches use a form not unlike that now named. The
Dutch: Form of the Lords Supper in the Dutch Churches.
The bread which we break is the communion of the body of Christ, take and eat
it: where they are commanded to take the body of Christ, as peremptorily, as
the Minister is commanded to take the Holy Ghost. So in the Cup. But none can
give the body and blood of Christ but himself only. And in the Germane Church
of Colen, Liber. Reform. Colen.
in the Liturgy above mentioned, in the form of giving the Lords Supper. Accipe
and manduca ad salutem tuam, corpus Domini, quod pro te traditum est: Take and
eat the body of Christ to thy salvation, etc. But secondly, as was said above,
if the words may bear the fotm of a prayer also, there needs no altering,
unless it be of the Brethrens spirit unto more charity. Again, wherein we
differ from the very words of Institution, it is partly because it would be
incongruous to use them, as to say: This is my body which is given for you,
etc. And partly, to prevent, as was said, such superstitions as had grown into
the use of that Sacrament for want of a more clear explication of those words.
But it is not incongruous english to say (as a Deputy in the name of the
Original Author) receive the Holy Ghost. So also there has no Superstition
arisen upon these words (because by Doctrine prevented elsewhere) by reason
whereof, the Church should be constrained to change the very words of our
Savior. Especially seeing they serve more emphatically to confirm the
assurance of the Minister in his call; as also to beget a greater Authority for
his person and office in the hearts of the people, both which is very
necessary. Ac uberrimum h. doctrinae fructum quotidie percipit Ecclesia, dum
pastores suos intelligit, divinitus ordinatos esse aeternae salutis sponsoris.
Call. in Joh. 20.23. Whilst the people hereby understand, that their Ministers
are ordained by God to be his Ambassadors. If it be replied; Popish opinion of
the Episcopal and Priestly power, to convey the Holy Ghost, forgive sins;
Popish, but only the Application of them to unfit persons; and the perverse
exposition of them, as if they had such power in their sleeve, to dispense when
and to whom they pleased. The danger whereof is not such among us, who are
better taught; as that we should for it, alter the words of institution, and
form of ordaining, of which there is such particular use. To their third
exception, that it countenances a sole form of Ordination answers, which
appoints that the Bishops with the Priests or Ministers that are present, shall
lay on their hands, and not the Bishop alone. To their last, of offense to
abroad, Vide Harm. confess.
they have not declared any such offense in their public confessions in
reference to our Church, that I know of; nor will, if they consider our
Doctrine in this particular. particular men should not be satisfied, if for
that we should alter, we should do it rather for the Brethren, who are, or
have been of our own Church. But to satisfy a few, we may not by unnecessary
change scandalize many more. To conclude, the sense of our Church in these
words and this ceremony, might be expressed in that of Austin, 'on those words:
Received ye the Spirit by the works of the Law, or by the hearing of Faith?
Aug. in Gal. 3. 2. Tom. 4.
Ab Apostolo praedicata est eis fides, in qua praedicatione utique adventum and
praesentiam spiriti sancti senserant. By the Apostle (says he) the Faith was
preached unto them, in which preaching verily, there was felt the coming and
presence of the Holy Ghost. So does our Church give the Spirit, whilst she
repeating the words of Institution, intends and prays, that those to whom her
word is directed, and for whom her prayers, Annot. in Joh. 20.22. in Indic.
Autho^it. ap. Aug. tanquam ex Sermon. 11. de verb. dom. Tom. 10 quanquam id ibi
non invenio, sententia tamen proba est.
may feel the coming and presence of the Spirit. I end all with the words of
that Author: Insufflavit and dixit, accipite Sp. S. Ecclesiastica iis verbis
po^estas co^lata esse intelligitur: inspiratio ergo haec, gratia quaedam est,
quae per traditionem infunditur ordinatis. He breathed on them, and said,
Receive the Holy Ghost: in these words we must understand (says he) an
Ecclesiastical power is given; This Inspiration therefore, is a certain grace
or privilege, which by delivery (in imposition of hands) is infused into the
ordained. which sentence being it takes in, both the power and the gift, may
not unfitly (being expounded as a Ministerial act assisted with prayer) close
this dissertation.

SUBSECT. IV. Consecration of Bishops and Archbishops, etc.
3. Genesis Exception against book of Ordination.
THe last Exception they have against the book of Ordination is about
consecration of Bishops and Archbishops. Where first, that because that the
same portion of Scripture is appointed to be read at the consecration of a
Bishop, Page 46.
that was read at the Ordination of Priests; therefore they infer that the
compilers of the book never dreampt of a distinction of orders between Bishops
and Presbyters. Surely the Brethren are somewhat confident, both, and peculiar
more specially to one of those orders. When they have expressed themselves
sufficiently before, must the appointing of a chapter that contains precepts
for both jointly, yet for the one more eminently, argue they meant thereby to
confute themselves? The next exception is, That there is no warrant
Archbishops. Not indeed for the very word (as there is not for many other
things, Trinity, Justification by Faith only, Baptism of Infants, Women coming
to the Lords Supper.) But for the thing there is. The Evangelists, as Timothy
and Titus had power over other Ministers; And the Apostles had power over them.
If the state of the Church then needed such Superintendents over Bishops, and
the state of the Church now, have the same use and exigency of them; There is
warrant in Scripture. And so there is in Law and Reason, viz. to constitute
such officers in the Church, as well as in the Commonwealth, as whereby the
government of it, may be the more conveniently managed. The commendation of
the wisdom of the Church in this institution of Archbishops, we heard above
out of Bucer and Zanchy. And may further out of Calvin: Calv. Instit. l. 4. c.
4. s. 4.
Quod autem singulae Provinciae unum habebant inter Episcopos, Archiepiscopum:
Quod item in Nicaena Synodo constituti sunt Patriarchae, qui essent ordine and
dignitate Archiepiscopis superiores, id ad disciplinae conservationem
pertinebat. -- Si rem, omisso vocabulo, intuemur, reperiemus veteres Episcopos
non aliam regendae Ecclesiae formam voluisse fingere, ab ea quam Deus verbo suo
prescripsit. Now that (says he) every province had among their Bishops one
Archbishop; Archbishops and Patriarchs approved by Calvin.
and that in the council of Nice there were ordained Patriarchs, which should
be in order and dignity superior unto Archbishops; this was done for the
preservation of Discipline and Government. -- But if we will, omitting
contention about the Word, consider the thing it self, we shall find, that
the ancient Bishops intended not to frame any form of Church Government, which
was, in kind, different from that which God had appointed in his Word. Thus
far he. Go to now, ye that pretend to be followers of Calvin, and see whether
Archbishops, yea Patriarchs have not warrant from the Word of God. The
Brethrens third Exception is against the consecration of an Archbishop; but
upon the former ground, that it is but a humane creature: Consecration of
Archbishops.
which ground is confuted. But if he were, Kings themselves be in some sense
(...) an humane creation, 1 Pet. 2.
though by Gods secret appointment; yet no man ever quarrelled with their
solemn inauguration by prayer and other ceremonies (suppose them such as are
not superstitious) into their office. That they say, our Church sees no
necessity of the consecration of an Archbishop, Inst.
because it appoints the same form for both, To appoint a consecration for an
Archbishop, and yet to make it a thing of no necessity. That it has not
appointed a different form for this, is, to let the Brethren and all men
understand, order, but degree only in the same order; and therefore the same
form of consecration might serve for both, Because the Church would not
multiply services without necessity. To the last Exception which they infer
from viz. That seeing the Archbishop is but of the Churches constitution, Oath
of common obedience.
therefore they see no reason why he should receive an oath of Canonical
obedience from the Bishop. But of the Antecedent we saw above; Superiors; and
this, by men in place, so hardly, oftentimes performed, without more solemn
obligation of conscience; what impedeth, either in Religion or Reason, that for
the securing the peace of the Church, and the exercise of Government, an oath
may not be exacted of an inferior degree. But that here is the cramp; it argues
too much inferiority and subjection unto the Archbishop of a Bishop, with whom
the Brethren do count themselves equal, who are men, (...) and such as cannot
bear the yoke; especially, having now, as Caesar once, so long ruled, that to
obey, they knew not how. But they should remember, that a levelling spirit, is
as dangerous in the Church, as in the Commonwealth and tends to Anarchy, and
no Government at all. What made Diodate else at Geneva, come so rarely to the
consistory, but this, that he said, Young men perked up, and every one having
an equal power, there was no place for gravity in the Government, which he
expressed to one I know, to this effect. And thus I have done with their
Exceptions against Episcopacy, the Government, and the solemn initiation
thereunto, its consecration.

SECT. V. Episcopal Jurisdiction.
THeir next is against its Right of Jurisdiction. Against Episcop. Jurisdiction.
And sole Jurisdiction, Or the exercise of Government alone. Where first their
assertion: not only, that Bishops have not the only power of Government, but
also that all Presbyters have a share therein. Next their proof of it. First to
their assertion. First, Because my scope is only to vindicate, Doctrine,
Worship and Government of the Scripture, and as received publicly, established
and practiced in this Nation; if any do break this fense, let the Serpent bite
him; Eccles. 10.8.
if he remove these stones, let them fall upon him, if he willingly violate
these holy and sacred bonds of Law, how weak a Patron soever I am, he shall
have no advocate of me. Next the Terms, perhaps would be explained. For sole
Jurisdiction may be taken either sole Right of Government, Sole Jurisdiction.
so that no man else has any thing to do to govern but himself, or by
delegation from him; or else for the sole Right of the exserting, exercise and
putting that power into execut^on. Scripture, so far as I understand, nor the
Church of England, has asserted such power in any Ecclesiastical persons since
the Apostles, who only, under Christ, had a power, (...), and autocratical. Or
thirdly, For an eminent degree, of power in Government, so as that some acts
thereof, do solely belong unto him to perform regularly, and in common order.
Now in this sense, omitting the name (as Zanchy said above) and keeping our eye
upon the thing it self; seeing both the Scripture and the Church of England, as
also the practice of the whole Church through the world formerly, and the most
learned men of the reformed Churches of late (all which have been evidenced
above) have constituted an order or degree of persons, who of right had and
ought to have the Regiment and Government over other Ministers (as is plain not
only by the Apostles, but also by the Evangelists, Timothy and Titus, as also
by the perpetual necessity of the Church) I must needs refer unto that
fore-quoted sentence of Cyprian to this purpose, and add here another of like
effect out of him: Haec sunt enim initia haereticorum, and ortus atque conatus
Schismaticorum male cogitantium, Cypr. l. 3. Ep. 1.
ut sibi placeant, ut praepositum superbo tumore contemnant. Sic de Ecclesia
receditur, sic altar prophanum foris collocatur; sic contra pacem Christi and
ordinationem atque unitatem Dei rebellatur. These are (says he) the
beginnings of Heretics, the rise and struglings of ill minded Schismatics; to
please themselves, and with proud stomach to despise the Bishop (for so this
word must here be meant) thence men depart from the Church; thence the profane
altar of separation is placed elsewhere; thence, against the peace of Christ,
and against the Ordinance and unity appointed by God, rebellion is raised. Sole
Jurisdiction, may be taken for exercising those Acts that of right belong to
him to do, wholly of his own head, without engagement to consult and advise
with any, or else for the sole power of acting, but upon engagement of taking
with him the Judgment and opinion, though not the governing power of others
also. Hence the Apostle in the former sense, admonishes that the Bishop, as
well as any other Minister and Elder, Tit. 1.7.
must not be (...), one that in the Government of the Church goes upon his own
head. And in the latter sense, is it that Cyprian (than whom, no man was more
for the privilege Episcopal, and for entire obedience thereunto; yet) says:
Cypr. l. 3. Ep. 10
Ad id vero quod scripserunt mihi compresbyteri nostri -- solus rescribere nil
potui, cum a primordio. Episcopatus mei statuerim, nihil sine consilio vestro,
and sine consensu plebis mea privatim sententia gerere. Unto that (says he)
that my fellow Presbyters wrote unto me, I can alone return no answer; for I
determined from my first entrance into my office, privately, and of my own
head, without your counsel, that are the Ministers, and without the consent of
the people, to do nothing. For the true understanding of which sentence and
other like, as also for a resolution of the question it self, a few things must
be severally and distinctly noted. First, That he does not in this, overthrow
what several times he said before, L. 1. Ep. 3. l. 3. Ep. 1.
touching the obedience due from the whole Church to the Bishop; but only
signifies that he thinks it his duty to advise with them, as theirs to be
obedient then, now, when as all the motions and actings of the Bishop are laid
forth and determined, and he obliged to operate and govern only by them (by
the Laws and Canons) which was not so fully done in that Fathers time. Thirdly,
That this order is not observed Brethren, or Presbyters, neither here nor
beyond the Seas; who do not call the people to all consultations, but only
Presbyters, either sacred or civil. Lastly, That this practice of Cyprian, is
ad amussim England. For, The Bishops in the Church of England do nothing but by
the advice of their Brethren, and of the people.
First, seeing they arrogate no power, but what the Scripture, the Canons of
the Church, and the Laws of the Land do allow; and secondly, that by these all
whatsoever materially they do, is already prescribed to them; And in the third
place, those powers in Scripture, Canons of the Church, and Laws of the Nation,
are approved, and confirmed both by their Brethren, the Ministry in
Convocation, and by the people in the Parliament by their delegates; it follows
truly and really, that the Bishops in England act nothing, but in effect,
according to that Fathers example, by the counsel of the Ministry, and consent
of the people. Thus much for their assertion. Brethrens proof.
As to their proof, It is from Antiquity, from the book of Ordination, from the
First, For Antiquity, P. 47.
they say in Cyprians time, there were in Rome a number of the Clergy, By this
argument we may infer strange consequences. For the Parliament acts with the
King: So Acts run, the Kings most excellent Majesty, with the advice of the
Lords and Commons, etc. And the Counsel acts with the King; for that is common
in proclamations; The King by the advice of the Privy Counsel. The question is
not with whom the Bishops act, as who has the primary Power. The Justices on
the Bench act with the Judge; but can they declare Law, give the charge, and
pronounce sentence. We heard above what Cyprians judgment was of the power of
the tenderness and indulgence, offense, and for better light, not for Next As
if this did not refer unto the Archbishop, P. 48.
The other place in the book of Ordination. That because it is asked the Priest
to be ordained, if he will administer the Doctrine, Discipline of Christ, as
the Lord has commanded, and as this Realm has received the same; therefore
they say it was the intention of the Church, to admit all Presbyters to have a
share in Ecclesiastical jurisdiction. That is, It was the intention of the
Church, govern, whom in that very question, and the answer to it, they did
intend to oblige to subjection and obedience. So gross is the Brethrens
conscience, to dare to utter; and their confidence to think that so palpable a
Calumny would pass undiscerned, yea so ridiculous their hopes, as to fancy it
would be believed. To the third, viz. that out of the Liturgy, Because it is
said in the Rubric before the Communion, Liberty given to the Minister by the
Liturgy touching Communicants.
that the Minister is authorized, to restrain notorious offenders from the
Sacrament, till they have openly declared themselves to have repented: The
Brethren query: What is this, but as much, and as high jurisdiction, as any
Bishop can use in that particular? But first, how shall we make a coat for the
Moon? more power about the Sacrament; and when my self mentioned this Rubric
unto one, Mr. J. Cas.
that is no Cipher among them; he said: it was not sufficient. Again, if the
Brethren are by Law already instated in jurisdiction as any Bishop can use,
about the Sacrament, and that is the greatest point; why rest they not in it?
why blaspheme they the Common Prayer Book, wherein it is contained? why do they
so wrestle imponere pelio ossam, And make the Church and State as blocks to be,
For steps to mount unto their Prelacy.


But thirdly, There are some Acts common in all governments, proper. A petty
Constable may charge any man upon a warrant to assist him, as well as the
Sheriff of the County upon a writ. Some kind of share in government, and
exercise of Discipline, was never denied to a Minister, as a Minister, no more
than a share with the Bishop in Preaching of the Word: But Jurisdiction is a
word of a louder sound, than Discipline, and the Government of the Church, than
some kind of restraining a particular communicant. Although those Acts belong
to Government, and are exercised by private Ministers; yet they are about
lesser things; And also it is by concession and delegation not to be
challenged (I think) of right, otherwise than as the officer of the Church
appointed in her name, to do that which of himself, and as a private Minister
he could not do: For then there must be, not as the Brethren say, if the
Bishops have sole Jurisdiction, so many Popes (that is six and twenty) but
sixty times six and twenty Popes in England. For every Minister might then
exclude whom he pleased from the Communion, and exercise an absolute tyranny
upon the people. And so much of their third proof. Their last is from Law,
Judges to determine: Bishops have appealed thereunto; that my self have said,
above, something to that point; That Vid. Tract of the R. Bp. Linc. now
published, of the Legality of the Bishops Courts, etc. Wherein the Kings
Proclam. and Judges sentence are recited.
it is declared already by the sentence of all the Judges, Enrolled in the
Courts of Record, and by his late Majesty's Proclamation; and that it is like
shortly to be further determined, I supersede from further answering, although
I could. Only I may not pass, the great inconsideration of the Brethren with
so much virulency, resisting the useful restitution of the Bishops into
Parliament, which is the interest of Christ himself, of the Ministry, and of
the Kingdom; First, Though we are (blessed be God) all Christians; yet our
masters cause will probably be minded a little more intently, by those whom
he has commissioned, for that purpose, the Ministry; the honor and flower
whereof are the Prelacy. Again, other persons have a vote in Parliament more
immediately by their proxyes, Why England should observe Episcopacy.
the Clergy none but in the Bishops. Lastly, The public interest to be
concerned, may well Prelacy, under whose Government, and by whose Influence,
and through the effusion of the blood of whose members, Religion has been
restored: nor only in regard, they were by the Ancient Laws, even the first
members next the head, Kings Majesty, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal; Nor
only in respect, perhaps of some higher engagements. But from our experience
(the Mistress of fools.) For, first, neither King, Lords nor Commons continued
in power long after the Bishops ejectment. And next, hitherto we have had no
face of a Church, no certainty of Doctrine, no observation of Worship, no
exercise of Government to speak of, but all things have gone to Babylonian
confusion, and antique Chaos. Discite justitiam moniti. --

The Phrygians will not learn till lasht they be;
If that amend us not, then worse are we.
I shall, for close, touching the Civil honor annexed unto Episcopacy in this
Nation, Zanch. confess. cap. 25. Aph. 21.
subjoyn the conclusion and judgment of the learned Zanchy, and that in the
confession of his Faith. The conclusion is. Episcoporum, qui and principes
sunt, politicam authoritatem non negari. That the Civil Authority of Bishops,
which are also Magistrates or Princes, is not denied. The explication follows.
Interim non diffitemur, Episcopos, qui simul etiam principes sunt, praeter
autoritatem Ecclesiasticam, sua etiam habere jura politica, Secularesque
potestates, quemadmodum and reliqui habent principes jus imperandi secularia;
jus gladii: nonnullos jus elegendi confirmandique Reges and Imperatores aliaque
politica constituendi and administrandi, subditosque sibi populos ad
obedientiam sibi praestandam cogendi, etc. That besides their Ecclesiastical
Authority, they have also Civil Rights, and SECULAR Powers, and may constrain
obedience unto such their powers, etc. which he contradicts not in the
observations. Neither does he contradict it in his explication of that
Aphorism. And that place, Mat. 20.25. It shall not be so among you; is
understood by some to concern all Christians, says he, neither does he
refute it.

SECT. VI. The close of the Church-Controversie.
HAving thus far passed through all the five heads of motives unto Separation,
viz. The Doctrine, the Worship, the Assemblies, the Discipline, and the
Government; with replies unto them; and having also vindicated them, according
to my weak arm by the sword of the spirit, against the opposers of them: I come
now to close this whole dissertation. His present Majesty has indulged to the
Brethren and their adherents, very much in all the Premises. May it prove
successeful! But his Grandfather King James having tasted of this Solunne
geuse, and wild fowl, whilst in Scotland; and being pressed at his first
coming, as His Majesty now, to the like here; he utters his judgment upon
observation of Gods presence with this Church and Nation; We have seen the
Kingdom under that form of Religion, King James's Proclamation for Uniformity
of Common Prayer, prefixed to some Editions of the Liturgy.
which by Law was established in the days of the late Queen of famous memory,
blessed with a peace and prosperity, both EXTRAORDINARY, and of many years
continuance. A STRONG evidence that God was therewith well pleased. The
importunity of the complainers was great, their affirmations vehement, and the
zeal scandal in the Church, than take offense away, and did other things
carrying a very apparent show of Sedition. Upon this double experience when
such motions of change were made to him, he In his Proclamation for unity of
Common Prayer, and confer. H. Court.
crushed the chicken here in the shell (lest it being hatched by indulgence,
might pick out his eyes; as it did afterward some others) and did well. King
Charles His Majesty's Father yielded in these things to Scotland, but does, not
obscurely, bewail it. If any, says he (speaking of Episcopacy) shall impute
my yielding to them my failing and sin, Icon. Basilic. medit. 17. p. m. 156.
I can easily acknowledge it. On the issue whereof, no man can, without horror
reflect. Now, Faelix quem faciunt aliena pericula cautum.
O happy he whom others failings make
Wise to become, and by them warning take.


But it may be, times are different, and: am I made of the Kings Counsel? I
conclude all, 2 Chronicles. 25.16 Erasm. in Epist. Hieron. ad Heliodor. Tom. 1. Ep.
1. in Antidot. advers. calumniam.
first with that of Erasmus: Ad haec video esse non-nullos hujuscemodiingenio,
ut cum apicula ad omnem flosculum, ad omnem advolans fruticem, tantum id
excerpat, quod ad mellificium sit conducibile; ipsi solum hoc venentur, si quid
sit quod aliquo pacto Calumniari possint. His mos est, e toto libro quatuor aut
quinque verba decerpere, atque in eis calumniandis ostendere quantum ingenio
polleant. Non animadvertunt, quibus temporibus, cui, Causes of calumniating of
an Author.
qua occasion quo animo scripserit ille. Neque conferunt, quid praecesserit
quid sequatur, quid alio loco eadem de rescripserit. Tantum urgent ac premunt
quatuor illa verba: ad ea machinas omnes admovent Syllogismorum: detorquent,
depravant, aliquoties and non intellecta calumniantur. That is, I perceive
(says Erasmus) that some men, are of that disposition, that, whereas the
little Be flies to every flower, and to every green thing, only that it may
gather that whereof it would make honey; these men only hunt after that, which
they may rail at. The custom of such men is, out of a whole book to cull out
four or five words, and in reviling of them, to show what abilities they have.
They consider not, in what times the Author wrote, nor to what persons, nor
upon what occasion, nor with what intention. Nor do they compare what went
before with what follows after; what he said of the same matter in another
place. Only they urge those four words; they wrest, they deprave, and
sometimes reproach what they understand not. Thus far he. Next with that
elegant and prudent observation (absit invidia verbo) of our late Sovereign
upon this same Argument. Icon. Basilic. Medit. 27. To His Majesty that now is.
Not, but that (says he) the draught being excellent as to the main, both for
Doctrine and Government in the Church of England; some lives, as in very good
figures, may happily need some sweetening or polishing. Which might have easily
been done, by a safe and gentle hand; if some men's praecipitancy had not
violently demanded such rude alterations, as would have quite destroyed, all
the beauty and proportion of the whole. Thus the King. The close of all. Dr.
Usher L. Primate of Armagh Sermon. before the H. of Com. Febr. 18. 1620. page 6,
7. Romans 16.17.
I seal up all with the grave admonition of a Primate Bishop, and the
Authentic Decision of this case by a Prince of Kings. Let not every wanton
wit (says the former, to one of the Houses of Parliament) be permitted to
bring what fancies he list into the pulpit, and to disturb things that have
been well ordered. I beseech you Brethen (says the Apostle) mark them which
cause divisions and offenses contrary to the Doctrine which ye have learned,
and avoid them -- Howsoever we may see cause why we should dissent from
others in matter of opinion; yet let us remember that, that is no cause why we
should break the Kings Peace, and make a rent in the Church of God. A thing
deeply to be thought of by the Ismaels Ismaels.
of our time, whose hand is against every man, Genesis 16.12.
and every man's hand against them, who bite and devour one another, until they
be consumed one of another; Gal. 5.15.
who forsake the fellowship of the Saints, and by sacrilegious separation break
this bond of peace. Little do these men consider, how precious the Peace of the
Church ought to be in our eyes (to be redeemed with a thousand of our lives)
and of what dangerous consequence the matter of Schism is, unto their own
souls. For howsoever the Schismatic secundum affectum (as the Schoolmen speak)
in his intention and wicked purpose, takes away unity from the Church; even as
he that hates God, takes away goodness from him as much as in him lies: yet
secundum effectum in truth and in very deed; he takes away the unity of the
Church only from himself: that is, he cutteth himself off from being united
with the rest of the body; and being dissevered from the body, how is it
possible that he should retain communion with the head? Thus that most learned
Primate, Note.
for whom the Brethren seem to have a special reverence in recommending of his
Model of Episcopacy. Necessit. Reform. p. 53.
Wherein yet, he did propound, but not prescribe his judgment; according to
that: Seneca.
Illi qui in his rebus nobis praecesserunt, non Domini, sed Duces nostri sunt;
or as the Apostle, as a helper, 2 Cor. 1.24
not as a Lord over the Faith of the Church in this particular; but especially,
as respecting the time, when more could not well be hoped for. The last word,
as it is meet, shall be the Kings, and 'twas his deciding one in these
controversies, after hearing of all debates about them at the conference at
Hampt. Court. Proclamat. for authorizing the book of Com. prayer, at the close.
And last of all (says he) we do admonish all men, that herereafter they
shall not expect, nor attempt any further alteration in the common and public
form of Gods service, from this which is now ESTABLISHED. For that neither will
we give way to any to presume, that our own judgment having determined in a
matter of this weight, shall be sweighed to alteration by the FRIVOLOUS
suggestions of any LIGHT spirit. Neither are we ignorant of the inconveniences
that do arise in GOVERNMENT, by admitting INNOVATIONS in things once SETTLED by
mature deliberation: and how necessary it is to use CONSTANCY in the upholding
of the public determinations of states, for that such is the unquietness and
unstedfastness of some dispositions, affecting every year NEW forms of things,
as, if they should be followed in their unconstancy, would make all actions of
state RIDICULOUS, and contemptible. Whereas the steadfast maintaining of things
by good advice established is the weal of Commonwealths. Thus far of the first
point of Independency, viz. Separation (the second and third Congregation and
non Subjection, have been spoken to above) and of the causes of my recess from
the Church thereunto, with responsals to them. Wherein, for the clearing of
things, I have been much larger than my self intended. But yet. Absit enim ut
multiloquium deputem quando necessaria dicuntur, quantalib. Sermonum
multitudine ac prolixitate dicantur. Aug. God forbid dhat I should count that,
Aug. Prolog. in lib. Retract.
multitude of words, when nothing is said but what is necessary, although it be
uttered with never so great a number of speeches, or length of discourse, says
S. Austin.

CHAP. IX.
The Proof and Trial of these Retractations.
SECT. I.
LEt me now subjoyn a certain proof, and as it were divine trial, or
attestation of these Retractations, and then I shall conclude and dismiss the
Reader. It is one of the gracious providence which Almighty God exercises
toward his Servants, to put them to the trial of their Faith and Profession, 1
Cor. 3. 1 Pet. 1.
and that by fire. So the Apostle. That the trial of your Faith being much more
precious than of gold that perishes, though it be tried by fire, etc. Hence
he smites them into the place of Dragons, and covers them with the shadow of
death; that by extremity being put to examine their grounds, if they were
insufficient they might not dye for, Psalm. 44.20.
or in them; and if good, they might stick the closer to them. Hereupon
oftentimes, sufferings, sickness, and the approach of death, occasions the
repenting of those things, whereof men have been very confident. Vid. The
speeches of the Gent. that suffered, as communicated by the public
intelligencer. Mr. Cook.
As appeared now of late in the sad Example of those Gentlemen, who suffered
about the death of our late Sovereign. As may be seen on publication of the
speeches of some of them, and the wonderful consternation and unpreparedness
for death of Mr. Peter's. And touching Mr. Cook, I remember that he being of
the Independent opinion, and writing a book for that way; wrote also soon after
the death of the King, a vindication and defense of that his act. Wherein, he
much glories in the office, he performed in that affair; Solicitor, as I
take it, he was.
and among other things has these. That he was indifferent whether he dyed
by a stab, or a pistol; or by a Fever, or Consumption. That in his pleading
against other malefactors, he used to tremble; but that in his actings against
the King, his blood sprung in his veins: Yet we hear he was of another mind
at his death, but whether so or no, I insist not on it. The profane Schism of
the Brownists. chap. 7. page 41.


And there is remarkable story (in a Book entitled, The profane Schism of the
Brownists, written by some that had been in that seduction) of a certain
Minister one Mr. Gilgate, who was misled that way, and of Mr. Ainsworths
company. Who lying on his sickbed, and in peril of death; uttered, by way of
repentance, these most savoury and considerable words: O Lord rebuke me not in
thine anger, Psalm. 6.
neither chastise me in thy wrath, for thine arrows have light upon me, and
thine hand lies upon me. There is nothing sound in my flesh because of thine
anger, neither is there rest in my bones, because of my sin, etc. Having now
long time been afflicted with sharp and grievous sickness, whereby it has
pleased God to bring me into more serious and deep consideration of my estate,
Note.
in separating from the Churches of Christ, and still finding my separation to
be more unlawful, the more I consider the same. And while I felt my felt at
the weakest and sickest, and so pressed with the force of my disease, that I
even doubted of life; I left my conscience most pressed with desire, Note.
to revoke my separation. And therefore do now think it my duty, before I be
taken away hence, and be found no more, or howsoever the Lord shall dispose of
me by life or death, to give testimony to the truth whereof I am persuaded in
my soul.

And as mine own disease, and the hand of God stretched out upon me, The
disease of the separation.
moves me to consider, and testify these things; so the disease of the
separation, and the hand of God, which I see to be stretched out aagainst it,
does also draw me on the other side unto the same thing. The disease of the
separation is a hot, and burning disease, that consumes and destroys many
with the poisonous and contagious heat thereof; of; every company among them is
a flame of condemnation, to devour another. The boil of their contention
swells and burns incessantly, and they have yet no poultess to break it,
nor any oil to mollify the same. (Then speaking of Mr. Ainsworth's and Mr.
Johnson excommunicating one another members with much bitterness, he adds:)
It appears they never traveled in pain of them; Note.
they never begot them by their Ministry, but having seduced and stolen these
children from the sides of other true Churches; the right Mothers in whose womb
they they were regenerate, and born anew, they are now become hard-hearted,
etc. Like the false Mother that would have the child divided. And a little
after: I do now by this writing unfeignedly acknowledge my sin to be great, in
renouncing the communion with so many faithful servants of God, with whom once
I lived. Church of England. Note.
In the Church of England, I sinned against, and dishonored his name, in
refusing to hear the word of life preached in those Assemblies. The life,
comfort, and salvation that I expect and hope for in the Kingdom of Heaven;
is, by the Faith of the Gospel preached in that Church; and preached there with
more power, fruit, and efficacy; Note.
than I ever yet heard in the Churches of the Separation. Then speaking of the
Lady C. that desired to be in that way, he adds: But for my part, having now
had sufficient experience of their ways, I do freely acknowledge and profess
in this bed of my sickness (from which, I know not whether ever I shall arise
unto my former health) that it should be my great comfort to dye, in the
communion of those Churches, Note.
whom they have now rejected, and to renounce my separation, before I be
separated out of this world. Thus far Mr. Will. Giigate, with other things
worth the noting.

SECT. II.
AS touching my self, the like, or if you will, the contrary upon a contrary
cause has happened. For in August last going to London, with a great part of
these Retractations, with intention to print them wholly off, as some of it was
done before. It pleased God to assault Aug. 24. St. Barth. day. 1660. Job
19.12. On the Eve whereof now 1661. (and in the same place) not on design, but
occasionally (I observe) I am ultimately fitting this Chapter for the Press;
providence has often such (not to be neglected) parallels.
me, with a whole squadron of diseases; 'and as Job speaks, he sent out his
troops against me; every one of them threatening no less, than the approach of
the King of Fears. A Plurisie, an high Malignant (if not a pestilential)
Fever, the Jaundice, and a Cough, threatening a Consumption after all. With the
second whereof, the Physicians being affrighted (that was their word) and it
prevailing to a great measure of heat, deprivation of sleep, inequallity, and
interception of the pulse; both in their fears, and in my own sense, I began to
receive the sentence of death in my self. 2 Cor. 1.
It was now a time of most solemn exploration, as in reference unto other
matters, so also unto that of Retractation, both that which I had before In the
Tract entitled, the Pastor and the Clerk. Anno 1659. Genesis 8.
published (above mentioned) and this, which I had brought with me for the
Press. But the Dove '(my conscience) could find no rest for the sole of its
foot, but in the Ark of this Church, and State, as established by Law; And unto
which I had by those Retractations declared my return. And I did tremble at the
thoughts of being found either in Sedition or Schism, as (to my judgment) I
formerly was. Now the Apostle says. 1 Cor. 3.
The fire shall try every man's work, whether it be Gold, Hay, or Stubble. This
proof therefore God having given me of these Retractations, I have made bold
thus far, with the Readers Candor, here to impart it, as, perhaps not
altogether useless.

SECT. III.
ANd now because, nec medico in majus gratia referri potest, Senec. de Benef.
lib. 3. cap. 35.
nec nautae, si naufragum sustulit; We cannot be too thankful to our Medicant,
or to our Mariner saving us from Shipwreck. Give me leave, by way of
Recognition, to reflect with Gratitude on the healing hands of those worthy
persons, Of Dr. Tho. Cox, one of His now Majesty's Physicians in ordinary (who
though designed formerly for another study, yet Scire potestates herbarum
usumque medendi
Maluit --
He rather chose the power of herbs to know,
And that good Art, whence health to man does grow.)
And of Dr. John Hill (another of the College) my honored friend and
Collegiate, now deceased lately; Both Gratis, and without Fee, yea and with the
offer of supply also, (because I was visited from mine own home) And of Mr.
Will. Bradford Apothecary, (my Collegiate also) at the three black Lions in the
Old-Bayley.
which God was pleased to make use of for my recovery.

None of these were of that number, with him; Tertul. advers. Marcion. lib. 1.
qui nutriat morbum mora praesidii, and periculum extendat dilatione remedii,
quo preciosius, aut famosius curet: That maintains the disease, by the delay of
remedy; and augments the danger, by deferring of help; for the more gainful
reward, or the greater reputation. But as one of them; Qui plus impendit, quam
medico necesse est, pro me, non pro fama artis extimuit. Senec. de Benefic.
lib. 6. c. 16.
Non fuit contentus remedia monstrare, sed admonit. Interea sollicitus assedit,
ad suspecta tempora occurrit. Nullum Ministerium oneri illi, nullum fastidio
fuit. Gemitos meos, non securus audivit. In turba multorum inuocantium, ego
illi potissima curatio fui: Who performs more than might be looked of a
Doctor. A Physician.
Careful not for his own credit, but for my safety. Not contented to prescribe
the remedies, but he applies them. In the mean while sits and observes
diligently. Hastens to be present at critical seasons. Is neither weary nor
ashamed of any office he may do. Hears my groans with trouble, and so attends
me, as if among the crowd that call for help, my self only were his patient.
And, in a word; (...). Hom. Il. l.

A man of Art, whose finger cures the sick;
More than the body of an Emperick.


SECT. IV.
BUt yet Non haec humanis opibus, Aeneid. 12.
non art Magistra
Proveniunt --
Major agit Deus, atque opera ad majora remittit.
This, not by humane help, nor Physics skill;
'Twas God that did it, whose most sacred will
Is, I should live to further service still.


Psalm. 147.3. After the old English. Mark 2.7.
For he (says the Psalmist) gives medicine to heal their sickness. Because
sickness (originally) is the fruit of sin, and none can forgive sin but God
only. Hence they are joined, and jointly ascribed unto him, Psalm. 103.3. who
forgiveth all thy sin, who heals all thy diseases. Which is also the
observation of Hezekiah, being recovered from sickness; Thou have, says he,
delivered me from the pit of corruption, Isa. 38.17.
for thou have cast all my sins behind thy back. Psalm. 116.12.
For my self therefore, I must exclaim with the former. And passionately
interrogate my soul: What shall I render unto the Lord for all these benefits
toward me. And particularly, for giving me this further proof (by this
trial) that there is no peace to the wicked, Isa. 57. ult.
and Apostates from communion with this Church, and from obedience to the
fundamental Laws of this Nation? The Laws being not only a result of the
reason of many men for public good (as that Dr. Sibs Souls conflict. cap. 17.
Author speaks) But also of the Law of Nature it self, As the Romans 2.15. chap.
1.19.
Apostle shows. Nay an express even of Gods own Law; As the same Apostle has
it a little before. if R. Hook. Eccl. pol. l. 3. sec. 9.
therefore they have God for their Author, contempt which is offered unto them,
cannot choose but redound unto him. Whose vindication of himself and such Laws,
we have seen executed upon the violaters, from the least of them unto the
greatest. The Lord therefore having delivered me from so great a sin, and so
dangerous a sickness; I will take the cup of salvation, and call upon the name
of the Lord; Psalm. 116.
I will pay my vows, etc.

CHAP. X.
The Conclusion. Petitory, Monitory, Speratory.
SECT. I.
ANd now, to close this Tractate; I beseech all men, to judge nothing before
the time, 1 Cor. 4.5.
until the Lord come; who will bring to light the hidden things of darkness,
and will make manifest the counsels of the hearts, and then shall every man
have praise of God; who shall defer his judgment till then, for that his
modesty and charity. Neither let others be difficult in forgiving, Concilium
Alexandr. apud Ruffin Hist. lib. 1. cap. 28.
remembering that ille Evangellicus junior filius, paternae depopulatur
substantiae, sed in semetipsum reversus, non solum suscipi meruit, sed and
dignus paternis complexibus deputatur, and annulum fidei recipit, and stola
circumdatur, per quam quid aliud, quam Sacerdotii declarantur insignia. Nec
probabilis extitit apud patrem senior filius, quod invidit recepto, nec tantum
meriti habuit non delinquendo, quantum noxae contraxit, non indulgendo Germano,
I. E. Luke 15.
That younger Son mentioned in the Gospel, the waster of his Fathers substance,
but returning unto himself, did not only obtain to be received, but was also
counted worthy of his Fathers embracements, and received the Ring of Faith, and
was clothed with a Robe; by which what other thing is signified than the
Ornaments of Priesthood. Neither was the elder Son approved of his Father, in
that he envyed the reception of his Brother: Neither deserved he so well by
not offending, as he contracted guilt by not indulging. Let no man therefore
be high minded, but fear; Romans 11. Gal. 6.
and let him that stands take heed least he fall. And let him whom God has
recalled, Psalm. 8. Prove. 14.14. 1 King. 2.
see, that he return not again to folly. For the backslider in heart shall be
satisfied with his own way; as we see in Shimei, who was not hearty to his
submission. And I remember that Watson the Priest, having well Watsons
Quodlibets
defended, allegiance, was afterward executed for At Winchester.
treason. I crave therefore the benefit and exercise of that Article of our
Faith, which every one of us professes: the communion of Saints; And
particularly, in the conjunction of their prayers with mine: that God who has
begun this good work in me, Phil. 1.6.
would strengthen, stablish, confirm and perfect it until the day of Christ.
Amen.

SECT. II.
The heads of this Treatise.
ANd now having rendered the grounds of these Retractations, and given a reason
of mine and the Englands Faith in these particulars; And represented Scripture,
Antiquity; and with the judgment of the best of the late writers of the
Reformed Churches; and made reply also to such Objections as did seem material;
let me adjure all men, and conclude in the Church affair, with the prayer,
obtestation and admonition of the learned Zanchy. Zanch. in clausula
observationum in confess. suam. Tom. 8.
-- Precor omnes Christianos per Dominum Jesum, ut positis vanis privatorum
hominum somniis; positis etiam propriae carnis affectibus, odiis, inimicitiis,
amplexi vero certam ac salutarem veteris Ecclesiae doctrinam Christianamque
dilectionem; coeamus omnes in unam fidem sanctamque amicitiam, sicut nobis
quoque omnibus, unus est Deus, unus Mediator, unum Baptisma, una spes
vocationis nostrae: Ad gloriam nominis Dei, Ecclesiae aedificationem,
salutemque animorum nostrorum. Citius enim quam putamus, sistemur ante tribunal
Christi, ut referat unusquisque prout se gesserat in corpore and in hac vita.
Quando post hanc vitam, nulla spes veniae, nullus resipiscentiae locus. I
beseech all Christians (says he) by the Lord Jesus, that laying aside the
dreams and vanities of private men; and laying aside also the corrupt
affections of their own flesh, as hatred and enmities; and embracing the sure
and sovereign Doctrine of the Ancient Church, with Christian love; we may all
grow into one Faith, and Christian friendship: As there is to us also all, but
one God, one Mediator, one Baptism, one hope of our Calling: This do we to the
glory of the Name of God, the edification of the Church, and the salvation of
our own souls. For sooner than we are aware of, Note.
we shall be set before the judgment seat of Christ, that every one may
receive according as he has carried himself in the body, and in this life;
when, after this life, there will be no hope of pardon, no place for
repentance. Thus far he.

And, in the matter of the Civil State, I cannot end better, than with that
most true and charitable, both judgment and prediction of the Kingly Prophet
our late slaughtered Sovereign, Icon. Basilic. Medit. 27.
speaking to His Majesty that now is (and whom God long preserve:) Be confident
(says he) as I am, that the most of all sides who have done amiss, have done
so, not out of malice, but misinformation, or mis-apprehension of things.
(And) none will be more loyal and faithful to me and you, than those
subjects, who sensible of their errors, and our injuries, will feel in their
own souls, most vehement motives to repentance, and earnest desires to make
some reparations for their former defects.

Psalm 32.3, 5. Whilst I kept silence, thy hand was heavy on me;
I said I will confess, and thou forgavest me.
O ter beatum, cui bonus arbiter
Non imputavit lubrica devia
Errata vitae, nec reperit dolum
Caeco in recessu pectoris --
Erasm. in vita Hieron. and de ipso Hieron. verba faciens.
Fit nescio quo pacto, ut efficacius nos eorum exempla permoveant, quibus ex
vitiosa vita contigit ad pietatem resipiscere.

Reg. juris in Tit. digest. Reg. 108.
Fere in omnibus paenalibus judiciis, and aetati and imprudentiae succurritur.

(...).

CHAP. XI.
Fuga Vacui: or, Some Additionals.
Phys. lib. 4. cap. 8. Seqq.
NOn dari Vacuum, that there is no emptiness in Nature (and the works of God)
was the assertion of the Philosopher; And ne detur Vacuum, that there may be
none in Morals, and in our works must be the contention of every Writer. For
which purpose, partly to fill the Vacant pages, and specially the Readers mind,
with satisfaction; I shall subjoyn, first certain notes in reference unto the
chief Arguments in this Treatise; Next some other Examples of Retractations,
and lastly, an undoubted evidence of the sincerity of my own. Concerning the
Notes.

1. Touching the Common Prayer Book, the notable Suggested to my search by my
Reverend friend Mr. Tim. Thriscrosse.
Testimony of John Careless, Confessor and Martyr (who died in the Marshalsey)
1556. The words ( Fox. Act. Mon. Edit. the first (for none since have it)
in his Examination) are [Dr. Martin. But I pray thee, how say thou now, thy
second Book (the Liturgy reformed in 5, 6. Edw. 6.) is also condemned in diverse
points of Heresy at Frankford, among the Brethren, which Book will you allow?
Careless. I am sure that it is not there in any point condemned of Heresy,
unless it be of the ANABAPTISTS, as it is here. And I do not think, but there
be some, as well there, as in England, and it is like enough that SUCH do find
fault with it. Who are offended with the Liturgy.
Dr. Martin. Nay even of Mr. Cox himself, and other that were Preachers in King
Edwards time, they have disproved your This Book established 5, 6. Edw. 6. was
re-established 1. Eliz. with two or three alterations, and is that we now use,
as was proved above. The Alterations are in the Act prefixed before the
Service Book.
second Book in diverse points, and have now made a third Book, how say you,
which of these three Books will you allow now? Careless. Forsooth I say still,
as I have written, that the second Book is good and godly, and IN ALL POINTS
agreeing to the Word of God; and I am sure that neither Master Cox, nor any
other of our godly Preachers that be fled unto Frankford, have condemned that
Book IN ANY POINT, as repugnant to the Word of God; though perchance they have
altered something therein, according to the usage of that Country, where now
they are. And I have not denied in my Articles, but the Church of Christ has
power and authority to enlarge or diminish any thing in the same GOOD BOOK, so
far forth as it is agreeable to the Scriptures. D. Martin. But what authority
have you, or how durst you be so bold to make an Article of the Faith,
concerning that Book, to be believed of all men under pain of damnation?
Careless. Ah Master Doctor, have I bound any man, to believe that Article
under pain of damnation, as you do charge me? I am sure there is no such word
in all my Articles. I have there written what I hold and believe my self, as I
am bound to do in conscience: And now I will add thus much more: That the same
Book, which is so consonant and agreeable to the Word of God, Nore in the fear
of God, and consider
being set forth by Common Authority, both of the Kings Majesty that is dead,
and the whole Parliament House, ought not to be despised by me, or any other
private man under pain of Gods

2. Concerning Monarchy, and that of this Nation. The Testimony of Mr. Sam.
Ward, sometime the famous Preacher of Ipswitch, the Author of several elegant
and useful pieces.
Hoc enim mihi ratum and indubitatum semper fuit; hoc semper cum Politicis and
Theologis gravissimis sensi, and palum apud omnes professus sum; Monarchiam
haereditariam (sub qua mihi vitales auras feliciter haurine, bonis omnimodis
frui, pie and tranquille degere contigit) esse omnium, quotquot extant aut
excogitari possunt regiminum formae; long multumque praestantissimam,
utilissimam, laudatissimam: Cui me ex animo favere ille novit, qui perscrutatur
renes meos, etc. i. e. This has always been with me a certain and undoubted
maxim; In his Preface to King Charles the first, prefixed before his Treatise
in Latin, of the Lodestone dedicated unto him; entitled Magnetis Reductorium.
this always with the best Statesmen and Divines I have ever concluded, and
openly among all men professed, viz. That a Monarchical Government hereditary
(under which providence has so ordered, that I have drawn my vital breath,
enjoyed many comforts, have had the opportunity to live godly and quietly) is
of all Governments which are, or can be divised, by many degrees the best, the
most beneficial and most commendable, to which, that I am, from my heart, a
well-wisher; he knows that searches my reins, and my heart; said that Author.

Dr. Sanderson the now Right Reverend Bishop of Lincoln in his late treatise,
entitled Episcopacy not prejudicial to Regal Power, as established by Law; in
the Postscript.
Lastly, Concerning the Divine Right of Episcopacy. Though from one in that
function, yet because it derives it higher, and founds it somewhat deeper, more
solidly, and also briefer, than is usually done, deserves more special notice.
His words are:

My opinion is, that Episcopal Government, is not to be derived merely from
Apostolical practice or Institution; But that it is originally founded in the
person and office of the Messiah, our Blessed Lord JESUS CHRIST, who being sent
by his heavenly Father to be the great Apostle, Heb. 3.1. Bishop and Pastor, 1
Pet. 2.25. of his Church, and anointed to that office immediately after his
Baptism by JOHN, with power and the Holy Ghost. Act. 10.37, -- 8. descending
then upon him in a bodily shape, Luke 3.22. did afterward, before his ascension
into Heaven, send and empower his holy Apostles (giving them the Holy Ghost
likewise, as his Father had given him, John 20.21.) to execute the same
Apostolical, Episcopal, and Pastoral office, for the ordering and governing of
his Church, until his coming again; and so the same office to continue in them,
and their Successors, unto the end of the world, Mat. 28.18, 20. This I take to
be so clear, from these and other like Texts of Scripture, that if they shall
be diligently compared together, both between themselves, and with the
following practice of all the Churches of Christ, as well in the Apostles
times, as in the purest and Primitive times nearest thereunto, there will be
left little cause, why any man should doubt thereof. Thus that Reverend Author.

II. Certain other Examples of Retractations.
In the next place other Instances of Retractations and repentings: Beda
prefat. in Retract. suas in Actor. Apostol. Tom. 6.
Cujus (Augustini) industriam nobis quoque pro modulo nostro, placuit imitari
-- Nunc in idem volumen (Actor. Apostolic.) brevem Retractationis libellum
condamus; studio maxim vel addendi, quae minus dicta, vel emendandi quae socus
quam placuit dicta videbantur. The ingenuity and industry of St. Austin (in his
Retractations) it is my purpose in my small measure, to imitate also -- Now,
(therefore) let us compile a brief Treatise of Retractations, with this intent
especially, either of adding those things which were not sufficiently
expressed; or of amending those that were expressed otherwise than did seem
convenient, says venerable Bede. Again.

For my part (says another, though a late Author, yet one of good note) Good
Reader, Mr. Whately in his Bride-Bush, in his advertisement to the Reader.
I account it no shame to confess and revoke an error; and will therefore do
it plainly, and without circumstance. Then he closes with this honest and
Austin-like expression, viz. From him, that had rather confess his own error,
than make thee err for company: The like whereunto we heard above out of that
Father. And

Dr. Bishop Brownriggs sentence concerning Retractations. Related by Dr. Gauden
the now very Rev. Bishop of Excester, his successon.
Brownrigge, the late most worthy Bishop of Excester would say that: He hoped
every good man had his Retractations, either actual or intentional, that died
in true Faith and Repentance; howsoever all had not time to write their
Retractations, as St. Austin did. This for Retractations.

III. An Evidence further of the sincerity of my own.
For the Truth of my Return unto the Church, take part of a Letter written to a
dying friend, and near relation, October. 8. 60. Immediately after my recovery
from my dangerous sickness above mentioned (the rather, because the matter may
do good to some others also) the words were these, viz.

-- The next thing I would remember you of, is; that you have according to the
course of this world, lived in Schism, and separation from the Church, your
Minister, and the Ordinances of God in the place where you live, and
particularly from the holy Communion. Remember what the Holy Ghost says, 1
Cor. 11.30. For this cause many are weak and sickly among you, and many are
dead. If the profanation, then the total neglect of the Sacrament (which
argues a contempt of it) is often punished in this manner. Apply this, and see
the Exhortations before the Lords Supper in the Common Prayer Book; where you
shall see more of the danger of the neglect of this Ordinance. Neither is
Schism, and withdrawing our selves from the Church, in the place wherein we
live, and the Ministry and Ordinances there, a small sin. For it is a rending
and defiling, and destroying of that particular body of Christ, and Church of
God. Now the punishment is: If any man defile or destroy (so it is in the
Margin of your Bible) the Temple of God, him will God destroy, 1 Corinthians. 3.17.
God is destroying of you in the midst of your years, and this is your sin. Your
Example makes other stones of the spiritual building (as one piece in a house
falling, makes way for another) fall off too. If all should do so, God should
have no Church, no Ministry, no Worship in that place. Your Father did not so,
but waited humbly on God in his Ordinances, and made use of such Ministry as
God sent (though sometimes mean, and none of the best) and encouraged them.
What is it then? First ask the Lord earnest pardon. Next go and be reconciled
to your Mr. P. of St. (...) A man fully conformable t^ the Church of England.
Minister; let proud men count never so meanly of him. Crave his prayers,
attend upon his Ministry, join with him in Public Worship, be admitted to the
Lords Table; and go not out of the world, as a Heathen of no Church, and with
no Sacraments -- If you will think on the premises, though your condition
should be as the giving up of the Ghost, as Job speaks, yet God ordinarily
works extraordinary things in such cases. 'He brings down to the grave, and
raises up again. 1 Samuel 2. He kills and makes alive. He gives forth the
sentence of death, and afterward quickens again, 2 Cor. 1. But so, that we
acknowledge, that we have sinned. Job 33. observe that place, and read Psalm.
107. Howsoever, you will depart in peace; namely in the Communion of Christ,
his Church and Ordinances; and so, with them, be gathered into the bosom of
Abraham, there to expect the second appearance of the Great God, and our
Savior Jesus Christ. If you neglect these things, my soul shall mourn in
secret for you; yet with this comfort, that I have in part discharged it. But
let me hope better things of you, and such as do accompany salvation. Consider
what has been said, and the Lord give you understanding in all This Lette^ to
have them (...) been sent, is (...) known to se^ral persons i^ Cambr. who^ have
seen t^ Original, wh^ also I have (...) covered. Act. 24.
things, etc. Thus far the Letter. And now to put a final period to this large
discourse; in a word:

I beseech all men to be persuaded, first, That I do, with the Blessed Apostle,
believe all things that are written in the Law and the Prophets, in the
Evangelists and Apostles; next that I have hope toward God, that there shall
be a Resurrection both of the Just, and the Unjust: And lastly, that hereupon,
I exercise my self to have a Conscience void of offense toward God, and toward
man always; with which Petition and Profession I cease and shut up all.

Sept. 13, Ann. Dom. 1661. Regni Carol. secundi Magn. Britann. Franc. and
Hibern. Regis sereniss. 13. sed (inaudito Dei Consilio) Restituti (and cum eo
Ecclesiae) secundo. A^t. M. 5 (Adulation^ epto) and i^ Maii 29. ((...) mihi
natali^ per lavacr^ generation^ NOVAE) (...) excurrit.
Quod utrique. secundissime faustissimeque in perpetuum cedat. Votum (ex animo)
quotidian.

JOHANNIS ELLIS.

FINIS.

