A CATECHISM WHEREIN THE LEARNER Is at once Taught to Rehearse, and prove all
the main Points of CHRISTIAN RELIGION, By answering to every queston in The
very words of Holy Scripture. Together With a short and plain Discourse, Useful
to confirm the weak, and unlearned in his Belief OF THE BEING of a GOD AND THE
TRUTH of SCRIPTURE.

Be ready always to give an Answer to every Man that asks you a Reason of the
hope that is in you, with meekness, and fear, 1 Pet. 3.15. Hold fast the form
of sound Works, 2 Timothy 1.13. By Clement Ellis Author of the Gentile Sinner.

London, Printed for Sam. Richards Bookseller in Nottingam. 1674.

TO MY PARISHIONERS.
My dear Friends and Brethren.
THis little Catechism, with the short Discourse joined with it, are chiefly
intended for your use, and therefore to you, in the first place, are they
offered. I pray God, the giver of every good gift, to make this, and all other
poor endeavors of his most unworthy servant, eff^ctuall to establish you in the
faith of Christ, and the constant practice of all Christian virtues.

Ever since I came amongst you, it has been my daily study how I might most
profitably instruct you in the truth which is according to Godliness. I have
not followed cunningly devised fables, neither used flattering words, as ye
know: my business has not been to amuse and confound you with a ^oise of
words, empty notions, and the ^dle dreams of phanciful men; nor to cozen your
Souls, by picasing the itching ear, or prejudiced palate* but to make necessary
truths plain and intelligible; (...) to dress the sincere mi^^k of the word for
you in that simple and wholesome way, as, I am persuaded, was most conducive to
your nourishment and g^outh thereby in Faith and Holiness. If the success of my
honest endeavors answer not my hopes of you, and prayers for you, I have cause
indeed to mourn over your sins, but I must not be discouraged from going on the
same way still, or praying unto God for his blessing upon it.

One evident cause of all that gross ignorance and error, ethat wretched
profaneness and licenciousness, that wild Fanaticisme, as well in practice as
opinion, which is now every where too visible, is the want of good and
seasonable instruction in the first principles of our Religion. Where youth is
suffered to grow up in ignorance, no better can be expected, but that it run
into dotage at last. If the Foundation be either unlaid, or fals-laid, it can
be no wonder to see the Superstructure shaken, or blown down.

The truth is, it is but too easy to show, that all those unhappy divisions and
miscarriages, which have been of late, and yet are amongst us in matters of
Religion, have Sprung, if not only, yet in great part, from the neglect or
abuse of that prime duty of Catachizing. But I am not willing to draw out this
Epistle into an unreasonable length by enlarging upon this subject. Instead of
that, le^ me earnestly exhort you, as you value the glory of Christ, the peace
of the Church, and the eternal happiness of your own Souls.

1. Be not wise in your own conceits, take heed of that Spiritual pride whereby
men are so apt to swell and grow great in their own eyes, and much above these
low ways of learning.

If any man despise these little helps, it is but reasonable he should make it
appear, that he needs them not, and when he shall do so, I will promise him, I
will not trouble him any longer with them.

2. Let not your children or servants perish for want of that instruction,
whereof you presume your selves to have no need. It is not your fullness can
keep them from starving. Suffer them to be led by the hand, till they get more
strength. If you have any love for them, expose them not, through want of
instruction, to be made a prey to Satan, and every crafty Seducer; whilst you
fancy your selves such strong Saints as that you need not fear either the
stoutest tempttaion, or the loss of Heaven it self.

3. Take heed how you run a whoring aft^r every new conceit in Religion, which
flatters your humor: Think it not impossible that you may be led into the
ditch by those who call them ^ives New L^ghts. ^ry the Spirits whether they be
of God. And th^s you can never do, if you be not first well instructed in the
Ch^e^ principle of Religion* which the holy Spirit of God has already taught
in his word.

4. Suffer not a blind Zeal about trifles to transport you beyon^ all care of
the more weighty and substantial parts of Religion. Think not that it is the
commendation of your Religion, that you scruple at a few Ceremonies, or quarrel
with the commands of your Superiors; but believe and do as Christ has taught
and commanded: certainly to live Godly, and Rightuously, and Soberly in this
present world, is a better sign of a Religious heart, than all Sacrificings of
the peace of Church and tate to a man's own humor or groundless fancy. A
sound knowledge of the principles of Christian Religion, would banish these
shadows, and bring back aga^n the truth and substance of Godliness.

5. Y^^ld therefore your selves with all meekness to instruction that ye may
grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, that
ye may no longer be Children tossed to and fro, and carried about with every
wind of doctrine, by the sleight of men, and cunning craftiness, whereby they
lie in wait to deceive: that ye may continue in the faith grounded and settled:
and may be ready to give answer to every one that asks, you a reason of the
the faith that is in you. He that can do so, will not be ashamea to do it: and
he that cannot should be ashamed not to learn to do it.

6. Remember that when you were baptized, you promised and vowed by others, to
forsake all sin, to believe all the Articles of the Christian Faith, and to
obey God's holy will and commandments; is it not therefore necessary, that so
soon as you are capable, you should apply your selves with all diligence to
learn what those Sins, those Articles, and those Commandment are? That you may
do so, the Churh has provided for you a short and easy Catechism, and
excellentl^ fitted (...) first years, to prepare y^u for Co^^i^ma^^on, that is,
to make you understand your vow of Baptism, so far, as you may be able in your
ow^ persons, openly in the face of the Church to profess an^ ^^clare (...) to
keep it; and thereupon (...) both the approbation, and prayers of (...)
^pirit^al Fathers, and ^^ t^^ (...), for Grace to enable you (...).

And seeing those (...) there solemnly made to God for ^ou^ growth, and
increase, in knowledge and gr^^sh^uld it not be your constant endeavor, by a
diligent use of all the m^a^s, to be daily more confirmed, and improve in both?
now for this ^n^, it is not only necessary to read the word, hear Sermons, be
frequent both in public and private prayer, and du^y receive the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper: but it is very conventent and u^eful, to have ever in your
hands some larger Catechism or exp^sition of the Chief Heads of Christian
Religion. Many of this kind there ^^ already extant, yet this one more I have
thought fit to add; I shall not now give you thy other reason for my so doing
(though I have many) then only this, that I love you, and study how I may most
contribute to your eternul welfare.

1. Thi^ Catechi^m will (I hope) by it is length prove no burden to the memories
of those who can already give an account of the Church Catechism, and have been
for some years exercised in reading the holy Scriptures, out of which the
answers are taken almost word for word, and unto such I chiefly offer it.

2. Though the answers are little else but the very words of Scripture, and of
such plain texts as are lest subject to dispute or cavil, yet have I all along
quoted the Chapter and verse whence the words are taken, and i^cl^^ed the
quotation between two crooked horns thus (...) that in the reading you may pass
them over, and when you please, consult the texts quoted for any clause of the
answer without the trouble of having recourse to the margin first.

3. The Learner is here at once taught to answer the question, and give a proof
of his answer, whilst he answers in the very words of those texts which are his
proofs. He thus answers not in the words which man's wisdom, but which the holy
Ghost ^eacheth: and is not put upon the more troublesome, and sometimes
impossible task, of gathering the author's sense out of the texts quoted.

4. In these days, when strange doctrines abound, and Seducers are busy, and
have learned the Devil's art of quoting Scripture for every wicked conceit: it
will be some advantage to the learner of this Catechism, that he is hence
furnished with one or more plain and pertinent texts for every point of his
Religion, to oppose against the tempter.

If in any particular I seem too short, consider that in the beginning I had
^^ed my self to the very text of Scripture, and therefore could go no farther,
than that would go along with me.

The Creed, the ten Commandments, and the Lord's Prayer, I suppose already
learned, together with those short and useful expositions in the
Church-Catechism, and what else may be yet required in a Catechism for the
fuller understanding of them, is not (I hope) wanting in this.

I shall only add, that thi^ Scripture Catechism, perfectly learned and well
digested, will be a great help to you in the profitable reading both of the
Scriptures and other good books: and will teach you to discover the Errors of
many unsound Discourses, which being industrously suited by a popular way of
writing to the humors of such, who being ignorantly zealous, are aptest to be
^eceived, are very likely to be thrust into your hands.

Now the God of peace that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that
great Shepherd of the Sheep, through the blood of the everlasting Covenant,
make you perfect in every good work to do his will, working in you that which
is well pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ. That ye may be filled with
the knowledge of God's will, in all wisdom and Spiritual understanding,
walking worthy of the Lord unto all pleasing, being fruitful in every good
work, and abounding in the knowledge of God; that you may hold the unity of the
Spirit in the bond of peace, and having your fruit unto holiness, may have your
and everlasting life: this is the daily prayer of

Your servant in all things wherein he may serve Christ.

Q. IS there any such thing as Religion?

A. All Nations in all Ages of the World have ever professed some Religion.

Q What mean you by Religion?

A. By Religion I mean, a belief that there is a God, joined with an endeavor
to please and honor him, a fear to offend him, and a hope to bemade happy by
him.

Q. What then is the Foundation of all Religion?

A. He that comes to God, must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder
of them that diligently seek him. Heb. 11 6.

Q How may a man know, that there is a God?

A. The invisible things of God from the Creation of the world are clearly
seen, being understood by the things that are made, even his eternal Power and
Godhead. Romans 1.20.

Q Of what Religion are you?

A. I am one of the Disciples of Christ, called Christians. Act. 11.26.

Q. Why do you choose to be a disciple or follower of Christ?

A. To whom should I go? Christ has the words of eternal Life. ( Ioh. 6.68.)
in him are hid all the treasures of Wisdom and knowledge ( Col. 2.3.) he that
follows him shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the Light of Life. Ioh
8, 12.

Q. How do you know that Christ has the words of Life?

A. Christ is that Messiah, of whom Moses in the law and the prophets did
write, ( Ioh. 1.41, and 45.) even the Son of God which should come into the
world. Ioh. 11.27.

Q. Why do you believe Christ to be the Messiah, the Son of God?

A. In Christ all things are fulfilled, which were written in the Law of Moses,
and in the Prophets, and in the Psalms concerning him, ( Luke. 24.44.) H^ was
also approved of God by miracles and wonders, and signs which God did by him.
Act. 2.22. Job. 3.2.10.25.

Q. Let me hear some of those wonders you speak of?

A. The blind did see, the Lame did walk, the Lepers were cleansed, the Deaf
did hear, and the Dead were raised, Luke 7.22. hereby are we sure he is that
Christ the Son of the Living God, John 6.69. for no m^^ could do these Miracles
which he did, except God were with him, John 3.^.

Q. What kind of Religion did Christ tea^h?

A. The Religion which Christ has taught us, (...) pure Religion, and
undefiled, James ^.27.

Q. Where may a man learn this Holy Religion?

A. Christian Religion is to be learnt in the Holy Scriptures, 2 Timothy 3.15.
especially in the Word of the Truth of the Gospel, Col. 1.5. that glorious
Gospel of the Blessed God 1 Timothy 1.11.

Q. What reason have you to speak so highly of the Gospel?

A. I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, for it is the power of God unto
Salvation, to every one that b^lieveth, Romans 1.16.

Q. How come you to the knowledge of the Gospel?

A. The Gospel began to be spoken by the Lord, and was confirmed to us by them
that heard him, God also bearing them witness, both with Signs and Wonders, and
diverse Miracles, and gifts of the Holy Ghost, Heb. 2.3, 4.

Seeing that your Religion is to be learned in the Holy Scriptures, Answer me
out of them to those Questions which I shall ask you; and first, tell me,

Q. Who made the World?

A. In the beginning, Genesis 1.1. God made the World and all things, Acts 17.24.
in six days, Exodus 20.11. by his Word, Heb. 11.3. and every thing which God
made was very good, Genesis 1.31.

Q. Who preserves all things?

A. God upholdeth all things by the word of his power, Heb. 1.3. in him we
live, and move, and have our Being, Acts 17.28.

Q. Who Rules and Governs all things?

A. God has prepared his Throne in the Heavens, and his Kingdom Rules over
all, Psalm. 103.19.

Q. Does God take Care of the smalest things of the World?

A. God preserves Man and Beast, Psalm. 36.6. He feeds the Fowls of the Air,
and cloatheth the Grass of the Field, Mat. 6.26, and 30. Not one Sparrow
falls to the ground without him, and the very hairs of our heads are numbered,
Mat. 10.29, 30.

Q. Where is God?

A. Heaven is God's Throne, and Earth is his Footstool, Acts 7.49. he fills
Heaven and Earth, Ier. 23.24. we cannot flee from his Presence, Psalm. 139.7.

Q. Has God any Body or Parts, as we see the Creatures have?

A. God is a Spirit, John 4.24. which has not Flesh and Bones, Luke 24.39. but
is invisible, Col. 1.15. whom no man has seen, nor can see, 1 Timothy 6.16.

Q. Has God beginning or ending?

A. God is Eternal, 1 Timothy 1.17. from Everlasting to Everlasting, Psalm. 90.2.
he Lives for ever and ever, Rev. 4.10.

Q. What Power has God? what is he able to do?

A. He is the Lord God Almighty, Rev. 4.8. he can do every thing, Job. 42.2.
nothing is too hard for him, Ier. 32.17.

Q. What is Gods Knowledge and Wisdom?

A. He is the only wise God, 1 Timothy 1. 17. his understanding is infinite, Psalm.
147.5. he knows all things, John 21.17. his Eyes are in every place beholding
the evil and the good, Prove. 15.3.

Q. Is he a Holy God?

A. God is pure, 1 John 3.3. and Holy, Isa. 5*16. he has no pleasure in
wickedness, Psalm. 5.4. cannot be tempted with evil, neither tempts he any
man, James 1.13.

Q. Is there any injustice in God?

A. God is most upright, Isa. 26.7. without Iniquity, just and right is he,
Deuteronomy. 32.4. and will render to every man according to his deeds, Romans 2.6.

Q. Is he not also good?

A. God is good, and does good, Psalm. 119.68. good to all, and his tender
mercies are over all his works, Psalm. 145.8.

Q. Is there any untruth or changing with God?

A. Our God is a God of Truth, Psalm. 32.5. a faithful God, 2 These. 3.3. he
cannot lie, Tit. 1.2. he changes not, Mal. 3.6. James 1.17. all his promises
are yea, and Amen, 2 Cor. 1.20.

Q. Is there any more but one God?

A. There is none other, but one, 1 Cor. 8.4. only true, 1 These. 1.9. and
Living God, Acts 14.15.

Q. Who is this one only true and Living God?

A. The Lord he is God* there is none else besides him, Deuteronomy. 4.35. even God
that made the World, Acts 17.24. the Father, the So^, and the Holy Ghost. Mat.
28.19. 2 Cor. 13, 14. Ephesians. 2.18.

Q. Who is the Father?

A. The God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 1.3. who having life in
himself, has also given to the Son to have life in himself, John 5.26.

Q. Who is the Son?

A. The Word, John 1.^. Jesus Christ* John 20.31. God's own, Romans 8.32. only
begotten, John 3.16. and beloved Son, Mat. 3.17. the only begotten of the
Father, John 1.14.

Q. Is the Son true God?

A. He is the Lord of Hosts, Isa. 6.3. with John 12.4. Numb. 21.6. with 1 Cor.
10.9. the true God, 1 John 5.20. the great God, Tit. 2.13. over all, God
Blessed for ever, Romans 9.5.

Q. Who is the Holy Ghost?

A. The Holy Ghost is the Eternal, Heb. 9.14. Spirit of the Father, Mat. 10.20.
and of the Son, Gal. 4.6.

Q. Is the Holy Ghost God?

A. The Spirit of God is God^ 1 Cor. 3.16, 17. the Lord, 2 Cor. 3.17. Acts 5.3,
4.

Q. The Father is God, the Son is God, and the Holy Ghost is God; are not these
three Gods?

A. There be three in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost; and
these three are One, 1 John 5.7.

Q. What know you of the Angels?

A. Angels are, either Holy Angels, Mat. 25.31. or evil Angels, Psalm 78.49.

Q. Which call you Holy Angels?

A. Holy Angels are an innumerable Company, Heb. 12.22. of Elect, 1 Timothy 5.21.
and mighty, 2 These. 1.7. Angels of Heaven, Mat. 24.36. excelling in strength,
doing God's Commandments, and harkening to the voice of his Word, Psalm. 103.20.

Q. Under whose Command are Holy Angels?

A. Angels, and Authorities, and Powers are made subject to Christ, 1 Pet. 3.22.

Q. What special Office have Holy Angels?

A. Holy Angels are ministering Spirits, sent fort^^ to Minist^^ for them who
shall be heirs of Salvation, Heb. 1.14.

Q. Which ^all you e^^l Angels?

A. The evil Angels are the Angels that sinned, and kept not their first
estate, but left their own Habitation, whom God cast down to Hell, 2 Pet. 2.4.
Jude 6.

Q. Who is chief of evil Angels?

A. Be^lzebub is Prince of Devils, Mat. 12.24. that Old Serpent called the
Devil and Satan, Rev. 12 9.

Q. What is the Devil's main business?

A. Our Adversary the Devil, as a roaring Lion, walks about, seeking whom he
may devour, 1 Pet. 5.8.

Q. What has God prepared for the Evil Angels?

A. Everlasting Fire is prepared for the Devil and his Angels, Mat. 25.41.

Q. Who was the first Man?

A. The first Man was Adam, Genesis 2.5. Luke 3.38. 1 Cor. 15.45.

Q. Of what did God make Adam?

A. The Lord God formed Man of the Dust of the ground, and breathed into his
Nostrils the breath of Life, and man became a Living Soul, Genesis 2.7.

Q. Who was the first Woman?

A. The first Woman was Eve, the Mother of all Living, Genesis 3.20.

Q Of what did God make Eve?

A. The Lord caused a deep sleep to fall upon Adam, and he took one of his
Ribs, and m^de it a Woman, and brought her unto the man, Genesis 2.21, 22.

Q. What are the chief parts of Man?

A Man has a Soul or Spirit, and a Body, Mat. 10.28. Eccl. 12.7.

Q In what state, or Condition did God m^ke Man?

A. God made man upright, Eccl. 7.29. in the Image of God made he him, Genesis
1.27.

Q What m^an you by God's Image?

A. Man was created after God in righteousness and true Holiness, Ephesians. 4.24.
and ^n knowledge, Col. 3.10. and God made him have Dominion over the works of
his hands, Psalm. 8.6. Genesis 1.16.2.20.

Q Where did God place Adam?

A. God put the Man into the Garden of Eden, Genesis 2.15.

Q. What Command did God give Man there?

A. Go^ Commanded the Man, saying, O^ the Tree of the Knowledge of good and
evil* thou shall not eat of it, for in the day thou eatest thereof thou shall
surely dye, Genesis 2.16, 17.

Q. Did Adam keep this Command?

A. The Serpent beguiled Eve, through his subtilty, 2 Cor. 11.3. Genesis 3.13. and
she did eat, and gave also to her Husband with her; and he did eat, Genesis 3.6.
So by one man sin entered into the world, Romans 5.12.

Q. What mean you by Sin?

A. Sin is the transgression of the Law, 1 John 3.4.

Q. What does every sin deserve?

A. The wages of sin is Death, Romans 6.23. Genesis 2.17.

Q. Should not man have dyed, if he had not sinned?

A. Death entered into the World by sin, Romans 5.12.

Q. Did Adam's sin do us any hurt?

A. By one man's disobedience many were made sinners, Romans 5.19.

Q How could we become sinners by Adam's disobedience?

A. Adam begat Children after his own likeness, Genesis 5.3. and who can bring a
clean thing out of an unclean? Job 14.4. that which is born of the Flesh is
Flesh, John 3.6. we are shapen in Ini^uity, and in sin do our Mothers conceive
us, Psalm. 51.5.

Q. What evils of Body came upon us by Adam's sin?

A. Man that is born of a Woman, is of few days, and full of trouble, Job
14.1. in sorrows, and in the sweat* of our face must we eat our bread till we
return to our dust, Genesis 3.17, 18.

Q. Did Adam's sin bring death upon us all?

A. In Adam all dye, 1 Cor. 15.22. by the offense of one, judgment came upon
all men to condemnation, Romans 5.18. and death passed upon all men, for that all
have sinned, v. 12.

Q. What evils of Soul became we subject to by Adam's sin?

A. The Natural Man receives not the things of the Spirit of God, 1 Cor. 2.14.
our carnal mind is enmity to God, not subject to the Law of God, nor indeed can
be, Romans 8.7. we are in Captivity to the Law of sin in our Members, Romans 7.23.
we cannot please God, Romans 8.8. but walk according to the Spirit that works
in the Children of disobedience, Ephesians. 2.2.

Q. What are we then by Nature?

A. W^ are by Nature the Children of Wrath, Ephesians. 2.3.

Q. What can we expect from God as we are by Nature?

A. As we are by Nature, we can expect nothing, but to be punished with
everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, 2 These. 1.9.

Q. What hope then can we have to be saved?

A. Where sin abounded, Grace did much more abound, that as sin has reigned
unto Death, even so Grace might reign through Righteousness unto Eternal Life
by Jesus Christ our Lord, Romans 5.20.21.

Q. When did this grace first appear to Man?

A. When God said to the Serpent, The Woman's Seed shall bruise thy Head, Genesis
3.15. And afterward when he said to Abraham, in thy Seed shall all the Nations
of the Earth be blessed, Genesis 22.18.

Q. Who is this promised seed?

A. This seed is Christ, Gal. 3.16.

Q. Is Dhrist the seed of a woman?

A. When the fullness of time was come, God sent forth his Son made of a woman,
Gal. 4 4.

Q. How was Christ the Son of God made of a Woman?

A. The Holy Ghost came upon a Virgin, called Mary, Luke 1.35. and she was
found with Child of the Holy Ghost, Mat. 1.18. and she brought forth her First
born Son, Luke 2.7. and his Name was called Jesus, Luke 2.21.

Q. Why was he called jesus, or Savior?

A. He was so named of the Ang^l before he was conceived in the Womb, Luke
2.21. because he was to ^ave his People from their sins, Mat. 1.21.18, 11. and
deliver us from the wrath to come, 1 These. 1.10.

Q. Can we be saved no other way but by Jesus only?

A. Jesus is the way, the Truth and the Life, no man comes unto the Father but
by him, John 14.6. neither is there Salvation in any other; for there is none
other name under Heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved, Acts 4.12.

Q. How is Jesus our Savior?

A. Jesus is the Mediator of the New Covenant, Heb. 12.24. between God and Men,
1 Timothy 2.5.

Q. How came Jesus to be the Mediator of a New Covenant?

A. Jesus was fore ordained, 1 P^t. ^. 20. and t^is grace was given us (...) 2 Timothy 1.9. and Eternal Life Pro^^ by God that cannot lie, before the world
began, Tit. 1.2.

Q. What could move God to take this course to save us?

A. God the Father according to his foreknowledge, 1 Pet. 1.2. and Eternal
purpose in Christ Jesus our Lord, Ephesians. 3.11. chose us in him before the
foundation of the World, that we should be Holy, and without blame before him
in Love; having predestined us unto the Adoption of Children by Jesus Christ
to himself, according to the good pleasure of his will, to the praise of the
glory of his grace, Ephesians. 1.4, 5, 6.

Q. Unto what did God chus^ us?

A. Unto Obedien^^, and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 1.2.
and to Salvation, through sanctif^cation of the Spirit, and belief of the
Truth, 2 These. 2.13.

Q. What was Christ first to do as Mediat^r?

A. Forasmuch as the Children are partake^s of Flesh and Blood, he also himself
took part of the same, Heb. 2.14. so ^ecame he the man Christ Jesus, 1 Timothy
2.5. God manifested in the Fl^^h, 1 Timothy 3.16. and the Word made Flesh dwelt
among us, full of grace and Truth, John 1.14.

Q. Why must Jesus be made man?

A. Jesus was made Man, that he might be made under the Law, Gal. 4.4. and
fulfill all Righteousness, Mat. 3.15. and through Death destroy him that had
the power of Death; that is, the Devil, Heb. 2.14.

Q. Why was Jesus called Christ, or anointed?

A. God anointed Jesus with the Holy Ghost, and with Power, Acts 10.38.

Q. To what Office in the first place was Jesus anointed?

A. Jesus was a Prophet mighty in deed and word, Luke 24.19.

Q. How did Christ Exercise the Office of a Prophet?

A. God anointed Christ to Preach the Gospel to the Poor, Luke 4.18. he came to
call Sinners to Repentance, Mat. 9.13. all things that he had heard of the
Father he made known unto us, John 15.5.8.26. and brought Life and Immortality
to Light through the Gospel 2 Timothy 1.10.

Q. Which is the second Office to which Christ was anointed?

A. Christ was called of God an High Priest, Heb. 5.10. for ever, after the
Order of Melchisedec, Heb. 6.10.

Q. Did Christ as High Priest Offer any Sacrifice for Sins?

A. This he did once, when he Offered up himself, Heb. 7.27. without spot to
God, Heb 9.14. an Offering, and a Sacrifice for a sweet smelling savor, Ephesians.
5.2. to put away sin, Heb. 9.26.

Q. Did Christ Offer Sacrifice for his own sins?

A. Christ did no sin* neither was guile found in his mouth, 1 Pet. 2.22. he
was in all points tempted as we are, yet without sin, Heb. 4.15. for such an
High Priest became us, who is Holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from Sinners,
Heb. 7.26.

Q. For what sins then did Christ Offer himself?

A. Christ was delivered for our Offenses, Romans 4.25. the just for the unjust,
1 Pet. 3.18. God making him to be sin for us, who knew no sin, 2 Cor. 5.21. and
laying on him the Iniquities of us all, Isa. 53.6.

Q. How did Christ Offer himself for u^?

A. Christ humbled himself, and became Obedient unto Death, even the Death of
the Cross, Phil. 2.8. redeeming us from the curse of the Law, being made a
curse for us, Gal. 3.13.

Q. What curse do you mean?

A. It is written, cur^ed is every one that continues not in all things that
are written in the book of the Law to do them, Gal. 3.10.

Q Why would God have Christ to dye for us?

A. God set forth Christ to be a propitiati^n through Faith in his Blood, to
declare his Righteousness for the Remission of sins, that he might be just, and
the justifier of him that believes in Jesus, Romans 3.25, 26.

Q. Did Christ truly satisfy God's justice for our sins?

A. Christ is the propitiation for our sins, 1 John 2.2. he gave his Life a
Ransom for many, Mat. 20.28. he was offered to bear the sins of many, Heb.
9.28. the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and by his stripes we are
healed, Isa. 53.5.1 Pet. 2.24.

Q. For whom did Christ dye?

A. Christ, by the grace of God, did taste Death for every man, Heb. 2.9. he
gave himself a Ransom for all, 1 Timothy 2.6. and is the propitiation for the sins
of the whole World, 1 John 2.2. 2 Cor. 5.14.

Q. What became of Christ when he dyed?

A. He was buried, and rose again the third day, 1 Cor. 15.4. his Soul was not
left in Hell, neither did his Flesh see Corruption, Acts 2.3^. but God raised
him up, having loosed the pains of Death, because it was not possible he should
be held of it, Acts 2.24.

Q. Was Christ to dye any more?

A. Christ being raised from the dead, dies no more, Death has no more
dominion over him, Romans 6.9.

Q. VVhither went Christ after he rose again?

A. He was received up into Heaven, and sat down on the Right Hand of God, Mark
16.19.

Q. What mean you by the Right Hand of God?

A. The Right Hand of Power, Luke 22.69. and Majesty, Heb. 8.1.

Q. Does Christ any^hing in Heaven for us as an High Priest?

A. When he h^d by himself purged ou^ ^ns, he sat down on the Ri^^t Hand of the
Majesty on High, Heb. 1.3 not entering into the Holy places made with hands,
which are the Figures of the true, but into Heaven it self, now to appear in
the presence of God for us, Heb. 9.24.

Q. What does he do in the presence of God for us?

A. If any Man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, even Jesus Christ the
Righteous, 1 John 2.1. who is able to save them to the uttermost that come unto
God by him, seeing he ever lives to make Intercession for them, Heb. 7.25.

Q. Does Christ any thing else for us as an High Priest?

A. God having raised up his Son Jesus, sent him to bless us in turning away
every one of us from his Iniquities, Acts 3.26.

Q. What is the third Office to which Christ was anointed?

A. Christ is the blessed and only Potentate, King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords, 1 Timothy 6.15.

Q. What is Christ's Kingly Power?

A. All Power is given unto Christ in H^aven and in Earth, Mat. 28.18. God h^th
highly exalted him, and given him a Name above every Name, that at the Name of
Jesus every knee should bow, of things in Heaven, and things in Earth, and
things under the Earth, Phil. 2.9, 10.

Q. Is Christ our Law giver?

A. Christ is that one Law giver, who is able to save, and to destroy, James
4.12. Isa. ^3.22.

Q. Does Christ as a King protect his People?

A. None shall pluck Christ's Sheep out of his hands, John 10.28.

Q. What Honorable Privileges does Christ's Subjects enjoy?

A. Christ makes his Subjects a Royal Priest*Hood, ^ Pet. 2.9. Kings and
Priests unto God, Rev. 1.6.

Q. Has Christ any reward in store for his Subjects?

A. Christ's reward is with him, to give to every Man as his Work shall be,
Rev. 22.12. If we be faithful un^o Death, he will give us a Crown of Life, Rev.
2.10.

Q. What shall be done to Christ's Enemies?

A. Christ must Reign, till he has put all Enemies under his Feet, 1 Cor.
15.15.

Q. What are these Enemies of Christ?

A. The Enemies of Christ are, Sin which has reigned unto Death, Romans 5.21.
Satan the Prince of this World, John 12.13. the Children of disobedience* Ephesians.
2.2. and Death which reigned by sin, Romans 5.17.

Q. What did Christ do for his People when he went away into Heaven?

A. When Christ ascended up on High he gave gifts unto men, Ephesians. 4.8.

Q. What was the chief gift which Christ then gave?

A. Christ sent the promise of his Father, Luke 24.49. Acts 1.4. even the
Comforter which is the Holy Ghost, John 14.26. to be with us for ever, John
14.16.

Q. To what more especial end did Christ send the Holy Ghost?

A. Christ sent the Holy Ghost to guide his Apostles into all Truth, John
16.13. to teach them all things, and bring all things to their remembrance,
whatsoever he had said unto them, John 14.26.

Q. What other gifts gave Christ to his People?

A. Christ gave Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors, and Teachers, for the
perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the
Body of Christ, Ephesians. 4.11, 12.

Q. What mean you by the Body of Christ?

A. God gave Christ to be Head over all things to the Church, which is his
Body, Ephesians. 1.22, 23. Col. 1.18.

Q. What mean you by the Church?

A. The Church is the Flock, Acts 20.28. 1 Pet. 5.2. and the House of God, 1 Timothy 3.15. those that are called to be Sain^s, Romans 1.7. the whole Family of
Heaven and Earth named of Christ, Ephesians. 3.15.

Q. Is there but one Church of Christ?

A. There is but one Fold, and one Shepherd, John 10.16.

Q. Are there not many Congregation of Christians?

A. We being many are one Body, 1 Cor. 10.17. and every one Members one of
another, Romans 12.5.

Q. In what respects are all Christians one Church?

A. We are all built upon the same Foundation of the Apostles and Prophets,
Jesus Christ himself being the chief Cornerstone, Ephesians. 2.20, 21. having one
Spirit, one Hope, one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, Ephesians. 4.4, 5. all partaking
of one Bread, 1 Cor. 10.17. bound to keep the Unity of the Spirit in the bond
of Peace, Ephesians. 4.3.

Q. What does God require of us in this new Covenant?

A. God requires of us, Repentance toward God, and Faith toward our Lord Jesus
Christ, Acts 20.21.

Q. What mean you by Repentance?

A. Repentance is a turning from all our sins that we have committed, Ezekiel.
18.2. and 30. unto the Lord, Isa. 55.7. amending our ways and our doings, Ier.
7.5.

Q. Is not sorrow for sin a part of Repentance?

A. We must be sorry after a godly manner, for godly sorrow works Repentance
not to be Repented of, 2 Cor. 7.9, 10.

Q. What else must accompany this godly sorrow?

A. We must hate every false way, Psalm. 119.104. and loath our selves for our
Iniquities, and be ashamed of our own ways, Ezekiel. 36.31, 32.

Q. Must we not ^lso confess our sins?

A. He that covers his sins shall not prosper, but he that confesses and
forsakes them shall have Mercy, Prove. 28.13. 1 John 1.9.

Q. Is there any thing more required in repentance, besides sorrow for sin,
hatred of sin, confessing and forsaking sin?

A. We must also bring forth Fruits meet for Repentance, Mat. 3.8.

Q. What are Fruits meet for Repentance?

A. Good Works, which God has before ordained that we should walk in them,
Ephesians. 2.10. so yielding our Members Servants to Righteousness, unto Holiness,
Romans 6.13.

Q. Give me the substance of this Duty of Repentance.

A. Cease to do evil, learn to do well, Isa. 1.16, 17. eschew evil, and ^o
good, 1 Pet. ^.11.

Q. Can we altogether cease from sin in this Life?

A. Who can say, I have made my Heart clean, I am pure from my sin? Prove. 20.9.

Q. What mean you then by ceasing from sin?

A. Let not sin Reign in our mortal bodies that we should obey it in the Lusts
thereof, Romans 6.12.

Q. To what end must we repent?

A. We must Repent and be Converted that our sins may be blotted out, Acts 3.19.

What mean you by Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ?

A. By Faith, I mean, a believing that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of the
Living God, John 6.69.11.27. 1 John 5.1. a coming unto him that we may have
Life, John 5.40. a receiving him as he is come in his Fathers name, John
5.43.1.12. and abiding in him, 1 John 2.27.

Q. What is it to believe in Christ as a Prophet?

A. To believe in Christ as a Prophet, is to come unto him for the words of
Eternal life, John 6.68. and to hear him in all things that he says unto us,
Acts 3.22.

Q. What is it to believe in Christ as a Priest?

A. To believe in Christ as a Priest, is to believe that he by one Offering
has perfected for ever them that are Sanctified, Heb. 10.14. and to look for
Redemption through his Blood, even the forgiveness of sins Ephesians. 1.7.

Q. What is it to believe in Christ as King?

A. To believe in Christ as King, is to take him for our Judge, our Lawgiver,
our King, who will save us, Isa. 33.22. and to observe all things whatsoever he
has commanded us, Mat. 28.20.

Q. What are the Properties of true Faith?

A. By Faith God purifieth our hearts, Act. 15.9. Faith works by love, Gal.
5.6. is made perfect by works, Iam. 2.22. overcomes the world, 1 John 5.4. and
quenches all the fiery darts of the wicked, Ephesians. 6.16.

Q. What is the end of our Faith?

A. The end of our Faith is the Salvation of our Souls, 1 Pet. 1.9. Heb. 10.39.

Q. What has God promised us in this New Covenant?

A. This is the Covenant, says the Lord, I will put my Laws into their minds,
and write them in their hearts, and I will be to them a God, and they shall be
to me a people; and I will be merciful to their unrighteousness, and their
sins, and their iniquities will I remember no more, Heb. 8.10, 12.10.16, 17.
and this is the promise that he has promised us, even eternal life, 1 John.
2.25.

Q. Tell me now what is the substance of the New Covenant?

A. The Substance of the New Covenant is this. 1. He that believes on the Son
has eveverlasting life; and he; that believes not the Son shall not see life,
John 3.36. 2. Repent and be converted, and your sins shall be blotted out, Act.
3.19 and except ye repent ye shall perish, Luke 13.3. 3. Christ is become the
Author of Salvation to all them that obey him, ^ Heb. 5.9. and will take
vengeance on them that obey not the Gospel, 2 These. 1.8.


Q What special benefits have they from Christ, that keep this Covenant?

A. By Christ all that believe are justified from all things, from which we
could not be justified by the Law of Moses, Acts 13.39.

Q. What mean you by Justification?

A. There is no condemnation to those that are in Christ Jesus, Romans 8.1. but
their iniquities are forgiven, their sins are covered, the Lord will not impute
sin to them, but righteousness, Romans 4.6, 7, 8. and make them accepted in the
beloved, Ephesians. 1.6.

Q. Can we not be justified by the works of the Law?

A. By thee deed^ of the Law shall no f^^^^ be ju^tified in God's sight, Romans
3.20.

Q By what then are we justified?

A. We are justified freely by God's (...) through the Redemption that is in
(...), Romans 3.24.

Q What is the fruit of our Justification?

A. ^e^^g justified by Faith, we have p^^^^ with God through our Lord Jesus
(...), Romans 5.1. and shall be saved from (...) ^im, Romans 5.10.

Q What other special benefit receive we by this Covenant?

A. Christ is made unto us Sanctification, 1 Cor. 1.30.

Q. What mean you by Sanctification?

A. By Sanctification, I mean, a putting off the old man which is corrupt,
according to the deceitful lusts, and a being renewed in the spirit of our
mind, putting on the new man, which after God is created in righteousness, and
true holiness, Ephesians. 4.22, 23, 24.

Q. By whom are we Sanctified?

A. We are Sanctified by the Holy Ghost, Romans 15.16. 1 Cor. 6.11.

Q. Are we perfectly Sanctified in this life?

A. We are but growing in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ,
2 Pet. 3.18.

Q. Of what necessity is Sanctification?

A. This is the Will of God, even our Sanctification, 1 These. 4.3. and without
holiness no man shall see the Lord, Heb. 12.14.

Q. What is the fruit of Sanctification?

A. Being made free from sin, and become servants to God, we have our fruit
unto holiness, and the end everlasting life, Romans 6.22.

Q. Can we merit, or deserve eternal life by our own righteousness or Faith*

A By Grace are we saved through Faith, and that not of our selves, it is the
gift of God, Ephesians. 2.8. for when we have done all those things that are
commanded us, we must say, we are unprofitable servants, Luke 17.10.

Q. Can we of our selves only, believe, repent, and obey?

A. Without Christ we can do nothing, John 15.5.

Q. Whence then have we strength to do all this?

A. All our sufficiency is of God, 2 Cor. 3.5. who works in us both to will
and to do of his good pleasure, Phil. 2.13. his grace is sufficient for us, and
his strength is made perfect in weakness, 2 Cor. 12.9. and we can do all things
through Christ, that strengthens us, Phil. 4.13.

Q. By what does God ordinarily beget Faith in us?

A. Faith is a fruit of the Spirit, Gal. 5.22. and comes by hearing, and by
the word of God, Romans 10.17.

Q Is Preaching of the Word a means of begetting Faith?

A. How shall we hear without a Preacher? and how shall men preach except they
be sent? Romans 10.14, 15. yea it pleases God by the foolishness of preaching to
save them that believe, 1 Cor. 1.21.

Q. Can men by Preaching beget Faith, and other Graces?

A. Neither is he that Planteth any thing, nor he that Waters, but God that
gives the increase, 1 Cor. 3.7. and works effectually in them, Gal. 2.8.
opening our hearts to attend to the things that are spoken, Acts 16.14. and
giving us the spirit of Wisdom in the knowledge of Christ, Ephesians. 1.17, 18.

Q What must we farther do to obtain that Spirit?

A. Our heavenly Father will give the holy Spirit to them that ask him, Luke
11.13.

Q. How did Christ command his Apostles to admit men into his Church?

A. Christ commanded his Apostles, to go teach all Nations, baptizing them in
the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, Mat. 28.19.

Q. Did they thus admit Men Members of the Church by Baptism?

A. They that gladly received the word were baptized, and so were added to the
Church, Acts 2.41. and 47.8.12.

Q. With what matter did they Baptize Men?

A. They Baptized, by washing with water, Acts 8.36. and 38.10.47.

Q. Can the washing with water in the Name of the Trinity make Men Living
Members of Christ, or Heirs of Salvation?

A. Baptism saves us (not the putting away the filth of the Flesh, but the
answer of a good Conscience toward God) by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ, 1
Pet. 3.21. and by one Spirit are we all Baptized into one Body, 1 Cor. 12.13.

Q. What does the washing of Water in Baptism signify?

A. The washing of water in Baptism, signifies the washing of Regeneration, and
renewing of the Holy Ghost, Tit. 3.5. for except a man be born again of water
and of the Holy Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God, John 3.5.

Q. In what does Regeneration, or new birth consist?

A. Regeneration is a dying unto sin, and a living unto God, through Jesus
Christ our Lord, Romans 6.11.

Q. Of whom are we newborn?

A. We are born not of blood, nor of the will of the Flesh, nor of the will of
Man, but of God, John 1.13. the Holy Ghost, John 3.5.

Q. What is the seed of this New Birth?

A. We are born not of corruptible Seed, but of incorruptible, by the Word of
God, which Lives and abides for ever, 1 Pet. 1.23.

Q. What are the Marks of this New Birth?

A. He that is born of God believes that Jesus is the Christ, 1 John 5.1. does
not commit sin, 1 John 3.9. loves his Brethren, 1 John 4.7. and overcomes the
World, 1 John 5.4.

Q. Is Baptism the Sacrament of our Regeneration, or New Birth?

A. We are buried with Christ in Baptism, wherein also we are risen with him,
the Faith of the Operation of God who has raised him from the dead, Col. 2.12.
as many as have been Baptized into Christ have put on Christ, Gal. 3.27. and if
any Man be in Christ, he is a New Creature, 2 Cor. 5.17. quickened together with
him, Col. 2.13. Ephesians. 2.1. and 5.

Q. What did the Apostles call for in those whom they Baptized?

A. The Apostles commanded those whom they Baptized to Repent, Acts 2.38. and
believe, Acts 8.37.

Q. What is the benefit of Baptism rightly received?

A. We are Baptized for the Remission of sins, Acts 2.38.22.16. and he that
believes and is baptized shall be saved, Mark 16.16.

Q. What does our baptism bind us to?

A. We are baptized into Christ's death, Romans 6.4. that the body of sin may be
destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve sin, v. 6. but Crucify the
Flesh with the affections and Lusts, Gal. 5.24. and mortify the deeds of the
Body, Romans 8.13. Col. 3.5.

Q. What else does our Baptism teach and bind us to?

A. That we should walk in newness of Life, Romans 6.4. yielding our selves unto
God as those that are alive from the dead, and our Members as Instruments of
Righteousness unto God, v. 13.

Q. Seeing you are Baptized into the body of Christ by the Spirit of Christ,
what is your duty?

A. We are engaged to keep the Unity of the Spirit in the bond of Peace, Ephesians.
4.3. and not to grieve the Holy Spirit of God whereby we are sealed unto the
day of Redemption, Ephesians. 4.30.

Q. Seeing you are baptized in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
what is your duty?

A. It is our duty, earnestly to contend for the Faith which was once delivered
unto the Saints, Jude 3. holding fast the form of sound words, 2 Timothy 1.13. and
obeying from the Heart that form of Doctrine which was delivered us, Romans 6.17.

Q. Seeing you that are baptized are by the Name of Christ called Christians,
what learn you thence?

A. Let every one that names the name of Christ depart from Iniquity, 2 Timothy
2.19. that the name of God and his Doctrine be not blasphemed, 1 Timothy 6.1. but
that the name of the Lord Jesus may be glorified in us, 2 These. 1.12.

Q. What Spiritual Food has Christ provided for those that are Newborn?

A. As newborn Babes we must desire the sincere Milk of the Word, that we may
grow thereby, 1 Pet. 2.2.

Q. What other Food has Christ provided for those of riper growth?

A. Christ gives us Meat which indureth to everlasting Life, John 6.27. even
the Bread of God which gives Life unto the Worl^, v. 33.

Q. What is this Bread of Life?

A. Christ is that Bread of Life, John 6.48. even his Flesh which he gave for
the Life of the World, v. 51.

Q. Is it necessary that we eat the Flesh of Christ?

A. Except we eat the Flesh of the Son o^ Man, and drink his Blood, we have no
Life in us, John 6.53.

Q. How can we eat the Flesh, and drink the Blood of Christ?

A. We eat and drink Christ by coming to him, and believing on him, John
6.35.40.47.64.

Q. What benefit have we by eating and drinking Christ?

A. Who^o eats Christ's Flesh, and drinks his Blood, has Eternal Life, and
he will raise him up at the last day, John 6.54.

Q. What Sacrament has Christ ordained for our more solemn feeding on him?

A. The Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, 1 Cor. 11.20. the Cup of Blessing, and
the Bread broken, 1 Cor. 10.6.

Q. When did Christ institute the Sacrament of his Supper?

A. The Lord Jesus the same Night that he was betrayed took bread, and when he
had given thanks, he brake it, and said; take, eat, this is my Body which is
broken for you: this do in remembrance of me. After the same manner also he
took the Cup, saying, this Cup is the New Testament in my Blood, this do ye as
often as ye drink it, in remembrance of me, 1 Cor. 11.23, 24, 25. Mat. 26.26,
etc.

Q. What do the Bread and the Wine signify?

A. The Body and Blood of Christ, 1 Cor. 11.24, 25.

Q. What do the Bread broken, and Wine poured out signifies?

A. The ^read broken signifies, that the Body of Christ was given, Luke 22.^9.
and broken, 1 Cor. 11.24. wounded and bruised for us, Isa. 53.5. and the Wine
poured out signifies* that Christ's blood was shed for many for the remission
of sins, Mat. 26.28.

Q. What do our taking, eating, and drinking these signify?

A. Our taking, eating, and drinking the bread and wine signify, the Communion
of the body and blood of Christ, 1 Cor. 10.16.

Q. To what end was the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper ordained?

A. We are to do this in remembrance of Christ, 1 Cor. 11.25. for as often as
we eat this bread, and drink this Cup, we show the Lord's Death till he come,
v. 26.

Q. What does our joint partaking together of this Sacrament signify?

A. Our joint partaking of this Sacrament signifies, that we being many are one
bread and one body, for we are all partakers of that one bread, 1 Cor. 10.17.

Q. What is the danger of receiving this Sacrament unworthily?

A. Whosoever shall eat this bread, and drink this Cup of the Lord unworthily,
shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord, 1 Cor. 11.27. and eats and
drinks judgment to himself, not discerning the Lord's body, v. 29.

Q. What must we do to receive this Sacrament wo^^hily?

A. Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that ^read, and drink of
that Cup, 1 Cor. 11.28.

Q. What mean you by examining a man's self?

A. We must examine our selves, whether we be in the Faith; and prove our own
selves, 2 Cor. 13.5.

Q. What shall become of us when we dye?

A. When we dye, the dust shall return to the Earth as it was, and the Spirit
shall return unto God who gave it, Eccl. 12.7.

Q Shall our Bodies lie for ever in the Earth?

A. No, there shall be a Resurrection of the Dead, both of the just and unjust,
Acts 24.15.

Q. By whom have we the Resurrection from the Dead?

A. As in Adam all dye, so in Christ shall all be made alive, 1 Cor. 15.2. all
that are in the graves shall hear his voice, and shall come forth, they that
have done good unto the Resurrection of Life, and they that have done evil to
the Resurrection of Damnation, John 5.28, 29.

Q. When shall the Resurrection be?

A. At the last day, John 11.24.6.39. the end of the World, Mat. 13.36. when
the Lord himself shall descend from Heaven with a shout, with the voice of the
Archangel, and with the Trump of God, 1 These. 4.16.

Q. Shall the very same Bodies rise again?

A. Yes, this Corruptible must put on Incorruption, and this Mortal shall put
on Immortality, 1 Cor. 15.53.

Q. To what end must we rise again?

A. God has appointed a day in the which he will Judge the World in
Righteousness, by that Man, whom he has ordained, Acts 17.31.

Q. What Man is that?

A. God shall Judge the Secrets of men by Jesus Christ, Romans 2.16. it is he who
was ordained of God to be Judge both of Quick and Dead, Acts 10.42.

Q. Shall all Men be judged by Christ?

A. We must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ, that every one may
receive the things done in his Body, according to that he has done whether it
be good or bad, 2 Cor. 5.10.

Q. What shall be the doom of the Wicked?

A. Christ shall ^^y unto the wicked, depart from me, ye cursed, into
everlasting Fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels, Mat. 25.41. and they
shall go away into everlasting punishment, v. 46. where their Worm dies not,
and the fire is not quenched, Mark 9.48. and there shall be weeping, and
wailing, and gnashing of teeth, v. 50.

Q. What shall be the reward of the Righteous?

A. Christ shall say unto the Righteous, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit
the Kingdom prepared for you from the Foundation of the World, Mat. 25.34. and
they shall go into Life Eternal, v. 46. and shall ever be with the Lord, 1
These. 4.17.

Q. Can you exactly tell me what blessings the Righteous shall enjoy in Heaven?

A. Blessed are the dead which dye in the Lord, they rest from their Labors,
Rev. 14.13. are comforted, Luke 6.25. enter into the joy of their Lord, Mat.
25.21.23. and an Inheritance incorruptible and undefiled, and that fades not
away, 1 Pet. 1.4. but it does not yet appear what we shall be, only we know
that when Christ shall appear, we shall be like him, 1 John 3.2.

Q. In the mean time how ought Christians to behave themselves in this Life?

A. Our Conversation must be as becomes the Gospel of Christ, Phil. 1.27.
walking worthy of God who has called us unto his Kingdom and glory, 1 These.
2.12. being fruitful in every good work, and abounding in the knowledge of God,
Col. 1.10.

Q. How may our Conversation be as becomes the Gospel of Christ?

A. The Grace of God which brings Salvation, teaches us that denying
ungodliness and worldly Lusts, we should live Soberly, Righteously, and Godly
in this present World, Tit. 2.11, 12. and herein should we Exercise our selves,
to have always a Conscience void of Offense toward God and toward Man, Acts
24.16.

Q. Is not the Profession of Christian Religion enough of it self?

A. Not every one that sath unto Christ, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven, but he that does the will of God which is in Heaven, Mat.
7.21.

Q. Do you not make void the Law through Faith?

A. God for-bid; yea, we establish the Law, Romans 3.31. as the body without the
Spirit is ^ead, so Faith without works is dead also, Iam. 2.2^. therefore
blessed are they that keep Christ's Commandments, that they may have ^^ght to
the tree of life, and may enter in through the gates into the City, Rev. 22.14.

Q. What is your duty to God, as he is but One?

A. Because there is but one God, we must worship the Lord our God, and serve
him only, Mat. 4.10. cleave unto him, Deuteronomy. 10.20. and have no other Gods
before him, Exodus 20.3.

Q. What sins are you here especially to take beed of?

A. We must take heed, how we say in our hearts there is no God, Psalm. 14.1. or
have not the knowledge of God, 1 Cor. 15.34. on knowing God, glorify him not as
God, Romans 1.21. or prosessing that we know God, yet in works deny him, Tit.
1.16. or serve the Creature more than the Creator, who is blessed for ever,
Romans 1.25.

Q. How ought you to worship God?

A. God is a Spirit, and they that worship him, must worship him in Spirit and
in Truth, John 4.24.

Q. What sins are we especially to take heed of?

A. No man hath^ seen God's shape, John 5.37. let us take heed, how we liken
him to any thing, or compare any likeness unto him, Isa. 40.18. or corrupt our
selves by making us a graven image, or the likeness of any Figure, Deuteronomy. 4.15.
Romans 1.23. Acts 17.29. to bow down to it, or serve it, Exodus 20.5. or think he
can be worshipped with men's hands, as though he needed any thing, Acts 17.25. or
worship him, teaching for Doctrines the Traditions of men, Mat. 15.9.

Q. What Duties learn you from Gods infinite Knowledge?

A. We must walk before God, and serve him in truth, and with a perfect heart,
and a willing mind, doing that which is good in his sight: for the Lord
searches all hearts, and understands a^ the imaginations of the thoughts, 1 Chronicles. 28.9. Isa. 38.3. Acts 1.24. all things are naked and opened unto his
eyes with whom we have to do, H^b. 4.13. Prove. 5.21. all our ways are before
him, Psalm. 119.168.

Q What sin are you here especially to avoid?

A We must lay aside all guile, and hypocrisies, 1. Pet. 2.^. and not draw nigh
unto God with our mouth, and honor him with our ^^ps, having our hearts far
from him, Mat. 15.7. for the hypocrites hope shall perish, Job 8.13.

Q. What duty owe you to God, as an Almighty God?

A. We must stand in aw of God, and not sin, Psalm 4.4. and fear him who is able
to destroy both soul and body in hell, Mat. 10 28. by the fear of the Lord, men
depart from evil, Prove. 16.6.

Q. Does not Gods Almightiness encourage you against other fears?

A. We must not fear what man can do unto us, Heb. 13.6. if God be for us, who
can be against us? Romans 8.31. let us therefore be strong in the Lord, and in
the power of his might, Ephesians 6.10. not staggering at the Promises of God through
unbelief, Romans 4.20. seeing we are kept by the power of God through faith unto
Salvation, 1 Pet. 1.5. See Genesis 15 1. Psalm. 56.40. Prove. 3.25, 26. Isa. 49.4.

Q. What duty owe you to God, as he is aholy God?

A. It is our Duty to be holy as God is holy, Lev. 11 44. 1 Ioh. 3.3. in all
manner of Conversation, 1 Pet 1.15. 2 Cor. 7.1. abhorring that which is evil,
and cleaving to that which is good, Romans 12.9. abstaining from all appearance
of evil, 1 These. ^.22. and worshipping him in the beauty of holiness, 1 Chronicles.
16.22. Psalm 29.2.69.9.

Q. What is our Duty to God, as he is just?

A. Because God does justly, we must bear the indignation of the Lord, Mic.
7.9. and not despise his chastening, Job 5.17. nor faint when we are rebuked of
him, Heb. 12.5. nor complain for the punishment of our sins, Lam. 3.39. but
confess that he does right, and we do wickedly, Neh. 9.33. Dan. 9.14.

Q* What special kind of sins does God's Justice warn you to avoid?

A. We must pray that God would keep us back from presumptuous sins, Psalm.
19.13. for the soul that does presemptuosly reproacheth the Lord, Number. 15.30.
let us therefore work out our Salvation with fear and trembling, Phil. 2.12.

Q. What does the Goodness, and Mercy of God chiefly teach you?

A. The goodness of God should lead us to Repentance, Romans 2.4. and to praise
the Lord, and give thanks unto him, because his Mercy endures for ever, Ps.
106.1. and to love him who loved us first, 1 Ioh. 14.19.

Q. How ought you to love God?

A. We must love the Lord our God with all our heart, and with all our soul,
and with all our mind, and with all our strength, Mat. 22.38. Mark 12.30.
having none in heaven but him, and desiring none upon earth besides him, Psalm.
73.^^.

Q. How ought you to express your love to God?

A. This is the love of God, that we ke^p (...) Commandments, 1 Ioh. 5.3.

Q. What love is incons^stent with the love of God?

A. If any man love the world, the love of the F^^her is not in him, 1 John,
2.15.

Q. Can a man love God, and not love his Brother?

A. If any man say, I love God, and hates his Brother, he is a liar, 1 Ioh.
4.20.

Q. What duty learn you from God's Truth, and Faithfulness?

A. Because God is faithful, let Patience have her perfect work, Iam. 1.4. and
let us hope to the end, 1 Pet. 1.13. and rejoice in hope of the glory of God,
Romans 5.2. and of eternal life, which God, that cannot lie, has promised before
the world began, Tit. 1.2.

Q. What is the pro^er effect of this hope?

A. Every man that has this hope in him, purifieth himself even as God is
pure, 1 John 3.3. having therefore these promises, let us cleanse our selves
from all filthiness of Flesh and Spirit, perfecting Holiness in the fear of
God, 2 Cor. 7.1.

Q. What does. God's faithfulness teach us in time of affliction and temptation?

A. When we suffer according to the Will of God, let us commit the keeping of
our souls, in well-doing, to him, as unto a Faithful Creator, 1 Pet. 4.19. for
God is faithful, who will not suffer us to be tempted above that we are able,
but will with the Temptation make us a way to escape, that we may be able to
bear it, 1 Cor. 10.13. 2 These. 3.3.

Q What special Duties owe you to God as Governor of the World?

A. Our duty to God as our Governor is, to fear him, and keep his Commandments,
Eccl 12.14. to walk humbly with him, Micah 6.8. to submit our selves to him,
James 4.7. saying, it is the Lord, let him do what seems him good, 1 Samuel
3.18. not our will, but his be done, Luke 22.42. assuring our selves, that all
things work together for good to them that love him, Romans 8.28.

Q. What does God's care and Providence teach you*

A. We must be careful for nothing, but in every thing by prayer and
supplication with Thanksgiving, let our requests be made known unto God, Phil.
4.6. casting all our care upon him who cares for us, 1 Pet. 5.7. Prove.
16.3.3.6.

Q. May we run upon needless dangers trusting to God's Providence?

A. No, it is written, thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God, Mat. 4.7.

Q. May we be idle, neglecting the works of our Calling, trusting in God's
Providence?

A. If any man will not work, neither let him eat, 2 These. 3.10. we must not be
slothful in business, Romans 12.11. but work with our own hands, 1 These. 4.11.

Q. Is all moderate care to provide for our selves and Families unlawful?

A. If any man provide not for his own, especially for those of his own House,
he has denied the Faith, and is worse than an Infidel, 1 Timothy 1.8.

Q. In what sense then must we be careful for nothing?

A. We must not take thought for the Morrow, Mat. 6.34. saying, what shall we
eat? or what shall we drink? or wherewithal shall we be clothed? v. 31.
neither be of doubtful mind, Luke 12.29. but praying God to establish the work
of our hands upon us, Psalm. 90.17. commit our ways unto the Lord, trusting
also in him, and he will bring it to pass, Psalm. 37.5.

Q. Must we not be content with the Portion which God gives us?

A. Our Conversation must be without Covetousness, and we must be content with
such things as we have, for God has said, I will never leave thee nor forsake
thee, Heb. 13.5.

Q. What is it to be content?

A. To be content is, to know every where and in all things, both to be full,
and to be hungry, both to abound and to suffer need, Phil. 4.12. saying, the
Lord gives, and the Lord takes away, blessed be the name of the Lord, Job.
1.21.

Q. May we wilfully lay our selves open to Sa^^ans temptations?

A. No, we must be sober and vigilant, and resist the Devil, steadfast in the
Faith, 1 Pet. 5.8 9. Ephesians. 4.27. for if we resist him he will flee from us,
James 4.7.

Q. How may we be able to resist the Devil?

A. If we put on the whole Armor of God, we shall be able to stand against the
wiles of the Devil, Ephesians. 6.11.

Q What is that Armor of God?

A. We must have our Loins girt about with Truth, having on the breast plate of
Righteousness, our feet shod with the preparation of the Gospel of Peace, above
all taking the Shield of Faith, and the Helmet of Salvation, and the Sword of
the Spirit, which is the Word of God; praying always, and watching thereunto
with all perseverance, Ephesians. 6.14*15, etc.

Q. Must we pray always?

A. Men ought always to pray, and not to faint, Luke 18.1. 1 These. 5.17. Col.
4.2.

Q. To whom must we pray?

A. We must ask the Father in Christ's Name, John 16.23.

Q. For whom must we pray?

A. Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions, and giving of thanks must be made
for all men, 1 Timothy 2.1.

Q. How are we to pray?

A. We must ask, seek, and knock, Mat. 7.7. continuing instant, Romans 12. 12.
and watching, C^ 4.2. in ^ervent prayer, James 5.16. with the Spirit, ^^d with
the understanding ^lso. 1 Cor. 14.15. asking according to Gods Will, 1 John
5.14. in Faith, nothing wavering, Iam. 1.6. lifting up holy hand without wrath
or doubting, 1 Timothy 2.8.

Q. What must we especially avoid in Prayer?

A. We must not, as Hypocrites, pray to be seen of Men, Mat. 6.5. nor, as the
Heathen, use vain repetitions, thinking we shall be heard for our much
speaking, v. 7. nor, as the Pharisee, trusting in our selves that we are
Righteous, and despising others, Luke 18.9. nor, as the Scribes, devouring
Widows Houses, and for a show making long Prayers, Luke 10.47. neither asking
amiss, that we may consume it on our Lusts, James 4.3.

Q. Where must we pray?

A. We must pray every where, 1 Timothy 2.8.

Q. What is the most proper place for private Prayer?

A. When we pray, let us enter into our Closets, and shut the door, and pray to
Father which is in secret, and our Father which sees in secret will reward us
openly, Mat. 6.6.

Q. What is the m^st proper place for public Pra^er?

A. God' House is called the House of Prayer, M^t. 21.13. we must come toget^er
in ^he Church, 1 Cor. 11.18. not forsaking the Assembling of our selves
together, as the manner of some is, Heb. 10.25.

Q. How is God to be Honored in his House?

A. We must keep our foot when we go into the House of God, and be more read^
(...) hear, than to give the Sacrifice of Foo^^, Eccl. 5.1. and not make God's
House a Den of Thieves, Mat. 21.13. or an House of Merchandise, John 2.16. God
is g^eatly to be feared in the Assembly of his Saints, and to be had in
reverence of all them that are about him, Psalm. 89.7.

Q. Has God commanded any time to be set apart for his more solemn Worship?

A. God commanded to remember the Sabbath day, to keep it Holy, Exodus 20.8.

Q. What mean you by a Sabbath day?

A. A Sabbath is a day of rest to the Lord, Exodus 35.2.16.2^.

Q. What day of the week was the Sabbath?

A. In the Seventh day, is the Sabbath of rest, Holy to the Lord, Exodus 31.15.

Q. Why did God command to rest the seventh day?

A. Because God rested on the seventh day from all his Work which he had made,
Genesis 2.2, 3. Exodus 20.11. and because he brought Israel out, when he was a
Servant in the Land of Egypt, Deuteronomy. 5.15. that it might be a sign betwixt God
and the Children of Israel for ever, that they might know that he was the Lord,
that did Sanctify them, Exodus 31.13.17. Ezekiel. 20.12.

Q. Are Christians bound to keep Holy that seventh day?

A. Let no man judge us in respect of the Sabbath days, which are a shadow of
things to come, but the body is of Christ, Col. 2.16, 17.

Q. Of what was the Sabbath days rest a shadow?

A. Of the rest which remains to the People of God, Heb. 4.9.

Q. What is that rest?

A. He that is entered into his rest, he also has ceased from his own works,
even as God did from his, Heb. 4.10.

Q. What works were Lawful to be done on the Sabbath days?

A. It is lawful to do well on the Sabbath da^es, Mat. 12.12. God will have
Mercy, and not Sacrifice, v. 7.

Q. What day do Christians keep Holy to the Lord?

A. Christians keep Holy the first day of the week, Acts 20.7. 1 Cor. 16.2.
when Christ rose from the dead, Mark 16.9. called the Lord's day, Rev. 1.10.

Q. What honor owe you to the Name of God?

A. Holy and Reverend is God's name, Psalm. 111.9. we must call upon his Name,
Psalm. 105.1. fear it, Psalm. 86.11. glory in it, Psalm. 105.3. sing praises to
it, Psalm. 135.3. sing forth the honor of his name, and make his praise
glorious, Psalm. 66.2. and swear by his name, Deuteronomy. 6.13.10.20.

Q. How do men dishonor God's name?

A. We dishonor God, when we take the name of the Lord our God in vain, Ex.
20.7. or profane it, Lev. 19.12. or when we give occasion to the Enemies of
the Lord to blaspheme, 2 Samuel 12.14. so that the Name, or Doctrine, or Word of
God is blasphemed through us, Romans 2.24. 1 Timothy 6.1. Tit. 2.5.

Q. How must we not swear?

1. A. We must not swear by things that are no gods, Ier. 5.^. neither by
Heaven, nor by the Earth, nor by Jerusalem, nor by our Head, nor by any other
Oath, Mat. 5.34, etc. James 5.12.2. We must not swear falsely by God's Name,
Lev. 19.12. nor forswear our selves, Mat. 5.33.3. Nor must we swear ordinarily,
or unnecessarily, but our Communication must be, yea, yea; nay, nay; for
whatsoever is more than these comes of evil, Mat. 5.37. James 5.12.

Q. How then ought we to swear?

A. We must swear, the Lord Lives, in Truth, in Judgment, and in
Righteousness, Ier. 4.2. when an Oath for confirmation may be to men an end of
all strife, Heb. 6.16. and we must perform to the Lord our Oaths, Mat. 5.33.

Q. What is it to swear?

A. To swear is, to call God for a Record, 2 Cor. 1.23. a Witness, Genesis 31.50.
and a Judge, Genesis 31.53.

Q. How must we honor God in his Word?

A. We must with an honest and good heart, hear the Word, keep it, and bring
forth fruit with patience, Luke 8.15. receiving it with meekness, James 2.21.
not as the word of men, but (as it is in Truth) the Word of God, 1 These. 2.13.
able to save our So^ls, James 2.21.

Q. Is it not enough to hear the Word?

A. We must not be forgetful hearers, but doers of the work, Iam. 2.5. letting
the word of Christ dwell in us richly in all wisdom, Col 3.16.

Q. What is it that chiefly hinders the effect of the Word?

A. Cares, and Riches, and pleasures of this Life, choke the Word, that it
brings no Fruit to perfection, Luke 8.14.

Q. Where have you the Word of God?

A. We have the Word of God in the Holy Scriptures, which are given by
inspiration of God, 2 Timothy 3.15, 10. for Holy men of God spoke as they were
moved by the Holy Ghost, 2 Pet. 1.21. Ephesians. 3.5.

Q. Do the Scriptures contain all things necessary to Salvation?

A. The Holy Scriptures are able to make us wise unto Salvation, through Faith
which is Christ Jesus, being profitable for Doctrine, for reproof, for
Correction, for Instruction in Righteousness, that the man of God may be
perfect, thoroughly ^^^nished unto all good works, 2 Timothy 3.^^, 16, 18.

Q. What then is your Duty?

A. We must search the Scriptures, John 5.39. and take heed lest any man spoil
us through Philosophy and vain deceit, after the tradition of men, after the
rudiments of the World, and not after Christ, Col. 2.8.

Q What does Christ in the first place require of all that will follow him?

A. If any man will come after Christ, let him deny himself, and take up his
Cross and follow him, Mat. 16.24.

Q. What mean you by denying our selves?

A. We must count those things which are gain to us but loss for Christ, Phil.
3.7. forsake all that we have, Luke 14.33. hate Father, and Mother, and Wife,
and Children, and Brethren, and Sisters, yea, and our own Life also, to be his
Disciples, Luke 14.26.

Q. How are you to honor God with your Estates?

A. We must honor the Lord with our Substance, and with the First Fruits of
our Increase, Prove. 3.9.

Q. How must we honor God in our Bodies?

A. We must present our Bodies a Living Sacrifice, Holy, acceptable to God,
which is our reasonable Service, Romans 12.1.

Q. What Virtues must we especially practice in o^r Bodies?

A. We must be temperate in all things, 1 Cor. 9.25. Gal. 5.23. 2 Pet. 1.6.

Q. Which is the first part of temperance?

A. Every one of us must know how to posses his Vessel in Sanctification and
honor, not in the lust of Concupiscence, as the Gentiles which know not God, 1
These. 4.4* 5. abstaining from Fornication, v. 3. 1 Cor. 6.18. and all
uncleanness, filthiness, Ephesians. 5.3, 4. and lasciviousness, Gal. 5.20.

Q. What is the other part of temperance?

A. We must not walk in rioting and drunkenness, Romans 13.13. revellings, Gal.
5.21. surfeitings, and the cares of this Life, Luke 21.34. nor make any
provision for the Flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof, Romans 13.14.

Q. How must we honor God in ordinary Discourse?

A. Our speech must be always with Grace, Col. 4.6. that no corrupt
communication proceed out of our Mouth, but that which is good to the use of
edifying, that it may minister grace to the hearers, Ephesians. 4.29.

Q. What thoughts are we to have of our selves?

A. We must not think of our selves more highly than we ought to think; but to
think soberly, according as God has dealt to every man the measure of Faith,
Romans 12.3. neither be wise in our own conceits, v. ^6.

Q. What is the danger of Pride?

A. God resists the proud, and gives grace to the humble, 1 Pet. 5.5.

Q. How are you to carry your selves in reference to the Fashions and Customs
of this World?

A. We must not be conformed to this World, but be transformed by the renewing
of our minds that we may prove what is that good and acceptable, and perfect
will of G^^, Rom 12.2.

Q. Where ought a Christians affections and treasure to be?

A. We must set our affections on things above, not on things on the Earth, Col
3.2. neither must we lay up for our selves Treasures upon Earth, but in Heaven;
for where our Treasure is, there will our Hearts be also, Mat. 6.19, etc.

Q. What is your Duty to your Neighbor?

A. We must love our Neighbors as our selves, Mark 12.31. Mat. 22.39.

Q. What is the general rule of Justice to our Neighbors?

A. Whatsoever we would that Men should do unto us, we must do even so unto
them, Luke 6.31. Mat. 7.12. rendering unto all their dues, Romans 13.7. So loving
not in word, neither in Tongue, but in deed, and in Truth, 1 John 3.18.

Q. How must you express your love to your Neighbors Soul?

A. We must exhort one another, Heb. 10.25. daily, lest any be hardened through
the deceitfulness of sin, Heb. 3.13. teaching and admonishing one another, Col.
3.16. provoking to love, and to good works, Heb 10.24. rebuking, and not
suffering sin upon our Neighbors, Lev. 19.17, restoring those that are
overtaken in a fault in the spirit of meekness, Gal. 6.5. and putting no
stumbling block, or occasion to fall in our brothers way, Romans 14.13.

Q. How must you show your love to the body of your neighbor?

A. He that has two coats, let him impart to him that has none, and he that
has meat, let him do likewise, Luke 3.11. giving him those things which be
needful for the body, Iam. 2.16. Mat, 5.42. 1 John 3.17.

Q. How must we behave our selves toward our neighbor, in reference to his
goods?

A. Let no man seek his own, but every man another wealth, 1 Cor. 10.34.
coveting no man's Silver or Gold, Acts 20.23. nor any thing that is our
neighbors, Ex. 20.17.

Q. What sins of the heart are contrary to the love of our Neighbor?

A. Sins of the heart contrary to brotherly love, are envy, malice, despite,
hatred, wrath, anger, implacableness, unmercifulness, evil surmizings,
emulation, covetousness.

Q. What sins of the tongue are contrary to brotherly love?

A. Sins of the tongue contrary to brotherly love, are, brawling, railing,
whispering, backbiting, false-witness, false-accusing, reviling, tale bearing,
tatling, business in other men's matters, dissimulation, cursing, slandering,
provoking, clamor, and evil-speaking.

Q. What are the sins in deed, contrary to brotherly love?

A. Sins of deed against Brotherly love, are, Murders, Wars, Fightings, biting
and devouring one another, theft, deceit, doing wrong, and defrauding, Covenant
breaking, truce breaking, extortion, strife, variance, the scant measure,
wicked balances, and bag of deceitful weights.

For all these sins see these following Texts, Romans 1.29.30, 31.3.14.12.9.1
Tim. 3.3. and 11.5, 13.6, 4. Tit. 3.2, 3. Gal. 5.19. and 26. and 15. Col. 3.8.
Mark 7.22.10.19. Mat. 15.19.2 Tim. 3.3. 1 Cor. 6.8. and 10. Lev. 19.16. Prove.
11.13. 1 Pet. 4.15. James 3.14. Ephesians. 4.31. 1 These. 4.6. Mic. 6.10, 11.

Q. What is your duty when men trespass against you?

A. If our Brother trespass against us, we must rebuke him, and, if he repent,
forgive him; and if he trespass against us seven times in a day, and seven
times in a day turn again to us, saying, I repent, we must forgive him, Luke
17.3, 4.

Q What is your duty to your Enemies?

A. We must love our Enemies, bless them that curse us, do good to them that
hate us, and pray for them that despitefully use us and persecute us, Mat.
5.44. If our Enemy hunger, we must feed him, if he thirst, we must give him
drink, Romans 12.20.

Q. May you not avenge your selves on your Enemies?

A. We must not avenge our selves, but give place unto wrath, Romans 12.19. nor
recompense to any man evil for evil, v. 17. Prove. 20.22. 1 These. 5.15. nor
railing for railing, but contrariwise blessing, 1 Pet. 3.9. not being overcome
of evil, but overcoming evil with good, Romans 12.21. waiting on the Lord, who
will save ^^, Prove. 20.22. for vengeance is his, and he will repay, Romans 12.19.

Q What are the properties of true Christian Charity?

A. Charity suffers long, and is kind; Charity envyeth not, vaunteth not it
self, is not puffed up, does not behave it self unseemly, seeks not her own,
is not easily provoked, thinks no evil, rejoices not in Iniquity, but
rejoices in the truth; bears all things, believes all things, hops all
things, endures all things, 1 Cor. 13.4, 5, 6, 7.

Q What is your duty when you have offended or wronged others?

A. If we remember that our Brother has ought against us, we must go and be
reconciled to him, Mat. 5.23, 24. conf^ssing our faults, James 5.16. restoring
that we have taken wrongfully, Luke 19.18. Ezekiel. 33.15. owing no man any thing,
but to love one another, Romans 13.8. and as much as lies in us, living
peaceably with all men, Romans 12.18.

Q. What is the duty of Wives to their Husbands?

A. Wives must submit themselves unto their own Husbands, as unto the Lord, in
every thing, Ephesians. 5.22.24. Col. 3.18. with chaste conversation coupled with
fear, and the Ornament of a meek and quiet Spirit, 1 Pet. 3.2, 3, 4. with
shame-facedness and sobriety, 1 Timothy 2.9. reverencing, Ephesians. 5.33. and loving
their Husbands and their Children, being discreet, chaste, keepers at home,
good, Tit. 2.4, 5. guiding the House, and giving none occasion to the Adversary
to speak reproachfully, 1 Timothy 5.14.

Q. What is the duty of Husbands to their Wives?

A. Husbands ought to love their Wives even as their own Bodies, and as Christ
also loved the Church, and gave himself for it, Ephesians. 5.25, and 28. not being
bitter against them, Col. 3.19. but dwelling with them according to knowledge,
and giving honor unto them, as unto the weaker vessel, 1 Pet. 3.7.

Q. May a man put away his wife for any cause?

A. What God has joined together, let no man put asunder Mat. 19.6. whosoever
shall put away his Wife, except it be for Fornication, and shall marry another,
comm^tteth Adultery, v. 9.

Q. What Command has God given to preserve the Chastity and Honor of the
Marriage Bed?

A. God's Command is, thou shall not commit Adultery, Exodus 20.14. Marriage is
honorable in all, and the bed undefiled, but Whore-mongers and Adulterers God
will judge, Heb. 13.4.

Q. What is the duty of Children to their Parents?

A. Children must honor their Father and Mother, Mat. 15.4. Exodus 20.12. Ephesians.
6.2. obeying them in all things, Col. 3.20. in the Lord, Ephesians. 6.1. and
laboring to requite their Parents, 1 Timothy 5.4.

Q. What owe Parents to their Children?

A. Parents must bring up their Children in the Nurture and admonition of the
Lord, Ephesians. 6.4. chastening and correcting them, Heb. 12.7.9. but not provoking
them to Anger, lest they be discouraged, Col. 3.21.

Q. What is the duty of Servants to their Masters?

A. Let Servants count their own Masters w^^thy of h^nour, 1 Timothy 6.1. obeying
them with fear and trembling, in singleness of heart, not with eye service as
men-pleasers, but as the Servants of Christ, doing the will of God from the
heart, Ephesians. 6.5, 6. pleasing them well in all things, not answering them again,
not purloining, but showing all good fidelity, Tit. 2.9, 10. not only to the
good and gentle, but also to the froward, 1 Pet. 2.18.

Q. What is the Duty of Masters toward their Servants?

A. Masters must give unto their Servants that which is just and equal, Col.
4.1. forbearing threatening, knowing that their Master is also in Heaven,
neither is there respect of Persons with God, Ephesians. 6.9

Q. What is the Duty of Subjects to Princes and Magistrates?

A. Let every Soul be Subject to the Higher Powers, Romans 13.1. not only for
wrath, but for Conscience sake, v. 5. submitting to every Ordinance of man for
the Lord's sake, whether to the King as Supreme, or unto Governors, as unto
them that are sent by him, 1 Pet. 2.13, 14. paying them Tribute, Custom, Fear,
and Honor, Romans 13.7. praying and giving thanks for them, 1 Timothy 2.1.

Q. What is the Duty of Magistr^tes?

A. Magistrates are the Ministers of God to their Subjects for good, Romans 13.4.
for the punishment of evil doers, and the praise of them that do well, ^ Pet.
2.14. and are to see, that we lead quiet and peaceable lives under them in all
godliness and honesty, 1 Timothy 2.2.

Q. What if the Magistrate command things contrary to the Law of God?

A. We ought to obey God rather than men, Acts 5.29.

Q. What if the Magistrate persecute you for obeying God?

A. If when we do well, and suffer for it, we take it patiently; this is
acceptable with God, 1 Pet. 2.20. blessed are they which are persecuted for
Righteousness sake, Mat. 5.10. 1 Pet. 3.14.

Q. But may we not rebel, or take Arms against a wicked Prince?

A. Who can stretch forth his hand against the Lord's Anointed and be
guiltless? 1 Samuel 26.9. whosoever resists the power, resists the Ordinance
of God; and they that resist shall receive to themselves damnation, Romans 13.2.

Q. What is your duty to your Pastors and Teachers?

A. We must ^ccount of our Pastors and Teachers, as of the Ministers of Christ,
and Stewards of the Mysteries of God, 1 Cor. 4.1. esteeming them highly in love
for their works sake, 1 These. 5.13. obeying them that have the rule over us,
and submitting our selves, for they watch for our Souls, as they that must give
account, Heb. 13.17. communicating unto them in all good ^h^ngs, Gal. 6.6. for
so has the Lord ordained, that they which Preach the Gospel, should live of
the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9.14.

Q. What is the duty of Ministers?

A. ^^n^sters must take heed to themselves, and to all the Flock, over the
which the Holy G^ost h^th made them Overseers, to f^^d the Church of God which
he has purc^ased with his own Blood, Acts 20.28. not by constraint, but
willingly, not for filt^y lucre, but of a ready mind, neither as being Lords
over God's Heritage, but Ensamples to the Flock, 1 Pet. 5.2, 3. speaking,
exhorting, rebuking with all Authority, Tit. 2.15.

Q. Having given me this account both of your Faith and Duty as a Christian;
now tell me in short, what is the whole design of Preaching the Gospel of
Christ?

A. The Gospel is preached, to open our eyes, and to turn us from d^^kness to
to light, and from the power of Satan unto God, that we may receive forgiveness
of sins, and Inheritance among them that are Sanctified, by the Faith that is
in Christ, Acts 26.18.

Q. What is the danger of not receiving the Gospel of Christ?

A. How shall we escape if we neglect so great Salvation? Heb. 2.13. if we sin
wilfully, after that we have received the knowledge of the Truth, there
remains no more Sacrifice for sins, but a certain fearful looking for of
Judgment, and fiery indignation, which shall devour the Adversaries, Heb.
10.26, 27.

Q. Ouce more tell me the happiness of Christians?

A. They that hold the Doctrine and Truth which is according to Godliness, 1 Timothy 6.3. Tit. 1.1. and by patient continuance in well-doing, seek for Glory
and Honor, and Immortality, to them Christ will render Eternal Life, Romans 2.7.

He that despised Moses Law, ^yed without mercy, under two or three Witnesses:
Of how much sor^r punishment, suppose ye, shall he be thought worthy, who has
trodden under foot the Son of God, and has counted the Blood of the Covenant
wherewith he was Sanctified, an unholy thing, and has done despite unto the
Spirit of Grace? Heb. 10.28, 29.

Some of the most Easy, and Obvious Considerations which may help to Confirm
the Weak, and Unlearned Christian in his Belief OF THE BEING of a GOD AND THE
TRUTH of SCRIPTURE.
THE Foundation of all Religion lies in the belief of a God; for if there were
not a God to be Worshipped by us, then all our Religion were in vain; and
though there be a God, yet if a man do not believe that He is, he can be of no
Religion: all Religion consisting in a firm Belief that there is a God, joined
with an hearty endeavor to please and honor him; a fear to offend him, and a
hope to be made happy by him. Now that the most unlearned may see how
reaso^able a thing it is to believe there is a God whom he ^s bo^nd to Obey and
Worship; let him con^id^r ^hese following things. 1. It has ever been the
general b^d^e of the whole world, that there is a God. Hence let a man thus
reason with himself: 1. I see that, in most things which are not plain to
sense, it is a very rare thing to find many men of one opinion; but even all
they, who differ most from one another, and that in very weighty matters of
Religion, do unanimously agree in this, that there is a God. 2. The best men,
that is, they who do most good in the world, have ever been most forward and
zealous in God's cause. 3. The most Learned, who have spent their strength, and
time, and have the best means to learn the Truth, have satisfied themselves,
and labored to confirm others in the belief of God. 4. The wicked, and worst,
who are also the most of men, could never find any reason to believe there is
no God: but, though they could heartily wish there were none, because the very
thoughts of him are troublesome, disturbing their pleasures, and their wicked
designs, with fear of him; yet do they feel him in their consciences whether
they will or no* 5. They who have denied a God, are but a very few, and so
wicked, that the world has been weary of them, and they could hardly persuade
the world they were in earnest; but rather that their wicked lives did persuade
them to wish there were no God, than that any reason did convince them to
believe so: Yea, all they can say, shows only, that at most they are in doubt,
and fancy for a time (to still their troublesome consciences) some possibility
that there may be no God, whilst they can neither make it certain to
themselves, nor so much as probable to others, who would fainest have it so,
that there is none. Seeing then that the generality of mankind, even the most,
the wisest, and the best, believe it; and a very few only of the very worst, do
rather wish than say, or only say, but cannot prove, that there is no God: I
have no reason yet to think all men in the world either fools in believing, or
knaves in making a lie; but only these very few, whom no man has cause to
account much better.


If any man shall now say, that this universal belief, is only grounded on some
blind Tradition, which some crafty Politician first set on fo^^, that he might
keep the silly world in awe: I ask, who made him so wise as to know that which
for so many thousand years now past, no man has been able to discover? When
began this Tradition? When was it not? Who set it first on foot? was it never
discovered to be so till now? How does it now appear that it is so? Did all men
before, believe there is no God? And is it then a likely thing that all men,
even the wisest, should beat first tamely caught, and ever after blindly led by
a bare hearsay, and that in a matter of such universal, and eternal
concernment to all mankind? By what means did he bring all men to believe him?
Did he by force compel them to it? What mighty man was he that could thus over
awe the world? How sewed up their lips, that no man could tell this lamentable
story? How came it to pass, that when this force abated, men returned not to
their old unbelief? Or did he move men by reason to believe him? They must
needs be very weighty reasons that could persuade all men to come off from
their old unbelief, and to embrace a belief that they saw would fill their
minds with fear, and awe, and put a ^^rb upon their carnal wills, and restrain
their beloved Lusts, and set a bar to their worldly Interests, and stop up the
current of their natural inclinations, and abridge them at once of all their
wonted liberties. If they were not strong and powerful reasons that could do
all this, which certainly must be very hard to do, then why has not the
Atheist all this while, out of love to his supposed truth, with his better
reasons, persuaded the world to that which must needs seem far easier,
considering men's corruptions, generally to cast off the belief of God? But if
they were good reasons, as they must needs be which makes so proud a thing as
man, to own a God above him; then is it reasonable to believe a God. But what
design had this politic man in all this? Did he pretend he had his Laws from
God, and by that device persuade men to submit to them? If he himself believed
no God, it is hard to think what hopes he should conceive, that those reasons
which could not persuade himself, might prevail with all others: besides, if
this was his design, it does not seem to savor much of policy, to persuade men
in love with liberty, to put their necks into his yoke, f^r the sake ^f a God
whom they knew not, or of Religion which they loved not: Again, the wiser sort
might well be supposed as politic as he, and not easy to be gulled out of
their liberrty; and the more simple are rather apt to suspect than believe all
that Politicians commend unto them. Lastly, Did he pretend the universal good
of all mankind, and rationally convince men that the belief of a God that
governs, and shall judge the world is the only thing that preserves good
order in the world? if so, then tell me, did he say the truth, or did he lie in
saying there is a God? If he said truly, then is it a truth, and to be
believed: If it was a lie, then is it for the good of the whole world, and
therefore a duty, to believe a lie, rather than a truth: For if it be a lie to
say, there is a God, then is a lie the Foundation and Pillar of all goodness
and virtue, peace and order, faithfulness and honesty among men: And if it be
true to say, there is no God; then is a truth the Foundation of all wickedness,
disorder and mischief. And who but the Atheist, who can believe any thing but a
God, will be persuaded to believe this.

2. The very works of Nature give the world great reason to believe (^s it
does) that there is a God. Let a man thus again reason with himself.

1. Suppose I were in some unknown Island, and there saw goodly Fields, and
Meadows of Corn and Grass, Pastures full of all kind of Cattle, stately Houses,
and the Rooms in them adorned with rich Furniture, Tables furnished with
variety of Victuals, neat Gardens, fruitful Orchards and Fishponds, with many
other curious works of Art and Skill; though all this while I saw no man in
that place, yet surely I should think, that these things were not thus of
themselves, or by chance; but that some skilful and provident person had thus
ordered them: How can I then look upon this world, and the numerous parts of it
above and below, the wonderful splendour, and beauty, the great variety, the
rare contrivance, the comely and constant order of things, the ample provision
made for every thing, the mutual service, ableness, and usefulness of them all,
and the like; but I must needs believe, that there is some infinitely powerful,
wise, and good Maker and Governor of the world, whom men call God?

2. When I look upon my self, and consider how wounder^^lly I am made; how I am
furnished with all useful Instruments of Life, and Sense, and Motion; how fitly
every part and member of my body is placed, and how wisely contrived and
fashioned, ^oth for the beauty of the whole, and for the particular use and
office to what it serves: what strange powers, and faculties of Soul I have,
and how wonderful are the workings of imagination, fancy and reason within me,
and the like: I must needs think whence I should have these things. I am sure,
I did not thus order them my self, and there was a time when I had none of
them, and when I was not what now I am; and therefore I must needs have both my
being, and all that is in me from some others. Who should this other be? My
Parents, and theirs before them, might say the very same of themselves that I
now do; and they could not make me what I am: they could not certainly promise
themselves a Child, they knew not how I was formed in the Womb, how my parts or
members were set together, nor took they any care to order them; when I was
conceived, they could not tell whether I should be a Man or a Woman, or
Monster, perfect or imperfect, a Wise man or a Fool, ^nor yet whether I should
be born, or live when born. No Man understands half the wonders of himself,
how he is nourished, and grows, and sees, and hears, and thinks, and
dreameth; no, not so much as how his hairs and nails came to be what they are.
What then can I think, but that I am the work of one, who is wonderful in
power, and wisdom, and goodness, who made both me and all Men, even God?

Thirdly, Now that I am, I find that I am not in my own power; I cannot bring
about all my own designs and purposes as I would; I cannot supply my own wants
and imperfections, nor continue to my self all my enjoyments and comforts; I
cannot make my food nourish my Body, nor keep my Body from Sickness or pain,
nor make that part straight which is crooked, or beautiful which is deformed; I
cannot keep out fears, nor rule my thoughts, nor hinder casualties, nor prolong
my Life, nor prevent my Death and Corruption: I am therefore in the power, at
the disposal, and under the Providence of another, by whom I am preserved and
governed, that is, God.

Fourthly, For ought that I can perceive, (and we* must rea^^n from what we can
perceive, and not from what we cannot) Man is the most perfect and Noble of all
things here below. Man has Life, and motion, and sense, and choice, and
understanding, and reason, and discourse; whereas of other things, some want
all, and all want some of these: yea, in all appearance, all these things were
designed for the use and benefit of Man, for they are fitted for his use, and
he can, and does upon occasion use them, and we see no other use of many of
them: I cannot therefore believe that Man was made by any of them, and I am
sure Man did not make them; but both they and Man were made by some other: for
if Man be not of himself, nor in his own power, but governed by another; much
less are those things which appear subject and inferior to Man, of themselves,
or in their own power, but rather are all governed by God the Maker of all.

Lastly, All things are, and work for some end and purpose, even things without
understanding, or sense, or life, work, as it were, by a certain Rule, and that
visibly for the preservation of themselves, and the common good of the World,
and especially of Man. The Heavenly Bodies orderly and duly shed abroad their
influence of Light and heat, to make the Earth fruitful, and direct, and
cherish man and beast: the Earth yields her Fruits in due season for the
nourishment of her Inhabitants; and without the Orderly motion either of the
Earth or Heavenly bodies, that Light and warmth would not be equally
distributed to the several parts of the Earth, and Summer, and Winter, and
Spring, and Harvest, and day and night would not keep their right course, If
the Waters did not contentedly keep within their own banks and Channels, the
Earth would be drowned, and except Vapors did go up, and gather into Clouds,
and come down in seasonable showers, the Earth would be barren, and Man and
Beast would perish. We see how all living Creatures do propagate for the
upholding of their kind; and how Plants bring Seed to the same end, and that
Seed scattered in the Earth furnishes us with a new stock of Plants. We see
how living Creatures are Armed with Natural weapons for their own defense, and
on occasion use them, and those that have none, have either wit and ability to
make for their own use, as Men; or have fli^ht of wing, as Fowls; or speed of
foot, as Hares, etc. or are fitted to make themselves hiding places, as Moles
and Worms, etc. We see how that young things so soon as fallen from their Dams,
seek their food; the little Infant when it knows nothing, naturally seeks the
Pap, and Sucks, which it can hardly be taught to do after it is weaned, and
needs it not. A thousand such things I cannot but observe, which show that
every thing has it is being for some end, and Naturally works for that end, and
yet many of them neither know that end, nor how they work: what then can I
imagine, but that there is some Almighty, and Sovereign power, or God, who
wisely made, and does still direct all things for, and to their several ends
and uses.

If any Man shall now again say, that it is possible all things might be as
they are without a God: I ask, how does he know that this is possible? If he
know it not, why does he say it is? And if he know it, why is he not so kind to
show us how it may be? But suppose it be possible, that things might be without
a God; is it therefore reasonable for me to think that things are not from God,
only because it is possible they might be otherwise, whilst I find great
probabilities to persuade that they are from God? Must I therefore believe I
had no Father, because it is possible I might be without a Father, or rather
because some body may possibly say, it may be I had none; when as I cannot
conceive, nor can he show me any reason why I should think I had none; yea,
whereas I see that all Men generally have Fathers, and there is one whom I call
Father, and of whom all that know me have ever told me that he is my Father,
and the features of my Face, and other resemblances of him in me make it likely
enough that he is my Father; and I have found cause to believe by the Portion
and Estate is given me, that (though he might be dead before I was born, and so
I never saw him) there was one who owned me for his Child, and loved me, and
cared, and provided for me? The whole World of Men witness that there is a God,
the whole course of Nature, and the special tokens in my self, make it highly
reasonable for me to be believe a God; and shall I now not believe it, because
one man or two are bold to tell me, it may be that there is none; certainly I
must believe that which is highly reasonable, rat^er than that which at most is
but possible, and I cannot conceive so much as possible neither.

If it here be said, that God is said to be an Eternal and Infinite being, and
that no Man can possibly comprehend such a Being, and therefore how can any Man
believe that which is incomprehensible? I must say, that it is true, what is
eternal and infinite, is also, as such, incomprehensible, for fully to
comprehend it, were to suppose it to have bounds and limits, which if it had,
it were not eternal nor infinite; yet though I cannot comprehend fully the
eternity and infiniteness of God, I may believe there is a God, who is Eternal
and Infinite, for this is no more than to believe there is a Being, that has
greater perfections than I can understand; and it is so easy for me to believe
this, that I cannot but believe it, for I cannot but believe that there is a
being that has greater perfections than man, because I cannot but believe
there is one who gave to man all his perfections: and I am sure that I cannot
understand all the perfections that be in Man, nor in any thing else, and
therefore much less can I understand all the perfections of him who made man: I
must therefore needs believe there is one of such perfections as I cannot
understand. Yea, it is most certain that all men know so much of Eternity and
Infinity, that they must confess that something is eternal, without beginning;
and something infinite, without bounds; whether they will or no. It cannot be
truly said, that once there was nothing, for then nothing could ever have been;
because where there was nothing, there could be no power or inclination to any
thing, nothing to make or produce any thing: but now we see many things, even a
World. Say then, had the World a beginning, or had it none? If it had a
beginning, was it made by it self, or by some other? It did not make it self,
for before it was made, it was not; and when it was not it could do nothing. If
it was made by some other, then was that other before it, and is the same who
made all things, God. If the World had no beginning, then was it eternal: So we
must grant an eternal Being, an eternal World, or an eternal God. And if
something be eternal, something is infinite, for eternal has no bounds of
duration. If it be then impossible to conceive that once there was nothing, and
then many things began to be without a Maker; then is it impossible not to
believe, and therefore easy to believe something eternal. Is it not then for
me more reasonable to believe an eternal God, who cannot be God if he be not
eternal, than for another to believe an eternal World, which may be a world,
and not eternal? Seeing then all must grant that something is eternal, I have
no reason not to believe a God, only because I cannot comprehend eternity.

I ask once more, how came Man to be? Every man can say, I was begotten by a
Father, and so was my Father, and his before him, and so I must go on, either
without end, or I must stop at some man, who was first of all men. If I go on
without end, and suppose that no Man was first of all, then must I grant an
infinite Succession of Men one after another, and that there has been already
an infinite number of men, and that this infinite number of Men may yet be
greater, and so one infinite may be greater than another, and the same number
infinite and not infinite: and these things are surely incomprehensible, and if
I must be forced to grant something incomprehensible, why should I not believe
an incomprehensible God? Is it not easier for me to conceive an eternal God,
who first made man, then an eternal Succession of short-lived men dropping into
the World one after another, and presently vanishing again? If I stop at some
first man, did that man once begin to be, or did he not? If not, then have we
found an eternal being, an eternal man: and shall it be more reasonable to
believe an eternal man, when we now see all men have beginning, and are Mortal,
then an eternal God, who must be eternal if he be God? Why did that eternal Man
leave Children so unlike himself, of so short a Life? Or what is now become of
him? If he was eternally, he had eternally a power to be, and live, and did
choose to dye, and be no more, and not leave the least notice to the World that
ever he was? Did that first man begin to be? He gave not his beginning to
himself, for before he began to be, he was not: he had it from no other man,
for he was the first man: did he spring out of the Earth? Show what power the
Earth had to prodcue so noble a Creature; and if it had that power, did it
spend it all at once, that it should never before or since bring forth another
man, or any thing like him? I know men may dream of strange things, and tell
their dreams so often, that they may forget they were dreams, and begin to
think them Truths: and because wicked man is afraid of God, he is willing to
set hi^ fancy a^ work to hatch pretty conceits, which he may play and sport
with, and divert himself from harkening to his Conscience, and fom all thoughts
of God, which disturb his quiet, and imbitter his delights with fears of
Judgment: but he shall never be able by reason to satisfy himself, that there
is no God.

3. The content of the whole World persuades me that it is at least a very
great unadvisedness and arrogance, hastily to dis-believe a God; the whole
frame and order of Nature convince me, that it is very reasonable and highly
satisfactory to the mind of man to believe there is a God; but far greater
satisfaction yet a man may receive from those clearer evidences which God has
given to the World of himself, in Prophesies and Miracles. Let a Man therefore
thus reason with himself.

First, Things have been foretold, many hundred years before they came to
pass; and these things have come to pass exactly in all circumstances of time,
place, and manner, as they were foretold. For my own part, I know, that I
cannot tell what shall be to Morrow, or the very next hour; and others who have
ventured to foretell such things, have miserably befooled both themselves, and
all that gave credit to them: only those few who pretended that they came from
God, and gave sufficient evidence to the world that they spoke by God's
Command, have been so happy as to gain credit to the God from whom they came,
as the true God, and to themselves as his true Prophets, by a timely and
evident fulfilling of those things which they did foretell. Now seeing, that
there have been men who have foretold the the things which afterward came to
pass in all circumstances as they were foretold; and such things as did not
depend upon the constant course of Nature, and such as no man else could
foresee; and seeing that these men did profess they knew not these things by
their own Art or Study, nor by any natural means, but only by the revelation
which they had from God; and seeing it is unconceivable how any should know
such things but he alone who governs and orders all things; I cannot but
believe there is a God, who sent these men, and spoke by them.

2. Works have been done, which not only exceed the power of man to do, but are
clearly above the power, and against the course of nature; these are truly
called Miracles, wonderful works. The Fire has refused to burn them that were
cast into it, the Waters have stood up like Walls on each hand, whilst men have
passed dry-foot through the midst of them; the Sun has been made to stand
still for a time, and the dead have been raised to life with a word: these, and
the like things I am sure man has of himself no power to do, nor can any man
imagine by whom they could be done, but by him alone who has the command of
nature. These things were done by men only, who said they came from God, and
to witness to the world that they said truly, and all to persuade the world to
acknowledge God, to fear, worship, and obey him; and therefore I cannot but
believe that there is a God who sent these men, and wrought by them.

If any man now ask, how we know there have been such things as these, he will
receive a fuller answer in that which now follows, to show what reason we have
to believe the Scriptures to be true, wherein these things are recorded.

It is very reasonable to believe, that (if there be a God) he expects some
homage and duty from us; and because we can of our selves but guess, at most,
what duties they be which we are to pay unto him, and so may be mistaken; it is
farther yet very reasonable to believe that God has given us some notice of
his will and pleasure, and some rule to direct us how we may acceptably serve
and honor him: and that he should therein make known unto us so much of
himself, as may beget in us an honuorable esteem, and reverend thoughts of his
Majesty; and so much of his works, as to convince us that we came from him, and
do depend upon him; and so much of his goodness and bounty as may encourage us
to serve him cheerfully; and lastly, such demonstrations of his truth, as may
satisfy us that all this is real, and no guile or deceit in it. The
reasonableness of believing this, upon supposition only that there is a God,
will make it still more reasonable to believe there is a God, when we see that
there is something, which men do receive and own, as a rule sent from God to
teach us how we are to honor him, and that it has all those things in it,
which we suppose it reasonable that such a Rule should have.

Now we have in our hands a book, called the Bible or book, and the Scripture
or Writing, by way of excellency: and it is believed that in this Book we have
the Word of God, whereby he has revealed himself and his will unto us; to
teach us both what we are to believe, and what we are to do, and what we are to
hope for. That then which we are now to be satisfied in, is, how it appears
that this Book does indeed contain the Word of God. Now this Book being made up
of two parts, the Old, and the New Testament, and the Writers of the New
Testament bearing witness to the Writers of the Old Testament, that they came
from God; it will certainly follow, that if the Writings of the New Testament
be true, and from God, the Writings of the Old are so too: Therefore a man need
do no more but satisfy himself in the truth, and Divine Authority of the New
Testament. And here let a man thus reason with himself.

1. I see that we have these Books, and I see whose names they bear, I see that
the men who writ these Books pretend that they spoke from God, and that we
ought to receive these books as the Word of God; and a great part of the world
does receive them as such. Now that such men once were in the world, and that
these books were indeed written by them, I have as much reason to believe as
the matter will bear, that is, as much as I can have to believe any thing that
was done before I was born; and no man can expect more. I find that the
Histories which are generally received throughout the world do make mention of
them, and do record the many oppositions, and persecutions which they met with
in the world, because of what they preached and writ. And of these that witness
of them, some indeed are Friends, such as believe what they write, and build
their Salvation upon it, and therefore would certainly take what pains they
could to be well informed of the truth of it, and cannot be supposed (being
many of them the learned men in the world) to have taken merely on trust a
thing which they thought of such everlasting concernment to all the world, that
they feared not ^he most barbarous Torments and Deaths, but cheerfully suffered
all in defense of it: Others are Enemies, such as believe not what is written,
but yet witness that there were such men, and that thus they writ, and
themselves write against the things here written. Seeing then that we have the
concurr^nt Testim^nies of Friends and Enemies in all ages since these men lived
and wrote, and that now their Writings have been received, and to the death
defended, by a great, and that the most civilized, learned, and wisest, part of
the world, for near upon seventeen hundred years; if I do not believe that such
men there were, and that such things they wrote, I can believe no History, nor
any thing which was, or was done before I was, or that I have not seen: and
this certainly were most absurd.

2. I find that these men who writ these Books do tell us in them, that there
was one then in the world called Jesus Christ, and he was the Son of God, and
came forth from God to teach men the true knowledge of God; and that they were
his Disciples, Scholars and Followers, and were taught by him, and by the
Spirit of God; and were sent forth by him, with command to preach what he had
taught them, to the world; and that this is God's Word which they have left us
in these Books. If then these men speak the truth, then is this God's Word. All
then that I am now to be satisfied in, is, what reason I have to believe that
these men spoke the truth.

3. That these men spoke truth, and writ the truth, and nothing else, I shall
have reason to believe, If I can find that they had all opportunities of
knowing the truth of what they writ; and that they have given sufficient
testimony of their integrity, and fidelity in writing only what they knew.

1. That they had all the opportunities of knowing the truth of what they writ,
I cannot doubt, when I consider that most of them were constantly with Jesus
Christ, and instructed by him: and that all they write is either a relation of
the deeds of Christ, whereof they were eyewitnesses; or of such deeds whereof
themselves were actors; or else such Doctrines as Christ taught them, and they
received from his mouth.

2. That they have given sufficient evidence of their fidelity and honesty in
delivering unto us nothing but the truth which they knew; I cannot but believe
when I consider these things.

1. In some of the chief matters of fact which they relate, which seem of all
others most incredible; and which, if once believed, will certainly give credit
to all they say; as the Death and Burial, and Resurre^tion of Je^^s Christ from
the dead on the third day; they appeal to the Testimonies of a multitude of
witnesses then living: and this is not the custom of men not confident of the
truth of what they say.

2. It cannot be conceived what advantage they could propose unto themselves in
delivering such an untruth to the world: for they could not but foresee that
they were to preach a Doctrine which the reputed Wisemen of the world would
scorn and deride, as a thing incredible to their reason, and contrary to the
Principles which their admired Philosopy was built upon: a Doctrine contrary to
the Religions then professed by the men of the world, and for which they were
most zealous, and all the powers of the world did own and countenance; and in
all probability, would with the Sword endeavor to uphold. Yea they found
themselves indeed derided and persecuted, exposed to hunger and thirst, and
watchings, and stripes, and bonds, and death; and constantly endured all
sufferings, and shame for the Doctrine's sake which they preached: they could
not then propose to themselves worldly wealth, or honors, or pleasures in what
they did* Nor is it reasonable to think they did it merely to get themselves an
empty name hereby; for besides that, they were made a laughing stock both to
Jews and Gentiles, and wholly disreguarded it: it is not usual for men of their
breeding, and mean way of living, to be so ambitiously greedy of a bare name,
as to forgo their whole livelyhoods* endure all miseries, and lay down their
lives to purchase it: yea both their Conversatitions and Doctrines did all
along condemn, and show they were not tainted either with falsehood, or
ambition. Did they then believe themselves what they spoke and writ, or did
they not? If they did not believe it, then did they for the sake of an known,
and unprofitable lie, forsake all that was good and profitable to them in this
world, whilst they had no hopes of another world, and so must needs be
perfectly mad: but they were no mad men, their own writings do abundantly
witness for them. If they did believe what they writ, to be true, and had all
opportunities of knowing the truth, and ^un the hazard of all they had in
professing it, and making it known unto the world, and sought no temporal
advantage to themselves b^ it; then sure we have all reason to believe them
honest and plain-dealing men, and to embrane the Truth which they have left us.

I consider once more, that they were men so unblameable in their Lives, that
the very worst their enemies could say of them, was, that they were a company
of plain, simple, and unlearned men: If so, then is it still more unlikely that
they should of their own brains invent such a Religion, as so great and learned
a part of mankind has now so long a time embraced as the wisest and the best,
and which all must grant did require more than a Fools head to invent it.
Again, if these men had an ambition only to be the Founders of a new Religion;
then either they had real hopes that the world would accept of it, or they had
none: It cannot be thought they had no such hope, for who would suffer what
they did to promote that which they did not hope would prevail? And if they had
any such hope, whence did it arise? They could not hope that all the mighty
Princes, and great Scholars of the world, and men bred and born and zealous in
other Religions, would easily be led into a new one by a few poor,
inconsiderable, unlearned men: nay, if they hoped by their own Authority and
credit to impose this new Religion on men, why were they so free in discovering
their own meanness, and what is more, their own failings and infirmities, which
sure must needs prejudice men from receiving it only upon their commendation
of it. Or did they hope that the Doctrine would commend it self, and so venture
it to be tried only by it is apparent purity and goodness? Then was this
plain-dealing and honesty; and if men embraced it for this, then is it truly
such, and indeed we cannot imagine but that which is received by so great a
part of Mankind, and yet is so contrary to the Religions to which men were
before wedded, and so cross to the designs of worldly, ambitious, and
voluptuous men, who are usually both the greatest and mightiest part of
mankind, must needs have some more than ordinary apparent excellency in it, and
power manifestly going along with it; and so we find still more and more reason
to believe it.

Will any man yet say, that perhaps these few well-meaning honest men were
deceived (as such men are apt to be) by the craft of him whom they followed?
What color of reason has any man to suspect this? First, the works he did
were such as they saw, and not only they, but his Enemies were convinced they
were real. Secondly, those works were enough to convince them that what he
taught them was nothing but the very truth.

First, that wonderful works were wrought by Jesus Christ and his followers,
they who are no Friends to either, but Enemies, do witness. Neither can any man
persuade himself, that the writers of Scriptures durst have published these
things to the World at that time, when there were so many men alive, who would
have disproved them, and declared them liars, and marred their whole design and
credit, if they had been false. They tell us not of things done in a corner,
where others could not see, but in the streets and Marketplaces, and public
Assemblies, and in the presence of thousands, who had seen and tasted of them.

Secondly, the works done were sufficient to prove the Doctrine taught to be of
God. 1. They were professedly done to that end that men might believe it was
from God; and therefore it must be believed that they were such as were fit to
produce such a belief, for if they had not been such as men must reasonably
think they were done by the power of God only, there could be no hopes the
Doctrine would be believed to come from God, because of them. 2. That they were
such as did truly manifest a divine power, the works themselves are enough to
convince us. For who but God, or they with whom God wrought, could make the
blind to see, the lame to walk, the deaf to hear, a few loaves to satisfy, and
much more than satisfy, many thousands? Who could raise the dead to life
again, command sicknesses to depart, the winds to cease, the Seas to be calm,
the Devils to be gone? Who could raise himself from the dead, and go up into
Heaven in the sight of Men, and discover the thoughts of men's hearts, and such
like wonderful works as the world saw done by Jesus Christ and his followers,
but by the power of an Almighty God? Was not all this enough to convince men to
believe that these men came from God, and spoke from God?

Lastly, If after all this it shall appear that the things which are written in
these books, are such things as do well become the Majesty and wisdom, and
goodness of God to make known, and fit for man, on supposition that there be a
God, to know; what m^re can be thought requisite to satisfy any reasonable
man, both that there is a God, and that these books contain his word? Now that
the things are truly worthy of God, and fit for man to know, he cannot choose
but confess that reads and understands them; they being such as all men must
acknowledge, are apt to beget in man, a due and honorable esteem, and reverent
thoughts of God; setting him forth before our eyes as the alone maker,
preserver, and governor of all things; glorious in incomprehensible Majesty,
infinite in power and wisdom, and holiness, and knowledge, and justice, and
goodness: showing us our dependence on him, and his Providence over us, and how
that in his goodness and bounty consists our Life, his Will is our Law, his
favor our only happiness, and his displeasure our destruction* These Books
show us how good God was to us at first in making us with immortal Souls, and
beautiful Bodies, and providing all things necessary for the good of both; and
in giving us the command and use of other Creatures; and how man fell by
disobeying God from that good and comfortable estate, into all manner of
misery, the severe judgments of God on those who stubbornly continue in their
Rebellion against him, and the wonderful courses that God has taken to restore
us to happiness, and the singular mercies of God to all that fear him: And what
things can we imagine fitter than these to persuade man to honor and fear, and
love, and obey God. Again, if we consider the Doctrines commended therein to
our Faith, as the Doctrine of the Trinity, and the Incarnation of Jesus Christ,
and the sending of the Holy Ghost, and the way of pardoning sins, and saving
sinners by the death and Resurrection of the eternal Son of God, and the like;
these things are wonderful and Mysterious; and because they are so, they are
the fitter to beget in us Humility, and Reverence, and admiration; and being so
comfortable, to oblige us to all love and obedience. If we look upon the Laws
and Rules of Life, of worshipping God, and watching over our selves, and loving
our Neighbors; we find them all to be full of all Purity, and Holiness, and
Justice, and Equity, such as we must needs in reason judge fit to be observed:
and the things commanded such as tend most evidently to the glory of God, and
the universal good of all mankind, so that the wit of man cannot possibly
conceive what could have been wiser or better. Lastly, if we consider the
promises and rewards proposed for the encouragement of obedience, and the
threatenings and punishments denounced against all disobedience; we find them
such as truly becomes an eternal God, and most apt to beget obedience to the
Laws of God: for they are not lite and momentany, nor reaching (as those of
men) to the body only and this present Life, but they are infinite and
eternal, of Soul and Body both. Considering all these things, I cannot imagine
what could be more worthy of God to reveal, or necessary for man to know, than
the things contained in these books.

Seeing now that the World has ever believed that there is a God, and that the
very Being, Order, Beauty, variety, use, and working of all things make it
highly reasonable so to believe: Seeing there have been Prophesies and Miracles
such as cannot be conceived possible without a God: Seeing that we have Books
which pretend to make known God and his Will unto us, and that it is most
reasonable, if there be a God, to believe he should some way make this known
unto us: and seeing that the men whose names these books do bear, cannot
reasonably be denied onc^ to have been, and to have written them; neither can
be suspected either of Ignorance or falsehood* Seeing they write of one Jesus
Christ their Master and Teacher, and it cannot be denied that such an one there
was, and that he said he came from God, and confirmed what he said by many
wonderful Works and Miracles, which none can imagine that any power less than
Gods could do: And seeing that the Doctrine which he taught, was spread over a
great part of the World, in a very short time, by men of vulgar Rank, mean
Occupations, and little Learning, and less Authority, without all outward force
or compulsion, without all pomp of seculiar Learning, but with all plainness
and simplicity of speech, and that against the Religion then in possession, and
highly magnified; against the Learning then in great esteem; against all the
beloved Lusts and worldly Interests of men, and the violent endeavors of
powerful and Learned Adversaries: And seeing these men had nothing to bear them
out against all this, but the Miracles which they wrought, and the purity of
their Lives and Doctrines: Seeing the Doctrines of these Books are so evidently
much for the glory of God, so full of all Holiness, so much conducing to the
good of mankind, so satisfactory to the minds of men in things not otherwise to
be known by man; and finally, such as being once received, makes the professors
thereof a most comfortable and cheerful being here, by giving them hopes of an
eternal happy being hereafter: I cannot choose but be fully persuaded, both that
there is a God, and that the Scriptures are the Word of God, and a standing
Rule of believing, and honoring, and serving God in such a way, as he will
graciously accept, and eternally reward.

The chief Heads of the Christian Faith expressed in an Homely, and familiar
Verse, for the easier committing them to memory.
THere is a God: the world did always own it,
Nature declares it, and God's Word has shown it.
The Scriptures given of God by inspiration,
Are the great Rule of Faith and Conversation.
There Is but one God, in Persons three,
The Father, the eternal Son,
And Holy Ghost: and all these be
In Person three, in Essence one.
God is a Spirit, infinite
In Wisdom, Power, and Purity;
Most just, most good, and to whose sight
Our very thoughts all open lie.
God made the World, and every thing,
God preserves all things, is their Lord,
And Rules all as the Sovereign King,
All things obey his Mighty Word.
God in's own Image Man did frame,
With knowledge, and a power to do
God's Will, without both sin and shame,
And made him Lord of all below.
To Adam God a Law did give,
Which if he kept not, he should die;
But if he kept it, he should live,
And so should his Posterity.
Man brake God's Law, and all Mankind
By that first breach are much the worse;
All born in sin, and sin does bind
All under a most heavy Curse.
All are by Nature ignorant,
A verse from good, inclined to evil,
Title to happiness all want,
And all made subject to the Devil.
God's wrath upon us all does lie,
No strength to help our selves we have;
We perish all eternally,
Except God's mercy do us save.
God did on us compassion take,
When by our selves we were undone;
God, merely for his mercy's sake,
Resolved to save us by his Son.
The Son did down from Heaven come,
To save us who by sin were lost,
Was conceived in a Virgin's Womb
By virtue of the Holy Ghost.
Thus God the Son, the eternal Word,
Man's Nature took, and Man became;
Even Jesus Christ our only Lord,
We have Salvation in his Name.
Jesus, in whom no sin was seen,
Did thus become the Mediator
Of a new Covenant between
Us Sinners, and our just Creator.
God did Anoint his Christ to be
A Priest, a Prophet, and a King,
And by these Offices all th^^e,
He does to us Salvation bring.
Christ, as a Prophet, has made known
His Father's will to men, that they
In him might find Salvation,
If they his Gospel would obey.
As Priest, Christ offen'd Sacrifice,
Himself upon the Cross did die;
His blood was of our souls the price,
Which did God's Justice satisfy.
Christ buried was, and rose again
The third day, and to Heaven is gone,
He does at God's right hand remain,
For us makes intercession.
As King, Christ gives us Laws, and all
His Enemies he shall subdue,
Sin, Satan, Death destroy; and shall
Judge all men, and give all their due.
A Crown of Glory he will give
To them that serve him faithfully;
And in his Kingdom they shall live
Triumphing after victory.
Upon the day of Pentecost,
The Apostles met with one accord,
Christ sent on them the Holy Ghost,
TO enable them to Preach his Word*
The Apostles did to all men Preach
Pardon of Sins through Christ alone;
Who did receive what they did teach
Them they Baptized every one.
Baptism's the Sacrament whereby
Men own the Covenant of Grace,
And God does Seal, who cannot lie,
Pardon to them who Christ embrace.
Baptismal washing signifies
Our cleansing by the Holy Spirit,
And whom the Spirit Sanctifies,
They are God's Sons, and shall inherit.
Believers, and none else but they,
In this new Covenant have part:
They who believe, learn to obey,
For Faith does purify the heart.
Faith works by Love; and Love constrains
To hate all sin, to bear Christ's Cross,
To keep Christ's Laws, to endure all pains,
And count all things, for Christ, but loss.
Christ's Spirit does by his Word beget
This saving Faith; and woen it is bred,
It by the same word farther yet
To strength and growth is nourished.
To strengthen Faith yet more, the Lord
Has given unto us Heavenly Food,
He has commanded in his Word
To eat his Body, drink his Blood.
By Bread and Wine, blessed, and recived
With true Repentance, Faith, and Prayer,
God Seals all Benefits believed,
Which by Christ's death once purchased were
We by this Feast, and joint Communion
Our selves one Body testify,
Members knit in a sacred Union,
By the blessed Spirit of Unity.
Believers all one Church do make,
One Faith, one Baptism, and one Bread,
One God, one Spirit, one Lord we take
Christ, of this Body, the only Head.
Whosoever in this Communion die
For ever happy are, and blessed,
Their Souls return to God on high,
In Earth their Bodies sleep and rest.
At the last day Christ shall appear
In Glory, to be Judge of all;
All who are dead, or then live here,
He to his Judgment Seat shall call.
Then shall all Bodies rise again,
And with their Souls receive their doom;
Well-doers shall in joy remain,
Who have done ill, to Woe shall come.
The Righteous with God shall rest,
From Labors, Sins, all Evils free;
With everlasting Glories blessed,
Such as cannot expressed be.
The Wicked shall be sent to Hell,
From God, and Comfort banished;
With Devils in Flames unquenchable,
There roaring in a Fiery Bed.
Thou, who to fear an Hell would have no cause,
Fear God, hate Sin, Love Christ, and keep his Laws.
FINIS.

