A SERMON Preached before the King and Queen, UPON The Second Sunday in Advent,
being the fifth of December, 1686.

By the Reverend Father Dom. PHILIP ELLIS, Monk of the Holy Order, of Saint
Benedict and of the English Congr. Chaplain in Ordinary, and Preacher to Their
MAJESTY'S.

Published by His Majesty's Command.

LONDON, Printed by Henry Hills, Printer to the King's Most Excellent Majesty,
for his Household and Chapel. 1686.

A SERMON Preached before the King and Queen Upon the second Sunday in Advent,
being the fifth of December, 1686.
MATTHEW. 11.2. Joannes in vinculis.

John in Prison.


STrange surprising News, (Sacred Majesty) John in Prison. Luke 1.13.
John the Child of Prayer, 11.
the gift and darling of Heaven, the mighty subject of an Angels Embassy,
himself an Angel, Matthew. 11.10.
and is he in Prison? John filled with the Holy Ghost in the very Womb, Luke
1.15.41.66.
filling his Mother with Prophecy, and all people with Admiration, as soon as
he appeared in the world, and is he in Chains? Is this the Character of the
greatest Man who ever rose among the Sons of Women? In vinculis. Vulgat. Matthew.
11.11. Luke 1.17.
Is this the Herald, the Precursor sent to prepare the Messiah's way in the
Spirit and Power of Elias? But he is tamely seized, 2 Kings 1.10.
and committed to Goal, when Elias would have called down fire from Heaven to
consume the Sacrilegious hand. Is this the powerful Man who was to convert the
hearts of the Fathers to the Children, Luke 1.17. Et Incredulos ad prudentiam
justorum. Vulgat.
and the Disobedient to the Wisdom of the Just? I should not have wondered at
his Fathers incredulity, had he foreseen the passage of this day; he would have
been struck dumb without a Miracle, horror and amazement would have done the
Work; unless I may call it a greater Miracle, that John IN PRISON heard the
Works of Christ, than all the Miraculous Works he heard. (...). Metuebat. Vulg.
reverebatur Rub. in concord.
In short, is this the Man whom Herod not only esteemed, but also knew for
certainty to be Just and Holy? Sciens illum justum and Sanctum; and what could
have endeared him so much to a wise Prince? and St. Mark seems to imply no
less, Marc. 6.20. (...). conservabat. Montan.
custodiebat eum, he kept him; who would doubt but as a Counselor and a
Friend? and so the Evangelist goes on, audito eo multa faciebat, he did many
things by his advice, and heard him gladly. So far it is very well; it is what we
expected. But St. Luke says, Luke 3.20.
he added one thing over and above, adjecit and hoc super omnia, he shut him
up, not in his Closet, but in Prison. Strange Paradox of Providence! strange
turn of Fortune! strange Emblem of human Mutability! a fresh instance of that
old Lesson, put not your trust in Princes, Psalm. 146.3.
nor in the Sons of Men, in whom is no Salvation, for JOHN IS IN PRISON.

But what real or pretended Crime could be laid to the charge of a person so
useful to his Prince, so serviceable to the Public, so just, so holy and
inoffensive in his Private capacity? The Gospel being but an Abridgement of
Transactions, sets down only the immediate cause, the immediate provocation,
because, says St. Luke, Herod the Tetrarch was reproved by him, cum
corriperetur ab eo, for Herodias his Brothers Wife, Luke 3.19.
( because he had Married her, says St. Mark, Mark 6.17.
his Brother being yet alive,) and for all the evils which he had done.

But Josephus Antiq. l. 18. c. 10. as a Statesman and Politician dives into the
bottom of the difference, and discovers the first spring which moved Herod
against the Baptist; because he excited people to the practice of Virtue and
Justice, quia praecipiebat Judaeis virtuti dare operam, justitiam colere: upon
which Doctrine, as guilt is ever jealous, but commonly in the wrong place,
corrupt Ministers, and a Government noted for many Injustices, Et de omnibus
malis quae fecit. Luke, ibid.
pretended to ground their politic and irreligious suspicion, that it would be
of dangerous consequence; a general reason for every thing one has a mind to
obstruct, when no other reason can be given: That it was not yet time to suffer
such Doctrine to be preached, ne novi aliquid fiat, as the Historian continues,
least it should cause some disturbance in the State; wherefore, says he, upon
this sole suspicion, not for any real ground of it, but upon the apprehension
of consequences merely imaginary, John began to decline in the Tetrarch's
favor, the Tetrarch began to fear whom he ceased to love; he first opened his
Ears to Accusations against him, and then his Hand to seize him, tenuit eum,
and behold Joannes in Vinculis, John is in Prison.

And here let us leave a while this Martyr of Justice, to consider a little the
weight and importance of his Doctrine; How much JUSTICE conduces to the
happiness both of Prince and People, when its Dictates are followed, and what
reparation is required when they are neglected. The first comprehends the
Nature, the Excellence, and the several Species of Justice, and shall be
treated in my first part: The second regards the violation of it, as it is
reparable; where I shall speak of RESTITUTION, and Conclude.

Let us beg a portion of his Spirit, of his Firmness and Courage, that I may
not sink the Reputation of that Cause, which he so gloriously maintained; but
as I cannot hope to bear it up to that height, so it is my comfort that I need
not, since I speak to an Assembly already prepared to receive a Doctrine so
agreeable to Reason, and essential to the Law of Christ, who came into the
world, to publish his word to Jacob, Psalm. 147.19.
his justice and judgments to Israel, when the Angel saluted the B. Virgin in
the same terms we make our usual addresses to her,

Hail Mary full of Grace, etc.

IT is the first and greatest commendation of Justice, that it comprehends all
virtues in it self, runs through every branch of the Divine and Humane Law, and
verifies the bold assertion of a Learned Writer, that, as never any thing was
well done which was not directed by Justice; so never any thing was done with a
right intention, if it was not for the sake of Justice. The Ancient Author of
the Imperfect Work among those of St. Author. oper. impert. apud Chrysostom. Hom.
34.
John Chrysostom, ingeniously proposes Justice as the Vine, all other Virtues
as the Branches which are vegetated and nourished with the Juice and Spirits,
which are transmitted to them from this Mother-Stock. And what can be a greater
eviction of this Truth, than the Holy Ghost's generally using that Name for the
perfection of all, and promiscuously for every Virtue? For when he would
deliver the verbum breviatum, speak much of a Man in a little, a Panegyric in
a word, he calls him Just; Thus when he would raise in our minds a high esteem
of Noe, he calls him a just and perfect man, Genesis 6.9.
Noe vir justus atque perfectus; when he would commend the extraordinary Piety
and singular Prudence of St. Joseph, Joseph cum esset justus; Mat. 1.19.
when he would represent in one view all the virtues of our Baptist's Parents,
Luke 1.6.
erant ambo justi: And in fine, when he had drawn the Portraict of our
Redeemer, with his Government upon his Shoulder, to express his Sovereignty, he
calls him Wonderful, Isa. 9.6.
for his Conduct; Councellor, for his Knowledge; the Mighty God, for his Power;
the Everlasting Father, for his Affection to his People; the Prince of Peace,
for the Tranquillity of his Reign; and this, says he, is his Name, his Style,
Character and Property, vocabiter nomen ejus; Hoc est nomen quod vocabunt eum.
Jer. 23.6.
all which he sums up elsewhere in one word, Dominus justus noster, our Lord,
our King the Just.

From which, and many such instances it appears, as St. John Chrysostom
observes, Hom. 23.
That a just man is a denomination which implies all virtue; that Justice (as
he speaks in Psalm 14.) is a compound of many virtues, and one active virtue
does not make a virtue, Justitia conflatur ex multis virtutibus, and una virtus
activa non facit virtutem.
una virtus activa non facit virtutem. How, Great Doctor! is not one Virtue a
Virtue? No, replies he, no more than the loss of one Plank makes a Wreck, or
one Stone can build an House: A Ship cannot be built without Planks, nor a
House without Materials; but Planks without mortressing, and Stones without
Cement are of little or no service: so are all other Virtues without Justice;
They are loose and disjoined, they cannot denominate a man Virtuous, because
they cannot denominate him JUST.

I know our Pulpits continually ring with the praises of Charity, as the Mother
and Mistress of all other Virtues, and little is heard of Justice. But you are
to observe that the Pulpit, in preaching Christianity, supposes Morality; as
one who labors to beautify and adorn a Fabric, supposes the Foundation is
well laid, otherwise it would be madness to spend his Time, his Money and
Industry upon a House which may likely fall upon his Head, and bury him with
his Art and Charges in the Rubbage.

Now Justice is the ground of Moral Virtues, as Charity is of the Christian:
and as it is a folly to think to be pious without first being honest; so it is
a fond hope, and senseless endeavor to superstruct Charity where Justice has
not secured the Foundation.

To proceed therefore from the more general and larger acceptance of the word,
to the common and more restrained use of it, as it signifies a particular
virtue, it is defined by Divines and Moralists, after Ulpian, Ulp. L. de just:
p de jus n: and jure.
constans and perpetua voluntas, jus suum cuique tribuendi, a constant and
unchangeable Will, and Resolution of giving to every one what belongs to him,
whether in Buying and Selling, or any sort of Trade or Exchange, which we call
Commutative Justice: or by dealing out Rewards or Favors, with respect to the
Merit, or Fidelity of Persons, which we call Distributive Jnstice: or
performing that Service, which every one in his respective station is bound to
exhibit to the Public, which is termed Legal Justice, or restoring the Goods
and Effects of another, which we have destroyed, or unjustly detained, which is
called Restitution. I purposely abstain from mentioning that sort of Justice,
which inflicts Punishments, and is called Vindictive: I speak nothing of it, I
say, partly because, it is a Branch of the Distributive; and partly because it is
more the business of the Bar, than of the Pulpit; and because I desire the
Audience should not think I exceed my Commission; I speak of the Divine, not of
the Human Justice, I summon you to the Inward Tribunal; and if I threaten
Punishment, I mean not that which is inflicted by the Temporal Power.

This premised, I affirm, any wilful and premeditated offense against one or
more of these species of Justice, constitutes a Man formally unjust; and this
not only by Committing, or doing wrong, but also by Omitting, or neglecting to
do what we ought, neque minus omissione reddi hominem injustum quam
commissione, say the Divines; And in such cases, the Dictates of right Reason,
as well as the precepts of Religion, command us to make reparation if we desire
to be forgiven; of which more in my Second part; at present, it will be
sufficient to illustrate the Doctrine by an Example or two, in each of these
heads, as far as the Time will allow.

First, If you have taken advantage of the necessities of your Neighbors and
upon that account sold things dearer than the true value or common price; you
have sinned against Commutative Justice, and stand obliged to Restitution. If
you have laid hold of the inadvertencie or ignorance of the seller, and
surpised him into an inconsiderate bargain; you have sinned against
Commutative Justice: which sentences you to Restitution. What you call a good
bargain is a deceit: you have not bought, but cheated.

Secondly, If you asperse the Reputation of your Neighbor, either take away
his good Name, or notably prejudice it, by Detraction, Drollery Inventing or
Dispersing Satyr, Imposing a False, or Revealing a Secret Crime, you have
offended against Distributive Justice, Romans 13.7.
which enacts honor to whom honor is due, and obliges you to Restitution,
even with the peril of your own fame, under pain of being the Aversion of
Mankind, hominum abominatio, says the wise Man: Prove. 24.9.
of being excluded from the common society of Men, cum Detractoribus ne
comedas: 21.
This sin of Detraction, being one of those for which God delivers Men over to
a reprobate sense, as he did the Gentiles; Detractores, Deo odibiles, Romans
1.28. and 30.
etc. For if one who has wronged another in his goods, is bound to repair the
injury with the expense even of his own, (as all Men acknowledge;) with more
reason shall he, who has committed a crime of a more heinous nature, and in an
higher subject, be adjudged to a severer compensation. And if Calumny be a
greater crime than Theft or Rapine, because it issues from a deeper malice, and
leaves behind it a greater prejudice; how came you to persuade your selves the
obligation of restoring, should be less? If the person injured be sacred, it is
not a Simple Defamation, but a Sacrilege; It is an Invasion as well upon the
Religion as Government; and to deface the Character of your Temporal or
Spiritual Superiors, is so much worse than profaning Churches and robbing
Altars, as it is worse to mangle or destroy God's living Representation, than
to demolish the dead: Diis non detrahes, and Principi populi tui non maledices:
Thou shall not revile the Gods, nor speak evil of the Ruler of thy People;
Exodus 22.28. Speak not evil one of another; James 4.11. In cogitatione tua Regi
ne detrahas, Debase not the King in thy very thoughts, Eccl. 10.20.
Wherefore then were you not afraid to speak evil of my Servant? Number. 12.8.

Thirdly, All acceptance of persons, whether in deciding differences between
Man and Man, or in conferring real Honors, places of Trust and Preferment in
the Commonwealth, is a violation of Distributive Justice, which obliges the
Magistrate, if not to proportion the reward to the Merit; at least to place the
Reward with the Merit: nor to accept persons, but upon account of a greater
desert, either of Service, or Capacity. In all other cases, that decision of
St. James falls heavy upon Men in public Employments; Si personas accipitis,
peccatum operamini, If you have respect to persons, James 2.9.
you commit sin, being convicted by the Law, as Transgressors of it. But what
Law is there which binds a Man to the choice of those who are to serve under
him, or in whom he pleases to repose a confidence?

First, The Law of Nature, which is nothing but the in born Rudiments of
Justice, prompting us to give every one, what in right and equity belongs to
him; reddere vnicuique quod suum est: Merit and Retribution are Relatives;
Merit therefore is a Right which Equity is bound to acknowledge, and what
Equity acknowledges, Justice is bound to pay. Public service, and suffering
for the Public are of equal weight: they balance each other when Justice
holds the Scale, they deserve an equal Reward; but he that suffers for
Justice-sake, weighs down Both. Innocence is the Palm Tree which naturally
grows under the weight, and by consequence ought to rise so much the higher, as
it was more depressed.

Secondly, The Law of God, as well declaring as acting; Deuteronomy. 1.16.
nulla erit distantia personarum, there shall be no distinction of Persons, say
the Pandects of Heaven, neither at the Bar, nor at the Board, nor upon the
account of Religion, much less of ungrounded Suspicion. John 7.24.
Nolite judicare secundum faciem, says our Blessed Savior, judge not
according to the face, which some men set upon things or persons; No, nor
according to the opinion of the Greater number, who are swayed by a contrary
Interest, says the Eternal Justice; Exodus 23.2.
in judicio non acquiesces plurimorum sententiae, nec accipies cujusquam
personam, ut a vero devies: in Judgment, i. e. in assigning rewards as well as
otherwise, do not acquiesce to the opinion even of the most, nor accept the
person of any Body whatsoever, so far as to depart from what is right in thy
own judgment: as if he had said, If you do exclude persons whom you think
deserving in your own judgment, either upon appearances, or the erring opinion
even of the most, you will depart from Justice. Now, the New Law, raising every
positive Commandment of the Old to a greater perfection, more is required in
this kind of the Christian Magistrate, than of the other, who acts merely by
the Law of Nature and Dictamen of Reason, or the brighter, yet imperfect and
glimmering Light of the Mosaical. Wherefore St. James 2.1. seriously admonishes
us to have a care That we do not hold the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ,
together with respect of persons, in personarum acceptione nolite possidere
fidem Domini nostri Jesu Cbristi; implying that such a proceeding is contrary
to the Economy and Justice, and by consequence, is a Prevarication of the
Faith we profess.

And the reason of this is evident, for every person who confers employments,
or has dependences, acts either ex officio, as the supreme Magistrate; a man
upon his own Estate, a Master in his Family; or else by Commission, as
subordinate Officers.

If he act ex officio, Justice and his Duty to the Public Weal oblige him to
delegate his Power to such as his own Judgment and Conscience represent to him
as the most faithful and ablest Ministers: For as he is obliged to carry the
Reputation of his Country and the Public Good, not to any determinate degree,
but as high as his utmost Prudence and Endeavors can reach: so is he bound in
Justice to make use of those Instruments which are best proportioned to that
End; and where there is equal Capacity, or but little inferior, a more approved
Honesty and Tenderness of Conscience ought to take place. If the person act
only by Commission, his Power is less, but his Duty is as great, in this kind,
as far as his Power extends; and he is bound in Justice to put the Places which
are in his Gift, not into such Hands as will give most for them, (which is
Extortion upon the Public) or are nearest related to him, (which is another
sort of Bribery, that of Affection,) or will more espouse and advance his
Interest, (which is but the Farming out an Office) but into such as will be
most Honest, and Careful, and Circumspect: For though the best Man is not
always the best Qualified for Employment, yet Virtue is the better Title, where
the Capacity is sufficient, because a Vicious Man can hardly be Just; for he
wants the Divine Assistance, and bottoms his Honesty only upon Moral Virtue,
which does very seldom bear up its Name in practice, and when it does,
generally the Temptation of Dishonesty is overcome, merely by a sense of
Honor: a doubtful case, where a man is to conquer one Passion by another.
Wherefore the Holy Fathers and Divines, I think of all Religions within the
Pale of Christianity, and I might take the Jew and the Gentile, the Rabbi and
the Philosopher, into the number: All Divines and Moralists, I say, unanimously
agree, that such as employ men who are corrupt in their judgments, exacting
upon the Poor, taking Bribes, or diverting the Public Stock, etc. are obliged
to Restitution, and to repair their Faults, if the Offenders do not do it
themselves, which indeed is possible, but not reasonably to be expected*

4ly. But there is another sort of Justice, which we call Legal, and touches
not only men in Employments, but reaches all who are capable of serving the
Public, and from whose service they are bound in Justice not to withdraw
themselves; bound not only to have their Loins girt; and be found in a
readiness when they are called; but even in their several respective stations
to promote the Public Good, and prefer it to the Private, whether Reputation
or Interest. For as every one is a part of the Civil Society, and enjoys the
Blessings and Protection of it; so every one has a Special Duty incumbent on
him to procure and promote the good of that Society: For the good of the Part
is ordered to the Whole, and the good of the Whole communicates it self to each
Member. And therefore when a man behaves himself merely passive to the
Community, much more when he vilifies the Government, and exasperates peoples
mind against it; he is a Monstrous member of the Commonwealth, and is obliged
to Restitution, that is, to rectify, and atone for his former coldness and
indifferency, with diligence for the future, with more than common Instances of
Loyalty, and Endeavors to set their hearts right, which by his Example or
Discourses have been alienated from the Government.

Thus have I given you a slight view of Justice in all it is Branches, and
crowded the Subject of whole Volumes, and indeed of ones whole Life into few
words. And having shown the great Duty of Restitution to be far more obliging,
and of far greater extent than people generally imagine; It is time I proceed
to Treat of it in the common sense and vulgar usage of the Word, which imports
only one sort of Restitution, when another's Goods are unjustly taken or
detained, whether by Theft, or Robbery, by Rapine or Extortion, and even by
forms of Law. Your Attention, and my Second Part.

SECOND PART.
Some, who in other matters accuse the Catholic Chuch of imposing too great
severities upon her Children, in this think her so impiously indulgent, as to
connive at Injustices, to sell Pardons for sins, and to allow of unjust
Possessions, provided she goes shares with the Possessour; and in short, that
she dispenses with all sorts of Restitution, unless it be to her self. But in
Truth, this last sort is the only Restitution she can dispense with, Sermon
before the King upon All Saints of the Order of St. B. Nov. 13.
and which she has actually, solemnly, and irrevocably done, as I lately proved
in reference to Abbey-Lands: She can renounce her own Title, but not another;
For in all other cases it is, and ever was her Doctrine and practice, sicut non
satisfit Deo. de injuria sibi illata, nisi per paenitentiam: ita nec proximo de
re spoliata, nisi per justam Restitutionem, S. Thom. Tom. 1. Opusc. cap. 17.
as the great Master of our Schools expresses it; As we cannot appease our God
for an injury done to him, but by a serious Repentance: so cannot we satisfy
our Neighbor for usurping his Goods, but by a full Restitution. He had learnt
this Doctrine of St. Gregory, whose Judgment is become that of the whole
Church, being inserted into the Body of our Canon Law: Qui bona alterius, etc.
Decret. Par. 2. de paenit. Did. 5. Cap. Falsas.
Who unjustly detains the goods of another, must at the same time acknowledge
he cannot do that Penance, or make that Satisfaction which will carry him to
Heaven, tho he may come off in this World, and in the eyes of Men, unless he
restore what he has unjustly seized. St. Gregory had learnt this Doctrine of
St. Aug. Ep. 54.
Augustine who in his 54th. Epistle to Macedonius, a Man of great Authority in
the Roman Empire, si res aliena propter quam peccatum est, non redditur, non
agitur paenitentia, sed fingitur. If the thing wherein you sinned by taking or
detaining, be not restored, you do not repent, but counterfeit Repentance. And
the reason of this is clear, for to obtain an end, we are obliged to use the
necessary means. Now there are two sorts of means, by which we are to work out
our Salvation; both necessary, but not equally so: The first is necessitas
precepti, necessary because commanded, as Fasting and Alms-deeds, etc. which
are then binding, when we are in the circumstance and condition to perform
them. The second, necessitas medii, necessary, because the end, without the
means cannot be obtained, as Faith in Christ in order to Eternal Life, the Love
of God and our Neighbor, etc. Now God has affixt both these necessities to
Restitution; that of Command is frequently repeated and urged in both
Testaments. In the Old, having provided for his own Love and Service in very
few Commandments, he imploys more than twice the number in securing the Rights,
and fenceing in the Goods of our Neighbor; and to imprint in us a greater
horror of usurping them, he forbids even the Desire, Non concupisces; and to
imprint in us a greater horror of detaining them, he will not permit his own
people to keep the wages of an hired Servant even till the next Morning. Levit.
19.13.
In the New Testament he does not repeat, but supposes the Moral Law as to
honesty; but proceeds to the perfection of it, a Consummated Virtue. This
Zachaeus understood, who without expecting any particular Order from Jesus
Christ, promises; Si quid aliquem defraudavi, if I have defrauded or wronged
any one, Luke 19.8. 2 Samuel 12.6.
I restore him fourfold. This the Moral Law obliged him to: The other Article,
Behold I give half my goods to the Poor, was in compliance to the Evangelical,
which enacts, quod superest date Elecmosynam; Luke 11.41.
what you have over and above necessity and decency, give it in Alms. Now he
that obliges us to give what is our own, will he dispense with us from rendering
what is not our own?

Secondly, This Duty of Restitution is necessary necessitate medii; it is
absolutely necessary; neither Divine, nor Human Power can dispense with the
performance of it; and nothing but a formal and absolute incapacity can excuse
us; for no body can be obliged to what is impossible. Yet this absolute
incapacity does not take away the obligation, but only suspends it for the
time; for it still returns upon us when we are able in any degree to comply
with it: I said, not the Divine Power; I said it, and I prove it. For there are
two injuries involved in every unjust action, or quasi-action, that is,
Nonrestitution; the one to God, who suffers by the violation of his
Commandment; the other to your Neighbor, who suffers by the loss or detention
of his Goods or Inheritance: Whence arise two distinct obligations; the one, of
satisfying God, whose honor and Sovereignty you have incroach'd upon by
disobedience; the other, of satisfying your Neighbor, whose tears, whose
wants, and even whose desires cry to Heaven for vengeance against you; Psalm.
10.17.
for our Lord hears the desire of the Poor, says the Royal Prophet. With this
Load upon your Conscience, you place your self in your Oratory, or come to the
Feet of your Confessor, you protest you are sorry for having offended God,
Psalm. 51.17.
and come to beg pardon of him who will not despise an humble and a contrite
heart. No question God would regard your sorrow, and have compassion upon your
tears, were the injury directed only against himself: But your Neighbor is a
party offended too; you beg not pardon of him, you still retain his Goods, you
grasp his Inheritance; his Children serve you upon their own Estates, Matthew.
5.24.
vade prius reconciliari fratri tuo; Go then says he, Go, and be first
reconciled to your Brother, repair the wrong, or compound it. Till one of these
be done, all your offerings are profane; Isa. 1.13.
Bring me no more vain oblations; All your observance of Religious duties, and
even your appointed Feasts, 14.
my Soul hates: even the Sabbaths, which I commanded. Iniqui sunt caetus
vestri; your solemn meetings are iniquity; They receive a tincture of Injustice
from that of the mind you bring to them. All your Alms are fruitless; They are
not your own; ex substantia tua fac Eleemosynas; Tob. 4.7.
to merit that Name, they must be done out of your own substance, not
another's. Indeed Charity covers a multitude of sins, 1 Pet. 4.8.
but why does not St. Peter say all sins, as Holy Toby 4.11. ab omni peccato
liberat? The Apostle seems to allude to, and explain this Text: For some Crimes
there are, which Charity it self cannot cover; she may varnish them over, but
can never efface them; and these are sins against Justice. To be short, your
very Repentance is false and counterfeit, non agitur paenitentia, sed fingitur;
Aug. supra.
your hopes of pardon are ungrounded and impudent; and when you spread forth
your hands to receive it, Isa. 1.15.
I will hide mine eyes from you: Your very Prayers, the only means left, become
a fresh provocation, and heighten your guilt, cum multiplicaveritis orationem,
non exaudiam, when you multiply them upon me, I will not hear.

But why have thou set us up as a mark against thee? Job. 7.20.
Why have thou marked us out for slaughter, Lament. 5.20.
O thou preserver of Men! wherefore do thou forget us for ever, and forsake
us so long a time? Isa. 59.3.
Because your hands are defiled with blood, and your fingers with iniquity. If
he who neglects to feed the Poor in necessity, is properly said by St. Austin
to Murder them, (si non pavisti, occidisti;) certainly he who reduces them to
necessity, and continues them in it, is guilty of a double Murder: Manus
vestrae plenae sunt sanguine, both your hands are full of Blood; the one for
taking, the other, for detaining. As for other offenses which strike only at
himself, as all the breaches of the first Table, he alone can, and is ever
ready to forgive them; but the injuries aimed at him through your Neighbor, as
Detraction, Oppression, Robbery, or Rapine, non dimittitur peccatum, etc. God
cannot pardon them I say, by the ordinary course of his Grace, and without a
Miracle, except the offenders ignorance be invincible, after he has used his
best endeavors to inform himself in his Fortune and Estate, according to the
Example of Holy Tobias, Tob. 2.21.
ne forte furtivus sit, lest any part of what he possesses came to him by
indirect ways.

But what a phrenzy and alienation of mind is it in a Christian to desire those
Riches which Providence has refused him? If you did Lawfully possess those
Goods you Unlawfully enjoy, the Baptist would advice you to return them to the
Donor in relief of the Poor: But what would he say, did he see us coveting our
Neighbors Possessions, or detaining them with an Unjust Hand, tearing them
from the Widow and the Orphan, and not regarding them, while their Cries, and
Tears, and Prayers pierce the Heavens, and call down judgment upon us, from a
God who vouchsafes to style himself the Refuge of the Oppressed, Psalm. 9.9. To
become their Advocate, and plead their Cause, Psalm. 25.1. and threatens to
break in pieces the Oppressor, Psalm. 72.4.

If God had designed to save you by Riches, he would have furnished you with
lawful means of acquiring them: But he has thrown up the Ditches, and thickened
the Fences, that you should not break in upon them, foreseeing you would abuse
them, they would seduce you. If God has bestowed them upon you, he also has
given you grace to use them to his Honor; but if you add to the Heap what you
receive not from his Hand, you force him to withdraw his Grace, and disable you
to use the rest as you ought. But a little, you may say, cannot be of such
dreadful consequence: Yet it is not the quantity, but the quality of the Poison
which is Mortal. This Little which comes in by driblets, must go out in Great
sums, when you come to restore; and when will you be disposed to render the
arrears in Quadruplum, Fourfold, if you cannot now be persuaded to throw up the
tenure, or pay in the Principal? God Almighty is no favourer of Interest upon
other accounts, Anselm. l. cur Deus Homo, c. 11.
but in Restitution he exacts it. Non sufficit solum reddere quod ablatum est,
sed pro contumelia illata, plus debet reddere quam abstulit, says, our famous
St. Anselm. If it be a little you unjustly possess, you ought to be more ready
to refund; if it be much, you ought to be more careful. Totum massum corrumpit
Vulg. (...), fermentat. 1 Cor. 5.6. Mat. 6.19, 20.
But what is a little to you, perhaps is the whole fortune and subsistence, the
Daily Bread of the Sufferer. A little Injustice is like the Leven, it corrupts
the whole Mass; it is the Moth, which devours the Treasure; it is the Thief,
which breaks in, and steals it away insensibly; the way, many Estates are
consumed, when No body could give an account by what means. Unjust possessions
have this quality of the Manna; they taste deliciously upon the Carnal Palate,
but putrify and become noisome, if they are kept even till to morrow; Nay,
they become Mortal, as soon as the person is satisfied they are unlawful.

Gabriel, Soto, Lessius, Gabriel in 4. d. 15. q. 2. a. 2. Soto l. 4. q. 7. a.
4. Lessius de jure l. 2. c. 12. dub. 2.
and many others of the first Class, both Ancient and Modern Divines teach as a
certain Truth, that every unjust Possessor, when he knows himself to be so,
continuo actu peccat, sins continually, not only by an habitual injustice
mortally criminal, but also sins actually, till the moment he restore. Be not
surpised at this Doctrine, it is grounded upon clear and undeniable Reason;
for who does not restore when he can, wilfully detains another Goods: But a
wilful detaining them is a new action, at least instar actionis, equivalent to
an action: Therefore as long as his Will to detain them does continue, so long
the Injustice continues, so long the Injury, and, by evident Consequence, so
long the Actual Sin.

Now, Christian, have you any thing to object against this, and not renounce
that Name? Dare you reply in your thoughts, that if you restore what you
wrongfully possess, you will not be able to bear up in the World according to
your Condition? If this Reason be as Weighty, as it is Popular, you may as well
steal, you may rob the Altar to live according to your Condition. Why cannot
you reduce your self for the sake of Justice, to what other people do for
Decency and Devotion? You will not be able perhaps to make so great a Figure in
Court, nor Glitter so much at a Ball, nor be so Expensive in Plays; you will
want Oil to feed your Excesses and Vanity: Now is not this an odd kind of
Objection, when one of the Reasons why God calls upon you to make Restitution,
and to pay your Debts, is to remove you from the cocasions of Offending? But it
will draw an Infamy upon me: Sure you are a great Stranger to Honesty, who have
so mean an opinion of it. Justice is honored, and revered, and applauded even
by the Wicked; and the Fame of a Zacheus shall live for ever; 1 Kings 21.1.
and so long the Memory of an Ahab shall be in Execration.

But if this Doctrine were reduced to practice, it would cause great changes in
a Nation. So thought the Statesmen of Galilee; so Herod feared, when a Baptist
preached it, apprehendens ne novi aliquid fieret. Josephus supra.
But what the consequence would be, King David tells us, veritas de terra orta
est, Psalm. 85.11.
and Justitia de Caelo prospexit; when Justice looks down from Heaven, Truth
springs up from the Earth, as it were to meet it. Justice and Peace shall kiss
one another, the Mother and the Daughter shall embrace; for Peace and
Prosperity are the fruit of Justice. O ye sons of men be Just, and fear no
other consequences than these; for the Justice of the clear-hearted-man, says
the Wise One, shall level and make strait his path, Prove. 11.5,
Justitia simplicis diriget viam; 6.
it shall conduct him safe to the end, liberabit eum, it shall prolong his
days, and deliver him from the death of fin; liberabit eum a morte: Prove. 10.2.
It shall Crown him with Eternal Life, in semitis ejus vita: 12.28.
It shall win the Affection of the Almighty, Qui sequitur justitiam diligitur
ab eo; 15.9.14.34.
it exalts a Nation; elevat gentem: and shall establish the Throne;
firmabitur justitia Thronus. 25.5.
Thus might St. John speak, because thus speaks the Holy Ghost, who replenished
him from the very Womb, and inspired him with that Courage which the Psalmist
glories in, that he spoke of the Testimonies of God, Psalm. 119.46.
of Justice and Equity, before Kings, and was not confounded, though he was
imprisoned: For nothing can confound a Precursor or Preacher of Christ, but
betraying his Ministry. And now he has discharged his Office; I hope, no one
here will put him off, Act. 24.26. Disputante autem illo de justitia, etc.
as Felix did St. Paul, when he had discoursed of the same Subject, Tempore
opportuno accersam te, I will hear thee at a more proper season: I hope no body
will think his Doctrine unseasonable, or if any one do; you will not find him a
Reed shaken with the Wind: you will find him firm to Himself, and to his
Character, preaching the word in season, and out of season. He will not change
his Camels Hair for Soft Raiment, nor be taken off, nor mollified by the
amusements of a Court. He is the same Man in the Kings House, as in the Kings
Prison: He will bid the Tradesman be just in his Dealing, Luke 3.11.
the Rich to impart of their Superfluities to him that wants Necessaries; The
Publicans and Collectors, to exact no more than is appointed them, 12.
and to give a faithful account of what they receive; The Soldier, to do
violence to no man, 14.
and to be contented with his pay: He has a Non Licet for every one, and a
Baptism of Repentance in their own Tears, for the Remission of Sin: He has a
Commission to Threaten every Tree which brings not forth good Fruit, that it
shall be cut down, and cast into the Fire; and he has an Humble Petition to
those who Judge the World, that they will not think they perform their Duty to
Justice, by observing it Religiously in their own particular, unless they cause
it to be observed by all their Subjects, as far as their Knowledge and Power
can reach; unless they redress the Wrongs of Innocents oppressed, and suffer no
body to be condemned, without first being heard; unless they repair the
breaches of the Public Faith, and overruled all Ordinances to the contrary;
which can never tie up the Sovereign's Hands from reforming abuses, though they
oblige the Subject to a Passive Obedience, to possess his Soul in patience, and
to forgive the injury, while he sues to have it redressed. Which God, etc.

FINIS.

