THE Great Day at the Door.

And He comes with Clouds that shall judge the Quick and the Dead, and reign
on the Earth with all his SAINTS.

Not for a thousand years in this corrupt and sinful World, as some coruptly
conceive and teach,

Nay: But for a thousand and a thousand, and ten thousand times ten thousand
thousands of years, even for ever and ever, eternally in the world to come.

Wherein Righteousness and Peace, Incorruption, Immortality and Joy, shall
habit and dwell for evermore, world without end.

Proved clearly by the Word of GOD.

Against all those Cabbilisticall Millinaries, and Jew restorers for a thousand
years: Mystical Familists, and all other such like raisers of new lights out
of the old pit of darkness, discovering their visions to be nothing else but
mere conjectures, fancies and lies.

DAN. 7. 13, 14, 15. I saw in the night visions, and behold, one like the Son
of Man came with the Clouds of Heaven, and came to the Ancient of Days, and
they brought him near before him.

And there was given him Dominion, and Glory, and a Kingdom, that all People,
Nations, and Languages should serve him: His Dominion is an Everlasting
Dominion which shall not pass away, and his Kingdom that which shall not be
destroyed.

Verse 27. And the Kingdom and Dominion, and the greatness of the Kingdom
under the whole Heaven, shall be given to the people of the Saints of the M^st
High, whose Kingdom is an Everlasting Kingdom, and all Powers shall serve and
obey him. Printed at London by Matthew Simmons. 1648.

TO THE TRULY HONORABLE, The Seed of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob* the Children
and Heirs of God, and Ioynt-he^^es with Christ; Of what People, Nation, or
Tribe soever; and in what degree of place, High or Low, Grace and Truth, and
Peace, be multiplied.
HOnorable and beloved in the Lord. That the^e is a (...)* Country, and a
City having Found^tion, and a Kingdom that cannot be moved, prepared for you*
he (...) fully assused: For it is most certain, there being ^^thing more
abundantly spoken of (...) more clearly promised in all the Scriptures, than
the (...) And that ye shall be delivered from all your (...) and troubles in
all places wheresoever ye are (...) and from all your mournings, sorro^es,
pains (...) tears, graves, dust* and brought to inherit all those great
things promised, with all the holy Fathers and their Ch^ldren, and childrens
children that have been before you; and with Christ your Prince at his
appearing and his Kingdom, which will be now very speedily, be ye a so (...)
assured. And so look ye for him, and for it.

And (...) take heed, that in the little mean time (which is to be between this
present hou^e and (...) of his appe^ring) no man deceive you by any way or
means. For as there has been false Prophets, and deceiving Spirit^ in the
world, that (...) deceived many, as Christ foretold they should* So there are
still many, even (...) with us (...) hand, as well as els^ here that shall and
do d^ce^ve. And (...) Doctrine you (...) hear of, or read tending to the
taking your mind, off from (...) hope and expectation of your eternal
inheritance in the world to ^ome, (...) same upon any thing that is or can be
imagined to be here in this present (...) not unto it: For all such Doctrine is
of the Spirit of Satan, and not of (...) glorious show soever it makes.

And as touching the Doctrine of the ^illinaries; Although it be (...) very
next ensuing age after the Apostles, the beloved Disciple of Christ having
written the Revelation, and sent it to the seven Churches of Asia (they being
not yet disp^rsed by the persecution of the Dragon) the same opinion of a
resurrection from the dead, and glorious reign of Christ with his Saints on
Earth for a thousand years before the general resurrection, and end of the
world, was conceived, taught, and held up by many Christians then counted ^ound
in the faith, Orthodox, as they speak. Some of which being men of great note,
Tertullian, Ereneus, Iustine, and others, all grounding their opinion chiefly
on this place of Scripture, Rev. 20. 4, 5, 6.

And that now the opinion (^aving lain dead for many hundred years) is again
revived and maintained by men of great esteem also ^or learning, etc. whose
names for the credit of the opinion, that it may carry the greater countenance
and authority with it, are (by those that have published books of the same)
mentioned and described with high applause, insomuch as the Doctrine is almost
generally entertained both by Ministers and people, and those especially that
seem the most zealous, who embrace it with great affection, as a most excellent
mystery of truth.

Although all this be so, yet nevertheless it may possibly be, And if one so
far inferior unto them in those great respects of learning and esteem, as
there is no comparison, may be so bold, I then durst say, they are all
deceived, and err, not understanding the Scriptures.

And this I do not only say; but by the grace of God, shall also make it
plainly to appear, though not unto all men, yet unto you that are the children
of Wisdom, whom the Kingdom does concern, and who can best discern and
judge between truth and error.

And this is all I do request of you, that ye will be pleased to read, and
duly to consider the things I here present unto you; and if ye shall find that
I speak not the words of truth and soberness, let me then be reproved.

And so I submit my self unto your censure, praying always unto the Lord, and
desiring with my whole soul, that his truth may prosper in the world, and take
place in the hearts of all his chosen people in these last days; and that
(...) would give unto us all his holy Spirit of truth to teach us, and lead us
into all truth, and to enable us to walk worthy of the same truth, to the glory
of his holy name, and our own comfort and peace of mind here, and salvation
hereafter in that world to come, through Jes^s Christ our Prince and Savior,
unto whom with the Father and the holy Spirit, be all praise and thanks for
ever and ever. Amen.

Your most unworthy Christian Brother, I. E.

Honored and Beloved,
THE things that I shall here in the first place present unto your
confideration, are the Scriptures whereon the Milli^aries do ground their
opinions before mentioned: the first and chief being this;

REV. 20. 4, 5, 6. And I saw Thrones, and they sat upon them, and judgment
wa^ given (...) them.

And I saw the souls of the^ that were beheaded for the witness of Jesus, and
for the word of God, and which had not worshipped the Beast, ^ither his Image,
neither had received his mark upon their foreheads, or in their h^^ds, and they
lived and reigned with Christ a thousand years. But the rest of the dead lived
not again until the thousand years were finis^^d. This is the first
resurrection.

Blessed and ^oly is he that has part in the first Resurrection, on such the
(...) death has no power: But they shall be Priests of God, and of Christ, and
shall reign with him a thousand years.

All these words do the Millinaries take as spoken to their purpose, which I
request ye (beloved of the Lord) well to consider.
ANd first this, how John could with any sense or truth, say, And I saw
thrones, and they sat upon them, etc. and mean by They (as the Millinaries
expound him) the s^uls of them that were beheaded for the witness of Jesus,
etc. which were showed him afterward. Or why John (if he had so meant) would
not then rather have said first, And I sa^ the souls of them that were
beheaded, etc. and then have said after this, And I saw (...), and they (...)
upon them, etc. but that he had respect unto some other person^, whom he had
seen and spoken of before: and who may they (...) thought to be, but the Beast
and the false Prophet, and those Kings of the (...) that gathered themselves
together against him that sat upon the white. Horse, and against his Army,
Chap. 1^. For they (...) and had power and great authority, and judgment given
unto them, and they beheaded the Saints for those causes mentioned, as by Chap.
13. 1, 2, 15. and 14. 12, 13, 14, appears, according to Dan. 7. 25.

But because John had seen another vision of binding the Dragon before this of
the Thrones, etc. therefore, that we may the more clearly understand these
things, we are to consider of the same, in the first place, as a thing going
before.

Verse. 1, 2, 3. And I saw an Angel come down from heaven, having the key of the
bottomless pit, and a great chain in his hand, and he laid hold on the Dragon,
that old Serpent, which is the Devil, and Satan, and bound him a thousand
years, and cast him into the bottomless pit, and shut him up, and set a seal
upon him, that he should deceive the N^tions no more, till the thousand years
should be finished, and after that he must be loosed a little season.

What is to be understood by th^s Dragon, (called here, that old Serpent, the
Devil and Satan) and what this binding of him should mean, and what his
deceit was wherewith he deceived the Nations before he was bound, and when this
binding of him should be, are things not here expressed: Neither is there any
thing at all spoken or showed, that the Dragon did, or should do under that
name or title of the Dragon, during all the time of the Beasts reign, from the
beginning of Chap. 13. unto th^s place; except that of giving his power, and
his throne, and great authority to the Beast, chap. 13. 2. only in chap. 12.
his doings are at large declared, and what was done to him. There, after John
had seen that great wonder in Heaven, A woman cloth^d with Sun, and the Moon
under her feet, and upon her head a crown of twelve Stars, and great with
child, crying and pained to be delivered, he s^i^h, And there appeared another
wonder in heaven; and behold a great red Dragon having seven heads and ten
horns, etc. ve^se 3, 4, 5.

This great red Dragon thus described, with these h^ads and horns, cannot be
taken for the Devil, Satan only and alone conside^ed, but must needs be
understood of those Pagan Emperou^s of Rome, in whom Satan dwelt, and by whom
he ruled and wrought all th^se wicked works there described. This was he that
so cruelly used that heavenly woman, the Church and Spouse of Christ, drawing
down with (...) of De^fied Ces^rs, a third part of the Stars of hea^^^, (with
who^e Doctrine she was crowned, and in the light whereof she wa^k^d) and cast
them to the earth: and that stood before the woman, ready to devour her child
as soon as it was born, even all the first fruits of spiritual off spring,
that man child which her Lord promised should (...) all Na^ions with a rod of
Iron, Rev. 2. 26, 27. This was he that with those his evil Angels forced the
woman from her most eminent bright shining primitive estate, and to betake
herself unto those two wings (which her Lord then gave her) of his word of
Truth, and (...) into the Wilderness, (there to have some refreshing from the
face of the Sespent, and be sed of God a thousand two hundred and sixty days:
For then was that great war in heaven, Michael and his Angels fighting
against the Dragon, and the Dragon and his Angels against Michael.

For the Name and Gospel of Jesus Christ, and worship of the true God that made
heaven and earth, by Michael and his Angels, that is to say, Christ and his
Apostles, and their faithful followers.

And in opposition to the same with sword and fire by the Dragon and his
Angels, those bloody Cesars, for their open professed Idolatry, Paganism and
superstition, ^triving by all wicked means to root out the Name of Christ, and
worship of the true God from the earth, and so settle himself in his throne,
to be worshipped and adored for ever.

But they prevailed not, as the Text says, neither was their place found any
more in heaven, Michael and his Angels overcame them by the word of their
testimony, and their patient suffering their most cruel murders and tortures:
And the great Dragon was cast out, as there it says, ver. 9. where he is
described even as he is here, chapter 20. 2. by the names of that old Serpent, the
Devil and Satan, which deceives the whole world, etc. his deceit being that of
his Paganisine before mentioned; and now was the time for Michael (that
Archangel Jesus Christ) (he having overcome the Dragon and cast him down) to
lay hold on him, and bind him, that he should so deceive the Nations no more,
nor so universally pursue the blood of the Saints, slaughtering all that
professed the Name of Jesus Christ, as he had done for a thousand years space
at the least, during all the time of the Beasts reign that was to succeed him,
whilst the true Church and Spouse of Christ should remain in the Wilderness
close, and hidden, as it were, out of his fight, till afterward, that she
should be seen abroad again with her graces shining, and he loosed for a little
season out of his prison.

This was he which Paul spoke of, that until he was th^s taken out of the way,
let the (...) of Sin to be revealed, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 7, 8. that Beast which John
saw rise out of the Sea, Rev. 13. 1.

All these things confidered and understood, who now can be thought to be they
that sat upon the thrones which John saw after he had seen the Dragon bound,
Revel. 20. but the Beast and the false Prophet his Clergy, and those ten horns
that had crowns on them, who received power as Kings one hour with the Beast,
mentioned chap. 13. 1. 11. and 17. 12. and 19. 19, 20, 21.

These, though professing the name of the true God, and of the Lord Jesus
Christ his Word and Sacraments, and themselves to be his Church, yet being
possessed with unclean Spirits of Devils, should by* another more secret way than
the Dragon used, deceive a great part of the world. (And having changed times
and laws, and power and judgment being given unto them for a time and times,
and half a time) should consume the Saints of the most High, kill them* behead
them for those causes mentioned, Rev. 13. 5, 6, 7. and 14. 12, 13. and 17. 6.
and 20. 4. where the souls of them they should behead, are showed, according to
that of the pale Horse, on which Death sat, and Hell followed, Rev. 6. 8.
whereupon John sees also the souls of them that they should kill for the word
of God, etc. verse. 9, 10, 11. and to that of the second Woe, upon the sounding
of the sixth Angel, chap. 9. 13. and chap. 11. where they are said to tread the
holy City under foot forty and two months, verse. 2. Every place agreeing to
that in Dan. 7. 25. speaking in order of one and the same things, the Dragon or
Pagan Empire first tyranizeth; the Beast, or Horn that had eyes, succeeds him
in his throne; the Saints are slain for the word of God, and not worshipping
the Beast, the great day of the Lord follows in every place.

Now concerning the souls of them that (during the reign of the Beast) should
be beheaded for not worshipping the Beast, etc. I request you, unto whom I
present all these things, well to consider, John does not say, And I saw the
souls that were beheaded, as if such a thing could be; Neither does he say, I
saw the bodies that were beheaded, and they lived and reigned with Christ a
thousand years, as the Millinaries would seem to expound him, or turn the
words, conceiving that John names the Soul for the Body, and would have a
resurrection of the body to be meant, and it to be the first resurrection John
speaks of, which is not so: for the words are plain, And I saw the souls of
them that were beheaded, etc. And they, that is to say their souls, liv^d and
^eigned with Christ, etc. not their bodies that were beheaded, but their souls
only.

Neither may the soul be named for the body in the resurrection of the body,
as to rise from the dead with it, or for it, or for both, because it is a mere
falsehood, and a contrad^ctory thing; John might as well and as truly have said,
I s^w the s^uls that were beheaded, and so have named the soul for the
beheading of the body, as for the resurrection of it, if it had been a thing
sensible or true; but he says (and that sensibly and truly) And I saw the
souls of them, etc.

When those bodies of Saints which slept, arose, Matthew. 27. 52, 53. it is not
said their souls arose, but their bodies only.

And although in some other cases while the soul and the body lives together,
the soul being the principal part of man, may be named for both, as Genesis 46.
All the souls of the House of Jacob which came into Egypt, were threesoore and
t^n; yet in this case it cannot be so, except they will make the soul to dye
or be ^lain with the body, and so lie dead in the grave with it, that it may
rise with it, as some of them have been bold to say, and some to publish,
contrary to many clear testimonies of Scripture, and to the words of Christ,
John 11. 25. I am the resurrection and the life, he that believes in me,
though he were dead, yet shall he live; and whosoever lives and believes in
me, shall never dye. By which words it is evident, that whosoever is once
quickened and made alive again in soul, by faith in Christ, from that
spiritual death, which it (being once alive in Adam) was brought unto by the
fall, and his own sins, this soul shall never dye more, he is passed from
death to life, as Christ says, John 5. 24, 25. and Christ will raise his body
up at the last day, according to his word, John 6. 4.

It is true, that the souls of the unregenerate reprobates, which were never
quickened and made alive again by faith from that death they had by the fall,
and their own sins, their bodies dying, their souls remain spiritually dead
in some low place of darkness, where evil spirits are, until the last day,
when both body and soul shall come forth and live, to undergo the second
death.

So then, when John says, And I saw the souls of them that were beheaded for
the testimony of Jesus, etc. and they lived and reigned with Christ a thousand
years, he means their souls and not their bodies* and by a thousand years,
all the time of the Dragons being bound, and the Beasts reign, and their
bodies suffering for the word of God, etc. even to the loosing of the Dragon,
and end of the world, according also to that in Rev. 6. where the souls under
the Altar cried, saying, How long, O Lord, holy and true, do thou not judge
and avenge our blood on them that dwell upon the earth* And white robes were
given unto every one of them, and it was said unto them, that they should rest
yet for a little season, until their fellow servants and their brethren which
should be killed (...) they were, should be fulfilled, verse. 9, 10, 11. which
must needs be understood from the beginning of the Beasts reign, (when they
first began to suffer for those causes) unto the end of the world, because
their brethren that should be killed as they were, would not be fulfilled till
then; and all the Saints are in one kind or other, killed for Christ's sake, as
it is written: For thy sake, O Lord, are we slain all the day long, and counted
as sheep to the slaughter.

And because this resurrection of the soul is effected here while the soul is
in the body, by the Word and Spirit of God, as John well knew, according to
that which Christ had said, John 5. 21, 24, 25. and 11, 4, 5, 6. and to that of
Paul, Ephesians. 2. 1, 4, 5, 6. Col. 2. 12, 13. Col. 3. 1, 2. 2 Cor. 4. 16. Ephesians.
4. 23. Titus 3. 5. and other places, and was also in those days well known to
the Saints; in consideration whereof John says, This is the first
Resurrection: The first, implying plainly, that it is the very first in which
every Saint has his part, and therefore he says again to the comfort of them
all in their afflictions here, Blessed and holy is he that has part in the
first res^rrection, on such the second death has no power, but they shall be
Priests of God, and of Christ, and shall reign with him a thousand years,
even till Christ shall come in his glory, and avenge their blood, and raise
their bodies, and receive them body and soul into his kingdom.

If therefore this resurrection of the soul and spirit, be the first
resurrection, as is before sufficiently proved, then there cannot be another
first, that which comes after it must needs be the second and genera^l
resurrection spoken of John 5. 28, 29. Rev. 20. 12, 13. So that this place
serves nothing at all to the Millinaries purpose, but is wholly against it.

Neither because the casting of the Beast and false Prophet into the Lake of
fire, was showed unto John (chap. 19. 20.) before these things, chap. 20. 1, 2,
3, 4, 5, 6 was it therefore to be done before the same, (as the Millinaries
would have it?) no more than the condemnation of that great Whore, and the
rejoicing of the Saints thereupon, showed him, chap. 17. and 18. to the 10.
verse of the 19. was before the Beast and his followers gathered themselves
together against him that sat on the white Horse, showed him presently after,
chap. 19. or than the second one, chap. 11. 14. was before the Dragons
persecuting the Woman, chap. 12. that second ^oe being the reign of the Beast
that rose after he Dragon was cast down, and was to continue forty and two
months, as by chap. 11. 2. compared with chap. 13. 5. appears.

But because the loosing of the Dragon, and the great day of the Lord, the
general resurrection of the bodies of all, the judgment and state eternal,
are the chief things intended to be showed in this last place of the
Revelation; and they being to follow next after the second woe, and casting the
Beast and false prophet into the lake of fire, (as by chap 16. also appears)
where after the fifth Angel had powered out his Vial upon the throne of the
Beast) v. 10, 11. the sixth Angel powers out his Vial upon the great River
E^phrate^, and John sees three unclean spirits like Frogs, come out of the
mouth of the Dragon, and out of the mouth of the Beast, and out of the mouth of
the false Prophet, to go forth unto the Kings of the earth, and of the whole
world, to gather them to the battle of the great day of God Almighty. Therefore
to make the way clear to those great things, the binding of the great Dragon,
the thrones and rule of those that should ^it on them the while, and the living
and reigning of the souls of them they should behead, are here briefly showed;
as being the sum of all the same things that had been so largely showed before
from chap. 12. to this place.

But there are yet other places where a thousand years are named, which the
Millinaries to confirm their opinions) add to this, as,

2 Pet. 3. 8. One day is with the Lord as a thousand years, and a thousand
years as one day, etc.

And Psalm. 90. 8. For a thousand years in thy fight are but (...) yesterday
when they are past, and as a watch in the night, etc.

Both these places they will have to intend their thousand years Monarch and
day of judgment, though neither of the places aim at any such things: but they
speak of the time of Gods long forbearance for the bringing in of his chosen,
and of their sufferings during that time before the Lords coming.

As first for the words of Peter, it is manifest that he speaks first in
reproof of those s^offers that in the latter days should mock and say, Where
is the promise of his coming? For since the Fathers slept, all things continue
as they were from the beginning of the creation, etc. verse 2, 3, 4, 5, etc. and
then ^aith to the faithful, But (beloved) be not ignorant of this one thing,
that one day is with the Lord as a thousand years, and a thousand years as
one day: The Lord is not slack concerning his promise, as some men count
slacknesse, but is long suffering to us ward, not willing that any should
perish, but that all should come to repentance. But the day of the Lord will
come as a thief in the night, etc. verse. 8, 9, 10.

Where the Apostle gives them and us all to understand, that the long time of
a thousand years and more, (which he foresaw would pass before the day of
the Lord should come, would be the time of Gods long-suffering to (...)-ward,
that all his elect might come to repentance and be saved, though they were to
pass through many tribulations, especially under the long reign of Antichrist.

Which time therefore, they might well think long, though in the account of God
in respect of his eternal mercies, they are but as one day, as yesterday, when
they are past.

And to this purpose also are the words of Moses in his Psalm, verse. 8. And
therefore he says after, verse. 13, 14, 15. Return, O Lord, how long? and let
it repent thee concerning thy servants, O satisfy us early with thy mercies,
that we may rejoice and be glad all our days. Make us glad according to the
days wherein thou have afflicted us, and to the years wherein we have seen
evil.

Where Moses (counting also the time long wherein the Lord afflicts his
servants) prays as we see, not that he would have us to understand him, as
the Millinaries conceive, as if he desired that the mercies of God which he
prayed him to satisfy his servants with early, etc. should be limited to the
time of a thousand years, or to be of no longer continuance than the days or
years of their afflictions. Which although they were and are to be and
continue, all the days of this present world, yet when they are past, are but
as yesterday, as a watch in the night; yea but as a moment in comparison of his
everlasting mercies; For so speaks the Lord unto his afflicted Church, to
comfort her in all her afflictions, saying, For a small moment have I forsaken
thee, but with great mercy will I gather thee. In a little wrath I hid my f^^e
from thee for a moment, but with everlasting kindness will I have mercy on
thee, says the Lord thy Redeemer, etc. Esaias 5 4. 7, 8, etc. According to which
the Apostle Paul also speaks, saying, For our light afflictions which are but
for a moment, works for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of
glory, 2 Cor. 4. 17. Works for us, says he; not that affl^ction do merit or
deserve the same, but because of the Lords promise and mercies, which is to
reward them according to their works, as Christ says, Matthew. 5. 10. 11. and
other places: not in proportion of time, or worth of work, but for exceeding
all, an eternal weight, as he says.

And so the words of Moses, Make us glad according to the days wherein thou
have afflicted us, and the years wherein we have seen evil, are to be
understood. It is too far fetched, and very unreasonable, to turn his words to
a thousand years Monarch; especially, considering what he said before, verse. 8.
For a thousand years are but (...) yesterday, (...) a watch in the night: and
what the Prophet Esaias and the Apostle Paul says of the whole time of all the
Saints affl^ctions, counting it but as a moment, and all their afflictions but
light in respect of the everlasting mercies and kindness of the Lord, and the
exceeding and eternal weight of glory he has prepared for them, and they
shall receive in the kingdom of Christ, when he comes in his glory, and all
his holy Angels with him, and shall fit in the throne of his glory, as he has
said, which is never likened to a small moment, or watch in the night, or to
yesterday, as the time of their afflictions is; nay what were his kingdom then?

The next chief place whereon they would ground their thousand years Monarch,
is, 1 Cor. 15. 24, 25, 26. Then comes the end, when he shall have delivered
up the Kingdom to God, even the Father, when he shall have put down all rule,
all authority and power: For he must reign till he has put all enemies under
his feet, the last enemy is Death, etc.

These words of the Apostle they make great use of to their purpose,
conceiving, that the Kingdom which Christ is to deliver up at the end of the
world, is his own Kingdom which he is to possess at his second appearing,
concluding in their minds, that there shall be a thousand years time between
his appearing and the end of the world, wherein he with his Saints is to reign
and judge: (...) the end of those years, all the dead that were not raised at
the beginning of them, and that shall die within the time, to be raised, and he
to deliver up his kingdom.

This in brief is that which they conceive and conclude to be the meaning of
the Apostle, and so they argue from these words, Then comes the end when he
shall have delivered up the Kingdom to God, even the Father, to prove the
kingdom of Christ to be in this world, for a thousand years, and then to end;
often using the words, and repeating them in their books, saying, For Christ
is to deliver up his kingdom at the end of the world.

Here also, I request ye to confider, how they misunderstand the Apostle,
turning The Kingdom, into His Kingdom; whereas the word^ are plain, Then
comes ^he end when he shall have delivered up the Kingdom to God, even the
Father, etc. meaning by The Kingdom, the high and supreme Kingdom of God the
Father, where Christ is now fitting and reigning with him at his right hand in
the heavens, expecting till his enemies be made his footstool. Which Kingdom
when he comes from thence to judge the quick and the dead, and to reign in
his own Kingdom) he is to deliver up and resign unto God the Father: Then
are the Saints raised up, the last enemy is destroyed, the end is come, as the
Apostle says: Christ the first fruits, then afterward they that are Christ's at
his coming, then comes the end, when he shall have delivered up the Kingdom
to God, even the Father, when he shall have put down all Rule, all Authority,
and Power. All these are to be done at one time, without any years or days
between.

And so the Apostle argues, saying, For he must reign till he has put down
all enemies under his feet, the last enemy that shall be destroyed, is Death,
etc. proving by the words of David (The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit thou at my
right hand, until I make thy enemies thy Footstool, Psa. 110) That the
Kingdom which Christ is to deliver up at his coming, is the Kingdom wherein
he now reigns in the throne of God the Father, with him, at his right hand
in the Heavens, expecting till his enemies be made his footstool. And
therefore he says, For he must reign until, etc.

And to the same purpose he proceeds further, and says, And when all things
shall be subdued unto him, then shall the Son also himself be subject unto
him that put down all things under him, that God may be all in all* declaring
plainly, that while Christ sits at the right hand of God in his throne
reigning with him, he is not subject unto him, as he shall be when God the
Father shall have put down all things under him; nor God all in all now, as he
shall be then when he has delivered up the supreme Kingdom wholly unto God
the Father, which he is to do at his coming to judge the quick and the dead,
and to reign in his own kingdom, and sit upon the throne of his Father David
for ever; not in th^s world, but in that to come, which is to be subject unto
him, as the Apostle testifies, Heb. 2. 5, 6, 7, 8 9.

This is Christ's Kingdom, which God the Father has appointed unto him,
wherein the Saints shall reign with him, as he said, And I appoint unto you a
kingdom as my Father has appointed unto me, that ye may eat and drink at my
table in my kingdom, and sit on Thrones, etc. Luke 22. 29, 30. And again, To
him that overcomes will I grant to fit with me in my throne, even as I
overcame, and am set down with my Father in his throne, Rev. 3. 21.

And so it is true, that the Kingdom wherein Christ now reigns with God the
Father crowned with glory and honor, is limited within the compass of a
certain time, even until the Father has put down all things under him. And it
is true also, that the living and reigning of the souls of the Saints in the
first resurrection, is limited within the compass of the same time, even till
he comes, and shall bring them all with him, and cloth them with spiritual
and heavenly bodies, to live and reign with him body and soul in his kingdom
for ever.

Which kingdom of his, he is never to resign nor deliver up, neither is it to
pass away, nor be destroyed, nor have an end, as the Scriptures witness, 1 Chronicles. 17. 11, 1, 29, 13, 4. Psalm. 89. 36, 37. Esaias 9, 6, 7. Dan. 7. 13, 14,
16, 17, 18, 27. Micha 4. 7 and sundry other places.

And as the Angel Gabriel testified unto Mary his mother, saying, He shall be
great, and shall be called the Son of the Highest, and the Lord God shall
give unto him the throne of (...) Father David, and be shall reign over the
House of Jacob for ever, and of his kingdom there shall be no end, Luke 1* 32,
33. according to Esaias 9. 7. No end is beyond all limitation of time.

Another place which some of them allege, is, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 16. The dead in
Christ shall rise first; conceiving the Apostle to (...), before the dead out
of Christ should rise, which they would have to be a thousand years after:
whereas the Apostle in those words has no respect unto them at all, but unto
the Saints that shall be alive and remain to the coming of the Lord, as in
verse. 15. these shall not prevent them that are sleep, as to receive a^y glory
before them; but the d^ad in Christ shall ri^e first, and th^^ they that are
alive shall be caught up together with them in the clouds, to meet the Lord
etc. as in ver. 17. he declares.

And so they would understand him (1 Cor. 15. The first fruits is Christ, then
afterward they that are Christ's at his coming) to intend a resurrection of
those that are not Christ's a thousand years after, as Christ the first f^ui^s
was a thousand years and more before: whereas the words spoken there, conc^rn^
not them at all, they are not fruits, neither is death to be counted an enemy
in respect of them; but of those that are Christ's, unto whom death will then be
swallowed up in victory, although they shall then be raised also, as Christ
says, The hour is coming, wherein all that are in the grave^ shall hear his
voice and shall come forth, they that have done good, unto the resurrection of
life; and they that have done evil, unto the resurrection of condemnation,
John 5. The h^^re comes (says he) he says not, the day, nor the thousand
years, but, the hour; for, no doubt, in the same hour that the Lords voice
goes forth, it shall be done, The Trumpet shall sound, the d^ad shall be
raised, and we shall be changed in ^ moment.

But there is yet one thing more, (which has been a long time held as an
Article of faith, that notonely at first drew them o^ to the opinion, but does
still hold them fast to it) the thing is this, That Christ at the end of the
world (after the general resurrection and judgment) shall ascend with all his
Saints into heaven, and there remain and dwell for ever, and the creation of
the Heavens and the Earth pass away and be no more, as is commonly believed by
the multitude, and they judge to be true, which if it be, then of necessity,
the glorious Kingdom of Christ, with his Saints (so much spoken of in
Scripture to he on earth, and not yet fulfilled) must be before the end of the
world, and then at the end thereof cease, as they say. The Scriptures they
allege for proof, are, John 14. 2, 3. 2 Cor. 5. 1. 1 Pet. 3. 4, 5, 6. Heb. 6.
19, 20. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 17.

This likewise I request ye to consider, not so much the common opinion of the
multitude, or judgment of the Millinaries, which proves nothing, as the
Scriptures they allege for their opinions, which ought duly to be weighed.
And first, the words of Christ, In my Fathers House are many mansions, if it
were not so, I would have told you: I go to prepare a place for you, and if I
go and prepare a place for you, I will come again and receive you unto my
self, that where I am, there ye may be also.

Christ does not say nor mean here, that he would go and prepare his Fathers
house, or the many mansions that are therein, for them, as some think; but a
place, as he says, which no doubt is that whereof God spoke before unto David,
saying, Also I will prepare a place for my people Israel and will plant them,
and they shall dwell in their place, and shall be m^v^d no more, etc. 1 Chronicles.
17. 9. Where he promised likewise to establish the Kingdom and Throne of
Christ for evermore, verse. 11, 12, 13* 14.

Neither does Christ say, I will come again and receive you up into heaven to
the Throne of God from whence I shall come, but unto my self, that where I am,
there ye may be also. And Christ is then to be in his Kingdom, which the
Father has appointed unto him, in the world to come, where all things shall be
in subjection unto him, when there shall be new heavens and a new earth, as the
Prophet Esaias testifies, and Peter also; and as John foresaw with the new
Jerusalem coming down from God out of Heaven, even that heavenly Country and
City, having foundations, which all the holy Fathers there is looked for. And
this is the place which Christ went to prepare for them, and for all their
children, and wherein (when he comes and receives them unto himself) they
shall be with him, and he will be with them, and God himself also, and will
dwell with them, and they shall be his people, and he will be their God, as he
has said, Rev. 21.

And concerning the words of Paul, 2 Cor. 5. 1. For we know, that if our
earthly House of this Tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of God, an
House not made with hands, eternal in the Heavens.

Here the Apostle speaks of our bodies, which he calls (...) earthly House
of this Tabernacle, and before, chap. 4. our outward man, if this be dissolved,
we have a building of God, etc. By which he declares plainly, that as we
believe the resurrection of our bodies at the last day; so we are to know, they
shall not be then, earthly, natural, vile, corrupt, mortal, weak,
dishonorable, without glory, as now they are: but they (both the dead that are
risen, and the living being changed) shall be heavenly, spiritual,
incorruptible, immortal, powerful, honorable, glorious, for so he had
testified before, 1 Cor. 15. And in another place again, saying, For our
conversation is in heaven, from whence we look for the Savior the Lord Lord
Jesus Christ, who shall change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like
unto his glorious body, etc. Phil. 3. 20, 21. And that this building of God, or
House, is not temporal, or fading, but eternal; and not lying now in the
grave, nor being any where now in earth (in respect of this glorious change of
clothing) but in Heaven, from whence it is to come, as he says, v. 2. For in
this we groan earnestly, desiring to be clothed upon with our House which is
from Heaven, etc. And he calls it a building of God, an house not made with
hands, as having respect unto the day of the Lord, that great day of the
general assembly of them all, his first born; so clothed and adorned, when
they shall manifestly appear to be that true and heavenly Tabernacle spoken
of, Heb. 8. 2. and 9. 11. that holy City, the New Jerusalem, which John saw
coming down from God ou^ of heaven, prepared as a bride adorned for her
husband; such a glorious change shall there be of the bodies of the Saints at
the resurrection.

And as touching the words of Peter, Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, which according to his abundant mercy has begotten us again unto
a lively hope, by the resurrection of Christ from the dead, to an inheritance
incorruptible and undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved in Heaven for
you who are kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation, ready to be
revealed in the last time. Th^s inheritance incorruptible, etc. is the same
spoken of before, (reserved in heaven ready to be revealed from thence in the
last time, as Peter says, 1 Pet. 1. 5.) and that within the veil, spoken of
Heb. 6. 19. whereinto the forerunner Jesus Christ is for us entered.

And for the words of Paul, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 17. Then we which are alive and remain,
shall be caught up together with them, to meet the Lord in the air, and so
shall we be ever with the Lord.

If the Apostle had said, the Lord would come to meet us in the air, there
might have been some reason for us to think (as many nevertheless do) that he
meant to take us up into heaven from whence he came. But his words being, We
shall be caught up to meet him, do plainly imply, that he comes unto us, to
the earth which is his inheritance, and to some one place therein, which no
doubt will be (as the Prophet sait^) The mount of Olives, from whence he did
ascend, near unto Mount Sion, where David's Throne was, and his is to be,
according as God said (notwithstanding all his opposites) yet have I set my
King upon my holy Hill of Sion. And because his elect will be then (at his
coming) as they are now, dispersed over all the earth, and he being one person,
who can be but in one place at once, and coming from heaven, he will send his
Angles, as he has said, who shall take them up out of all places, to meet him
in the air, and so they shall be ever with him in his Kingdom, which at his
appearing shall be manifested, as it is written.

Neither is there a word in all the Sc^iptures that speaks of Christ's ascending
up with his Saints into the heavens (where he now is) after his coming, and the
resurrection of their bodies; nor that promises the same for their habitation.
But that they shall inherit the earth, and dwell therein for ever, there are
many words and promises in many places of Scripture, where this is expressed, as
Psalm 25. 13. Psalm 37. Mat. 5. 5 Heb. 11. 8. Romans 4. 13. and sundry other.

And whatsoever things are said to be prepared and reserved in heaven for the
Saints, or promised as rewards unto them, as Christ says, Blessed are ye when
men shall revile you, and persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil
against you falsely for my sake, Rejoice and be exceeding glad, for great is
your reward in heaven, etc. Matthew. 5. and other places. All those great rewards
and things that no eye has seen, will Christ bring with him, as it is written,
Esaias 40. 10. and 62. 11. Rev. 22. 12.

And as concerning Gods creation of the Heavens and the Earth, that God should
destroy the same, or turn all unto a Chaos again, as some imagine, the
Scriptures no where speak to any such purpose, but the clean contrary often,
That he has established it, and will, so that it shall never be moved, as 1 Chronicles. 16. 30. Psalm. 78. 69. Psalm. 93. 1. Psalm. 104. 5. Psalm. 144. 5, 6. Esaias
45. 17, 18.

Only the corrupt and evil estate of all things, with the curse which our
sins have caused, shall be r^moved, in which respect the whole creation is
said to groan, and the creature to be delivered from the bondage of corruption,
as Romans 8. So the Heavens and Earth that now are, shall pass away, and no
place any more be sound for them, as it is written, Esaias 65, 16, 17. 2 Pet. 3.
10. Rev. 20. 11. and 21. 1.

And all this shall be done in the very same day wherein Christ shall come, as
Peter says, and as John also testifies, saying, And I saw a great white
Throne, and him that sat on it, from whose face the Earth and the Heavens fled
away, and there was found no place for them. They are to fly away at his
coming.

For, corruption and evil may not abide where the Throne of God, and of the
Lamb shall be, nor where his holy City shall appear, and therefore John says,
I saw a new Heaven, and a new Earth, and the former were passed away, etc.

It were a very unreasonable thing, and unbeseeming us once to think, that God
should make this excellent frame and wonderful work of the world, the
Heavens, Sun, Moon and Stars, the Earth, plants, and all other creatures,
to destroy the same. This were to make God weak, like unto man, that builds and
pulls down again, because it is not to his mind.

Neither are we to conceive that God does alter his purpose in any thing, but
what he first determined shall stand. God created not the world for the time or
state before the flood, that old world which perished, nor for this corrupt on^
that now is, as if it had been the utmost end he had respect unto therein: Nay,
but we are to know, it was for that which is to come, where God only shall be
exalted in that day above all, and his anointed one Jesus Christ be under him
King over all the earth, and his redeemed an holy Nation, and a Kingdom of
Priests before him for ever, world without end, as it is written, Esaias 2. 11.
17. Psalm 2 6, 7, 8, 9. Psalm 72. 8. Dan. 7. 14. Exodus* 19. 5, 6. Ier. 31. 36,
37. Ier. 33. 20, 21, etc. Esaias 45. 17, 18, 19. 1 Pet. 2. 9. Rev. 5. 10. and
sundry other places.

The Millinaries will have marrying, and giving in marriage, infants of days
waxing old, and people to dye in their Christian Monarch.

But the Scriptures absolutely deny such things to be in that world where the
Kingdom of Christ is to be with his Saints after the resurrection of their
bodies, when God shall have created new Heavens and a new Earth, and Jerusalem
a rejoicing, etc. as he says, There shall not be thence an infant of days,
nor an old man that has not filled his days, etc. Esaias 65.

And Christ also more fully confirms it, saying, The children of this world
marry, and are given in marriage, but they which shall be counted worthy of
that world, and of the resurrection from the dead, neither marry nor are given
in marriage, neither can they dye any more, etc. Luke 20. 34, 35, 36.

And the Apostle Paul says to the faithful, Behold, I show you a mystery, we
shall not all sleep, but we shall all be changed, in a moment, in the twinkling
of an eye, at the last Trump; for the Trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall
be raised incorruptible, and we shall be changed; For this corruptible must put
on incorruption, and this mortal must put o^ immortallity, etc. 1 Cor. 15. 51,
52, 53. etc.

By all which testimonies it is plain, that in the world to come after the
resurrection of the Saints, there shall be no more marrying, nor any more
children of days, nor old men whose days are not filled, nor any mortallity
or dying. All these things (which were before in the former worlds) shall now
cease and be no more, The child of what days soever he was before, few or
many, shall die and be changed, as the old man that is an hundred years old,
there shall be in the resurrection and change no such difference, there shall
be on defect in the child for want of days, nor in the old man by reason of
many days. Both shall be, thence, in a perfect, incorruptible, immortal, and
unchangeable estate. But the sinner being an hundred years old, shall be
accursed, as the Prophet says: He shall have no change for the better, but to
a far worse condition.

Now if all these things be so, if there shall be no more infants of days, nor
old men that have not filled their days, nor marrying, nor dying after the
resurrection of the just, but all Gods chosen, as well they that are alive, as
they that are dead, being raised, shall be changed to perfection,
incorruption, immortallity and glory; and the sinners be accursed, as the
Scriptures declare; where then will the Millinaries find time, or place, or
persons for their Millinary Monarch, let them speak.

And as concerning the other sort of Millinaries, I mean those that will have
all the prophesies and promises of the Kingdom of Christ with his Saints, so
abundantly spoken of in Scripture, fulfilled on a remnant of natural Jews,
which they imagine shall be all converted to the faith of Christ, and gathered
out of all parts to the land of Canaan, and with the Christian Gentiles, become
a glorious Church and Kingdom for a thousand years before the end of the
world, or resurrection of the bodies of the Saints. Let these also consider the
things before spoken, and what I shall here further propound unto them.

And first this, That if the promise of the Land of Canaan, ( Genesis 13. 14, 15,
17. Genesis 15. 7, 8 9. Genesis 17. 7, 8. Genesis 26. 1, 2, 3, 4. Genesis 28. 10, 11, 12,
13, 14.) be as plainly and truly made unto Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob their own
persons, to be given them for an everlasting inheritance, as well as to their
seed, and to all the seed as well as to a part, or any one of them.

And secondly, if the Gentiles, which have the says of Abraham, be of the same
seed, and included also in the promise, as well as the Jews having the same
faith, as the Lord spoke and promised to* Abraham, Genesis 15. 5. and Genesis 17. 9,
10, 11. and as Paul accordingly declares it, Romans 4. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16,
17, 18. and Gal. 3. 28. For I take it as granted of all, that the children of
the promise are counted for the seed, and not the children of the ^lesh, as the
Apostle says, Romans 9. 8.

If all these things be so, as these Scriptures speak, which I suppose no
understanding Christian will deny; Then I demand of them a reason why the holy
Fathers themselves, as well as their seed, and all the seed as well as a part,
should not inherit the same, and not any one, or part to be excluded, seeing
God is faithful that promised. Let them answer.

God did covenant also with Abraham, Genesis 17. 7, 8. to be his God, and the God
of his seed, and he established the same in no plainer nor surer ner than he
did to give them the land for an everlasting possession. But if God should
fail either Abraham, or any of his seed in this respect, how did he then keep
his covenant? Even so of the other concerning the Land, which Paul expresses
by the name of the World, saying, For the promise that he should be the heir
of the world, was not to Abraham or to his seed, through the Law, but through
the Righteousness of Faith, etc.

So that therefore as God will not fail Abraham, nor any of his seed, to be
their God, neither will he fail to give them the Land of Canaan, and all the
world besides (after the resurrection and change, when all things shall be
heavenly) for an everlasting possession.

And all this did Abraham well understand, and looked for the accomplishment
thereof accordingly; as the Apostle declares, Hebr. 11. saying, By Faith
Abraham when he was called to go into a place, which he should after receive
for an inheritance, obeyed, and went not knowing whither he went. By faith ^e
sojourned in the land of Promise as in a strange Country with Isaac and Jacob,
the ^eires with him of the same promise. For he looked for a City which has
foundations, whose Builder and maker is God, verse. 8, 9, 10. and so to verse.
13. where he says, These all died in faith, not having received the promises,
but having seen them afar off, and were persuaded of them, and embraced them,
and confessed that they were strangers and pilgrims on earth. And they that
say such things, (says the Apostle) declare plainly that they seek a Country.
And truly, (says he) if they had been mindful of the Country from whence
they came out, they might have had opportunity to have retu^ned, but now they
desire a better country, that is an heavenly. Wherefore God is not ashamed to
be called their God, for he has prepared for them a-Citie, verse. 14, 15, 16.

And so through the Chapter, the Apostle having spoken of Moses and the
Prophets, and others of the faithful, concerning their faith, and patience in
suffering, says, And these all having obtained a good report through faith
received not the promise, God having provided some better thing for us, that
they without us, should not be made perfect. verse. 39, 40.

By which testimony of the Apostle it is evident, that all the holy Fathers,
Prophets and Saints (upon the words of the promise) looked for a heavenly
country, and an eternal City in a better world than this is, and that they
all died in faith, and received not the promise, nor might, until all the seed
were accomplished as well they of the many nations, as they of the Jews. And
then they shall he raised out of their graves, even all the holy Fathers and
Prophets, and obtain that better resurrection which they so confidently (in their
pilgrimages) and sufferings hoped for, and be delivered (all of term) from all
their captivities and troubles, and brought to their own land, where Christ
their Redeemer shall be their King, and they with all their seed be an holy
nation, and a kingdom of Priests unto God the Father for ever, according as
Moses and the Prophets, and Christ and his Apostles have spoken.

But that all the Jews and Israelites now remaining, should be all converted
to the faith of Christ, and become a great nation and kingdom, this is a thing
not only beyond all probability in reason, but also besides all ground of
Scripture.

The sayings of Paul, Romans 11. which they chief^y allege, make nothing at all
to such purpose: he speaks only of them of the election, both in respect of
the time past, as in the days of Elias, verse. 2, 3, 4. and his own present
time, as verse. 1. 5, 6, 14. And also of the time from thence to come, and
severeth and distinguishes them from the rest; (the reprobate part) as verse
7. where he says, What then, Israel has not obtained that which he seeks
for, but the election has obtained it, and the rest were blinded, according as
it is written, God has given them the spirit of slumber, eyes that they should
not see, and ears that they should (...) hear un to this day, verse. 8, 9, 10.
And again, v. 15. For I would not, brethren, that ye should be ignorant of this
mystery, lest ye should be wise in your own conceits, that blindness in part
is happened to Israel until the fullness of the Gentiles be come in. Blindness
in part, he says not in the whole, he still reserveth them of the Election,
as in v. 7. The Election obtained it, the rest were blinded. And so verse. 18.
As concerning the Gospel, they are enemies for your sakes: But as touching the
Election, they are beloved for their Fathers sakes: he still severing them of
the election from the rep^^bate part; against whom in another place he
concludes, saying, Who both killed the Lord Jesus, and their own Prophets,
and have persecuted us, and they please not God, and are contrary to all men,
forbidding us to speak unto the Gentiles, that they might be saved* to fill up
their sin always, for the wrath is come upon them to the uttermost, 1 Thessalonians.
1. 15, 16. According to that which Moses had foretold of them long before,
Deuteronomy. 28. 49. And Esaias 6. 9, 10. David also, Psalm. 69. 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26,
27. And Christ himself, Luke 21, 22, 23, 24.

All which has been seen fulfilled not only upon those of that present age,
who so obstinatly stood out against Christ and his Apostles, and their manifest
approved testimonies to the very destruction and and desolation of Jerusalem;
but upon their posterity also to this day, even as it was foretold, and as
themselves in their rage against Christ, cried out, saying, His blood be upon
us and upon our Children.

For this blindness and wrath foretold, was to continue upon them not for a
short time like to the captivity in Babylon, nor for a thousand and six hundred
years, as already it has, and then, or soon after to cease, as the
Millinaries imagine; nay but continually as David said, Psalm. 69. 23. 24.
always, even until the fullness of Gods elect Gentiles should come in, as
Paul concludes, Romans 11. 25. which must needs be understood to the end of the
world, because the fullness of them will not be come in till then.

And so the fullness of the Gentiles being come in, as the Apostle says, All
Israel shall he saved, as it is written, There shall come out of S^m the
Deliverer, and shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob; v. 26. meaning by all
Israel and by Jacob, all the whole house spiritual, even every one of that
seed of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, who are the children of the promise, and
heirs with them, according to Romans 4, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. Rom 9. 8. Gal. 3. 7,
8, 28, 29. Not one shall be lost of what Nation, Tribe or people soever, they
that have been in times past, are now, or shall be hereafter among the blinded
Jews, or the ten Tribes, wheresoever dispersed, the Lord that knows them all,
will search them out, and gather them together, that they with their Fathers
and their brethren, Gods elect Gentiles (whom the Lord will also search out and
bring,) may make up that one fold, and one nation, to that one King and one
Shepherd, Jesus Christ, and be the Tabernacle and Sanctuary of God for
evermore, as Ezekiel prophesied, chap. 37. and as Christ also fore-shewed, John
10. 10. Rev. 21. 2, 3, 4.

All these things considered, what ground or foundation is there to be thought
the Millinaries can find in Scripture for a thousand years Monarch of any kind,
let them search and see.

Nay, if they did rightly understand the Scriptures that speak of those
glorious things that are to be manifested at the appearing of Christ and his
Kingdom, and of the fignes going before the same, and the end, they would know
that there is not, nor will be found so much as one hundred years time to come
(here in this world) for any Monarch or Kingdom soever.

And were they not too highly conc^ited of their own wisdom, they might
perceive is by that which is (...) (though in a plain and simple way) expressed;
they would reprove their own thoughts, repent of their error, and not any
longer hold it as an Article of their faith, that there must be such a Monarch
as they speak of: nor think that the present reformation in respect of the
Ministry and form of Church Government, is the beginning thereof, that Christ
is thereby set upon his throne, (...) some of them give out. Nay,

But would rather know this, that if there be any thousand years Monarch
foretold in the Scripture, that should in this world rule over the nations
under the name and profession of Christ and his Church, (...) is that of Rome
and no other, which has made such a profession, and has so ruled 1240 years
already, there lacking but 20. more at most to make up the 1260. (the full time
determined in Scripture for that B^ast and his Church to rule) which being
accomplished, and his City (...) in that year^ of his number 666. (as will be
known throughout the world when it is) there will be thence but 45 y^ar^^ more
to the end, as the Lord has diclared, Dan. 12. where he having spoken of the
abomination of that Man of Sin, and numbered the days thereof to be (according
to the Chaldee account) 1290. faith, Blessed is he that waits and comes to
the 1335. days. And then faith to Dani^l; But go thou thy way till the end
be, for thou shall rest and stand in the lot at the end of the days, verse. 12,
13.

So that if Daniel was to go his way till the end should be, and shall stand
up in the lo^ at the end of the 1335. days, as the Lord has there spoken,
then the end of the world must needs be at the end of those days. Let this be
considered: for the word of the Lord is true.

And concerning the signs that are to go before that day of the Lord, and end
(that we may understand things clearly) we are to consider first, how the
estate now stands as this present, and then what i^ to follow according to
the Scriptures.

That the end was not to come till first the Man of Sin should be revealed,
and his days ended; it is plainly foretold in Scripture, and believed by
many, and that his days are now near at all end.

And it was also foretold that those days of the abomination and tribulation,
should (for the elects sake) be shortened, and that the light of the Gospel
(which Antichrist and his false prophets had obscured) should break forth for
the saving of the elect, and convincing of those their enemies, which has been
and is in part fulfilled, and shall more clearly and fully, after the full end
of those abominable days; as the Scripture declares.

The Lord having now in this last age of the world, a great number of his elect
to call and sanctify, his last fruits being now to be all gathered in, for
which cause also peace is to be in Christendom the most part of those forty
five years, according to Ezekiel. 38. 8, 11, 12. and Dan. 12. 12. Even until
Satan shall be loosed out of his prison, and (with those foul spirits of
Devils) go forth unto the Kings of the Earth, and of the whole world, to
deceive them, and the nations of the four quarters of the earth, Gog and
Magog, to gather them together to battle (whose number is as the sands of the
Sea innumerable) and shall compass the Camp of the Saints about, and the
beloved City, for a little season, until fire shall down from God out of
heaven and devour them, as it is written, Ezekiel. 38. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Ezekiel.
39. 2. Rev, 16. 4. Rev. 20. 7, 8, 9.

And then, in the time of this battle, will be that great earthquake spoken
of Rev. 6. 12. Rev. 16. 18. that great sh^king in the Land of Israel, foretold
by Ezekiel. 38. 18, 19, 20. that of which it is said, Yet once more will I shake
not the earth only, but also heaven, testified Heh. 12. 26. from the words of
the prophet, Hag. 2. 6, 7.

Then shall the Sun be darkened, and become black as Sackcloth of hair, the
Moon shall lose her light, and also become as blood, the Stars shall fall
from heaven to the earth, and the powers of heaven shall be shaken, as it is
written, Esaias 34. 4, 5. Joel 2. 30, 31. Joel 3. 14, 15, 16. Matthew. 24. 29. Rev.
6. 12, 13. 14.

All which things being figuratively intended according to that in Rev. 8* 12.
and Rev. 12. 1. fulfilled long ago.

So that by the Sun we are to understand the Gospel of Christ, and the l^ght
thereof: and by the Moon, the earth, and the i^habitants of it, whose light of
faith, and (...), depen^ on the light of the Gospel, as the light of the
natural Moon does on the light of the Sun: and by the Stars, those in the
Church of God as are in place as st^rrs and lights to the world; some of which,
b^^ng faithful, shall ^e (...), and fall to the earth, for the witness of
Christ and his truth, l^ke unto that third p^r^ of the stars in the primitive
time, whom the Dragon with his tail drew down and cast to the earth, Rev. 12.
And others being unfaithful, like untimely Figs, shall fall away from Christ
and his Gospel, to Mahumatisms and other heathenish Apostasy and wickedness.
And by the powers of heaven, th outward estate of the Church, and all means of
salvation to the world.

The number of Gods elect being accomplished, the limited day of grace will be
ended, and there shall be time no longer, no time nor place, for any man more,
to turn unto God by repentance, and reconciled unto him by faith in Christ. He
that is unjust, let him be unjust still, and he which is filthy let him be
filt^y still, and he that is righteous let him be righteous still, and ^e that
is holy let him be holy still. This will be the case at this time, as the Lord
has spoken, Rev. 10. 7. Rev. 22. 11. Where he also says, And behold, I come
quickly, etc. verse. 12, 13.

The Armies of Gog will now spread themselves upon the breadth of the Land,
throughout the Lords mountains, as it is said, Ezekiel. 38. 8, 9. And there will
be a great shaking in the land of Israel, and the troubles for the time will be
great. But the Lord God (he having respect to his faithful in defense of them,
and for his own holy name and glory sake) will call for a Sword against them
throughout all his mountains, every man^ Sword shall be against his brother,
and the Lord will plead against them with pestilence, and with blood, and will
rain upon Gog, and upon all his Bands, and the many people with him, an over
flowing rain, and great hailstones, fire and brimstone, and they shall fall
upon the mountains of Israel, and be devoured, as it is written, Ezekiel. 38.
21, 22. Ezekiel. 39. 3, 4, 5. Rev. 16. 24. Rev. 20. 4. So the moon will be turned
into blood.

The Lord will now bathe his sword in heaven, as he has said, Esaias 34. 4, 5,
6. The land shall be soakt with blood, and the dust thereof made fat with
fatness. He will call every feathered foul, and every beast of the field,
and say, Assemble your selves and come, gather your selves together on every
side to my slaughter that I do sacrifice for you, even a great sacrifice upon
the mountains of Israel, that ye may eat flesh, and drink blood. Ye shall eat
the flesh of the Mighty, and drink the blood of the Princes of the earth of
Rams and of Lambs, and of great goats, of Bullocks, all of them fathings of
Bashan, and ye shall eat fat till ye he full, and drink blood till ye be
drunken of my sacrisice which I have sacrificed for you.

Thus shall ye be filled at my table with Horses, with Chariots, with mighty
men, and with all men of war* says the Lord God, Ezekiel. 39. ^0, 18, 19, 20.
according to Esaias before mentioned; who thereupon says, For it is the day of
the Lords vengeance, and the year of recompense for the con^roversie of Sion,
Esaias 34. 4, 5, 6. 7, 8. As also chap. 63. 4. For the day of vengeance is in my
heart, and the year of my redeemed is come.

For, as the Dragon, or Romans, compassing Jerusalem about, was, as Christ
foretold his faithful, the very last and infallible sign of the desolation
thereof; so this of the Dragons compassing the Camp of the Saints, and beloved
City with his Armies of Gog and Magog, and their destruction by fire from
heaven, will be the last and most certain sign of the end of this world, and
of the coming of Christ in his Kingdom: And therefore Ezekiel as well as Esaias,
thereupon faith, Behold it is come, and it is done, says the Lord, this is the
day whereof I have spoken, Ezekiel. 39. 8.

And Rev. 16. upon the very same, when the seventh Angel had powered out his
vial into the air, there came a great voice out of the Temple of heaven, from
the Throne, saying, It is done.

And Rev. 21. after the same destruction of Gog and Magog, And he that sat
upon the Throne, said, Behold I make all things new, and he said unto me, It is
done. I am Alpha and Omega, etc. verse 5, 6.

Let all sorts of Millinaries consider of these things and know, that there is
not so much as one hundred years time to come of this world, before the end,
for any Kingdom, Lordship, or State soever.

And let them see their error and great mistake of the Scriptures, and repent
of the same, and take heed of all such vain aspiring thoughts of greatness
here, of pride, of covetousness, and of all carnal and worldly de^ires, and
that they scorn not to be admonished.

Let them be content with any low estate in this world, and prefer godliness
for their gain, and not think much, nor envy at it, that they of Rome should
have the privilege and honor to be the only thousand years monarchy that
ever was, or shall be in this world. Nay, but let them alone with it to have
it; for it is all the portion of happiness they are ever like to have, which
will shortly cost them dear.

And ye that are the children of the promise, and heirs with Christ of the
everlasting Kingdom; to whom chiefly I present all these things; Take heed
also and remember the words of Christ, Luke 21. where he having foretold of
the great troubles and signs that should go before the day of his coming, and
end of the world, exhorts you saying, And take heed to your selves, lest at
any time your hearts be overcome with surfeiting and drunkenness, and cares of
this life, and so that day come upon you unawares, verse. 24.

Meaning by surfeiting and drunkenness, that of the soul, with the wealth,
pride, fullness, pleasures, profits, and prmotions of this world, which will
assault you, and are apt to entangle even your minds, they being things
pleasing corrupt nature of flesh and blood. Nor on the other side, with the
cares of this life, which do much quench the Spirit, and take off the
affections of the mind from the love of Christ and his truth, and from minding
the heavenly and eternal things to come.

And therefore left that day should come upon you unawares, the Lord
fore-warneth you to take heed to your selves, and gives you a strong Reason to
persuade you to it, saying; For as a snare shall it come upon all them that
dwell on the face of the whole earth, verse. 35.

Meaning by All them that dwell, etc. all the ungodly reprobate people of the
world, whose souls are drunk with all those things, their hopes, their hearts
delights and dwellings, being there with them.

And therefore he exhorts you again, that are his pilgrims, and dwell not
here, saying, Watch ye therefore, and pray always, that ye may be counted
worthy to escape all these things, and to stand before the Son of Man, verse. 35.

And meaning by Wat^hing and praying always; always indeed, in the spirit,
every hour of the day, and watch of the night, according as he had said
before, L^ke 18. 157, 8. And as Paul says, Ephesians. 6. 18. 1 Th^ss. 1. 5, 7. 1
Pet. 4. 7.

And be ye ware of those learned Authors of the Millinarie Doctrine, who would
make ye believe that the words and exhortations of Christ, Luke 21. 9, 34, 35,
36. and of the Apostles, Hebr. 10. 23, 24, 25, 35* 37. Iam. 5. 7, 8. 1 Pet. 4.
7.) did concern the Christian Jews only in that time, and were to be
understood of the coming of the Roman power against Jerusalem, and end of the
Jews State (fulfilled above 1500. years ago (but was then near at hand to
come) judging it a senseless thing to watch and pray in respect of the coming
of Christ, and end of the world, so long before it should be. A^ in a Book
entitled. The Apostasy of the latter times, page 88, 89, 90, 91. By Ios^ph
Mede, approved by D. Twiss^.

Whereas it is very plain, that Christ and the Apostles (in all (...) places)
speak of the coming of Christ in his glory, and end of the world, and have
respect to the Christian Gentiles, as well as to the Christian Jews, which
those learned men ought to have known, and that it was no senseless thing, nor
without reason or cause to watch and pray in hope and expectation of the same,
especially considering, that all the wise virgins in all ages and times, did so
watch and pray, and though (they being weak) did some times slumber and sleep,
yet they had their lamps always burning, and oil with them, expecting with
fervent desires in their heart, the coming of their Lord the Bridegroom.

For they well understood by the word of the Lord, that all those evil
servants, and foolish Virgins, which say in their heart, My Lord delayeth his
coming, and begin to smite their fellow servants, and to eat and drink with the
drunken, not caring to watch or pray in respect of his coming, nor to have oil
or light in their lamps, and so live and die, will be so found in that day of
the Bridegroomes coming, and shall then be shut out from ent^ing into the
Bride chamber for ever.

Therefore ye that are the Lords faithful and wise Servants, and of the wise
virgins, watch ye, and pray always in the Spirit, as Christ and his Apostles
have exhorted you, and in meekness do ye minister unto your fellow servants
(in the House) good things, whatsoever those evil servants, and foolish
virgins say or do.

And take ye heed also of those, who would make ye believe, that the
Bridegroom Jesus Christ is already come, and fitteth now in the Throne of his
glory, judging the quick and the dead.

That the resurrection of the Body, spoken of 1 Corinthians. 115^. and other
places, the perfection, the salvation, the glory, and all whatsoever the
Scriptures have spoken concerning Christ and his Kingdom and reign with all
his Saints, are now at this present time (in a secret mystical manner
fulfilled, turning all Scriptures into allegories, and making Jesus Christ a
mystical thing, and all persons names, matters and things therein spoken of,
and written, to have my-sticall meanings, which they undertake to declare in a
kind of Philosophical way.

And is well pleasing to those wandering professors that could never yet learn
to repent of their sins unto God, and desire mercy through faith in Christ,
like the similitude of the lost Son, and poor publican; but having turned
from one opinion, and form of Religion to another: and now, at last, meeting
with this, readily entertain it; and especially such men, as are most
delighted with their Philosophy, tending so much to liberty, and such wanton
women, as like to fulfill their carnal pleasures, of which sort the most are
that embrace the doctrine, as experience proves.

And strong reason arises from their doctrine, that it should be so.

For if Christ be already come in his glory, etc. And that the resurrection of
the body is now, while men live, and that when they dye they return into their
first principles, and so remain for ever, as they were before they knew they
had a Being, as they say. Then well may they eat and drink and take their
pleasure: for who knows of any felicity or pain he had before?

Therefore take heed, hearken not unto them, but know ye, and believe it
assuredly, that the Lord Jesus Christ shall come personally and truly, and be
seen in his glory with all his Saints, as he was by Peter, James and John
(with Moses and Elias) in the holy mount. And the bodies of the Saints shall be
truly raised and changed, as before is proved by clear Scriptures.

And be ye ware also of those that shall offer to persuade you, that the
Scriptures which we have in our native language, is not, nor do declare unto
us, the word or mind of God; but that we must looks for some new Apostles,
endued with such miraculous gifts as Peter and the other Apostles once had, to
be sent from God to instruct us, and to plant new Churches. Or that another
Elias must come and restore all things, before we can know the truth, or see a
true Church.

Believe them not, but know ye, that if it were true, that some places of
Scripture should be, by the ^ranslators, or by the Copier mistaken, or
mistranslated, yet could not that make the word or mind of God in the same
places, unpossible to be understood, especially by those servants of God,
which have that unction from the holy O^e, whe^eof the Apostle John speaks,
(and which Christ promised should be with them to the end of the world) or if
it could, yet does it not therefore darken or deprive them of the understanding
of all, or any of the rest. N^y, the grace and wisdom, the Divine power and
majesty of the Scriptures, as they are in our nativ^ Language, proves the same
to be the word of God, declaring hi^ mind and will unto us.

And as for miracles to confirm it, there is no need, because that has been
done sufficiently already.

Neither is there such necessity of new Apostles, or of another Elias, or of
one to come from the dead to instruct the people. Nay, but as Christ said once,
in way of admonition to such persons of the Jews, They have Moses and the
Prophets, let them hear them, etc.

So now, we have Moses and the Prophets as well as they; yea more, we have
Christ and his Apostles* and we have the Elias also that was to come, even John
the Baptist, insomuch as we have his, and their words* their testimonies and
examples.

And Christ himself prayed for those that should believe in him through their
word, John 17.

And if we will not hear nor be persuaded by them, to repent and believe,
neither will we if new ones, or some of them should come and preach anew unto
us.

And as concerning the Church, or House of God, the Apostle Paul declares unto
us plainly, that it is, and has been ever since his time, built upon the
foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief
corner stone. There are no new builders to be looked for, to lay a new
foundation.

And the living stones of this House, are those wise Virgins that have their
lamps always burning, waiting and attending the coming of their Lord the
Bridegroom, whose great Day is so near a^ the Door.

And so unto your sensure who are the children of the Bride-chamber, I refer
all these things.

And the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all. Amen.

And if any man shall conceive that I have herein been to bold, let him
consider what one says*

We having the same Spirit of Faith according as it is written, I have
believed, and therefore have I spoken,

We also believe, and therefore speak.

FINIS.

