SIR JOHN ELIOT HIS GRAVE AND LEARNED SPEECH Spoken in the High Court of
PARLIAMENT. Desiring an orderly Proceeding in Matters of Religion, and that it
may not be only disputed of, but firmly established, as it ought to be.
Expressing the Misprision and Error, whereby his Majesty is traduced by evil
Members about him. And the great danger of overwhelming that we were in, by
the Bishops Articles, and their Proceedings. Exhorting to maintain our King,
Country and Religion, even with the sword against all Opposers. With a Motion
propounded, for laying down of the Grounds, wherein the Arminians and we
differ.

SIR JOHN ELIOT HIS Grave and Learned Speech in Parliament.
I Have always observed in the proceedings of this House, that our best
advantage is in order, and I was very glad, when that noble Gentleman, my
Countryman, gave occasion to stay our proceedings; for I fear, it would have
carried us into a sea of confusion, and disorder, J having now occasion to
present to you in this great and weighty matter of Religion: I shall be bold to
give you a short expression of mine own affection, and in that order, that I
hope will conduce to the effecting of our work, and direct our labor to an
end.

To enter into a particular discussion of the writing of the opinion of the
Divines, I fear, it will involve us into a Labyrinth, we shall hardly get
out, and perchance, hinder the way, and darken the path, in which we must
tread. Before we know what other men have declared, it is necessary we should
presently lay down what is the truth. And, as I presume, we come not hither now
to dispute of religion, far be it from the thoughts of this church, that have
thus long continued, and confessed now to dispute. Shall posterity think, that
we have enjoyed our Religion fourscore years almost, and are now doubtful of
the sense? God forbid. It may be, Sir, out of something lately delivered, I
have not unnecessarily collected, that there is a jealosie conceived, as if we
went to deal in matters of Faith; it is our profession: this is not to be
disputed; neither will that truth be receded from this long time held, nor is
that truth decayed. It is confirmed by Parliament, because it was truth. And in
this, before J shall come to deliver my self more particularly, give me leave,
that have not yet spoken in this great cause, to give some apprehensions that J
have of few; for it is not in the Parliament to make a new religion, nor J hope
shall it be in any to alter the body of that truth we now profess. I must
confess, Sir, among all the fears we have contracte^, there arises to me not
one of the least dangers in the Declaration, which is made and published in his
Majesty's name.

And yet notwithstanding this Conclusion exclusively, let me say, that I may
not be mistaken, that either in that, or other things shall appear to carry
mention of his Majesty. We have not the least jealousy in him, we have that
comfort in his piety and goodness, as if there be any misprision or (...) is by
those Ministers about him, which not only (...) but all Princes are subject
unto. And to clear that Princes are subject to misinformation, and many
actions may be entitled to their own names, when there is no suspicion of it
to be done by themselves: but give me leave to look back to presidents of
other times, and what I find in other stories, may be useful in these.

Antiochus of Asia sent Letters unto his Provinces, if they received any
dispatches in his name, not agreeable to Justice, Ignoto se literus esse
scriptas, ideoque non parerent, I find by Plutarch of the great King Antiochus
of Asia, who says, that Princes are obnoxious to abuses of Ministers, and it
could not at all times be prevented: therefore he sent Messengers, that
Letters, or Dispatches sent in his name, that were not warrantable by Law, and
agreeable to Justice, should not be conceived to be done by him, and therefore
they should not give way unto it.

Sir, I find another book, and I beseech you, let it be apprehended; for I
hope I shall clear some misprisions. Gratian did not only note and confess
the same, but added the reason also, which the Masters of the Civil Law can
also testify, from their books wherein it is thus expressed, Quod
inveretundia potentium in instigation^, principes saepe restringuntur ut non
concedenda concedant; because that oftentimes with importunity of Ministers,
and those about them, Princes are drawn to grant things not fit to be granted.
As it was in that, so it may be in this, I speak it to this end, to draw this
conclusion; that if there be any thing that carries the title of his Majesty,
it may be the fault of his Ministers: far be it from me to have any suspicion
of him.

And now to that particular, in the Declaration, wherein I confess, it is an
apprehension of more fear, then I have in all the rest; for in the rest of the
particulars, we heard what was said of popery and Arminianisme. It is true, our
faith and religion is in danger, but it is by degrees. Here, Sir like an
inundation does break in at once, that we are in danger to be ruined and
overwhelmed.

For I beseech you, mark the ground of our religion, it is contained in the
body of these Articles. If there be any difference of opinion concerning the
sense and interpretation, the Bithops and Clergy in the Convocation, have power
admitted them to do any thing that shall concern the continuance, and
maintenance of the truth professed, which truth being contained in these
Articles, and these being different in the sense: so as if there be any dispute
about it, it is in them to order which way they please: and for ought I know,
to Popery, or Arminianisme, may be a sense introduced by them, and then it must
be received.

Js this a slight thing, that the power of religion must be drawn to the
persons of these men? J honor their profession, and honor the persons; but
give me leave to say the truth, what we profess, is not men's but Gods: And
God forbid, man should be judge of that truth. Look upon the conclusion they
have made, and from thence J draw their Arguments. J remember a Character I
have seen in a Dyary of Edw. the 6. that young Prince of famous memory,
wherein he does express the condition of the Bishops and Clergy of his time,
and says under his own handwriting; that some for sloth, some for age, some
for ignorance, some for luxury, and some for Popery, were unfit for Discipline
and Government.

Sir, I would it were not so with us, nay give me leave to vindicate the honor
of those men, that openly show their hearts to the truth. There have bin
Bishops, such who were fit to be made examples to all ages, who have shone in
virtue like those two faithful witnesses in heaven, of whom we may use that
Elegy, which Seneca did of Cami^s that to their memory and merits, Ne hoc
quidem obstet, quod nostris temporibus nati sunt. To whose glory, I may use the
saying, others faults are no prejudice to their virtue, who are so industrious
in their works. But that ours now, are not such, so free, sound, and Orthodox
in religion, as they should be: Witness the man nominated lately. I apprehend
such fear, that should it be in their power, we may be in danger to have our
religion overthrown: but I give this for testimony. And thus far to express my
religion, against all the power or opposition of these men, or whatsoever
opposition shall be, we shall still maintain that religion we profess, for
that we have bin born and bred in, nay if cause be, in that to dye. Some of
these, Sir, are Masters of Ceremonies, and they labor to introduce new
Ceremonies into the Church, I hope we should draw our swords, to defend our
Prince, Country, and religion, against all Opposers.

This I speak out of the care I have to preserve the honor of our King
against them, who by these Innovations, I fear, have fought to undermine it.

But to come to the manner and method of our proceeding, having made this
expression: wherein if I have transgressed the rule propounded, I crave your
pardon. I desire to avoid confusion, and distraction, and that we may go
presently to the ground of our Religion, and lay down that rule, wherein all
others rest; and when that is done, it will be time to take into consideration
the Breakers and Offenders against this rule in the next place; for before we
have laid down that, our work will be in vain.

Therefore lay down the profession wherein we differ from Arminianisme, and in
that I shall be ready to deliver my opinion.

And this is my humble Motion.

FINIS.

