A Sudden and Cloudy MESSENGER, With Glimpses of great joy to the Israel of
GOD. Declaring the hastening of that day of the Resurrection of the Lord JESUS
in his Saints, tending to a deliverance from spiritual and temporal Captivity,
but much sorrow, woe, and calamity, to the Lords, and his peoples Enemies in
England. Presented especially, to the waiters for this day of the Lord, to the
gathered Churches, Parliament, Army, City of London, and Ministers of England.
A Spark from the Altar, or a Beam of the Light of God, declaring the
scattering of the gathered Churches in England. A voice out of Cloudy
Discoveries to the Army. A further warning to London, of the dreadful coming of
the Lord God Almighty. A voice to high and low, showing what the determination
of the Lord seems to be on this Land. A warning to awaken all the Idol
Shepherds in England, otherwise called Ministers, with friendly advise to those
in the Ministry, that have the true Spiritual life of Jesus brought forth in
them.
By a lover of peace and purity, though appearing so terrible and dreadful.
EDWARD ELLIS.

Gal. 1. 15. 16. 17. When it pleased God to reveal his Son in me, that I might
preach him among the heathen, immediately I conferred not with flesh and blood,
neither went I to them that were Apostles before me. Cant. 2. 11, 12. Lo the
winter is past, the rain is over and gone, the flowers appear on the earth; the
time of the singing of birds is come, and the voice of the Turtle is heard in
our land, the Figtree puts forth her green figs, and the Vine with the
tender grapes give a good smell. Arise my love, my fair one, and come away,
until the day break, and the shadows fly away. Cant. 3. 11. Go forth O ye
daughters of Zion, and behold King Solomon with the Crown, wherewith his Mother
crowned him in the day of his Espousals, and in the day of the gladness of his
heart. London, Printed for the Author. 1649.

An Epistle to the Churches, Parliament, Army, City of London, and Ministers,
so called, in ENGLAND.
CHurches, should I tell you of more Wars, Pldgues, Famine, Staining of all
Worldly Glory, shaking all Earthly Powers; you would, (it may be) believe me.
But, if by a Beam of light, I tell you of the shaking and scattering of your
Heaven, your Sumptuous and Glorious Building, the Churches gathered: You say,
This is a hard saying, who can hear it; but surely it will be done, whether
you believe it, or no. But, hear a word more, I told you my Spark of light was
well nigh spent, its now supplied, or anointed with fresh oil: mistake me not,
my design is not presently, if I could, to take you off those ways wherein you
are, or may be profitable in building up one another in your most holy faith,
so long as there is Lambs, smoking flax, or bruised reeds, or babes in Christ
among you, there is need of your helping one another, till power from on high
be brought forth in a more immediate way to do it, which shall be in the time
appointed by the Father. The end of that which is declared unto you, is to
prove you are not of so long continuance as many of you imagine.

Honorable Parliament of England, who are managing the great Affairs of this
tottering Kingdom, you are now higher than you were: I have nothing against it,
but there is one higher than you, the Lord of Hosts, who has his designs in the
midst of yours. In this small volume, written by a glimse of his light, you may
take a small view and sight of his footsteps, that are, and will be upon this
Kingdom, even the overturning all worldly powers, and Governments, that His
may be set up, whose right all Government is, the Lord Jesus, which is more
pure, and spiritual, than any is yet in the world; to which, if you, or
others, shall act subserviently, you may flourish; if not, expect yours, or
their designs frustrated, or broken, that tend to Exaltation. This Kingdom, to
whom you ought to be as Fathers, how many Storms has past through it, and been
upon it? All Is pretty quiet now, and they begin to strengthen, and settle all,
almost exalting themselves, as though all evil were past, though not a whit
bettered by those judgments that have been already. But behold, that line of
desolution that is spread over this Land, to lay its Excellency yet more
lower: I wish you would lay it to heart, and tremble before the Lord; put off,
and lay by your brave Ornaments, within, and without, that the Lord may know
what to do unto you. Could I command as many drops of blood, as tears have
fallen from mine eyes, or sighs from within, as have been in beholding the
miseries hang over this Kingdom: I would write unto you in a more scarlet die.
If you will read this Book, you shall find nothing but joy and gladness
proclaimed to the Israel of God, and that the day of their Redemption draws
nigh; but lamentation, mourning, and woe, to the wicked, be they high or low,
rich or poor, noble or ignoble; those in power, or not in power, I can proclaim
nothing else; what it will cost me, I know not: Storms I have met with already,
but they caused me not to desist from my work, but were as wind to the fire,
which makes it flame the more, so long as God thought fit to employ me.

I have lived among diverse Great Persons many years, a poor servant, and now
come to this hard encounter with them, it seems harsh; but surely the strong
Lord of Hoasts is before, he leads, he is Light, Life, and Strength, a strong
Tower, a Buckler, and Shield, to help me to bear stripes, if need be, and to
avoid their scorns, although they should say, as Eliab to David, 1 Samuel 17.
28. I know thy Pride, and the haughtiness of thy Spirit. Or as Michal to
David, 2 Samuel 6. 20, 21. That I have uncovered my self as one of the vain
fellows, it is before, and at the command of the Lord: But I will yet be more
vile then thus, in this manner, if the Lord think fit, and will be base in mine
own sight. Plainness and truth is almost out of fashion, it was once
otherwise, Job 32. 21, 22. Let me not, I pray, accept any man's person, neither
let me give Titles unto man. For I know not to give flattering Titles, in so
doing my Maker would soon make me away. Zech. 8. 16. Speak you every man the
truth to his neighbor. But,

Idle Shepherds, awake, call upon the Lord, come, you should be wise, if you
read what is said concerning Powers, great ones, City and you. What will you do
even like your brethren in former times, will you not? you know who smote
Michaiah on the cheek, 1 Kin. 22. 24. and said, which way went the Spirit of
the Lord from me to thee: so Amos 7. 10. a Priest that ought to have been
wiser, when a Heardsman comes with a true message from God, he like a deceiver
sent to the King, saying, Amos has conspired against thee in the midst of the
Land of Israel, the Land is not able to bear all his words, go says he, flee
the way into the Land of Judah, eat bread, and prophecy there. But prophecy
not again at Bethel, for it is the Kings Chapel, and it is the Kings Court. He
might as well have said, Amos, this is no place to entertain such Persons as
shall Prophecy of Ruin, or Desolation, although commanded by God, if you will
come hither and be welcome, you must speak pleasing things, prophecy of Wine
and strong drink, and pleasures, such as are fit for great persons, prophecy
flatteries, as Ahabs Prophets did, 1 Kin. 22. 6. and then thou shall be
entertained at Court, and with great ones as they were: it may be so now in our
Land, flattering and deceitful Priests that prophecy lies and pleasing things
to the fancies of great persons may flourish, when as they that declare the
truth of God to them, may go in danger of the loss of all outward enjoyments,
but they will say I am beside my business, toward you O watchmen; therefore
hearken, do not you like Amasiah say, I have conspired against this Land, nor
that it is not able to bear all my words, nor bid me Prophecy somewhere else,
or of pleasinger things, they are the true sayings of God, would you have me
cry Peace, when the Lord cries trouble, and so be consumed for my pains, what
the Lord has spoken to me, that declare I to you; Oh you will say, Observe, what?
he makes himself a Prophet, this is as Christ says, false Prophets shall arise
and deceive many: well, they shall so, take heed you be not a kin to them: do
you think I am guided by a deceiving spirit, come then, handle me, pry into
me, try and search me by the Scriptures, I am willing to be tried, but you want
sight, I Will refer my self to the judgment of those that have a clearer light
then you, even the Saints: But secure London, what say you to me? what is your
judgment concerning these sad things threatened against you, you have had many
warnings from the Lord, by diverse men, you have taken little notice of them to
believe them, would you believe one that should be raised from the grave to
declare against you from the Lord? why? behold, he has sent one with a message
raised from the valley and shadow of death, from the powers of darkness that
were within him, even from the belly of hell. The floods compassed him about,
his billows and waves passed over him, he was even broken, and shattered in
pieces; his strength of inward and outward man; was well nigh spent, as to his
own view, and the view of others, laid aside as a vessel of no use, yet
suddenly by an Almighty power, raised him like a Lion roaring for his prey: of
a fearful and faint heart made bold, of weak was made strong, to declare as
sad a message elsewhere as to you, even with, and not minding the hazard of
life. Will thou believe now, and turn to the Lord, whether you will hear, or
whether you will forbear, know you have had a message, you shall be inexcusable.

As for you of the Army of Officers, and Soldiers, the least part of this
small book concerns you, as you are Soldiers, but if you war against Heaven,
you will be conquered, notwithstanding all your victories; the line of
dissolution will reach you, you have been such, as have been made use of by God
to work great outward salvation for Israel, that before was in, and under the
hands of cruel, and unreasonable men, blessed be his great name for it, and the
Lord reward your kindness and labors into your bosoms, with spirituull and
temporal blessings. I know, you will many of you confess, that you have seen
much of the power of God with you, subduing your enemies, and that God has
shown much of his kindness to his poor Israel, as in giving them such
deliverance as at this day, they are so precious and dear in his sight, that he
has reproved and given men (I may say) to the slaughter for their sakes: but
as if that were not enough he is following them with more excellent things,
even the breakings forth of his own Glory, in a more large manner, which you
may see a glimpse of in this book: and what ever desolations shall come upon
this Kingdom, through his fulness in them, they shall lift up their heads
when others shall call to rocks and mountains to cover them from that wrath
which will be upon them. The Temple of the Lord Jesus is to be built, and
exalted, yea, glorified with his own Glory: the time and day grows on apace,
though Israel it self knows not what to make of it, when Moses walked into
Egypt, saying, Let Israel go, though there were great combustions amongst the
Egyptians, and Israel hearkened not to the voice of Moses for anguish of
spirit, and cruel bondage, and Moses was troubled, and much discouraged in his
work, complaining to the Lord, that Israel would not hearken to his message,
Exodus 6. 9. 12. Yet it presages Isreal's deliverance is nigh at hand, Israel is
in boudage now, and has been a long time, and for the Lord to snatch poor
persons out of the fire, and cause them to walkup and down in the midst of
great ones, as has been done through the strength of God in Cambridge-Shire,
and now in this City: the great ones must know Israel must be delivered out of
Captivity and Bondage spiritual, and temporal: let the world and Israel too
think what they will, of a truth* God is hastening with the breakings forth of
some great spiritual Glory.

Where your Scouts were met formerly, it argued your Army was near, the Lord
sending his Scouts or forerunners, crying, the Lord is come, and coming; it
presages he is at hand, if the Lord send watchmen, that shall lift up their
voice like singers, and call upon the waste places of Jerusalem, to break forth
into joy, and sing together, and say to Zion, thy God reigns, and the Lord
will bring back their captivity, read Isa. 52. 7. 8, 9. and tell me what you
think.

This the Lord has done of late in England, and does still, though they be
accounted mad men, men wondered at, scoft at, as Neh. 4. 2. What do these feeble
Jews? will they fortify themselves? will they sacrifice? will they make an end
in a day? Scoffers, hearken, Israel must sacrifice otherwise than they have
done; the spiritual Temple of Jesus must be built: We care not, though for
walls, bulwarks, or Armies for this work; God is all this to the building of
this Temple, Isa. 26. 1. Zech. 9. 8. Nay hearken, The Lord himself will be the
alone Erecter and Exalter of it, Zech. 16. 12. 13. Not by might, or by power,
but of the Spirit of the Lord of Hoasts, Zech. 4. 6. The Lord will be the Glory
of it also, its now but the day of small things, there is many powers of
darkness to hinder the breaking forth of this Glory. But, who are you, O great
mountains, before the breakings forth of the Lord Jesus? You shall become a
plain, he shall be brought forth in despite of you, and there shall be
shoutings, crying, Grace, Grace unto Him. Be silent, O all Flesh, before the
Lord, for he is rising out of the habitation of his Holiness. The Fountain
yet maintains life, therefore O spiritual Israel, do you search the
Scriptures whether these things be so, or no, like those, Acts 17. And do not
lightly cast these precious Declarations to you, away, till you have carefully
examined these things, and consider what these voices mean.

O Israel, consider, is here another Gospel? the breakings forth of another
Spirit? another faith, or new prophesies? Or, is here not a taste of the
promises, prophesies, and words of the Prophets of old, and Apostles of our
Lord Jesus Ghrist? I speak as to wise men, judge what I say, and with Mary,
ponder these things in your hearts. The God of wisdom be your light
injudging: Its the desire of him, who could willinglp spend, and be spent, (if
the Father thinks fit) for the furtherance of your Consolation and Joy; who is

The unworthiest of all Saints, EDWARD ELLIS.

A Spark from the Altar: OR, A Beam of the Light of God.
Declaring the Scattering of the gathered Churches in England, before the
consummation of all things. Or, The End of the World, tending to a Discovery,
or Separation, between the Righteous and the Wicked; which shall be done by
the Lords coming to his Temple: At which day, the Saints shall enjoy a more
clear Sight of their Fathers Glory, than now they do.
CHurches, Harken; I know you will startle at this Cloudy Messenger, with a
Spark from the Altar, or a Beam of the Light of God, scattering yours, which
seems to be as a full Sun.

Many of you glory much in your Privileges, as if the Lord were no where in
his manifestations of Light, and Love, but among you; So did the Jews, Jer. 7.
The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord.

Many of you think your selves very well, and rich; I should not meddle to
impoverish, or strip you of your Glory, were I not certain I am under the
teachings, and subservient to the design of my Father.

You have, many of you, like Hannahs Adversary, vexed the souls of those that
were not under your Forms, upraiding them with barrenness, and
unfruitfulnesse, boasting of your own. But consider, Hannah had an Husband,
and being vexed with her Adversary, cried unto the Lord, he brought forth fruit
out of her womb, and she was a joyful mother of children, when she that vexed
her, its possible, waxt feeble.

To spiritualize it; Those you have, and still vex, have an husband, the Lord
Jesus; in him is their fruit found, which he will bring forth, and cause them
to be fruitful, and strong, when you may be weak, and feeble: Then shall they
sing Hannahs Song of Joy, read it, 1 Samuel 2.

Therefore, talk no more so exceeding proudly, let not arrogance come out of
your mouths; For the Lord is a God of knowledge, by him actions are weighed,
they that stumbled, are, and shall be girt with strength, 1 Samuel 2. 4. Psalm.
113. 7. 8. He raises up the poor, (even such as you despise) out of the dust,
and lifts the needy out of the dunghill, that he may set him with Princes,
even with the Princes of his people.

But hearken still; Tell many of you of a spiritual Glory, that's contrary to
yours; or a Land more excellent than yours; one may almost as soon make a
blind man believe the Moon is made of cheese, (as says the Proverb) as cause
you to see this spiritual Land; that is, discoveries above, and contrary to
yours.

I have been wandering a long time like Noah's Dove, as the Spies to search the
Land, I have seen it afar off, behold a branch, or a cluster of its fruit, its
a glorious land, only with pure, spiritual glory, the inhabitants are very
wise, and strong, but with the wisdom and strength of the Lord of Hoasts, no
need of any low, or inferior light, but the pure light of God; no need of
Teachers, to say, Know the Lord; no fear of Enemies, The gates stand open.

Its very pure, nothing but holiness there; its very strong, the Lord himself
is walls and bulwarks. There may be Dogs, and ravenous Beasts about it, they
may attempt to storm it, but they shall soon be destroyed, Rev. 20. 9. This
spiritual Land of Canaan, is altogether glorious: When the Lord has given me a
more clear view of it, if he thinks fit, you shall hear of it.

But Churches, hearken: Many of you boast much of your strong Pillars, that
will bear up your building to the end of all things almost, I mean those
Scriptures that are so frequently brought to prove the continuance of your
practice; but I spare you, considering the Disciples were ignorant to the
Resurrection of Christ, though taught by him, living under his teaching of
their measure. Yet hearken, there is a great deal of danger in your way, and
practice, in retaining those Scriptures that make for you, in opposition, and
clear contradiction to many others. You boast much of them, to prove your way,
if that be true which many of you hold out, if the light of God did not lead
me, I might question the authority of them, which I do not, but am rather
confirmed in the excellency of them, or else not know what to make of them.

But Churches, hearken still: Because many of you are so confident, that I may
not beat the air, or speak at uncertainty, what will you say to those
Scriptures that prove your desolution?

First, Consider those Scriptures that promise, and prophecy of the large
measure of the fullness of God, the Saints shall be filled withal in the last
days, and then tell how long you think your building can stand, Joel 2. 28. I
will pour out my Spirit upon all Flesh, and your Sons and your Daughters shall
Prophecy; your old men shall dream dreams, and your young men shall see
visions. And so, upon the servants, and upon the handmaids, in those days will
I power out my Spirit, Zech. 12. 8. In that day shall the Lord defend the
inhabitants of Jerusalem, and he that is feeble among them at that day, shall
be as David, and the house of David shall be as God, as the Angel of the Lord
before them. Zech. 10. 5. And they shall be as mighty men, which tread down
their enemies in the mire of the streets; in the battle they shall fight,
because the Lord is with them, and the Riders of horses shall be confounded.
Zech. 10. Chap. 7. verse. 12. And they of Ephraim, shall be like a mighty man,
and their heart shall rejoice as through wine, yea their children shall see it,
and be glad, their heart shall rejoice in the Lord. And I will strengthen them
in the Lord, and they shall walk up and down in his name, says the Lord.
Hearken, and observe Churches, the Strength spoken of here, is, because of the
fullness of God he will fill his Israel with; me thinks there is one prop of
your building gone. But,

Hearken still, there is more behind, Isa. 60. 22. A little one shall become a
thousand, and a small one a strong Nation, I the Lord will hasten it. In his
time, Isa. 25. 7, 8. He will destroy in this mountain the face of the covering
cast over all people, and the veil that is spread over all Nations. He will
swallow up death in victory, and the Lord God will wipe away tears from off all
faces, and the rebuke of his people shall he taken away: The Lord has spoken
it.

Hearken yet, Zec. 9. 15. 16. 17. The Lord of Hosts shall defond them; and they
shall devour and subdue with fling stones, and they shall drink and make a
noise as through wine, and they shall be filled like bowls, they shall be like
a Crown lifted up, as an Ensign upon his Land, corn shall make the young men
cheerful, and new wine the maids.

Churches harken, this mirth presages sadness to your building; does it not
appear to you weaker then it was, how ever, hearken, there is more yet, Zach. 14.
8. 21. And it shall be in that day, that living waters shall go out from
Jerusalem, half of them toward the former sea, and half of them toward the
hinder sea, in Summer and in Winter shall it be, and there shall be no more the
Canaanite in the house of the Lord. Mic. 3. 7. And I will make her that halted
a remnant, and her that was cast far off a strong nation, and the Lord shall
reign over them in mount Sion, from hence forth, even for ever. Isa. 33. And
the inhabitant shall not say, I am sick. Rev. 21. 1, 2. And there was no more
sea; and I John saw the holy City coming down from God out of heaven, prepared
as a Bride adorned for her husband. All these Scriptures do clearly prove the
abundance of grace, and spiritual glory the Saints shall have powered upon
them, from that fullness of their head, the Lord Jesus. When this time comes,
surely Churches, you will stagger like a drunken man. You that are not taken up
into, and made partakers of this glory, you will not know what to do with your
selves, you will be like him that cried after his God.

Awaken your selves, and hearken still, and secondly consider those Scriptures
that hold forth a dissolution of your Forms of worship, what if I should say
Ordinances? as you converse in them. Remember it is but a Spark from the Altar,
a beam of the light of God, that declares your dissolution: if your light be as
a full Sun, sit still, and ^^e through me; fall not upon me with harsh
censures. What can a Spark, a beam of light see; but consider, for in that,
Rev. 21. 22. 23. And the Street of the City was pure Gold, and as it were
transparent glass; and I saw no Temple therein: for the Lord God almighty and
the Lamb are the Temple of it, and the City had no need of the Sun, neither
of the Moon to shine in it; for the Glory of God did lighten it, and the Lamb
is the light thereof. If this Scripture may be interpreted concerning the Glory
of the Church on earth, as it may be compared with others, which cannot fully
be done now with a beam of light: but if the Lord please, it may hereafter; but
if it may be interpreted so as you cannot clearly deny, then what will become
of your Churches which many expect shall even last near as long as Sun and
Moon endures.

Hearken still, Ier. 31. 34. And they shall teach no more every man his
neighbor, and every man his brother, saying, know the Lord, for they shall all
know me from the least of them unto the greatest of them, says the Lord. 1.
Epist. John 2. 27. But the anointing which you have received of him abides in
you, and ye need not that any man teach you, but as the same anointing
teaches you of all things, and is truth, and is no ly. These Scriptures, I
expect shall be fulfilled in the very letter of them, I conceive your quick
apprehensions, in part, to quarrel against this, but I Will let you alone, till
the Spark or beam of light be increast: I Will leave to your further consideration
to confirm the scattering of you, Rev. 22. 3. 4. 5. Isa. 60. 19. 2 Pet. 1. 19.
and when you have considered these, and those quoted and set down before; tell
truly what will become of that famous building many so much adore. I shall
hardly hear, of the result of your thoughts, therefore know from a beam of the
light of God, concerning your building, there will not be one stone left
uponanother. The house of your glory will be left desolate.

But come now let us reason, I know you startle, and are affrighted at the
Spiritual and heavenly voice of Christ, as the Disciples were when Christ
spoke to them in a form they had not conversed with him in: so do you let the
Spiritual voice of Jesus come amongst you, which tends to destroy your fleshly
forms or knowledge: you are terrified, and affrighted, and cry out a Spirit,
but a deceiving one: I grant you, it is abroad: the deceiving one may act very
like the true breakings forth of the Spirit of God, take heed you be not
offended at the truth, because error is abroad.

I certainly believe there are many choice spirits among you, to them I
declare, my desire is not to force you out of your particular ways of worship;
but if you meet with the presence of the Lord, walk there, and I say unto you,
as it was said to the Disciples, tarry at Jerusalem till you be endued with
power from on high, to arise from what you are: but in the mean time beware of
passing such censures as usually comes from many that are of your Assemblies:
you think, it is possible, you are very high in Principles, there be those that
are higher: they will not despise you; if their highness be of God, it teaches
no such thing, so far as they are acted by the true light of God, if they do,
it is from the darkness that is in them, do not you judge them.

Hearken still, and more which proves your scattering, or the dissolution of
your practice, though many of you be glewd as close to it almost as your flesh
to your bones: consider that Scripture, Mal. 3. the coming of the Lord Jesus to
his Temple, as a devouring fire to burn and destroy the filthiness that is in
his Saints. The effects of his coming is to difference between the righteous
and the wicked, between them that fear God, and them that fear him not: this
Scripture reaches these last days, you are conversing one with another, with a
great deal of comfort, because you are joined together in an outward form: but
there will be found many false ones among you, when this day comes; and surely,
then you will be shaken, and that day tend to your s^attering, how you shall be
gathered together, judge you,

Further, consider those Scriptures that prophecy of the shaking of heaven,
and earth, and declare what will become of yours in that day, if you can,
Farewell, the Spark from the Altar: the beam of light has even spent it self;
for there shall be a day, that the watchmen upon the mount of Ephraim, Jer. 31.
6. shall cry, arise, yea, and let us go up to Zion unto the Lord our God. Micah
2. 10. Arise, yea, and depart, for this is not your rest, because it is
polluted. Joh. 14. 31. Arise, let us go hence. Cant. 6. 10. Who is he that
looks forth as the morning, fair as the Moon, clear as the Sun, and
terrible as an Army with banners.

A Voice out of cloudy Discoveries to the Army.
HEarken, O Army, I was of you, I am with you still, and acknowledge that
present power you enjoy, to be that, the Lord of all Armies has invested you
with; you have been, and still in appearance are, instrumentally a wall of
defense, to keep Israel from the rage of malicious Enemies, through the good
hand of our God, that has been upon you, as you have fought for Israel, with
your Swords in the Field; many of you being sprinkled with Blood: Israel has
wrestled with God for you in the Mount, like Moses, bedewed with tears; that
one without another should not boast of victory, and that both might return
praise, singly to God; and the Lord of Hosts be made more glorious to either of
you. What you have done this way was excellent and glorious in its season; the
Lord thereby dying, as I may say, his, and your garments, with the blood of his
own, and Isreal's Enemies: I cannot certainly determine, whether you shall
conquer them any more so, or no; remember what the voice is (cloudy) you have
got many Victories, and Conquests by your Sword of steal: Will you suffer your
selves now to be overcome by the Sword of the Spirit, the power of the Lord
Jesus Christ? Surely this design of the Lord is hastening apace, whereby he
will overcome all his Enemies, in his Saints, by the power of his Spirit, which
will be as great a plague and torment to high and low, in this Land, as these
miseries by a bloody and unnatural war; nay, surely greater when this day of
the resurrection of the Lord comes in his Saints; which doubtless is hastening,
they shall consume away while they stand on their feet, when as beheading and
slaying in the Field, delivered them from their pain presently. As to this
world, Its a wonder to consider, and observeable, that not a Dog should bark at
Israel, when they marched out of Egypt, though at midnight: It will be as great
a wonder, to see Israel, I mean, the beloved ones of the Lord, to march up and
down in England, in his strength, and majesty, and not a Dog, I mean wicked
men, so called, Revel. 21. not able to bite, though bark they may, by reason of
that consumption, and vexation of spirit, that shall be upon them.

Army, keep your Swords, and your Power, walking in ways of Justice, and
Righteousness; but you that are spiritual, mind, and hasten the coming of
that day, wherein Israel shall have no need of Armies, to defend them from
Enemies; the Lord in them will be strong enough to do that; besides, he will
be a wall of fire round about them, no need of Scouts, Sentenels, or Guards,
the Lord will keep it night and day; this glorious days a coming of the
Saints Exaltation, and safety, by the fullness of Jesus in them.

The Alarm's given, Trumpets sound, Harolds proclaim it, The watchmen are set
upon the Watchtower, spy him nearer and nearer, tarry there long, no relief,
as from men, yet not weary. Awake, awake, stand up Israel in the Army, when the
Lord calls; but tarry till then, the world will yet rage, and be mad, but lets
go up at once, fear them not, their strength is departed from them, the Lord
of Hoasts is on Isreal's side still.

They say, they are strong, wise, and rich: Its no such thing, they have
rejected the word of the Lord; they are weak, foolish, and poor, as to a
spiritual understanding: But, were they as they say, the Battle's the Lords,
he marches in the Van, He sounds the Trumpet, and will go before as whirlwinds
of the South; Zec. 9. Joel 2. he will also send a hornet before, their hearts
shall fail them, and melt away like water. This Spiritual Army will be very
great, mighty men all, when they are got together; no fear of fainting in
their marches, for God is with them, and in his strength shall they walk. You
enemies of the Lord of Hoasts in England, be you what you will, tremble, quake,
and fear, for this terrible day of the Lord of Hoasts is coming apace.

And you O Army, as you have been wise, and diligent, to learn, and find out
the designs, and intended marches of your Enemies formerly; be wise now, and
with double diligence, set your selves to know the designs, footsteps, and
travelings of the Lord of Hoasts, that are, and will be upon this Kingdom, and
act subservantly; carry on your designs in the light and wisdom of God, he
alone, and his Saints must be exalted in a spiritual power; to which, if you
be subjected, you that are so, shall flourish; but ruination, and desolation of
those that are not so at his coming: Its a voice, (but of a cloudy discovery)
that's spoken to you.

The Messenger that writ this Book, sudden, and cloudy, you must not expect
clearness, it concerns you, and others, to pry narrowly into, and seacrh the
Scriptures, whether they be so, or no, then judge, not before. Micah 4. Chap.
3. 4.

Farewell.

FINIS.
A further Warning to London of the dreadful coming of the Lord God Almighty.
O London, in thee was I nourished many years; for thy happiness I have
suffered much, my blood had not been dear to me, so thou might have
flourished, and have been a City that the Lord would have taken pleasure in; my
bowels are yearning after thee, I must bear witness against thee for all
this; and how am I straitened till it be accomplished; from the days of thy
Fathers, thou have departed from the Lord: the Lord sent his messengers in the
midst of thee to call thee to return to him, what usage they had, thou, and
many in the world know to thy shame: your Fathers, where are they? the
Prophets, do they live for ever, but has not the words of his servants taken
hold on you?

The day of the Lords anger they spoke of, how has it been accomplished on
you, these years past, thou have, and art set on fire, yet thou know it not,
you are consuming, but lay it not to heart.

The Lord has yet a farther controversy with thee, because thou art
unmindfull of him, he brings forth his judgments morning by morning, but thou
take no shame, his judgments are in thee, and about thee, but thou learnest
not righteousness, nor beholdest the Majesty ofthe Lord; his hand hathbeen,
and is lifted up against thee; thou will not see, but thou shall see, and be
ashamed for all thy abominations, (or confounded by the fury of the Lord.)

O London, consider what plagues, what unseasonable weather, what want of bread
has been in thee in former years? but thou returnest not to the Lord!

But behold, and tremble for fear, O London, that bloody war that was brought
forth, not by the power of man, but from, and by the Lord of hosts: how many
thousands of thy men are slain with the Sword, how are the widows, and
fatherless increased in thee: how are thy riches exhausted? what leading into
captivity? what complaining in thy streets? How art thou forced to be servant
to those that formerly thou would have despised! (thou do it now, but can
thou help thy self?) O London, what vexatiousnesse of spirit have thou? what a
trembling heart is in the midst of thee? a great and sad consumption is upon
you: But that which is the greatest plague of all, and declares a further
consumption upon you, is, you are not bettered by the judgment of the Lord.

You are at peace in appearance now, and you think the bitterness of death is
over: but a deceived heart has deceived you, London! I beseech you in the name
of the Lord consider, the Lord has yet a further cotroversie with you: his
hand is stretched out still: thy sins remain: your spots are not the spots of
the Lords people: but of rebellious Children that refuse to hear the rod, and
who has appointed it; you refuse to return, your pride testifies to your face,
you will refrain turning to the Lord, and you will refrain turning away his
anger. What people ever set themselves against the Lord, and prospered: how
furiously has the Lord marched up and down amongst us: how are his garments
died in blood: not of the mean men only, but of the mighty; thy mighty and thy
honorable men are fallen in thy streets: yet his anger is not turned away.

London! mind that Thunderclap given to you of late: the Lord was there,
itpreaches to you, that unless you repent, you shall perish also.

London! in thee, and against thee is found the blood and cries of poor saints,
acry of oppression, the cry of the poor unminded: a cry, yea, and a horrible
cry of abomination, that has, that still does come up into the ears of the
Lord of Hosts. London, is there no healing for you, are your wounds incurable?
nothing but the blood of Jesus can wash you from your filthiness, whch to your
shame you despise: What shall I say unto you, be instructed, lest the soul of
God depart from you, and he take no pleasure in you: London, you are conquered
and overcome in your power by men, that it cannot break forth to manage War
against them: but your inward power that maintains War against heaven is
unsubdued, you are yet found fighters against God: but he will bestronger then
you: and overcome you by his strong power in despite of thee.

The Lord has lain still a long time, and you thought he had forgotten, or
forsaken the earth; but he is, and will rise more and more with fury in his
face, to recompense wrath to his, and his peoples enemies: to make up his
Jewels, and glorify the house of his glory, that is, his Saints, whom you
have so much despised, and trampled under foot, you have ruled, they must rule.
You that have been, and still are enemies to the Lord, your best days are
past, the days of Zions joys are coming: the Lord must be King over all the
earth, the Lord will come gloriously too, and in his Saints. You enemies to God
make haste, you wicked generation, what you do, do quickly, the Lord is coming
apace, with sorrow and mourning to you, but with joy and gladness to his
Israel. How will you like it wordlings? to see the Saints rule 'twill vex you,
but you cannot help it: they must be the head, you the tail, the Lord Jesus
will reign in them, you must be spoiled, Isa. 32. Behold a King shall reign
in Righteousness, and Princes shall rule in Judgment. Ezekiel. 39. 10. And they
shall spoil those that spoiled them, and rob those that robbed them, says the
Lord.

How will you like this you stout spirits, to see the Saints spoil you, and you
to be their servants, and come bowing to them, Is. 60. 14. The sons of them
that afflicted thee shall come bending unto thee, they that despise thee shall
bow themselves down at the soles of thy feet: the Lord will manifest himself so
in his Saints, and he has begun it already, that the proudest of you, if you
will not honor and exalt them, woe unto you* Isa. 60. 12. The nation and
kingdom that will not serve thee shall perish: yea, those Nations shall be
utterly wasted.

As youtender (O London) your own happiness and welfare, repent of your
despising the Saints, and take heed of offending them hereafter, the Lord has,
and will reprove Kings and great ones for their sakes. But London thou boastest
of thy Religious enjoyments, thy prayers and fastings; and because of these,
you cry as those in Micah 3. 11. and are like them, You lean upon the Lord, and
say, is not the Lord among us, no evil can come upon us: be not deceived, so
did the Israelites many years, Zec. 7. And yet the Lord took no pleasure in
them. it is possible, he takes as little in you. You will say, are all our
days of fasting in vain. Hear you that are enemies to God, he takes as little
delight in your Sacrifices, as in those, Isa. 63. 3.

London, thou think there be those in thee, that God hears their prayers; it
is true, that God hears the prayers of the Saints, but you shall have but
little benefit by it, that war against heaven, they have prayed much for the
prevention of spilling that blood that has been spilt, and for the avoiding
those Judgments they saw hang over this Land: but you see they could not
prevail, their prayers returned into their own bosoms: they pray now much, but
it is for the breaking forth of a spiritual glory: a vexation to you, O
Rebellious people: you shall (it is possible) see it, but not taste thereof;
London, consider thy condition, the Bridegroom is coming, he yet entreats thee
to return, if thou will not, he will send plagues upon you, till he has
consumed thee; and leave a poor people, and afflicted, and they shall fear,
and praise the name of the Lord, which you refuse to do. Hear this from the
Lord by the unworthiest of men,

Edward Ellis.

Amos 7. 14. I was no Prophet, neither was I a Prophets son, but I was an
heardman, and a gatherer of Sickamore fruit: and the Lord took me as I followed
the flock, and the Lord said unto me, go prophecy unto my people Israel.

Isa. 21. 10. That which I have heard of the Lord of Hosts, the God of Israel,
have I declared unto you, I was bowed down at the hearing of it, I was dismayed
at the seeing of it.

Isa. 28. 11. 13. For with stammering lips, and another tongue will he speak to
this people, that they might go, and fall backward, and be broken, and snared,
and taken, Ezekiel. 2. 5. Yet shall they know there has been a Prophet among them.

Isa. 52. 8, 9. 10. Thy watchmen shall lift up their voice, with the voice
together shall they sing: for they shall see eye to eye, when the Lord shall
bring again Zion, break forth into joy, sing together you waste places of
Jerusalem, for the Lord has comforted his people, he has redeemed Jerusalem:
The Lord has made bare his holy arm in the eyes of the nations, and all the
ends of the earth shall see the salvation of our God.

FINIS.
A voice to high and low, showing what the determination of the Lord seems to
be on this Land.
HIgh and low, hearken, the Lord of Hosts is come, and still coming, his decree
is like that of Nebuchaduezzar, Dan. 3. 29. I make a Decree, that every people,
nation, and language, which speak any thing amiss against the God of Shadrach,
Meshach, and Abednego, shall be cut in pieces, and their house shall be made a
dunghill: this is the determination of God upon all those that shall speak, or
act, any thing amiss against the God of Israel, unless they repent; and that
which the Lord has begun already to do, he has, and is still a making good,
that Prophecy, Isa. 24. Read it, O England, to thy sorrow, who would have
emptied this Land of the Saints, and destroyed them, now thou art near
destruction thy self, the day of the Lord is come against all those powers,
that wereas Cedars, as Oaks, as high mountains, he has powered contempt upon
Princes, Psalm 107. and caused them to wander in the wilderness, where there is
no way, and that promise is now fulfilled. It shall come to pass, Isa. 24. 21.
that the Lord shall punish the host of the high ones that are on high, and the
Kings of the earth upon the earth, Isa. 23. 9. The Lord of hosts has purposed
it to stain the pride of all glory, and to bring into contempt all the
honorable upon the earth. This he has done already very much. You present
powers that have been as a rod, and staff in Gods hand for the accomplishing
of his design, tremble, and fear, and avoid walking in their steps: think not
your power so strong, that it cannot be moved, for that strong God which
overturned those powers that were before you, is able, and will most certainly
dash you in pieces, if you shall walk in their steps of oppression and
violence, Psalm 75. 5. Lift not up your horn on high, speak not with a stiff
neck; for promotion comes neither from the East, nor from the West, but God is
the Judge, he puts down one, and sets up another. If you will honor God,
he will honor you; if not, you shall be lightly esteemed, both of God, and his
Saints, for they are looking for a spiritual glory and power; and will esteem
of you, as you act by the breakings forth of a spiritual light in you.

You corrupted ones of what degree soever; how have you despised the poor
Saints, and scornd the excellent of the Earth? Now is God lifted up, now is he
exalted, and they shall despise you, Howl you great ones, what a sad day, by
the light of God, do I see coming upon you; your Glory is gone, the Saints
shall see through you now, by the light of the Father. You painted Sepulchers,
what ever you are, if you will not exalt the Lord Jesus, they will esteem of you
no more, than the mire in the streets: many of them have esteemed of you, and
has got their bread with sorrow of heart among you, because of that abundance
of vanity that was in you, and that darkness that was in their own spirits;
they durst not speak to you for fear of your power; their Father will fill
them with his own glory, then shall they not fear your faces.

You Great ones that have, and yet do, oppress the Saints; put off your brave
Ornaments, and mourn, for the day of your joy is much spent, vexation and
disquiet of heart you must have, but Israel joy and gladness.

The Saints deliverance must be in the destruction of their inward and outward
enemies; you enemies of the Lord in England, consider, turn to the Lord
speedily; the door of mercy is seemingly yet open, it may be soon shut; you
will cry for pity then, but there shall be none; but as you have rejoiced at
the sorrows of the godly, so shall they rejoice in yours. Zion heard and was
glad, and the Daughters of Judah rejoiced because of thy Judgments, O Lord,
Psalm. 107. 42.

When God is pouring contempt on Princes, on the great ones of the Earth, the
Righteous shall see it and rejoice. You Enemies of the Lord, be you great men,
or others, read in the Revelations, what Songs the Saints shall sing, its your
doom, and day of sorrow.

The day of the Lord is come, O England! a day of wrath and fury, a Consumption
is in this Land; many sorrows already, more behind: yea, such a day as yet,
was never upon it. Alas, for that day is great, so that none is like it, Jer.
30. 7.

I have heard a voice of trembling, of fear, and not of peace: Wherefore do we
see every man with his hand on his loins, as a woman in travel: all faces are
turned into palenesse; the Fowls of the Air knows the time of their coming,
but thou, O England, know not the coming of the Lord, it presages more
ruin to thee.

The day of the Lord makes haste, wherein he alone must be exalted in his own
pure strength and wisdom. Rulers take heed you act in the pure wisdom of
God; all your fleshly wisdom must be destroyed, and the designs it thinks to
effect will be frustrated, to your sorrow and grief, that are not spiritual.

The day is come, the Lord marches on still, wherein he has, and will sift,
and fan thee, O England! you see how the Lord has discovered your spirits,
one to another. Parliament, consider this, you seem to be more pure then
others; there is drossie and chaffie spirits amongst you; surely the Lord will
search you yet more. Take heed the next discovery be not by the breaking forth
of a spiritual glory and power, in those that are upright amongst you: surely
the Lords separating day's at hand, to divide between Sheep and Goats, who are
yet so mingled, that nothing but the pure light of God can discover.

O England! this will not be one of the least of thy plagues, that are coming
upon thee: you seem to be like those Mal. 3. desiring delighting in, and
longing for the coming of Jesus to his Temple. He makes haste, but who may
abide his coming? He comes like a Refiners Fire, and Fullers Soap, to take
away that filthiness that is in his Saints; then shall they return, and
discern between the Righteous and the Wicked: and what a sad day this will be
to thee, O England judge.

The day of the Lord is come, and hastens greatly for thee O Israel! for thee O
captive Daughter, Zion, who lie in the dust among the pors in the valley and
shadow of death; how do thou mourn, by reason of the oppressors within and
without thee, thou fear continually, there is none to guide, or comfort thee,
almost amongst thy friends; thou art drunk, yet not with Wine, but with the
fury of the Lord; thou faintest as thou travailest up and down; thou art as a
wild Bull in a Net, the more thou strivest to get out of thy misery, the more
thou art entangled: thou prostratst thy self to thy Enemies, that say, bow
down that we may go over thee: and how have they darkened the breaking forth of
thy spiritual glory? thou chaste Spouse, how many looks have thou for thy
dear Husband, for the Resurrection of the Lord Jesus in thee, why he is risen,
and has appeared to some already? The words will seem to thee as Tales, thou
beleevest them not; yet say not, how can this thing be? though it be marveilous
in thy sight. O sad soul consider, Is any thing too hard for God? he will
work, and who shall let him, if he say, take away thy filthy garments, they
are gone; be full, thou art full, he will fill thee with his own presence, then
shall the enemy be thrust out, and the spoilers spoild: The days of thy
mourning shall have an end; deliver thy self, O Zion, that dwells with the
Daughter of Babylon, the Lord will contend with those that have vexed thee, they
shall be consumed by the brightness of his appearing; thou shall rejoice
according to the days of thy mourning. How has thy King, O Zion, cast down
thine enemies in this Kingdom? he will go on, and thou shall rejoice, when
the world shall howl for sorrow, Isa. 65. 13. 14, 15. Read thy glory also in
the 60. of Isa. The Son of Righteousness will arise with healing in his
wings, and cure thee of all thy diseases; and as thou have been the shame of
this Kingdom, thou shall be the glory of it; the Lord will hasten to you all,
O Israel in his time.

Come Lord Jesus, come quickly.

Surely his salvation is nigh them that fear him, that glory may dwell in our
Land, Psalm. 85.

Only with thine eyes shall thou behold and see, the reward of the wicked,
Psalm. 91. 8.

As we have heard, so have we seen in the City of the Lord of Hosts, in the
City of our God, God will establish it for ever Psalm. 48.

A Warning, to awaken all the idle Shepherds, (otherwise called Ministers) in
England, with friendly advice to those who are in the Ministry, who have the
true Spiritual Life of Jesus brought forth in them.
Watchmen, where are you? What, asleep? Where Is your Flock? Awake, and hear
the Lords controversy with you: You have fed your selves, and not the Flock;
you have sought your selves, and not them: You have been cruel, in rejecting,
and scattering them. And now behold, the Lord is, and will be cruel,
scattering, and rejecting you: You howl and cry already, because no man will
buy your wares. Ye Merchants of Babylon, did you think it possible, so great
judgments should have come upon you in so little time? Alas for you, you blind
guids, how do you travail up and down in sorrow, and yet more is your
portion still? How will you live? The Lord will take of his Saints which you
have despised, for Priests, and Levites. Do not you see how they are increased
already? They were but as a cloud of a hand breadth, and now they are almost
spread over the Land. Are they not as a great Army? Not of Locusts, as you
think; but the Servants of the most High God, in whom he will so appear, that
you shall be filled with madness, and vexation of Spirit, by reason of the
brightness of the Lords coming in them, which Glory, unless you return unto
the Lord, you shall not taste of. You think you are rich, and wise, and see
more than they. Well,

Watchmen, what do you see? Do you see men like trees? Does the light appear
to you to be neither clear nor dark? Are you brought into a Wilderness, not
in temporal, but spiritual things? You will say, no, this is new light, and
heresy. Therefore, hearken, and know, you wicked Pastors, your light is
darkness, and you retain it, in opposition to further breakings forth of the
Lord Jesus. Woe unto you, woe unto you, that call light darkness, and
darkness light. Watchmen, The morning is come, and yet comes, and also the
night, if you will enquire, enquire. Return, come, its night, and Watchmen,
what think you of it? You are ignorant. Therefore, consider Micah 3. 5. 6.
Where the Lord declares against false Prophets. You are their Brethren, their
judgments yours. Night shall be unto you, that you shall not have a Vision; and
it shall be dark unto you, that you shall not devine. And the Sun shall go
down over the Prophets, and the day shall be dark over them. Then shall the
Seers be ashamed, and the Deviners confounded: Yea, they shall cover their
lips, for there is no answer of God. This is your plague from the Lord at this
day you careless Shepherds, the Sun is set upon you; this glorious and
bright day of the Lord is dark over you; the breakings forth of the Sun of
Righteousness is upon the Saints, it will break forth to a perfect day. Light,
Life, and Glory, is among the Israel of God; but darkness and obscurity among
you. But you will say, you are Ministers of the Gospel, and light is amongst you:
So were the Scribes and Pharisees Teachers in Israel, as well as you in
England. They could declare to Herod, the place where Christ should be borne.
But when he was born, and chose poor despised, and ignorant persons, to
proclaim his Glory in the World, who greater Enemies to him than they.
Hearken, you that have, and would pretend to be our Leaders, have not many of
you acknowledged, and preached something of glorious times which were to come,
even the coming of the Lord Jesus in Spirit. Why, behold, he is come, and
still coming in his Spiritual Glory; but the persons he has appeared to,
are so mean, and poor; so sinful, and unworthy; that you, (O ignorant
Watchmen) and thousands more in the Kingdom, are offended, and stumble, even
to the ruin of your poor souls, unless you repent.

Hearken, you know who could tell where Christ was borne in the Flesh, the
Shepherds: The place where he was laid, in the Manger. Watchmen, would you
know the place, or the persons, in whom the Lord Jesus will be born, or bring
forth himself gloriously in, its possible, in the vilest, and unworthiest of
men, that you should stumble; and the riches of his mercy exalted toward them:
They will love much, because much was forgiven them. But take notice, the
breakings forth of this Glory, gives no liberty, but destroys, and consumes
the filthiness of their natures, who are partakers of it. Would you hear of the
Spiritual Glory, and Excellency of the Lord Jesus? Go to the Plough-men, to
the Shops, to the Soldiery, and many other places, and there you may find
those that can declare much of it to you: But you will go near to perish
before you will do so, therefore you lie down in darkness.

You careless Guides, the Lord is angry with you: How many poor souls has been
lost, whom you pretended to be Watchmen to, and you never gave them warning of
their danger, but even luld them asleep: You walk in lies: You have, and do,
strengthen the hands of evil doers, that they return not from their
wickedness. You deserve to perish for them; the Cry of the poor oppressed
Husbandman is against you, whom you have defrauded, by requiring part of their
increase, not minding their precious souls for it, like greedy and cruel dogs
as you are, read Isa. 56. 11. and Phil. 3. 2. You may say, the State gives it
you, let them look it be not laid to their charge. The true Ministers of
Christ, in former time, never required the Magistrate to enact Laws to
constrain people to maintain them; nor did they make such a trade of Preaching
as you do, to sell the word of God as men sell beasts. You ignorant and
beastly Watchmen, those whom you have sheltred your selves so much under, might
as lawfully make a Law, to drive you from the Pulpit, to the plough, or dig the
ground, and as just it would be.

Watchmen, come, are you for Peace? You Will say, with all your hearts, never good
days since we have had such divisions. But Hypocrites, hearken, they that put
not into your mouths, you prepared War against them. But remember, how many
years is it since Isreal's troubles were? How did you help them forward? How
did you rejoice in their afflictions? Now is, and shall be the time of your woe
and calamity; they shall help forward, and rejoice in yours; yea, they shall
give you a double portion of sorrow.

Hearken still: You wait for a day to Reign as you have done: You Will pay these
Preachers their wags then, will you not? But stay, you may be deceived, the
Lord does not bring forth children for the Slaughter: Know it, ye ravenous
wolves; if you wait for it, you may starve before that day come: I know you are
hungry, and thirsty, after the bodies and blood of the Saints, like your
Forerunner, Bonner, of whose Tribe you are: Would you be content to satisfy
your hungry appetites on him that is writing to you; if my Father thinks fit,
and gives me life and strength, you shall. But hearken,

Watchmen, be instructed, be wise in time, meedle no more with the Saints, you
will but trouble and molest your selves, and yet not conquer them. Behold what
you have pulled upon your heads, by meddling with them in former years, the same
you shall meet with still. Read Zech. 12. I will make Jerusalem a Cap of
trembling unto all the people round about, when they shall be in the Siege
against it: The Lord will make his people like a harth of fire among the Wood,
like a torch of fire in the Sheafe, and they shall devour all the people round
about. But again; In that day will I make Jerusalem a burdensome stone for
all people, all that burden themselves with it shall be cut in pieces, though
all the people of the Earth were gathered together against it. Therefore, be
you quiet, and be content, if the Lord of Hoasts think fit, and be their
servants, though it be to hew their wood, and draw their water; and if you will
yet preach, preach this, that the Kingdom is to be given to the Saints of the
most High God, and that the Lord has, and will, reprove, and destroy, the great
ones of the Kingdom for their sakes, if they will yet oppose, and labor to
destroy the breakings forth of God in them.

Watchmen, hear yet, the day of the Lord hastens greatly upon us, to stain,
and bring down all fleshly and worldly wisdom, and, out of its ruin, bring
forth a pure and spiritual Glory in his Saints. There is a fountain open for
sin, and for uncleanness; If you will repent of your abominations, and turn
to the Lord, you may be washed, and made clean; If you will not, you are in
hazard of perishing. Its the Counsel of God concerning you, O false and
deceiving Prophets.

Jer. 23. 15. Behold, I will feed them with wormwood, and make them drink the
water of gall: for, from the Prophets (of England, it may be read) is
profaneness gone forth into all the Land.

Zach. 13. And it shall come to pass, that when any shall yet Prophecy, then
his Father that begot him, shall say unto him, thoushalt not live, for
thouspeakest lies in the name of the Lord. And it shall come to pass, that the
Prophets shall be ashamed every one of his Vision, when he has prophesied;
neither shall they wear a rough garment to deceive.

Isa. 26. They are dead, they shall not live; they are deceased, they shall not
rise; their m^mory is, and shall perish.

Psalm. 120. Then said they among the Heathen, the Lord has done great things
for them, the Lord has done great things for us, whereof we are glad. Zech.
11. 3. That is, A voice of howling of the Shepherds, for their glory is spoiled.

If the Lord had not been of our side, may Israel say, they had swallowed us up.

Friendly advice to those Ministers that have the Spiritual life of Jesus
brought forth in them.
Dear Friends.
I Hope you will not startle, or be offended at those harsh words spoken to
those lazy Pastors, or punishments denounced against them: They are words of
Scripture, or according to it; the punishments, such as are threatened by the
Lord against such a Generation of men as they are; my desire is not to cast
contempt upon you, but to encourage the lowest appearance of God in you, though
you be but one of a hundred to those false Pastors. It has been so, what a
company of false Prophets were there to one Elijah, 1 Kings 22. 6. And surely,
our Land may parallel Jerusalem, wherein is many false Teachers, for one that
is true and faithful: But the Lord knows who are his, though men know not one
from another.

Friends, The Lord Jesus most certainly is hasting with a glorious
manifestation of himself, in, and for his Saints. My desire is not so much to
teach you, but, as a friend, desire you to take heed you act nothing against
him, which (its possible) you may do, by reason of that darkness that
remains in you unsubdued, and destroyed by light of God. The way he comes in,
is, and will be contrary to the wisdom of flesh; its possible, you shall not
have the first sight, or discovery of this Glory. The Resurrection of Jesus
Christ out of the Grave, was made known to Mary Magdalen, out of whom Christ
had cast many Devils, before the Disciples, and to two others unexpectedly in
their journey: they declared, but the Disciples believed them not, their words
seemed as tales: The Lord Jesus will have his Resurrection in the hearts of the
Saints, and that such a one, as will cause a great Earthquake in them, even to
the destroying those powers of darkness that shall striv to keep him down; and
what if he shall thus so appear, and raise up himself, first in those that
wereas great sinners as Mary Magdalen was, avd they shall declare this glad
tidings, and proclaim this glory, that the Lord is risen, and will rise more
and more in his Temple. Why should this offend you? May not he do with his
own what he will? Give as much to a poor Prodigal, or more, than to you that
have continued in your Fathers house? What if the unworthiest of men, yea, the
last be first in this discovery of Jesus; be not troubled, or offended at it,
the Vision may speak in you, though it tarry: wait for it, and with Abraham,
see this day, and rejoice. You will ask what day do we speak of: Why, the
day of Isreal's deliverance from the Spiritual bondage and captivity wherein
they lie, whose oppressors shall be destroyed by the brightness of his
appearing, a Glory to be manifested in these last claies to the Saints. Read
those Scriptures which say, Sorrow and sighing shall fly away, all tears shall
be wiped from their eyes: There shall be no more a Canaanite in the House of
the Lord. And those Prophesies that concern these last days, and you shall
see glorious things spoken of Sion, the City of the Lord of Hosts, which some
have a glimse of, and are earnestly longing for their breaking forth to a
perfect day.

My Friends, I would not have you think, that I conceive the various
transformations of the Devil, as an Angel of light, to be these glorious
discoveries of Jesus: But its certain, the Lords discoveries are amongst us,
the Devil is so busy in acting like him. Take this as a rule from one that
waits for clearer light, what ever Principle gives way to the Principles,
Filthiness, or Excellency of our natures, is contrary to the pure light and
nature of God. But our God will teach us to avoid their slights; they may come
near, but shall not deceive the Elect.

Friends, Let me entreat you, not to be so much offended at Laymens Preaching,
(as you call them) I have travailed up and down formerly, and have seen you
much against them; I am afraid there is a remainder of that Spirit still. Moses
was not angry (though a great Prophet) when some would prophecy in the Camp,
but honestly said, I would all the Lords people were Prophets. When the
Disciples saw some casting out Devils, and followed not them, they forbad them:
Christ hearing it, very meekly replies, forbid them not; of a truth, there is a
more clear sight and enjoyment of spiritual things among them, than with you.
But I spare you, choosing rather to go backward, covering your infirmities, than
forward, to lay them open. Yet, my Friends, if it be possible, let me beg one
thing at your hands, even for the Lord Jesus Christ sake: Consider the poor
husbandmen, who suffer much by your way of maintenance. What if you should
Preach the Gospel, and trust God for a living? The Aposties did so, the people
wereas cruel to them, as these can be to you, yet they lived in the world,
should not you? Mistake me not, I think you ought to live on the Ministry, if
you be truly called thereto by God, But your barganing with people, so much you
will have, or not preach, is a practice I understand not, if you do by the pure
light of God, it is well.

Friends, the Bridegroom is coming, mind his beloved ones you meet withal of
it: he comes as a thief in the night, Blessed are they that wait for him. Come
Lord Jesus, come quickly: and let those that love his appearing say Amen. Finis.

Cant. 2. ver. 8. The voice of my beloved, behold, he comes leaping over the
mountains, skipping upon the hills: I sat under his shadow with great
delight, and his fruit was sweet to my taste.

Be thou like a young Roe, or young Heart upon the mountains of Bether, or of
Division, as you may read it.

Cant. 8. Who is this that comes up from the Wilderness leaning upon her
Beloved? Psalm. 8. What is man that thou art mindful of him, and the son of
man that thou visitest him.

An apology to the true Israel of GOD.
MY dear Friends, you have been very precious in my sight, formerly, though I,
a poor weak creature, have wanted power so to walk as to adornthe glorious
gospel of Jesus Christ, which has caused me where I have loved, scarce to own
God or you, for sear of bringing contempt, and despising to both; no enjoyment
satisfying me, but even to be declared the Son of God with power, as Christ
was, which yet I wait for more, and more, God has disposed of me now a little
to bring my self forth by writing: the words used to great ones, to idle
Shepherds, to many in the gathered Churches, may seem harsh to you, and grieve
your spirits, thinking them to be contrary to the meekness and gentleness of
Jesus Christ, and so be grieved and made sad; but shall I add Sorrow to you,
now my bowels are most yearning over you, and not able to speak any thing
against you, but all I can for you, In blessings spiritual and temporal, to
prevent your grief if it be possible; consider first, what is judged here of
such a Generation, as have been, and are enemies to God, its in the womb with
you, its here brought forth: you had by the light of Christ spelt it, here is
only the pronounciation of the word.

Secondly, consider Jesus Christ is the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, as well as
the Lamb slain from the beginning, both these he used on earth, he was meek,
gentle, not quenching smoking Flax, nor breaking broken Reeds, yet was able to
appear otherwise, if need were, as you may see at large Mat. 23. which life he
does, and will bring forth in his Saints.

Thirdly, those raised expressions, and actions the Saints used, and shall act,
did not, nor shall arise from a power or principal of darkness, but from the
power and purity of God in them, read 2. Kings 3. 4. Acts 13. 10. Psalm. 149.
6, 7, 8, 9. 1 Cor. 6. 23. Rev. 18. 6. 7.

Israel, I believe the Saints shall be more terrible to the world then ever
they have been, and reward them according to their works, not in, or by a base
power, but a pure one, rule, judge, inflict punishments, they shall, but in
righteousness and judgment, whereas the world has ruled over, judged, and
inflicted punishments on Israel by a beastly, and fleshly power, and principle,
which the time is coming, and who knows how soon, but such a power then, shall
not be found in Israel, but destroyed by the exaltation of Jesus in them.

Fourthly consider, has not this generation of men spoken so too, been as
Goliath, despisers of the host of Israel, not beccause they were filthy, but for
the breaking forth of some Beams of the glory of God, and thereby defied God
himself, most certainly he has and will defy them more and more, and that the
breaking forth of himself in his people, in this I have endeavored to remove
that sight of trouble I saw might befall your spirits. And Israel, through the
goodness of God, you may in this book see a glimpse of a feast prepared for
Israel, some have had a taste of it, how soon you may, I know not, see it, long
for it, and rejoice as Abraham, you will say I may do it, and not taste of it my
self, well you have been, and still are precious in my sight, the Lord do with
me as seems good in his sight, let me have your prayers who am unworthy of
mercy,

Edward Ellis.

FINIS.

