NEW ENGLANDS FIRST FRUITS; IN RESPECT, First of the Conversion of some, of the
Indians.

First of the Conviction of diverse, of the Indians.

First of the Preparation of sundry of the Indians.

2. Of the progress of Learning, in the College at CAMBRIDGE in Massacusets
Bay.

WITH Diverse other special Matters concerning that Country.

Published by the instant request of sundry Friends, who desire to be satisfied
in these points by many New England Men who are here present, and were eye or
eare-witnesses of the same.

Who has despised the Day of small things.

Zach. 4.10. If thou were pure and upright, surely now he will awake for thee:
-- And though thy beginnings be small, thy latter end shall greatly enerease.

Job. 86, 7. LONDON, Printed by R. O. and G. D. for Henry Overton, and are to
sold at his Shop in Popes-head-Alley. 1643.

NEW ENGLANDS FIRST FRUITS: 1. In respect of the INDIANS, etc.
THe Lord, who uses not to be wanting to the desires of his Servants, as he
has not frustrated the ends of our Transplanting in sundry other respects; so
neither in the giving some light to those poor Indians, who have ever sat in
hellish darkness, adoring the Devil himself for their GOD: but has given us
some testimony of his gracious acceptance of our poor endeavors toward them*
and of our groans to himself for mercy upon those miserable Souls (the very
Ruins of Mankind) there amongst us; our very bowels yerning within us to see
them go down to Hell by swarms without remedy.

Wherefore we judged it our duty no longer to conceal but to declare (to the
praise of his owe free grace) what first Fruits he ha^h begun to gather in
amongst them, as a sure pledge (we are consident) of a greater Harvest in his
own time. And wonder not that we mention no more instances at present: but
consider, First their infinite distance from Christianity, having never been
prepared thereunto by any Civility at all. Secondly, the difficulty of their
Language to us, and of ours to them; there being no Rules ^o learn either by.
Thirdly, the diversity of their own Language to it self; every part of that
Country having its own Dialect, differing much from the other; all which make
their coming into the Gospel the more slow. But what God has done for some of
them, we will declare.

1. MAny years since at Plimmouth Plantation, when the Church did fast and pray
for Rain in extreme Drought; it being a very hot and clear sunshine day,
all the former part thereof; An Indian of good quality, being present, and
seeing what they were about, fell a wondering at them for praying for rain in a
day so unlikely, when all Sun and no Clouds appeared; and thought that their
God was not able to give Rain at such a time as that: but this poor wretch
seeing them still to continue in their Prayers, and beholding that at last the
Clouds began to rise, and by that time they had ended their Duty, the Rain
fell in a most sweet, constant, soaking shower, fell into wonderment at the
power that the English had with their God, and the greatness and goodness of
that God whom they served, and was smitten with terror that he had abused them
and their God by his former hard thoughts of them; and resolved from that day
not to rest till he did know this great good God, and for that end to forsake
the Indians, and clear to the English, which he presently did, and labored by
all public and private means to suck in more and more of the knowledge of
God, and his ways. And as he increased in knowledge so in affection and also
in his practice, reforming and conforming himself accordingly: and (though he
was much tempted by inticements, scoffs and scorns from the Indians) yet,
could he never be gotten from the English, nor from seeking after their God,
but died amongst them, leaving some good hopes in their hearts, that his soul
went to rest.

2. Sagamore John, Prince of Massaquesets, was from our very first landing more
courteous, ingenious, and to the English more loving then others of them; he
desired to learn and speak our Language, and loved to imitate us in our
behavior and apparel, and began to hearken after our God and his ways, and
would much commend Englishmen, and their God; saying ( Much good men, much
good God) and being convinced that our condition and ways were better far
then theirs, did resolve and promise to leave the Indians, and come live with
us; but yet kept down by fear of the scoffs of the Indians, had not power to
make good his purpose; yet went on not without some trouble of mind, and secret
plucks of Conscience, as the sequel declares: for being struck with death,
fearfully cried out of himself that he had not come to live with us, to have
known our God better: But now ( said he) I must die, the God of the English is
much angry with me, and will destroy me; ah, I was afraid of the scoffs of
these wicked Indians; yet my Child shall live with the English, and learn to
knew their God when I am dead; I Will give him to Mr. Wilson, he is a much Good
man, and much loved me: so sent for Mr. Wilson to come to him, and committed
his only Child to his care, and so died.

3. Diverse of the Indians Children, Boys and Girls we have received into our
houses, who are long since civilized, and in subjection to us, painful and
handy in their business, and can speak our language familiarly; diverse of whom
can read English, and begin to understand in their measure, the grounds of
Christian Religion; some of them are able to give us account of the Sermons
they hear, and of the word read and expounded in our Families, and are
convinced of their sinful and miserable Estates, and affected with the sense
of Gods displeasure, and the thoughts of Eternity, and will sometimes tremble
and melt into tears at our opening and pressing the Word upon their
Consciences; and as far as we can discern, some of them use to pray in
secret and are much in love with us, and cannot endure to return any more to
the Indians.

Some of them will not be absent from a Sermon or Family duties if they can
help it; and we have known some would use to weep and cry when detained by
occasion from the Sermon.

Others of them are very inquisitive after God and his ways; and being
themselves industrious in their Calling, will much complain of other servants
idleness, and reprove them.

One of them, who for some misdemeanour that laid him open to public
punishment, ran away; and being gone, God so followed him, that of his own
accord he returned home, rendered himself to Justice and was willing to submit
himself, though he might have escaped.

An Indian Maid at Salem, would often come from the Word, crying out with
abundance of tears, concluding that she must burn when she die, and would
say, she knew her self naught for present, and like to be miserable for ever,
unless free Grace should prevent it; and after this grew very careful of her
carriage, proved industrious in her place, and so continued.

Another often frequenting the House of one of the Ministers at Salem, would
tell him the Story of the Bible, even to his admiration, and that he attended
upon the Word preached, and loved it; and how he could tell all the
Commandments, and in particular each Commandment by it self, and how he
labored to keep them all; and yet for all this (said he) [Me are, and walk in
fire] that is, when I die, I must to Hell: That Minister asked him why? he
answered, because I know not Jesus Christ, and prayed him earnestly to teach
him Jesus Christ, and after went out amongst the Indians, and called upon them
to put away all their wives save one, because it was a sin against
English-mans Savior.

Another Indian coming by, and seeing one of the English (who was remote from
our jurisdiction, profaning the Lords day, by felling of a tree, said to him,
Do ^ou not know that this is the Lords day, in Massaqusetts? much machet man,
that is very wicked man, what, break you Gods Day?

The same man coming into an house in those parts where a man and his wife
were chiding, and they bidding him sit down, he was welcome; he answered, He
would not stay there, God did not dwell there, Ho^^mock, (that is the Devil)
was there, and so departed.

One of the Sagamores, having complaint made to him by some of the English,
that his men did use to kill Pigeons upon the Lords day, thereupon forbad them
to do so any more; yet afterward some of them did attempt it, and climbing
the high trees (upon which Pigeons in that Country use to make their nests)
one of them fell down from off the tree and brake his neck, and another fell
down and brake some of his limbs: thereupon the Sagamore sent two grave old men
to proclaim it amongst his Indians, that none of them should kill Pigeons upon
the Sabbath day any more.

Another Indian hearing of the fame of the English, and their God came from a
far to see them, and such was this man's love to the English and their ways
after he came acquainted with them, that he labored to transform himself into
the English manners and practices, as if he had been an English man indeed; he
would be called no more by his Indian name, but would be named William; he
would not go naked like the Indians, but clothed just as one of our selves;
he abhorred to dwell with the Indians any longer; but forsaking all his friends
and Kindred dwelt wholly with us; when he sat down to meat with us, if thanks
were given before he came in, or if he did eat by himself, constantly he would
give thanks reverently and gravely, he frequented the word and family duties
where he came, and gat a good measure of knowledge beyond ordinary, being a man
of singular par^s, and would complain that he knew not Christ, and without
him, he said all he did was nothing; he was so zealous for the Lords day, that
(as it was observed) if he saw any profaning it, he would rebuke them and
threaten them to carry them to the Governor.

All which things weighed, we dare not but hope, that many of them, do belong
to the Kingdom of God; and what further time may produce, we leave it to him
that is excellent in Counsel, and wonderful in working.

4. There is also a Blackmore maid, that has long lived at Dorchester in New
England, unto whom God has so blessed the public and private means of Grace
that she is not only endued with a competent measure of knowledge in the
mysteries of God, and conviction of her miserable estate by sin; but has
also experience of a saving work of grace in her heart, and a sweet savor of
Christ breathing in her; insomuch that her soul has longed to enjoy
Church Fellowship with the Saints there, and having propounded her desire to
the Elders of the Church, after some trial of her taken in private, she was
called before the whole Church, and there did make confession of her knowledge
in the Mysteries of Christ and of the work of Conversion upon her Soul: And
after that there was such a testimony given of her blameless and godly
Conversation, that she was admitted a member by the joint consent of the Church
with great joy to all their hearts. Since which time, we have heard her much
admiring Gods free grace to such a poor wretch as she was; that God leaving
all her friends and Kindred still in their sins, should cast an eye upon her,
to make her a member of Christ, and of the Church also: and has with tears
exhorted some other of the Indians that live with us to embrace Jesus Christ,
declaring how willing he would be to receive them even as he had received her.

5. The last instance we will give shall be of that famous Indian W^^uash who
was a Captain a proper man of person, and of a very grave and sober spirit;
the Story of which coming to our hands very lately, was indeed the occasion of
writing all the rest: This man a few years since, seeing and beholding the
mighty power of God in our English Forces, how they fell upon the Pequits,
where diverse hundreds of them were slain in an hour: The Lord, as a God of
glory in great terror did appear unto the Soul and Conscience of this poor
Wretch in that very act; and though before that time he had low apprehensions
of our God, having conceived him so be (as he said) but a Muskett^ God or a God
like unto a fly; and as mean thoughts of the English that served this God
that they were silly weak men; yet from that time he was convinced and
persuaded that our God was a most dreadful God; and that one English man by
the help of his God was able to slay and put to flight an hundred ^n^an^.

This conviction did pursue and follow him night and day, so that he could have
no rest or quiet because he was ignorant of the English man's God: he went up
and down bemoaning his condition, and filling every place where he came with
sighs and groans.

Afterward it pleased the Lord that some English (well acquainted with his
Language) did meet with him; thereupon as a Heart panting after the water
Brooks he enquired after God with such incessant diligence that they were
constrained constantly for his satisfaction to spend more then half the night
in conversing with him.

Afterward he came to dwell amongst the English at Connecticus, still
traveling with all his might and lamenting after the Lord: his manner was to
smite his hand on his breast, and to complain sadly of his heart saying it was
much machet, (that is very evil) and when any spoke with him he would say
Wequash, no God, Wequash no know Christ. It pleased the Lord, that in the use
of the means, he grew greatly in the knowledge of Christ, and in the
Principles of Religion and became thoroughly reformed according to his light,
hating and loathing himself for his dearest sins, which were especially
these two Lust and Revenge, this repentance for the former was testified by his
temperance and abstinence from all occasions, or matter of provocation
thereunto. Secondly, by putting away all his Wives, saving the first, to whom
he had most right.

His repentance for the latter was testified by an eminent degree of meekness
and patience, that now, if any did abuse him, he could lie down at their feet,
and if any did smite him on the one cheek, he would rather turn the other,
than offend them: many trialls he had from the Jndians in this case. Thirdly,
by going up and down to those he had offered violence or wrong unto,
confessing it, and making restitution.

Afterward he went amongst the Indians, like that poor Woman of Samaria,
proclaiming Christ, and telling them what a Treasure he had found, instructing
them in the knowledge of the true God and this he did with a grave and serious
spirit, warning them with all faithfulness to flee from the wrath to come, by
breaking off their sins and wickedness.

This course of his did so disturb the Devil, that ere long some of the
Indians, whose hearts Satan had filled did secretly give him poison, which he
took without suspicion: and when he lay upon his death bed, some Indians who
were by him, wished him according to the Indian manner, to send for Po^ow (that
is to say) a Wizzard; he told them, If Jesus Christ say that Wequash shall
live, then Wequash must live; if Jesus Christ say that Wequash shall dye, then
Wequash is willing to dye, and will not lengthen ^ur his life by any such
means. Before he dyed, he did bequeath his Child to the godly care of the
English for education and instruction and so yielded up his soul into Christ
his hands.

I cannot omit the testimony of Mr. Sh a godly Minister in the Bay, that wrote
to his Friend in London concerning this Story, his lines are full plain and
pithy his words these,

Wequash the famous Indian at the Rivers mouth is dead, and certainly in
heaven; gloriously did the Grace of Christ shine forth in his conversation, a
year and a half before his death he knew Christ, he loved Christ, he preached
Christ up and down, and then suffered Martyrdom for Christ; and when he dyed*
he gave his soul to Christ, and his only child to the English, rejoicing in
this hope, that the child should know more of Christ then its poor Father ever
did.

Thus we have given you a little taste of the sprincklings of Gods spirit, upon
a few Indians, but one may easily imagine, that here are not all that may be
produced: for if a very few of us here present, upon very sudden thoughts, have
snatched up only such instances which came at present to hand, you may conveive,
that if all in our Plantations (which are far and wide) should set themselves
to bring in the confluence of all their Observations together, much more might
be added.

We believe one mean amongst others, that has thus far won these poor
wretches to look after the Gospel, has been the dealings and carriages,
which God has guided the English in our Patent, to exercise toward them: For,

1. At our entrance upon the Land, it was not with violence and intrusion, but
free and fair, with their consents and allowance the chief Sagamores of all
that part of the Country, entertaining us heartily, and professed we were all
much welcome.

2. When any of them had possession of, or right unto any Land we were to plant
upon, none were suffered, (to our knowledge) to take one acre from them, but do
use to compound with them to content.

3. They have had justice truly exercised toward them in all other particular
acts; that as we expect right dealing from them, in case any of them shall
trespass us, we send to their Sagamore, and he presently rights us, or else we
summon them to our Court to answer it; so if any of our men offend them, and
complaint and proof be made to any of our Magistrates, or the public Court
(they know) they are sure to be righted to the utmost by us.

4. The humanity of the Enghish toward them does much gain upon them, we
being generally wary, and tender in giving them offensive or harsh language, or
carriage, but use them fairly and courteously, with loving terms, good looks
and kind salutes.

Thus they having first a good esteem of our Persons, (such of them as God
intends good unto) are the sooner brought to hearken to our words, and then to
serve our God: whereas on the contrary, the wicked, injurious and scandalous
carriages of some other Plantations, have bin a mean to harden chose poor
woeful souls against the English, and all Religion for their sakes; and seal
them up under perdition.

Yet (mistake us not) we are wont to keep them at such a distance, (knowing
they serve the Devil and are led by him) as not to imbolden them too much or
trust them too far; though we do them what good we can. And the truth is, God
has so kept them, (excepting that act of the Pequits, long since, to some few
of our men) that we never found any hurt from them, nor could ever prove any
real intentions of evil against us: And if there should be such intentions
and that they all should combine together against us with all their strength
that they can raise, we see no probable ground at all to fear any hurt from
them, they being naked men, and the numb^r of them that be amongst us not
considerable.

Let us here g^ve a touch also of what God has done and is further about to
do, to diverse Plantations of the English, which before that time that God sent
light into our coasts, were almost as dark and rude as the Indians themselves.

1. First at Agamenticus (a Plantation out of our jurisdiction) to which one of
our Preachers coming and laboring amongst them, was a means under God, not
only to sparkle heavenly knowledge, and work conviction and reformation in
diverse of them, but conversion also to Christ in some of them, that bless God
to this day, that ^ver he came thither.

2. Then after that, as Sauco Plantation, which is an hundred miles from us,
diverse of that place coming often into our coas^s and hearing the Word
preached, and seeing Gods goings amongst his people there, being much affected
went home and lamented amongst their neighbors their own woeful condition,
that lived like heathens without the Gospel, when others enjoyed it in great
plenty: hereupon with joint consent two of their chief men were sent in all
their names earnestly to entreat us to send a godly Minister to preach the Word
unto them; which was do accordingly, not without good success to the people
there, and diverse places about them.

3. After this, toward the end of last Summer, four more Plantations some of
which are diverse hundred miles, others of them many hundred leagues from our
Plantation) hearing of the goodness of God to his people in our parts, and of
the light of the Gospel there shining; have done even as Jacob did in the
Famine time, when he heard there was bread in Egypt he hasted away his Sons
for Corn, that they might live and not die: in like manner three several Towns
in Virginia as also Ba^bados, Christophers and Antego all of them much about
the same time, as if they had known the minds of each other did send Letters
and Messengers crying out unto us as the man of Macedonia to Paul, Come and
help us and th^^ with such earnestness, as men hunger-starved and ready to die
cry for bread; so they cry out unto us in the bowels of compassion for the Lord
Jesus sake to send them some help. They tell us in some of their Letters that
from the one end of the Land to the other, there is none to break the bread of
life unto the hungry; and those that should do it, are so vil^, that even
drunkards and swearers, cry shame on them.

We had thought (but only for the swelling of our Discourse) to have set down
their Letters at large, which they wrote to all our Churches, which spoke with
such strength of reason and affection, that when they were read in our
Congregations they prevailed with us, that for their necessity we spared the
bread from our own mouth^ to save their lives, and sent two of our Ministers
for the present to Virginia; and when the Ships came away from them they left
them in serious consultation, whom to give up to the work of Christ in the
other three places also.

We hear moreover that the Indians themselves in some of the places named did
join with them in this their suit.

Now from what has bin said, see the riches of Gods free Grace in Christ, that
is willing to impart mercy even to the worst of men, and such as are furthest
off cry out with Paul, On the depths, etc. and let heaven and earth be filled
with the glorious praises of God for the same.

And if such as are afar off, why should not we that are nearer press in for
a share therein, and cry out, as Esau did with tears to his Father, when he saw
the blessing going away to his young^r brother, and himself, like to lose it:
[ Oh my Father have thou but one blessing, bless me also, even me thy first
borne, bless me, oh my Father.] Else these poor Indians will certainly rise
up against us, and with great boldness condemn us in the great day of our
accounts, when many of us here under great light, shall see men come from the
East and from the West, and sit down in the Kingdom of God, and our selves
cast out.

2. Let the world know, that God led not so many thousands of his people into
the Wilderness, to see a reed shaken with the wind, but amongst many other
special ends, this was none of the least, to spread the light of his blessed
Gospel, to such as never heard the sound of it. To stop the mouths of the
profane that calumniate the work of God in our hands, and to satisfy the
hearts of the Saints herin that God had some special service for his people
there to do, which in part alr^ady we begin to see, and wait upon Divine
Wis^^me, to discover more of his pleasure herin, and upon his Grace to effect,
which we b^leeve in his time he will so do, that men shall see and know the
wisdom and power of God herin.

3. Shall we touch here upon that apprehension which many godly and wise have
conceived, and that from some Scriptures compared, and from other grounds, and
passages of Providence collected that (as it is very probable) God means to
carry his Gospel westward, in these latter times of the world; and have
thought, as the Sun in the afternoon of the day, still declines more and more
to the West and then sets: so the Gospel (that great light of the world) though
it rose in the East, and in former ages, has ligntened it with his beams; yet
in the latter ages of the world will bend Westward, and before its setting,
brighten these parts, with his glorious luster also.

4. See how Gods wisdom produces glorious effects, from unlikely means, and
make straight works by crooked instrumen^s: for who would have thought, that
the chasing away hence so many godly Ministers, should so far have promoted
the praises of God, and should be a mean to spread the Gospel, when they
intend^d to ruin it: they blew out their lights and they burn clearer: their
silencing Ministers have opened their mouths so wide as to sound ou^ his
glorious praises, to the uttermost parts of the earth, say with the Psalmist,
This is the Lords doing and it is marvelous in our eyes.

5. Despise not the day of small things; let none say of us as those scoffers
did of their building ^erusalem, that will these weak ^ewes (...)? but learn
to adore God in all his Providence, and wait to see his ends.

6. Lend us, we beseech you (all you that love Zion) your prayers and help in
heaven and earth for the furtherance of this great and glorious work in our
hands; great works need many hands, many prayers, many tears: And desire the
Lord to stir up the bowels of some godly minded, to pity those poor Heathen
that are bleeding to death to eternal death and to reach forth an hand of
soule-mercy, to save some of them from the fire of hell by affording some means
to maintain some fit instruments on purpose to spend their time, and give
themselves wholly to preach to these poor wretches* that as the tender
Samari^a^ did to the wounded man they may pity them and g^t them healed that
even their bowels may bless them in the day of their visitation, and Christ's
bowels refreshed by their love, may set it on his own score, and pay them all
again in the day of their accounts.

NEW ENGLANDS FIRST FRUITS: 2. In ^espect of the College, and the proceedings
of Learning therein.
1. AFter God had carried us safe to New England, and we had builded our
houses, provided necessaries for our liveli-hood, reared convenient places for
Gods worship, and settled the Civil Government: One of the next things we
longed for, and looked after was to advance Learning and perpetuate it to
Posterity; dreading to leave an illiterate Ministry to the Churches, when our
present Ministers shall lie in the Dust. And as we were thinking and
consulting how to effect this great Work; it pleased God to stir up the heart
of one Mr. Harvard (a godly Gentleman, and a lover of Learning, there living
amongst us) to give the one half of his Estate (it being in all about 17^0.
l.) toward the erecting of a College and all his Library: after him another
gave 300. l. others after them cast in more, and the public hand of the State
added the rest: the College was, by common consent, appointed to be at
Cambridge, (a place very pleasant and accommodate)* and is called (according to
the name of the first founder) Harvard College.

The Edifice is very fair and comely within and without, having in it a
spacious Hall; (where they daily meet at Common Lectures) Exercises, and a
large Library with some Books to it, the gifts of diverse of our friends,
their Chambers and studies also fitted for, and possessed by the Students, and
all other rooms of Office necessary and convenient, with all needful Offices
thereto belonging: And by the side of the College a fair Grammar School for
the training up of young Scholars, and fitting of them for Academicall
Learning, that still as they are judged ripe, they may be received into the
College of this School. Master Corlet is the Mr. who has very well approved
himself for his abilities dexterity and painfulnesse in teaching and education
of the youth under him.

Over the College is master Dunster placed, as President, a learned
conscionable and industrious man, who has so trained up his Pupills in the
tongues and Arts, and so seasoned them with the principles of Divinity and
Christianity that we have to our great comfort, (and in truth) beyond our
hopes, beheld their progress in Learning and godliness also; the former of
these has appeared in their public declamations in Latin and Greek, and
Disputations Logical and Philosophical, which they have been won^ed (besides
their ordinary Exercises in the Colledg^-Hall) in the audience of the
Magistrates, Ministers, and other Scholars, for the probation of their growth
in Learning, upon set days, constantly once every month to make and uphold:
The latter has been manifested in sundry of them, by the savoury breathings of
their Spirits in their godly conversation. Insomuch that we are confident, if
these early blossoms may be cherished and warmed with the influence of the
friends of Learning and* lovers of this pious work, they will by the help of
God, come to happy maturity in a short time.

Over the College are twelve Overseers chosen by the general Court, six of
them are of the Magistrates, the other six of the Ministers, who are to promote
the best good of it and (having a power of influence into all persons in it)
are to see that every one be diligent and proficient in his proper place.

2. Rules, and Precepts that are observ^d in the College.
1. When any Scholar is able to understand Tully, or such like classical
Latin Author extempore, and make and speak true Latin in Verse and Prose,
suo ut a^unt M^rie; And decline perfectly the Paradig^m's of Nounes and Verbes
in the Greek tongue: Let him then and not before be capable of admission into
the College.

2. Let every Student be plainly instructed, and earnestly pressed to consider
well, the maine end of his life and studies is, to know God and Jesus Christ
which is eternal life, Joh. 17.3. and therefore to lay Christ in the bottom,
as the only foundation of all sound knowledge and Learning.

And seeing the Lord only gives wisdom, Let every one seriously set himself
by pray^r in secret to seek i^ of him Prove 2, 3.

3. Every one shall so exercise himself in reading the Scriptures twice a day,
that he shall be ready to give such an account of his profic^ncy therein, both
in Theoreticall observations of the Language, and Log^^^, and in Practical and
spiritual truths, as his Tutor shall require, according to his ability, seeing
the entrance of the word gives light (...) giv^ (...) understanding ^o the
simple, Psalm. 119.130.

4 That they eshewing all profana^ion of Gods Name, Attribu es, Word Ordinances
and times of Worship, do study with good conscience, carefully to retain
God, and the love of his truth in heir minds else let them know, that
(notwithstanding their Learning) God may give them up to strong a^^usions, and
in the end to are probare mind. 2 These. 2.11, 12. Romans 1.28.

5. That they studiously red^eme the time; observe the general hours
appoint^d for all the S^udents, and the special hours for their own Classi:
and then diligently attend the Lectures without any disturbance by word or
gesture. And if in any thing the doubt, they shall ^nquire as of their
fellows, so, (in case of Non satisfaction) modestly of th^r Tutors.

6. None shall under any pretense whatsoever, frequent the company and society
of such men as lead an unfit, and dissolute life.

Nor shall any without his Tutors leave, or (in his absence) the call of
Parents or Guardians, go abroad to other Towns.

7. Every Scholar shall be present in his Tutors chamber at the 7th. hour in
the morning, immediately after the sound of the Bell at his opening the
Scripture and prayer, so also at the 5th. hour at night, and then give account
of his own private reading (...) res^id in Par^icular the third, and
constantly attend Lectures in the (...) all at the hours appointed? But if any
(without necessary impediment) shall absent himself from prayer or Lectures, he
shall b^e liable to Admonition, if he offend above once a week.

8. If any Scholar shall be found to transgress any of the Laws of God, or
the School, after twice Admonition, he shall be liable, if not adultus, to
correction, if adultus, his name shall be given up to the Overseers of the
College, that he may be admonished at the public monthly Act.

3. The times and order of their Studies, unless experience shall show cause
to alter.
THe second and third day of the week, read Lectures, as follows.

To the first year at 8th. of the clock in the morning Logic, the first three
quarters, Physics the last quarter.

To the second year, at the 9th. hour, Ethics and Politics, at convenient
distances of time.

To the third year at the 10th. Arithmetic and Geometry, the three first
quarters, Astronomy the last.

Afternoon,

The first year disputes at the second hour.

The 2d. year at the 3d. hour.

The 3d. year at the 4th. every one in his Art.

The 4th. day reads Greek.

To the first year the Etymology and Syntax at the eight hour.

To the 2d. at the 9th. hour, Prosedia and Dialects.

Afternoon.

The first year at 2d. hour practice the precepts of Grammar in such Authors
as have variety of words.

The 2d. year at 3d. hour practice in Poesy, Nonnus, Duport, or the like.

The 3d. year perfect their Theory before noone, and exercise Style,
Composition, Imitation, Epitome, both in Prose and Verse, afternoon.

The fifth day reads Hebrew, and the Eastern Tongues.

Grammar to the first year hour the 8th.

To the 2d. Chaldee at the 9th. hour.

To the 3d. Syriack at the 10th. hour.

Afternoon.

The first year practice in the Bible at the 2d. hour.

The 2d. in Ezra and Danel at the 3d. hour.

The 3d. at the 4th. hour in Trestius New Testament.

The 6th. day reads Rhetoric to all at the 8th. hour.

Declamations at the 9th. So ordered that every Scholar may declaime once a
month. The rest of the day vacat Rhetoricis studiis. The 7th. day reads
Divinity Carecheticall at the 8^h. hour, Common places at the 9th. hour.
Afternoon.

The first hour reads history in the Winter,

The nature of plants in the Summer

The sum of every Lecture shall be examined, before the new Lecture be read.

Every Scholar, that on proof is found able to read the Originalls of the Old
and New Testament in to the Latin tongue, and to resolve them Logically;
withal being of godly life and conversation; And at any public Act has the
Approbation of the Overseers and Master of the College is fit to be dignified
with his first Degree.

Every Scholar that gives up in writing a System, or Synopsis, or sum of
Logic, Natural and Moral Philosophy, Arithmetic, Geometry and Astronemy:
and is ready to defend his Theses or positions: withal skilled in the
Originalls as above said: and of godly life and conversation: and so approved
by the Overseers and Master of the College, at any public Act, is fit to be
dignified with his 2d. Degree.

4. The manner of the late Commencement, expressed in a Letter s^nt over from
the Governor, and diverse of the Ministers, their own words these.
THE Sindents of the first Classis that have been these four years trained
up in University-Learning (for their ripening in the knowledge of the Tongues
and Arts) and are apprved for their manners as they have kept their public
Acts in former years, our selves being present, at them; so have they lately
kept two solemn Acts for their Commencement, when the Governor, Magistrates,
and the Ministers from all parts, with allsorts of Scholars, and others in
great numbers were present, and did hear their Exercises; which were Latin
and Greek Orations, and Declamations, and Hebrew Analasis Grammatical,
Logical and Rhetorical of the Psalms: And their Answers and Disputations in
Logical, Ethicall, Physical and Metaphysicall Questions; and so were found
worthy of the first degree, (commonly called Batchelour) Pro more Academiarum
in Anglia: Being first presented by the ^r^sident to the Magistrates and
Ministers and by him, upon their Approbation, solemnly admitted unto the same
degree, and a Book of Arts delivered into each of their hands, and power given
them to read Lectures in the Hall upon any of the Arts, when they shall be
thereunto called, and a liberty of studying in the Library.

All things in the College are at present, like to proceed even as we can
wish, may it but please the Lord to go on with his blessing in christ, and
stir up the hearts of his faithful, and able Servants in our own Native
Country, and here, (as ^e has graciously begun) to advance this Honorable and
most hopeful work. The beginnings whereof and progress hitherto (generally)
do fill our hearts with comfort, and raise them up to much more expectation,
of the Lords goodness for hereafter, for the good of posterity, and the
Churches of Christ Jesus.

BOSTON in New England, September the 26. 1642. Your very loving friends, etc.

A Copy of the Questions given and maintained by the Commencers in their
public Acts, printed in Cambridge in New England, and reprinted here verbatim,
as follows.

Spectatissimis Pietate, et Illustrissimis Eximia Virtute Viris, D. Iohanni
Winthropo, inclytae Massachusetti Coloniae Gubernatori, D. Johanni Endicotto
Vice-Gubernatori, D. Thom. Dudleo, D. Rich. Bellingham^, D. Joan. Humphrydo, D.
Israel. Stoughton^.
Nec non Reverendis pientiffimisque viris Ioanpi Cotton^, Joan, Wils^n^, Joan,
Davenport, Tho. Weldo. Hugons Petro, Tho. Shepardo, Collegij Harvardensis nov.
Cantab^. inspectoribus fidelissimis, caeterisque Magistratibus, and Ecclesiatum
^^usdem Coloniae Presbyteris vigilantissimis,

Has Theses Philologicas, and Philosophicas, quas Deo duce, Praeside Henrico
Dunstero palam pro virili propugnare conabuntur, (honoris and ^bservantiae
gratia) dicant consecranique in artibus liberalibus initiati Adolescentes.

Benjamin Woodbrigins. Georgius Downingus. Gulielmus Hubb^rdus. Henricus
Saltonstall. Johannes Bulkleius. Johannes Wilsonus. Nathaniel Brusterus. Samuel
Belinghamus. Tobias Bernardus.
Theses Philologicas.
GRAMMATICAS.
LInguarum Scientia est utilissima.

Literae non exprimunt quantum vocis Organa efferunt.

3 Haebraea ^^t Linguarum Matter.

4. Con^onantes and vocal^s Haebreorum sunt coaetaneae.

5. Punctationes chatepha ae ^yllabam proprie no efficient.

6. Linguarum Graeca est copiosillima

7. Lingua Graeca est ad acc^ntus pronuntianda.

8. Lingua Latina est eloquentistima.

RHETORICAS.
RHetorica specie differt a Logica.

In ^locutione p^rspicu^tati cedit ornatus, ornatui copia.

3. Actio primas tenet in pronuntiotione.

4. Ora^oris est celare Artem.

LOGICAS.

UNiversalia non sunt extra intellectum.

Omnia Argumenta sunt relata.

3. Causa sine qua non non est peculiaris causa a quatuor reliquis generalibus,

4. Causa and Effectus sunt simul tempore.

5. Dissentanea sunt aeque nota.

6. Contrarietas est tantum inter duo,

7. Sublato relato tollitur correlatum.

8. Genus perfectum aequaliter communicatur speciebus.

9 Testimonium valet quantum testis.

10. Elenchorum doctrina in Logica non est necessaria.

11. Axioma contingens est, quod ita verum est, ut aliquando falsum esse possit.

12. Praecepta Artium debent esse (...).

Theses Philosophicas.
ETHICAS.
PHilosophia practica est eruditions meta.

Actio virtutis h^bitum antecellit.

3. Voluntas est virturtis moralis subjectum.

4. Voluntas est formaliter libera.

5. Prudentia virtutum difficillima.

6. Prudentia est virtus intellectualis and moralis.

7. Justitia matter omnium vi^tutum.

8. Mors potius subeunda quam aliquid culpae perpetrandum.

9. Non injuste agit nisi qui libens agit.

10. Mentiri potest qui verum dicit.

11. Juveni modestia summum Oranmentum.

PHYSICAS
COrpu^ natural mobile est subjectum Phisicae. Materia secunda non potest
existere fine forma.

3. Forma est ^ccidens

4. Unius re^non est nisi unica forma constitutiva.

5. Forma est principium individuationis.

6. Privatio non est principium internum.

7. Ex meris accidentibu^ non fit substantia.

8. Q^icquid movetur abalio movecur.

9. In omni motu movens simul est cum mobili.

10. Coelum^on movetur ab intelligen^ijs.

11. Non dantur orbs in coelo.

12. Quodlibe Flemen^um habet unam ex primis qualitatibus sibi maxim propriam.

13. Putredo in humido fit a calore externo.

14. Animanon fit extraduce.

15. Vehemens sensibile destruit sensum.

METAPHISICAS.
OMne ens est bonum.

Omme creatum est concretum.

3. ^^icquid aecernum idem and immensum.

4. Bonum Metaphysicum non suscipit gradus.

Thus far has the good hand of God favored our beginnings: see whether he
has no^ engage^ us to wait still upon his goodness for the future* by such
further remarkable passages of his providence to our Plantation in such things
as these:

1. In sweeping away great multitudes of the Natives by the small Po^ a little
before we went thither, that he might make room for us th^re.

2. In giving such merveilous safe Passage from first to last, to so many
thousands that went thither, the like has hardly been ever observed in any
Sea-voyages.

3. In blessing us generally with health and strength, as much as ever (we
might truly say) more then ever in our Native Land; many that were tender and
sickly here, are stronger and heartier there. That whereas diverse other
Plantations have been the graves of their Inhabitants and their numbers much
decreased: God has so prospered the climate to us, that our bodies are hailer,
and Children there born stronger, whereby our number is exceedingly increased.

4. In giving us such peace and freedom from enemies, when almost all the
world is on a fire that (excepting that short trouble with the Pequits) we
never heard of any sound of Wars to this day. And in that War which we made
against them Gods hand from heaven was so manifested, that a very few of our
men, in a short time pursued through the Wilderness, slew and took priso^^rs
about 1^00 of them, even all they could find, to the great terror and
amazement of all the Indians to this day: so that the name of the s^equits (as
of Amaleck.) is blotted out from under heaven there being not one that is or,
(as least) dare call himself a Pequi^.

5. In subduing those erroneous opinions carried over from hence by some of the
Passengers, which for a time infested our Churches peace but (through the
goodness of God) by conference preaching, a general assembly of l^arned men,
Magistraces timely care* and lastly, by Gods own hand from heaven, in most
remarkable strokes upon some of the chief fomenters of them; the matter came to
such an happy conclusion, that most of the seduced came humbly and confessed
their Errors in our public Assembli^s and abid^ ^o this day constant in the
Truth; the rest (that remained obstinate) finding no fit market there to vent
their wares, departed from us to an Island far off; some of whom also since
that time, have repented and returned to us* and are received again into our
bosoms. And from that time not any unsound, unsavourie and giddie fancy have
dared to lift up his head, or abide the light amongst us.

6. In settling and bringing civil matters to such a maturity in a short time
amongst us having planted 50. Towns and Villages, built 30. or 40. Churches,
and more Ministers houses; a Castle, a College, Prisons, Forts, Cartwaies,
Causies many, and all these upon our own charges no public hand reaching out
any help: having comfortable Houses, Gardens, Orchards, Grounds fenced, Corn
fields etc. and such a form and face of a Common wealth appearing in all the
Plantation, that Strangers from other parts, seeing how much is done in so few
years, have wondered at Gods blessing on our endeavors.

7. In giving such plenty of all manner of Food in a Wilderness insomuch, that
all kinds of Flesh amongst the rest, store of Venison in its season. Fish, both
from Sea and Fresh water. Foul of all kinds, wild and tame; store of
Whit-Meale, together with all sorts of English Grain, as well as Indian, are
plentiful amongst us; as also Roots, Herbs and Fruit, which being better
digested by the Sun, are far more fair pleasant and wholesome then here.

8. In prospering Hemp and Flax so well, that its frequently sown, spun, and
woven into linen Cloth: (and in a short time may serve for Cordage) and so
with Cotton-wooll, (which we may have at very reasonable rates from the
Islands) and our linen Yarne, we can make Dimittees and Fustions for our
Summer clothing. And having a matter of a 1000. Sheep, which prosper well, to
begin withal, in a competent time we hope to have woollen Cloth there made.
And great and small Cattle, being now very frequently killd for food; their
skins will afford us Leather for Boots and Shoes, and other uses: so that God
is leading us by the hand into a way of clothing.

9. In affording us many materials, (which in part already are, and will in
time further be improved) for Staple commodities, to supply all other defects:
As 1. Furs, Bever, Otter, etc. 2. Clapboord, Hoops, Pipestaves, Masts. 3.
English Wheat and other grain for Spains and West Indies; and all other
provisions for Victualling of Ships 4. Fish, as Cod, Haddock, Herrings,
Mackerill, Basse, Sturgeon, Seals, Whales, Seahorse. 5. Oil of sundry sorts,
of Whale, Seahorse, etc. 6. Pitch and Tar, Rosen and Turpentine, having
Pines, Spruce, and Pitch-trees in our Country to make these on. 7. Hemp and
Flax. 8. Mineralls discovered and proved, as of Iron in sundry places,
Black-lead (many other in hopes) for the improving of which, we are now about
to carry over Servants and instruments with us, 9. (Besides many Boats,
Shallops, Hows, Lighters, Pinnaces) we are in a way of building Ships, of an
100, 200, 300. 400. tun, five of them are already at Sea; many more in hand
at this present, we being much encouraged therein by reason of the plenty and
excellency of our Timber for that urpofe, and seeing all the materials will
be had there in short time. 10. In giving of such Magistrates, as are all of
them godly men, and members of our Churches, who countenance those that be
good, and punish evil doers, that a vile person dares not lift up his head;
nor need a godly man to hang it down, that (to Gods praise be it spoken) one
may live there from year to year, and not see a drunkard hear an oath, or
meet a beggar. Now where sin is punished, and judgment executed, God is wont
to bless that place, and protect it, Psalm. 106.30, Ier. 5.1, Ios. 7.25 with 8.
1. c con^ra E^a. 20 21. 11. In storing that place with very many of his own
people, and diverse of them eminent for godliness. Now where his people are,
there is his presence, and Promise to be in the midst of them, a mighty God
to save, and to joy over them with singing, Zeph. 3.17. 12. Above all our other
blessings, in planting his own Name, and precious Ordinances among us; (we
speak it humbly, and in his fear) our endeavor is to have all his own
Institutions, and no more then his own and all those in their native simplicity
without any humane dressings; having a liberty to enjoy all that God Commands,
and yet urged to nothing more then he Commands. Now Where soever he records his
Name, thither he will come and bless, Ex. 20, 24.


Which promise he eath already performed to very many souls in their
effectual conversion to Christ, and the edification of others in their holy
Faith, who daily bless God that ever he carried them into those parts.

All which blessings named we look upon, as an earnest-penny of more to come.
If we seek his face, and serve his Providence, we have no cause to doubt,
that he for his part will fail to make seasonable supplies unto us.

1 By some means to carry on to their perfection our staple trades begun.

2. By Additions of Ammunition and Powder.

3. By maintenance of Schools of Learning especially the College, as also
additions of building to it, and furnishing the Library.

4. By stirring up some well-minded to cloth and transport over poor children
Boys and Girls, which may be a great mercy to their bodies and souls and a
help to us, they being super abundant here, and we wanting hands to carry on
our trades, manufacture and husbandry there.

5. By stirring up some to show mercy to the Indians, in affording maintenance
to some of our godly active young Scholars, there to make it their work to
study their Language converse with them and carry light amongst them, that so
the Gospel might be spread into those dark parts of the world.

Ob. But all your own cost and ours also will be lost, because there can be no
subsistence there for any long time. For,

1. Your ground is barren,

Answ. 1. If you should see our goodly Corne-fields, near harvest you would
answer this your self. Secondly, how could it be thin, that we should have
English Wheat at 4. s. per bushel, and Indian at 2.8. and this not only for
ready money, but in way of exchange. Thirdly, that in a wilderness in so few
years, we should have corn enough for our selves and our friends that come
over, and much to spare.

2 Obj. Your ground will not continue above 3. or 4 years to bear corn.

Answ. Our ground has been sown and planted with corn these 7.10.^2. years
already by our selves, and (which is more than can be said here of English Land
(never yet summer tild: but have borne corn, every year since we first went,
and the same ground plant^d as long by the Indians before, and yet have good
crops upon it still, and as like to continue as ever: But this is, (as many
other slanders against that good Land against all sense, reason and experience.

3 Obj. But you have no money there.

Answ. It Is true we have not much, though some there is, but we having those
staple commodi^ies named, they will (still as they are improved) fetch money
from other parts. Ships, Fish, Iron, Pip^staves. Corn, Bever, Oil, etc will
help us with money and other things also.

2 Littl money is raised in coin in England, how then comes it to abound, but
by this mean?

3. We can trade amongst our selves by way of exchange, one commodity for
another, and so do usually.

4. Obj. You are like to want clo^hes hereafter.

Answ. 1. Linen Fustians Dimettees we are making already. Secondly, Sheep are
coming on for woollen cloth. Thirdly in mean time we may be supplied by way
of trade to other parts. 4th. Cor^^vant. Dear, Seal; and Moose Skins (which
are beasts as big Oxen, and their skins are buffe) are there to be had
plentifully; which will help this way, especially for servants clothing.

5. Obj. Your Winters are cold.

Answ. True, at sometimes when the wind blows strong at Nor-West: but it holds
not long together, and then it uses to be very moderate for a good space.
First the coldness being not natural (that place being 42. degrees) but
accidental. Secondly, The cold there is no impediment to health, but very
wholesome for our bodies, insomuch that all sorts generally, weak and strong
had scarce ever such measure of health in all their lives as there. Thirdly,
Its not a moist and foggie cold, as in Holland, and some parts of England, but
bright, clear, and fair wether, that men are seldom troubled in Winter with
coughes and Rheumes. Fourthly, it hinders not our employment, for people are
able to work or travel usually all the Winter long, so there is no loss of
time, simply in respect of the cold. Fifthly good fires (wood being so
plentiful) will make amends.

6. Ob. Many are grown weaker in their estates since they went over.

Ans. Are not diverse in London broken in their Estates? and many in England
are grown poor and thousands go a begging (yet we never saw a beggar there)
and will any tax the City or Kingdom, and say they are unsubsistable places?

Secondly their Estates now he in houses, Lands, Horses, Cattle, Corn etc.
though they have not so much money as they had here, and so cannot make
appearance of their wealth to those in England, yet they have it still, so that
their Estates are not lost but changed.

3. Some men's Estates may be weaker through great and vast common changes,
which the first planters especially have bin at in making the place
subsistable and comfortable, which now others reap the fruit of unknown
sums lie buried underground in such a work as that is.

4. Some may be poor (so we are sure) many are rich, that carried nothing at
all that now have House Land, Corn, Cattle, etc and such as carry something
are much increased.

7. Ob. Many speak evil of the place.

Ans. Did not some do so of ^he Land of Canaan it self yet Canaan was never
the worse and themselves smarted for so doing. Secondly some have been punished
there for their Delinquencies, or restrained from their exorbitances; or
discountenanced for their ill opinions and not sufferd to vent their stuff:
and hence being displeased take revenge by slanderous report. Thirdly, Let such
if any such there be as have ought to allege, deal fairly and above board,
and come and justify any thing against the Country to our faces while we are
here to answer, but such never yet appeared in any of our presence to avouch
any thing in this kind, nor (we believe) dare do it without blushing.

8. Ob. Why do many come away from thence?

Answ. Do not many remove from one Country to another, and yet none likes the
Country the less because some depart from it? Secondly, few that we know of
intend to abide here, but do come on some special business, and purpose to
return. Thirdly of them that are come hither to stay, (on our knowledge) some
of the wisest repent them already, and wish themselves there again. Fourthly,
as some went thither upon sudden undigested grounds, and saw not God leading
them in their way, but were carried by an unstayed spirit, so have they
returned upon as slight headless, unworthy reasons as they went Fifthly others
must have elbow-roome, and cannot abide to be so pinioned with the strict
Government in the Commonwealth, or Discipline in the Church, now why should
such live there; as Ireland will not brook venomous beasts, so will not that
Land vile persons, and loose livers. Sixthly, though some few have removed from
them, yet (we may truly say) thousands as wise as themselves would not change
their place for any other in the World.

FINIS.

