An ELEGY Upon the Death of the Most Illustrious Princess HENERETTA MARIA,
Duchess of Orleans, etc.
WHat ails the Town? what is it clouds their eyes?
And speaks them Martyrs to grief's cruelties;
What sudden change has turned our joy to sorrow,
When swelled Lungs, breath from the air did borrow,
To express that joy, which must not last till morrow.
Me thinks that joyful news I still do hear,
Heneretta's Landed now at Dover Peer,
There the Air did dance at the Guns Mus'cal sound,
And how each Hollow, did that sound confound,
To see her Landed safe on English Ground.
But ha'nt you seen a black Clowd at Noonday
To bereave Phoebus of his brightest Ray.
So when our Joy was raised up to the height,
Death interposed his Shade, t'Ecclips that light
And turn our Noon of Joy, to Sorrow's Night.
Heneretta Dead! and Heaven no notice give
By Blazing Comets, that do only live
Upon those Vapors, which The Earth does expire
In Sigh, when Heaven her Princes do desire,
To attend their Service, at its Sacred Quire.
Princ^s are Gods a Solocoesm 'twould be,
For to desire the Death of 'ts Deity,
Is the World defensive, Tutelars will have
Their Lives, for her Protection she must crave;
No help can come from such as sleep in Grave.
Death if for Lives thou thirst's? why do not go,
And take whole thousands to thy Shades below
Of Common sort, such we can well thee spare,
But when to Royal Branches thou come near,
We all the Lapping of that Tree do fear.
Alas I thirst not (death does now reply)
For Royal Blood, it was her Destiny:
The Fatal Sisters surely did Combine,
To Spin and make for her a Silken Line,
Which was the sooner broke for being fine.
Kings, Queens, or Princes, all must yield to Fate,
When their decree is past complaint's too late:
Ask Sacred Urns, and they will soon reply,
The Fates of Old decreed Mortality,
And all must yield to this their destiny.
Rivers of Water then give now to me,
I Will soon exhale out their Humiditie,
That now from thence I may some Water have
Enough, to moysten this, too early Grave,
Yet scarce enough, though I the Sea should Crave.
Hence let us seek some doleful Gloomy Shade,
By Nature only for our Sorrows made,
There we will bewail's our most unhappy Fate,
Of our lost Royal Princess, who of late,
Was the only Female Branch of Britains State.
Nor need we fear, she would visit us again;
If Heaven proud of her, did not detain;
There now among the Heavenly Saints she is set
A Jewel fit for such a Cabinet,
May we by her Example thither get.
To speak her Worth, we Mortals strive in vain,
That Honor Angels, can alone attain:
Yet my endeavers, Reader do not blame,
If I attempt t'Illustrate still her Fame,
By an Accrostick of her Maiden Name.
An Accrostick.
Here Majesty in Dust does lie,
Earth's Goddess see's Mortality,
Nostre-Dame our Dame does hide,
Earth's luster does in darkness bide,
Rejoicing Heaven, her Soul does claim,
Earth her Princess, Heaven her Saint does name,
Thus Alt'red, she in Marble Sleeps,
The Altar now her Body keeps,
And every Stone for Sorrow weeps.
May Streams of Water ever flow,
And every Eye a Delluge know,
Rather than she should want a Tear,
I think Heaven would condense the Air,
And make us all a Delluge Fear.
Stay Traveller then yet a while:
Tarry and view this Funeral Pile,
Even Vrns our Judgments may inform,
Worthies have trembled at a Worm,
And do thou see a Princess lie,
Remember then that thou must dye,
The low Tree fall as well as high.
Quis talia fundo, tempore a Lachrymis sic transit illa, cujus Foelicitati, non
est. T. R.
LONDON, Printed by E. Crowch, for T. Passenger, at the three Bibles on
London Bridge. 1670. 67.


