POEMS OR EPIGRAMS, SATYRS, ELEGIES, SONGS and SONNETS, Upon several Persons
and Occasions.

By No body must know whom, to be had every body knows where, and for any body
knows what.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Brom, at the Gun in Ivie-Lane. 1658.

TO THE READER.
THese Poems were given me near sixteen years since by a Friend of the Authors,
with a desire they might be printed, but I conceived the Age then too squeemish
to endure the freedom which the Author uses; and therefore I hitherto
smothered them, but being desirous they should not perish, and the world be
deprived of so much clean Wit and Fancy, I have adventured to expose them to
thy view; if they do arride thy Pallat I am glad I gave the occasion; if not, I
shall not send thee a Challenge. All that I shall say is, that I have read them
with delight, ^ find that the Author writes not pedantically, bu^ like a
Gentleman; and if thou art a Gentleman of thy own making thou will not mislike
it.

Farewell
To the Great in Worth and Merit as in Honor and Title, the Lady happily
Marchioness of Winchester, humbly these.

A New Years Gift.
MADAM,
COuld I but dive into the Oceans Breast,
Or climb those Rocks, that with the clouds contest,
If I could sail unto the Persian shore,
Or rob the wealthy Indies of their Oar.
Your private walks, and Arbours I would pave
With orient Pearl, and you should Diamonds have,
Such as might dimn the glory of the Sun,
And make old Nature think her self undone;
With Persian Carpets I would deck your Rooms,
And gold should be, but offerings for your grooms.
But I the diving Dolphin cannot ride,
Nor yet the high eye-daz'ling rock bestride;
I cannot swim unto the Persian shore,
Nor rob the spacious Indies of their Oar;
Yet, Madam, rather then I would appear,
With empty hand to welcome in this Year,
Or with the Country Maid, to show my loves,
Bring Capons, Hens, or Orange stuck with cloves,
I have my Paper-office searched, and there
Finding some sheets, that never tainted were
With unclean hands, lines that never saw the Sun,
Nor yet been breathed upon since they were done.
Of them, I chose with cu^iosity
Such, as I thought, might take your Ear, or Eye,
Plain dealing, Madam, some a Jewel call,
If you esteem it so, your Honor shall
Find it like swelling grapes, like fruitful Vine,
Under each leaf, hanging on every line,
Each Satyr wears it in his hayrie Ear,
And in each Epigram it will appear.
Your wonted favor grant then, and I live
Richer then those that thousands have to give.
I. E.
To the Censorious Reader.
I do desire the snarle and do thy worst,
Who at thy mercy stands is most accursed:
I write to please my Friends and bouldly vow,
Neither thy venomed Tongue, nor bended Brow
Shall force me to a Recantation.
I know thy trade, thy Occupation
Is to find fault, find them good Sir, and take them,
They are your own, it is you not I that make them,
Belch out thy poison then, and vent thy gall,
I have an Antidote within against all.
Besides here is a Charm, if you but look
Upon the Frontire piece of this poor Book;
A Ladies name, a name that virtue has
Enough to make this Book become a Bath,
And give each line a healing power by which
Each critic may be cured of his salt itch.
This makes me here with confidence protest,
I fear not thee nor any such wild beast.
To the Courteous Reader.
I Kiss your hands, and would be glad to meet
Such Friends in every leaf, 'twixt every sheet.
I wish that every dish, and all the Sallets
That Is set before you may delight your pallets*
Therefore I sent to Florence for my oil,
My Olives grew on that Italian soil.
The Oranges and Lemons Spanish speak,
And if the Vinegar be dead or weak
Then blame the Time and people, that will carp
At any thing though wholesome, if but sharp.
Woodcocks here are, as good as ever flew;
Widgeons and gulls that certainly are new.
Here Is foul of every sort save only one,
And that is foul faults of them I hope here is none.
Sit down then courteous Reader, and fall too,
For know the feast was only made for you.
Sit and be frollike, whilst I humbly wait
Expecting how you relish each conceit.
And if you rise well pleased my noble Friends,
I then am rich as having all in ends.
To his Book.
GO forth my little wanton, go and play,
But on my Blessing, see thou do not stray
Beyond those bounds to which I have confined thee
For if in Paul's Church yard I chance to find thee,
Nay if within the City walls thou come,
I wish thou may be instantly struck dumb,
Or if with Prentices thou do converse,
Pray Heavens their Masters Counters prove thy hearse,
There with their damned account books lie for ever,
And may I hear, or see thee thenceforth never.
The old Exchange I do forbid thee too,
Lest thou should meet in hasty crowds, a crew
Either a Grain too light, or too too grave,
Composed of too much fool, or too much knave.
The Inns of Court are safe, none there will scare thee,
But from the Inns of Chancery I bar thee;
There Under-sheriffs, Sollicitors and such
Will make a Battery of every touch.
Benchers and Barristers pass by, for those
To wit are Neuters, neither friends nor foes.
If to the Royal Court a Courtier bear thee,
Avoid the knavish Pages, lest they swear thee,
And force the so the Author to bewray:
With Grooms and Chamber-maids forbear to play
Gentlemen-Ushers, and the quarter-wayters,
Though just unto their King, they may be traitors
To me, or thee; with Pentioner or Querrie
Be free and bold, they can be bold and merry,
For they good Fellows are, and can dispense
With wit that fights, but in its own defense.
The new great Lords avoid, and if thou can,
For every Lord is not a Noble man.
Shun Countesses, as much as thou art able,
She may b'a Countess that is not honorable.
For Senators, know they are sharp-edg'd tools
Not too be jested with; there are Court fools,
Who cog and ly, but still their Coxcombs have
A cursed sent, of the most dangerous knave.
A Clergy man that wears a little ruff,
And keeps his hand untainted with a cuff;
Who wears no Spanish leather Boot or Shoe,
Or any other fashion that is new,
Lest it from France, or Spain, or Rome should come,
To such a silenc't Brother be thou dumb;
Say not, God save him, lest he say, he is able
To save himself, and damn the profane rabble.
The only friends to whom I would commend thee,
Are only those to whom I humbly send thee:
Kiss their fair hands, and at their noble feet
Stand and do penance, in a paper sheet.
From them alone thy absolution crave,
Since they alone have power to kill, or save.
J. E.
To the jealous Reader.
WHo finds an Epigram like clothes in fitness,
Of him 'twas made, his Conscience is my witness.
And yet I wonder how it comes to pass
What for a Goose I made, should fit an Ass:
But take it Sir, and now I know your measure
I Will fit you better at my further leisure
To the Printer, if these papers should unhappily come to the Press.
IF you should be accused have care to look
You do not play the fool and crave your Book,
For to your condemnation that may rise,
Rather stand mute my Friend be dumb and wise.
If you confess as they perhaps would have you,
Take it from me this Book will never save you.
If they condemn you 'cause you will not confess,
You know they can but send you to the Press.
Then pray stand mute, the counsel's good I give,
Die by the Press since by the Press you live.
To the Stationer if need be.
IF you shall make Paul's Pillars Penance do
In any sheet of mine, or set to view
The Title of this Book on any Post,
I wish your expectation may be lost;
For common things that men at stairs do cry
Are only fit for the vulgar sort to buy.
As wife or daughter let this Book have keeping,
And men will hunt it out when you are sleeping.
To the punctual Poets.
IF you examine by the rules of art
These Rimes of mine, together or apart,
And to the common touchstone of your trade
Send them, i will prevent you, for know they were made
Not for the Universities, nor yet
To sell at any stall for current wit,
Fiddlers and Queresters are bound to sing
Allwaies in tune, and eke their fiddles string
With Trebles, Means, Counter-tenor Bases,
But know, you Critics, mine another case is,
I write to please my true and noble friends,
To please you in the cross part is my ends:
Besides Parnassus hill I hear is steep,
Your spring of Hellicon's for me to deep,
Nor do I truly know, I truly vow,
Whether your Pegasus be horse or Cow.
You that do write for money or applause
Keep you the rules of art, observe her laws;
My papers shall not smell of oil nor wax,
Your lamps and tapers force you set a tax
Upon your Stationers who many times
With dear repentance bind your dear bought rimes
Which serve a prentiship upon their stalls
For few there are that come unto their calls
Unless Tobaccoe men, sick men or such
As physic take because they surfeit much:
But know you men of curiosity,
These sheets shall in some ladies closset ly;
Who them in their fair hands shall take sometimes,
With sweetest powders to perfume my rimes;
The Damask rose buds in these papers shall
In them be dried, and hung against the wall
And the very worst that these leaves can abide,
About some gally Pots they may be tied,
And so preserve those sweets, that sweeter grow
By those sweet hands that did preserve them so.
Armed with this confidence my Muses flight
Shall not be checked by any Critticks slight.
A Satyr. To the Times time-serving Poets.
I claim no place no office, or degree,
In your alliance, or fraternity,
I Will ^^and alone, and either fall, or rise,
No^ by your hands, but by the destinies,
Light headed Mercury, not grave Apollo
My patron is, his winged feet, I follow,
With him, I often cut the subtle air,
And from the Dogg-star, pluck a lock of hair,
Then to the man in the Moon I nimbly leap,
And fleece his shaghair'd Cur, from thence I step,
Down to the fatal sisters, force them spin,
These hairs, to thrids, of which I weave a gin,
To catch wild beasts, tame fools, and great ones too
This is a trifling work, you scorn to do,
Nor would it well become your gravities,
You fish with lines of filke, and painted flies,
You angle for great Ladies favorites,
Bow to their grooms, flatter their parazites,
Smooth up their Bauds, and to conclude commit,
Idolatry with Calves, and make your wit,
Worse then a hackney Jade, that every host
With any paper packet, may send post,
Whilst I with nimble footed Mercury,
Through unfrequented woods, and groves, do fly,
And with a sharp hooft Satyr, pace by pace,
In Desert forests hunt the wild goose chase,
And fear no beast though he a title bear.
As big as is his bulk, freedom dwells there,
And christian liberty, like Ships on seas,
Unbounded is, and stears which way it please,
There in security we, sport and play,
Scorning to fear, what City Cryticks say,
Sometimes within the Court I do appear,
But not like you to scratch an itching ear,
For know I croude those ulcerous organs full
Of sulphur, copprice, gaul, black Incke and wool
And if to any States man I but whisper,
So sharp my breath is, that I leave a blister.
Some times to the old Exchange, travel I do,
My Patron Courtiour is, and Merchant too,
There to the Aldermen, I packets tender;
From their god plenty, and when they would render
A brace of Teasters, for the news I bring,
I falcon like, am got upon the wing,
Spurring the sloe pac't wind, until it throws me
Upon some noble country friend that knows me;
To him I dare be free, to me he dares
Communicate the common fears, and cares,
With which the humble subjects are possessed,
How by that Courtiour, they have been oppressed
How by that Lawyer, wrested from their right
How by that Prelate tith'd unto a myte,
How by Projectors rifled and undone,
How by some strange Monopoly, some one
Ingrosses that, by which two thousand poor,
Have got an honest living heretofore;
This when I hear I then turn Satyrist,
And still my hardest lines, I harder twist,
And to my Incke, ad gaull, then naked strip them,
And without fear, or pity, boldly whip them,
I hate those sneaking Poets, that put one,
Faces as rough as Satyrs, yet are none,
Such as do only bark, and dare not bite,
When an Invective, I intend to write,
My pencile make as sharp, as sword, or knife,
And if I needs must rayl, i will do it to the life,
Daring Authority I will outlooke,
And mercy want rather then crave my book,
Blind are those fools that stumble at a straw,
Satyrs never ought to know nor fear a law,
With them I am resolved some hours to spend,
And to that sport, summon one only friend.
A Court-Prodigall.
ON Calsors back, heaven knows for what offense,
This day is hanged all his inheritance
That Cloak to No'hs Ark well you may compare:
For every living beast he had lies there
His hose and dublet like that mighty Flood
Has dround each field and overwhelmed each wood
A lease with diverse Coppie-holds does ride
In an Impropriation by his side
His Haberdasher joining with the Pointer
Has trust him up in his old mothers Joynter
To Sturbridge Fair why run you then for shows
When heers a Monster much more strange then those.
An Old Unthrift.
ALbertus swears and swearing so resolved
That if Court tables should be quite disolved
Himself with thousands more would sell their spits
And leave the poor to live by their poor wits
Albertus do; since forth thou d^r'st not peep
Let that keep thee; that thou were wont to keep
For thy revenews and thy penny rents
Are all forestalled by Citizens extents.
Then as I said good unthrift let it be
Thou once kept house now let the house keep thee.
To a great Lord that upbraided his Servant with Poverty.
YOur Lordship did object upon a time
My poverty against me as a crime,
You blamed me that I borrowed had of those,
Who to your knowledge were my greatest foes;
It had been nobly done Sir to relieve me,
Rather then with my wants and Foes to grieve me
But in distress give me a foe that lends,
Before a thousand faithless fruitless friends,
To his reconciled Enemy:
YOu were my enemy so went the cry
But your late actions has given that the ly;
You are my friend professed nay you have sworn it
And but I know it real I should scorn it;
Let all back-biters then henceforth be Mute,
Friends by their works are known as trees by fruit
He that shall speak me fair and loves me not,
Calls for the reckoning up, but pays no shot,
Give me the man that smoothly steals away,
Uses few words, but leaves me naught to pay.
Let those that envy this our friendship know,
That I much more to you then them do owe,
For you have paid my scores, so used me better
Then such as scorned me, 'cause I was a debtor.
Thus by your actions I shall ever prize you,
Who calls you then my foe, I swear belies you.
Upon a Fool that was angry at his evil Fortune.
GRaccus at fortune rayls, and often imparts
Unto his private friends some evil chance,
Still wondering that a man of his deserts
That fickle whore so slowly should advance:
Indeed since fortune favors fools so much,
All wonder may, that thy ill fortune's such.
Upon a Fellow that feared he should run mad for his Mistress.
RAlph is love sick, and thinks he shall run mad,
And loose his wits, a thing Ralph never had.
Take comfort man, if that be all thou fear,
A groat will pay the loss when wits at dearest.
Upon a Highway Thief.
DIck had two words that did maintain him ever,
The one was stand, the other was deliver.
But Dick's in Newgate, and I fear will never
Be blessed again with that sweet word, deliver.
Of one that was burnt in the Hand.
THat fellow there, as simply as he stands,
Has all the law by rote at's fingers ends:
Nay answers one, he has it in his hands,
For at last Sessions, had he not found friends,
He had been hanged, if out he have not bit it,
The law's there to be read, as Deverax writ it.
Upon a Ladies Tailor turned out of service, having been long her Favorite.
WHat Monsieur Nit my Ladies Tailor here,
That she maintained for trimming her old gear?
I heard why you were out of favor put,
A sour Nitships yard she found was lately cut:
Then blame her not, she had just cause of Ire,
A child once burnt, you know will fear the fire.
Then she that has so oftentimes been served,
Has in her old age cause to be afeard.
Upon his unkind Kindred.
IN kinsman friend of old was comprehended,
Give me one friend and hang up all my kindred.
A Gardner and his Wife.
A Gardners wife that long had barren been,
Her husband one night thus did make his moan,
Sure wife quoth he it is for some deadly sin,
That this our work amongst all the rest alone
Is fruitless, here is labor, but no increasing,
Husband quoth she, this ground does want much dressing
With that the man a far fetched sigh sent forth,
And swore it had more dressing then it was worth.
A peremptory Goldsmiths Wife.
A Goldsmiths wife most boldly often required
Of her good man a hundred pound in gold,
For what use to know humbly he desired,
For my pleasure quoth she, strait down it was told,
Take it said he, my only dearest Dear,
And thus she serves him twice or thrice a year.
Though he do often thus for her pleasure pay,
Yet that he is a Wittall who can say?
A Courteous Chambermaid.
DOll often did protest, and deeply too,
Her sought for Maydenhead she would not loose,
At last her Ladies Son did Doll pursue,
And wood so well she could not him refuse,
How now quoth he, how can you salve your Vow,
Why that is not lost quoth she, that is given to you.
To one that entreated the Author to write some Verses to a Book that he had
going to the Press.
I Was entreated by a scambling Knight
Something in praise of his new book to write,
I that am ready at each Suitors whistle
As others did, provided an Epistle,
But 'cause I did not praise his work enough,
He left it out, which I took much in snuff;
But let it pass it has given me a schoolling,
I Will henceforth sooth up woodcocks in their fooling,
The Author upon his Epigrams.
MY Epigrams by hundreds I send forth,
And give them too for naught that's just their worth
If in mouths of gift horses few men look,
Vouchsafe but so much justice to this book.
For rather then I Will sell paper and Inck,
I'l^ be a night man, though the office stinck.
To the truly Honorable and anciently Noble Benefactor the Lord Dunkelly,
Vicecount Tunbridg, Upon the Authors obligations to him, An Epigram.
I Am your Lordships debtor, yet who looks
I fear will scarcely find me in your books,
My name I do suspect is clearly lost,
And I for want of payment out am crossed:
Yet my ambition's still great Lord, to mount
High in your books, I mean of good account:
In other books where ere I find my name,
I wish their libraries were all in flame.
A tradesmans book is worse to me by far
Then the black book, where psalms of mercy are.
To read is not enough my life to save,
Judgment or satisfaction they must have,
Their books condemn me, yours would me acquit,
Let me be blotted there, in yours fair writ,
Their great accounts my greatest sorrow is,
The greater your account the more my bliss.
Then know your honor cannot please me better
Then write me down at large your thankful debtor.
To the most deservedly beloved and honored the the Lady Viscountess Tunbridge.
Madam,
WHere should I place your honor if not here,
Since it is as all men know your proper sphere;
You do not in your orb so sweetly move,
Wanting his presence you so dearly love:
Therefore my judgment humbly thought it meet,
To place you thus together in one sheet,
And may those powers that govern death and fate,
So ty, so bind, and so conglutinate,
The holy bonds that hold you now together,
That neither may lament the loss of either;
May death, and time, and fate want power to force
Either a separation or devorce,
Betwixt you, and let every new year bring,
To both your bloods, to both your loves, a spring;
May you grow old in nothing but in seeing,
Your Childrens Childrens Children still in being;
My orisons are done, and Madam now,
I humbly come to beg one boon of you.
Vou hsafe though hitherto you have not known me
To write me down your servant, and so own me.
That happiness convaid but to my hearing,
I Will strive to spin a web worthy your wearing.
An Epigram Humbly presented to his Majesty upon Release of a prisoner that
was committed for making Libellous Verses.
YOur royal Mother Sir, blessed ever be,
This day that brings her to our memory,
To England, Scotland, and Ireland gave,
A judge to Censure, and a king to save:
It was a day of mercy, so said she,
God mercy showed in her delivery;
Oh let it be a day of mercy ever,
Pronounce great Sir, this day that word, deliver.
A prison is a womb, whence only you,
Have power to bid bad men be born anew:
In imitation of our God then say,
Fiat, and I am born anew this day;
The acts of mercy Saints and Angels sing,
They will rejoice with her first gave you being.
Oh pardon then my much repented, folly,
That I with them may keep this day still holy.
To his Noblest Friend Mr. Endimion Porter upon Verses writ by Ben. Johnson.
THey that give wine to Poets, noble friend,
Verses receive, they need not verses send;
Only your self that all men can out do,
Did send your Poet wine and verses too.
You gave him Oil, for wine Sir is the same,
It makes the dying Fire freshly flame.
It is the Philosophers stone, with which
Their lives do catch conceits, which makes them rich:
It is the Antidote that does preserve,
Their fancies, which without it drop and starve.
It is indeed the spirit, that infuses
Quick apprehensions in the dullest Muses.
The gift was rare, but there is a better thing,
You drew it from the bosom of a king;
For had you from the fountain drawn a piece,
Pierced the Star, or squeezed the golden fleece,
Or searched the bowels of the Lion, nay
Had you done more, sent a tall shipp a way,
To Spain or Greece, and with your money bought
The head of all the vintage, and that brought,
At your own charge home to his Celler door,
You had done much; but this is much much more:
You brought him sack even from a god like giver,
Such, and so blessed, as it shall last for ever,
As if the Faces, being pleased, would now design,
To the immortal Muses precious wine;
So that your Poet to the last of days,
Is bound loud Sir, to singe your lasting praise;
Thus have you built your self brave Sir, a tomb,
That neither time nor envy can consume.
And if you want an Epitaph, you must dye,
When as Parnassus burns, and Helicon is dry.
For Mistress Porter on a New years day.
GO hunt the whitest Ermine, and present,
His wealthy skin as this days tribute sent,
To my Endimion's love, though she be far,
More gently smooth, more soft then Ermins are,
Go climb the rocks, and when thou there have found,
A star contracted in a diamond,
Give it Endimion's love, whose equal eyes,
Out-look the starry jewels of the skies:
Go dive into the southern sea, and when
Thou'st found to trouble the nice sight of men
A swelling pearl, and such whose single worth,
Boasts all the wonders which the sea brings forth,
Give it Endimion's love, whose every tear,
Would more enrich the skillful Jeweller,
How I command, how slowly they obey
The churlish Tartar will not hunt to day,
Nor will the lazy sallow Indian strive,
To climb the rock, nor that dull Negro dive,
Thus Poets ^ike to kings by trust deceived,
Give what is oftener heard of then received.
To his loved Friend Mr. Davenat, upon his Verses to the well-deserving both
his, and all others praises the virtuous Mistress Porter.
I Seldom praise least using so to do,
My Muse at length might learn to flatter to,
But if I envy any, be it known,
Dear friend, it is you, it is you that have out-gone
My nimble thoughts, thoughts that for many days
Have been upon the wing to catch a praise,
Worthy her wearing, but I now despair,
For you have robbed the earth the sea and air;
And in conceit made her a richer feast,
Then Cleopatra did her Roman Guest.
You hunted well and though you caught no game,
Yet by it you have gained from me this Epigrame,
Thus Poets with the Gods, loved friend, may boast
That they can feast each other without cost.
An Epigram, To his Friend Ben Johnson, upon his Libellous Verses against the
Lords of the Green-Cloath concerning his Sack.
You swore dear Ben you would turn the green cloth blew,
If your dry Muse might not be bathed in sack,
Nay drunk with choler you protested too,
Their white stains you would smoke till they were black.
This with those fearless Lords nothing prevailing,
The Scean you alterd and you smoothed your pen,
You left your bitter and your fruitless railing,
And basely slatter'd even the worst of men;
Then give me leave henceforth good Ben to think,
You drunkest are when you the most want drink.
To Ben Johnson again, upon his verses dedicated to the Earl of Portland, Lord
Treasurer.
Your verses are commended and it is true,
That they were very good, I mean to you;
For they returned you Ben as I was told,
A certain sum of forty pound in gold:
The verses then being rightly understood,
His Lordship not Ben Johnson made them good.
An Epitaph upon the chaste and fair Lady Walsingam.
Within this humble hearse of clay here lies
Relics that heathen men would Idolize;
Such flesh and blood to dust and ashes turned,
As since the worlds first birth was never urn'd;
Virtue and beauty had mere strangers been,
Till God and nature lodged them in this Inn;
Where having met and kissed they kept one room,
Till crewell death removed them to this Tomb:
Which sharpey'd virtue quickly did discover,
To narrow for her self and her chaste lover:
And that they might no more the subjects be,
To death, or chance or times unconstancie,
She fled to heaven and there is now providing,
A place for both their everlasting biding;
Good Sexton then, until these lovers meet,
As virtue did keep beauties lodging sweet;
That Saints and Angels at the last may find,
This dust as pure, as when 'twas first inshrin'd.
Verses dedicated by way of New Years gift to the Earl of Portland, at that
time Lord Treasurer, by the favor of him that presented them they were said to
be begot and brought forth, whilst He and the Author drunk a pint of Wine; to
try the truth his Lordship commanded the Author to send another Copy upon as
short warning: they were by his Lordship equally liked, and happily commended;
but in the Authors opinion there is much difference.
The first Coppie.
May it please your Lordship,
A Diamond right and rich if breathed upon,
Does clear it self so does no other stone;
It has a secret unseen unfelt fire,
No sooner clouded, but those clouds expire;
By which the Lapidary Sir descries,
The hidden wealth and worth that in it lies:
Far honored Lord be smooth faced flattery hence,
Such is your now known virtues excellence;
Like a rich diamond, by your own power alone,
The breath of venomed tongues in the air is thrown:
Foul mouthed detraction you have now struck dumb,
Envy is silent for the time to come:
Let me with pardon then great Sir, declare
How much in these your honors I have share;
Your now approved goodness to my glory,
Confirm what I foretold of your Worths story,
You have most honored Lord, to my great fame,
Gained me from all good men a Prophets name;
And though my modest joys were long since born
Yet they but learned to speak this very morn,
And with the crowd that to your Altar brings,
Jewels or plate for this days offerings,
I humbly pray they may without offense,
Supply the place of Mirrh and frankincense.
Upon the Altar of your favor throw,
Those Zealous wishes which from my heart flow
As the sun this morn set forth,
And increases in his growth;
As it by degrees does mount,
In our lengthening days account:
Certain minutes every hour,
And each day augments his power;
Even so I humbly heaven desire,
Your spring honors may aspire;
Until they overlook the tops,
Of all your wishes and your hopes:
When thus the height of bliss is won,
Then let them like Joshua's Sun,
Not for hours but for ever,
Stick and thence retire never;
And may no age an Ecclips see,
In you or your posterity.
Thus he humbly prays that stands,
With patience waiting your commands.
The Second Coppie.
Upon reading the former verses his Lordship wa^ pleased to command Mr.
Titchborne to go with the Author to Mr. Attorney General, to pray in his
Lordships name a speedy dispatch of business which the Author had with him: at
their return these were made i^ the presence of Mr. Titchborne, and by him
sent to hi^ Lordship to show that he studied not, but wrote freel^ and wantonly
making it a pleasure and no trouble.
Great Sir,
I Borrowed Neptun's Trident for an hour,
Gave it an Indian, charge him by that power
To dive into each wealthy Chanel, where,
The rich oriental Pearls engendered were:
He winged his feet with Fins seemed to strive
With nimble Zeal the Dolphin, to out-dive.
He went and came as swift as wish or thought,
And told me Neptunes store house he had sought:
That he the high archt Rock had undermined,
And searched the Mer-Mayds Cabinet to find
A Pearl, which both in beauty and in wealth,
Might equal what was once drunk at a health;
When that ambitious Queen had at a feast,
The great Mark Anthony for her chief guest,
But all was empty and his labor lost,
Great Britans Merchants had them all ingrost:
And they within your Temple should appear,
This day to wellcom in this new born year;
A Negro then I entertained that knew,
Where the unpolisht sun burnt Diamond grew,
I baith'd his feet in hot and quick desire,
And sent him to those Rocks that do aspire,
In their ambitious growth to check the Sun,
He mad's return as soon as thought upon:
Gave me the answer that I had before,
Great Britains Merchants had ingrost the store;
A light heeld Fancy I did then bestride,
And in conceit upon a cloud did ride:
Whose long wing dared the winds unto a chase,
And beat the nimble Swallows in their pace,
The Persian Looms the wealthy Indian shore,
For hangings, Carpets and for golden Oar
I did survey, and found it was most true,
All that was good had been brought thence for you
With that, my griefs great weight did quickly break
The cloud I rode on, and I did awake:
For all this while I was but in a dream,
Begot the day before by an extreme
Desire to offer some such sacrifice,
The which for ^arity might catch your eyes.
Sleep banished thus, a bright eyed waxen taper
Presented to my view Pen, Inck and paper,
My Muse came dropping in as she had gone
That morn to bath her self in Hellicon
She forced me write these humble lines which may
Quoth she, out live the offerings made this day.
For Jewels, Hangings Plate, all fortunes treasure
Are but times slaves, and vanish at his pleasure.
Two things alone Immortalize great men,
And that is Children and a fruitful pen;
The first heavens has provided, and you may
Create the second, if you please, this day.
And from the first of this new years good days
A Poet make to singe your virtuous praise.
A great Lady presented the said Lord Treasurer with a silver skreene having
these following verses engraven about it, made by this Author at her request.
YOur virtues, like this silver skreen,
Are known to enterpose between
The flameing Eyes of envious fools,
Till your clear fame their Fire cools;
Sit then securely, take your rest,
And with this Motto dare their Test,
Detractions sparks no more dare fly,
But like these Coals shall wast, and dye.
The same Lady presented his Majesty the Queens Picture, in a Square table,
wrought with a needle so artificially, as the most Skillful Painter could not
have bettered it, and at the 4 corners were the names of his Majesty's four
kingdoms, with these verses made by the same Author.
SHe, whose ambitious Genius watching lies,
With ardent Zeal to catch your sacred Eyes,
Discovered has the blessed object, where
Those stars do move as in their proper sphere.
On that she humbly fixed her loyal heart,
Until her soul had taught her hands the art,
By which that objects sweet Idea thus,
Was made to feast those eyes that govern us.
If then this zealous offering find but grace,
Your four Kingdoms next you shall give place
Unto the Prince, Princess, Duke, and the other
Expected fourth Model, their third Brother.
And thus by Hierogliphicks she aspires
To teach her hands to speak her hearts desires.
Mrs. Sanderson her Majesty's Laundress presented a Celler of empty glasses to
her Majesty.
Madam,
THese little glasses had been sil'd with Juice,
Pressed from the fruits that grow in Parradice,
The tree of Life I would have squeezed and thence,
My humble Zeal had brought the quintessence,
Of that as yet untouched fruit, and here
Have tendered it, to welcome in this year,
But gracious Mistres, know that I have been,
At every gate, courting each Cherubin,
Told them, to whom I humbly would present it,
They prayed my pardon, vowed they durst not ventur'^
Your Majesty, before all creatures living,
A bottle should have had of their own giving,
But 'twas decreed, for Woman's first offense,
No Aqua-vitae should be brought from thence,
Accept then gracious Madam, what I give,
And if my humble prayers can make you live,
You shall Immortal be (...) ^^at denied,
Since none are so, but those that's deified,
I shall imp^^^^ne heaven with my best breath,
You may transported be, and never see death,
That all the world may know, as we believe
You are derived from heaven, not from Eve.
John Eliot.
Finis.
An Elogie.
On the Lady Jane Paulet Marchioness of Winchester daughter to the right
honorable the Lord Savage of Rock-savage.
I Would invite this my humble verse
Some weeping eyes to wait upon this Hearse,
But when I view who it is that lodges here
I know not then from whom to beg a tear;
To Ladies if I should this suit prefer,
So good this Lady was all envyed her:
Such as had beauty whilst they stood alone,
If once compared with her they then had none;
Those spangle virtues that they gloried in,
To her Test brought, proved then but gilded sin;
She was the Lyllie of the Field, the rest
But Da^ies, Primrose, Cowslips at the best;
This blazing star all others thus our shining,
Inferior lights grow great, by her declining;
Since Ladies then are bettered by her death,
To beg their tears were but to wast my breath.
Should I to virtuous men my self adress,
And crave some sighs from them they would confess,
That if a thought of her but crossed their way
Even in the Temple, they no more could pray.
The fire of love, their sparks of Zeal put forth,
And they no text could study, but her worth;
The thickskind Boar, that at high noon defies
The scorching Sun was melted by her eyes.
The stiff-neckt Puritan does not allow
His god a knee, yet to this Saint would bow.
Her granest Chaplins in the midst of grace
Stood often mute, till gazing on her face
They f^o^ her Cheeks, as from two well pend books,
Found graces store, and read them in her looks.
And thus all men Idolatry commit,
Some with her feature, others with her wit.
All good men then how deer so er'e they loved her
Are glad e'n for their souls sake, death removed her
Shall I rub natures sores, and once again,
From tender Parents eyes press drops of rain;
That were a Crime that would beget a story,
To mourn for her they know is crowned with glory,
But they religious are, and will repent
The sighs, and groans, and tears already spent;
For being married thus before they die,
To Joys Long lived, as is eternity,
Part of her hapiness they shall destroy
That weep for her, unless they weep for Joy.
Should I awake her Lord, and from his eyes
Requier tears, by way of sacrifice,
That were a Cruelty her gentle soul
Would sharply in his sleeps and dreams control;
For if the Saints our actions do discover,
To weep for her would show he did not love her;
For being Crowned with bliss, 'twere most unjust
To wish her here again, to dwell with dust,
What Joy, what honor can there be like this,
She that was once his wife an Angel is.
A piece of his own flesh with her is gone,
As in his right, to take possession,
Of these eternal Joys long since decreed
To godly Parents, and their righteous seed;
Nor was high heaven content to grace him so,
But knowing nature apt to over throw
Foundations, that by faith are weakly laid,
This goodly Fabric must not be decayed
By flow pac't time, nor did those powers please
To ruin it by surfeits or disease;
Sure common messengers were thought too mean,
This was a Temple pure, and chaste, and clean,
And must not canceled be the Common way,
Or sink like houses built of Lyme and clay*
She was a Diamond, and a Diamond must
Be found to cut her er'e she fall to dust;
A Diamond of the self same Rock, or none,
The Flesh of her own Flesh, bone of her bone;
And this must cut and pollish either other,
The mother fit the Child, the Child the mother,
For Gods own wearing, O now tell me where
A husband can find room to place a tear,
Or Parents ground whereon to drop a groan,
Happy, unhappie Lady, is their none
Has cause to mourn, or to lament thy death,
Yes blessed soul, more then do yet draw breath;
Children unborne, and ages yet to come
Shall bring their offerings to thy honored Tomb,
Pilgrims from furthest parts shall here arrive,
To kiss the earth tho^ trod'st on being alive;
Chaste virgins, widows, wives shall every spring
Branches of Palm and Laurel hither bring;
And round about thy Sepulcher shall kneell,
And vent in sighs what their sad hearts do feel.
Infants shall to thy Infant every hour
Offer a garland, or at least a Flower,
And then the elder shall the Younger tell,
That they must never hear a passing Bell;
But they must drop a tear in memory
Of those two blessed souls, whose bones there lie.
And as each year that day shall bring about,
On which the Tyrant death those lights put out,
They must invent a curse, and that curse lay
So heavy, that it prove a dismal day.
A day on which no work shall be begun,
No fruit be planted, nor a seed be sow'n:
No traveller that conscience makes of ^in
Shall dare a Journey on that day begin:
And if a Yew that day bring forth a Lamb,
Let it be Fatal to the silly dam;
Let not a dove that day a dove disclose,
Nor hunts-man find a Fawn, fallen from his does;
Let Midwives only on that day be blessed
With what they seldom get, sweet sleep, sweet rest;
For on that day, that dismal day, the earth
Lost all her pride, by an untimely birth,
And this poor Isle was utterly undone,
And robbed of such a mother, such a Son,
As doting nature with her palsy fist
Shall never frame again, nor fates untwist
Such gentle stuff, so soft so debonayr,
As was this Child, nor mother half so fair
As was the lovely mould in which it was cast.
For never wa^ ^here womb so pure so chaste,
No^ shall mankind so much as hope to see
The world inricht with fruit from such a tree;
A ^^i^d that saw the world, and fell a Crying,
As if to live with us were worse then dying;
A mother wisely apprehending too,
One Phoenix to one world was only due:
And thus as by consent they both retire;
And both to ashes burn in their own fire.
Is it a sea that overwhelms each eye?
Or is it some black cloud that masks the sky?
Or is the Sun eclipst, or has the day
Clapped on her swiftest wings and fled away?
And left me thus, as if this subject might
Be best pursude in solitary night?
Or whence proceeds those mists that thus involves me?
^as there dropped a tear and that resolves me,
(...) heart surcharged with grief seeks ease, and tries
How sorrow may be vented by the eyes;
The blots of Inck that from my pen do fall,
Like hired mourners, at a Funeral,
No power have to move the Lookers on,
To speaking actions of compassion,
Let others then sad Epitaphs invent,
And paste them up about thy moniment;
Let such whose sorrows are not great as mine,
With golden verses beautify thy Shrine;
Whilst my poor muse contents it self, that she
Vents sighs, not words unto thy memory;
Nor can thou want blessed Soul an Elogie;
I see one writ in every Readers eye
Rest then in peace, the world to dust shall turn
When tears are wanting to keep moist thy urne.
In Praetorem.
WHen I behold thee, proudly to advance,
Behind thy sword, and Cap of Maintenance,
Bold Macchabeus, me thinks I peruse,
Leading into the field, a troop of Jews.
When on the seat of Justice, you sit plodding,
And Alderman, against Alderman, sits noddling,
I do conceive, in Arras hangings wrought,
The wicked Elders Images, that sought
The chaste Susanna to betray, but when,
The market bell, has roused you, from your den,
Each Tripe wife, Baker, Hagler, and the rest,
Flying as lambs, before a Crewell beast,
I then Conceive a lion, in Fox Furs,
Marching before a Crew of bloody Curs,
For such your Sarjeants are, but when I see,
You lead toward Paul's, with all your liverie,
Making an artificial day, with lights,
As numberless as stars, in frosty nights,
I cry good God, preserve thy blessed son,
For treason is on foot, and fast does run,
Since Judas like, you seem to be attended
By such, as our Redeemer apprehended,
Thus as you vary in your shapes I conster
You sometimes man, beast sometimes, sometimes Monster.
In Senatores.
WHen I behold your wealth, I do admire
Your fruitful wits, by which you do acquire
Such vast estates, but then your wisdom founding,
Wonder on wonder, works to my confounding,
To think that so much Treasure, should be gained
By you so deep bellied, and so shallow brayn'd,
I ask a reason and am answered strait,
You get it not by wit, but by deceit,
This seeming truth my admiration cools,
And I conclude, fortune still favors --
A pair of Shrieves.
IN scarlet gowns, and golden chains when I,
Dull sighted as I am, your worships spy,
Swimming down Ludgate hill in haste, to meet,
The Temple daring Rebels in the street,
Me thinks I see two Gallie Foists well manned,
Sent from the turks, to Milford in the strand,
With strict Commision, to pluck out by the Ears,
Those sea-burnt soldiers that once sacked Algiers,
For verily your sarjeants seems to me,
No other then mere infidels to be,
But when your beasts have brought you nearer hand
I further am from knowing you, and stand,
Like one amazed, I then begin to doubt,
The Devil, and his Crew, are all broke out;
For sure I see a Furnace in each Nose,
That like to Etna, burning Brimstone throws
Into the Air, their Cheeks to me appear
Like Beacons fired by the Peoples fear.
Their beetle Brows look like those Cherubins
Kept Adam out of Eden, for his sins.
My Boy, that is better sighted far then I,
Would face me down, he saw in every Eye
A Vintners Boy, burning or Sack, or Claret,
But, hang him Rascal, he prates like a Parrat;
I rather think, their eyes four Cyclops are,
Forging an Armor for the God of War;
And those grim Sarje^nts Hellhounds, used to keep
The Furnace hot, whilst the toiled Cyclops sleep,
So know Right Worshipful, without desembling,
I never see you, but I fall a trembling;
And to confess the Truth, I daily pray,
That I may never meet you in my way.
Good brazen Serpent, vanish hence apace,
Since it is to me a Hell to see thy Face.
A Recorder.
YOu are the Cities Mouth, as they report,
That have to do in any City Court.
But I that never by rumor could be lead,
Do rather take you for the Cities Head.
A goodly beast of venery proclaims you;
But let it be as the poor people names you,
The Cities Mouth, by which their minds are vented
Then gentle Mouth, pray be not discontented,
If that I ask you in a civil way,
What good proportion of Oats and Hay
Do they allow you, for without offense,
Full well I know their thrifty providence;
Do you at Livery stand, or by the Bottle
Get you your Hay, your Oats by Peck or Pottle?
Fie no, I hear one answer me in scorn,
That you on Custards feed, and not on Corn.
Eat Custards still, yea Custards eat for ever,
And rotten Eggs let there be wanting never:
And to that end, good Sir, be render hearted,
For if you still do doom Bawds to be carted
Eggs may grow dear, and so by ^ons^quence,
Custards may loose in their circum^^renc^,
Therefore take care in time, you Head or Mouth,
Left Custads fail, that please your rotten tooth.
A Sword Bearer.
THou Sword of Justice, sheathed in Velvet good,
Whose Blade, as yet, never tasted other blood
But what the Tyrant Tiburn monthly sheds,
Whose Hilt was never stained with broken heads,
I humbly would demand of you the Bearer,
Whether it be by the Grandfather, or nearer
Allied unto that honored dudgion Dagger
With which a Major of old did bravely swagger:
When b'ing half drunk (as I conceive) he drew it?
And winking into Jack Cades Bosom threw it;
Doubtless they are so near of kin, as neither
May marry, nor with safety come together.
For should that dagger with that sword but trade,
Betwixt them they would get a bloody blade;
And such a one to speak the simple truth,
As might put dangerous valor in your Youth.
O wisdom! wisdom worthy lasting wond^r!
Blessed be those heads that kept these blades asunder,
Since by that means, to their eternal praise,
Shovetuesdayes are become sweet peaceful days:
Bold Prentices no more the Rebels play,
Nor in old armor fetch in youthful May.
Comedians act in peace, each Baud and Whore,
Sleeping securely needs not guard her door.
March then in Triumph, and that sword advance,
Well it becomes that Cap of Maintenance;
For all things perish do, if not maintained,
That Blade would rust, that Scabbard would be stained;
The Sun, and Moon, and Stars would waste each hour,
Were they not nourisht by a Heavenly power.
In their election too of that Sword Bearer
Their wisdom shines, there is nothing does shine clearer;
For if men but uprightly speak, who can,
Find out in Europe a more upright man?
And to speak truth, uprightness best becomes
Such as of the Bench fill up fair Justice rooms.
Let others then with Lybels strive to blast you,
You men of wisdom, I shall strive to cast you
In good Bell Metal, and with my rude rimes,
Set to a sweeter tune then Bow Church Chimes,
I Will ring your praise, which shall be heard as far as
Sir Thomas Greshams pipes on the Changes Tarras,
Paul Pinders new gilt Organs in Paul's quyer,
Shall not dive deeper, no nor yet reach higher,
To catch a note, worthy your worships hearing,
Then I Will make praise worthy your wearing.
King Edwards Sword in old Westminster Abbey
May seem to catch this Fool, or that young Baby.
The keeper too, that licensed is to cozen,
On Sabbath day poor people by the dozen,
May prosper for a time, but I suppose,
Neither his sneaking speech, or snuffling nose
That moves the multitude to mirth and laughter,
Shall ever be heard, or minded much hereafter;
For in thy swords sweet praise, and thy uprightness,
Thy feets straight shape, thy heads garb, thy Eyes brightness,
I will such verses write shall turn the tide
From durty Westminster, to fair Cheapside;
And money shall be given the next age
To see that Sword, and thy strange equipage.
No matter then how dear the place thou buyest,
It shall come treble home before thou dyest.
To the City Sarjeants.
STand by you cursed Rascals, whilst I strive
Your Hellish Pedigree thus to derive,
And tell the world, not of your develish trade,
But of what Loathsome Metal you were made.
Nature being sick, and in an Ague quaking,
Distempered in her Brains, each Member shaking
She in a fury rose, and madly said,
Devils like men as yet she had not made;
But now she was resolved of Metal base
To make so wicked, and so damned a Race,
As should degenerate from humane kind,
They should be men in shape, devils in mind.
With that unto her Tub of Shreds she goes,
And first, the loathsome clouts of Bauds she throw^
Into a cankerd furnace, which had been
Never looked on, since Judas was put therein.
A Rag she finds all leaprous, the which
She long since pulled from a foul stinking Breec^
And that into her Cauldron she does crowd,
A nasty Masty Bitch, new lined, still proud,
She made a spirit fetch and slay; that done,
The matrice of that ugly Bitch was thrown
Amongst the rest, to these she adds withal
A cruel Tigers Heart, a mad Dogs gall,
A Wolfe's rank Gut, the Pizel af a Bull,
With these her fiery cauldron filling full.
She boyls them long, and then she them does mix
With water, fetched from the black River Styx.
This done a name she to this Monster gave,
Which was Varlet, that is to say base knave.
Walk on base knave, and know he is much to blame
That ever calls you by a better Name.
A City Hangman.
IF formerly I undervalu'd thee,
'T was want of knowledge in thy Pedigree,
For which I pardon ask, and now believe,
In Heraldry thou should ride with the Shrieve.
Nay to speak truth, and give thee thy full Grace,
Of him by right thou ought to take the place;
For well I know, that when the Hangman pleases
To keep his Chamber, let it be diseases,
Or melancholy, nay let business be
The moving cause, he then must work for thee,
And hang, or head, or press, or whip, or burn,
Let him write Knight, that shall not serve his turn,
He must supply thy place, thy office do;
As for his Sarjeants, they are but a Crew
Of upstart Rascals, and come in of late;
For when proud Haman was hanged up in State,
Where was the Sheriff, where the Sarjeants then?
The History remembers no such men.
Nay Judas fares the worse, no doubt because
That he against both God, and Natures Laws,
Usurpt another place, and so became,
Proudly ambitious, of a Hangmans name,
Nay more, I Will bouldly say, mankind had been,
This day plunging, in Original sin,
And we no Blessed Advocat, had known,
If those accursed Jews, had not found one,
To offer up for us, that Sacrifice,
Who is it then a hangman dare despise,
Who are thy enemies, who thy Detractors?
They Are none but whores, Bauds, and Malefactors.
Truly Right Worshipful I grieve to think,
That I should now be writing with such Inck,
So thick with Gall, that from my sharp edged pen
No praise will fall, for such deserving men;
For when I Commiks write, Hangman shall be,
The only subject of my flattery.
Mean time in my esteem great Sir believe,
Thou better art then Sarjeant, nay then Shrieve.
To a Lady Majoress.
WHen I behold your head and limbs all shaking
Much like a Custard newly come from baking,
Your Velvet hood on tipto raised upright
As if your Hinch boy challenge would to fight.
Your pretty mouth, like Oyster gaping wide,
As if it did expect ere long the tide;
Your Chin like Aple, both so red and shrivel'd,
So scalded by a hot rhume hourly drivel'd.
From those your rotten stinking teeth and gums,
Not to be qualified by best perfumes,
Your eyes retired, as ashamed to see
Your Cheeks in such a painted livery;
And then to see your Mary-bone like nose,
Dropping down stinking stuff on costly clothes.
Besides your body too hung up in chains,
And Ropes of Pearl binding your bloodless veins
Your neck like rotten stake in rotten Hedge,
Your grafted locks like sun burnt hay, or sedge,
Your high exalted shoulders lined with quilts,
Propping your head as if it walked on stilts;
Your deformed carcass Covered over all,
With several rayments like a Brokers Stall.
Whilst thus I see your honor sit in state,
Me thinks you seem a Pageant out of date:
But coming to salute you I conclude
You a Dungbarge that against Symo^ and Jude
Has been trimmed up, and those your silken Rags
Are merely painted streamers, gilded flags,
Your upper Deck so stinks, I dare be bold
No drunken Skipper would endure your hold.
Sail on old rotten Pinke, I would not be
Lord Mayor to ly one night aboard in thee.
An Aldermans wife
GRave Madam I your style will not forget,
For that your husband writes Knight Barronet
I do remember too, it was your pride
That forct the fool so to be dignified;
Nor ever shall my my memory let fall,
How you with Madam start up stood for thuswall:
It cost the good old Alderman at least
To get the wall for his old wall-ey'd beast,
Two thousand pounds, in money and in ware,
In which your worships portion had no share,
Your mother was a tripe wife, that I know,
And good old woman sometimes did bestow
A tub of Souce to ease your households charge,
With good Sheeps trotters, Cowheels fat and large:
In which sad time all your great kindreds purses,
Went to make up a stock of Hobbie Horses,
Babies, Rattles, Incle, pinns, points and Laces,
With Shooeing horns, Boan Combs in moldy cases
Out of which pedling stuff, your wits be praised,
A sum of forty thousand pounds you raised
Your daughters were so frequent with this ware,
That yet me thinks they Hobbie horses are:
Your sons have Rattles in their heads, and Prate
As each a Peddler had within his Pate;
And truly Madam you one points do stand,
As if your points lay still upon your hand;
The good old Alderman his head does bear,
As if a shooing horn hung in each Ear.
But if the people wonder at his rise,
'I is selling bad wares at a treble price;
Trading and cheating, which he calls endeavor,
Made him first great, and make him so persever:
Until the Shrievedom came, and then he sold
Both Law and justice for shrieve damning gold.
And if he once be Mayor, and so a Lord,
Then he will have Orphants furnish out his board,
Dres'd in their blood like Carps, while their estates
Is melted down to make their silver plates.
The end that makes him cheat, rack and encroach,
Is but to have a gold-chain and a coach.
Ride on, good Madam, in your dignity
With your young Alderkins, both he and she,
But yet take heed, left that to pay your scores,
Your sons prove cockscombs and your daughters whoors.
To the great Mistress of my humble Muse the Lady Honora, happily as deservedly
Marchioness of Winchester.
Madam*
THough I have placed you here amongst a heard
Of rough sharp Satyrs be not you afeard,
I dare be bold to say, your honors name
Has power alone the wildest beast to came;
And for that cause your servant being inclined
To fury and madness, but calling to mind
His noble Patrones, that very thought
Has dispossessed me. Madam I am brought
Into a millder strain and to the Court
I take my way, there if you will see me sport,
And wantonize, I shall a gentler way
Pursue, and hunt those gentler beasts of prey.
And for your Guarde Madam, I Will humbly place
Such as are nearest in your love and grace,
Two faithful servants, servants of your own,
Yet Courtiours too, and such as can make known
The names of all the beasts that I shall chase,
Tell me their pedigree, their kind, their Race
A work I dare not do, I must persist
Still in the way of Epigramatist.
The Maskers must be vayl'd as in a clouds
I must present them, let me be alow'd
Your wonted favors, and with confidence,
I shall go boldly on without offense.
Armed with a resolution not to care,
So you be pleased, who the mad Critics are.
To his best of friends, and so the best deserver of his best respects Sir
Edward Bushel knight.
BRave Sir, had I a praise reserved in store
So high a one, as never was spoke before,
You have deserved it, only know I fear,
A beast, called flattery, more then Wolf or Bear;
But this unto your glory be it said,
The praises I let fall are seldom wai'd;
They pass for current and are still received,
As Coin by which men never are deceived:
Take it in brief, you are unto your friends,
Faithful, real, and constant without ends.
Find me another Courtiour of that strain
And I against Courtiours never will rail again.
To his honored kinsman Sir. Gregory Fenner knight.
IS it my poverty begets your scorn,
If greatness dwell in blood, we both were borne
In one degree, though you have got the start
In fortune, hold it, know I speak my heart.
A strangers happiness does never spite me,
Yet I Will be angry if a kinsman slight me:
I dare the world to tax me with a crime
Unless it be as now in wanton rhyme;
Then if your blood loud sir, I have not tainted,
Why are we strangers, let us be acquainted.
I hate my friends should know you do reject me,
For fear they should suspect you can detect me.
Then let us meet, and merry be together,
And give men cause to praise but censure neither
A complaint to one of his friends to whom the Author sent a coppie of verses
which were printed without his consent or knowledge.
I Sent you Sir, by way of thankfullness,
Verses, which since by stealth have past the press;
I hope by stealth, because a man unknown
Ventured to print them, calling them his own
To have him pressed then is my humble suit,
Not for the theft, but 'cause he should stand mute:
Would he confess to save him I Will be willing,
And swear the verses were not worth a shilling.
But if his heart obdurate prove like flint,
I Will shortly prove him knave and fool in print.
A new made Lord.
WOnder good people I beseech you wonder;
At that strange Monster which you see go yonder,
Men call it Lord, but as I have been told,
His honor's not above two hours old.
And yet it struts, and as you see it goes,
A thousand Country fools would now suppose
It were a very Lord of gods own making,
But pardon heavens such their gross mistaking;
For God was never called to his creation,
Fie no, it is a new found Occupation.
There are outlandish men of late come hither
Can make you two or three such toys together.
And by one Lord so made, get more by odds,
Then did the Panim Priests by their false Gods.
It Is wisely done since God is little set by,
To make such foolish toys as men may get by.
A new made Countess.
COachman I thank thee, had thou not rid bare
I had offended in a high degree,
In truth I should have took that Lady fair,
For one that lately loved Iniquity;
I knew a whore, heaven bless thy Ladies Father,
So like her, as thy horses are each other.
So like in all things, as I needs must tell her,
No Girl was ever half so like her mother:
Nay still me thinks she runs so in my thoughts,
As I shall never see thy Ladies face,
But I shall think upon that thing of naught,
Both of the hour I met her, and the place.
But hoping thy Countess will such thoughts forgive
I Will more esteem a bare Coachman whilst I live.
A Lord that used to swear by his honor before his pattent was sealed.
BY mine honor quoth an elective Lord,
Madam, of all your sex I love you best.
She answers, swear by something on record,
And then I shall believe what you protest:
For want of fees your Pattent's yet undrawn,
The Heralds and the Ushers are unpaid,
Until that is done your honor lies in pawn,
And must do till all charges be defrayd,
No credit seek till you that disingage,
For in the mean while your honors under age.
To a great Lady of little worth, that used to say she could eat the Author, if
he were worth the eating.
MAdam, I wonder since your honor knows
I dare speak truths, and dare maintain them too
How you durst put your self upon my censure,
Though well I know you are a cunning Fencer,
As in Romes Theater did e're apear,
But Lady Gypsy let me crave your ear.
I know where all your Bastards were at nurse,
I know your Bauds, your Panders, nay what is worse
I know how one abortive was conveid
By your chayr-woman, or your chamber maid,
Into old Ajax broth, whose stinking breath,
Had nature given it life, had given it death.
Why do you tempt me then with often repeating,
That you could eat me, were I worth the eating,
Keep close your teeth good Madam, left that I
Open my mouth, and tell your villainy.
Upon a proud painted upstart Lady.
WHat makes that painted puppet stand for the wall?
If you would know the cause quoth one, you shall.
Her father was a Mason as men say,
Which makes her Ladyship still lean that way.
Beshrew my dim dull eyes, for now I see
In both her cheeks written her pedigree;
Her nose is like a Trowell, and her Chin
A Tray, such as they carry mortar in.
Walk on good lyme and hair, I ever shall
As duty binds, give to thy wall the wall.
Upon her Chambermaid.
SVsan swears, if all hit right it may be,
She Will have as good a face as has her Lady.
Faith Susan have it, else you are much to blame,
For all men know, thou playsterest up the same.
Upon a Maid of honor that went into the country to take the air.
MAdam you left the court the virtuous cry,
To take the air, or see some Country friend,
I heard it spoke, but know it was a lie,
To loose an heir Lady, was all your end.
The doctors cannot cure a Maid that is ill,
O noe, old mother Midwife has more skill*
Upon her chambermaid.
MAtilda mightily of late does brave it,
Since she was Madam Mopsas Chamber maid,
Five marks a year is all, and if she have it,
But many times her wages is unpaid.
No, it is a mark intayl'd her by her Grandum
That yields her now a hundred pounds per annum.
Upon a Lady that went to Tunbridge wells.
A Lady fair whose outside spoke civillity,
Went to the wells to cure her wombs sterillity,
And eke to free her from the stone and gravel;
But in a while this Lady fell in travel,
And was delivered of a goodly daughter;
This bred about the court much mirth and laughter,
Because she barren was so long before.
Alas good people, pray admire no more,
'Twas not the water, they that say so mock,
It was the pipe, rather the water cock;
Nor think it was a dunghill cock, for shame,
O noe, it was a lusty cock o'th game.
If then the stone, as doctors tell the story,
Be a disease that prove hereditory,
I trust her daughter will have so much wit,
Early to get a cock for her cockpit;
And rather then be barren; play the whore,
As her great mother has done heretofore.
What need we doubt it, since we always find,
Like daughter like mother, Cat will after kind.
A Footman turned Gentleman Usher.
LIving not long, yet have I lived to see
A mimble youth, a light foot, a lackie,
To run so fast into his ladies grace,
That now next her in the Coach he takes his place,
For having tried she found this youth a cunning,
Riding as stiff as he was strong in running.
But riding much his Laundress now complains,
He runs much faster then he did o'th rains.
Upon a coy country Lass
MOpsa I met and offered to have kissed her,
She turned her cheek, and I stepped by and mist her,
She spared her lips, because her breath was tainted,
And I her cheeks, because I found it painted.
Since at first sight we had no better greeting,
Your hand, coy Lass, shall serve at our next meeting.
Upon the same proud fool turned Courtiour.
DAmetus sent this Mopsa to the Court,
Where at the first Ladies with her made sport;
But she soon learned tricks in such a measure,
As now the greatest Lords use her for pleasure.
I could have told Dametus so before,
The Court would make her either fool or whore.
A quarrel between two Court Chamber-maids.
TIb on a time her fellow Francis crossed,
And Francis swore Tibs Maidenhead was lost:
In truth quoth Tib, you do me mighty wrong
Who sells her maidenhead, but for a song,
Loses it not, but Mistress Francis I
Sold it to the worth, who says it is lost, they lie.
A Court Baud.
WOuld you not think that fair seeming feature
Were in good sooth a very living creature,
Would you not think it had eyes, teeth, and nose,
That those her own legs are on which she goes,
That her own hair, nay more, that her own face,
A lass I could direct you to the place,
Where all those toys were bought and know from me,
That nothing is her own of all you see,
Those stars, that from her face cast such a light,
Are shut into a little box each night;
That propt up nose like a Percullis where,
The god of war, keeps Citizens in fear:
By artificial Surgeons is let down,
No air at night breaths through that stinking town,
Naught issues out, until the morning bell
The watch discharges, and brings careful Nell
Her Chambermaid to her relief, she straight
Draws the Percullis opens every gate,
Lets loose the common Sewer of her brain
Which like a filthy Iakes, or sink against rain,
Sends forth a fume able to taint the air,
Those orient teeth, and that her Flaxen hair,
One of her legs, a Merkin too it is said
Each night committed are unto her Maid.
So he that sees her, Ladyship in bed,
Sees a mere bundle of trash with a deaths head.
And least you should conceive all this but fraud,
Know it was Macarella the Court Baud.
To her Coadjutor.
AS Midwives Coadiutors have, and whoors
Assisting Panders, to keep safe their doors.
Sarjeants their Yeomen, Sheriffs have Undersheriffs,
Hangmen have fellow helpers, and as Thieves
Must Setters have, if they a good trade drive,
Even so a Ba^de if she intend to thrive;
If she be provident she must provide
A careful Deputy, to be a Guide
To wandering youth, grave Macarella knew
Well what she did, when she made choice of you.
To old Canidia, you were Chambermaid,
Who drove as all men knew, a mighty trade,
She furnished all the Senators with ware;
Of great Ambassadors she had a care;
And rather then she would be destitute,
Her own fair Daughters she would prostitute;
She was to strangers very charitable,
And would supply, so far as she was able
Distressed Matrons, and to a younger Brother
She was more open then her own dear mother:
Indeed the Court had ill been served if she
Had been as simple as most ladies be,
Then Macarella as before is said,
Did well to choose so grave a chamber maid
To be her fellow helper, I commend her,
For well I know such providence will render
A great increase, and the adventurer raise
To great renown, and get them no small praise.
A lass what could the maids of honor do,
Sit like so many Hawks within a mew,
Without your industries and secret helps,
Feed on sheeps eyes, and play with whining whelps
Unto the old exchange they could not fly,
Nor could their trunks and wardrobs get supply,
They could not impe one feather in their train
Not eat, nor live, but by your fruitful brain;
And though you walk with Cruches, yet in truth,
You are two Staves to weak and simple youth.
Walk on good Madam Baud with that your Mate,
You are two needful members in a state.
To an honorable Lady that sometimes graced the author with the name of
servant, and afterward neglected him.
YOu were my Mistress, and a gracious one,
But how I lost you is to me unknown,
Let me in ignorance so rest for ever,
For it is a sin that should be pardoned never;
A sin I mean in him or her that laid
That danmed plot by which I was betrayed.
There Is none so great but may before she dies
Have cause to need a slave for Sacrifice,
If such a one your honor chance to want,
Trust not a Parasite or Sicophant.
Nature for their discharge has this excuse,
She made them up for show, but not for use.
To the same honorable Lady suspecting her servants secrecy.
I hear you do mistrust my secrecy,
Your Midwife is not half so close as I,
I have a Rule by which I measure others,
He never takes my Faith that e're discovers.
To boast of favors were but to proclaim
My own ignominy, and bost loud shame.
When I am dead, he that shall dissect me
Shall nothing find by which he may detect me.
Living I am in hope yet to regain you,
It were my own loss Madam then to stain you,
It were an honor that would make me proud
To have it thought, not said, I am alow'd
To have the favor of your common rooms,
Which never is denied to meanest Grooms.
We may have business, business we have had
Which none shall know, unless you make me mad.
If I in any thing fair Soul, do glory,
It is in this, No man can write my story;
For to my self, my self shall still be true,
And I my self must blast, by blasting you.
Sleep then in peace, the world may know my face,
But nothing know that tends to your Disgrace.
A just Complaint to his Just as Honorable Patrones against a Sorcerer, that
by his Enchantments depraves her humblest Servant of her Grace.
Madam,
THere is a seeming Saint that haunts your table,
Who by his Sorcery and Spells is able
To make the staidest man to Bedlam run,
His company, blessed Lady, timely shun.
He is a great Magician, I Will maintain it,
Or else I had enjoyed a peaceful brain yet;
My senses had been at mine own disposing:
But Madam, simple as I was, reposing
In him great trust and confidence, I went
The other day, when he came out of Kent,
Boldly unto his Chamber, when Heaven knows
I little thought he had been one of those
That studied, as the people call it well,
That foul Black Art, taught by a Child of Hell.
I held him for a good plain dealing man,
But out alas, simple Fool that I am,
He was too cunning for my shallow brain,
I know not how, or where he laid his train,
But suddenly your Servant was suppris'd,
And by his Spells and Charms so vassalis'd,
That as you may perceive by these my Rimes,
I am stark staring mad at certain times.
Nor shall it be amiss, your patience had,
To tell your Honor how I first fell mad.
One night, and it is most true, night's still the Baud
To Conjurors, and such as practice fraud,
This cunning man, this great Magician sent
To call me to a supper, whether I went
Fearless Heaven knows, and when I came he had,
For he is curious too, a Table clad
With Linen white, as is the Mountain Snow,
So clean as I complained they foul'd it so;
For Fowl of every sort on this same cloth
He caused his Servants set, some swome in broth,
Some dabled in such sauces, as might make
The heavyest Fowler swim such Fowl to take,
And rather venture drowning in that Flood
Then lose the Fowl that was so fat and good.
There wanted not Anchovies and grand saliets,
In fine, things were prepared to please our pallets:
But then, before my Ears he would take up,
This subtle man calls for a swelling Cup
Of unctious wine, wine proud of its own wealth,
But prouder far when 'twas baptized your health,
Here is quoth he, and then his Beaver cast
On ground, health to those Souls I came from last,
Health to the fairest, sweetest, chastest soul,
That ere was mentioned in such a Bowl,
The blessed Honora Goddess of Sommerhill,
He drinks it off, and bids his servants fill
Until the blushing grape was seen to swim,
Like a high tide, above the silver brim
Of that blessed cup; for blessed quoth he it is,
Whilst it contains so blessed a health as this.
I silly wretch pledged him without least fear
Of any poison could be mingled there,
That done his silver head aloft he rayses,
As he were proud to speak Honoras praises;
And like a cunning Orator goes on
Mildly, till he had gained attention.
First he was sorry that I did not know you,
O that I had but wit his art to show you!
And then he wishes by some happy way
Your honor might know me, then he did play,
As skillfull Fishers do, with wanton trout,
Tickling me gen^ly, and at last brake out,
Your daring Muse quoth he, that flies at game,
Compared with her, not worthy is of name,
I would invite to Sommerhill, since there
Such quarry is, such air, so pure, so clear,
As you may at one flight much glory gain;
And thence he raised up to a lofty strain,
Madam, of your unparralel'd deserts,
Swears that you are the Mistres of all hearts,
And gives a reason why you must be foe,
Then reckons all the graces that can flow
From God, or nature, and then he beats his breast
Angry he could not as he would digest,
What he conceived into such lively phrases
As might ornate and beautify your praises.
Then calls for wine, and still sweetens the same,
With blessed, with fair, with chaste Honoras name.
Thus first he raised my heavy leaden brains,
Next wild fire throws into my frozen veins,
And still as he perceived my heart to sink
He roused it with your praises, clad with drink:
Thus he the cunning Gypsy Madam acted,
Till with your fair fames love I grew distracted.
On him then best of Ladies lay all crimes,
That can be found in these my frantic rimes.
^ need not name him Madam guilt alone
(...) time will make himself make known;
^or if you mark him like a polliticion,
The better to avaid sharp-ey'd suspicion,
This man will be the first that will appear
^o speak my praises in your honors ear.
which if he do, heaven pardon that offense,
^^nce I to merit plead my innocence.
^y accusations done and now again,
^e thinks a certain tickling in my brain
^akes me break loose, new spirits do possess me,
and to the Court again I must address me.
(...) best of Ladies, do not scorn to grace
^y humble Muse in her wits wild goose chase.
To the truly honorable the Lord Paulet Marquess(...) Winchester.
My noble Lord.
Often have I blessed that night, that hour in which
You two one pair of sheets joy'd to enrich.
As then you marshaled were great Lord, by tho^^
Your Virgin Bride that nuptial night had chose^
Those Ceremonies to prepare, so now,
The self same Herauldries proud to allow
Your fair Bride, first with her chaste limbs to ble^^
Those sheets, which witnes'd that great happines^
Your chaste wife now, most honored Lord, as (...)
In your Bed, now I marshall with my pen.
Can your best wishes noble Lord aspire,
To greater happiness then to ly by her:
Had Phaeton seen her in his height of pride,
Blushing to see a man ly by her side,
Ambition had his blood to Ivory turned,
And by the sun his wings had never been burned.
Noe he had shunned those flames that melt the skie^
And singed his feathers in her brighter eyes.
If then high heaven can add to what you have
Let it be done, so prays your unknown slav^
To the same noble Lord again.
WIthin a Savage Rock there once did grow
As fair a diamond as the world could show,
This rich rocks head, though many lords did crave it,
Set it in gold, and to your Lordship gave it.
And happily for some few years you wore it,
Till sullen nature forced you to restore it;
For 'twas her master piece and she resolved
To keep it by her till the world dissolved.
One only spark Heaven caused her leave behind,
That still that Jewel might be kept in mind.
You that had found, how nature ever locks
Her chief Treasure either in hills or rocks,
Knew well the way your losses to recover,
For had you searched the spacious world all over,
To Summer hill a^t last you must repair,
To find a Jewel full as rich and fair
As was that diamond, you restored to nature,
You once again are rich in such a creature,
As all mankind how rich so 'e're they be
In her may envy your felicity.
Live envied ever noble Lord, till Fate
The earths whole Fabric shake, and ruinate.
So heartily and humbly prays each one
To whom bold speaking fame has made you known.
To the far famed Lady, and Mistres of untainted virtue, the truly and nobly
noble Lady Dorathy Sherly honored by being Sister to the most deservedly
honorable Earl of Essex.
Madam,
NOe matter though you know me not, I trust
To common Fame, she speaks you nobly just;
She does proclaim your honor such a prize,
As men would see it, though to their loss of eyes.
You love the best Honora, that aproves
What wise men say, goodness still goodness loves:
You are her Sister, and your purest blood
Sprung from one fountain, that concludes you good,
Be constant to that googness, let naught awe you
Millions there are that love you, who never saw you.
Amongst those many let me boldly say,
Madam, I honor you a noble way,
And love you as I love those unseen faces
That on the throne of glory take their places
And though you know me not, scorn not to sit
To read, then write me what you please but Parasit,
Let me but in your books fair Saint be found
And I with joy and honor then am crowned.
A Satyr.
Upon a miraculous Marriage, made between a Brave Young Viscount, and an
unworthy Old Viscounts Widow.
D^d thy strong potions then old rotten Punk,
So work on Hymen as to make him drunk?
W^ence comes that drug, what Fiend, what Fate
Perfumed his brain so to ineb^iate?
For doubtless had that God but sober been,
He never had matched such virtue to such sin.
Or did she pawn her soul to some old Witch,
To get a Lord to cure her hot salt Itch?
They must be Bawds and Sorcerers, that had
A hand in such a Crime, so foul, so bad;
For sure thy painted Face, thy sugared words
Could not betray him to thy tub of turds:
Nor was it out of hope to find a Mine
Within that Dunghill, that foul sink of thine;
For but to mix Man's seed with that thy ordure
Were worse then Sodomy, much worse then murder.
What can I call thy common hackney womb,
But an old beastly painted, new stoned Tomb?
Barren as is a Grave, leprous within
As Judas soul, so foul, so full of sin.
So that in my opinion he destroys
Nature it self, that digs for Girls or Boys
Out of what mud O Lord, what charms what spell?
What strange Enchantments did she get from Hell?
That caused thee lay thy youth, thy blood at stakes
In Pledge against a Bog, a sink a Jakes?
Whose throat is like a Tunnel to a vault,
Nor are her rotten Lungs alone in fault;
For from her foul corrupted Brain their flows
A deadly poison through her pocky Nose:
Such as the Night-mans Cart, or common Sewer
Yields none so loathsome, nothing so impure.
Each Bone she has is like an Asses hoof,
So used to poison, it is poison proof:
And if she have a Tooth that justly may
Be called her own, I dare be bold to say,
That Tooth shall cost her Lord each day a piece
In Storax, Civet, and in Ambergreece;
Besides the Ulcers in her rotten Gums,
Not to be qualified with best perfumes:
Yet with this charge, though great it will appear,
That Mouth holds something, nothing can make clear;
For if she find that scoulding may prevail,
Her tongue soon turns as Monstrous as her Tail:
And if some difference be, this this the worse is,
Her Tail but monthly shall produce foul courses,
But that her mouth each minute shall afford
Base Excrements, that shall out stink a Turd.
I have disgrest brave Lord, but more will come
To my promised Epithalamium,
My hearty wishes to your nuptial Bed,
And wish that to your Bride they might be read.
May all those sheets wherein you two shall lie
Prove Barren as are those in which men dye.
And may your Lordship want the power to turn
To quench her flames of Lust, but let them burn,
Till they consume the nest where they were bred;
Yet still a jealous eye cast toward her bed,
Lest her adulterous thoughts to action grow,
And make you harvest seed you did not sow.
A grisly beast, such as all others scorned,
A thing with Goatish beard, a head well horned
Your lustful Bride found out, and him maintained
To do that drudgery a Groom disdained.
Be careful then, be vigilant and wise,
He that has such a Wife needs many eyes.
An old, cunning, well experienced whore
Will through the key hole of a double door
Let in Adultries. Still I do digress,
An Epithalamium I do cease.
This Satyr should have been, but my Muse ranges,
And like your Lordships Bride is full of changes.
Yet do I not transgress against all the Laws
Of an Epithalamium, because
Your Lordship shall in time discover this,
My Muse unto the Bridegroom wishes bliss.
O may you Sir, and quickly too, invite
This Pen, your lewd Brides Epitaph to write.
Mean while so long as she on earth has dwelling,
So long I wish you loose the use of smelling.
May your desires in their conceptions dye,
Such as shall tend to Love or Lechery,
That you may treasure up a stock so great,
As when you vent it, may allay the heat
Of seventeen years, in her that Heaven shall please
To send you in the place of this disease.
Till when, let sleep and pleasing dreams betray
The sullen night unto the cheerful day,
And early bring the Sun, to let you see
Her Morning ugly, foul deformity;
And then with sad relenting may you rise,
And from that monster thenceforth bless your eyes,
May you be deaf unto her cunning Charms,
And when she throws her self into your Arms,
May then the nimble sense of seeing leave you,
Lest with her false embraces she deceive you.
And lastly, may you still distrust those things
She to your touching, smelling, seeing brings.
May all your senses disaffected be
Till from that hidious Monster you get free.
Upon a Collar and Garter imprisoned in a Brokers Box.
O Men of might, what have you now to brag on,
shall I believe your George e're killed a dragon?
When in six Months he cannot break the Lock
Of an usurious Brokers little Box.
When thus I find him lodged in Long-Lane quarter,
And by his side a Collar and a Garter,
As two most faithful Squiers waiting on,
For the blessed day of sweet Redemption,
Shall I believe that he a Saint can be?
No, your vain boasting never shall cousen me;
For if an Almanac I buy this year,
And find it writ with a red Letter there,
I Will blot it out, and over-write the same
In blackest Ink, the filly Brokers name.
For if your George so great a name must have,
Then much more he that keeps your George his slave.
Another upon the same subject.
INto a Broakers shop once being called,
I found a Knight of the Garter there installed:
But when the sad relation I had heard,
I then concluded 'twas a Knight interred.
The Brokers Bulk I thought the Altar stone,
Because his Robes and Order lay thereon,
The Shop a Temple I conceived to be,
The Broker some poor Priest appeared to me.
It grieved me much, that so a Knight should ly
Without an Epitaph or Elogie,
I called for Pen, and without fear or wit
Unto his Memory these lines I writ.
Upon the same again.
YOu ^augh at Catholics, and them deride
Because they honor those are sanctified.
Why to Idolatry are you then drawn
By a poor thing that subject is to pawn.
If you will Idolize your George, advance
A fitting pension for his maintenance,
Let him not beg, let not his Knights descend
So lo, as ask a Broker what he will lend
Upon his Idol, lest there come complaints
Against the Church, that should maintain those saints;
For who so sees your George in pawn beleives,
Like Baals priests, his priests do play the thieves.
The Prellat of the Garter, they will be bold
To say in private, eats up all the gold
That is in public offered to your saint;
Besides the knights of Windsor make complaint,
And in derision and great scorn do say,
Some of your knights are near as poor as they:
And that its feared that they will have the faces
Ere long to beg the Windsors poor knights places.
Which to prevent let each rich knight give a little
And for your wretched knights, build up a spittle.
A Sonnet upon the same subject.
ROom for unthrifts here comes a Company,
Room for spendthrifts St. George is at hand,
With his Idolators,
Dect up in costly furs,
And their rich Colors,
That lately were paun'd.
Bald pates and pe^iwigs,
High plumes and tossing Sprigs,
See how they dance their lygs,
Thorough the Strand.
Room for Rascals here comes a company,
Ushers and Marshalls look well to your doors,
Tailors and Sempsters,
With Silkemen and Mercers,
And Goldsmiths and cutlers,
Approach with their stoares:
And see who comes after,
Made fit for the slaughter,
A wife and her daughter
For the Chavaliers Whoors.
Room for Beggars here comes a company;
Old Retayners to this upstart crew;
That many years served,
And well have deserved,
But now may be starved,
For ought their Lords do.
For some Lady mother,
Or some Basterd brother
Some Pander or other
To black turned their blew.
Old King Henry blessed by thy Memory,
Lord how we vary since thy golden days;
Thy Knights of the Order,
Like Knights to Prince Arthur,
Did search out each quarter,
For Honor and praise;
But now they adventure
A Tavern to enter,
And sit in the Center
Of common stage Plays.
Room for Bowlers, here comes a company.
Room for Iockyes, the Lords do appear;
Let Ordinary Eaters,
And old Jest repeaters,
With Banckers and Cheaters,
Make all places clear.
Heers Blew and Carnation,
The Colors in fashion,
In spite of damnation
Shall swear and forswear.
To a Ladies Chambermaid.
YOu are your Ladies Cabinet and may
At midnight let in sharp Eyed waking day,
And bring those blushing acts of ours to light,
That being seen show blacker then the night.
A Chambermaide does serve in these two places,
Sometimes a watch, Sometimes she a Jewel case is:
One while a Watch to see none gaze upon her,
And then a Case wherein she locks her honor.
O gentle Watch in thy most noble Case
Know you a Jewel keep, then be not base.
An Atheist, a Poet, and a Puritan.
ATheists, Poets, and Puritanes are at odds
About their none, their one, their many Gods.
The Atheist is at liberty, and he
Dreams not of Unity or Trinity.
The Poets speak of many Gods it is true,
But honor none at all, or very few.
The Puritan his only God does ty
As he were Jealous of the Trinity.
A Partner with his God he will not have,
See here is a Fool, a Devi^l, and a Knave.
To reconcile these three and make them one,
Is but to hang them all and make them none.
A Papist, a Protestant, and a Puritan.
THe Papists do believe more then they see,
And guided are by faith.
The Protestant stands out, and will not be
Removed from his own path.
The stiffneckt Puritans are so uncivil,
Rather then follow them, they will run to the Devil.
A pestilent professed Puritan.
I Do believe that this accursed sect
Is much more ancient then men do suspect.
The Jews, when Christ, was crucified I find,
In that damned act, were variously inclined.
Some pearc't his fide, others his name deride,
Another Crew his garments did divide.
And these were Puritans, I Will lay my life,
Whose seed since then have ever been at strife
With Surplices, with Rochets, and with Coaps,
Hating to hear of figures or of Tropes.
Real presence, and what is good by thems abated,
With brain sick Zeal more then the devil it is hated.
Go on mad beasts put on our saviors Coats
But his bright Eyes will know his sheep from goats.
An ignorant obstinate Brownest.
THat wicked Oath of kings Supremacies,
Says he is a trap to catch poor simple flies;
For how can knowing men be so mislead,
As to believe our savior had a head
For many Provinces, believing thus,
We must make Jesus Christ most monsterous.
Then how, great Monsters, silly beasts are you?
Makes him your Churches head that mends your shoe,
A Cobbler, or a Rogue of meanest trade,
In your no Church the Churches head is made.
See then at Banbery, and in black Friars
Christ has a head, but doubtless you are Liars
The Catholics with Puritans averr,
There Is but one Church, one head, so then you er^.
But you defy them both so do they you,
Go on mad Beasts, Let the devil take his dew.
A Ladies Roses that ever looked rusty.
CArnation Roses on her feet still wither,
And being put on fresh in the Morn, ere Noon
They blasted are, do but the cause consider,
And then I know you will leave to wonder soon.
Lucinas Roses, it is too well known,
Do grow within a yard of the burning Zone.
Upon a Ladies Roses that were always fresh.
FLorellas Roses on her fresh still grow,
And in the hottest days do flourish most,
Hearken to Me if you the cause would know,
Luna hangs ever dropping over the coast.
Then know those Roses cannot wither soon,
That are so far from the Sun, so near the Moon.
The Fiddlers that were committed for singing a Song called, The clean contrary
way.
THe Fiddlers must be whipped the people say,
Because they sung the clean contrary way;
Which if they be, a Crown I dare to lay,
They then will sing the clean contrary way.
And he that did those merry Knaves betray,
Wise men will praise, the clean contrary way:
For whipping them no envy can allay,
Unless it be the clean contrary way.
Then if they went the Peoples tongues to stay,
Doubtless they went the clean contrary way.
A Lady walking with the Author in her Garden, plucked a sprig of Bays, and put
it in his Hat to wear as her Favor.
YOu gave me Laurel Madam, which some call Bays
I gave you but your right, when I gave you praise,
Why then with injury do you requite me?
Which being true, doubtless you ought to right me*
Laurel belongs to Conquerours, but I
Your Captive am, and at your mercy lie.
Poets are crowned with Bays, and such alone
Whose Muses higher soar then Phaeton.
My humble rimes flow from an abject Herd, crowned
And cannot Laurel merit for reward:
The honored Brows that are with such wreath
Dread neither lightning nor loud thunders sound
Then left your favors down to the Earth should cast me,
Or your bright eyes lightning thus should blast m^
I Will crown that Laurel with which you now crown me
With a chaste kiss, as your choice Deputy.
The Author intending to write upon the Duke of Buckingham, when he went to
fetch the Queen, prepared a new Ballad for the Fiddlers, as might hold them to
sing between Dover and Callice.
1.
NOw list you Lordings, and attend
Unto a Ballad newly pend,
I took it up in Kent;
And if you ask who made the same,
The Author wished me say, his Name
Was honest Jack of Lent.
2.
But ere I further pass along,
Or let you hear more of my Song,
I wish the doors were locked;
^or if there be so base a Groom
As an informer in the room,
Your Fiddlers may be knocked.
3.
Nor is it rare to find a Knave
amongst a company so brave,
For Knaves are gallant things:
and they of late are grown so bold,
They dare appear in cloth of Gold,
Even in the presence of Kings.
4
But hit or miss I must declare
The speech at London, and elsewhere,
Concerning this design.
Amongst the Drunkards it is said,
They hear her Dowry shall be paid
In naught but Claret wine.
5.
The Country Clowns when they repair
Either to Market, or to Fair,
No sooner get their pots,
But straight they swear the time is come
That England must be overrun
Between the French and Scots.
6.
A holy Sister having hemd,
And blown her nose will swear she dreamd,
Or else the Spirit told her,
That they and all their holy seed
To Amsterdam must go and breed.
Ere they were twelve months older.
7.
And might but Jack of Lent advise,
Those dreams of hers should not prove lies,
For as he greatly fears,
They will be prating night and day,
Till verily by Yea and Nay
They sets together by the Ears.
8.
The Reverend Bishops whisper too,
That now they shall have much to do
With Friars and with Monks.
And eke their Wives do greatly fear
Those learned men will mak't appear
They are canonical Puncks.
9.
At Cambridge and at Oxford eke,
They of this Match like Scholars speak
By Figures and by Tropes.
And as for the Supremacy,
The Body may King Charles his be,
But sure the Heads the Popes.
10.
The learned in Astrology
That wander up and down the Sky,
And there discourse with Stars,
Foresee that some of this brave rout
That now goes sound and bravely out,
Shall back return with Scars.
11.
The civil Lawyer laughs in his sleeve,
For he does verily believe,
That after all these sports,
The Citizens will horn mad grow,
And their ill gotten gold will throw
About their Bawdy Courts.
12
Such as in Music spend their days,
And study songs and roundelayes,
Begin to cheer their throats;
For by some signs they do presage,
That this will prove a fiddling age,
Fit for men of their coats.
13
Next such as do Apollo court,
And with the wanton Muses sport,
Proclaim the time is come,
That Gallants shall themselves address
To Masks, and plays, and wantonness,
More then to Fife or Drum.
14
But leaving Colleges and Schools,
Unto those Clerks and learned Fools,
Let Us through the City Range;
For there are Sconces made of horn,
Foresaw things long ere they were borne,
Which may be thought most strange.
15
The Major and Aldermen being met,
And at a Custard closely set,
Each in his rank and Order,
The Major a question does propound,
And that unanswered did go round,
Till't came to the Recorder.
16
For he is the Cities Oracle,
And which you will think a miracle,
He has their brains in keeping;
For when a cause should be decreed,
He cries the bench are all agreed,
When most of them are sleeping.
17
A Shrieve at lower end o'th 'board,
Cries reverend sirs, hear me a word,
A bolt I Will only shoot,
We shall have executions store
Against some gallants now gone over,
Wherefore good brother look to it.
18
The rascal Sarjeants flearing stand,
Wishing their Charter reach the Strand,
That they might there intrude:
But since they are not yet content,
I wish that it to Tiburn went,
So they might there conclude.
19
An Alderman both grave and wise,
Cries brethren all let me advise,
Whilst wit is to be had,
That we some speeches may provide
To entertain the Lady Bride,
Before all men run mad.
For by my faith, if men may guess
Of greater matters by the less,
I pray let this suffice,
If we do on men's backs but look,
And then survay each trades man's book,
You Will swear few men are wise.
21
Some third bare Poet let us press,
And for that day we will him dress,
At least in beaten satin;
And he shall tell her from this Bench,
That though we understand no French,
At Paul's she shall hear Latin.
22
His Lordship all this while demurs,
And counsel takes of his grave furs,
That stunck of Fox or Cunny;
And then he swells with high disdain,
Swearing the City in his reign
Shall buy no wit with money.
23
For by this Sack I mean to drink;
I would not have my Sovereign think,
For twenty thousand crowns,
That I his Lord Lieutenant here,
And you my Brethren should appear,
Such arrant witless Clowns.
24
No no I have it in my head,
Various conceits shall strike it dead,
And make proud Paris say,
That little London has a Major,
Can entertain their Lady fair,
As well as ere did they.
25
Saint Georges Church shall be the place,
Where first I mean to meet her grace,
And there Saint George shall be
Mounted upon a dapple gray,
And gaping he shall seem to say,
Welcome Saint Denis to me.
26
From thence we will march by two and two
As we to New gate use to do,
And to the Bridge convey her,
Where on the top of that old gate,
On which stands many a Rascals pate,
I mean to place a Player.
27
And he unto her grace shall cry,
Vouchsafe to cast up one bright Eye,
To view these heads of Trayters.
Know thus we mean to use all those,
That to your highness shall prove foes,
For we to knaves are haters.
28
Down Fishstreet hill a whale shall shoot,
And meet her at the Bridges foot,
Out from her mouth so wide a
Shall Jonas peep and say, for fish,
As good as her dear heart can wish
She shall have hence each Friday.
29
At Grace Church corner there shall stand
A troop of Graces hand in hand,
And they to her shall say
Your Grace of France is welcome hither,
It Is merry when graces meet together,
Pray keep on your way.
30
At the Exchange shall placed be.
In ugly shapes those Sisters three,
That gives to each his fate:
The Spanish Infanta shall stand by,
Wringing her hands she loud shall cry,
I do repent to late.
31
There we a payr of gloves will give,
And pray her highness long may live,
On her white hands to were them;
For though they have a Spanish sent,
The givers have no ill intent,
Wherefore she need not fear them.
32
About the Standerd I think fit,
Your Wives my brethren all shall sit,
And eke my Lady Maioress
They shall present a Cup of Gold,
Saying if they may be so bold,
They Will drink to all at Paris.
33
Nor shall the Cundit now run Clarret
Perhaps the French now care not for it,
They have at home so much;
No I will have that boy to piss,
No worse then purest Ipocriss,
Her Grace never tasted such.
34
In Paul's Church yard we breath may take
For they such tedious speeches make,
Will tire any horse;
And there I Will put her Grace in mind,
To cast her princely Eye behind,
And view Saint Paul's old Cross.
35
Our Sarjaents there shall go their way,
And for us at the devil stay,
I mean at Temple Bar;
There we of her our leaves will take,
And swear 'twas for king Charles his sake
We came with her so far.
36.
Thus fearing I have tired the Ears
Both of the Duke and all these Peers,
I Will be no more uncivil;
But leave the Major and both the Shrieves;
With Sarjeants hanging on their sleeves
For this time at the Devil.
A Song.
OF Cupid nor Hymen we bring you no Song,
With many good Morrows, and God give you joys
But of a young virgin that wanted a tongue,
Yet had wherewithal to get Girls and Boys.
A Batchelour that had told threescore and three,
To her for her silence a Sutour would be.
He wood her, and won her, and married they were,
He had his fair choice a whole kingdom among,
But ere he found means to get him an Heir
She found cockahoop the full use of her tongue.
But for his amends, in short time it was known,
She brought him an Heir that was none of his own.
A Song in praise of Sack.
NOw Bacchus assist me with strength of thy spirit
To give unto Sack the full meed of his merit,
Whilst all other wine subjected stand by
To crown thee their King of Majesty by.
O Sack, O Catholic Sack!
Old Malmsey and Muscadell shall have high place,
To wait by thy sides in Episcopal grace;
Stout Alegant shall thy Nobility be,
Brisk Claret and White shall be thy Gentry.
O Sack, majestical Sack!
Mild Rhenish and Backrag are Handmaids to thee,
And white and brown Bastard thy pages shall be:
Thus graced and attended in state thou do sit,
Dispensing thy virtues of valor and wit.
O Sack, munificent Sack!
Thou art the brave Soldiers Bellona and Mars,
The Scholars scribendi ac loquendi ars,
Thou make a blind Beggar at Midnight to see,
As well as a Poet can write without thee.
O Sack miraculous Sack!
Thou can the best Courtiours best complements mend,
And wit into Citizens heads thou can send.
'Twas thou made a Goldsmith to alter his copy,
From making gold horshoos to keep a Sack shoppy.
O Sack, miraculous Sack!
Thou every brain for employment do sit,
Thou make a dull Justice a worshipful wit.
Thou make the Scholar speak more then his share,
Embroidering his brains when his clothes are bare.
O Sack, Philosophical Sack!
A Song.
WIll you hear a true relation
Of a Damsel, and her Lover?
She the nicest of a na^ion
He thought nothing dear to move her,
Costly things, Jewels, Rings,
He bestowed in plenty on her;
But her disdain increast his pain
Until he cried a Pox upon her.
Cupid heard his bitter Curse,
And to punish his fond error,
Caused her to purchase with his purse
That ill which is a Lovers terror.
The unhappy maid was shortly paid
For her love with loss of Honor,
By a French Squire whom she did hire,
Who left her with the Pox upon her.
To her fist Lover then she yields,
Who to curse her had forgotten,
And thought him in the Elisian fields,
When he was in flesh half rotten,
Till aching bones, and waking groans
Made him wish he had forgone her,
While still she swears, the faults not hers
But his that wished, a Pox upon her.
A Song.
LEt Soldiers fight for prey or praise,
And money be the Misers wish,
Poor Scholars study all their days,
And Gluttons glory in their dish,
It Is wine, pure wine, revives sad souls,
Therefore give us the cheering Bowls.
Let Minions marshall every hair,
And in a Lovers Lock delight,
And artificial Colors wear,
We have the Native red and white.
It Is wine, etc.
Take Pheasant, Pout, and calver'd Sammon,
Or how to please your Pallats think,
Give us the salt Westphalia Gammon,
Not meat to eat, but meat to drink.
It Is wine, etc.
The backward spirit it makes brave,
That lively which before was dull,
They prove good fellows which were grave,
And kindness flows from Cups brimfull.
It Is wine, etc.
Some have the Tisick, some the Rheum
Some have the Palsy, some the Gout,
Some swell with fat, and some consume,
But they are found that drink all out.
It Is wine, etc.
Some men want Youth, and some want wealth,
Some want a Wife and some a Punk,
Some men want wit, and some want wealth,
But they want nothing that are drunk.
It Is wine, etc.
A Song.
WHen I seek to enjoy the fruits of my pain,
She careless denies me with endless disdain,
Yet so much I love her,
As nothing can either remove me, or move her.
Alas why contend I, why strive I in vain
Thin water to ^ingle
With Oil that is Aerie and loves to be single.
It Is not Love but Fate, whose doom I abide,
Ye Hours and you Planets, who Destiny guide,
Change your Opposition:
It fits Heavenly Powers to be mild of condition,
You only can alter her scorn and her Pride
Who me now disdaineth:
For women willyield when the right Planet reigns.
A Sonnet.
LOve, be as froward as thou will,
I ask no Mercy for my guilt;
Though I confess I have denied
Thy Laws of Cruelty and Pride.
Lay on thy Punishments, I fear
Thee least when most I bear.
Spend all thy shafts at me, and cry
To Mother for a new supply:
Thy Bowstrings break, let her repair
Them up again with her own Hair,
And give a fresh charge on me. I
Can neither beg relief nor fly.
Yet to the hazard of thy Crown,
If I should perish by thy frown,
Where I a perfect Rebel fall,
The world shall me a Martyr call.
And (I hope) in revenge of me
Abolish quite thy Laws and thee,
On Loves blindeness.
WHat is the reason Love is blind?
Because for Love no cause we find
But here and there, and this and that
We dote on, for I know not what,
Lust does somewhat rampart prove,
And straight is christened into Love,
So that though beasts we are in shame,
We must be Lovers all in name.
2.
The black we see do fair admire,
And fair there be that black desire.
A sort there is affects the crump,
And all alike, but for the rump,
Love being now a Drunkard grown,
And can a Madam hug in Joan:
Tell me then, must not Love be blind,
When Women loved are for their kind.
3.
We men an Idol Beauty make,
And do adore't for Fancies sake;
Our thoughts create the handsome creature,
And our tongues commend the Feature:
Or else, the Breech first warms desire,
And then the face maintains the fire:
Does not then Cupids eyesight fail,
That for the Heart does wound the Tail.
4.
For what should Love have Eyes to see,
When all his sports in Darkness be;
But little is his use of Light
Whose only work is done at night,
In that alone Loves pleasure lies,
That for the hand is made not eyes:
Where let me lie and let me be,
Blind Boy, as dark and blind as thee.
An Elogie on the Death of Love.
I Never yet wrote Love-lines: Now a few
Upon the Death of Love, me thinks, are due
From every Pen. And most unskilful I
That would be doing want Ability.
No Muse can I invoke unto my aid,
They are all dumb, or suddenly afraid
To touch this Subject. They Will not have it read
In Crimson Characters that Love is dead.
No Muse? What then? Turn over History,
Or search the Poets; Try if they can be
Assistant by example: Learn to move
In their high strains. Ovid wrote much of Love,
But not his Death. His Art of Love was light,
And in the Elogies that he did write
He could not frame perfection of that Ruth,
Which here is laid before us in a Truth.
Nor had Euripides in all his pack
A Theme so' Tragic, or a Scean so black
As is the Death of Love. Stay. Speak no more,
Nor study for expressions to deplore
The loss of him. The sense of these two words
Love's dead enough of Argument affords
To melt dry eyes to Tears; and hearts of stones
To moulder into Sand by ceaseless groans.
While I was writing this (to Earths great wonder)
The Heavens thick showers did weep, and rore in thunder.
A Song.
GIve me a Preacher
Whose Life is a Teacher,
Whose Sentences suit with his Actions;
Who rayls not at Rochets,
Nor preaches odd Crochets,
Nor troubles the Church with new Factions*
No Scoffer, no Squibber,
No Ale or Wine Bibber,
No wrangler for Tith-Pigs, or Geese:
But Truth teaches plain,
And good house maintain,
And loves more the flock then the fleece.
On the Duke of Buckinghams Death. An Elogie.
YEt were Bidentals sacred, and the place
Stricken with thunder, was by special grace
Nere after trampled over; if this blow
That struck me in my height, and brought me low,
Came from the hand of Heaven, let it suffice
That God required no other sacrifice.
Why do you bruise a Reed? as if your rod
Could wound me deeper then the hand of God.
Why do you judge me ere the judgment day?
As if your verdict could Gods judgments sway.
Why are you not contented with my blood?
For hate of me, why make you Murder good?
He that commends the fact, does it again,
And is the greater Murderer of the twain.
Oh high-revealed malice, that can draw
Heaven out of Hell, check Gods proper Law,
Nadab and Abibu, that thus accord,
To offer your strange fire before the Lord.
Take heed 'twill burn you, it is a dangerous thing,
He that does bless a Murderer kills a King.
I now have past your pikes, and seen my Fare,
My Princes favor, and the peoples hate.
Strange blear-eyed Hatred, whose repining sight
Feeds all on darkness and does hate the Light
Shows any goodness in me, was I all
Marra corrupta, and stigmaticall?
Was I all ill? Yet those that ripped me found
Some of my vitalls good; some inward sound.
I had a Heart scorned danger, and a Brain
Beating for Honor, life in every vein:
Nor was my Liver tainted, but made Blood,
That might have served to do my Country good,
Had you not let it out: nor was my Mind
So fixed on getting as to make me blind,
And to forget mine Honor, and my friend,
Witness those now, who need no more depend.
And those whose merits, I have made, and raised,
Will find out something more, that may be praised.
All do not mourn in jest; there is some one Eye
Shed tears in earnest when it saw me dye.
And whatsoere those Remonstrants make,
I never lost my self but for their sake.
That, God forgive them, for the rest I Will say,
I loved the King, and Realm, as well as they.
EITAPH.
REader stand still, and look, lo here I am,
That was of late the Mighty Buckingham.
God gave to me my being, and my breath,
Two Kings their favor, and a Slave my death.
And for my fame I claim, and do not crave
That thou beleev'st two Kings, before a Slave.
An exortation for the battering down of those vanities of the Gentiles which
are comprehended in a May pole written by a Zealous brother from Blackfryers.
THe mighty Zeal which thou have new put on,
Neither by Prophet nor by Prophets son,
As yet prevented does transport me so
Beyond my self, that though I never could go
Far in a verse, and all rimes have defied
Since Hopkins and good Thomas Sternhold died
Except it were the little pains I took,
To please good people in some prayer book
That I Have set forth or so; yet must I raise
My spirit for thee, who shall in thy praise
Gird up her loins, and furiously run
All kind of feet, but Satan's cloven one.
Such is thy Zeal, so well do thou express it,
And were not like a charm I Would say, Christ bless it.
I needs must say it is a spiritual thing
To rail against the Bishop or the King.
Nor are they mean adventures we have bin in
About the wearing of the Churches linen:
But these were private quarrels, this does fall
Within the compass of the general.
Whether it be a Pole painted and wrought
Far otherwise then from the wood it is brought,
Whose head the Idolmakers hand does crop,
Where a lewd bird towering upon the top
Looks like the calf at Horeb: at whose root
The unyoakt youth does exercise his foot.
Or whether it reserves its boughs, befriended
By neighboring bushes, and by them attended
How can thou choose, but seeing it complain,
That Baal's worshipped in the groves again.
Tell me how cursed an egging, with a sting
Of lust do these unwieldy dances bring.
The simple wretches say they mean no harm,
They do not surely, but these actions warm
Our purer bloods the more; for Satan thus
Tempts us the more that are more righteous.
Often has a brother most sincerely gone
Stified in prayer, and contemplation.
When lighting on the place where such repair
He views the Nymphs, and is clean out in's prayer.
Often has a ^ifter grounded in our truth,
Seeing the jolly carriages of the youth.
Been tempted to the way that is broad and bad,
And were not for our private pleasure, had
Renounced her little ruff and goggle eye,
And quit her self of the Fraternity,
What is the mirth, what is the melody
That sets them in this Gentiles vanity?
When in our Synagogues we rail at sin,
And tell men of their faults which they are in,
With hand and voice so following our theams
That we put out the Sides men in their dreams,
Soundes not the pulpit which we then belabour
Better and hollower then does a tabor?
Yet such is unregenerate man's folly,
They love the wicked noise, and hate the holy.
Routs and wild pleasure do invite temptation,
And this is dangerous for our damnation.
We must not move our selves, but if we are moved
Man is but man: and therefore those that loved
Still to seem good, would evermore dispense
With their own faults, so they gave no offense.
If the times sweet enticing, and the blood
That now begin's to boil, have thought it good
To challinge liberty and recreation,
Let it be done in holy contemplation.
Brothers and sisters in the fields may walk
Beginnings of the holy word to talk,
Of David and Vriah, lovely wife,
Of Tamar and her lustful brothers strife;
Then underneath the hedge that wooes them next
They may sit down, and there act out the text.
Nor do we want how ere we live austere
In winter Sabbath nights our lusty cheer;
And though the Pastors grace which often does hold
Half an hour long make the provision cold
We can be merry, thinking never the worse
To mend the matter at the second course.
Chapters are read, and hymns are sweetly sung
Jointly commanded by the nose and tongue.
Then on the word we diversely dilate
Wrangling indeed for heat of Zeal, not hate:
Where at the length an unappeased doubt
Feircely comes in, and then the lights go out.
Darkness thus makes our peace, and we contain
Our fiery spirits till we set again.
Till then no voice is heard, no tongue does go,
Except a tender sister shreike or so:
Such should be our delights, grave and demure,
Not so abominable and inpure
As those thou seek'st to hinder, but I fear
Satan will be too strong, his kingdom's here.
Few are the righteous, nor do I know
How we this Idol e're shall overthrow,
And since our sincere Patron is deceas't
The number of the righteous is decreast.
But we do hope these tim'es will on, and breed
A faction mighty for us, for indeed
We labor all, and every sister joins
To have regenerate babes spring from our loins;
Besides what many carefully have done
Getting the unrighteous man a righteous son.
Then stoutly on, let not thy flock range lewdly
One their old vanities, thou Lamp of Beawdly.
One thing I pray thee, do not too much thirst
After Idolatries last fall, but first
Follow this suit more close, let it not go
Till it be thine as thou would have't, for so
Thy successors upon the same entayle
Hereafter may take up the Whitson Ale.
Epithalamium. Upon the Celebration of the happy Nuptials of T. L. Esquire, and
his Lady.
AMong the Multiplicitie of Votes,
True hearts Oblations sprung from joyful thoughts,
That are here offered at the sacred Shrine
Of your best Marriage, be accepted mine!
They are the wishes of a Heart, as true,
As any his of the more elegant Crew,
In choicest numbers and Poetic Dress;
That often to such Solemnities do press:
And, plainly though set forth, they yet may prove
Effectually propitious to your Love;
Your now united Love, thrice happy Pair,
Whose equal Hearts concorporated are.
May the effects of that still springing Love,
Grow to a numerous Issue, to improve
Your Family with new Increase of Joy.
I wish you the first year a hopeful Boy
To Wisdom and to Valor: Next year after
I wish no less, a no less hopeful Daughter
To Beauty and to Virtue. And, that, so,
While your first fruits unto your comforts grow,
You may, till many years their course have run,
Yearly increase a Daughter, or a Son:
That they, like Olive branches, round may stand
Fair, to inherit both your Love and Land.
And for your selves mine Orisons shall be,
You may like Isaac and Rebeckah see
Long life and happy days, speaking his praise
Who hitherto has blessed you in your ways.
And may the progress of your whole Life be
As full of joy as this days Harmony.
That individually, till life be done,
You may continue still two Hearts in one.
And when your days are numbered and made even,
You may but part on earth, to meet in Heaven.
To the Lord Chamberlain.
MY Lord, so subject to the worser fame
Are even the best that claim a Poets name,
(Especially poor they that serve the stage,
Though worthily, in this verse hating age.)
And that dread Curse so heavy yet does lie
Which the wronged Fates, fallen out with Mercury
Pronounced for ever to attend upon
All such as only dream of Hellicon,
That durst I swear, cheated by self opinion,
I were Apollo's, or the Muses Minion,
Reason would yet assure me, it is decreed
Such as are Poets born, are born to need.
If the most worthy then, whose pay's but praise
Or a few sprigs, from the now withering Bays,
Groan underneath their wants, what hope have I
(Scarce yet allowed one of the Company)
Of better fortunes; that with their good parts
Even want the ways, the bold, and thriving arts,
By which they grow remarkable, and are prized:
For sure I Could not live a thing despised
Durst I profess 'twere in my power to give
A Patron that should make him ever live;
Or tell great Lords that the main reason why
They hold a Poets praises flattery
Is their own guilt, that sense they left to do
Things worthy praise, even praise is odious too.
Some few there are who by this boldness thrive
Which yet I dare no^ follow; others strive
In some high minded Ladies grace to stand,
Ever provided that her liberal hand
Pay for the virtues they bestow upon her,
And so long she is the miracle, and the honor
Of her whole sex, and has forsooth more worth
Then was in any Sparta ere brought forth:
But when the beauty fails a change is near,
And she is not then, what once she did appear,
For the new giver, she dead, must inherit
What was by purchase got, and not by merit,
Let such write well that do this, and in grace,
I would not, for a pen^^on or a place
Part so with mine own Candor, let me rather
Live poorly on those toys I would not father,
Not known beyond a Player, or a man
That does pursue the Course that I have ran
Ere so grow famous: yet with any pain
Or honest industry, Could I obtain
A noble favourer, I might write, and do
Like others of more name, and get one too,
Or else my Genius is false, I know
That Johnson much of what he has does owe
To you, and to your Family, and is never
Slow to profess that, nor had Fletcher ever
Such reputation, and Credit won
But by his honored Patron Huntington.
Inimitable Spencer never had been
So famous for his matchless fairie Queen,
Had he not found a Sidny to prefer
His plain way in his shepherds Callender.
Nay Virgill's self, or Martial does lie,
Could hardly frame a poor Gnats elegy
Before Mecaenas cherisht him, but then
He straight Conceived AEneas, and the men
That found out Italy, theirs are presidents
I cite with reverence my low intents
Look not so high, yet some work I might frame
That should nor wrong my duty, nor your name
Were but your Honor pleased to cast an eye
Of favor on my trod down poverty.
How ever I Confess my self to be
Ever most bound to your blessed Charity
To others that feed on it, and will pay
My prayers with theirs, that as you do, you may
Live long beloved, and honored: doutless then
So Clear a life will find a worthier pen,
For me I rest assured besides the Glory
'Twood make a Poet but to write your story.
Upon leaving off mourning for his Mistres.
HEnce faint resembler of my woes, adieu,
I have thoughts sabler, blacker far then you:
Can griefs so real, so immence be shown
By that which has no being, a privation?
(For so we black define) how can I call
You Emblems of my sorrows, when that all
Those mournful thoughts you do pretend to express
(It seems) I banish, when I please to undress.
My 'Griefs no sorrowful figure ere defines,
But those black thoughts that round my essence twines
None can depict the soul I wear within
But he who paints me in an Ethiops skin.
The night which mourns the absence of the sun
And to express her loss puts darkness on
Yet smiles in stars, and when she goes away
Postilions forth a lovely dauning gray.
I am all darkeness, I have not one spark
Of hope or comfort to be day my dark.
Besorrowed soul, sorrow which naught can ease,
Naught can becalme, nor naught but death appease
And when I Am dead insculp upon my grave,
Here lies my Anna's mourner, once her slave.
An Elegy on the death of a Schoolmasters.
MUst he dye thus? has an eternal sleep
Seized on each Muse that it cannot sing nor weep?
Had he no friends? no merits? or no purse?
To purchase mourning? Or had he that curse
Which has the scraping Worldling still frequented
To live unlov'd and perish unlamented.
No; none of these; But in this Atlas fall
Learning for present found its funeral.
Nor was it for want of grief, but scope and vent,
Not sullenness, but strong deep astonishment.
Small griefs are but soon wept out great ones come
With bulk, and strike the straight lamenters dumb.
This was the scoolmaster, that did derive
From parts and piety's preogative.
The glory of that good, but painful art
Who had high learning yet an humble heart.
The Drake of Grammar learning, whose great pain
Circled that globe, and made that voyage plain.
Time was, when the artless paedagogue did stand,
With his vimineous scepter in his hand.
Raging like Bajazet over the 'tugging fry,
Who though unhorsd' were not of the infantry;
Applying, like a glister, hic, haec hoc,
Till the poor Lad's beat to a whipping block;
And hold so long to know a Verb and Nown
Till each had Propria maribus of'^ own:
As if not fit to learn As in praesenti
But legally, when they were one and twenty.
Those few that went to the Universt'ys then
Went with deliberation, and were men.
Nor were our Academies in those days
Filled with Chuck-farthing Batchelours and boys
But scholars with more beard and age went hence,
Then our new lapwing-Lectrers skip from thence.
By his industrious labor now we see
Boys coated borne to 'th' Universitie
Who sucked in Latin, and did scorn to seek
Their scourge and top in English but in Greek.
Hebrew the general puzler of old heads
Which the gray Dunce with pricks and comments reads
And dubs himself a scholar by it, grew
As natural t'him as if he would been a Jew.
But above all he timely did inspire
His Childrens breasts with an aetherial fire.
And sanctified their early learning so,
That they in grace, as they in wit did grow:
Yet nor his grace nor learning could defend him,
From that mortality that did attend him.
Nor can there now be any difference known
Between his learned bones and those with none.
For that grand Lev'ler death hudles to one place
Rich, poor, wise, foolish, noble and the base.
This only is our comfort and defense,
He was not immaturely ravished hence.
But to our benefit, and to his own
Undying fame and honor, let alone,
Till he had finished what he was to do,
Then naturally split himself in Two.
And tha^'s one cause he had so few moist eyes,
He made men lea^ned and that made them wise.
And overrule their passions, since they see
Tears would but show their own infirmity.
And it is but loving madness to deplore
The fate of him, that shall be seen no more.
But only I cropped in my tender years,
Without or tongue, or wit, but sighs and Tears;
And yet I come to offer what is mine,
An immolation to his honored shrine.
And retribute what he conferred on me
Either to's person or his memory.
Rest pious soul and let that happy grave
That is entrusted with thy Relics, have
This just inscription, that it holds the dust
Of one that was Wise, learned, pious, just.
A Catch.
SI^ close, sit close, my bonny boon Comrades
Sit close, and taste freely your tipple,
It Is weal^h to the poor, a salve to ^he sore,
And a crutch to the hal^ing cripple;
It Is this, it is this, it is this, that makes
The Cobbler merrily sing,
It is the good drink makes the beggar think
Himself as rich as a King:
Then trowl, then trowl a merry merry bowl,
Trowl it down, and fill it again boys;
He that grieves night and day drives no so^row away,
To be sad it is but vain, boys:
On a woman having two Husbands.
THe law provides one husband for one wife,
But wanton women cannot brook this life,
They must have two, for having one they still
In spite of law are wedded to their will:
On an Elder Brother.
WHere nature's wanting, fortune lends her hand,
The Elder brother still enjoys the land,
The youngest have most wit; hence it is that all
The elder brothers we Wise-acres call.
On a proud beggar.
O Tho goes barefoot, yet no cold he feels
The Cause is pride; he scorns good shoos at's heels:
A Courtship betwixt a man and a woman.
Man. Why so fast away my dear,
Is It because that I am here?
Will you ever
Still persever
Thus to fly me
And deny me?
Shall it be my hard misfortune,
Or a punishment to folly
To like, to love, and to importune
Yet still languish
In the anguish
Of despair and melancholy?

Wom. Fond man, forbear, enjoy thy quiet,
Know, I am not for thy diet,
You can tell, Sir
Very well Sir,
What Is my mind
Then be kind
To your self, and let me go,
For in vain you hope to see
My spotless honors overthrow;
Then be chaste,
That thou may
Preserve us both from infamy:

Man Why will you so cruel be
Both to thy self, and unto me,
Heavenly Creature,
In that feature
Will you treasure
So much pleasure,
And put it up from man's embraces,
Be less fair, or be more kind,
Let those temptings of thy face
Suddenly
Fade and die,
Else let me be stricken blind,

Wom. Thus we shall be flattered, till
Your ends are compast to your will,
Then you leave us
And deceive us.
Once undone us
You will shun us;
You may range about, and alter
Each hour, you meet a new one; we
May not do so; since men thus falter,
Ere I love you
I will prove you,
Lest I loose my liberty:

Man What can move your thoughts to be
Jealous of my constancy
Let me know it,
I will show it
If unjust
Try, then trust?
Were my breast of crystal made,
There you might my heart espy,
That never yet true love betrayed
There you might
Read the white
Charrecters of loyalty:

Wom. I! so you tell me, but I know
How far an ounce of air will go,
If I thought
There were ought
Truly meant,
And hearty in it,
I were cruel then indeed;
Women can be kind, as mothers,
But they must their bounty heed,
Cause given, we
Never can be
Our own again, nor any others:

Man It Is unjust, to doubt, where we
No ground for our suspicion see:

Wom. Shall I doubt,

Man We Will kiss it out.
Next I Will rifle

Wom. What

Man A trifle,
Which though I purchase with delight,
I shall get no more, then you,
Since neither wins, nor loses by it.

Wom. I am won then.

Man I have done then,
Yet we still have have more to do.

On women, of what stuff they are made.
ALL ye, that lovers be, and love the Amorous trade
Come learn of me, what women be, and whereof they be made:
Their heads are made of rush; their tongues be made of say,
Their love is of silk changeable, that lasts not a day:
Their wit Mochado is, of durance is their hate,
The food they feed on most is carp, their gaming is Check-mate;
Of fustian their discourse, their zeal is made of freez,
And they, that one their Favors wayt, do get most when they leez:
Their glory comes from satin, their vanity from feather;
Their beauty is, stand farther of, their conscience is but leather:
Their humor watery chamlet, but canvas fits them best,
Perpetuum is their folly, their earnest is but Jest:
Their love is life in Idleness, their doings are their Pleasure,
They lawless are, yet all they wear, they buy by standing measure.
Their foreparts are of rue, their hinder parts of docks,
Their heads of hardest brass be made, their hearts be made of box;
Or if in plainer terms they will with all be dealt,
Of beaver are their snow white thighs, there TH. is made of felt.
The lash A Song
LOng have I lived for to see,
All the state of each degree.
I have laughed, I have quafft, I have wept,
And a stir, like a -- have I kept
But now here I stand with a whip in my hand,
Come I must lash you:
Come, you Divines, that live so pure,
And keep another to serve your Cure.
You will preach, not to teach, but to show
Phrases fine, scarce divine, how they flow
The benefice you will keep, whilst another starves the sheep,
Come I must lash you.
Come you Physicians, that do kill
More then you Cure, to try your skill;
Our disease, do you please, and we see
Our relief is our grief; for the fee
You Will cure us off our purse, when our bodies are far worse;
Come I must lash you.
Come you Lawyers, that with your law
Do keep the Neighbors all in awe;
If a dog, or a hog, you espy,
Or a mouse in the house, or a fly,
The whole country straight shall brute of a star chamber suit,
Come I must lash you:
Come you Tradesmen, in town, and city,
That are so cunning, and so witty;
Not your weights, but deceits, are so large,
You will spare men your ware, at your charge;
The buying you will give, thus by lying you do live,
Come I must lash you:
Come you In-holders, that live by gallants,
Till they have spent all their Tallents;
You may fill what you will, when they call;
But your pot's and your quarts are so small,
The reckning must be paid, or their horses must be stayed,
Come I must lash you.
Come you, too fine, where is your state,
Which your father left of late
You do'nt care for to spare, but to spend
Till you bring every thing to an end
Now may you go with sorrow to beg, sharke and borrow,
Come I must lash you.
Come, you ladies, that do ware
More fashions, then are days i'ch' year,
Your ribbands, and your knots, your roses and your spots,
Your bare breast, and back do show what you lack;
Come I must lash you.
Come, you also that are so merry,
And drown your sorrows all in sherry,
Now you laugh, now you quaffe, then you sleep,
And this course, or a worse you do keep
You drive away your wealth, and you drink away your health,
Come I must lash you.
Come thou, that braggest of thy wealth,
Because thou have a little pelf;
You Are the worse, that thy purse is so strong,
For thy gold makes the bold to do wrong;
You build houses high to the poors misery,
Come I must lash you.
Come, you Vserers, that heap up store,
By griping of the wretched poor;
You will take men to stake at their need,
And their portion by extortion will you rid;
O that I had bin made of a thong-cutters trade,
That I might lash you.
But I am now so weary grown,
That I must let the rest alone,
I could slash with my lash, did I dare,
Many more, then before, but I spare;
And them will I leave to the Judge and the Shrieve
And they shall lash them.
To his friend on the death of his Mistres, immediately before the intended
marriag^.
AMong the train of Mourners, whose swollen eyes
Wallow in tears at those sad obsequies
Admit me as a Cipher in to come;
Who, though I Am nothing, yet can raise a sum.
And truly I can mourn as well as they
Who Are clad in sable weeds, though mine are gray.
Should I not weep, I should not pay my due
Of tears to her, or sympathy to you.
For Death has slain you both when she did die,
So who writes ones, must write boths Elegy.
Excuse me Sir. Passion will swet that is pent,
Thank not my Tears; I cannot but lament
To see a Lady ready for your bed,
To deaths embraces yield her Maidenhead.
And that Angellick corpse that should have been
A Cabinet to lodge your Jewels in,
Should now b' embalmed with dust, and made a prey,
To glut'nous worms, which will call that day
On Which her loins unto their lot did fall
Though your solemnities, their festival.
She was to good for man, she was to high.
A mate for Angels to get Angels by.
In whom there was as much divinity
And Excellence as could in woman be.
Whom you and all adored and did suppose
To be a Goddess in a Mortals clothes
But Heaven to undecieve thee, let you know
By her mortality, she was not so.
To his friend. Mr. B. archd: of N.
LEt me enjoy you, for I feign would know
If still you look like one of us or no:
Is not your former pleasing form off stripped
Since when your Worship was arch-deaconship't?
Quakes not your headpiece with ingotten wind,
Or swells and burst your night-caps all behind?
Or are you to the Velvet day-caps come
As fits Episcopabilissimum?
Rise not your brows in billows, apt to drown
Poor Tom beneath, with an impetuous frown.
Burn your disdainful eyes, or sweetly move
(As erst) and gently shine on those you love?
Is not your nose suspended or awrie,
And since it was archt, exalts it self on high?
Bless me! what dainty proper men of late
By wealths convulsion, or a pang of state
Have I seen changed (as once by Circe's cup.)
And to a be astlie figure quite run up.
Poor Cambridge Snakes that use to creep and lick
The bubling spume of my then Rhetorique,
And cling in amarous folds my verse to hear,
Verse that at once could please, and keep in fear;
Now fiery flying dragon doctors are
That warmed with Prebends and fat steeples dare
Both hiss and sting: For me, it is state enough
To hiss, or creep in their forgoten slough
Practice and contemplations, I agree
Should rise; let that a Banging B B be
Whiles this shines West: yet may no crime attaint
The first; but like the second, live a saint,
Alas! the churches tail is lost in drink,
While Pot and Pipe are made their pen, and ink,
And if the Jowle in pride be pickled too
What shall the sides, the bulk, the body do.
Curates leave ale: leave Prelates ease and pride,
Or learned and Lay the Clergy will deride.
God knows those blemishes on foot and face
Do need the healthful spirit of his grace.
And you my Learned friend, though past the rore
Of Scillia's dogs! take heed in vent'ring ore
Charibdis gulf, where M^rmaid Honor sits
On seas of danger, strow'd with rocks and pits.
Lest I when clambring over hills and dales
By North and South, your palace out in Wales
Approaching as to Ph^^bus burnisht roof
(Like Phaeton) be bid to stand aloof.
And scarce recovering me at second sight
You swear, good faith, I had forgot you quite:
I promised you a Prebend, but in tro^h
I am so pressed with Lords and Ladies both
That I can do you now no further grace
Then the reversion of the ninetenth place.
Nine years I have expected, (and am loath
To name him yet) a mounting B B S oath.
But if I live to write his Epitaph
It shall so weep, that all that read, shall laugh.
You cannot so decieve. Then onward march
Till to your first, you raise a second arch.
On Mistres Angel wife to Master John Angel preacher of Leicester, deceasing at
Bath.
Angel in name, and angel like in life
Save that she was a mortal, and a wife.
Those bonds discharged advanced this perfect wife
To Angell's single and immortal life.
FINIS.
Books Printed for Hen. Brom at the Gun in I^y-Lane.
The Souls Gonflict, Being Eight Sermons, six whereof were preached at Oxford.

The Queens Exchange, A Comedy, by Richard Brom.

Two Essays of Love and Marriage.

The Grand Impostor Examined, Or, the life and Trial of James Nayler.

The Souls Tournkey, Being a Conference betwixt Mr Hanum and Mr Tuke Moderator
of Gr. Coll. in London.

Books now in the Press which will shortly be extant.
The affinity of sacred Liturgies, By Hamon L' Estrange, Esquire

Five New Comedies which were never before published, By Richard Brom.

A Learned and desired Comentary on the whole Epistle to the Philippians, By
Nath. Tucker late Preacher of the Gospel at Portsmouth.

Dr Browns Garden of Cyrus or the Quincunciall Lozenges or Network plantations.


