Approved Medicines OF Little cost, to preserve health and also to cure those
that are SICK. Provided For the Soldiers Knap-sack, and the Country man's
Closet.

Written by RICHARD ELKES Gent. Student in the Art of Physic, living at
Bagshot in the County of Surry.

Medicos and Chirurgos subinde mutare; aegris taedium non levamen est. Eccles.
38. 4. The Lord has created Medicines out of the earth, and he that is wise
will not abhor them. LONDON Printed for Robert Ibbitson and are to be sold by
Tho: Vere at the Angel in the Old Bailey. 1651.

TO THE High and Honorable Court of Parliament, Rich. Elkes wishes health,
peace, and tranquillity.
Right Honorable,
FOR as much as all men ought in their several places and callings to
endeavor to do good in that Commonwealth, wherein they live, your poor
Subject has seen many men, both Soldiers and others loose their lives, by a
careless demeanor, sometimes ignorantly, some times wilfully, sometimes for
want of a Physician, and Chyrurgeon, sometimes neglecting the means when it may
be had, for the prevention thereof, I do here make bold to present unto your
view some Defensives and Remedies, for all that desire Health.

In the absence of a Learned Physician and Chyrurgion, these easy Medicines
may both cure and preserve health; as the learned says, the Physicians duty
consists, in two principal points, First, To preserve health. Secondly, To
cure the sick, which I have and will endeavor to do, according to that
Tallent that Almighty God has bestowed upon me, and rest

your obedient Servant To Command, in all submission and diligence. RICHARD
ELKES.

The Directions of an old Soldier in Ireland about forty years since, which
became a Physician there.
AS I traveled through the County of Clare, I heard of an excellent Physician
which had accomplished many rare cures, but especially the Bloody Flux. After
some time spent I found the man, and conferred with him touching his Art, which
he seemed willing to impart, requesting the like of me, and said about forty
years before that time, he came out of England a Soldier into that Country,
which was in Queen Elizabeth's days; before a month was expired the Bloody
Flux seized upon him, and as he suppofed it came by eating of fresh meat, fresh
fish, lying upon the ground being hot, and such like; he remembered some
directions that was given to him before he came out of England, That when you
eat, give over with an appetite, drink no more but to quench thirst, if you
drink when you are hot, march after it, or stir your body, when you rest at
your fires sit not upon the cold ground, but upon wood, straw, or such like;
put off your wet clothes, and especially your Stockings and dry them, etc.

And carry in your Knap-sacke a piece of steel to heat red hot, and quench it
in your beer, water or milk, and as you travel gather the leaves and bark of
the Oak, and the leaves of the black-Thorn, a bag of Salt and Oatmeale, that
if the Flux should take you, you might help your self. So this old Soldier
remembered his directions, and observed it diligently, when he came to their
fires, to dry his clothes, and sit upon wood, or such like, and he cast his
piece of steel into the fire to warm his drink, and when they had fish or
flesh boiled, he would cast into the boiler, a handful of Oaken leaves, or
bark of the Oak, or a handful of leaves of Black-Thorn, Salt and Oatmeale; and
grated into his beer some of the Oak bark; this being observed, cured
himself, and many of his fellow Soldiers. The Wars being ended, he became a
Physician, and gained both money and credit, by curing the Flux, and some other
infirmities.

Thus may any Soldier observe and do for their healths in England, Ireland,
and Scotland, if need require. Also the Soldiers may provide in their
Knap-sacks three sorts of Earth, that is Terra Lemnia, it is called in the
Apothecaries shops, Terra Sigillata, Bolarmonicke, and Chalk; this Terra
Lemnia comes out of the Island of Lemnos in the Turks Dominion, the quantity
of a Bullet swallowed whole or beaten topowder, and taken in Broth or other
liquor fasting, it cures the Flux, and preserves from the Pestilence; the
best Bolarmonick comes out of Spain, and may be taken fasting in like
quantity, or in some broth, the quantity of two Bullets to cure a Flux; the
common Chalk which we have in England may be beaten to powder and boiled in
milk or broth, and taken fasting it cures a Flux, if it be often taken the
quantity of a spoonful twice in the day. Thus much of medicines with little
cost.

2 To proceed to the cure of the Flux, methodically according to Art.
YOu must consider what kinds of Flux the parties are grieved with, and the
complexion that does predominate; first, whether it be the Flux Diarrhea,
Lienteria, or Dysenteria, if it be Dysenteria which is most dangerous, I have
read of four kinds, but it requires a long discourse concerning all the sorts,
but I omit that, because the cure differ eth but little, only this, if you find
the exhulceration to be in the upper and small guts, you must minister medicines
at the mouth, but if it be at the bigger or lower bowels, you must cast in
glisters often, if the party be without a Feavour, give him milk newly milked,
wherein a gad of steel has been quenched, you may make Suppings or Broth with
Quinces, Knot-grasse, Plantain-leaves, Willow-leaves, Cumfreyroots, and such
like, you may make Rice-Milke, or boil white Starch in Milk, eat no flesh
but Partridges, Culvers, or Birds of the mountain, Goats and Hares flesh may
be permitted; a good diet well observed, the cure is half accomplished.

If strength do permit, you may purge down the vicious humors with two drams
of Rubarb, infused in half a pint of white wine, with Currants and sweet
Fennel seeds, and drink it fasting to purge the vicious humors, after purging,
take a dram of Diascordium, thus may you purge every other day; for in a week
after this, make a drink with running water of two quarts, put seeds of
Sorrel, Pumgranat rindes, Knot-grasse, Cumfery roots, Bryer roots, Plantain
leaves, Cinnamon, Bolarmonicke, Dragons blood, and Sugar; drink this as an
ordinary drink: Likewise you may make a drink with red wine, Cinnamon, Sugar,
Knotgrasse, and Cumfery roots to drink three times a day four spoonfuls at a
time.

2 To make a Glister glutinous.
REc: three pints of water, quench steel in it, until one third part be wasted
then boil in it Cumfery roots, Knotgrasse, Bryer leaves, red Rose leaves, and
Plantain leaves, of each a little handful of Acatia, hypocischidis, ana. ij.
Bolarmonack; Sanguis Dragonis: ana. j. the juice of Quinces j. Goats Tallow j.
if it may be had, and yolks of three eggs, commixe this together and make a
Glister, administer this as often as you shall see cause.

3 For an Implaister.
REc. of the Oils of Quinces, Roses Mastick ana. j. of the meal of Fenny
Greek and Barley j. Sanguis Dragonis Balaustia ss. Bolatmonicke j. acalia ij.
as much wax and Rosen as is sufficient, and make a Plaster, spread it upon
leather, and apply it to the Navill over the nether Ventrick where the party
complains most. Much more might be spoken but I leave it to the ingenious
practitioner, and wish all men to be temperate, for intemperance is the cause
of this and many other incurable diseases.

4 Of the Pestilence or Plague.
THe Pestilence is a Fevor in the highest degree, which may be taken several
ways, by living amongst sick people, by a corrupted Air, by rotten and
corrupt Diet, which fills the body with rotten and corrupt humors, but some
bodies are stronger then others, some are more temperate in eating and drinking
then others, in them rotten humors abound not, and, the infection fasteneth
not so strongly upon them, but nature expels it, this is the reason that
some people never catches the Pestilence, though all be in a room together,
sometimes the infection happens, by living with the sick, and lodging in bed
with them, drawing the breath that comes from the sick party, if they
approach near to them; as the office of the Lunges is to draw in fresh Air to
comfort the heart, instead thereof it draws in a venomous breath, which may be
the destruction of the heart: the cause of a corrupted Air, is by standing
Ponds, or Marshes in the heat of Sumer, rotten Coleworts, rotten Roots, and
fruits, and many people continuing in a close room, many dead Bodies unburied:
which may happen in the time of War, dead Carrion and such like, immoderate
heat of the Air, and moisture in Summer time, thick Mists, especially about
Autumn, that in a morning it may be smelt. The cause of corrupt humors in the
body, is by eating corrupt meats and drinks, as flesh long unsalted, rotten
fruits, Cole-worts, and rotten Cabbig, and roots: and corrupt water, or wine,
or beer made with evil water, breeds rotten humors in the body, which I wish
al men to have respect unto, and the best means to preserve their bodies from
the Pestilence that is, is not to continue in a pestilent Air, make fires
often, burn Rosemary, Sage, Juniper-wood and Berryes, Frankincense, Myrrh,
Pitch, and such like, what you eat let it be wholesome, gluttonizing does
corrupt the blood and produce dangerous diseases, as the Measles, the Pox which
are the forerunners of the Plague, always eat with your meat sharp things,
as Vinegar, Vargis, Oringes, Lemons; let your pot-hearbs be Sage, Isope, Balm,
Buglosse, and Burrage, drink no wine but alay it with good water, eat Terra
Lemnia or fine Bolarmonack as before is showed, carry in your Knap-sack a Box
of Diascordium, and Methridate, a handful of Rue the root of Setwall, in shops
Zedoary, and Elicampane roots, take either of these it may preserve from the
Infection, but above all, if you come into a house, or place that you doubt you
have taken the Infection, go presently and dig a hole in the fresh earth, put
in your mouth and nose, and breath into it a quarter of an hour, then remove
from that place and dig another hole and do likewise, this you may do three or
four times, and by Gods blessing the fresh earth will draw the venom from your
heart, which I have proved also, if a man be in a sound, or choked in a room,
where a multitude of people are, it will as it were fetch life again.

Further if you go into a room which is infected, hold a turffe of fresh earth
to your mouth and nostrills, it will preserve you from the contagion, as I have
proved: you must avoid Bathing, Venus, and violent exercise, which opens the
Pores, then the venomous Air will have no entrance into ^he body to destroy
it: to be Costive is hurtful, for prevention thereof you may ^ive a soft
Glister or Purge, with ^iludie Rufi, also it is good for young people to be let
blood, but remember to use a good dyed after it, and keep in until the blood
be settled again: and avoid all perturbations of the mind, as wrath,
melancholy, and such like: Many more remedies might be showed, which for
brevity I omit; only this antidote you may cause to be made at any Apothecaries
to carry in your Knap-sack, and for the Country man to keep in his house, to
use if occasion be; Rec: of Saffron ss. of Alloes Epaticke of Mirrh ij. Mastick
i. Bolearmonacke j. Terra Lemnia ij. harts-horne burnt j ss. the bone of the
Harts-heart, red Corrall ana. j. Walnuts in number 20. Figs 13. Bay salt j. of
Rue a little handful, Roots of Scabius Aristolochia Rotunda ij. Tormentil and
Pimper-nell, ana. v. Bitany j. Zedoary j Seeds of Sorrel, and Seeds of
Purslain, ana. ss. and make all these into an Electuary with clarified honey, or
with Syrrup of Gillyflowers, and Marygolds, take every morning upon the point
of a knife, the quantity of a Nut, it will preserve from the infection, in like
manner you may take it at any time when you come among infected persons: thus
far I have showed you how the Pestilence happens, and how to prevent it;
Now I will show you briefly the simptomes and signs of it, and proceed to the
cure. When the wind is often in the South and West, the Air much altered,
specially in Autumn, many pimples rising: the Measles and Pox in diverse places
increasing, are the signs of the Pestilence ensuing: the simptomes are, the
extreme parts of the sick person will be cold, and the inward parts very hot;
heaviness, lazy and sleepy with a great pain in the head; sometimes sadness,
sometimes raving, vomiting, purging, loss of appetite, great thirst, the Pulse
frequent low and deep, the tongue red, at first growing black; the Urine thick
and troubled, but sometimes like the Urine of a healthy man, (therefore I wish
you to observe other signs) most specially if there be any risings behind the
ears, armepits, or groine, these are chiefly to be observed: And now I proceed
to the cure.

5 The Cure of the Plague.
IF you come to the sick party, the first or second day of falling sick, the
common use has been to open a vein in that fide that the Botch appears, or
that side he complains of: for if you let blood in the contrary side, you
draw venom over the heart, and destroy the body, also if the grief be above
the shoulders, cut the Cefallick vein, if below the shoulders, cut Basilica,
so if it be below the nether Ventrick, cut the vein in the Ham, or the Anckle;
but the practice of some is not to bleed, you may apply cupping-glasses: if the
Pestilence should seize upon a man at dinner, or Supper, give him a vomit: If
it happen other times, you may give the party of the Antedote before written,
the quantity of a Nut in some Scabius water, and cover him very warm to sweat
an hour, and cool him gentlely, it will both cure and defend him from it: or
you may give this Medicine following: Rec: Methridatum j. Theriaca Londinensis
ij. Bolearmonack prepared jss. waters of Buglosse and Scabius as much as is
sufficient to make it into an Electuary, give to the sick the quantity of a
dram, and lay him in a warm bed, and cover him with clothes that he may sweat
four hours, then let him be cooled gentlely by taking off the clothes one after
another; this being done, use the same the second day, and by Gods blessing it
may drive the venom from the heart, unto the extreme parts, which I will
direct for the cure thereof hereafter: you may also take Electuarium de ovo the
quantity of a dram or a scruple, according to the strength of the party, it is
commended above all by some Physicians; but Bolarmonick, or Terra lemnia, I
have proved them the quantity of a nut given in posset drink or in surrup of
Gilloflowers, and 3 grains of Saffron powder, this will drive out the venom
into Botches like Carbunckles when other Medicines be wanting, so the party
has recovered, it is also good to drive out the Measels and the Pox, remember
in the time of sweating, you must not let the party sleep, nor in six hours
after; you may give him Julips, made with waters of Scabius, Sorrel, Endive and
Succory, surrup of Gilloflowers, of Wood sorrel, Lemons, Violets, and such
like, for his meat, you may boil a Chick, with Sorrel, the juice of Lemons,
and Burrage-flowers, or Marigold-flowers are very good; also you may dissolve a
little Saffron in his Vinegar to dip his meat in it, but let the Saffron be
very finely poudered, or tied in a linen cloth (as Saffron is a Cordinal, so
if much be taken it hurts) Many other cordial things may be used, wood of
Aloes and Sanders grated into his beer is commended.

6 The Cure of the swelling or Plague sore in the extreme parts.
IF the swelling will not break it self, you may apply that plaster called
Diachylon compositum, or Galbanum spread upon Leather, and applied to the
place: or an Onyon cut off the top, and dig out the middle, and put in London
Treacle, and three or four leaves of Rue, put this to the fire and roste it,
when it is well roasted, lay it warm to the Botch or swelling, if it break put in
a Tent, and let it run what it will, when the corruption is out; Diachilon will
heal it up again, also you may use this; Rec. great Raisons half an ounce,
Bay salt j. Figs 6 Oil of Cammomell, and honey, as much as will make this into a
Plaster, mahearbs, ny other medicines might be set down, but these will easily
be gotten; if you desire further, repair to your learned Physician.

7 Of the Calenture and spotted Feavor.
THese Feavors are very near unto the Pestilence, which does often happen unto
Mariners at sea, by feeding upon salt Beef, Bacon, salt Fish, and evil water,
pulse and worm-eaten bread, which cannot be avoided at Sea, this Feavor is
known, by feeling the outward members cold, and those within, as the
Pestilence, sleepy, and heavy, the pulse very low: This Feavor brings death
in 24 hours many times if not speedily prevented: furthermore, you shall
perceive the Patient as it were distracted, ready to leap into the Sea,
sometimes vomit, the tongue white underneath, and black at the top, cold
sweats, cramps, with many other accidents, like as in the pestilence: For the
cure thereof, if the patient be able to endure Flebothomy, open a vein in the
arm, if he complain most in the head, cut the vein called Cephalia, if at the
chest, the Basilicke vein, remove the sick into a fresh room, make a fire in it
first, then put out the fire, and refresh the room with sweet waters, or what
else may be had at the Sea; if at Land cast Rushes in the Room, and green
Boughs; if the Air be hot, misty, and moist, shut the windows, if clear and
pure let in the fresh Air to comfort the heart: At the first you must not let
the sick sleep overmuch, that will draw the venom to the heart, until it is
defended by giving cordials, such as is prescribed before in the chapter of the
Pestilence, his diet must be Broth, made with cordial Flowers, and a little
Saffron tied in a cloth, after the third day you may give crumbs of Bread in his
Broth; for the cure, if time will permit, give him a Glister before letting
blood, in this manner make your decoction with cordial flowers, after boiling
dissolve into it Diascordium, surrup of Violets, Roses and such like; after
Phlebothomy give him a cordial, and lay the party to sweat, as is taught in the
chapter of the Plague: After sweating and Phlebothomy, the sick may drink
Barly-water, made with cool Raisons of the Sun stoned, and a scruple of
Saffron tied in a cloth and boiled in the water, Lemons boyld in Milk both
rind and pulpe, until it is turned to Curds, and Whay, drink the Whay
continually as you thirst, I have proved it of good effect.

And when he has recovered a little strength, and the venom expelled from the
heart, let him be purged with this Potion; Rec. a quart of running water, or
more, a handful of cordial Flowers, a little Cardus Benedictus, a root of
Tormentil, a leg of a Poultry, these being boiled, take a pint of that liquor
or thereabout, dissolve in it of Diaphenicon, j. Diacatholicon j ss. electuary
of Roses ij. give the sick this to purge the dregs of the Fever, as you shall
see cause, adding some cordial surrups after purging, made with Diascordium,
Amber Beaser, surrup of Violets, and surrup of Lemmons, waters of Buglosse,
Burrage and Wood Sorrel to drink at night, so by the blessing of God the sick
may recover health again.

8. Of the Scurvie.
THere is the sea Scurvie, and the land Scurvie, both of these are a
putrefaction of blood which comes by the neglect of exercising the body, and
eating rotten meats, and corrupt drink, or water, as is showed in the former
Chapter; the obstructions of the Spleen do increase this evil, and the
Morphew and black soult, the simptoms are these; the gums swell, the teeth
loose, the legs will swell, and have spots about the anckles, some will have
many tawny spots about their breast, other some have complained with a great
pain in the head, with a soreness all over the head; I cured a Tanner that
labored with this evil seven years, chiefly in the Spring, and at the fall
of the Leaf; by his own relation in his youth he was laborious, but after he
had gained a competent estate he took ease, and eat much, but of gross meat;
his drink was made of standing water, which as he supposed made the strongest
drink, his bread was made with Barme, or Yeast, but in his youth he eat
leavened bread, so from this and such other of the same I have observed, that
evil water, and unleavened bread do breed this and many other dangerous
diseases, for drink made of such water, the venom does purge by the Barme, and
is in it, of which bread is made, and he that eats such bread (especially in
Cities and Towns) may have the Scurvie, and Fevers of all sorts, for if there
be any venom in the drink it will be in the Barme; therefore I wish all men
to eat leavened bread if he can have it, and drink made of clear water ten
days old at least.

9 For the Cure of the Scurvie.
THe first intention is to keep a good diet, and exercise the body moderately,
his meat must be meats of the best nourishment, as Birds of the Field, Mutton,
or Veale, Rabbets, and Chickings, broth made with Agremony, Avins, Scabius, or
Bitony, and such like; all salt meats must be avoided, the first three days
let him take a draught of Oximell in the morning fasting, and last at night,
which is to be made in this manner; Rec. a quart of clean water, a root or two
of Fennel, three or four roots of Parsley, a sprigge of Rosemary, a little
Fumotery if it be to be had, Fennell-seeds, and Parsley-seeds of each a Dram,
three spoonfuls of the best Honey, let this boil gently, and scum it, and in
the boiling put into it two spoonfuls of Vinegar, after this has been taken
three days, take of Rubarbe 3ij. of Sena 3j. 40 Raysons of the Sun stoned, a
race of Ginger sliced, sweet Fennel-seeds, Annis-seeds of each 3j. let these be
infused all night upon Coals, the next morning take half a pint of this and
dissolve in it a Dram of Diacatholicon, take this three mornings, after this
let Blood if need require; the body being thus prepared, make your
Scurvye-grasse Drink in this manner: Take a peck of Scurviegrasse, and a
gallon of Watercresses, and a gallon of Brook-limes, one handful of Egremony,
one handful of Tamariske, or the buds or bark of the Ash, Raysons of the
Sun stoned a pound, of Licorish half a pound, concused Fennel roots
peethed, and Parsley roots, Annis-seeds, and Fennel seeds a quarter of a
pound, put all these into a thin Bag, in five gallons of Beer or Ale, put
the Bag into the Barrel when the drink is ready to be tunned, with a stone
in the bottom of the Bag, let it hang within three or four inches of the
bottom of the Barrel, let this drink work with these ingredients in it,
then stop it close, and at eight or ten days drink of it and none other
(except a little at meat) until the Party be well; most especially in the
morning drink a pint, and exercise until the party is ready to sweat, and
keep him warm after it; the spoon-wort is good for the land Scurvie, used as
before is directed, and taken forty days together.

10 Of the Flux called, the Plague in the Guts.
THis Flux in England which is called by many, the Plague in the Guts, is
contagious as I conceive, a venomous matter cleaving to the nether or great
Guts for the most part, some seem to have no Feavor, other some have a
Feavour, and complain most in the middle Ventricle; in brief, I suppose the
Cure is accomplished by giving Cordials, and sweating, and by Glisters, if the
Flux appear to be bloody, or like scraping of Guts; without a Feavour, you may
proceed as I directed before in the Chapter of the Flux Dysenteria; at the
first coming of this Flux, take a quart of Milk, boil in it a handful of
Marigold Flowers, Sage, and Rosemary, Bryer leaves, and knot grass, this being
boiled take one pint of this, put into it surrup of Slowes, surrup of
Gilly-flowers, anna j. the yolke of an egg, and a dram of Diascordium, give
this blood warm, the next day if strength permit give the other pint of Milk
in a Glister as before is directed, but after the first Glister has done
working, give a Cordial thus prepared, take of the water fo Burrage, Scabius,
and Marygolds, ana. j. Diascordium j. Confectio Alcermis j. Mithridates ss.
surrup of Violets, surrup of Gillo-flowers, ana. j. commix all this together
and drink it warm, presently after let the sick be covered warm, to sweat
two hours if strength permit; in sweating, drink Posset wherein Saffron is
boiled, this being used three times may cure it, for it has recovered many of
the above named Flux, keeping a good diet without flesh; thus briefly of the
Pestilence, which destroys many, if means be not used to prevent it in time.

11. The cure of the Itch, and Lice.
FOr cure thereof Methodically, is first to observe a good diet (that is to
say) you must eat and drink such things that breed good blood, and to avoid
all things that breeds evil and rotten humors, as you may see in the Chapters
before going; then purge the body with pilule de fumo terrae, or pilule Inde
haly, which you may have at any Apothecaries, the second day let blood in the
Basiliske vein, then make this water following; Rec. A gallon of running
water, or the water that Smiths use, and quench in it a gad of steel red hot
until half the water be wasted, then boil in it a quarter of a pound of
leaf Tobacco, of Dock roots, Willow leaves, and leaves of the Birch, of each a
handful, of Brimstone tied in a Cloth 3 ij. wash the sore places twice in the
day and you shall be cured (except the Itch be incorrigible, which with long
continuance does bring it to pass; also if you make so much of this water as
will wet your shirt twice in the week, the shirt being clean washed and
dried, then dipped in this liquor, and dry it again, it will both kill the
Itch, and destroy the Lyce that are about you) I have read a story of some
Soldiers that would boil Saffron, Pepper, and Grains in running water, and
in that liquor dip their shirts twice in the week, it will make the shirt
yellow, but it destroyed Lice and Itch; others of the inferior sort would
boil Staveacre and Tobacco in water and dip their shirts in it, and cure both
Itch and Lice. Many more Medicines for the Itch have been used, as Brimstone
pounded to Powder with Ginger, and tied in a cloth, and infused in fallet Oil
nine days in the Sun, annoint the sore places with this oil and be whole (but
this will smell) also Mercury sublimate ss. beaten to powder, and put into a
quart of Running water three or four days, then with a little cloth wet the
sore places, it may cure the Itch, but it is dangerous, and must not be used
unto raw places, for it may poison the blood, therefore I wish that none would
use it without the advice of his Chyrurgion.

So I come to speak of the incorrigible Scab called by some the Naopolitan
disease, which happen, and hardly found out, the first cure (as Vigo says) of
this foul disease is called Morbus Gallicus, I will speak little of the cure in
this place, because diverse have written largely of it, and the maledy being
Chronicled it will require a long time to perfect, I will only give you some
cautions to preserve from the infection; if you be infected before it be
confirmed, to expel it: The infection of this evil comes chiefly 4 ways,
but seldom or never by eating and drinking, with the diseased as many think,
the most dangerous way of catching this Maledie is by a clean body carnally
acting with an unclean body; the next way of taking it is, man and man, or
woman and woman lying in bed, the one clean the other unclean, the heat of
their bodies do as it were participate of each others Itch, Scab, Pox or
Pestilence; The third way of taking this Infection, is by approaching so near
the diseased party, as to draw in its corrupt breath, as in the Pestilence; The
fourth way is, Infants sucking an unclean woman. Signs how to know this
disease, if it be newly taken not so easily discerned, if of long continuance,
the face of some will be wan and pale, the eyes hollow, and blew some scabs
about the nose, sometime Ulcers, sometimes no Ulcers, a full pain in the head,
great pains in the joints, especially in the night, the Shin bones continually
pained, the Uvula and neck swollen, the Spade bone and sinews in pain, Lazy, and
Lumpish, Gonorrhea swelling, in the Arme-pits little Knobs or Ulcers, about the
privy Members, and Fundament, sometimes Scabs over all the body, with many more.

12 For cure hereof newly taken, and not confirmed.
FIrst of all you shall observe a good diet, that is, eat Veale, Mutton, roasted
Birds of the Mountain, Hens, Chickings, Partridges, or Phesants, and such
like: All salt meat is hurtful, al fish, but Cra-fish; Garlic Onyons, Salt,
Pepper, Swinesflesh, and White-meates, and Venus is forbidden; sometimes the
Patient may use Burrage, Lettis, White beets in Rice broth, when he is wearyed
with meat dry roasted; The second intention is to digest the corrupt Matter with
surrup of Violets, surrup of Fumotary, of each half an ounce, water of
Endiffe, and Maiden hair, a spoonful of Vinegar, let this be taken over
night, the next morning give him this potion, take a handful of Burrage
Flowers, a handful of Mary-goldes: 40 Raysons of the sun stoned, boil them in
a quart of water, to a pint, then take a dram of Rubarh, and insuse in it all
night, in that pint of liquor, dissolve of Diacatholicon and Diaphenicon, of
each half an ounce, in the same liquor, and take it fasting, and fast two
hours, in the interim provide some thin Broth to drink as he Purges, after
purging give some Cordial surrups with Diascordium; the second day Purge
again, the fourth day Sweat 4 hours, the sixth day Sweat 4 hours, and the
eight day sweat 4 hours; in this interim provide this drink, take of Lignum
vite li. j. of the Bark of the said wood li.. ss. Raisons of the Sun stoned,
li. j. Chinaroot ij. Sassafras vj. Salsaperilla ix. Cardus Benedictus, and
Maiden-haire Mj. of Liquorish, and Annyseeds li. ss. of each, and 16 pintes of
water, put all these in a pot very close stopped, and let it stand upon the
coals 24 hours to infuse, then let it boil 24 hours gently; in the boiling,
put in of white wine and quart, scum it, and save the scum, to apply to the
scabby or soate places, strein this liquor and keep it in a vessel, close
stopped, drink this drink and no other 40 days (except at meat) a little
small drink may be permitted, thus havel cured many, at the first, before the
evil be confirmed; also this drink will cure al diseases of the Liver, as the
Dropsy, etc. if rightly used: Further, if the party be Scabby, or Itchy, make
this Bath following, Rec. of the Roots and Leaves of Docks, Chickweed,
Fumoterry, of each a little bundle, Lentils, and Lupins, four handfuls bruised,
Elicampane Roots, Walwort, or the roots instead of Walwort, Elder, li. ij.
Black helibor iiij. Kneeholme li. ij. Brimstone li. ij. boil all these in so
much water as will bath a man, when the third part is wasted, then let the
diseased Bath and sweat in it, two or three times in a week, after Bathing, let
the patient go to bed, and keep warm, and drink the aforesaid drink, this
has cured many but if the Scab be more inveterate, use this unction, Rec. of
Quicksilver killed with fasting spittle, j, in areadinesse, then take the Oil
of Bays, and Masticke of each an ounce, and of the liquor of the Bath
aforenamed a pint, of fresh Butter, and Swines grease, iij. of each; sees all
these until the liquor be wasted, then add clear Turpentine j. of Storax
liquidam ss. White wax iiij. Rock Alum burnt j. Litarge of gold and silver ij.
of each, of Myrrh and Frankensence, ana. ij. juice of Lemons, iij. commixe all
these together with the Quicksilver quenched, and annoint the Scabs, this will
cure; if you annoint and sweat until the Flux be moved, but if this evil be
confirmed and ulcerated it will require a longer discourse, which you may have
hereafter if time permit; thus briefly I thought good to direct the Soldier,
and others to prevent the danger thereof. I have read that Charles the eighth,
King of France, coming to Rome, and Naples with his Soldiers, they brought
this Disease into France, the Spaniard instead of Silver and Gold, brought it
from the Indies, but I hope better of our Countrymen, and rest, etc.

13. Of the Flux of blood in wounds, and the remedies thereof.
IF the Flux be little it is the easier restrained, but if it flow out
abundantly, there must be speedy remedy, for blood is the treasure of life,
sometimes it chances in the inward parts, sometimes outwardly, inwardly by
violent moving, and such like may break a vein, outwardly by Swords, Guns,
Pikes, and other Instruments; also it does happen by venomous medicines applied
to wounds, corrupting the veins, which cause a Flux; if the Flux happen in the
inward parts, as in the Liver, Lungs, Reins, and Bladder, it is of hard
curation, yet it must not be neglected, for which purpose all stipticke and
conglutinating things must be used, as Cumfrey roots, knot-grasse roots, Gum
Dragagante, Terra Lemnia, Bolearmoniacke, Rice, Quinces, Lentils, Pomgranats,
and such other cooling drinks are best, and broths made with the abovenamed
simples may help forward the cure, but this Medicine following I have proved;
Rec. Pomgranat Rindes j. Pulveris. Bolearmonack ss. Terra Sigillata ij.
Knot-grasse and Cumphrey roots pounded, and the juice pressed out, Gum
Dragagante ss. intused in that juice, make the said Powders into Pills, like
little Bullets with this infusion, and give the sick six of them in a day,
three fasting in the morning, and three of them last at night, continuing this
ten days, and it will make you whole.

14: The Flux in outward wounds
ARe chiefly two, if it flow from the veins it is gross and red, if it come
from the Arteries, it is of a purple color, and comes out by heaps, both
these must be speedily cured, if the Orifice be large; to cure this, take of
Bolearmoniack, Terra Sigillata, ana. j. Dragons blood, ss. Alloes, and
Frankensence, ana. ij. Hares hair cut in pieces, of Sponge of the Sea dried
and burnt, Dragagant brayed, mingle all these together and bind it to the
wound, and let it rest to the third day; so man's blood dried into powder will
stench the blood, the wound being filled: also, if need require you may bind
the extreme parts, or open a vein in the contrary part, as if the right Arm
be wounded, open a vein in the left; you may cautorize the place, wet Lint in
Vinegar, or a cloth wet in Vinegar and put about the Codds, has been used
with good effect; besides all these, Gerrard in his Herball speaks of an Herb
called Clownes all-heale, that was found out by a Mower which wounded himself
with his Sith dangerously, he not having any Surgeon near, by accident
gathered an Herb which stenched the blood, and after made a Medicine of the
same Herb and healed the wound; this being known to Gerrard he called it
Clownes all heal, this I have proved. Also it happened that I was coming from
Winchester, I met with a Soldier coming from a Fight near Ailsford, which
was wounded largely in the neck, so that the Flux of blood could not be
stopped, I remembered an Herb showed me by an old Midwife that grows in
shadowed places, I searched under an Apple Tree and found the same Herb, and
gathered a handful, and rubbed it in my hands, and filled the wound
therewith, it stenched immediat^y, after I made a Salve of the same Herb, and
cured the wound in 14. days, only I ^nnoynted it with Oil of Hipericon the
second dressing, and gave directions to him to do likewise; the same Soldier
^ame to my dwelling in 14. days perfect^y whole, and gave me thanks; this I
have often proved since that time, the name of the Herb is, Archangel, or dead
Nettle, which carries a purple Flower, this I made trial of when all other
Medicines could not be gotten; I write this because any Country people and
Soldiers may find this Herb when Chirurgions be not present, and other
Medicines far distant, unless the Soldier carry them in his Knap-sack, and
the Countryman keep them in his Closet until time of need.

15 Of Wounds.
VVOunds in general are according to the several Members, as wounds in the
head, face, neck, shoulders, and arms, etc. but Wounds chiefly to be observed
are two, that is, Mortal, and Curable; also wounds curable may be made mortal
by ignorant Chirurgions, therefore I wish all men to hasten to an able
Surgeon. As wounds that are mortal is in the Brain, the Heart, the
stomach, the small Guts and the Bladder, nevertheless I wish all Chirurgions
not to neglect the means, for I have seen Gods mercy wonderfully shown in
giving strength to Nature when the judgment of man fails; As touching wounds
superficial or deep after the Flux of blood is stopped as before directed, and
that your Surgeon cannot be had; first consider whether there be any
dislocation of bones or fractures, or whether any veins, Arteries, sinews,
ligaments, tendons, or Muscels be wounded, if you find any of these you must
proceed to the Cure very carefully, or else you may make that wound gangred or
rotten, which at the first might be cured; this I have seen by ignorant people,
applying hot Medicines to hot and chollerick wounds, and cold Medicines to the
cold causes, as Hemlock, Henbane, and such others, which I omit, and come to
show you whether there be any Dislocation or Fracture; First, compare one
member with the other, as if the shoulder be depressed it will be lower then
the other, neither can the party lift it to his head; if the elbow be out of
joint, the hand cannot be turned about, neither will it be like the other, for
the reducing of such a member, hasten to your Bone-setter, but in his absence
if such a thing happen in the fingers, toes, or the elbow, two men grasping the
member very fast, a third man directing them to pull in the joint, and the said
third man with his right thumb upon the place, the left hand turning the
member into his right place, which the Patient will soon find ease, if
rightly performed. Further, if the shoulder be out, let that man put his arm
over the round of a Ladder, or over the head of another man that is higher then
he that is dislocated, the Surgeon, or he that sets the joint put both
his thumbs to the place, a second minister or two holding fast the lame Arm
over the Ladder, or over the same man's head, so the sick may be above the
ground, and the weight of his body with this help may reduce this joint into
his proper place; many other ways there are, but I omit, and come to
Fractures, which must be very diligently placed, if in the thigh, or above the
elbow where is but one bone it may be broke short off, so the member will be
shorter then the other; this must be drawn into his proper place as before is
showed, if riven or shaken into splinters, they must be all placed and bound up
in some frame or spleets, past-board, or Iron made according to the form of the
member, if wounded through the flesh, there must be a place left for the
dressing of the wound, and an implaister made with Bolearmonick, Terra
sigilata, Gum Dragagante, Dragons blood, whites of Eggs laid upon Flax, and
applied round the member grieved, put into the wound Oil of Elder, and Oil of
Hipericon, also make Tents with Lint rolled in the same Oil (but be sure make
them so, that you leave none of them behind when you take them out of the
wound;) above all be sure that no dust nor hairs fall in the wound, nor Lint
left behind that comes off the Tent; also there must be care had of wounds of
dry bodies, and of moist bodies, as tender bodies are more moist then those
that labor and travel, if you find them to be moist bodies, you may use
drying powders, as Bolearmoniack, if proud flesh, or dead flesh, then use burnt
Alum, or Precipitat, or you may make this powder: Rec. Sarcocolle, j. Oliban.
ij. Aloes Epatick iij. Mastick j. Frankincense, ij. Dragons blood j ss.
Balaustia j make this into fine powder and it will incarn wounds, if you find
the wound to be dry you may use the said oil of Hipericon, oil of Lillies; if
the sinews be wounded, oil of Elder is very good. To preserve a wound from
Imposthumation, Rec: of Mallows, Beets, Violet leaves, and Landebeef, of each
a handful, boil them until they be soft, then put in oil of Roses, and white
Lillies, make a Cataplasme or Poultis, with Roses, Rye meal or Barley meal,
adding some Hoglard, apply this warm until the Impostume be removed, for no
wound can heal until the Impostume be cured.

Likewise a Member may Cancern if not speedily removed, that Member must be
taken off; to prevent this you must observe, whether the Member about the
wound, do alter in color, glissen and of a blew color, the member does not
quite rot, but the spirits being hindered from coming to that place, it does
mortify; which comes by applying venomous Medicines, sometimes by overtying
of a member when a bone is broken; sometimes by applying things that are cold,
stipticke, and sharp, these and such others may cause Cancerna, now to
preserve the Member wounded from cancerna; Rec. oil of Roses, Umphacin, oil
of Mirtive ana: iij. the juice of Plantaine and Nightshad, ana: ij. ss. let
them sees all together until the juice be wasted, then put to white Wax j. ss.
Flower of Beans, Lintiles, and Barley ana: ij. ss. of all the Sanders
pulverised ana: j. ss. Bolarmenacke j. grains and mirtiles a Dram, make this
into a Plaster, with oil of Elder, labor it in a mortar into a plaster,
besides all these, there happneth Feavors, Cramps, Convulsions, and many other
by applying evil Medicines to a wound which must be removed, before the cure
will be ended; if there be a Feavor, you must give cooling Glisters and purge
with Potions following, make a decoction with Cordial flowers, in a ciate full
of that decoction, dissolve of Diacatholicon of Diaprunis, ana: ss. surrup of
Roses ss. take this fasting as a potion, if pained in the head, take Pilule
chochie or Pilule aure, and such like; if the Crampe assail the body, rub the
member with warm clothes, or oil of Hedghog; if a Convulsion, rub the pole and
the member with oil of Castoreum and Sage. These impediments being removed, I
proceed with the Cure as follows; If the wound be large or dangerous, let his
diet be good Broths, and meats of easy digestion, as Birds of the Hills,
Mutton, Veale, Chickins and Rabbits; he must avoid salt meats, Beef, Poulse,
Cabbig, and windy meats, as fruits, nor drink no inflaming drink: The next
intention is to keep the body soluble, with potions, Pills, or Glisters, then
you must wash the wound with this lotion, take Plantain water, Buglosse, or
Burrage water, odoriserous Wine, Pomgranet flowers, Plantain leaves, the
flowers of St. John's wort, boil this together and wash the wound, then make
Tents and roll them in oil of Hipericon, and fill the hollow places with
them, then make Plasters to mundisie: Rec. of clear Turpentine ij. Honey of
Roses j. Smallege j. let them boil together a little time, add thereto the
yolke of an egg, Saffron, a little Myrrh ij. of Alloes j. make this into a
stiff Plaster, with oil of Roses, and flower of Barley, this will mundifie
and clear a wound in two days, if not very foul; after the wound is clear,
you may proceed again with healing Medicines; if not mundified, you may use
Unguentum Egiptiacum, or unguentum Basilicum; and for a healing-Plaister, the
wound being mundified take of Clownes all-heale, falilly, Archangell, ana: one
handful, pound them, and boil it in Hoglard, then strain it, let it stand to
be cold, take the top of it, pour away the bottom, and boil it with wax and
Rosen, so much as is sufficient to make a Plaster, this, or one of these
Herbs made in a Salve, will heal a green wound, or you may have this
Implaister made at any Apothecaries, Rec. Salet oil iiij. white Wax j.
Turpentine ss. Greek Pitch, j. Frankincense, and Mastick ana: j Saffron j.
mingle these and boil them upon a gentle fire, and make Plasters: So I end
for old Ulcers, you may mundifie the Soar with White wine, and Aquavitae, or
with the Mundificatives before written, as Egiptiacum, or unguentum
apostolorum, and finish the Cure with the above named Medicines.

16 To cure a Gunshot.
THe Chyrurgeons first intention must be to stop the Flux of blood, next to
search diligently, whether the bullet do remain in the member wounded, or
whether the bullet have carried any thing before it into the wound, as Paper,
cloth or such like if so, the next intention is, with a Terra-bellum or other
Instrument to take it out. Make this Digestive, Rec: Turpentine washed in
Aquaviter iv. Vitelorum ovorum number ij. oil of Roses ss. Precipitat twice
calcined j. Saffron j. commix this and make a Plaster, after this you may wash
the wound with Plantain water, red Rose water, with oil of Roses and oil of
Elder, after mundific the wound with this: Rec: Venice Turpentine washed in
Aquaviter iij. oil of Eggs j. or Yolks of Eggs number ij. Honey of Roses,
and surrup of Roses, ana: ij. the bran of Fetches, Frankincense, Mastick of
each ss. cover your Tents, and make Plasters, until the wound be clean, then
you may proceed to end the cure with the forcnamed oil of Hipericon, and
healing Salves.

17 To cure Burning with Gunpowder, or burning with fire and scalding.
IF it happen that any part of the body be burned with Gunpowder or fire; take
the Juice of Onyons iv. and common salt ss. beat them well together, and if the
burn blistered, anoint it three or four times in a day, for three days, then
you shall proceed as follows: but if the skin be burnt, and made raw, you
must cover it all over with the finest Lawn and, anoint it with the Juice of
Onyons, and Salt, letting the Lawn lie upon the wound, until it is whole; but
if deeply burned, use this following, Rec. the finest Hoglard li. iv. Linseed
oil li. ij. oil of Roses li. ss. of Mallow-Leaves, Violet leaves, the Brood
of Bees; Plantain leaves, Burnet, Peny-wort, Tulson, Live-ever ana: Mj. infuse
these 6 days upon a gentle fire, add thereto white Wax li: ss, white Niter
vj. also you may put to Shoomakers peece-greace, this being used will cure it,
chipping off the Lawne, as it health: if there be Blisters you must not cut
them, it will be painful: you may make part of this Medicine if you need not
the whole Receipt; Also if the burn or scald be not much, you may pound Onyons,
and a little Salt, or Leeks with a little Salt, so much as will cover the
soar, and let it lie 24 hours, in the interim, take a handful of House-Leek,
and the inner bark of the Elder, bruise it and boil it in a quart of Cream
into an oil, scum off the clear oil as it arises, keep it and anoint the
soar place twice or thrice in the day, and it will be whole, this I have often
proved: You may beat into the Cream the white of an Egg, if your eyes or
eyelids should be burned. Rec: Rose water iij Woman's Milk ij. the oil of
whites of two Eggs, Sugar Candy half a quartern, mingle these and make an
ointment and annoint about the eyelids, and about the eyes: or you may make
this, Rec: oil of Roses vj. white Lead washed in Red Rose water ij. white Wax,
oil of the Whites of four Eggs, the Gum called Campher, make this into an
Unguent, to take away the spots and scarres, take oil of Eggs, and oil of
Almonds, and wash the face it clears the skin.

Courteous Reader, Seeing many people, as well Soldiers as others, have
neglected the means in time of danger to preserve their health, I thought good
to show you briefly some easy medicines, which may be had most of them with
little cost (other Medicines may be made for you at the Apothecarys) to keep in
your Closets, or Knap-sacks until time of need to make use of them in the
absence of your Physician or Chyrurgion, which I wish you to hasten unto for
advice.

FINIS.
A Table of the Weights used by Physicians,
A Scruple. A Dram. An Ounce. A Pound. li. A Quarter. q. A Half: ss. A
Handful. M. Of every one. ana.



