AN ELEGY Upon the Most Ingenious Mr. HENRY CARE, Who Departed this Life on the
Eighth Day of August, 1688. and in the Two and Fortieth YEAR of his AGE.
HOw! The Great CARE Deceased! And not one Verse
Dropped by some Muse on his Lamented Hearse!
It cannot be: All must his Praises tell,
That did both Write, and Live, and Die so well.
That maugre Laws and Levites durst be good,
And in most Crooked Times, most Upright stood:
Whom all the Tory's Curses could not draw
From an Adherance unto what he saw
Would the True Interest of his Country be,
Which is, A well-Established Liberty
In Things Religious; that none may have Power
His Neighbor for his Conscience to Devour.
For when of late, the Churchmen with high hand,
Did persecute Dissenters through the Land,
And on pretense of their Loud Penal Laws,
Made them a Prey to the Devouring Jaws
Of Villainous Informers, who were then
The Kings best Subjects styled, by those Hot Men:
CARE Saw, and Grieved to see what work they made:
And to Divert them by his Pen Essayed:
And did to Peaceful Counsels them incline,
(But this, Alas! was Cross to their Design;
Which was for the Dissenters Ruin laid,
From which no Arguments could them persuade)
For his Discerning Soul did then foresee
Those Violences soon would fatal be
Unto Themselves, and Gall and Wormwood bring,
When once they were considered by the King:
This He Remonstrated; but all in vain:
Dissenters then no Favor could obtain.
But when Great JAMES into his Royal thought
The Sufferings of Dissenting Subjects brought;
And to the great Rejoicing of the Nation
Did Publish His most Gracious Declaration
For Liberty of Conscience, and set free
Dissenters from the Church-mens Tyranny:
Then CARE did in Heroiek Numbers sing
Praises to GOD, and Thanks unto the King:
This was the Joyful Epoch! From hence
He saw Great Britains Glory would commence:
'Twas this he saw that would the Kingdom Crown
With Wealth and Honor, Riches and Renown.
And therefore when the Nations Restless Foes
So great a Blessing did in Print oppose,
He thought himself obliged to declare
How Vain and Groundless their Pretenses were:
And that such might have nothing left to say,
He also Published his DRACONICA.
And always, as Occasion did him Urge,
He unto Persecutors proved a Scourge:
This he himself affirmed to be his Station:
But O! so great a Blessing to the Nation
Is snatched from hence, even in his prime of Years,
And left all Good men for his Loss in Tears:
His Loss indeed is National we see,
And as his Loss is, should Our Mourning be:
Well may we drein whole Rivers from our Eyes,
For we his Matchless Worth could never prize!
But Tears alas cannot bring him back; His Gain
Does prove our Loss; and we now Sigh in vain,
And tho Vile men have often Reproached him here,
He did not them nor their Reproaches fear:
Nor did their Threats their hop'd-for issue find:
He did his Duty, not his Danger mind.
And maugre all their Scoffs that him deride,
A Protestant he Lived, and such he Died.
And tho This Age unto his Worth be blind,
Yet will his Writings such Acceptance find
With After-Ages, that his Name will be
Admired and Honored by Posterity.
But words don't need his Praises to relate,
For his own Works do praise him in the Gate.
By them it is his Worth is best Expressed --
Grief stops my Pen, and I must weep the rest.
His EPITAPH.
UNSder these Clods that Body lies,
Whose Soul now soars above the Skies;
Yet will they both Unite again,
And in Eternal Bliss remain,
But Reader, when thou do but know
Who 'twas that did this Body owe,
'Twill cause thee weep ever you are aware,
Here lies the most Ingenious HENRY CARE.
Who was (to render him his Due)
To GOD, his King, and to his Country True.
Here lies (let Carpers all say what they can)
A Loyal Subject, and an Honest Man.
With Allowance.

London: Printed by George Larkin, at the Two Swans without Bishopsgate.


