ELIZA'S BABES: OR THE Virgins-Offering.

BEING Divine Poems, and Meditations.


Written by a LADY, who only desires to advance the glory of GOD, and not her
own.

LONDON, Printed by M. S. for Laurence Blaiklock, and are to be sold at his
Shop near the Middle Temple Gate. 1652.

TO MY SISTERS.
Look on these Babes as none of mine,
For they were but brought forth by me;
But look on them, as they are Divine,
Proceeding from Divinity.
To the READER.
WHen first the motion came into my mind, that these Babes of mine, should be
sent into the world; I would feign have suppressed that motion, for diverse
reasons which may be imagined, by them, that shall read them: But especially by
those, that knew my disposition. But rising one day, from my Devotions, it was
suggested to my consideration, that those desires were not given me, to be kept
in private, to my self, but for the good of others.

And if any unlike a Christian shall say; I wrote them, for mine own glory. I
like a Christian, will tell them; I therefore sent them abroad; for such a
strict union is there betwixt my dear God and me, that his glory is mine, and
mine is his; and I will tell them too, I am not ashamed of their birth; for
before I knew it, the Prince of eternal glory had affianced me to himself;
and that is my glory.

And now to all such shall I direct my speech whose brave spirits may carry
them to high desires. Place not your affections in your Youth, beneath your
selves; but if you would be happy on earth, and enjoy these outward blessings,
with free and lawful contentment; bestow your first affections on my Almighty
Prince. I would have you all love him, and him to love you all. I being his,
must do, as he will have me: and methinks, he directs me to tell you, that
you shall never be happy on Earth, nor glorious in Heaven, if you do not love
him, above all earthly things. More, I must tell you, that if you will dedicate
to his service, and present into his hands, your wealth, wit, spirit, youth,
beauty, he will give you wealth, if less, more useful: your wit more pure,
your spirit more high, and transcendent, and your youth and beauty, which time
will steal from you, or some malignant disease, with pain, rend from you;
them he will lay up awhile for you, and return them again for eternity, with
great advantage. And that you need not doubt of the certainety of what is told
you, they that tell it you have found part of it true, and shall the rest. I
cannot be content, to be happy alone, I wish you all blessed too; nor can I
smother up those great and infinite blessings, that I have received from him,
with private thanks. That Great Prince of Heaven and Earth, proclaimed by
Angels, that he was come into the world, to show his good will and love to me;
was here content, to dye a public death for me, to save me, from a Hell of
misery; in which I lay, and should have layen, bad not he, the Prince of Peace,
and the fairest and chiefest among the sons of men, shed his most precious and
royal blood, for me; and before he dyed be left word, that I should not fear,
for it was his great and glorious Fathers will, to bestow on us a Kingdom. And
was so great a Prince, not ashamed to avow so great affection and love to me,
and shall I be ashamed to return him public thanks, for such infinite and
public favors? No: I will not, but with all my mind, heart, and soul, I
bless and praise my Almighty God, for so great benefits, bestowed on me, his
unworthy servant. Methinks it is not enough for my self only to do it, but I
must send out my Babes, to do it, with me, and for me: And if any shall say,
others may be as thankful as she, though they talk not so much of it; Let
them know that if they did rightly apprehend the infinite mercies of God to
them, they could not be silent: And if they do not think the mercies of God
worth public thanks; I do, and therefore I will not be ashamed, to be that
one in ten that returned, to acknowledge himself a cleansed Leaper. And now my
Babes some may say to you, unless you had been more curiously dressed, or more
finely shaped, your Mother might have kept you in obscurity. Tell them, I sent
you to their more learned and refined wits, to form you to a more curious
shape, and tire you in a more enticing dress. But this I will say for you, You
want none of your limbs, and your clothes are of rich materials. I dare not
say, I am loath to let you go: Go you must, to praise him, that gave you me.
And more I Will say for you, which few Mothers can, you were obtained by virtue,
borne with ease and pleasure, and will live to my content and felicity. And so
Adieu: But stay! Something you may truly say for your own imperfections, and
your Mothers excuse, That some of you were borne, when herself was but a child;
but

My joy, my bliss, my happy Story
In Heaven is writ, and that is my Glory.
Psalm 56. Verse. 10.
I Glory in the word of God,
To praise it I accord.
With joy I will declare abroad,
The goodness of the Lord.
All you that goodness do disdain,
Go; read not here:
And if you do; I tell yon plain,
I do not care.
For why? above your reach my soul is plac'st,
And your odd words shall not my mind distaste.
And when you read these lines, mistake not a Divine affection, for a Poetical
fancy; for I affect not to express my fancy, but I would have my fancy express
my affection.

The Invocation.
Come Sacred Muse to me this day,
And ever here, make you a stay
Within the closet of my breast;
For I with thee, do find great rest.
My sweet Companion, here thou art,
Dear Lord, Let it not from me part.
From thee, this gift, I did receive,
To thee, the same I do bequeath.
Aspire, aspire, my mind, aspire,
From earthly things unto the higher.
Set not thy mind on base desires,
But think upon the heavenly Quires,
Of Angels sweet, that singing be,
And still the face of God do see.
Admiring much, his wisdom great,
And glorious sweetness of his seat.
Then hie my Soul to that sweet place,
Where glory is, with mirth and grace.
The Request.
Come sweet Spirit expel my fear,
Assure me that thou have a care
Of me, and of my giddy youth,
Assure me of it, still for Truth,
That thy Spirit shall me direct,
And that thy power shall me protect.
Then shall my spirit be at rest,
And with sweet thoughts my soul be blessed,
When that I know, thou love me,
And that my youth shall guided be,
By that Spirit, that does dispose,
All for the happiness of those,
The which be servants unto thee;
Blessed be thy Name, that so made me.
The Answer.
HIs Spirit much thou do desire,
His Spirit much he will inspire.
What thou desire, that shall be,
Thou have thy wishes granted thee.
With thee, needs must I wish to live,
That make me wish what thou will give.
Lord harden thou my heart, as hard as steel,
And loves vain passion, let me never feel,
Only in Heaven, my soul shall seek her rest,
In Heaven perpetually to be blessed.
On Earth a while I must tormented be,
Because that sin, too much abides in me.
It is the enjoying of thy Spirit,
That makes my soul here, true joy inherit.
And here to show me that thou hat'st my sin
Thy Spirit like the Sunbeams, is drawn in.
Then does my Soul, full woe, and sad remain
Till that sweet spirit does appear again.
Then when thy Spirit, again reigns in me
Then comes my joy, away my pain does flee.
For when thy Spirit my Soul does enjoy,
Nothing can then, my happy Soul annoy.
For why? No cause of sorrow, I can see,
Because, beyond my self, it raises me.
Anguish.
FRom this distraction, Lord my poor soul bring,
That still thy heavenly praises, I may sing.
For this distemper does my soul affright;
My Lord, it takes from me, all my delight,
And pleasure that I had, in serving thee.
This trouble great, vain folly brings to me.
If from thy holy service, I be taken,
No comfort can I find, but endless pain.
For what can yield our Souls here true content,
If to serve thee, we are not wholly bent?
For here I see vain pleasures, quickly fly,
And that which I did love, must surely dye.
But in thy service, if I pleasure take,
And thy sweet word my whole delight do make.
That word does still my drooping soul assure,
That for the best it shall be all to me,
If patiently I do awaite on thee.
Of Submission.
WHat comes to me, Lord comes from thee?
Naught comes to me, but comes from thee.
What though, against my will it be,
If thou it fitting see for me.
Let be, and Master thou my will,
That I thy servant, may fulfill
Thy holy will, and thee obey:
Make me obedient be, I pray.
If I obey thy Majesty,
I need not fear, although I dye.
Hope.
WHat though my morning be debard of light,
For me thou shall break forth, a noon most bright.
The only Comforter.
WHat in this world do I deerer esteem?
Or greater in my mind, here still do deem?
Then that Spirit which flows still from thee,
Which makes my soul in happy bliss to be?
For nothing in this world, here can me please,
Nor yet my Soul, from pain and grief can ease:
But thy sweet spirit which abides for aye,
For these vain worldly things, do fade away.
My soul immortal, did proceed from thee,
And pleased with mortal things, she cannot be.
You earthly pleasures, I can use you all,
But treasures of my soul, I Will not you call.
Go flee vain pleasures, for sure all must grant,
Naught can us please, but what is permanent.
In thee my Lord, my soul alone is blessed,
In thee alone, I do attain sweet rest.
The Souls Flight.
WHither away, my Soul, do high,
That thou so fain, from me would fly?
Sure it is, to some holy place;
That thou thy self, there may solace.
Thou will not here abide with me,
But go to God, there to be free.
To him thou liv'st, to him thou flyest,
That is the reason that thou highest.
And here I wish thee not to stay,
I wish to Heaven, thou mighst away.
From Prison often, I wish thee free,
That thou may be at liberty.
The Virgins Offering.
WIth thee, blessed Virgin, I would bring
An Offering, to please my King.
Two Turtle Doves, thou did present,
Can there be better by me sent.
A Lamb more pure, then they could be,
I heard was thither brought by thee.
These two small Turtles now of mine,
To him, I do present with thine.
The Lamb will serve for thee and me,
No better offering, can there be.
Thus with thee, Virgin do I bring
An offering will please my King.
To my Doves.
YOur life, I meant not, till my death
Might give you freedom with my breath.
And when I breathed in Heavens Air free,
I did intend your liberty.
But offered now, you sure must be,
A Sacrifice of thanks from me.
When we are dead, we cannot give,
Our offerings must be while we live.
Two Doves, no Phoenix, you must be.
I must see that live, comes from me:
You as an offering, go from me,
But on your wings, my heart must be.
My heart now free, from all desire,
But what is kindled by heavens fire.
To him, I do present, as free,
As ever he did give it me.
I on your wings, would sore aloft,
And still live free from humane thought.
Accept great God, what I present,
Thy glory is my Souls intent.
Go now my Doves, and soar aloft,
The drooping heart raise you full often,
To such a height, bear it away,
That it may see celestial day,
And never let it on earth rest;
But leave it in Heavens glorious breast.
The Triumph.
Since thou from thrall have set me free,
I will sing praises unto thee.
Thou have brought me from Temptation,
And filled me with contemplation
Of thy heavenly habitation,
In which lives a glorious Nation,
Which triumphantly do sing,
Praise and glory to their King.
No darkness, nor no doleful night,
Obscures their Vision of delight,
No noise does interrupt their voice,
They do incessantly rejoice.
May thou my Soul, now be so bold,
That glorious place for to behold,
And say, how that fair Cities blessed,
In which the righteous shall have rest.
The walls are raised of Gems more bright,
Then are the Diamonds here in sight:
The Sapphire, Diamond, Ruby fine,
Their beauty in each one combine.
The other Gems their luster bright,
With them do give so fine a light;
That like the Rainbow it does show,
But far more bright, you will think I know.
Most glorious things, are said of thee
Thou City, where the mighties be,
The streets, are of the purest mold,
Exceeding far, the brightest gold;
And from Gods glorious Throne does spring
A River that sweet pleasures bring,
Adorned with many a goodly tree,
Which fresh and flourishing ever be.
They do not only please the eye,
But heal the wounds, would make us dye,
Nor fruitless do their trees appear,
But pleasant fruit yield all the year.
I do not wonder, fruit so rife
Upon these goodly Trees of life.
No change, does in this place appear,
No scorching heat, nor cold is here.
This heaven the bright Lamb his wife gives,
And she in this place always lives.
She is more lovely then the Rose,
Fresh, fair and beauteous, and still goes,
In long white Robes, so pure and clear,
Like Orient Pearl she does appear:
And on her head, a Crown more bright,
Then is the Sun, here in our sight.
The pure white Lilly, at her feet,
And pleasant Rose there strive to meet;
For all their beauty and their grace,
Is from reflection of her face.
These lovely flowers do never fade,
But for eternity were made.
How can this place but pleasing be?
When here such pleasures you may see!
And in this place, you may behold,
The ancient Martyrs Crowned with gold,
With Palms of Victory, in their hand,
Which were given them at Gods command.
By a bright stream like Crystal pure,
The blessed Saints sit safe and sure.
In a fair Grove, pleasant and sweet,
They with great joy each other meet.
And they recount, their troubles past,
And their transcendent joys at last.
The Quires of Angels, still do sing
Continual praises, to their King
Like them, let me, be praising thee,
While here on earth thou wilt have me be.
Here let me drink, deep of that spring
That flows from thee, and I shall sing,
Sweet praises to thy holy name:
My tongue and hand, shall speak thy same,
I still must end my God to thee,
All praise and glory given be.
To my Sister. S. G.
HEavens bright shining star, shine in thy face,
Thy mortal body, with rare virtues grace.
I wish those beams may still thy soul inwrap,
That Satan may not thy sweet soul entrap.
From his malicious suares, I wish thee free,
That thou may have thy soul at liberty.
Set not thy heart upon these fading pleasures,
Thou art an heir to heavens eternal treasures.
Their vain delights will not abide, but vanish
From thy pure soul, in youth them quickly banish,
If thou delight in them they will breed thy pain,
But if thou banish them, then shall thou gain
To thy high-borne Soul immortal treasure,
Celestial joy, true eternal pleasure.
Then here on earth thy heaven thou shall begin,
For pleasures vain, entice thee unto sin.
Vain pleasure soon, Sweet Sister do thou fly,
That sin in thee, may fade full soon and dye.
Fix thou thine eyes on that fair Sun of light,
Who aye inwrap thee in his beams most bright
Dazzle and blind thine eyes, to earthly things,
Open them in Heaven, where his sweet angels sings.
He bring thy soul to that immortal place,
Where like the Sun shall shine thy mortal face.
I know you pleased will be, to hear of me,
If I am blessed or happy, you shall see.
My Soul, I therefore now have sent you dressed,
When so she is tired, she cannot but be blessed.
My glory and my Lord have taken from me
The garments of sad mourning, you shall see:
Upon her head a Crown of joy he'ath placed,
How can she be but happy, when so graced.
The bright fair robe of honor she has on,
Which can be given but by himself alone,
Seeing he has dressed me for his throne of glory,
But I must stay to act another Story.
Canticles 2.
THe Winter is past, the Summer is come, I will now solace my self in the
Vineyards of my beloved; for he will guide me here by his Counsel, and at
length receive me to his Glory.

The Rapture.
MOst people hover here below,
Too near the earth, I Will not do so;
But I Will arise, and to Heaven go,
I will not tarry here below.
This earthly state's, too mean for me,
I Will flee where the bright Angels be,
That still the face of God do see,
With them, my Soul can best agree,
Among them I Will set me down and sing,
The praises of our glorious King,
By him we have our blessed being,
We with delight his praises sing.
Still in this Rapture let me bide,
And from this pleasing bliss never glide,
But be like to the Eagle eyed.
I have just now methinks descride
The glorious Sun in Heaven so bright,
On this transcendent throne of light;
It dazles now my humane sight;
The lust of it is so bright.
^ would not now with mortals be,
^o tell them in what bliss are we.
^et them arise, and come to me,
^f they would know our dignity.
^ let me not to earth now go,
How dark and hideous, it does show,
They crawl like Ants methinks below,
Among such Creatures I Would not go.
But if to earth thou will have me,
To do what thy will does decree;
Let me descend more willingly;
By me thy will must acted be.
But yet before I go away
Grant I beseech, for what I pray,
Or let me here with thee still stay,
Take no offense at my delay.
Oh let thy heavenly Sun of light
With me send down his beams most bright,
So to my soul shall be no night,
She being inwrapt in Heavens bright light.
The Flight.
ELiza for, ask now not here,
She Is gone to heaven, to meet her Peer.
For since her Lord, on earth was dead,
What tarry here! she would not, she sed.
And to the heavens, she took her flight,
That she might be still in his sight,
And so to us she bid adieu,
But proved her self a lover true.
The Life.
IF as men say, we live not, where we are,
But where we love,
I live above.
For what on earth, or yet in heaven is there
Desired can be,
It Is none but thee.
Great God, thou only worth desiring art,
And none but thee, then must possess my heart.
My Wishes.
I Wish no wit to wrong my Brother,
I wish not wealth to wrong another;
I wish no beauty to enthrall,
I wish no worldly wish at all.
I wish from sin God would me bring,
I wish for heaven, at my ending.
Upon a pain at heart.
GOd laid his hand upon my heart,
To see, if I would from it part:
I was content to let it go,
I liked it best to have it so;
For then no more it should be pained,
When it with him a place had gained,
But he would hav't here, a few more days,
An Instrument unto his praise.
The Portion.
WHat if the world on me should frown,
Thou art my Crown;
(...) wealth and beauty part away,
Thou art my stay.
Let others count this world a hell,
In it I Am well;
^o wonder, if I happy be,
Since, I Am in thee;
For why? in thee all bliss does dwell,
Then here, to me can be no hell.
The Friday before Easter.
WHy should I now, lament and moan?
The blessed seed, to day was sown,
Shall never in the earth decay,
But rise in triumph, the third day.
On Easter day.
A Rise and see, why do thou sleep,
The bed of earth, could not him keep,
The Sun is risse, that made the day,
^n grave, thou needs fear no decay.
Those glorious beams has made the earth,
A place to give thee a new birth.
From Mothers womb thou came to be
A Creature of Mortality;
From womb of earth, thou raised shall be,
A creature like the Deity;
When thou art pleased, that I shall dye,
I am content in earth to lie:
There shall I safely lie and rest,
Till thou will raise me with the blessed.
Though I could wish, that it might be
As were my childish thoughts in me,
That like Elias I might rise,
On Cherubs wings, in Chariot wise:
To thy bright heaven, where I might be,
There clothed with immortality:
Those thoughts were childish it is confessed,
In grave I must be for heaven dressed.
The earth a while, my body must retain,
Though as a King, my Soul in heaven does reign.
The Pavillion.
ON thy fair wings, most sacred Dove,
Let me be raised, with thee on high
Unto the heavenly God of Love,
Where I shall rest me quietly.
No ill shall there my Dove affright,
I Will bid all fear on earth adieu,
For I am now at such a height,
As cannot reached be by you.
In this Pavillion I shall sing,
Though I may see you fly at me,
I am assured by his bright wing,
He will not let me wounded be.
The Submission.
MY soul to Heaven would have and fly,
And there make suit, that I may die
Because from heaven she is detained,
Lives in a body sometimes pained:
And in her glory cannot be,
So long, as here she stays in me.
But that thy will she does respect,
And looks to what thou have elect,
And will contented be to stay;
That here thy will, she might obey:
The wishes rather to please thee,
Then in her glory for to be.
The Change.
Vain world, when as I loved thee.
Dire sadness still possessed me,
But since I lernt to despise thee,
Sweet joys and gladness fills me.
The Choice.
HEavenly treasure,
In some measure
Have thou here unto me sent,
Yet I would dye,
And to heaven fly
To possess a full content.
My soul's sweet joy
Naught does annoy:
But my body's sometimes pained,
I cannot be
From all ill free,
Till bright heaven, I have obtained
Here the story
Of thy glory
Is that which does me delight;
But sure more joy,
With no annoy
Must be in thy Palace bright,
With speed thy will
Let me fulfill,
And take me to thy heavenly light.
The Rest.
FRom Heaven still flows such sweet Celestial joy,
That this earths troubles shall not me annoy,
For I above them shall set safe and free,
And underneath me shall them gliding see.
The morning Star.
BRight morning star of heavenly light,
Rise to my Soul, and banish night,
And with thy fair bright beams expel
Those clouds that make this world like hell:
And with thy sweet attractive power,
Raise thou me, to thy blissful bower:
Where being raised, let me aye rest,
Fixed in the Region of thy breast;
Where like a bright star I shall shine,
I being arrayed in rays of thine.
And to the darkesome world shine bright,
I living in thy glorious light.
The worlds farewell.
NOw to the world I bid adieu,
I Am hasting better things to view:
To Heavens fair Palace shining bright,
It may be I may fly to night,
And among bright Angels spend my time,
To hear and see, but what is Divine:
And with an Orient light be clad,
And live like to the Angels glad;
For what makes me so joyful here,
Cause in thy robes, I shall appear.
Lie thou my body in theeath,
Till thou shall gain a better birth.
From earth thou came spotted with sin,
And thither so return'st again.
When thou art purified then I
Shall take thee and thou shall not dye:
And when the Trumpet thou do hear,
Thou in thy glory shall appear.
A King does come to bring that lort,
Which he himself for thee has got,
A Kingdom it is, of joy and glory,
And now, I end my earthly story.
The Swans.
Fair Swans, you now beyond me go,
In pleasant Robes, like pure white snow,
But I ere long shall be more bright,
In fair eternal robes of light.
Your fair robes fall and fade away,
But my bright robes, shall never decay.
You sing they say, before you dye,
But when I Am dead, then sing shall I.
To a friend at Court.
REtired here content I live,
My own thoughts to me pleasure give.
While thine own actions anger thee,
Sweet quiet thoughts contenteth me.
This blessing sweet retiredness brings,
We envy none, but pity Kings.
Christ's Kingdom.
With you blessed Angels, I must sing,
That brought the news of heavens great King
That from bright Heaven awhile did part,
To raise his Kingdom with my heart.
Before he came there was great strife,
To lead me to a hellish life:
But like an humble Babe came thou,
Yet made those mighty powers to bow.
Thou did regain me for thy right,
For I at first sprang from thy light,
Satan aside a while drew me,
But could not keep me Lord from thee.
When thou have cast off that foul fin,
Thy Kingdom in me did begin,
And here thou will still reign in me,
Till I shall come and reign with thee.
At thy approach, black shades did vanish,
And from my heart thou fear did banish,
And in their room did light appear,
And joy instead of dreadly fear.
Sweet joy and peace, thou did bring me,
How can I choose but sing to thee:
To my great God all glory be,
Thou plac'st his Kingdom here in me.
Vain thoughts banished.
A Dieu vain thoughtt, Adieu, Adieu,
My Soul no more delights in you,
You Are no companion for my spirit,
I must a heaven of bliss inherit.
Your darkness dims my souls clear fight,
And you debar me of heavens light:
When free from you I heaven can view;
Vain thoughts, I now will banish you.
My intention.
GO vain invention, get you hence,
With me make not your residence,
Court not my Muse with fine invention,
To praise my God it is my intention,
Lord let no line be writ by me,
That excludes, or includes not thee,
Earths honor slighted.
OF Earthly honor tell not me;
The vanity of it I see:
It Is like a flower that soon does rise,
If ruffly struck it falls and dies.
But that bright honor which I prise,
Sweetly springs up and never dies;
And's like the Sun whose pleasing ray,
Does banish night, and bring the day:
His pleasant sweet attractive light,
Raises me to a heavenly hight.
With this fair honor being dressed,
I Am free from fear, and live in rest.
It Is heavenly honor I esteem,
All earthly honor vain I deem:
The one is made to fall and dye,
I love what bides eternally.
Luke 20.36. In that world they shall be equal to the Angels.
HEre like the Angels let me be,
And as those blessed spirits free:
From vain engagements let me bide,
And as they with thee still reside.
Like them I Am made, by my new birth,
But I Am still wrapped in robes of earth.
Through a dark mantle I thee see,
But oh that I unwrapt may be.
This blessing now on earth me give,
That like thine Angels I might live.
So shall my soul such sweet joys find,
That earthly things I shall not mind.
Upon the morning rise.
NOw welcome sweet and pleasant Morn,
Do you not think, that I you scorn:
Cause with a more Oriental light,
Imbellisht is my blessed spirit.
With thanks I still you entertain.
For by your light, my eyesight gain:
But you are darkness, to that light,
That is discride, by my souls sights.
Upon hearing the Birds sing.
SWeet Birds with you I Will set and sing,
Due praises to our heavenly King.
Like you me thinks, I am as free,
So made great divine Prince by thee.
My Robes.
I Will not now to thee Lord come
As I from Adam came,
But I will come as in thy Son,
His Robys shall hide my shame.
He is my Spouse, and my loved Lord,
In him thou love me,
I to thy will would still accord,
And with him still agree.
In his bright Robes, I will present
My self to thee and say,
To do thy will is my intent;
In him I thee obey.
Thou can not now, Lord me reject,
Thou must me perfect see:
His beauty does on me reflect,
I Am beautiful to thee.
The Dart.
SHoot from above
Thou God of Love,
And with heavens dart
Wound my blessed heart.
Descend sweet life,
And end this strife:
Earth would me stay,
But I Will away.
I Will dye for love
Of thee above,
Then should I be
Made one with thee.
And let be sed
Eliza's dead,
And of love died,
That love defied.
By a bright beam, shot from above,
She did ascend to her great Love,
And was content of love to dye,
Shot with a dart of Heavens bright eye.
Of Poetry.
POets they say are always poor,
But it is not they are at thy door.
They cannot choose but wealthy be,
For why? Rich poems flow from thee.
It Is they that clime the hill, is none of thine,
But go for aid unto the Muses Nine.
No wonder though such fools are poor,
That go for Alms to a wrong door.
They seek to them to get their wealth,
Who have too little for their self.
To the King. writ, 1644.
TO thee, Great Monarch of this Isle
I send my Babes, pray make them smile;
For yet methinks it is in thy power,
To make them smile, or let them lower.
They Are children to that Prince of might,
Who is the Prince of peace behight.
Do not with war my Babes affright,
In smiling peace is their delight,
My Prince by yielding won the field,
Be not too rigid, dear King yield:
Examples that are great and high.
I hope you will follow, fix your eye
On my great prince, that is your King,
He left a Heaven, you peace to bring.
A Kingdom I Would not have you leave,
But rather three reformed receive.
All bliss and peace I wish to you,
Let us in peace, your presence view.
To the Queen of Bohemiah.
LOng since, it was by me defir'd,
To see that Queen so much admired;
But well I knew, it was not for me,
Great Princesses to go to see.
But thraldomes key, did let me out,
And trouble brought my wish about,
By thraldom then I freedom gained,
By trouble my desire obtained.
I then did see her so admired,
And thy rich graces Lord inspired.
A mind so great and bravely bear,
What in the most breeds care and fear.
A spirit high so humble be,
To deigne her sweet regards to me.
Her I admire, and for her pray
On earth she may live many a day:
And when this earth she shall forsake,
That into heaven, thou would her take,
Where on a Throne she may be Crowned,
And with bright Angels compast round.
The Lover.
COme let us now to each discover,
Who is our friend, and who our Lover,
What? art thou now ashamed of thine,
I tell thee true, I Am not of mine.
And you will say when you him see,
That none but he, defir'd can be,
He is the only pleasing wight,
Whose presence can content my sight.
For He Is the purest red and white,
In whom my soul takes her delight*
He to the flowrs heir beauty gives,
In him the Rose and Lilly lives,
His pleasant hair with feemly grace,
Hangs by his fair sweet lovely face,
And from his pleasing eyes do dart
Their arrows which do pierce my heart.
These beauties all are richly grac'st,
For on his head, a crown is plac'st,
Of glory, which does shine so bright,
As mortal eye can see this light,
This lovely Lord's, the Prince of Peace,
In him, my joys will still increase;
For he is the true, and constant friend,
Whose love begun, will never end.
From Heaven he came with me to dwell,
And saved my soul from direful hell,
It Is he alone my heart does gain,
That keeps me from eternal pain.
While here I live, here he will be;
Death cannot separate him from me:
And when I dye, he will me place,
Where I shall ever see his face.
Into his glory, he will take me,
This do I know, this shall you see.
And now you know my loved friend,
My loves begun, it will not end.
The renowned King.
LAdies! if beauty you desire,
Or to high fortunes do aspire,
Come now with me I have descride,
A Prince, that to all, can you guide.
He is a King of great renown,
And on your head can place a Crown
And with immortal beauty bless,
Can you wish more? yet wish no less
If you desire this Prince to see,
Then leave the world and go with me,
To true Elisian fields, i will guide
You, where I this great Prince espied.
The holy leaves of Sacred writ
Are those Elisians, there let us get,
Where with joy we shall him find,
This glorious Prince will please your mind
He Is like the Rose in Sharon fields,
Pleasant to sight, and sweetness yields,
With sweet and fair, from his bright face,
The Lilly and the Rose gets grace,
With serious thoughts now him behold
If you him love you may be bold,
And in his presence ever be,
His beauty will reflect on thee.
If thou get beauty from his face,
He will you take from your mean place,
And on his Throne he will set thee,
Where with his Crown thou crowned shall be,
That beauty still with thee will stay,
Time will not carry it away.
That Crown shall no man take from thee,
But thou shall wear't eternally.
To my Sister, S. S.
SWeet Sister, Let us in Heaven greet,
Since here on earth we cannot meet
Hard by that stream of Crystal pure,
To meet thee there I will be sure.
That stream which from this Throne does rise,
Whose waters pure cure our ill eyes:
Then let us sit us down and rest,
No enemies shall us there molest.
Lets leave our bodies here as dead,
When thus our Souls to heaven are fled:
Where we possess a ravished joy,
When as the world lies in annoy.
Let Us take those waters now and drink,
'Twill make us then no more to think
Of these base follies here below,
Dear Sister, let us both do so.
Then let us set us down and tell
By whom we were redeemed from hell,
It Was he that sits on you bright Throne,
Wrought our redemption all alone.
Who would not now their souls prize high,
For whom so great a Prince did die.
Come let us up those streams and see,
Where those bright glories sitting be.
There Three in One conjoined we see,
And yet each Person differing be.
There sets our powerful God alone,
Upon his glorious heavenly Throne,
At his right hand sits his dear Son,
Oh! Who would think he would let him come
From that bright Throne to suffer here.
And for our sakes vile to appear.
Ten thousand, thousand Angels be
Tending about his Throne you see:
They sing the praises of that King,
Oh hear, how rare, and sweet they sing!
My senses now are ravished quite,
My Soul is filled with such delight,
That if I now my choice might have,
They should my body lay in grave,
And say, That I did choose to dye,
And let my body on earth lie,
Till it most glorious should be,
Like to Those Angels that we see.
The holy Spirit there does bide,
For in the Son they all reside.
No bodily presence does appear,
But of that God that sufferd here.
These glories cannot limned be
By my frail pencell, well I see.
Now let us down those banks, like green
Rich Velvet, whereupon are seen
Bright orient Pearl, and Rubies fair,
Strow'd on the velvet here and there,
Bright Diamonds scattered there do lie,
Look! there springs up the violet by:
As if a pride that sweet flower took,
Her face in that bright Gem to look,
The pure white Violet does delight,
To hang upon that Ruby bright,
The sweet Carnation Pink that grows
By that rich Pearl, how fine it show's.
Now let us on these sweet bancks rest,
Methinks we are divinely blessed.
Look by those crystal streams, there grows
The Lilly fair, and lovely Rose.
How in the waters they do show,
Brighter then they do where they grow.
A Luster fine those waters give
Into those plants that by them live.
Come let us now go walk and see,
Like whom we shall hereafter be,
See there Elias does appear
Like to the Angels that are here,
did forget; we shall in light,
Be like his glorious body bright,
But hark! Methinks I hear one say,
Thou must from Heaven to Earth away:
You must your children go and teach,
How they this blessed place may reach,
^will be a pleasant sight to see
Their faces like those Angels be,
The which ere while, we did behold,
In Robes more bright then is the gold;
The which on earth we think so fine,
When we in those base metals shine,
But yet before you go away,
^ere me a little what I say:
^f cross you find things go below,
On earth a while it must be so,
^et it not trouble your blessed mind,
^n Heaven you shall no crossness find,
^f any ask you how I fare,
Then tell them sure I Am free from care;
For I Am in heaven, you left me there.
The Vision.
WHy from celestial bliss, did you
Draw me? these meaner things to view,
Through those fair gates of pearl, get I
And that most pleasant wall past by,
Up that pure river strait I went,
That from the throne takes his ascent,
Then to the glorious throne I got,
Where I did see, O God, what not:
For whatsoever does excel,
In thee, does in perfection dwell.
That glorious Luster and bright ray
Made me forget my mortal day.
Me thought that fine Oriental light,
Made me like it appear as bright.
From these sweet joys why draw you me
My self in meaner Robes to see?
For since I used to heaven to go,
All things on earth do sordid show.
The Heart.
TWo hearts in one breast can there not remain,
The one heart puts the other heart to pain.
My heart I will still keep, take thou thine own,
My heart is happy when disturbed by none.
Without a heart I know you cannot live,
Therefore your own I freely to you give.
Mine is in Heaven, and will admit no change,
To leave my rest in heaven, on earth to range.
I Would have it written in my happy story,
None had my heart but heavens great prince of glory
My youths affection, to him I did send,
None can have any but what he will lend.
From mortal thraldom dear Prince keep thou me
So though on earth, I as in heaven shall be.
The Bride.
^Ith you me ask, Why borne was I?
I Will tell you; it was to heaven to fly,
^^t here to live a slavish life,
(...) being to the world a wife.
^hen I was born, I was set free,
^om mortals thraldom here to be;
^r that great Prince prepared a bride,
^^at for my love on earth here died.
^^y not I then earths thraldom scorn,
^th for heavens Prince I here was born?
^^match't in heaven I we are a Crown,
^t earthly thraldom pulls me down.
On the day dedicated to the God of Heaven.
Lord, if this day belongs to thee,
No part of it pertains to me.
^hen since this Day, is wholly thine,
^et thoughts and actions be divine.
^et my soul, be divinely clad,
and let me be like Angels glad.
^ith Angels food, this day feed me,
and let heavens Nectar my drink be.
and to complete my hearts desire
and down a beam of heavens bright sire.
(...) it let me that pure path see,
that leads to glorious bliss and thee.
The Defiance.
COme now tumultuous floods and show,
Your spite by tumults, you shall know,
Eliza's plac'st above your reach
Upon her soul you make no breach,
Unto the world, you do let see
You Would have her loose, but gain shall she,
What you can get she does not mind,
Her treasure lies not in your wind.
When my Brother was sick.
IF that my Brother thou will take from me,
Lord with thy will make me contented be.
But if it be, thy blessed will my Lord,
To my request to bend and to accord.
And if no harm, to him, that it might be
In this request, then gracious God hear me,
And grant, that well and long, he here may live,
And honor thee, and glory to thee give
And be an instrument here of thy praise,
And in thy service, spend and end his days.
But if in his young years, my Lord thou please
From pain and grief to take him unto ease.
And if thou fitter do my Brother see,
With thee to reign in glory, then to be,
Here subject to a world of slavish fears;
For in this mortal world we must have cares.
Only in heaven we shall sweet freedom gain,
In heaven, there is no fear, no care, nor pain.
Then to thy holy will, my gracious Lord,
Make me thy servant ever to accord.
And if to Heaven thou will my Brother take,
^ pray thee teach my soul for to forsake
^ain earthly thoughts, and flee from earth to thee,
^o with my Brothers soul my soul shall be.
My wishes are, those beams may ravish thee,
That wrapped me now in sweet felicity.
The Guard.
YOu blessed Angels, that still live,
And tendance on us mortals give,
From my most dear Lord you are sent,
To tend on me, for the intent,
From harm and danger me to keep.
You are my guard while I do sleep,
^ do not grudge for to confess,
Nay my poor soul can say no less;
^ am unworthy of that favor,
Granted to me from my Father,
That you on me, should tendance give,
Ye which in glory still do live.
^ have offended him each hour,
And done the ill lay in my power.
Then you, that still obedient be,
Oh! why should you attend on me.
This is a mystery full deep;
You being righteous, sinners keep.
My God I pray thee make me know,
Why those blessed Angels should do so?
For should I my deserts consider,
My judgment thus I must deliver,
Into the pit, and dungeon deep
Where Satan is adjudg'd to keep:
Where fire and brimstone raging be
Where pain abides perpetually,
Into this place of misery,
There should I go, when that I dye.
Go leave thy thoughts, thy own thoughts leave,
And from thy God, answer receive.
From that fierce place of misery,
Thee for to save, the Lord did die.
And though no sin he did commit,
He of his goodness thought it fit
To take thy sins, and quit them all,
And bid thee then no more to fall.
And tells thee, thou needs not to fear:
For why of thee he takes the care.
And that on earth while thou do live,
For tendance on thee he will give.
His Angels charge, thee to protect,
And be the guard of his Elect;
His mercy is the only reason
We are secured from Satan's Treason.
Felicity.
I Am my Gods, and he does let me see
In him a true and sweet felicity.
Those springs of joy, that rise still fresh in me,
Proceed my dear sweet heavenly Prince from thee
On sudden Death.
IF thou in have shall send for me
Great God to live in Heaven with thee,
Though to some minds it sudden be,
It is not sudden unto me.
Heaven.
LOrd thou do bring a heaven with thee,
Then where I am a heaven must be,
For thou art ever Lord with me.
The Giver engaged to the Receiver.
THou say thou art engaged to me
For what I give, when I Am to thee:
Thou do accept a gift that is poor.
For it I have ten thousand more.
The Sun Beams.
THy blessings, like the Sunbeams be
Reaching from heaven to earth on me.
Like a rich Canopy they show,
Spreading from Heaven, does round me flow.
It Is not abundance rich makes me,
But a sufficiency from thee.
To my Brother.
ELiza says when as she dies,
She Will banish tears from all your eyes,
Unless for envy you will weep,
That you could not her blessed soul keep
From her eternal bliss and joy,
To live with yours in earths annoy.
When you have brought me to my grave,
Then tell the world, it is what I Would have,
Ye need not say you left me dead,
But say, I am laid in my bed.
Where I shall safely lie and sleep,
For heavens great Emperor does me keep.
Among Kings and Princes that attend.
Till to our glory we ascend.
What I Love.
GIve me a Soul, give me a Spirit,
That flies from earth, heaven to inherit^
But those that grovell here below,
What! I love them? I Will not do so.
The only bound.
MY boundless spirits, bounded be in thee,
For bounded by no other can they be.
The Christians happiness.
GOds high Spirit shall thee direct,
His Angels shall thee still protect.
They shall thee guard, while thou do sleep,
They from all evil shall thee keep.
So thou no evil needs to fear,
Because of thee God takes the care.
The Retribution.
^F thou art pleased to have my heart,
^ Accept it Lord from me,
^ith thou do choose it for thy part,
^ give it none but thee.
Mine eyes to thee I do present,
Accept them now of me;
For thou unto me have them lent,
They do belong to thee.
Thus heart and eyes, and all are thine,
That do belong to me.
Before I knew that they were mine,
They were all made by thee.
Gods Commands easy.
MY Lord! how easy is thy will
Do, as I would be done unto.
Thy holy Law I then fulfill,
And give the Lord his praises due.
Why should I to another do,
What I would not have done to me,
All praises to thee Lord, is due,
For all we have proceeds from thee.
Praise.
GLory to my gracious Lord,
Who to my wishes does accord,
While here I live, I must thee praise,
For as in Heaven I spend my days.
For naught does here my soul annoy,
But I possess a Heaven of Joy.
And when from this bliss, thou'le take me,
In glorious Heaven my soul shall be.
The Companion.
WHo does an heavenly Muse enjoy,
Regards not this vain worlds annoy.
Nor can they ever be alone,
Heavens Muse is there Companion.
Upon the loss of my Brother.
WHen loss of ought would thee torment,
Cry; it is thy will, Lord I Am content.
My love must not divided be,
'Twixt Earth and Heaven, thou wilt have me see.
My brother from me thou have taken,
But yet content I must remain.
A Brother and a friend was he,
But much more thou will be to me.
When thoughts of absence moves a tear,
Thy will is, that I should forbear,
He went not but by thy decree,
And I must not displeased be.
On the Sun.
AT height of noon, it cannot be,
That I can fix mine eyes on thee,
^ut when at setting; I am bold,
With settled eyes thee too behold,
^ onverter of Atheistick thought,
^hou were to me, when as I sought
^ remedy against that sin,
Which I too deep was falling in.
Some one above thee must make thee,
Thou governed by a God must be.
Being told, she was proud.
MY body, it must surely dye,
Off to be proud then what have I.
Yet proud, if they will have me be,
My high-borne soul, it is of thee.
But Lord, my Soul, is none of mine,
Shall I be proud, of what is thine?
As being thine, from pride I Am free,
It is enough I Am freed by thee.
My pleasing Life.
SWeet quiet, sweet obscurity,
Here in this life, best pleases me,
Till from earth's thrall I shall be free
To live in glorious bliss with thee.
When from earths tumults I am free
To contemplate great God on thee
A heaven of bliss in thee I see
How can this life, but pleasing be.
Nothing of thee merit I can,
But yet when free from thrall of man,
I can thee serve with heart more free,
Then from that thraldom still keep me.
To a Lady unfaithful.
Madam,
THe Prince of heaven being in love with you
Did to his glorious Kingdom, bid Adieu.
The heaven, he was awhile content to leave
To see, if you would his chaste love receive.
You did belong to him, when he you sent
Into the world; but you from him soon went,
And his chaste love, so pleasing and so sweet,
You left your wanton Paramour to meet,
With his unlawful love you pleased your self,
Fie Madam, leave him, he is but an Elf.
See what your dear sweet Prince has done for you,
It Is very strange, but yet it is very true.
When he did see you wantonize with them
Who were professed enemies to him:
He then with his fierce enemy did fight,
To reingain you as his ancient right.
He lost his royal blood to purchase you,
How can you then but to this Prince prove true.
Can you a Coward love, and stain your name
By being false unto this Prince of fame?
Your wanton lovers actions hate the light,
And you are ashamed to act them in our sight.
Then here I Will tell you, if you know not it,
All your actions, and vain thoughts unfit,
Your true and lawful Lord does straight epsy,
He sees the wanton glances of your eye.
Think with your self, and then you will refrain,
You both your self, and your great Lord defame.
I wonder how you can this vain world love,
^f you did forget your heaven above,
(...) in your ill unlawful actions live.
^^r God does freely all things to you give:
^ve you but constant to his love and true,
(...) things are lawful to be used by you.
The Curse.
(...) thou detainst my right from me,
(...) never will wish worse to thee.
^ou ill enough have in thy self,
(...) right to thee will prove an Elf.
(...) Angels will be good to me,
^t Devils they will prove to thee.
Metamorphis strange I see,
^gels with me, Devils with thee;
^us while I wish no ill to thee,
^ith what I have God will bless me.
and will with what thou do detain
^t thee to a most hellish pain.
This on my Tomb shall written be, When I in Glory am with thee.
^Ain mortals, you think I am dead,
You are deceived, for I am fled.
Into that Kingdom I did choose,
When as the earth I did refuse.
And I in glory now am plac'st,
And with a Crown in Heaven am grac'st.
My soul in fair bright Robes does shine,
My Lord, methinks they are like to thine.
Which in the Mountain did appear
Glorious shining, bright and clear.
On marriage.
LOrd! if thou have ordained for me,
That I on earth must married be:
As often I have been foretold,
Be not thy will, by me contrould.
And if my heart thou do incline
Children to have, Lord make them thine,
Or never let't be said they are mine.
I shall not like what is not divine.
I no ambition have for earth,
My thoughts are of a higher birth.
The Souls sweet Babes, do bring no pain,
And they immortalize the name.
The Gift.
MY Lord, have thou given me away?
Did I on earth, for a gift stay?
Has he by prayer of thee gained me,
Who was so strictly knit to thee.
To thee I only gave my heart,
Would thou my Lord from that gift part?
I know thou would deliver me
To none, but one beloved by thee.
But Lord my heart thou do not give,
Though here on earth, while I do live
My body here he may retain,
My heart in heaven, with thee must reign.
Then as thy gift let him think me,
^ith I a donage am from thee.
And let him know thou have my heart,
^e only has my earthly part.
^t was my glory I was free,
And subject here to none but thee,
And still that glory I shall hold
If thou my Spirit do infold.
It is my bliss, I here serve thee,
It Is my great joy; thou love me.
The choice of my Friend.
PRay tell the world, I did choose thee,
Cause thou aspir'st to heaven with me.
I did not choose for earthly state,
But 'cause thou seem base earth to hate.
It was not earth, my love did merit,
'Twas a high and heavenly spirit,
Thus with heaven, I did decree
That such a one my friend should be.
And while our spirits do aspire
To heaven, I have my hearts desire,
And still methinks I am yet free,
We living both great God in thee.
The change.
Great God!
HOw have thou changed my thoughts in me,
For when I thought to be a wise,
I then did think troubled to be,
Because I saw most live in strife.
But thou a husband have given me,
Whose sweet discretion does direct,
And orders all things so for me,
As if of heaven, he were elect.
To take all trouble quite from me,
That earths possession here does bring,
And so does leave me quite to thee,
Thy praises here to sit and sing.
Promise Performed.
MY Lord, thou have performed most free
What in thy word thou promised me.
That if thy Kingdom first sought we,
All things on earth should added be.
Thou have given me earth, water, air,
And heavenly fire which is more rare,
That heavenly flame thou have sent me,
To offer up the earth to thee.
And if thou please them to take,
I willingly shall them forsake.
I Will not be loath to give to thee
What of thy bounty thou gav'st me.
Plenty thou have, great God in store,
And if thou please can give me more.
If earth thou take, and heaven giv'st me
A gainer yet, I much shall be.
Not a Husband, though never so excelling in goodness to us, must detain our
desires from Heaven.
MY heart I find upon her wings,
Ready to flee from earthly things.
But that the virtue lives in thee,
On earth a while retains me.
Not that of life I weary am,
For what on earth here wish I can,
From heavens great Prince, receive I do,
I must most freely tell to you.
Great blessings from him I enjoy,
And with him I have no annoy,
Yet these must not retain my heart,
Another of me claims his part.
To heavens great prince I must away,
No love on earth here must me stay.
He lent me but awhile to you,
And now I must bid you adieu.
My Descent.
IF any one think mean of me,
It Is cause they do not my birth see,
I did descend from a great King,
And an Immortal God did spring.
I Am daughter to the King of Kings,
And must contemn base earthly things.
To heaven's great Prince, he married me,
And now my lineage you may see.
And while I mean am in your eye,
I often to my glory fly,
And with my great Prince do abide,
Where placed by his blessed side.
With heavenly bliss methinks I Am crowned,
His glorious beams do me surround,
Where I set and hear the story
Of my Prince, and see his glory.
To my Husband.
WHen from the world, I shall be taken,
And from earths necessary pain.
Then let no blacks be worn for me,
Not in a Ring my dear by thee.
But this bright Diamond, let it be
Worn in rememberance of me.
And when it sparkles in your eye,
Think it is my shadow passes by.
For why, more bright you shall me see,
Then that or any Gem can be.
Dress not the house with sable weed,
As if there were some dismal deed
Acted to be when I am gone,
There is no cause for me to mourn.
And let no badge of Herald be
The sign of my Antiquity.
It was my glory I did spring
From heavens eternal powerful King:
^o his bright Palace heir am I.
^is his promise, he will not lie.
^y my dear Brother pray lay me,
(...) was a promise made by thee,
and now I must bid thee adieu,
^or I Am a parting now from you.
My Bill of thanks to Mr. C.
THough my words rare thou do not find,
Might not God be praised by my mind.
The heart, not phrase, God does esteem,
To him my heart in them are seen.
Let men, like God, my words, not mind
In them, a thankful heart they find.
To praise him is my souls intent,
For his great blessings he has sent.
You said at the end of my days,
God would them bring out to my praise.
My own praise! I regard it not.
^ have enough; God is my lot.
^ would hear God now praised be
For his great blessings given to me.
You'ave bills of thanks often sent to you,
For earthly blessings, and they are due.
Shall not then heavenly blessings be
More prized then earth; they shall by me.
This Bill of thanks to you I send,
What though it be not rarely penned?
It Is the intention of my heart,
That I in it to you impart,
It is not only sent to thee,
But Preachers all praise God for me.
I with a Trumpet could proclaim
Praises to the God of fame;
For teaching me to know his name,
All people for me do the same.
Being in pain.
LOrd, if my sin produce my pain,
Pray let me never sin again.
For pain is grievous unto me,
And sin is hateful unto thee.
Let me not do what troubles thee,
And thou wilt not send what grieve shall me.
But if my patience Lord thou tryest,
If I will bear, what thou applyest,
To cure the malady of sin,
Cease not my pain, but send't again;
For pain I rather would endure,
Then grieve thine eyes of light so pure.
That our most secret thoughts do spy,
And wanton glances of the eye:
For which thou sendest punishments,
Or else corrects with sapience.
Being taken with a sudden pain on the Day appointed for God's public Service.
LEt not this pain Lord, deter me
From public offering praise to thee.
Though private prayers may pleasing be
From others, and as well from me.
But public blessings thou giv'st me,
And public praise I Would offer thee.
Thou te^st me, if I will confess
Thee before men; thou wilt do no less
For me before thine Angels bright,
And thy great Father in his light.
In private I may serve thee here,
But that to men does not appear.
I then in public will serve thee,
Whiles here thou give me liberty.
And not depend on charity,
To think I do belong to thee.
The Antidote.
THis Antidote will cure your fear.
The God of heaven for you takes care.
They cannot fear, that live above,
Their fear is cured by their love.
My Satisfaction.
I Am content with this earths fate,
Cause I am borne for higher state.
Sweet quiet here I wish no more,
I Would have my glory kept in store,
Yet I have on those Robes of glory,
Of which I often have read the story.
That pure refined souls do wear,
Living in regions free from care.
For with the eye of faith I see
My self sweet Prince, as I Am in thee:
And with thee I do live above,
Because we live where we do low.
But Oh my God! when shall it be that the dark Lantern of Faith, shall be
swallowed up in the bright mantle of sweet fruition?

Being called a Stoic
NOt as a Stoic I Am exempt from care,
But as a Christian I would all things bear.
Nor that I blinded am and nothing see,
No: I see all, but take all patiently.
Gods Prerogative.
LOrd, shall I grudge at thy just will,
Or shall I question thy great skill,
And think the world thou do not rule
As thou art wont; peace silly fool.
Without his rule it cannot stand,
All things are done at his command.
Do not then grudge at what he does,
Nor in thy heart have any ruth
Against them who now do rule the Land,
They have no power but from his hand.
The earth is his, and he plucks down
Who him displease, and gives the Crown
To others, if they him obey,
They shall still rule; if not, then they
Shall be destroyed with his frown,
And to their foes he will give their Crown,
Then let me Lord my self submit
To what thy wisdom sees fit.
Since no authority can be,
But what appointed is by thee.
My Mansion.
Liza for, do you not care,
She lives in heaven, free from earths fear,
^er 'bidings in those regions be,
^er converse with the Deity.
Man's unkindnesse my Benefit.
LOrd, what a courtesy does man to me,
When he is unkind, he drives me straight to thee.
Where I my deer sweet Prince, do ever find
Careful for me, contenting, pleasing, kind.
Then let them be, as likes them to me,
^Ile not complain, since I can come to thee,
Who art my joy, my love, my crown, my peace,
In whom my joys abound, and still increase.
My Second Part.
I Did withdraw me from the stage
Of this vain world, in my best age,
Thinking for heaven thou had be dressed,
So I retired for my rest.
But thou a Prophet had me made
Unto my self when I had said.
Another part I here must play,
Before I went from hence away.
A wife thou choo'st out for my part,
Which I misliked in my heart;
And thought wedded to none to be
Great Prince of Heaven and earth but thee.
But thou that had ordained that part,
Foundst out a means to turn my heart:
Because my Lord, thou wilt have me see
We happy in that life may be,
But then on thee, we must depend,
For thou alone that bliss can send.
For should our Husbands love fixed be
Upon some others, not on thee.
Heavens Prince will never thee forsake,
But still his darling will thee make.
And should he of thee careless be,
Heavens Prince, he will more careful be.
He from the earth will raise thy heart,
That thou content may act that part.
The Resurrection.
WHy should I be afraid to dye,
Or let my body in earth lie.
In that safe bed I Am laid to sleep,
When others in their closets weep.
It is to me a quiet night,
And next day brings the wished light,
That makes for me eternal day,
My body there feels no decay.
And when I waken, I shall find
All things well pleasing to my mind.
Youth, beauty, spirit, now present
Themselves for that days Ornament.
With Robes more bright then are the beams,
That from her pleasing Sun here streams,
Decay they say they never will,
For they were made with exact skill,
To adorn the bodies that ascend,
And on the Deity attend,
Now shall I see my Princely peer,
That I on earth did hold so deer.
And with him still converse shall I,
Who would not now let their soul fly,
Seeing there is no fear of decay,
Fools that think death a dismal day.
Fearful Uncertainty.
OH you that know not when you dye,
Whither your Souls to heaven shall fly,
Or wander, in the dismal shade,
No wonder though you be afraid.
Would you not wear black hellish weeds?
Avoid then, wicked sinful deeds.
Do actions that are just and right,
If you would live in heavenly light.
Do you think peace you can enjoy,
That others with your deeds annoy?
No! what you unto others do
Assure your selves, shall fall on you.
And if good council, now you slight
Look in Hells mouth, and be affright.
Avoid betimes, that hellish fume,
Which all your pleasures will consume.
To General Cromwell.
THe Sword of God does ever well
In The hand of virtue! O Cromwell,
But why do I, complain of thee?
'Cause you are the rod that scourges me?
But if a good child I will be,
I Will kiss the Rod, and honor thee;
And if you are virtuous as it is sed,
Thou Wilt have the glory when you are dead.
Since Kings and Princes scourged be,
Whip thou the Lawyer from his fee
That is so great, when naught they do,
And we are put off from our due.
But they for their excuse do say,
It Is from the Law is our delay.
By Tyrants heads those laws were made,
As by the learned it is said.
If then from Tyrants you will us free,
Free us from their Laws Tyranny.
If not! we will say the head is pale,
But still the sting lives in the tail.
To a Lady that bragged of her Children.
IF thou have cause to joy in thine,
I have cause too to joy of mine.
Thine did proceed from sinful race,
Mine from the heavenly dew of grace.
Thine at their birth did pain thee bring,
When mine are borne, I set and sing.
Thine does delight in naught but sin,
My Babes work is, to praise heavens King.
Thine bring both sorrow, pain and fear,
Mine banish from me dreadful care.
The Conquest.
GOd made on earth a paradise at first,
For man, but he by sin betrayed his trust.
But heavens great Prince who came to conquer sin,
For me won Heaven and Paradise again.
Questions and Answers.
Qu. LOrd! why have I so much from thee?
An. Thou Art child to me.
Qu. But why on earth have I such store?
An. In Heaven is more.
Qu. Lord I have more then I do need?
An. The poor then feed.
Then since I Am thine,
I Will be divine,
And what I Have more.
I Will give the poor.
To a Friend for her Naked Breasts.
MAdam I praise you, 'cause you are free,
And you do not conceal from me
What hidden in your heart does lie,
If I can it through your breasts spy.
Some Ladies will not show their breasts,
For fear men think they are undrest,
Or by it their hearts they should discover,
They do it to tempt some wanton Lover.
They are afraid tempters to be,
Because a Curse imposed they see,
Upon the tempter that was first,
By an all-seeing God that is just.
But though I praise you have a care
Of that al-seeing eye, and fear,
Lest he through your bare breasts see sin,
And punish you for what is within.
Safety.
MY gracious God be not my foe,
It matters not if man be so.
And let my ways great God please thee,
Then from all foes I shall be free.
What Kingdom to be wished.
WHose Kingdom can I wish but thine,
Who make hell, Heaven and me divine.
that Kingdom ought I wish to be,
^t where all thine shall reign with thee.
^l thoughts of Kingdoms I will banish,
^t of thy Kingdom will not vanish.
No Kingdom must I wish,
But Heavens great Prince of glory,
Which if I be divine,
Will be mine only story.
^arthly blessings do me surround,
With heavenly blessings I am crowned.
^n earth I live free from all care.
because heavens King I love and fear.
Comfort in Temptations and Afflictions.
COme Christians that so mazed be
At earths events, O come and see
What cause there is for your dismay,
When God takes care for you each day.
The Apostle bids us then to joy,
When as temptations us annoy.
And heavens great Prince sed unto you
Before, he bid the earth adieu.
Let not your hearts here troubled be,
For if you do believe on me,
In heaven a Palace there is for you,
Fear not, in me, it is your due.
Is It prison that does you afright?
In dungeon deep he will be your light.
Is It war whose fear you do pretend?
The Lord of Host can you defend.
Is It sickness that does cause your dread?
He easy can make your sick bed.
Unless by these he will you take
Into his glory, and there make
You to behold those Visions fair,
Will ravish you from all your care.
Then since heavens King can safe you keep,
There is no cause for you to weep.
You shall not enter to his rest,
If you by doubting him molest.
On going to the Sacrament.
I To the world Lord will let know,
That I desire thy death to show;
By going to some public place,
And take the pledges of thy grace.
And when I take the bread, then I
Will say, my Lord did for me dye.
And thus I Will do great God for thee,
For thou have done much more for me;
And when I drink the wine I Will tell
Thy blood redeemed my soul from hell;
And then I Will offer up to thee
What thou sweet Prince! requirest of me.
None but the Sacrifice of praise
Do thou require now adays,
And that I should remember thee,
When as these things are done by me.
My Prayer in my Youth.
MY Lord, whose mercies to me are unspeakable; Who in thy works art great and
powerful, wholly bend mine affection on that which is certain, and not subject
to varibility; to that which no sinister mishap can alter; Oh, let not my Soul
which thou have made to be fed with heavenly Manna (which still will last) here
seek to be satisfied with vain delights, which soon will vanish. Banish from me
the Thoughts of vain delights, and make me know that they must end. And for
those infinite blessings which thou have deigned to bestow upon me, make me for
ever to admire thee, and from my heart send up the sweet incense of thanks and
praise for thy heavenly benefits bestowed on me thine unworthy servant.

The Temptation.
MY Soul! Woulst thou find favor with the Lord, be not then afraid to go to
him; Let not the fear of thy former past sins, nor of thy continual weakness
be an occasion to hinder thee of thy happiness, but let the assurance of the
pardon of thy sins, and the certainty of the promise to strengthen thy
weakness, animate thee to go confidently to the throne of grace. There do not
imagine that thou see thy sins stand as a thick cloud to keep thy prayers
from ascending to the presence of thy God, nor think that through that dark
cloud thou seem unseemly in the eyes of thy loving father; be not thou
ignorant that the bright beams of his gracious favor, has dispersed those
clouds of thy sins, never to be gathered again together, before his pure eyes.
Know thou, that he will not let such fearful sights, and sad appearances, to
stand in his presence, to afright his dear chosen children; No my Soul! such
sights are not there; he that calls thee has removed from thee all those things
which should hinder thy passage to him; or disturb thy quiet appearance,
before him. He calls thee, and bids thee be confident in his presence; He
assured thee by his word that thou shall find his spirit strengthening thy
weakness, and inabling thee to perform that which thou thoughtest impossible
for thee to overcome.

My Soul! he has brought thee from thy straying errors, he has enabled thee
to overcome the manifold temptations of thy subtle enemy, when he would have
made thee to have thought there was no God, then thy God manifested himself to
thee, when he would have had thee taken pleasure in the vain delights of this
wicked world, then thy dear father having a watchful eye, and a careful mind
over thee, sent a heavy dulnes into all the powers of thy soul and body,
enforcing thee as it were to leave those earthly vanishes, because neither soul
nor body could take delight in those things, which others call pleasures, by
reason of thy exceeding heavy dullness. Then do thou my soul, think that a
most severe punishment on thee from thy father, when thou saw others enjoy
the blessings of thy God with great contentment; Then in the height of this
distemper were thou my soul almost brought to the pit of despair. When as the
enemy pictured before the eyes of thy soul, the sad appearance of the anger of
thy God, and still he ^ersisting in his pernicious temptations, bid thee leave
^is service, telling thee it was to no purpose to be so ^arefull to serve him,
for thy prayers were not heard, ^hy tears not regarded, thy heaviness not
removed; and ^f Gods word be true, he hears all that calls upon him, and
removes from them their griefs. Thus subtly ^elt my enemy with me, thinking to
have in wrapped me in his hidden nets of most pernicious temp^ations. First,
making me to think my God was angry, then that he heard not my prayers, and
that his word was false: thus by consequence feign would he have made me to
have doubted of thy being, O my eternal and ever-being Father. By these snares
would he have bereft me of the hope I had in thy word, by which I was brought
to know thee. Thy creatures teach us (I acknowledge O Lord) to know that there
is a God, but they cannot teach us to know how to come to this God, or how to
find comfort in thee our God; it is only thy word can declare to us what thou
art, and thy spirit it is that must assure us, that this word is thine. It was
thy self O Lord, who art able to perform what thou have decreed, that have
brought this flinty heart of mine to the knowledge of thee. My Lord, I must
^eeds confess thy powerful working in framing this heart of mine to the belief
of thy word, and thee; for before thy spirit mollified this heart of mine, thy
word was to it like water gliding over the hardest marble, no whit entering or
piercing the same.

My gracious Lord, thy divine Majesty in all the changes and chances of my
life, has had a most peculiar care of me, for now have thou taught me to know,
that those temptations, and those perplexities, in which my soul was in, have
been all disposed for the good and happiness of my Soul. Now thou make me to
know that thy word is true, and that our grief does work for our good: for
though our temptations be never so great, thou can and wilt deliver thy
children.

It was thy Majesty that kept me from doubting of thy being; it was thy
fatherly goodness that stupefied the powers of my Soul and Body with that heavy
dullness, not because thou would punish me for my sins, no! thou did teach
me to know, that my gracious Savior had already endured the punishment that my
sins deserved; My Lord, thy Majesty did not lay that dejection on me proceeding
from thy justice, but thy mercy. For my God! I must confess to thee, that which
thou then did know, for then I did love the world, more then I loved thee,
and because thou would have me love the pleasure that should never end; thou
madst me to take no pleasure in these delights, which never end but in sorrow.
That heaviness was then a bitter pill to purge my Soul from the gross humors
of earthly love, that afterward she may be made more fit and apt to receive
the sweet bliss of thine everlasting love. This thy love to me kept me from
falling into the miserable pit of despair; thy loving kindness it was that
moved thee to let that word of comfort with which thou sustainest thy servant
St. Paul, sound ever in my ears, That thy grace should be sufficient for me
without which grace of thine, I not having sufficient strength of my self,
should have fallen into the gulf of everlasting misery. Thy love likewise kept
me^ constant to thee and thy service, and kept me from doing or saying that in
my dispairing thoughts, that had not been fit for thy servant to do or utter.
Thy unwearied love and great wisdom it was that sent those trials and
temptations to me in my youth, that thou might sanctify my youth to thy
service, and make me careless of those pleasures, that my young years were too
much addicted to.

For if thy Majesty had suffered me to have run on, to have taken pleasure in
those vanities, till I had been inwrapt in them, and had set my whole delight
in those vanishing pleasures. Then had it been more hard and grievous to me to
have left them; But thou, O my Lord, did deal more graciously with me; for
before I knew what pleasures meant, thou took'st from me the love of pleasure,
for which great mercy of thine, I render thee most hearty thanks.

My Lord! When I consider of these thine infinite mercies, I cannot choose but
admire thy goodness, and admiring, say unto thy heavenly Majesty. O Lord, what
am I that thou should have such a peculiar care of me; I am not worthy to be
in thy thoughts, much more unworthy to be beloved of thee; yet it does
evidently appear that thou do love me, in that thou take off from me the
love of the world; for my Lord-unless thou love me, thou would not have
cared for my love, and I know that it was in love that thou wea^nedst me from
the world, because that I should love thee alone, and not the world.

The Angels Joy.
YOu blessed Angels, by my Father are we honored to have you for our
attendance. Sure your lovely faces could not but look sad when my Savior
suffered: for methinks it was a sad fight to behold, your loving Lord hang
tormented on a cursed tree, and for those too, whose sins caused his torment;
and then for you to hear him cry out in the bitterness of his Soul, My God, my
God, Why have thou forsaken me? Methinks it should have so incensed your wrath
against us poor mortal creatures, that you should have petitioned to your
All-powerfull Lord* that all humane flesh should have suffered endless
torment, seeing they had so justly deserved it, rather then your righteous Lord
should have dyed.

But whether my Soul; in the deep consideration of the undeserved suffering of
thy righteous Savior do thou run? Shall the Angels which are our attendants
be grieved at our happiness? My Soul, wrong not those blessed spirits with
such vain thoughts; for God was not pleased, nor his wrath appeased toward us
till that time: Oh sad time, yet pleasant time, the time of thy most gracious
dying: Sad, in respect of thy torments, O blessed Savior; yet pleasant in
respect of the unexpressable liberty, and endless happiness, which by thy
powerful dying we obtained.

Oh Blessed Spirits, I cannot now think, that you were displeased with us, for
your nature does so concur with his will, that it cannot be opposite to it.

But yet God was angry; yea, to the very apprehension of his only Son, What
else made him cry out so grievously, My God, Why have thou forsaken me? God
was angry then with his Son, for us; you had reason then of grief for him, not
anger toward him: but yet sure to see him angry with his Son, and to see his
only Son so grievously tormented, you could not but be moved, what then must
move you? sure it could be nothing, but our sins for which he suffered.

Oh you heavenly Spirits. I find you rejoicing, when we had our Savior born,
and sure you could not but rejoice, when the work of our salvation was
finished, your joy was then intermingled with your sorrow, if you be capable of
sorrow, for you could not but sorrow, to see your God so grievously to suffer;
you could not but rejoice, to see that they on whom you attended, should be so
happy, that by his death they should be admitted to enjoy eternal life.

If you joy at our repentance, sure your joy at our ^rgivenesse, and then was
the time of our forgiveness ^ome, when he willingly yielded up his life, that
we ^ight live eternally, then was our debts paid, when as ^y now glorified
body, Oh Son of glory, was debarred ^f the heavenly appearance, of thine
eternal God^ead.

Ye blessed Angels, ye joyed in your sorrow, and ^ot we, but our sins were
hateful to you, which were ^he cause of his most grievous suffering.

More bitter then grim death could be,
My sin, my Lord was unto thee,
Because I sinned my Lord did dye,
Because he died, hate sin will I.
On Earthly Love.
FRom thee, O Heaven of glory flows that celestial stream, that being taken
has power to make us forgetful of our earthly love, the which must vanish,
and alone can set us free from those tormenting passions.

Thou sweet stream, having cured us of those distempered passions, have then
the power to work in our hearts a more peaceable and durable affection: earthly
affection, ever brings distemper, sometimes distraction; but that sweet love,
which thou O pearly fountain, raisest in our breast, flameth in our hearts,
peace, rest, joy, and it works a perpetual assurance of still enjoying what
we love, wish, or can in heart desire.

My Lord! My soul is ravished with the contemplation of thy heavenly love; and
I cannot choose but infinitely admire thy mercies to me thine unworthy servant;
for grievous were the perturbations which I was subject to, when I was infected
with the poison-bane of earthly affections, the which a time thou were pleased
to let reign and tyrannize in my breast, which like a thorn in the flesh, not
being drawn out, by the hand of art, lies throbbing and working torment, not
only to the place where it has taken up its abode, but brings distemper to
the whole body: So that unruly passion having taken up his place in my heart,
did not only tyrannize there, but wrought destraction in my Soul, and bred
distemper in my body; But blessed be thy Majesty for that distemper, for in
that time of my weakness, thou Oh all-powerfull hand, by thy most heavenly art,
did draw from my heart that tormenting passion, and by the addition of thy
heavenly love, which thou did leave in the room thereof; thou repairedst in
me the breaches that that unrulie passion had made.

When I was sick I thought that I should dye,
I did mistake, 'twas earthly love, not I.
HOSEA 2.19. My Contract.
MY Lord! Does not thy Majesty send thy messages of love and favor, to those
that will take hold of them, and believe there shall be a performance of what
is promised, Thy Word tells us, That they that believe in thee shall have
eternal life: My Lord, I do believe it, and that this Message, sent by thy
royal Ambassador, belongs to me, as well as to any other; [I will marry thee to
me for ever] Thou art righteous and wilt perform it; who would now refuse so
great, and so good a King? I disdain not marriage, I desire it with this great
Prince, who is the Prince of Kings, and at whose footstool they must one day
lay down all their Crowns, and bring in all their riches at his command: The
greatest of them must confess they hold their Scepters of him, and to him they
must do service, at his will. This is a Prince of such exact perfection, that
I cannot see any thing in him any way to be dislik't. When I consider any
creature, I can find in it but little to be beloved, but a great deal of
inconvenience with it, to be dislik't; why then should I set my mind on the
creature of so little worth? and not wholly have my mind intent on the
Creator, who alone is excellent. Most mighty Prince, I must confess my self
unworthy to be the least servant in the Court of so magnificent a King; much
less to be one who shall have the honor to be married to thee; but because I
do think my self unworthy of thee, shall I be such a fool to refuse so great
a fortune? No, I will not. My Lord! I now challenge thy promise, for I do
think thou have prepared me a mind for thy self, for thou madst me long since
to be ambitious of perfection, but when I saw it was not to be obtained in
this world, how slightly did I esteem of all things in it? thou having prepared
my mind for thy self, by the dislike of all imperfect creatures, and the love
of perfection, Thou madst me to see a clear perfection in thy self, and
wroughst in me a love to thee; and because I dare not presume to the thoughts
of possessing thee, thou seeing my desires, sent that comfortable message to
me, and to all that do sincerely love thee, that thou will receive us to thy
self, and wilt marry us to thee for ever.

I being wedded to Heavens King,
As his blessed Spouse must his praise sing.
The Souls Agitation.
MY great and glorious God! In what a strange agitation is my Soul, being
assailed by two contrary considerations; the one of my heavenly bliss, in which
thou did at first make me, and to which thou have and wilt, in the fullness of
time again restore me; the other of the sordid and vile condition, in which I
had by my rebellion inwrapt my self. The thoughts of the first fills me with a
sweet contenting joy; the consideration of the other with a hateful
detestation of my self; for when I record in my mind, how thou at the first
made me a creature of a rare composition, one part of thine own divine
spirit, the other of earth purified, by thy heavenly art, and built up fit for
a Temple for thy divine greatness to inhabit; these thoughts fill me with a
pleasing contentment. But when the consideration of my vile condition, in which
by my too much yielding to please my earthly companion, comes into my mind, I
then hate my self, for I have thereby made my self subject to all painful
diseases, yea, to mortality, by my intemperance; for how justly might I have
pleased my self in the lawful and temperate use of all thy other creatures;
and could not a whole world of pleasures content us, but we must take that one
forbidden? My God! I am to my self, a hateful creature, how much more must I
needs be to thee, whose eyes can behold no impurity? but my dear Father look
not now on me as I have clothed my self, but look on me as new arrai'd by thy
blessed Son, the King of Saints.

And to settle the disturbed motion of my mind, send down a beam from thy
glorious divinity, that might so inlighten the eyes of my Soul, that I might
now behold my self, as clothed with thy self, for thou were pleased to cloth
thy divine nature with my mortality; that my mortal nature might be made
immortal, by being joined to thy divinity. My great God! these thoughts will
not only take off my hatred from my self, but I fear, if it be possible, make
me too much love and admire my self: but it cannot be; for that bright beam
from thee, makes me see my self, not but in thee, and with these thoughts have
thou so raised my Soul beyond what it was, that I see my self clothed with the
bright white robes of thy pure innocence; for thou know no sin. I now look
on my self as sacred, and on this flesh as immortal, only because it has
spo^ted it self with sin, after thou had made it purer then the common
earth; therefore in the earth must it be laid again to be purified till it be
fit to be new built up a glorious structure for her divine companion: Then will thou take us both up into thy glorious habitation, where we shall not be
capable of doing any thing that shall any more cause us to part from our selves
or thee.

I once immortal was Lord! made by thee,
I that bliss lost; But I again it see*
Restored with more, great Prince of Saints to me.
The Contempt of the World.
MY Gracious God! Do I offend thee, if I contemn the world? I find thy blessed
Apostle counting all but dung in respect of the knowledge of thee; then by his
example I hope I offend thee not; but yet, when I consider it is thy
workman-ship, which is most excellent, and thou have given it to the sons of
men, I cannot but call my thoughts in question with some suspicion of fear of
offending thee; for my dear God! I confess, that what I see most desired by
people, for themselves or for others, is to me most displeasing and
distastefull. My powerful God! if I do not offend thee in it, still keep me
in this mind; if I do, root out (as it is my daily prayer) this contempt, and
all things else that within me disliketh the pure eyes of thy divine Majesty.

My Lord! Somewhat to clear my self to the world, that I do not offend in
this point (for thou know my heart) I do not contemn any thing in it, as
thinking meanly of it, as thou had made it; My great God! thou made all
things good at the beginning, but since the making of them, the perfection of
all things is much changed. Our sins altered the purity of all things in the
world; then as it is made sordid, by our sins, I distaste those odd things I
see pleasing to the most.

But my Lord! This may draw me into another inconvenience, and make some
think, I think better of my self then of others, for distasting those things
sullyed with sin; But I know thou will answer for me, that I confess to thee
that by nature I am sinful, addicted to love those things soyled by our sins;
so that it does not make me think well of my self, but it makes me love and
admire thee the more; when I see thy abundant mercy to me, in giving me a
mind, so contrary to the most; for I doubt not but thou have made many in the
world as happy as thou have made me, in giving them such a mind; For my dear
Father! What do they atchieve when they attain that here which they desire, a
few conveniences, accompanied with ten thousand troubles, ^ears, and
distastefull cares; for I have often heard some express, how happy they should
be but for such and such inconveniences, when I having food and raiment
^ufficient, and possess a heaven of felicity in thee, am happy without a But.

The Royal Gods.
MY Lord! With what a Title have thou honored the Kings of the earth: I have
said ye are Gods; and the Children of the most high. Thou have given them that
Title their desires pretended too, to be Gods, and to be of their race, they
that knew not thee, my great God! nor from what true immortal race they
sprung; yet would have the world think them to be of divine lineage, and
themselves to be gods. And shall not we, who know from whom and by whom Kings
reign, think our Princes to be as they are styled by that great King, who set
them to reign for him? God forbid, but that we should so think of them, and
they of themselves. He is the great God of the world, and has set them as
lesser Gods under him, to govern and protect that people over which he has
plac'st them. The people must then honor their King, as a God under him, not
observe or adore him above him; and he must esteem himself as a God ^oo^; if
he be of that great immortal race he will not degenerate, but will be like to
him: He will be like a fiery pillar in the night of ignorance and darkness, to
direct them which way they shall walk; and as a cloud in the day of
persecution, to keep them from the pursuing adversary: he will my God with thee
hide them under his wings, and they shall be safe under his protection: he
will be just too; punishing those who seek the destruction of thine and his
people. His bowels of mercy will be extended, and he will not punish according
to their deserts; and rather then destruction shall shall come to thine and
their people, they will follow the example of that renowned Prince, thy
firstborn Son, they will with him a while leave their glory, and take up with
him an humble deportment, and cry with him, Thy will be done not mine: They
thus imitating thee, their great pattern, shall be blessedt by thee with
eternal renown, and crowned by thee in immortal glory: but first thou have
said, They must dye like men.

The Rule.
MY Lord! What an infallible rule have thou left us, to know, whether we be
thine or no; for if the preaching of the Gospel of our blessed Savior Jesus
Christ, be to us foolishness, and as a thing we delight not in, we may justly
fear we are to perish: but if it be esteemed by us the power and excellent
wisdom of God, which delights our hearts; we may be confident we shall be
saved; for the preaching of the Gospel is to them that perish foolishness, but
to us that are saved it is the power of God, 1 Cor. 1.18.

PSALM 119.165. The Souls Peace.
MY great God! how often do thou make us to see, and by experience to know
the truth of thy most ^cred Word, it is great peace indeed, that they possess
who love thy law: thou keep them in such secure and pleasant pavillions,
that nothing shall ofiend them, they must speak to thy praise, whom thou have
blessed, and if I have been thought too mean to speak in the praise of ^n
earthly King; My God, I cannot but confess my self too mean, too ignorant to
speak off, and in the praise of the Majesty of Heaven.

But Oh thou greatest and highest Ruler of all the Great on earth, under whose
feet lie all their crowns of Majesty: Thou have told us thou art no respector
of persons, but thou acceptest of the prayers and praises of thy meanest
creatures. Then must my Soul speak to the praise of thy Sacred Majesty, for the
peace that thou have given me, since the time that thou have taught me to
love thy Law; thou have made me to delight in the multitude of peace, thou have
given me peace in thee, thy blessed Son set me at peace with thee, and I have
such a peace in thee, that all the oppsition of the world cannot take from me.
I am at peace with thy servants, I am sure they will not hurt me; I am at peace
with thy creatures, for thou have made the stones, and beasts af the field to
be at league with them that fear thy name; I pass by thy creatures, and
through them without fear, for they are at peace with me.

But can thou my Soul say, thou thus possessest a happy peace withal No, I
cannot: for then they that have sought to disturb my peace, by their odd
untruths, will tell me, I said not true; for I have seen and felt their Arrows
of uncivil war strike against my heart: But my God thou have so strongly armed
it, that their arrows have recoyl'd back, and not pierced my heart: How can I
choose then most blessed and sweet finger of Israel but speak in thy own words;
Great peace and rest shall all such have
As do thy Statutes Love,
No danger shall their quiet state,
Impair or once remove.


The Support.
MY Lord! When in my young years, the consideration of thy infinite mercies,
had penetrated my heart. I confess there was with it, an earnest desire i^ me
to do or suffer something, whereby I might manifest my love to thy Majesty,
for those great unexpressable favors that thou have deigned to bestow on me
thy unworthy servant. But then had I no other thoughts in me, but that if the
contrary Religion (which then too much abounded) had prevailed, I then might
have offered up my life in flames, with devotion to manifest my love to thee:
But now thou have turned the tide, and art pleased to suffer two great powers
to rise, both professing to maintain the truth of our Religion, so that now
thou have taken off my thoughts for suffering so for thy sake, but thou have
put me on another: My Lord! I will not say worse for me: for whatsoever is done
by thee, with me or by me: I am confident, it is the best and fittest for me,
though death to some spirits be easier to bear then reproachful speeches: And
I confess with impatience heretofore did my unruly Spirit, detest reproachful
words, and thought a religious death far better: For my Lord, thou know what
reproaches and slanderous speeches they are subject to, that profess thy name,
or declare thy mercies to them.

But let them now speak, and in their speech, declare their little love to thee
my Lord, and their malice and spite to thy children, thou shall set my spirit
beyond the reach of their contempt, where with a holy contempt with thee, I
shall laugh such fools to scorn. And now I dare not say, I am an ignorant
woman, and unfit to write, for if thou will declare thy goodness, and thy mercy
by weak and contemptible means, who can resist thy will. My gracious God, I
will be now so far from being unwilling to do it, that I will not rest till
I have done it, for in all ages thou will not leave thy self without a
witness of thy mercy and goodness to thy children, and therefore I will send
out my words to speak thy praise, and as thou have made them comfort to some
troubled minds, so I wish they may be to more, when they shall see the truth
of thy merciful dealing with me, and how thou have made me so happy in this
world, as my heart can wish; for thou have given me my hearts desire, and have
fulfilled the request of my lips; for there is not that thing in the world that
I can desire more, then what thou have given to me. For long since, my Lord,
when thou had given me sense to see, that no earthly thing though never so
excellent or pleasing could give us a perfect contentment, then made I my
prayer to thy divine Majesty, that thou would be pleased to give me that
which the world could not give; and though I confess I did then think it was
unpossible ever to possess a true content in this world, yet my dear Father, I
must now ask thee pardon for those misdoubting thoughts; for I have seen thou
can give us a joy, and a true content, beyond the expression of our souls, in
this world; for when we possess thee with, and in thy creatures, we enjoy a
felicity that fills our hearts with an unexspressable delight; My Lord! when
thou art pleased to manifest thy self unto our souls, thou bring all that
can be desired. Death that to some natures, the mention of it is bitter* to
thine, thou make it a pleasing companion, and with pain thou make them
pleased and happy, and for the bitter speeches of the world, which thy children
must hear, thou make us to forget or contemn them.

I must confess to thy honor, my great King, that thou make me not to
remember the bitterness of this life, thou answering me with such joys in my
heart, and thus will thou at length, my gracious God, bless all thy children
that with an upright mind, and a sincere heart, do earnestly seek their
happiness alone in thee, and not from the world.

PSALM 85.10. The Perfume.
IN thee most blessed Prince, are those two excellent ingredients mixed, which
yield so sweet a sent to the world, that no corrupted air of our unsavory
enemy is able to disperse. Thy most blessed body, the sweetest and truest
perfume that ever proceeded out of the earth, was joined with the odoriferous
scent of righteousness from heaven. Blessed Joseph, knew thy perfect body
needed no imbalming; That pure Balsam that came from heaven at the beginning,
kept thy precious body from corruption.

On the cross was all that that was to be suffered in the body, finished, God
would not suffer his holy one to see corruption; truth made have, and sprung
the third day from the earth, and righteousness showed her self from heaven;
in thee met mercy and truth, righteousness and peace there kissed each other.
Now are they in thee conjoined never again to be separated. It Is not for
ignorant man, seeing thou have not revealed it, to examine what thou didd'st
with thy precious soul, when thy body was in the grave. My Lord! I will not
search into those secrets, kept in thine own Cabinet: Thou have revealed
enough to confirm my faith, and to make me happy. Thou have told me, That
righteousness looked down from heaven; I will not expect thy coming from any
other place.

The Acknowledgement.
MY Omnipotent God, feign would I say something to thee, but I am afraid. But
shall my womanish fear make thee loose thy glory; My God it must not! Thy glory
must so dazzle mine eyes, that I must not regard the censure of the world.

And if thou, O all-seeing eye! see ought of my self, in what I write or
say, restrain my hand from writing, and my tongue from speaking; but if thy
glory be the intention of my heart, let not my hand and tongue be ashamed to
confess that I cannot but see those infinite blessings that thou have bestowed
on me, which thou have not as yet bestowed on all. My Lord! I were a fool if I
did not see them; I were a beast if I did not acknowledge them; but thou have
taught me to know the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent into
the world, to take away my sins; this wisdom given me by thee, inlightens mine
eyes to see thy blessings, and that I must not be like a beast which receives
many favors from thee, without acknowledgment; Then with infinite thanks I
do acknowledge to thy glory, thou have enriched me with a multitude of thy
blessings.

And that I may know, that whatsoever is in me tending to good, is from thee:
there are times that I cannot see any thing that has any appearance of good in
me; for when, by thy mercies, I lay me down in peace to take my rest, being
happy in the consideration of thy infinite mercies, and full of thy goodness;
yet in my sleep I find my thoughts busied in nothing but a multitude of
confused follies, and vain imaginations, which plainly represent to me my
natural condition; that by nature I cannot think a good thought; but thou
remembering thy mercies in the morning again, restorest to me thy gifts and
graces in which I was happy the night before; So that thou make me to lie
down in peace, and to rise with joy, when I see that thou do each day renew
to me thy heavenly gifts, for thou art to me as thou art to all that fear thee,
the light of my eyes, the joy of my heart, and a Crown of glory to my head.

My Lord! shall not these blessings of thine be acknowledged by me, to thy
praise and glory? for fear the world should say, I were proud of them: Most
people glory in something or other, and thou have said, Let them that glory,
glory in the Lord. My God! thou have heard my prayer, that I leanrt of thy
servant, that thou would give me a glorying heart, and now thou make me
with him to rejoice in the God of my Salvation. My Lord! experience has taught
me to know, that if I delight in earthly things, thou will take them from me;
for thou will not have thy children delight in any thing more then in thy
self. But if we love thee thou will manifest thy self to us, and wilt give us
more full possession of thy desired self. But my beloved Lord, if after the
expression of my excessive joy, for being thine, I shall through the frailty of
mine own nature, and thy sufferance fall into any great transgression, to make
thee for a while to withdraw from me, the pleasing and joyful light of thy
countenance. My tender Father, assure me that thou will again restore me to
the joy of thy salvation here in this world, or thou will in thy mercy take me
to a more full possession of thee in the felicity of thy chosen, where I shall
perpetually rejoice with thy children. But to make me careful of my self, let
me remember thy warning, Let him tha thinks he stands take heed lest he
fall.

The invincible Soldier.
MY Lord, the Lord of Hosts; I being in sweet security under thy banner, cannot
but acknowledge with thanks thy mercy to me, for the means that brought me to
this felicity. Thou art merciful to me in letting me be borne of Parents, who
were listed under thy command, and to be brought up by her that did survive,
who knew thy service was perfect freedom. She that was happy in being a
Soldier of thine, used her authority by love, to bring her children under the
obedience of that General, whom she served, and to make me love him in my
childhood, whom her experience had taught to love and admire; enforced me to
read his Royal story, wherein I might see his victorio us conquest, who was
never foiled. There did I see his enemies had all their forces from him,
wherewithal they resisted him. His wisdom, his power, his valor, stole into
my heart a little desire to follow him. But when I came to consider what a
great Prince I should serve, what impenetrable weapons and armor he had
provided for me to defend my self, what rewards he had promised to give to all
that did overcome; I began to contemn the thoughts of serving any but that
victorious Prince of glory. And seeing great God, thou have bid us take that
impenetrable armor. I will not willingly ever go without it. Then dear Prince
bestow on me the Girdle of Truth, and put on me the breast plate of thy
Righteousness, and let my feet be shod with the Gospel of peace, and let me have
the shield of Faith, and set on my head the Helmet of Salvation, and instruct
me how to weild the Sword of the Spirit, and when I am so armed, I shall not
fear the fiery darts of the assailing enemies, Though they be principalities,
and powers and rulers of darkness in this world; My Prince whom I serve, is a
Ruler of those Rulers, and will assist me: yea the stars shall aid us in their
courses against our adversaries. That bright morning star shall arise on our
side, to enlighten us, and to dazzle and afright our weak-sighted resisters,
with his exceeding brightness. The sweet influence that flows from that
overruling star shall make us to renew our strength, each hour to maintain
the battle: his gracious aspect will make all his fighting Soldiers
victorious Conquerors, and at the length he will take them up into a Triumphant
chariot of glory, to reign with him as Kings in his Kingdom of immortal
felicity, where he will place on their head a Crown of eternal glory.

On ECCLES. 9.7. Go eat thy bread with joy, etc.
MY Dear Lord! with what a sweet and pleasing object this morning have thou
presented mine eyes, that they may deliver it to my heart, for to my heart,
thou art pleased to speak it, and if any shall ask if that message was sent to
me, I will aver it was, for they who by the hand of faith lay hold on the
promises of God, are and shall be partakers of those promises; My hand
presented that object to mine eyes, mine eyes delivered it to my heart, my
heart took hold of it by the hand of faith; so that I may confidently say, It
belongs both to Soul and body; And now methinks I hear my God saying to me, Go,
But some may say, Go is a word of separation, and so he will say to those that
shall for ever be debarred of his happy presence: but yet to me he says, Go,
but it is not from him, but with him, to that blessed place from which Adam
fell; and I am sure it is not from him, but with him; for from him is hell, but
here is joy and gladness to my heart, and delicacy of clothing, and in his
presence is the fullness of joy and at his right hand is life everlasting. But
did I say it is to that place from which Adam fell; my thoughts then hovered
too near the earth; it is to heaven my God bids me go with him; for I must eat
my bread with joy, and drink my wine with a merry heart, and let my garments be
always white, and my head must want no odoriserous ointment, for God accepts
thy works.

My Lord! When I consider that those words were spoken to those whose works
thou acceptest: My confidence is somewhat shaken; whether or no those words
were spoken to me, for thou art a God of pure eyes, and can not behold
iniquity. I am a creature unclean, defiled with original and actual sin. How
then can thou O God accept my works, for unclean hands defile what they
touch.

But stagger not my soul, nor doubt; for now to my memory is presented, that to
the house of David was a fountain set open, for sin, and for uncleanness: Have
thee thither my soul, that thou may be clean, for thou needst not doubt, but
that fountain belongs to thee; for from eternity by election were thou
affianc'd to him, that was to be the immortal son of David, and so thou being
of his lineage, the privilege of that fountain must belong to thee: yea my
Soul, thou have heard himself cry out; If any thirst let him come to him and
drink, and out of him shall flow rivers of living water.

I will not stay, but will have and run to thee O blessed fountain of life, and
I will drink abundantly of that desired water, that shall make me capable of
so great a bliss, and purge me clean from my actual and original pollutions,
so that my God may accept my works, and I go with confidence to eat my bread
and drink my wine with a merry heart.

But stay my Soul! do thou think to run to heaven in a full career of
felicity and pleasure; thou can not but remember that the servants of God,
have eaten the bread of affliction, and drunk the wine of astonishment, and
mingled their drink with their tears; this was their portion heretofore; I
confess it was so, but I find in this message at (now) which calls to my mind
that there was a time when I could not do so; for when I lay polluted in the
deformity of my sins, and had my hands foul with the poison of mine iniquities;
it is no wonder, if then our bread be the bread of affliction, and our wine the
wine of astonishment, and how can we choose but mingle our drink with our
tears, when we feed our selves with those hands which we have washed in poison?
how can we choose but think that that bread must end us here, and carry us from
a fearful life in this world to be tormented in a hideous place of misery for
ever.

On^y God! How can they either eat or drink with contentment, who have not
first sought out that fountain wherein they may wash themselves clean from
that dreadful poison: But my Soul, have heard thee ^ay, thou would have to
that pure stream, and wash thee clean from thine iniquities, and thou being
clean, may now go and possess those free liberties.

My Soul, Thou must now flee to heaven, and there eat that living bread, and
drink that wine of life, which cannot be taken but with excessive joy, so that
out of them shall flow rivers of living waters; springs of joy shall rise in
thee, and streams of thanks and praise shall flow from thee, to thy dear God,
for his infinite blessings; these will be to thee rivers of life.

And from heaven my soul may thou take those white garments with which thou
may always be clothed, for his garments were white and glistering: then ask
for those robes of purity that are his, for thou may be sure thou shall
obtain; and being clothed in those garments thou needst not fear thou sholdst
ever be found naked or unseemly dressed, for thou shall be gloriously habited,
because God will make thy righteousness in him as clear as the light, and thy
just dealing as the noon day; and now my Soul thou loving and desiring those
garments of righteousness, needst not fear that thy head shall want any
precious ointment; for if thou with and in that great King, love right and
hate iniquity; God, even thy God will anoint thee with the oil of gladness.

And now my Soul, Thou see the privileges that are presented to thee in this
speech: but thou said ere-while, it belonged to thy body too; I confess it
did, but my thoughts were so taken up with the consideration of the infinite
felicity of my Soul, that I had almost forgot my body; and truly did not she
accord to the action of my Soul, and desire with her only to be happy by the
privileges that adhere to her by reason of my Soul, I would never seek to
content her, nor regard any privileges that belongs to her, but she is an
assenting companion to my Soul, and an instrument to convey the promises of God
to her, and shall hereafter be a perfect glorious companion with her in
eternal bliss, I will now regard the privileges that belong to her in this
message: And though I thought tha^ place from which Adam fell too mean for the
felicity o^ my Soul, yet for my body it is a place sufficiently considerable;
and seeing the benefits that were lost by the first Adam, are all, with many
more restored to thee by the second: My body, thou may go with my Soul, and
eat thy temporal bread with joy, and drink thy wine with a merry heart, and
thy garments may be pleasant and delighting, and thy head want no odoriferous
ointment, for our bountiful and liberal God, has given us many creatures for
pleasure and delight, as well as for necessity; but it is with a restraint, our
bodies are of Adams race, we must not touch that which is forbidden; thou may
use them all with an innocence, not with any sinister end, or to think to make
thy self like a God, by them or with them; but thou may lawfully use them
all to praise thy God, for them and with them.

Thus my body, thou see thou art happy with my Soul, and my Soul is happy in
thee, and you shall be both glorious together in Heaven; and now my heart can
wish no greater bliss on earth, but my tongue must ever say, To my Great God
all glory be,
That gives such blessings unto me.


Ambition.
MY Lord, I will not ^inely desire to pry into thy Cabinet of secrets, to find
out what was the reason, why thou did cast down those sometime bright Angels
in Heaven, now tormenting and tormented spirits in hell; but I have heard that
some have thought that it was for having too ambitious and too high desires.

My Lord! Could their desires be raised higher then are mine? for I confess
mine reach unto thy Throne; Nothing will now satisfy me, but to be enthroned
with thee in glory. I am grown so confident too, that I aver those high desires
in me to be lawful, and know that for them thou will not cast me from thee,
but wilt inthrone me with thee,

My Lord! I see it is dangerous to do any thing in thy service without a
command, or a message from thee: For I see many things done by thy command,
blessed with felicity, when without, punished with misery. I find no command
given them for such desires; but methinkes I hear that blessed Apostle of thine,
When returned from his heavenly rapture, calls to me, and tells me from thee,
that I must seek those things that are above, where Christ sits at the right
hand of God, and that my life is hid in Christ with thee: so that now I seeking
to attain my high desires, made lawful by thy command, am not only placed on
thy Throne, by thee, but I am in thee; and those rebellious Spirits that sought
to obtain their ambitious desires, without thy commands, are not only cast out
of thy blessed presence, but also are for ever to be tormented in eternal
misery.

Now on thy Throne thou have plac'st me,
Great God with thee,
No greater bliss can wished be,
My Lord by me.
I now will set me down and rest
Being so high blessed.
MY God! I will not do good on earth to shine with thee in glory: But because
I will shine with thee in glory, I will do good on earth.

Upon Peter's denial.
SAint Peter! How well had it been, had thou spoke and kept thy word; for why
should thou be offended at thy good Master; he telling thee that himself
should be smitten, you should but be scattered: Had he told you that you should
be smitten, and he separated from you, there might have been some reason, you
might have been offended; but when himself was to be smitten, and for your
sakes too, to secure you from eternal destruction; Methinks the offense was
taken on the contrary side. But if in thy family, it was so taken, thou strict
Prince of perfection, no wonder if it be so in families of looser liberty, and
full of imperfection. I do not wonder to hear thee say, Thou will not be
offended, but I wonder that thou were not over-joyed to hear him telling thee,
that for all he should so suffer, yet he would after he was risen, go before
you into ^alille. Methinks, I should hear you filling the world ^ith songs of
thanksgiving, for joy of that Kingdom ^e has promised you, from his Father,
and for the assu^^nce he gave you of his resurrection; rather then hear ^ee
denying such a powerful and loving Master, with ^athes. My Lord! Let me, with
him, not be ashamed ^o profess thee; but keep me from the shame of de^ying
thee, or if thou may gain glory by my fall, give ^e with him, abundance of
tears, and a heart and ^ongue to confess my fault to thee, and to the world,
that thou and they may see with him, my repentance.

My Redemption acknowledged.
MY Lord! Have thou spoken it, and shall it not be performed? It is impossible?
Thou the Ruler of ^ll the world, have by thy blessed Prophet, bid, that ^hey
which are redeemed by the Lord, declare with praise, how he has redeemed them
from the hand of the oppressor, rather then thy word should not be ful^^l'd to
thy faithful friend; Thou vvilt raise him children ^ut of the dust of the
earth, rather then this command not be performed, thou vvilt raise me who am as
one out of the dust to be one of them, that must declare with praise, how
thou have delivered me from the hands of mine enemies. And though I find it a
thing now adays done but by few; and so by doing it, may make my self a wonder,
and ridiculous to the world, and some other womanish reasons, that might
detain me from it; yet I cannot but know thou have redeemed me^ and I must
confess, it was thou alone, my great God that have done it, for it was none
but the great God, and Ruler of the world, that could deliver me (...) of the
Lands of that great enemy of mine, and of all mankind; that Prince that rules
in the air, who goes about like roaring Lion, seeking each minute to devour
us: O^ of the arms and power of that fiery enemy, have tho^ unparalleled
Conqueror delivered me, else had I bee^ led captive to his will; For that great
deliverance (...) thine, my Soul shall render thee continual praise: I was
thou, O great Prince of life and death, that triumphed over death, thou only
can deliver me from the fear of death, and make me embrace it with a Heaven
of contentment. It is only thou my Lord, who alon^ do arise to them that
fear thy name, with healing i^ thy wings, can, and have cured me of, (to man)
uncurable diseases. Thou have cured me too of the plague o^ my own heart.

No Conqueror did Conquer ought,
But over what Death had power,
Thou Conqueror have Conquered Death,
Which Conquered us each hour.
PSALM ^ Thou have compast me about with Songs of Deliverance.
BLessed King! Well may thou say, Thou should b^ compast about with Songs
of deliverance, when the Lord of Hosts was thy hiding place; with him are n^
Complainers; in his presence is nothing but joy; thos^ that are under the
protection of his pleasant wings, cannot but have their hearts full of
excessive joy, which moves their tongues to sing songs of praises and
thanksgiving to their great and powerful protector for delivering them out of
all their troubles; needs must thou be compassed about with Songs of delight,
thou could not choose but sing thy Self too, those Songs thou did teach to
thy chief Singers; that they might enclose thee in the sweet air of delighting
praises, and with thee my Soul must desire to sing, when with thee I am so
protected.

Saint Stephen.
GOd can make our faces to shine like Angels to daunt our enemies; and he here
can make us to see his face to shine in glory, to comfort our Souls: Why then
should we fear our fiercest enemies; why then should we not be confident of the
aid of our loving and powerful God.

Thy blessed power is like thy Light,
But our frail fear is like our night.
MY Soul being plac'st on the wings of contemplation, with them raises me to
the Regions of felicity.

The foundation and felicity.
MY great God! Thou that have aided me in laying the foundation of assurance,
assist me still now ^owring in the turrets of contentment; and let all know,
that they can never with safety ascend the turrets of delighting contentment;
if they have not first laid the true foundation of assurance.

Upon the Temptation of the doubting of Heaven.
MY Soul! Though that subtle enemy of thine, and of all men, do seek to seduce
thee, by his insinuating persuasions, to doubt of that unexpressable and
immortal felicity of thy Soul and body: yet my Soul, faint not! For if the
holy Writ be true, thy felicity is certain; the which my gracious God I do
most confidently believe, to be the written word of the God of all the world,
by whose word and will, I, and this Fabric were created; though that
pernicious enemy, seeks to persuade me that it is a fancy of a studious brain,
and writ to keep people in awe to human obedience. And because nothing does
please our Souls, but the thoughts of eternal bliss, nor afright them, but
the dread of eternal punishment, therefore have they fained a heaven for
reward of the virtuous, and a hell for punishment of the disobedient; and that
those felicities, of which I have written, are but fictions of my own brain,
and somewhat like they that invented it, and partly taken out of it.

But my gracious God, keep me, that I fall not by these temptations, but let me
know why he is, and has been so busy in drawing me to doubt of thy being, and
of that glorious heaven, which I do notwithstanding his temptations, believe I
shall possess with thee.

My God is it to draw me to a loose liberty of my life, and so by disobeying
thee, I might live in fear of being cast out of thy favor to eternal
punishment? if so! I will tell him, that he may cease his labor: for if that
which I believe to be the holy word of God, be a fancy of any brain, it is so
just and pleasing to my soul, that with all my power and might; I will
endeavor to lead my life according to the direction of that exact and royal
Law; and so hateful is any thing to me that is contrary to it, that when
through my frailty I do what in it is forbidden, I am hateful to my self,
till I am assured that that offense be washed from me, and that something
within me assures me, that the breach of that transgression, is pardoned. This
is a strong argument to me against that temptation, and of the divinity and
eternity of my Soul; for if my Soul were not to be eternally either happy or
miserable, why should the expectation of eternal misery, trouble me, and the
assurance of eternal bliss so exceedingly joy me. Tempter go! Reason and
experience teaches us to see, that likeness breeds love; our Souls, our minds
(for such things there are) can never love nor delight in what is not; but our
Souls affect eternal glory, then sure such a thing there is: but be it so, or
be it not, such a thing is presented to our consideration, and if I am not to
live a life of eternal bliss hereafter; yet for the happiness of my present
life, I will so near as I can run in the paths that lead to that heaven, which
I so much affect, that I might live with a confident hope that I shall possess
it, for nothing can truly satisfy my Soul, but a heaven of eternity, and with
these thoughts I can live on earth in a heaven of felicity.

Tempter! Thou art like to loose thy labor, for I must take up that
resolution, not to live a sensual and vicious life; for if I have no grace,
such a life is hateful to my disposition, and such a life would not I live,
were there no God to give blessedness, or no Devil to torment. But one thing
more I have now to tell thee; I in the Sanctuary of the great God of all the
world, presenting my petitions to him, that by something I might be assured
that thy wicked suggestions to make me doubt of his being, were false, I was
directed to consider the glorious Sun, which then shined bright in mine eyes;
so that I plainly see, that great God, of whose being thou would have me
doubt, does aid and assist me against thy wicked temptations: for it cannot be
but a great God, that can make and govern so glorious and so great a light,
the God that made that, made me; that God I did offend in my first parents, and
since in my own person, but to him am reconciled in his first borne Son Jesus
Christ, who is God and man, and for his sake shall I possess a Kindome of
felicity here, and at the last a Kingdom of eternal glory.

To him be Glory. On the Sunrising.
AS the appearance of the Sunbeams, disperseth the clouds of darkness, which
brings sadness to the earth: so let the bright shining beams of thy Spirit, O
heavenly Son of light disperse the clouds of dark despairing thoughts and
vain imaginations, the which do darken the brightness of my Soul, and bring
sadness to my heart. Let them purify and raise my mind, that I may still be
singing praise, and let me ever say.

To my great God all glory be,
Who makes his light to shine on me.
Heaven upon Earth.
MY Lord! Though thou will not take me from earth to live in Heaven with thee;
yet thou coming from heaven to live on earth with me, makes me on ^arth to
live in heaven with thee.

The Temple.
MY God! Is my body the Temple of the Holy Ghost? What Palace can there be in
this small Fabric, fit ^o entertain so great a Prince; yet thou have said, If
my love thee, thy Father will love them, and thou, and ^ee, and thy holy
spirit, which cannot be separated from thee, will come and make thy abode with
him. My Lord and King! thou know I love thee, for ^ong since I was willing
to have left the world, and all ^he blessings that thou have given me in it, to
have gone to live with thee: but what talk I, leaving the world to come to
live with thee. Thou art come into ^he world to live with me and in me. But my
great Lord, where in me, shall I find thee; have thou in^hron'd thy self in
my heart, give me then thy assistance, that no proud imagination, for my own
greatness, may arise to disinthrone thee, and make the distaste that habitation;
but be thou in my heart, ever attended by sweet humility and humble obedience.
Let all the members of my body be employed in thy service; Let my hands
administer to thy Saints, and not stretched ^ut to covetousness. Let my feet be
swift to run in the ways of thy commandments, and not to shed innocent blood:
or if in my head thou have taken up thy seat, there let humility attend on thee
too, or I sha^^ fear thou will go from me; for thou resistest th^^ proud: but
though thou be high, and instabitest eternity, yet thou, O great Prince will
dwell with the humble. Then in my head, and in all that belong to (...) do
thou find humble obedience, that there I might retain thee. Let not mine eyes
have any proud look nor be windows to let in vanity, but let them be eve^
looking to the hills from whence comes my salvation* Let not my tongue which
thou have given me to serv^ thee, be employed to back-bite or defame any the
least of thy children, or any one; for how know I who ar^ thine, or who not,
but let my tongue be ever speakin^ to thy praise and glory; and let the words
of mout^ be accptable in thy sight; nor let mine ears listen t^ any idle or
unseemly discourse, that may displease the divine Majesty, and let my nostrils
be ever filled wit^ the sweet savor that comes from thy heavenly garments: So
if all the faculties of my body be imploye^ by my Soul, humbly to serve thee, I
shall live and express a glorying heart, because I know this body is the
Temple of the Deity.

Then where I am a Heaven must be,
For thou do bring a Heaven with thee.
The true Object of Love.
MY Lord! When thou were pleased to take my thoughts quite off from the world,
I was directed to regard that place, where thou bidst us cease from man, for
wherein is he to be accounted of, for his breath is in his nostrils, yet he a
creature after thine own image, and the excellentest of all thy workman ship
on earth yet this rare creature, his love, his hatred not to be regarded, for
thou can in an instant take away that thin fume of life, and then what power
has he to love or hate. My Lord! He is indeed a most contemptible creature in
respect of thee. But when my Soul enters into the consideration of thy
greatness and deep abisse of thy endless power and mercy. My Soul is struck
dumb, and knows not what to say, but silence giving me opportunity to consider
of thy infinite love to me, power, form, beauty and excellency, in, and about
thee; my Soul is wounded with a deep affection toward thee, and love cannot,
will not be silent: And ^ow my great and powerful God, was it not enough for
thee, to make so great and beautiful a structure for me, and for all men; but
when I had run from thee, by my disobedience into the territories and
tormenting arms of my enemy, for thee, O most glorious Prince of eternal
bliss, to leave thy Kingdom where thou ^ert attended by a multitude of bright
Angels, and blessed Saints, which continually sing thy praises with their
heavenly voices; for thee to leave such transcendent delights, to take on thee
my frail flesh, and come ^o me, and subject thy self to all the contempts that
^n insulting enemy could impose: had nor this been enough to have manifested an
unanswerable love to so contemptible a creature, but thou, My dear Prince I who
would set a perfect pattern of humility and love, for all that were thine
to follow for love to me, ^hou were content to dye, and the most painful and
ig^ominious death that could be inflicted on the mean^st person: Thou who were
served by all the world, was ^leas'd thus to serve for me, and to dye, to save
me from ^ternall death; and before I knew into what torment^ng habitation I had
plunged my self by my rebellion, ^hou were pleased to declare to me how thou
had re^eem'd me out of those most cruel inthralments, by ^hy willingly
yielding to dye for me; for none could ^ave power, O great Prince of Heaven and
earth, to have taken away thy life, had thou not laid it down^ of thine own
accord thou were please to tell me too though I live here among thy enemies and
mine, yet ^ should not be afraid of them, for they can but kill my body, and
that too not without thy leave, for none ca^^ take thy children out of thy
hand, unless thou ar^ pleased to deliver them into the hand of their
persecutors, and by that fiery Chariot to convey us to that immortal Kingdom,
which thou have promised to thou that believe on thee; where we shall receive
from the hand the beautiful Crown of our eternal glory. ^ my God! Who can
choose but be ravished with thy unfa^dom'd mercy, and unexpressable love to thy
poor, ye^ by thee enriched creatures. My dear Prince! Wha^ shall I do, to let
all the world know what engagements my Soul has to thee. I do wish it were in
my power, as in my desires, that all the world may sing Halalujahs to thee for
the saving of my Soul from tha^ cruel adversary, and for the glory that thou will inve^^ her in, and that they would sing public praises unt^ thee, for thy
mercies to themselves too: would tha^ were their employment, then should not
thy service be so much slighted, nor thy name so much dishonored nor thy
servants so much contemned; But Let them sing praises to thy name,
Whom thou have blessed,
And kept their Souls from endless pain
And plac'st in rest.
Thou have me kept from hellish pain,
And plac'st in rest.
How can I choose but praise thy name
When I Am so blessed.


Romans 12.1.
MY Lord! I cannot plead ignorance, for I must confess I have often read it,
and knew that I was to ^er up my self a living sacrifice to thy Majesty, and to
^ve my self wholly to thy disposing, and not to have ^y sequestered thoughts
from thee, dedicated to mine ^wn ends, in either my actions, words or thoughts:
but ^y dear Father, I now plainly see the necessity of entering ^to thy Courts,
to hear thee, most gracious Prince ^eake to us by thy Ambassadors; And I, nor
any other ^ught to say; what should I go thither, to hear a man ^ell me, but
what I knew before? But my Lord, thy Ordi^^nces are powerful, and thou workest
more effectually ^n our hearts for the most part, by the preaching of ^y word
from them, then by our own reading and stu^y, and now I begin to suspect, I
have not offered up my ^lse so exactly to thee, as I should; for me thought, ^e
besought me from thee, to offer up my self a living ^acrifice, wholly and
acceptably to thee, My Lord! I ^ave heretofore long since given my self to
thee by ^ierce meals; but I fear, reserving something from thee, and if
offering my self wholly to thee, be but a reaso^oble serving of thee, sure
when I reserved any thing ^om thee, that service was contemptible: But graci^us
Father, pardon all that heretofore I have done a^isse in thy service, for now I
do give up my self wholly to thee; But how shall I dare to say my self, I
^are not appear by my self in thy presence, yet with, and in my self I may;
Thou have taught me out of thy ^oyall story, to know that thou have given me
that Princely Son of thine, I cannot choose but accept so ^ich a present; then
seeing he is mine, and I am his, I am confident to present my self to thee,
with and in him; My Lord, thou can not but take the care (...) me, now I have
given my self wholly to thee; the gracious Father let me live without fear of
falling fr^^ thee; for if I fall from thee, wilt not thou loose pa^^ of thy
glory? My Lord, I know it stands not wi^^ thine honor to let that perish which
is committed i^ to thy hands; then since I have committed my self wh^^ly to thee,
let me with confidence sit down and re^^ and fear no evil, For from all ill I
shall be free,
Sure nothing can be ill to me.


Upon Adams fall.
MY Dear God! did thy Majesty make Adam wi^^ before he fell, then any man; or
have thou si^^ his fall given man the gift of Faith, or had he no nee^ of
Faith, or did Adam not believe thee the maker (...) all things, so much as we
believe each other? Su^^ Adam did not believe thee, when thou toldst him th^^
the day he should eat of that tree, he should dye t^^ death. We think men wise
when they avoid what (...) told them will hurt them. I find Adam not so wi^^
and if one tell us, Mercury will cause our death, w^^ that are called the
depraved Sons of Adam, will not ea^ it, if we be in our right senses, though
the pureness (...) the color may tempt us, and it be only a morta^^ man that
tells us so, who neither made it, nor eve^ tried it. Adam believed not the O
Lord, who made that tree, and gave the nature to it; O Adam, wha^ made thee
to eat of that tree, had thou not this great world full of all pleasures to
content thee, a beautifu^ healthful active body, a mind endued with all
exce^lent and pleasing knowledge: No where could tho^^ cast thine eye but it
had pleasing objects: nothin^ could thou taste, but it was delicious; no
troubled mind, no distracted thoughts, to take thee one minute, from these
delights, or cause thee to wish a change. Oh what then was it? But now I must
check my self; Great God pardon me, I now sin with Adam, whiles I am inquiring
why Adam ^inn'd: he would know what he should not, I what I cannot; Thou had
made him so wise as was sufficient for any mortal man; and had given him
such qualities of his Soul as were requisite to have made him for ever happy,
in that blessed condition. Frail Adam, I will no more examine, whether thou
had faith or no, or whether thou did think to have been happier by what
was kept from thee, then in possessing what was so plentifully given to thee.

Great God, I will content my self to know thou had made him at first in a
happy condition, and us so in him; and will be patient now I see my self in a
worse: because thou have given me faith to believe I shall be in a better. And
as Adam made himself unhappy by expecting to be happier; So I shall be more
happy by believing I shall be gloriously perfect hereafter.

Security in Danger.
MY Lord! When with that blessed servant of thine I send up to thee my
petitions for security against those that rise up against us; Let me receive
his assurance that thou hear me out of thy holy hill, and let me say with
him, I will lay me down and also sleep in peace, for thou Lord only make me
dwell in safety. I will not be afraid, of ten thousand of people, that should
beset me round about; for seeing it has pleased thee to let me be in a
Kingdom of division, though blessed be thy name who has yet preserved me, I
am now in a place of peace, yet for ought I know I might to morrow be
encompassed with ten thousand enemies, though not to me in particular, yet to
those among whom I am now in safety: But if thou art pleased I shall be so
enclosed, then let not me be afraid of them, shr thou can preserve me, either
by destroying those that would harm me, or by letting me find favor in the
sight of mine enemies, or by their hands can thou send me to thy blessed
Tabernacle of security, where I shall never need any more to send up prayers
for deliverance, but shall always sing praises to thee, for having so many
ways to deliver me.

And so all fear I now may bid adieu,
Go enemies, I Am secured from you.
The Royal Priesthood.
PEace! Present now no more to me (to take my spirit from the height of
felicity) that I am a creature of a weaker sex, a woman. For my God! If I must
live after the example of thy blessed Apostle, I must live by faith, and faith
makes things to come, as present, and thou have said by thy servant, that we
shall be like thy blessed Son: then thou will make all thy people as Kings and
Priests, Kings are men, and men are Kings; And Souls have no sex; the hidden
man of the heart, makes us capable of being Kings; for I have heard it is that
within makes the man; then are we by election capable of as great a dignity as
any mortal man; But thoughts of mortals! now Adieu; I will close the eyes of
my Soul, to mortality, and will not open them but to eternity; seeing that by
thy grace and faith in thee, thou have made us partaker of thy divine nature,
by thy assistance I will live by faith; I will no more now see my self as
mortal, but as an immortal King will I begin to live, that hidden man never
dies, but when mine immortal King, that plac'st me in this Kingdom of
felicity with him; shall see it fit time, he will raise me on a triumphant
Chariot, composed of the wings of bright Angel, to his immortal Kingdom of
Glory, where I shall reign with him for all eternity, and never more desire to
change. And as a Royal Priest must I be to thee; ever offering up the sweet
incense of my praises to thy divine Majesty, for thy infinite mercies to me,
thy unworthy servant.

The secure Pavillion.
MY God, Thy children need not now pray that those lips may be put to silence
that speak grievous things against them; they have long since had a friend, and
thou a servant, that sent up his petitions to thee for that, and as if he been
ravished with a present answer from thee, he cries out; O how great is thy
goodness, that thou have laid up in store for them that fear thee, before the
Sons of men, that would dishonor thy servants. And now he has brought us so
pleasing a message from thee, that it is no wonder if we with disregard slight
those unsavory words which we hear. And now look here all you who shall any way
slight or annoy his children, by your odd speeches; they are plac'st above your
reach, for God will laid them in the secret of his presence, from the pride of
men, he will keep them secretly in his Pavilion, from the strife of tongues,
you may shoot, but your aim must be above your head, if you think to hit them,
and when you have shot, your arrows cannot reach them, but they may light where
you would not have them, on your own heads.

A Question.
MY God! What business on earth is worth detaining a Soul from Heaven, that is
prepared with desire to come from earth, to live in heaven with thee.

Palmer! Why told you me, God has something here remarkable for me to do,
before I leave the earth; else could I have laid down my head each night, with
expectation of a mornings rise in heaven; now I do lay it down only with a
contenting joy, that I am his, and that when his will is done with me, or by me
here; I shall then go to possess tha Heaven which only can content the
desire of my immortal Soul: Had you not told me so, I might have hoped, that
excessive joy, for the glory which I shall possess, might have raised me to
that bliss to which I do aspire. My God, my Soul breaths after thee, and
cannot be satisfied, till she comes to a full possession of thee.

Lord, what on earth can there be done by me,
Worth keeping here, my longing Soul from thee.
Wings my Doves you have now obtained
To flee to that Invincible Rock
Where you may hide you safe
In those Clifts of Security
From your Malignant Enemies,
Who may flee after you.
And think to graspe you,
And so to hurt you,
But they cannot.
But you may without any gaul tell them;
You are placed beyond their envies reach,
And with that blessed Apostle may say
It Is a small matter for me to be judged
By you, or of man's judgment
The Lord is Judge of all;
He judges me, and I
Am safe under
His powerful Wings.

