The Magistrates Obligation to Punish VICE.

A SERMON Preached before The Right Worshipful the Mayor, Aldermen, Sheriff,
etc. of the Town and County of Newcastle upon Tyne.

AT THE Parish Church of St. Nicholas, October 8. 1699. Upon the Election of
the Mayor.

By Nathanael Ellison, Vicar of Newcastle.

Published at the Request of the Mayor and Aldermen.

LONDON: Printed by W. B. for Richard Randell, Bookseller in Newcastle upon
Tyne: And sold by Luke Meredith, at the Star in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1700.

To the Right Worshipful ROBERT EDEN, Esquire Mayor; The Right Worshipful Sir
Robert Strafloe, Knight. Recorder; And to the Right Worshipful and Worshipful
Aldermen;
Sir William Blackett, Bar. Sir Ralph Carr, Knight. Timothy Robson, Esquire Nicholas
Fenwick, Esquire William Auboney, Esquire William Carr, Esquire Matthew White, Esquire Thomas
Wasse, Esquire Joseph Atkinson, Esquire George Whinfield, Esquire
Jonathan Hargrave, Esquire Sheriff of the Town and County of Newcastle upon Tyne.

Right Worshipful and Worshipful,
THE just Sense I had of the many Defects of this Sermon, made me very
unwilling to Appear in Public, when so many Correct and Excellent Discourses
have been Printed upon the same Argument and Occasion. But when You were
pleased to make it Your Request, I thought Obedience would be better Resented
than Excuses; and was therefore willing, rather to Publish my Own Infirmities,
than to Incur the Imputation of Disrepect or Disobedience to my Superiors, to
whose Commands I owe an Absolute Deference and Regard.

I wish the Performance had been more Worthy of Your Names: But such as it is,
it is with all Humility Addressed to You, as the Only Opportunity I have yet
had, of making those Public Acknowledgments that are Due for Your singular
Favors to my Self, and for Your Generous Liberality to the Clergy of this
Place; few Corporations (if any in the Kingdom) Voluntarily Contributing as You
do, out of Your Public Revenue, above Eight Hundred Pounds per Annum toward
the Maintenance of the Clergy and Schools. But what ought to be dearer to us
than this, is, the Charitable Constructions You put upon our Labors, Your
early and constant Attendance, and solemn Deportment at Church; Your frequent
receiving Monthly Sacraments, and Your sober and exemplary Conversation; which
as they bespeak a true Sense of Religion, so also Your sincere and steady
Affection to the present Establishment of our Church. And because nothing is so
much wanting to make us the happiest Church in the World, as Reformation of
Manners, Your late Orders for the better Observing the Lord's Day, and Your
putting the Penal Laws in brisk and vigorous Execution against Profaneness and
Immorality, give us no small Hope, that as You have already put a stop to the
present Growth of Debauchery among us, so also, that hereafter You will more
effectually Suppress it. If this Sermon be any way Instrumental in promoting so
good a Work, it will answer Your Design in commanding it to be Printed, and
mine in Preaching it; which, that it may be subservient to so good an End, is
the hearty Prayer of

Your most Obliged and Faithful Servant, N. ELLISSON.

ERRATA.
IN the Dedication, l. 4. r. Shaftoe. l. ult. r. ELLISON. Sermon, p. 8. l. 8.
after Forfeitures, add and of several lesser Corporal Punishments. p. 31. l.
17. after little, instead of which read will. p. 32. l. 23. after before add
him. p. 33. l. 9. after have add the best Cause in.

ECCLES. VIII. 11. Because Sentence against an evil Work is not Executed
speedily, therefore the Heart of the Sons of Men is fully set in them to do
Evil.
THOUGH these Words be Interpreted by the Generality of Commentators, to be
primarily meant by Solomon, of the ill Use that wicked Men make of God's
Clemency and Forbearance, yet they may be Secondarily and Consequentially
Applied also to the ill Effects that usually attend the Remisness and
Indulgence of Magistrates, and Men of Power and Authority. As this is a Sense
of which the Words are very capable, as they may be taken Absolutely, so also
as they relate to the Context, do I find them to be so Translated and
Interpreted by some (...). Symmach. Est autem (...) hoc loco sententia Iudicis.
Drus. Sententia Judicum de Opere malo. Pagnin. and Vatabl.
Men of Note. And Mr. Cartwright's Note upon the Place is this, Hoc Magistratus
Admoneat, ne Poenam sceleribus Justam and Debitam differant, nisi velint Terram
scelerum velut Diluvio obrui. That this should be a Caveat to Magistrates, how
they delay the Execution of Justice upon Criminals, lest a Deluge of
Profaneness and Impiety break in upon them, and cover the Face of the whole
Earth. In this Sense will I Discourse of the Words, as most suitable to our
present Occasion.

They contain a very sharp and cutting Reflection upon some soft, and easy, and
careless Magistrates; viz.

That the Growth and Predominancy of Wickedness is owing in a great measure to
the Negligence and Remisness of those in Authority, who are entrusted with the
Administration of Justice: The Truth of which Observation shall be made appear
in the Sequel of my Discourse: In the Prosecution of which I will endeavor to
show,

First, The Magistrates Power and Obligation to Punish Vice, and Execute
Sentence upon every evil Work.

Secondly, The ill Consequence that naturally attends their Neglect of this
Duty. The Growth of Sin and Wickedness is thereby promoted and encouraged; the
Guilt of which is laid at their Door whose Neglect occasioned it. This is the
Conclusion that the wise Man draws from such Premises, Because Sentence against
an evil Work is not executed speedily, therefore the Heart of the Sons of Men
is fully set in them to do Evil.

Thirdly, I shall conclude all with a word or two of Exhortation.

First, Consider we the Magistrates Power and Obligation to Punish Vice. God
has invested and entrusted you with this Power and Authority, and also has laid
an Indispensable Obligation upon you, to Correct and Punish Delinquents. And
here my Design is not so much to direct you that are Magistrates in your Duty,
as it is to Vindicate your Acts of Justice, in bringing Criminals to condign
Punishment; by Representing to those that are under your Government, the
Indispensable Obligation that lies upon you to Execute this Power, and to
Discharge this Trust that is reposed in you by God, the King, and your Country.

The Punishing of Criminals is what is very disagreeable to all good Tempers,
and for that very Reason is it most of all Ungrateful to our English Nation,
which perhaps is the most Merciful and Compassionate in the World, we being as
singular for our Good Nature, as we are for the use of that The Earl of
Clarendon observes, That no Language in the World has any single Word to
express what we understand by Good Nature.
Phrase; but it may be we overvalue our selves too much upon this Character,
what we reckon our Commendation may be a Fault, and our good Nature may be
Censured by some as Softness and Folly: And, indeed, that is but a Foolish
Salutaris severitas vincit inanem speciem Clementiae. Cicer. Ep. 1. ad Brutum.
Pity which is indulged so far as to Invalidate the salutary Execution of Penal
Laws, which are absolutely necessary to the support of Religion and Government,
and the Preservation of good Manners. For what Government can there be without
Laws? And what avail the best Laws, without Sanctions to enforce them? And what
signify Sanctions without due Execution?

This is a Truth so plain and self-evident, that my Text supposes it, and takes
it for granted; and which supercedes any laborious Proof, were there not a bold
sort of People ( Socin. Explicat. cap. 5. S. Matthew. v. 42. Id. in Resp. ad
Jacob. Palaeolog. part. 1. c. 3. and part. 2.. 26. and part. 3. c. 2. Lud.
Woltzogen. Appendix ad Commentar. in Matthew. 5. 38. ap. Fratr. Polon.
Socinians and Anabaptists) started up among us, who endeavor (what they can)
to subvert all Government, by Disowning and Impugning this Power and Authority
of Magistrates, and by Crying down their whole Office, as Unlawful and
Antichristian. But no wonder that these Men clamor so bitterly against the
Rights and Jurisdiction of Magistrates, since it has been the Practice, as it is
also the Interest, of all well-Constituted Governments, severaly to Prosecute
them, as the greatest Disturbers of Peace, and the very Bane and Pest of
Societies. But if Non potest ullam Authoritatem habere sententia, ubi qui
Damnandus est Damnat. Senec.
Malefactors and Criminals at the Bar be allowed to Plead for themselves, no
doubt but they will except against the Jurisdiction of the Court, and the
Authority of the Judges. It Is no great wonder that these Parties detract so
much from the Authority of Inferior Magistrates, since One of them have
disowned the Authority of their Great Lord and Redeemer, by denying his
Divinity and Satisfaction; and the Other (and indeed both of them) have
disowned the most Sacred Authority of the very Sacraments themselves, which
must be owned by all good Men to be most undoubtedly of Divine and most Solemn
Institution. How will the very Heathens rise up against these Men one day, and
condemn them? 'Twas Plato's Opinion, That neither God nor Man would say it was
any Injustice to Punish Criminals: And indeed, who can say it? Not the
Heathens; none of their Authors having ever Pleaded in all their Writings
against this Authority of Magistrates: How much less can any Christian say it,
when God has so fully Invested them with this Power and Authority; 1. Before
the Law; 2. Under the Law; 3. Under the Gospel.

1. We have very imperfect Memoirs in Scripture, of what Courts of Judicature
God erected, or what Penalties were Appointed for Punishing Malefactors before
the Flood; but immediately after the Flood, we find God settling a standing
Magistracy, and intrusting them with a Power of Inflicting capital Punishments
upon Offenders; Genesis 9. 6.
Whosoever sheddeth Man's Blood, by Man shall his Blood be shed. I shall not
trouble you with the various Translations which the Learned De Jur. Not. and
Gent. l. 1. c. 5. and l. 4. c. 1. Id. de Synedr. l. 1. c. 5.
Mr. Seldom has Collated with a great deal of Accuracy; the most Natural Sense
of the Place seems to be, That he that took away the Life of Another was to
lose his Own, and to be Sentenced to Death by the Judge or Magistrate: And so I
find both the Targums render it. God seems before this to have reserved this
Royalty of Life and Death to himself, as appears probable by the Story of Cain,
whom he would not suffer any Man to kill, though he very well deserved it, for
slaying his Brother. But here he seems to settle a standing Magistracy, and to
invest them with a Power of Life and Death upon such Occasions. And although
Death seems to be restrained here, to the Case of Murder, yet I will not doubt
in the least, but that the like Sentence extended also to other heinous
Enormities, as seems very plausible from Thamar's being Sentenced to be Burnt
for playing the Harlot; Genesis 38. 24.
which Sentence, if it were decreed by Juda, proceeded not in all probability
from any Arbitrary Power that so near a Relation would have assumed to himself;
or if it were pronounced by any other Magistrate, it argues that there was Vid.
Calvin. and Grot. in Loc. and Seld. Uxor. Hebr. l. 3. c. 12.
some peculiar Custom or Law to punish Adultery, as well as Murder, with Death.
And if Thamar was a Priest's Daughter, (as some of the Hebrew Doctors imagine)
this was the very same Punishment that was afterward inflicted by the Law of
Moses in the like Case. Lev. 21. 9.
But however that may be, certain it is, that,

2. Under the Mosaic Economy Death was the ordinary Punishment that was
appointed both for Murder and Adultery, besides several lesser Punishments that
Magistrates were empowered and obliged to inflict for lesser Crimes. It Is
needless to reckon up all the Penal Laws of this Nature, which occur in the
Mosaic Dispensation; it is enough, that God himself gave it in Commission to the
Judges, Deuteronomy. 25. 1.
to Justify the Righteous, and to Condemn the Wicked, to Condemn them, both to
greater and lesser Punishments, according to the greatness of their Demerits:
And hence it is, that we Read of pecuniary Mulcts and Forfeitures, as
Imprisonment, Stocks, Scourging, etc. as well as of several Capital
Punishments, as Stoning, Burning, Beheading, and Strangling: Instances of all
which might be produced, were there any need of it; let it be enough to Remark,
That these Penal Laws were so highly reasonable, that Artaxerxes, though a
Heathen King, thought fit to confirm them to the Jews, Ezra 7. 25, 26.
when Ezra returned to Jerusalem after the Captivity. These Penal Laws, I say,
that Heathen King confirmed to them, as the Result of God's Wisdom; and Ezra
owns this to be the Effect of God's Spirit upon his Royal Heart; Thou Ezra,
says Artaxerxes, after the Wisdom of thy God, set Magistrates and Judges which
may judge all the People: And whosever will not do the Law of thy God, and the
Law of the King, let Judgment be executed speedily upon him, whether it be unto
Death, or to Banishment, or to Confiscation of Goods, or Imprisonment: And
Ezra's Answer to this Gracious Concession was, Blessed be the Lord God of our
Fathers, who has put such a thing as this into the King's Heart.

3. But that which much more concerns Christians, is, That the like Sovereignty
was invested in Magistrates even under the Dispensation of the Gospel, which is
the most gentle and merciful Dispensation that ever appeared in the World. And
although this Power was lodged in such ill Hands at first, as exerted it to the
very great Prejudice of Christianity, and in perfect opposition to the Interest
and Propagation of the Gospel, and (as far as in them lay) to its utter Ruin
and Extirpation; yet it is very remarkable, That neither our Blessed Savior nor
his Apostles make the least Exception, no not against the Arbitrary and Unjust
Exercise of this Power and Jurisdiction, even of Heathen Magistrates; but when
they were suffering most unjustly under them, even then do they own and assert
their Power to be of Divine Institution and Establishment. Thus when our
Blessed Redeemer was most unjustly brought upon His Trial, and Pilate seemed to
Triumph and value himself upon the Power he had to Crucify and Release him,
our Blessed Savior is so far from detracting from this Authority he claimed,
that he runs it up to the Divine Original, and tells him, He could have no such
Power (of Life and Death as he boasted of) except it were given him from above.
John 19. 10, 11.
The word in the Original is (...), which cannot be interpreted of bare Divine
Permission, but of Express Commission. And so also St Paul, when he Appeals
unto Caesar's Judgment Seat, he owns it as a Court where he ought to be Judged.
Acts 25. 10.
Nay, both St. Peter and St. Paul make this Power of Heathen Emperors, not only
God's own Establishment, but they lay it as the very Foundation and
Cornerstone of Christian Subjection and Obedience. 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14.
Submit, says St. Peter, for the Lord's sake whether unto the King as Supreme,
or unto subordinate Governors that are sent by him, i. e. that are sent by
God, and then follows the Commission they are sent upon, They are sent by him,
says he, for the Punishment of evil Doers, as well as for the Praise of them
that do well. To the like purpose St. Paul in that known place of the 13 th
Chapter to the Romans, where he calls the Higher Powers God's Ministers no less
than three times in two Verses; Romans 13. 4, 6.
and when he calls them so, it is with reference to that Power they were
entrusted with of punishing Offenders, and executing Wrath upon those that do
Evil. It Is observable, That though the Emperors these Apostles lived under were
some of the very Worst or Heathens, though they nailed the one Apostle to the
Cross, and struck off the Head of the other, yet these very Apostles tell us,
that God made them His Ministers in the Execution of Justice, and entrusted
them with the Sovereign Power of the Sword. Now, if God, under the Gospel, put
a Sword into the Hands of Heathen Emperors, who made so ill use of it, as to
oppose the Preaching and Establishment of Christianity, and to persecute and
kill the Apostles and Primitive Christians, we cannot think that he designed to
wrest it out of the Hands of Christian Princes, when there is the same
necessity and occasion of Correcting Sin, and when they may manage it more for
the Honor and Glory of God, and the Promotion of Piety. No, if the Heathens
abuse of their Power did not vacate their Commission, how much more should the
prudent and sober, the regular and impartial Administration of this Power
confirm and establish Christian Magistrates in the use and exercise of their
Authority? I am sure, so it has been understood in all Christian States, every
one of them claiming the like Power of punishing Offenders, as has been
exercised by former Kings.

There Is little question then to be made, but that all Supreme and Subordinate
Magistrates have a Power to coerce and punish Criminals: It Is well if those
that are in Authority would consider, that this Power of theirs is not so much
a Privilege and Royalty, which they may use at Pleasure, as it is a Duty
incumbent upon them, which they are obliged to under the severest Penalties.
It Is a Trust which they are obliged to Execute and Discharge as they will
answer it at the Supreme Tribunal of the great Judge of all the World, who will
call them to a very severe and particular Account for their Neglect,
Mismanagement, and Maladministration.

Supreme Magistrates are God's Ministers, and it is expected, that such should
be Faithful to their Master, that they should Assert, Vindicate, and Promote
his Honor, in encouraging Virtue, and in discountenancing and punishing Vice.
as Great as the Greatest of them are, they are but Ministers; and though their
Greatness exempts them from any Punishment here, yet they must one Day give an
account, and a very severe one too, hereafter, for the abuse of their
Ministry, according to that of Solomon, Eccles. 5. 8. If thou see the
Oppression of the Poor, and violent Perverting of Judgment and Justice, marvel
not at the matter, says he, for he that is higher than the highest regards,
and there be higher than they that will call them to an account for it: Or as
it is Wisd. 6. 3, etc. Power is given you of the Lord, and Sovereignty from the
Highest, who shall try your Works, and search out your Counsels; and because,
being Ministers of his Kingdom, you have not judged aright, nor kept the Law,
nor walked after the Counsel of God, horribly and speedily shall he come upon
you. For a sharp Judgment shall be to them that be in high Places; for Mercy
will soon pardon the meanest, but mighty Men shall be mightily tormented, and a
sore Trial shall come upon them.

If Supreme Powers then be thus accountable, how much more those that are
Inferior and Subordinate. They are accountable to God, their King and their
Country for the Discharge of that Trust reposed in them; and if they neglect to
execute it with an honest conscientious Integrity, if they Pervert, Corrupt or
Obstruct Justice, they become guilty, not only of Betraying their Trust, but
(which is yet of more dismal Aggravation) they are guilty of the Violation of
that sacred Oath which they have taken to discharge it. Matthew. 25.
If he that hid his Lord's Talent (though it were but a single Talent) was called
to a strict account for it, and sentenced to outer Darkness, as a wicked,
slothful, and unprofitable Servant, what Name will be bad enough to affix to
those that have wasted, abused, or misspent the many Talents they have been
entrusted with? And what Place in the Infernal Lake can be found hot enough to
receive such unjust and unfaithful Servants?

'Twas God's express Charge and Direction to David, 2 Samuel 23. 3.
That he that Rules over Men must be just, ruling in the Fear of God: Which
Divine Admonition holy David seems to have had constantly in his Eye, and to
have made his Rule and Model of Government; insomuch, that you have this
glorious Character transmitted of him, that while he Reigned over Israel, He
executed Judgment and Justice unto all his People. 2 Samuel 8. 15.
And indeed, you have him laying a good Foundation for this Character, as soon
as ever he came to the Throne, or (as some think) when he had but a prospect of
it. So early do you find him resolving, Psalm. 101.
to govern first himself, and then his Court, and then his whole Kingdom, with
such care and caution that good Men might secure themselves of his Favor, and
the wicked be afraid of feeling the Severity of his Displeasure. I will behave
my self wisely in a perfect way; I will walk within my House with a perfect
Heart; I will not know a wicked Person. He that walks in a perfect way shall
serve me; he that works Deceit shall not dwell in my House. And, as the
Conclusion of all, says he, I will destroy all the Wicked of the Land, that I
may cut off all wicked Doers from the City of the Lord. And if the Seventy
fifth Psalm were Composed by the same Pious King, you have him there renewing
the like pious Resolution, and that at a time when there was the greatest
Occasion and Necessity for interposing his Royal Authority, when the Earth (i.
e. the Kingdom of Juda) and its Inhabitants threatened its Ruin by an universal
Dissolution of Manners, when wicked Men lift up their Horn on high, and spoke
with a stiff neck, i. e. when they bad open defiance to all Divine and Humane
Laws, then, even then did the Holy Psalmist interpose with heroic Courage and
Magnanimity, every way becoming a King in such a desperate Juncture; then did
he resolve to cut off all the Horns (i. e. all the Power) of the Wicked and
Profane, and that all the Horns of the Righteous should be exalted. But
whether David were the Author of that Psalm or no, it is not to be doubted but
that the 72 Psalm was of his own Composing, the Title of which is a Psalm for
Solomon, and was made by David (as it is supposed) 1 King. 1.
when Nathan the Prophet, and Zadok the Priest (by David's own Command, and
while he was yet living) took Solomon and set him upon his Throne: In which
Psalm he prays, That God would give his Son Solomon his Judgments and his
Righteousness, that so he might judge his People with Righteousness, and the
Poor with Judgment; that he might keep the simple Folk by their Right, defend
the Children of the Poor, and punish the Wrong-doer. But there are two Examples
more behind, which very well deserve your Consideration, and which indeed, in
strictness, should have been mentioned before, if we had regarded the Age they
lived in. The one is Job, Job 1. 3.
the other is Moses. Job is called the Greatest, i. e. one of the greatest Men
in all the East; in all probability he was a King; and if his Dominions were
not so large, yet his Power might be as great and absolute, as any Monarchs at
this day. It Is evident he was a Man in great Power and Authority, by what we
read Chap. 29. 7, etc. But he was not contented with the bare Ostentation and
Pageantry of Greatness, but he showed his Greatness in Acts of Goodness, in the
highest Instances of Justice and Mercy; I delivered, says he, ver. 12, etc. the
Poor that cried from Oppression, etc. I put on Righteousness and it clothed me,
my Judgment was as a Robe and a Diadem. By which it appears, he took not so
great Pride in the Ornaments of State which he wore, as in the impartial
Execution of Justice upon Offenders, and in breaking the Jaws of the Wicked.
Number. 12. 3.
Moses had the Character of being the meekest Man upon the face of the Earth;
and yet, notwithstanding his unparalled Meekness, we read of his exerting
very severe Acts of Justice, when he saw God's Honor Prostituted, and his
sacred Laws violated and trampled on; witness Exodus 32. Numb. 25.
the Idolatry of the Golden Calf, and that of Baal-Peor. These four Illustrious
Examples I have mentioned are very well worthy your Imitation; none need to be
ashamed to be taught their Duty by such Persons who had so established a
Reputation both for Greatness and Goodness. But it is high time to advance to my

Second General: To consider the dismal ill Consequence that naturally attends
the Carelessness, Negligence and Remisness of Magistrates. The growth of Sin and
Wickedness is thereby promoted and encouraged, the guilt of all which is laid
at their Door whose Neglect occasioned it; for thus the wise Man tells us in my
Text, Because sentence, etc. Ill Men are emboldned and encouraged by this
Impunity, and as long as they meet with (...). Sept.
No Contradiction, nor Haud prompta fit oppositio. Arab.
Opposition, no Check nor Control from Men of Power and Authority, they go on
to do ill with (...). Sym.
a fearless Heart; nay, it is (...). Sept.
fully persuaded, settled, and confirmed in their Wickedness. They grow daring
and obstinate, and at last obdurate in their Sins. This is a melancholy Truth
that has obtained too much Credit in all Ages.

Plutarch. Romans Apopth.
Cato the Elder was wont to say, That he would rather be unthankful for a good
Deed, than not punish a bad one; which as it is an Argument of the ill Opinion
he had of Ingratitude, so also of the Necessity there was of Vindictive
Justice. Nay, he thought soft and easy Magistrates intolerable in a
Government, and not only so, but that even their suffering Death was a small
Compensation for the Damage and Injury the Public sustained through their
Negligence and Remisness.

Such a violent Propensity to sin there is in all of us, that all Nations have
thought it absolutely necessary to restrain it by the severest Punishments: To
this purpose is that Observation of a Heathen Philosopher, That though several
Nations have differed in the several Punishments they appointed for the
Violation of Religion and good Laws, yet they were all agreed in affixing some
Punishment or other upon such Violation. But the severest Penal Laws are but a
dead Letter without Execution, and signify no more than if they had never been
made at all: To have such Laws made, and not executed, is an Argument of
Weakness, either in the Government or Governors, that they cannot or dare not
Punish; and ill Men take occasion thence to strengthen themselves in their
Wickedness, when Laws or Magistrates want Power or Courage to restrain them.
And no wonder indeed, for if even the vigorous Execution of Laws is little
enough, and too little effectually to prevent, or wholly to suppress and
obstruct the growth of Impiety; what Progress must it of necessity make, if all
Restraint and Opposition be removed out of the way? When the Flood Gates are
once broken down, it is a Miracle if an Inundation does not follow. David was of
invincible Courage, and was resolved (as you have heard) to do what in him lay,
to put an early stop to the growth of Debauchery and Profaneness in his Reign;
and for fear that his own personal Endeavors might prove ineffectual, he calls
in all good Men to assist him in so Pious a Work; Psalm. 94. 16.
Who will rise up for me against the evil Doers? or who will stand up for me
against the workers of Iniquity? And yet after all, notwithstanding the Design
was so Pious in it self, and was most vigorously Prosecuted, yet the Success
answered not Expectation, as we may probably conjecture from the Psalmist's own
Complaint of an universal Degeneracy and Corruption of Manners that still
prevailed: Psalm. 12. 1.
as, That the Faithful were minished from among the Children of Men; Psalm. 14.
That they were Corrupt and Abominable in their doings, and that there was not
one that did good, no not one: Insomuch, that Rivers of Water ran down his
Eyes, Psalm. 119. 136.
to consider that all the severity he had used, could not totally suppress that
depravation of Manners that was become universal in his Days. But if so
Epidemical a Disease was not to be perfectly cured all on a sudden, yet
however, Time and a severe Course of Physic, might very much correct it. Now,
if even the severest Execution of Laws has not had that Success, as totally to
prevent and suppress the growth of Profaneness, I leave it to you to guess what
a dismal Consequence must inevitably follow a total suspension and relaxation
of those wholesome Laws. If Men's hearts are fully set in them to do Evil,
because Sentence against an evil Work is not executed speedily, what would they
do, what would they not do, if it were not executed at all? If the very Delay
of Justice would encourage Sin, How much more would a total Obstruction of it?

We shall be better able to judge of the ill Effects of this, by producing an
Instance or two of what Disorders have been occasioned by too great Remisness
and Indulgence of Government. Gregory Nazianzen was prevailed upon to intercede
with the Secular Power for some Favor to be showed to the Apollinarians; but
when he saw how ill it succeeded, and what ill use they made of it, he wrote
back to the President in this manner, I now own my Intercession on behalf of
these Men to be unseasonable, since I find they make not so good use of your
Indulgence, as to be reclaimed. But no Instances like those that are taken out
of the Word of God. If you look into the Book of Judges, Chap. 18. 7. you will
find the People of Laish dwelling quiet and secure: It had been a good
Character of a People, if it had been a true Quiet, and well-grounded Security;
but (as it is there added) 'twas a Careless and Supine Security, which in all
probability made them indulge themselves in Luxury and Sensuality. And this, it
seems, was occasioned either by their having no Magistrates at all, or by the
shameful Remisness of those they had; for so it follows, There was no
Magistrate in the Land, that might put them to shame in any thing they did; and
no wonder then that they became an easy Prey to the first Enemy that Attacked
them. Laish had the Character of a sweet and plentiful Country, it being a
Place where there was no want of any thing that was upon the Earth, ver. 10. A
pity it was that so good a Place should want good Magistrates! From whence it is
natural to observe, That though a Country abound with every thing desirable,
and want nothing else but a good Magistracy, yet they want that which will make
them a happy People. This was what Laish wanted, There was no Magistrate among
them; i. e. they had either none at all, or as good as none; for there was none
that took due care to execute his Office; none that restrained them from Sin,
or punished them for it, or so much as fixed any Mark of Disgrace upon them;
There was none that put them to shame for any thing they did: And this proved
in the end the Ruin of that People, and so it will prove of any Persons
whatsoever. Thus there was nothing perhaps that contributed more immediately to
the Wickedness, and in effect to the Ruin, of Eli's two Sons, than the too
great Indulgence of their old compassionate Father; who, being a Judge as well
as a High Priest in Israel, should have made it his Business to discountenance
and punish Vice severely and impartially, wherever he saw it, but especially
in his own Family. But it seems that good Man was of too mild and easy a
Temper, and his natural Affection to his Children, made him forget the Duty
both of a Parent and a Judge; for when their Sins became so scandalous and
notorious, that the Congregation publicly remonstrated against their Lewdness
and Debauchery, Eli, instead of Punishing his Sons severely for their
Wickedness, instead of turning them out of the Priest's Office, for Desecrating
and Profaning their Sacred Character, and instead of calling them to a more
severe Account for their Adultery (as the Law required) he Expostulates with
them with too much Calmness and Mildness; 1 Samuel 2. 22, etc. Vid. Sanctium in 1
Reg. c. 2.. 90, 91, etc. Id. in cap. 3.. 29.
Why do ye such things? for I hear of your evil Dealings by all this People.
Nay, my Sons, it is no good Report that I hear, Ye make the Lord's People to
Transgress. But this was so gentle a Reprimand, that his Sons gave no ear to
it, but become 1 Samuel 2. 12. Filii Belial, i. e. sine Jugo, Grot. in 2 Cor. 6.
15.
Sons of Belial; indeed, their Father's Indulgence made them so, i. e. it had
made them throw off the Yoke, and sin without all restaint; and in this
obstinate Course of Impiety they continue, until God thought fit to destroy
them. Neither is this all, but observe how severely God dealt with Eli and his
whole Family for this neglect. These two profligate Sons of his die an untimely
Death, both in one day, and (which is greatly to be feared) they died in their
Sin; the News of which sad Disaster so confounds Eli, that he fell back and
died immediately: And well had it been, if God's Vengeance had stopped here,
but 1 Samuel 3. 11. etc.
there is a dreadful Curse entailed upon his whole Posterity. Vid. Seldom. de
Success. in Pontif. Ebraeorum. l. 1. c. 2. etc. Constable. l'Empereur Annot. in
Bertram de Rep. Ebr. c. 15. and Sanctium in 1 Reg. 9. c. 1.. 6.
Let the Learned resolve you how Eli, (that was of the Stock of Ithamar, the
younger Son of Aaron's Family) came to be High Priest. However he came by that
Sacred Office we know not so well, as that 1 Samuel 2. 32, 35.
God threatened for the future to transfer it from his Family to Eleazar's
Posterity again; and takes a solemn Oath, 1 Samuel 3. 13, 14.
That the Iniquity of Eli's House shall not be purged with Sacrifice nor
Offering for ever, for the Iniquity which he knows; because his Sons made
themselves vile, and he restrained them not. Doubtless Flesh and Blood would be
apt to resent it as a very great Hardship, if not Unnatural, for a Father to
Condemn his own Children; but where God's Honor is struck at and affronted,
our Duty to our Heavenly Father must overruled the strongest Affection to our
own Children. Chrysostom. l. 3. adv. vituprat. vit. Monastic.
St. Chrysostom observes, That though Eli was truly Admirable in other
Matters, and though God had nothing else to lay to his Charge, but this Neglect
of his Children, and his Tenderness to them: Yet this very thing was so great a
fault, that it blemished his whole Life, and God would not forgive him for it.
Because he refused to punish them severely for their sin, God punished him
severely for it; and destroyed both him, and them, and his whole Family. Which
single Instance is pregnant Proof, that notwithstanding the great Aversion that
there is in our Natural Tempers to be severe, that the Qui induit Personam
Judicis exuit Amici. Cicer.
Public Station Magistrates are in, should overruled all private Interest,
Relation, and natural Affection; and make them execute the Laws impartially,
even upon their nearest Relations, if they should deserve it. Numerous Examples
of which Valor. Max. l. 5. c. 3. and l. 6. c. 5.
occur in Profane History. And would it not be a Reproach to our Religion, if
Haec in suggillationem nostri dicta sunt, si non praestet fides quod extribuit
infidelitas. Hieron. Epitaph. Nepotian.
Faith will not make Christians as Zealous, Impartial, and Disinterested in the
Administration of Justice, as Infidelity did the Heathens. I am sure Justice
should begin where Charity does, and where Reformation should begin, and that
is at Home; which if it did, would silence some of the strongest Exceptions
that are made against the Administration of it, and we might then hope to see a
happy Reformation: Whereas if Justice stands afar off, and Judgment is turned
away backward, nothing can be expected, but that Libertinism and Debauchery
must prevail, and overrun the Kingdom; for so Solomon has told us in my Text,
that because sentence, etc. which was never more verified in any Age than that
we live in.

The Government we live under is certainly the most happliy Constituted in the
World, as having provided the best Laws to prevent, restrain and punish the
growth of Impiety; but how faintly they have been put in Execution, appears by
the Complaint that has been made by Public Authority; His Gracious Majesty in
his Proclamation, the late Queen of happy Memory in her Letter to the Justices
of Middlesex, and the House of Commons in their Address to his Majesty, all
unanimously declaring, That the growth of Profaneness and Immorality has been
in a great Measure occasioned by a long continued Neglect of too many
Magistrates not putting in Execution those good Laws, which were made for the
suppressing and punishing thereof.

The Apostle charges us, 1 Timothy 5. 22.
Not to be partakers of other Men's sins, which implies that we shall be
accountable for other Men's Sins as well as our own, if we be any way the
occasion of them. It Is a dreadful Account we must all of us give one day for
our own Sins; but how terrible will it be to answer for the Miscarriages of
others, which shall be laid to our Charge? And so will all those be that were
occasioned by our Neglect, according to that known saying, Qui non prohibet
peccare cum potest, jubet; He that permits Sin when he has power and
opportunity to prevent it, is interpreted, to allow it, nay, to command it to
be done: As St. Homil. 8. in Act. Ap.
Chrysostom speaks upon Eli's Indulgence to his Sons; it is much to be feared,
that such profuse and unreasonable Clemency shall one day meet with the
greatest Severity, as having given occasion and encouragement to the most
Profligate and Flagitious Enormities; and if Magistrates neglect to punish the
Sins of others here, it shall very much aggravate both their own Sin and
Punishment hereafter.

Since Sin then is the natural and necessary Consequence of Impunity, and that
Impunity will be charged home severely one day, as the Effect of Magistrates
Negligence and Remisness. Give me leave in the

Last place, to shut up all with a Word or two of Exhortation.

I have endeavored in the former part of my Discourse to Assert and Vindicate
your Commission and Power; what remains, but that you do your selves that Right
to vindicate your own Authority by more cogent Arguments than any I have used?
That is, by duly exerting it to those good Ends and Purposes for which it was
committed to your Trust; that you put the wholesome Laws of this Kingdom in
brisk and vigorous Execution, and rescue them from that Contempt which long
disuse and former mismanagement have brought upon them. For however the
Clemency of the Government has thought fit to suspend for the present several
Penal Laws, which were formerly made against the public Exercise of several
Religions, yet there are other Penal Laws, those, I mean, against Profaneness
and Debauchery; which remain still in full force, and require nothing but a
courageous Magistracy to put them in Execution. And herein do I find all
Parties agreed: For whatever difference there is among us, as to the execution
of Penal Laws relating to Religion, all good Men of every religious Persuasion
are unanimously agreed, as to the expediency and necessity of their Execution
against all Irreligion and Debauchery. Certainly the Execution of them could
never be more seasonable, nor was ever more necessary than in that loose and
dissolute Age we live in; which seems to be distinguished from all preceding
Generations by this peculiar Character, That it is the most knowing, and withal
the most profane and debauched Age that ever yet appeared in the World. Such
open Profanation of the Lord's Day, such hideous Oaths and Imprecations, such
beastly Drunkenness and Debauchery, such abominable Lewdness and Lasciviousness
was never known, I am persuaded, in any Christian Age or Kingdom, as is now
publicly professed and practiced, to the great Scandal of Religion. The
Confideration of this has animated some sober Persons, even of different
Persuasions, with a Spirit of Zeal, to Associate themselves for the Reformation
of Manners. 'Twere well if the Heats of all Sects and Opinions among us were
thus united, and concentred to stop the insolent Growth of Impiety and
Profaneness, and to oppose and withstand the common Enemy of our Religion. If
the Management of these Societies be as regular and orderly as their Designs
are Pious, I cannot but heartily with Success to their Endeavors, as any must
that has perused the Printed 1699. 80.
Late Account that has been given of them; which is very well Worthy your
serious and particular Consideration, not only as giving an Account of the
Original Institution, etc. of those Societies, but as using the most cogent and
pressing Arguments to recommend and enforce the Execution of Penal Laws against
Immorality and Profaneness, as the most indispensable Duty and Trust incumbent
upon Magistrates.

It Is for the Honor of you in this place, that you have given us some hopes of
a Reformation among us, by issuing out Orders for the more strict Observation
of the Lord's Day, etc. Having begun so good a Work, let me beseech you, by all
that is Sacred and Religious, That you would go on to give it in strict Charge
to your Subordinate Officers, That they visit all Public Houses on the
Lord's Day, not only in, but out of, Divine Service; That they present all
Houses of suspicious and ill Fame; That you would facilitate, encourage, and
promote the Prosecution of Drunkenness and Debauchery, of Cursing and Swearing,
etc. In a word, that you would let loose all the Penal Laws against all manner
of Profaneness and Immorality, which there was never greater occasion to be
vigorously executed than in the present Age. For so profligately Vicious are
Men now grown, that they have disowned and discarded Conscience, the most
sacred Principle of Obedience, and which has kept former Generations in awe.
But now how many deny, that there is any such thing at all? Or, if there be,
they think it not at all concerned in the Obligation of Humane Laws. Those then
that will not be subject out of a Principle of Conscience, make them stand in
awe of your Power out of a Principle of Fear; convince them, That you bear not
the Sword in vain; by making them feel the edge and weight of it: Thus shall
you show your selves Ministers of God, by asserting your Master's Honor, by
revenging his Quarrel, and by executing Wrath upon all that dare Affront him.
Gird your Sword upon your Thigh, and let your Right Hand teach you terrible
Things: Let Judgment run down as Waters, and Righteousness as a mighty Stream,
that it may turn that impetuous Tide of Impiety which threatens to overrun us.
This is the Commission, and this the Charge that is given you; Deuteronomy. 16. 18, 20.
To Judge with just Judgment, and to follow that which is altogether Just: Or,
as it is in the Margin, Justice, Justice, shall thou follow. Let it be
executed, I beseech you, 1. Speedily; 2. Impartially; 3. Courageously.

1. Speedily, and without delay, when once you have full Proof and Evidence of
the Fact, lest otherwise your dilatory Demurs occasion Confidence, Presumption
and Obstinacy in the Offenders, and their Hearts be fully set in them to do
Evil; for Delays in any thing that is good are ill, and in the best Things
worst.

2. Impartially, upon all Immorality whatsoever, and upon all Transgressors
indifferently, without distinction or respect of Persons. Let the Great as well
as the Small, your nearest Relations within your own Gate, as well as the
Stranger, feel the Severity of the Law, in case they deserve it. This is what
we are taught to pray for, That all that are put in Authority, may truly and
indifferently minister Justice to the punishment of Wickedness and Vice, and to
the maintenance of true Religion and Virtue. Justice is visible even in small
Matters, in Anise and Cummin, as well as the weightier Matters of the Law; and
he that fails in the one, it is greatly to be feared will be defective in the
other. Our Blessed Savior having told us, Luke. 16. 10.
That he that is unjust in that which is little, which be unjust also in much.
This is so far from being Severity, that I am persuaded it may prove great
Charity and Kindness to a Criminal; the Punishment of small Sins often
preventing the Commission of greater. And if petty Trespasses should not, how
much less should the crying Profanations of the first Magnitude, escape your
Cognizance, although committed by Let a Magistrate but take to himself that
Courage which he should do, and now and then make a Great Man an Example of
Justice, he will find a few such Examples, will breathe move Life into the
Laws, and strike more Awe into the People, than the Punishment of a Hundred
Underlings, and Inferior Persons. Bishop Sanderson on Job 2. 14.. 18. See
also. 20. and his Sermon on Psalm 106. 30.. 22.
Great Men, or those that are nearest Related. Exodus 32.
Moses punished the Sin of the Golden Calf very severely, although Adron was
principally concerned in it, who was a Great Man, next to Moses himself, and
his elder Brother. Number. 25. Psalm. 106. 31.
Phineas was not afraid to smite Zimri and Cosbi when he caught them in the Act
of their Uncleanness, though they were both of them Persons of the highest Rank
and Quality. And this act of Justice was so acceptable to God, that he highly
Rewarded him and his Family, by giving him a Covenant of Peace, and an
everlasting Priesthood, because he was zealous for his God. And thus also God
preferred the Tribe of Levi to be his own peculiar Portion and Inheritance,
Exodus 32. 27, 29.
and to attend upon him in his Worship and Service, because they signalized
themselves in the impartial Execution of Justice upon their nearest Relations,
Deuteronomy. 33. 9.
in the Idolatry of the Golden Calf.

3. And Lastly, Let Justice be executed Vigorously and Courageously. To be a
Coward is a Scandal for any Man that wears a Sword; but it is a much greater
Reflection upon him that has it carried before. What an indelible Blot had it
been upon Nehemiah's Character, if he had wanted Courage in the Public Station
he was in? See how hainously he Resents the very Thoughts of any such
Imputation; Neh. 6. 4.
What (says he) should such a Man as I flee? No, he could not have a better
Cause to defend, and therefore he was resolved to maintain it with the hazard
of his Life. A noble and manly Resolution, every way becoming Magistrates,
Exodus 18. 21.
who should be able Men, fearing God, i. e. Men of Courage and Magnanimity, who
should not be afraid of the Face of any Man, Deuteronomy. 1. 17. Ecclus. 4. 9.
nor be faint-hearted when they sit in Judgment: They should fear none but God,
and be afraid to do nothing but that which is ill. Sure I am, you have the
World on your side, the Cause of God and Religion, the Cause of Godliness and
Virtue, Prove. 28. 1.
which should make you as bold as a Lion: And besides, you have also all the
powerful Assistance imaginable that Heart can wish; 2 Chronicles. 19. 6.
God himself having promised to be with you in Judgment, and particularly in
the courageous Execution of Justice; ver. 11.
Deal courageously, and the Lord shall be with the good.

If you thus execute Justice, you will answer one great End of your
Institution, which is, to be a To. 13. 3.
Terror to evil Doers, and to be (...). Plato de Leg.
Conservators of the Laws you are entrusted with. You Will thereby answer the End
of the Law, which was 1 Timothy 1. 9.
made for the Lawless and Disobedient, for the Ungodly and for Sinners, for the
Unholy and Profane: And you will answer the End of Vt aut eum quem punit
emendet; aut ut Paena ejus caeteros meliores reddat, aut ut sublatis malis
securiores caeteri vivant. Senec. de Clement. l. 1. c. 22. Vid. A. Gellium
Noct. Attic. l. 6. c. 14.
Punishment, which is to make bad Men good, and good Men better. By this means
you will become the truest Patriots of your Country, and the best Benefactors to
the Nation, Luke 22. 25.
by being the happy Instruments of Reforming a Kingdom, Jer. 22. 15, 16.
of deriving down Blessings upon it, Jer. 5. 1.
of preventing God's Judgments from befalling us, or Numb. 25. 8. Ps. 106. 30.
of averting them when they are already begun. By this means Fundamentum est
perpetuae Commendationis and Famae Justitia. Cicer. de Offic. l. 2.
you will illustrate your Character, you will Embalm and Perpetuate your Memories
to Posterity, and future Generations shall rise up and call you Blessed. (...).
Philopon. in Prior. Anst.
Even ill Men shall commend you, for executing Justice; good Men shall Praise
you in the Gates, and God himself shall highly Honor you here, and most amply
Reward you hereafter; Matthew. 25. 21.
when he shall say, Well done, thou good and faithful Servant, thou have been
faithful over a few Things, I will make thee Ruler over many Things, enter thou
into the Joy of thy Lord.

FINIS.

