THE Gentile Sinner, OR, England's Brave GENTLEMAN: Characterized In a Letter
to a Friend, Both As he is, and as he should be.

1 Cor. 1. 26. Not many Noble are called. -- Sanctus haberi,
Justitiaeque tenax, factis dictisque mereris?
Agnosco procerem.
Iuv: Sat. 8. OXFORD, Printed by Henry Hall, for Edward and John Forest, 1660.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL, MY HONORED FRIENDS Sr* PHILIP MVSGRAVE Knight and
Baronet, AND Sr GEORGE BENNYON Knight, The Author vvishes all Grace, Health,
and Honor here, and Happiness hereafter.
Right Worshipful,
YOu who have been so long a time sharers both in the same great Virtues, and,
for them, in the same great Sufferings: be pleased too, to share in this small
tribute, for which I have been long indebted to your Goodness. Your Names, I
confess, are either of them too great to stand in the front of so
inconsiderable a paper as this, wherewith I here present you; and might make a
suitable Frontispice to some far more excellent Tract. Whatever this be,
which begs your Candid acceptance, it may perhaps need, but I fear it deserves
not, I am sure it does not now come abroad to seek a Patron. The reason why I
address it to you, is an Ambition I have, to bring the world better acquainted
with so great a part of it is own Treasure: and to make it know, there be yet
(after all these dreining times) some such Worthy Persons as your selves; whom
even they, who are (to a Christian Stoicisme) enemies to the present World,
dare both love and honor. Were it my business to seek out an Instance of the
Genuine, or a Pattern whereby to correct the Spurious and degenerate
Gentleman, I should despair to fit my self better, then I may in You: in whom
after so many killing Afflictions the World may yet behold a true Religion and
Loyalty surviving your Fortunes. I might well fear, should the Reader know you
as well as I, his expectation by the view of your praefixed Names, would be
raised too much above the Contents of the following Letter; and therefore I
shall, no less out of Charity to mine own Infirmities, then from a due
Reverence to that known Modesty which Crowns your many other Noted Virtues,
forbear any further to display your Merits: only this I would have the World to
know, and do beg you to believe, that I shall ever be industrious to manifest
my self

Right Worshipful Yours in all Christian Services C. E.

To the REEDER.
IT is a Formality very much in Fashion of late amongst Writers, to Complement
the Reader, and give him a view of his following Entertainment, in a large
Praeface to every little Pamphlet. I intend not to usher abroad this rude
Letter in so great State; neither will I play the Gentleman so much, as to tire
out my Reader with feigned Apologies for that Course fair he is like to have
anon. I am not without some of those Common Sanctuaries, wherein many Writers
can Fancy themselves so secure from all Censure; but I dare not pretend to
those I have not, and those I have I Slight. Reader, the plain truth is, this
Letter is not now sent^ out, to prevent or decry any Surreptitious Copy,
neither merely to satisfy the Importunity of my friends: Nor yet am I willing
so much to Humor either thy Curiosity, or the Common Vanity, as to tell thee
what Inducements I had to this Publication; If what thou shall here read,
either Concern or Content thee not, I am sure those cannot.

Perhaps thou art one of those, who may read their Names and Characters in the
former part of the following Letter; If so, it would be time and pains ill
lost to talk with thee now. If thou can be so much the Master of thy
Passion, as to read thy self over therein with Patience, and without either
Oath or Curse, for the Paper or it is Author; I shall begin to hope there may
yet be a Possibility of a return to thy felfe and to thy God. 'Till then, what
ever cause thou have to Carp at the Book, or Revile the Author; I am bold to
tell thee, I have much more, to Slight thy Speeches, and Pity thy Folly. I
value as little thy Censure, as I have reason to Envy thy Conversation; I dread
as much thine Applause as I scorn thy Derision; and this I do no l^sse then I
abhor thy life, or pray for thy Conversion.

When thou art willing to understand what may do thee Good, it will be
seasonable for me to say more; and tell thee, that if thou would be a
Gentleman, there is a Book extant, which for that End, well deserves thy
Study, and thy Practice. At present it is too noble a Jewel to be thrown to
such a Swine. If the Courser and more homely Diet I here offer thee, may beget
in thee (though by loathing it) a liking to that far richer Dish; It will be
then enough for my Ambition, as it is now too much for my Hopes.

That most Singular piece of Impartial Truth, and unparalleled Ingenuity; of
most Cogent Reason, and Iusinuating Rhetoric; of most sage Advice, and
Religious Instruction; which abundantly Commends it self to thy serious
perusal, and it is Author (were not his strange Modesty, as much our Enemy, in
Concealing his Name; as his Piety and Ingenuity our friends, in discovering his
worth) to thy Intimate acquaintance; bears for it is Title, what thou by thy
Practice labourest to prove a Contradiction, THE GENTLEMAN'S CALLING. This Book
would Certainly teach thee to be, did thou not think thy self too wife to
learn, all that becomes a Christian Gentleman: as another Practical piece
which for it is Excellency is rationally supposed the work of the same Pious and
Ingenious hand, would make thee, if used aright, a Christian Man: I mean that
Book, the Title whereof speaks much, yet noe more then the Contents do verify
THE WHOLE DUTY OF MAN. Read these two soberly, and practice them Constantly;
and, though thou burn'st this paper, thou shall never persuade me not to think
thee a Man, a Gentleman, and a Christian. But if in some or other of thy Mad
Moods: thou shall rage and foame against what here I send thee, play the
Critic upon it amid'st thy Potts, or make it thy sport and merriment amongst
those who cannot think themselves men except they be Frolic and Jolly: the
Paper may suffer, and thou may spit in my face; but know, I have a Christian
name, thou can not stain; and a Charitable Intention; thou can as little
vitiate, as thou have hitherto deserved it.

But if (Sir) you be one of those brave souls, whose Merits are above their
Names; whose Honors are not dumb Idols, neither their Virtues shadows; and
yet vouchsafe to east an Eye, upon this flat and unstudy'd piece of mere
Obedience: Your Candor will save me the Customary Ceremony of a long Apology;
seeing I am assured you can sooner pardon an Hundred faults, then the other
find one; your Goodness by a constant practice of all virtues being as much
augmented, as his Judgment by an Endless succession of most sottish
debaucheries is daily Impared.

Whosoever you be, who chance to hit upon this paper; let it suffice you to
know, that it is but a Letter; and that, an Imperfect birth after a Fortnight's
labor. It had never ventured so far abroad, had not better eyes then, the
Author's directed it forth. The best on it is, Censures I regard not, Frowns I
fear not, Criticismes I smile at, and Derisions I laugh at. The Style ('it is
true) is rough; I had rather be told of it, then lose so much time as to smooth
it: Many things are Blunt and ^lat, It is my Humor, often to prefer a plain
truth, before a Witty Fancy: The Phraise in many places is tart, and
provoking; I hope it will appear in all my Actions, that I study not to please,
but profit. Reader, Call me what thou will, Stoic, or Fool, or Clown, or
Madman, I am willing, with all my heart, to seem any or all of these, to
reform a Sinner. If in any place thou think I deal uncivilly with thee;
give me leave to ask thee where? If in the former part, What business had
thou there. Either thou art indeed the man there described, and then, why art
thou angry, that I say the truth? Or else thou art one of the Better stand keep
thee then in thine own place, and, I am Confident, I shall do thee right. Art
thou the true Gentleman? thou can not so far mistake thy self, as to think
the Character of the false will fit thee: Art thou the False? Thine own
Confession quits me of the Scandal: And I hope thou shall here find thy self
so much in thine own Colors, that thou shall be so far out of love with thy
self, as to know the least Commendation of thee could be no less then a
flattery. If this little labor of mine may do thee good, it is therefore
worthy of thine acceptance, and I bid thee heartily welcome: If thou see
nothing in it worth the reading, use thy fredome, I may lose my labor, neither
thou nor I shall ever lose my charity.

Instead of a longer preface, I commend to thy reading the words of a Reverend
Doctor, whose exemplary Piety, Learning, Judgment, Moderation are sufficiently
known to the greatest part of our English Nation.

Dr SANDERSON in his Sermon on the 1 Cor. 7. 24.
As for our (mere or parcel) Gallants, who live in no settled course of life,
but spend half the day in Sleeping, half the night in gaming, and the rest of
their time in other pleasures and vanities, to as little purpose as they can
devise; as if they were born for nothing else but to eat and drink, and snort
and sport; who are spruce and trim as the Lillies (Solomon i^ all his Royalty
was not clothed like one of these:) yet they neither sow, nor reap, nor carry
into Barn; they neither labor, nor Spin, nor do any thing else for the good of
humane society: Let them know, there is not the poorest Contemptible Creature,
that cries Oysters and Kitchinstuffe in the streets, but deserves his bread
better, than they; and his course of life is of better esteem with God, and
every sober wise man, than their's. A Horse, that is neither good for the way,
nor the cart, nor the race, nor the Wars, nor any other service; let him be of
never so good a breed, never so well marked and shaped; yet he is but a Jade:
his Master sets no store by him, thinks his meat ill-bestow'd on him;
Every man will say, better knock him on the head then keep him; his skin,
though not much worth, is yet better worth then the whole beast besides.

Consider this, you that are of Noble and Generous birth. Look unto the Rock,
whence you were hewn; and to the pit, whence you were dug. Search your
Pedigrees; Collect the Scattered Monuments and Histories of your Ancestors: and
observe by what steps your worthy Progenitors raised their houses to the height
of Gentry and Nobility. Scarce shall you find a man of them, that gave any
accession, or brought any noted eminency to his house; but either serving in
the Camp, or sweating at the Bar, or waiting at the Court, or adventuring on
the Seas, or trucking in his Shop, or some other way industriously bestirring
himself in some settled Calling, and Course of life. You usurp their Arms, if
you inherit not their Virtues: and those ensigns of honor and Gentry which
they by industry achieved, sit no otherwise upon your shoulders, than as rich
trappings upon Asses backs; which serve but to render the poor beast more
ridiculous. If you by brutish sensuality, and spending your time in swinish
luxury, stain the colors, and embase the metals of those badges of your
Gentry and Nobility, which you claim by descent: think, when we worship or
honor you, we do but flout you; and know, the titles we in Courtesy give you,
we bestow upon their memories, whose degenerate offspring you are, and whose
Arms you unworthily bear; and they do no more belong to you, than the reverence
the good man did to Isis; belonged to the Ass that carried her Image.

The CONTENTS.
SECT. 1.
THe Gallant. page 9.. 1. His names. p. 10.. 2. His Nature in General. p. 15..
3. His Calling or Imploiment. p. 20.. 4. His Education and Breeding. p. 23.. 5.
His Habit and Garb. p. 28.. 6. His Language and discourse. p. 31.. 7. His
Religion and Conversation. p. 39.. 8. An Apology for this part of the
Character. p. 44.
SECT. 2.
. 1. THe Second sort of degenerate Gentlemen. p. 48.. 2. Several sorts of such
Gentlemen. p. 50.. 3. The Provident Gentleman. p. 53.. 4. The Prudent
Gentleman. p. 60.. 5. The Peaceable Gentleman. p. 69.. 6. The Stately
Gentleman. p. 75.. 7. The Conclusion of this part. p. 83.. 8. A more particular
Application of this Character. p. 85.. 9. The Winner and loser in these times
p. 88.. 10. How good^Englishmen these Gentlemen are. p. 94.
SECT. 3.
THe true Gentleman.. 1. An Apologeticall Introduction. p. 98.. 2. His general
Character. p. 100.. 3. His chief Honor and dignity. p. 105.. 4. His Outside
and Apparel. p. 108.. 5. His Discourse and Language. p. 113.. 6. His Behavior
and Civility. p. 122.. 7. His Inside. p. 126.. 8. His Command over himself. p.
129.. 9. His Magnanimity and Humility. p. 133.. 10. His Charity and Temperance
p. 139.. 11. His Valor and Prudence. p. 144.. 12. His Behavior in both
Fortunes. p. 149.. 13. His Respect and Affection for his Country. p. 156.. 14.
His Studies and Recreations. p. 162.. 15. His Good-husbandry. p. 170.. 16. His
Religion. p. 172.. 17. The Conclusion of this Character. p. 178.
SECT. 4.
. 1. HOw few true Gentlemen now in England. p. 182.. 2. An Enquiry into the
more Civil sort of our English Gentry. p. 191.. 3. An Appeal to the Gentleman's
Conscience. p. 199.. 4. Motives to the Gentleman to be Indeed Religious, and
first of Common Civility. p. 204.. 5. A second motive from Shame and Disgrace.
p. 212.. 6. A third Motive from Aequity. p. 218.. 7. A fourth motive from
Honor and Reputation. p. 234.. 8. The Conclusion and sum of all. p. 242.
THE GENTILE SINNER, OR England's Brave-Gentleman.
Honored Sir,
I Am very much indebted to your most obliging Goodness, for that great and
undeserved Freedom, you were pleased to allow me in our last Discourse: And I
am so Confident to meet with the same Goodness still, that I shall not fear
to express as great a Boldness in these following lines.

With Gentlemen, I very much love to be talking of Gentlemen; with him that is
a Gentleman indeed, that in his language (for in better, I am sure, I cannot) I
may learn how to shame his Counterfiet; and with him too, who has no more then
the bare Name, that I may thereby gain an opportunity of proposing to him
something better then himself, as a fit object of his Love and Imitation. I
confess I am often apt, more then well becomes me in the presence of Persons
of your Quality, to inveigh somewhat Satyrically against such as this wanton
Age of the World loves to miscall by so good a name; which might give any man
of less Cand^r and Courtesy then Your self (Sir) a just occasion of judging
me more Bold then Wise. What your resentments were of my last unponder'd
expressions, I know not; But if in any of them I gave offense, I dare hope you
will make your late Commands pass for my Sentence, and let this prosecution of
that too Inconsiderate discourse (I beseech you) serve for my penance.

You were pleased to require a Summary of my thoughts concerning our Pr^sent
English Gentleman, both as to what he is, and what he should be. I must not
tax you of Indiscretion, by telling you how ill you have placed your Commands;
and therefore I shall rather choose to show you your Charitable mistake, by my
ready Obedience; then by an unseasonable Modesty, seem to question your
judgment: The task enjoined me is in it self so odious, that nothing less
then that highest respect I have for the worthy Imposer, could make it welcome;
and it carries so great a disproportion to my weaker Faculties, that nothing,
but too great an affection in you (Sir) could make it appear possible. To tell
you, what the Gentleman is, requires an experience; and to say what he should
be, must suppose a Breeding far above mine.

If by the Gentleman, you mean him whose real virtues are such as have indeed
merited him the name; I could go a very compendious way to work, and show you
him in as fair a piece as Virtue can draw, or the World imitate, by directing
your eye to that object which best deserves it* You must needs know your self
too well, (Sir) to be Ignorant whom I mean. But for the other, whom we then
took the boldness to talk of, you cannot, I hope, imagine, that one so
little acquainted with the present Garbes and Modes of the world, as without
blushing I dare confess my self to be, should be able to present you with his
perfect portraiture.

To be short, Sir, You are too well acquainted with the true Gentleman, to
think you shall ever read him any where better described then you find him at
home; and I am too little acquainted with his counterfeit, to presume I may be
able to give you an exact Character of him, 'till I use to go more, then I
hope in have I shall do, abroad. However, I had rather betray my. Ignorance of
what I could never yet esteem well worth my knowledge; then the least disrespect
to a Person, whose long-experienced Goodness has abundantly meritted the best
of my services. Such a prospect therefore as I could have of him, whilst
immured up within the narrow compass of a Dark Study, I shall make bold to
lay open before your eye; and, in as plain English as I can, tell you what I
think both of the Man and his shadow.

But before I begin to discribe him, I find it necessary for me to premise unto
you this cautious request -- That you would be pleased to believe I do not
make nor take pleasure to see those wounds, which you have persuaded me to
uncover; for I cannot but foresee too many of them, through Imprudence and
Negligence, so altogether fester'd and Nauseous, that as they will try your
patience to behold them, so will they even dare your faith to believe them: And
this I shall further beg of you, that seeing to serve you I am forced to take
the Liberty of a more open, and sometimes biting expression; you would not
debar me of the Privilege of an Impartial, yet friendly, Censurer; one who
had much rather lose a friend, then tolerate a fault: Or the beneficial
Severity of a Faithful Surgeon, who is allowed often to make the smart the
forerunner of the Cure, and is excusable, though sometimes he seem so
hard-hearted as to disregard the lamentable out^ries, and most moveing groans
of his afflicted patient; not sparing his Probe, 'till he have thoroughly
searched the wound.

I must in Good Earnest tell the Gentleman, how much my Pity and Commiseration
outgoe my Reprehensions and reproves: And that my hearty prayers both now are,
and ever shall be much more for him, then my unpleasing Invectives can be
against him. The later are only sent out to invite him to take some Knowledge
and Compassion of himself; but the former ascend as high as Heaven to Implore
God's Mercy and Pity toward him. For I know it (let him entertain as
flattering thoughts as he will of himself) the world has not had since the
fall of Adam a more miserable Spectacle, then this poor wretched Leper, the
Debauched Gentleman: who, doubtless, were he not so Complacently accessory to
his own Misery, So obstinately bent upon and solicitously studious of his own
overthrow, would be no oftener beheld then pitied.

But seeing his daily practice persuades me, that his main industry is a
Design to ruin himself, his Constant Profession an open D^fiance to his
Happin^sse; seeing his chief d^light seems to be placed in looking upon his
own sores, and his Continual Study is how to increase them: Seeing he esteems
nothing so dangerous as real goodness, and every day proclaims open
Hostility against whatever shall bring along with it that unwelcome charity of
preserving him from Hell: Seeing he labors to express a deadly feud betwixt
himself and his own soul, and dreads no torments so much as the joys of
Heaven: Seeing the business of his whole life is to spoil a Gentleman:
Without all doubt, the safest way now to be his friend is to seem his enemy,
the readiest means of making the Christian is to vex the Gentleman, and the
hopefull'st method of healing his sores, is first to seratch them 'till they
smart. There Is no way to deal with a man in a Swoon, but to pinch him by the
Nose, and to dash Cold water in his face, when he is thus brought to himself,
he may be capable of a Cordial: Thus indeed must we be constrained to deal
with the Gentleman, who is not only void of all spiritual life, but even of
all common sense: We must handle him a little more roughly then what he will
think Civility, that so we may at length force him to open his eyes, to see how
much he is mistaken in what he calls so. If after all this he will persist to
call me his enemy, I shall only profess my sorrow for this, that he has l^st
the benefit intended him by my pains; Not at all that I have missed the reward
of his Commendati^n and thanks; these I shall then first be ambitious of
enjoying, when I shall be assured that he is so much become a New man, that I
need not fear his Commendations may prove Scandalls, or his thanks reproaches.
'Till when here he has my Confession, I am his utter Enemy: and let him take my
Resolution too along with it, so I am resolved to continue 'till I can see him,
more then yet he is, his own friend: Then, I am sure, he will without a
prompter acknowledge, that thus to appear his Enemy was the only way he had
left me to befriend him.

With this resolution (Sir) and Confidence, I shall venture, first to give you
a short Character of him as it stands legible in his common practice and
Conversation; where, that he may not have so much as a pretense to be angry, I
shall only write after that Copy himself has set me, and lets lie every where
wide open to the view of the world: And having done this, I shall in a very few
words characterize the man I would see, and tell you what I suppose, you know,
God Expects, and his own Name and profession do witness he ought to be.

SECT. I.
The Gallant.
TO give you My sense of the Gentleman in a word, He is, I know not what. I no
sooner cast my eye upon him, but (alas) I see too little to love, enough to
Pity, more to abhor, and in all too much to be expressed. It Is usual with
us to call man a little world, and truly the Gentleman may well be compared to
that which is more ancient, the Old Chaos, when the numerous parts of this
larger world, lay confusedly therein, intermixed and jumbled together, without
Form or Order; Before the Omnipotent Wisdom of the Great God had created any
such thing here below as Method or Beuty: Such an undigested Mass and heap of
Every thing, have we here met withal, and nothing perfect: Only herein the
Similitude fails, for supposing such an unformed heap, yet had there been
nothing therein but what were to be confessed the work of God's hands and
therefore very good; But here (alas) is almost nothing left that God created,
but every thing so altogether evil, that hardly so much of that we call
goodness appears, as a bare possibility of becoming so.

. 1. His Names.
If there be such a Sin in the abuse of words as some do think there is; and if
it be true, that a great part of this abuse lies in giving names unto things
contrary to their Natures, never was there a greater error of this kind
committed then here, for never Honest name was more abused, then this of
Gentleman; Indeed it is to be feared, that having been so long misapplied, it
will at last find the like hard measure, with those other once more Honest
Names of Tyrant and Sophister; and from a Title of Honor degenerate into a
term of the greatest disgrace and Infamy. It is indeed already made to be of
no better a signification then this, to Denote a Person of a Licentious and an
unbridled life; for though it be as it is used, a word of a very uncertain and
equivocall sound, and given at Random to Persons of far different, nay
Contrary both Humors, descents, and merits, yet if we look upon him that in
this sad age comes first in play, and carries both the Feather and the Bell, as
the first Horse in the Team, away from all the rest; a Gentleman must be
thought only such a man, as may without Control do what he lists, and sin
with applause: One that esteems it base and ungentile, to Fear a God, to own a
Law, or Practice a Religion; One who has studied to bring Sin so much into
Fashion, and with so much unhappy Success, that he is now accounted a Clown
that is not proud to be thought a Sinner; and he as ridiculous as an Antique,
who will not, without all Scruple, proclaim himself an Atheist.

Some of the wisest in the present world, have of a long time, (ashamed, I
suppose, to be known by the same name with such a Monster) thought it more fit
to call him Spark or Raunter; and indeed the former Name carries so much of
the Fire of Hell in the ^ignification, the other so much of the noise of Hell
in the sound, as may almost suite with the Gentleman's Actions. But the
proudest vice is ashamed to wear it is own face long; Nor dare I believe the
Devil to be much in love with his own Name; I am sure neither is willing to be
thought such as in truth they are; but wickedness has worn virtue's mask
quite threadbare; and Satan has so often appeared like an Angel of Light,
that it is now evident, he is not enamored of his own Form. And thus had the
Gentleman too, rather deserve then wear the Devill's Livery; though he be
willing enough to be the man, yet he abhorres the Name. Thus he thinks virtue
and vice, like his Honor and Reputation, no more, but the creatures of Popular
breath; and that his eternal Happiness (as his Temporal estate) is entailed
upon the bare Name alone; and by a little alteration of that, he may (when he
pleases) translate his Title from Hell to Heaven: So fondly Sollicitous he is
(that I may use his own Language) to Trapan his own Soul, and by the
Lamentable Imposture of a Borrowed Name cheat her out of a most Glorious
Inheritance.

Hence he endeavors a little more to Civilize the Title, and calls himself in
a more pleasing language Gallant. In this he is apt to Fancy charm enough to
bring even Heaven it self in love with him; and make it as the trees did
Orpheus, to follow him whithersoever he goes; and certainly so it must, and
with some speed too, or he shall never see it, seeing he is always running, as
fast as he can, the quite Contrary way. But, alas, this is all he is like to
gain by the pitiful exchange; that whereas the ungrateful sound of the
former names, did so startle the Devil, that he was ready to quit his
habitation, either as jealous of a Rival in the very words, or else afraid of
a Discovery, hearing his own names become so Common; he is now bribed to stay
by the Flattery of this later, and securely Lodges in the Gallant's breast,
without the lest fear of Disturbance.

But seeing the Gallant is so great a lover of New Names, I hope he will not be
troubled, If I make bold to add one more, and call him with no less reason,
but in more words, The Divel's Ghost. For whilst Satan is put to a large
expense of Time and Pains to Haunt and Seduce others, Here he meets with one
not half so coy, but such an one as by his unseasonable kindness, seems to be
a trouble rather, to the very Fiend, by haunting the Devil. And doubtless, if
he go but on half so fast a while longer, as he has done of late years, He
will tire and Puzzle the whole numerous H^ste of Hell to Invent a variety of
objects answerable to that of his Humors.

To speak him out a little more plainly; our English Gentleman, as now a days
we commonly meet him, is such a strange kind of thing, that no one name will
fit him. Such an Heterogeneous Soul he is, that no less then a Combination of
all the vices in the World must be summoned in to make up a Partial
Description of him: Of an Essential Definition I dare hardly think him
Capable, lest thereby granting him a Complete Essence, I should be forced, at
lest in a Metaphysicall Notion, to call him Good. Good Man is a title he has
ever much scorned, and it is that which (If yet his pride will afford him any)
he very truly thinks the fittest Compellation for the poor honest Labourer.
The same he will sometimes vouchsafe to bestow upon those few Tenants his
Prodigallity has spared him. Such a Complicacy of Evils goes to his
Constitution, that ere we shall be able to fit him with a name, we must borrow
it from Satan himself and call him Legion. As sin and vanity make up his
very Essence; so can nothing but wonder and shame Compose his Character.

. 2. His Nature in General.
You have heard his name, and now take a farther General description of him
thus. The Gallant is a Pretty, neat, Fantastical Outside of a man, and if
you dare always believe your eye, it is not unlikely you may (now and then) be so
much deceived, as to think him Something. But a true man you can never Imagine
him, he has too long ago shaked hands with his Reason, and now counts it the
greatest degree of Baseness in the world, to live what Nature made him, or to
seem beholding for any thing unto ought but his own Humor.

He is a well-digested bundle of most Costly vanities, and he is evermore
tumbling up and down the streets to gather more of that same Chargeable Dirt:
as if he should have enough to excuse his sin, when he can at once say, it is
both glorious and Costly. You may call him a Volume of Methodicall Errataes
bound up in a gilt Cover, and his only commendation is this, that his
disorders seem to be orderly; and his Errors not Casual but Studied, and he
can tell how to sin most Ingeniously. He is a Curiously wrought Cabinet full
of Shells and other Trumpery, which were much better quite Empty, then so
emptily full. He is a piece of ordinary clay stuck round with Bristol Diamonds,
Pretty sparkling things, which for a time might perhaps make a gay show in a
foole's Cap, or on a Dunghill, But in a Lapidary's shop amongst true stones,
have only so much luster left as will prove themselves to be but Counterfeit.
Such a Silly Gloworme may look like a little Star in the Dark, but it is
Splendour is always sure to be benighted with the Rising Sun. It Is no small
advantage for this fine Sir to live in this Night of the world, where that very
darkness of Ignorance which obscures the great virtues of so many good men, is
the only thing that makes his wild-fires so visible as to be taken notice of.
He is the Rich Scabbard of a Leaden Spirit, and that very dullness of metal,
makes him endure so long in the world, whilst the keener zeal of nobler
Souls, soon makes their way for them through the Scabbard into Heaven. I do
heartily wish he would give us no reason to call him, the painted Sepulcher of
a Soul Dead and Rotten in Trespasses and sins: If this Comparison will ever
fit any man that is no Hypocrite, certainly it is the Swaggaring Gentleman.

He is a man's skin full of prophanenesses, a Paradise full of weeds, an Heaven
full of Devils, or Sathan's Bedchamber too richly hung with Arras of God's Own
making: such an Excellency would he feign hold in the basest Iniquity. He can
be thought no better then a Promethean Man, at best but a lump of animated dirt
kneeded into Humane Shape, and if he have any such thing as a Soul (which he
shall hardly be able to persuade any man to believe that sees how little care
he takes to save it) it seems to be patched up of vice and Bravery.

If you would come acquainted with his pedigree, let Sin be your Herald, and it
will be sufficient to tell you, he was the Son of an Offender. His very
name's enough to blast the Nobility of all that went before him, and to breath
a perpetual disgrace upon the sleeping ashes of his worthy Progenitors. There
may be some question made, whether he needs fear going to Hell or no at his
death; because he has been so well acquainted with it in his lifetime; whither
if he have not leave every day to take his full Carier, he think, his Soul
bereaved of her Christian Liberty; as if he had no other way left him of
Imitating the blessed Savi^ur of mankind, but by often descending into Hell. O
what a piece of Gallantry is it now a days for a man to give his Soul to the
Devil in a Frolic! It is the part of a Gentlemen to out-brave Damnation, and
not to be daunted with the thoughts of a future Judgment: A retreat into
Sobriety would betray such an Effeminacy of spirit, as might argue him in love
with a Religion; and make the world believe he were such a Coward as might be
Frighted into Piety. Every petty sinner can outface an Earthly, he will do his
best to out-vapour an Heavenly Tribunal; and make it appear unto all, that a
Gentleman has a Spirit, dares go to Hell, before he will be said to fear it.
Indeed he alone seems to have the art of turning Nature upside-down, and will
only be a perfect man at the Pap, when he is weaned he gives both his humanity
and Innocence to his Nurse for her wages, I am sure he is rarely, if ever,
after that time, seen to have either about him. In short, The Gentleman is
nothing that he should be: His whole life is a flat Contradiction to his duty;
His constant study is to teach his Body how to put affronts upon his soul, and
to give him the lie who dares tell him there are any hopes it may be saved; He
laughs at him that tells him there is any other Heaven then that of his own
creating, any other happiness besides his pleasures, or an Hell diverse from
that which Christianity has objected to the Coward's Fancy. He has the Courage
to be any thing but what he should be, an Honest man or a Good Christian.

. 3. His Calling or Imploiment.
The Gallant's General Calling and Emploiment is, to scorn all business, but
the Study of the Modes and Vices of the times: and herein he spares not to rack
his brains, and rob his soul as much of her Natural as her Spiritual rest,
to supply the wanton world with variety of Inventions. He takes an especial
care that nothing may ever appear old about him, but the Old Man of Sin, and
him he every day exposes to Public view in a several Dress, that (if it be
possible) he may persuade the world to believe that all there is New too.
Indeed so miserably happy is he in Inventions of this sinful Nature, that any
man, who had not a Spiritual eye, to discern the same Proud and Luxurious
Devil in all his Actions, would almost think he had a new Nature as well as a
New Suit for every day throughout the Year.

Thus he that thinks it so much below him, to be reckon^d amongst the Laborers
in God's House or Vineyard; and disdaines to receive his Penny, with those he
should call his brethren, either as a Reward, or a Gratuity; but seems rather
to expect it as a Debt, or Portion due by Inhaeritance: Yet is he Content to
sit all day long in Sathan's Shop, one of his Slavish Prentices or Iourny-men,
who feeds him with course and Empty Husks here, and will reward him with an
Hellfull of torments for his labor hereafter.

He is all but a Proud and Glistering Mass of Swaggering Idleness: and he
makes it his chief Study to Demonstrate to the world, how many several ways
Idleness has found out to be busy. He takes this for granted (as well he may)
that he is not Idle but Dead that does just Nothing. It is his task ever to be
doing, Nothing to a Good but much to a bad or no Purpose. Though he may often
seem to sit still, and not to move so much as a little finger, yet even then is
his soul close at work, plotting and Contriving how he may for the time to
come be most Pausibly Idle. He acts so little for the Public Good, as if he
were afraid he should be thought a Member of Mankind; or as if the only
business God intended him, were but to take care, that he continue breathing.
He lives indeed as if he meant to prove, that God Almighty had made him to no
other End but this, to show the world that he could make something whereof he
had no need when made; as if whilst he created other men for use and Service,
he intended him only, as Artists do some of their neat^st but Slightest
pieces of work to stand upon the stall, or hang out for a sign at the
Shop-windowes, to show passengers with what the Shop is furnished within. Or if
you will, you may look upon him as upon the painted sign of a Man hung up in
the Air, only to be tossed to and fro, with every wind of Temptation and
Vanity. Such a vain shadow or Picture is he, that were there no more but
himself I should take the boldness to Affirm there were no such Creature as
a Man in the world.

To me he seems of no more worth then a Piece of Outcast Iron, lying useless
upon the face of the Earth, 'till his soul be even eaten away with Rust and
Sleath. God made him a Man, but to prove himself his own God by a Second
Creation, he endeavors to make himself a Bruit, nay a senseless Carcass
that only Cumbers the Earth, and is fit for nothing but to dung the ground it
lies upon, and Stink in the Nostrils of the most High. If ever he Sweat, it is
in pursuit of a feather, at his play and sport, in running away from his Work,
and in the chase after his Ease: And yet even in that he can never rest, this
indeed being the Natural fruit of Idleness, that it makes the Sluggard weary,
not only of whatsoever he does, but even of Idleness it self.

. 4. His Education and Breeding.
So soon as his age is capable of Instruction and Discipline he is sent to
School, or rather by reason of too great an Indulgence in his fond Parents, the
School is brought home to him; where if the foolish Mother do not more awe the
Schoolmaster, then he his Scholar, the Rod and an empty purse together do for
a while preserve him himself: But it shall not be long, ere he find room
enough abroad in the world, wherein he may lose himself again. Yet truly it
is a great rarity in this age, to see the earliest Morning of Youth, unclouded
by the fumes and vapors of lust. It being too usual a thing with the
debauched father, to make his child, as we use to say, over early his Father's
own Son.

Most Gentlemen seem to make it a special piece of their fatherly care to
stave off their Children as long as they can from Virtue and Religion; lest
therein resembling better men then their Fathers, some might take occasion to
think them Spurious. To infuse so early into the Young Child the graver Notions
of God and Goodness, were to make him Old before his time, and these would
look no better then so many wrinkles and furrows in the fresh cheeks of an
infant: alas, what were this but an unspiriting of the Child and laying an
unseasonable Damp upon the comely sprightfulnesse of youth? It Is fit he should
be manned up by bold and daring exercises, and as men use their Hounds, be
blooded now* when he is young. Divinity and Morality are supposed to much to
mollify and emasculate the brave soul of a Young Gentleman, and make it of
too soft and facile a temper for Noble and Generous actions. To instruct him
how hereafter he should manfully resist his Enemies, he shall first be taught
to fight against God and Goodness. It is indeed most lamentable to consider
how very few of those we call Gentlemen endeavor to make their Children either
Honest men or Good Christians: as if it were their only business to beget
them, and when they are come into the world, to teach them by their own
example, how they may most unprofitably spend the short leavings of their own
Luxury. Thus at their death leave they them doubly Miserable in bequeathing
them, first, little to live upon, and secondly, many ways to spend it. Indeed
the greatest Charity and providence in such Prodigal Parents, were either not
to beget Children at all, or to beget them mere beggars, that so they might not
give them, with their estates, so many unhappy opportunities of becomeing
altogether as bad as themselves.

But the Hopeful Youth must be a Gentleman, and in all have he must be sent to
see the University or Innes of Court; and that before he well knows what it is
to go to School. Whither he comes, not to get Learning or Religion, but for
breeding, that is, to enable himself hereafter to talk of the Customs and
Fashions of the Place. Here he gets him a Tutor, and keeps him (as he does all
things else) for Fashion's sake. Such an one who may serve at least, as poor
Boys do in some Princes Courts, to sustain the blame of the Young Gentleman's
Miscarriages, and whom the father may chide and beat when the Son is found in a
fault: Indeed this care is taken for the good Tutor, that if his Scholar
chance to return home (as too seldom he does) with either Schollarship or
Piety, he shall then have the Credit or Discredit (call it which you will) of
making the Scholar, or spoiling the Gentleman; seeing his parents had taken
order he should bring neither of the two along with him. Here perhaps he is
permitted to continue a year or two, if he have no mother upon whom he must
bestow at least three parts of that time in visits, else his Father knows not
well where he may with more Credit loose so much good time, or is it may be
afraid it will be a greater trouble to keep him at Home. In this time he will,
in all probability have learned how to make choice of his boon Companions, how
to rail at the Statutes and break all good Orders; How to wear a Gaudy Suite
and a Torn Gown; To curse his Tutor by the name of Baal's Priest, and to sell
more books in half an Hour then he had bought him in a year; To forget the
second year what perhaps for want of acquaintance with the Vices of the place
he was forced for a Passe-time to learn in the first; and then he thinks he
has learning enough for him and his heirs for ever.

And now that he may be able to maintain his title to so wretched an estate, it
is time he should be hastened away to some Inn of Court, there to study the
Law as he did the Liberal Arts and Sciences in the College. Here his pretense
is to study and follow the Law, but it is his Resolution never to know or obey
it; If in any measure he do apply himself to it, it is to this one end, that
he may know how to plead for himself when he breaks it: or to attain at last
to so much more Law then Honesty, as to Cozen him that has more Honesty then
Law. Here indeed he learnes to be (in his Notion of the Man) somewhat more a
Gentleman then before, having now the Mock-happinesse of a Licentious life, and
a Manumission from the Tyranny (as he terms it) of a Schoolmaster and Tutor.
This he reckons the happy year of his Enfranchisement, and in Commemoration
whereof his whole lifetime is to be one continued day of rejoicing. From this
time forward he resolves to be a Gentleman indeed, and now begins to clear
himself from all Suspicion of Goodness, which Constraint and Fear, made some
believe there was a Possibility of before.

. 5. His Habit and Garb.
As his Condition of life seems now to be New, so does he endeavor that all
should appear New about him except his vices and his Religion; He is too much
in love with those, to change them, and the latter he cannot change, because he
never had any. Pride and Wantonness have a very rare and ready invention:
here is a New Garb, New Clothes, and a New body too, O could he but once get
him a New Soul or no Soul he might be thought happy. When you look upon his
Apparel, you will be apt to say, he wears his Heaven upon his back; and truly
('it is too much to be feared) there you see as much of it, as he ever shall. He
is so tricked up in Gauderies, as if he had resolved to make his Body a Lure
for the Devil, and with this Bravery would make a bate, should tempt the
Tempter to fall in love with him. He looks as if he had prevented our first
Mother in sinning, and wanting patience to stay for the fruit, had plucked the
very blossoms, and now wore them about him for Ornaments. His Suite seems to
be made of Lace or Ribbon, trimmed with Cloth. By his variety of Fashions he
goes nigh to cheat his Creditors, who for this reason dare never swear him to
be the same man they formerly had to deal withal. His Mercer may very well be
afraid to loose him in a Labyrinth of his own cloth, which yet sits, or hangs
(shall I say) for the most part so loosely about him, as if it were ever ready
to fly away for fear of the Sergeant. Alas, how often is he proud of a Feather
in his hat, which a silly Bird was but a while ago weary of carrying in her
tail? Do but take him in that condition wherein you may commonly be sure to
find him, he will make a complete walking Tavern. His head and Feather will
serve both for sign and Bush.

If you observe but a little his strange Garb and Behavior, either that
wherein he walks the streets, or that other more set and affected one reserved
for his form of Complement; You would conclude he were going to show Tricks; I
am sure he wants nothing but a stage erected for the purpose. He takes as much
care and pains to new-mold his Body at the Dancing-School; as if the only
shame he feared were the retaining of that Form which God and Nature gave him.
Sometimes he walks as if he went in a Frame, again as if both head and every
member of him turned upon Hinges. Every step he takes presents you with a
perfect Puppit-play. And Rome it self could not in an Age have shown you more
Antiques then one of our Gentlemen is able to imitate in Half an hour: whose
whole life is indeed no other then one studied imitation of all the vanities
Imaginable; and by his daily practice, a man would guess there could be no
such ready way invented of becoming a Gentleman, as to degenerate first into
that Beast, which now, if ever, is most like a man, an Ape. Such an Honorable
creature has he made himself, who accounts it below him to be numbered among
the ordinary sort of men.

. 6. His Language and Discourse.
His Language and Discourse are altogether suitable to his Habit and Garb; All
affected and Apish, but indeed for the most part much more vile, sinful and
Abominable. When it is most Innocent, then is it Idle and Light, and then most
quaint and Rhetorical, when Drolling or profane. Although he make it his
whole business whenever he dares be Bookish (which indeed he dreads as much
as any thing but to be Good) to furnish himself with an Elegant and Courtlike
expression; yet will all but amount to this at most, that sometimes he may be
able to talk well, and show us how much he is a better Speaker then a man:
That he shall be able to carve out his Language into some of the most Modish
and Dissembling Complements, and to Interlard an affected discourse, with many
an Impertinent Parenthesis. And then amidst all this his Time-observing hand
and foot do so point, accent and Adorn all with Curious and Fantastic
flourishes, that his words are often as much lost in his Actions, as his sense
in his words.

A piece of noisy Bombast denominates him one of the great Wits, where the
Substance of his discourse (if it have any) is dressed up in so rude and
Antique a form; that staring (as it were) the hearer in his face, it goes nigh
to scare him out of his Wits.

If Don Quixot or some Romance more in Fashion, can but furnish him with a few
New-Coyn'd words, and an Idle tale or two to make up his talk at the next
Ordinary* In his own fond Conceit and by the votes of his simple Companions, he
is carried up to Heaven; a wanton piece of Drollery will send him beyond it.

To be truly Ingenious is not the way to Humor his Frollick Companions, and
therefore he is put to study out something else which must serve for a while
instead of wit, and it is strange, he can think of nothing will do this so well
as flat fo^lery; for most perfectly such is that Dr^lling vein wherein he is
so frequently industrious to show himself a witty fool; What a learned age is
this we live in, when he is the best Companion for a Gentleman, who can best
act the Rustic, and most facilely Imitate the rudeness and Flatnesse of his
language? and when he alone must be esteemed the Wit, who can neatliest play
the fool to Humor Madmen? To be sober or serious in the Gentleman's
Dictionary, signifies just as much as to be Dull and Bl^ckish. A Fancy which
dares not roave about, beyond the limits of Sobri^ty and Discretion, nor
proclaim her self to be most affectedly profane, or as industriously vain
and Idle, is a Bird that has no note sweet enough for his Cage. It Is a
wonderful thing to see, how the Apish Ingenuity of this Age, has cut the very
throat of all sober Invention, and Genuine wit. A Mimicall tone, a Fantastic
action, a Couchant sense, and a Phrase Rampant, quarter the Coat of our Modern
Gentile Wit. Such are the Spungy Ears of most Companions, that they will suck
in nothing but froth: And the Gentleman looks upon him as a poor solitary
fool, who will not thus make himself on Ass for Company.

But (alas) all these are but he Innocent recreations of his Tongue, wherein it
sports it self in it is Infancy, e're it attain to that nimblenesse and
volubility of expression which becomes a Gentleman. He is not always
delighted in these soft walks; but as he grows more a man, he chooses him
rougher paths, and more manly exercises. By degrees he steps up from
Idleness, and Emptiness, foolery and Drollery, to Scurrility and ^bloquy;
when at every step he tramples some Good Man's Honor in the Dust; at each word
he spits in the face of his Betters, and labors to bespatter with the Dirt of
Infamy and Disgrace, every name and reputation, that stands above his own: And
you may be sure he will ever throw the blackest dirt upon the fairest face,
where it may certainly do the greatest mischief, and be most conspicuous. Like
an experienced Archer, he never misses the white; but (as good luck is) such is
the Impenitrability of Innocence, when darted at by the poisoned arrows of
Envy, he never holes it. If this black breath of his could blow out, or eclipse
those lights that shine brightest, we should not have one star left in
virtue's Heaven: And those lights which were sent into the world to guide him
timely and truly out of it into a better, he first endeavors to extinguish,
that so he may without check or shame wander through all the works of
darkness into Hell. What so often in his mouth, as that which he never names
but with the deepest accent of scorn and disdain, a Paltry Parson? And he does
not stick often to tell him to his face, that when he comes to have as much wit
as zeall, he will begin to tell him another tale then that of Heaven; that he
may do well to keep him to his tub, and tell a precise story once or twice a
week, to his Ignorant Auditors in his Countrey-Church, and forbear to read
lectures of Godliness to persons whom he should be afraid to look upon but at
a Distance. That he brought more learning from school with him, then all the
Canonical Cassocks and Girdles in the Nation, with all their tough Logical
Notions and knotty Metaphysics shall be ever able to Contain. With a thousand
more such like raveings of a wild and Atheistical brain. I shall willingly
forbear to personate him any farther in them, lest he might think me able (as
I hope I shall never be) to reach the Frantic strain of his loose and
prophaine Railleryes.

Neither are his Discourses less Beastly then Devilish, less Filthy then
Malicious. So foul, obseane, and nauseous for the most part are his words, that
some one or other as little acquainted with a God as himsefe, will be apt to
conclude, that nature spoiled him in the making, and set his Mouth at the wrong
end of his Body. Certainly there must be a Corrupted and putrified Soul within,
whence there daily steames out so much odious and stinking breath. Indeed so
strangely is the Gentleman's Palate distempered by this same loathsome Disease,
that he can now relish just nothing but the very Excrements of Discourse. He
is not only taken with the wanten language and Lascivious Dialect of Love,
wherein to accomplish himself, he makes it too much his buesyness to collect
what he can out of all the loose past^ralls, Beastly Poems, and Baudy pieces of
Drollery, which by their number seem to turn our Booksellers shops into so
many Iakes: But he takes a great deal of pleasure to lick with his tongue, the
Nauseous Botches, and Putrified sores, and the Infectious Leprosies of wit. O
how does he delight to dwell upon the sore place of an obscene Poem* and he
never Commends the Poet for any thing but his Infirmityes. He is no Company for
the Gallant of late, who will not once at least before the close of every
Period Commit Lip-Adultery. As there is not any more filthy vice of the tongue
then this; so neither do I ever find the Gentleman more in Love with any other;
Except it be that one which I am now to name.

And that is it, which indeed I tremble to mention, though he esteems it the
greatest Grace and Ornament of his Discourse. I mean, Swearing. For as the
Gentleman seems Continually to measure out his time by sins instead of Minutes;
so his louder Oaths, were they not so very frequent, might well be Compared to
the Great Clock, which gives us notice how his hours pass. This is that
pleasing part of his language, wherein he so ordinarily bids defiance to his
God, and so powerfully Courts the Devil; with whom by this means he has as
frequent Converse as if he were his Familiar. And he has so great a variety of
these Hellish Complements, that the Master of that Language Satan himself,
may in a little time stand in need of an Interpreter to understand him.

This is a sin to which there are so few colorable Inducements or
prov^cations, that herein, or not at all, the Gallant shows his Proficiency
under that Good Master he serves, and proves how straight he can go to Hell
and how fast, without a guide or bait. Here indeed he seems to cry out upon
Eve for a Lazy and dull sinner, whilst in Every Oath he loudly swears, that
soul not to be worth a damning, which cannot sin without a temptation. It Is here
he expresses his great Charity to the Devil, for as if he were afraid the
tempter should have to great a load of other men's sins at the last and great
day of acounts, he freely exempts him from putting his helping hand to some of
his sins, and openly professes he is able to go far enough out of the way to
Heaven without a seducer.

How many Horrible and hideous Oaths does he daily invent, only to swell up
his cheeks, and make his words sound high and big in the Ears of those that
tremble not to hear him? with what boldness and pride does he abuse God's
most Holy and tremendous Name, by making it a cloak and varnish to set off his
most false, loose, and profane speeches. As if indeed he had this desperate
design upon Almighty God, to render his sacred Name Odious to the world, by
taking it so often into his profane lips.

Unto this we may here add that other as Common extravagancy of his tongue,
which is the abusing and making a Mock of God's Word, as well as his Name. His
Rhetoric seems all Low and Flat so long as his Metaphors lie on this side
Profaneness; but when he has once got a trick to heave up his cheeks, and
set his face against the Heavens, and to embosse his discourse with a Rumbling
Oath, then he begins to think himself an Orator with a witness.

. 7. His Religion and Conversation.
I am afraid it is now too late to tell you what is the Gentleman's Religion,
seeing he has so very little either of Honesty or Humanity. The sad truth is,
he is so far from being indeed Religious, that he is ashamed of nothing so
much as that any man should have the charity to think him so, Against this
Ignominious brand of a Godly man, he takes the readiest Course he can to
vindicate himself, that is, openly to deride all those that own it; Laughing
aloud at all such as have more religion then himself. The chief Ceremony of
his Religion next to that of Blaspheming his God, is lustily to Curse the
Devil: and to declaime both against Heaven and H^ll in a breath. It is below a
Gentleman to be a Beggar, though at the Gates of Heaven and the Throne of
Grace, and he does as much scorn to say his prayers, as to beg his bread.
Nothing but Necessity can persuade him to do either. Devotion and Humility are
names wholly inconsistent with Nobility and Gallantry; These become not that
Brave Heroic Spirit, which had rather choose to starve even his soul to all
eternity, then to receive salvation it self at the expense of a petition. It Is
for such faint hearted creatures as have not the Courage to undergo with
Al^^ri^y the torments of Hellfire, to stoop so low, as to beg an Heaven on
their knees, Alas he sees no such lovelynes in the things above, as may oblige
him to so submissive a Courtship: And yet he is so Confident to Enjoy them all
at last, as if he thought God would be beholding to him for accepting his
blessings, or as some foolish lovers take occasion to double their addresses
from the unkindness of a Coy Mistres, God would the more Earnestly importune
him to be saved, the more disdainfully he looks upon salvation.

If ever the Gentleman appears at Church, it is but to give you a testimony of
his courage, whereby he shows how he dare sometimes venture upon what he most
fears. But then he behaves himself so proudly there, as if he would Command
the Great God of Heaven and Earth to keep his distance, and he may be sure, so
he will, for he will draw nigh unto none but such as will first draw nigh unto
him. But some times his appearance in the Holy Assembly argues more Cowardice
then Courage, and shows that he fears the Constable more then God; and to be
religious more then to appear so. Here if he stay long, he is no less pained
in hearing the Sermon, then if both his Ears were fast nailed to the Pillory.
To prevent tediousness and to give himself as much Ease as may be; he picks up
here and there something from the Preacher to make merry with, at the next
meeting; Or else he meditates upon the Ladies as they set in their
Sunday's-Beuties; and then he returns from the Church, as most do, who come
thither with no better intentions, ten-times more an Atheist then he came.

But as fast as the Gentleman's Atheism has taught him to jeer and laugh at
all those who are so soft-hearted, as to profess a Religion, so well has their
Religion taught them to pity and pray for him that has none.

If the Gallant have no estate (as many who think themselves Gentlemen have
none) he makes his vices his trade, and so traffickes first for a liveing, and
then for damnation. The Tavern for the most part is his Exchange, where having
prepared the way for one wickedness by another, some drunken cheat is usually
the Enriching Bargain; and this, when discovered, must pass by the name of an
Ingenious frolic. Here he lies drinking out the Day, except he be forced to
sleep out the last night's Intemperance. This is the stage of his Wit and
wantonness: where he thinks himself a Champion, when he can kick two down
stairs at once, the Drawer and his Bottle, and sound the Alarm to the
Skirmish in a Loud peal of New-fashion'd Curses. Afterall's done there, he
walks the streets as light in his head as his Purse, and much oftener salutes
the Pavement then the Passengers.

He Drinks as stoutly, as if he meant to carry liquor enough with him in his
Belly to quench the flames of Hell; or rather as if he meant to drink himself
so far into a Beast, as he might thereby become incapable of Damnation. When
he has Drunk his fill, he studies how to make the next young heir he meets
with, pay the reckoning. If he chance to meet with some poor Innocent Lady,
whom a sweet word or two may make his miserable prey, he makes a shift to scrue
a ring or two off her finger, and this will both pay the shot, and his Common
she for his next night's lodging.

In a word, this Ranting Gentleman is a Golden or at least a Gilded sinner, a
Royal stave, a Prodigal spark; one who hates no name so much as that of
Christian; because he is afraid it would make him Melancholy. He travails over
the wide world of sin, 'till he have as little money as Religion, and no more
Credit then money. So that he is usually at last constrained either to lie hid,
and so become his own Prisoner, or to pawn his Body to his Jailer for his
chamber, or else to become a Citizen of the World, and so at last is every
where at home, because he is indeed at home no where.

. 8. An Apology for this part of the Character.
Perhaps you may here expect my apology for making so bold with the Gallant as
in the foregoing lines I have done, which I am so far from acknowledging my
self obliged to do; that I shall hardly obtain mine own pardon for being no
bolder. It Is out of no other respect then a tender Compassion to his Person,
and a most perfect hatred of his ways, that I here take leave of him. In good
earnest (Sir) I have not the patience to follow him any farther, no not in
those paths wherein he walks with so much Pride and Complacency. If he think I
have used him too unkindly, I shall only answer, that it is not half so ill
as he uses himself: who by being so much his own enemy, has found out a very
easy way for his b^st friends to be so too, and yet solve the Contradiction by
an obvious distinction betwixt his Spiritual and his Carnal self.

I thank God, I have learned to hate a vice in my best friend, and the more I
hate it the better I love my friend, whom I shall ever wish so well, as that he
may continue for ever Virtuous, that so I may for ever have his friendship. And
I have as well learned to love the soul of my most vicious Enemy, and the
rather because I know my Savior did as much for me.

I dare not think a Sinner needs my prayers one, jot the less, but much more
my Pity, because he pretends to be a Gentleman. I am sure he would say as much
himself, if he could but seriously consider what distinction of blood or
Degrees there is to be expected in Hell, or what respect will there be shown
to the Son of a Prince more then to a Beggar. Which was best rewarded, the
Noble Dives, or the poor and so long despised Lazarus? A Captive is still to
be looked upon as a Captive, though it be his lot to lie bound in Fetters of
Gold, and to have a stately Palace for his Prison; Nor shall I think that
Malefactor's torments much the less who has the honor at his execution to
have his Fatal Pile made up of all the richest Spices of Arabia. How great an
happiness found he in his death, whose sentence it was to be smothered to
death in a Bed of Roses? That Prisoner may be in a merry, but in no very good
Condition, who, when he should be singing Psalms unto his God, and so with the
Captive Apostles set his soul at liberty; when he should on the wings of
Devotion send her out with Noah's Dove, to fetch in the Olivebranch of Peace
and liberty from Heaven; when he should do all this, can yet in a rough Note,
and some wild disjoynted Catch, Crown his cups, and Invoke the Cursed
Inhabitants of Hell in an Health to the Devil: whatever others better bred and
of a more Gentile Education may think of him, I shall never be able to Commend
such a man's Courage and Alacrity: But this I shall (I hope) be able to do,
with all the due affections of a Charitable Christian, bewail his madness,
Lament his Folly, and earnestly pray that God would at length in great mercy,
restore him to his lost self and senses. Thus would I hold my self bound to
pray for a Madman, and truly no otherwise for our English Gallant: For were it
my purpose to show how Easily a man might be, rather then how hard it is for
him, not to be Satyricall upon so foul a Subject; or did I not more desire
with ^yle to heal then with salt and Vinegar to vex his wounds, I could
without the least wresting fully apply unto the Person we speak of, all the
Symptoms and degrees, of the most extreem Madness or Brutish Folly
Imaginable. But I leave him here, and for those others which are behind I shall
study more Brevity if not less Bitterness.

SECT. II.
. 1. The Second sort of Gentlemen not to be reckoned amongst those which are
truly such.
I Would not have you think (Sir) that I have done with the Spurious Gentleman,
when I have done with the Gallant. I should do some violence to the true
Gentleman's virtues, should I say all that are not included in the foregoing
Character are just such as he, and deal somewhat too severely with him of whom
I am now to speak, if I should Conclude all that are none of the Best, to be
the very worst. I find my self therefore necessitated to say a little of
another, who, though he may be thought by many degrees above the former, yet
have I no reason to call him a Saint. If we eye the Common Course of his life,
and his Ordinary Conversation; we may perhaps discover in him something more of
Modesty and the man, then in the former, yet shall we not find much more then
what is to be read in those two names, of Religion or the Christian: At best,
he has in him only so much of Christianity as may save him Credit in this
world not his soul in the other. And of this sort is (alas, I may too truly
say) the far greatest part of our English Gentry; I must include very many of
our Nominall Nobilityi and not a few of the Real too, I mean as far as blood
alone will make them so, under this Head.

This indeed is that Gentleman, whether of City of Country, whom his
neighbors, as well as himself, do too often, for want of a better, flatter
into Somebody. One, who though he has more discretion then to be stark mad;
and more sobriety than to dwell in a Tavern, or to transform his own house
(as too many choose to do) into a perfect Bedlam; I am sure there wants very
little of it in many, but the Correction and Discipline; Though he be not fully
arrived at the very height of Vanity, nor can yet take a Pride, by the idle
expense both of estate and Honor, to purchase an irremediable Poverty to his
heirs, and to himself the Empty title of Spark and Gallant: Yet he can hardly
persuade me to believe, the Principles whereby he is kept within these bounds
of Modesty and Sobriety, such as may merit him the Name of Gentleman or
Christian. Indeed the greatest Difference betwixt him and the Gallant seems to
be this, that whereas the Gallant is the very Spume and Froth of Nobility,
which ever works upwards, impatient of a Confinement within any limitts
whatsoever, but always flies out by reason of it is extraordinary Levity into
Emptyness and Air; this other Gentleman like the Lees or Dregs, by reason of
too great a mixture and participation of more Gross and Terrene parts, settles
wholly downwards till he come to the very bottom of all Baseness: Such Lees
though at present of some more use then the other, yet will they at length
prove good for nothing but to be thrown away.

2. Several sorts of such Gentlemen.
Such a Gentleman as he who has a good estate and a full Chest; and these,
excepting a Coat of Arms, and a few old Pictures hung up in his Parlor or
Gallery to let strangers see who were his Father and Mother, are all he has to
show for his Nobility: and yet his too great Care in preserving these, is for
the most part, that whereby he forfeits his Honor: For as the Former freely
spent his estate to make him a Gallant, so this later as freely parts with all
Gallantry to save his estate. If Nature have blessed him with some Good parts
and Faculties, and if the care of his Parents have added many more excellent
Ornaments and accomplishments of a Gentleman; yet there always appears some
abatement or other in his Bearing, which Disgraces all: And there is that base
alloy of (I know not what) dross, in his best Gold, which renders it
uncurrent, and altogether useless both to himself and all the world besides.
In some this is Covetousness, and a love of the world; in others it is Cowardice
and a Poor-spirit; In a third sort Lazyness and a Love of Ease; and in many
others Pride and a vainglorious Humor. Though in favor to the Gentleman, or
rather to the world, lest it might seem to be quite void of all such things as
true Gentry and Nobility; men are willing very often to bestow upon them too
Good-Names; Calling the first Providence and a Natural Care; The second
Prudence and a Commendable Policy; The third a Goodnature and a Peaceable
mind; and the last a Noble and brave Spirit, and a piece of Necessary state. I
Confess I am as ready as any man to cast into him all the allowances, he can
in any reason demand, or I with safety grant him, and all will be little enough
to make him full weight for a Gentleman. But he must pardon me, if I love not
to hear Good-names thus grossly abused; nor to see the most beloved and
plausible vices pass so Currently and unquestioned for Virtues. Call them what
we will, and make them as Good as we can, as they are enough to sink the
Gentleman as far below his name as Hell is below Heaven; so have they been too
effectual and prevalent of late, to the choking up all breathings of true
Religion and Piety, and to the bringing a Glorious Church and flourishing
Kingdom, to say no worse, into a very low and ruinous Condition. And this I
dare be bold to affirm, though I take not my self for a Politician, that let
us all pretend and Endeavor too what we can, till we can make these Gilded
vices to be known and owned by their own names, we shall have small reason to
hope for a settled Church, or peaceable state. I wish I had a salve which
applied to the Gentleman's blind Eye might take off the Pearl and make him see
this truth.

3. The Provident Gentleman.
The Provident Gentleman (as he loves to hear himself miscalled) is one who
is ever putting the question with him in Job. What profit is there in the
Service of the Almighty? If you could once persuade him to believe that every
Good gift comes from above, and that Whosoever asks shall indeed rec^ive, you
would soon see him grow Religious, and hear him saying his prayers in good
Earnest: But alas, so long as he can make a shift to fill up his Coffers by
delving in the Dirt, you must give him leave to Continue Infidel in these
particulars. He is Content to hear of Glorifying God, till you come to tell
him he must do it with his Substance, but then it becomes an hard saying, and
he will hear you of that at a more Convenient time; perhaps he means it upon his
deathbed. So little is he in love with, or sensible of what you call Honor,
that allow him the gain and profit, let God or any one else (it is all one to
him) take the other. This Gentleman has just as much God and Religion as a full
Chest will hold, his God and his Gold like Hippocrates his Twins, live and
thrive, and are sick and dye together: and yet it were much to be wished he
were but half so industrious to preserve the one, as he is to keep the other.
Instead of laying up his treasure in Heaven, he lays up his Heaven in his
Treasury; and, if God will be content with it so, he shall be sure to have his
heart there too. Covetousness, I dare say, in such as he, is the greatest
Idolatry; I am confident he would fall down and worship the Image of a Nero,
nay of a Devil, rather then want the single penny that bears it. You will have
much ado to convince him of the truth of the Apostle's Proposition, That
Godliness is great gain, except you will grant him that this is a Logical
Conversion, and not to be questioned that Great gain is Godlyness. If with the
Silver-smith he can by his craft get his wealth, then shall Religion become his
trade, and the Church his forge: But till then you must give him leave to be a
worshipper of his great Goddess Diana. So far is he from putting in practice
that good and wholesome advice, to be Careful in nothing, but in every thing
to give thanks; that he dares never read the text but backwards, Give thanks
for nothing but in every thing be careful, He cannot esteem it a true piece of
providence to make the day Content with it is own labor, but on the Contrary
he gives every day the trouble of careing for many years; and therefore is
ready to Fancy himself far from the Rich Fool's Condition in the Gospel,
because he never yet could allow his Soul her Requiem, or think that he had
enough for many years.

He takes much more pains to leave his Children Rich then Good, and had rather
give them a Portion then a blessing. The main advice he gives them is to be
thrifty and Good- husbands, let them make themselves Godly and Good-Christians.
All the learning he intends to bestow upon them, is so much Latin as will fit
them for understanding a Bond and so much Arithmetic as may secure them from
the Dishonesty of an unjust Steward; If he suppose the Book may be made a
thrifty diversion to keep them from the greater expense of the Tavern or their
Game, he may perhaps allow something toward a study. And (be sure) he will be
careful enough, to give them so much Law as may be sufficient to maintain
their own rights, and rack their Tenants.

If he go Constantly to Church, it is more to serve himself then his God. Often
because he hopes by being his frequent Auditor, he may oblige the Parson to let
him his tithes at a low rate, or to believe him a man of Conscience, that so he
may defraud him of his dues without suspicion. For the most part this Gentleman
is the Patron or has the Impropriation, and yet, whilst he and his family grow
fat by feasting upon the bread of the Altar, he grudges him who dispenses
freely of the bread of life the very Crumbs that fall from his table. The Church
of God thus often starves for want of food, whilst such Dogs Eat up the
Children's bread: Such men's whole Lives are but so many Continued Sacriledges,
and all they can allege for themselves comes but to this, that they hold their
sin as their land by right of Inheritance, from their Ancestors: Their Coffers
grow full by robbing the Sanctuary, and at every meal with their sacrilegious
teeth, like so many ravenous wolves or vultures, they tear in pieces the Body
of Christ's languishing Spouse: But let her dye, the Provident Gentleman had
rather see her Carcass then his Chests grow Empty; and if by her death he may
peaceably enjoy her revenues, he will hardly mourn, but as such enriched heirs
use to do, at her funerals.

It is long since this Good man turned Charity out of doors, as an unthrifty
Hous-wife, and one that made it her busyness to throw all away. The Poor come
and go about his gates, as hungry birds about a painted Vine, at best they
meet with an hard Crust and harder language. He loves not thus to lend his
money, though it be to the Lord, except he would give him bond to return him
Eight in the Hundred here in this world. When our Savior tells him of an
Hundred for one here below, and eternal life hereafter in Heaven, he has as
little faith to believe, as patience to wait for such a reward: Yet he could
almost wish upon Condition the former part of the promise might be made good to
him, without Persecution; that the later might be reserved for such who can
Fancy a God in Heaven better then a thousand pound in hand.

If this Gentleman can but so far deny himself as to do no open violence or
Injury to any man; if he can arrive at that degree of Christianity; which will
enable him to reach the Negative part of Justice and charity, he is apt to
think he has made a fair progress in the way to Heaven. And yet (God knows)
he ordinarily mistakes this part too. For to win another's estate by some
quillet in the Law, or by bribing a Judge; to overreach his poor neighbor in
an hard Bargain; to take advantage of a needy person's present necessity, and
accordingly raise the price of his Commodity; to exact first more then he is
able to pay, and then make him pay use for his disability; to send a poor
naked soul to bridewell instead of an Hospital, to the stocks instead of a
Bed, to call him knave and Vagabond, that he may have a pretense not to relieve
him: to suffer a languishing Creature to dye in the street, whilst he had
enough to spare wherewith to feed and cloth him; Or to permit a breach in the
walls of Jerusalem, when a small sum out of his purse would repare it; These
he can by no means reckon amongst the species of Injustice, or as defects in
Charity; but therefore counts all good duties as things unnecessary and no way
obliging, indeed because chargable and seemingly Burdensome; and such as
contradict that thrifty forecast, and necessary providence he holds himself
tied to maintain. He thinks it a greater degree of wisdom to trust God's
providence now for some miraculouse relief of the present poor, then to rely
upon it for the after-enrichment of his posterity.

Certainly this is the thing that passes so Currently for Providence, even
amongst those who are counted the wiser and more religious sort of our English
Gentlemen: But if this can belong to Christianity, then must Covetousness and
a Worldly mind, be reckoned amongst our Christian virtues. It is (alas) too
evident what good friends such virtues and such Gentlemen have been of late to
our Jerusalem; whilst our richest Gallantry have all along, in these
calamitous times, chosen rather, by a kind of Constrained bounty to reward the
Demolishers; then voluntarily to part with a farthing to pay the builders of
our ruinated Sion. Besides this, it is not a little to be feared that those
many Contrary Oaths and Engagements, Vows and protestations, which with the
help of this sauce of providence have been so readily swallowed (I fear I may
say) by the greatest part of our Gentry, will at last expose their souls
within no less to Corruption, then the Contrary Qualities do their Bodies
without. O how happy might this poor Nation have been even to this day, had
not the Rich Gentleman under a pretense of a Natural affection and a Necessary
Providence, set an higher aestimate upon his own Chest, then the Ark of God;
upon his own Barn, then the Lord's Temple; Had he not loved his Interest more
then his Religion, the safety of his Body more then the Salvation of his Soul,
his Natural children more then his Heavenly Father, and his money above them
all.

. 4. The Prudent Gentleman.
By this short view I have given you of the Provident Gentleman, I suppose you
will grant him to be none of those we may call the best, or such as it might be
wished, we had many of in our Nation; And truly the Prudent Gentleman, I mean
him who is now adays known by that name, is not of a much Nobler dye: very
often you shall find him to be the very same, always very near of kind to the
former. Cowardice is as much afraid to be known, and therefore as loath to walk
without her mask as Covetousness; and would as gladly arrogate to her self
the never more abused names then now of a wise caution, and a Christian
Prudence; as that other of a virtuous thrift and necessary Providence.

Instead of being (as wisdom commanded his Disciples) wise as serpents,
Gentlemen are become mere Serpents in wisdom; and have rendered themselves
very capable of that Commendable Character, which was long ago given to the
Serpent, They are more subtle then all the beasts of the field; and the
Prudence they boast of, and under which they veil a Carnal mind, and a
Carking Cowardly soul, is nothing else but a worldly Policy, or rather a
Devilish Subtilty. They have made one half of the text quarrel with, and
justle the other quite out of their Bibles, advancing the wisdom of the
serpent to so high and Intense a degree, that it cannot admit the least
proportion of the Holy Doves more necessary Innocence. Such a foraminous piece
of Net-worke has Christian Prudence been made of late, that these Glib
serpentine Politicians can so wind themselves in and out at pleasure, as if
they meant neither God nor Man should ever know certainly where to have them.

It is a very famous piece of the Gentleman's prudence to Endeavor to Out-wit
an All-wise God, and to go about to put Fallacies upon him out of his own
word, often making even God's most righteous precepts the Topics of his
disobedience. How frequently endeavors he to cloak the violation of one law,
by a pretended obedience to another, and by setting God's Commands at variance
one with another, thinks to steal away his beloved sin, and not be taken notice
of? He dares not take up his Cross and follow Christ, lest he should become
Felo de se, accessory to his own death; Nor knows he how to forsake Father and
Mother for Christ's sake, without a breach of the Fifth Commandment, which
binding him to Honor both, he cannot see how he may in any sense forsake
either. He dares not part with houses and lands, for fear he might seem to
Despise God's good Blessings; nor hazard his estate in the vindication of his
Religion and his Loyalty, lest he should be said to have thereby thrown away
the opportunities of expressing his bounty and his Charity; He knows how much
he is obliged not to deny Christ before men, and to give an account of his
faith to such as demand it of him; but then he produces a text which tells him
of days wherein the Prudent shall keep silence, and these days he supposes
still present, whenever his person or estate may be endangered by an open
heart or an Ingenuous tongue. He will be ready to suffer Persecution for the
Gospel of Christ, and, with St Paul, to be bound and to dye; but this must
only be when his Prudence is at a loss and he can find out no way just or
unjust to avoid all this. As long as there are shifts enough left him, such as
dissembling language, Covert Engagements, Cunning flatteries, treacherous
Compositions, petty Contributions, Underhand Compliances, in things both Civil
and Religious, he thinks he wants no honest Evasions, to secure both Life and
livelihood, Thus he is Content to set him down in quietness, whilst the
Enemies of God's Church advance in troops and Armies against her; and thinks it
enough, when he can say he wishes all well, and prays for the Peace of
Jerusalem. It were no Prudence openly to declare his opinion, or to act on any
side; alas, he is but one single man, and one's as good as none against the
stream of the multitude, not Considering that where one does not join with
one, there can be no multitude. There are other Champions enough in the world to
vindicate her quarrel, such as have no estates to look after, No families to
provide for, when if all were of his mind there would not be so much as one;
and besides who has greater reason to labor then he that has already received
so great a share of his wages. What though he freely gives away a large portion
of his goods to the Enemies of God? It is but the way to secure the rest for
better purposes. What though he be constrained with fair speeches to flatter
up the transgressors in their Iniquities? His heart for all this shall be for
God, his prayers for the Church, and he is as Good a Christian and as Loyal a
Subject within as the best. Alas, it is no great matter to Comply a little in
outward things, to lay an hand upon a Bible, to invoke the sacred Name of God,
and seemingly to Renounce Religion and Loyalty; God knows, he intends no such
matter, but only takes this Course to keep his Family from ruin, and to
preserve himself safe and whole to do God and his Church more service
heareafter.

It is all one with him to go to Church or C^nventicle, so he may by
frequenting either be thought to favor the Religion in Fashion, and so not be
suspected an Enemy to the God that rules, the man in power with a sword in his
hand. He can take a great deal of pains, rise early, and go far, to encourage
a seditious Lecture, and when Sermon's done with an Hypocritical face smile
upon the preacher, and inviteing him home with him witness his thanks and
approbation in a Good dinner; But he holds it imprudence to frequent that true
worship and service of God, which the excellency thereof and the Command of his
superiors commends to his Conscience, lest he should be thereby thought
ill-affected to that Religion, which he would have Good men believe his soul
abhorres. He dares Countenance Rebellion and Sacrilege both with his tongue
and Purse; but aesteems it dangerous, and therefore (without all doubt)
Imprudence, to Contribute so much as a Good look to the Encouragement of the
truly Religious and virtuous, lest he should be suspected by the prosperous
sinner, an Enemy to Treason, and Wickedness.

Till we can find a way how to cast out this Prudent Devil, which (as the
Prophet tells us) is wise to do evil but to do Good has no understanding; we
shall ever hear this possessed Gentleman crying out with the Daemoniack in the
Gospel, what have we to do with thee Jesus thou son of God? Why art thou Come
to torment us before our time? Such a perfect Gout is this prudent Cowardice,
that the lame Gentleman ever cries out at the very sight of any thing looks
like Religion, as if it would come too near him, and touch him upon the sore
place. So sad a thing is it to stand in fear of health, lest it should make us
sick* to tremble at the sight of what would bring us to Heaven, lest we should
lose our Earth; and to take so much anxious care to praeserve the Body whole,
for fear a Courteous wound should set open the door, and give the soul leave to
fly out into Heaven and be at rest.

If such men be truly prudent, then are all true Christians undoutedly fools:
Or if this over-warynesse be no more but a prudent and Religious Caution, then
are most of our English Gentlemen (which I have not yet Charity enough to
believe) Prudent Christians. But (alas) Neutrality hangs too much betwixt two,
ever to come so high as Heaven; and a Cold Indifferency comes so far short of
that necessary zeal which is the unfailing Consequent of true Piety; that it is
impossible it should ever be Crowned with aeternall Happiness. He that is not
deeply in love with his God, cannot place his absolute felicity in the fruition
of God; and he that is afraid to do any thing, or think's it prudence to suffer
nothing for him, is not in Love with him. God has long ago told the Gentleman,
and all others, how much of another temper he must be who will live for ever,
instructing him what an immediate Contrariety there is betwixt being for God
and against him, so that there can be no mean left for such a prudent
Indifferency: betwixt fighting Under Christ's Banner, and being the Devill's
Soldiers. Moderation, it is true, in things of Indifferency is a Commendation;
but the Gentleman needs fear as little that he can be over zealous in a Good
matter here upon Earth, as that he may be over happy in Heaven. As there be no
Angels but such as are either very good, or very bad, so every Gentleman is
either a Saint indeed, or else stark naught. He that sitts still shall come as
soon to Hell as he that sweats in pursuit of it. But whosoever hopes to Come
to Heaven, he must ever run and with his face that way if he will be sure to
obtain. I would wish that Gentleman who has not the heart to Confess Christ
before men, to Consider, how he can have the Courage to hear Christ denying him
before his Father which is in Heaven, or to Endure those torments in H^ll which
he shall be sure to undergo for not Confessing him here upon Earth. Such a
Lukewarm soul is so Nauseous unto God, that he must at last Spue him out into
the Bottomless pit.

If this be Christian Prudence, to secure an Estate or preserve a Family, or
save a life, by being frigid, and so Spiritlesse in our Profession, as may make
us nauseated by God, and set us at such a distance from Heaven; a true
Christian shall have as little reason to Envy the G^ntleman his Prudence, as
the poor Church of England has cause to be proud of his Courage.

. 5 The Peaceable Gentleman.
The Peaceable and Honest-natur'd Gentleman (as many call him) is one to whom
the poor* Church of England is not much more indebted for his kindness then
to either of the former: this is he that is so far from being Cordially
sensible of the Afflictions of Joseph, or the dessolations of Jerusalem, that
he seems to have hardly so much of an humane spirit in him as to understand the
meaning of those two words, Happiness and Misery. Three parts of his time at
least, he spends in sleep, as if he were resolved to die all his life long; or
by this course to keep himself Ignorant of the Concerning affairs of the
world, being loath to come acquainted with the truth of those evils which he
is resolved not to take any pains to remove. The other quarter of his time he
carefully divides betwixt his meals and his sports, and this ^e calls, liveing
a Good, honest, quiet, and harmless life, such as hurts no body.

Sometimes he seems even to Envy the very stones that Constant rest which
Nature has indulged them, whereby they are made incapable of any motion but
what is occasioned, and that but rarely, by some violence from without them. If
he had so much of that Philosophy, which tells us the caelestiall bodies are in
a perpetual motion, as to believe it for a truth, he would for that very cause
be unwilling to go to Heaven. When he hears of an aeternall Saboth of rest for
all those that go thither, he is almost persuaded to become a Christian, yet
is he in a great straight betwixt two, for though he love his rest too well,
yet he hates the very name of Saboth much more, especially when he hears St*
John telling him, that, the Angels and Glorified Saints never cease Day nor
Night from praising God

Sometimes again he seems to grudg the poor bruit Animals their
Irrationalitie, and to share with them, endeavors by a Sordid sensuality to
degrade himself into a Beast* or at least, to become as like one as humanity
will permit him. That he may be better acquainted with their Natures and
dispositions, his Dog and his Horse, or his Hawke, henceforward become his
Principal Companions; with these he plays, and with these he discourses, and
toward these (if you seriously consider all his terms of Art, you will be
ready to say) he has his set forms of Complement: and indeed his whole study
is to learn readily to speak that language wherein he may be understood by the
silly animals. When the weather or his health or the like will not befriend him
in these exercises abroad; then he sits at home, numbering his minutes by the
turns of his die, or the playing of his Cards; or perhaps gets so much liberty
abroad, as to measure out his hours by the motions of his bowl. Such a
merciless Tyrant is he to that (which he fears he shall never loose or
destroy fast enough) his precious time; that he allwaies studies to invent
variety of Executions for it. Now he delights to drown it in his Cups, anon he
burns it in his Pipe, by and by he tramples it under his horse's h^ofes; again
he knocks it in the head with his Bowl, tears and devours it with his Hawks
and his Hounds; there is nothing he will leave unexperimented, 'till he have
certainly found out a way to prevent it is natural, Honest and Commendable
departure.

These Courses he willingly allows himself in, and desires to have all
thought noe more or worse then his Contempt of the world, and his study of
retiredness from those Distracting Cumbrances thereof, which are unworthy of a
Christian, or a Gentleman.

Sometimes he delights to consume a great part of his time in unnecessary
visits, but studies withal to make them so unprofitable, as if he were
desirous to have it thought men were made only now and then to look upon one
another: his discourse (what there is of it) being so idle and impertinent,
that it serves to no other end, then to exercise his tongue and keep it by much
motion voluble; lest for want of use he should in a short time (as he does by
most good things) forget to speak. Sometimes you shall have a Complement from
him, but puffed up with so many hyperbolicall expressions of your worth, and of
the incredible respects he has for your person, that you cannot choose but
suspect he only labors how to be disbelieved; or has learned of his Dogs how
to fawn and flatter. And thus when he has made a shift to lose an hour or two,
and to trouble his friends with much Impertinent talk, he returns home again
to eat and play, and sleep, and spend the remainder of his time as Idly as he
can.

In a word this sort of Gentlemen borders so closely upon him we first
described, the Gallant, that I shall not need to say more of him, then only
this, that he has some degrees less of Madness then the other; he seems as
yet but to hang about the doors, and has not gained an admission into the
Society of Raunters: Nor is this because he wants a Genius or Inclination to
evil in the General, but rather he is beholding to one vice to keep him from
another, and being wedded so much to this, is forced to abstain from it is
Contrary. Either he is tied to his Chest with a Golden chain, which will not
allow him the liberty of ranging into so many costly riots; or else a l^aden
dullness so much oppresses his soul, that she cannot Soar so high in the vast
Region of Debauchery: So that if you find him free from any one vice, he is to
thank the Contrary vice and not the virtue for it; or at best, he owes it to an
Infirmity of Nature that he is free from both.

Indeed for the most part this Gentleman is (as the Philosophers use to say of
their first matter) though not perfectly formed into all those Noble
qualifications (as they are usually miscalled) of the Complete Gallant, yet is
he, at lest, in a remote Disposition to all or any of them: As the Polypus is
said to be always of the same color with the neighboring object; or as the
Looking-glass reflects as many different faces as are obviated to its own
superficies: So is this Gentleman not properly one, but any Body; of the
Religion, and the Humor, and the fashion of his Companions, as near as his own
weakness will permit him to Imitate them. And this is it which Commonly
purchases him the repute of a Civil, a Courteous, an Affable, a Good-natured
and sweet-disposition'd person: Only because he know^s as little how to be
angry with a vice, as how to be guilty of a virtue. Such a Ductile, soft and
Compliant soul he has, that as the Wax to the Seal, he would fain smile upon
every man in his own face, and speak with every one in his own language; He
Complements, and Praises, and Flatters, and performs all the offices of a
Gentleman, as his shadow in the Glass, only by reflection. For a fair word he
will part with his own soul, and with a fair word he does often occasion the
ruin of many more: whilst he loves as much to flatter others up in their
wickedness, as to be flattered up by others in his own. Say and do what you
will (so you injure not his person or estate, nor rob him of his beloved ease)
you are sure to have his approbation, and if for this he may have yours, he
thinks it a reward and encouragement great enough. But I leave him.

. 6. The Stately Gentleman.
There is yet another that challenges a room in this paper, and truly
deserves his place as much as any: If he will not be angry, and in a rage swear
to burn the paper, when he finds himself set in the last and lowest place,
all is well enough. And this is that Stately and Majestic he, whom I dare
hardly name lest he should take it as an affront, for though he hunts after a
name and reputation amongst all men, yet he looks upon it as a kind of
Disparagement of his virtues, and an undervaluing of his Honor, to hear his
name from any mouth but his own. But most of all he esteems it pr^phaned, when
mentioned by persons so inconsiderable, as all those of our Color, unto such
as himself have ever appeared.

This is he who thinks himself as much too good to be a Christian, as he
thinks all Christians too mean to be accounted Gentlemen. His only God is his
Honor, and to give it something of a Deity, he Phancies it to be singular, and
that there is none other besides it; when (alas) this Idol too is just
nothing. But such is the strange Omnipotence of Pride and Ambition, this
Gentleman can first create to himself a God out of nothing, and then fall down
and Worship the Idolized Vanity which his own Ridiculous Fancy has thus set
up. That he does indeed more esteem this Shadow then the true God, he too
loudly affirms in all his Oaths; for when he intends what he says shall
unquestionably pass for serious and creditable, he swears by his Honor and
Reputation: Other Oaths he has enough, by the Glorious Majesty of Heaven and
Earth, which are but too literally the Burden of his discourse; these (as we
said of the Gallant) he uses not for Confirmation of the truth, but as the
sportive recreations of his tongue, and the graces and Ornaments of Good
Language.

He it is, that (wheresoever he be) will see that all men do their duties, but
himself. And he does something well herein, except, when by a proud mistake he
calls an unmerited respect to his own Supposititious virtues, their
indispensible Duty. He looks that all men should observe as great a distance
from his person, as he is resolved to do from their virtues; or as if already
he were (where I wish by the much despised grace of Humility he may at last be
found) in heaven. He expects no less observance and reverence from his
Tenants, then as if he were not only Lord but Creator of the Manor: as though
he would be thought as much Master of the Universe, as he is the slave of his
own Ambition. He walks up and down so wantonly and affectedly, as if he
intended thereby principally to Demonstrate to the world his great perfections
and Excellency, that he must take much pains to do amiss. This Lordly Sir, so
long as he can but get a Cap and a knee from his Inferiors, and the chair at
every meeting with his betters; he thinks that all the blessings of Heaven
(though a Crown of Glory be one of them) can add nothing to his Honor: Were
it but for this one reason, he would never make it his business to come
thither, because he may justly despair of ever being the best man there. If it
may be conferred upon him as an Honorary reward, and upon the meritorious
claim of his virtues, he will perhaps be Content to wear the Crown; but as a
Gift he scorns it, lest he should draw upon himself an obligation to the
Donor by accepting it: And as his wage he scorns no less to acknowledge it,
for as he has not by any labor Earned it, so is he afraid to be looked upon to
his God in the relation of a servant.

In short this Gentleman Phancies himself endowed with such a transfigurative
excellency, that (as the Philosophers stone, once found, should turn all
things it touched into Gold) he supposes it able to turn all things into
Gentile and excell^nt which he is in love with: All his vices, whatever
deformity the dull eye of the world apprehends to be in them, his over-weaning
humor looks upon as no less then the most absolute of all virtues: and he
conceits himself so Immoveably fixed and settled upon the highest Pinnacle of
Honor, that Baseness it self shall never have any power to degrade him. Thus
ever conceiting himself placed at so great a height, it is no great wonder if
he become so giddy at length in all his actions; and beholding others at so
great a distance, I marvel not, that he begins to see men like Moles upon the
earth, and to think them all so blind, that they cannot discern his vanity.
This indeed it is that makes him think neither Church nor State worth his
reguarding, he can with Dry eyes behold both vessels split at once, and in the
mean time flatter himself up with the Divellish hopes of Enriching his
Ambition by the miserable wrack.

This is he, that can think it no Injustice to rob the whole world, and rifle
the storehouse of Nature, to adorn his Body and humor his Palate; to wear
the portions and livelihoods of (I know not how many) Orphans and Widows in a
Bandstring; and carry the lives and Fortunes of many languishing Souls upon his
Little-finger. I wish that whilst he casts ^o scornful an eye upon these
poor naked Beggars, he would but seriously consider how many of their
Contemptible rags he has picked up together, to patch up all that bravery upon
his own back; whilst either his oppression occasioned, or his uncharitableness
prolonged their lamentable condition. He makes indeed almost the whole creation
Club to maintane his Ambition, and returns a derision in requital.

This Gentleman's chief pastime and sport whereby he makes himself merry, is
to laugh at two sorts of men, The Godly and the Po^r, the one as a Praecisian,
and he that has unmann'd himself by too much Religion; the other as the
outcast of Fortune, or a man intended by Nature for nothing else, but by his
labor to make him rich, and by his Ignorance to make him merry. The
Black-coate or Parson (for by these names he thinks he does sufficiently pay
the Divine and Scholar) he ever looks upon with as much Superciliousnesse and
disdain, as if the very Color of his Coat were odious and an Eyesore to him,
or as if because shame and fear keep him from Immediate and Direct Blasphemy,
He were resolved to express his spleen against God himself, by despighting
his servants. He is seldom or never his Auditor but when he has a mind to
sleep, or is disposed to be merry, and then he comes to Church and there
worships God just as he honors his Ministers out of it: Nay he is unwilling to
allow his God that ordinary Civillity, which and much more he expects from his
own Chaplain, that of a Cap and a knee: Or if his Breeding have taught him more
manners, then his Piety has Reverence; then shall all his Religion be pent up
into this one poor Ceremony, and so he makes his Worship all one with his
Complement.

This is he, whose intolerable Pride makes every thing, that is not the very
basest kind of Flattery, pass for an Affront, and an high piece of Disrespect
unto his Person. For this immediately he studies a revenge, which he has learned
to call a necessary vindication of his Honor. What an excellent Chimistry is
there in such deluded Nobility, which can extract a Spirit of Honor out of the
very Dunghill of Unworthiness; and find so admirable a sweetness, in that
which cannot be thought better then the very Ordure and Excrement of Ambition,
Malice and Envy, I mean, Re^enge! Let but the least Circumstance of that
Respect, he supposes due, be omitted, and presently there flies out a
Challenge, and for the most part so vauntingly worded as if he meant his breath
or his Ink should do more execution then his sword By this means he makes his
first thrust at his adversaries very heart, that so he may wound his courage
before they meet, and cause his heart to fail him before the Encounter; for
this indeed is often the only way his late repented temerity uses to leave
him, for the securing of his Reputation. But is so be his courage stand upon
the same level with his Ambition, it is nothing but the death or disgrace of
his Antagonist, will assuage his Fury^ in the Field therefore he often sends
his Body to the Grave, and his own Soul to Hell at a Blow. This is his
Gallantry, and this the necessary vindication of that Honor, which is so
tender, that every thing except it have in it the unworthy softness of the
most servile compliance with his own unconstant Humor, rends, sp^ts, or
grieves it: and which nothing can wash clean, or make whole again: but the
Heart-blood of him who durst give the Affront.

I hope he will not take it as such, if I make bold here to take my leave of
him; I have neither leisure nor patience to trace him through the wild
Labyrinth of his Pride, wherein he has long ago with no small complacency lost
himself, and all things which look like virtue. I wish all men, whom he
studies to provoke into an madnesseequall with his own, may ever have that
high charity for this Gentleman, which I have now; then should they answer all
his challenges with this prayer, That God would give him more courage, then to
suffer himself to be thus basely Affronted and domineered over by so
dangerously insulting a Passion, without the least Essay: toward the just
vindication of that Name and Honor which alone are Valuable.

. 7. The conclusion of this part.
I should as much tire you (Sir) as my self, should I run (though with never
so much haste) over all the particulars of the Gentleman's vanity and madness;
which are so inseparably, for the most part, interwov^n one within another,
that I fear I may already seem too absurd, by dividing them into so many
Sects or Species. The plain truth is, Vice seems to be that very blood which
Gentility so much boasts of; that which conveyes it self through all the
Gentleman's veins, and is dispersed into all the several members of the body,
in a measure suitable to the capacity of each. Or rather you may call it the
common-soule which informs and actuates the whole body of Gallantry; and which
is Communicated to the particular members thereof, not by an extention, or
Distribution of parts and degrees, but (to borrow once more the Philosoph^r's
Phrase) it is wholly in the whole, and wholly in every part of the whole. If the
great variety and diversity of operations will yet needs plead for a further
Distinction, we must say, what we use to say of the various actings of the same
soul, This Diversity arises not from a Multiplicity of Soul^s or Principals,
but from the many powers and faculties of that one soul, and the various
dispositions and qualities of the Material Organs.

Really, Sir, the Gentleman we have hitherto spoken of, is but the more curious
and costly instrument of Sin, and would appear such a breathless thing
without it, that a man might well question whether or no he would be found an
animated being. For ought that I can yet discover, he has no more motion then
what vice gives him, excepting that which he expresses when he is asleep,
which (setting aside his excess therein) is almost the only thing wherein he
looks like a man.

To give you therefore the Conclusion of this whole character; call him any
thing but what he would be called, and you can hardly miscall him; for indeed
he is almost any thing but what he would be thought to be. A Gentile thing,
made to wear fine clothes, and throw away much money: to eat the best, and
drink the best, and do the worst: one that seems to have been sent into the
world, to help away with the superfluities of Nature; and by his Intemperance
to devour all those temptations which might allure others to the like Sin. He
knows no shame but that which arises from singularity, nor any singularity,
but in doing and living well.

. 8. A more particular application of this Character to our present English
Gentleman.
It has, alas, been but too true in all Ages, that to be Great, and to be Good,
are two: and never was there a more undeniable Demonstration of this truth,
then in the praesent Gentleman of England; to the no less dishonor of the
whole Nation, then Disparagement of his own name in particular. Whilst there
is nothing more his talk and his boasting, then his blood and his Breeding,
and yet nothing less his Care then to Dignifie the one, or make a right use of
the other, How few of those Gentlemen have we now to show, who dare make it
their buesinesse, and their Glory to be serviceable to their God, their
Country, or the Church; or that have breasts full of that Heroic Courage and
magnanimity, that may embolden them to renounce a sin that is profitable or in
Fashion? How rarely are the men to be met with, who indeed have a real sense
of any thing, but their Meat, their Drink, their Apparel, and their Game!
Except you will Instance in some of their most notorious vices, wherein indeed
they do too truly aemulate, and labor to outvie each other.

Heretofore when this shattered Nation was a well cemented Kingdom, and
enjoyed those (then slighted, but now much desired) blessings of peace and
plenty* how by a studied abuse of those great mercies did the Gentleman even
Dare Allmighty God to punish him or his Nation! And now that a sad and long
experience of their Contraries, has made him feel, though he will not yet be
truly sensible of, the lamentable Consequents and effects of his former Bold
Wickednesses; how does he instead of Confessions, petitions and vows, draw up,
as it were, his Remonstrances against his God, and wages an open war with
Heaven, endeavoring to force the Almighty unto a Composition and that upon the
most unacceptable terms in the world? It is too manifest (alas) to any eye,
how little Holiness has been the Product of those Judgments which have
doubtless, among other sins, been the especial punishments of the Gentleman's
Luxury and profaneness. We here him indeed very frequently crying out upon
these sad times, but too seldom reflecting upon those much worse men who
occasioned them. Like a Churlish Dog, Snarling at him that beats him, but never
considering whose the fault was that caused the beating. I know not I confess
what should make the Gentleman so Atheistical in all his Actions, as either
formerly he has been, or now is; Except God's mercy on the one hand persuaded
him he could never be provoked unto Judgment; or his Judgments on the other
that he can never be reconciled in mercy; except he dares think the Benefits he
formerly enjoyed greater then a just God could possibly confer upon so
unworthy a sinner; or the present Judgments he now smarts under, rather the
Crossenesse of an unkind fortune, then the tokens of the Incensed wrath of an
Angry God. Whence else should he be either so stupid or unnatural, as neither
to live thankfully under the former, nor penitently under the latter?

. 9. The Winner and the Looser in these times.
I find two sorts of such Gentlemen, one is the Winner the other is the Loser
in this late game (for indeed we have all along sported our selves in our own
Miseries) which has been played in England.

The former of these thinks himself much too happy already, to become now
Holy. The Fortunate success which he has had in his sins, makes him only
repent that he practiced them no sooner; and the taking way of Religious
pretenses, makes him sorry for nothing but that he was no Earlier an Hypocrite:
It is a very sad thing to Consider what foul tricks this Politic Jugler every
day plays behind the glorious hangings of these Religious pretenses: what
deadly poisons he has sent abroad into the world in this perfumed breath. This
Gentleman's only Religion is his Art of Dissimulation; the fair gilt which
makes his Copper Coin to pass so Currently. O what a Chargable commodity has
this Legerdemain been to our little world! Whilst they who have it, purchased
it at no lower rate, then that of all sincerity and honesty; and they that will
live safe by them, must become as very knaves as themselves. That Garment of
Religion which is now worn and in Fashion with these men, is of a very slight
stuff, and indeed by long wearing and often piecing is so very full of
diversely colored patches, that it is hard to say which is that, which belonged
at first to the whole: And whence is all this, but from the Gentleman's
scorning the good and strong lineing of Morality (so much now adays decried by
the most) which would have held all much Longer together: he is the only Saint
in the world (if you will believe himself) and the Morall-man is no companion
for him. O how many fair Estates and Glorious Churches has this man's furious
zeal reduced to ashes? and yet, alas, the long promised Phoenix of Reformation
appears not yet. How many Palaces and Temples has his Piety defaced? How many
rich treasuries has his self-denial plundered? And whence all this, but
because Robbery and Sacrilege are much more profitable appendages of his
Religion, then the more castly formalities, and expensive superstitions of the
other? To how many Sons of Rebellion has that one plausible pretense of
Christian liberty, by this Gentleman, been made the Mother! And yet for all
this is our Freedom but still an Idaea, and our happiness a Fancy.

How dearly has the Church paid for the New-coyning of this Language, and
refining his profaneness and Ribaldry into Dissimulation and Canting? O what
an enriching Commodity is Hypocricy, which has set up so many Broken tradesmen
in the world Complete Gentlemen? And extracted our most refined Nobility' out
of the very dross of the People* Indeed if to be rich, be to be a Gentleman;
if to be Crafty be to be Prudent; if to dissemble be the highway to be Sainted;
and to be Fortunate the sole Foelicity, which terminates the hopes, and must
crown the endeavors of a Christian: If the fears and cowardice of fools and
sinners, and the scorn and pity of the wise and good, will make a man truly
Honorable, who has no foundation of his own whereupon to build a Reputation;
then is this prosperous and thriving Gentleman, and none but such as he, the
true Gentleman of our Nation.

But the Gentleman on the losing side will, I know, think it too much (and well
he may) that another should grow so honorable at his cost and charges, and
give him so few thanks for his honor when he has it. He is no less troubled
to think how he shall yield him so much Honor now, then he was to part with
his estate to him a while ago. But then, alas, what does this Gentleman, who
(with no small passion) calls himself a loser, toward the regaining of what
he has lost? truly just the same, which at first occasioned the loss it
self: as if not being Evil, but Evil to a less degree had been the only
cause of all his sufferings; and the way to remove his afflictions were to be
ten times more a sinner then before: He so behaves himself under the
correcting hand of God, as if he thought, the merciful God did only chastise
his children to make them cry and complain of his unkindnesse, not at all to
make them sensible of their errors, or forsake their wickedness. Certainly
such a resentment of God's dealings with us is a stubbornness, not a
poenitence; and such a praeposterous improvement of God's deserved judgments,
is the way to provoke him unto more and greater, not to persuade him to
withdraw the less and lighter. O that the suffering Gentleman would but
seriously think of this! who grows daily (as it is visible in all his actions)
worse by Correction; and only swears at, and Curses his Oppressors, instead of
fasting and praying for the pardon of his Offenses. He takes it to be an
undeniable privilege of Loosers to talk what they list, though never so
profanely: and looks upon this time of his sorrows as the chief opportunity
of serving himself, and easing his heart by all kinds of merriment: and
therefore he makes have to drink and play away his Cares and the scant relics
of his estate together. Neither yet can I believe he would be half so bad as
he is, were it not more in opposition to his Enemy, then out of love to his own
vices. He often abhorres and abstains from the vices of other men, not (as good
Christians do) for the sin's sake but for the sinner's; from whom he
endeavors to set himself at such a distance, that he never rests 'till he be
gotten into the Contrary extreme, and often into the more Scandalous though not
always the more dangerous of the two. As if vice could have no opposite but of
it is own name, nor any means were left him to become one way better then his
adversaries, but by being another way worse. Was the former an Hypocrite? He,
left he should be thought so too, will be Openly profane. If the one will not
swear or kiss the book when called to it by a lawful Authority; the other
to be Cross will swear a thousand Idle Oaths against God's express Command.
Thus betwixt them do they labor to show the world what a Latitude there is in
Atheism.

I might to these very seasonably here add a third person, one that has played
his Cards so well, that he is neither Loser nor Winner in this Sad Game. One,
who (I am sure) has done as little Good, as he thinks he has done hurt to any
body: who still makes a shift to lie lurking in some hole or other 'till the
sport (as he calls it whilst it touches not him) may be over, so he can but
sleep in an whole skin, and with a full purse, he takes no thought how the
world goes: What my thoughts are of this Quiet Soul, I shall have told you
sufficiently by saying thus much, he loves his ease and safety better then his
God. If you desire to read him more at large, I must entreat you to cast your
eye a little back, and with the Provident, Prudent or Peaceable Gentleman you
will be sure to find him.

. 9. How Good English men such Gentlemen are.
And now (Sir) how much reason the poor Church or Kingdom of England has to
brag of her Gentry, I think I have abundantly told you. Her richest Sons do
not always prove the most affectionate and Natural to their Disconsolate
Mother. But indeed daily aggravate her grief and Sorrow, by their prodigal
courses and most Barbarous behavior. What do they less then with the
ungrateful Mule, hourly kick at the paps which gave them Suck? And with the
bloody Tyrant whose Character it was, to be a lump of dirt kneeded up together
in blood, they have torn out the very Bowels of a most Compassionate and
Indulgent Mother. Our Church may very well complain of some who would be
thought her own Sons, as God of his ungrateful people of old, She has brought
up Children and they have rebelled against her, and among all the sons she has
nursed up, there is none to pity her or lead her by the hand. When they were
full and waxen fat, then they forgot God; and now that some of them are lean
enough, nay as the fat kine in Pharaohs vision, even eaten up of the very
leanest Cattle in the Nation; yet being so many ways smitten they do but
revolt more and more. It will be a mercy rather then a Judgment, if God
vouchsafe to smite them once again.

Thus, whilst one is Ignorant and can do nothing, another Lazy and will do
nothing, a third Cowardly and dare do nothing: whilst one is so Prudent he
thinks it not wisdom, another so Covetous he holds it not providence, a third
so Lordly he accounts it below him to do any thing but what may foment his own
sinful inclinations: Whilst one is too voluptuous, another too worldly, a
third too ambitious; whilst one has a Wife, another a Farm, a third a Dog,
and the fourth a Pot; It will ever either misbeseem their Dignity, or Cross
their Interest, or hinder their Calling, or Injure their Families, or thwart
their Humors (and indeed there is the main let of all the rest) to follow
Christ or take care of his Spouse. God give them grace betimes to love her
better in whose arms alone they can hope to be safe from the roaring Lion; and
to abandon those Dal^laes which so long as they Court, they can neither love
Her, nor secure themselves! In a word, I shall put up for them a short prayer
but a full one, if they would but understand it -- God make them all such as
Gentlemen should be! And what that is, I shall now endeavor, to the best of my
skill, to tell you: though both for want of Age and breeding, I must
necessarily come as far short of him I would describe, as I have been all
this while above that other, whom our Nation had been more happy never to have
known. The Gentleman's virtues are as much above my reach, as the Gallants
braveries below his Imitation.

SECT. III.
The True Gentleman.
. 1. An Apologeticall Introduction.
BEing now (Sir) to give you the True Gentleman's character, you might very
justly expect to meet with something truly like the Subject, High and Noble.
He is indeed too sacred a thing to be touched by so Common a Pen; every slip
whereof can be deemed no less then a Prophanati^n of his worth, who is the
liveliest Image which God has left us of himself upon any of his Creatures.
However, seeing where there is so venerable an Excellency, as all Encomium's
may be thought Folly and Praesumption, so can silence be judged no less then a
Sacriledg: seeing we use to offer unto Heaven, not so much what we owe as what
we may: I think it much better becomes me to say that little I can, then just
nothing; and to tell you, if not what the Gentleman is, yet at least so much of
his greatness, as falls to my share to understand. I had much rather be
censured for committing such a pious error, then be Condemned for the wilful
omission of so necessary a duty. I dare not suspect the Gentleman's Goodness
to be of a less extent then My Ignorance; and therefore I doubt not but he can
pardon as often as I through weakness shall offend. Where I* err, let him
think it was the brightness of my subject which dazzled my eyes, and occasioned
me to stumble. Where my expressions fall low and flat, I do beg of him, that he
would impute it to that Reverence which I bear unto his virtues, which
Commands my Pen to to keep it is Distance.

I hope you will not blame me for this Apology, for I would gladly keep off as
long as I can, when I cannot draugh nigh without a necessity of Erring. Even in
this short Praeamble you may be pleased to read something of the Gentleman's
Character; to wit, such a Greatness as Commands a Distance and reverence, and
such a Candor as can pardon a failing; and (which is indeed the sum of all I
have to say) such a Man as is truly a Gentleman. Which name speaks all that
bears a Contrariety to the thing we lately spoke of, whose very name is such a
Complete Summary of all Vices, that there is but one thing lest to Denominate
the true Gentleman; I mean, as absolute a Combination of all virtues. All which
I can confer to his Character will amount to no more then an Imperfect
paraphrase upon his Name; and as much as I understand of this, take as follows.

. 2. His General Character.
The True Gentleman is one, that is as much more, as the false one is less,
then what to most he seems to be. One who is allwaies so far from being an
hypocrite, that he had rather appear in the eyes of others just nothing, then
not be every thing which is indeed truly virtuous and n^ble. He is a man whom
that most Wise King, he best resembles, has fitted with a Character -- A man of
an Excellent Spirit. This is he whose brave and noble Soul sores so high above
the Ordinary reach of Mankind, that he seems to be a distinct species of
himself. He scorns so much the vices of the world, that he will hardly stoop
to a virtue which is not Heroic; or if he do, it is by his good improvement
of it, to make it so. He is one to whom all honor seems cheap, which is not
the reward of virtue, and he had much rather want a name then not deserve it.

This Gentleman is indeed a Person truly Great, because truly Good; His Honor
is of too excellent a Nature to be supposed the Creature of any thing besides
his own virtues; and those virtues too Eminent to be esteemed less then the
most refined actions of so great a soul. He is no less the Glory of Mankind
then man the Glory of the whole sublunary Creation. One that would every way
deservedly be accounted more then what is humane, were not one part of him
Mortal; However it is his first care and endeavor to make this mortal part
of him such, as may make it apparent to the world, how Great an Excellency may
be the Companion of so much frailty.

'Till he may be so happy as to enjoy the Heaven he hopes for, he does what he
can to be an Heaven to himself; and by his extraordinary pains, so beutifies
his soul with all Celestial accomplishments, that he needs only die to be in
Heaven; and seems to want nothing of those Glorious Spirits which dwell there,
but only to be without a Body and as high as they.

He looks upon himself whilst in this world as no more then a Probationer in
the School of Honor; and makes it his business so to behave himself at
present, that he may be sure of an admission into that true Honor (when the
Day comes) which will be as certain and Durable, as true and Great: Well
knowing that the only way to be Lord of Many things, is to be faithful in
these few wherewith he is now entrusted.

His Soul is so truly great and Capacious, that nothing but an Heaven and
aeternity can fill it: So nobly high are all his thoughts, that he is ever
aiming at a Crown: So active and mounting his Holy Ambition, that it disdains
to perch longer then a Breathing space, upon the most exalted spire of all
Sublunary Glories. He is so thoroughly sensible of the Celestial Nature of his
Soul, that (did he not think it one great part of his Happiness, to suffer
any kind of Misery in Submission to his God) he could not think his life less
then one Continued torment; and so long a detention here upon the Earth, a mere
restraint and Confinement from all Comfort and bliss.

As for the Blessings of this world, he looks upon them, as the Child should
do upon his farthings or his Counters, small things indulged him for the
recreation not the business of his soul. Yet (such a Good Housewife is
Virtue) he reaps no small advantage to himself, from these subordinate
enjoyments; which by their frequent Cousennages persuade him the more to be in
love with what is both more precious and more useful. Knowing that his Mansion
is prepared in Heaven, he can esteem the world no better then the handsome
frontispice to that most Glorious building; where he beholds a great many Fine
flattering objects, and pretty Curiosities both of Art and Nature; but all is no
more then an Earnest and kind Invitation to him to Enter in and possess those
unspeakably excellent Mansions, which these things so dimly shadowed out unto
his eye; these well dressed Dainties which he enjoyes here, he dares but taste
at most, to prepare him an Appetite; he intends to feast himself in Heaven.

To give you the sum of what I think of him in the General; He is every way
so much more then a man, that he is no less in all things then himself. One
whose rarest Excellencies are such, as would make us believe his breeding had
bin amongst the Angels in another world, rather then amongst Gentlemen here in
this: and that he were only lent us a while, an universal pattern for
Mankind to Imitate; And to let us see how much of Heaven (if we will receive
it) may dwell upon Earth. He is so refined from all Mixture of our Courser
Elements, as if he were absolutely Spiritualized before his time; If ever he
were proud of any thing, it was of being the Conqueror of that, and all other
Vices. He scorns and is ashamed of nothing but Sin. He lives in the world as
one that intends to shame the world out of love with it self: and he is
therefore Singular in all his Actions, not because he affects to be so, but
because he cannot meet with Company like himself to make him otherwise. In a
word, he is such, that (could we want him) it were pity but that he were in
Heaven; and yet I pity not much his Continuance here, because he is already so
much an Heaven to himself.

. 3. His Chief Honor and Dignity.
His first Honor in this world, is to be borne the most noble of God's
creatures here below; His next is to live one of his most Obedient and
laborious servants, like those above: His greatest to Die his beloved Son, that
so he may reign with him for ever. It was the Honor of his Infancy only, to
have Noble Parents; It is the Honor of his riper years, that he can Imitate
their Virtues, and it will be the Crown of his Old Age to be as good a father
as his own. Blood and Birth then stood him instead, when his tender years had
not yet rendered him Capable of virtue and Worth. When he comes to Age, He
Enters upon his Honor, not as upon his estate, by the will or title of his
Ancestors, but by the claim of his merits; looking upon it not as his lot or
Inheritance, but as his choice and purchase. He has an Especial care that his
Honor and his Person may both live and Grow up, but never die together. He
accounts it much below a person of his Quality, to owe all that Respect which
is given him when he is a man, to his full Coffers; or all the Reverence which
is paid him when an Old Man, to his Gray-haires: But he so provides for his
Honor, that whatever Respect is offered him, may be esteemed a Debt and not a
Present; and that his future Goodness may not be thought the Product of the
Old, but rather an Obligation to New respects: Such he Civilly accepts when
paid him, but seldom challenges when delayed or withheld; so far I mean, as
they Concern his person, not his Office. For though it be one Honor to
deserve, yet is it another Contentedly to want them. He needs never go abroad
to seek himself, and therefore he hearkens with more safety to his own
Conscience, then the people's Acclamations; and he had much rather know
himself Honorable, then be told that he is so.

His highest Ambition is to be a Favorite in the Court of Heaven; and to this
end his Policy is to become not a Great but a New Man: and to dress up
himself in all those Spiritual Ornaments, which may make his Soul truly
amiable in the eyes of the Great King. He considers how that he owes himself
unto God, as he is his Creature; and he endeavors to discharge that Old debt,
by a most earnest and importunate suite for New favors; ever praying that God
would make him fit to serve him, by making him first a New Creature. He Could
never yet think the Old Man fit to make a Courtier of Heaven; and therefore he
uses to walk in his white-Robe, and his Wedding Garment, that so he may be
admitted into the King's Praesence. He furnishes himself betimes with such
Apparel as this, and he fits and settles it to his soul beforehand, knowing
that the longer it is worn, the more Splendid it Grows, and the more it is
used, the longer it will last; the only way to wear it out, is, not to wear it
at all: but having once attired himself in this Habit, now Every day is with
him an Holy Day, and he is henceforward every where at Court.

But that which he esteems his great Honor indeed, is this, that he can with
Confidence, and truly, call God his father, His Savior his friend and his
brother, the Church his Mother, and the Angels his fellow servants. Such
Parents, such kindred, and such Company he may safely boast of; but this he does
no other way, then by his Obedience and Gratitude. He behaves himself as a
King's son ought to do, that is, he does nothing misbecoming his birth and
Dignity.

. 4. His Outside and Apparel.
If we may spare so much time from the Contemplation of those richer
Excellencies of his inner man, as to take notice of his Outside, we may there
behold the Ingenious Emblem of his better self: so much Good care he takes
that there be nothing found about him, but what may speak him indeed a
Gentleman; and present you (so far as the Matter will bear it) with the fair
picture of a Noble Mind. He would gladly so polish and adorn his body, as
becomes the lodging of so great a Soul. He looks upon it as a thing only so
far deserving his care and pains, as it is a necessary Instrument of her
Operations: and yet he rather could wish himself (might it so be) freed from
the Cumbersome Company of his Flesh, because it proves often so great a Clog
and hinderance to the more Active and vigorous inclinations of his better part.
So long as he is Confined to his Tabernacle of clay, he makes the best that can
be made of a Necessary Evil: so feeding his body that it may have strength
enough to serve his Soul; and so clothing it, that the other part may be kept
from freezing, and fit for more sprightly actings. Indeed he never makes much
of his Earthly part, but in subserviency to his Spiritual; that so he may the
better, as he is Commanded, Glorify God both with body and Soul, which are his.

Hence is it, that you may always observe in his Habit, such a Gravity as
beseems a Christian; and yet such a Decency as becomes a Gentleman. He chooses
rather to have his distinction from other Men founded in his virtues then in
his Clothes. Herein he shows that he looks more after what is serviceable and
useful, then what is pleasing and Fashionable. So much Curiosity he has, as not
to be Slovenly; and so little, as it cannot show that he is vain or wanton. He
had rather have his Apparel Rich then Gaudy, and yet rather warm then Rich.
It is neatness not bravery, a Decent not a Gorgeous attire, which, next unto
what is useful, he aims at.

In every suite he buys he has as great a regard to the poor man's
necessities as to his own humor, and makes choice of that Cloth or Stuff
which may please God hereafter upon the Beggar's back, more then what he knows
may now flatter the wanton eye of the World upon his own. He has much better
thoughts of Virtue, then to hope his fine Clothes may gain him a respect where
that could not; nay on the other side, he knows that Goodness is enough of it
self; to advance the Ragge above the Robe, and a Leatherne Cap above the
Golden Diadem.

He Pitties the unskilful wantonness of the world, which allwaies (as
Children and Fools use to do) sets an higher value upon the Varnish and the
gilded Frame, then on the lively features and excellent Art in the rich Piece
they adorn: and he calls it a blindness, at least, a weak sight, which cannot
behold a virtue, but (as we do a dull picture) through the Glistering Glass of
Vanity. He esteems his penny in the Poor man's purse a much greater Ornament,
then a fair Plume in his own Hat. Neither knows he how he may with a Good
Conscience wear that, which might be made many a poor man's livelihood (as
too many now love to do) in a Band and a pair of Cuffes. He is more pleased
to see his own Clothes cover another's Nakedness, then displaying his lusts:
and thinks it more honorable to wear the Charity then the Bravery.

If his Place or Office challenge an Habit above his desires, by what he is
forced to do, he shows what he would choose to do; and most lively expresses
his singular humility, in his necessitated Gallantry: showing how he can
Condescend even to any thing, so it be Innocent; though by a Conformity
contrary to his natural Inclinations. And even herein he takes care to Provide
himself such Apparel, that his cast suite (as we call it) may not be quite
cast away: and to this end he chooses rather to swaggar it in Gold then Tinsell,
in Cloth then Stuff: that so it may be sullied before it be torn, and unfit
for him to wear, before it be worn out; and then most becoming the Poverty
and mean Condition of another, when it shall be below the State and Dignity of
his Place and Person.

It is most certain (and the Gentleman knows it as well) that the Temper and
Disposition of the Soul, is no way better Discernable, then through the Habit
and Garb of the Body: He that longs after New fashions, will not be backwards
in embracing New Religions: both proceeding from one and the same dangerous
Principle, an unconstancy of mind, and a Desire of Novelty. The True Gentleman
knows it by experience, that where there is no levity in the thoughts, there
appears no alteration in the Body; where no inconstancy and Pride of Soul,
there is no change or flaunting in the clothes. And therefore that the world may
know that he has a fixed and resolved soul; he has one Constant Garb and
Attire; and he will never yield that to be out of Fashion, which is both
Serviceable and Frugall. Alas, the poor Body (he knows) Desires nothing but
what may preserve it alive and in health; It is the lascivious Soul which
calls for all those other Superfluities; and the Gentleman accounts it below
him to gratify his lusts, and to be at so vast an expense to cloth his
Humor. He could never, since he was a child, play with a Feather, or think
himself happy in the Glistering of a Lace or Ribband. He leaves these toys to
those silly Creatures who are resolved to Continue for ever in their Childhood
or Infancy, and dare be so foolish as to think a bread band and a slaunting
Cuffe, as necessary as Heaven. He can think himself a man without such a
vanity; and know himself a Gentleman without any such Mark or bravery: always
wearing such Clothes, as his Body may in Old Age have good reason to bless the
moderation of his soul; and the Needy may have no less cause to pray for the
health of of his body.

. 5. His Discourse and Language.
When you hear him speak, you will think that he intends no less, then to
give you a taste of his Soul at every word: Nor indeed is it possible you should
in any thing plainlier Discover the Nobleness of his Spirit, then in his sweet
breath, so Divinely molded into most excellent discourse. Every word he
speaks, speaks him; and gives you a saire Character at once both of his
Abilities and his Breeding.

If you respect the Quality of his Discourse, it is Grave and Noble, Serious
and Weighty; and yet always rather what is fit to be spoken, then what he is
able to speak. His Words are most Proper and Genuine, but not affected; His
Phrase high and lofty, but not Bombastick; His Sentenses close and full, but
not obscure or Confused. His Discourse is neither Flashy nor Flat, neither
Boyish nor Effaeminate, neither rude nor Pedantick: It is always Sober, yet
Ingenious; Virile, strong and Masculine, yet sweet and Winning: He loves a
Smooth expression, but not a Soft one: a Smart or Witty saying, but without a
Clinch or Iingle. His words are those which his Matter will best bear, not
such as his Phaney would readily est suggest. No poor half starved Jests, no
dry Insipid Quibbles can get any room in his Rhetoric: hardly a word in all,
but what has it is Emphasis, nor any sentence without it is full weight.

If you would eye the Quantity of his Speech, it is not Long but Full; not Much
but Great: He speaks not always, but when he speaks he says All. He as often
shows how well he can be silent, as how well he can speak; and others always
love more to hear him talk, then he himself. He makes no less use of his
Ear in all Companies, then of his Tongue; and by his serious harkening to the
more impertinent discourses of his Companions, plainly proves he has no less
Patience then Rhetoric. He makes it evident, that he has his tongue (that
unruly Beast in most men's Mouths) as much at his Command, as his Wit, and
that he is able to make both rest, as well as both move at his pleasure.

His sayings are never long or taedious, but they always reach Home; and he
will very seldom take any thing less then a Necessity, for an Opportunity of
speaking. But then usually he delivers all with that facility and perspicuity,
as if his words were not the elect and voluntary, but the ready and Natural
emanations of his Soul. No Passion shall at any time more Disturb the Order of
his words, then it can Cloud the Serenity of his forehead. He cannot make
himself merry, much less proud, with his own Inventions; nor does he ever
catch at the applause, but aims at the Edification of his Auditers.

If you will look upon the Matter and Substance of his Discourse; you shall
see, it is always what he finds, not what he makes: Not what he supposes may
afford the fairest field for his Fancy and Invention to roave in; but the
Best-Garden of such choice fruits as the Stomachs (Not the Palates only) of
his Company shall be best able to bear: Or such as may prove most Medicinal,
when seasonably applied to the several Diseases of those that hear him: These
he always studies rather to heal then Discover, and yet rather to Discover
then Flatter. Hence he often distributes amongst them the Bitter as well as the
Sweet: and rather that which may nourish, then what may please.

And yet here it is, if ever, that he acts the part of the Tempter: for he
makes even the Sourest Apple (which he knows to be wholesome) so pleasant to
the Eye, that he forces such as need it, by a Pious Fraud, into a real love of
what naturally they most hate. Indeed the only way which for the most part in
such Company is left him to prevent the loss of his own time, is to make
others with whom he Converses gainers by his Society: and he does his utmost
endeavor, that every one that hears him, may by what they hear, either gain
a virtue, or lose a Vice.

This is it, which makes him very careful to avoid, whatsoever might
rationally be supposed able to vitiate either his own Discourse or the M^nds of
his Auditors. And very good reason he has to be more cautious in this respect
then other men, seeing the most Odious vice from his Language would gain so
great a Loveliness as would probably make it one of the strongest temptations.
But his Rhetoric has too sweet a face to be made the Mother or Midwife to any
thing that has the Monstrous shape of Sin: he should foully* Adulterate so
great a Purity, who should go about to match it with any thing less then
Piety and Virtue.

Obloquy and Scurrility are too deformed and wryfaced to gain any place in his
Affections; He that is able, when he will, to create to himself a Reputation
not inferior to the highest, scorns as much, as he needs little to Rob any
other man of his. His fingers are too clean to be fouled by throwing dirt in
other men's faces. He is as much afraid to discover a Blemish in another man's
eye, as he is to suffer a greater in his own; and will rather charitably
condescend to lick out the Mote with his tongue, then deridingly to talk of
it. He holds it too much below a man to employ his Nails in vexing an Old
Sore, and scratching 'till he make a New one. He leaves it to Dogs and Ravens
to prey upon Carrion. Alas, it is a very hungry wit, which is fain to feed upon
such Nauseous Diet. Other Men's Infirmities, especially if Natural or
accidental, are much more the objects of his Charity and Pity, then of his
Merriment and Derision. He judges it a Cruelty proper to weakness alone to
Murder the Sick; no true Ingenuity can be so Barbarous as to sport it self in
the Misfortunes of the Miserable. He esteems that (as well he may) a mere
Dwarfish wit which cannot tell how to show it self to the world but by
trampling (and so advancing it self) upon the Reputation of others. It is a
Barren Fancy, or at least has always a very Hard Labor, which can be mother
to nothing but to what Misfortune must be the Midwife. The True Gentleman has
both more wit, more Honesty, and more Charity, then to permit his tongue to be
so foolishly, so unworthily, so Tyrannically busied.

Nor does he less abhor to come near that filthy Puddle of obscaenity; it is
a Sow and no Minerva that can be for such nasty food. He never carried the
Goat's tongue in the Gentleman's head, but wishes that all who do so would for
ever use it as Goats do, that is, continue allwaies Mute. All his discourses
are as Chaste as fair, and the sweet Loves in recital whereof he so much
pleases himself and all those Good men which hear him, are no other then
those betwixt God and his own Soul.

He is too just to himself and his own unusurped Majesty, to suffer his talk
to flag into an idle much less a wanton strain of Drollery: that is too
Plebeian and Vulgar for a Gentleman, and this no less too foul and Beastly
even for a Man: and he must be more then both these in every expression, a
Christian. He cannot but with as much wonder and astonishment as pity and
Compassion, hear those puny Souls, which can invent no other Method of Gracing
their Discourse, and make it taking, but by a Complacent rehearsal of their
own and other men's uncleanness; nor can find matter for an Houre's talk,
without being beholding for it to a Mistress or an whore; Or at best by
dressing, up some Empty piece of Folly in fine words. Thus can they never be
merry, but as Children use to be, with a Baby or a Rattle.

His Soul presently boyles up in a pious Agony within him, whenever he hears
a vain Oath or any thing that sounds like profaneness: He never mentions the
dreadful name of Almighty God, but with that due Reverence both of Soul and
Body which suits with it is greatness. He is too much the friend of God, and is
every way too nearly related unto him, to hear him Dishonored with patience;
or to suffer his Name to be made so vile and cheap, as to be used (as too
Commonly it is) only as an Expletive particle to prevent a Chasme, or make up
a Gap in the sentence, or to make all run more smoothly.

He has the like Holy respect for God's Word as his Name. He is too much in
love with Scripture to see her prostituted to every licentious Fancy, and by
an impudent wresting made the subject of every Atheistical wit. The Gentleman
looks with a more reverent eye upon this sacred Fountain: not as set open to
be troubled and made Muddy by the Wanton Goats, but to water and wash the
tender Lambs. He uses it further as a wholesome Bath for his White Soul,
which will preserve her both clean and whole.

I should Injure the Gentleman, to dwell any longer upon his Negative virtues.
Only, this is an Indulgence given to our Ignorance, that we are allowed to
speak in the Negative of all Great perfections, and say what they are not, when
we cannot, as we should, express what indeed they are. If you will hear what
I have to say more of his Discourse in short, then know, that all his words are
not only the pretty pleasing, yet Empty bublings of a restless Fancy, a
rageing lust, or a wanton and Frollick Humor; But all of them the Grave,
weighty, and well proportioned Breathings of his great and Holy Soul.

. 6. His Behavior and Civility.
His whole Behavior and Carriage is Masculine and Noble; such as becomes his
Heroic spirit; and yet always accompanied with a wonderful Humility and
Courtesy. His Body is only made straight, and the more it self, not (as most
men's are) New-moulded by Art: He has just so much of the Dancing-School as
will teach him how to laugh at those that have too much. He has made more use
of the Vaulter and Fencer, then the Dancer; for his desire was more to be a
Man, then a Puppit, and to be a servant to his Country rather then his Lady.

If in things of this Nature he sometimes studies another's satisfaction more
then his own, he will show how much he can be more then a man, not how much
less, and how Active he can be, not how Apish. He so behaves himself, that by
what he does, you may rather Conclude he can do more if he will, then that he
has done all he can do. In these, as in all things else of the like
Indifferency, he manifests his greatest power there where most men have the
least, in refusing to do, what he is sure would gain him the empty Applause of
the Multitude: Though, so far as he can judge the sport or Recreation
Innocent and lawful, he had rather manifest a slighting and a disreguard, then
an hatred toward them.

His Complements are not (as in others) the wild extravagances of a Luxuriant
Language, but the natural breathings of a sincere kindness and Respect; His
Civility is always one, with his Duty, his Frindship, or his Charity. A
Court-dresse cannot bring him in love with a Lie; nor can he look upon a
Fashionable Hypocrisy with a more favorable eye, then upon a Glorious cheat;
He judges of all Dissimulation, as in it self it is, for though in Complement
the Practice of it may seem Princely, yet in its own Nature he knows it is
Devilish, and in the Issue will prove Damnable. He Scorns to be Sathan's
Scholar, though for so profitable a lesson: for it was He indeed was the first
Master of this Ceremony; when he Complemented our first Parents out of their
Innocence and Paradise at once; tickling their Ambition with this High strain
-- Ye shall be like Gods.

It is his care, that all the Obedience and Honor his Inferiors are obliged
to render unto him, may seem no more then an Imitation of that he pays unto
his Superiors: And that the Courtesy and Civility of his equals may be thought
nothing else but the reflection of his toward them. But if another kindness
chance to get the start in showing it self, he makes it appear that his
Backwardness proceeded not from any want of Good Will but Opportunity; and he
endeavors to requite the earliness of his friend's Courtesy, by the measure
of his own.

His Inferiors may behold in him how well Humility may consist with Greatness,
and how great an Affability, Authority will admit of: By his Practice our
licentious world might easily be convinced, that Freedom and subjection may
dwell together like friends.

All his words, and all his Actions are so many Calls to virtue and Goodness,
and by what he himself is, he shows others what they ought to be. If Heaven
were such a thing as stood in need of an assistant Temptation (which a man
would almost believe when he sees how little men love it for it self)
certainly it would make choice of the Gentleman as the loveliest bait to draw
others thither, were not the Generality of Mankind grown so stupid in their
sins, as to fall in love with Hell; were they not infatuated even to a
Confidence in those vanities, which are worse then nothing, and besotted into a
sensuality below what is Brutish; who would not make have to Heaven, were there
no greater Happiness then the fruition of such a Companion as is the true
Gentleman?

And truly thither with all speed he must resolve to go that intends to enjoy
him long; for he makes too much have to that place of happiness, to stay long
by the way. Such Good men indeed are soon taken away, and this is so little
laid to heart by us, that we have great reason for our own sakes to fear, that
they are taken away from the Judgments yet to come upon this sinful and
Rebellious Nation. The world grows so thin of such as he, that we may too
truly now say he is but one of a thousand; and then it is no less then a
thousand to one that very shortly whosoever would find him, must go to Heaven
to seek him. And indeed it were an high injury to persuade him to a longer stay
here, except we would assure him of our Company thither at last.

. 7. His Inside.
It is now time to take a short view of his Inside, and it must indeed be a
very short and Imperfect one; for you cannot but imagine what would be the
unfortunate event, if such weak eyes as mine are, should gaze too long and
intently upon the Glorious body of the Sun. I shall only therefore be so
officious to such (if any such there be) as need my help, as to set open the
windows for them, the Sun (I am sure) will shine in of it self. And truly his
rays dart in so thick and fast upon us, we shall hardly know which to take
notice of first: An understanding here we meet withal, so clear and unclouded;
a Will so regular and uncorrupted, Affections so well refined, so orderly, and
uninterested. that it is wholly evident, that as Nature found Materials, and
Education built the House and set all in Order; so do Religion and Morallity
Govern within, and betwixt them keep all clean and handsome.

His virtues seem to be so much the Necessary and Natural Emanation of his
most Active and boundless soul, that he is in danger by being altogether Good
to lose the praise and honor due to so eminent a Goodness: If he could Leave
off to be virtuous, the world might then seem to have some excuse for being
vicious. But his Goodness is too absolute, to grow out of love with it self,
and too knowing to lie obnoxious unto such a cheat, as to part with her own
face in exchange for the fairest of Vices. I wish the world would forbear to
love Vice, till he begin to forsake virtue; and that all our Gentry would
endeavor to be like him, till he become like them, or esteem any thing truly
Noble, which he cannot prove to be really Good.

As for his Intellectual Excellencies, so far as he owes them purely and
Immediately to God and Nature, I think it not fit so much as to touch any
further upon them; lest I should not bear up even in that great variety,
wherein they are distributed among the many Individuals; God having
proportioned them out unto the severals in so different a measure, as nothing
but his own Infinite wisdom can give a particular reason of it. Only this I
may safely say, that whatsoever his talent is, the Gentleman Digs not in the
Earth to hide it; but so traffiques with it, till Art and Industry have Brought
in an Increase some way proportionable to the Stock of Nature: at lest to that
degree which may entitle him to the Euge of his Lord; and the Glorious welcome
of a Good and faithful Servant. He makes use of God's Bounty, not as a Warrant
for his sloth or an Indulgence to his Idleness; but as a Spur and motive to
a grateful Care and Industry: Not as a treasure to be prodigally spent, but a
stock to be thriftily husbanded and Improved: He accounts it a thing most
unworthy in a Gentleman, to be an Il husband, especially where the treasure is
God's, and he but his Steward; yet such a steward, as has the use, as it were,
of his Lord's purse for his Encouragement.

His acquired Intellectual accomplishments, are too numerous and various to be
here characterized, something must be said of them hereafter in his study,
though but very little; for I choose rather to insist upon what Denominates him
Good and Noble, then Great and knowing: for though the latter be useful and
excellent, yet the former are more praise worthy and Necessary.

. 8. His Command over himself.
His Will and Affections he makes the Instruments and servants, not the Guides
and Mistresses of his Soul. He subjugates His Will unto Reason, and this to
Religion; and and by this means it comes to pass that he never misses of
having his own free Choice in all things. He both Does and Has what he will,
because he never wills but what is according to reason, nor thinks any thing
Reasonable but what is honest and Lawful: thus by making God's will his own, he
is never Crossed in his desires.

Thus he exercises the first and main act of his Authority at home; and that he
may be more expert in Governing others, he first practices upon himself; and
learns to command his Inferior Soul. He will not submit in the least to the
Tyranny of a Passion, nor hearkens he further to the most tempting Suggestions
of his Sensitive part, then he sees that subject to the grave and sober
dictates of its lawful Emperesse Right Reason. His Affections when prepared
and fitted by an unprejudiced Judgment for his service, he delays not to put
into exercise, but imployes them as so many wings, whereon his soul may be
Carried up above the reach of Vulgar men. It would be too great an Indulgence
in him, to suffer his Passions to be their own carvers, and chusers of their
own objects: for these being the Natural Daughters of his untamed sensitive
Appetite, have too much of their mother in them, to be discreet in their
choice; like wanton and imprudent Girls, they would pitch upon the fairest
rather then the best, and more labor to flatter the Sense, then obey the
Reason: As their Lord and Sovereign, therefore he appoints, and Reason Cuts
them out their work, and assigns every one it is proper task; and by this
means at length they become the Beauty, ornament and strength, which otherwise
had naturally been, the Blemishes, Disorders, and Infirmities of the Man.

He desires in all things to be above the world, that is his Ambition; and
therefore he sets his Affections on things above, and points them out the way
to Heaven, that is his prudence. The soul without them would be lame and unable
to go; and they without it is eye of Reason, are blind and know not which way
to go: but (as the Cripple upon the blind man's back) let but the judgment
direct them in the right path, and then they will carry the soul to Heaven. The
Gentleman is too much a Man to be without all Passion, but he is not so much a
Beast as to be governed by it.

In this Moderation and Empire over himself, where he gives Law to his
Affections, and limits the extravagances of Appetite, and the insatiable
cravings of sensuallity; the just rule he goes by is not Opinion but knowledge;
not that leaden one, which is so easily bent and made Crooked, or melted and
dissolved by the heat of Passion, or the arts of Sophistry, into error and
Skepticisme; but that other Golden one, which lies as close and firm, as it is
made straight and even. When he would imprint the true loveliness of any
Object upon his affections, he takes it into a true light, and has a care to
remove from before his eye all those Cunningly wrought Glasses, or other
instruments of Satan and Lust, set so frequently to prejudice and deceive the
sight; whatsoever might cause him to mistake a false object for a true, or to
see a true one amiss: so endeavors he to be as free from error as from vice:
esteeming it as a sin to act against his knowledge, so a shame at least to be
deceived in his Opinion.

He judges of things, as he does of men, not by what they promise, but by what
they prove; and so he trusts, and Loves, and fears them, not for what in
appearance they seem to be, but for what in the use and trial of them he finds
that in truth they are. He accounts not an Ox therefore more terrible then a
Lion, because he is greater: nor a Pebble more desirable then a Pearl because
it is heavier: But he first collects the Excellency of every thing from it is
usefulness, and tendency unto that end he aims at in the pursuit after or use
of it, and then he proportions his affections according to that degree of
Excellency, he has thus rationally concluded to be in it. After this manner
does he in the first place Lord it over his Passion, 'till in a long obedience
she have served out her apprenticeship to his Reason: then is she deservedly
enfranchised into a virtue, and so becomes at length her Lord's Mistress; and
it is she will get him a reward for his service in Heaven.

. 9. His Magnanimity and Humility.
There is a Brave Heroic Virtue, which is as a second soul unto the true
Gentleman, and Enspirits every part of him, with an admirable Gallantry; I
mean, Christian Magnanimity and Greatness of Soul. This presently heaves him
up to that size that the wide world seems too strait and narrow to contain him,
or afford room enough for him to express the activity of his Spirit. This is
it which teaches him to laugh at small things, and disdain to go less then
his Name. Being carried up on high, upon the wings of this Virtue, he casts
down his eye upon those little Happinesses, which seem enough to satisfy the
Narrow Souls of other men, with no little Contempt and Scorn: but on those
poor starvelings themselves, whose Earthly Appetites can make such trash their
Diet, with as much Pity and Compassion. It is this Virtue which so ennobles
all his actions that they bear a just proportion to the largeness of his
thoughts; and permits him to engage in nothing which is not truly Honorable.
And it is this same Virtue which makes his own Bosom his Treasury, and that so
rich and self sufficient, that all the external felicities this world has or
can cast in to the Bargain, are looked upon by him with as slender a reguard,
as the Widows Mite would have been by the great Lord of the Temple, without a
large Augmentation from her Piety and Devotion. It is this Virtue which makes
him a Calm in his own breast when the whole world besides rages like a troubled
Sea round about him. Let the storm and tempest threaten never so loudly a
splitting and a wrack to other unballanced souls; he knows not how to fear,
whilst his Courage is his Anchor, and Innocence his safe Harbor. This is it
which makes him conclude their Labor very ill spent, who for the cherishing of
a Childdish humor, use to sweat, and Consume their strength and Spirits in
pursuit of a Feth^r; or strain their backs to take up every straw that Glisters
in their way. It ought to be a much Nobler Game then such a silly fly, that
this Eagle vouchsafes to Stoop to.

But as this brave Virtue thus teaches the Gentleman, to he enough to
himself, and rest Content and Satisfied with what he has at home; so does it
likewise teach him to be too much for himself and Commands him not to
vindicate all of himself wholly to his own use and service. It were pity so
great a Goodness should be thus Confined within one subject, as not to be able
to Distribute something of it self to every one of it is neighbors. Nay this
Christian Magnanimity does so stretch out his Soul, that even that too seems to
be Communicated unto others besides himself: It is a kind of violence and
restraint to her to be pinned up within the narrow Province of one Individual
Body, and therefore she studies how she may enlarge if another Empire yet her
Charity; and make a number by being the Objects of her bounty, the witnesses of
her Greatness. Indeed so Diffusive and spreading is Virtue, when she grows in
so rich a soil, that of a little she soon becomes great, and of One a
Multitude. This grain of Mustardseed grows up so fast, and so great, that many
may reap the benefit of it is grouth, by partaking of it is branches. And such a
Cloud, as at first might appear but of an hand breadth, will suddenly make a
Nation happy in that refreshing dew, which by it is plenty, will argue a strange
increase after so small an appearance. Indeed the Gentleman acts as if he
intended, that his soul should in a short time animate the Universe, and make
it more then ever the poor Philosopher could dream of, One great Gentleman; and
the several Individuals therein but the numerous members of his own body.
Though the indocile and untractable spirits of the Common sort of men be such
as force him against his will to be singular; yet to show us how unwilling he
is to remain so, his virtues are too charitable to be long alone: and hence are
all his Breathings such, as might well be thought intended by him to inspire
his Company with something like himself; and all his Actions so many earnest
Essays toward the assimilating of their Natures unto his own. He is Master of
so inexhaustible and Miraculous a treasury of Goodness, that he may very well
afford every man a little and yet keep all unto himself. He knows not how to
be good; and not to do good, and therefore one half of his study is to give
himself away. Neither his breast nor his purse are ever shut to such as need
him, and (God knows) more need him, then will make use of him.

The Gentleman may well be Compared unto a Great Book, which always lies wide
open to the world; that whosoever wants advice or Counsel, may freely Consult
him at pleasure: there they may read, what himself, as opportunity served him,
has taken great pains to Copy out fair in all his Actions, whatever is both
safe, great, and Good; thus in one and at once they may behold both the rules
of a Good life, Praecept and Example.

Nor does this virtue more manifest it self in a liberal distribution and
Instruction, then in as free and Impartial a Correction and reproof,
whenever it is requisite, choosing much rather to cross the humor of his
friend, then flatter his vice; and to lose his friendship here, then his
Company (if it may be possible for him to have it) in Heaven another day. He is
not afraid to call every Man by his own name, or add the Epithete which is due
unto it; that so every one that comes into his presence, may be afraid to bring
a bad name along with him. He can envy no man because he cannot see any one
better then himself; neither yet can he despise any man, because he really
desires every one might be as good as himself.

So that, what is most of all Commendable, this most excellent virtue is
accompanied with a most exemplary humility; and there is nothing can more
deservedly exalt him in the thoughts of all men, then this, that he is such a
Diminutive in his own. Nor does this proceed from an Ignorance of his own
excellencies, but rather hence, that he knows whence he had them: Neither does
he therefore praeferre every man in Honor before himself, because he knows
not what other men are, but because he knows not what they may be. He is
really so high that he may with ease reach Heaven, but he makes himself so low
that he may go in at the strait gate. When he looks upon his own virtues (which
he had rather show then see, and have then show) he will not think them great,
because he intends to make them yet much Greater; neither can he tell how to
applaud himself when he sees them great, because he knows well how little he
either made or deserved them. It is this virtue that makes him much more desire
the friendship of a virtuous Beggar, then the favor of a vicious and
licentious Prince; because this he must assuredly lose, seeing he knows not
how in a Compliance to his humor to become wicked; but that shall never end,
but last as long as his Heaven. He chooses his Companions not by the outward
habit of their Body, but that internal of the Soul; and sets an higher value
on them for their Merits then their Births. He is so little proud of what he
is, that he is indeed very humble for what he is not. He will never be
persuaded (as most of those we call Gallants do) to pride himself in his
Vanity, Beast of his folly, and Glory in his Profaneness.

. 10. His Charity and Temperance.
The Gentleman's Charity, is no other then his Soul draw'n out to his finger's
ends. Every piece of money he has, bears as well the Impression and Image of
this Virtue, as that of his Prince; and this is it which makes him value the
Coin more, and the Silver l^sse. He is indeed that true Briaraeus, which has
as many hands, as he meets with receivers: and for this cause he is looked upon
as a Monster in these later days, and very rarely to be met with.

The course he takes to air his Bags, and keep them from moulding, is to
distribute freely to all that are in need. If he take some pains to become
richer then others, it is only to put a cheat upon that which men miscall
Fortune, and to manifest he has a power as great as here is; that is, to make
himself poor again at his pleasure; and to show that Charity can entertain as
rich servants as she. Though God has indulged him the privilege and
inheritance of an Elder brother in the world, yet he wisely Considers that the
youngest of all may in equity challenge a Child's portion. He esteems it a
very high Honor, that God has vouchsafed to make him one of the Stewards in
His great Family: and he is nothing ambitious of his Epithete to his Name, or
reward of his pains who is recorded in the Gospel for his Injustice.

When by giving to the poor, he lends to the Lord, the Honor of being the
Lord's Creditor is all the Interest he expects; and doubtless this Happiness
is not every man's, to have God his Debtor. He accounts it much the safer way,
to trust his Charity then his Luxury with the Bag; the former will bring in an
even reckoning in Heaven; the latter perhaps a jolly one in the Tavern, but a
very sad one in Hell. He delights not to see any thing starve but his Lusts, he
lets these crave without an Answer, and die without Compassion. I would to God,
there were many in the world such as he, we should then see fewer Beggars, and
more Gentlemen. Men's backs and Bellies would not then so frequently rob and
undo their souls: Now adays, the Gentleman's clothes wind about his Body, and
his Body about his Soul, with no greater kindness, then the twining Ivy about
the Oak; the Apparel sucks away the nourishment which is due to the Body, and
this that other which we owe to the Soul.

Where he is not able to make his Estate adaequate to his deserts; he takes a
better Course, and Levels his desires to his fortune: though he seldom have
all that he deserves, yet he always has whatsoever he Covets. He never wants
much of that which is needful, because he enjoyes all that he is in love with.
He makes his life and health not his Estate or ambition the standard, his
Reason and not his Humor the judge of his Necessities.

Such is his Temperance and Sobriety in the use of those Creatures, of which by
God's blessing, he is made owner; that he sacrifices very much to his God in
the relief of the Indigent, nothing to sin, in satisfying the importunate
cravings of his Carnal lusts. Above all, he is ashamed, when Fortune has used
him very hardly and spoiled him of many opportunities of exerciseing his Bounty
and his Charity, to permit his lusts to use him yet worse, and leave him
nothing at all. He scorns first to swaggar and swill away his estate, and then
Curse his fortune for useing him so roughly; first to make himself a Beggar,
and then cry out upon his poor Condition; or to Complain he is as poor as Job,
when every day he fares as Deliciously as Dives. When he has the least, he
shows that he is able to live with less; and when he is brought into a low
Condition, he tries how he could bear up in a lower; and proves by his
cheerfulness in that some would call want and Misery, that Happiness does not
Consist in superfluities. He is Content with any thing, and by this means
enjoyes all things; and is so Charitable of a little, that it is evident in
that little he wants not much.

He chooses rather to be well in the Morning, then drunk over night; and at any
time had rather be free from the Sin, then please his Companions with the
Frollick. His Money is too little to love, but too much to throw away: and he
had much rather give it then lose it; preferring his charity before his Game;
and the poor man's life, before his own Wantonness and Riot: Though he had
never so much, he could never have more then enough, because he sees so many
that want what he has, and pitties all he sees in want. He looks upon his
estate as that which was given him for use and not for wast; and upon so much
of it as he loses at play, as that whereby he has robbed himself of a virtue,
and another of a Comfortable livelihood, and he cannot sport himself with such
losses.

. 11. His Valor and Prudence.
Having spoken already of the Gentleman's Magnanimity, I shall need to add
very little of his Valor; which he exercises more in Obeying his God, then
Opposing his Brethren. His highest piece of Fortitude is that whereby he
Conquers himself and his sin; and in this he is always practicing. He knows
that by thus becoming his own Captive, he shall not want the usage of a
Gentleman; and thus being made his own Lord too, he is sure to be free from all
the world besides. He looks upon it as the basest degree of Cowardice, to yield
unto those feeble Passions, which, did not both Reason and Religion step into
their Succor, would certainly become the prey of every light and Empty toy.
His Christian Fortitude is such, that he fears not to Encounter the Great
Goliath of Hell, or an whole Army of such Philistines as have set themselves in
array against his Happiness, all at once: not though they be such, as by their
Cunning have already got within him: He never gives over Resisting the Devil
till he have put him to flight. He has that greatest Courage which is so
rarely found in others, who would be called Gentlemen, he dares be Religious in
spite of the World. He sets himself, without betraying the least timidity,
against that great Bugbeare, which so scares most men not only out of their
wits but out of all good actions, Shame, or Derision. These are they which, as
the Elephants in King Pyrrhus his Army terrified the Romans with their
prodigious Bulk, do so affright the greatest part of our Gentry, that they
never leave flying till they tumble into the Bottomless Pit together. The True
Gentleman, like the stout Minucius, has by experience proved these Monsters to
be of more Bulk then Metal, and to want nothing but an Adversary, to bring
them into Subjection.

The true Gentleman has so much true valor, as not to fear the brand of a
Coward, where his Courage would be his sin, and his Conquest his ruin. He is
ever the fugitive in such a chase, and dare boast of nothing but being routed.
It Is then alone he fears not Death, when he is sure there is no Hell will
follow it. His life is more dear to him, then that he should be Content to part
with it for any thing less then Heaven. He has an Honor, and that is his
Religion, a Mistress too to vindicate and defend from all injuries and
affronts, and that is his own Soul: For the sakes of these two he is engaged in
many a Duel, with those Heresies and those Sins, which would stain and Corrupt
the one, or steal away and deflower the other.

He thinks that Honor too dear which must be bought with a Murder; and a Name
which is never to be worn, but by his Monument, none of the cheapest, when
purchased with his life. He has much Honester thoughts of his Mistress, then
to think her such a Proserpine, that either he or his Rival must be sent to
Hell, before either can enjoy her.

There is indeed a Beauty, for which the Gentleman thinks it no loss to die;
but such an one as is often black, though always lovely: I mean, his own
Mother and his Savior's spouse; the Church of God: and there is an Honor
which he holds cheap enough when bought with the high price both of Life and
Livelihood, though (if he might have his choice) he had rather preserve both to
maintain it, then lose either to purchase it, Loyalty to his Prince, and
Fidelity to his Country: For these he does not fear to Embrace a Stake, to make
the Scaffold his Bed, and a Block his Pillow; seeing he is assured, that
whosoever thus lies down to rest at night, shall without fail rise again to
Glory in the Morning. He holds it much more desirable to live a Beggar, then
to die a Traitor: And that his Honor and Conscience should expose him to
Tyranny and Violence, then his Treachery or Hipocrisy buy out his temporal
security. He thinks it no great matter to trust that God with his Person and
his Family, who has trusted him with his spouse and his Children.

Hence is the Gentleman's Prudence, the Legitimate Daughter of Loyalty and
Conscience, not the Bastard of Covetousness and Cowardice; it is mixed of
Discretion and Wisdom, not Craft and Knavery. He was never yet so blindly
zealous, as to worship a Golden Calfe for a God, that so he might keep his
Chest from being broken open: Nor was he ever so absolute a Statesman, as to
call Rebellion Reformation, for fear of Poverty or an Halter. His natural
affection to wife and children is such that he would enjoy them for ever in
happiness; and therefore his ^are is so to part with them now, that he may
meet them again in Heaven, not in Hell, hereafter: His whole Policy is to avoid
an aeternall, though by incurring a temporal, misery. Such a Politician only
he thinks fit for Heaven, that has prudently managed his Lord's affairs upon
Earth; he cannot call him either a prudent or a faithful Ambassador, who
prosecutes his own design with more earnestness then his Master's; or acts
more vigorously for the advancement of his own particular Interest, then the
Public Good, or his Prince's Honor.

It is his Prudence to secure what is best, by the loss of what is Indifferent,
whenever he is necessitated to part with one of the two; and he chooses rather
freely to part with that which he is only sure once to lose, and by that l^sse
become eternally happy; then to throw away that which in spite of violence he
might for ever have kept, and can never part with, without his utter ruin: If
tares must spring up amongst the good Corn in that field. wherein God has
intended him a labourer, he had rather show by his activenesse that they were
not sown whilst he slept; then by a covetous laziness give the Enemy an
opportunity of Compassing his designs; or occasion the disheartening of his
brethren, by withdrawing his shoulder, and leaving them alone to bear the
burden in the heat of the Day. He can think it a greater prudence with the
Disciples of his Lord, to leave his Father and his Net, to follow a Savior
through Persecution into Heaven; then with the Carking Fool, to lie modelling
out a Barn which may contain his wealth, and in the mean time suffer his Soul
to be stolen out of his Body by the sedulous craft of the seducer.

. 12. His Behavior in both Fortunes.
If Fortune smile upon him, and be indeed such as he dare call her Good, he
makes it his business to be altogether as good as she; and will be sure as
well to deserve as to wear her Livery. His care is that her good usage of him
may be rather deemed the just reward of his own Moderation and Good-Husbandry;
then the unmerited Bounty of so blind a Mistress. He makes his Prosperity a
motive to his Piety, not (as others) the opportunity of displaying his Vanity.
He proves by his example, that he most happily enjoyes the World, that Glories
lest in the enjoyment of it. He looks upon his present flourishing Condition,
rather as that which is not without ingratitude to be refused, then with
egernesse to be desired; and upon what he now possesses, as that which he
knows not how soon he may lose; and therefore he makes himself now so
careless an owner, that (if the wind chance to turn) ^e may prove a cheerful
and Contented loser. He dares not Fancy himself one jot the nearer Heaven,
for being thus mounted on the Deceitful wings of Fortune, lest when the
contrary wind of adversity dismounts him, and his unexpected fall awakes him
from his pleasant dream, he should find himself to be really as low, as he
was before but seemingly high. If Fortune be content to lodge with him as his
ghest, she is welcome; But he cannot be so dotingly enamored of her, as to
entertain her, either as his wife, or his Harlot; lest either an untimely
divorce should break his heart, or she should bring a Bastard for a Son, and so
at length shame and disgrace him. He can neither so far flatter her as to
call her Goddess, which he knows of her self to be no more but a name; nor
so far Honor her as to ask her blessing, because he knows that whatsoever
Goodness men are apt to ascribe unto her, is but one of the meanest blessings
of a Greater then she. Laugh she never so heartily, her pleasantness shall
never overjoy him, seeing (for ought he knows) she either does or may ere long
laugh at him; and if she Frown, he can frown as fast as she, and that for her
kindness. He never relies upon her, because he knows she is naturally so
unconstant: nor can he see any reason why he should be proud of being her
favorite, because he may every where behold many of the most undeserving
altogether as much in her Favor as himself.

To speak the whole, the true Gentleman has so slight an esteem of Fortune,
that he cannot vouchsafe her the Honor of a Being, but leaves that to those
poor Heathens who were indeed as blind as they supposed her to be. Whatsoever
blessings he enjoyes he received them, as indeed they are, as the bounties of
an indulgent father, with thanks and love; and he uses them to that end, for
which he supposes so Good and Prudent a father would bestow them on a Beloved
Son; so that he may make them as much Instruments of his own Good, as they are
testimonies of his father's affection. He looks upon his Prosperity, not so
much as a reward for doing well, as an encouragement to do more, and an
opportunity of doing better: Much less can he think his flourishing condition,
as many seem to do, a piece of Heaven's flattering Courtship, where no more is
intended, then the affording him an opportunity of pampering up his lusts, and
making himself a Glorious sinner. Seeing he has already received so bountiful
a reward for doing so little, he accounts it a shame for the future not to make
himself a fit object for a greater, by doing both more and better. Such an
Ingenuous Spirit has the Gentleman, that he thinks every reward for what is
past, an obligation to future good services; and he had rather wait with
patience for all his arreares together, then ever be thought to have received
the last payment here.

If it be his lot to groan out his days under the heavy pressures of
affliction: he is not like the Inconsiderate Drunkard, who in the morning after
his double Intemperance in drinking and sleeping, complains that his head
aches, and begins to Curse his Pillow, and his Bed-maker, for his want of ease;
forgetting to turn that sin out of doors which occasioned all this the day
before: Nor like a Wretched and Impenitent Malefactor, who when he is hurried
away to a just Execution, does nothing but cry out upon the hard-heart of his
Judge, and the Rigor of the Laws; Cursing the Executioner, but forgetting to
repent him of the Murder or the Robbery which brought his Body into the hands
of this executioner, and will, unrepented of, deliver his Soul into the far
less merciful of another hereafter: But like a Natural and hopeful child*
he seriously Considers his own Errors, which provoked his father thus to
Chastise him; and so by stroking the hand, and kissing the Rod, and humbly
begging pardon for his offense, he sets his father's affections, which before
he had turned aside, not lost, into their own proper Channel again.

He looks upon his Afflictions with one eye, as Corrections, and so blames
himself for the Occasion, but blesses God for the Charity; with the other, as
Trials, and so makes it his care that he come not all Dross out of the
Furnace. The same Fire which Consumes others, does but refine his soul, and
separating from it, the more gross and Terrene Mixtures, makes it the fitter
for Heaven. He grudges not to undergo the Winnowing, so he may be sure to
loose the Chafe, and be made all wheat, such as his Lord may think fit to
receive into his Garner. He is ashamed to think that God should lose his
pains, and the more he thrashes, find only more straw but less Corn:
rather, like good grain from the Mill, he comes forth from the grinding, more
in measure, purer in Color, and readier for use and service. Though a Bryar or
a Thorn, may scratch or prick his heel a little, in his way to Heaven, and
draw a little useless blood; though he may sometimes be so entangled in the
Brambles, that he may be forced to part with something of his fleece, and
perhaps so much of the skin too, as may make it smart a while; Yet has he too
high a soul, to fall so much within the reach of these Creeping brambles, as to
receive from them the least Scratch in his face. He always carries an head as
erect as his hopes are high; and takes great care that neither his Religion,
his Honesty, nor his Honor be made to suffer by it.

He dares not make either a Base Compliance with the vices of his persecutors,
the refuge of his Cowardice; or the wings of the Potent, by bribing their
Ambition with Flattery and Dissimulation, his Sanctuary of protection. He will
not attempt the light^ning of his sufferings by a voluntary casting any part of
his estate into the devouring Treasury of the Church's Enemy; nor hope to
appease the wrath of a displeased God, by bringing an oblation to the Avarice
of his oppressors; neither does he essay to drown his sorrows in the Bottom
of his Cup: But he flies, and takes Sanctuary at the Horns of the Altar: and
by a Magnanimity which becomes a Gentleman, shows that true Honor, is a Jewel
indeed, such as will not break with the Hammer: His Religion, like the Flint,
never so much discovers those Holy fires of zeal and devotion, which were not
before so apparent, as when it most experiences the violence of the hardest
steel: And his Innocence is so perfectly Malliable, that the more you beat it,
the broader it grows. In short, the Gentleman carries himself ^o evenly
betwixt these Contrary winds, that he is neither shaken by the one, nor puffed
up with the other: He is such in prosperity, that he does not fear Adversity;
and such in adversity, that he needs not to wish for Prosperity; such indeed in
both, that it shall never repent him, that he has tasted either.

. 13. His respect and affection for his Country.
The true Gentleman is no less Serviceable to his Country, then Honorable in
himself. He cannot Fancy himself so great, as to forget that he is but a
creature, and so made for something; and 'till he can persuade himself to be a
God (who is his own End and Happiness) he cannot think that he was made only
to serve himself. He that made him, made him a Brother to many, and he owes a
duty of love unto them all. He is not like a lump of Gold in the Bowels of the
Earth, which is neither for sight nor service; but like that which having once
received the stamp of the Prince, is ever after Current, and useful to many.
Neither resembles he the Glow-worme or a Rotten stick in the Dark, which has
no more light then will show it self to be something; though no body by that
light alone knows what; but illuminates nothing else about it: no, he rather
emulates the Sun in the Firmament, from which this Inferior World receives all
it is life and vigor. Thus the Gentleman is continually scattering the rays
and Influence of his virtues round about him, quite through all that lies
within the Wide Sphere of his Motion. As amongst the Elements, the most Noble
and Pure, is always the most active too; and most profitable, as well as most
High and Distant: And as the highest of Bodies, to wit, the Caelestiall cannot
naturally rest, but indeed by their Continual and swift motion, do never fail
to labor for the Benefit of the whole world besides: So is this Little Heaven
and Glory of Mankind, never without some commendable business and Employment,
and such as shall assuredly at last tend unto the great good and advantage, of
as many as lie within the Compass of his Influence.

The Gentleman (without doubt) is made for some other end, then to stand, like
a fair and goodly Tulip, in a painted Pot, in some window or other Corner of
the Chamber, only to grace the room, without either smell or other apparent
virtue; He is rather like the sweet and lovely Rose, which perfumes the Air
all about it, and is besides, no less Medicinal, then fragrant. If ever the
Gentleman seem to be Idle, he does no more but seem so. He only sets himself
down a while, as he would do a Bottle of precious Water, which has been
troubled by much motion, that so it may by a settling of it is heavier parts
become clear again: Thus does he order his Soul, that after she has been
violently shaken to and fro, and much troubled with the affairs of the world;
he may by this rest, give leave to the more terrene parts therein to draw
toward the bottom, that so the Grosser descending, his best and clearest
thoughts may again be uppermost and at Liberty. He carries not his fine Body up
and down the streets, as men use to do their Dancing-horses in a Fair, only
to be seen, and make sport for the Spectators: No, though never so gloriously
tricked up, and accoutned, yet does he freely stoop, to take some part of that
weighty burden of the Commonwealth upon his back; and never walks with more
ease, nor shows more real state, then when thus Laden.

He cannot call him a man that is without all calling, knowing that every
servant (and every man ought to be God's servant) how proud soever must have
his work* Seeing God has so blessed him with abundance, that he needs not work
for his own bread, he will in gratitude to his God, Work for his Countrie's
peace and safety. He scorns to have it thought, that He is the only
Cumbersome thing in the Nation, the only Wen in the Body Politic, which
grows great only by sucking away that nourishment, which should feed and
strengthen the serviceable members; and is good for nothing at length, but to
Improve the Chirurgions skill, and the patience of the Diseased. Those parts
and members of the man which are uppermost in the Body, and most Honorable,
are always most busied too for the Good of the whole: In the Head are placed
the Eye and the Ear, and the Organs of sense; there too is the Understanding,
Fancy and Judgment, to see, to hear, discern, contrive, plot and direct: and
as he knows it is his Honor to be made a part of the Head of his Country; so
does he own it his duty, not to refuse the exercise of that Office which
belongs unto him. Hence he thinks it an unworthiness in him, not only, to do
ill, but to do no Good; and these two he can very hardly distinguish, as some
would fain do, seeing undoubtedly that which does no good, is good for
nothing, and this is to be stark naught.

-- He holds it to be (as indeed it is) a crying shame, whilst the Tailor, and
the Cobbler are justly reckoned among the Necessary members of a Commonwealth,
that the Gentleman, who takes it as an affront not to be thought much better
then such Mechanics, should not be so much as useful to the place where he
lives: or at most, but as the trimming is to a good suit, or the hair to the
head, which may be Cut off and thrown away, and no great hurt done to either.
This indeed is the Gentleman's privilege, not to be a servant to any one
particular Member, but to the whole body; and that whilst others in their
Inferior Condition, are only made capable of serving a few, his fortune is
such as will allow him to be truly serviceable unto all. Herein consists his
Honor, that he is not put to work as a drudg or journy-man; but is a Freeman
indeed, and Master of his trade; and whilst others toil hard, and receive a
scant pittance when their worke's done; He is able to work gratis, and so
oblige a great part of the world by his service. Indeed this must needs be the
greatest obligation can be laid upon the Gentleman, to labor harder and do
better then other men, because he is beforehand not only furnished with good
tools, by an Ingennous education, to work withal; but has (as was said)
received so great a part of his reward already, and yet is assured of an
infinitely greater yet behind. How is he ashamed to deceive him by his
Idleness, who of his great goodness has so far already trusted to his
honesty?

As he refuses no Employment, which may render him according to the measure of
his Abilities serviceable to his Country; so is he no way ambitious of that
which he knows to be above his strength and reach. As his great love to his
Country persuades him not to refuse the higher, so does his humility Command
him to accept the lower: he accounts no burden heavy which he is able to
bear; nor any light which is either beyond, or not worth his bearing. He makes
not his Ease an excuse, nor the Difficulty an apology for his refusal. He
discharges his trust with that fidelity, which will be sure to gain him,
though perhaps the hatred of the Bad, yet the applause and love of the Good,
and the unanimous thanks of his Country.

. 14. His Studies and Recreations.
That he may in good time be fitted for the Calling he intends, he begins to
think upon it early in the Morning of his age; and accustomes himself to the
yoke whilst he is young, that so he may bear it without galling his neck when
he grows old. He makes it now his business to gather the thyme, which he
intends shall prove Honey hereafter; and to lay up in the Spring what may stand
him in stead when his winter is come. That he may indeed be young in Old Age,
he learnes to be Old in his youth; and he sucks so much out of every science
now, as Experience and years may by degrees hereafter improve into that
Prudence which becomes a Gentleman.

Having in his greener years only so much discretion, as to find the want of
what he should have, he is willingly directed by the prudence of another, 'till
he can get enough for himself. He is not Impatient of Subjection now to that
wise and grave Instructor, from whose both dictates and example he hopes to
gain so much as may make him the Instructor of others hereafter: And he learnes
so betimes to obey, that the world may never have reason to say he began to
Command too soon. It is his choice to live under a severe discipline, rather
then to be left to himself as his own Master; lest perhaps failing in his
first Command, whereby he should have Governed himself, he might despair of
better success in his second of Commanding others.

His first care therefore now is to be wholly guided by him to whose prudence he
is entrusted; lest by rejecting him, he might seem to disparage the judgment of
his parents, who made that choice for him. Where the Commands laid upon him
seem to him irrational, so long as he knows them not sinful, he had rather
distrust his own judgment, then neglect his director's counsel: and he never
thinks himself (as very many do) a better man then his guide, 'till he be
sure he knows the way to that he aims at, better then he. He never shows
himself more to be his own man, and at his own disposal, then by this
unconstrained act of resigning himself up unto another.

When he is come to that maturity of Age and Discretion, as to be able to
benefit himself by his Company, he will be sure to make choice of such
Companions as may serve him instead of Books; and of such Books as he intends
shall often serve him for Companions: He is not ashamed to be now the worst man
in that Company, wherein he may learn from his betters, how to be the best in
another: this is much more honorable, then to be the best man there, where he
can never learn to be better, but often worse then he was before.

The Studies whereunto he cheerfully applies himself, are such as will more
make the man, then please the Boy. He takes delight in nothing which will send
him back again toward his Infancy, but Innocence. As for Poetry and such like
pleasing studies, he does not wholly neglect them, but uses them as good sauces
to make others more substantial and nourishing relish the better. He loves
not to spend his time in cracking Empty Nuts without a Kernel; nor to break
his tender teeth by gnawing upon Saples bones. Neither Nice Criticismes nor
tough Notions, can recompense him for the vast expense of that precious time,
he should be at in making himself the Master of either. When he is entered into
the fair garden of the Muses it is not his only business to pick up here and
there a few leaves to hide the Nakedness of his discourse; or to adorn it
with Blossoms and flourishes out of some Poetic figment, or Romantic story;
but he gathers, eats and digests, that which is fruit indeed, and such as is
truly wholesome and nourishing: Nor does he, as the Emperor's Army, lie
loytering, and picking up Cockle-shels upon the shores of good litterature, but
he boldly launches out into the main Ocean, and there Contemplates the wonders
of the deep. It is not his design to be called a Witty Gentleman, and such an
one as can talk high, and breath flashes, and thunder out big words, and store
himself with so many jests, and so much Bombast, as may tickle some, and
stupifie others; he studies more to make himself a man then a Companion; and
more how to live and do well, then talk finely. True Histories, and Sound
Politics, and grave Moral discourses, are the fruitful Gardens where his
Muses do ordinarily recreate themselves: that so by his Pleasures as well as
Pains, both the Commonwealth may in due time be happy in him, and he in
himself. As for those lighter and more ayery studies, such as too frequently
by their lovely paint and dissembled beauty, steal away the amorous and unfixed
youth of most Gentlemen, he makes the same use of them which he does of his
Galleries or his Arbours; whither, now and then he comes to take a turn or two
for Recreation's sake, and as he passes along sometimes casts a careless eye,
upon those many pretty blossoms or pictures which he finds there. These may
for a moment or two command his eye, but never ^is affection. Of such toys he
had rather (...) hereafter that he has seen them, then that he knows them. He
would be ignorant of nothing, but he would only be acquainted with the b^st.
He has a more Masculine stomach, then to f^ed upon that which is all sauce, but
if there be a little in the Dish, to make him relish his meat the better, he
is not displeased with it, though so long as his meat of it self is good, he
does not greatly desire it.

Divinity can never lie out of the true Gentleman's way, because he is always
going toward Heaven: For notwithstanding she seems so pale-faced, and of so
sour a Countenance to those that love her not, because they do not know her;
yet is there so much heavenly beauty, and so many noble features discernable in
her face, by the Gentleman's undistemper'd eye, that he soon begins in earnest
to love her, and he can never go on far in any other path whatsoever, but he
must often cast a longing eye back upon her. Still bearing in mind the happy
place whither he is travaling with so good a will, he calls in at other Arts
and Sciences as at so many Innes, to take a short repast by the way: or he
stands looking upon them a while as upon so many way marks set up at the
several turnings and Cross paths, that from them he may receive directions
which way to turn: But the knowledge of his God, that is the way he constantly
walks in, and that which will certainly bring him at last to that home, where
he shall meet with a Welcome, which will abundantly recompense the tediousness
of his journey; and an entertainment suitable to the Quality of a Gentleman.

His way being long, it is not amiss that he allows himself sometimes a
recreation and diversion. But then his recreation shall be always such as he
dares not make his business, and yet such as he dares safely make his play: It
has always so much of Innocence as to be blameless, and so much Brevity as
to be no Hinderance. It has so much Youthfulness, as not to be a Business,
and yet so much Business as not to be Boyish. It shall bring with it so much
real pleasure as may make it a refreshment, and yet so little loveliness, as
may spoil the temptation. He may step over the hedge into the pleasant Meadow,
and pluck a sweet flower or two to smell to as he goes along, but he dares not
lie him down, or roll himself upon the tender grass, lest he should be
tempted to too long a stay, and thereby be benighted in his journey.

He thinks it no prudence to fall in love with any sport, which like a Cunning
thief, smiles him in the face, whilst it cuts his purse, steals away his
time, and cheats him of a good Conscience. If Agar once begin thus to insinuate
her self into those affections, which are only due to her Mistress; out of
doors she shall go: He intends not to sell his Charity at so cheap a rate, as
the false pleasure of his game; Nor has he so little either thrift or Religion,
as to make so foolish an Exchange, and part either with his Soul or his Time
for the transitory delight of a dangerous temptation. His usual Recreation
therefore is, to make a play of his Study. He makes one study, like a
shooinghorne, to draw on another, and makes the variety the recreation. Thus he
takes the surest course that may be, for making his Study so much his Delight,
he saves himself the labor of studying for a Passe-time.

. 15. His Good-husbandry at Home.
When the Gentleman comes to have the manageing of his own Estate, he takes
pains to instruct the world, how far a man may be Frugall with Honor; and a
Good-husband without a suspicion of being worldly or Covetous; and again how
freely a man may spend his Estate, and yet be no prodigal. He has so
circumspect and watchful an eye upon all his affairs, that you may see he had
much rather give away his estate, then be cheated of it. He would be cozened of
nothing, for fear of loseing the opportunity of bestowing much. As he would not
allow the unfaithfulness of a servant, to prevent the Bounty of the Master; so
neither would he have the Master's negligence to occasion the servants
dishonesty.

His Table is moderate, that so his Charity and Hospitallity may exceed: as he
studies to be good himself, so endeavors he to make every member of the
Family as good as he; and he will have his servants to be his Disciples, no
less then his Children. Neither ever does he so wholly vindicate their service
to himself, but he allows them time enough to pay what they owe both to God,
and their own souls.

If his condition of life be single, he so behaves himself therein, that no
man shall thence be able to conclude, either that he wants a Wife, or his house
a Mistress; So much chastity has the one, and so much good order is there in
the other. But if he think it fit to change his Condition, he endeavors to
choose a second self, that may suite with the former; that so they may be (as
near as he can effect it) one Spirit, as well as one flesh. Whom, not long
ago, he courted rather as a Virtue then a Mistress, he now uses as a wife and
not as a servant; not (as it is usual of late) calling her Mistress and Lady
before she be his wife, whom he intends to make his drudge all her life time
after. Nor does he (as too many) marry only for Money; knowing that such are
in danger of Committing Adultery after Marriage, seeing they never Married the
Woman, but her Portion. With him Virtue and Love, not Money and parentage, make
the Match: and the question he asks, is not -- What has she? but -- What is
she. He makes Prudence and Religion the guides of his Love; and so he becomes
as good an Husband and Father, as before he was a man.

. 16. His Religion.
I have told you (Sir) already that the Gentleman is not ashamed to be called a
Religious man; although that Epithete be thought no better then a term of
debasement, by the degenerate Gentry of our age. He ownes a God, and he
Worships him, and makes that Honor which he observes others to render unto
God, the ground of his respect to them. He looks upon no man as a Gentleman,
but him alone, who derives his pedigree higher then from Adam, even from
Heaven: and he accounts all those who can brook any Dishonor or Contempt of
their God that one Common father of us all, as a Bastard and no Son. It would
be no Honor for him to seek an acquaintance here upon Earth, and therefore by
his frequent Devotions he often goes to seek out a better in Heaven; where he
may be sure to meet with such, as shall be worth his keeping. He dares call
every man a Fool to his face who with David's Fool, suffers either his tongue
or his heart to say There is no God.

If you ask him, what Religion he is of, his answer is ready, of his mother's;
that is, he is a true Son of the Church: And yet is he only so far her Son,
as he sees her willing to continue his Savior's Spouse. Neither is he content
to be still an Infant in Religion, and to be taught only (as mothers use to
teach their young children) to say his prayers and his Creed by rote, but he
prays and believes and practices all truly by heart: Notwithstanding, he
never forgets his Mother, nor neglects to Honor her with his Life and
Substance. He is always more ready to take her Directions for the Form and
Method of all his duties, then to be Disciplined by all those Chatting
Dry-nurses which are so busy about him, such as indeed have talk enough, but
(alas) no Milk; whose whole business is indeed to make him undutifull to his
own mother, and to set light by all her Counsels and Commands: persuading him
to believe that a true Child of God, not subject to a Mother in any thing; And
they never show their venomous teeth more plainly, then when they go about to
make him forget what this Mother of all Christians by a strict Command from her
Dearest Lord has ever been most careful to teach all her children, to say --
OUR FATHER.

He goes not to Church to save his Credit or his Purse, to see his friend or
speak with his Tenent, but to meet his Heavenly Father, and Commune with his
God, and to take Directions from him how to behave himself the following week
or Day. When he is there, he makes his heart accompany his tongue, and his Ear
keep time with the Preacher. Every Morning and Evening, like a Dutiful son,
he in private Confesses his faults, and begs his Father's pardon and blessing;
and for the better ordering of his following duties, reads over with Care and
Humility some part of those Directions, which he had long since Commanded his
servants to set down in writing for his use.

He chooses his Religion, not by it is Commonnesse but it is truth: and often
weighs each branch of it in the Balance of the Sanctuary, that he may be sure
it is full weight. He takes it not up by votes, nor (as it is most evident too
many do) thrusts his hand at all peradventure into an Hat-full of Lots, being
content with whatever he hits on first; for should he go the first way to
work, he knows, he should be sure to have, not what is Best and Soundest, but
the Easiest, and most Gainful; if the later, it is an hundred to one that he
shall draw a blank, and be made an Atheist for his labor. Here he dares not by
any means follow or embrace what is most in Fashion, for that ('it is clear) is
Hipocricy the cunning Sister of Atheism, or Atheism shamed or frighted into
conformity; but he professes that which is most Ancient, for that (he may be
sure) will at last be found most true.

His Religion is not such a Young, Light and Wanton Girl, as pleases the vain
Fancy of every giddy Interested professor; but such a Grave Matron whose
natural Beauty, and Constancy, the Gray-hairs of Prudence and Sobriety, have
ever judged to be truly Venerable, and most deserving of the Christian's
embraces. This is that worthy Lady, which he daily Courts, to make her the
Mistress and Protectresse of his Soul, and she it is alone that can give him a
breeding fit for Heaven.

He shows how freely he can go on in the, ways of Godliness without a
Spur; and how base a thing it is and unbecoming his Quality to be driven into
Heaven by force. By his have and cheerfulness in his race, he evidences his
sense of the Worth of what he aims at; And by his egernesse in the pursuit of
another world, endeavors to confute the folly of those, who would linger out
an eternity (were it possible) amongst the Onyons and Fleshpots of this Egypt.
As he was borne a man, so he had his Inheritance upon Earth; but as he is
Newborn a Christian, he leaves this trash to the Prodigal younger Brother,
expecting a Possession durable in the Heavens.

He fears as little the names of Precise and zealous, wherewith the Devil in
the Mouths of his Disciples, thinks to fright him out of all Holiness; as they
understand them, who thus too frequently abuse them. That Boisterous breath
which the profane world sends forth to deride and Cross him in his intended
voyage, he, like a skillful Pilote so orders by the right Composing of his
Sails, that he makes that his greatest advantage and furtherance, which was
intended for his ruin. He can go to Heaven with any wind and with any Name,
where he is so sure to meet with a title of Honor, a name written in the book
of life, even the Honor of all his Saints. He cannot Fancy that to be any
debasement of his spirit, which carries him out upon so High and Noble
achievements; but thinks it an Happiness to go into Canaan, though it be
through a Red sea, and a rude Wilderness; whilst others (alas) feed so
greedily upon the Quails, that they never say grace, but in a murmuring, that
they have not more and better cheer; He feeds more upon his hopes, then his
enjoyments, and blesses his God for both.

And now this Religion, which he has thus wisely espoused, and entirely loves,
he dares not prostitute to Interest or Humor: But as any man accounts the
enjoyment of one thing which he principally loves, enough to recompense him for
all that he has been constrained to part with in his pursuit after it: so the
Religious Gentleman can freely part with both Humor and Interest, with all he
enjoyes, and all he hopes for here, for his Religion's sake, being sure to find
them all again hereafter, in the fruition of Her, whom he so sincerely loves.
Like a Prudent lover, he removes all occasions of Iealousy from his beloved;
His Religion shall never have cause to fear, that either his Pleasure or his
Honor, or his Profit, shall gain so much upon his affections, as to become
her Rival.

. 17. The Conclusion of this Character.
Thus (Sir) Whilst I go about to give you the Character of a true Gentleman,
I am fallen into that of a Christian; and indeed no wonder, for there is such a
necessary Connection betwixt these two, that they seem to be no more then the
Different Names of the same man. If you desire to have his picture in a less
Compass here it is.

The true Gentleman, is one that is God's servant, the World's Master, and his
own Man. His Virtue is his Business, his Study his recreation, Contentedness
his rest, and Happiness his reward. God is his Father, the Church is his
Mother, the Saints his Brethren, all that need him his Friends, and Heaven his
Inheritance. Religion is his Mistress, Loyalty and Justice her Ladies of
Honor; Devotion is his Chaplain, Chastity his Chamberlain, Sobriety his
Buttler, Temperance his Cook, Hospitallity his Houskeeper, Providence his
Steward, Charity his Treasurer: Piety is Mistress of the House, and Discretion
the Porter, to let in and out as is most fit. Thus is his whole Family made up
of Virtues, and he the true Master of his Family. He is necessitated to take
the world in his way to Heaven, but he walks through it as fast as he can; and
all his business by the way, is to make himself and others happy. Take him
all in two words, he is a Man and a Christian.

And here (Sir) it is time that I beg both the Gentleman's pardon and Yours,
for thus abusing his name; and presuming to give you his Character, whose
excellencies are not to be Comprehended, much less expressed, by any one less
then himself. I have an Apology at hand, for giving you this rude and
Imperfect draught of his Picture: that I give it you at all, it is my obedience
to your Command; that you receive it so Misshapen and ill proportioned, besides
the little experience and less skill of the Painter, he has this to say for
himself; he could hardly tell where, being absent from such as you Sir, to
find a true Gentleman to draw it by: But either he was Constrained to take it
from the Dead, and then no wonder if his work fall short both of Complexion and
life; or by that faint Idea he had in his own mind, and therefore he hopes he
is excusable though he sometimes mistake in the Feature. If you meet in any
place with too deep a shadow, where there should be more light, he desires,
that beside the weakness of his eye, you would consider the Darkness of the
Time, and the uncertain light he saw by. For we live so much in the Evening of
the world, when the thick and foggy mists of Ignorance darken the air; and
that fading light we have is so variously refracted by our Glittering Vices;
and so often reflected by the Disfigured glasses of Fancy and Humor; that
there is nothing troubles him so much, as that he is unhappily furnished with
so many excuses to plead for his Error. But if any will not be satisfied with
this, he yet lays claim to a further Privilege of a Painter, that is, to be a
little more talkative, and to say something more in vindication of what he has
done; and thereby demonstrate, that the excellent Original he would have
Coppy'd, is either not at all, or very rarely to be met with, at this day, in
England.

SECT. IV.
. 1. How few of the true Gentlemen are now to be found in England.
I Need not tell you (Sir) who have paid so dear for the sad changes; that it
is our hard hap to live in a reforming Age, wherein most things grow every day
new, but very few things better. And I do heartily wish it were as seriously
Considered by themselves, as it it well known to most, rejoiced at by some, and
sadly lamented by others, what a decrease and waning there has been in the
Gentry of England within a few of the last years; and that not only in the
number of their Persons, and largeness of their Estates; but even in the
Excellencies of their Souls, and the greatness of their Virtues. As if it had
been a small thing for them to live so long the Despised vassels of their
Hypocritical Adversaries, the good Masters that have so long ruled us; except
they had been permitted, by the severest kind of Cruelty to take vengeance of
their own virtues, and render themselves ten times more the wretched Captives,
and despicable slaves, of their own Tyrannical Lusts, and Atheistical Humors
then before. Indeed an Atheist and a Gentleman in the opinion of many, have for
a long time been either Synonymous or at* least Convertible terms: I dare not,
I confess, have such hard thoughts of all, though I could heartily wish, they
would rather take some pains by their lives and Conversations to prove this to
be an absurd, then stretch their lungs to cry out upon it, and swear it to be a
rash and uncharitable Censure.

Indeed, if on the oneside, in a feigned show of Religion to exclaim against
Drunkenness and Swearing, and other such like loud and Open Prophanenesses,
will suffice to Denominate the Saint: Or if on the other side to Cry out upon
Hipocricy and Injustice, Rebellion and Sacriledg, Lying and Perjury, may be
thought sufficient to constitute a true Son of the Church of England: then have
we all enough to say for our selves, and to prove that most of our Gentlemen
are indeed Christians. But, alas, it is too manifest, that on the one hand, all
this Canting and superficial sanctity; all these strained sighs and Greanes,
and turn'd-up Eyes, are no better then Sathan's Sunday's Garb, or the painted
Maskes and vizards, which Avarice, Ambition and Interest love to be seen in
abroad. These are the Enriching Crafts, whereby our Demetriuses get their
wealth. Many who have passed for Saints along time (experience has shown it us)
have been just such as he, who had rather make Silver shrines for Diana, so
they may be sure to be well paid for their work, then build Temples for the
Worship of a Crucified Jesus in hopes of an Heaven, and meet with his Cross
for their pains. And on the other hand all those raveings which we daily hear
against Oppression, Hipocricy and Tyranny, I am afraid, they are not so often
the seasonable overflowings of a Devout Spirit, a sincere soul, and a Loyal
heart; as the wild outrages of a boiling Passion, of a Confined, vice, and a
restrained lust, which makes the sufferer like a Mad man to gnaw upon his
chains and fetters: or else they are the violent motions of a revengfull Soul,
which frets it self at the prosperity of the wicked, and had rather see it is
enemies miserable, then it self sober and good. This is in truth that which
many have thought enough to give either party the title of religious: but how
they make good their claim to this title in their Actions, it is but too
visible.

Certainly if the Gentleman's life and ordinary Conversation may be thought (as
it ought to be) the best index to point us out to his opinion; we shall have
much a do to meet in most of those that own that name, with a Good Opinion
either of God or Religion. Most of them (I am sure the younger sort) do grudg
either of these the least place in their discourse, and therefore, it is to be
feared as little in their thoughts. They would as soon, nay much sooner make
choice of a Tinker or a Fiddler, then of a Religious man for their Companion.
Alas, such an one would spoil all their Mirth, and make their very lives, by
plunging them into a Malancholy Mood, mere torments to them. Any thing that is
grave and serious they perfectly loath and utterly reject, as that which cannot
at present suit with their more sprightly and flourishing years: Age and
scarcity of their Iuvenile blood, will hereafter (they think) make this a
business of Course, and so they had rather have it then make it now a matter
of choice: what need they be Religious now, who shall (as they think) whether
they will or no, be so before they die?

If we should but a while take notice how many Riots, the Gentlemen of our
times daily commit, all those wanton Frolicks and Revellings they are not only
guilty of, but Glory in; especially when they are at the Tavern or some other
Good house of expense and Merriment, we should be readier to lose our selves in
Admiration of their Madness, then to find out any thing of real Honor and
Nobility in them. To behold them there Contending for the Victory over a pot,
and taking the measure of their Gallantry by the strength of their Brains, or
Capacity of their Bellies: to hear them there drawing up with so much
complacency an Inventory and Catalogue of all their sinful extravagances, and
in a double proportion intermixing their prophanenesses with their wine:
whilst they drink wine with a song and prove themselves mighty to drink strong
drink: To hear them roaring themselves out of breath, never taking leave of
their wine, but of their senses too: nor forbearing their Oaths 'till they be
able to speak no more; would you believe these men could ever be so sober, as
to mention the names of Christian or Gentleman?

And yet it is most certain as well as sad, that you can never be more sure to
meet with our Gentry in any place, then at these Academies of sin, and
Nurseries of uncleanness, there exercising their abilities, and making
themselves expert in all those arts whereby they may most gratify Satan, and
as it were, in so many open Bravadoes, challenge the Almighly into the field,
and dare him to do the worst he can.

But (alas) we need not seek so great an advantage over them, as to take them
there, where they have so often lost themselves, and it heartily grieves me, as
certainly it must do every Charitable Christian, to see them so desperately
madded with the fear of being accounted Holy; and so ravenously greedy of
eternal destruction, as thus to swallow it down by whole Bowls, and make
their Companions Merry at the working out of their own Damnation. Doubtless
Satan has but two much Power over these men when they are most Sober, they
need not give him the advantage of finding them so often drunk. Except in a
Gallantry they desire to show the world how boldly they dare desie Heaven, and
how much they Scorn to owe their ruin to any but themselves.

At such good places as these, is it, that our Gentlemen make all their
Bargains, entertain all their friends, treat all their Ladies: here they
Consult about the weightiest affairs of the Commonwealth; Seal and Confirm
all their agreements in the very hight of their Intemperance; as if they were
afraid they should know or remember hereafter what then they did; or as if they
were Confident then to be in a Capacity of doing all things best, when they
were lest of all themselves: There can be no meeting, at least, no parting
without a Cup; as if there could be no surer pledge of friendship, or tie of a
Civil Correspondence and Familiarity, then by being thus Drunk together, or at
left, next door to it.

And now all this Madness, must be thought no worse then the Demonstration of
that Civillity and Courtesy which they owe one another; a necessary kindness
or an handsome treatment: And who so refuses either to go along with them, or
to do as they do when he is there, he is no better then an uncivil fellow,
and no Companion for Gentlemen: what a disgrace is it held for a man to leave a
drop in the bottom of his Cup? What an affront is it to the Company, not to
pledge every man his wholeone? And not to admit every Health, it is no less
then the greatest disrespect and Injury can be offered to the person in
remembrance; whosoever refuses it, especially if it be a Lady or a Minion is
remembered, shall be sure to hear of it with an Oath now, and perhaps a
Challenge anon.

More Ceremony is used, and more Reverence by half, to set off their drunken
Revels, then to grace the Worship and service of their God: All must be bare,
and all upon their knees, and a Catch instead of an Hymn: this is their
morning and their Evening Devotion; but whether this be the true service of
their God, or the business of Gentlemen, I dare appeal to those Consciences of
their's, which they now endeavor so to silence and Drown both by their
Drinking and their Roaring.

Nay, it seems very evident, that even these Gentlemen themselves make this
Sottish passetime the most infallible mark of true Gallantry: and account him
a person of worth, and without all exceptions fit for their Company, whosoever
can but take off his Cups handsomely, and is versed in all the Methods and
Maxims of this Hellish Art. Indeed they have made it a kind of Science, and
have given it so many rules and laws of late, that he that will now be expert
in it, had need to serve out an Apprenticeship to learn all the Circumstances
and terms, though he be never so perfect in the Substance before. Any person
how Contemptible soever shall not be thought unworthy of their Company, if he
be but the Master of this Art. Even he whom they would almost scorn to own for
a man when Sober and in his right wits, when he is Drunk or Mad, though but a
Tinker or a Cobbler, he is a Companion for Gentlemen. I do not grudg the poor
fellows the Honor of such Society, nor indeed can I think it any: But I am
more the Gentleman's friend, and more tender of his reputation then he
himself: ^I do therefore make it my prayer, as it is doubtless much the
grief and trouble of all good men to see them otherwise at present, that they
may at last become more charitable to themselves, then thus to debauch and
unman their own souls, and fall as much below the Nature of men, as the
Quality of Gentlemen.

. 2. An Enquiry into the more Civil sort of our English Gentlemen.
But let us look upon our Gentlemen in a more sober Posture; though, I am
afraid they will take it as an Injury done them, to consider them thus
abstractedly from the highest degree of Debauchery: take away their Pot and
their Pipe, and you rob the most of them, of the most delightsome method they
know, of spending their time, which is such a trouble to them. This is it,
which is their burden, and their disease, that as the Stag with the Arrow in
his side, they run, and shift, and throw themselves about from place to place,
and are always mad to be rid on it; 'till the sad moment appear wherein they
are called out of the world, and then their time and life, both equally
desired, vanish together. This wasting of their time, they esteem a thing so
innocent in it self, that they seem to apprehend a Goodness in it, great
enough to make them a pretense for all their other vices, and sinful
employments, shrouding them all under the generally approved names of Necessary
Passetimes and diversions. Cards, or Dice, Bowling or Hunting, or Fidling, or
any thing that has but a Motion in it to delude the tediousness of their
Hours; shall be welcome to them, and thought to be things not only Harmless
and Honest, but as invented to this good end of passing away the time, things
desirable by most, and very Commendable in a Gentleman. In these they merrily
spend, both their Nights and their Days, their livelihoods and the greatest
part of their lives; whilst the poor neglected Soul all this while, cannot be
allowed so much as half an hour's time in the Morning, by her Devotions, and
viewing her face in the Glass of God's word, to dress her self for Heaven.

Into how many Gentlemen's Families shall you come, where they do not
ordinarily by sleeping out all the Morning, make it night till noone? They rise
from their Beds just so Early as their Dinners may prevent their Devotions:
When they are thus removed from Bed to Board, they feed there their Lusts
better then their Bodies, and yet their Bodies more then their Souls. The
table is the Altar where they Sacrifice their Healths to their Appetites; and
Temperance to Luxury. They choose their meat, by it is Cost and rarity, not use
and wholsomnesse; and it is too true a Proverb, that what is far fetched and
dear bought, is meat for Gentlemen. After they have thus satiated for a while
their lusts, and gratified the Delicacy of their Pallates, they must sit out an
houre's Impertinent and Idle tattle to digest their excess: when they have
done this, they are ready for another Nap, and that prepares them for another
meal, except the Tavern or their Game prevent it.

If they chance to hear of some Pamphlet, Libell or Pasquill, wherein some
honest name is a sufferer, or where Chastity is put to do penance in an
obscene sheet; any piece of Drollery, or wanton Ballad upon a Mistress, a New
Romance or a Play, presently the News of it is dispatched from one to another,
these shall be read and pondered over and over, and be their Discourse and
Passetime at every meeting* For mine own part it has very rarely been my
Fortune to meet with a Club of Gentlemen, but as often as I have, I have been
frighted out of it again, or have had good Cause to repent me afterward; that
I was not so, by that wild kind of behavior, and looseness of talk I heard or
saw amongst them. The best of their talk at any meeting, is but to ask and
impart the News then stirring, or to give their judgments of the Ladies and
the Fashions of the times; to find fault with their own Tailors, or to commend
another's; to Droll out the time, or vie Wits by abusing each other, but every
man most of all himself. If any man in the Company can (and there be not many
that can do so much) by some slight problem, make a shift to pose his
fellows; he thinks he has done wonders, and has sufficiently vindicated his
credit from the imputation of Ignorance or Idleness for ever.

Alas (Sir) what is it that even the Prime of our Gentlemen pride themselves
in? even they whom we are prone to esteem highly; and style Civil and
Ingeniaus persons^ what but a little vain and Glittering Apparel? and he is
the Compleatest Gentlem^n for the most part, who wears the best suit, and
shines most in a tinsell bravery. Who is thought the man of the highest inward
accomplishments, but he that can talk volubly of the Customs* and vices of the
Court, or that which is most like it now there is none? He that can tell you
how much he is courted by the Ladies, and how much he is in favor with our
Great Folks. He that can express himsele modishly in a Complement, that can
speak much, and dance well; and hand his Lady with the greatest grace along the
streets; these are the brave Gentlemen that are every where cried up as they go
for Gallant and well accomplished persons. Or if you would go higher yet, then
he must be the man, that has laden his Memory with a few broaken Ends and
Chippings of History; or can tell you strange stories of the fashions and
Customs of other Nations, and tell you where he has been, and what rarities he
has seen; and at once perhaps both discommend and practice their vices. Or if
he be yet a more through Scholar, and generally acquainted both with books and
men, so far as to applaud and Censure and talk Skeptically: If he be an
exquisite Mathematician, or Musician, or the like; We think we have reason
enough to suppose him company for the best; and certainly he were so, would he
but labor to be one of them, when he is amongst them. But, alas, what is become
of his God and his Religion all^ this while? If you can find a little of either
in his Discourse, it is much, though there be just nothing of them in his life:
All those other accomplishments were truly commendable, were they thus
accompanied, but not being so (alas) they are stark naught.

Let us pass on to those who are thought by many the most Sober and serious
persons of all others, and even amongst these (I fear) we shall find too many,
on whom we can only bestow this poor Commendation, that they are more Grav^ly
wicked, more Cautiously sinful, and more Soberly Atheistical. Such are the
men, who (as I have told you before) flatter themselves up in a kind of
Negative Justice; and thereby with those whose persons and estates, they have
not actively violated or diminished, are esteemed persons of much worth and
Honor; and yet these are no better then the tamer sort of Satan's servants,
whom by a long usage he has made somewhat less wanton, and brought up to his
hand; and has taught them to Cozen and Dissemble almost as well as himself. I
need not tell any affectionate Son of the Distressed Church of England, how
good friends and servants, these Good, Honest, Civil, Sober and prudent men
have all along been to his poor Mother: How many of them have quietly stood by,
and looked on, if with no delight, yet (I am sure) with a great deal of
unworthy patience, and base C^nnivance, whilst she has been mercilesly torn
in pieces, by the cruel teeth of those raveneus beasts, which pretend^d to
watch and defend her: and yet not so much as an Arrow shot out of any other
Quiver then their mouths in a Chimney-Corner, against any of them. Whilst the
Younger Gentlemen want true Prudence, and the old have too much of that they
miscall so, they all prove very bad Soldiers, for such as pretend to fight
under Christ's Banner, and on the behalf of his Church; which truly now if
ever may be called truly Militant, and that too for want of Good Soldiers. If
our English Gentlemen be made to stay for, and expect their Honors till they
shall be knighted in the field for that Good service which they have done the
Church of which they would be thought Members; It will I fear be a sad and
unwelcome sword must Dub them.

It is too plainly apparent, that very few of them have so much real Honor,
as may make them sensible how they lose it. For if they had, could you Imagine
it Possible, that so many Horrid Murders and rapines, so many incredible
Treasons and Blasphemies, such as their Posterity will not find faith enough to
believe, should be thus openly acted and frequently vented even in their faces;
and not a man so much as move his hand to revenge what is past, or prevent
what is to come? Nay how often have the greatest part of them, by a base
Compliance with those men who have allwaies struck at the very root of that
Religion, which they so solemnly (some of them more then once) swore to defend,
given themselves not only the lie, but the perjury? Alas, their Ho^ours are so
jaded by drawing after them the Dung-Carts of their estates, that they now
brook any rider whatsoever. Had but one ^enth part of all those vast sums of
Money, and those many excellent parts, which these s^pposed Good-husbands, have
prodigally lavih'd out in the Tavern or at their Game, be^n put to that good
use it might have been, The Church might have received her own with usury;
England might yet have had the face of England, and they deserved the Name of
Gentlemen.

. 3. An Appeal to the Gentleman's own Conscience.
For Confirmation of all this that has been said, I shall dare to make my
appeal to the Gentleman's Conscience, though I dare not think it to be one of
the Best, or most impartial in this case. I heartily wish he could in earnest
and in truth tell me, that whosoever says England has now but few true
Gentlemen, is guilty of a Scandal. I confess I could almost willingly be
guilty of the Sin, upon condition his Innocence would once prove me a liar.

If he can think it possible to be a tru^ Gentleman without any sense of true
honor or Religion; or if he dares call him Religious and think him desirous of
Heaven, wh^ (though his whole life be little enough (...) prepare for it, yet)
grudges to spend o^e Minute of his time to gain it: If he have the Charity to
account him pious, w^o suffers his Soul to Starve for want of Sprituall food,
and yet can feast and pamper up his lusts every hour: if he can have a true
sense of Honor, who can Fancy himself Happy in Sathan's service, and is
oftener upon his knees to him then to his God; who makes his Soul the very
drudg of his Body, and his carnal appetite the Mistress of h^s life; and
every one of his members the sl^^e of some lust or other: If that man can
rationally be thought, to set a just estimate upon an Honest Reputation, who
had rather lie dabling in the Dirt, and Wallowing in the Mirc of Sin, then walk
in the pleasant paths of Holiness; the highway to Heaven: If it be a mark of
Religion, to drein out a vast estate, by a vain ambition placed in Fine
Cl^aths, delicious meats, rich wines, wasting Games, and other such like
expensive sins, as are now the mode; and all this while, not one mite cast into
God's exhausted treasury, not a Rag designed to cover the poor man's
nakedn^sse: If to behold God's own peculiar servants and Ambassadors lie
starving in the streets for want of some few morsells or Crumbs of that bread
which they grudg not by whole loaves to throw to their Dogs: If to see God's
House all on fire, occasioned by the outrages of their own flaming passions;
and God's children frying in the midst of the flame, and yet not so much as
move a foot to fetch a little water to quench the one or stretch out an arm to
save the other: if any man can judge these things to be the tokens of Religion
or Honor: If to sit still all the day Idle, and laugh at those who are working
in the Vineyard; if to come into a Church with a long train of gaudy
attendants, and to shine a while there in a little garish pomp; if to sit in
the highest pue, and to make this the chief part of their Devotion (without so
much as the Pharisee's Lord I thank thee) that they are better then other men;
if to justle a poor neighbor out of their presence, with a stand off, for I am
more Honorable then thou; if to scoff at all those who make any show of
Piety, or to deride all those who think it necessary to have more then a show,
be the infallible characters whereby we may know a Gentleman, then indeed I
must of necessity confess we have yet more then enough such Gentlemen in this
poor England.

I had rather mourn in secret, and in sadness of Spirit, si^h out the rest
unto my God, then proceed at present any further in so unpleasant a the^e. O
that the spilt blood of Christ's poor languishing spouse, cry not too loud in
Heaven at the last day, not only against those bloody souls, who have most
barbarously thrust their spears into her side, and with inhumane hands torn
out her very Bowels; but even against all those too who could have a Calm upon
their Spirits, whilst the tempest continued in the Church, and could hold it
prudence to sit still, and not come forth to the help of God's spouse and his
anointed one against the Mighty; and therefore only because they appeared
Mighty. My prayers are, that an Early, and an Active repentance, may seasonably
prevent their threatened ruin; and a timely understanding of their own names,
may make them before it be too late, truly sensible of their duties, and in
earnest endeavor to regain that Honor, which they have been too remiss
hitherto in preserving spotless. This is my great Charity to the Gentleman's
soul; and the highest respect I can conceive any man owes to his person, is to
wish that part of him best, which he seems to reguard least. I would to God he
could once, though late have so great a Charity and respect for himself, that
so he might not one day be found, with weeping, and wailing, and Gnashing of
teeth, crying out upon himself with no less reason, then despair and Horror,
even as that once-glorious Church, to the untimely ruin whereof his sins have
in so large a measure Contributed, cries out upon him now with sorrow and
amazement. Had he not shown himself all along so stupidly senseless of, and
Bruitishly unconcerned, in the afflictions of Joseph; I might have had the
Charity, to think him capable of Council and advice, and to wish him one
better able then my self to serve him herein. However give me leave to mention
one or two of those Considerations, before I conclude this letter, which
(doubtless) if he have not quite forgot himself, must needs sink deep into
his thoughts, and provoke him, if any thing can do it now he is at such a
distance, to return to himself.

. 4. Motives to the Gentleman to be indeed Religious, and first of Common
Civility.
To persuade the Gentleman to be good, a man would think were no hard task,
seeing he takes it so ill out, that any man should suspect him to be otherwise:
and yet notwithstanding, it may well be thought a very difficult and bold
undertaking, when it shall be considered how much he is in love with his
present self; for as self-love is blind whenever it should look upon it is
own faults; so is it altogether as deaf when it should hearken to instruction.
Yet because the Difficulty lies not so much in making him understand what he
should be, as in making him see how much he is at present what he ought not to
be; for that he ought to be good and Religious I know he will readily grant,
but that he is not so already we shall have much ado to persuade him to
believe: Seeing one half of our work is already done to our hand in his own
Conscience, we may have the greater encouragement to proceed in the other yet
behind: I am Confident, that by reading what goes before, he cannot choose but
behold himself in his own shape, at least in one so like it, that the very
sight must of necessity bege^ in him an hatred of the old object and a love to
the New: and therefore at present I shall confidently suppose, that I have no
more to do but this, to let him see in some measure how rational a thing it
is for him to be, what he himself so well knows, he should be.

I intend not here to trouble you or him with any large Encomium of Virtue or
Religion, which would swell up this Discourse much above the just proportion of
a Letter, neither is it my purpose to call in all those Auxiliaries I might
from several Common-places be supplied withal, to complete my conquest over
the Gentleman's Affections; I shall only mention one or two of those motives
which I hope may be, I am sure in another would infallnbly be prevalent and
Effectual.

The first and slightest which I shall here most humbly offer to his serious
Consideration, is an argument which he too often makes use of to a worse
purpose, and thereby suffers his sensual to gain the victory over his
Spiritual self. And this is taken from that Topic of Common Civility, which
naturally obliges him to make suitable returns to those many real kindnesses
and respects which the best of his friends have ever had for him. I shall
beseech him to remember, how whenever he is by the swing of his own
dominering lusts, no less then by the attractive vices of his acquaintance
drawn to a Tavern, or carried on to any other excess or riot, it is to this
one pretense be confidently betakes himself for Sanctuary; that he was merely
drawn in by the Civility of others, and that he was not able to resist the
Importunity of his friends; that Common Courtesy did strongly oblige him, not
to show himself reguardlesse of his acquaintance, by forsaking their Company
who had expressed themselves so desirous, and had taken so much pains to enjoy
his. I wish he would but call to mind what weight this argument has when
pressed upon him by his lewdest companions, and assisted by his own forward
Inclinations to that which is evil; and how infinitely more force then it
ought to have, when made use of by such as really desire his happiness, and
applied to that which in it self is so deservedly Commendable?

Would the Gentleman but open his ears, how many real friends might he hear,
and those such whose Courteous Invitations he cannot either with Civility or
Gratitude refuse, every where with no small importunity wooing him into Heaven,
and to walk along with them in those paths which will lead him thereunto. I
might here tell him how heartily God himself calls and Invites him, and daily
sends abroad his Messengers early and late to beg and entreat him to accept of
his Invitation; how he has prepared his Oxen and his Fatlings, and made ready
his Supper, how he bids him to a Feast of Fat things, and to drink wine and
milk without Money and without price: How he stands with his arms of mercy
spread wide open, to receive, embrace, and kiss his returning Prodigalls, with
a new Robe and a Ring, nay with a Crown and a Kingdom to welcome them. Can it
now be judged Civility to refuse and slight the Invitation of so Bountiful and
Indulgent a father? I might tell him how the Angels in Heaven even long for his
Company, and will be overjoyed to see him, and to hear him exercising that
voice so long abused in warbling out his lascivious. Love-songs, or roaring it
in his wild Catches, by bearing a part in their Holy Quire, in perpetual
Halelujahs to the King of Heaven: And can he think it Civility to make void the
Hopes, and prevent the joys of such Heavenly Company. I might further mind him
how the poor Church of England his mother, longs to receive him again with joy
into her Bosom, and to kiss him with the kisses of her Love, and to uncover
to him her breasts of Consolation; whence he needs not draw the Wind of False
Doctrine, nor fear to taste the blood of Tyrany and Oppression, but may suck in
that sincere milk which is his souls only true nourishment: She whose tender
care and wholesome instructions, like an unwise child he has so long despised,
longs yet once again to rejoice in his Love, and would be proud of so Glorious
a Son, which might not only cherish and defend, but grace and Credit his
mother: And can he call it less then an Incivility, to envy Her this Honor,
which wishes him that happiness? can he choose rather to augment her Sorrows,
and provoke her tears, and bite her breasts, and suck out her blood, then
cherish her and be nourished by her? All the Good men in the World, all the
most Honorable of God's servants, his special Ambassadors, do with all the
power of their Rhetoric, and moveingnesse of Passion, cry aloud, calling upon
him, and beseeching him to come home, and live happily in his Father's house;
these who have had the high charity for him, to take the care and charge of
him, and night and day to watch for his soul, and must be accountable for it
at the Great and Dreadful Audite: Upon Him they look with a more vigilant and
tender eye, as upon the very Best and fairest of the flock, whose straying
would be not only the loss of one, and him the fattest and chief of all the
rest, but such an one, as by his influence upon the others, may probably
occasion the loosing of many more: These persuade and entreat him, and that for
Christ's sake, for his who loved him so well, that he did not grudg to purchase
him with the best treasure in Heaven, his own most precious blood: And now, how
can the Gentleman who pretends so highly to all manner of Civility, think it
less then an unworthiness in him, to set so light by all this Care, and this
kindness? He that would be thought all Courtesy, all Civility, O let him not
now only be unkind and discourteous, to his God, and God's Church, God's
Angels, and God's Ministers, unto God's Son and his Savior. He that expressed
so remarkable a kindness to a false friend, who is most certainly the greatest
and most Dangerous of all enemies, to him who was only set by the Devil in a
friend's habit to Decoy him out of the way, and watch his opportunity to
murder his soul; let him not now for shame be so unnatural to himself, and
unkind to them, as to slight those real and sincere friends, who make it the
greatest part of their study to save him from eternal torments: He that would
not be bought out of his Civility, though but to a sin, and sinner, by the high
price of an Heaven and eternity; shall he now any longer be bribed to offer so
many affronts to his God, with an Hell, and it is Endless torments? Certainly,
if any Importunity could ever prevail, as alas too often it has, even to the
melting of his Soul into Sin and Vanity; what must it now do? never so great,
never backed with so many obligations to Civillity as here; for where ever did
there appear so much and so earnest wooing, and Entreating, and begging, and
watching, and dying?

Again, In civility to the Nation wherein he lives, and which he should labor
both to Serve and Credit; he is her Hopes, and he should be her Honor: She
calls him her choice Treasure, her strongest Pillar, her potent Protector; and
shall he not think it base to evacuate her hopes, and detect her too charitable
Error, by neglecting to deserve and maintain his name? Shall it be to his
Honor when he shall hear it said by others, that the Precious stones and
Jewels of England are all but vile and unprofitable pebbles; that all her
purest Gold is full of Dross; her best Pillars quite rotten; and her Guardians
her principal underminers and destroyers? that with the least wind that
blows, her pillars shake, and the building tumbles?

The Gentleman is that great and fair White, at which all men aim and direct
the Best of their Respects; and on whom they think the greatest of their
Honors not misplaced: And is this his Civility to all his Lovers and Admirers;
to leave them embracing a shadow for a substance, and to pay home their
affection and respects to him, with Neglect, and Disgrace, and too often with
misery and Ruin to themselves? Is this his care, to provide that no man shall
ever be deceived in him, but he that thinks well of him? If this be the
Gentleman's Civility, then what, I pray Sir, is his Unkindness?

. 5. A second Motive grounded upon Shame and Disgrace.
The next thing which I shall propose to his Consideration, is that which
usually has too powerful an operation upon him; I mean Shame and Disgrace. The
pretense of securing his Name and Reputation from these blurres, being another
of those Figleaves, wherewith he would fain hide his most foul and deformed
Vices: He had rather throw himself headlong into the grossest sin Imaginable,
then by chuseing what is best, but out of fashi^n with the Multitude, expose
himself to the laughter of fools and Sinners. O what torment, what affliction
is it to him, to be feer'd and Mocked, and Hooted at by a Company of Madmen,
for behaving himself with more sobriety and wisdom then they?

Here I shall most earnestly beseech the Gentleman to Consider, how miserably
he befools himself, and how inconsiderately he runs himself upon those rocks
he endeavors so carefully to avoid; whilst nothing can lay him more open to
shame, then that which was the first parent of it, his sin: which makes him a
mere Laughing Stock to all but those that pity him. Let him remember how he
daily provokes that God, who is the only Fountain of all true Honor here, as
well as Happiness hereafter, to Laugh at him and have him in Derisi^n Will it
be no shame for him to be found, at last, one of those wretched and
Contemptible Creatures, which shall have the door shut upon them, and be forced
to stand knocking at the Gates of Heaven, with sighs and tears, and like so
many miserable starving beggars in bitterness of spirit, craving admission,
and yet for all their selfe-conceited Greatness, be vouchsafed no more
respectfull an answer, then a -- Depart ye cursed, and -- Be gone I know you
not. What shame and Disgrace can the Gentleman fear to suffer like this, when
he who pranced it up and down with no less security then Pride and vanity, and
laughed to see others take so much pains to go to Heaven, shall even then,
when he thinks himself so sure of all, meet with a Scornful repulse?

But if the Gentleman will venture this Disgrace, because he phancies it to be
yet at so great a distance; yet I must tell him he is much mistaken to think he
shall speed much better here below. Is it no shame, to be justly accounted by
all, who understand themselves, a poor, silly, ignorant fool, such an one as
can please himself with a toy, a rattle; and can think himself the only wise
man in the world, when alas all they who are wise indeed, look upon him and
Pity him, as the most silly, despicable wretch under Heaven? It is thus men
commonly make trial of the Fool's Genius, they propose at once to his choice,
a piece of painted Glass and a Diamond, a Feather and a suit of Clothes; that
so by preferring the gayer^toy, before the precious or the serviceable
substance, he may betray his Ignorance and Simplicity. Alas, Sir, what can we
judge the Debauched Gentleman to be better or Wiser, then such a silly Deluded
Idiot, or (as we call him) a mere Natural, that sports himself with his own
shadow and places his Happiness in Dancing about in his party-colored Coat,
his Cap and his Feather? Did the Gentleman but know his friends, or durst he be
so much his own, as to entertain fewer Flatterers, who Cover his eyes and stop
his Ears, so that he neither sees nor hears of himself, what otherwise he
might; how soon would he grow ashamed of his own face! Did he but know how even
all they, whose tongues are bridlea either by his power or Prodigality in his
presence, talk of him when they are out of it, at their several meetings,
doubtless this would bring him out of love with his own Gayety, and
Prettiness. The Stoic talks of him with Contempt and Derision; the
Charitable Christian with as much Pity and Compassion; and what a shame is it
for the Gentleman who always thinks himself both the Best and Happiest man in
the world, either to deserve the one, or need the other?

If he yet reguard nothing of all this, but Contents himself with this Fancy
that he can do as much for them, and that he can think others as very fools as
they think him; and pity them as much: Alas, how is he to be pitty'd for these
thoughts! whilst like a man in an high Fever, he makes a Felicity of his
Distemper, and in the Lightness of his head, Phancies he is amongst Angels,
and in as Glorious a Condition as they. Let him consider how great a shame even
this is, to say, he can laugh at, or he can pity he knows not what: Others
know (alas too well) what in him they pity* They have, most of them, some time
or other, tasted of his sweets to their sorrow, but found them at last bitter
to their present joy and Comfort; Let him then first taste of their's, and then
let him choose, whom he will make the Object of his Pity. I am Confident he
would in the first place be thus Charitable to himself.

But this is not all the reason the Gentleman has to be ashamed of his present
course of life. Is it not a disgrace for a man therein to be cheated wherein he
has ever thought himself to be the wisest of all men; and to have such tricks
put upon him, by what he most Confides in, as will cast a damp upon all his
Iollity at once? There Is no man but will confess it an high degree of
indiscretion in himself without a very strong temptation indeed, to place his
great Confidence, and best Affections upon a mere cheat: and yet that Gentile
Sinner we speak of (if ever any) is highly guilty of this Folly. He may assure
himself, if he repent not in due time, Satan will put the same cheat upon
him, whereby he so sadly beguiled his wise Brother in the Gospel; whom in that
very night, when he Lullaby'd his soul into a groundless security, by
presenting to her eye the abundance of his riches; he suddenly snatches away
into the place of Torments, and makes this addition to the rest of his
Sorrows, that he derides his former security, and laughs at his present
misery. But this is too Common and Copious a Theme to dwell any longer upon; I
durst not altogether omit to mention it, because I have not yet met with any
thing more frequently prevalent with the Gentleman, to persuade him to sin,
then this fear of shame and Disgrace; and if it have been so powerful to hurry
him on to his ruin, I hope, rightly apprehended, it may have some efficacy in
drawing him to his Felicity.

. 6. A third Motive drawn from Aequity.
I shall but propose two Considerations more, and these are such, as much
concern the Gentleman to entertain, viz: of Aequity and Honor.

And first, in all aequity and justice the Gentleman ought to proportion his
Gratitude, to the Bounty which enriched him; and to live a Gentleman is as
little as can, with any reason, be thought a just requital of his Goodness
who made him more Honorable then others. For it was not he himself by whom he
was made better then another man, neither has he any thing which he has not
received. It cannot therefore be Gratitude in him like a Spongy substance, to
suck in all which is proffered it, but to return nothing again without a
Squeezing: Or like a black and heavy clod of earth, to receive the most
Courteous and enlivening rays of Heaven, and yet requite the Bounty neither by
a present cheerful reflection, nor a future seasonable fructification: neither
yet to lie like a rotten Dunghill, which repaies all the sweet Influence it
participates of, in a stenchy fume, or a generation of Vermin. He should
rather labor to resemble the true Crystal, whose property it is either to
transmit or reflect those rays it receives, with great advantage of light to
the darker objects about it; and of a more visible splendour and Glory to the
light it self. A true Diamond will not cease to sparkle in the darkest night,
and the true Gentleman too, will take care, that his light so shine before men,
that they may behold his works rather then his person (as the Sun gives us a
clearer prospect of the other parts of the world, then of it is own Body) and
teach them much more to Glorify his God in Heaven, then to pay him a Reverence
upon Earth. The Gold was not made so excellent a Metal, that it might lie hid
and rust in the Bowels of the Earth, but by a reception of the Prince's Image,
administer to the Necessities of Commerce amongst the several members of the
world. It would be a poor thing to Imagine God should make the best of
Creatures for the worst of uses; or the Noblest of Men to be Satan's
Instruments now, his Companions and his prey anon. The Gentleman I know will
easily grant himself to be a Vessel created for Honor; but it is strange he
should go about to prove himself so, by continuing always Empty, or refusing
to hold any thing, but the worst of poisons: by standing (as some of those do
which cost most pains in the making, most money in procuring, most time in
scouring) idle and useless, only to adorn and grace the Cup-board, and shine
there, 'till they become Dusty again. As all Flesh is Grass, so is the
Gentleman the Flower of the Grass; but let it not appear in this, that the
grass is more useful, though the flower more beutifull; neither let the leaf
smell sweeter then the Rose. Though all Mankind be but Dust and Earth, yet
certainly we may in reason think the Gentleman a part of the Richest soil, and
from which the Husbandman or Gardener may justly expect both the fairest
flowers and fullest Crop, as from that ground which in it self is fattest, and
in the Cultivating and Manuring whereof, has been spent both the most money and
the most sweat. Far be it from the Gentleman to be called (as we do sometimes
our most fertile fields) only the Proudest ground, such as swaggers it out
with Poppy and Cockle, and flatters the eye with many fine Blew and Yellow
Flowers, but such as are neither for use themselves, nor will suffer the good
Corn to thrive and grow 'till it may be so. The Gentleman, I am sure, would be
troubled to be thus requited for his Care and pains by his field, and shall not
God be justly angry for the like bad usage from the Gentleman? Certainly he
cannot in equity expect the largest wage, who does the least work, or think he
can* merit the most Honorable reward, by standing all the day Idl^; nay for
hindering and Deterring others who were going to labor in the Vineyard. Shall
the Steward be the greatest loyterer, and most Careless^ servant in the whole
Family? And is it fit the Heir should be the meerest Prodigal? I am Confident
the Gentleman would think it an injury to be thought so* and is it not then as
great an injustice to be so? I should not have breath enough to enumerate half
those many Honors and Dignities, those several Privileges, and Advantages,
Endowments and Possessions which the Gentleman is blessed with above his poorer
Brethren, and can we think all these, not encouragements to be better, but
rewards and Bribes to and for being Idler then others?

The Gentleman is apt to boast himself much of his Noble Ancestors and
Virtuous Progenitors, and is it not therefore equity, that all men should
expect from that tree the best fruit, which has the Noblest root? Men do not
of Thistles expect grapes, nor of Brambles Figs; but even of the wild Olive
tree when but grafted into the true Olive tree, God expects the Natural fruit.
That Noble person who Adopts a Clown his heir, will expect he should
henceforward become a Gentleman, and how much more is this to be expected from
him who is born the true Son and heir? The Gentleman will pull his Cock's head
off, if he degenerate from his kind; and why should his God use him better?

The Gentleman, again, is apt to talk very much of his good Breeding, and
Ingenuous Education; and certainly it is the greatest happiness which can so
early betide him, that usually he has Parents which are as tender of his
Honor as of his life, and very often more* careful of his soul, then of their
own: who howsoever they live themselves, yet will be sure to reprove the least
vice in the Child, and it is a very ordinary form of blessing him, to pray he
may be a better man then his Father. Now the Gentleman will expect this from
his Horse or Spaniel, to behave himself hereafter, as he has been taught when
he was young. Alas, how many brave and Generous dispositions are flatted and
lost, how many Ingenious spirits are dulled and besotted, how many keen wits
are blunted and lose their Edg, by being put to Delve in the Earth, being
altogether Cowed and Enslaved, by the Tyranny of Poverty and an Adverse
Fortune; whilst they could not be allowed that timely and Noble Nurture and
Cultivation, whereby they might have been weeded and improved to a very high
degree of Excellency and fruitfulness? How much good and tractable earth has
been lost merely for want of a Skillful Potter, or spoiled upon the wheel of
one unskilful? Whilst the Gentleman has all the aid and assistance that
Prudent Parents or a rich-purse can afford him; and shall he, whom God has thus
blessed with that which may procure him as well what is Best as what is
Necessary, grow more Barren under all this care and Good-husbandry, which is
bestowed upon him? Shall he like a stubborn and unwieldly branch, so soon as
ever he is from under the wise hand which would have pruin'd and straighted
him, start back into his Natural rudeness, and Deformity again? Shall he be
like the Vial or Watch, one whereof will only continue it is even and Certain
motion, so long as the owner forgets not to wind him up; and the other gives us
its sweet sound no longer then the Musician's hand provokes and beats it; but
so soon as the hand rests, the Motion and the Music ceases, and in a short
time, the strings crack, and the Pegs fall, and the Noble Instrument grows
moldy and worm-eaten? Is it not most unnatural, that he who has all these
great advantages in his youth, which others do often in vain, and he himself
too often when it is too late, wish to enjoy, should not do something whereby
he might show all that care and cost, not quite thrown away and misspent? And
yet much more, that he should only so behave himself, as one that knows how
readily to forget, whatever had cost him so much time, and pains, and Money in
acquiring; and one that can now make that a part of his glory, which indeed is
no small argument of shame, that he once had a little learning, and Might have
been a Christian, had he not had wit enough to befool himself, and so become a
Gentleman. It troubles me to say that very many of our English Gentlemen do
thus Commence (as it were) and take Degrees in Ignorance and Vanity, I wish it
troubled him as much to do so.

Again, it were but just, our Gentlemen should think upon their large portions
and fair Inheritances, and so take the Measure of their Duties, by their
liberal allowances. To have an estate makes not man Happy, but to use an
estate wisely may bring a man very far on his way toward it. O let it never
be said of the Gentleman, what is recorded to the perpetual dishonor of the
Young Man (he knows [I hope] where) that he departed from Christ because he
was very rich. It is certainly a mistake in any man, to think, a man's soul may
no way feed and grow fat, upon his wealth: or to say a man may not become a
Better man, by having greater possessions. Wisedome's seven Pillars are most
readily erected, and firmly grounded upon a Basis of Gold: And Virtue cannot
there have the best fair, and thrive most, though she may have a kind welcome,
where Poverty keeps the house. Though the treasures of Wisdom and knowledge lie
not in the Chist, yet are they for the most part so locked up, that he who
would at any time come readily at them, must not sail to carry the Key in his
Pocket. Though Virtue and Piety may live Quietly and Contentedly under a
thatched roof, and may meet with such entertainment as may preserve life; yet,
alas, they are but there as in Prison, and shall hardly obtain the Liberty to
walk much abroad except there be something in the purse to purchase their
freedom: Without this they may have what fettered Captives may enjoy, their
hearts and tongues, but very seldom their hands or feet at liberty. What rare
perfections might be attained to, and what wonders wrought, had but either the
Rich Gentleman the poor man's soul, or the Poor man the Rich Gentleman's purse?
What a shame is it, that he whom God has blessed with enough to buy the
Precious Pearl, should rather choose to lay it out upon an Hobbyhorse; that he
should suffer either Himself to be a Fool, or Virtue a Beggar, when it is in
his power to prevent both? If his wealth know not what to do with his Virtue,
let him give Virtue the key, and she knows how to make use of his wealth. What
an ungrateful fool is he, who with what is given him will neither fulfill the
Donor's will, nor make use of the gift to his own advantage? How might the
Church become truly Glorious, and her raiment literally of wrought Gold, how
might the Poor man grow Rich, and the Rich man Good and Happy, did the
Gentleman study to make that improvement, which he ought to make of this one
talent, and not either with the Raunting Prodigal waste his inheritance by
riotous living; or with the other Ill-husband and foolish servant, wrap it up
in the Napkin of a lazy, or hide it in the Earth of a Worldly mind?

There is a third obligation whereby the Gentleman in equity is bound to outgoe
his Inferiors, no less in Goodness then in Wealth and Pomp. I mean an
Immunity from the Drudgeries of the World: Nature and Fortune both seem to
consent in granting him a Dispensation from those Brickkilnes, to which by the
Pharaoh-like Cruelty of a Necessitous Condition, many a better Israelite is
sentenced. He tugs not at the Oars, nor delves in the Dirt, nor washes his
face, and Bathes his body in his own sweat; nor lives, as other men are often
constrained to do, almost by a wearisomenesse of living: But seems to plead an
Exemption from that part of Adam's Curse, whereby he was condemned in the
sweat, of his Brows to eat his bread. Whilst many others by their continual
labor, seem from meal to meal to kneed their own dough; and other men's too;
and, like the poor Israelites, when driven out of Egypt, to run up and down
with their kneeding-troughs upon their Shoulders. They carry both their Lives
and livelihoods to and fro in their hands; and by a toilesome improvement of
the Gentleman's vast estate, pick up for themselves a very scant subsistence.
He eats the fat, and drinks the sweet, and has one part of him always provided
for to his hand; and ought not this to lay a strong obligation upon him, to
take more pains about the other? Ought not this to bind him to the ready
service of his God, who has made the whole world in a manner to serve him?
Certainly he never had a general Dispensation granted him from all labor, but
only from the more slavish and drudging part of it; that the less he has to
care for besides, the more time he should have to care for his soul and Heaven.
It was Adam's growing wanton in Eden, where the Earth freely brought forth all
things of it self, and where his task of laboring was but his Recreation not
his toil, which sent him first abroad to sweat in the World, and to wage a
Constant war with Briars and Thistles. And if the Gentleman will not take
some pains to dress the Garden of his Soul, when all the world seems to be so
much his own round about him, that one part of it is his Steward, the other his
Estate, he can expect no less then to be driven out at last with a flaming
sword to seek a Miserable killing livelihood in another.

Could the Gentleman be truly sensible of his extraordinary privileges he
enjoyes, more then the rest of his laboring brethren do, in this one
particular, doubtless we should see him more thankful, and less Idle; for
though leisure be a very great blessing yet is lazin^sse a mere Canker, which
will in a short time, if not seasonably cured, eat out both Purse and Soul. Let
him not thus turn the Opportunities of doing good, into encouragements to
sin, nor the Means of Happiness, into the Instruments of Misery.

O what an inestimable advantage is this, for any man that would either learn
much or do well, to have always a Soul so tranquil and Serene, that all is
Smooth and calm within him? What would many a brave Ingenious spirit, which
could never yet obtain one smile from fortune, but lies always under the black
cloud of Poverty, and tossed upon the tumultuous waves, of much bucsinesse and
more sufferings, what would it not give to be blessed with such a Sunshine, and
to have so long a vacation from the world and it is sorrows? None of those
distractiois which come from the affairs of the vorld without him, which with
so much e^^rnesse and irresistible Importunity, ^dl and pull, and hail away
many a good soul from his Study and devotion, need to be so much as hearkn'd to
by the Gentleman; vho if he would but understand, the easy distinction, betwixt
being careful and being ^iesy, betwixt Idleness and leisure, we should find
him betaking himself to another and more cheerful course of life, having much
time to use, but none to lose.

And suppose you should ask the Gentleman this question, and wish him to answer
it according to Conscience-Whether, if he had a servant whom he had designed
for some more honorable and extraordinary empoyment; and to this end, had
exempted hin from all Common business and works proper to an Inferior
calling; and not only so, but furnished him also, with whatever he could
suppose isntrumental to his work; and for his better encouragement had given
him a considerable sum of Money beforehand; if after all this, this servant
should neglect this business, and throw away all the time allotted him, in
matters of small concernment, or in mere Idlen^sse, go and spend his
allowance, and waste his Master' money in Bad Company, and in pampering up his
own humors and lusts; let him tell you in good earnest, whether he would not
think himself slighted and abused, and for ^ reward, turn that servant out of
doors o^ into Prison? And why then should the Gentleman flatter himself up
with fair^ hopes; his charge I am sure is as great, (...) care much less, and
therefore his case can (...) no better.

I may here very seasonably add, as another branch of this Motive, the
Gentleman's fair opportunity, not only of doing good to himself, but others
also: and such an Opportunity it is, as is indeed a Necessity of doing either
much good, or much hurt by his Example. For the Gentleman stands upon the top
of an Hill, and being advanced to that considerable an height, is thereby made
(...) Conspicuous to the eye of the world, that his actions have an influence
upon the Inh^bitants of the vales round about him. (...) His Tenants must for
fear Flatter him, and many others will for his favor humor him, an^ there be
yet more, who have an Ambition (...) be like him. Every sin in him is like an
Eclipse in the Sun, whereby not only his own luster and brightness is
obscured and hid, but his rays are withheld from the world below, and a
Malignant Influence scattered abroad upon Inferior Bodies. It is a very hard
matter for a Gentleman to be bad alone; I dare say, his heart will bear
witness, that he owes not a few of his own sins to the powerful Example of
his superiors; and that he has very often resisted the more sober and virtuous
inclinations of his own soul, and the more rational dictates of his own
judgment, only out of an Ambitious humor to make himself Company for great
ones; and because he was ashamed to be found less then a Gentleman in any
thing, though in Sin it self. Let him therefore consider how much it will
Concern him, who is the true Loadstone of the Nation, whose Motion the poor
Iron souls of the multitude with trembling expect; and perceiving follow, to
turn himself always to the right Pole. I wish the Gentlemen of our Island
would remember this, that by their vices they prove not only Bad in
themselves, but unjust to their Neighbors: that so they may see how much in
equity they are obliged to amend their lives.

. 7. A fourth Motive from Honor and Reputation.
The other mark to which I would gladly persuade the Gentleman to turn his
eye, is that which he pretends to aim at most; his Honor or Reputation;
things (If you will believe him) whereof he is more tender then his life; but let
us see how he will endeavor to make this good, for I cannot believe he values
much, what he takes to pains to preserve.

The main Character of an Honorable person, is a great care in him, never to
do any thing below his Name, or which may reflect upon his Progenitors or his
Family with shame and disparagement. He therefore can admit no emploiment which
is base or low, but as his Honor was at first raised, so he studies to
maintain it at that height, by some noble and Gallant achievement. But how
truly tender is he of his Honor, who thus (as we have said before) is willing
to degrade himself into a Beast, and to trample upon his Dignity and humanity
at once? He that can bend his proud neck to the most galling Yoke which Satan
can put upon him; and patiently kneeles him down to receive so many loads of
Dirt upon his back? who scorns not to drudg for the Worst and Basest of
Masters, and that in his meanest and most Beggarly service, when he sends him
out (with the Young Prodigal) into the field of Carnal pleasures, there to
feed a few swinish lusts: and all this too, upon hopes of the slenderest reward
here, a few deceitful Husks, and in daily fear and expectation of the most
dreadful punishment hereafter, that of Endless torments.

The Gentleman that values his honor, will be sure not to mix with any
Company, but such, from whom he may reap both Credit and profit; such as will
be no lets to him in his virtuous progress, nor blemish to his desired
Reputation. But alas how little do those Gentlemen reguard either of these, who
indeed care for no Companions but such as have made themselves altogether the
Creatures of their vices, and the nearest Pandors of their Lusts.

The truly Honorable Gentleman, is always most faithful and punctual in the
performance of his promises, and shows himself to be as Good as his word,
esteeming no disgrace like that of deserving the Lie. Every promise he makes,
he pawns his Honor and Reputation, to secure the performance; and looks upon
no disrespect as comparable with that, of not being thought a person fit to be
trusted. But how little care do our Gentlemen take to maintain this support of
their Credit; who swear so frequently to, they know not, or heed not what, that
they cannot possibly so much as remember, much less discharge one third part
of their Oaths. These upon every slight or no occasion they send out in such
Volleyes, and with so much Inconsideration and temerity, that they cannot have
time to Consider whether one half of what they swear be true or false. Nay
there is one solemn Vow, and that the most sacred one that ever they made, and
to a person with whom it most Concerns them to be punctual and deal
faithfully, I mean that at their Baptism; which, alas, they so well perform,
as that they hardly ever call to mind, or can believe there was any such thing
done by them: Was it not this that then they promised, to Forsake the Devil
and all his works, the vain pomp and glory of the World, with all the Covetous
desires of the same, and all the Carnal desires of the flesh, so that they
would neither follow nor be lead by them? In which, the engagement of their
Honor would not serve the turn, but they brought their sureties and Bondmen,
who promised (as much as in them lay) to see all made good; I tremble to think
how this vow has been fulfilled by all those persons who would be thought so
sensible of Honor, that their bare word might at any time serve for their
Bond. What they vowed to forsake, they with all earnestness follow; and that
whereby they would not be led, they sweat to Outgoe. Hugging and embracing
those temptations they promised to abandon, and making the Vain Pomp and Glory
of the World the only Gods they dare love and adore. If the Gentleman be thus
careless in maintaining his Credit, thus false in his promises to God and his
Soul, I hope he will not think it strange, if others be so scrupulous and
weak-faith'd, as not to believe him to be a Gentleman upon his own bare word.

Further yet, he that desires to be truly Honorable, and esteemed so; Will so
provide for his Honor, that the world may have no just cause to throw the
miscarriages and sins of his Country upon his shoulders, or that all the
Miseries thereof should be found the Daughters of his Vices. But whether or no
we have any reason to blame the English Gentleman for the Calamities of his
Nation, I appeal to himself, let his Conscience determine it. To whom shall we
impute the Blindness, the Ignorance, the Giddiness of the People, but to him
that pretends to be the eye and the head? We know it is the Lightness of the
head, which often makes the heels stand uppermost; And when we see a Drunkard
reel and staggar, we all know it is the Giddiness of his head which causes his
uneven motion. It were happy for us, if all those who would be thought the
Heads of this Headless Nation, would daily consider their office; and how much
of the Crazinesse and Distemper of this Infatuated people, is to be imputed to
the unsetlednesse of their own Brains, and want of a due Government of
themselves. O that the World might no longer have just cause to say (as now
many are apt to do) that the sad disease of this poor Kingdom, wherein it has
well nigh Cough'd out it is very heart, proceed from a cold it has taken in the
Noblest members of its Body: and that indeed is Atheism.

If therefore our Gentlemen ever intend to deserve that honor, they so egerly
desire, let them learn to be and Act like themselves, so shall they assure
themselves of true Honor both before God and amongst men. Let them pluck up
their Courage, and make it appear to the World, that they have yet something
of a Noble and Generous Spirit within their breasts; that they dare yet own a
God, in despite of Atheism and Blasphemy, and stand up for his Church in
opposition to Tyranny and Sacriledg: that they have Spirits above the reach of
Swords, and Souls not to be out-braved by the terrors of the Grave; nor blown
out of their bodies with the proud and threatening breath of those that can but
seem mighty. Let it once be seen that they have espoused a Religion which has a
Majesty enough to Daunt a Nebuchadnezar with the hottest furnace in his Mouth:
and an Holy zeal, which (as the Brighter Sun beams do upon the fainter light
of a Candle) can prey upon, and Consume to nothing, the most scorching flames
of Persecution. When they have learned to take the roaring Lion by the Jaws,
and pull out his teeth; when they can (with the stout Champion of Israel)
defend the endangered Church against that great Goliath of Atheism, which now
or never appears with the Weaver's Beam in his hand; when they have once got
the Courage, to slight and pity all the Cursing Shimeahs and railing
Rabshakahs of the land; to scorn the Barkings of reproach; and not to be
afraid of the teeth of Poverty; when they dare go with Abraham to sacrifice
their less lovely Isaacks at the Mountain of the Lord: In a word, when they
dare be good without fear of Shame or Want, and Religiously Loyal without
dreading either Beggary or Death: Then shall they have Honors without stain or
Blemish; and Names venerable in the Mouths of all men: then shall they set
their feet upon the Necks of the Mighty, and Tyrants shall bow down under them,
and they shall be set up on high with the Rulers of the People: then shall they
have the acclamations of the Saints, and the Bended knees of the poor at the
throne of Grace, for their long life and Happiness; Then shall they be feared
by their enemies, and loved by their friends; They shall have the Motherly
Blessing of the Church, the joyful welcome and plaudite of Angels, and the
Bountiful reward and Euge of their God and Father; a Glorious Robe, an
immarcessible Crown, a perpetual kingdom: for indeed this Honor have all his
Saints.

I am really ashamed, and heartily sorry, that either the Gentleman's
unnatural Behavior, that strange Meander of all vices, or the sad and
deplorable condition of this poor Church and Nation, to which in all Reason,
Honor, and Conscience, he ought to show a more filial respect and Affection,
have provoked me to this unusual length of a Letter: But the Copiousnesse of
the Theme, which you first proposed to my thoughts, will I know be my
sufficient excuse; though the unpleasantnesse of it, together with those many
other businesses which are never wanting to You, but now incumbent upon me,
might afford you an opportunity of being more profitably employed and me more
suitably to my present calling, then in reading or writing of what here I send
you. I shall therefore in a very few lines more, give you a Breviate of what I
have already said, or have more to say concerning the Mixed theme of this
letter.

. 8. The Conclusion and sum of all.
I shall allwaies with all readiness Confess that I dare not have a low
esteem of any of those Worthy Persons, whom the Allwise God by advancing them
to the Top of the Pinnacle, seems to Commend both to me and others, as the most
fit objects of our Admiration and Reverence: Only I hope the Gentleman will
give me leave to make it a part of my Prayers (and too sad experience daily
shows us what great reason we have so to pray) that they who stand both so
high and so Ticklishly may ever take heed lest they fall. Satan had the
Confidence upon as high a place (though at that height he met with the most
exemplary Humility that the world ever heard of) to venture a temptation upon
the Lord of Life: where certainly his hopes of prevailing must rationally be
thought to have been as low, as his attempt was high: It is therefore too much
to be feared he has very often his wished for success in overturning the
Bravest Sinner. The Subtle Serpent, though he despair of Heaven, is always
crawling upwards, and can as easily twist and wrap himself about the Gilded
spire of Honor and Nobility, as once he did about the fairest tree in Eden;
and questionless not seldom with as much unhappy success, as malicious
Subtilty. Here, I am sure, he has the same or surer holds to fasten upon, and
Climb up by, which there he had; Even the wild protuberances of Pride and
Ambition. The first assault he made, was upon an unspotted Innocence but
matched with an over facile and flexible Humanity; and meeting there with the
Hoped Issue of his temptation, he takes the Boldness to venture on an Infinite
Wisdom in the Bosom of Omnipotence: and though there he was foiled, yet
being the more madded with the Shameful repulse, it is likely he will fall the
more desperately, and so with the greater violence, upon that Prudence, which
is at best much abated by the base mixture and too excessive alloy of a Beloved
Folly. I wish it might be the Gentleman's good Fortune or Courage to ward the
stroke, and come of unhurt.

When I hear this inferior world wherein we are to breath out our Minority,
compared (and not unfitly) to an Inn or Diversory; whereinto Man, whose life
is a journey or Pilgrimage, only turns in to take a night's lodging, that so
he may fit and dress himself against the Morning for a Better Country; I am
ready to take the Boldness to prosecute the Metaphor a little farther, and I
would fain say, that those Glittering, spangled souls, are most Noble and
Honorable, which Wise Nature treats with the greatest respect and Ceremony;
those, for whom, as her Chief Guests she has reserved her most stately, and
fairest rooms: that these, if any, are to be thought the Gentlemen of the
world, to whom Nature as well as Fortune seems to pay a reverence.

These are the Men who enter into the world with that Ceremonious state and
Pomp, that would almost persuade us they were sent hither on an Ambassy from
Heaven. They are indulged an Honor seemingly too great for Mortallity. They
are admitted into the world by the most beautiful gate of a Renowned
Parentage, they are ushered along with all that Pomp and Magnificence, which
use to attend our highest hopes and most teeming Expectations; and are most
significant of our greatest joys: Their births are congratulated, and they
welcomed hither, with a long and Methodically ordered train of solemn and
Honorable both Civil and Religious Ceremonies. They are honorably placed in
the most richly furnished, and neatly contrived Lodgings, of Comely and
wel-featured Bodies; in adorning whereof the Divine Art of Better Nature, has
best shown it self; these are Gloriously set forth by all those most lively
Images of Majesty and Honor, which Corrupted Nature can be thought capable of
receiving: All these are more sweetened, by a lovely prospect into the world
abroad, where an Indulgent fortune, to give the better relish to the gifts of
Nature, presents her self in all variety of Dresses, of Riches, Pleasures,
Preferments; ever creating such store of New-delights as may soonest win upon
the sense, and best recreate the soul.

And now, Sir, would any man seeing all this, think it possible, that after
Nature, and Fortune, and the Great God of Both, by so long a Succession of no
less truly Delectable then indeed inestimable blessings, have been so
industriously Solicitous for the Gentleman's welfare; and with so much
Charitable Importunity, have Constantly Courted his soul, to be in love with
that fair hand which made it; to invite it to an early sense of it is own worth
and excellency, and to set a due estimate upon it self; to possess it with
the true Apprehensions of that, which is certainly the highest Honor that can
befall a mortal here or Crown him hereafter, I mean his near Relation to
Heaven, and the God of Heaven his Maker: Would any man believe it possible
after all this, that the Gentleman should be either so uncharitable to
himself, or so ungrateful to his Creator: either so much a Churl or a Fool,
or Both: as neither to yield to those Importunities of a Wooing Heaven: nor
Embrace the Courteous Invitations of an endless Felicity? Would you believe,
that when he is entrusted by the King of Glories, upon so honorable an
Expedition as that of winning a Crown; he should be tired and foot-sore at the
very first step; and sit down to rest him upon the first cold stone in his way,
there flattering his Childish Humor, in the Empty fruition of some Garish but
fading vanity? Could any man with a rational soul in him, Hope to find an
Happiness in such toys adequate to the Immense desires of an Heaven-borne
substance? Alas, who is ignorant, that these pretty Glories, and little
felicities, which so please us here, cannot in any reason be thought more
(seldom so much) then the smaller tokens of a Father's Love, or an Earnest
penny to a future Inheritance; something for the Child to keep his purse with
whilst he is here at school: Nay, they are so often less then this, that they
amount not to so much, as those less tokens, which we use to call the Mother's
Blessing; but are rather like the deceitful Gifts of a Stepdame, such as a
brass shilling, or a Gilded Nutmeg, the slight kindness not of a Fond but a
dissembling Fortune: whereby the unwary Child is very often bribed and
Flattered out of his due Portion and Inheritance.

Doubtless, if the Gentleman find himself to be so much Fortune's Darling, or
(as he would rather have us think) the Favorite of Heaven: as to be afforded a
more tender and delicate Education then his poorer brethren: I dare hardly
believe all this an Indulgence to sin, but an encouragement unto Holiness, and
to go on with Cheerfulness to see what that Good Father has in store for him
in Heaven, who is so liberal to him here upon Earth. The Comfortable warmth of
his Prosperous Condition, is indulged him, thereby to preserve his soul, more
tender, and pliable, zealously forward to receive both more Generous and more
pious impressions: not to scorch or dry it up into a rebellious obstinacy:
neither to give him the opportunity of melting it away in the soft embraces of
more wanton and lascivious delights: or to Dissolve his happiness into the
Aerie and shadowy vanity of a Carnal pleasure. The Golden Foundation being
laid, God expects, he should not so abuse it, as to erect thereupon any meaner
structure then an Heaven. The right use of what he already enjoyes, ought to
dispose his soul into a Capacity of receiving more and better, even of those
spiritual blessings which will set him up above the reach either of an adverse
Fortune, or a Malicious Devil.

If the Gentleman would be persuaded to cast a Religious eye upon the Excellent
Symmetry and lovely features of his own Body, wherewith it is no strange thing
to find him beautified above other men; certainly he would presently consider
with himself, that this fine Outside was not the only or best piece of work
intended, but there should be a suitable Inside too, such as may make the man a
fit temple of the Holy Ghost to reside in: that this stately and well-wrought
Body should be but the external Emblem of a more Beutifull and Majestic
soul.

If it be his Good luck to find his way to Paradise straw'd all over^with
Roses: whilst other poor souls are forced to run Bare footed through Briars
and thistles, stints and Pibbles; whereby their feet are often so galled, that
their pace proves slow, and so pricked and scratched that you may trace them,
as they their Savior, into Heaven by their blood; he ought wisely to consider,
that this entertainment should not retard him in his journey, neither make him
Fancy that he is already in the Garden; and therefore may sit down, or roll
his soul upon these sweets to a satisfaction; alas, the more he thus tumbles
upon them, the sooner will these tender Blossoms fade and wither: They are
only scattered in his paths, that by their fragrancy his decaying Spirits may
be restored and cherished, that he faint not ere he reach that garden where
grows the Tree of life, and never-perishing Flowers of sweetest pleasures,
even at God's right hand for evermore.

If the Gentleman may boast of his honorable descent, from a virtuous and if
so, a deservedly renowned family; how much will it concern him in Honor and
Duty, to provide that his Children by his virtues, may be enabled to brag of as
much as he? It will certainly be a greater disgrace to him, when his Son shall
be constrained to say, he had a Worthy Grandfather, then it can now be his
Glory, that he himself can tell the world he had a Deserving father. Can he
Imagine it half so Creditable, to swaggar it out with the Old Name and Title
of his rotting Ancestors; as to manifest their yet surviving Virtues in
himself their Genuine offspring? What a pitiful Credit must it needs be for
him, to show a stranger a firm and substantial foundation, laid by his
Ancestors many years ago, toward an intended Heroic and sumptuous building,
if all this while he have neglected by his own virtues to add a
superstructure, proportionable to such a Groundwork?

I am Confident the Gentleman needs not a remembrancer to mind him of his Name;
nor any other Herald to persuade him he has a right unto it, then his own
Ambition and Conceit: But how unlikely he is by the means he uses to make the
world believe him, he seems not so well to Consider. Is it a matter of such
Credit, to show us, how well he can put on his Fathers old Clothes, or play his
Ape in his Silver Ierkin? Is this the main Badg of his Gentilitie, that he has
never a Coat but what was given him by the Herald; or that he lives as Beggars
do, upon the Charity and Alms of the Parish? Let him say, what other title it
is he can pretend to, who by his own personal merits cannot purchase his name?
What does he less then Pick up his Crumbs under the Old-man's table: Nobility
without Virtue has just so much life, as it can Borrow; and only breaths by
the common and Ignoble breath of the People. What does the unworthy Gentleman,
but go from door to door for an Alms of Honor? One throws him in a Sir,
another a Master, a third a Good-your-Worship; and with these few scraps he
makes a shift to preserve alive his meagre and raw-boned Reputation.

A name that thus feeds only upon the fragments of charity, is not like to
grow truly great in have: And a Reputation so long worn already without
mending, is too vile and cheap for a true Gentleman to appear abroad withal.
The Cloak must needs be very threadbare, that is so old, and has bin so ill
used; It were more Noble to wear a New one of his own buying, then that of his
Great-grandfather which at best he can by his scantling virtues only fill full
of patches. His Father's Honor can be his but at Second-hand: and to be proud
of an Hereditary title only, is but to raunt it in a Deadman's suit, and like
him, whom he too often Imitates, after his father's death, to fright the world
by appearing in his likeness; for when we come more narrowly to examine the
Reallity of what we think we see in him, we find nothing but a cheat and
Delusion of the sense; we catch at a bare Apparition for a substance; or at
best grasp a senseless clod of cold clay instead of a Man. What is it to be
thus Sollicitous after an Old Coat of Arms, but to wish the Herald were a
Broaker, And that he might buy old scutcheons, as he may old Cloaks, because
his Merits will not amount to the price of New ones. Whilst he thus opens his
Press, and shows it to be well-lined with the rich apparel of those who
lived before him, he does no more then what often his father's Page or Lacquey
is able to do: Nay I shall be bold to say it, whatever the Gentleman may
therefore think of himself or me, that he who shows his Father's Bearing,
without some Honorable Addition, due at lest, if not given, to his own
virtues, has but little more reason to boast of his Gentility, then his
Father's Fool or Fiddler, whom I have often observed to bear his Master's Coat
upon his Livory. O that the Gentleman would in good earnest Consider, how much
all Wisemen laugh at him, even in his Finest Clothes; and how much more all
Good men do pity him, when they see him with all his Borrowed Bravery delight
to tumble in the Mire!

He that will be a Gentleman indeed, must look no less carefully before him,
on what yet remains for him to do, to maintain his Honor, then behind him, on
what has been already done by his Ancestors to purchase it. Honor has a very
delicate palate, and loves to feed upon fresh Diet; and very much Nauseates the
Molded Offals of Antiquity. No broken Dishes come to her table, neither can
she subsist by Chewing the Cud after the largest feasting upon the
Grandfather's deserts. The sharp teeth of Time will at length enter deep into
the Marble Monument under which the Fathers Ashes are laid to rest, or at least
the Injurious Dust will fill up and hide the fair Characters thereupon in which
perhaps alone the Honor of the Son stands legible: It can be no long-lived
Honor, where the Patent is only a Dead-man's Epitaph. It will therefore
highly concern the Gentleman in due time at least to lay a New gilt upon the
Old letter, that so he may transmit an Honorable Memory of his name to late
Posterity, rather under his own hand, then his father's Zeal.

The Stateliest Pile, yields and stoops by little and little to the
importunities of Age: And it is rare to see a building left by the father so
firm and weather-proof, but it will require some repairing before the Death of
the Son. A Good-husband will therefore make have even to prevent his fears, and
not expect an Invitation from a visible ruin; knowing that it is a Necessity
not deserving the name of Providence to under-prop the declining wall; Neither
will a Prudent person cover a dangerous breach in the wall of his house with a
superficial plaster or paint, thereby to Cozen the World into a false Opinion
of his Counterfeit thrift and Providence, 'till a sudden fall of the whole house
discover at once his folly and his Policy; In vain shall the Gentleman by the
bare shadow of a virtue endeavor to make the world believe he wants not the
substance: He must by the real and undissembled excellencies of a Generous
soul, sincerely devoted to the service of Religion and Virtue, both add many
Sollid Pillars to support the Old, and lay a firm Basis for a New structure.

A Fathers good name deserves a reverent memory in after ages, but will never
be injured or grow less renowned, by being out-shone in the Son's virtues: It
is rather proud thus to grow young again. There can be no perpetual entailment
of Honor upon all succeeding posterity; The best Gentleman holds his Nobility
but by Lease from Heaven, which is to be renewed once at least in every life;
when a good round sum of Heroic Actions are expected as his Fine. God has
his Stewards always ready to receive the Gentleman's rent, the Church and
State, and he that pays not at his day, to either of these, forfeits all.

It is no slight sin to suppose God so vainly Prodigal of his Jewels, as to
think them well disposed of when placed in Swines snouts, where they only
serve to root up the Earth, and delve in the Dirt. Common, Rustic, and
Plebeian spirits fitted by the hardness of their Nature, to Dig and plow the
ground, these are the Out-labourers of God's great Household, who by the
greatness of their Necessary Drudgery, take off much of the Burden from the
more refined sort of Mankind: The Gentleman God has chosen to be as it were the
steward of his Family, and Guardian to his Church; and therefore in all
Prudence and Gratitude he ought to endeavor a due discharge of so great a
trust. No Loyterer, much less, a Spend-thrift, can be a member of his Family,
we know the certain wages of such unfaithful servants. He then that thinks
himself exempted from all that hardship which many others by a leaden soul and
an Iron Body, besides the course usage of an unkind Fortune, are Naturally or
Casually sentenced to, takes a very preposterous course, when he arrogates to
himself a license to do ill or to do nothing: If the Gentleman would be
valued above others, it is but reason if we require him to make it appear, that
he is of better Metal then others which is to be judged of, not by the
Color, but service.

I would not see the Gentleman's Soul sitting in his beautiful Body, like a
Breathless Idol of Gold in a Temple of Silver, there to be worshipped by all,
but do good to none: It is not fit it should be thought only such a fine gay
thing, as is sometimes by the choicest of Natural endowments and Artificial
accomplishments, embellished into something more then ordinary, or burnished
over into such a slight superficial gloss, as may make it, as well as his
Body, admired and gazed upon by a few Ignorant worldlings; Neither should it be
his business to get his Body always New-molded to the varying humors of the
Court, and tricked up in all the late invented Gauderies, Gorgeous
Accoutrements, and Gingling trappings, wherewith the Levity of Art has made
bold to overload and abuse the Modesty of Honest Nature: He that has no Nobler
a Soul or Body then these, may still be no more then a mere Carcass, such as,
if it express any motion, seems rather to be actuated by the multitude of
crawling vermin within it, sprung from it is own Corruption, then by a true
Rational soul inspired by God Allmighty. All the Salt of Wit and Ingenuity
which such a person usually so much brags of, will not be enough to preserve so
putrid a Lump from stinking above ground.

In a word, Sir, the true Gentleman will labor so to qualify his soul, that he
may be disposed to do a service to his God, in some proportion answerable to
those several tokens of favor and Honor, whereby he has so blessed and grace'd
him in the eye of the world: Seeing God has been pleased to advance him some
degrees above the Multitude, he takes care to raise his soul too to that
spiritual hight and pitch of true Piety and Holiness, that when thus advanced
in outward Dignity, he may not seem a Dwarf on Horseback.

And because the Common Gifts of the most Bountiful Nature will not put a man
into a Capacity of performing his part to the full in such an employment, much
less will Idleness and Negligence: It should be every Gentleman's care in his
Youth to give and resign himself wholly up with all his pleasures and
Interests, to the Care of his Soul; that so by the Prudent Industry of a
Learned and Godly Instructor, seconded with his own Indefatigable pains and
patience, he may have his Golden parts made truly bright, and be, as it were,
midwised afresh unto such a perfection, that he may not, by the low and
beggarly condition of a rude and Ignorant Soul, be a Discredit to his Lord, or
a Scandal to that calling he professes. God Delights in H^nourable, though
not in pr^nd attendants; and although he is many times pleased to fill up his
house, and make up the number of his Family, with those who have not been very
much befriended either by nature in a Noble birth, or by Fortune in a Plenteous
and prosperous life; yet does he long to see his Religion graced and Credited,
with a long train of such as the King has delighted to Honor.

And (blessed be God!) the Care of our Ancestors has been such, that we want
not Nurseries both of Learning and Piety in this Nation; such as may afford a
breeding to our Young Gentry not unsuitable to their Quality and intended
emploiment. It is my hearty prayer, that these may never be unstocked with such
hopeful and Generous Plants, as may there grow and thrive, 'till they arrive
at that Maturity both of Grace and good Literature, as well as of Years, that
they may in due time become, not only strong but also Curiously polished
Pillars for the support of those two Glorious Fabrics of Church and State.
That, as by the special Indulgence of God they were Honorably borne; so by
his special Grace too, they may indeed live, both truly profitable to his
Saints here, and as truly Glorious with them hereafter.

Thus (Sir) have I done my best to obey your Commands; and, as largly and
fully, as a little time, less leisure, and yet fewer abilities would give me
leave; I have given you my present thoughts and wishes concerning our English
Gentleman. I have sent you (I fear) a very little Kernel in a large Shell; but
now you have it, you may choose whether you will take the pains to Crack it, or
throw it into the Fire. Whatever it be that here you receive, as your Commands
gave it birth, and my Confidence of your Goodness, has taught it to speak and
go abroad; so does it now submissively expect your sentence, whether of life
or death. Do what you will with all the rest, so you do but vouchsafe to read
thus much in it, that I am -- Sir,

Your most humble and Obedient Servant.

The END.
The ERRATA.
The reader will frequently meet with a small Errata, which he may be pleased
either to mend with his pen, or with less pains to pardon: one or two of the
Grosser sort I have here noted to his hand.

Page: 50. Sect: 2. l: 1. pro as r. is. p: 141. l. 22. r: He owes. p: 142. l: 5.
r: State. p: 159. l. 4. r. accoutred. p: 174. l: 1. r: is not. p: 240. l: 12.
r: Shimeis. p: 249. l: 10. r: for. p: 254. l: ^enult: r: Seal.


