Thomas Ellwood's Answer to so much of Leonard Key's late Printed Sheet of
Paper, as relates to him.
SUch is the restless Nature of ENVY, that it will not suffer those, in whose
Breasts it lodges, to be quiet; but filling them with a fretting Discontent,
is continually stirring them up to Strife and Contention: Whereby they become
like those whom the Prophet of old compared to the troubled Sea, when it cannot
rest, whose Waters cast up mire and dirt, Isa. 57.20. Thus some ungodly men now
(like those whom Jude described of old) having, in their sensual minds,
separated themselves from the People of God, and become like raging Waves of
the Sea, have fomed out their own shame in many printed Books and Papers, which
of late years they have sent abroad. And lest those Books and Papers should not
have fallen into every hand, or the matter contained in them should have fallen
or slipped out of any mind or memory, a restless Agent of that Party has lately
published a Sheet of Paper to revive them, the Title whereof is, Something of a
Revival of what has been made public, etc. Wherein many of their reviling and
abusive Pamphlets are named, and recommended afresh to the Readers view. So
industriously careful they are to blow the Coals, to keep the Fire flaming; so
fearful lest Contention and Strife (the food and life of that Spirit which they
are joined to and guided by) should die, decay or flag. By which all, that will,
may see how deceietful they are, who (to gain upon the Simple) pretend they are
for Peace, and that Contention might cease and die; yet lest it should, are ever
and anon sending forth some envious Book, or silly sheet, to pick new Quarrels,
or revive the old. But, as it was said of the foolish Woman, that she pulls
down her house with her hands, Prove. 14.1. So it is observable of this man, and
of the rest of that Party, that have appeared in Print, that in all their
undertakings of this kind, they have either themselves discovered their own
Deceit and Wickedness, or given others occasion to do it, and have thereby still
pulled down some Piece or other of their own confused Building. Which
Infatuation of mind may well be looked upon as a divine Judgment upon them. Now
although the greatest part of that Paper, lately published by L. Key, is about
the Shutting up the Meeting House Doors at Reading, and turning Friends out of
their Right and Property (which having been already stated and debated in
print, may probably be the reason why the Friends of Reading, named therein,
have not thought fit to take notice of it: Yet, in as much as in that Paper my
name is used, and mention made of a Certificate made by me, with an Insinuation
as if I had declined a public Meeting with J. R. and C. H. (which, with some
other Passages, are so darkly hinted in the said Paper, that they cannot be
thereby understood) I think fit a little to open those Passages, that the
Reader may be enabled to see, and judge where the Truth of the matter lies.

In the Title of L. Key's sheet, he'saith, And something is said to Thomas
Elwood's Book. But certainly that Something is so near Nothing, that were it not
for the clearing of other Passages, and partly also to prevent his being wise
in his own conceit, I should not have thought it worth my while to have said
any thing to it at all. He begins with me in his third Paragraph, where he bids
his Reader see the Account from Wickham, and see also what was said to it, by
that quibbling man Thomas Ellwood: For (says he) it does appear he was the man,
that writ the Certificate, concerning that Marriage he does make such a Clamor
about: Which he says, in page the 5th was before the Women's Meetings were set
up. That the Reader may understand the matter thus darkly laid down, I think it
needful to open it a little. The Account from Wickham, which he here mentions,
was part of the Title of a Printed Sheet of Paper, published in the year 1690,
and subscribed in diverse places with the Letters J. R. and C. H. (though C. H.
has since declared that it was printed without his consent or knowledge.) To
that I writ an Answer, the Title whereof was, The Account from Wickham ( lately
published by John Raunce and Charles Harris) examined and found false, etc. In
that Answer of mine, to manifest their Deceit (and thereby prevent others from
being deceived by them) who in their printed Paper said, We have only stood for
our own and others Laberty in Christ, etc. I was necessarily led to show, that
the Liberty they had stood for was (...) Liberty in Christ, but a Liberty out
of Christ, out of Truth, a fleshly Liberty, a corrupt Liber(...) mix in
Marriages with such as were not of us, and those also (...) by her
Neighbor(...) having showed how much that Marriage was against the mind and
life of the Meeting, and what a long Contest it occasioned therein, I set forth
there also how, at length, they overbore and prevailed upon the Meeting to
permit it to pass, which yet was not yellded unto without this particular
Caution, that they should not take each other in any public Meeting of
Friends, but amongst their own Relations that Friends might stand clear of them
afterward. To which though J. R. and themselves agreed, yet were they
afterward brought to a public monthly Meeting of Worship, where they took
each other in Marriage amongst Friends, and as Friends, J. R. being there to
preach on that occasion. And that, when some Friends, being greived and
offended thereat, arose and departed in Testimony against it, J. R. in
reflection upon them and to abet the Marriage, publicly said, Let him that is
without Sin cast the first Stone as in my said Answer to their Account is more
at large declared. This Open Discovery of their Deceit and Naughtiness (whereof
not themselves only, but many others also know them to be guilty) has so
enraged them, and others of their party against me, that in many places, both
of City and Country they have poured forth their Displeasure against me in
floods of Reproaches, Revilings and Railing: For which the Lord give them
Repentance, and forgive them.) But because bare Railing at me would not excuse
themselves, therefore, that they might seem to say something in their own
defense, they allege that I, who blame them for promoting that Marriage, did
my self write the Certificate for it. And by this Artifice they have amused and
abused many. Now of that matter the plain and naked Truth is this; that as the
terms, and (as it were) Condition, upon which the Meeting, after so long
contention about it, did at length yield to permit that Marriage to pass, was,
that they should not take each other in any public Meeting of Friends (which
the Parties concerned agreed to:) so, in order to hold them there unto, I did
make a Certificate for them, thereby fixing their Marriage to a certain Day and
Place (of their own nomination) which was a private House of one, who was
either Relation or Acquaintance to one of them, on purpose to prevent their
being married at any public Meeting, or amongst Friends. But that Certificate
which I writ, and as I writ it, was not the Certificate that was signed at
their Marriage; but either there was, another written by some body else, or
that which I writ was altered, to accommodate it to their design, and that in
those material parts of it, relating to Time and Place, for the only sake of
which I writ it. So that, to justify themselves for imposing that Marriage
upon Friends, they allege that I writ the Certificate, thereby insinuating
that I owned and forwarded that Marriage as well as They: whereas the
Certificate that I writ was written on purpose to prevent that which they did;
and that Certificate which they used was not the same that I writ. I writ a
Certificate to keep that Marriage from being brought to any public! Meeting of
Friends: some of them either writ another, or altered that Certificate, to
bring that Marriage to a public Meeting of Friends, and by so doing made that
Certificate their own, not mine, eitherin Deed or in Intention. Thus they would
cover Deceir with Deceit: but their Covering is too short and to narrow, and
this further Discovery of their double Deceit redounds to their further shame,
But this is not all: L. Key is so eager on their behalf to fasten this upon me,
that he runs himself on ground, and as they falsified the Certificate I writ,
so he has falsified the plain words in my Book: for he says that, in page 5.
of my Book I say this Marriage was before the Woman's Meetings were-set up;
which is an apparent Falsehood of his, and he is therein guilty of a downright
untruth. My words, in the place he quotes, are quite otherwise. I there say,
The Contest between Friends and them about this Couple, was before any Marriage
had gone to the Women's Meetings: He says, I there say the Marriage was before
the Women's Meetings were set up. Had he not been in the blind Zeal, he falsely
charges others with, he might have seen in the page he quotes of my Book, that
the Woman's Meetings were set up before that ^ince I there declare, that the
Friends were fain to use the help of the Women's Meetings, to examine that
unhandsom Carriage of the before mentioned Woman toward her Father. But Envy
ha^ blinded him, and his Master owed him this shame.

He goes on thus concerning me, viz. The Noise he makes against Separates and
Separate Meeting cannot be pleasant nor easy to his Friends at Reading that
could have talked as much of their in^ be does of his, etc. This is idle trashy
stuff. How knows he, and what needs he matte^ be pleasent or easy to my
Friends, or not? My Friends at Reading are quiet and still, a good (...) and
Content: but he winches, kicks and flings, by which I can tell whose Back is
gauled, be^ his silly Insinuations. I would know of him when, where and to whom
I have talked so m^ Inward sense? Let him produce some Instance of it, if he
can, or blush (if he be not pa^ over bold Folly. He says of others, there blind
Zeal being somewhat abated, they go now at a (...) but surely his blind Zeal is
somewhat heightened, he runs on at so fast a rate in his ungo(...) of scoffing
at inward sense. I confess I value inward sense more then to be jeered out of
the (...) by any of his frothy fiouts: And if he were a man of any good outward
sense, he would (...) made inward sense the subject of his sport.

He has yet another snap at me, but snaps short, and though he shows his
Teeth, he has (...) to bite. His words are, Reader, see for thy self, and take
not what he says upon trust: For it has (...) he suffered his aged Father to
want. This speaks its self a Slander even from the very manner of ^ing it
forth. It has been said, By whom, has this been said? perhaps by L. Key
himself, or some (...) of his Party, who care not what they say, that they
think might disgrace me. The like, I have (...) has been said by Charles
Harris, who (against all Rules of either Christianity, common (...) Humanity)
did publicly traduce me with it, in an open Meeting, before a great Assembly
of (...) and in my absense. But when, at a Meeting afterward in the same
place, appointed between (...) and him (wherein his unbridled Tongue manifested
his Religion to be vain, James 1.26. and his (...) corrupt, Mat. 12.34. amongst
other scoffing Reflections and vile Reproaches, calling Jsaac (...) oldest Son
FOUL-MOUTHED BRATT) I called him to an Account for his base (...) me with
relation to my Father (as I did then also another of that Party, then present,
who (...) bitten me also with the same Slander) demanding of them severally, by
name, if they would (...) to make it good against me, they both slunk back, and
severally answered, No; for they knew (...) of it (they said) but by Hearsay.
And when I had given that Assembly an Account of my de^ and carriage toward my
Father (which I believe gave satisfaction to all there, who were not (...)
against it) C. H. acknowledged that wh^ I had said might be true for ought he
knew, (...) had not mentioned my Father, if I had not blamed the Woman for
lying with her Father. (...) the Meeting was ended, one of that Party came to
me, and said he was sorry that busin^ Father was mentioned, for he was sensible
I was greatly wronged therein, having made part about it, for his own
satisfaction, (...) Key's Paper being written (as I have (...) think) since
that Meeting, he would not adventure to make it a downright Charge against
m(...) to his shame, had done) but brings it in with an ( It has been said)
which is a sly way of (...) a Slander. But seeing L. Key has thereby
manifested himself to be like those whom the (...) old complained of that said
Report, and we will report it, Jer. 20.10. I do again deny the Ch(...) put him
upon the proof thereof. And since he says It has been said, It behooves him to
(...)he has heard say it, to free himself from being the Author, as well as
Publisher of this envio(...) He says of others, It was their Practice to spread
Lies: But he has now proved it to be his o(...) therefore I have much more
reason, then he, to desire the Reader not to take what he says For he deserves
no credit, with honest and judicious Persons, in surmising a Defamation up
(...)er ground than an ( It has been said,) especially seeing I have now
convicted him of falsifyi^ words of my Book. But since he, and some others of
that Party (especially those at Wi^ taken this course to defame me, let them
not complain if, when occasion serves, I shoot th(...)ows back upon themselves,
and let the World as publicly know what has been said of (...) more in my
Book, than I could make out or (...) any from or for them (that ever I could
(...)were thereunto; so little earnest were they in reality to have what they
(...) to offer, (...) Meeting. And how little reason the Meeting, or I, had to
take notice of that Paper may appear^ by this, that whereas in that Paper
(which has as little fence as Truth in it) they complain that I have wronged
and abused them and my self, and all those that do adhear to me, by publishing
Lies against them, the matter they assign for proof thereof is that in my
Examination of their Paper, I say I have found the Account from Wickham false,
but have not proved it so. Was not this a sufficiently-idle pretense for a
public Hearing in the Country, when as both their Paper and my Answer thereto
being in print, both City and Country (and all Countries where they were
spread) were capable, by comparing the one with the other, to judge whether I
had proved their Account false, or no? They pretended they were wiling to have
a public Hearing in the Country, that they might clear their innocent
Undertakings, and make their just Defense. Could they not clear their
Undertakings in Print? It must be then because their undertakings were not
Innocent. Could they only offend others in Print, and not Defend themselves? Or
could they imagine any hearing in the Country (how public so ever) could be so
public as from the Press, where they began? How shallow and silly their
pretenses are! But it may be guessed what sort of hearing they intended (if
indeed they really intended any) by their proposing it to be before such
Friends and Neighbors that are willing (said they) to hear what we have to
say. A partial Auditary they designed, it seems not such as would indifferently
hear what both sides had to say, but) such as would hear what THEY had to say.
They desired also to know who were the Approvers of such Beoks, and whether
they are not paid for out of the Public Stock? Why did they not, at the same
time, signify who were the Approvers of their Paper (if any but themselves
approved it) and out of what stock it was paid for? Could they not clear their
undertakings, and defend themselves without knowing the Approvers of my Book,
and how it was paid for? My Name is to my Book in words at length: What then
does it concern them either who approved it, or how it was printed. This shows
their Design was, under pretense of clearing themselves (which they know they
never can) to pick some fresh Quarrel to wrangle and make a noise about, and so
slip off from their own Purgation. Their Agent L. Key says (and that truly)
Truth is strongest: And had they had, or believed they had, Truth on their
side, they knew where to have met me, even where they complained I had met with
them, viz. in Print. Which as it is the most public so was it the most
suitable, and indeed the only proper way for them and me to meet, on that
Subject, after they had begun in Print. Had they sought me there, and I had not
appeared, he might with less untruth have said I declined a Meeting. But being
conscious to themselves of their own Guilt, and not thinking it safe to trust
their Cause to the deliberate Examination of every judicious Eye, they
themselves declined that sort of Meeting which they had given the open
Challenge to. For in the first Postscript to their Account from Wickham, p.4.
they say, Now if we and our Friends be no better esteemed than we have been
rendered by some persons, (...) come forth in plainness, and if there be no
Unity, no Peace to be made with us, LET THEM (...)AUSE PUBLIC. Were they such
Children, to think that, after they had, by such a daring Provocation, drawn
forth something of the Cause in public, they should slip back into a Corner,
(for such the most public Hearing may be called in comparison of the Press) to
have the matters, already printed, heard and adjudged by a partial Auditory, of
such, perhaps, as were either Patients to J. R. or of Party with them both;
such, it may be, as was that Person, who (when C. H. in a public Meeting,
which some Friends had lately with him in this Country, where he and they
dwell, was openly charged with an evil Conversation, and proof offered to be
made thereof, which he refused to hear, or stand the trial of) said If ye do
prove it, I will not believe it, Before such Hearers it is probable they would
be willing to have an Hearing, such as would hear what They have to say, and
would not believe Proof against them. But let them remember, they have in print
bid us come forth in plainness, they have in print bid us make the Cause
public; and so far as that has been already done, shall (with Gods help) be as
publicly defended.

T. E.


