THE Communicant's Guide: SHOWING A Safe and Easy WAY TO THE Lord's Table: In
Compassion to The Poorer and Weaker Sort OF CHRISTIANS.

By CLEM. ELIS, Rector of Kirkby in Nottinghamshire.

1 Cor. 11. ^^ If we would Judge our selves, we should not be Judged. LONDON:
Printed for John Baker at the Sign of the Three Pigeons in St. Paul's
Churchyard. M DC LXXXV.

TO THE Christian Readers: More especially to those who belong unto my Charge;
for whose Help this Book is principally intended.
My Dear Friends,
I Hope none of you will think me so vain, as to publish this Little Book for
this Reason, That I suppose there are not many better of the same Subject, and
for the same Use, already abroad in the World. I well know, that there be very
many; and not a few of them so excellent, that if you had them, and knew how to
use them, this that I now present you with might well seem to be superfluous,
if not contemptible. But, I hope, till you can be better provided, it may be
very useful to you, at least in this. that it may help to fit you for the using
of those better: and if this only be the use of it, you ought not to despise it.

The true Reasons then, why I thus tender you my Service, are those, which some
of your selves have often prompted me with. When you have been admonished to
prepare your selves carefully for the worthy Receiving of this Holy Sacrament,
you have been ready to say, That you wanted good helps and Books for that
purpose, and you continue ignorant for want of Instruction; for though you hear
Sermons, and have been Catechized in public, and have been examined and
instructed privately too by the Minister, yet your Understandings being dull,
and your Memories weak, you are not much better for all this, because you want
such Books to read as may help you more fully to understand your Duty. This is
a Pretense, and no more than so, in very many, whose Love to Sin, and
Carelessness of their Souls and all their spiritual Concerns, is indeed the
real cause of their Ignorance and Unfitness for this and all other religious
Duties. To remove this Pretense, and that you may not delude your selves to
your utter undoing, by thinking you have a sufficient Excuse for not doing so
necessary a Duty, when you have none, is the cause of my presenting you with
this help to the doing of it.

Some of you say, That the most excellent of those Books already extant to this
purpose, are too dear, and you are not able to buy them. Herein some of you
speak the Truth; such I mean as have not wherewith to buy Bread for their
Mouths, or Clothes for their Backs. But the most of them who thus plead their
Poverty, say no more in effect but this: That they think their Money better
bestowed in a Lace or Riband, a Cup of Ale, or a Game at Cards, than on their
Souls, which were so dear to Christ, that he paid his most precious Blood to
redeem them.

Others say, That those Books are too learned and hard for their Understanding,
and they should be no wiser for them if they had them. And indeed there is too
much Truth in this: yet are there not wanting such as are so plain and easy,
that it can be nothing but your unacquaintedness with the very Princ^ples of
Religion, that makes them seem hard. If you were concerned to understand any
other Language than that of the Plow and Cart, or thought it as needful to
discourse sometimes of matters relating to God and your own Souls, as to talk
to your Horses and Oxen, you might soon learn much Good from the Books you thus
complain of.

Some of these Books, you say, are too* long and tedious. And it is true, that
some of them are longer than they should be for the use of the weaker sort of
Christians. But it is no wonder if every good Book seem too long to them who
have no Delight in Goodness, and to them that are weary of hearing a short
Sermon of an Hour, or it may be not so much. A Book that will cost them some
days to read it over understandingly, must needs be very tedious indeed. They
that think all their time little enough to trade and drudge in for the World,
or their swinish Lusts, cannot spare much of it for their Souls without
grudging and wearisomness.

Now that you may not henceforward have any color for such Pretenses, I here
offer you one that is, if I mistake not, every way fitted to your Condition and
Capacity, for it is cheap, and easy, and short; and yet, I hope, sufficient to
teach and direct you in your Duty. I herein endeavor to manifest my hearty
Love and Care for your Souls and everlasting Welfare: and if I had no other
Reason for writing and publishing it but this only, that I desire to show my
Readiness to serve you, and to cast in my small Mite amongst those that offer
more largely out of their Abundance, toward the enriching of your Souls, I
may, I hope, be at least excusable.

But, alas, what better will you be for my Kindness if you will not make use of
it! This Book, nay all the Books in the World, will not make you Christians, or
worthy Communicants, by lying by you, or by a careless reading, without
understanding, applying, and practicing, no more than your Meat will nourish
you without eating it. Some few Years ago I gave you, for the same Reasons
which move me now to give you this, a small Summary both of your Faith and
Duty, called, Christianity in short; which has with very many found a welcome
much above my Hope or Expectation; the worst Entertainment it has met with, is
from some of you for whose Benefit it was chiefly intended, and who had it
gratis. The Reason why it has been so coldly entertained at home whilst it was
so welcome abroad, I am apt to think is this, That you know me better than
Strangers do, and seeing my Infirmities daily, do more slightly regard my
Endeavors than they who see them not. But remember, I pray you, it is the
Doctrine of your Blessed Savior, that in both that little Book, and this I
commend unto you, and not my own Example. Make but use of that as you ought,
and my Failings, what hurt soever they do my self, shall not hurt you.

One thing you are to be here minded of: You read things of this nature so
imperfectly and so heartlesly, that little of what you read remains with you.
An obscene Ballad or idle Tale-Book you can read with Delight; and though
imperfectly at first, yet you read them so often, till you grow too perfect in
them to your own great Hurt. Why take you not the like Pains in these Helps of
Religion? Because you take no Pleasure in Religion, nor care much what becomes
of God's Honor, or the Salvation of your Souls. This is too sad a Truth, and
you cannot deny it. Your drowsy reading makes all good Books mere Nonsense to
you.

If it were not so, you would never be weary of learning your Christian Duty,
nor of practicing it neither; and you would particularly never rest till you
understood the right way of coming worthily to this heavenly Banquet, unto
which I here direct you. Whenever men are Christians indeed, they will set a
greater Price than now they do upon this unvaluable Token of Divine Love; and
they will be ashamed to think that the Table of Devils should have so many
Guests, and the Table of the Lord so few.

I have here very plainly, shunning all Disputes and Niceties, laid the whole
Duty before you, with the necessity of it, and the way to perform it aright; I
have also removed out of your way all the Rubs and Mormoes which are apt to
hinder or affright you. Nothing can be wanting but a Will in you to be
Christians, and to live so now as that you may live eternally. This is that
which I cannot give you, but must not cease to beg it for you of the only Giver
of all good Gifts, nor to beseech you, by the Mercies of God, that you will by
all means endeavor after it.

To the Grace of God I do mo^^ heartily commend you in my Prayers, beseeching
him to bless this poor Endeavor to the eternal Good of your Souls.

THE CONTENTS.
Chap. I. THE necessity of Receiving this Sacrament. II. The necessity and way
of Receiving it worthily. III. How to examine our selves about our Baptismal
Covenant. IV. A help for the Examination of our Faith. V. A help for the
Examination of our Repentance and Obedience. VI. How to examine whether we be
rightly disposed for this Sacrament? VII. What Affections of Soul are suitable
to this Sacrament. VIII. How we are to behave our selves at this Sacrament. IX.
The pretended Reasons for neglecting this Sacrament briefly answered. X. The
Stumbling Blocks cast in our way removed. Some short Directions and Prayers.
THE WAY TO THE Lord's Table.
CHAP. I. The necessity of receiving this Sacrament.
REverently and Devoutly to receive the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper is so
indispensable a Christian Duty, that whosoever refuses to do it, does no less,
in effect, than refuse Salvation, and renounce his Savior.

There is no Salvation in any other but JESUS CHRIST: Acts 4. 12.
No man comes to the Father but by him. John 14. 6.
There is no Salvation by Christ for those that keep not his Commandments; Heb.
5. 9.
but as he is the Author of Salvation to them that obey him: So will he come to
take Vengeance on them that obey not the Gospel. 2 These. 1. 8.
And his express Command he has left us in these plain Words, This do in
Remembrance of me, Luke 22. 19. 1 Cor. 11. 24.

He that has given us this Command is GOD Romans 9. 5.
over all, Col. 1. 16.
blessed for ever. 1 Cor. 6. 19.
The great God that made us; 1 Pet. 1. 19.
the good Lord that Matt. 28. 18.
bought and redeemed us Matt. 17. 15.
with his own most precious Act 3. 22.
Blood; John 15. 9. 10. 13.
he to whom God the Father has given all Power both in Heaven and in Earth,
Romans 5. 6. 8.
and has commanded us to hear him in all things whatsoever he says unto us.
It is the Command of a dear Friend, who loved us as his Father loved him, who
has called us Friends, and laid down his Life for us in pure Love; and has
assured us, that if we keep his Commandments we shall abide in his Love. The
Command of this dying Friend, when he was going to reconcile us wicked Rebels
by his own bloody Death unto God, was this, This do in Remembrance of me.

When dying for us, he bequeathed unto us Pardon, and his Spirit and eternal
Life, this he required of us, that by doing this we would preserve alive a
loving and thankful Remembrance of him, and show his Death, 1 Cor. 11. 26.
and his Kindness therein to our Souls, till he come again to receive us to
himself, and put us into full Possession of eternal Glory. And how shall we
then look him in the Face if we have refused to do this?

In this Sacrament he offers us himself Crucified for 1 Cor. 10. 16.
us, his Body and Blood; the most choice Token of his wonderful Love. Can we
refuse it, and not renounce his Love and Friendship thereby?

Thus would He have us declare our Fellowship with the Father and the Son, 1
John 1. 3.
and with the Holy Apostles and all Saints, as joint Members of his one Body
the Church, 1 Cor. 11. 17.
by feasting together at his Table on this one Bread. Can we refuse to do this,
and not renounce all Fellowship with the Father and the Son, and the Communion
of Saints?

Two solemn Rites he has instituted as peculiar to his Religion, Baptism and
the Supper of the Lord; whereby we are to own him openly before the World, and
profess our selves in Covenant with him. As he then that refuses to be
Baptized, refuses to be a Christian; so he that having been baptized refuses
this other Sacrament, does in effect renounce his Baptism, disown the Covenant,
apostatize from Christ, and cast off the Profession of Christianity.

He has not commanded us many chargeable and troublesome Sacrifices, such as
the Jews offered; nor the Blood of our Sons and Daughters, which the Gentiles
grudged not to offer unto Devils. The Cost we are put to is of a little Bread
and Wine; the Pains we are put to, is, with holy and thankful Hearts to take,
eat, and drink, in Remembrance of our Savior. Can we now disobey so easy a
Command of the God of Heaven and Earth, the King of the World, the Redeemer of
Sinners, the only Savior of Souls, and not renounce God, our Savior, the
Christian Religion, and all our claim to Salvation? No, it is very plain, that
though the want of this Sacrament, when it is desired but cannot be had, is no
Sin, if not occasioned by our Sin; yet the wilful neglect of it is no less
than a damning Sin, unless there be no such thing as Damnation, and the Gospel
be a Fable; from which blasphemous thought Good God preserve us all.

CHAP. II. The Necessity and Way to Receive worthily.
HE that eats not at the Lord's Table must dye, and he that eats unworthily
is in danger of Death: so St. Paul assures us; Whosoever shall eat this Bread,
and drink this Cup of the Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of the Body and
Blood of the Lord, 1 Cor. 11. 27. and again, v. 29. He eats and drinks
Damnation [or Judgment] to himself.

If this seem hard to us, it is only because we are unreasonable, and had
rather not do any Duty at all, than be at the Pains to do it as we ought. As
the Duty is necessary, and yet very reasonable and not burdensome; so to do it
worthily is as necessary, and no less reasonable or easy if we have a Mind to
be Christians.

The Direction how to communicate worthily we have in these words, Let a Man
examine himself, and so let him eat of that Bread, and drink of that Cup, 1
Cor. 11. 28. They who are ignorant, and are not sufficiently instructed, cannot
examine themselves, and therefore may not eat, and they who, either because
they are afraid to awaken their Consciences and not be able to sin in
Quietness, or because they are loath to be at the Pains, or take so much time
from their worldly Business or Pleasures, will not examine themselves, may not
presume to eat.

What then must such Persons do, for if they eat not they die? The ignorant
must be Catechized and learn: if they be ashamed of this, they are ashamed of
Christ, and must perish for hating Instruction. They that will not examine
themselves, must consider how they can dwell with everlasting Burnings. Eat or
Die, Examine or eat not, that is all the Choice our Sins have left us.

Yet Examination is not a thing commanded for it self, but in order to
something else. Counterfeit Gold is of no more worth than it was before, for
being examined or tried by the Touchstone. We must examine our selves, that we
may know what we are. Examine your selves, whether you be in the Faith; prove
your own selves: Know you not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you,
except you be Reprobates? 2 Cor. 13. 5. We might know whether we be Christians
or no, would we try our selves, and not be content, like false Gold, to make a
show only. And to this end must we by Examination learn to know our selves,
that we may be able to approve of our selves in our own Consciences before God,
that we are sincere Christians, that we may not think our selves to be
something when we are nothing, and so deceive our selves, let every Man prove
his own Work, and then shall he have rejoicing in himself, Gal. 6. 4.

In short, we are to examine what Graces God has given us, and be truly
thankful; what is yet amiss in us, and amend it; what we yet want, and
endeavor to obtain it.

The difficulty of this Duty affrighteth many from this Sacrament: and indeed,
considering how most of us live, it is no wonder that it seems difficult. But
we should remember, first, That this Self-Examination is a Duty, necessary, not
only now and then before a Sacrament, but at all times, that we may understand
how far we are Christians indeed; and therefore the Difficulty may as well
affright us from being Christians as from this Sacrament; and so I fear it does
too many, who therefore abstain from the Lord's Table, because they have no
mind to be Christians any farther than in Name only. And then, secondly, We
must remember, that whatever Difficulty there is in this Duty, it is of our own
making, and we may make the Duty more easy if we will. For,

1. We continue willingly ignorant of the Word of God, and its use; and it must
needs be hard for us to examine our selves by a Rule which we understand not.
But let us take pains to learn perfectly the particulars of our Christian Faith
and Duty, gathered from the Sacred Scriptures and explained in easy
Catechisms, and often beg the Minister's help for the right understanding and
due applying thereof to our selves, opening freely to him all our Ignorances
and Doubts, and this part of the Difficulty will be removed.

2. We live loosly and carelessly, not observing well our own Tempers and
Actions; and having let them slip without any notice of them, we cannot recall
to mind and examine what we never regarded. Let us but once every day take a
little time to consider what Inclinations in us have that day shown themselves,
and what have been our Thoughts, Words, and Actions, and comparing them with
the Rule of Life, observe how they agree or disagree with it: and heartily
blessing God for any Good that by his help we have done, humbly bewailing,
confessing, and begging Pardon for all our Failings of Omission or Commission,
praying devoutly and seriously for more Strength and Grace to live better,
resolve to do our utmost Endeavor to amend and improve daily; we shall soon
find all the Difficulty over: especially if we would, as often as we find cause
to doubt of any thing, open our Souls freely to our Spiritual Guides, God's
Ministers, for their Assistance. Which course till i be taken, we shall every
where find too few Christians: but if we would do thus, we should learn to know
our selves so well, that it would be a very easy matter to examine our selve^
against a Communion.

Now that we may be worthy Communicants, we must examine our selve both whether
we be sound Christian^ or no, and, whether we be rightly disposed for this
particular Christian Duty.

1. We must be of Christ's Family, as Christians, before we may feast at
Christ's Table as Communicants. W^ are solemnly admitted into the Family, or
Church of Christ, by Baptism, wherein we are dedicated to God the Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost, and admitted into the Bond of a sacred Covenant with the ever
Blessed and Glorious Trinity. So long as we continue faithful in this Covenant,
so long are we Christians; and therefore this is first to be enquired into,
Whether or no we faithfully stand to this Baptismal Covenant?

2. Then are we duly disposed for this Duty of Communicating, when
understanding the Nature, Ends, and Benefits of this Sacrament, we find the
Affections of our Hearts in some measure suitable thereunto. And to this
purpose it is, that we are more especially before our Approaches to the Lord's
Table to examine our selves.

CHAP. III. How to examine our Selves about our Baptismal Covenant.
THE faithful keeping of our Baptismal Covenant is our Christianity. We are
therefore impartially to enquire both how we understand it, how we have kept
it, and how we resolve to keep it.

1. To help us to understand it, we must know four things; viz.

1. Genesis 1. 27.
That our Good God having made man a rational Creature in his own Image, Eccl.
7. 29.
and given him an immortal Soul, void of any Inclination to Evil, with
sufficient Knowledge to understand his Duty, and Power enough to do it, did
command him to live in perfect Obedience to God his Maker, whereby he and his
might live for ever happy in the Love of God.

2. That Adam, Genesis 3. Romans 5. 12.
the first Man and common Father of us all, by the Temptation of the Devil,
disobeyed this Command, and thereby brought us all into a state of Weakness,
Sin, and Death: And now in such a Condition we come into the World, Romans 8. 7,
8.
that, left unto our selves, we would do nothing but sin against God, and run
upon our own Destruction.

3. That our gracious God, when he might justly have cut off at once the whole
Race of Mankind in Adam and Eve, or have left all their Posterity to perish by
their own Doings; of his wonderful Goodness and Mercy took pity on Sinners, and
opened ^ to us a new way to Salvation, by providing for us a Savior, even GOD
the SON, the only begotten of the FATHER, who in our Flesh having taught us
what God now requires of us if we will be saved, laid down his Life for us to
satisfy for our Sins and free us from Vengeance, Mat. 1. 21.
1 These. 1. 10.
Mar. 16. 16.
and offers us a full Pardon on Condition that we will believe in him and be
baptized, so signifying our Consent to the new Covenant which God is pleased to
make with us in him.

4. The meaning of which Covenant is this: That though we cannot now be
innocent, and so can never hope for Life by obeying and fulfilling the Law of
Innocence given to Adam; yet, if we will first, Act. 3. 19.
truly repent, and secondly, Ioh. 3. 36.
believe the Gospel of CHRIST, Heb. 5. 9.
and thirdly, Heb. 8. 10.
sincerely obey his Commands, God will yet be our God, and take us for his
People; and for his beloved Son Jesus Christ's sake pardon our Sins, and
sanctify us by his holy Spirit; and finally, glorisie us with himself in
Heaven.

II. Next we must examine how we have kept this Covenant. And here, seeing we
were baptized in our Infancy, and what was promised on our parts, was promised
by others in our Name; we are to examine,

1. Whether we have, since we came to Understanding, at any time owned and
confirmed this Engagement, and taken upon our selves the Performance of it. Our
Church has well provided, that no Person shall be admitted to the LORD's
Supper till he be Confirmed, or have declared his willingness to be confirmed;
that is, till he have satisfied the Church, that he understands the Covenant of
Baptism, and declares his Resolution to keep it.

2. If we have thus owned our Baptismal Engagement, we must diligently examine
how we have hitherto performed it in all the Parts of it, viz. Repentance,
Faith, and sincer^ Obedience. And this we are to do by posing our selves in the
several Articles of our Christian Faith, and in the Commandments of God. If we
find that we have not been faithful to God in this Covenant, we must not come
to this Sacrament till we have unfeignedly repented of our unfaithfulness, and
seriously renewed our Engagement to keep it henceforward Therefore,

III. We must examine how we resolve to keep it for the time to come: And here
we are to see to these things:

1. That it be a serious, deliberate, and well grounded Resolution, not taken
up dissemblingly, nor rashly, nor for weak Reasons. But being clearly convinced
and become sensible of God's absolute Right in and to us and all our Services,
his sovereign Authority to govern us and command us, and his wonderful Goodness
and Love to us, more especially declared in his Son Jesus Christ; this Sense
and Conviction of God's being our Maker, our Governor, and our Benefactor,
should be the reason and ground of our Resolution to be wholly his, to be ruled
by him, and love and honor him above all.

2. That it be a full and complete Resolution, that we use no Ifs or Ands, or
rest in some faint Purposings; but we must be thoroughly determined and fixed
upon it. That whatever we may lose or suffer by it in this World, we will by
God's help go through with it, without any Exception or Limitation whatsoever,
doing the whole Will of God from the Heart.

3. That it be a humble and pious Resolution, without any proud Trust or
Confidence in our own natural Strength to make it good; but yet with all Trust
and Confidence in the Goodness of God, that if we conscientiously use the means
of Grace and Strength which he has ordained, as he has wrought in us to will,
so he will strengthen us to do his good Will, and finally, reward us according
to his infinite Mercy.

When we have thus considered our Covenant of Baptism, and are thus resolved,
by God's help, to keep it, we should earnestly pray unto God for his
Assistance: and, if we are not already Confirmed, it is fit that we humbly
offer our selves to Confirmation so soon as we can. The very sense of Shame to
break a Covenant after this solemn Engagement in the Face of the Church to keep
it, and the Fear of drawing a greater guilt upon our Souls, by breaking a
Covenant so renewed, must needs be some Restraint upon us to keep us from
breaking it. And besides this, we have good Cause to hope, that the Prayers of
the Church, and the Blessing of God's Minister, the Bishop, who by his Office
blesses in God's Name, shall very much conduce to our greater Strength and
growth in Christianity.

CHAP. IV. An help for the Examination of our Faith.
WE promised in Baptism, to believe all the Articles of the Christian Faith.
These Articles are briefly laid together in the Creed. To examine our selves
how we keep this part of our Covenant, let us in the presence of God, the
Searcher of Hearts, ask our selves these Questions:

Have the Word and Works of: Romans 1. 20.
God convinced me, Heb. 11. 6.
that there is an eternal, John. 4. 24.
invisible, 1 Timothy 6. 16. 1. 17.
living Spirit, Ier. 23. 24.
every where present throughout the World, Rev. 4. 8.
infinite in all Perfections of Power, 1 Timothy 1. 17.
Wisdom, and Goodness, called GOD? Ps. 119. 68.


Do I believe, 1 Cor. 8. 4.
that there is but one only true and living God, 1 These. 1. 9.
even the FATHER, Matt. 28. 19.
the SON, 1 John 5. 7.
and the HOLY GHOST, which being three, are yet all three but one GOD blessed
for ever?

Do I believe, 2 Timothy 3. 15, 16, 17.
That the Books of the Old and New Psalm 32. 5.
Testament do contain the very Word of God, Titus 1. 2.
and that therein God has revealed unto us all things that are needful to our
eternal Happiness; 2 Cor. 1. 20.
and that he is a God of Truth and cannot lie, and that all his Words are true?

Do I believe, Acts 17. 24, and 28.
That God is the Maker, Preserver, and Governor of all things; Psalm 103. 19.
that I and all things are his, 1 Cor. 6. 20.
and at his Disposal; that our Life, Motion, and Being, are from him, and all
our Happiness depends upon his Love and Blessing.

Do I believe, Genesis 1. 27.
That Man was made in the Image of God, very good, with an immortal Soul, with
Knowledge and Power enough to understand and do God's Will?

Do I believe God made Col. 1. 16.
many Spirits called Angels, Heb. 1. 14. 12. 22.
and that some of these 2 Peter 2. 4.
by Sin fell from their first Jude 6.
State, Mat. 25. 41.
and these are the Genesis 3.
Devil and his Angels for Romans 5. 12.
whom Hell was prepared; Ephesians. 2. 3.
and that the Devil tempting Heb. 12. 14.
Man to sin in disobeying God, Romans 4. 6.
all Evil came thereby into the World: that we are all naturally Sinners, and
the Children of Wrath, and cannot be happy without being pardoned and cleansed,
but must be tormented for ever in Hell?

Do I believe, Ephesians. 1. 4, 5, 6.
That God of his own free Grace and John 1. 14.
Goodness has made us a Acts 4. 12.
new way to Happiness through his only begotten SON JESUS CHRIST our Lord, and
that there is Salvation in none other?

Do I believe, 1 John 5. 20.
That the SON being the true God 1 Timothy 2. 5.
and eternal Life, Matt. 1. 18.
became also the Man CHRIST Luke 2. 27.
JESUS, 1 Timothy 3. 16. 1
being conceived by the power of the HOLY GHOST, Peter 2. 22.
and born of a pure Virgin, and being thus God manifested in the Flesh, (...)
an holy Life on Earth in perfect Obedience to his FATHER's Will?

Do I believe, John 1. 41. 45.
That this is the promised Messiah, Acts. 10. 38.
the Anointed holy one of God, Luke 24. 19.
who as the great Prophet of God has instructed us in the way of Righteousness
and Salvation; John 15. 15.
and having taught us the whole Will of his Father, Heb. 7. 27. 9. 26.
after he had suffered many things in our Humane Nature, 2 Cor. 5. 21.
was Crucified, 1 Cor. 15. 4.
and willingly died a Sacrifice of Atonement for our Sins, Heb. 2. 17.
and was buried, and continued till the third day in the state of the Dead, and
herein was the true High Priest, who offering himself once for all, has made
Reconciliation for the Sins of the People?

Do I believe, That on the third day he rose again from the dead, Romans 6. 9.
to die no more; Matt. 28. 19.
and having sufficiently instructed his Apostles in their Office, and
instituted the Sacrament of Baptism whereby they were to admit men into his
Church, Mark 16. 19
he was received up into Heaven, Luke 22. 69.
and sat down on the Hebrews 8. 10.
right hand of God, 1 Timothy 6. 15.
in all Power and Majestly, Ephesians. 1. 22.
King Hebrews 7. 25.
of Kings, Acts 3. 26.
and Head over all things to the Church; Acts 17. 31.
and there, 1 These. 4. 16.
as the great High Priest, Acts 10. 42.
makes Intercession for us and blesses us, rendering our Services acceptable
to God?

Do I believe, that at the day appointed by God, he shall come again in Glory
to judge the Quick and Dead, according to his Gospel; and that we must all
appear before his Judgment Seat, 2 Cor. 5. 10.
that every one may receive the things done in his Body, according to that he
has done, whether it be good or bad?

Do I believe, Luke 24. 29.
That Christ sent the Promise of his Father, Acts 1* 4.
the Comforter, Acts 2.
which is the HOLY GHOST, John 16. 13.
to guide the Church into all Truth, John 14. 16.
to be with it for ever, Romans 15. 16.
and to sanctify our Hearts, 1 Cor. 6. 11.
to believe, love, and obey the Truth, and to prepare us by Holiness for
Happiness in the Presence of God for ever?

Do I believe, Ephesians. 1. 22.
that God always had and will have a peculiar People and Society of Men, 1 Timothy
3. 15.
Col. 1. 18.
which make One holy Catholic Church, Ephesians. 4. 11. 12.
Ephesians. 2. 20. 21. 4. 4, 5.
or Body, whereof Christ is the only Head, who rules and governs it by his
Spirit and Word, and Ministers under him, in Doctrine, Worship, and Discipline?

That all the true sanctified Members of this Church are enlivened by the holy
Spirit of Christ, 2 Cor. 13. 14*
Ephesians. 2. 18.
1 John 1. 3.
Heb. 1. 14.
Heb. 12. 13.
Ephesians. 4. 3. etc.
and by the Communion of the Spirit communicate in the Love of the Father, and
the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, in the Ministry of Angels, and the Prayers
of glorified Souls, and with all Saints in the same holy Faith and Love and
Offices of Religion?

Do I believe, Acts 2. 38.
that all who faithfully persevere in this holy Communion of Saints have the
Pardon of their Sins given them of God through Jesus Christ, Luke 24. 47.
proclaimed unto them by the Ministry of the Word, and particularly applied and
sealed unto them in the Sacraments?

Do I believe, Acts. 24. 15.
That the Bodies of all men shall after John 5. 28, 29.
Death be raised up again to Life, Mat. 25. 41. 46
and that the Wicked shall go into everlasting Torments, 1 These. 4. 17.
and the Righteous shall live for ever in perfect Holiness and Glory in the
Presence of God in Heaven? 1 John 3. 2.


These are the chief Matters of Faith, wherein we are to examine our selves.
But that we may know whether we believe these things savingly, we are farther
to enquire:

1. If we believe them understandingly. To be satisfied herein, we should do
well to have the Approbation and Judgment of God's Minister.

2. If we believe them with a divine Faith, because of the Truth or Veracity of
God who has revealed them. Be perfect therefore in the Scriptures, that you
may know they are taught therein by God.

3. If we believe them firmly, so that we are persuaded we dare even lay down
our Lives for the Truth.

4. If we believe them effectually and practically, so that this Belief does
fill our Hearts with the Fear and Love of God, and produce strong Resolutions,
servent Prayers, and strenuous Endeavors to honor God by holy and obedient
Lives.

Yet here we are to note, That it is not every doubting whether we understand
aright, or whether the thing be a divine Truth, or whether our Faith be firm
and strong, or have sufficient Influence on our Hearts and Lives, that should
dismay us: but whilst we find, that notwithstanding some Doubtings, our Faith
is able to carry us on in a Christian Course of Life, trusting our Souls in
well doing to the Mercy of God through Jesus Christ, we are to cheer up our
selves, and using the means of strengthening our Faith, say, Lord, I believe,
help thou my Unbelief.

CHAP. V. An help for the Examination of our Repentance and Obedience.
IT is the great Blessing of the Gospel, Matt. 9. 13.
that CHRIST came to call Sinners to Repentance. That after the Law of
Innocence was broken, Luke 24. 47.
and we were under the Curse of Death, and an impossibility to be saved by our
own Righteousness, Repentance is allowed of, and a new Obedience.

Repentance, Matthew. 3. 2.
in Scripture, Mark 1. 15.
is sometimes all one with Conversion; Luke 13. 3.
that is, Acts 3. 19. 26. 20. 2. 38.
such a turning and change of Heart and Mind, that, being brought to the
Knowledge of the true God and our Duty to him, we renounce our former course of
Life, and resolve to serve and honor God according to his Word. This fits us
for Baptism, wherein God's Minister, in God's Name, admits us into the Church,
and assures us of Pardon upon our continuing living Members of the same.

Repentance is also an humbling sense of, Revelat. 2. 5.
and hearty Sorrow for any Sin or Violation of our Baptismal Covenant, 2 Cor.
7. 9. 10.
with a free Confession of our Demerit, 1 John 1. 9.
an earnest begging of Pardon, Isai. 1. 16, 17.
a resolving to amend, Ezekiel. 36. 31, 32.
and praying for God's Grace so to do.

Now because all Sin is Disobedience to the Law of God, 1 John 3. 4.
we may at once examine our Repentance and Obedience by that Law, it telling us
our Duty, and our Consciences telling us how we have either done it, or are
concerned for not doing it. Ask then,

Have I done my best, 1 Cor. 15. 34.
by such helps as God affords me, Romans 1. 22.
to attain to divine Knowledge, and not contented my self to live in Ignorance
of God and of his Truth? Has the Knowledge of God wrought in me a most high
and honorable Esteem of him, an aweful Reverence toward him, an entire
Resignation of my self to him, and humble Obedience to his Government, a total
dependence and trust to his Goodness, an unfeigned Love of him above all
things, and an ardent Desire to enjoy him?

Do I love God for the excellency of his Nature, Matthew. 22. 38.
and the beauty of his Holiness, 1 John 5. 3.
and his Goodness to me and all men; especially as manifested in Jesus Christ?
Do I love him so, as to love his Laws, and his Word and Worship, his Ministers
and his Children; his House and Day, and every thing that relates to him? Is it
the earnest desire of my Soul to be able to honor him more, and to be more
like him in Holiness, and can I find no rest to my Soul in any thing but him?

Have I made his Wisdom my Director, Psalm. 119. 24.
and his Will my Choice, Matthew. 6. 25.
and his Promises my Confidence, Phil. 4. 6.
and his Laws my Rule, 1 Pet. 5. 7.
and depending on his Providence in all dangers or wants, using the lawful
means which he allows, and no other, without any disheartning Fears, or
anxious Thoughts and Cares, commending the Success to him in Prayer; dare I
trust all my Concerns, both in this World and the next, to God, only through
the Mediation of Jesus Christ?

Do I not presume of Salvation by Christ without the Sanctification of his
Spirit, nor hope for Mercy without Repentance and Amendment of my Life; 1 John
3. 3.
but does my hope in God set me upon cleansing my self from all Filthiness of
Flesh and Spirit, 2 Corinthians. 7. 1.
and perfecting Holiness in the Fear of God, never despairing of his Mercy
through Christ so long as I sincerely desire and endeavor to serve him
faithfully?

Have I been patient in Wants, Mic. 7. 9.
and Losses, Lam. 3. 39.
and Griefs, James 1. 4.
without all repining at God's Dealings, Luke 22. 42.
or hard Thoughts of him? Romans 8. 28.
Do I thankfully receive his sharpest Chastisements, improving them all to
Humility, and Amendment of Life, and rejoicing in them as Tokens of his Love,
and as the Condition which he has chosen as best for me?

Have I not neglected to worship God devoutly both in public and in secret,
John 4. 24.
and do I not rest in a formal outward Worship, and for low ends, Matthew. 15. 7.
but heartily, 1 Peter 2. 1.
in pure Conscience of Duty, Matthew 7. 7.
to honor God thereby? Romans 12. 12.
Do I pray fervently and reverently, James 5. 16.
and with a prepared and composed Mind, 1 John 5. 14.
and for such things as are agreeable to God's Will, Colos. 3. 16.
especially for Grace to enable me to honor him? Have I reverently,
attentively, and constantly, read and heard God's Word, treasuring it in my
Heart as the Rule of Life, and Foundation of Hope, not enduring to hear it
abused?

Have I kept holy the days of God's solemn Worship, constantly frequenting the
public Assemblies, and devoutly joining in all the Services there? Exodus 20.
8.
Have I behaved my self in God's House as in his more especial Presence, Matthew.
21. 13.
and done what I was able to maintain and uphold the holy Ministry, Heb. 10. 25.
and the Purity of God's Worship, Eccl. 5. 1.
without Heresy, Psalm 89. 7.
Superstition, Luke 8. 15.
Schism, 1 These. 2. 13.
or Faction?

Have I duly and preparedly received the Sacraments of Christ's Institution,
and submitted my self to the Government and Discipline of his Church, Ephesians
4. 3.
endeavoring to hold the Unity of the Spirit in the bond of Peace?

Have I had a religious regard to the sacred Name of God, Psalm 111. 9.
in no case using it blasphemously, Exodus 20. 7.
profanely, Lev. 19. 12.
vainly, Romans 2. 24.
irreverently, 1 Timothy 6. 1.
or willingly hearing it so used, Titus 2. 5.
either in common swearing, Matthew. 5. 34.
needless swearing, James 5. 12.
false swearing, or in idle talk of God, or hypocritical praying to God, or
venting false Doctrine in God's Name, or fathering any evil practice on God, or
by my wicked Life tempting others to blaspheme the Name of Christ by which I am
called?

Have I made a right use of my Reason, to judge of things as they deserve, and
to consider my Obligations to God, and the great Concerns of my Soul, Mark 8.
36.
and to care for it more than for my Body, and to govern my self so by the Laws
of God, that I am ready to die, and to give account of my self at the Judgment
Seat of Christ?

Have I checked in my idle Thoughts, and busied them in things useful? Have I
restrained and kept in my Passions within the Bounds of Religion, Colossians 4.
6.
and not been hurried by them unto any Words or Deeds unbeseeming a Christian?
Ephesians. 4. 29.
Have I well husbanded my time in doing good, and lost wilfully as little as
may be?

Have I had just Thoughts of my self as a vile Sinner, and has not any Opinion
of my Birth, Parentage, Strength, Metth. 5. 3.
Beauty, Luke 17. 10.
Riches, Romans 12. 3.
Honors, 1 Peter 5. 5.
Wit, Learning, any Action, Gift, Grace or Virtue made me proud,
self-conceited, ambitious, or vainglorious? Have I thankfully acknowledged all
to be God's undeserved gift, of which he may deprive me when he will, and very
justly, because I have not done so much good by it as I ought?

Have I been temperate and sober, not exceeding in Meat, Romans 13. 13, 14.
Drink, 1 Peter 2. 11.
Sleep, Gal. 5. 16.
Sport, Luke 21. 34.
or Apparel; and used them all to the Health, Strength, Refreshment, and Vigor
of my Body and Mind, that I might the better serve God in the Duties of my
Calling? Have I not in any of them wasted my time, weakened my Body, disordered
my Head, fed my Lusts, consumed my Estate, disabling my self to do my duties of
Piety to God, Justice to my Neighbor, Charity to the Poor, and providing for
my Charge, and educating my Children? Have I carefully avoided superfluous
Expenses, bewitching Pleasures, tempting Company, Idleness, and unprofitable
Business?

Have I loved my Neighbor as my self, Mark 12. 31.
and done to all men as I would they should do to me, Matthew. 22. 39.
that is, Luke 6. 31.
all the good I could, 1 John 3. 18.
and no hurt; Heb. 3. 13.
instructing, Col. 3. 16.
admonishing, Heb. 10. 24.
reproving, Lev. 19. 17.
counselling, James 2. 16.
comforting, Matthew. 5. 42.
giving, forgiving, healing, helping, relieving, speaking well of, praying for
him, and doing him all good Offices according to my Power and Opportunities?

Have I been thankful to others for the like Kindnesses, studying to requite
them? Do I reverence without Envy my Superiors in any kind, am I loving and
friendly to all my Equals, and affable and helpful to my Inferiors, without
Pride or Disdain, no way scorning, upbraiding, mocking or vilifying them for
any Infirmities or Imperfections?

Have I honored the King and all inferior Magistrates, Romans 13. 1. etc.
praying for them speaking no evil of them, 1 Pet. 2. 13.
obeying their just Commands, 1 Timothy 2. 1.
paying Tribute and Custom, 1 Peter 2. 20. 3. 14.
suffering willingly for my Faults, Matthew 5. 10.
and patiently without resistance for welldoing, discovering all Plots and
Conspiracies, that I can know of, against them, assisting them against their
Enemies, serving faithfully under them in my ^lace and Calling, no way
disturbing the Peace, obstructing or reproaching the Government?

Have I esteemed the Pastors and Governors in the Church highly in love for
their Works sake, 1 Corinthians. 4. 1.
not defrauding them of, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 13.
or grudgingly paying, Heb. 13. 17.
or by hard Bargains diminishing their dues? Gal. 6. 6.
Do I pray for them, 1 Cor. 9. 14.
often consult them, submit to their Teaching and Discipline, and neither by my
Absence from Church, nor irregular Life, or any war, discourage them.

Have I loved and honored my Father and Mother, Matthew. 15. 4.
concealing their Failings, Exodus 20. 12.
bearing their Infirmities, Ephesians. 6. 2.
endeavoring their Comfort, Col. 3. 20.
obeying their Commands, Ephesians. 6. 1.
following their Counsel, 1 Timothy 5. 4.
praying for their Happiness and long Lives, submitting to their Correction,
relieving and requiting them to my Power as there was need?

Have I loved and done all fatherly or motherly Offices for my Children, Ephesians.
6. 4.
given them devoutly to God in Baptism, Heb. 12. 7. 9.
prayed for them, Col. 3. 21.
nursed them, instructed them, moderately corrected them, restrained them from
Evil, given them good Example, encouraged them in Goodness, not pampered them
in Back or Belly, brought them up in Humility and Modesty, provided them of
honest Callings, and married them religiously?

Have I loved my Brothers or Sisters, and manifested my Love to them as there
has been occasion? Am I a Father to the Fatherless, a Husband to the Widow, a
Deliverer to the Oppressed, a Reliever of the Poor? Do I weep with those that
weep, Romans 12. 1^.
and rejoice with those that rejoice, Gal. 6. 9. 10.
with a fellow-feeling of their Joys or Afflictions? Heb. 13. 1. etc.
Am I more especially thus affected toward those of the Household of Faith,
mourning for the Calamities of the Church, and praying for the peace and
flourishing of it?

Have I married no such as is forbidden by God, nor for unlawful ends, nor
against my Parents Will? Do I use the Marriage Bed soberly and religiously?
Heb. 13. 4.
Do I love, Ephesians. 5. 22.
and live quietly and kindly with my Husband or Wife, Col. 3. 18.
and faithfully using his or her Bed only? 1 Pet. 3. 2. etc.
Do we bear with each others Infirmities, 1 Timothy 2. 9.
advising, Titus 2. 4.
assisting, Mat. 19. 6. 9.
comforting, praying for and with each other, promote each others spiritual
Welfare, agree in governing the Family and well-educating our Children?

Have I not used my Servants hardly or cruelly, Colossians 4. 1.
but gently as Christian Brethren or Sisters, Ephesians 6. 9.
giving them their due, instructing and allowing time to serve God.

Have I diligently done my Master's Commands, 1 Timothy 6. 1.
studied his Profit, Ephesians. 6. 5.
not wasted his Goods, Titus 2. 9.
or wronged him of my time or service by Idleness or any other way? 1 Pet. 2 18.
Have I concealed his Secrets or Infirmities, born his Rebukes and Corrections
without answering again? Have I done him Service as in the Sight of God?

Have I murdered no man, Vid.
hurt no man's Body, Romans 1. 29, 30, 31. 3, 4. 12, 9.
tempted no man to Intemperance or any thing which has impaired his Health or
occasioned his Sickness or Death, 1 Timothy 3. 3 and 11. 5. 13. 6. 4.
Titus 3. 2. 3.
Gal. 5. 19 and 26.
Col. 3. 8.
raised no Quarrels or Dissentions among men, been angry causlesly, or
immoderately? Have I labored to promote the bodily Welfare of others as my own?

Have I defiled no man's Wife, Mar. 7. 22. 10. 19.
nor lusted after her, Matt. 15. 19.
committed no Fornication or Uncleanness? 2 Timothy 2. 3.
Have I checked all lustful thoughts, 1 Cor. 6. 8.
forborne all lascivious words and Actions, Lev. 19. 16.
not occasioning Lust in my self or others by Idleness, Prove. 11. 13.
pampering the Body, using immodest Dresses, amorous Gestures, obscene Songs or
Stories, unseasonable Familiarity, and private Opportunities? Do I use all
means of preserving my own and others Chastity?

Have I stolen nor spoiled no man's Goods, 1 Peter 4. 15.
nor by force or fraud, James 3. 14.
or color of Law, Ephesians. 4. 31.
injured him in any part of his Estate? 1 These. 4. 6.
Have I not begged without need, Mic. 6. 10, 11.
nor borrowed without punctually paying again, Gal. 6. 5.
Romans 14. 13.
Luke 3. 11.
James 2. 16.
1 John 3. 17.
1 Cor. 10. 34.
Luke 17. 3, 4.
nor overreached others in buying or selling by concealment of faults, or
taking advantage of another's Ignorance or Necessity, nor oppressed any by
Usury or Exaction? Have I labored honestly for my own Living, and freely given
and neighbourly lent as there was cause? Do I make satisfaction for all
Trespasses, pay all Dues, and do what I can to better another man's Estate as
mine own?

Have I no way injured any one's good Name or Credit, Matthew 5. 44.
by false-witness, Romans 12. 20.
railing, 1 These. 5. 18.
slandering, 1 Pet. 3. 9.
backbiting, 1 Cor. 13 4. etc.
busy prating of his Behavior, Mat. 5. 23. 7. 1.
Infirmities or Concerns; causless suspicions, rash censuring and judging,
misconstruing and wresting his Words or Actions, not checking or willingly
hearing others do so; gibing, scoffing, playing upon him, or not righting and
defending him as much as we can with Truth?

Have I not been too selfish, James 5. 16.
so that I could be content to thrive by another's Loss, Luke 19. 18.
or value not much the Public or my Neighbors Welfare, Ezekiel. 33. 15.
so I may please my self? Romans 13. 8. 12. 18.
Have I so learned to deny my self that I can be heartily contented with, and
thankful for my present Condition be it better or worse, and rejoice to see
others in a better Condition than I am in; that I can bear Poverty, and Shame,
and Injuries; and love, pray for, and do good to Enemies? Am I so little in
love with the World, that nothing therein can tempt me to dishonor God or
wrong my Neighbor, or bear Malice or Hatred against any man, or break the Bond
of Love and Charity, or to neglect the care of my Soul?

These are the chief Branches of our Christian Duty, whereby we may also know
our Sins, and what we have more especially to repent of. And here we are to
note some things very needful to be observed.

1. That though we are to aim at the Perfection of Duty in all we do, and not
to satisfy our selves with low degrees of Holiness, but to be greatly humbled
by the sense of our Failings, and restlesly to strive after better things; yet
it is not a perfect Obedience without Sin, but a sincere Obedience without
feigning and hypocrisy, that is the Gospel-condition of our Salvation through
Christ Jesus. It is not our duty to be perfectly innocent, but it is our duty
to labor after Perfection. Tho then we find that we offend in many things, and
do all that we do very weakly and imperfectly, we are not to discourage our
selves thereby, so long as we can find our hearts sincerely bent to keep
Covenant with God, and to honor and serve him more perfectly.

2. That we are therefore narrowly to search our hearts, to see that we are
sincere in our obedience. We are to see, that all our obedience flow from a
true Love of God in our hearts, and a sense of his Right to command, and our
Obligations to obey; that our great design in all things be to please God and
to enjoy his Love, and not any of those low ends of pleasing men, or securing
our own Reputation, or our worldly Peace, Profit, or Safety. And if our
Obedience be thus sincere, then do we make a Conscience of those which men
account little Duties as well as of greater, of shunning little Sins as well as
grosser Sins, of governing our Thoughts and Desires, as well as Words and
outward Actions; we are as religious in private as in public, where it is
costly as where it is cheap, where it is painful as where it is easy, where it
is against our natural Inclinations as where it suits with our natural Temper,
where it is discountenanced, derided, or persecuted, as where it is
countenanced, commended, and rewarded by men.

3. That having discovered our Sins, we seek not any Excuses or Pretenses to
cloak or lessen them, but endeavor to view them in their ugliest and most
affrighting Shapes; as contrary to the Purity of God, and the very Nature of
man as well as his Happiness: against so much goodness, long-suffering, and
patient Forbearance of God; against so many Encouragements of his present
Bounty and rich Promises of Reward; so many gracious Warnings and Threatenings,
so many fatherly Chastisements and Corrections, so much Light and Knowledge, so
many means, helps, and opportunities, so many vows and engagements, so many
admonitions by Friends, and checks by our own Consciences: after all this, so
long continued in, so much time, strength, estate, wasted thereby; so little of
all this left to serve God with, etc. By such Considerations must we labor to
humble our proud Hearts, and bring them to a perfect Hatred of Sin.

4. That our Repentance be unfeigned, and rest neither in confessing our Sins,
nor sorrowing for them, nor begging Pardon, nor in any thing else, till it come
up to a hatred of Sin, and a full Resolution to forsake it. When it is come to
this, we will be very angry at our own Folly that we have so long continued in
it, very thankful to God for any Chastisement, thinking our selves mercifully
dealt with, whatever our Condition be, so long as we are not in Hell; use
cheerfully all helps and means, how hard or sharp soever, to mortify our
Lusts; thank any man that will reprove us and show us our Faults; watch
diligently against all Temptations, avoid carefully all occasions of Sin;
observe jealously our Thoughts, Words, and Actions; pray devoutly for more
Grace and Strength; abridge our selves of many things lawful, and punish our
selves by crossing our own Wills; not be ashamed to make public satisfaction
to the Church where it is required, nor to open our Breasts freely to the Guide
of our Souls for our own Satisfaction. We will do any thing, or suffer any
thing, to prevent sinning against God.

These helps to Self-examination might here have been omitted, had I cause
enough to believe, that they for whose Ease and Benefit they are chiefly
designed, had made as good use of my little Book, called Christianity in short,
as I could wish they had made. Those Summaries of Faith and Duty which there
they have, might have served them for this purpose. And here I think fit to
give my Readers notice, that I suppose it would be very beneficial to their
Souls, once a Week or Fortnight, or at least, when they have examined
themselves in order to this Sacrament with the greatest Seriousness and
Devotion, to use that form of Resigning themselves to God, and renewing their
Covenant with him, which they have at the end of that small Book.

CHAP. VI. How to examine whether we be rightly disposed for the Sacrament of
the Lord's Supper.
IF we be Christians, we have a right to this Sacrament; yet, that we may
profit the more by it, we are more particularly to examine our selves both how
we understand it, and how suitable our Affections are unto it.

I. We are to try how we understand the Nature, Ends, and Benefits of this
divine Ordinance. To which end, we are duly to consider the Institution of it,
as it is recorded in Scripture.

St. Matthew tells us, Matthew. 26. 26. etc.
that as they were eating, Jesus took Bread, and blessed it, Mark 14. 22. etc.
(St. Luke says, he gave Thanks) and brake it, Luke 22. 19. etc.
and gave it to the Disciples, 1 Corinthians. 11. 23. etc.
and said, Take, eat, this is my Body. ( St. Luke adds, Which is given for
you, this do in Remembrance of me: and St. Paul says, which is broken for you,
etc.) And he took the Cup, and gave Thanks, and gave it to them, saying, Drink
ye all of it; for this is my Blood of the New Testament which is shed for many
for the Remission of Sins. ( St. Luke says, This Cup is the New Testament in
my Blood which is shed for you) And St. Paul says, This Cup is the New
Testament in my Blood: This do ye, as often as ye drink it, in remembrance of me:
For as often as ye eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, ye do show [ or, show
ye] the Lord's Death till he come.

By these Words of the Evangelists and St. Paul, we may understand what the
meaning and use of this Sacrament is.

1. It is a holy Christian Feast, not much unlike the Feast of the Passover
among the Jews, at which this was instituted by Christ. Exodus 12.
When they were in Bondage in Egypt, God, in order to their Deliverance,
destroyed all the firstborn in Egypt, commanding them to kill in each Family a
Lamb, and to strike the Blood thereof upon the Door-posts of their Houses, and
so to feast upon it, promising, that when he saw the Blood he would pass over
their Houses, and not destroy their firstborn. In thankful Remembrance
whereof, they yearly kept the like Feast, called therefore the Lord's Passover.
Thus by the Sin of Adam we being all brought into Bondage and Slavery under
Satan, it pleased God to destroy the Power of the Devil, and deliver us by the
Death of JESUS CHRIST, the Lamb of God which takes away the Sins of the World;
John 1. 29.
to redeem us by his precious Blood as of a Lamb without Blemish and without
Spot: 1 Pet. 1. 19.
so that Christ is our Passover sacrificed for us. 1 Cor. 5. 7.
Therefore are we to keep the Feast, eating our Passover, the Body and Blood of
Christ, in a thankful Remembrance of this our Redemption and Deliverance by his
once offering himself to God a Sacrifice for our Sins.

In like manner, when according to the Law, Men sacrificed Peace Offerings unto
God, Levit. 7. 20.
they were allowed to feast before God on part of the same; to signify, that
God now admitted them to an intimate Communion and Friendship with himself,
feasting them at his own Table, of that meat which by their Oblation was now in
a special manner his. So Christ, whom all the Sacrifices of the Law did shadow
forth and typifie, being offered once for all a Sacrifice of Atonement for our
Sins, calls us Christians to feast upon this Sacrifice, though it was a
Sin-offering; and even upon the Blood of it (as the Jews were not allowed to do
in their Feasts) in token of a more intimate Communion and Friendship with God
through him, who has made our Peace. This Sacrament then is a sacred Feast,
and that upon the sacrificed Body and Blood of Christ: and as bodily we eat and
drink the broken Bread and pouredout Wine, the Symbols of his Body and Blood;
so spiritually we eat his crucified Body and drink his poured-out Blood.

2. The great end of this Feast is, to keep up in the Christian Church a fresh
and joyful Remembrance of Jesus Christ, and of all that he did and suffered in
the Flesh for us. This do, says he, in remembrance of me. It is his Pleasure
that we more signally and solemnly commemorate thus the Sacrifice of his Death
by a lively Representation of it at this Feast of Love, and so show his Death
till he come.

1. We show it hereby to our own Hearts, for the stirring them up to an holy
rejoicing in Christ, praising him, believing in him, loving him and obeying
him, and to bring them to true Repentance and a perfect hatred of Sin which
crucified the Lord of Glory.

2. We show it to the World, declaring to the Honor of our holy Jesus what
great things he has done for our Souls; that we are not ashamed of a crucified
Savior, that we glory before the World and rejoice in him, that he is the Food
and Gladness of our Souls, that we are resolved to be faithful unto him whilst
we live, and are ready to dye a bloody Death for him if he shall call us to it.

3. We show it unto God, laying before him in our Prayers the Death of his only
begotten Son, as the most powerful Argument, and all indeed that we have, to
prevail with him for Pardon, and Grace, and Glory; offering our Persons and our
Services to the Father as acceptable unto him in the Virtue of this Sacrifice
only.

3. The Benefits of this Sacrament must needs be many, seeing herein our
blessed JESUS gives himself unto us to be the food of our Souls His Body,
which was broken for us, he here bids us take and eat. His Blood, which was
shed for us, he here bids us drink, The Cup of Blessing, 1 Cor 10. 16.
which we bless, is it not the Communion or Communication] of the Blood of
Christ? The Bread which we break, is it not the Communication of the Body of
Christ? Christ, and all the Benefits of his Passion, are freely communicated to
the worthy Partakers of this Bread and this Cup. The Cup of which we drink, is
the New Testament in his Blood. Covenants were of old made and confirmed with
Sacrificings and Feastings: the new Covenant of Grace and Salvation was
established with us through the bloody Sacrifice of Jesus Christ, and is
renewed and confirmed by our feasting before God on this Sacrifice.

1. This Blood was shed for the Remission of Sins, and by our worthy drinking
of it, we receive an Assurance, That our Sins and our Iniquities God will
remember no more, Hebrews 8. 12.

2. God, by admitting us to his Table to feast on this Sacrifice, owns us as
Members of his proper Family; and will accordingly provide for us and protect
us. He will be to us a God, and we shall be to him a People, Hebrews 8. 10.

3. The Promise of the Covenant was this, Hebrews 3. 10.
I will put my Laws (says God) into their, Minds, and write them in their
Hearts: God will give the light of Knowledge and the life of Grace; not only
teach us, but incline our Hearts to love and delight in his Laws. Here is Life
and strength of Grace promised, but all through Jesus Christ; he is the bread
of God which gives Life unto the World; and this bread is his Flesh which he
gave for the Life of the World, and he that eats this bread shall never
hunger nor die, John 6. 33. 51. 35.

4. The Bond of Union betwixt Christ our Head, and us his Members, is hereby
strengthened. He (says he) that eats my Flesh and drinks my Blood, dwells
in me, and I in him, Joh. 6. 56.

5. The Communion of Saints is hereby preserved and maintained; by this we
declare, that we being many are one Bread and one Body; for we are all
Partakers of that one Bread, 1 Corinthians. 10. 17.

6. Our Faith of the Resurrection is hereby confirmed; Whosoever eats my Flesh (
says Christ) and drinks my Blood, has eternal Life, and I will raise him up
at the last day, John 6. 54.

So many and inestimable are the Benefits of the New Testament in Christ's
Blood by this Sacrament confirmed unto every worthy Communicant.

CHAP. VII. What Affections of Soul are suitable to this Sacrament.
HE eats and drinks unworthily who discerns not the Lord's Body. 1 Cor.
11. 29.
To discern the Lord's Body, is to put a sufficient Difference between this
Divine Feast and other common Feasts, both in our Judgment, Affection, and
Behavior. How we are to judge of it, has been already shown. We are next to
see what Affections it calls for.

We come not here to feast with Men only, but with God; nor to feed our Bodies
with a little Bread and Wine, but our Souls on the Body and Blood of Christ.
Let us then enquire,

1. Are we deeply sensible of our spiritual Wants, and our great need of this
divine Food? Except we eat the Flesh and drink the Blood of the Son of Man, we
have no Life in us, John 6. 53.

2. Are we highly sensible of God's wonderful Goodness in providing so
graciously for our Wants? God so loved the World, that he gave his only
begotten Son, that whosoever bel^eveth on him should not perish, but have
everlasting Life. All things (says he) are now ready, come ye to the Marriage.
John 3. 16. Mat. 22. 4.

3. Do we verily believe, that whosoever comes preparedly shall be kindly
welcome? Him that comes to me (says Christ) I will in no wise cast out, John
6. 37.

4. Have we longing Appetites and ardent Desires to this food of our Souls?
Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after Righteousness, for they shall be
filled, Matt. 5. 6.

5. Do we empty our Souls of carnal and worldly Thoughts and Cares and Desires?
Labor not for the Meat which perishes, but for that Meat which endures unto
everlasting Life, which the Son of Man shall give unto you, for him has God
the Father sealed. John 6. 27.

6. Are we not ready to lay hold on vain Excuses borrowed from our worldly
Businesses of Pleasures? None of those Men (says God) shall taste of my
Supper, Luke 14. 24.

7. Do we labor to put our selves into a fit habit and posture of Soul for so
divine a Feast? He that came without his Wedding Garment was bound hand and
foot, and cast into outer Darkness, Matt. 22. 13.

Now therefore we are as it were to new trim up all our Graces, and appear with
them before God in their greatest Brightness, having our Souls adorned, and
adorning the Gospel of Christ.

1. Let the Consideration of the Odiousness of Sin to God, which he would not
pardon without the Death of his only begotten Son, and of the astonishing Love
of God to Sinners Souls, so that he would send his Son to die rather than they
should perish, give Life to our Repentance.

2. Let this Consideration, that Christ has not only left us the History of
his Life, Death, and Resurrection, in his Gospel, confirmed by many Miracles;
but has also instituted a solemn festival Commemoration of himself, which has
been constantly celebrated in his Church in all Ages, wherein what by the Word
is preached to our Ears is lively represented to our Eyes, even Jesus Christ
evidently set forth crucified among us; Gal. 3. 1.
set our Faith on work.

3. Let the wonderful Love of the Father in giving his only Son, of the Son in
shedding his precious Blood for us ungodly Sinners, rebellious Enemies,
hopeless Wretches, demonstrated in this Feast of Love, inflame our Hearts with
the Love of God in Jesus Christ.

4. Let the Promises of God that cannot lie, first sealed in the Blood of the
everlasting Covenant, now renewed and confirmed in this Sacrament, feed and
nourish our Hope.

5. Let the numerous Benefits of Christ's Death, thus signally exhibited and
assured unto us, fill our Hearts with Thankfulness, remembering that this
Sacrament is the Eucharist, a thankful Commemoration of Christ, and this Cup
the Cup of Blessing, Praise, or Thanksgiving.

6. Let our Deliverance from the Vassalage of Sin and Torments of Hell, and our
new Title to the Kingdom of Heaven, Ps. 116. 3.
fill our Hearts with spiritual Joy. Let us take the Cup of S^lvation, and call
upon the Name of the Lord, in joyful Songs and Hymns of Praise.

7. As God, whom we have so often provoked to Wrath and Indignation, does
graciously condescend in Christ Jesus to renew his Covenant of Mercy to us; so
let us most heartily come to renew through the same blessed Jesus our
Engagements to him, and do that which may correspond with what Christ has done
for us.

Did he deny himself, Phil. 2. 5. ad 8.
veiled his Godhead in mortal Flesh, taking on him the form of a Servant, Lu.
14. 26.
humbling himself to the Death of the Cross? Let us deny our selves, take up
the Cross, forsake all, and follow, him.

Was he Crucified for us? Romans 6. 6.
Let the Old Man be cruci^^ed in us with the Affections and Lusts, Galat. 5.
24. 6. 14.
let the World be crucified to us, and we unto the World, let us make no more
Provision for the Flesh to fulfill the Lusts thereof.

Did he give himself a Sacrifice for our Sins? Psalm. 51. 17. 107. 22.
Let us offer to God the Sacrifices of broken and contrite Hearts, Heb. 13. 16.
the Sacrifice of Prayer and Supplication, of Praise and Thansgiving, Romans 12.
1.
of Almsgiving and Mercy; and in a word, our Bodies a living Sacrifice, holy
and acceptable to God.

8. Let this Feast of Love and holy Communion oblige us to hold the Unity of
the Spirit in the bond of Peace, 1 Cor. 5. 8.
to purge out the old leaven of Malice and Ephesians. 4. 32.
Envy, Gal. 6. 10.
to forgive as God for Christ his sake has Mat 5. 44.
forgiven us, Romans 12. 20. 21.
to do good to all men as we have opportunity, Mat. 5. 24.
especially to them that are of the Household of Faith; to love our Enemies,
bless our Persecutors, pray for our Haters, render good for evil, overcome evil
with good; and if going to the Altar, we remember that our Brother has ought
against us, go first and be reconciled unto him.

When we are thus disposed we may with an holy Boldness come to the Lord's
Table, and need not fear but we shall have the Benefits thereof conferred upon
us.

CHAP. VIII. How we are to behave our selves at this Sacrament.
AS thou go to the Church, meditate all the way, or discourse with thy
Company of the Goodness of God in inviting poor Sinners to his own Table: Say
thus with thy self.

O my sinful Soul, taste and see that the Lord is good! O what a Love and
Goodness is this! that such wicked Prodigals as we, who have so long abused all
the good Gifts which our heavenly Father has bestowed upon us, in a vain,
foolish, and sinful way of living, should have such Encouragements as these to
return to our offended God and Father! I will go unto him, and say, Father, I
have sinned against Heaven and before thee, and am not worthy to be called thy
Son, or to appear and feed amongst thy Children. O Lord, not considering what
thou have made me, a rational Creature, to know, love, and honor thee my great
and good God, I have used my self like a Beast, and have fed with Greediness
and Delight amongst swinish Sinners, upon empty Husks and Vanities. O blessed
be thy Name, who have brought me to my self again, to see, and lament, and hate
my past Folly. I am now in all Humility coming to feast my Soul with thee in
thy House, where there is ever bread enough and to spare, even the Bread of
Life, my ever blessed JESUS. O send out thy Light and thy Truth! let them lead
me, let them bring me unto thy holy Hill and to thy Tabernacles; then will I go
unto the Altar of God, unto God my exceeding Joy, and with all my Soul will I
praise thee O God, my God. I will enter into thy Gates with Thanksgiving, and
into thy Courts with Praise, I will be thankful unto thee and bless thy Name:
For the Lord is good, his Mercy is everlasting, and his Truth endures to all
Generations.

Entering into the Church, have such Thoughts as these before the Service begin.

O how dreadful is this place! This is no other but the House of God, and the
Gate of Heaven. Holiness, O God, becomes thine House for ever. One day in thy
House is better than a thousand. Blessed is the man whom thou choosest and
causest to approach unto thee, that he may dwell in thy Courts. I come, O Lord,
into thy House in the multitude of thy Mercy, and in thy Fear will I worship
thee in thy holy Temple. I have loved the Habitation of thy House, and the
place where thine honor dwells. O let me be abundantly satisfied with the
Fatness of thy House, and make me drink of the River of thy Pleasures.

Ioyn devoutly with the Congregation in the Prayers of the Church, and attend
diligently to God's Word read and preached. And when the Minister is going to
the Table, say thus:

Blessed be God for affording us Pastors and Teachers: O how beautiful are the
Feet of them that preach the Gospel of Peace, and bring glad tidings of good
things! O Lord bless and assist this thy Servant in this holy Ministration.
Thou, O Lord, art our Shepherd, we can want nothing; thou preparest a Table
before us, surely Goodness and Mercy shall follow us all the days of our Life.

When the Bread and Wine are placed upon the Table, and thou art preparing
thine Offering, say thus:

O gracious Lord, what a miracle of Divine Love do we here behold! We have
sinned against thee, and yet thou call not upon us for Sacrifices and burnt
Offerings, but have prepared a Body for thy eternal Son, that he in that might
do thy Will, live among us, and die a Sacrifice for us, and here feed us on
that Sacrifice of himself to eternal Life. I have abundantly deserved to be at
this time in Hell amongst the Devils, and do thou yet vouchsafe to feast me
at thy Table, amongst thy Children, on the Body and Blood of thy dearest Son? O
astonishing Love! Let this thy love, O God, pierce my Heart, and do thou, O
blessed JESUS, dwell therein for ever.

The Earth is thine, O Lord, and the fullness thereof. What can I render unto
thee for all thine inestimable Benefits. My Goodness extends not unto thee,
but to the Saints that are in the Earth. Thou, O God of thy Goodness, have
prepared for the poor. Accept, I beseech thee, of my poor Mite, receive this my
humble Acknowledgment of thy Bounty to me poor Sinner, whereby I confess and
declare my self and all that I have, to be at thy Command and Service, accept
of me for Jesus Christ his sake.

When the Exhortation is read, mind it well, and observe whether you come so
duly prepared as is therein said you ought to be. Then say,

Search me, O God, and know my heart; try me and know my thoughts, and see if
there be any wicked way in me, and lead me in the way everlasting. Who can
understand his Errors? Cleanse thou me from my secret Faults.

When you are bid to draw near, do so, both with Body and Soul, saying;

My Heart is ready, O God, my Heart is ready; I will wash my hands in
Innocence, and so will I compass thine Altar, O God.

I come, O my God I come, for whom have I in Heaven but thee, and there is none
upon Earth that I desire besides thee. O hide not thy comfortable Presence from
me.

Then humbly join in the Confession of Sins, saying after the Minister, and
receive in the humblest Posture the Absolution as from Christ himself
interceding for you at God's right hand and blessing you. Draw Comfort from the
Sentences of Scripture read unto you, and lift up your Hearts with joyful
Praises unto God, as you are called upon to do, heartily joining in the
following Devotions.

When the Minister consecrateth the Elements, fix your Eye upon the whole
Action, and your Heart upon your crucified Jesus, considering with what Pains
and Tortures on the Cross he finished your Redemption.

When the Minister draws near you with the Bread, say;

Create in me a clean Heart, O God, and renew a right Spirit within me.

When you take the Bread, say;

With all Humility and Thankfulness of heart I take this sacred Pledge of thy
Love, O dearest Savior. Be it according to thy Word, with thy crucified Body
feed my Soul to Life eternal.

Then eating the Bread, say;

O Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, one God blessed for ever, I am wholly thine and
not my own; reign in me, rule over me, O blessed Jesus, now and for ever. By
thee I live, through thee let me grow in Grace and Goodness. Keep me from
hungring any more after Sin and Vanity. Lord, evermore give me this Bread till
thou bring me to thy eternal Supper in thy Kingdom of Glory.

Receiving the Cup, say,

I will receive the Cup of Salvation, and call upon the Name of the Lord.

Having drunk of it, say,

My Soul was a-thirst for the living God; let thy Blood, O holy Lamb of God,
cleanse me and this whole Congregation from all Sin. Let thy holy Spirit be in
us a Well of living Water springing up into everlasting Life. I have confessed
my Sin, and thou art faithful and just to forgive my Sin, and to cleanse me
from all Unrighteousness. Take now, my blessed Lord, a full and everlasting
possession of thy dear Purchase. As I believe we have Redemption through thy
Blood, even the Forgiveness of Sins; so do I here deny my self, and resolve by
thy Assistance to follow thee even unto Death. And, O thou God of Peace, that
brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus Christ, that great Shepherd of
the Sheep, through the Blood of the everlasting Covenant, feed, govern, and
protect thy whole Flock the Universal Church, make us perfect in every good
Work to do thy Will, working in us that which is well-pleasing in thy Sight,
through Jesus Christ, to whom be Glory for ever and ever. Amen.

During the time of the Distribution, if no Psalm be sung, (or, if a Psalm be
sung, then, during the Oblation, or at any other vacant times) employ your
selves in such Meditations as these following.

O how wonderful is the Love of God! How does the Lord triumph in his Goodness,
and rejoice in his Mercy! We that have a thousand times over deserved to be
weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of Teeth in everlasting Fire, are here
admitted to feast and rejoice at the Table of the Lord.

O astonishing Love of the blessed Jesus! O abominable Sins of us rebellious
Wretches! Was thy holy Body, my dearest Lord and God, thus broken and torn,
they precious Blood thus shed and poured out for our sinful Souls? And shall we
not abhor those cursed Sins of ours, and with all due Hatred and Indignation
cast them off for ever? Shall we not renounce all Kindness to our beastly
Lusts, loath our selves for our Iniquities, and give our selves entirely to thy
Service (which is perfect Freedom) for evermore?

O ravishing Love, that moved the eternal Son of God to rescue us from
everlasting Torments, by the sharpest Pains and Tortures of his spotless Body,
and the bitterest Agonies of his purest Soul! That moved the blessed and only
Potentate, the King of Kings and Lord of Lords, to condescend unto Sufferings,
Shame, and Death, and to be made a Curse for us, that we might be made the
Righteousness of God in him?

Wast thou, O blessed Savior, content for our sake to be despised and rejected
of men, to become a Man of Sorrows, and acquainted with Grief, and have we so
long hid, as it were, our Faces from thee? Have thou been despised, and yet
have not we esteemed thee? Surely thou have born ou^ Griefs, and carried our
Sorrows; thou wast wounded for our Transgressions, and bruised for our
Iniquities; the Chastisement of our Peace was upon thee, and with thy Stripes
we are healed. All we, like Sheep, have gone astray, we have turned every one
to his own way, and the Lord has laid on thee the Iniquity of us all. Thou
wast oppressed and afflicted, yet did thou not open thy Mouth; thou wast
brought as a Lamb dumb to the Slaughter; thou wast cut off out of the Land of
the Living; for the Transgression of thy People wast thou stricken.

O holy Jesus, I do most steadfastly believe, that thou art the Lamb of God that
take away the Sins of the World; that thou have in thine own Body born our
Sins upon the Tree; and that in the Body of thy Flesh, through Death, thou have
reconciled us who were Enemies, to present us holy and unblameable in God's
sight. Thou wast not ashamed to call us Brethren; and because the Children are
Partakers of Flesh and Blood, thou (...) thy self tookest part of the same, and
through Death have destroyed him that had the power of Death, the Devil.

We have not an High Priest which cannot be touched with a feeling of our
Infirmities, but was in all Points tempted as we are, yet without Sin.
Therefore may we come boldly unto the Throne of Grace, that we may obtain
Mercy, and find Grace to help in time of need. Thou, O blessed Jesus, being
made perfect through Sufferings, art become the Author of Salvation unto all
that obey thee.

O Lord, I poor Sinner fly for Refuge, to lay hold on the Hope now set before
us. Thou art able to save them to the uttermost that come unto God by thee,
seeing thou ever live to make Intercession for us. By thine own Blood have
thou entered in once into the holy place, having obtained eternal Redemption,
for us. Thou art entered into Heaven it self now to appear in the Presence of
God for us. Thou art our Advocate with the Father, the Propitiation for our
Sins, and we look for thee to appear the second time without Sin unto Salvation.

O Lord, seeing thou have given us Boldness to enter into the holiest by the
Blood of Jesus, by a new and living way which he has consecrated for us
through the Vail, that is to say, his Flesh: and having such an High Priest
over thine House, I here draw near with a true Heart, in full Assurance of
Faith, having my Heart sprinkled from an evil Conscience, and resolving by thy
Grace to hold fast the Profession of my Faith without wavering.

I do here, O Lord, in all Humility, offer up my self to be a living Sacrifice,
holy and acceptable unto thee in virtue of the Sacrifice of thy dear Son,
desiring to glorify thee with my Body and Spirit which are thine. Confirm, I
beseech thee, now unto my Soul, and to all here present, the Covenant sealed in
his Blood. Enable us to continue steadfast therein for ^ver.

Lord, make all that profess thy Name zealous of good Works, unite us in the
same Faith and Love, and let us keep the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of
Peace. Let us never forsake the assembling of our selves together, to celebrate
the Memorial of thy Loving Kindness, and show thy Death till thou come. Put thy
Laws into our Hearts, and write them in our Minds, and enable us to cleanse our
selves from all filthiness of Flesh and Spirit, and to perfect Holiness in the
fear of God.

When the Distribution is ended, join heartily in the Thansgiving, and
following Hymn of Praise.

Being returned home, give hearty Thanks for this Mercy afforded you; pray for
Grace to perform your Vows, and return not too soon to your common Business.
Strive by Meditation to keep a warm sense of God's Goodness in your Heart, and
labor to strengthen your Resolutions of a Holy and Christian Life Watch
especially against the Sins you have been lateliest guilty of, or (...) most
inclined to, and sin no more lest a worse thing come unto you.

CHAP. IX. The pretended Reasons for neglecting this Sacrament briefly answered.
NO good man will seek an Excuse, no wicked man can find one, for not
endeavoring to do his Duty; and a Duty it is to do this in Remembrance of
Christ. The Benefits are such as cannot be slighted by a wise man, the
Necessity is such as cannot be dispensed with by any man. Yet because men are
too apt to deceive themselves out of their Duty and Happiness at once by
something that they call Reason, and where they have no good Excuse are ready
to make a bad one; in charity to their Souls, their Vanity herein is to be
shown them.

Obj. 1. We eat the Flesh and drink the Blood of Christ spiritually by Faith
out of this Sacrament; what need therefore can there be of this Sacrament,
seeing therein we are but to do the same?

Ans. This is all one as to say, We do some part of our Duty, what need is
therefore of doing the rest? Or, We believe in Christ, what need i^ there to
obey his Commandments? It is enough to a Christian, that Christ has commanded
it.

That Faith whereby we eat the Flesh and drink the Blood of Christ spiritually,
implies Obedience to the Gospel of Christ; and it is an especial Command of
the Gospel to do this. He then that neglects the doing of this, neglects to
obey the Gospel, and therefore falsely pretends that he eats and drinks
spiritually the Flesh and Blood of Christ. Whatever therefore the Christian
does more in this Sacrament than out of it, the willful Neglecter of it is
inexcusable, for he is no Christian or true Believer.

Obj. 2. he that receives unworthily receives Damnation to himself; therefore
it is safer to forbear.

Ans. So you may say, He that eats may, if he be not careful, eat Poison, or
choke himself, or surfeit and die; and therefore it is safest to forbear eating.
Will you fast for this reason?

Willful neglect is certain Damna^^^^; receiving is not so: Will you prevent an
uncertain danger of Death, by killing your self?

If a man receive without Faith and Repentance, he receives Damnation; and so
he does if he do not believe and repent, though he receive not this Sacrament.
What better is he then for not receiving it? He perishes either way, receiving
or not receiving it.

A Communicant that being a penitent Believer comes to the Lord's Table without
due Preparation and suitable Affections, may receive thereby Judgment, (so the
Word translated Damnation may be englished) that is some Chastisement, such as
Weakness, Sickness, or Death, 1 Cor. 11. 30. and he is thus chastened, that he
may not be condemned, v. 32. But even this may be prevented by judging our
selves, or duly examining our selves, v. 31. And now which is safer, to judge
our selves and eat, or to neglect our Duty and perish?

Obj. 3. But I am afraid I am unworthy, and therefore dare not come to this
Sacrament.

Ans. In a strict sense, we are all unworthy, even so much as to eat or live,
being Sinners, and deserving Damnation.

In another sense, he is unworthy that is ignorant, an Unbeliever, and wicked,
or no good Christian, and must not come. But say,

Are you a sincere Christian, or a dissembling Hypocrite? If the former,
prepare your self and come; if the latter, be ashamed of it and repent, for
otherwise you perish.

Obj. 4. I doubt of my Sincerity, and he that doubts is damned if he eats,
Romans 14. 23.

Ans. To do a thing, doubting that it is an unlawful thing or a Sin, is that
which deserves Damnation, according to that Text. But you cannot fear that the
receiving of this Sacrament is a Sin, it being a necessary Duty. That which you
doubt of is your own Sincerity. If you be indeed unsincere, that is, a
Hypocrite and a Dissembler, you are not to receive it: if you be sincere you
may, there can be no doubt of this. But you doubt whether you be a sincere
Christian. And if this Doubt be so prevalent that you rather judge you are not,
I shall not advise you to come to this Sacrament till you be better satisfied
of your Sincerity. But then consider,

Will you contentedly rest in this doubtful Condition? Can you be quiet in your
Mind, till you find cause to hope you are a Christian, and shall be saved? If
you find no cause to hope this, why should you not forbear all other Christian
Duties as well as this?

Why do you not lay open your condition freely and impartially to your
spiritual Guide, and take his Judgment of your Sincerity? If you use not this
or any other means of knowing your self, but rest contentedly under your
Doubts, and plead them as an Excuse for not doing your Duty, you are certainly
no sincere Christian.

But if you are troubled that you know your self no better, and are above all
things desirous to be a good Christian, and endeavor by all means to be so,
and to know that you are so, and give your self no rest, but mourn, and pray,
and examine your self, and crave Advice, and set your self in earnest about the
Duties of Christianity, these are good signs of Sincerity; and you ought to
receive this Sacrament, and wait upon God for a farther Blessing.

Obj. 5. I fear I have not a saving Faith, I have no Assurance of my Salvation.

Ans. Though such Assurance may be had, yet I verily think, that the far
greater number of good Christians want it, and are but working out their
Salvation with fear and trembling. To labor after it is our Duty, to have it
is our great Comfort, but no Condition of Salvation.

Do you believe the Gospel, that he that believes and is baptized shall be
saved? that Jesus Christ is the Savior of all them that, repenting of their
Sins, trust in his Merits, and live in Obedience to his Government and Laws?

Do you accordingly consent to be saved by him upon these terms; and striving
against Sin, earnestly desire and endeavor to live according to his Gospel,
and trust to him for Salvation? This is saving Faith, whether you have full
Assurance or no, and you are to receive this Sacrament for the strengthening of
your Faith.

Obj. 6. Faith works by Love, Gal. and I fear I do not love God.

Ans. Are you convinced, that God is the chief good, and ought to be loved
above all things? And do you so value him above all things?

Are you thereupon resolved to do any thing, to part with any thing, to suffer
any thing, thereby to honor him and enjoy his Love?

Do you thus practice, and can you deny your self and your own Will to do his?
This is Love, that you keep his Commandments. And though you feel not such a
passionate Lov^ (...) you have for some other things, yet, if you have this
prizing and overruling Love, that you do prefer his Will and his Favor above
other things, you are to use this Sacrament for the confirming and farther
inflaming your Love.

Obj. 7. I fear I do not truly repent, for I cannot weep for my Sins.

Ans. Can you hate them and avoid them; and do you in Obedienee to God, and of
Love to him, shun all Temptations, and watch against them? If so, though your
Eyes be dry, God will not despise a broken Heart.

Obj. 8. But I feel Lusts and evil Inclinations stirring in me.

Ans. So you shall whilst you live, more or less. But do you not feed and
cherish them? Do not you delight in them, nor obey and fulfill them? Do you, on
the contrary, check and restrain them, and use all the means of subduing and
mortifying them? If you find it thus, come to this Sacrament with Comfort. Let
not Sin reign in you to fulfill the Lusts thereof, and all will be well.

Obj. 9. I am not in charity with my Neighbors, therefore I dare not come.

Ans. That is, You dare sin and perish, but you dare not leave off sinning and
do your Duty and be saved. If you be not in charity, how dare you pray for the
Forgiveness of your Sins as you forgive others? how dare you sleep, lest you
die out of Charity? Plead not Sin as an Excuse for not doing your Duty, but
leave your Sin, and do it.

Obj. 10. But I am engaged in Law Suits, and dare not come till they be ended.

Ans. That is, You will have your Right first, if you can get it, and let God
stay your leisure for his. When you have got your Will of your Neighbor you
will do your Duty to God.

But cannot you manage your Law Suits justly and charitably? Can you not defend
or recover your Right without doing wrong or bearing ill will to your
Neighbor? Then do^ you take a sad course, to damn (...) own Soul to do your
Neighbor an ill-turn.

Do nothing but your Duty in going to Law, and you need not be kept from your
Duty in this Sacrament of Christ.

Obj. 11. I have so much Business, that I cannot prepare my self.

Ans. Is it honest and profitable Business which you may do to the Glory of
God? Then need it not hinder you from doing this great Business of your Soul.

Does it afford you time to eat and drink, to sleep, yea and perhaps give and
receive impertinent Visits? And will it allow no time to prepare your self for
this Sacrament? See that you make no more Business than is needful.

Examine your self daily, and stir up your Affections to God, and renew your
Vows, and use only honest Business, and the work of Preparation will require no
great time.

^bj. 12. I receive it sometimes, but why so often?

Ans. Where Is the Zeal of the Primitive Christians, who communicated every
Lord's Day, or oftener?

What Reason can you give, why this Sacrament should not be a part of all our
public and more solemn Worship, seeing it is a Duty whereby we are so
especially to own our selves the Disciples of a Crucified Savior?

Have we not need often to stir up in us the Remembrance of Christ, to quicken
and actuate our Graces? Are they so lively and active in us?

Would not the frequent Celebration hereof keep in us a warm sense of our
Christian Duty, to live Godly, Righteously, and Soberly?

Would it not keep in a constant readiness to dye, and fit our Accounts for
Judgment?

Can our unwillingness frequently to communicate signify any thing else, but
that we too coldly resent God's Love to our Souls in Christ; and tha^ we desire
to have time enough betwixt Sacrament and Sacrament to (...) get our Vows, and
to enjoy our Sins, and hope to make amends for all the next time we receive?

Obj. 13. I see many that come to this Sacrament little better for it, they
live no better Lives than they did before.

Ans. You see some that thrive not by their Labor, nor grow strong by their
Meat, nor are cured by their Physic. Will this move you to neglect your
Business, refuse to eat, seek no Remedy when you are sick?

Must not you do your Duty because others do it amiss?

Obj. 14. I have not found that Benefit and Comfort by it formerly which should
encourage me to come to it again.

Ans. We are to do our Duty whether we get any thing by it or no.

If we reap not the Benefit, the fault is neither in God, nor his Ordinance,
but in our selves. The Sun makes a living Plant grow, but dries up a dead one.

If we have done our Duty as we ought, the Conscience of that should comfort us
very much.

If we hold on constantly in a Christian course of Life, we may presume we have
got good by this Sacrament, and may get much more by receiving it oftener.

Be more careful to do your Duty in an acceptable manner, than too desirous of
sensible Joys and Comforts. The Duty is ours to perform in its season, the
Benefit is God's to give when he pleases, and the Comfort may be reserved to
come in fully in Heaven.

Obj. 15. But I am guilty of back-stiding into many Sins since the last
Sacrament.

Ans. It is that which good men have been guilty of, and for that there is no
less need of Humiliation and Repentance, but there is more room for Hope.

The more dangerously you have fallen, the more care ought you to take to rise
again by Repentance, the more need have you to renew you^ Covenant, and to come
for more strength in your greater need.

Obj. 16. I shall but break my Vows again, and incur the greater Damnation.

Answ. If thy Leg were broken, would thou not set it for fear of breaking it
again? If thou art sick, will thou not be cured for fear thou should relapse
and dye?

If indeed thou resolvest to return to the Mire again, it is in vain for thee
to wash and be clean. But be in good earnest to strive against thy Sin and
forsake it, and fear not, God's Grace is sufficient for thee.

CHAP. X. The Stumbling Blocks cast in our way, removed.
WE may well say here, as Christ said in another Case, Some there be who will
neither enter into the Church to receive this Sacrament themselves, nor suffer
those to enter in that would, but are very busy in laying such
stumbling blocks in their way as they are not able to remove. So that either
they keep away from this blessed Sacrament to their great hurt, or struggle
through their doubts and scruples with much Galling and Uneasiness, to their
great disquiet. In pity therefore to the weak, these also ought to be removed.

1. Some have been made to think it unlawful to receive the Sacrament where it
is administered with a prescribed form of Words.

Not to prove here the Lawfulness and Usefulness too of set and prescribed
Forms of Prayers in the public Worship of God, it will be sufficient, in
reference to this Sacrament, to consider thus much.

1. That when our blessed Jesus commanded this to be done in ^^membrance of
him, he neither commanded nor forbad it to be done by a set or prescribed Form:
it is therefore certainly left to the Discretion and Piety of the Church to
consider which is most expedient and conducing to Edification, a Form or no
Form; and to act accordingly. The thing must be done, and with a prescribed
Form or without one, it must be done. Christ has not told us which way, and
who shall determine the matter but they to whom he has committed the ordering
of all such things in the Church?

2. If in any part of the public Worship a prescribed Form be expedient, it
must be in this. It Is the Feast of Love, and a holy Communion, wherein we
declare our selves one Bread and one Body; it is therefore in a great measure
even necessary, that before we come together we should have before our Eyes the
things wherein we are ^nanimously to join, the Words to which we are to say,
Amen: and not go at ^^^nture to join in we know not what, and commit our
Thoughts and Devotions there to the conduct of a single man, that loves it may
be to hear himself talk, and to show his Wit and Eloquence in Words, (to say
the best of them) for the most part unintelligible to the greater number of
Communicants.

Yea, seeing, to the great Grief of all good Christians, the Devil and his
Instruments have ever been very busy to deform this holy Ordinance, and to
turn this Sacrament of Union into a bone of Contention; it well becomes the
Church to use all care, that nothing be said or done in this Administration,
but what is according to Truth and Godliness. And certainly it would be no good
sign of such Care, to leave every Minister to his own Discretion, to use his
own affected, and perhaps erroneous, Way and Words.

II. Others are made afraid to kneel in receiving this Sacrament, because the
Apostles at the first Institution did not so (...) and because the Papists
doing so (...) the Bread and Wine.

If the Apostles kneeled not, yet they neither sat nor stood. And if they used
a Supper-gesture, it was on occasion of the Passover whereat this Sacrament was
instituted. Christ has commanded that this be done, that is, that Bread and
Wine be blessed and broken and distributed, taken, eaten, and drank in
Remembrance of him; but he has not commanded any Gesture, nor expressly
forbidden any. This therefore also must be left to the Prudence of the Church,
as all other Circumstances of this sacred Action, till it can be shown that the
bare Example of the Apostles did oblige us perpetually to imitate it; which
here cannot be shown: and therefore to say it did, is to add to the Word of
God, and to lay a Snare before Men's Consciences; it being hard, for most men at
least, to give a reason, why their Example in this Circumstance of Gesture,
should ^ore oblige us than in others of Time, Place, Number, etc.

Kneeling is a Gesture of Humility, and that better becomes vile Sinners
offering their Prayers and Praises at the Throne of Grace in the Virtue of the
Sacrifice of Christ, than any Posture of Familiarity, such as sitting
especially is. However, seeing, it is enjoined, were it less convenient, yet he
has certainly no very great Love or Appetite to this divine Food, who will
rather want it than receive it on his Knees, and chooses rather to disobey
Christ in not doing this at all, than obey the Church in doing it thus, when
there is no Divine Law to the contrary.

And if the Papists do kneel to worship the Elements, may not we therefore
kneel to worship Christ? The Church of England has sufficiently declared
against worshipping the Elements; and if she knew you did so, would cast you
forth as Idolaters.

III. But we must thus communicat^ with Sinners in a mixed Congregation and we
are forbidden so much as to eat with such, 1 Cor. 5. 11. and commanded to
withdraw from every Brother that walks disorderly, 2 These. 3. 6. and to come
out from among them and be separate, 2 Cor. 6. 17.

You must come out from Heathens, and be separate from Idolaters, such as were
those Unbelievers, 2 Cor. 6. 14, 15, 16. But none but baptized Persons and
Professors of Christianity, are admitted to the Lord's Table.

You must also withdraw your selves from disorderly Walkers, as you are
commanded, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 6. not familiarly to converse them, so as to partake
with them, or countenance them in their Wickedness or Idleness; but set a note
of Disgrace upon them by shunning their Company and Familiarity, to make them,
if possible, ashamed of themselves. Yet must we not look upon them as Enemies,
but admonish them as Brethren, v. 14, 15. All this plainly relates to our
ordinary Conversation with such men, and nothing is ^ere said about
communicating in this Sacrament.

^e sure that you be none of those whose Company is here forbidden to
Christians, such as are disorderly Walk^ers, that obey not the just Orders of
their Pastors and Governors ( v. 14.) but are unruly and will not be governed
(1 These. 5. 14.) and such as cause. Divisions and Offenses contrary to the
Doctrine that they have learnt, Romans 16. 17.

In the same sense we must not eat, that is, familiarly converse with wicked
Christians, 1 Cor. 5. 11. For that it is ordinary Conversation that is there
meant seems plain, because it is such a keeping Company with them, as the
Apostle allows them with Heathens and Idolaters, v. 10. which cannot be at the
Lord's Table whither they are not admitted, but only Professors of Christianity.

Though we are to withdraw from such wicked and disorderly Persons, so far as
not to countenance them, but endeavor to make them ashamed o^ their Sins; yet
must we be careful to do this orderly, 1 Thessalonians. 4(...)
and as becomes Christians. 1 Peter 4. 15.
And this you do not, if you study not to be quiet and to do your own Business,
but delight to be busybodies in other men's matters. If you suffer for that,
you have the just Reward of your busie-boldness.

Qu. But must wicked men be admitted to this Sacrament?

Ans. No, not if they be notorious, and have not declared their Repentance.
They ought to be admonished, and if stubborn, cast out of the Church by those
to whom it belongs to do it. Leave that to your Governors, and do you the Duty
of private Christians.

Remember Charity thinks no evil, 1 Cor 13. 5. 7.
but believes all things; it judges not rashly, but has as good an Opinion
as may be had of all men. Be sure then that you have sufficient ground for it
when you judge any one wicked.

Take heed also of spiritual Pride in your self, and that your unreasonable
swelling with self-conceit cause not (...) Brother to seem little and vile in
your Eyes.

See that you count not any man a wicked man only because he is not of your
Opinion, or because he is not of your Party, or dares not separate from the
Church as you do, or censure other men as boldly as you do, or have as high an
Opinion of his own Godliness as you have: it is no good sign of that Purity
which some pretend to, that they scruple at a Form or Ceremony, but not at
being drunk, or being unjust in not paying every man his due, or reviling their
Governors, or uncharitably censuring the whole Church; or, that they dare not
come to the Lord's Table with wicked men, but dare go to the Alehouse with
them.

See that you have discharged a good Conscience toward your Brethren, before
you abandon their Communion.

Have you friendly reproved and admonished them privately? 1 Thessalonians. 5. 14.
Talk not to others of their Wickedness till you have first told them of it.
Matthew. 18. 15.
If this have done no good upon them, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 15.
have (...) admonished them again before two or three Witnesses? If this
prevail not, have you told the Minister and desired his help to reform these
Sinners? If he cannot reclaim them, have you endeavored to have them cast out
of the Church by Excommunication? If you have not done this, where is your
Charity to your Brother? where is your Obedience to God? Where Is your Zeal for
the Church's Purity? You have more cause to be afraid of your own Sins, than of
other men's: nay, you become by this neglect, Partakers of other men's Sins,
which you pretend to be the very thing you are so greatly afraid of.

Obj. You say, perhaps, you have done all this, and yet these Sinners are not
excluded, but admitted.

If it be so, it is not well; yet it is not your Fault that they are admitted;
but it is your Fault if you will not do your Duty because other men will not do
theirs.

Obj. But I shall so profess Communion with the wicked.

Ans. By the course you have taken you have done what was your Duty, to avoid
their Communion. You come not to communicate with the Wicked, but with sincere
Christians.

Obj. But by so doing I shall countenance them, and seem to own them as good
Christians.

Ans. By what you have done to amend them, and by what you may still do in
continuing to reprove them, you prevent that danger.

There were very wicked Persons in the Church of Corinth, such as the Apostle
orders to be cast out and delivered to Sitan; yea at the Sacrament there were
Divisions and Factions, and some were drunk. These things St. Paul reproves
them for; but you no where hear him bid others abstain from the Sacrament
because of such men, but he bids them examine themselves and eat.

IV. But you say; you dare not receive this Sacrament at the hand of a wicked
Minister, and you take yours to (...) such.

It is not well if he be such indeed; and if he be openly such and not removed,
some others are to blame as well as he. Have you admonished him? Have you again
admonished him? If that would not do, have you complained of him, and used all
the means in your power to have him either reformed or turned out? If this be
not done, you have not done your Duty either to him, or your own Soul, or the
Church of God. Complain not then of his Wickedness, but your own.

Have you used all these means in vain to reform or remove him? Then if you can
conveniently you may remove to some place where you have a better. If you
cannot, you are to be content, and receive the Food of your Soul from a dirty
hand, rather than want it. You would not refuse the King's Pardon though a
Drunkard or a Swearer brought it you. This Meat nourishes not by virtue of the
hand of him that ministers it unto you, but by the Blessing of God that gives
it. Take it as from the hand of Christ himself, and have Faith in him, and when
you have done what legally you can to get a good Minister, you shall fare no
worse for a bad one in the end.

Obj. But though I can find no great Fault otherwise with the Minister, yet
this I like not, that he admits scandalous Sinners to the Communion.

He is indeed to charge all such to abstain from this Sacrament till they
declare their Repentance. He is not to admit such, if he know them, till they
have declared their Repentance, and made such Satisfaction as the Church
requires. Do you certainly know then that he does otherwise; and have you
acquainted him who they are, and satisfied him that they are so indeed? Usually
such men keep most out of his way, and he is least acquainted with them, and
has at most but an uncertain Report of their Vices; and they that bring him
this Report, refuse to prove the Truth of it; and when he enquires of the
Persons themselves they deny it, and he dare not deny them the Privileges of
Christians, till he have better grounds to go upon. Or if you are sure the
Minister was not ignorant of their wicked Life, are you sure also, that they
have not, before they were admitted, given him all the Satisfaction he could in
reason demand in such a case?

You ought to be sure of these things before you censure him so hardly. And if
you be sure he is guilty, complain of him, after due Admonition, and I am
confident this Fault will be amended. But if unfit Persons be admitted by him
ignorantly, and you know of it, and do not inform him better, it is your selves
on whom this Guilt will lie.

The good Lord grant that we may all more conscientiously do our Duties in our
several Stations, that his Name may be glorified, his Church may flourish in
Truth and Purity, and Peace and Love may abound amongst Christians.

Some short Directions and Prayers.
WHen you go to examine your Faith by the help I have herein given you, or some
other, fall humbly before God on your Knees, and heartily say;

O most glorious God, who made me that I might know thee, and knowing thee
might love thee, and loving thee might be for ever happy in thy Love; I poor
Sinner do here most humbly bewail and confess my great, and alas, too willful
Ignorance of thee: O! for his sake whom thou have sent to call us out of
Darkness into Light by his Gospel, even JESUS CHRIST, in whom dwell all the
Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge; enlighten my dark Soul by thy Word and holy
Spirit, with the saving Knowledge of the Truth, and incline my Heart firmly to
believe it even to the end. Remove from me all prejudice and blindness of
Heart; let not the God of this World any longer darken the Eyes of my
Understanding, or delude my poor Soul to believe a Lie, or possess me with a
desire of vain Knowledge which profits not unto Godliness, but enable me
daily to grow in all Grace and the Knowledge of thee the only true God, and
Jesus Christ whom thou have sent. Help me at this time to discern my Errors,
and the Imperfections in my Knowledge and Faith, and to correct them.
Strengthen me to hold fast without wavering the form of sound Words, which thou
teach and not Man; that persevering steadfast in the same unto the Death, I
may receive the end of my Faith, even the Salvation of my Soul, through Jesus
Christ my blessed Lord and Savior. Amen.

At the end of every Question, consider well; and if you find you so believe,
say:

For ever blessed be God, who has enlightened my Soul with the Knowledge of
this sacred Truth, and Faith in him: O Lord, increase this Knowledge, and
confirm this Faith in me unto the end.

If you doubt in any point, note it well, and say;

O Lord, pardon thy Servant, I am weak and blind; open mine Eyes, what I know
not teach thou me, by thy holy Spirit guide me into all the Truth, for Jesus
Christ his sake.

Having noted all your Doubts, take a fit opportunity to consult your Pastor
for better Instruction.

At the end of this Examination, thus pray:

O most blessed God, if my Heart deceive me not I firmly believe all that I
know of thy sacred Truth. Thou know, O Lord, the scantness of my Knowledge
and weakness of my Faith, I most heartily beseech thee to pardon my
Imperfections, to keep me from Heresy and Error, and to strengthen me daily in
the true Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ. Let me not rest in an idle and dead
Faith, but make it lively and active in me, purifying my Heart from all
Hypocrisy and Uncleanness, kindling in me a fervent Love to thee and to thy
Laws, working in me by Love an universal Obedience to thy blessed Will,
enabling me to overcome the World, subdue the Flesh with the Lusts thereof, to
quench all the fiery Darts of the Devil, to resist all his Temptations unto
Victory, to be conformed daily more and more to the Image of Christ, to be
strong against all Sufferings and the Terrors of Death, and finally to lay hold
on eternal Life, through thy Mercy, and the Merits of my blessed Savior Jesus
Christ. Amen.

When you are to examine your Repentance and Obedience, pray to this sense.

Most great and good Good, the searcher of Hearts and trier of the Reins, who
art every where present, and from whom no Darkness can hide us; thou compassest
my Path, and my lying down, and art acquainted with all my ways: there is not a
word in my Tongue, nor a thought in my Heart, but thou know it altogether.
My heart, O God, is deceitful above all things, and I cannot find it out,
neither understand the errors of my ways, nor the sincerity of my Purposes,
without the help of thy holy Spirit. Help me, O my God, help me, I beseech
thee, to know my self and the true frame and temper of my Soul; show thou me
wherein I have offended thee in Thought, Word, or Deed; grant me a true and a
humbling sight and sense of all my Sins; let not my Ignorance blind me, nor
self-love beguile me, nor the common practice of the World delude me into a
false Opinion of my self and my own Righteousness: but enable me, I humbly
beseech thee, to find out all my Sins, together with all the Aggravations of my
Guilt; make me truly vile in mine own Eyes, and heartily sorry for all my
Failings; enable me to hate and forsake every evil way, and to turn unto thee
by an unfeigned Repentance, and a sincere Obedience to all thy holy and good
Laws; that I may have my fruit unto Holiness, and the end everlasting Life,
through Jesus Christ my only Lord and Savior. Amen.

After every Question pause a while, and impartially judge your self; and where
you think you have done any part of your Duty, say;

Blessed be my good God through Jesus Christ, who by his holy Spirit has
enabled me either to will or to do any good thing in his Sight. O Lord, I have
done all very weakly and imperfectly, and most humbly beg thy pardon. If I have
done any thing well, not unto me, O Lord, not unto me, thy very unprofitable
Servant, but unto thy Name, be the Glory, through Jesus Christ my Lord.

Where you see your sin, lay it in earnest to your Heart, and say;

O Lord, I have herein sinned most grievously against Heaven and before thee,
and am not worthy to be called thy Child: God be merciful to me poor Sinner who
deserve nothing but Hell and Damnation: O grant me Repentance unto Life, and
enter not into Judgment with thy Servant, but pardon my Sin, and lead me in the
ways of thy Commandments to eternal life, through Jesus Christ.

If you have offended or injured any man, note it well, and take some sit time
to confess it to him, satisfy him, and beg his Pardon.

If your Sin be public and scandalous, think not you have done enough till you
have publicly testified your Repentance, as the Church shall require it of you.

When you are in any doubt, resort again to the Minister, confess your Sin
freely to him, and crave his Judgment and Directions.

After Examination, pray earnestly to this effect:

O most holy and just God, who perfectly hate all Iniquity, and will not have
Mercy on any impenitent Sinner, how should so vile and polluted a Wretch as I
am dare so much as to take thy holy Name into my defiled Mouth. O Lord, I am a
most grievous and abominable Sinner, and do altogether deserve thy fierce Wrath
and heavy Indignation. It is a very great wonder of Mercy, that thou suffer
me yet to live, and have not long since cast me into Hell, and given me the
Wages of Sin for which I have so long labored. How many and foul are the Sins
which thou have now enabled me to discover in my self! even the least of this
black number is enough to condemn me to endless Torments; and whither then
would not such a multitude of foulest Transgressions sink me, if thy Mercies
were not infinite, and thy Patience truly wonderful! Yet alas! how few are all
these in comparison of those which have escaped my Observation, but cannot be
hid from thine all-seeing Eye? And if I appear so vile in my own Eyes, how
loathsome and abominable a thing must I needs be in thine? My Sins (O God) are
not a few but many, no small Offenses, but very heinous Transgressions, few of
them rare with me, but most of them very often repeated, long continued in, and
become even familiar, customary, and habitual. Yea, O Lord, with shame and
confusion of Face I confess, that I have had so little regard to thy Will, that
I have even sinned, as I eat and drink, with all greediness and delight. Though
thou have never been wanting to me in any help to enable me, or any
Remembrancer to mind me, or any Motive to invite me, or any Bounty or Promise
to encourage me; yet have I made a very bad use of all thy Goodness: and by
that very Patience and Forbearance which should have led me to Repentance, I
have encouraged my self to sin the more freely, even without fear, and I may
justly fear, to the great hardening of my Heart. Tho I have lived long under
the bright Light of thy Gospel, and have thy Word sounding in my Ears daily,
and have thy Ministers ready at hand to instruct me; yet am I very ignorant,
and have even hated Knowledge and despised Instruction, and cast thy Words
behind. Though I have had many seasonable Monitors of my Duty, and felt many
motions of thy good Spirit, and suffered many Checks from my own Conscience;
yet have I turned my Back upon thee, and done almost none of thy Commandments.
Nay, after the most solemn Engagements, Covenants, and Vows, I have
treacherously revolted from thee, rebelled against thee, and set at naught all
thy Goodness to me. I have a false and treacherous Heart, which has never yet
kept Faith with thee. I find, to the great discomfort of my Soul, that I have
dissembled with thee, and gone about to mock thee by feigned Professions,
counterseit Repentances, and hypocritical Devotions. Even now, O Lord, I feel
not that deep Humiliation, that piercing Grief, that Anger, and Hatred, and
Indignation, against my Sins, and my self for cherishing them, that I ought to
have: neither do I find in my Heart, that servent Love of thee, that true Zeal
for thy Honor, that hungring desire of Righteousness and Holiness that should
be in me. And now, O my God, what can I have to say for my self after all this?
Why should thou not deal with me as I have justly deserved, and reward me
with Indignation and Wrath, Tribulation and Anguish? If thou should even now
instead of accepting my Confession, throw me, in thy just Fury, into
unquenchable Flames with the Devil and his Angels, thou were most just in so
doing, and even merciful in taking Vengeance of me so late, when I had so often
and long provoked thy Wrath before. O Lord, I have nothing to plead in my own
Excuse, I have nothing to fly unto, but that Mercy of my good God which I have
so long abused. O hide not thy Face away from me, but humble my Soul yet more
for my Unworthiness; break my Heart into true Contrition* that it may yet be an
acceptable Sacrifice unto thee; give me not over unto vile Affections, nor a
reprobate Mind; break the dominion Sin has got over me, for the earnest desire
of my Soul is to be thy Servant, and only thine for ever. O gracious God, we
have an Advocate at thy right hand, even Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is
the Propitiation for our Sins; him thou sentest into the World to be the
Savior of lost Sinners, and have promised, that no Man shall perish or be
rejected that comes unto thee by him: for his sake pardon me, for his sake
have Mercy upon me; by the bitter Death and Passion of thy dearly beloved Son
in whom thou art well pleased, I beseech thee, O holy Father, to look
graciously upon me, and blot out all my Transgressions, and restore unto me the
Joy of thy Salvation. Cleanse and purify my sinnful Soul in his Blood, receive
me graciously into the number of thine adopted Children, rid me and set me free
from the power of Sin, and slavery of my Lusts; let thy holy Spirit rule for
ever in my Heart, and deliver me from the Law of Sin and Death in my Members. O
speak Peace unto thy Servant, and let me yet live to praise thy Name; let me
not return any more with the Dog to his Vomit, nor with the Sow to her
wallowing in the Mire; but work in me a perfect Hatred of all that thou hate,
and a true Love to all that thou love. Strengthen me by thy Grace to
withstand all Temptations, and to persevere and grow in Faith and Love, and all
Goodness, to deny all Ungodliness and worldly Lusts, and to live henceforward
righteously, soberly, and godly in this present World; patiently and
comfortably looking for that blessed Hope, and the glorious Appearance of the
great God and our Savior Jesus Christ, who gave himself for us, that he might
redeem us from all Iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar People zealous
of good Works. In his blessed Name and perfect Prayer, I here commend unto thee
all the Desires and Needs of my poor Soul, and of thy whole Church. Our Father,
etc.

A Prayer before the blessed Sacrament.
O Most merciful God and Father in Jesus Christ, who of thine infinite Love and
Goodness to our poor perishing Souls, have provided for us all things that be
needful to us in our polluted and miserable Condition, whereinto we have
brought our selves by Sin and show Mercy unto us even when we would have no
Mercy on our selves: I am here, O Lord, prostrate at thy Footstool, a vile
Wretch, that have again and again deserved to be punished with everlasting
Destruction from thy presence. And will the great God of Heaven and Earth
vouchsafe to look upon such a Dog as I? Shall the so often offended,
dishonored, provoked Majesty of the glorious God, condescend even to invite
and beseech so traitorous a Rebel as I have been, to accept of Pardon and
Salvation? And shall I yet despise thy loving kindness, O my gracious God, and
neglect so great Salvation as this that thou daily tenderst unto us in the Son
of thy Love and our blessed Savior Jesus Christ? When we were gone astray from
thee the God of our Life, and were going headlong to Destruction, thou were
pleased to open unto us a new and living way by the Death of thy only begotten
Son. When we lay polluted in our Filth, and odious to thy pure Eyes, thou
opened'st for us, in his precious Blood, a Fountain for Sin and for
Uncleanness. Thou have not disdained to admit me poor Sinner into thy holy
Church and Family by Baptism, and into a sacred Covenant of Grace and Peace
with thy self through the Blood of the blessed Mediator. And even now after so
many careless and even willful Violations of this holy Covenant, thy Mercy
follows me with fresh Offers of Reconciliation, and thou have invited me to a
Feast of Love in thy House, and at thy own Table, and on the Body and Blood of
thine own dear Son and my blessed Redeemer. O my most bountiful God, how long
have I played the ed Prodigal, and pleased my self in Sin and Vanity, and
delighted in disobeying thy Commandments? How often have I set light by the
Bread of Life in the House of my Father, and preferred the Trash of this World
before it? How often have I boldly and presumptuously, without due Preparation,
approached unto thy holy Table? And how often have I returned thence with the
same unclean Heart and unmortified Lusts which I carried thither? When I
consider this, I tremble to think what Entertainment such a monstrous Sinner as
I have been, might expect from thee. O let me not any longer, through
Impenitence and Negligence, lose the Benefits of thy rich Mercy in Jesus
Christ. For his sake pardon all my former Neglects, Misbehaviours, and Breaches
of Covenant with thee, and grant me now, good God I beseech thee, such a
measure of thy Grace as may fit me for this sacred Ordinance. Once more most
blessed God, I am preparing to come at thy gracious Call, but what can I do
without thy Help? I am clogged with Sin and Corruption, I have suffered my
Lusts to get the upper hand, and to lead me Captive; O! show thy Strength in my
weakness, pull down every proud and unruly thing in me that exalts it self
against thy holy Spirit; strengthen me henceforward for ever to do thy Will.
Awaken and stir up my dull Affections to love thee, and praise thee for thy
wonderful love in redeeming us by the Sacrifice of thy beloved Son. O Lord, I
do now renew most heartily my so often broken Vows and Promises to be wholly
thine, O Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, for evermore. Accept of me, O my God, and
let not my great Unworthiness provoke thee to reject thy poor Servant whose
Soul pants after thee. Enable me, amongst those that keep Holyday in thy
House, worthily to show forth the Death of our blessed Jesus, even as he has
commanded us, in a joyful and truly thankful Remembrance of his inestimable
Love, in an absolute and entire Dedication of our selves to his Service and
Government, in a total Reliance upon thy Mercy through his Merits, in a cordial
Love to him our Head, to all his Members, yea to all Mankind, and even our
Enemies for his sake. And do thou, O merciful Father, for thy dear Son's sake,
herein seal unto our Souls the Pardon of all our Sins, confirm and strengthen
us in all Grace and Goodness, and bring us by the constant and conscientious
use of this and all other Instruments of Grace, to everlasting Life, through
Jesus Christ our Lord, in whose holy Words I farther beg whatever is needful
for my self and for thy whole Church. Our Father, etc.

A Prayer after receiving this Sacrament.
O Father of Mercies, and God of all Comforts, I have this day tasted and seen
that thou art good, and that thy Mercy endures for ever. It is well seen, O
God, that thou delightest not in the Death of a Sinner, seeing thou vouchsafest
so vile a Sinner as I am to feast my hungry Soul at thy Table, and to drink of
the Rivers of thy Pleasures. For ever blessed be thy Goodness, and praised for
evermore be thy Mercies to us poor Sinners in the Lord Christ Jesus. O let the
deep sense of this thy wonderful Love ever rest upon my Heart. Let the
spiritual Relish of this heavenly Feast so delight my Soul, as to render all
Sin and Vanity unsavory and loathsome to it for ever. Let this great Grace and
Favor of admitting me this day to renew my Covenant with thee after so many
Breakings of it, oblige me to constant Thankfulness, and continual Obedience,
to the greatest watchfulness over my Heart^ and Circumspection in all my ways.
And as I have been showing the Death of Christ in this holy Sacrament in the
midst of the Congregation; so give me Grace and Strength to show it daily in a
Christian Life and Conversation, and in the continual mortifying and crucifying
of my sinful Affections and Lusts. Enable me to resist and vanquish all those
Temptations to Sin whereby I have been formerly conquered. O holy Jesus, I have
given my Heart to thee this day, take, I beseech thee, such a full Possession
of it by thy holy Spirit, that neither the Devil, the World, nor Sin, may ever
again have any part or interest in it, nor let me ever desire to be any
otherwise my own, than that I may continue wholly thine, at thy sole Command
and Disposal. O good God, pardon all the Infirmities and Failings whereof I
have been guilty in the performance of this great Duty. And bless, I beseech
thee, this sacred Ordinance to thy whole Church, so that Truth, and Holiness,
and Christian Love, may ever flourish and abound therein. As we have one Faith,
one Baptism, one Lord, one Hope, and profess our selves one Body by partaking
this one Bread; so grant us to hold the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of
Peace, till we come to the Church triumphant in Heaven, through him who loved
us, and has washed us in his Blood, even JESUS CHRIST, our only Lord and
Savior. Amen.

FINIS.
Books printed for and sold by, John Baker at the Three Pigeons in Saint
Paul's Churchyard.
THE right Foundation of Quietness, Obedience, and Concord: by Clement Elis.

Lately published by Dr. Parker, Archdeacon of Canterbury; An Account of
Church -- Government, for the first six hundred Years.

Religion and Loyalty; or, a Demonstration of the Christian Church, within it
self. octavo. in two Volumes.

The Service Book, in folio, in (...), fit for Churches and Chapls.

Duport in Psalmos. quarto. Gr. Lat. -- idem in Homerum. 4o. -- idem 4o. Graece
separatim.

An earnest Invitation to the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper. 12o. by Joseph
Glanvil.

A Sermon before the Artillery-Company, by Dr. Calamy, lately published.

FINIS.

