A further Account of the progress OF THE GOSPEL Amongst the Indians In New
England: BEING A Relation of the Confessions made by several Indians (in the
presence of the Elders and Members of several Churches) in order to their
admission into Church Fellowship.

Sent over to the Corporation for Propagating the Gospel of Jesus Christ
amongst the Indians in New England at London, by Mr John Elliot one of the
Laborers in the Word amongst them.

LONDON, Printed by John Macock. 1660.

TO ALL That love the Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity, and have a zeal for the
propagation of Gospel Light, to those who sit in darkness, Grace and peace be
multiplied.
Brethren,
IT was the holy ambition and strife of the Apostle Paul ( that chosen Vessel
to bear the Name of Christ before the Gentiles) to preach the Gospel where
Christ was not named, lest he should seem to build upon another man's
foundation, Romans 15. 20.

To hand on a good work begun by another is very commendable, and shall not
loose its reward; but to break the ice and begin a good work is very
honorable, and shall surely have a great reward. I am much persuaded it has
been the gracious strife, I am sure it has been the lot of many of our
faithful Brethren, in New England, to preach the Gospel where Christ was not
named before; and the Lord has given a signal Testimony, that they have not
labored in vain. We read of the First Fruits of Achaia unto Christ ( Romans
16. 5. and again, 1 Cor. 16. 15.) We have also heard both of the First Fruits
and Second-fruits of India in New England unto Christ; and these are a fair
assurance of a plentiful harvest there in due time. A blessed Foundation is
laid, yea, the Building begins to appear above ground, in the visible
profession or professed subjection of many poor Souls unto the Gospel of
Christ. May we not therefore hopefully expect, that the Top-stone shall be set
up with a shout of Grace, Grace to it?

He that attentively reads the Report, which is made in the following
Collection of the Examinations and Confessions of several Native Indians, who
have been wrought upon by the preaching of the Word in the Wilderness, will see
much cause to admire the free grace and goodness of God to them, as also his
mighty power and the revealing of his arm in them. What strong and clear
convictions of sin, both of the sinfulness of their natures, and of the sins of
their lives have they been under, who lay (before) dead in trespasses and sins,
wholly alienated from the life of God through the ignorance that was in them?
What strugglings and strivings with corruption and temptation do they speak of,
before they could come off from sin, and from that vain conversation received
by tradition from their Forefathers? What wrestlings had they with unbelief,
before they could close with Christ in the promise? What full resignations of
themselves have they made to the commands of Christ after closing with him by
faith in the promise? Yea, what hungrings and thirstings do some of them
express for more intimate communion with Christ in attendance upon all his
Ordinances in a Church State or holy Fellowship with his People?

Surely, what these late Aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel have found and
declared (as their spiritual experiences) about the dealings of God with their
hearts, in bringing them off from sin, and home to himself, may shame many
among us, who have been born and bred up in the air and sound of the Gospel
all their days.

I may, not unfitly, make use of those Prophesies of Moses and Esaias
concerning the Jews and Gentiles (and so applied by the Apostle Paul, Romans 10.
19, 20, 21.) in this present case between us in England and the Indians. The
Lord has begun to provoke us to Jealousy by them that were no people, and by
a foolish Nation he has angered us, he is found of them that sought him not,
he is made manifest to them that asked not after him, but all the day long
has he stretched out his hands unto us a disobedient and gainsaying people.
Conversions are grown somewhat rare (that is sad) in England; and such accounts
of Conversion much more rare. And as we find but few able to give any passable
account of their conversion to God, so we find not a few offended at the
requiring and taking of it, before admission into complete Church Communion.
We have many who profess the Religion they were born in, but we have
(comparatively) only a few, who profess Religion upon the evidences of their
New Birth. And that is one great reason why the Church and the world, the
precious and the vile, are in so lamentable a mixture in most places at this
day.

It were a very desirable mercy, that the practice and example of our native
Brethren, yea, of the native Indians in New England might kindle in us the fire
of a blessed emulation in this matter; and that the Ministers of the Gospel
would every where exspect and diligently enquire after some hopeful proofs of
the work of Grace from all those, who, in their own right, partake of those
higher Privileges, the Seals of the Covenant of Grace. Doubtless, then,
Churches would appear more like Churches in the beauties of Holiness, and the
fruits of the presence of Christ would be more gloriously visible in them. The
great thing which we (upon whom the ends of the world are come) should
earnestly pray, endeavor and wait for is, that the new Jerusalem may be seen
coming down from heaven, like a Bride adorned for her Husband; and to be any
way, rightly, isntrumental for the bringing in of this glory, is a piece of
the best Glory which we are capable of on this side our heavenly Glory.

'Twas therefore a very gracious as well as a noble Design, to create and
establish a Corporation in this our England, to receive, improve, manage, and
issue a free contribution and the profits arising from it for the constant
support, encouragement, and promotion of this work of Christ in That Other
England. Nor can we but with much thankfulness to God take notice of the
liberal charity of many who have already contributed to it, as also of the
faithfulness, diligence, prudence, and Godly zeal of those worthy Persons who
are entrusted with the disposal of those Contributions. And because, as the
whole Work is great, so there are some great parts of it now in hand, as the
Printing of David's Psalms and the New Testament (besides an intendment of
printing the whole Bible) in the Indian Language, which must needs be a work of
great charge as well as of excellent use, (for these reasons I say) it would be
a most acceptable Charity, either to procure or advance additional
Contributions. How can any honor the Lord better with their perishing
substance, then by forwarding a Design which may be a means to keep thousands
of Souls from perishing? Yea, what an honor will it be to this whole Nation,
that the Holy Bible should be printed in our days and at our cost in a
Language and for a Nation which never had it to this day? That this blessed and
beautiful Undertaking for the gathering in of those poor Souls, who yet wander
in that Howling wilderness, to the Flock and fold of Christ (the Great Shepherd
of the Sheep) may not want their compassionate and cheerful assistance, who
are already (through grace) gathered into his holy flocks and folds, is the
hearty desire and prayer of

The 6th of the first Month, 1659. Sirs, Your affectionate friend to serve you
in the Lord, JOSEPH CARYL.

A brief Relation received from Mr John Elliott of the late Proceedings with
the Indians in New England, in order to their admission into Church Fellowship.
In the year of our Lord 1659. The fifth day of the fifth Month.
THis is the third time that the Praying Indians (some of them) have been
called forth into public, to make open confession of the Name of Christ, to
come under the public trial of Gods people, whether they be indeed Christians,
as fit matter for a Gospel Church. Truth loves and seeks the light.

I was stirred up hereunto* and quickened by Letters from England. The Lord put
it into the hearts of such as are honorable, reverend, and of eminent service
to Christ in England, to move me, before I moved. When I moved this last time,
I perceived that it was the general inclination of the Spirit of the Saints,
both Magistrates, Elders, and others, that (at lest some of the principal of
them) should (for a season) be seasoned in Church Fellowship, in communion with
our English Churches, before they should be Churches among themselves. And when
it was Objected, What should the rest of the people do, if the principal and
most able should not keep their Sabbaths among them? It was Answered, That
their usual Sabbath conversation should be at home among their own people, only
sometime to be among the English; viz. for participation of the Seals, the
Sacraments of Baptism and the Lords Supper, and for any special Exercise of
Discipline. When it was Questioned what English Church they should join unto?
All with one mouth said, that Roxbury Church was called of God to be first in
that service of Christ to receive the praying Indians. In the accomplishment
whereof, I yielded my self up to follow counsel in the Lord. The Elders offered
themselves, on some Lecture day, to meet (if need were) at Roxbury Lecture,
then to speak with the Church, to persuade to an unanimous accord, in receiving
the Indians for a season; which accordingly they did: and the Lord was so
effectually present in that meeting, that all Objections, so far as I know,
were silenced. Soon after, our Church passed a Vote for the receiving of the
Indians. The Elders of Roxbury called eight of them to a private preparatory
Confession, in order to our public proceeding. We gave notice of the time and
place of this meeting, and many were present to hear them, both men and women;
which Confessions I shall here set down, for reasons which seem to me to have
much weight; and they are as follows.

An Abbreviate of the Confessions of some of the Indians, which they made
before the Elders of Roxbury, (sundry Christian people being present, both men
and women) the 15th day of the second Month, 1659. preparatory, in order to
their admission into the Church.
Nisho^kou.
OH God of Grace and Salvation, help me by thy spirit to confess truth and
grace, in the presence of God.

1 I confess, that I have now learned out of Genesis 5. 1. that God made man in
the Image of God, and Adam lived 130 years, and begot a Son in his own Image,
ver. 3. which then was not the Image of God, but by reason of the fall, was the
Image of Satan; and that Image of Satan he did communicate to us, so that we
are all born in sin, and so I lived.

After we prayed to God about three years, my heart was not yet right, but I
desired to run wild, as also sundry others did. Then I understood, that the
Lord did make heaven, earth, sea, and all creatures, and also man, and
therefore I understood that God made me. Yet I being young, I was still vain,
and ran about; and I liked to do acts of youth and vanity, and lust, as others
did. And I went to Pawwauing among others, and these things I loved thoroughly,
and they grew in my heart, and had nourishment there, and especially lust; if I
cut my hair, it was with respect to lust, to please women; if I had long hair,
it was with respect to lust, and all I did was with respect to lust and women;
when there was meetings, drinkings, sports, they respected lust, and these
things I perfectly loved. When the Minister came to teach us, he taught, and I
came to meeting; but I came to look upon women, I understood not what he
taught; sometimes I came, and understood nothing at all, only I looked on
women. About two years after, I began to understand what the Minister preached:
I understood that Scripture Iam. 1. He that doubts is like a wave of the
sea, driven of the winds and tossed; and if any man lack wisdom, let him ask
it of God. This I understood, yet I only understood it, but it was very hard to
believe. Afterward, I heard out of Genesis 6. that God spoke concerning man, I
will destroy man whom I have made, because God saw that the way of man was
corrupt before him; and this troubled me. And again, in the same Chapter it is
said, That God saw that the iniquity of man was great upon the earth, and that
every imagination of the thought of his heart is only evil continually; this
troubled me, for I saw the roots of sin in my heart: yet it was hard to
believe. Again, in that 6. of Genesis God rebuked that sin in man, which was my
sin, and then my heart was troubled. Sometime my heart said, it is better to
run wild as I did before, then to pray to God; for if now I sin, or commit
lust, I shall be punished, or put in prison; but if I run wild, I have liberty
to sin without danger: but I was ashamed of such thoughts, and repented; but
yet I doubted.

After half a year I heard the Minister preach this; That Christ his death is
of infinite value, but our death is little worth; God is satisfied with the
death of Christ, and promises to pardon our sins for Christ his sake, if we
believe in Christ: we deserve to die, but Christ stands in our stead, and
dies for us, and so saves us from death. Next time the Minister came, he
asked, what I remembered of this I now spoke of: and I did remember it, and do
remember it to this day; and I desire to pray to God as long as I live. I
believe Christ dyed for sinners, but I doubted concerning my self. Then I heard
this promise; If you repent and believe, you shall have pardon and be saved:
and therefore sometime I believe, and sometimes I doubt again. Afterward, I had
temptation to drinking, and to vain courses, nigh half a year; yet when Sabbath
came, my heart would turn to God; when the Soldiers came upon us on the
Sabbath, while we were at meeting, and made us bring our guns hither: then my
heart said, Sure God has not said, Keep the Sabbath day holy; and then my
heart cast off God, yet it was only in my heart. When we came to the
Magistrates, and Cutshamoquin asked, Why they came on the Sabbath day? my heart
was troubled, and I did believe, when we went from the Magistrates. I was
thirsty, and I drank a great deal; and I was drunk, and was carried before the
Magistrates, and then I was ashamed. Then I came to the Ministers house, and I
was greatly ashamed; and my heart said, Sure I have now cast off praying to
God; but I repented and cried to God, Oh God, pardon all my sins, and this my
sin; for my sins are great. I had other temptations to drinking, and I found my
heart weak, and doubting, but my heart was troubled, and I was ready to stumble
like a little weak child.

After this, I heard that word of God, Mat. 12. Do ye not remember what David
did on the Sabbath day, and was blameless? Then I thought the Soldiers did
not sin; but then I saw that I was a great sinner, and that I had broken the
Sabbath.

Again, I heard that word, Mat. 3. Every tree that brings not forth good
fruit is hewn down and cast into the fire: and this troubled me, because I
had evil fruits.

Again, Mat. 6. Christ says, Be ye not like hypocrites, which seem to pray
before men. I thought this was my case, I did only pray before men, but I
doubted of Christ and his Grace.

Again, Mat. 5. Who ever breaks the least of Gods Commandments, and teach men
so to do, shall be least in the Kingdom of heaven. Then I was troubled, because
I had been an active sinner, in lust, and other sins, and I was worse then a
beast in my sins. Then I cried to God, Oh Christ pardon all my great sins, Oh
Christ have mercy on me, Oh God remember me, to pardon all my sins. Thus I
cried and desired pardon, but I was weak in believing. But then, about two
years after, I was greatly troubled about my weakness: I desired to do well,
but I was weak: Then I cried to God, Oh God help me by thy spirit in me, and
send thy spirit into my heart. Sometimes I read and taught on the Sabbath day,
but weakly. Then I heard, Mat. 23. Christ bid the people do what the Scribes
and Pharisees said, but not do as they do. I said (Lord) that is my case; I
teach better then I do: and therefore I desired repentance for my sin, and to
forsake my sin. Then Mat. 7. Christ says, Thou hypocrite, first cast the beam
out of thy own eye, and then thou may see clearly to cast the mote out of thy
brothers eye. My heart said, Truly it is so; I teach others, but I do not well
my self; I reprove sin, and yet I do it. Then was my heart weary, and I desired
again to do well, and amend, but I found my self very weak. Sometime my heart
hated praying to God, and meeting on the Sabbath days; and therefore I see I
deserve hell torments: and then I cried, Oh Christ pardon all these my sins.
Then afterward my heart desired strongly to pray unto God, but I saw I deserved
misery and punishment, and I was weak. Then I desired my heart might be made
strong by Church Covenant, Baptism, and the Lords Supper, which might be as a
Fort to keep me from enemies, as a Fort keeps us from our outward enemies.
Yet my heart was sometime backward, and said, No matter, do it not, but still
do what thy heart would have thee. And I saw Satan did thus follow me with
these temptations to misbelief and doubting. But now I see Satan tempts me,
because he desires I should be ever tormented with him. Then I learned that
in John 6. I am the true bread, and he that eats me shall live for ever,
and he that drinks my blood shall have life; but he that does not eat my
flesh and drink my blood shall not have life. Then my heart says, Truth Lord,
that is my case. Again I learnt, John 3. He that believes shall not perish,
but have eternal life: And my heart said, Yea Lord, let it be so.

Again, Mat. 16. Christ says, Thou art Peter a Rock, and on this Rock I will
build my Church, and the gates of Hell shall not prevail against it: Therefore
my heart said, I desire this; because Christ dwells in the Church, and is in
the midst of them* where two or three are met together in my name. Oh! I do
therefore desire Church Ordinances, that I might be with Christ, and that I
might have the Seals. Mat. 3. Christ says, Let it be: for it is necessary that
I should fulfill all righteousness: My heart said, Oh that I might also so do O
Lord, now my heart desires and thirsts; Oh God have mercy on me and pity my
weakness, that I may have pardon in Christ, and strength from Christ in all his
Ordinances, and that I might leave all my sins; and Oh God pardon all my sins
for thy mercies sake; I know not what to do I am so weak, Oh God help, and have
mercy on me. And the same I desire of you, before whom I am in this house,
help me; for Mat. 16. whom ye bind on earth are bound in heaven, and whom
ye loose on earth are loosed in heaven: and my desire is, that Christ would
pardon all my sins, and that I may be helped.

Elder Heath propounded this Question, which he answered in broken English.
Question. Whether does Satan still tempt you with former lusts and
temptations? and what do you when you are tempted?

Answer to the first part. Yes, always to this day. To the second part: When
Devil comes, I sometime too much believe him, but sometime I remember to do
Gods Word, because Gods Word is all one a sword, and breaks the Devils
temptations.

Deacon Park propounded this Question. What is it in sin, why he hates it now
more then before?

Answ. his answer in broken English. I did love sin, but now not all one so,
because I hear Gods Word, and that shows me, that which I loved is evil, and
will bring me to hell, therefore I love it not now.

Deacon Park urged, Does he hate sin because it is against God?

Answ. That chiefly.

Anthony.
FIrst, I make confession in the presence of God, and of all these Elders: and
this I confess, that I am not able to speak before the Lord, yet I do it
according as God requires I should. Assuredly I am a sinner, but now I hope
Christ has taught me his Word; Oh let him (my Lord!) help me to speak it.

I confess, that in my mothers belly I was defiled in sin: my father and
mother prayed to many gods, and I heard them when they did so; and I did so
too, because my parents did so: and in my childhood, (before I could act sin) I
did delight in it, as dancing and Pawwaug: and when they did so, they prayed to
many gods, as Beasts, Birds, Earth, Sea, Trees, etc. After I was born, I did
all such things. I loved lust when I was a youth, though I did act these lusts
but a little. But when I had a little begun, my heart did very much desire more
to do such sins: I saw the English keep Sabbath; I cared not, but played, and
caught birds, or any thing: yet when I saw Englishmen, I ran away, on the
Sabbath day, because they should not see me. As yet I knew not of great sins,
as Murder, Adultery: then some Indians said we must pray to God. When I was in
English houses, I saw them pray, and I thought it a vain work. They said there
was but one God; I thought, nay, there be many Gods. When Indians said, We
will pray, my heart said, No; I will not so long as I live. Yet I heard more
and more of praying to God, and that my brothers prayed to God; but my heart
said, Praying to God is vain. After I heard Waban did pray, and my brothers,
Wompo^as, and Toteswo^mp; yet my heart said, No: I am well enough. I have not
so sinned as other men, I am no Murderer, Adulterer, etc. Then I ran away; yet
I was not much troubled, because my brothers prayed. A little after I came, and
my brother said to me; I pray you pray to God. I answered him not, but my
heart said, No: yet I was troubled, because I heard my brothers. I thought, if
any should kill my brothers, I would kill him: if any Wars were, I would go
with my brothers; only I thought of my love to my brothers: and then that, if
my brother make War, I would go with him, to kill men* Now he prays, shall
not I go with my broth^^^^ (...) my brothers love me, and they both pray to
God, (...) should not I? They prayed morning and (...) they eat, and on Sabbath
days, then I thought I would do so: but it was not for love of God, or fear of
God, but because I loved my brothers. Again, when I came to Noonantam* I heard
the Minister preach, and I desired to hear what he (...) taught, but I
understood not, (...), because I understood stood (...) to hear, I heard some
youths (...) Roxbury. My brother said to me. Go you, because you may learn
Smithery: For that reason I did go, but desired not to learn to pray: all these
things were vain. When we came to Roxbury, I said, I desired to learn Smithery:
But my Master said, I may not teach him my Trade, lest Indians learn to make
Locks and Guns. Then I would not dwell with him, and thought to cast off
praying, and thought I would forsake my brothers. My brother persuaded me to
dwell one year there, but I would not: yet at last I did dwell there one year,
and went to meeting, but in vain, for I understood not one word. After that
year, I returned to Noonantam, and then I heard that God made all the world,
but yet I did not pray to God one jot, but still sinned, and especially the sin
of Lust, and I made light of any sin. I heard, and understood the Commands of
God, Thou shall not murder, commit adultery, steal, bear false witness, covet;
and that made me afraid to commit sin before man, lest I should be punished or
put to death, but I feared not God. After I heard the Minister ask, Who made
you? A. God: and Who redeemed you? A. Christ: and Who must sanctify you? The
holy Ghost, and that God made Heaven, Earth, Sea, etc. then I a little
considered of God, who made all this world, and then I was afraid. I saw that
no man could make these things, and that therefore we must pray to God, Then my
heart said, Assuredly it is so; God made all things, and made me, and I must
pray to him: After this, my brothers were sick, and I prayed God, Oh that they
may live! and then I heard, that now God tries me whether I will pray or no.
I confess I have done many sins, especially lust, though I had not been a
Murderer, or the like. But then my brothers and kindred dyed: then my heart
said, Sure it is a vain thing to pray to God; for I prayed, yet my friends dye^
therefore I will run wild, and did cast off praying, I did not pray morning
and night, and at meat, only on the Sabbath day I came to meeting, but I cared
not for hearing, nor did I believe any thing I heard, but I still lived in sin,
and my heart said, I will run away; for here we are hindered from sin, in other
places I may freely sin. Then my brothers which lived were troubled for me.
Then I said I will abide with my brothers, because I love them, but not because
I would pray.

Then that Winter God broke my head; I knew but little, I was almost dead: Then
my heart said, Now I know God is angry with me for my sins, and has therefore
smote me; then I prayed hard, when I was almost dead. I remembered my sins
much, and considered them much: I remembered that God made all the world, and
therefore assuredly there is a God. I heard that God made Adam, and made him in
his own image, Genesis 1. and assuredly none but God could make all the world,
heaven, earth, sea, etc. then I did believe that God did make the world.

Again, I confess, I saw that I had offended against God, and sinned against
him, and that I had the root of sin in me, and that I had deserved all
miseries, and death, and hell. I heard, that God made a Covenant with Adam, and
forbad him to eat of the Tree in the midst of the Garden; and yet he did eat,
and therefore God was angry with man: and I was born in sin, and therefore God
was angry with me: and because I have sometime forsaken God, and run wild,
therefore I now know my sin and my offense against God. I desire no more to
cast off God and prayer, for now I know my sins, and that I have deserved
misery: therefore now I desired to pray to God, as long as I live. I desired
pardon of my sins, and I thought it may be God will pardon me: and my heart
prayed to God, Oh God if thou give me life again, I will assuredly believe and
obey; and now I know my sins by the sin of Adam: but when I had thus done,
quickly my heart would be vain again. After my wound, when I came to my self
and awaked, I saw my sin, and promised God to pray unto him, when I saw the
mercy of God was so great unto me: I heard that word, Say not, I will pray
hereafter, but now, Today if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts,
but pray to God; and that made my heart to yield to do it. Then I understood,
Genesis 2. that God formed man out of the dust of the earth, and breathed into him
a living soul: by this I did believe that God made me. And I heard that God
caused Adam to sleep, and took out a rib, and made it a woman: and by this I
believed, that surely this is the work of God. Again I heard, that we are born
in sin, under the guilt of Adams sin: and by that I believed that I was a
sinner. Again I heard, Genesis 6. that all the thoughts and imaginations of the
heart of man, are only evil continually; and that God did threaten to destroy
man whom he had made, and all beasts and living creatures which he had made:
and by this I saw, that surely sin is a very great evil.

Again I heard, that Noah found grace, and he only was upright before God,
and that God drowned all the world, except Noah, and his sons, and their wives,
eight persons: this did make me remember my sins, and confess them, and I
saw that God is angry with sin. It rained forty days, and so drowned all the
world: then I said, Surely this is Gods work, and he does as he threatened to
do to sinners; and the same may God do to me, who am a sinner; and my heart is
full of sin, and evil thoughts, etc. And then I prayed, Oh God be not angry
with me, but be merciful to me, and show me what I should do. Then I
considered why did God bid Noah make an Ark, and saved Noah and his Sons, and
their Wives: and by it my heart saw, that this is Gods work, who does what he
speaks, and has mercy on whom he will. And my heart thought, does God
pardon me, and love me? It may be God will have mercy on me. I heard that
promise, Mat. 3. Repent and believe, for the Kingdom of heaven is at hand: then
my heart said, Oh that God would help me, and pardon my sins. And God made me
wonder at Gods mercy to me. I heard of Sodom, and their great sin, and
destruction, and that did make me to remember my great sins, and the great work
of God that he had almost killed me; Oh, I thought this is Gods work, to show
me my sins: and as God saved Lot by the Angels, and sent him out of the
place, but burnt Sodom and all the people, this I saw to be Gods work, and now
I desired to fear God and pray unto him all the days of my life.

Again I heard, Mat. 3. The axe is laid to the root of the tree, every tree
that brings not forth good fruit is hewn down, and cast into the fire: then
I feared my own case, because my fruits were sin, and I deserved to be cut
down; then I desired to believe in Christ. I did believe that Christ is the Son
of God, by that word Matthew. 4. Satan tempted Christ, If thou be the Son of God,
etc. but Christ conquered Satan; and therefore assuredly he is the Son of God.
Then I considered that place, Mat. 11. Many came to Christ, the halt, and
blind, and lame, and deaf, and sick, and he healed all, and if they did but
touch Christ they were healed; and therefore my heart believed assuredly, he
is the Son of God: and therefore now I will pray, and Oh let Christ save me.
And Christ has promised, Whatever ye ask in my name, it shall be done:
therefore now I prayed, Oh Christ Jesus pardon me; but my heart is weak and
doubting, and I cannot believe. And I heard that word, that every tree that
brings not forth good fruit, is cut down and cast into the fire: then I said,
I deserve that. Again, that word, Not every one that says, Lord, Lord, but
he that hears the Word, and does it. Assuredly it is so; and I desire not
only to hear the Word, but to do it: then my heart was ashamed of my sins,
and grieved. I heard that word, Matthew. 6. Blessed art thou Simon bar-Ionah,
flesh and blood has not revealed this unto thee, but my heavenly Father: then
my heart said, Yea Lord, no man has taught me Christ, only God has taught my
heart to know Christ.

Again, I heard that word, Mat. 1. He will save his people from their sins:
then my heart said, Be it so to me, Oh Lord. Again, I heard that Christ rose
again the third day with an Earthquake; and the Watchmen were afraid, and
fled: then my heart said, Surely this is Christ the Son of God; and whosoever
believes in Christ, his soul shall go to heaven: For again, I heard of the
Ascension of Christ, and more then five hundred saw him ascend; and therefore I
believe this is Christ the Son of God. Again, I heard that in John 14. No man
comes unto the Father, but by me: my heart answered, Yea assuredly, Oh Lord,
Christ is the way, to believe in, and come to God.

Again, I heard that Mat. 25. Christ says to the wicked, Depart ye cursed: I
said, God might justly say so to me, and send me to eternal death. But I
earnestly cried to God, Oh God, set me into the right way, and give me
Christ, that I may ever walk with Christ; for I am poor and weak: and Christ
promises, that what we ask he will grant; and I say, Let God do with me
what he will: but I beg mercy in Christ, only I desire to pray to God as long
as I live.

John Speen.
THis I confess, that I assuredly am a great sinner before the Lord: but now I
beseech God to help me; Oh Christ, lead me in the right way, that I may speak
that which is right.

This I confess, that before we prayed to God, I was wholly a sinner, and not
only before, but since praying to God, I have been a great sinner: and now I
desire to make a short confession [for we desired that they would be shorter,
the time requiring so]. At first when I prayed, my prayer was vain, and only I
prayed with my mouth; and on the Sabbath, only I came to the House of Prayer. I
prayed morning and evening, and when I eat, but I considered not what I prayed
for; I was sometime angry and passionate about wordly matters; and I was
troubled when I saw my brother was chosen to be a Ruler, who was younger then
I; because now I saw that I was a sinner; and though I repented, yet presently
again I fell into sin: therefore I thought, surely God has cast me off,
because I thus sin; and still my heart was full of sin, all my thoughts were
full of sin, all my talk and doings were sinful.

But now of late, about 2 years ago, I heard this word, Mat. 12. When the
unclean spirit was cast out, he went up and down unquiet; then he returned
and took 7 devils with him, worse then himself, and dwelt in that man, and the
latter end of that man was worse then his beginning. When I heard this I
feared, my heart feared; I feared that my repentance and praying and all was
naught, and that God has almost quite cast me off. Then I considered how I
fell into these sins: I remembered that the Serpent did deceive the woman, and
she the man, and thereby brought sin; and thereupon God punished both the man
and the woman. Hearing this, my heart thought; Surely I am a great sinner, and
I was born in sin, because my parents were sinners, and so am I. I have sinned
against God, and I was born in sin. My Parents broke that Command, Thou shall
have no other gods but Me; but they served many gods, and so did I, and
therefore the earth brings forth thorns and weeds unto man, when he laboreth:
therefore by this I remembered my troublesome life, and all is because God is
offended at me, because of my sins. And then I remembered that many of my
children are dead; this is Gods punishment on me, because of my sins. Sometime
men punished me, and were offended at me, but now I remembered my sins against
God, and I saw that the punishments of God are a greater matter. Again, I heard
that word, that he that keeps his word shall find mercy. I thought so it is
indeed; but I am a sinner. I considered what I should do, because I was a
sinner, and born in sin, and have lived in sin. I considered assuredly there is
a God, and God made heaven and earth, and all that is therein, and all
destructions and deaths are the work of God. I remembered my vain praying to
God, and considered what to do* I confessed my sins before God, and begged
pardon for Christ his sake. I did find I could not deliver my self, but Christ
only is my deliverer; and my heart desired to believe, and pray to him, and yet
knew not what to do, nor how to please God, and get pardon; only I prayed, Oh
Christ deliver me, because I am a sinner, and know not what to do.

Then I remembered that God lays on us two deaths in this world: First, the
soul is dead, and we are made guilty of Adams sin, and have lost Gods Image,
and hereby my soul is a fool, and hereby my soul is dead: and a man dead can do
nothing, nor speak, nor go, nor stand, and verily so is my soul dead, and I
shall fall to eternal damnation by sin. Therefore now I cry to God to help me,
for I am thoroughly a sinner. After I heard that God pardons penitent
believers: and I remember the word of Jonas, when he was almost cast off, he
repented, and God made a Whale to eat him up; and then he looked to God, and
cried for mercy; and then I saw that if I cry for mercy, and believe, I shall
have pardon. I heard that Christ healed all manner of diseases; therefore I
believed that Christ is the Son of God, able to heal and pardon all. Now I
confess I know nothing, almost nothing at all. Again, Christ says, He that is
not with me is against me; my heart said, True it is so, so must I do, I must
be with Christ: and, He that gathers not, scatters; I said, So it is with
me, I have so done; I scatter, and am a stranger to Christ. And I did not
truly love them that prayed to God, but I was a stranger in heart unto them.
But now I desire in my heart to do as they do; and our poor teaching, I desire
to obey it, and do what God bids; and what he says you shall not do, that I
desire not to do: But yet again I do sin, and my sins troubled me by hearing
the word of God, and yet I would do them. I heard that God will pardon all
kind of sins, that men sin, but the sin against the Holy Ghost shall not be
pardoned in this world, nor in that which is to come. Then I feared that I was
such an one, and that God would not pardon me. Then I earnestly entreated God
to pardon and deliver me, because he was the true deliverer. Again, I heard
that word, that they that are well need not the Physician, but the sick. My
heart said, True; I did even so, I sought not help when I was well, but now I
remember my sins, and now my soul is dead, and now I desire that my soul may
live, and I desire the Physician of my soul to heal me; and Christ will not in
vain heal souls, but such as convert from sin, and believe in Christ, their
sins Christ pardons: this my soul does earnestly beseech of Christ, and else
I know not what to do. Again, I heard that Christ dyed for our sins, when we
are sinners. Again, Mat. 26. Christ says, This is my blood of the New
Testament, which is shed for many, for the remission of sins: my heart said,
Yea (Lord) let it be so for my soul, and let me not be a stranger any more
before thee. I know not what to do, Lord help. I desire to be washed from all
my filthy sins, and to be baptized, as a sign of it. I am as a dead man in my
soul, and desire to live.

Ponampam.
A Little I shall speak. I was young, about 8 years old when my father lived. I
did play as other children did, and my father did chide me for playing. I
wondered at it, for he said we shall all die. I wondered and sat amazed about
half an hour, but I soon forgot it. That Winter the Pox came, and almost all
our kindred dyed. I and my mother came to the Bay, and there dwelt till we
prayed to God; but I did nothing but sin, as the rest of the world did. Then
hearing the word of God, I heard that from the rising of the sun to the setting
thereof, my Name shall be known among the Gentiles: therefore all must pray to
God. But my heart did not desire that, but to go away to some other place. But
remembering the word of God, that all shall pray to God. Then I did not desire
to go away, but to pray to God. But if I pray before the Sachems pray, I fear
they will kill me, and therefore I will not pray. But yet when others prayed, I
prayed with them; and I thought, if I run away to other places, they will pray
too, therefore I will pray here. Then on a Sabbath, none taught, and some bid
me teach, what the Minister had taught us; but I feared, and durst not for fear
of the Sachems, yet they urged me, and I did. And I taught them what I
remembered, and they were angry at me, and we fell out, and I went away. I
thought that my praying would be in vain, and I laid by praying; and there was
Pawwauing, but I doubted to do that, because I had prayed, and I did think they
would laugh at me. After I returned again, and was among them which prayed, but
my heart did not rightly pray, though I came on the Sabbath day. Then about the
time that my Son (who was at School) was born, the Minister taught on 1 Chronicles.
28. 9. Thou Solomon my son, know the God of thy fathers, etc. if thou seek him,
he will be found of thee; if thou forsake him, he will cast thee off for
ever: Then I feared, for I said, This already I have done, I have cast off God,
and therefore he will cast off me; for every such one God will cast off, I know
not what to do. It repented me for my sin, I feared Gods wrath and damnation.
Then I prayed, and called upon God, yet only sometimes I repented, and after I
found my heart full of sin again: But then I was angry at my self, and knew not
what to do; always I did fear, God has cast me off, for all my many sins
which I have done. Hereby I was troubled and angry at my self. Then I heard
that word, Who ever repent and believe shall be saved, I Will pardon them: Then
my heart cried, Oh Christ let it be so, that my sins may be pardoned, and that
I may pray always. Then I begged, Lord give me repentance and faith, and I did
pray to God much. Then I did beg, that I might give up my self, wife, and
children to God as long as we live; and then I prayed. Then I heard that word,
Mat. 5. He that looks on a woman to lust after her, has committed adultery in
his heart. I then remembered my sins; that though I had promised to pray, yet I
had thus sinned, and my heart was now troubled about this. My heart said, Cast
off praying, because you are filthy in lust, your heart and eyes still commit
adultery; therefore run away from these that pray to God, and go to Qunniticot,
or some other place; and if you be in other places, you may do what you will,
and my heart almost inclined to this sin: But after that, this merciful word of
God I heard, That Satan led Christ into the wilderness to tempt him, and so I
thought he would do me. Then I desired God to be merciful to me; then I turned
to God, and cried, but knew not what to do, for I feared God had cast me off,
and I shall perish for ever; God has cast me off, and I have deserved hell
fire. Then I heard that word, Joh. 14. 6. None come to the Father but by me: I
did pray, Oh Christ let it be so, that by thee I may come to God; and I pray
Christ Jesus pardon all my sins, this mercy I beg. Then I repented my casting
off praying to God; then I promised I would not return again to sin, and if
Christ help me, I and children shall serve God. Then that Spring my mother and
two children dyed, and I was troubled, and knew not what to do; my heart said,
Lay by prayer, but that I did not: but I saw Christ came to give eternal life,
and therefore what Christ will do for me, so let it be. Therefore I believe
only in Christ for eternal life; and what Christ will do with my soul, so let
it be; and my soul desires that I may receive the Seals to make strong my
heart.

Piumbuhhou.
ASsuredly, I have nothing that I should confess as I ought, for my heart is
full of foolishness and darkness; stopped up is my heart, and deaf are my ears. I
know not by what way I can get life. I was born in sin into this world, and
therefore I am in folly, and I know my heart is full of foolishness and
ignorance. I am a great sinner ever since I saw light in this world; my
foolishness appears in every thing I do in this life. I know not what God
has given me, but now I hear of the mercy of God, who has made the world, and
all things in it; by this great work of his I know there is a God, and because
my heart checketh me for sin, and I fear the punishment of God: And the Word
of God now shows me that there is a God; therefore my heart says, I desire
to pray to God: and because God is angry with me for all my sins, I know
nothing by my self but that which is evil. I heard that word Mat. 5. Blessed
are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Then my heart
said, So be it Oh Lord to me, and I love thee as long as I live. Then said my
heart, I am a poor man, and desire to pray to God. Again, God said, Blessed are
they that hunger and thirst after righteousness, for they shall be filled. Then
when I heard that word, my heart rejoiced; and yet again I doubted, and my
heart misbelieved and feared. Then that word came, that Christ says, Be ye
merciful, as your heavenly father is merciful. And again, He makes his sun
to rise on the evil and on the good; and sends rain on the just and on the
unjust. When I heard it, my heart rejoiced to hear of the mercy of God; yet I
doubted, and my heart was hard again. Now I confess before God, because God is
a great God, and a merciful God, and I pray to him. I heard of Gods great
mercy, to give us his only Son to dye for us; therefore I loved God, and I
begged, Oh God pardon all my sins, and I give up my self to Jesus Christ.

Monotunkquanit.
BEfore I prayed to God, I lived at Nipmuk. I did not know that there was a
God, only I lived for nothing, for no end or purpose; but I always did wild
actions. I kept no Sabbath, nor Lecture, nor any work of Prayer; nor did I
remember my works. I now know that all my words and works are naught, my eyes
and ears are stopped, and mad works I daily did. After I went to Dorchester
Indians, the praying Indians; and they that were my friends, did say it was
good to pray to God; and said, Tomorrow is our Lecture, and the Minister comes
to teach us; then my heart desired to see the Minister, and hear what he said:
next day he came, and taught the Indians; I went and desired to see: when I
came, my son Sam. came with me; the Minister called my son, and set him before,
and asked him, Who made him? and he was taught to answer, God. Then he
commended my son, and asked whose son he was; they said, Mine. The Minister
gave him two apples: then the Minister said to me, Do you pray to God? you see
your child says, God made him; [Note here that God has so blessed this
youth, that he is one of our Schoolmasters, and an hopeful young man.]
and therefore it is your duty to pray to God:

Then I considered what he said, I could not sleep that night. I considered
whether I should pray to God; my heart did much doubt that night! Shall I pray?
my heart said, No; yet I doubted. Then Waban came to my house to Nipmuk, and
persuaded me to pray to God; I said, I know not how to pray. He said, God will
teach you; God is a great God, and made all the world. I answered, Who knows
that? and who can witness that? He said, The Minister is sent of God, and
shows us Gods Word, and he by that teaches us, Then I promised Waban, that
when he came again I would pray to God. Then Toteswamp came, and exhorted me
to pray to God, and told me of Christ, and pardon of sin; and then almost my
heart prayed to God. Then I said, English men understand not me, and does God
understand me? They said, God made all^, and understands all: then I said, I
will pray to God. Then I heard first, that God made heaven, and earth, and all
things, and in six days finished them; and also made man in his own Image,
wise and holy like God. Then I heard that Satan came and tempted Eve, and
cozened her, and she tempted the man. And God had said, Eat not of the tree in
the midst of the Garden, if ye eat thereof ye shall dye; yet she did eat, and
gave unto man, and he did eat: and thereby he sinned, and all his posterity
became sinful, and deserved damnation. Then my heart said, What shall I do? and
I prayed for my children, for now I hear of eternal damnation, and sure I am a
great sinner. Again, I heard the Minister preach, That Christ was born like a
man, and was both God and man, and dyed for us, and shows us the way of
eternal life. Then I cried, Oh Lord give me Christ, because Christ has dyed
for us, and has made his righteousness ours, and our sins are Christ's, as Adam
made his sin ours. Now my heart was broken, and I saw that I was a great
sinner. When I heard of the great works of Christ, I said, Oh what shall I do,
that I may get Christ? and I said in my heart, Oh let the holy Spirit help me,
for I am ashamed of my sins; melted is my heart, and I desire pardon of all my
sins; now I desire to forsake all my sins, and now I desire daily to quench
lusts, and wash off filth, and cast out all my sins, by the blood of Jesus
Christ, and this I do by believing in Jesus Christ. Genesis 6. there was only one
Noah righteous, and God saved him: then my heart said, Oh merciful God, who
savest them that trust in thee, save me. Again, God made his Covenant with
Abraham, and with all the seed of Abraham: now I desire to have this Covenant,
and to receive this Commandment of Christ. Abraham was strong in faith, and
followed Christ; and my heart does desire to follow Christ, because he has
dyed for us.

Wutasakompauin.
OH Christ help me! I confess my sins before God, and before men. We are all
born in sin, because Adam sinned, and made his sin ours. Our Parents knew not
God, nor the way of life; we Indians are all sinners, and did all sins, before
we heard of God; we did pray to every thing that is in the world, and knew not
the way of life. When English men came first, we did pray to the Devil, and
many were our sins; and God does know all our sins, all which we have
committed, before the English came. After the English came, I went to Sudbury,
to Mr Browns house, and he said to me, Pray to God; but I did not like it, nor
to hear of praying to God; but afterward I heard Waban prayed to God, and I
was not glad of it; yet after Waban prayed, he told us of it, and that the
Minister came to Noonantam. I heard him, and he taught, that the souls of good
men die and go to heaven, the souls of the wicked, when they die, they go to
hell; but I only heard it. Then we resolved we would pray to God, and carry our
children to Roxbury, that they might learn to pray, but we feared that we
should not learn to pray. After the Minister taught that word, that every man
himself must pray and believe to be saved; and though your sons be at Roxbury,
and learn to pray, yet if you pray not, you must be damned.

Again, I heard many words of God; this was one, Therefore watch, for ye know
not the day, or hour, when the Lord will come: When I heard that, I knew not
what to do, nor do I know when is the day of death. But I am full of sin, and
when I die Christ will not receive me, because I am so full of sin. After that
my wise dyed, and then weak was my heart, almost I left praying to God, but yet
I did not so. But after, I heard that word of God, Who ever hears the word,
and does it, is like a wise builder, who built on a rock; and when the storms
and floods came and beat upon the house, it stood, because it was built upon a
rock: But he that hears the word, and does it not, is like a foolish
builder, who built upon the sand, and the storms and floods came and beat upon
that house, and it fell, because it was built on the sand. By this I saw that I
was a foolish builder, because the death of my wife did almost make me leave
praying to God. After I had another wife, and she dyed also: Then I heard that
word, That it is Gods love, by afflictions, to call us to repentance; and
therefore my heart said, Oh Lord I will pray, Oh Lord help me. Again, I heard
another word, that at the end of the world all must appear before the Judgment
Seat of Christ: and therefore now confess all your sins, and repent, because
Christ has writ down all your actions, both good and bad, and all shall be
opened; and therefore repent of your sins, that they may be pardoned.

Then I said, I am a great sinner, and ever I commit sin; I confess I have
deserved hell, and I cannot deliver my self; but I beg of God, Oh Lord give me
Christ; and I give my soul to Christ, that all my sins may be pardond, and I
now confess my sins before man but at the end of the world I must be judged by
Jesus Christ. Now I desire the spirit of God would help me to confess all my
sins to God, that they may be pardoned in Jesus Christ.

THese Confessions I wrote in English from their mouths with the best of my
endeavors, both for diligence and also faithfulness; and so soon as they had
done, I read them unto the Elders and Brethren and Sisters there present, and
that the substance hereof was delivered by them, and faithfully translated and
delivered by me (to the lest of my understanding) I do here before the Lord
testify.

JOHN ELIOT.

I Did understand most things that some of those Indians spoke; and though
others spoke not so well to my understanding, yet many things I understood of
what they all spoke: and thus much I may testify, that (according to what I
understood) the substance of their Confessions is here truly set down.

JOHN ELIOT, jun.

Waban being sick when the rest made their Confession, after the Lord had
restored him, came to Roxbury, and before the Elders made his Confession as
follows.
UNto this day I do understand but little of the English Language; the Word of
God came not first unto my heart by the English Language. I did not know what
state I was in at my first birth, and my sin by birth I knew not: When I was
young I knew not what I was, as now I do know; for now I know that I am a
sinful man. Since I prayed to God, I know more of my self; but before, I cared
not for such things, nor what they said. If I heard any thing, I took no heed
to it; if any asked me whether I knew God, I did not regard it; yea, I hated
the knowledge of God, nor did I regard any word of God: but other kind of
praying (which we used) I did love; to pray to the Devil, this I loved.

But afterward, I began to think; it may be they say true, that speak of God;
it may be it is true, that God is in heaven; and should any teach me in my
language, I might know God: but if I should pray, it may be it is in vain to
pray in my language; could I speak English, I might learn to pray. And I see
the English love us, and therefore it is like, that is true which they say of
God, and I desire to live for ever where they do. When I first heard the Word,
it said, God is good; a little I believed it, but I did more doubt.

Mr Iackson asked me if I did pray to God: I asked him whether God understood
our language, if I prayed to him: He said, yea, all things God does know, and
all languages. Then my heart said, It may be I may attain to pray. But my heart
was hard, and therefore I could not pray, afterward it may be I may. Sometime
I thought if we did not pray, the English might kill us; but if I prayed, I
thought I did not pray right. When I saw, and considered, that all men in the
world dyed, I knew not how I might come to live for ever, how my soul might
live, and therefore I desired I might pray to God aright; because they that so
pray, are all one as if they dyed not, but live for ever. I wished I could pray
aright, but could not tell how to do it. I did in my heart love wandering
about, and our wild courses always; and when I did pray, it was but outside
praying, for in my heart I understood not right praying to God; I understood
not how to pray, and I regarded not my weariness of that which was good, many
things hindered my heart; I was ashamed, because my heart was full of evil.
Sometimes I thought of my sins, but it was but a little, and I was soon weary
of any good. I did not think God was not merciful, but I saw my heart was
naught, and very little did I know the evils of my heart. No humility was in my
heart, and to this day my heart is evil, and hard is my heart, When you taught
us the Word of God, my heart did not believe, but went contrary to the Word of
God. I saw my mourning for sin was not good: I do confess my heart did not
submit to God, only I hoped I might might learn the Word of God, which you
taught us. My heart did before love praying to the Devil, but I do not find
that I so love praying to God: therefore I did pray, Lord break my heart, that
I may pray to God aright. My heart was weary of praying quickly; and therefore
my heart said, Surely my heart is naught, and I am like a dead man: and
therefore I prayed, Lord help me now to pray aright to God. Now I knew that God
knows all the thoughts of my heart, and my many sins, and contrary doings,
and how little I know of God. Surely I am a great sinner, and this I do
thoroughly know, that great are my sins, and that my heart is contrary to
praying to God, and my heart desired wild courses, and I see that my heart
loves not praying to God. Yet now my heart began to desire to pray, and to
love those things which are according to right praying; but I knew not what to
do. Then I asked what I should do; then I heard this answer, I should desire
Christ to break my heart by his spirit, none else in the world could do it; no
man could work faith in me, but the Word which I heard does it. I could not my
self repent of sin, or be ashamed; but this I know, that the Word of God says,
Those that believe in Christ shall not perish, but have eternal life: Then my
heart said, Oh Lord, let it be so to me, and let not my heart say contrary.
Again I heard, If any be foolish, let him ask wisdom of God, who gives
freely: Then my heart said, I am foolish, Oh Lord teach me. Then I feared that
my heart in vain seeks, and then I desired humility, and that I might not
pray in vain, and that I might not pray only outwardly. But my heart had
contrary and misbelieving thoughts daily, and my heart did not daily desire
after God, and but a little could I remember of God. Sometime my heart desired
not to be like to such as prayed aright unto God; therefore I desired the Image
of God upon me, and that I might be like to them which prayed to God aright;
always I thought that what God said in his Word was right. I heard this word,
The Foxes have holes, and the Birds have nests, but the Son of man has not
where to lay his head: Then my heart said, Truth (Lord) the riches of this
world are of no value; and therefore I desire not this worlds goods, but only
heavenly blessings and grace, and I desire the way to the Heavenly Kingdom. And
always my heart says, touching my poverty and misery, I give myself and my
soul to God and to Christ, because that is right. Again, I learn in the
Catechize, Q. What has Christ done for us? A. He dyed for us, he was buried,
he rose again for us, and by his resurrection he raises our souls unto grace,
and also at the last day: And my heart said, Oh let it be so in me! Again it is
said, What else has Christ done for us? A. He ascended to heaven, to raise our
hearts first to heaven, and then to carry us to heaven also, to be with him for
ever. My heart says, Oh God I am not able to save my self, I cannot save my
own soul, this is only thy work Oh God, and my heart believes it; and with God
is mercy and goodness, but in this world is nothing but weariness, and I know
my weakness; therefore I am ashamed, and Oh let God put grace into my heart;
and my heart says, Oh let me not say in vain that I believe, Oh Lord help that
I may truly believe, not by my works, but by thy Word Oh God. Again it is said
in Catechism, Why is Christ a Prophet? A. To teach me the way to heaven:
therefore my heart desires that Christ may ever lead me by his Word; and it is
only the mercy of Christ that must do this for me, and he gives me true
comfort only by believing in him.

THe Lord was so graciously with them in these Confessions, that they had good
acceptance. We advised with the Church touching our further progress; the
conclusion whereof was, that we sent Letters to all the neighbor-Churches,
informing them of our progress in this matter, in order to our receiving them;
desiring them, or any among them, that had any just offense against any of
these eight Indians, whom we named, that they would orderly communicate the
same unto us, and seasonably; or if they had such knowledge of any of them, as
to give us encouragement, we should be thankful; or their silence, we should
take in good part also. We had both encouragement and testimony from some
Churches, only the paucity of Interpreters to co-attest with my Interpretation,
was a matter of much difficulty, and no small impediment; for which cause I
sent to Mr Peirson, to old Mr Mayhu, to Thomas Stanton, to be present with us,
losing no known opportunity to bring our ways into the light, and to make all
things clear. We proposed it to our Church, to agree about the public day of
Confessions; the conclusion was, that a Council was called, we sent unto ten
Churches about us, requesting them by their Messengers to be present on Roxbury
Lecture day, being the 5th of the 5th Month, 1659. acquainting them that that
day was set apart to hear the Indians Confessions, and we requested counsel and
direction from them, and concurrence with us.

After Prayer, I first declared to the Congregation what supply of Interpreters
we had for co-attestation with my Interpretation of the Indians Confessions.

First, here was Mr Peirson, and we had (for clearness of our way, because of
his unacquaintance with our dialect) ordered the confessing Indians to keep
Sabbath at Roxbury; we spent half the Sabbath among them, a good part whereof
was spent in hearing some of their Confessions, and all the second day we so
spent, so that Mr Peirson had taken in writing all their Confessions; so that,
if the Assembly pleased, they might hear the Confessions which they made before
the Elders of Roxbury, which I have here in writing, and had been already seen
by sundry of the Elders; also they might hear the Confessions which Mr Peirson
and I had taken yesterday; which (compared with what the Lord shall assist them
to utter this day) may help to clear up the verity and reality of their hearts
in these their Confessions.

Moreover I declared, that here was a godly brother of Martyns Vineyard, named
Peter Fouldger, who had for many years taught the Indian School in Mr Mayhu's
life time; and since, he has been by the Commisioners employed to teach the
Indians each other Sabbath; who told me, when I spoke unto him about this work,
that by reason of the different dialect, he durst not alone undertake to give
in a testimony; but if he brought one of his Indians with him, (as need might
be to help him) then he durst undertake to give a testimony upon Oath, if need
were. This man, and his Indian with him, are this morning come, and are present
in the Assembly, and set in a convenient feat together. Again I declared, that
my son was present, who does in some measure understand the Language: Also here
are present two sons of Thomas Stanton, one of which the Commissioners maintain
at the College. And lastly, here are the Indian Scholars present; so that if
the Assembly think meet to make use of any of these youths in this grave
business, they might so do.

Further I declared, that in all this matter we did submit our selves to the
guidance of the Reverend Council here present, and desired them to direct us
and order us, as they saw meet to do in the Lord.

Then we proceeded to hear the Indians Confessions, which are as follows.

Nishohkou.
I called him forth, and said, Stand up and make your Confession before the
Lord and his people.
He said, I Desire to confess before God and all these wise men, and God
helping by the merciful help of his gracious spirit, that I may confess all my
sins.

I heard that word, Genesis 5. that God made Adam in his own Image, both male and
female; and after many years Adam begat a son in his own Image, having lost
Gods Image. And God did form man in the womb of our mother, in Adams Image, and
so I was formed in the Image of Adam; and when I was born I lived in the same
way, in the Image of Satan, and original sin was rooted in my heart, and grew
up there; also I confess, that when I was a Child, my Parents and I were all
wild, we prayed to many Gods, and many other sins we did, and all the people
did the same, both men and women, they lived in all lusts, they prayed to every
creature; the Sun, Moon, Stars, Sea, Earth, Fishes, Fowl, Beasts, Trees, etc.
all these things I saw when I was a youth, and all these things I liked and
loved to do, and was delighted with these things; in all these things I lived,
and with these things my memory was exercised, and in my youth I did what I
listed, as pauwauing, or what else I would; when I was grown up, I loved lust,
and delighted in it, I knew it not to be a sin, but an excellent delight: I
loved all sin, but especially lust, and all that I did, was for the sake of
lust, such things as women might like of; if I cut my hair, it was to please
women; if I cut my hair in another fashion, and left a Lock on one side, it was
with respect to lust; if I got fine clothes, stockins, shoes, all was for to
serve lust; our meetings and drinkings were with respect to lust: so that this
was the chief thing I did delight in; and these things were in my bones, and
there grew; then the Minister came to Channit to teach us: I came to the
Meeting, but in vain; I came for lust to look on women, always I did thus, and
I thought teaching to be madness, and so I continued two years after we prayed
to God; after two years I heard a little, my ears were a little opened; I first
understood that word, He that doubts, is like a wave of the Sea, driven to
and fro, and tossed; and that word, If any man lack wisdom, let him ask it of
God, who gives freely, and upbraideth no man. Also the same Winter I heard
that word, Genesis 6. God said, I will destroy man whom I have created, and he
repented that he had made him. These things I understood and remembered, but I
confess before God, that I did only hear and know these things, as I did
sometimes speak of what I did remember, but I believed not, yea I laughed, as
other youths did, at all these things, because thereby did original sin grow in
me, and hard it was to root it out, and hard to believe. After this I heard
still, and more I understood; I heard, Genesis 16. that the people were full of
sin, lust, and all other sin, and therefore the Lord destroyed them; and I knew
that I had the same sins, and therefore I was afraid; but I feared only this
bodily life, and not for my Soul: After this, my heart did a little desire to
pray to God, because God found Noah righteous, and did save him, therefore I
desired to pray; but again I laid it by, and I said it is vain to pray, for if
I pray, and should commit sin, I shall be punished, or imprisoned, but if I
pray not, I may commit what sin I will, and have no punishment for it. About a
year after, I heard the Minister teach another word, that the Death of Christ
is precious, and our death is nothing worth, therefore God promises pardon of
all sins for Christ his sake; he bid us remember this against next time: When
he came again, he asked me, and I did remember it, and do to this day; but I
confess I did not believe, only I did remember it, and answered when I was
asked: And then again, I desired to pray to God, and would not go away, but it
was because I loved our place and dwelling; I prayed, but I believed not, I
considered not Eternal Life, but only this worldly life: And thus I went on,
till they chose Rulers at Natik, they chose me, and I refused, because I
believed not: After that, my Wife and Child died, and I was sick to death, but
lived again, and being well, I thought I could not pray, I was a Child, and
therefore could not, I put off praying to God, my Relations died, and why
should I pray? but then I considered, why does God thus punish me; yea, the
Minister spoke to me about it, and said, it may be it was because I refused to
do Gods work, as Moses, when he first refused, God was patient, but when he
persisted in his refusal, God was angry; and then my heart saw my sin, and then
my heart almost believed: I desired to do right, and to keep the Sabbath, for I
further heard in the 4th Commandment, Remember the Sabbath to keep it holy; and
Psa. 101. I will walk wisely in a perfect way: Also in Isay 58. If thou turn
away thy foot from the Sabbath, and do not thy own works, nor find thy own
pleasure, nor speak thy own words; therefore my Soul desired to keep the
Sabbath, then the Soldiers came upon us on the Sabbath day, while we were at
meeting, and took away our Guns, and caused us to bring them as far as Roxbury;
that night my heart was broken off, my heart said, God is not, the Sabbath is
not, it is not the Lords Day, for were it so, the Soldiers would not have then
come; then my heart cast off praying, then we came before the Magistrates, and
Cutshamoquin asked, Why they came on the Sabbathday: It was answered, that it
was lawful; but I did not understand it: That day I being very thirsty, did
drink too much, and was brought before the Magistrates, and was ashamed: I came
to Roxbury to the Minister, and there I was ashamed also, because I had greatly
sinned; then I cried to God for Free-mercy, because precious is the Death of
Christ, oh pardon this my sin: Yet again I had temptations to drinking, and
then I considered what a great sinner I was, even like a beast before God: Then
I heard that word, Mat. 5. He that breaks the beast of Gods Commands, and
teaches others so to do, shall be the least in the Kingdom of Heaven: My
heart said, Lord, such an one have I been, for I have been an active sinner;
yet I cried again for mercy, O Lord freely pardon my great sins. Again, I
confess I am very weak, even like a very child, and I so walk, and know not
what to do; if I die, I fear I shall die in my sin; yet I cried again, O God
pardon me for Christ his sake. Again, further I confess, that when I was
troubled about our wants, poverty, and nakedness, I considered that text, Foxes
have holes, and Birds have nests, but the Son of man has not whereon to lay
his head. And again, Mat. 6. The Birds plough not, and the flowers spin not,
and yet God does both feed and cloth them; and therefore be not overmuch
troubled about these things, yet I desire to follow labor with my hands,
because Gen 1. God gave Adam dominion over the creatures, and commanded him to
Till the ground: And Genesis 2. He set him in the Garden, and commanded him to
dress it, and keep it: Also Genesis 3. he said, Thou shall eat thy bread in the
sweat of thy face all thy days, till thou returnest to thy dust. When I
remember these things, my heart does bow to labor: also I heard that riches
were the root of all evil, and Dives with his fine apparel, and dainty fare,
was in hell, and poor Lazarus was in heaven: When my heart is troubled about
our Land, and about riches, I quiet my heart with these meditations. Also I
further heard, when my heart was troubled about Salvation, and doubted, I heard
that there is no means of Salvation but Christ, not any thing in the world can
carry us to heaven, only Christ, which I did believe, by Genesis 28. where Jacob
dreamed a dream, and he saw a Ladder which stood on earth, and the top reached
up to heaven, and that Ladder is Christ; who is Man, and so touches the earth;
and God, and so is in heaven, and by believing in him, we ascend to heaven as
by a ladder. This helped me almost to believe, and I cried, Oh Christ be thou
my Ladder to heaven! Again, Ioh. 14. Christ says, None comes to the Father,
but by me; therefore I believe, nothing can carry me to God, but only Christ,
if I penitently believe in him. Again, I confess I do still find my self very
weak to resist sin, for if I read, and teach on the Sabbath, I teach indeed,
but I do not as I ought; and therefore that Word of Christ does rebuke me, Mat.
23. Hear, and do what they say, but do not as they do. When I do, among others,
reprove sinners, that Word of Christ reproves me: Thou hypocrite, first cast
the beam out of thine own eye, and then thou may see clearly so cast the
moat out of thy brothers eye. Again, when I pray, I find hypocrisy in my
heart, to do it to be seen of men, and that Word of Christ reproves me, Mat.
6. They pray to be s^en of men, verily they have their reward; and then I cried
mightily to God, O Lord help me, pardon me, what shall I do. Again, I heard
Mat. 9. The Son of Man has power to pardon sin on earth, and therefore me O
Lord; then my heart did desire Christ, and to pray as long as I live, and my
heart was stirred up thereunto, by Luke 18. Christ spoke a parable, that we
should pray, and not be weary, because the Widow tired the unjust Judge, and
made him help her; how much more shall God the righteous Judge, hear and help
his children, that cry night and day, therefore I desired to pray unto God as
long as I lived: Then my heart said, What shall I do, for I am weak, and I fear
I shall perish; then I heard that word, Ioh. 3. God so loved the world, that he
gave his only Son, that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have
Eternal Life. And again it is said, that God loved his Son, and gave all things
into his hand: I am weak, and though I pray, yet I am weak, therefore I desired
to be in Christ's hand, as in a Fort; in a Fort we are safe from exercise, they
cannot easily catch us; out of a Fort we are open to them: So I desire
Church Estate, the Seals of Baptism, and the Lords Supper, and all
Church-Ordinances, as a Fort unto my Soul: I heard that Word of Christ, Mat.
16. Thou art Peter, and on this Rock I will build my Church, and the gates of
hell shall not prevail against it: Oh I desire to be there kept! Again, I heard
Mat. 3. God is able of these stones to raise ^p seed to Abraham; therefore
raise up me O Lord: And again, Christ came to John to be baptized, John
refused, but Christ said, Suffer it to be so: It is necessary to fulfill all
unrighteousness, therefore so I desire to do all that is right, and I desire to
be baptized. Again I confess, I fear I shall sin again, and defile my self,
after I am washed and baptized, even as the dog returns to his vomit;
therefore I cry, O God help me for thy free mercies sake. Again, I heard that
in Mat. 18. where two or three are met together in my Name, Christ is in the
midst of them: Therefore I desi^^ to have the Ordinances of Christ, to be with
Christ; but my heart says, if I be bound by Ordinances, then I shall be
imprisoned, but yet I desire to be there in pr^^on with Christ; if my heart
say, I shall be as dead, but yet I desire to be so with Christ. Again, I heard
in John, Christ says, Who ever comes to me, I cast him not away, but he shall
have life: But Ioh. 5. Christ does say, Ye will not come unto me, that you
might have life: Therefore my heart did greatly fear, and pray, Oh that I might
come to Christ! and Christ is the everlasting Son of God; therefore my Soul
desires to be with him: And this I confess, that though I believe in Christ,
yet I am still weak; and therefore I desire to be made strong by the Seals; but
I fear I am unworthy, because of that word, Mat. 7. Cast not Pearls before
Swine, nor holy things to dogs; yet my heart says, O Lord remember me, and yet
let me a dog come under thy Table to get a crum; and I cry to God because of
all my weakness! I confess I cannot deliver, or help, or save my self, only
Christ Jesus can do it, and let Free Grace pardon me, and save me, O God have
mercy on me! Again, Mat. 18. Whatever ye bind on earth, is bound in heaven; and
whatever ye loose on earth, is loosed in heaven; therefore I desire to be
loosed both in earth, and in heaven, and to be sealed with Gods Seal.

When I had read this Confession of his, I said, because the Lord has said,
that in the mouth of two or three Witnesses, every Truth shall be established;
therefore I desired that the rest of the Interpreters might attest unto this
which I had read.
FIrst, Mr. Peirson said, so far as I discern, I doubt not of the truth of what
Mr. Eliot has delivered, and for that which he has now uttered, though some
things the Indian has added more then he spoke in private, and some things
left out, and some things otherwise placed, yet for the substance of his
present Confession, it is the same with that which he delivered in private,
where we did carefully try all things, that we might be sure that we understood
him right. Then Bro. Fouldyer was desired to speak; who says, That he did not
expect to have understood so much of his speech, and so plainly as he did, and
his Interpreter did perfectly understand all; and to his best understanding,
that which Mr. Eliot had delivered, was the very same which he spoke.

I said unto the Assembly, In that he spoke so plain to his understanding, it
is because I had advised him, and so all the rest, to express themselves in the
most plain and familiar words and expressions they could, for my more easy and
perfect understanding. Again, for that my Bro. Peirson observed, that they left
out something, and added other, and varied in sundry expressions: It is true, I
observed the same, and it may well be so, for they have not any writing, or
like helps, only their memory, and the help of Gods Spirit, to read in their
own hearts, what they utter.

Then the two Sons of Thom. Stanton were called, to testify the Scholar spoke
first, and said, that he did understand perfectly all that the Indian said, and
he did not observe any difference in what Mr. Eliot had delivered, but it was
the same which the Indian spoke.

The other spoke, and said, he did not perfectly understand all that the Indian
said, but so far as he did understand, Mr. Eliot had delivered the truth.

My Son was called to speak, who said, I did, for the most part, well
understand the Indian, and to my best understanding, my Father has given a
true interpretation thereof.

Antony.
He was next called, who thus spoke.
I Confess my sins before the Lord, and all these people and godly men, for ye
thoroughly know that we are great sinners, not only before God, but before man
also.

I confess that in my Mothers Womb I was conceived in sin, and that I was born
in iniquity; my Father and Mother were sinners, and lived in fin, they prayed
to many Gods, the Sun, Heavens, Beasts, Trees, and every thing in the world,
they made them their Gods, and thoroughly we followed these sins: When I was
born, I was in the Image of Satan, I knew not that God made all this world, I
was only wise to sin, and I did all those things which I liked to do, even all
lusts, from my youth up; and now I confess my sins before God, and all men, for
God and men do know them: I did all my delights. When I was a youth the English
came, but I regarded them not: Afterward I heard that the Indians prayed, but
my heart-said, I will not pray so long as I live, for they be vain words to
pray unto God, my Parents taught me to pray unto many Gods: Sometime I came to
English Towns on the Sabbath day, and I played, for I did not regard that sin;
I thought it vain to keep one day, yet I feared that the English should see me
play, least they should be angry, but not because I offended God. Afterward I
heard that my Brothers prayed, and therefore I disliked them, and I thought I
will forsake my Brothers, because they do a vain work, and I did run away into
the Country, but they soon found me, and asked me to pray, and they pitied me,
and loved me, and therefore I returned, not because I loved God, but because I
loved my brothers: My brother said, Go dwell with the English, and learn their
manners; I yielded, because I loved my brother: I dwelt here at Roxbury, and
came to this meeting house, but in vain, I prayed not one word, and my heart
did misbelieve; I heard the Minister preach that there is one God, and he made
the World, and all things in it, but my heart thought it was a vain word; I
thought my Father made me, and not God. Again, I returned from this Town, but
yet I did not pray; I heard the Commandments, Thou shall not murder; Thou
shall not commit adultery; Thou shall not steal; Thou shall not bear false
witness against thy neighbor; Thou shall not covet, etc. and other sins and
punishments I heard of, and I feared to sin because of man, and because of
punishment, but not for fear of God; therefore vain were all my ways. When I
came back to Noonantam, I did the same sins again, especially I loved lust;
yea, after my praying and being among them, I loved it more then before: When
the Minister came and taught, I went to the meeting, but in vain; I learned
nothing, but I still loved all our sins and lusts: Afterward hearing the
Catechism, Who made you? God. Who redeemed you? Jesus Christ, etc. my heart
misbelieved, and said, I will not believe, I will go away into the Country.
Again, I heard that God made all the world, and then a little I believed, and
thought I will pray to God, but weak it was. Again; I heard Mat. 7. Ask, and ye
shall have, seek, and ye shall find, knock, and it shall be opened to you: Then
I prayed a little, and then I thought there was a God who made the whole world,
I thought man could not make the world, but only God; and therefore I did pray
unto him. Afterward my Brothers were sick, and others also, I remembered that
word, Ask, and ye shall have; then I prayed, to try if that word was true, but
they dyed; then I thought that was a vain word, and that God hears not our
prayers, and that God is not; therefore I thought I will cast off praying, and
run away. I did not believe in God; my heart said, I shall die, whether I pray,
or not pray, all is one: Then I heard that praying was the way to Everlasting
Life, but yet I regarded not praying, I thought of running away, and yet I
thought, whether I go or stay I shall die, and therefore I was troubled, but I
did not pray: Afterward I was at work* and my head was broken in the Saw-pit,
and then I knew God was angry with me, because I prayed not; and then I did
much know my sins, I thought surely God is angry; I remembered that I had heard
that Word preached, Watch, for ye know not the hour that the Son of Man comes;
this I remembered when my head was broken, I heard that God made all the world,
and Adam, and set Adam in Paradise, and bid him eat of all the Trees, saving of
the Tree in the midst of the Garden, if he eat thereof he should die; but Adam
did eat thereof, and died; then my heart believed, surely God is, and he made
the world, and man, and me. I heard Genesis 1. God said, Let us make man in our
own Image, and let him have dominion over all the creatures: Then my heart
believed, sure God is good to man, and man is a sinner against God; and
therefore God is angry with me for my sins. I heard that God formed man of the
dust of the earth, and breathed into him the breath of Life; and then my heart
said, surely God made the world, and man, and me, and all things, and my heart
believed: And now I know God is angry with me; now I will pray to God as long
as I live, and no more return to sin, but I will do Gods Word all my days.
Again, I heard that God made Adam sleep, and took out of him a rib, made it a
woman, and brought her to man; then I thought, sure God made us, and the world,
and these great works show, that there is a God. Again, I heard that God called
her the Mother of all living, and by that means we have life, and then I
believed that God made us; and therefore I will pray to God as long as I live,
and no more cast it off. Again, I heard Genesis 6. that God saw the sin of man,
that it was great, and that all the thoughts and imaginations of his heart are
only evil continually; and therefore God was angry, and repented that he had
made man, and therefore drowned the world, and every living creature; he caused
it to rain forty days on the earth; then my heart said, sure there is a God,
and he will perform all his threatenings, he is God, and therefore he will do
it. Again, I heard that God found Noah righteous, and he found favor in his
sight; he believed in God, and did obey his Word, and God saved him: Then my
heart desired to believe that God is, and to pray unto him. Again, I heard Genesis
19. that the Angels of God came to Lot in Sodom, and delivered just Lot, but
did burn up with the wicked Sodomites with fire from heaven, who had cast off
praying to God, and did commit great sins against God; therefore I saw that I
had deserved to be burnt, because I had done their sins: And when God sent his
Angels, and did deliver just Lot, and then the rest were burnt, then I saw in
my heart, sure God is merciful to them that love him; and therefore my heart
said, I will no more return to sin, but I will follow God; but yet, sometimes I
doubted, but I believed the mercy of God, according to that I heard, Mat. 1.
she called his Name Jesus, for he saves his people from their sins: Then my
heart thought, surely it is true, that Christ is the Son of God, and was made
man, and is merciful; but yet I still did doubt whether Christ was the Son of
God. Again, I heard Mat. 3. Repent, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand. And
again, The voice of one crying in the Wilderness, prepare ye the way of the
Lord, and make his paths straight: My heart said, I desire to repent, and to
make ready my heart for God, that I may have mercy and pardon in Christ Jesus.
Again, the word says, The Tree that brings not forth good fruit, is cut down,
and cast into the fire: My heart said; sure so is my heart, and I have deserved
to be cast into the fire; I have brought forth such fruits as may justly cut me
down. Again, I heard the word of Christ, He that hears the Word, and does
it, shall be blessed: Then my heart said, I have deserved not to be pardoned,
but I beg for mercy. Again, the word says, This is my beloved Son, in whom I
am well pleased: My heart said, sure God is merciful to send his own Son, and
Christ is merciful that he came and died for us. Again, I heard that the
Tempter came to Christ, and said, If thou be the Son of God, make these stones
bread: But Christ said, man lives not by bread only, but by every word which
comes out of the mouth of God: Then I believed that Christ was the Son of God,
and that my Soul lives not by bread, but by the Word of God. Again, Mat. 8.
the Leper came to Christ, and said, Lord if thou will, thou can make me
whole, and Jesus touched him, and he was healed: Then my heart said, surely
Christ is the Son of God, and he only can heal my sins. Again, I heard in Mat.
6. If ye forgive one another, God forgiveth you: Then my heart said, I desire
to do this, else God will be angry with me. Again, I heard Mat. 9. all diseased
came to Christ, the blind, halt, etc and he healed them; therefore I believed
that he was the Son of God, and I begged of Christ to pardon my sins, and save
me, because sure he is Christ the Son of God. Again, the word says, Not every
one that says Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom, but he that does the
will of my Father: Then my heart said, I do fear, because I do very weakly obey
the Word of God; and therefore Christ says, Depart ye workers of iniquity: My
heart said, such an one am I but now I cry to, and trust to Christ, to pardon
all my sins. Again, I heard Mat. 11. that Christ said Capernaum was lifted up
to heaven by the Gospel, but should be cast down to hell, for refusing it: I
thought I did now pray, i^ I now fall off I shall perish. And again, Christ
says, It shall be easier for Tire and Sidon in that day: Then my heart said, I
have deserved the worst of Gods wrath, for I believed not the great works of
God; and therefore I desire pardon of all my sins, and to forsake all my sins,
and to pray to Christ as long as I live. Again, I heard Mat. 5. That Heaven and
Earth shall pass away, but not one jot or tittle of the Word of God, but all
shall be fulfilled: Therefore my heart did desire, that I may both hear and do
the Word of God, which will never perish. Again, I heard Mat. 16 Christ says,
Who say ye that I am? Peter said, Thou art Christ, the Son of the living God;
Christ said, Blessed art thou Peter, flesh and blood has not revealed this to
thee, but my Father, and on this Rock I will build my Church, and the gates of
hell shall not prevail against it: Therefore my heart believed that God helped
me to receive Christ, and I desire to take that promise to Peter, and my heart
joyed more and more in Christ, and in the Word of God. Again, I heard Mat. 26.
Jesus took bread, and blessed it, and brake it, and gave it, and said, Take
eat, this is my body which is broken for you, and likewise the Cup, etc.
saying, This is my blood in the New Testament, which was shed for remission of
sins, etc. My heart said, sure Christ is full of love, and has given us great
mercy, and I desire to partake of it. Again, the wicked did kill Christ, but he
rose again, and ascended to heaven; then my heart believed Christ. Again, I
heard John 14. No man comes to the Father, but by me: My heart said, so be it
Lord; I desire to come to God by Christ; and I said, Why did the wicked kill
Christ? My heart said. I believe that Christ died for my sin; and therefore I
desire to believe in Christ: Then my heart did joy in Christ, and to heartle
Word of God; but yet to this day I have doubts in my heart, my heart is weak to
this day: And now I know that in six days God made the world, and before that
God I desire to confess my sins, and forsake them, and no more to do them.
Sometimes my heart is in an ill frame, and loves sin, and my heart hates
good; therefore I desire the free Mercy of Christ to hold and keep my Soul.

When he had finished, and I had read before the assembly this confession of
his, we called upon the witnesses to co-attest. Who did in the same order as
before express themseves to the like purpose. Only when we called for Tho:
Stanton his sons, they were not present, nor did they any more appear in the
Congregation, to attest the Indians confessions all the day.

Ponampiam
He was next called forth, and thus spoke.
I Confess my sins before the Lord, and his people this day. While my Father
lived, and I was young, I was at play, and my Father rebuked me, and said, we
shall all die shortly. [In private we asked him what ground or reason moved his
Father so to speak? he answered, it was when the English were new come over,
and he thinks that his Father had heard that Mr Wilson had spoken of the
flood of Noah, how God drowned all the world for the sins of the people.]
Then I was troubled, and thought sure what God says, shall be, and not what
man says; but I quickly forgot this, and thought not of any good. That same
Winter the pox came; all my kindred died, only my Mother and I lived, we came
to Cohannit, by Dorchester, where I lived till I was a man, and married. All
those days I sinned, and prayed to all gods, and did as others did, there I
lived till the Minister came to teach us. When I heard that they prayed, my
heart desired it not. Sometime I prayed among them, and sometime I neglected
it. I feared to pray because of the Sachems, therefore I put it off, for the
fear of man. Afterward I considered in my heart, to pray to God, not because I
loved the word, but for other reasons. I heard that Word, Mal. 1. From the
rising of the Sun to the going down thereof, my name shall be great among the
Gentiles, and in every place incense shall be offered unto my name, and a pure
offering, for my name shall be great among the heathen, says the Lord of
hosts. Then I was troubled in my thoughts about running away, yet then I
thought if I should go to another place, they must pray also, and therefore I
cannot fly from praying to God, therefore I tarried, and when others prayed, I
prayed with them, only I still feared man; after I heard the same word again,
to persuade us to pray to God; and I did so, but not for Gods sake, only it was
before man. I remembered the Sabbath, and I heard Mr Mathews also preach of it,
and therefore I thought I would keep the Sabbath, but still I feared man. Upon
a Sabbath, they wished me to teach what I remembered, that the Minister had
taught. I did so, and we had talk about what I said, and we fell out. Thereupon
I went away, and left praying to God. I went into the Country, but I remembered
my wife and children, and quickly returned, but not for Gods sake. Again the
Minister preached on 1 Chronicles. 28. 9. And thou Solomon my son know the God of
thy Fathers, and serve him with a perfect heart, and with a willing mind, for
the Lord searches all hearts, and understands all the imagination of the
thoughts; if thou seek him, he will be found of thee, but if thou forsake him,
he will cast thee off for ever. This greatly troubled me, because I had left
praying to God, and I had deserved eternal wrath. Then I desired to pray, I
begged mercy, but I knew not what to do, for my sins were many, my heart was
full of original sin, and my heart was often full of anger; but then I was
angry at my self, for I found my heart quickly carried after sin. Afterward,
through the free mercy of God, I heard that word, He that penitently believes
in Christ shall be pardoned and saved; then my heart did beg earnestly for
pardon and mercy. I heard Ioh. 15. Whatever ye ask the Father in my name, he
will give it you; therefore my heart did now greatly beg for mercy in Christ
and pardon. Afterward I heard Mat. 5. 28. Who ever looks upon a woman to lust
after her, has committed adultery in his heart. Then my heart was troubled,
because many were my sins, in my eyes, and heart, and actions too. My heart did
love the having of two wives, and other lusts of that kind: Then Satan said to
me, You are a great sinner, and God will not pardon you, therefore cast off
praying, and run away, it is a vain thing for you to pray. Here you want land,
but in the Country there is land enough, and riches abundance, therefore pray
no more. My heart did almost like it, but I heard that word, Mat 4. Satan
tempted Christ, and showed him the Kingdoms of the world, and the glory
thereof, and promised to give them to him, if he would worship him. Then my
heart said, that even thus Satan tempts me to cast off praying to God; and
therefore my heart desired to believe that word of Christ, Thou shall worship
the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve. Then I prayed again, but still
I was full of sin, and very weak I was, and I loved sin. Again I heard, Ioh.
14. I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life, no man comes unto the Father but by
me. Then I fully saw that Christ only is our Redeemer, and Savior, and I
desire to believe in Christ; and my heart said, that nothing that I can do can
save me, only Christ: therefore I beg for Christ, and a part in him. Then said
my heart, I give my heart and my self to Christ, and my wife and children, let
him do with us what he will. Then my mother and two children died, and my heart
said, What Christ will do, so be it; I have given them to him, and I begged
pardon and mercy, if God will please to pardon me a poor sinner, blessed be his
name.

When I had read this Confession in the Assembly, we called upon the witnesses,
as before we did, whose answer was like as before it was.

John Speen
He was next called forth, and thus spoke.
I Confess my sins this day before the Lord, and not only before God, but
before all these people. Before I prayed, verily I was a great sinner, yea, in
my mothers womb I was a sinner: my sins are such as not only God knows, but
people also know them. Before our praying, I did thoroughly sin, and did commit
all sins; and now I confess these my sins before God. After I prayed, I did
alos live in sin. At first when I prayed, I did not worship God, nor believe in
Christ; but I did therefore pray, because my brothers, and friends, and Waban,
and the rest did pray, for their sakes I prayed. And again I therefore prayed,
because many English knew me, that I might please them; and because I saw the
English took much ground, and I thought if I prayed, the English would not take
away my ground, for these causes I prayed. When I prayed, it was but with my
mouth, yet I thought I do well enough in that I pray thus, and I thought, that
for it God will pardon all my sins; and I thought that my praying was good
enough. But yet again I sinned, and did the like sins as before, only I did
outwardly pray, but I mourned not for my sins. I thought, if we pray and leave
Pauwauing, who shall make us well when we are sick. But again, I thought man
could not make us well, because he must die himself, and therefore Pauwauing is
a vain thing, and they die though they Pauwau. But still my heart did not
believe praying to God: then I heard that word, Repent and believe; and if we
repent and believe, God will pardon all our sins. Then sometimes I repented,
yet again quickly I committed sin; and sometimes I thought I am thoroughly a
sinner. I heard that God made the world, and all things in it, and lastly man,
and that God formed him of the dust of the earth, and breathed into him the
breath of life, and he became a living soul, and that God made a Covenant with
Adam, that he should eat of all the Trees of the Garden, save one in the midst
of the Garden, and if he eat of that Tree, he should die. Then I understood
that Adam sinned, and fell, and thereby I uneerstood that I became a sinner,
born in sin, my heart full of sin, and God will not pardon sinners; and yet
again I sinned, and therefore I feared that God will not pardon me, because
more and more I sinned: and thus I sinned after praying, as well as before
praying. When they chose Rulers, and chose my brother, and not me, my heart was
in an evil frame, and then I thought sure I am a great sinner, and yet still I
was more and more a sinner. After my brothers loved me still, and then I
repented of my sins, but not for Gods sake, but for my brothers sake; then I
desired to pray as long as I live. My brother died, which troubled me; the
people said, Be you in your brothers place: then my heart thought, I will no
more do as I had done, but sure I was weak, my praying was but words, I was a
great sinner. After this, a while since I heard that word, Mat. 12. The unclean
spirit being cast out of a man, he walks about seeking rest and finds none;
then he returns and brings 7 other spirits with him worse then himself,
and the end of that man is worse then his beginning. When I heard this, my
heart feared. I thought now I repent of my many sins, for verily I am a great
sinner, and I have offended, I am 7 times worse then before I prayed; then I
repented.

Again I heard that Word, He that penitently believes shall be saved, and then
my heart did desire to repent and believe, then I thought that men will not
forgive me, and therefore it is not good to abide in this place, but I
remembered that I had learned to read the Word, and if I should forsake my
friends, I should lose the Word of God. Then I heard that Word, Repent, for the
Kingdom of Heaven is at hand, my heart said o let it be so, and then my heart
rested; but yet quickly it was unquiet again. Then I did strongly desire to
repent of my sins. I heard that Word, that God Sowed good seed, but evil
seed was sown by the Enemy, and such were in my heart, and as in my field
there were many roots, and weeds which spoiled the corn, and I plucked them
up, and cast them out; my heart said, verily just so is my heart, the Word is
but a little in my heart, and there be many ill roots in me, and therefore God
may justly cast me out from among his people, because of my many sins. Then
my heart said, I desire to pray to God as long as I live, and now I forsake my
sins, who have been a great sinner. Now I beg of Christ, O give me thy spirit,
that I may confess my sins before God, and not only before men; again I
remember that I cannot pardon or help my self, but only Christ must help me.
Again I heard that Word, All manner of sin shall be forgiven to a man, but the
sin against the Holy Ghost, shall not be forgiven in this world, nor in the
world to come. Then my heart feared, because many and great were my sins since
I prayed to God, and I cried to God for mercy and pardon: and then I thought I
will pray to God as long as I live. But verily I am a sinner, for I am guilty
not only of Adams sin, but of my own sins also, and they are many. I remember
that in Catechism I learn, that God made a Covenant of works with Adam, Do the
Commands, and thou shall live, and thy seed also; but if thou sin, thou shall
die, and thy seed also; therefore by that I know I am a sinner, and have
deserved to die. Then I cry to God, O God have mercy upon me, and pardon me.
Again, I heard of the mercy of God, but I am forgetful, and cannot remember
Gods mercies to me. God made a Covenant with Abraham and said, I will be thy
God, and the God of thy seed after thee, then my heart said, O let it be so to
me O Lord. And now Abraham is in heaven, who believed, and kept Gods Covenant;
So I, if I believe and keep Gods Covenant, God will have mercy on me. I
remembered the Covenant of Circumcision to him, and all his family; and such a
Covenant I desire for me and mine. Again I heard, Mat. 3. In those days John
baptized in Jordan: saying, Repent for the Kingdom of God is at hand. When I
heard this my heart said, the same is now with us, not Abraham's sign but
baptism, and therefore I desire to repent, and Confess before God, and before
the Church: and I desire not only to confess, but to have repentance, and
faith, that I may have grace, mercy, and pardon: and such repentance as works
obedience. Again, the same Word says, verse. 6. They were baptized confessing
their sins; So I desire to do. I do confess before God, and desire to cast off,
and forsake my sins, and to go to Christ. The promise of pardon is to them that
penitently believe, and rest on Christ. In the same Baptism of John, he said, I
baptize you with water, but he that comes after me, is mightier then I, he
shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost and fire. Now this Baptism I desire, and
not to receive the sign in vain: I desire to purge out evil thoughts, and
therefore I confess these sins before God, that they may be purged, and I
desire the spirit of God may dwell in me for ever, to turn me to Christ. I
cannot of my self do any of these things, but only Christ Jesus can by his
spirit in me.

Again I heard another word, As the Eagles are about a carcass, so believers
come to Christ: then my heart said, So be it Oh Lord; when I receive the
Covenant of God, I am like the Eagles; when I come to Christ, I desire not to
come in vain; but if I feed not, I shall die, my soul will die. Then I greatly
begged that I might feed my soul on Christ; and Oh Christ send thy spirit into
my heart, that I may not only know, but do the Word of God. Again, Christ, near
his death, took bread, and blessed it, and broke it, and gave it to his
disciples, and said, Take ye, eat ye, this is my Body which was broken for
you: And so also he did the Cup, and said, Drink ye of it, this is the Cup of
my blood in the New Testament which is shed for the remission of sins. Now this
believers in Christ must do, not only to eat Bread, and to take the Sign, but
soul food: therefore Christ sending his spirit, and helping me, I desire to
receive the Sign, not in vain, but to help my faith.

When I had read this Confession in the Assembly, we called upon the witnesses,
(as before we did) whose answer was to the like purpose as before.

Wutasakompauin
He was next called forth, who thus spoke.
HElp me Oh Jesus Christ, to confess before the Lord; Oh I am full of sin,
because Adams sin made mine, and so was a sinner in my mothers womb. When I was
a youth I found many sins, and after I was grown up, I did the same always,
all the days of my life I lived in sin. After the English came, I went to
their houses; they would teach me about God, but I hated it, and went out, I
did not love such teaching. Afterward the Minister taught, and at first Waban
persuaded me to pray, and taught us; I did not at first like it, yet afterward
I did. Four years the Minister came to Noonantam; I came, but I only came, I
lost all he taught. After I considered one word; the Minister said, That God
sent him to teach us; then I thought surely there is a God, therefore I must
believe and pray: a little I believed, but when I heard, I did only outwardly
hear. After, my wife and children died, and then I almost cast off praying. I
had another wife, and she died also; and then my heart said, Surely God is
angry with me, who does thus afflict me. Then I heard that word, Mat. 22. God
made a Feast, and invited his Guests, and they would not come, and therefore
God was angry with them: So did I; for I came not to the Word of God, when he
called me, I cared not for the Feast of Christ. Again, after many of my friends
were destroyed, I thought it was because they prayed not to God, therefore I
feared that God is angry with me also, because of his punishments. I fear, I
believe not Christ; and my heart fears, because of my sins; daily I break
Gods Commands. Another Word I heard, Mat. 5. Blessed are they who hunger and
thirst after righteousness, for they shall be satisfied; this is the Word of
Christ, and I desire to hunger for Christ, and begged O Christ help me. Again,
I remembered that Word, Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God;
my heart says, O Christ help me to be so, that clean may be my heart. Again,
I heard that Word, Blessed are the peacemakers, for they shall be called the
Children of God; then my heart thought, O that I had peace with God in Christ,
that I might have that blessing; and therefore I now confess my sins before
God, and I beg mercy from God in Jesus Christ. When I had read this short
confession, (for the day spent, and brevity was called for) we called upon the
witnesses who spoke as formerly.

Monotunkquanit.
He was next called, who thus spoke.
I Have heard the word, and prayed to God several years. And I confess that
before I prayed, I was full of sin, and yet I do not know my sins. I thought
they were all good ways, and therefore I did them. I knew not the Sabbath, nor
Lecture days, nor any good, only I knew wild Actions, daily I desired
falsehood, vile actions, singing Indian songs, these things I desired to do: but
all good things I was ignorant of, and very much I sinned, daily. Then I heard
of praying to God. I came to Cohannit at Dorchester, from Nipmuk where I lived,
but my heart laughed at praying, and said its a vain action, only those actions
that I was bred up in, I liked and esteemed, but these new things I derided.
The Sachims disliked it, and therefore so did I. The rich men disliked it, and
therefore so did I. I believed not, that God is; I went to Cohannit, not for
praying, but to gather clams: When I came thither, they exhorted me to pray:
and said, The Minister comes to morrow to teach, it is lecture day. I desired
to see him: he came, they met together. I went, and carried my son Samuel: I
saw the Minister, he called my son; asked him, Who made you; they bid him say
God; but I had not so taught him. He asked, whose son he was, they said mine:
he said, do you pray to God? I said no, for I am a poor man, and naked: they
that pray are clothed. Therefore I will not pray, can poor men pray?
Therefore I would not pray: I went home. Then Waban and Totherswamp came to my
house, and taught me to pray. They entreated me, now pray to God; My heart
liked it not. They said, God is a great God, and made all the World. I said,
who is witness of that? They said, the Minister will answer you. Again, they
taught me the Commandments of God; but I did not believe. Totherswamp promised
to come again, he did so; and said, now pray to God, because God is good. I
thought it a teadious thing to pray to God. Then he strongly entreated me: I
said I will try; but not for praying, but in vain. Then my kindred said,
praying is a vain thing, why will you pray? therefore return again: then I
went, and prayed. When I first came, Waban taught that Word. The night is far
spent, the day is as hand, therefore let us cast off the works of darkness, and
let us put on the Armor of light. My heart asked what are dark works? They
answered, sianes; and what is day? they answered, praying to God, and the
wisdom of the Word is light: And this is now almost come unto us. Then my
heart smile, I will pray to God. Again, I heard the Minister who said, these
words, Thou shall have no other Gods but me; thou shall not make to thy self
any graven Image, nor the likeness of any thing in Heaven above, in the earth
below, in the waters under the earth: thou shall not bow down to them, nor
worship them; Then my heart said, that I did worship many false gods, therefore
if I pray, it may be God will kill me: but they said no, he is a good God; then
I prayed, and then my kindred hindered me. Therefore my heart said, If my
kindred pray, then I will pray. Then I was taught more, and I did hear the
Word, that God made Adam of the dust, and made him sleep, and took out a rib,
and made a woman, and thus God made man. My heart said, It may be God made
English men, but not us poor naked men, as we are of a strange language; and
therefore I doubted to pray. Then I heard of Nimrod his building of Babel, and
that God was angry, made strange to each other their language, and brake their
work: Then my heart said, Surely so it is, as I did believe. Again I heard,
that God found one man just, Noah, and saved him in his Ark, and did drown the
world: then my heart said, I desire that God may find many just persons with
us, therefore I pray to God: then I more prayed. Again I heard, that God made a
Covenant with Abraham and his seed, to be their God. My heart said, so let it
be: I desire to be in this Covenant of God, and to pray so long as I live. I
thought, if I do well, God will pardon all my sins: the Minister said no; If
you do all good, as perfectly, yet God will not pardon: God will pardon, only
for Jesus Christ his sake. Then I believed Jesus Christ was both God and man,
and made peace betwixt God and man: Christ did for us all the Commandments of
God, and died for us, he paid death for us; and therefore for his sake God
will pardon us, if we believe in Christ. I heard that which Mat. 7. Ask and ye
shall have, seek and ye shall find, knock, and it shall be opened, etc. Then my
heart said, I will pray as long as I live, and knock at heaven door. Again I
heard that word, Enter in at the straight gate, etc. My heart said, Sure it is
so, narrow and hard is the way to Heaven, broad and easy is the way to hell; I
desire to walk in the narrow way to heaven. Again, Christ died for us, and
thereby saves us; and says, Come to me all that are weary, and I will give
you rest. Then my heart said, Great is my weariness, for many are my sins,
and I desire rest in Christ. I heard that Christ only is our redeemer and
Savior, my heart did much joy in it; and I desired to pray and hear the Word
as long as I live. Another Word of Christ I heard, Whoever forsakes father or
mother, or brother or lands for my sake, etc. My heart said, o Lord let it be
so, I have for Christ his sake left all, and come to pray. And I desire now to
confess before the Church of Roxbury, and do submit to your government, and
Gods Ordinances among you. He was going on, but shortness of time made me take
him off. When I had read this confession, and the witnesses had spoke as
before, some of the Elders present, did move that seeing there be two more to
speak, and the time straight; and seeing Mr Peirson had in private taken in
writing their confessions, which they perceived by his testimony, to be for
substance the same which they expressed in public; What if the Assembly should
hear Mr Peirson read those two remaining confessions, according as he had
taken them? The motion was acceptable to the Assembly, and he did read them,
which are as follows.

Piumbuhhou.
First, THis I say in the presence of God, and in your presence, Verily I knew
not how or what to confess or God, before I prayed. I knew not who gave me life
and being, but I thought my life was of my self. I confess I was born in sin,
my Parents were sinners, and I thought I had life from none but my Parents,
therefore my sins were very great: from the first time that I saw light, until
this day, I do nothing else but sin; hard is my heart, proud is my heart, and
hypocritical: I do hypocritical acts, to this day. I act foolishly, and
deceitfully; therefore so many are my sins, that I am not able to express
them; only this I say, that I am naught. Then I heard that Waban prayed, and
they said to me, pray to God: but I hated it, for I had a wife, and many
children, and therefore I cared not for praying. I thought if they were any of
them sick, the Pauwaus could make them well, therefore I believed not Waban,
when he exhorted me to pray to God. Then my wife and children died: then my
afflicted poor heart came in, and the Minister came to me and said, pray to
God, because God afflicts and tries you; my heart said, when the Minister
spoke to me, let it be as you say, that God may show me that mercy: then my
heart said, I will pray to God, from henceforth, as long as I live. Then I
heard the Minister Preach of the great works of God, in making Heaven and
Earth, and therefore fear the great punishments of God; and because my heart so
feared, and condemned me, therefore I did believe that God is, who had punished
me, and took away my children. Again, I heard from Mat. 5. Christ says,
Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of God: and blessed
are the merciful, for they shall find mercy; my heart said, I am a poor man,
and therefore I will pray to God so long as I live: and I desire to find mercy
with God. Again, now my heart says, I am weak and doubting, and full of
misbelief. Again, I heard that Word of Christ, which says, Come unto me all
ye that are weary and heavy laden, and ye shall find rest; my heart said, be
it so O Lord: and now I will pray to God, as long as I live; my heart said,
surely I am greatly laden with many, and great sins: and therefore I will go to
Christ, and pray unto him, as long as I live. Again, Christ says, Take up my
hurden, and learn of me, for I am humble and meek; then my heart said, surely
I am a great sinner, and therefore I desire to learn of Christ, and to follow
him. Again Christ faith, Ye shall find rest to your soul; and therefore my
soul desired to pray as long as I live, that I may find rest to my soul in
Christ. Again, my heart did gladly hear the Word of Christ, and the great
redemption of Christ. Again, I learned in a Catechism, that Christ sends his
Spirit into my heart, to break it, to make it repent, to convert me, to cause
me to believe: my heart said, therefore I desire to pray to God, and to believe
for pardon, and adoption, and peace with God. Then hearing of the mercy of
Christ, my heart said, I am like a dead man, and therefore I desire to be with
Christ as long as I live: my heart did not know how to Convert, and turn to
God, therefore my heart did gladly pray to God for it; my heart did desire to
pray, because I heard, Christ is our redeemer, and does deliver our souls. I
cannot deliver my self, therefore I desire that Christ may be my deliverer:
therefore I betrust my soul with Christ as long as I live; and because Christ
is my merciful God, therefore let him do with my soul what he will.

When Mr Peirson had read this Confession, he was desired to go on, and read
the last, which was Wabans Confession, and is as follows.

Waban.
First, I Confess, that before I prayed, it was hard to love another fashion
then my old course: my Parents were sinners, and in my Mothers belly I was in
sin: after I was born, the same way of sin I followed. When I was a child I
grew up in sin, and I did not know that they were sins, but now of late I know
them; in my youth also, in the same sins I lived, and did not know them to be
so, but by the remembrance of my ways, I do remember my sins, and hereby I am
made to understand, that my Parents taught me to love sin. And after they were
dead, others taught me to sin: I liked to be taught to commit sin; those that
taught me, said to me, Choose to be a Pauwau: they said, If you be a Pauwau,
you may make others to live; and if you he a Pauwau, God will bless you, and
make you rich, and a man like God. Then I desired so to do: also I always
desited other sins, for my heart did desire to grow up in those sins, always
lust I desired, always my heart labored and desired to know how to add to,
and to multiply my sins. Thus it came to pass that I knew abundance of sins,
before I knew my ways were sin. When the English came hither, they said, when
I came to the Englist houses, that I loved the Devil: then I was very angry,
and my words were, You know the Devil: I do not know the Devil, and presently I
would go out of the house: Sometime they spoke meekly to me, and would say, God
is in heaven, and he is a good God: yet I regarded not these words, but
strongly I loved my sins: it was hard for me to believe what the English said:
after many years, I sometime believed a word, but I left not my sin. When I
began to understand more, I began to doubt, but I desired not Conversion from
sin. Afterward, when the English taught me, I would sit still, because they
would give me good victuals; then I sometimes thought, certainly God is in
heaven: then my thoughts said, It may be I have sinned.

Again I thought, if I prayed, God could not understand me; then I found it
hard to believe, and love God, because I was almost an old man, because I
thought, if any could read the book, he would love God. I asked Mr Iackson,
Whether God knew our language? He answered, Yea: God knows all languages in
the world, and therefore now pray unto God; then I first thought, I will pray
unto God; a little I thought of praying; sometimes I would a little pray when I
eat; about that time you came to teach us; then I remembered the Word, Glad
tidings was sent us from Heaven; then my heart said, Now I will pray, because
the Minister is come to my house, now I heard the Word of God. Then you called
the Children to Catechism: and one question is, Who redeemed you? then you
taught, that Christ died for our sins. Then my heart thought, that Christ is
a very great life-giving God. Then I feared not Pauwaus, nor loved them; and
the Minister taught, that we must take heed of all these sins. Then my heart
said, I will leave off my sins; and again my heart said, I will pray to God as
long as I live. Further you taught, that Christ died for sin, was buried, rose
again, ascended: then my heart hoped and desired, Oh that it might be so, that
I might have eternal life by Christ, because Christ is a great life-giving
God. But then I found that I did not understand right words, and therefore I
walked not in the right way: when the Word of God said, Six days shall thou
labor, then I was strong, yet I did not labor; and I was soon weary of
praying to God: and therefore I saw, I found not the right way unto
righteousness; therefore now I verily see that I am a sinner, and did not
believe: my heart feared because of my great sins, and my heart fears that I
do not yet much know the Word of God. Sometime my heart says I believe, I am a
believer: but my heart wandereth away, and the deceits of my heart I sometime
know, and my poverty I know, but my heart cares not for that; I reject riches,
but my heart says strongly, I will pray to God so long as I live; I do not
thoroughly know the vanity of my mind. I have heard the Word but believed it
not. I remember that Word of Christ, the Pharisees said, Why does you Master
eat with Publicans and sinners: Christ said, Those that are not sick need not
the Physician, but they that are sick. My heart said, sure I do not need the
Physician: but my desire is now, that I may need him, and spiritual life by
him. Again, I heard that Word of Christ, A leper came to Christ, and worshipped
him, saying, Lord if thou will, thou can make me clean: and Christ touched
him, and he was perfectly healed. Then my heart said, that outward healing
which he had, my soul desires, that I may have it in my soul: for Christ
heals the outward diseases of the body, but especially the inward filth of
the soul; this I desire may be healed. Again I heard that Word, go learn what
that means, I desire mercy and not sacrifice: I came not to call the
righteous, but sinners to repentance. Then my heart said, my own righteousness
cannot obtain mercy for me; then my heart said, Oh I fear that Christ the
truest righteousness is not in my heart: I am almost ready to die; and now I
desire to know Christ.

WHen Mr Peirson had done reading these two last Confessions. Mr Wilson spoke
to this purpose, though they have all spoken well of Jesus Christ, in their
Confessions, and especially the last viz: Monotunkani^, yet he desired further
to hear how they were instructed in the knowledge of Christ. This question
touching Christ, I called Piumbathou to answer, and his answer was to
satisfaction: and then many other Catecheticall questions were propounded,
which would be too long to rehearse, as touching Grace, Ordinances, Sacraments,
Baptism and the Lords Supper: about Repentance and Faith, all which they
readily answered, and so as that there was no reply. Nish^hko^, answered the
question what Faith is, Mr Allin asked him, whether he had that Faith in his
heart, which he now spoke off; to which after a pause, he answered to this
purpose, that he feared himself about it, and if he spoke, he must say no! but
he hoped in the Lords mercy that he would work it in him, and help him to
believe.

Then Mr Danforth said, I ask you Nishohkou this question, and answer me in
English whether the same lusts which you have so much confessed, do not follow
you still; and what you do to resist them? I said that a question to the like
purpose was asked him, when he made Confession in private, to which he answered
in broken English, if the Assembly pleased I would read that: but he was
desired to answer now, and his answer was to this purpose; that the Word of God
is all one like a sword: and he did with that, resist his temptations. He was
asked further, if he did diligently watch against his sins: he answered, he did
not well know what a diligent watch is, but he hoped that Jesus Christ would
keep him.

Then Mr Danforth called Anthony and asked him, whether he believed that it was
the duty of men to labor six days in the week? After a pause, he answered, he
believed it was Gods command, but he confessed he did not obey it so much as he
ought to do; and says Mr Danforth, that I would have asked you next, whether
you obey it, for you ought to do so; and follow labor, and cloth your self
and family better, and you ought to give toward the maintenance of Gods
Ordinances. After this I remember no more questions.

Then I declared to the Congregation, that they having heard their Confessions;
if they thought meet, they might hear what testimonies we have to produce
touching their Conversation, but it went not forward, and so we ceased the
work, and Reverend Mr Wilson concluded with prayer. After the public meeting,
the messengers of the Churches met together, and considered what answer to give
to our Church: and the vote among them all was, that as touching their
Confessions, which was the work of the day, they were satisfactory, and they
appeared in that respect, to be fit matter for Church estate.

The End
THese are to testify to all men whom it may concern, That two of five Indian
youths, viz. Cales and Joel, that are instructed and educated in the Grammar
School at Cambridge, were publicly examined at the Commencement in Cambridge
(mon. 6. 9. 59.) concerning their progress in the learning of the Latin
Tongue, out of Buchanans Translation of David's Psalms, and they gave good
satisfaction unto our selves, and also to the Honorable Magistrates, and
Reverend Elders that were present, and others that were judicious, as we have
had opportunity to inquire off: and we conceive, that the other three Indian
Youths, that are trained up in the same School, have made some competent
proficiency, for the short time that they have been with us: In witness whereof
we have subscribed our hands.

Camb. Sept. 6. 1659. Charles Chauncy Praesident of Haward College in
Cambridge. Elijah Corlet Londinensis olim and jam Ludimagister Cantabrigiensis.


