A SERMON Preached on the 29th of May 1661.

THE DAY OF His MAIESTIE'S BIRTH, AND HAPPY RESTAVRATION, After along Exile, to
His CROWN and KINGDOM.

Before His EXCELLENCY WILLIAM Ld MARQVIS of NEWCASTLE. at his House of
WELBECK.

By CLEMENT ELLIS M. A. Household Chaplain to his EXCELLENCY.

OXFORD, Printed by Henery Hall Printer to the University, for Edward and John
Forest, 1661.

TO HIS EXCELLENCY WILLIAM Ld MARQVIS OF NEW CASTLE, PRIVY COUNSELOR TO HIS
MAJESTY, etc.
My most Noble Lord and Patron. May it please your EXCELLENCY,
THe Duty which I owe, first unto GOD, as his Minister, then to my SOVEREIGN,
as his Subject, and in the next place to Your EXCELLENCY, as Your Domestic
Chaplain, made the threefold cord whereby I found my self indispensibly
obliged, to contribute that little I was able, toward the Solemnity of that
memorable and happyest Day, which this poor Kingdom has in many years
beheld. And having, after my weak manner, preached this plain and short Sermon,
which had then Your Excellency's approbation, and (I hope) since GOD's pardon
for my failings therein; I had very well satisfied my self; as I shall always
have great reason to do, when by serving GOD, I can please Your EXCELLENCY. I
confess, I then understood no obligation that lay upon me to do, what now I
am commanded to do, to preach it over again this Second time to the World;
being (I bless GOD for it) yet uninfected with that ambitious itch of making
my self known abroad, and loving to be gazed upon, as somebody by the
Multitude. It Is very fit that they, and only they, should wear great names,
who have great meritts to support them; and that they alone should be permitted
to praesent their labors to the public eye, whose great abilities, by being
so made manifest, may become more isntrumental to the public Good: But (My
LORD) Your HONOR seemed very well to understand the' extent of that Talent
wherewith GOD has entrusted me, when You presented me to the charge of my
little Flock in the Country; but too much to value it, when You committed to
me that other of Your Family: being thus entertained and employed, I need not
seek abroad for more work or more honor: and therefore (My LORD) that I now
expose this rude piece, and my self with it, to the forward censures of all
that see it, it is a piece of mere Obedience to Your EXCELLENCYS express, and
indeed, importunate Commands: I always resolving, so far as they are Just
(and I know they will ever be most exactly so) rather to suffer by them, then
to disobey them.

I have often heard Your EXCELLENCY, and My Lord, (would it signify any thing
to say what pleased me) I would say, with much pleasure I have hearkened to
You, discoursing of that satisfaction You reaped, from that sweet privacy and
retirement his MAJESTY is pleased to grant Your LORD-SHIP here in the Country,
where You live free from the Noise and Cumbrance of Court and City. Indeed,
the greatest reward his MAJESTY can possibly recompense Your matchless
services withal, is thus to bestow YOUR-SELF upon YOUR-SELF; and I know You
think it greater happiness to enjoy My LORD MARQVIS of NEW CASTLE at WELBECK,
then all the Offices and Honors which your exemplary Loyalty has meritted: And
there is all the reason in the World for it, that He who has so Nobly
sacrificed the Fairest of his Years, and the Amplest of his Revenues, to the
service of his King and Country, should now have leave to Consecrate the
remainder to his Health and Quiet. My LORD, could I ever hope to merit of Your
EXCELLENCY, I would not yet leave begging a Favor of the same kind; that, as I
have an Honorable place in Your Family, so I might live retiredly from all the
world besides. But seeing. (My LORD) Your commands lie so heavy upon me, I will
endeavor to bear them with the best strength I have, and still encourage my
self with this confidence, that it is all one with Your EXCELLENCY to Command
and Patronize: And therefore after others have served in their solemn joys,
with all becoming State and Magnificence, I hope I may (atleast) obtain a
pardon, If I make bold to drop in, in the Rear, and offer too my poor dish of
cold water in the name of a Disciple. Many, it is true, go before me, and it
is very fit they should; Others come with richer clothing, and finer language,
and why not? They that wear soft raiment, and they that speak soft words too,
are in Kings houses. It is the great freedom Your EXCELLENCY is pleased to
indulge me, to speak mine own sense in mine own words, fully and freely; and I
am so much the servant of my greatest Master, that I greedily embrace all the
Liberty can be granted me in this kind. If there be any thing in this short
Discourse, disrelishing to the palates of those that read it; it will be enough
for me to tell them, it is a Sermon, and therefore not purposely suited to any
man's humor: and yet, I will add; it has passed Your EXCELLENCY'S
approbation, and that will be enough to answer whatever may be objected against
it. Let men say what they will, I have abundantly satisfied my self, by
praying that all, even they that despise it (if it be possible) may be bettered
by it; and in taking this opportunity of expressing my self, by this, as by
all honest means, I shall always labor to do, My LORD,

Your EXCELLENCY'S most obedient Servant, and Chaplain CLEM. ELLIS.

Psalm: CXVIII. v: 22, 23, 24. v: 22. The stone which the builders refused, is
become the Head-stone of the Corner.

23. This is the LORD's doing, and it is marveilous in our Eyes.

24. This is the day which the LORD has made, we will rejoice and be glad in
it.


SHould the great GOD forbear to express his Goodness toward the sinful sons
of men, 'till man begin to understand what is best for himself; we should soon
become all as miserable, as at present we are ignorant; we should die in our
sins, and drop into Hell, ere we would understand the happynes of an Heaven, or
the loveliness of that way which leads unto it. And yet does our grossest
Ignorance fall much short of our perversenes; what now aggravates our guilt,
and (without a timely repentance) will add to our torments hereafter, is this,
that we so often know what we ought to do, when we yet stubbornly refuse to
do what we know to be our duty. So that if our good GOD did delight only there
to show Mercy, where he meets with meritt, did he not, on the contrary, love to
magnify his Goodness, by pitying even those, whose daily business it has been
to provoke his Justice: Blessings would soon be as rare, as Sins are rife; and
Heaven would at last be as empty of men, as Hell is of Saints.

But (Blessed be our Good GOD!) his mercy endures for ever. The unnatural
sinner ever Kicks and spurns at the yerning bowels of a tenderly compassionate
Father; and they only swell the more, and extend the wider toward the
miserable wretch; even so wide, till they reach a Miracle; such a miracle as
forces Stupidity it self into wonder and Admiration; yea such a wonder as
cannot contain it self, but suddenly breaks forth into a signal joy, and a
solemn thanksgiving. This, and more then all this, we read in the Text.

1. A blessing proffered, no sooner proffered but rejected, and though
rejected, yet sent again, and that with advantage. The stone which the
builders refused is become the Head stone of the Corner.

2. This great mercy thus rejected, and thus returning, is (as it ought to be)
humbly acknowledged, highly admired. This is the LORD's doing, and it is
marvailous in our Eyes.

3. This great wonder and Humility are seasonably seconded with an Hearty Joy,
and Solemn Thangs-giving. This is the day which the LORD has made, we will
rejoice and be glad in it.

Thus, the Text wants nothing that is fit: for the day, presenting us with a
Wonderful Blessing, an Humble Reception, and a Joyful Thanksgiving: In all
which we shall. briefly consider, first, the History and the Doctrine; next,
the Parallel and the Use.

1. We begin with the great Blessing: concerning which, let us enquire, 1. What
it was? 2. To whom it was proffered? 3. What welcome it found?

1. This Blessing in the Metaphor, is a Stone; in the History, David in the
Prophecy, Christ: and whether David; the Type of Christ, or Christ the Seed of
David; still we shall find it a Precious Stone, and a great Blessing.

1. The Stone in the History is David, thatholy King, in whose Royal Person
most of the Happiness of the Old, and in whose Heavenly Seed all the
Happiness of the New Israel of GOD did consist. David the Author and the
Subject of this Gratulatory hymn, an Hymn composed and set for the Solemn
Quire of Israel to be sung by them in their joyful commemoration of the happy
return of God's Anointed, and their long exiled King: He is the stone. A stone
hewn out of the rock, by God's own hand; consecrated with the Holy Oil by
God's own Prophet; set apart by God's appointment, to smite down the great
Goliath of the Philistines, to dash in pieces the Tyranny of a wicked Saul, to
crush to nothing the Enemies of God and of his chosen Israel. A stone fitted
and squared to be the foundation, and pillar of his Jerusalem, his Sion; solid
and firm, such as the hottest fires of Persecution could not crack; nor all
the storms and tempests of Affliction impair; of that weight, and so well
fixable, that all the strength and art of Satan and his Instruments could not
remove or shake it; but still he stood fast, the Foundation, the Pillar, the
sure stay and support of God's Church and People committed to his Charge. He
is the stone in the History: which in the Prophecy is.

2. Christ JESUS our Lord, the everlasting seed of David. The sure rock of our
Salvation. So He himself applies the text to himself. Math: 21.) and after
him, his Apostle St Peter (1 Pet: 2.) He, who was a stone of stumbling, and a
Rock of Offense, to the Jew first, and then to the Gentile; is a most sure
hold, and a strong Tower of defense to all those that steadfastly believe in
him; the firm and everlasting Foundation of the New Jerusalem: the chief
cornerstone, In whom all the building fitly framed together, grows unto an
Holy Temple in the Lord. Ephesians: 2. 20. and 21. This is the living stone, of
which that former was no more but the bare shadow: the stone whereon our Hopes,
our Comforts, our present privileges, and our future Inheritance, all are
surely founded: the Rock on which, if we be once well bottomed, let the winds
blow, and the waves beat, and all these with all the violence they can, yet
shall we stand sure and unshaken to all eternity. These be the stones here
proffered in the Text, David first and afterward Christ; and (what I would
desire you to note) both these Kings

A good King is indeed a most precious stone, the most solid foundation of the
Church's peace and the Peopl's happynes: remove this stone, and the whole house
comes down upon your head; touch but the Lord's anointed, and you disjoint all,
the whole Kingdom shatters into confusion; all falls into pieces, and all the
wit of man is not able to bind it up again: Proofs and instances of this sad
truth we have too many, our own lamentable experience, still fresh in our
memories, renders all citations of them at present needless: Hereby we have
found, that whosoever wildly pushes at these sacred stones, he only runs his
head against an hard Rock, which though he should have the unhappy strength to
shake a little, yet he shall be sure withal to dash out his own brains, at
lest he must expect to receive such a wound, as cannot easily be healed but he
is like to bleed into a too late repentance: He that fights against the powers
set up by God, can only beat the skin off his own fingers. It will be
therefore our Prudence as well as our duty, not to strike with too much
violence upon these holy stones, left like men hammering too boldly on a good
flint, we thence produce such a fire as will not again be quenched: Saint Paul
dares not warrant so strange a Confidence, when he tells us, (Romans 13.) They
that resist the power shall receive to themselves Damnation. Rather pray we,
that we may never come to want such a Stone as God here profer'd in the Text.
but,

2. To whom did he proffer it?

Even to those, who wanted not eyes to see it, nor experience to understand the
worth and value of it, nor skill sufficient to make a right use of it. David
was profer'd, not to the poor rude Israelites, that could not distinguish their
right hand from their left, but to the Grandees of Israel, to Saul and his
Councillors; whose business and Profession it was to deal in such Stones. Our
Blessed JESUS was profer'd, not only to a few blind Gentiles, who had all
their knowledge but at the second hand; the wonder had not been great if these
had refused what they so little understood; but he was proffered to the Wise
men and Rulers of the Jews, to the great Maister-builders of that Church,
Scribes and Pharisees, Lawyers and Doctors; those that knew the Law, and had
read the Prophets, and understood what was foretold, and prefigured concerning
him: whose bare acceptance of him, had been precedent and warrant enough for
the Peoples Faith; as appears by that question (John 7, 48.) have any of the
Rulers or of the Pharisees believed on him? So would they doubtlesly have said,
Have any of the Rulers or Pharisees received this stone? If they have, then so
will we.

This is God's method, he so proffers his great Blessings as to leave the
refuser without excuse; to those who best could discern the worth of it, and
therefore should first in all reason have begun to use it, was this Gift
proffered: lest afterward they should go about to excuse themselves with a
Non novimus, we knew is not: The fittest Blessing to the fittest persons, the
stone to the builders.

3. Lett's now see, what is it is welcome.

Indeed very course and more strange, considering the persons to whom it was
proffered: so foolish were they, or so selfish, or both; they refused it.

1. David is thrust out from the presence of Saul, bannish'd the Land, driven
into Caves and Dens, to lead a sad and melancholy life with Bears and Tygres;
or at best, amongst strangers, too frequently more inhumane and barbarous, then
those beasts of prey. He is hunted like a silly partridge upon the Mountains,
and no means that a cruel and jealous Saul could invent, left unattempted, to
rid him of his Kingdom and the world at once.

2. And in this particular too, was our Blessed JESUS, very truly the Son of
David. He is refused of his own People and Nation: rejected by the chief
Rulers, and Highpriests, with a -- No King but Caesar: -- Not this man, but
Barabbas. Any murderer, rather then the Lord of life; a bloody Tyrant, rather
then the God of mercies; away to the Cross with him. This is the very voice of
the builders, No stone of God's squaring for our building, out with it amongst
the rubbish: Give us rather a Nero, any lump of clay kneeded up in Christian
blood: Give us such stones as will admit of no Cement, but what is made of the
blood of us and of our Children: that blood which Caesar sheds, be it on the
heads of us and ours, but this stone which God would in mercy bestow upon us,
be it thrown out into the streets, and trampled under our feet forever. This is
the language of these prudent builders.

Thus, even thus do the builders too often prove the unhappy demolishers, and
when they should strengthen, raze to the ground the walls of Jerusalem:
whilst they lay their own ambition, their Humors, and their Interests, the
only Foundations of all their actions; they are sure to refuse that stone,
which is sent down from Heaven. Here Is the Wisdom of the Wise, this is the
Counsel of the Prudent, when they have not God before their Eyes. The stone
is refused, which yet in spite of all their little Policies, and petty devices,
shall most certainly return the Head-stone of the building. Which brings us
from the Folly and Baseness of the builders, to the unerring Wisdom, and
Constant Goodness, of God Almighty.

They cast out the stone, God brings it in again, They reject it with scorn, He
sets it in with advantage, They refuse it as useless, and unfit for any thing,
He restores it the Beuty, the strength of the whole Fabric.

David, after his long and tedious exile, is called home again, even by those
same persons who at first were as ready as any to reject him; with the shouts
and acclamations of Israal he is welcomed, and made the Glory of that people,
and their bulwark, by whom he had been so much slighted.

And thus was it with the great Rock of our Salvation, after his numerous and
grievous sufferings, hardly ending in a bitter and a shameful death; He rose
again, and ascended into Heaven in Glory and Triumph, and is become the Head of
the Universal Church, and the only Sanctuary those very Enemies who refused
him can confide in.

God will have his design, let man do his worst; he will make all those in his
due time to understand their own folly, who would not when they ought, embrace
his Counsel. The stones which He sends are more precious in his eyes then to
lie always unreguarded on a Dunghill: David's Palace and Kingdom shall not
forever be a Cave and a wilderness; Christ's Crown shall not always be made
of Thorns; Those Cruel hammerings, and rougher usages, which the despised
stone at present undergoes, shall not break and Crush it, but, on the Contrary,
Square and smooth, and polish it, and make it the more serviceable, and fitter
for the building; His Enemies at length shall know, that those many torments
they barbarously inflicted on him, shall reflect with doubled force upon
themselves; and by a seasonable and unexpected restoration they shall be made
to acknowledge, that the undeserved exile of their David, was not the
punishment of his Sins, but the greatest curse could be laid upon his very
Persecutors.

And here, on the one hand, we may clearly behold, the folly and blindness of
worldly men, even of those who would fain be esteemed the wisest and
skilfull'st builders and repairers of a broaken state; on the other hand, the
Infinite Wisdom and Providence of God, even in those actions which seem lest
considerable to the dim eyes of men. Here we see man's Unworthiness and
perverseness in slighting and refusing the very choicest of God's blessings,
there God's Infinite mercy and unalterable Goodness in redoubling his
blessings after they have been refused: In short, here is man's impiety in
rejecting the stone which God had designed, and by proffering it, Commended:
there is God's Justice in making that despised stone to become at last, all that
he intended it for at first, even the Head-stone of the Corner.

2. Thus are we, from the wonderful mercy, come to the cheerful reception
thereof. It is received (as so great a blessing ought to be) with an humble
acknowledgement of the Author, with an high admiration of the Mercy.

1. This is the Lord's doing: There King David acknowledges, and there he
would have all those that join with him, to acknowledge the Divine Author of
this great blessing. To the Honor and Glory of his gracious GOD, to the
Comfort and Justification of the late suffering David, to the shame and
confusion of his once insulting persecutors, he utters it aloud -- It is the
Lord's doing. The Restoration of this Royal person, and in him of Israel's
happiness, was a work more peculiarly and properly the Lord's whereby he was
wonderfully pleased to exhibit to the world, as it were, under his hand and
seal, a most signal testimonial of David's Just and Righteous cause: Most
things He brings to pass by such ordinary and common Instruments, and after so
plain and easy a manner and method, that, though they be the Lord's doings
too, yet the homeliness of the visible Instrument, together with the frequency
of such operations, keep us from taking so much notice of them, as we ought to
do: But such rare and remarkable passages of providence as this was, cannot
go by us without a due observation, a seasonable wonder, and an humble
reflection upon the glorious and Omnipotent agent: If David had yet had any
visible means left him, of ridding himself out of Danger, and attaining unto
that Crown, which was fitted by God for his head, they would have been less
apt through the multitude of humane means, to eye the hand of God in his
advancement: But that he should be restored even now and thus, whose doing
should this be but the LORD' s? for

1. Behold the poor exiled Prince, wandering to and fro, in a rude wilderness,
as destitute of all hopes to man's thinking, as of companions: his strength
failing him, his lovers and his friends standing aloof from his Soul, many
enemies on all sides, and perhaps some few well wishers, but, alas, no helpers:

2. Behold the sweetness of his generous and Princely Soul, abhorring to be
cruel more then desiring to be King: more delighting in Mercy, and contented
in his sufferings, and confiding in his GOD, and reverencing a King, though a
Saul, a Tyrant, then to revenge himself, when GOD had put the life of his
Enemies into his hand.

3. Behold his Enemies, for multitude innumerable, for malice implacable, for
Interest insatiable; no force could subdue, no Reasons persuade, no
condescensions mollify, no hopes of a reconciliation or agreement upon terms
or articles; so that in the first place to the Glory of the Author we must
confess -- It was the LORD's doing.

And again, for the Justifying of David's righteous cause, and for the
abatement of his adversaries confidence and boasting, he shows, it was the
LORD's doing. Prosperity and Success accompanied with Oppression and Violence,
make but a slender argument, for the Honesty and Innocence of a thriving
Tyranny: but a sudden promotion out of the dust, by an unexpected hand from
Heaven, conducting a poor rejected David, through the fury of his Enemies,
into the embraces of his friends, from a Cave to a Throne, may beget a very
strong persuasion of a Righteous cause: when the mouth of the fierce Lions are
closed by a naked Daniel; when the extreme raging of a fiery Furnace is
stilled and cooled at the approach of three fettered Innocents; when the Bolts
fall off, and the doors fly open without a Key or a File, to set the shakled
Apostles at Liberty; who will not presently say, that GOD's favor is Sanctuary
enough for an Injured Innocence; his purpose to save, armor enough against
man's endeavors to destroy; that there is no Policy against Providence, no
stratagem against Heaven? Had David by force of arms, with a great Host of
men entered the Land, and so made havoc of his Enemies, the residue of them
might still have cbeer'd themselv's up with such hopes as these, that seeing
there were yet more men in the world, they might yet come to regain all, as
they got it a first, or lost it now, by an arm of flesh. But now when they
behold the LORD making bare his own arm from Heaven, and showing himself
mindful of David in his lowest condition, bringing all the subtle devices of
the long prosperous sinner to none effect, and without the help of man, even
against all the projects of man, restoring his Anointed to his own: how can
they choose, but seeing, be amazed and wonder, be silenced, and condemning
themselves and their own Folly, with all humility, at least, with shame and
confusion of face acknowledge, that it is the LORD' s doing? and therefore

2. Truly Marveilous in our eyes.

Indeed all the works of GOD, when considered as they ought to be, are wonders,
but such works as this was, the more immediate doings of the LORD, are to be
acknowledged above measure wonderful: Considering

1. The rarity of them, such blessings come not every day, the LORD makes a Day
for them, and by them. He is not altogether prodigal of his Miracles, but
reserveth them for special occasions, and for great Ends: that he may thereby
manifest his power in the weakness of his servant David; and his adversary's
weakness and folly, in the very height of their policy and Confidence; and the
equity of David's cause in the midst of his Enemies triumph: Ordinarily GOD
works by common and known methods, but when such a singular act of Providence,
as unusual and new, as true and effectual, discovers it self to our view,
must it not be marveilous in our eyes?

2. Again, when such deliverances are wrought by methods so far above all,
both expectations and Inventions of friends; and not only so, but above all
fears too and preventions of Enemies: when so many means formerly, in the eyes
of man more likely, had proved utterly ineffectuall; so many endeavors and
projects, in the opinion of most men strong and sure, had been altogether
quashed and frustrated; and yet notwithstanding all this, the blessing, when
even almost despaired of, comes at last, and that with interest; it must needs
be truly mavelous.

3. Once more, When GOD so works, that man does not see it, yea even secretly
in the hearts of those who do not yet understand it; directing their actions to
those very ends which, it may be, they least intended; strangely, and secretly
charming the Disobedient into Duty, the Rebellious into Loyalty: when the
promoters of David's exile, are made the main Instruments of his restoration;
and all those fretting Shimeies which would still fain curse, can or dare do
nothing but bless and congratulate: certainly, This must needs be the LORD's
doing, and altogether marvailous in our eyes.

And as it was the LORD's doing, thus graciously to re-establish, what man had
so stubboruly and scornfully rejected; so must it too be acknowledged his
doing, to make these foolish men embrace what the second time he profer'd them.
However without all doubt, it is man's duty in receiving the many and great
blessings which GOD of his infinite bounty conferres upon him, to look upon
them as GOD's doings, not as the rewards and purchases of his own merits and
endeavors; and withal to admire therein the Goodness, the Power, the Wisdom
and Justice of the Author and Donor; all which if we do but see as clearly as
we ought and may, we shall not rest'till we break out into an holy Joy and
thanksgiving: after such a mercy and such a wonder, 'twere a greater wonder
yet, if Israel should not be Glad and Rejoice.

3. Which is the third branch of the Text. And truly David was never backwards,
nor David's followers, to answer God's miracles of Meroy, with holy returns of
Praise. Whilst the Blessings of GOD, descend upon the wicked as the dew of
Heaven on a dunghill, begetting nothing but a nauceous stench, and unwholesome
weeds; when they meet with a David like the same dew upon a good and pleasant
Garden, they produce first a fair Springtide of sweet and lovely flowers, and
afterward as full an harvest of sound and wholesome fruits. Good words of
Praise, and better works of Righteousness.

And, as private mercies challenge our private praises, so public and
National blessings call for public and Solemn thansgivings* when the Crown
is restored to David, and David to his People, it is very fit that all Israel
should keep Holy Day: And thus they did, and for this they have a double
warrant.

First, David's command, or (if any will rather have it so) his invitation. He
sends forth a General Summons unto all Israel, in the second verse;
particularly to the house of Aaron, verse the third, and in short, to all that
fear the LORD, at the fourth verse: and all the reason in the world they
should comply with his will, who would share in his happiness. And yet behold,
a greater authority then David's is here, for --

Secondly, It Is the Day which the LORD has made. He that made every Day, is
pleased to make some days over again and again: and so has he new-made by
some extraordinary mercy or other all those days, which Holy Church has
commanded us (in commemoration of the same) to keep Holy: such was this Day,
made again, by a new Sun shine of his Special favor overthe Land; a Day by a
most glorious mercy, so gilded and dignified, that it were a profaneness to
fully it with the low drudgeryes of our common employments: Graced it must be
with hearts and countenances as glad and cheerful, as the day it self is
bright and glorious.

There must be gladness in the heart; not only in the mouth and in the
clothes: such new-made days are to be celebrated with all inward
cheerfulness and alacrity of soul, proceeding from a sweet and pleasing sense
of his favor who made them for us: away which that grudging and Irksomenesse of
spirit, we meet with Amos 8. 5. which is ever crying out, when will the Sabbath
be gone, that we may set^ forth wheat? except we please our selves in the
observation of these Days, we cannot please the LORD that made them: And as
Gladness is required; so is

2. Rejoicing: a signification of that gladness to the world: an external
expression and profession ought always to be the inseparable attendant of that
internal affection which GOD delights in; thus were the feasts of old
celebrated with shoutings, and soundings of trumpetts, and distributing gifts
etc: all sober manifestations of Joy become that day, whereon GOD vouchsafes to
manifest his Favor: Only men are to take heed, how instead of be glad and
rejoice, they read, be drunk and Profane: that were not to sanctify but
pollute the Day: David and his Subjects express their joy, by entering into the
Gates of Righteousness, into the Courts of GOD's house, provoking mutually
each other cheerfully to acknowledge; and heartily to sing aloud to his Honor
and Glory, who had done such great things for them, whereof they are glad, with
an -- O give thanks unto the GOD of all GOD's for his mercy endures forever.

We have heard of the Day which the LORD once made for Israel, let us now
descend to consider the Day the LORD has lately made for England: where it
would be very easy, would it not be too tedious, almost in every particular to
show you, how King David and his Day is paralelled by King CHARLES the Second
(to whom God make many long and happy Days) and his Day.

How much of England's happiness is bound up in the Prudence and Fortune of
England's Kings: How long this famous Nation may possibly continue one Body,
without one Head, How long those two great sides of this glorious Fabric the
Church and State, may stand firm and unshaken, as they ought to be, the
beauty, the strength and support of each other, if not well knit together by
these Corner-stones: Our ancient flourishing, and out late miserable and never
sufficiently deplored condition, when compared together, will too manifestly
evidence. We have known what it is to have Kings our Nursing Fathers, and
Queens our nursing Mothers: and how happily those two Twins: the Church and
Commonwealth did thrive, and grow, and flourish, when fed and cherished at such
breasts: and, alas! we have to our sorrow found, what sad Days those were,
wherein there was no King in our Israel, days full of nothing but black
clouds, raging winds, and fat all storms, in which both God's house and
Cesar's were blown down to the ground; all honest and Loyal men driven out
of the Land, or dispersed, and scattered, and hurled into the little narrow
Corners of the earth, making privacy and poverty their sanctuary: nothing
appeared for many years together but the horrid face of Rebellion and
confusion; no Religion, no Law, no Justice, no Charity, no Order, nay, nothing
but the bare name of that, a mere pretense whereof was craftily imposed upon a
deluded multitude as a sufficient warrant for their disobedience, and a sure
basis for Anarchy, or what is nearest of Kin to it, a Democracy, indeed nothing
but the bare name of Liberty. Was it ever thus, so long as England willingly
embraced the Corner-stones which GOD proffered her? and did she ever want such
praecious stones, till her State-Architects became altogether as wise as the
foolish builders in the text, refusing the stone which GOD had prepared? They
rejected a stone such as England never saw before, and therefore could never
know how to prize sufficiently, and I would to GOD, that it might truly be said
in diminution of their guilt, that through Ignorance they did it! The singular
worth and use of that Head-stone they first rejected (alas, so altogether
brutish were we) nothing could teach us to understand, but the succeeding ruin
of three most flourishing Kingdoms. A stone indeed he was so truly precious in
himself, and for those many signal excellencies, which never shone brightes
to the eye of the Christian world, then (as such true stars and Diamonds use
to do) in the darkest night of his persecution; that he was highly and
deservedly valued of all that knew him, is still cabinetted up in the hearts
and affections of those that loved him, and shall (I doubt not) be found in the
first row, in that great day, when GOD shall make up his Jewels. And as our
Cornerstone, he was so exactly squared, so solidly laid by the great author of
all piety and Justice, that nothing but Satan and Envy could find a fault. His
Pious reign had left us nothing but a superfluity of happiness to be sick of,
and his exemplary^ Clemency nothing but too much mercy to coplain of, the noted
softness and freedom of his nature, gave those rude flints that came against
him too great an advantage over him so good a man, and so gracious a King, that
his most inveterate enemies had nothing else to fear, hardly to pretend, but
that God's house would, by the help of such a stone, in a very short time,
become more strong and glorious then their own. Late Posterity may indeed very
well believe that God removed this stone so early, as too rich a Pearl to be
thrown away upon such unworthy swine; but what faith will be so daring as to
believe, that the very Master builders did reject this stone as useless and
cumbersome. Oh! that it might be however forgotten in Gath, and silently buried
in the streets of Askalon, how that a Christian Nation, an English Subject
rejected a King that was as a Saint, and such a Saint as CHARLES the First.
Oh, the desperate tementy of a blinded zeal. The infatiable fury of a
covetous, Sanctity. The horrible attempts of a malicious Hypocricy. What
execrable villainies barbarism may execute when is walk(...) (...) the vizard
of purity and Reformation! for The LORD' s Anointed was murdered.

And, can it be so much as thought, that those very Builders who were called
together to make up the breaches, and repair the decays in the walls of Sion,
should thus rashly pull out, and dash in pieces in the open street the
Cornerstone thereof; and afterward contrive and labor to fill up it is room
with such Rubbish as a Commonwealth; or such a rough and unhewen Flint, as
that late prodigious Tyrant; which whilst with all their Art and skill they
strove to fit and pollish, they could never hope to produce anything but a fire
to consume at once both the builders and the building? But will it not yet seem
more strange and incredble, that even our Spiritual builders too, those that
pretended, to be joint laborers with Christ for the aedification of his
heavenly kingdom upon earth, should make it their Pulpit and their Lecture
trade, to mete out to their auditors such large measure of factions and
seditious doctrine each Market day, and like the Jewish Highpriests move and
incense the People to run raging up and down the streets with a Crucify him,
Crucify him, and never cease watching at the doors, with their traiterous
Petitions in their hands, till they had obtained their request, the Murder of
their King, and the ruin of his Kingdom? And yet such unskilful builders had
unfortunate England on all sides set on work, who had a far greater longing
to grow rich upon the ruins, then famous by the repairs of Jerusalem.

Yet, as if this had amounted but to some light matter, and were a thing
excusable, or (as they would have it) very commendable: Observe how bravely and
resolutely they go on. It had pleased our Indulgent GOD to hew us out a Second
most excellent stone, out of the same Royal rock; exactly squared and fitted
for the same place, and dignity too: and this again the Builders reject, and
throw as far out of their sight as out of their affections, saying within
themselves, as those honest servants we know where, This is the Heir, come let
us kill him, and the Inheritance shall be ours; thus stoutly resolve they, that
neither they themselves who had been so long sools, would ever again grow wise;
nor that Church, which they had so Sacrilegiously ruined, glorious.

But there is no fighting against Heaven, the same wise hand which fitted this
Second stone is an Omnipotent hand too, and has fixed it Even that same Royal
stone, which (with shame we may speak it) for so many years together had layen
in the dust, neglected by the People, Hated by the Builders, beat upon by
storms and Tempests; and has felt the heavy hammers of his implacable
Enemies; is now sent home again, more solid and firm for all that Hammering,
more sound and undecayed by reason of that long obscurity, more welcome and
acceptable, after so long an absence. With whom is restored a lost Justice, a
long time smoother'd amongst numberless Interests and Factions: a lost
Liberty, so long shackled by a most intolerable Tyranny and Usurpation; a lost
Religion, so long buried in grossest Atheism, only with a fair flourish of
Hypocricy, and an inscription of Holiness over her grave: This stone, the
Basis of our Laws, the Pillar of our Church the Bulwork of our Peace, and I may
truly add, the Landmark of our Estates, for whilst he was removed, no man
knew what to call his own, even this stone, uncrack'd by the blows of his
Enemies, unmollified by the flatteries of his false friends, which the builders
for so many years have shamefully refused, is now become (Blessed be our good
GOD) the Head-stone of the Corner.

And now, Whose doing is this?

Whose but his who is the great King of Kings, Protector of the Fatherless,
Wise, Mighty, and lust, who puts down one, and lifts up another, and makes
the most prosperous sinners to know themselves to be but men: He alone it is,
that could do these mighty things for us, whereof we are Glad, he that has so
strangly turned again the Captivity of Sion, that we seem yet like men that
dream: Now we see what that is, whereof our adversaries so boasted
themselves, Divine Providence; and in whose power it is, to still the raging of
the waves, and in whose hands are the Hearts of the Mighty; and by whom it is
that Kings do reign.

This is a work which the LORD has all this while reserved to make his own
Doing, that all the Earth might see, and be afraid, because there is a reward
for the Righteous, there is a GOD that judges in the Earth. This cannot be the
work of any hand but GOD's: for

1. If we cast an eye back upon our gracious David whilst under the cloud an
Exile: what can we see, but the LORD alone, he had to confide in? How was he
round about begirt with miseries? It is hard to say in which he was most
unfortunate, his many inhumane Enemies, or his more cowardly friends. They of
his own Religion (If they were of any) thought it more prudence to comply with
a prosperous Tyrant, then to succor a banished Prince; The sons of Rome
grudged him their friendship, who was afraid to share in their slavery: Nay
such is the natural sweetness wherewith GOD has blessed our Prince, and such a
gracious Prince has GOD designed for us, that he was afraid to become a King
by Conquest, and chose rather to wait for the Affections, then to triumph over
the Lives of his rebellious Subjects.

2. Again, amongst his enemies here at home, we saw nothing could befriend him:
A Power seemingly invincible, a malice utterly implacable, a Confidence built
upon a long and wonderful success; and yet certainly a conscience full of
guilt, and consequently full of jealousies, and therefore most vigilant:
Interests espoused in Rebellion, and therefore only to be maintained by
Injustice and Cruelty. Besides all these, a Confederacy of Oaches, Covenants,
and Engagements, though these ('it is true) made little opposition to any thing
but honesty, and Loyalty, being only set up as mere engines of Policy, which
might easily be scrued into all postures, to serve the Swearer's Interest Add
now unto all this, on the one hand, that grand and Master-craft of Hypocricy,
whereby their enemies did their best endeavors to cozen even God himself as
well as men into a false beliofe of their integrity and Innocence; and on the
other hand the Irreligion and profaneness of pretended friends, whereby too
many were thoroughly persuaded that a King could have no favorite but
wickedness, no friend, but the profane: considering this lewd temper of spirit
in too many, and a coldness, an indifferency, a cowardice in more, we must
needs confess, it was the LORD's doing.

And certainly a very wonderful Doing in our eyes. Hopes and expectations all
dying, all Projects and endeavors failing, enemies rejoicing, flourishing,
triumphing; friends scattered, impoverished, imprisoned, all disponding; the
Conquerors sitting down securely, and dividing the spoil, and crying with
David's enemies, Ah, so would we have it, persecute and take him, for there is
none to deliver him: even then God throws in the Apple of dissension, and in
pieces they fall, and a sudden storm from the North scatters them. An Army
marches up not knowing whither; all Sects and Factions meet it, and
congratulate, and know not for what; Well, the allknowing God brings all this
to an happy Issue; the LORD's Anointed is restored, his dying friends revived,
all barking Shimeies silenced, Sectaries and Schismatics confounded, Rome and
her Children troubled and amazed. This surely was the LORD's doing, and
therefore marvailous in our Eyes.

What Praises therefore do we now owe unto God for all these his Marvailous
works? This is the Day, which God has thus (as you have heard) re-made for
England; a bright and clear Sunshine, after black clouds and thick darkness,
The Day of our Redemption from a more then Egyptian bondage and slavery; the
Day of our freedom from Tyranny and Oppression; the Day wherein our gracious
King was at first ushered into the world with a new and miraculous light from
Heaven; and the Day wherein he was welcomed into his Kingdom by all the lights
of the Nation; Stars of all Magnitudes with all the luster and Glory they
could cloth themselves withal. A Day, by the light whereof we begin to see
our late Follies, God grant we may truly repent us of them! And our present
happiness, Oh, that we could be heartily thankful for it! A Day, wherein
Religion begins to appear again in her own dress, and all those maskes and
vizors, too freequently worn in the dark night of Ignorance, begin to fall
off from her face: All the Nightbirds of prey and rapine begin to betake
themselves to their Holes: and the doors of God's house are set wide open, that
we his servants may freely enter in and worship the God of our Fathers, after
the manner of our Fathers, solemnly and decently. 'Twere an endless task, to
recount half the blessings of this Day; the sum of all is this, The Anointed
of the LORD, whom we feared to have been taken in their nets, is returned in
peace.

Let us therefore be Glad and Rejoice: be Glad inwardly, and Rejoice outwardly,
be so glad, that God may accept of our Joy, as an acceptable sacrifice of
praise and thansgiving for his great and provident mercy, in having reguard
unto his holy One: and so rejoice that the world may see we are glad indeed,
and acknowledge him the Author of our Happiness. It is most fit, that as the
world has seen us sad, yea, perhaps too sinfully dejected in the Day of our
Afflictions; so it should now behold us cheerful and full of joy, but still
without sinfulness, in this Day which the LORD has made.

Only let us here beware, lest we so rejoice as to forfeit again the ground
of our joys: In vain do we observe this Day as a Thanksgivingday, except we
labor to keep every Day of our life henceforward Holy Day. It is not enough to
say LORD we thank thee, but we are to Sacrifice our Persons and our endeavors
to his honor and glory; returning him not only the Calves of our lips, but
the Affections of our hearts, and the labors of our hands, and the obedience
of the whole man for the abundance of his mercies. Our King, our Church, our
Land have all too long groaned under our Sinful rejoy cings, and let us take
heed lest all these suffer over again by our confident and presumptuous
re-assuming of such carnal Joys: Why should it be any longer said, and that
with so much color of truth, that Loyalty and Piety cannot dwell together in
the same breast? Why should it be any longer said to our shame, that swearing,
and drinking, and deriding Religion, and making a mock of Holiness, are the
Principal badges of such as call themselves Royallists? We know who and what
they are who have long ago publicly boasted, that they have been the King's
best Subjects and Friends, the way to confute them is not to swear they are not
so, but to prove by our actions that we indeed are so: and to do this, there is
no way left us but to be as sincerely Religious, as they hypocrytically: We may
safely give leave to the Covenanter, the Engager, and the rest of a
Schismatic people to pretend as high as they can, whilst we are sure we are
as much as they can pretend to Let us but once out-doe and out live them, it is
no great matter who out-talks, and outbraves us: but let us by no means give
occasion to the enemies of God to Blaspheme; but whilst we endeavor to
express our Loyalty in our Joy, let our joy be most clearly manifested in our
Obedience to His just commands, and in our Conformity to his good example;
whose first Proclamation was to condemn and prohibit, and whose whole course
of life is to shame all manner of Profaneness and debauchery. Let but our good
and righteous actions first stop the mouths of our Enemies, and then our
Righteous God will undoubtedly bind their hands, and turn their hearts, and
make us all at last charitably and unanimously to join in the Praises of that
great God, who has miraculously restored our Cornerstone, and rebuilt our
Jerusalem, and made her once more a City in a fair way to be at unity within
herself. He will then make our King a glorious Prince, and us happy Subjects,
and all of us at last more happy Saints, when we shall all obtain Crowns and
Kingdoms, and be built up together one triumphant Church on our Head
Cornerstone Christ JESUS; full of all Gladness, and Rejoicing, and perpetual
singings, to the Honor and Glory of him that sits upon the everlasting
Throne, who is LORD of Lords, and KING of Kings; to whom for his unspeakable
mercy to our Gracious King, and to us his Subjects in his happy Restoration,
let us ascribe all Honor and Glory, Praise and Thanksgiving now and for ever.

AMEN.

