AN ENGLISH-DUEL: OR Three to Three OR GREAT BRITAINS Challenge to France,
Denmark, and Holland; her Puissance and Strength, her Readiness and
Willingness to obey her Sovereign in his Just War: and how all the Counties
in these Three Kingdoms are at an hours Warning ready to defend his Sacred
Majesty, together with the justness of his Cause, and hopes of a happy
Conquest over his Enemies.
By George Eliot.
Great Britain's angry, and begins to frown:
France, Denmark, Holland, all must tumble down.
WHen high Jehovah's own right hand did bring
Great Britains Monarch, and her mighty King,
To his undoubted right; and Heavens hand
Had quite disarmed the Rebels of this Land:
This famous Island then her days did spend
In Peace and Plenty, and all Kingdoms send
To Englands King, who kindly did him greet
With joyful Welcomes; humbly at his feet
Did crave his friendship: and amongst the rest
False-hearted France, France and Holland deceitful Nations.
and that base Scorpions Nest
Deceitful Holland, those fat greasy Hogs,
Did fawn and flatter like to Spaniel Dogs*
But now these greasy States, without a Cause,
As God an^ all the Christian World well knows,
By force of Arms does seek to overcome
The greatest Potentate in Christendom.
Poor silly Currs, I Am sure they may as soon
Put out the Suns light, or pull down the Moon:
For Britains Empire, I dare boldly say,
Of stout and valiant men, has at this day
Above four hundred thousand, Britains terrible Puissance.
which can make
Not Europe only, but all Turkey shake;
They all are willing for to spend their blood
In this just War, the Cause it is so good.
All Counties in these Kingdoms ready are
To aid their King in his Defensive War.
Brave England, Three to Three.
Scotland, Ireland, are agreed
To make false Holland, France, and Denmark bleed.
When James and George their glittring swords do draw
Then Englands Lion, Duke of York. Duke of Albermarle.
with his armed paw,
Will tear proud France in pieces, and will make,
Rebellious Holland, Duke of York. Prince Rupert.
and base Denmark shake.
There Is not a King in Christendom can say, Duke of Albermarle.

In his Dominions he has at this day
Such brave Commanders, Duke of Ormond.
as has Britains King,
Whose Names already through Earths Globe does ring.
Nor is there any King that ever had Earl of Manchester.

More just a Cause, Marquess Newcastle.
nor ever Foe more bad.
Poor hungry Hollands belly he did fill, Marquess Dorcet.

And did allow them at their own free will
To trade in England, Lord Fairfax.
on her Seas to fish.
They had their pleasure, Lord Bellas.
and what heart could wish.
From England yearly of all sorts of grain, The Kings love to Holland.

Went many thousand Quarters, to maintain
Her hungry children, or else they would die;
And for his goodness him they now defy. Hollands Ingratitude.

But it is a baseness with a detestation,
That France should such a hair-brained Declaration
Set forth, The baseness of France.
and without cause give such affront,
As not a King in Europe would have don't.
A Crown of Gold will not become that pate, The King of France none of the
wisest.

That sides with Rebels, and a paltry State,
And wars with Kings: No, such a Cock-brain'd head
Must wear a Fools-Cap, or a Crown of Lead.
It is not Denmark that can you assist,
When Britains angry, and does heave her Fist:
For she has power for to overcome
France, Denmark, Holland, and all Christendom.
When Hell and Earth, and all the World did fight
Against Queen Elizabeth in Eighty Eight,
Because Gods Sacred Truth she did maintain; The Victory over the Spanish
Invincible Armado, in Eighty eight.

Those Sons of Belial which did come from Spain,
From Rome, and France, and many Nations more,
All Slaves and Vassals to that Scarlet Whore
Were by the valor of her Subjects drowned, Great Britains^ Valor.

Nor could they set a foot on English ground.
Great Britain's now as willing for to fight,
As ever England was in Eighty Eight:
For never King in England ere did reign, The Subjects love to his Majesty.

That did the affections of his Subjects gain;
Or ever did more good, than Englands King
That now does reign. Since Heavens hand did bring
Him to his Sacred Throne, in this short while
He has restored new life to this great Isle:
For many years in thraldom she did lie,
And groaned deeply under Anarchy;
Till God was pleased to work a work of wonder, Restored him to his Crown and
Dignity.

Then he did hew those bands and cords asunder,
Restored Religion to his Subjects Joy,
And like Josiah, he did quite destroy
False ways of Worship, As Soon as God restored him, he restored Gods Truth; an
Argument of Thankfulness.
clean throughout the Land,
And at this day defends with his own hand
Gods Sacred Truth; His Subjects he does nourish:
Both Church and State abundantly does flourish.
A word or two I have to speak, and then
I shall conclude, and so take off my Pen.
Ere many years, The King an Instrument of much good.
all Christendom shall see
Great Britains King Gods Instrument to be;
Christ's Sacred Gospel Truth he will advance,
Throughout all Holland, and wide-skirted France.
And with his own right hand will tumble down
Base Antichrist, and take from him his Crown.
False Sects and Schisms, with all vain opinions,
Shall not take root or bide in his Dominions.
And now, O Britain, give me leave to say,
Thou art obliged this good King to obey;
Thy hand and heart unto him freely give,
And in Subjection see thou ever live.
Stand fast and shrink not, and thou then shall see,
He Will be a Nursing Father unto thee.
FINIS.
Printed in the Year 1666.


