THE PRIVILEGES AND PREROGATIVES of the High Court of Chancery.

Written by the Right HONORABLE Thomas Lord Elsmere, late Lord Chancellor of
ENGLAND.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Sheapheard. 1641.

The Preface.
THe gravitie and discretion of the Judge in a^tient time, has been such, as
in doubtful causes and especially for construction of Statutes, they desired
to confer with the Kings Privy Council, whereof there be many examples,
some are cited in the Case of Post nati.

And this ought to be specially regarded, where the authority and Jurisdiction
of the Kings Court is to be brought into Dispute and question.

For gravius privatorum damno peccatur, Bodm. lib. 3. Cap. 6. p. 425
Cum inter summos Magistratus Curiasue majores de imperio certatur. And in
these cases the Judges should first have private and loving Conference
together, Bodm. lib. 3. Cap. 6. p. 425.
before public disputes, according to the Emperor's command. Alloquere
illum, ne rem injustam faciat.

NOTES AND OBSERVAtions upon the Statutes of Magna Charta. cap. 9. and other
Statutes concerning the proceedings in the Chancery, in cases of Equity and
Conscience.
THe Statutes, Mag. Chart.
which be now urged and stood upon against the Chancery, Cap. 9.
are first Magna Charta, where the words be Nisi per legale iudicium parium
suoz vel per legem terrae. It is lex terrae, that is, the Judges of the Common
Law shall determine questions in Law, and Pares and Jurors to try matters in
fact, so the Chancery is to order and decree matters of Conscience and Equity,
which cannot be remedied by the strict rules of the common Law: And the same
rule serves for understanding, Stat. 25. Ed. 3. Cap. 4.
the Statute Anno 25. Edward 3. cap. 4. Upon these words, Sic niscit duem ent
mesne en-respons and soriudg d'icells per voy de lege. And it appears the
cause of making that Statute, was to restrain private suggestio^s made to the
King or to his Council, but not meant to take away the ordinary judicial
proceedings and hearing of Cases of conscience and equity in the Chancery.

Has the same words, Stat. 28. Ed. 3. Cap. 3.
as Magna Charta, cap. 9 viz. Without being brought into answer by due process
of Law: For understanding whereof, that is to be remembered, that those that
are sued in the Chancery are brought to another by due process of law, for
cases of equity and conscience as it is per legem terrae. Stat. 2. Ed. 3.


That it shall not be commanded by the great Seal or the little Seal, Cap. 8.
to disturb or detain common right: and though such commandment do come,
the Justices shall not therefore cease to do right in any point.

For the understanding of this Statute.

The ordinary Judicial proceedings by the Chancery, according to conscience
and equity, is not any disturbance, or delay of Common right.

But is the doing of right and Justice in cases, which the common Law cannot
help, for common right stands not only in the strict rigor, and extremity
of the Law (for often summum ius often summa injuria) but rather in the doing of
right, according to equity and conscience: And the Judges of the common Law
themselves, do almost every day extend their discretion, to stay and mittigate
the rigor and strictness of the common Law: and in so doing do, well
notwithstanding the strict word of their oath.

Declares the law concerning writs of search, Stat. 14. Ed. 3. Cap. 14.
and in the end of the same Statute, these words, viz. That by commandment of
the great Seal, noe Privy Seal, nor point of this Statute, (viz. concerning
Search) shall be put in delay.

Nor that the Justices, of whatsoever place they be, shall let to do the
common law by commandment, which come to them under the Great Seal or Privy
Seal.

The Common Law has always allowed the proceedings in the Chancery, in cases
of conscience and equity; and therefore the words (to do the Common law) must
not be construed too precisely, as thereby stop all Courts of equity, for it
stands with the common law, as well that equity and conscience be ministered,
where the common law cannot help, as that strict Justice be ministered
according to the common law, when the common law may serve.

The Chancery does not commonly send any Writ super sedeas, under the great
Seal have been directed to the Judges, in diverse special causes, and have
in all times (until of late) been dutifully obeyed, as in cases of privilege
and to stay their proceedings: Reges in consulto and diverse others, etc.

Also it is to be remembered, that many Judges of the common Law have
complained, and sued for remedy in the Chancery; and have been sued and
answered there, and obeyed the orders of that Court in cases of equity and
conscience, which could not be relieved by the Common law.

This Statute is persuing two former Stat. Stat. 42. Ed. 3. cap. 3.
one 37. Edward 3. cap. 18. which gives paenam Talionis, against those, which
make false suggestions to the King: the other 38. Edward 3. cap. 9. which
confirms the former statute in all things saving pro paena Talionis. And this
42. Edward 3. explayneth the two former, and provideth that the people be not
greived by false accusers which do often times make their accusements more for
vengeance and singular profits then for the profits of the King and his people,
and therefore ordains that none be put to answer (which is to be intended
upon such accusation and false suggestions) without. 1. presentment before
Justices, or 2. matters of Record, 3 by due process, or 4. by Writ original
according to the only law of the land.

In this Statute, the intent is to be considered, first to explain, the
second former statute Anno 27. Edw. 3. and Anno 38. Edw. 3. as is before noted,
2. that the ancient law of the land be observe, that is; That for matters
determinable by the common law, none be put to answer, but by presentiments or
matters of Record, or by original Writ, or by due process. But therein is
not meant, that the ordinary judicial proceedings in the Chancery, in matters
of equity and conscience (not being remediable by the Statutes of the common
law) should be taken away or restrained: But that in such cases, they may
proceed against parties called in by due process, for that is according to
the ancient law of the land.

So the practice and experience has been ever since, which is the true and
certain interpretation of that Statute and of all other Statutes.

The words be these: Stat. 4. Hen. 4. Cap. 23.
Whereas as well in plea Real, or as in plea personal after Judgment given
in the Courts of our Sovereign Lord the King, the parties be made to come upon
grievous pains some time before the Kings Council, and sometime in the
Parliament to answer thereof anew, to the impoverishment of the parties
aforesaid, and subvertion of the Common Law of the Land: It is ordained and
established, that after Judgment given in the Court of our Sovereign Lord the
King, the parties and their Heirs thereof shall be in peace until the
Judgment shall be undone by attaint, or by error, if there be error, as
has been used by the Laws in the time of the Kings progenitors.

For understanding of this Statute the question is,

Whether there be any thing in the word or intent of this Statute to take away,
or restrain, or impeach the Jurisdiction of the Chancery to give remedy and
releife according to conscience and equity in cases, which cannot be remedied
by the strict rules of the common law, by attaint, or by Writ of error.

For the resolving of this question, is to be considered, what has been used
by the laws, before the making of this Statute.

And to this point I must say, I have not seen any record or President, that
the Court of Chancery has been restrained to hear and determine causes of
conscience and equity, and to give relief accordingly, as well after, as
before Judgment given by the Judges of the Common Law.

But before the making of this Statute; Un. Stat. 29.
there be many precedents and records to prove, Ed. 3. cap. 1.
that the King and his Council, and the Kings Commissioners appointed to be
auditors querelarum and Court of Rome, and some, pretending to have power and
authority for the Pope, did take upon them to examine such Judgments to
reverse and undo the same, which seems to be the point remedied by this
Statute: And this is within the direct and precise words of the Statute,
whereupon it may be inferred and concluded, that is the words shall be taken
precisely in the strict sense; Then the King himself and his Counsel, and the
Parliament, who in time of the Kings progenitors, used to examine and reverse
Judgments, shall be bound and restrained by the Statute; But the Chancery
medleth not with the reversing of the Judgments given by the Judges of the
common Law, but in allowing the same to be good and just, according to the
strict rule of the Common Law (whereunto the Judges are sworn) does examine
only the equity of the case, according to the rule of equity and conscience,
and takes order with the party, to do that which in equity and Conscience
ought to be done, which the Justices of the Common Plees has no power to do,
and that seems to be the true reason that the Statute does not once mention
the Chancery.

And it cannot reasonably be conceived, that the Parliament meant to bind the
Chancery (which is not named) or the King or his Counsel and the Parliament it
self, which are expressly named: That they should not relieve parties that
are greived by the Rigor of the common Law, against equity and conscience in
cases, which the Judges of the Common Law cannot relieve the^ by attaint, or
error, or otherwise. For sententia Iudicis non praeiudicat veritati: And sicut
res iudicata naturalem obligationem non tollit, Ita conspercatam, laesamque
conscientiam non purgat: And some do aptly and truly define equity thus; In
Casus. 192. in quae.
Equitas est publici iuris moderatio apectore Regio, velut ab Oraculo petenda.
And another says thus, vel. and novi. lib. pradict.
Equitas in potestate moderatoris esse debet, multa contra scriptum facere et
dicere: Another says, Cap.
Equitas iustitiae aciem retundit: And Saint Augustine, Lex quiaese ipsam
molire non potest mitiganda est and. contemptus, fraus, and dolus, in Curia
Regal, neminisubuenire debent.

And furthermore for the true understanding of

The next is how this Statute was understood and contemporanea expositio is
specially to be regarded: and for it (as I said before) I have not seen any
Record or Precedent that this Statute has been expounded to restrain the
Chancery, to proceed in their ordinary courses, to give releife in cases of
equity, according to good conscience. Nere the time of the making of it, or
many years after.

And I suppose no such material or effectual record or precedent can be
showed. And for later times as in the time of Henry the seventh, and since, the
proceedings and examples be so frequent, and so plain and direct, as nothing
is more common; and it is a certain and true rule Intellectus currit cum praxi.

Bractons rule is to be holden: Bracton. lib. 2. fol. 34.
(that is) that the King's interpretation is to be expected, Who is to declare
and expound all doubtful or obscure words in Chartis Regiis and factis-regum:
cap. 16.
For all Statutes are facta regi^, made at the request and by the consent of
the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, 22. Edw. 3.
and the Commons.

And where some new conceits have been lately imagined, that the party
grieved should have complained before Judgment or else not to be heard or
relieved after Judgment by reason of this Statute. This is but a cavil and a
Sophistical distinction not worthy the answering. For before he be hurt, he

Lastly it is to be lamented that the ancient common Laws are so much
neglected and contemned, and almost grown obsolete and out of use: that for
the most part, we have not the substance but the shadow of the ancient Common
Law, Manet magni nominis umbra: and therefore his Majesty at the first
beginning of his gracious reign of England, King James.
did most princely, prudently, and iuditiously show his mislike of the
incertaintie of the Judicature in his Courts of Justice in England, and require
and commanded his Judges to take mature consideration of it. What followed I
will say nothing.

Wherefore let the Judges now consider, how they observe in their Courts and
proceedings, the words and intent of this Statute, whether after Judgments the
parties be in peace, until the Judgment be undone by attaint, or error,
whether after Judgments in Writs of error firm, they suffer not new Actions,
and verdict, against verdict, and Judgment; against Judgment without attaint
or error to the manifest deluding of the true and ancient Maxims of the
common Law, and without regarding of the words of the Statute. And thus suites
for one, and the self same cause, are carried from Court to Court, as power
and might of the parties, or favor or affection of the Judges, or corruption
of Sheriffs or subordination or perjury of Witnesses or such like shifts or
tricks can best accomodate the business.

De Chartis regiis and factis regum, Bracton. lib.
non debent, nec possunt Iusticiarij, 1. fol. 34. cap. 16.
nec privatae personae disputare, nec etiam nisi illa dubitatio oriatur,
possunt eam interpretari and in dubiis* et obscuris, vel si aliqua dictio duos
contineat intellectus Domini regis erit expectanda interpretatio and voluntas
eius sit interpretari, cujus est condere. Maneant termini patrum, and inter
fines proprios se quisque contineat, Leo. Epist. 67. and 94.
Sufficiant limits, quos sanctorum patrum providentissima decreta Posucrunt.

Some notes and observations upon the Statutes of Provisoes and Praemunire
especialy concerning the Chancerie and other Courts of equity. Stat. 25. Ed.
3. Cap. 22.


The words be, 1. because some do purchase in the Court of Rome provisions, to
have Abbeys and Priories in England in destruction of the Realm, and of holy
religion, it is accorded that every man that purchases such provisions of
Abbeys and Priories, that he and his executors, and procurators, which do sue
and make execution of such provisions, shall be out of the Kings protection,
and that a man may do with them, as of enemies of our Sovereign Lord the King
and his Realm.

Note the usurpation of the Church of Rome in this Case Judged at this time,
Note.
to be the destruction of the Realm and of Religion.

And the party himself and his Executors and procurators putting in execution
such provisions, judged to be enemies of the King and Realm, and out of the
Kings protection, (and so in worse degree then Traitors) and that therefore
every man might justify the taking of their goods, and killing of them, and
not to be impeached for it.

There is another Statute entitled Statute de provisorib. Anno 25.
declaring the great mischeife that the King and the Realm sustained, Edwad 3.
by the usurpation of the Pope, in cases of provisions and reservations of
Benefices, reciting the Laws ordained by King Edward the first, and adding
further remedy, and severe punishment against the offenders; and that no
process or suit should be in these cases in the Court of Rome, nor in no part
else where.

Both these Statutes were specially provided to restrain the usurpation of the
Pope, and the Churches of Rome in these cases of provisions, and reservations.

By the Statute Anno 27. Stat. 27. Ed. 3. Cap. 1.
Edward 3. it appears, That notwithstanding the two former statutes Anno 25.
Edward 3. yet the usurpation of the Pope, and the Church of Rome, was so
exorbitant, that the Nobles and Commons complained in this Parliament, and
prayed further remedy for the same, alleging that diverse of the people have
been drawn out of the Realm, to answer of things whereof Counsance
pertayneth to the Kings Court, or of things whereof Judgments be given in the
Kings Court, or which sue in another Court, to defeat or impeach the
Judgments given in the Kings Court, in prejudice and disherison of the King
and his Crown, and of all the people of his Realm, and the undoing and
distraction of the Common Law of the same Realm at all times used.

This is the Mischief, which was complained of and was desired to be remedied.

The Offenders, against whom remedy is sought, are these, which draw any out
of the Realm by plea.

Wherefore the Counsance being to the Kings Court or of things, whereof
Judgments be given in the Kings Court, or which do sue in another Court, to
defeat or impeach the Judgments given in the Kings Court.

Then the remedy provided is,

That such offenders shall receive punishment by two months, to be before the
King and his Counsel, or in his Chancery, or before the Kings Justices of the
one Bench or other, or before the Justices of the King, which to the same shall
be deputed to answer in proper person to the King for their contempt done in
this behalf, and if they come not, then to be out of the Kings Protection,
etc. Provided, that when they do come before, they be outlawed, they shall be
received to answer.

Now it will appear manifestly that the intent of the Parliament, was not to
restrain or punish any that complained and sued in the Chancery, to be
releived according to equity and Conscience; In Cases wherein, by the strict
rules and rights of the Common Law, the Judges of the Common Law could not
relieve them, neither are there any words in the Statute, which can without
violence be strayned or reathed to serve any such unreasonable Construction:
For the better understanding hereof, the parts of the Statute are to be
divided and severally considered.


For the mischeife, the Parliament finding, that the Pope and Court of Rome did
not only continue their usurpation in the Cases mentioned in the former
Statute. An. 25. Ed. 3. But did also extend it further in drawing the people
out of the Realm to answer things, whereof the Counsance pertains to the
Kings Court, or of things whereof Judgments be given in the Kings Court, or
by suit in another Court, to defeat or impeach the Judgments given in the
Kings Court; In prejudice, etc.

In the preamble, wherein this mischeife is declared, it appears that the
drawing of the people out of the Realm to answer to those Cases, specially
remembered, was the grief of the people, for which they prayed remedy.

But by suites in the Chancery to be relieved according to equity and
conscience in cases, in which the Judges of the Common Law could not give
remedy, the people were not driven out of the Realm, nor Judgment given in
the Kings Courts, were not sought to be defeated or impeached, but conscience
and equity to be observed.

Nor such suites in the Chancery cannot be accounted to be any other court
then the Kings Court; For the Chancery is one of the Kings supreme Courts of
Justice, and as much or more greived by the inordinate usurpation of the Pope
and his Courts as any other of the Kings Courts: Neither could such suits in
the Chancery being the Kings own supreme court, be in prejudice or disherison
of the King and his Crown, and of his people; or the undoing or destruction of
the Common Law at all times used; And I suppose there can no record or
warrantable precedent be showed that such proceedings in the Chancery has in
times before used (that is before. 27. Ed. 3.) Been construed to be the
undoing or destruction of the Common Law.

And hereupon it may be inferred and concluded, that those, which complain
and sue in the Chancery for releife and remedy, according to equity and
conscience, in such cases as the Judges of the Common Law cannot remedy, are
not any offenders within the words or meaning of this Statute.

And this will appear more plainly by the remedy, which is provided; that
is, that the offenders shall have garnishment by two months, to appear before
such Judges, as are assigned to give remedy in the causes before mentioned in
the Statute, which are these: The King and his Counsel the Chan. the Justices
of one Bench or the other, or other Justices of the Kings, which shall be
deputed.

Wherein is to be noted, that the Chancery is the second Court that is
appointed to give Justice against such offenders, as the Parliament meant, and
is placed next after the King and his Council, and before the Judges of the
one Bench or the other (between whom the Parliament gives no prioritie nor
precedent) and adds such other Justices as the King shall depute: By which
power the King may by the Statute exclude both these Courts, and appoint other
Justices, if it shall please him so to do.

Now it is too absurd to say or imagine that the ordinary and juditiall
proceedings in the Chancery by the Kings own Authority, in cases before
remembered can be in prejudice or disherision of the King or his Crown or
destruction of the Common Law; or that the Parliament did so meant or
understand, sith they have designed the Chancery to be a special or prime
Court to punish offenders against the said Statute.

And to resort to the true rule Contemporanea expositio, for Intellectus currit
cum praxi. I have not seen nor heard that any person has been charged, or
impeached by suit in the nature of a Praemunire upon this Statute for sueing in
the Chancery in the Cases before remembered, or in any other like cases.

The Statute 27. Ed. 3. was grounded upon the exorbitant usurpations of the
Pope and Church of Rome, which were in some sort provided for, by the former
Statutes An. 25. Ed. 3. But the Parliament Anno 27. Ed. 3. finding the same too
weak, and the Church of Rome did not only continue their former usurpations,
but did daily increase the same more and more, did therefore devise further
remedy against their insolent and outrageous excess.

Wherein appears that the special mark, whereunto both those Parliaments
aimed and directed their Actions, was to provide and give remedy against the
wicked proceedings of the Pope and Court of Rome, and not to restrain the
jurisdiction and authority of any of the Kings own Courts in their ordinary
and juditiall proceedings, either in law or equity, and by that, which is
before remembered, is sufficiently declared, yet the same is made more manifest
by the Statute Anno 38. Ed. 3. Stat. 2. cap. 1. 2. 3. 4.

By which it appears that in 9. years space, after the Parliament An. 27.
Ed. 3. the Pope and Church of Rome ceased not to go on still in their wicked
and inormious usurpations upon the king and the Crown, and therefore that
Parliament Anno 38. Ed. 3. declares plainly, that it was the Court of Rome,
that dealt in cases, whereof the Counsance and small discussions pertain to
the King and his Royal Court; and for remedy thereof ordains, that the
former Statute made Anno 25. Ed. 3. and Anno 27. Ed. 3. shall be in all things
affirmed and executed, adding also some further punishments and provisions
against the offenders, directing the proceeding therein to be before the King
and his Council, only without mentioning any other Courts, as 27. Ed. 3. did.

So as upon conferring together these three Statutes viz. 25. 27. and 38. Ed.
3. it appears that the intent of al these Parliaments was only to punish
offenders, that maintained the usurped and pretended authority of the Pope, and
Church of Rome, and prosecuted any Action or suit by virtue of the same in any
case, whereof the Counsance and final discussing perteyned to the King and his
Courts; And therefore if any doubt be conceived upon any words in the Statute
27 Ed. 3. it is to be explained by the Statute 25. Ed. 3. going before, and the
Statute 38. Ed. 3. coming after.

After all these Statutes, Stat. 16. Ric. 2. Cap. 5.
yet ambitious usurpers, and greedy covetous extortions of the Pope and Court
of Rome ceased not, but still continued and increased more and more, where-upon
the Parliament Anno 16. Rich. 2. chap. reciting some particular cases, viz that
Judgments being given in the Kings Courts for recoverie of presentiments to
Churches, and Benefices, and the same Judgments duly executed by the
Archbishop and Bishop as they ought to be; That thereupon the Archbishop and
Bishop have excommunicated by the Popes censure for executing of the same
Judgments.

and the treasure of the Realm to be made away out of the Realm, and so the
Regality and Crown should be made subject to the Pope in perpetual
destruction of the King and his Crown, and all the Realm.

In which cases, and in all other cases attempted against the King, his Crown,
and Regalitie, the Lords Temporal and Commons, did promise to stand with the
King and the Crown, and to live and die; and the Lords Spiritual promised
also, to stand with the King in the cases before mentioned, and in all other
cases bound by their alleagiance with a special protestation and saving of the
Popes authority in excommunicating of Bishops, and translating of Prelates,
according to the Laws of the holy Church, and thereupon it is ordained and
inacted, that if any purchase or pursue in the Court of Rome or elsewhere, any
such translations, processes, and sentences of excommunication, Bills,
Instruments or other things, which touch the King, against him, his Crown and
Regality, or his Realm, as is aforesaid: And they, which bring or receive the
same within the Realm, or make thereof notification or any other execution
within, or without that they, etc. shall forfit, etc. and to be put out of the
Kings protection, and be attached, etc. and sue in process of Praemunire, etc.
And against others, which sue in other courts in derogation of the Kings
royalty.

By this it appears plainly, that the Pope and Court of Rome continued
still, and proceeded further in their exorbitant usurpatiou upon the Crown and
Kings Royalty, and the common Laws of the Kingdom; So this Parliament
endavoured to meet with, and stand with the same, namely in the particular
cases, which are specially mentioned, viz. Concerning Judgments given in the
Kings Court in these pleas and cases, and in translating of Prelates etc. and
in other cases attempted against the Kings Crown and Regality; But it is
manifest, that the intent and the scope and drift of the Parliament was only
against the Pope and Court of Rome, and against those persons, that pursue any
such Translations, process, etc. or other things, which touch the King, or
against his Crown, or Regality or his Realm as is aforesaid, and which being,
notify or execute the same within the Realm or without, these be offenders,
which the Parliament had cause, and meant to punish; and it is strange and
improbable that any learned Judge of the Common Laws of England, should stretch
or extend the words of this Statute further, then only against the usurped
aurhority of the Pope, and Church of Rome; But it seems that some that take
pleasure ludere in vorbis, dormitare in sensibus, and to dispute de apicibus
juris, equi and boni ratione praetermissa, and to profess learning peritia
literali non intelligentia spirituali; And so are contented verba legis tenere
and vim legis ignorare, have gone about to press and strain the word of this
Statute, not only against the Pope and Church of Rome, but also against the
Kings own High Court of Chancery, and other his Majesty's Courts of Equity in
England, grounding, their opinion and conceit upon these words of the Statute.

If any purchase, in the Court of Rome or else where, any such Translations, or
processes, or other things which touch the King: And for the better
understanding hereof, it is to be remembered, that the Pope and Court of Rome
kept their Seiges and Court not at Rome only, but sometimes at Avignion,
sometimes at other places; and diverse Antipopes being at one and the self
same time, kept their several seiges and Courts at several places, and yet
each of them challenged, and pretended to have supreme jurisdiction, power,
and authority over and above the King and his Crown, and regality in the cases
before remembered; And therefore it was requisite and necessary for the King
and the Parliament to withstand and provide remedy against the same.

And that is the true and right understanding of Ou Aylors: For it is too
absurd to say, or imagine that the King or Parliament meant to extend the same
against the Kings own Courts of equity in England, which dirived their
authority and jurisdiction from him only: and heard and determined, as his
substitutes, according to equity and conscience, such cases as the Judges of
the common Law could not by the strict rules of the Common law Judge and
determine.

These Courts and the Judges, and Ministers thereof, the King had power to
suppesse, altar, and punish at his pleasure, and therefore against these the
Lords Temporal and Commons needed not to engage themselves to stand with the
King and the Crown, and to live and dye, Nor the Lords Spiritual and Clergy
to promise to stand with the King, as they were bound by their allegiance,
with their Cautious protestations for the ordinary, legal and iuditiall
proceedings, the Chancery and Courts of equity according to conscience.

The King, nor his Crown, nor Regality, nor the Common Law were not in any
danger, but the danger was by the ambitious usurpation of the Pope, and the
Church of Rome, and by the proceedings in the Courts holden by that usurped
authority; and therefore against them the Parliament provide this Statute
following, the example of the former Parliament 25. Ed. 3. 27. Ed. 3. and 38.
Ed. 3. and those be the Courts which this Parliament, and the Parliament Anno
27. Ed. 3. cap. 1. noted to be in derogation of the Kings regalitie and
destruction of the Common Law, but not the Kings own Courts of equity and
Conscience. And for the further clearing of this doubt, if it be worthy to be
made a doubt, how these words ou Ayllors shall be understood, in the 5. Ed. 4.
there is this note, An. 5. Ed. 4. 6. 9.
Nota, que le statute de praemunire est in Curia Romana Vel alibi: lequel alibi,
est intendue en les Courts del evesques illmit, que sihome soite excompe en
court del evesques perchose que appent all Royal Majesty ses shose alcomen
lep il aur praemunire and issent adiudge and fith: abridging that case says,
Praemunire.
that 11. Hen. 7. the opinion of the Court was so, which he himself heard.

By which it appears, that the Judges did then understand the proceedings by
the Bishops in the Spiritual Courts, which was by authority derived from the
Pope and Church of Rome, was only meant by the word vel alibi. But not the
procedings in the Kings own Court of Chancery by authority derived from him
only in cases of equity and Conscience not remediable, otherwise for that were
to set the King against himself, which is too inconvenient and absurd.

FINIS.

