A Late and Further MANIFESTATION OF THE Progress of the GOSPEL AMONGST THE
INDIANS IN New England.

Declaring their constant Love and Zeal to the Truth: With a readiness to give
Account of their Faith and Hope; as of their desires in Church Communion to be
Partakers of the Ordinances of CHRIST.

Being a Narrative of the Examinations of the Indians, about their Knowledge in
Religion, by the Elders of the Churches. Related by Mr JOHN ELIOT.

Published by the CORPORATION, established by Act of Parliament, for
Propagating the Gospel there.

Acts 3. 47. I have set thee to be a light to the Gentiles, that thou should
be for Salvation unto the Ends of the Earth. LONDON: Printed by M. S. 1655.

WE having perused the ensuing Narration, written by Master Eliot, do
conceive it fit to be Printed, That thereby the Servants of God in England may
be further enlarged in their Praises to God for his free Grace wonderfully
manifested in beginning and so succesfully carrying on the hoped for Conversion
of the Indians. And also that they may be much encouraged to continue their
Prayers, and liberal Contributions for the finishing and perfecting of this
blessed and glorious undertaking, so much conducing to the Glory of God, the
Salvation of souls, and the Enlargement of the Kingdom of Christ upon Earth.

May 13. 1655. H: Whitfeild. Simeon Ash. Edm: Calamy. John Arthur.


AA


To all that pray and wait for the Prosperity of SION, and the increase of the
Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ to the ends of the Earth.
Grace and Peace be multiplied.
Beloved Brethren.
AS, The One thing which ye have desired of the Lord, and which ye have sought
after, is, that your selves might dwell in the house of the Lord all the days
of your lives, to behold the beauty of the Lord, and to enquire in his Temple:
So, I am much assured that the next thing which ye have desired of the Lord,
and which ye have earnestly sought after, is, that they who have hitherto been
strangers to, might dwell also in the house of the Lord all the days of their
lives, to behold the beauty of the Lord, and to enquire in his Temple; yea,
that they might be a house and a Temple of the Lord. This being the gracious
design of your holy breathings unto God, and of your liberal contributings
unto men, ye cannot but rejoice to hear of any thing which looks like, much
more which really is a fruit and return of such breathings and contri^^uti^gs.
Holy prayers and zealous endeavors are very sweet in their acts, but they are
much more sweet in their effects and issues. It should mightily encourage the
seed of Jacob to pray, because God has said, that he has not said to the seed
of Jacob, (...) ye me in vain. But how should it pr^voke the s^ed of Jacob to
give thanks, when they find that they have not sought the Lord in vain? and
that their labors have not been in vain in the Lord?

Beloved Brethren, ye may now see and taste the fruit of those Prophecy, which
ye have been helping to the birth. The Wilderness and solitary places are
glad, the desert rejoices and bloss^m^th as the Rose it blossometh abundantly,
and rejoices even with joy and singing. The glory of Leb^non is given to it,
the excellency of Carmell and Sharon, these see the glory of the Lord, and the
excellency of our God.

This little Book of Observations and Experiences gives you a brief and
faithful Narrative of the increasing glory of Christ by the Progress of the
Gospel in New England: It tells you ^ow Christ has there led captivity
captive, and given gifts for men, yea, for the rebellious, that the Lord God
might dwell among them. Where the strong man Armed kept the house (for many
Ages and Generations, and all was in peace:) there now (Christ) A stronger then
he, has come upon him, and has (in many examples) overcome him and taken from
him all his Armor wherein he trusted, and divided his spoils: Now Christ
keeps the house, which Satan formerly kept; yea, they who were kept by Satan as
his house, are now ready and earnestly desire to be built up as a house for
Christ. The poor, naked, ignorant Indians, who lately knew no civil Order, now
beg to be brought into Church Order, to live under the Government, and enjoy
the holy Ordinances of our Lord Jesus Christ, in the purest way of
Gospel Worship.

May we not now (Beloved) make mention of Rahab and Babylon to them that know
Christ? Behold Philistia, and Tire, with Ethiopia, this man was borne there;
and of Sion (in New England) it may be said, this and that man (of the wild,
rude, and barbarous Indians) was borne there. Read this short discourse, and it
will tell you that the Lord has blessed the labors of the Messengers of Sion
in New England, with the Conversion of some (I may say, of a considerable
number) of the Indians, to be a kind of first fruits of his (new) Creatures
there. O let old England rejoice in this, that our brethren who with extreme
difficulties and expenses have Planted themselves in the Indian Wildernesses,
have also labored night and day with prayers and tears and Exhortations to
Plant the Indians as a spiritual Garden, into which Christ might come and eat
his pleasant fruits. Let the gaining of any of their souls to Christ, and their
turning to God from Idols to serve the living and true God, be more precious in
our eyes then the greatest gain or return of Gold and Silver. This gain of
souls is a Merchandise worth the glorying in upon all the Exchanges, or rather
in all the Churches throughout the world. This Merchandise is Holiness to the
Lord: And of this the ensuing Discourse presents you with a Bill of many
particulars, from your spiritual Factory in New England, as the improvement of
your former adventures thither, for the promoting of that heavenly Trade; as
also for an encouragement not only to all those who have freely done it
already, to adventure yet more, but also for the quickening of those who
hitherto have not done it, now to underwrite themselves Adventurers for the
advancement of so holy and hopeful a design. I shall add only this one word,
That, Whosoever shall thus Adventer for Christ, shall have Christ for his
Insurer. To his Grace and Blessing I recommend both you and this Blessed Work,
who am

Dearly Beloved, A hearty well-wisher to the Propagation of the Gospel; and
your Servant for Christ's sake. JOSEPH CARYL.

A BRIEF NARRATION OF THE INDIANS PROCEEDINGS In respect of Church Estate, AND
How the Case stands at the present with us.
AFTER I had spent my poor labors among the Indians for the space of near four
years, it pleased God to stir up in them a great desire of partaking in the
Ordinance of Baptism, and other Ecclesiastical Ordinances in way of Church
Communion. But I declared unto them how necessary it was, that they should
first be Civilized, by being brought from their scattered and wild course of
life, unto civil Co-habitation and Government, before they could, according to
the will of God revealed in the Scriptures, be fit to be betrusted with the
sacred Ordinances of Jesus Christ, in Church Communion. And therefore I
propounded unto them, that they should look out some fit place to begin a
Town, unto which they might resort, and there dwell together, enjoy
Government, and be made ready and prepared to be a People among whom the Lord
might delight to dwell and Rule.

When they understood the mind of God in this matter, they were desirous to set
upon the work: The reallity of which desires, the living have actually
expressed, by their performance thereof (in some poor measure) and some of them
dying, left their earnest affections and desires with the rest, to set upon
that work; especially Wampocas, a godly man, of whose death and exhortations
that way, I have made some mention in some former Letters.

We accordingly attended thereunto, to search for a fit place, and finally,
after sundry journeyes and travells to several places, the Lord did by his
special providence, and answer of prayers, pitch us upon the place where we
are at Natick. Unto which place my purpose at first was to have brought all the
Praying Indians to Co-habit together: But it so fell out (by the guidance of
God, as it now appears) that because the Cohannet Indians desired a place
which they had reserved for themselves, and I finding that I could not at that
time pitch there without opposition from some English, I refused that place,
and pitched at Natick, where I found no opposition at present. This choice of
mine did move in the Cohannet Indians a jealousy that I had more affection
unto those other Indians, then unto them. By which occasion (together with some
other Providence of God, as the death of Cutshamoquin, and the coming of
I^sias, to succeed in the Sachemship in that place) their minds were quite
alienated from the place of Natick, though not from the work, for they desire
to make a Town in that forementioned place of their own, named Ponkipog, and
are now upon the work. And indeed, it now appears to be of the Lord, because
we cannot have competent accommodations at Natick, for those that be there,
which are about fifty Lots, more or less. And furthermore, by the blessing of
God upon the work, there are People, partly prepared, and partly preparing for
three Towns more. Insomuch, as that it is most evident, that had I procceded
according to my first intentions, to have called them all unto that one place,
we must have been forced very quickly to have scattered again, for want of
accommodations for so great a company of Inhabitants, and so have discouraged
them at our first onset of drawing them from their scattered way of living,
unto Co-habitation: seeing it would have brought them unto such wants and
streights as they could not have grapled withal, but rather would have been
occasioned to think there were insuperable difficulties in this enterprise:
Whereas in lesser companies they may find a more plentiful and better course
of life then they found in that former way out of which they are called; as
through Gods mercy, and the bounty of good people in England, whose love lays
the foundation-stone of the work, they do already feel and find at Natick,
and begin to find at Ponkipog.

In prosecution of this work in the year 1650 we began by the Lords assistance
our first Town at Natick, where we built a Fort, and one dwelling house. In
the year 51 after Fasting and Prayer about that matter, they gave up themselves
and their Children to be governed by the Lord, according to his word, in all
ways of civility, and chose among themselves Rulers of ten, fifty, and an
hundred, according to the holy Pattern, so far as they could: In which way of
Government the Lord has not a little owned them, and blessed them.

In the year 52 I perceiving the grace of God in sundry of them, and some poor
measure of fitness (as I was persuaded) for the enjoyment of
Church Fellowship, and Ordinances of Jesus Christ, I moved in that matter,
according as I have in the Narration thereof, briefly declared. In the year 53
I moved not that way, for these Reasons.

I having sent their Confessions to be published in England, I did much desire
to hear what acceptance the Lord gave unto them, in the hearts of his people
there, who daily labor at the Throne of grace, and by other expressions of
their loves, for an holy birth of this work of the Lord, to the praise of
Christ, and the enlargement of his Kingdom. As also my desire was, that by
such Books as might be sent hither, the knowledge of their Confessions might be
spread here, unto the better and fuller satisfaction of many, then the
transacting thereof in the presence of some could do. These Books came by the
latter Ships (as I remember) that were bound for New England, and were but
newly out when they set sail, and therefore I had not that answer that year,
which my soul desired, though something I had which gave encouragement, and
was a taste of what I have more fully heard from several this year, praised be
the Lord.

Besides, there fell a great damping and discouragement upon us, by a jealousy
too deeply apprehended, though utterly groundless, viz. That even these
praying Indians were in a conspiracy with others, and with the Dutch, to do
mischief to the English, In which matter, though the ruling part of the People
looked otherwise upon them, yet it was no season for me to stir or move in this
matter, when the waters were so troubled. This business needs a calmer
season, and I shall account it a savor of God when ever he shall please to
cause his face to shine upon us in it. Yet this I did the last year, after the
Books had been come a season, there being a great meeting at Beston, from other
Colonies as well as our own, and the Commissioners being there, I thought it
necessary to take that opportunity to prepare and open the way in a readiness
against this present year, by making this Proposition unto them; namely, That
they having now seen their confessions, if upon further trial of them in point
of knowledge, they be found to have a competent measure of understanding in the
fundamental points of Religion; and also, if there be due testimony of their
conversation, that they walk in a Christian manner according to their light,
so that Religion is to be seen in their lives; whether then it be according to
God, and acceptable to his people, that they be called up unto Church Estate?
Unto which I had I bless the Lord, a general approbation.

Accordingly this year 54 I moved the Elders, that they would give me advice
and assistance in this great business, and that they would at a fit season
examine the Indians in point of their knowledge, because we found by the former
trial, that a day will be too little (if the Lord please to call them on to
Church Fellowship) to examine them in points of Knowledge, and hear their
Confessions, and guide them into the holy Covenant of the Lord. Seeing all
these things are to be transacted in a strange language, and by Interpreters,
and with such a people as they be in these their first beginnings. But if they
would spend a day on purpose to examine them in their knowledge, there would be
so much the more liberty to do it fully and thoroughly (as such a work ought to
be) as also when they may be called to gather into Church Communion, it may
suffice that some one of them should make a Doctrinall Confession before the
Lord and his people, as the rule of faith which they build upon, the rest
attesting their consent unto the same: And themselves (the Elders I mean, if
the Lord so far assist the Indians, as to give them satisfaction) might
testify that upon Examination they have found a competency of knowledge in
them to enable them unto such a work and state. And thus the work might be much
shortened, and more comfortably expedited in one day. I found no unreadinesse in
the Elders to further this work.

Some dispute there was about Officers in the Church, if they should be found
fit matter to proceed, of which I shall anon speak God-willing.

They concluded to attend the work, and for several Reasons advised that the
place should be at Roxbury, and not at Natick, and that the Indians should be
called thither, the time they left to me to appoint, in such a season as
wherein the Elders may be at best liberty from other public occasions The time
appointed was the 13 of the 4 month; mean while I dispatched Letters unto such
as had knowledge in the Tongue, requesting that they would come and help in
Interpretation, or attest unto the truth of my Interpretations. I sent also for
my Brother Mayhu, who accordingly came, and brought an Interpreter with him.
Others whom I had desired, came not. I informed the Indians of this
appointment, and of the end it was appointed for, which they therefore called,
and still do, when they have occasion to speak of it, Natootomuhteae kesuk, A
day of asking Questions, or, A day of Examination. I advised them to prepare
for it, and to pray earnestly about it, that they might be accepted among Gods
people, if it were the will of God.

It pleased God so to guide, that there was a public Fast of all the Churches,
betwixt this our appointment, and the accomplishment thereof: which day they
kept, as the Churches did, and this business of theirs was a Principal matter
in their Prayers

It has pleased God to lay his hand in sickness upon Monequassun our Natick
Schoolmaster, so that we greatly wanted his help and concurrence in this
business. Yea, and such is his disease ( viz. an Ulcer in his Lungs) that I
fear the Lord will take him away from us, to the great hindrance of our work,
in respect of humane means: Lord increase our faith!

There fell out a very great discouragement a little before the time, which
might have been a scandal unto them, and I doubt not but Satan intended it so;
but the Lord improved it to stir up faith and Prayer, and so turned it another
way: Thus it was. Three of the unsound sort of such as are among them that pray
unto God, who are hemmed in by Relations, and other means, to do that which
their hearts love not; and whose Vices Satan improveth to scandalize and
reproach the better sort withal; while many, and some good People are too
ready to say they are all alike. I say three of them had gotten several quarts
of Strong-water, (which sundry out of a greedy desire of a little gain, are
too ready to sell unto them, to the offense and grief of the better sort of
Indians, and of the godly English too) and with these liquors, did not only
make themselves drunk, but got a Child of eleven years of age, the Son of
Toteswamp, whom his Father had sent for a little Corn and Fish to that place
near Watertowne, where they were. Unto this Child they first gave too
spoonfulls of Strong-water, which was more then his head could bear; and
another of them put a Bottle, or such like Vessel to his mouth, and caused him
to drink till he was very drunk; and then one of them domineered, and said, Now
we will see whether your father will punish us for Drunkenness (for he is a
Ruler among them) seeing you are drunk with us for company; and in this case
lay the Child abroad all night. They also fought, and had been several times
Punished formerly for Drunkenness.

When Toteswamp heard of this, it was a great shame and breaking of heart unto
him, and he knew not what to do. The rest of the Rulers with him considered of
the matter, they found a complication of many sins together.

1 The sin of Drunkenness, and that after many former Punishments for the
same. 2 A wilful making of the Child drunk, and exposing him to danger also.
3 A degree of reproaching the Rulers. 4 Fighting.
Word was brought to me of it, a little before I took Horse to go to Natick to
keep the Sabbath with them, being about ten days before the appointed Meeting.
The Tidings sunk my spirit extremely, I did judge it to be the greatest frown
of God that ever I met withal in the work, I could read nothing in it but
displeasure, I began to doubt about our intended work: I knew not what to do,
the blackness of the sins, and the Persons reflected on, made my very heart
fail me: For one of the offenders (though least in the offense) was he that
has been my Interpreter, whom I have used in Translating a good part of the
Holy Scriptures; and in that respect I saw much of Satan's venom, and in God I
saw displeasure. For this and some other acts of Apostasy at this time, I had
thoughts of casting him off from that work, yet now the Lord has found a way
to humble him. But his Apostasy at this time was a great Trial, and I did lay
him by for that day of our Examination, I used another in his room. Thus Satan
aimed at me in this their miscarrying; and Toteswamp is a Principal man in the
work, as you shall have occasion to see anon God-willing.

By some occasion our Ruling Elder and I being together, I opened the case unto
him, and the Lord guided him to speak some gracious words of encouragement unto
me, by which the Lord did relieve my spirit; and so I committed the matter and
issue unto the Lord, to do what pleased him, and in so doing my soul was quiet
in the Lord. I went on my journey, being the 6 day of the week; when I came at
Natick, the Rulers had then a Court about it. Soon after I came there, the
Rulers came to me with a Question about this matter, they related the whole
business unto me, with much trouble and grief.

Then Toteswamp spoke to this purpose, I am greatly grieved about these things,
and now God tries me whether I love Christ or my Child best. They say, They
will try me; but I say, God will try me. Christ says, He that loves father,
or mother, or wife, or Child, better then me, is not worthy of me. Christ
says, I must correct my Child, if I should refuse to do that, I should not
love Christ. God bid Abraham kill his Son, Abraham loved God, and therefore he
would have done it, had not God withheld him. God says to me, only punish
your Child, and how can I love God, if I should refuse to do that? These
things he spoke in more words, and much affection, and not with dry eyes: Nor
could I refrain from tears to hear him. When it was said, The Child was not
so guilty of the sin, as those that made him drunk; he said, That he was guilty
of sin, in that he feared not sin, and in that he did not believe his counsels
that he had often given him, to take heed of evil company; but he had believed
Satan and sinners more then him, therefore he needed to be punished. After
other such like discourse, the Rulers left me, and went unto their business,
which they were about before I came, which they did bring unto this conclusion,
and judgment, They judged the three men to sit in the stocks a good space of
time, and thence to be brought to the whipping-Post, and have each of them
twenty lashes. The boy to be put in the stocks a little while, and the next day
his father was to whip him in the School, before the Children there; all which
Judgment was executed. When they came to be whipped, the Constable fetched them
one after another to the Tree (which they make use of instead of a Post) where
they all received their Punishments: which done, the Rulers spoke thus, one of
them said, The Punishments for sin are the Commandments of God, and the work
of God, and his end was, to do them good, and bring them to repentance. And
upon that ground he did in more words exhort them to repentance, and amendment
of life. When he had done, another spoke unto them to this purpose, You are
taught in Catechism, that the wages of sin are all miseries and calamities in
this life, and also death, and eternal damnation in hell. Now you feel some
smart as the fruit of your sin, and this is to bring you to repentance, that so
you may escape the rest. And in more words he exhorted them to repentance. When
he had done, another spoke to this purpose, Hear all ye people (turning
himself to the People who stood round about, I think not less then two
hundred, small and great) this is the Commandment of the Lord, that thus it
should be done unto sinners; and therefore let all take warning by this, that
you commit not such sins, least you incur these Punishments. And with more
words he exhorted the People. Others of the Rulers spoke also, but some things
spoken I understood not, and some things slipped from me: But these which I have
related remained with me.

When I returned to Roxbury, I related these things to our Elder, to whom I had
before related the sin, and my grief: who was much affected to hear it, and
magnified God. He said also, That their sin was but a Transient act, which had
no Rule, and would vanish: But these Judgments were an Ordinance of God, and
would remain, and do more good every way, then their sin could do hurt,
telling me what cause I had to be thankful for such an issue: Which I
therefore relate, because the Lord did speak to my heart, in this exigent, by
his words.

When the Assembly was met for Examination of the Indians, and ordered, I
declared the end and Reason of this Meeting, and therefore declared, That any
one, in due order, might have liberty to propound any Questions for their
satisfaction. Likewise, I requested the Assembly, That if any one doubted of
the Interpretations that should be given of their Answers, that they would
Propound their doubt, and they should have the words scanned and tried by the
Interpreters, that so all things may be done most clearly. For my desire was to
be true to Christ, to their souls, and to the Churches: And the trying out of
any of their Answers by the Interpreters, would tend to the satisfaction of
such as doubt, as it fell out in one Answer which they gave; the Question was,
How they knew the Scriptures to be the word of God? The final Answer was,
Because they did find that it did change their hearts, and wrought in them
wisdom and humility. This Answer being Interpreted to Assembly, my Brother
Mahu doubted, especially of the word [Hohpooonk] signifying Humility, it was
scanned by the Interpreters, and proved to be right, and he rested satisfied
therein. I was purposed my self to have written the Elders Questions, and the
Indians Answers, but I was so employed in propounding to the Indians the Elders
Questions, and in returning the Indians Answers, as that it was not possible
for me to write, unless I had caused the Assembly to stay upon it, which had
not been fitting; therefore seeing Mr. Walton writing, I did request him to
write the Questions and Answers, and help me with a Copy of them, which I thank
him, he did, a Copy whereof I herewith send to be inserted in this place, on
which, this only I will animadvert, That the Elders in wisdom thought it not
fit to ask them in Catechisticall method strictly, in which way Children might
Answer: But that they might try whether they understood what they said, they
traversed up and down in Questions of Religion, as here you see.

Postscript.
LET the Reader take notice, That these Questions were not propounded all to
one man, but to sundry, which is the reason that sometime the same Questions
are propounded again and again. Also the number Examined were about eight,
namely* so many as might be first called forth to enter into Church Covenant,
if the Lord give opportunity.

THE EXAMINATION OF THE INDIANS AT Roxbury, The 13th Day of the 4th Month, 1654.
Quest: WHat is God?

Answ: An Ever-living Spirit.

Q. What are the Attributes of God?

A. God is Eternal, Infinite, Wise, Holy, Just.

Q. In which of these are we like unto God?

A. In Wisdom, Holiness, and Righteousness: But in Infiniteness and
Eternity, God is only like himself.

Q How many Gods are there?

A. There is one only God.

Q. Have not some Indians many Gods?

A. They have many Gods.

Q. How do you know these Gods are no Gods?

A. Before the English came we knew not but that they were Gods, but since they
came we know they are no Gods

Q. What do you find in the true God, that you find not in false Gods?

A. I see in the English many things, that God is the true God.

Q. What good things see you in the English?

A. I see true love, that our great Sachems have not, and that makes me think
that God is the true God.

Q. Do you love God?

A. A little I love God, my heart wants wisdom, but I do desire to love
him.

Q. Why do you love God?

A. Because we are taught this, that when we dye, we must go to God, and live
ever with him.

Q. Who among the Indians shall go to God, and what are the signs that they
shall go to God?

A. Every man that truly believes in Jesus Christ shall go to heaven.

Q. Whether have you not many jealousies and fears that you love not God in
truth?

A. I hope I have some love to God, but I know that I have but little knowledge
of him, I hope I love him.

Q. How do you understand that God rules in your heart?

A. Before I prayed to God, I knew nothing of God, but since I have been
taught, I desire to believe.

Q. What is faith in Jesus Christ?

A. I confess I deserve to be damned for ever, and I am not able to deliver my
self, but I betrust my soul with Jesus Christ.

Q. Whether does not your soul groan within you, under the sense of unbelief,
and other sins?

A. Since I have been taught, I find my self very weak, there is a little in
me, sometimes my heart mournes, sometimes I desire more.

Q. How do you know the word of God is Gods word?

A. I believe the word that you teach us, was spoken of God.

Q. Why do you believe it?

A. Therefore I believe it to be the word of God, because when we learn it, it
teaches our hearts to be wise and humble.

Q. Whether are not your sins, and the temptations of Hobbomak more strong
since, then before you prayed to God?

A. Before I preyed to God, I knew not what Satan's temptations were.

Q. Do you know now?

A. Now I have heard what Satan's temptations are.

Q. What is a temptation of the Devil in your heart, do you understand what
it is?

A. Within my heart there are Hypocrisies, which do not appear without.

Q. Whether do not you find this a principal temptation from the wickedness
of your heart, to drive you away from Christ, and not to believe the gracious
Promises in Jesus Christ? Or whether when you find wickedness in your heart,
you are not tempted, that you cannot believe?

A. My heart does strongly desire to go on in sin, but this is a strong
temptation, but Faith is the work of Jesus Christ.

Q. Why do some believe in Christ, and not others, what makes the difference?

A. Because Satan speaks to some, and bids them not believe, and they hearken
to him, and God speaks to others, and they believe God.

Q. Why do they believe God?

A. It is the work of the Spirit of God, teaching them to believe in Jesus
Christ.

Another Indian being asked what he could say further to it, he Answered, Jesus
Christ sends his Spirit into their hearts, and teaches them.

Q. What moves Jesus Christ to send his Spirit, whether any thing in your
self?

A. I believe, the Promise of God.

Q. Whether do you indeed believe there is a God, Christ, Heaven, Hell,
whether have you any doubts concerning these thing, or no?

A, I do but a little know my own thoughts, but God thoroughly knows my
heart, I desire to believe these things, I desire not to be an Hypocrite.

It being put to another Indian for further answer, he answered, My heart
desires truly to pray unto God, and I more and more desire to believe these
things. When I am taught by the word Preached, I desire to believe in
particular, I desire to believe as long as I live.

Q. What is the Word of God?

A. That wherein God has written his Will, and therein taught the way to
Heaven.

Q. What is sin?

A. There is the root sin, an evil heart; and there is actual sin, sin is a
breaking of the Law of God.

Q. Wherein do you break the Law of God?

A. Every day in my heart, words, and works.

Q. Why are you troubled for sin, that none ever knew but your self?

A. I fear God, and Jesus Christ.

Q. What do you believe about the immortality of the soul, and resurrection
of the body? does the soul dye when the body dies?

A. I believe, when the body of a good man dies, the Angels carry his soul to
heaven, when a wicked man dies, the Devils carry his soul to hell.

Q. How long shall they be in that state?

A. Until Christ comes to Judgment.

Q. When Christ comes to judge the world, what then shall become of them?

A. The dead bodies of all men shall rise again,

Q. Whether shall they ever dye any more?

A. Good men shall never dye any more.

Q. Whether do you believe that these very bodies of ours shall rise again?

A. This body which rots in the earth, this very body, God makes it new.

Q. Who is Jesus Christ?

A. Jesus Christ is the Son of God, yet borne man, and so both God and man

Q. Why was Christ Jesus a man?

A. That he might dye for us.

Q. Why is Christ Jesus God?

A. That his death might be of great value.

Q. Why do you say, Christ Jesus was a man that he might dye, do only men
dye?

A. He dyed for our sins.

Q. What reason or justice is there, that Christ should dye for our sins?

A. God made all the world, and man sinned, therefore it was necessary Christ
should dye to carry men up to Heaven. God has given unto us his Son Jesus
Christ, because of our sins.

The Question being put to another for further Answer, his Answer was, That God
so loved the word, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life.

Q. What is God?

A. An Ever-living Spirit

Q. What are the Attributes of God?

A. As before.

Q. In these Attributes wherein are we like God?

A. As before.

Q. How many Gods are there?

A. One only God, but he is three, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost?

Q. What is Eternal?

A. Man is not like God in Eternal being.

Q. What is infinite?

A. All the World has an end, but God has no end.

Q. Had God any beginning

A. No, but he is ever.

Q. Was there always an Heaven and Earth, how came they to be?

A. Jehovah made them, and Governs them all.

Q. Were they ever?

A. No.

Q. How did God make the world?

A. Only the Will of God.

Q. Out of what matter did God make the world?

A. Not of any thing at all.

Q. How long was God making the world?

A. Six days.

Q. How comes it to pass that the Sun rises and sets, that there is
winter and Summer, day and night?

A. All are the work of God.

Q. Now the world is made, can it keep it self? By whose strength is it kept
together?

A. God preserves it, he made it, and keeps it all.

Q. In what condition was man made?

A. Very good, like unto God.

Q. What is the Image of God in man?

A. Holiness, Wisdom, and Righteousness.

Q. Was there then any sin in the soul of man?

A. No.

Q. What Covenant did God make with Adam?

A. A Covenant of Works, Do this and live, thou and thy Children, Sin, and
dye, thou and thy Children.

Q. How many Commandments are there?

A. Ten

Q. What is the first Commandment?

A. God spoke these words, and said, Thou shall have no other Gods but me.

Q. What was the sin of Adam?

A. He believed the Devil, and eat of the Tree in the midst of the Garden, of
which God commanded him not to eat.

Q. When Adam sinned, what befell him?

A. He lost the Image of God.

Q. What is that Image of God, which he lost?

A. Wisdom, Holiness, and Righteousness.

Q. To whom is man now like?

A. He is like unto Satan.

Q. What is this likeness to Satan?

A. He is Unholy, Foolish, and Unrighteous.

Q. How many kinds of sin are there?

A. An evil heart, and evil works.

Q. What do you call it?

A. We daily break Gods Commandments, and there is the root sin.

Q. What is the wages of sin?

A. All miseries in this life, and death, and damnation.

Q. Whose wages is death?

A. All unbelievers.

Q. Seeing but one man Adam sinned, how come all to dye?

A. Adam deserved for us all, that we should dye.

The Question being put to another for further answer, he answered, Adam was
the first man, and father of all men, and in him we sinned.

Q. Who is Jesus Christ?

A. Christ is God, born like man, God and man in one person.

Q. Why was Christ man?

A. That he might dye.

Q. Why was Christ God?

A. That his death might be of great value.

Q. How many are the Offices of Christ?

A. Three. A Priest, a Prophet, a King.

Q. What Sacrifice did Christ offer?

A. His own body.

Q. What has Christ done for us?

A. He has dyed for us.

Q. What death dyed Christ for us? Who put him to death?

A. Wicked men.

Q. What else has Christ done for us?

A. He has kept all the Commandments of God for us, and also dyed for us.

Q. What has Christ deserved, or merited for us?

A. Pardon of sin, and eternal life.

Q. The same Question was asked another, What has Christ merited?

A. Pardon of all our sins, because he paid a ransom, the favor of God, and
Eternal life.

Q. What else has Christ done for us?

A. He rose again, and ascended into Heaven

Q. What does Christ in heaven for us?

A. He appears for us before God, he prays for us, and gives us the New
Covenant.

Q. What is the New Covenant?

A. The Covenant of Grace, Repent and believe in Christ, and be saved.

Q. Shall all men be saved by Jesus Christ?

A. All that believe in Christ shall go to heaven, and be saved.

Q. Why does thy heart desire Jesus Christ more then sin, and thy former Idols?

A. Before we prayed to God, I did not desire Jesus Christ, I did desire my
sins, but now I see my need of Jesus Christ.

Q. Why do you need Christ?

A. When I dye, Christ carries my soul to heaven.

The same put to another for further answer, he answered, We need Jesus Christ,
because we are full of sin.

Q. How does Christ work Grace in our hearts?

A. I believe Christ has sent his Spirit into my heart by his word.

Q. What is repentance for sin?

A. I am ashamed of my self, and broken is my heart, I hate, and am aware of
all sin.

Q. What most of all breaks your heart, why is your heart broken?

A. Because I have sinned against God.

Q. What see you in sin that breaks your heart?

A. It is not my own work, but Christ sends his Spirit, and breaks my heart.

Q. What does he put into your heart, that causes your heart to break?

A. The Spirit.

Q. What wounds your heart most, because you sin, or because you must go to
hell?

A. Because we must go to hell.

Q. When you hear that Adam by his sin deserved eternal death, and when you
hear of the grace of God sending Jesus to save you, which of these break your
heart m^st?

A. Pardon of sin goes deepest.

Q. What work of the Spirit find you in your heart?

A. The Spirit of God breaks my heart to repent of all my sin, and turns me
from sin to believe in Jesus Christ.

Q. Whether have you found at any time any such work in your self?

A. I am ashamed of my self, I do not thoroughly find it in my heart to be so.

Q. When God sends his Spirit, what does it work in us?

A. A change of the heart.

Q. What change has God wrought in you of late, which was not in you in former
times?

A. The Spirit turns us from our sins, to believe in Jesus Christ.

Q. Do you find this in your heart, that your heart is turned from your sins?

A. I find my heart turned, I leave my stealing, lying, lust, and now my heart
believes in Jesus Christ.

Q. Do you believe in Jesus Christ?

A. I do believe in Jesus Christ.

Q. What is it to believe in Jesus Christ?

A. I confess I deserve to be damned, and am not able to deliver my self, and
therefore I do give up my self unto Jesus Christ, and trust in him, casting
away my sins.

Q. Why do you cast away your sins?

A. They make me that I cannot love Jesus Christ.

Q. Is there any Promise set home on your heart that comfort you, what
Promise do you remember?

A. I believe the Promise of God, that he will pardon believers in Jesus Christ.

So far they proceeded in Questions and Answers.

Some or other of the Elders did several times publicly call upon the
Interpreters, to be attentive to all things that passed, because they must
rely upon their testimony, or to that purpose, praying them to speak if they
doubted of any thing.

In the conclusion, the Elders saw good to call upon the Interpreters to give a
public testimony to the truth of Mr. Eliets Interpretations of the Indians
Answers, which Mr. Mahu, and the two Interpreters by him, did, all speaking one
after another, to this purpose, That the Interpretations which Mr. Eliot gave
of their Answers, was for the substance the same which the Indians answered,
many times the very words which they spoke, and always the sense.

WILLIAM WALTON.

WHen the day was well spent, in this above-written manner, some that were aged
desired that an end might be put unto this work for this time, because by this
taste which they had, they saw that which gave them comfortable satisfaction.
Then I desired that (if it might be without prejudice to any) they might be
further tried with Questions about Christ, and grace wrought in us by the
Spirit; and about the Ordinances of Christ (concerning which, no Questions had
been yet propounded) and also about the estate of man after death, of the
resurrection of the dead, and of the last Judgment, wherein they were, through
the grace of Christ, in some measure instructed. But it was said, that they did
perceive that they were instructed in points of Catechism, by what they had
heard from them. When they came to a conclusion, one of the Elders (viz. Mr.
Ezekiel: Rogers) having first privately conferred with such of the Elders as sat
near him, spoke words of acceptance and encouragement both to me, and to the
Indians, in the name of the rest. But Mr. Walton did not write them, and
therefore I omit the rehearsing of them.

This great and solemn work of calling up these poor Indians unto that Gospel
light and beauty of visible Church Estate, having now passed through a second
Trial: In the former whereof, of, they expressed what experience they had
found of Gods grace in their hearts, turning them from dead works, to seek
after the living God, and salvation in our Savior Jesus Christ. In this second
they have in some measure declared how far the Lord has let in the light of
the good knowledge of God into their souls, and what taste they have of the
Principles of Religion, and doctrine of salvation. Now the Question remains,
What shall we further do? And when shall they enjoy the Ordinances of Jesus
Christ in Church Estate?

The work is very solemn, and the Question needs a solemn Answer. It is a
great matter to betrust those with the holy privileges of Gods honse, upon
which the name of Christ is so much called, who have so little knowledge and
experience in the way; of Christ, so newly come out of that great depth of
darkness, and wild course of life; in such danger of polluting and defiling
the name of Christ among their barbarous friends and Contrymen; and under so
many doubts and jealousies of many people; and having not yet stood in the
ways of Christ so long, as to give sufficient proof and experience of their
steadfastness in their new begun profession. Being also the first Church
gathered among them, it is like to be a pattern and president of after
proceedings, even unto following Generations. Hence it is very needful that
this proceeding of ours at first, be with all care and wariness guided, for
the most effectual advancement of the holiness and honor of Jesus Christ
among them.

Upon such like grounds as these, though I and some others know more of the
sincerity of some of them, then others do, and are better satisfied with them:
Yet because I may be in a temptation on that hand, I am well content to make
slow have in this matter, remembering that word of God, Lay hands suddenly upon
no man Gods works among men, do usually go on slowly, and he that goes
slowly, does usually go most surely, especially when he goes by counsel. Sat
cito si sat been, the greater proof we have of them, the better approbation
they may obtain at last. Besides, we having had one public meeting about them
already this summer, it will be difficult to compass another, for we have many
other great occasions, which may hinder the same, and it is an hard matter to
get Interpreters together to attend such a work, they living so remote. The
days also will soon grow short, and the nights cold, which will be an
hindrance in the attendance unto the accomplishment of that work, which will
most fitly be done at Natick.

But above all other Reasons this is greatest, that they l^ving in sundry Towns
and places remote from each other, and laborers few to take care of them, it
is necessary that some of themselves should be trained up, and peculiarly
instructed, unto whom the care of ruling and ordering of them in the affairs
of Gods house may be committed, in the absence of such as look after their
instruction. So that this is now the thing we desire to attend, for the comfort
of our little Sister that has no breasts, that such may be trained up, and
prepared, unto whom the charge of the rest may be committed in the Lord. And
upon this ground we make the slower have to accomplish this work among them.
Mean while I hope the Commissioners will afford some encouragement for the
furtherance of the instruction of some of the most godly and able among them,
who may be in a special manner helpful unto the rest, in due order and season.

And thus have I briefly set down our present state in respect of our
Ecclesiastical proceedings. I beg the prayers of the good people of the Lord,
to be particularly present at the Throne of Grace, in these matters, according
as you have hereby a particular Information how our condition is. And for me
also, who am the most unfit in humane reason for such a work as this, but my
soul desires to depend and live upon the Lord Jesus, and fetch all help,
grace, mercy, assistance, and supply from him. And herein I do improve his
faithful Covenant and Promises, and in particular, the Lord does cause my
soul to live upon that word of his, Psalm. 37. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. wherein I have
food, raiment, and all necessaries for my self and Children (whom I have
dedicated unto the Lord, to serve him in this work of his, if he will please to
accept of them) and this supply I live upon in these rich words of gracious
Promise, verse. 3. Trust in the Lord, and do good, dwell in the Land, and
verily thou shall be fed.

Herein also I find supply of grace to believe the conversion of these poor
Indians, and that not only in this present season, in what I do already see,
but in the future also, further then by mine eye or reason I can see. Which
supply of grace, I live upon in those words of his gracious Promise, which I
apply and improve in this particular respect, verse. 4. Delight thy self also
in the Lord, and he shall give thee the desires of thy heart.

Herein also I find supply of grace to believe, that they shall be in Gods
season, which is the fittest, brought into Church Estate; faith fetching this
particular blessing out of the rich Fountain of those gracious words of
Promise, Commit thy way unto the Lord, trust also in him, and he shall bring it
to pass.

Herein also my soul is strengthened and quieted, to stay upon the Lord, and to
be supported against all suspicious jealousies, hard speeches, and unkindnesses
of men touching the sincerity and reallity of this work, and about my carriage
of matters, and supply herein. Which grace my soul receives by a particular
improvement of that rich treasury of the Promise in these words, verse. 6. And
he shall bring forth thy righteousness as the light, and thy judgment as the
noon day. And herein likewise I find supply of grace, to wait patiently for the
Lords time, when year after year, and time after time, I meet with
disappointments. Which grace I receive from the commanding force of that
gracious Promise, verse. 7. Rest in the Lord, and wait patiently for him, fret
not thy self, either for one cause, or for another. Thus I live, and thus I
labor, here I have supply, and here is my hope, I beg the help of prayers,
that I may still so live and labor in the Lords work, and that I may so live
and dye.

THe Corporation (appointed by Act of Parliament) for Propagation of the Gospel
amongst the Heathen Natives in New England, desire all men to take notice, That
such as desire to be satisfied how the moneys Collected, are disposed of, may
(if they please) repair to Coopers-Hall, London, any Saturday, between the
hours of Nine and Twelve in the forenoone, where the said Corporation meet.

FINIS.

