QUEEN depiction of Queen Elizabeth I ELIZABETH's Opinion concerning
TRANSUBSTANTIATION, Or the Real Presence of Christ in the Blessed Sacrament;
with some Prayers and Thanksgivings composed by Her in Imminent Dangers.
DURING the Reign of Q. Mary, the Lady Elizabeth being a Prisoner at Woodstock,
a Popish Priest came to visit her, and after some Discourse, pressed hard upon
her to declare her Opinion of the Real Presence of Christ in the Sacrament, to
whom she truly and warily answered in these following verses: 'Twas God the
Word that spoke it,
He took the Bread and brake it:
And what that Word did make it,
That I believe and take it.


The sense of which is more fully explained in the following POEM.

A MEDITATION how to discern the Lords Body in the Blessed Sacrament.
AND if Men's Fingers cannot make the Wheat,
Which makes the Sacramental Bread we eat;
What Art of Transubstantiation can.
Make God of Wafere, who of Dust made Man?
When we are by the Apostle truly told,
The Godhead is not like Silver or Gold;
Or any thing Corruptions Power can waste,
For He to all Eternity must last:
And if the Art of Man can make his Maker,
The Smith may do as well as does the Baker;
Bread was the substance which our Savior gave,
And Bread it was the Apostles did receive;
His Real Body was but in the Sign,
He gave his Flesh, and Blood in Bread and Wine:
For if his Body he did then divide,
He must have eat himself before he died.
His humane Body which for us was given,
Is given to us of Bread which came from Heaven;
The which if we unworthily Receive,
We eat our Judgments, and our selves deceive.
In not discerning what his Body is,
Our Souls are robbed of everlasting Bliss.
We must believe the Words of him, who said,
This is my Body, when he gave the Bread:
And sure that Blood which curdl'd in each Vein,
Did in His Sacred Body still remain,
Till he was Crucified and Slain.
However, there is great Influence therein,
Which expiates and cleanses us from Sin:
We are made One with him in Holy Union,
When we in Faith receive the Blessed Communion.
In Commemoration of his bitter Passion,
Who shed his Blood to purchase our Salvation;
We on his Merits must depend alone,
Sufficient it is that Merit we have none:
Nor can there any other Name be given
To save us, but by him who sits in Heaven.
His Body here on Earth need not appear,
When Angels to the Women say, He is not here;
He Is not in the Press or Cup-board, as some say;
For then the Mice might carry him away.
The Primitive Christians never were so blind,
To think he could be blown away with wind.
Or that some Thieves or Robbers might devour,
Him who created Heaven by his Power.
We are not saved by Sense, but by our Faith,
And ought to credit what our Master says.
He called himself a Vine, and yet we see,
He was a perfect Man, and not a Tree.
He called himself a Door; it is understood,
We enter Heaven through Him, and not through Wood.
He called himself a Way, the which does lead
Our Steps to Heaven, yet none does on him tread.
His blessed Words were oft-times Mystical,
And are not rightly understood by all:
Save such on whom he does that Gift bestow,
Who to the Ignorant the Truth may show.
His Blessed Body Heaven must contain,
Where He a King eternally does Reign:
Until the Restitution of all,
Then we with him and Angels ever shall,
Sing Allelujahs in their Hierarchy;
For where He is, there must his Servants be.
A PRAYER of Queen Elizabeth upon her escape from being burnt in her Bed, by a
Fire flaming through the Boards of her Chamber, during her Imprisonment at
Woodstock in Oxfordshire.
O Gracious Lord God, I humbly prostrate my self upon the bended Knees of my
Heart before thee, entreating thee for thy Sons sake, to be now and ever
merciful unto me: I am thy work, the work of thine own Hands; even of those
Hands which were nailed to the Cross for my Sins. Look upon the Wounds of thy
Hands, and despise not the work of thy hands. Thou have written me down in thy
Book of Preservation; read thine own handwriting and save me: Spare me that
speak unto thee, pardon me that pray unto thee. The Griefs I endure enforce me
to speak, the Calamities I suffer compel me to complain: If my hopes were in
this life only, then were I of all People most miserable. It must needs be that
there is another life; for here those live many times longest, who are not
worthy to live at all. Here the Israelites make Bricks, and the Egyptians dwell
in the Houses: David is in want, and Nabal abounds: Sion is Babylons Captive.
Have thou nothing in store for Joseph but the stocks, for Esaias but a Saw? Will
not Elias adorn the Chariot as well as the Juniper Tree? Will not John Baptists
Head become a Crown as well as a Platter? Surely there is great Retribution for
the Just, there is Fruit for the Righteous: Thou have Palms for their Hands,
white Robes for their Bodies. Thou will wipe away all Tears from their Eyes,
and show thy goodness in the Land of the Living. How good and desirable is the
shadow of thy wings? Oh Lord Jesus! That is a safe Sanctuary to fly unto, a
comfortable refreshing from all sin and sorrow: Whatsoever Cup of Affliction
this Life makes me drink of, it is yet nothing to those bitter Draughts that
thou have already drank for me: Help me, Oh thou my strength, and thereby I
shall be raised up: Come thou my Light, and thereby I shall be illuminated;
appear thou Glory to which I shall be exalted: Hasten thou Life by which I
shall be hereafter glorified. Amen, Amen.

When Q. Mary was dead, and the News thereof came to Q. Elizabeth, she removed
from Hatfeild to the Charter House, from whence she was Royally Attended to the
Tower of London, and Nov. 24. 1558. She set forward from the Tower to pass
through the City to Westminster. But the Queen considering that she was now
exalted from Misery to Majesty, from a Prisoner to a Princess: She very
devoutly and religiously lifted up her Hands to Heaven before she would suffer
her self to be mounted in her Chariot, and made the following Prayer. O Lord,
Almighty and ever living God, I give thee most humble and hearty thanks that
thou have been so merciful unto me as to spare me to see this joyful and
blessed day; and I acknowledge thou have dealt as graciously and wonderfully
with me, as thou did with thy true and faithful Servant Daniel thy Prophet,
whom thou deliveredst out of the Lions Den, from the cruelty of the greedy and
raging Lions; even so was I overwhelmed, and by thee delivered: To thee
therefore only be Thanks, and Honor, and Praise, for evermore. Amen.

In 1588, The Spanish Armado invaded the Kingdom; the Design being no less than
the Conquest of England; at which time Q. Elizabeth having raised a
considerable Army of Horse and Foot, who were encamped at Tilbury, near the
Thames mouth; the Queen with a Masculine Spirit, like another Deborah, came and
took a view of her Army; and going about through the several Ranks of Armed
Men, drawn up on both sides of her, with a Generals Truncheon in her hand,
walked sometimes with a Martial pace, another while gently like a Woman: It is
incredible how much she encouraged the Hearts of her Captains and Soldiers by
her presence, but especially by her most generous and undaunted Speech, which
she made in the midst of them, to this effect:

MY Loving People,
we have been persuaded by some that are careful of our safety, to take heed
how we commit our selves to armed Multitudes, for fear of Treachery; but I
assure you, I do not desire to live to distrust my faithful and loving People;
let Tyrants fear, I have always so behaved my self, that under God I have
always placed my chiefest strength and safeguard in the loyal Hearts and good
Will of my Subjects; and therefore I am come amongst you, as you see at this
time, not for my Recreation and Disport, but being resolved in the midst and
heat of the Battle, to live or die amongst you all; to lay down for my God, and
for my Kingdom, and for my People, my Honor, and my Blood, even in the dust: I
know I have the Body but of a weak and feeble Woman, yet I have the Heart and
Courage of a King, and of a King of England too; and think foul scorn that
Parma, or Spain, or any Prince of Europe, should dare to invade the Borders of
my Realm; to which, rather than any dishonor shall grow by me, I my self will
take up Arms, I my self will be your General, Judge, and Rewarder of every one
of your Virtues in the Field: I know that already for your forwardness you have
deserved Rewards and Crowns, and we do assure you in the word of a Prince, they
shall be duly paid you: In the mean time my Lieutenant General Leicester shall
be in my stead; than whom, never Prince commanded a more noble or worthy
Subject; not doubting, but by your Obedience to your General, by your Concord
in the Camp, and your Valor in the Field, we shall shortly obtain a famous
Victory over those Enemies of my God, of my Kingdom, and of my People.

The Queen provided also as good a Fleet as possible, consisting of 140 Ships,
divided into 3 Squadrons, commanded by the L. Howard Admiral, Sir Fr. Drake
Vice Admiral, and the L. Hen. Seamour Rear Admiral; which being ready to sail,
this Religious Princess composed this Prayer for their good Success. MOst
Omnipotent Creator and Governor of all the World, that only searchest and
know the bottom of all hearts and thoughts, and therein see the true
intention of all our Actions: Thou know, O God, that it is neither malice,
nor revenge for any injury offered us, neither desire of bloodshed, nor
greediness of gain, that has been the occasion of raising and setting forth
this Navy, but only that necessary care and wary watchfulness, that neither the
malice of our Enemies, nor our own over-security may bring danger to us, or
triumph to them: These being the true grounds and reasons of our attempt, as
thou, O Lord, know, I humbly beseech thee with bended Knees to prosper the
undertaking; command the Winds to assist us, and grant us Victory and
Deliverance from this imminent danger; that so all may end in the advancement
of thy Glory and Honor, the exalting of thy Name, and the safety of this
Realm, with the least loss of the English Blood that may be: To these my devout
Petitions, Lord give thy blessed Assent. Amen.

After the Defeat of the Spanish Invincible Armado, as they called it, the
gracious and godly Queen, who ever held Ingratitude a capital sin, especially
toward her Almighty Protector, as she had begun with Prayer, so she concluded
with Praises, and Thanksgivings; commanding a solemn Thanksgiving to be
celebrated to the Lord of Hosts; and composed her self a Prayer of Thankfulness
to this effect: MOst Omnipotent Creator, Redeemer and Preserver of all Mankind;
when it seemed good to thy Almighty Wisdom to create the whole Earth; thou
did divide into four several parts the materials thereof, which are since
called Elements; and do all serve to continue that orderly Government which
thou have designed them: And all these, O God, out of thy most singular bounty,
and unheard of care, thou have made to serve as Instruments to daunt and
destroy our Foes, and to confound their malice; for which, with bowed Heart,
and bended Knees, I humbly return hearty thanks and acknowledgment; and it is
not the least part of this great deliverance that the weakest Sex has been so
assisted by thy strongest help; that my own People have no cause to complain of
my weakness, nor Foreigners to triumph at my ruin: Yea, such has been thy
unwonted Grace in my days, that though Satan and his Instruments have been
continually practicing against my Life and State, yet thy mighty Hand has
defended us, and thy Wings have covered us, that they have not prevailed
against us, neither have we received any damage by them; but have cause to
bless and magnify thy Holy Name, that thou have clothed our Enemies with
shame, and the greatest dishonor: for which great goodness of thine, O Lord,
grant that we may be continually thankful, and ever mindful: And if I may find
favor in thine Eyes, be pleased, O God, to grant thy countenance and favor to
us in my days, that my years may never see any change of thy love and grace
toward me, but especially to this Kingdom: which grant, O Lord, for thy Sons
sake, may flourish for Many Ages, after I shall go hence and be no more: Grant
this, O Lord, in the Name of Jesus. Amen.

Licensed,

Aug. 27th, 1688.
LONDON: Printed for F. E.


