CLAVIS FIDEI, OR THE KEY OF FAITH. Written in Latin by JOHN ELLIS D. D. and
Rector of Whitfield in the County of Oxford.

AND Propounded by him in Public Lectures upon the Apostles Creed, to the
Students of Hearts Hall in the University of OXFORD.

Faithfully translated into English by W. F. for the good and benefit of the
ingenuous Reader, as an help to build him up in his most holy faith.

2 Timothy 1.13. Hold fast the form of sound words, which thou have heard of me,
in faith and love which is in Christ Jesus. CAMBRIDGE, Printed by John Field,
Printer to the University. 1668.

To the Right Worshipful The VICE-CHANCELLER, And to all other the Reverend
Masters and Heads of Colleges in this University of CAMBRIDGE:
W. F. Wishes all increase of the true Grace of Christ, and the blessed
fruition of the Glory of God in Heaven.
Right Worshipful,
I Humbly beseech you to pardon my boldness in presenting these rude and
unpolished lines to your learned views: You whom God has set on high, and like
Stars of the greater magnitude which shine forth more bright then others; or
like as the Celestial Signs moving in their own proper Sphere, govern the
several parts of man's body: so in like manner you Reverend Doctors and Heads of
Colleges, moving in your Sphere, do superintend and govern the whole Body of
this Famous University, being under your Care and Tuition. I had not presumed
to present this small Tract to your Worships, if that of the Poet had not came
into my mind, Audaces fortuna juvat: whereupon rushing on you unawares, and at
an adventure, I beseech your Worships pardon, and that you would be so far
pleased as to grace this small Treatise with your favorable acceptance, which
contains in it certain observations upon the Apostles Creed; or as the Author
thereof John Ellis a Reverend Doctor of Divinity styled it, Clavis Fide^ the
which in a Translation from Oxford to Cambridge, has in a short space learned
in plain English to speak its mother tongue: and I rather implore your
patronage and protection of it then any other, by reason of the calumnies and
aspersions that some may cast upon me the Translator thereof, (qui nunquam
gradum suscepi) and although I was no Scholar brought up at the University, yet
a teneris unguiculis, even from my tender years I have ever bin a lover of
learning, and a Scholars servant, there being about thirty and nine years
expired since I was first a servant to Mr Thomas Buck, at the Art of Printing:
but having h^^ a long vacation from my employment of composing letters (in that
late and epidemical time of Plague and Pestilence) I began to consider with my
self how to spend my time to the best advantage, and taking this small Book
into my hand, and here and there perusing it, I did at last assay to translate
it, the which through Gods assistance I have finished, and exposed to public
view. And now at length hoping of your Worships favorable acceptance and
patronage of it, your unworthy servant shall ever be paying that which is but
his duty to do, the debt of gratitude and thankfulness to you, though never to
the full: Si ingratum dixeritis, omnia dicitis; for as one well spoke, An
ungrateful man is no man, but an enemy to God and man: but your humble servant
hopes that your Worships shall have no cause to say so of him, nor yet suspect
him to be guilty thereof: but he shall ever pray to Almighty God, that he would
so water your studies with the dew of his heavenly benediction, that after this
painful life ended, he would translate you from hence into the Kingdom of his
dear Son. The which he prays for, who is, and shall ever remain,

Your Worships most humble and obedient servant William Flower.

To the Courteous Reader.
I Here propose to thy view this small Treatise; the which if thou will bestow
the pains to read, thou will find much matter comprised in few sheets; and I
doubt not, if thou read it with understanding, but that thou may find
many things contained in it which may be of no small advantage to build thee up
in thy most holy faith: For without faith (as the Apostle St Paul intimates
unto us) it is impossible to please God. It may be styled a Breviary, or
certain short observations upon the Apostles Creed; or more properly, The Key
of Faith: wherein many mysteries of faith are opened and made evident to thy
understanding. And as a Cabinet containing in it many jewels of great value, if
it be kept continually locked proves to be of little or no use to the owner; in
like manner, this book, if it had remained still in the original, had been of
as little use to thee; but now being translated, and accommodated and fitted to
thy capacity, this Key of Faith does now open unto thee, and as it were unlock
those mysteries of faith which were hid from thy understanding.

I have heard from the Pulpit, by one that was well versed in History, and a
learned man, that the Proceres, or Noblemen of Poland, did use to stand up at
the reading of the Creed, with their swords drawn in their hands ready to
defend it, in case any should offer to oppose it; how much more then should we
of the true Catholic faith endeavor vi and armis, as much as in us lies to
vindicate the same; for the Creed is commanded by public Authority to be
learned of all, even by children, when they come to years of discretion, and
whatsoever is commanded in general, ought to be every ones particular
concernment. For as the Nautick Chard, or Compass does direct the Mariner that
has skill in it, qui oculum ad astra, manum ad clavum habet) to steer his
course aright to whatsoever place he is bound, that he runs not precipitately
upon dangerous rocks or shelves: in like manner this little book may be some
help to direct thee to look up to God by an eye of faith, that thou splitst not
thy self upon the dangerous rocks of unbelief and ignorance; and it may by Gods
assistance bring thee into safe harbor, even to heaven the haven of happiness;
whilst others remaining in unbelief, making shipwreck of faith and a good
conscience become castaways. Lege ac perlege, veruntamen ne dijudica antequam
perlegisti; Read it over and over, but judge not before thou have thoroughly
perused it: and if thou reapest any benefit give God the glory, for I
acknowledge my self to be but a weak instrument for such a work as this: yet as
near as I could, (avoiding circumlocutions or hyperbolical phrases) I have
expressed the scope and meaning of the Author verbatim. There is contained in
this small Tract the mystery of the Trinity explained, so far forth as is
necessary for thee to know, and likewise many excellent observations upon the
Incarnation of our Savior, with the manner of his crucifixion expressed ad
vivum, to the life; and in all the other Articles of the belief being briefly
handled, thou will find many excellent observations, much comprised in few
words. And to conclude, I wish that these precious truths were imprinted in our
minds as well as in this book, the which God grant. Courteous Reader, Farewell
in the Lord Jesus.

W. F.

The Key of Faith.
EVen as the river that watered Paradise was divided into four heads; so in
like manner is the doctrine of the Church: to wit, The Apostles Creed, the
Decalogue, or ten Commandments, the Lords Prayer and the Sacraments.

First, we are to live in the Church by faith. Secondly, to come unto the rule
of life by precepts. Thirdly, lest we faint, we are to take heed by prayer; and
when notwithstanding all these, we are yet weak, we are to have recourse to the
seals of grace; which are the Sacraments.

First, faith is necessary. Without faith it is impossible to please God, Heb.
11.6. For the sum of faith is contained in the Apostles Creed, or Symbol. It is
called a Symbol, because it is a token or mark by which Christian Soldiers are
discerned from others: or (...), from contributing, as if it were compiled and
composed by the Apostles. However it is said to be the Apostles, because it
comprehends the sum of the faith which the Apostles preached. We are to search
the Scriptures, and to believe those things which are contained in them: but
above all, the special and fundamental places which are simply necessary. Lib.
6. confess. cap. 6.
S. Austin writes, they are to be blamed, not to be listened to, if perhaps
there be any such that should say, How know thou that those books which are
ministered to us by men, are the mind of the only true and unerring God: for
that for it self it is chiefly to be believed. Notwithstanding there are enough
(...), evidences, which evince and clear it, that the Scripture is inspired
from God: whereof these are the most choice; The authority of the writers, who
were in an extraordinary manner called and sent forth. The majesty of the
doctrine. The amplitude and clearness of the miracles. The truth of the
prophesies. The sanctity of the Bible: nothing is here to be found dissonant to
piety and truth, nothing of contradiction. And to add to this, the sublimity of
the mean style, and the sublime humility. To conclude, the harmonious truth of
either Testament: that which lies hid in the Old, is manifest in the New.

But the Symbol or Creed it self, which is taken out of the Scriptures,
contains in it twelve Articles, and is as it were the a A circle in heaven
wherein the twelve Signs are.
zodiac of a Christian. But these may be reduced to four parts: The first
concerning God the Father, who has made all things. The second concerning God
the Son, who has redeemed mankind. The third, concerning the H. Ghost, who
has sanctified the faithful. The fourth, concerning the Church and its
privileges, which the Lord has communicated to it.

But some one may say, then to pass, that creation is attributed to the Father,
redemption to the Son, sanctification to the H. Ghost?

This comes to pass,

The first is, I believe in God the Father Almighty, Creator of heaven and
earth. It is said I believe, not we believe; because every one ought to have a
special faith of his own, explicit not implicit, or taken upon trust. We cannot
see well with other men's eyes, neither is it sufficient to have an opinion in
divine matters.

The disputation of Gregory de Valentia is of no force; Lib. 6. Analys. fidei
cap. 13.
in which he thus asserts concerning a man that is not Theologically learned:
That if he prefer the Romish Church for its outward authority before the
Reformed, then God shall have nothing to object against this illiterate man in
that most dreadful Tribunal: for God does not require of him this, that he
should come to the knowledge of the truth by searching into the doctrine, since
that he understands not Theological controversies. These things says he. But
let him say what he will, every one certainly ought to hold the substance and
saving sense of the Articles, although not all the most difficult circumstances
of questions from thence arising. But now to believe, is not only to know and
give assent to those things which are propounded in the Gospel, but also to
acquiesce and rest satisfied in them. It is not all one to believe a God, and
to believe God, and to believe in God. In the two first senses sinners and
devils do agree, the third sense none attain to, unless they be such who have
faith formed in them: in this manner to believe is to go into God by good
works, 3 Sent. Did. 23.
says the Master of the Sentences.

To believe a God, is to know there is such a God. To believe God, is to
confess that he is true: but to believe in God requires application, that he is
my God. There is a faith found that is not right. There is a faith that is
feigned, and it is of the hypocrites; the Apostle says, that the end of the
commandment is charity, out of a pure heart, and faith unfeigned, 1 Timothy 1.5.
There is a kind of dead faith, and it is that of sinners, or of those that are
still in their sins; Faith without works is dead, Jam. 2.26. There is a kind
of weak faith, and it is of the lukewarm, Receive you him that is weak in the
faith, Romans 14.1. There is likewise a little faith, and it is of the fearful,
therefore Christ said, O thou of little faith why doubtest thou? Matthew. 14.31.

Hitherto we have treated concerning faith it self, now concerning the objects
of faith, of which God is the principal, whom not to know is death, and whom to
know is life. And first, it is to be demonstrated, that God is. This may be
proved out of the book of Nature, inasmuch as he is the Creator, and out of the
book of Scripture, in that he is Creator Conserver and Redeemer. Sum part. 1
quaest. 12. Art 7
God may be known, although not comprehended, as Aquinas says.

These arguments that are drawn from nature do prove that there is a God, which
notwithstanding are common to Scripture also; to wit the most beautiful order
of the creatures, as, the heavens declare the glory of God, Psalm. 19.1. the
understanding of man, the knowledges of principles, and the knowledge of this
principle, That God is, Romans 1.19. the tremblings of consciences in sinners,
the rewards of good men, the punishments of the wicked, the political order,
the heroic virtues, the invention of arts, the prediction of future events,
the end and profit of all things, the impossibility of the progress of causes
without end. It may be proved likewise out of Scripture, well-nigh by infinite
testimonies, by diverse apparitions, by stupendous miracles, by the writings of
the Prophets, and by the admirable event of things. He therefore that denies
that there is a God, is not void only of reason, but sense also, as Avice^na
is reported to have said. It is manifest therefore that there is a God; now let
us see what he is.

God cannot be defined because he is immense; he may be described
Philosophically and Theologically.

Philosophically, God is a Spirit, sufficient of himself, and the cause of all
good.

Theologically, God is the most perfect being, one in essence, three in Persons.

The Theological description differs from the Philosophical, first in
perfection; for it adds something unknown to nature concerning the Trinity, and
unfolds or explains that which is known to nature. Secondly, in effect, natural
knowledge renders men only inexcusable, Romans 1.20. but supernatural knowledge
is saving: hence then the true God differs from the gods of the Gentiles, in
Attributes, Persons, Works. In Attributes, because they are not rightly and
entirely understood by them that are without the pale of the Church. In
Persons, because the Gentiles are ignorant of the Trinity. In Works, because
the wonderful works of God, and especially that of the Redemption, are not
perceived by them who are out of the Church.

But now omitting other proprieties, which amongst Schoolmen are handled at
large, I will first show, that God is one: the Lord he is God; there is none
else besides him, Deuteronomy. 4.35. Furthermore, chief Majesty is competent to no
more but one. None can be the most perfect, unless he be but one: but God
contains in him all possible perfection by reason of the latitude of his
essence. Yea there can be but one only Omnipotent. And if there should be more
Gods, they are all imperfect, or the rest are superfluous, both (which to say)
is absurd. Besides, that which is Infinite can be but one only; neither can
there be but one first cause of all things: and to conclude, it is most
necessary that the only chief good be but one. God therefore is one, and the
only one, as Saint Bernard says.

by reason of a certain similitude or likeness, or according to the opinion of
vain man. First, by a certain similitude, as either for eminency of nature and
wisdom, as Angels; or for excellency of office, as Magistrates; or for
exceeding great power, as the Devil; or for the ^oo too much indulging of it,
as the belly.

Secondly, out of a false opinion of men, Idols are called Gods.

It appears therefore that God is one, now we are to show that he is three in
Persons. Tho. Par. 1. q. 32. art. 1. ^. Sent. did. 3.
The Trinity cannot be proved by the light of nature, as Thomas teaches
against Scotus. Yet Lumbard fetches some footsteps of the Trinity from the
creatures; especially from the three faculties of the soul, the understanding,
memory, and will. But these do only produce a confused knowledge, not a
distinct. God is three but not threefold, for he is a most simple being of
himself: and we use the name of Trinity, not because the Scripture says so,
but because it does not contradict it, and for the thing it self it is in the
Scriptures, though not the very word, that being implied, this not expressed;
and you may interpret Scripture in convenient words; especially by reason of
the deceit of Heretics, concealing their heresies for the most part under
Scripture expressions.

In many places of Holy Writ, it does evidently appear, that there are three
Persons, Matthew. 3.16. The Father proclaims it This is my beloved Son, The Son
is baptized, and the Holy Ghost descends in the likeness of a dove, 1 John
5.7. There are three that bear witness in heaven, The Father is of himself, the
Son from the Father begotten from eternity, The Holy Ghost proceeds from
both. The Father is distinguished from the Son, but not another essence, and so
of the rest. But in this matter better is a faithful ignorance, then a rash
knowledge. I conclude therefore with Robert Holcot, Quaest. 10.
a most famous Professor in our University of Oxford; who, as Gabriel Biel
relates it, Quaest. 10. Determ 1. sent. did. 13. qu. 11.
says thus modestly.

Digne loqui de Personis
Vim transcendit rationis
Excedit ingenia.
Quid sit nasci, quid processus,
Me nescire sum professus.
Thus Englished.
To speak condignly of the Persons three
Transcendeth reason in a high degree,
It does exceed all wits.
What it is to be born, what the a Alias proceeding.
process,
I understand it not I do profess.
Some one perhaps may say, is taken sometimes personally by way of distinction
from the Son, and sometimes essentially in reference to the creatures, for the
whole Divine essence.

The first Person is called Father, either in respect of Christ, or in respect
of us. Or like as Durandus shows, he is the Father of all generally, the
Father of Christ singularly, and the Father of the elect especially.

Credo in Deum, I believe in God:

It refers not only to the Father, but also to the Son and Holy Ghost: and the
Father is called omnipotent, not excluding the other Persons.

God is omnipotent, because he can do all things, what he pleases; all things
that do not imply a contradiction, and which are not repugnant to his nature:
and because he does all things without difficulty, or by his beck only,
because he alone has power of doing all things, and for that he is the Author
of all created power.

If it be said, that God cannot die, sin, things which imply power, but nothing
that argues impotency or weakness: for this would not stand with his
perfection. And if it be said, that he cannot do those things which are
contradictory. We answer, that this would be inconsistent with his immutability.

I pass by niceties. This is the most principal thing, seeing that God is
omnipotent; he that fears God has not any thing beyond that he need to fear;
and if God be with us who can be against us.

It follows in the Creed, that God is the Creator of heaven and earth, that is
of the whole world.

Creation is the producing of something out of nothing; it is either immediate,
of the first lump; or mediate, of things produced out of that lump. This power
of creating belongs to God alone, it appertains not to the creatures: because
there is nothing presupposed in that work, part. 1. quaest. 45 art. 5.
which is capable of disposition by the action of the instrumental agent; as
Thomas shows touching the manner of the emanation or proceeding of things
from their first principle. And assuredly Suarez in his Metaphysical
disputations, and Pererius in his book of Natural Philosophy, prove this thing
very notably. It may be demonstrated out of Scripture, that the world was
created by God, and by natural reasons also: for there is no infinite progress
of causes and effects in nature, and the world is the first and most excellent
effect; therefore it is from the first and most excellent cause. The
Philosophers err therefore, who either with Aristotle dream of the worlds
eternity, or suppose with Plato an uncreated matter; or with Democritus,
Leucippus, Epicurus, bring in atoms, and a concurring of them by chance.
Hermogenes errs, who affirmed the world to be coeternal with God, and the
Stoics who feigned two beginnings.

But the Philosophers object, idle. But what then did he do? It may be said,
that he chose us in Christ before the foundation of the world, Ephesians. 1.4. or as
S. Austin answers: For them that do too curiously enquire
After such things, he made the infernal fire.
But every thing that has a beginning has his end; the world has no end:
ergo. Here is a distinction to be made between things that have their
beginnings by a natural generation, and such as have them by creation, both
which, those as well as these, God may either preserve, or reduce them into
nothing. But it may be said again, that he who is lord and governor actually,
is more happy then he who is such an one potentially: therefore, either the
world was from eternity, or God is made more happy by the creation.

We answer, that no felicity can accrue to God from the creature, who is most
perfect and happy in himself.

The world was created of God the Father, by the Son, and the H. Ghost.

All things are created out of nothing, not out of the substance of God, nor
out of any preexistent matter.

But out of nothing comes nothing.

This is true in a natural way or course,

But man is not created out of nothing.

It is true in respect of the next matter, but not in respect of the first.

He created all things most wisely, and very good.

But the Prophet says, There is no evil in a city that God has not done, Amos
3.6.

Besides, the world was created, not of a sudden, but in the space of six days.
In the beginning, Genesis 1. In the beginning of the universe, or generality of
things, so Basil and Ambrose. Hom. 1. Hexam. l. 1. de genesis ad literam c. 1.
Before all created things, says S. Austin. And it was created for the glory
of God, and the profit of men.

Under creation the providence of God is comprehended; God does still work by
preserving, but not by creating things.

As there is nothing made but by his creating essence, so nothing thrives
without the power thereof keeping and preserving it, In Monol. c. 12. Tom. 3.
as Anselm says.

For providence is Gods action or working, whereby he does liberally, wisely,
well and powerfully preserve and govern all things for the glory of his Name,
and the salvation of the godly.

It is the action of God, for it is not an idle intuition or looking on, but an
effectual administration of things. The most minute or least things are subject
to Gods providence; as sparrows, hairs, worms. God is all eye, because he sees
all things, yea the most abject of them. And excellently says S. 1 Offic. cap.
13.
Ambrose. If it be not an injury and disparagement to God to have made the most
small things, much less disparagement is it to him to govern them being made.
God does act most freely. God is not subjected to necessity, but necessity to
him. The Stoics err, who tie God to a fatal necessity of causes: God does all
things wisely, to certain ends, contrary to that of the Epicureans, who affirm
that all things come to pass by fortune: Chance and fortune are words used by
the unlearned, says S. Basil, Conc. 8. in Psalm 32. Lib, 1. Retr. c. 1.
nothing comes by chance in respect of God, but in regard of us: and S. Austin
does acknowledge, that he did ill to use the name of fortune so often in his
writings: God works powerfully, and cannot be hindered by any might, bound by
any law, wearied by any impotency or weakness: God does all things well,
because he is the best; out of the most evil things he brings good, and
makes use of evil things to a good end: But the providence of God is either
universal or particular. That of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 9.9. Does God take care
for oxen? is not spoken absolutely, but comparatively; that God has not the
like care of beasts that he has of men; his care toward men is greater.

things are so confused, Aristotle his fourth book of the generation of
animals, They forsake not the order of the universal cause, but of the
particular only; or according to Thomas, they fall short of the ultimate or
last end, which is the perfection of the thing generated, but not of their
nearest end: for nature still works and forms somewhat at the least.

And if any one does speak concerning sins. We answer, that sins are not
actions, but are accidental to actions; which are good of themselves and from
God likewise. But some one may say, sins happen by the providence of God. It is
true, by the providence of God permitting, determining, directing them to the
best ends, but not effecting, or being the procuring cause of them. Let them be
confounded, who do think or imagine God to be the Author of evils or
wickedness: Lib 4. de Orthod^xa fide, c. 20.
this is the vote or wish of Damascen. And if it be said, that the same evil
work is attributed both to God and the sinner; as the selling of Joseph, or the
crucifying of Christ. We answer, that this is done in a diverse respect; it is
attributed to the sinner, as it is an evil work, but to God as it is a good
one. This is the reason of that common simile of a hors-man riding on a lame
horse, its halting or lameness proceeds not from the hors-man, but from the
horse it self; Joseph's brethren sold him out of malice: God permitted this out
of mercy, lest he should have been slain; for his own glory, and for the great
advantage and profit of his servant. The Jews crucified Christ out of ill will,
God the Father permitted this out of his greatest good will toward men. Judas
betrayed Christ out of covetousness, our heavenly Father out of love.

They err, who affirm that God does incline and force the will of the wicked to
commit great and grievous sins; to have formed man in his mothers womb with a
perverseness of nature, and a necessity of sinning; or to this end to have
created Esau to lead a wicked life, or to move a thief to kill the innocent,
and him that is not prepared to die. This is most certain, that God does not
approve of wickedness, neither is he the cause of it: yet all things subject
themselves to his providence; all his creatures, rational or irrational; all
events, good or evil. But his principal care is of his elect: His providence in
respect of them is most special. We should do well therefore to be patient in
adversity, thankful in prosperity, and hope for the future. For our God is
omnipotent good and true.

Hitherto of the first part of the Creed, the second follows, which is
concerning faith in Christ in these words:

And in Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord, etc.

The second Person is true God, not mere man, otherwise he were not the object
of our faith. He is called Jesus in the Hebrew (...) or (...) that is a
Savior, because he saves his people, Jeschuah, Jehoscuah.
Matthew. 1.21. This name JESUS is honey in the mouth, melody in the ear, a
jubilee or rejoicing in the heart. Others have had this name Joshua, a Captain
or Leader, and Joshua the High Priest: But they by the imposition of men, Jesus
by the denunciation of an Angel. Those were saviors by a figure and typically;
but Jesus truly and in his own nature. They brought corporal good things, and
Jesus spiritual. They were ministers or servants, He the Master. Jesus is a
Savior (...), or superlatively, He alone saves excluding the creatures. There
is no other name given under heaven, whereby they may be saved, Acts 4.12. He
saves from the evil of sin, and from the evil of punishment: the cause being
taken away the effect cease: let therefore every faithful soul rejoice and
say, O Jesu be thou to me a Jesus, or Savior.

Secondly, our Mediator is called (...), unctus, anointed, a (...) ungo, to
anoint; but in Hebrew he is called (...) And as he has his Hebrew name
Jeschuah, Maschiach.
because he was to be the Savior of the Jews; so he has his Greek name
Christ, because he was to be the Savior of the Greeks, that is of the Gentiles
and other nations: for all the Gentiles were called Grecians as S. Epist. 200.
Austin says, because from the time of Alexander the Great, the Greeks having
the rule almost over all nations, did propagate their tongue together with
their Empire. As the Prophets, Priests and Kings were wont to be anointed; so
likewise Christ was anointed, although not in regard of the sign outwardly,
and ceremonially, yet in respect of the thing signified, inwardly and really.
He was anointed, because he was ordained to the office of a Mediator, and
endued with gifts for the accomplishing of the same work of this duty. The
bestowing of gifts was in reference to his humane nature, the ordination to his
office was according to either nature. Christ was anointed to be a Prophet and
a Teacher, who should make known the will of his Father: to be a High Priest
and a Priest, that by the sacrifice of his body he might redeem us, and that he
might always intercede for us: to be a King, that he might guide us by his word
and Spirit. This is our duty then that by the odor of his ointments we should
run after him. Draw thou us O Lord Jesus, and we shall run after thee. From
Christ we are called Christians, and this name was first given them at Antioch,
Act. 11.26. Of his fullness we have all received, and he has made us kings and
priests to God our Father. We are kings that we should fight against Satan, the
world, yea and against our selves.

Fortior est qui se, quam qui fortissima vincit. He Is stronger that subdues
himself by far,
Then he that conquers greatest walls by war.
We are Priests, that we may sacrifice to God the sacrifice of praise, prayer,
contrition, alms, righteousness, and in fine, serve him in all things
appertaining to a Christian life.

We are Prophets, that we may know God, and knowing him we may truly profess
him: that we may be Christians not only in outward profession, but also by
inward communion; that we may be members of the Church, not only in
appearance, but also in reality and truth. As for the remaining titles of our
Mediator, He is next of all called the Son of God.

He was his Son according to the Divine nature, being light of light, and God
of God. And according to the humane nature after the common manner in respect
of creation, and after a special manner in respect of conception. The Son is
the only begotten, for he has no brethren according to eternal generation,
nor according to his extraordinary conception; yet the elect are called Christ's
brethren by reason of the Fathers adoption, and likeness of humane nature; for
their liberality, charity, and for some kind of conformity they have with
Christ.

Besides, our Mediator is called Lord. Lord was a title of the Emperors, so
high, that Caesar Augustus would not be so called, as Dio and Tertullian
testify; deeming himself to be unworthy of so great a name. It seems he did
this by Divine instinct, that that glorious Title being untouched, might remain
to the only Son of God, The King of kings, and Lord of lords; who straight
after came into the world. But at this time the Turks call their Emperor the
great Lord, and the Tartarians, Persians, and others of the East country,
Sultan, that is Lord.

Jesus is our Lord by right of creation, because all things were made by him,
Col. 1.16. by right of redemption, which we have through his blood, Col. 1.14.
By right of principality; for he is the head of all principality and power,
Col. 2.10.

By right of preserving his unto salvation; for he gives life eternal to his
sheep, Joh. 10.28.

By right of the Fathers constitution, because the Father has put all things
under his feet, and gave him to be the head over all things to the Church, Ephesians.
1.22. and has made him heir of all things, Hebr. 1.2.

His Dominion therefore extends not only unto us, but unto all creatures.

Seeing therefore Christ is the Lord of us all, we ought to be humble and meek
one toward another; for we are fellow servants of the Lord. Masters, give unto
your servants that which is just and equal, knowing that ye also have a Master
in heaven, says S. Paul, Col. 4.1. And seeing that Christ is the Lord, let us
adhere to him alone, otherwise we shall have very many strange lords, whom to
serve, it will be most miserable. Most truly said S. Ambrose, O how many lords
has he who has not one? he has so many lords or masters as he has sins: yea
holy father, he has so many mistresses as lusts, and certainly, thou thy self
being judge, lust is a most furious mistress. Let us therefore serve the Lord
Jesus only. And if we be noble and generous Christians, let us not admit of
any other government. As Thomas Aquinas observes of horses, that a spirited
and wel-mettled one will not admit of any other rider but his own master, and
is moved only at his beck.

Hitherto of the titles of the Mediator; he is further to be described,
according to the degrees both of his exinanition or humiliation, and likewise
of his exaltation.

First, Christ did empty himself, and became very low. The word is made flesh,
Joh. 1.14. The Son of God is made the Son of man, that the son of man might
become the son of God. He is now who was, and what he is he was not, De Trin.
lib. ^0.
says S. Hilary. Our Mediator is become God and man, that he might conjoyn God
and man together again, who were separated and disjoined.

And if it be said,

If it be said that no accession can be made to God, we say That is true, if
meant of perfection, but not of union. If further any object,

But although there be in Christ two natures, yet there is only one Person.
Although he be God and man, yet he is not two, but one Christ, as S. Athanasius
professes in his Creed. The humane nature of Christ does not constitute a
person, because it subsists not of or by it self, but it is upheld or sustained
in and by the Word.

If it be objected,

If it be said, that dead and always living, are not the same. It is true, that
they are not the same, according to the same: But Christ was so according to
his diverse natures.

If it be enquired, How is the Incarnation attributed to the Son? We are to
know, that the Incarnation is the work of the whole Trinity by inchoation, and
of the Son alone by termination. He assumed our nature, which the Father formed
in him, out of the substance of the Virgin by the Holy Ghost. This substantial
knitting or joining although produced by all the Persons, yet formally it did
not knit or conjoyn the humane nature with any, In 3. p. D. Thom.
but with the Person of the Son: as Suarez copiously, and other Divines. And of
the two natures there was an union made hypostatically, or personally: not
physically as the form is united to the matter: nor spiritually, as the elect
among themselves, and with God; nor by help and assistance, as the mariner to
the ship; nor relatively, as a friend to a friend, nor mystically, as in the
Sacrament; the two natures were united inconfusedly, unchangeably, not
admitting of any division, inseparably. Inconfusedly, each nature having their
properties remaining; but the properties of one nature by communication of
idioms is attributed in the concrete to the person denominated from either
nature: as that God has purchased his Church by his blood, Acts 20.28. The
Lord of glory was crucified, 1 Cor. 2.8. this is spoken according to his humane
nature. This speech ought to be taken in the concrete, not in the abstract: and
it follows not, that because God is said to suffer, therefore the Deity
suffered.

Secondly, the natures were united, inconvertibly, that is without the change
of the Divine into the humane, or of the humane into the Divine.

Thirdly, individedly, without division of natures, although not without
distinction: they are not two, but one Christ.

Fourthly, inseparably, this union remains for ever. At the death of Christ his
soul was separated from his body, but the Divine nature remained united to both
after its own manner; the natural union was dissolved, and not the personal.

Thus far concerning the Incarnation in general. The parts thereof follow, the
conception of Christ and his nativity.

Conceived by the Holy Ghost.

Not of the essence, but by the efficiency of the Holy Ghost: This particle of,
does not denote the matter, as if that Christ was of the Holy Ghost, for he was
of the fathers according to the flesh, Romans 9.5.

God also is immutable, and the Word assumed our flesh, and is not changed into
it: but of signifies the efficient cause; because by the virtue and power of
the Holy Ghost Christ was conceived.

His conception by the Holy Ghost speaks the miraculous forming of the flesh,
or body of Christ without the help of man: then, the sanctifying of it from
original sin, and the hypostatical union of it with the Word.

The body of Christ is thought to have been made simul and semel, together and
at once perfect, not successively, as the bodies of men are in the space of
forty days; otherwise Christ should not have been conceived a man, but an
embryo; yea he was inspired with a reasonable soul. Wickedly did Apollinaris
say that the soul of Christ was his Divinity. His soul was heavy and sad, which
is not competent to the Divinity; at his death his soul departed from his body;
but his Divinity did not recede or depart.

He was conceived for us, behold his love! how can we conceive to express it?

He was conceived of the Holy Ghost, behold his wisdom! that he might be free
from sin: let us mourn by reason of our impure conception. Let every one say
with David, Behold, in iniquity was I conceived, Psalm. 51.5. His pure
conception will cover our impurity, if that hereafter we endeavor to be pure.

So was his conception, his nativity succeeds.

Christ was born, that he might signify to us the truth of his humane nature.
Born of Mary, to show that he was of the fathers, to wit, David and Abraham, of
whom Mary came. Born of the Virgin Mary, lest he should be defiled with
original sin, and that the Scripture should be fulfilled; this the Prophet
foretold, Isai. 7.14. Behold, a Virgin shall conceive and bring forth a Son.

Neither were the Sybils silent in this matter, if those things be true which
are written of them. And truly Boethius in his Tractate of Scholastical
discipline, reports a wonderful thing, to wit, that there was found in Plato's
tomb a plate of gold, in which was written, I believe in the Son of God, that
is to be born of the Virgin. And such a like story Nicephorus tells of a
certain man, that in the time of Constantine and of his mother Irene, there was
a stone chest found under the earth with this inscription, The Messiah shall be
born of a Virgin, and I believe in him.

Out of all these arises the confirmation of our faith, and firm consolation,
that a Savior is born, and born to us, Isai. 9.6. When he was rich, he became
poor for us. For our sakes he was disgraced of men, and contemned of the
vulgar; he was humble, because he would not have us to be proud; he was born of
a poor Virgin, that he might show to us, that we ought not to boast in riches
and honor; and that he might teach us to be contented with the meanest
condition. The Virgin brought forth her Son, and she wrapped him in swaddling
clothes, having taken him first in her Virgin arms, into the which he being new
born the Angels had laid him, as Suarez conjectures. The Pastor of Israel
manifested himself to be a good Shepherd to the shepherds. The Angels brought
news of great joy that should be to all people, for that a Savior was born,
Christ the Lord, in the city of David, and suddenly there was with the Angel a
multitude of the heavenly host praising God. Jesus the bread of life was born
in Bethlehem the house of bread. He was born in a stable, that we should not so
much care for sumptuous Palaces; in which place afterward there was built by
S. Beda de locis sanctis and alii.
Helen a most sumptuous Church to the honor of the Virgin the Mother of God.

Concerning the manner of his birth, it was wonderfully singular, and
singularly wonderful. Of this thing Saint Austin does very admirably discourse,
saying thus, Let the incredulous Jew tell me, how, or in what manner the dry
rod (to wit Aarons) budded and blossomed, and brought forth almonds; then I
will tell him how the Virgin conceived and brought forth. But truly neither can
the Jew explain the one, nor I the other. Divine mysteries are not to be
discussed or searched out by the understanding, but to be adored by faith,
says S. Gregory. I believe therefore that it is enough for us simply to
believe, that Christ was born of the Virgin Mary. And certainly we ought
piously to hold and maintain it, that the blessed Mother of our Redeemer always
remained a Virgin. She was a Virgin before, in, and after her bearing or
bringing forth. The which S. Jerome at large proves against Helvidius. And that
place, Mat. 1.25. He knew her not till she brought forth her firstborn Son,
notes that he knew her not at all. The like you have, 2 Samuel 6. and the last
verse; where it is said, Michal the daughter of Saul had no child until the
day of her death, that is, she never had any.

But how is Christ said to be the firstborn, if he had no brethren? We answer,
that Christ is so called, not because there was not any son after him, but
because there was none before him.

And where in the Scripture there is mention made of the brethren of Christ,
there cousin-germans and kinsmen are understood: so Abraham said unto Lot, We
are brethren, Genesis 13.8.

Hitherto of the nativity of Christ, his passion follows.

He suffered under Pontius Pilate. The whole life of Jesus was a passion, he
suffered in his circumcision, in his flight into Egypt, in fasting forty days,
and in his temptation by the Devil, he suffered in the want of the chiefest
felicity, he suffered all kind of evils, all humane infirmities, sin excepted:
he endured poverty, injury, and the sense of the wrath of God, but without
despair; and to conclude, he suffered death it self, according to his humane
nature. To teach that Christ felt no pain in his flesh, nor true sorrow in his
soul at the time of his passion, is contrary to truth and heretical; as if it
should be said, he took not upon him to be true and real man, but only his
similitude: So truly says the Master of the Sentences, The Divine nature did
rest, 3 Sent. did. 14.
that the humane might suffer; but it upheld the humane in its agonies, that it
might overcome. The cause moving God to subject his Son to sufferings, was
either inward, or outward. The inward was the love of his good pleasure. The
outward threefold: the misery of sin, from whence was mercy; sin it self, from
whence justice; and the tyranny of the Devil, from whence revenge: the end and
fruit of Christ's passion are the same in a diverse respect; the end in respect
of Christ, the fruit or benefit in respect of us; and they are two, the glory
of God, and our salvation.

The Judge under whom he suffered was Pontius Pilate the Governor of all Judea
for Tiberius the Emperor: that it might be evident that Jesus was the true
Messiah, who was not to come till the scepter was wholly taken away from Judah,
Genesis 49.10. which came now to pass, Judea being overcome of the Romans. Then it
is also said that he suffered under Pilate; that the truth of that which Christ
spoke concerning his being delivered up to the Gentiles might be manifest,
Matthew. 20.19. Besides, because his sufferings under Pilate were most heavy and
grievous. For Pilate scourged Christ, and with thongs, not by his own, but by
the hands of the executioners, says S. Jerome. Soon after, when his body
throughout was torn with scourges, being crowned with thorns, adorned with a
purple robe, and a scepter of reed, by a new kind of mockery, as it were to
act in a theater, Pilate brings him in a King of misery to be beheld of the
people, and says, Behold the man. By which words he would have moved the Jews
to pity. But they, O hard-hearted men as they were! used Christ very
unmercifully: made choice of Barabbas, one notorious for lewd pranks, to be
released from punishment, and were very instant requiring that the most
innocent Jesus might be crucified. Pilate could have denied them, but he would
not: and against his conscience he delivered Jesus into the hands of his
enemies. Moreover, Pilates wife, In Chr. 10. An. Chr. 34.
whom Lucius Dexter calls Claudia Procula, was earnest with her husband that he
would give no rigid sentence against Christ: but the threats of the Jews did
more sharply prick him then his wifes advice. Perhaps Pilates wife dreamed that
he should smart for it, which afterward fell out accordingly, when he was sent
an Exile into Vienna in France: as Josephus, Ado, and others report: and we
read that afterward out of desperation he laid violent hands upon himself.

Furthermore Christ suffered under Pilate an ordinary Judge, that he might
absolve us from the severe judgment of God; and to conclude, that his
innocence might be demonstrated: for Pilate gave him this testimony that he
found no cause of death in him, Joh. 18.38. Therefore God would have him
examined, and so by consequence it was very clear, that Christ was delivered to
death, not for his own, but for our sins.

Against this passion of Christ under Pilate it may be objected, Rev. 13.8. how
therefore could this be under Pilate?

To this we answer, Pilate in a real.

But Pilate seems to be absolved from the guilt, Act. 4.28.

The shameful act of the Jews and Pilate displeased God extremely; but the
passion of Christ, and the redemption of mankind from thence arising was
exceeding acceptable, Prosp. ad objecta Gallorum, resp. 13.
decreed from eternity and preordained. Which is Prospers and other Doctors
judgment in the point. From what has been spoken it is manifest, how that the
wicked do execute the counsel of God although they purpose no such thing, and
yet notwithstanding are not exempted from blame.

But some one may say, Pilate nor the Jews may seem to have sinned. He ought
indeed upon supposition,

Ye have heard that Christ suffered and under whom. It follows in the Creed,
that he was crucified, Mat. 27.23.

And they are urgent to have this punishment of the cross inflicted on him
before any other, as being the most cruel, lingering and shameful death of all.
The offender was exposed alive to the view and mockery of all people: hanging
on a tree he was accursed, Deuteronomy. 21.23. All kind of hanging, not only among
the Jews, but among the Romans also, was of most extreme infamy and disgrace;
as both Seneca and Livy testify. Seneca epist. 101. Live lib. 14.
And this seems to be the reason, that he who is hanged on high, is judged in a
manner unworthy to tread on the earth with his feet: and therefore he is lifted
up from it. Wherefore Christ that he might make himself of no account, did
undergo this most vile and accursed kind of death, and took that curse upon
himself that was due to us, Gal. 3.13.

But wherefore would God have his Son rather to be crucified then otherwise
punished; the reason was says Tertullian, That he who overcame by the tree, to
wit the Devil, by his envious working, might be overcome also by the tree.
Secondly, that by his suffering of the most cruel punishment, he might procure
for us a most copious redemption, by satisfying to the full the Divine justice:
so others, and from hence comes our chiefest consolation. Thirdly to satisfy
the figures and oracles of the Prophets, Ita S. August. lib 6. de Civ. Dei. c.
32.
in the which it was fore-signified: For the brazen serpent being lifted up in
the wilderness, Number. 21. Joh. 3. and the sacrifices which were lifted up on
high, Levit. 7. were the types of Christ crucified. And as Isaac bare the wood
whereon he was afterward laid, Genesis 22. so likewise did Christ the wood of the
Cross. One part of the mount Moriah was without Jerusalem, wherein S. Jerome
informs us out of a tradition of the Jews that Isaac and Christ likewise were
offered up. This place was afterward called the mount of Calvary: by reason of
the sculls of the condemned that were there put to death. Here Adams scull as
some think was found, whom Tertullian and other of the Ancients deemed to have
been buried under the Cross; some also affirming, that the blood of Christ
hanging upon the Cross, ran down upon Adams scull, which manifests to us, that
he and his posterity believing in Christ should be saved by his blood: and this
was believed by the godly, as S. Cyprian averrs in a Discourse of the
Resurrection. Which opinion is pious enough, but I know not how true. In
general, it is evident that from the blood of Christ there is a virtue derived
most efficacious unto salvation. Let us in the mean time bewail our sins, for
the which Christ was pierced through with nails: and as the Israelites looked
on the brazen serpent, let us in like manner, by the eyes of faith look upon
Jesus, and we shall be healed; and as much as in us lies let us be crucified
unto the world: for this cause let him be wholly fixed in our heart, who was
wholly fastened upon the Cross for us.

And so pass we from his crucifixion to his death.

The Lamb of God expired on the Cross, at the same time that the evening lamb,
or the daily sacrifice was offered up in the Temple: to wit at the ninth hour
with the Jews, which answers to our third hour in the afternoon. The death of
Christ was voluntary, no man took his life from him; but he laid it down of
himself, Joh. 10.18. which is certainly apparent from his strong cry on the
Cross, when others being about to die, lose their speech, and do only wheez in
the throat. Not without cause said the Centurion greatly admiring: This is the
Son of God, Mat. 27.54. The bowing of his head shows the same, whereas other
men die before they bow their head. And because the death of Christ was
voluntary, therefore meritorious; otherwise he would not have been punished for
our disobedience. Secondly, his death was innocent, which the whole History
proves, and the confession of his enemies. Thirdly, his death was precious,
the dignity whereof was from the dignity of the Person, and so equivalent to
eternal death.

Christ ought to die by reason of the justice of God. Sin is an offense or
injuring of him who is man's Summum bonum, or highest good, and therefore to be
expiated by the greatest punishment: he therefore that was our surety was to
taste of death, by reason of the truth of God, who spoke concerning the fruit
of the forbidden tree, in the day that thou eatest thereof thou shall surely
die, Genesis 2.17.

It behoved Christ to die for the fulfilling of the prophesies, and by reason
of the prediction of Christ himself concerning his death, Joh. 12.33.

For the confirmation of the Testament of his grace, which was to be performed
by the death of the Son of God, Heb. 9.6.

From the death of Christ, as it were out of a fountain flows our redemption:
hence primarily is justification, Romans 8.34. hence regeneration, or the
restoration of corrupt nature; our old man is destroyed by the power of
Christ's death, and sanctification is obtained: the death of Christ does much
weaken original sin in a Christian, and although the death of Christ be past,
yet to this present time it does mortify our sins: because its virtue and
efficacy endures for ever. If so be that we apply this universal remedy of the
heavenly chief Physician to our hearts. Let us therefore with the Apostle exult
for joy and say, a Mors mortis morti mortem, mors morte redemit.
O death where is thy sting, etc. 1 Cor. 15.55.

This bondage of death Jesus undertook that he might procure unto us the
liberty of eternal life. True real death seized upon him, that we might attain
to true life, says S. Ambrose.

But if Christ died for us,

Christ laid down his life for his friends, yea for his enemies: let us in like
manner love others if occasion require; which thing the most holy Apostle S.
John urges in his 1 epist. chapter 3. v. 16. This love is heartily to be wished,
but can hardly be expected from a sort of men too too cruel. To conclude, death
to believers is nothing but a disguised thing to scare them; let us therefore
be faithful unto death and not afraid to die.

Hitherto of the death of Christ, his burial follows.

The bodies of the dead ought to be decently buried. They are esteemed inhumane
who neglect this. Amongst these were the Lotophagi, Historici and Geographici
passim.
a people of Africa, who cast the bodies of their friends into the sea. The
Sabeans, who threw the carcases of kings amongst dung-hils. The Scythians, who
to honor those whom they loved, did in their banquets devour their dead
carcases. The Hyrcanians, who gave them to dogs or wild beasts. All these are
detestable.

But although the death of Christ were ignominious, yet his burial was very
honorable. For he was buried by men of quality; Nicodemus a great Lawyer, and
Joseph a Counceller and Citizen of Jerusalem. These were disciples before but
secretly, now they appear openly; so great was the virtue of his passion.
Moreover, many noble and religious women helped forward this work. The honor
of his burial is evident also by other circumstances: his body was embalmed
with abundance of spices and wrapped in costly fine linen. Christ was buried in
a new sepulcher, hewn out of a rock, lest that if another should have been
buried there, another might have been said to have risen; as the Fathers note.
The New man would be buried in a new sepulcher, and in a garden, that his body
might be sown there, and bring forth the fruit of resurrection. That as in a
garden Adams sin was committed, so in a garden it might be expiated and
satisfied for. As his nativity was from the unstained bed or chamber of a
Virgin; so likewise his burial might not be defiled by any dead body. He would
be buried in another man's sepulcher, that as he was born in another man's house,
so being dead, he might lie in a grave that was another man's. And he would not
have a proper burial place, or sepulcher of his own, who had no proper cause of
death in himself. The sepulcher of Christ was a place of the chiefest devotion.
S. Jerome speaking of Paula says, That at her entrance into the sepulcher of
the Lord, she kissed the stone and the very place where Christ had lien. The
pilgrimage to this glorious sepulcher has been most famous from all parts of
the world. The Turk a most malicious enemy, gets much profit by the
visitation of the place; which for this cause, or for fear of punishment, he
has not yet destroyed. I think it not necessary for us to take so long a
journey, we may meditate on this matter more safely at home. And although there
is appointed a solemn procession at Lovain for the memory of Christ's burial,
where the blessed Virgin and other women sorrowfully following the dead corpse,
are wont to be represented; yet we doubt not but that a pious soul may perform
this without such pomp or ostentation.

Christ was buried, that the types of the Old Testament might be fulfilled; to
wit that of Jonah and others. As Jonah was three days and three nights in the
belly of the whale, so Christ foretold concerning himself, Matthew. 12.40.
Besides, he was buried, that it might appear that he was truly dead: and that
we might know that our sepulchers are sanctified by his being buried; no more
to be horrid places, but sweet and quiet chambers, in which we may rest until
we shall be raised up; hence our burying places are called (...), places for
the dead to rest or sleep in.

We therefore being buried with Christ by baptism into his death, ought to walk
in newness of life, Romans 6. v. 4. where the Apostle alludes to a rite of
baptism, which was by plunging: for his body who was baptized in this manner,
was in a sort buried in the waters. And they that were baptized were wont to be
thus plunged thrice in the waters, by an allegorical similitude to represent
Christ dead, and three days immersed or drowned in the Sepulcher. But S.
Chrysostom says, the tropological meaning of it was, to signify that as
Christ by his corporal death is dead unto this world, so we likewise by a
spiritual death should die to the same world; and to sin its lord and king; and
with a purpose to lead a new life, as Tertullian expounds it; Let not sin
therefore reign in our mortal bodies, that we should obey it in the lusts
thereof: let us not be buried as it were in sleep and wine, but let us reckon
our selves dead unto sin, and alive unto God through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The death of Christ is explained, proceed we to his descension into hell.

Hell in the Scriptures is taken many ways: properly for the place of the
damned, metaphorically for the greatest sorrows and infernal anguishes:
moreover for the grave, and sometimes for extreme ignominy. Hence arise the
diversities of opinions concerning this Article. Some interpret it of the
grave, but if so, the same should be twice put in, and declared by a more
obscure one, which in so perspicuous a Compendium it is not likely would be
done. It matters not much that this Article was left out in the Nicene Creed;
perchance the reason of it was because it never came into disputation.
Howsoever Eusebius who was present at the Council, delivers the same; as also
S. Athanasius in his Creed, received by the Church, although he omits the
burial. Others expound it of the torments of hell. Which if they understand
thus, that Christ before his death felt torments equal to the infernal, this
opinion is pious enough; but if their meaning be, that after his death he did
really feel the pains of hell, it is impious: for before this all things were
finished. If we say as Durandus does, that Christ descended into hell
vertually, or effectively, that is to destroy hell in the behalf of the
faithful: or if with others, that Christ descended to the lowest degree of
exinanition, or emptying himself: verily these opinions contain nothing in them
of falsehood: But some refer this descension to the soul of Christ. This opinion
that you meet with in Noels Catechism, our Church seems to approve of; in this
sense Christ is said to have descended into hell, that he might demonstrate
himself to be Conqueror over the devil, and all the infernal host, that he
might strike terror into the devils, and triumph most powerfully over them.
Many write many things concerning this matter. But my judgment is, that this
Article ought not to be handled subtly or scrupulously, Our English
Confession has so appointed it in the third Article. Even as Christ died for
us and was buried, so also is it to be believed that he went down into hell.
Here is nothing determined of the manner of his descension. Let idle wits by
their curious speculations search out this, and here if I be not deceived they
will find somewhat to do. Let it suffice us to believe, that Christ descended
into hell, and has performed all things necessary to our salvation: but for
the manner how, this hereafter will be better known.

The Papists who have been bold very accurately to describe the parts of hell,
are not yet agreed, whether Christ descended only into the limbo of the
fathers, or into Purgatory also: whether he delivered any from thence out of
his special grace and favor, as Thomas does conjecture: or whether he
delivered all, as Bonaventure and Gabriel: or whether also he descended into
the place of the damned, as Bellarmine affirms. They feign that he descended
that he might deliver the Fathers out of limbo: but we say plainly that limbo
is not known or mentioned in Scripture, that the souls of the godly were in the
hand of God, not in hell; that the Fathers were redeemed by virtue of the merit
of Christ, the Lamb slain from the beginning of the world, and not at length
freed by Christ's descension.

Neither is it any obstacle, Pet. 3.19. and preached, not by himself, but by
Noah to the spirits in prison, that is to men, whose souls are now in hell, who
were in time past disobedient, that is before the flood, while they then lived.
But it may be objected out of the same Apostle, Pet. 4.6. Here lies the
fallacy in the words or sentence; Peter wrote these sayings: but it was
preached to them when they were yet alive. Others with S. Austin interpret this
verse of the Gentiles being spiritually dead before conversion.

I confess many places out of the Fathers are brought against the Protestants:
but this consequence holds not good; some affirm it, therefore it is true.

We must know also, that the Fathers have uttered many things Rhetorically
concerning the efficacy of Christ's descension into hell, and have amplified
them in lofty expressions: acting like Ecclesiastical Orators, and therefore
making use of Rhetorical figures, not only to teach magisterially, but also to
persuade and move the affection. Let others contend concerning this matter: but
thou O. Christian soul, hold this faith, that thou have faith sufficient to
believe, that the descension of Christ is the cause of thy ascension on high.

And so from the degrees of Christ's exinanition, and the state wherein he was,
before he made it evident that he was alive, let us pass to the degrees of his
exaltation, amongst which the first that offers it self is the resurrection
from the dead.

The third day he rose again from the dead.

Christ is said to have risen again on the third day, not fully complete, but
being begun: which is typified by Jonah, Matthew. 12.40. It seems
notwithstanding that Christ was not three nights in the Sepulcher, no not so
much as by parts; but only the night of the Sabbath, and of the Lords day.
Here therefore it is to be noted that their days were reckoned from one
midnight (...) the other. Christ was in the Sepulcher part of Good Friday, all
the Sabbath day, and part of the Lords day, on the which he rose early in the
morning. And so the Romans who then ruled over the Jews, did compute their days
and nights.

Christ rose on the third day: not sooner, that it might manifest him to be
truly dead: not later, because he would not hold his disciples and others any
longer comfortless.

He rose, that by his resurrection from the dead he might declare himself with
power to be the Son of God. And this was merely an effect of his divinity, to
quicken himself by his own virtue and power; wherewith, being the Son of God,
he was invested.

That the Father is said to have raised the Son is no hinderance to this, Ephesians.
1.20.

He rose that he might demonstrate himself to have satisfied for our sins, and
to have purchased true righteousness for us. Unless he had risen, we had been
yet in our sins, all our faith would have been in vain, 1 Cor. 15.17. He rose
for his own and his Fathers glory, for the dignity and authority of his Person.
Because of his office, he ought to reign for ever, and always to intercede for
us. He rose for our salvation, for our justification, for our regeneration, for
our resurrection and glorification. That he might raise up our bodies at the
last day; the head being risen, the members cannot but rise: like as Adam
brought death upon himself and his posterity, even so Christ life; the Lord
makes the faithful coheirs of his glory; let us therefore rise again to the
life of grace, and persevere in the same.

It is objected that these benefits flow from the death of Christ. that these
benefits were given to the faithful believers under the Old Testament; our
answer is, This was done in respect of the resurrection to come.

But may some say, the ungodly also shall rise again. They shall rise again
indeed, but to the judgment of condemnation, not of absolution. And these
things out of many concerning the resurrection of Christ.

His Ascension follows.
Jesus like the Sun at his full meridian ascends the highest Heaven. He
ascended from the mount of Olives to Bethany, and not only into the aereal and
starry heaven, but also into the empyreal, into the seat of the Blessed. He
ascended according to his humane nature. John 3.13. the Son of man was then in
heaven.

But he that descended has also ascended, Ephesians. 4.10. He did not descend as
man, it seems therefore that neither did he ascend as man. But here the kind
or manner of the predication is changed; the Divinity descended, that is, did
show it self in a place where before it had not so discovered it self. And even
as Jesus did discover or manifest himself in his humane nature, in like manner
he ascended.

He ascended on the fourtieth day after the resurrection; in this space he
would instruct his disciples concerning his kingdom. He ascended visibly and
locally: he ascended into heaven.

But S. he ascended far above all heavens, surface of the highest Heaven where
the Saints live under him. But the words of the Apostle compel us not to the
belief of this. He may be said to have ascended far above all heavens, when he
ascended into the supreme or highest Heaven, and to the most worthy place
therein: even as we say, not only he that gets up to the very top, is said to
ascend a tree or a tower, but he also that climbs up to the higher boughs or
steps, although he stays beneath the top.

But it may be objected, but worms, may ascend with him. Adam had shut up
heaven, Christ opened it again. And although Enoch and Elias ascended before
him, yet it was not by their own but Christ's power, by which also he himself
ascended. Thirdly, Christ ascended, that he might give the Holy Ghost: and
although he was given before, yet it was in regard of the Ascension, and after
it in a more plentiful manner.

Hitherto of the Ascension of Christ, his sitting at the right hand of the
Father follows.

The right hand is attributed to God per (...), that is, by a borrowed speech
from men, and it signifies the chiefest power and glory. To sit at the right
hand, is a phrase taken from the custom and manner of kings, who place those
whom they honor at their right hand, and cause them whom they set over the
affairs of the kingdom to sit together with them. So Christ is said to sit at
the right hand of God the Father, because the Father, after he had finished our
redemption on earth crowned him with the chiefest glory, above all Angels and
men in heaven, and declared him to be Head and King of the Church, by whom he
would immediately govern all things both in heaven and earth, and whom he would
have to be adored of all creatures, The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit thou on my
right hand, says the Prophet, Psalm. 110.

The sitting therefore at the right hand of God, is the singular and proper
dignity of Christ (...), God and man, conferred upon him by the Father after
his Ascension. And it consists, First, in the perfection of his Person, or the
equality of the Word with the Father, which indeed he did not then first of all
receive, but it being veiled in the time of his humiliation, he did again make
apparent or manifest. Secondly, this dignity consists in the perfection of the
humane nature; which, the infirmities being put off or laid aside, is adorned
with supereminent and surpassing excellency of gifts, wisdom, and power.
Thirdly, this dignity consists in the perfection of his office, because Jesus
is constituted or appointed Head of the Church. This true Trismegist is King,
Prophet, Priest. And although he was the Head of the Church before, yet was not
that according to both natures nor always exalted.

Fourthly, the dignity of Christ consists in the perfection of his honor,
because he ought to be acknowledged and extolled by all as Lord of all. All
things are put under Christ's feet by reason of his glorious victory, and
although some things may seem to be refractory to him; yet they are to be
repressed by him at his will and pleasure.

It may be objected against the sitting of Christ at the right hand of God the
Father, Stephen saw him standing at the right hand of God, Acts 7.55.

But by this posture he expressed Christ his readiness to assist them that are
his Champions; true in a diverse respect. Besides, some may argue after this
manner, The right hand of God is every where; the humane nature sits at the
right hand of God; therefore it is every where. But in this argumentation you
are to say, there are four terms, as in this which follows; The sea compasses
the whole world; a certain city is situate by the sea: therefore a certain city
compasses the whole world. Neither also does the uniting of two inseparable
things require, that wheresoever one is, the other should be; but only that
they are somewhere together, and not at a distance. This is evident in the soul
and in the head, which are united inseparably: and yet, not wheresoever the
soul is, there is the head, when as the soul is in the feet, where the head is
not. But let us give over this subject, and be of good courage. Christ sits
at the right hand of God the Father, interceding for us. O how great a comfort
is this? Let us therefore embrace the Lord Jesus with our chiefest love, and do
his will: so we shall be blessed when he shall come to judgment: of which
there is mention made in the next Article.

From thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead.

That word [From thence] designs the place from whence the Judge shall come,
namely from heaven. He shall come from thence, whither the disciples saw him
ascending, Acts 1.9, 10. And although the work of judgment may be assigned to
every one of the Persons, according to decree, consent and authority; yet the
exercise of this visible act, and the execution is committed to the Son, as he
is the Son of man.

As for that place, The Father judges no man: to it we say thus, He judges no
man alone and without the Son,

Neither does that of Christ in any wise contradict this, when he says, Joh.
12.47. I came not to judge. He speaks there concerning his first coming in the
flesh, in the which he came not to condemn the world, but to save it; and not
of his second coming, which is unto judgment.

Neither is that which is said of the Apostles, that they shall judge the
twelve tribes, Matthew. 19.28. and of the Saints, that they shall judge the
world, 1 Cor. 6.7. any let hereunto; for this shall be done of them by way of
approbation, not of authority.

The end of Christ's Advent or Coming is explained by the distribution of the
subjects; that he may judge both the quick and the dead: under which terms all
men altogether are comprehended, who are said to be quick of dead, in respect
of that state which precedes the judgment: The quick being they whom the last
day of judgment shall surprise alive, who in a moment shall be changed from a
mortal condition to an immortal. The dead, those, who from the beginning of the
world have departed this life, and before the last day, shall be raised up at
length by the trump of the Archangel, and presented before the judgment seat
of Christ: and the Angels are included also who kept not their first station,
Jude, v. 6. and are therefore reserved in chains under darkness, to the
judgment of the great day, 2 Pet. 2.4.

It may be objected, he that believes not is condemned already, John 3.18.

We answer,

The last judgment shall be set up, that every one may receive what he has
done in his body, whether it be good or evil; and that the justice of God may
be published to the praise of it. Since God is just, it is necessary that it be
perfectly well with the good and godly, and that the wicked and impious be for
ever miserable; this very thing is not done in this world, therefore it is
righteous to recompense to them who trouble the godly, trouble; and to you who
are troubled rest, when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven, 2 Thessalonians.
1.7.

That there shall certainly be a judgment, this we know against the
Epicureans; but the year, month, day and hour, we know not; no, not the Angels
in heaven, Mark 13.32. The Fanatics err, who either out of an enthusiastical
revelation, or Arithmetical calculations, and Astrological prognostications, do
set down the time when the judgment shall be, but without a right judgment.
Let us in the mean time prepare our selves all our days, and moments of our
lives for the coming of Christ; and let us take heed lest that day come upon us
unawares, and find us unprepared. The last day is hid from us, that we might
watch all our days: it is always unknown, that it may be always expected; let
therefore that terrible trumpet ever make this noise in our ears, Arise ye
dead, and come to judgment.

The second part of the Creed was concerning the Son of God, the third follows,
of the Holy Ghost. I believe in the Holy Ghost.

We are to believe, that the Holy Ghost is God, and that he is the third Person
of the Trinity, equal to the Father and the Son in all perfection. This is
clear out of Sacred Writ, and the doctrine of the Church, which do render equal
glory, to the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost.

Yet it may be said, Ergo.

This is true of him who receives part from another,

Some may object, that he that is sent, is not equal to him that sends: but
this does not hold, where the mission or sending is by a voluntary consent.

He is called a Spirit, because he is a spiritual essence, and that by way of
excellency, because he is far above all created spirits.

It may be objected,

So they are indeed absolutely, and the river from the fountain: but the water
of the fountain, river and pool, are all one and the same. The Father as the
fountain, begets the Son, as the river. The Father and the Son, as the
fountain with the river breathe forth the Holy Ghost, as it were a pool: yet
their essence is one and the same. The late Grecians are accused, because they
think that the Holy Ghost did not proceed from the Son: neither will I contend
very much to excuse them; but if their doctrine were with moderation explained,
perhaps the difference between them and us may seem to be in words and not in
the thing it self. And if any urge us more morosely, that it is no where said,
that the Holy Ghost proceeded from the Son; we will not contend about the word,
if he be granted to be the Spirit of the Son no less then of the Father; and to
be sent from the Son as from the Father; which is all one in sense as to
proceed. Neither do I believe that the Grecians will deny this. Certainly this
procession is done in an unspeakable manner, and how it may be done, is not for
us to search overcuriously.

The Spirit is said to be Holy, because he is essentially holy; when as the
Angels are so by the grace of creation, believers by the grace of adoption. And
again he is said to be Holy, because he is the Author of true or perfect
holiness: he is a quickening Spirit, because he is the efficient cause of
spiritual life in our souls. The body is dead without the soul, and the soul is
dead without the Spirit. Let us say with David, O Lord renew a right spirit
within us, Psalm. 51.10. and so the short third part of the Creed is briefly
explained.

The fourth follows, I believe the holy Catholic Church.

I believe the Church was, is, shall be, and that I am a lively member thereof:
I believe not in the Church: the affiance of the heart is to be directed only
to God. This Church is a company of men that are called, who do embrace the
word of God, and that rightly use the Sacrament. The Church is called Ecclesia,
from the Greek word (...), to call forth. The convention or meeting of Citizens
amongst the Athenians, who were called forth by the Crier from the rest of the
company to hear the judgment of the Senate, had that name given them:
answerable to which there are a company of the faithful amongst Christians, who
by the preaching of the word are called out of the kingdom of the devil, to
hear Gods will and pleasure. The Church is called holy, because it is
sanctified by the most precious blood of Jesus, because by his merits it is
purified through the word, sacrament and faith, and because it is taken up in
the holy exercises of Divine worship, and Christian charity. They are not true
members of the Church, who abroad in the world shine in sanctity, and at home
abound in iniquity: nor those, who are like to the lascivious Monks, whose body
is in the Quire, and their mind in their chamber: of whom Innocentius said of
old, In the night they embrace venery, and in the morning they adore the
Virgin. From outward sanctity we cannot necessarily conclude the inward
holiness of the Church. But beloved, be you holy within and without. To be
Saints and seem so is good, to seem and not to be such is worst of all. Feigned
sanctity is double iniquity, says S. Austin.

To proceed, The Church is called Catholic, that is, Universal. This word is
not written in the Scriptures, but after the times of the Apostles it began to
be used.

The Church is so called, because it is gathered out of all kinds of men
throughout the whole world, and because it does profess and approve of the
Catholic doctrine of the Prophets, of Christ, and of the Apostles, by an
unanimous consent. So Catholic is the same with Orthodox, and it is opposite
to heretical: as it was first of all opposed to the Arrian heresy, and to
others, not judging aright of the Trinity. And they were called Catholics, who
did follow the true doctrine of the Divinity of Christ as it was expounded by
the Nicene Council. This signification of Catholic is the most principal one.
Where there is not an universality of the faith, there the universality of time
and place is of no avail.

If any one should say that the Church of Rome is Catholic in respect of
place.

Neither does that make for it, that it is called Catholic. For it is not
enough to be so called, but to be such. We are not to look what is done, but
what ought to be done. The Pontificians are called Catholics by us, but either
according to their own opinion, or ironically, even as they call us the
Reformed. But ours is the true Catholic Church, because the doctrine thereof
was declared by the Apostles throughout the whole world, and because it is
entertained and received by men of all sorts, because it was proposed in all
ages, although not in a like degree, and for that it is consonant and agreeable
to Holy Writ. Let others please themselves in the beautiful shell of a name, we
had rather obtain the kernel of the thing.

Hitherto concerning the Church, now let us treat something of the Communion of
Saints in the Church.

Communion is a relation between two or more having something common.

Saints are the members of the Church, which are said to be holy, either for
the imputation of Christ's righteousness, or their begun conformity to the law,
or for their separation from the world.

The communion of Saints is the common possession and interest, which the
members of the Church have amongst themselves in Christ their Head, and all his
benefits and gifts. This communion therefore consists, First, in the union of
the members of the Church with their Head Christ, which is not the subsistence
of the body of Christ within our bodies, but the inhabitation of the same
Spirit. And truly they are three, yea four times blessed, whose fellowship is
with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ: concerning which Saint John
speaks in his first Epistle, chap. 1. verse 3. Good God, what a noble
association is this? What is more desirable in this life then to have perfect
amity with God the Father and Christ, by faith, by hope, by reciprocal love, by
mutual colloquies, obsequiousness, joy, by the communication of good things, as
it is between a father and an adopted son, between the bridegroom and the
bride? I beseech you therefore by the plentiful effusion of the blood of Jesus
on the Cross, that ye walk with God, or have your conversation with God: not in
the darkness of unbelief, or of sin, but in the light of faith, grace and
virtue. God by his nature is light, void of darkness, if ye would be joined to
him, ye must of necessity bid adieu to darkness, and your delightful sins.

The second part of this communion is the union of the members of the Church
between themselves, We being many are one body in Christ, and every one members
one of another, says the Doctor of the Gentiles, Romans 12.5. and from thence
the holy man does infer golden or precious precepts; amongst some other these,
Let love be without dissimulation: Communicate or distribute to the necessity
of the Saints: rejoice with them that rejoice; weep with them that weep: be of
the same mind one toward another: as if he should say, I would have such a
sympathy or fellow-feeling among you Christians, as to be equally affected both
with the good and evil things of all, whether in prosperity or adversity.

Beloved Auditors, yield ye obedience to these admonitions of the Apostle. Be
ye endued with humanity, or brotherly love, charity, meekness, bounty: let it
be a shame to Academians, who ought to be more rational creatures then others;
to be given to anger, brawlings, envyings, disobediences, evil-speaking,
inhumanity and revenge; shun these vices which become not the Students of
humane learning, and after the examples of the Christians of the Primitive
Church, Be ye of one heart and of one mind, Acts 4.32. And if ye shall forgive
others the injuries that are offered unto you by them, ye shall also obtain
remission of sins from your heavenly Father. The which is treated of in the
following words: I believe the remission of sins.

Forgiveness of sins is the will or good pleasure of God, whereby he forgiveth
believers both the sin, and the punishment due to sin for Christ's merits sake.
Yea, their most enormous sins shall be forgiven; for it is repugnant to the
infinite goodness of God to be overcome by any humane wickedness. He does
injury to God that despaireth of his mercy; rightly Saint Augustine against
those words of Cain, Genes. 4. Mine iniquity is greater then that it may be
forgiven. After this manner says he, Thou lie Cain, for the goodness of God
is greater then the iniquity of all men; and elsewhere he has written, That
greater is the mercy of God then the misery of all men. Verily, it is a most
excellent speech of his unto God in his meditations: Although O Lord, I have
committed that for which thou may condemn me, yet thou have not lost that
whereby thou may save me. It is most true, for if a sinner do repent, the
Lord will not remember his iniquities. Let the wicked forsake his way, and turn
again unto the Lord, and the Lord will have mercy on him, Isai. 55.7. In God
there is omnipotent mercy, and merciful omnipotency; such is the benignity of
his omnipotency, and the omnipotency of his benignity, that there is nothing
that he will not, or cannot forgive a believing soul: yea, oftentimes beyond
remission God bestows most abounding grace. What cannot repentance do? Who in
the secular state sinned more enormously then Paul? Who in the religious more
out of measure then Peter? Yet they by repentance did not only attain to the
ministry, but also the magistery of holiness.

But to explain this Article more fully.

We must know, that God is the principal efficient cause of remission; He alone
can forgive sins primarily, or by chief authority. But the Priests or Ministers
of the Church are only administering causes as they are messengers of the
Divine forgiveness. God only of himself forgiveth sins, because he cleanses
the soul from the inward blemish or stain, and releaseth it from the debt of
eternal death; but he has not granted this to the Priest; to them
notwithstanding he has given the power of loosing and binding, that is, by
showing them they are loosed and bound, 4 Sent. Did. 18.
as Lombard writes.

Some may say,

This is true,

Some may object again, that it is an unjust thing to punish the innocent for
the offender. We answer, It is not, if the innocent party offer himself
spontaneously to punishment, if he can go through it and get out of it; and if
this tend to the glory of God, and the salvation of men, all which conditions
do meet very well in Christ.

It may be further objected, that this remission of God is not freely bestowed;
because satisfaction was required to the forgiveness of sin. But we say, the
satisfaction required was not made by us, but by another. If we be urged still,
that he who on such condition forgiveth, does not forgive freely. It may be
answered, It is true, unless the party that requires it does also give the
satisfaction: But God the Father has given his Son, that he might satisfy for
us.

Hitherto Of the remission of sins, the resurrection of the body, or flesh,
follows.

Credo resurrectionem carnis.

I believe the resurrection of the body, or flesh.

It is a very difficult thing to understand by the sense or perception of
corrupt reason, how or in what manner the same body should rise again, after so
many transmutations, and be reunited to the same soul: And therefore many in
the Areopagus derided Paul, when they heard of the resurrection of the dead:
yet by the light of faith it is most clearly manifest that there shall be such
a resurrection; It will not be difficult to them to believe this, who do
believe, that with God there is nothing difficult: the restitution of the body
or flesh is by far easier then its first constitution or forming. It is of
lesser concernment by much to restore that which has been, then to make that
which never had any being. He which could make all things out of nothing, can
easily raise again our bodies out of something; to wit, restore them out of the
dust of the earth: and why should we admire, that that could be born again,
which has had a being, when as we behold that to have a being which never had
any before. Holy Job in the Old Testament, an Evangelical man before the
Gospel, doubted not of this thing: I know, says he, that my Redeemer lives;
and after that worms shall consume this body of mine, yet in my flesh I shall
see God: whom I shall see for my self and not another, Job 19.25. Thy dead men
shall live, says Isaiah to the Lord, together with my dead body shall they
arise, chap. 26. verse 19. And in the New Testament, the Lord Jesus, John 5.28.
does most apparently attest the self-same thing: The hour shall come, in the
which all that are in their graves shall hear his voice; and they which have
done good, shall come forth unto the resurrection of life; but they that have
done evil unto the resurrection of condemnation. S. Paul also very notably
confirms the resurrection by very many arguments, 1 Cor. 15. the which
arguments I desire you to search out from thence.

The Sadduces therefore have erred, who believed not the resurrection, Acts
23.8. and the Epicureans, who practice the like with them; to whom death is the
utmost bound and end of all things.

Ecclesiastes, chap. 3. verse 19. that there is one and the same event both to
man and beast. But the beasts rise not again, therefore neither do men rise
again.

To this we answer,

Besides, bodies shall arise again the same in number, and with perfection and
beauty: in the same form, as it is likely, which men attain to, if they come to
man's estate. Our bodies shall be like to the glorified body of Christ, (...),
not (...), in quality, not in quantity; and aliqualiter, non aequaliter; and
after some fashion, but not equally. Our bodies shall be spiritual, not in
substance, but for certain qualities and proprieties: they shall have agility,
subtilty, and be incorruptible.

The Anabaptists err, who deny that bodies shall arise again the same in
number: and affirm that at the second coming of Christ new bodies shall be
created.

Origin also was in an error, who was of this opinion, that it should be an
aereal body, not a carnal that should rise again: It is very warily warded in
the Creed, that the very self-same flesh shall arise. For the resurrection is
of the same body that did fall: as the word it self implies.

So far concerning the doctrine of the resurrection. That which remains for me
to do, is to warn and admonish all, yea and my self too, that even now we would
arise to the life of grace, that by so doing we may hereafter arise to the life
of glory, of which there is mention made in the last Article; I believe the
life everlasting.

In hell this is the state of the wretches there, that they have death without
death, in a dreadful manner; an end without an end, a defect without defect:
because that death always lives, and the end is always beginning, and the
defect knows not how to cease: death destroys and exextinguisheth not. God
preserve and keep us from this eternity; which that he may do, let us repent,
amend our lives, correct our pride: for it is not so easy a thing to be saved
as men say. If we do this, we shall enter into life everlasting.

This life is the eternal being of those that live in heaven, which is an
eternal well-being. It is called eternal life, not in regard of that part which
went before, but of that which is behind, because it is to endure for ever.

In this life there will be the necessary presence of all good, and the
necessary absence of all evil. Whatsoever shall be lovely will be there
present, nothing shall be desired, that shall not be there: there shall be life
without death, day without night, security without fear; pleasure without
grief, tranquillity without toil, beauty without deformity, strength without
weakness, rectitude without perverseness or frowardness, love without malice,
truth without falsehood, felicity without misery. The blessed shall rejoice for
the pleasantness of the place which they shall possess; for the delightful
society in which they shall reign; for the glorified body which they shall
have; in regard of the world which they have contemned, of hell which they have
escaped, yea in respect of God, whom they shall behold for ever and ever.

In the life eternal there are the most choice delights, and the greatest store
of riches. The good things which are there exceed all understanding, and
therefore much more, that which can be said of them. I will therefore admire in
silence, what I cannot express by speaking.

Lastly, it is to be noted, that this word Amen, is added to the Creed, as the
seal of faith; as if a Christian should say, I believe all these things to be
most true.

S. August. de Civit. Dei, lib. ult. cap. ult. Non alius est finis, nisi
pervenire ad regnum, cujus nullus est finis. There is no other end, but to
attain to that kingdom, whereof there is no
END.

