A DIALOGUE BETWEEN Alkali and Acid: CONTAINING DIVERSE PHILOSOPHICAL and
MEDICINAL CONSIDERATIONS WHEREIN A late Pretended New Hypothesis, asserting
ALKALI the Cause, and ACID the Cure of all Diseases; is proved Groundless and
Dangerous. BEING A Specimen of the Immodest Self-applause, Shameful Contempt,
and abuse of all Physicians, gross Mistakes and great Ignorance of the
Pretender John Colbatch.

By T. E. Chirurgo-Medicus.

(...).
(...). LONDON: Printed for R. Cumberland, at the Angel in St. Paul's
Churchyard, and Tho. Speed, at the Three Crowns, near the Royal Exchange in
Cornhill, School. And Sold by most of the Booksellers of London and Westminster.

Price One Shilling.

PHARMACOPOEUS and CHYMICUS, Symmystae; seu Pharmacopoeia Chymica. In qua
Medicamenta Alphabetice digesta tam Chymica quam Officinalia, Scitu dignissima,
uno quasi intuitu legenda simul and pernoscenda, Lectori Subjiciuntur. Authore
Joshua Lasher. M. D. and Coll. Div. Johan Bapt. in Univer* Oxon, olim Socio.
Habeo Chymia quod Sane^ and Herbis. Londini: Impensis Tho. Speed, apud quem
prostant Venales ad Insignia Trium Coronarum in vico Vulgo v^cato Cornhill.
School. Pretium 2 s. 6 d.

The PREFACE to the Reader.
Although I have most commonly found the Pretenders to New-Light, and rare
Inventions (so common now Adays) no more but Pretenders; yet having something
of Curiosity, shall I call it, or Vanity, to be Inquisitive for Truth in such
Pretensions; the noise of a New-Light of Surgery, and a New Method of
Physic Built upon Principles directly contrary to, and overthrowing all
whatsoever has been done by the whole World of Physicians, could not but excite
in me an Attention, and cause me to enquire into the Truth of such a Report.
But when I had Read over one or two of those Books which at length gave
occasion and Matter to the following Discourse (though they contain something, I
confess very Uncommon) I found nothing which could give me the least Stomach to
another Meal of the same, or Appetite to any New-Dish, afterward presented by
the same Author. I had found his Sauce sour enough, and the Dishes Garnished
with Oranges and Lemons; but the Meat it self so Raw and Insipid, I set it by
as a sort of stuff I had for ever enough of. But sometime since, conversing
with diverse Persons having little, or no Skill in Medicinal Cookery, and
finding them highly Commend as choice Viands, those things which I knew would
be but of bad Digestion, and very apt to breed ill Humors: And considering
that it becomes an Honest and Generous Physician, as well to Advise what things
may preserve, or be prejudicial to the Health of his Neighbors, as to heal
their Diseases; I begun to think, whether I was not obliged in Duty to Mankind,
as well to Discover the evil Practice of another, as to labor to act rightly
my self. And forasmuch as I know, an Unreasonable and Rash Method of Physic,
though it hurts not Physicians, may more than endanger the Lives and Healths of
the People, though not in the Theory, yet in the Practice which is made upon
them, I was persuaded once more to Read over what I had before been sated with,
and what farther has been offered by the Author of the pretended New-Method,
and to transcribe, and make some Remarks upon some of the chief Things whereby
he endeavors to persawde the Truth of what he calls his New-Hypothesis: Which
when I had done, I could not but yet more admire what it was in this Author,
that Persons of any Literature and Sense, whether Young Physicians, or
Gentlemen found so taking; something very Uncommon, as I said, there is. But
what? (...), CONFIDENCE the sign of Ignorance of Art, as the Noble (...) Cous
says: Yet which methinks is strangely accounted nowadays so great a
Qualification, and particularly in a Physician, that it can atone for, Yes,
and set off, all the Imperfections, and Deformities of bad Language, want of
Reason, Reiterated Tautologies, Contradictions and Calumnies, the Author of a
Quack Book, Bill, or Speech, can be guilty of. I was a little uneasy to think
that the Judgment of our Age seemed so declined it such, and such Persons: But
yet they might have embraced their Nonsense, and hugged their false Juno long
enough for me, Sed quod luditur de corio, imo de vita Humana, but that her
Embraces I knew, might prove unwholesome to them. Which I think, will appear in
the following Discourse, to all that will but grant that the Art of Healing is
grounded upon Reason, and Experimental Philosophy. The way of Dialogue I chose
to Write in, I think, will not only be less tiresome, but more easy and
profitable to my Reader; since I have Transcribed from my Author Word for Word,
all that I take occasion to Speak too, for the most part under the Person of
Acid, but what farther Excerptions I Reflect upon, Rehearsed by Alkali, you
will find noted in Italick Characters, so that you may save the Trouble or
Charge of turning to his Books, in Reading mine. Wherein I assure you, I have
not abused him. or altered his Sense in a Tittle, that I know of, or added,
more than some few Words of Connection, and the entrance of the Discourse, which
the Justest Reader, I suppose, will pardon as a small Transgression against the
Man that I never saw, or owe any more Ill Will too, than him that I never heard
of, but wish him really, as great (if it were possible) as he says he is, and
would have us esteem him. It Is one of the Main Points of my Religion, though I am
a Physician, That I ought to be a Friend to all Men; but I am somewhat of the
Opinion of Plautus, Amicum non castigare ob merita, mala noxia imane et
facinus, I think it a Fault, not to reprove those Errors, even in a Friend,
that may be of evil Consequence. But here are Errors, that may endanger even
the Lives of better Men than him that I reprehend, if so unfortunate as to be
enticed by the love of sharp Sawces, and to fall into the Hands of so Bold a
Medicaster. The exposing af whose Faults, I know, may be in some respect to his
Private Damage, but the Publick-Good, ought to be esteemed greater than the
Private-Interest of any Man. Salus enim populi Suprema lex est. Yet if things
be Weighed in the most just Balance, I think it may be found, That I have said
nothing against our Doctor, or which, may not be for his real Benefit, whom I
look upon as a Sick-Man, and am so far of his own Opinion, as to think his
Disease cannot be Cured without sharp Medicines; which though he may as little
like in the Swallowing, or Application, as some of his Patients may the Effects
of his Acid-Doses, I hope yet it may be for his Health hereafter. But there are
so many things in my Author, which are the Breakings forth of Vicious Humors,
I am doubtful whether I shall be reckoned culpable for giving him so many, or
so few Doses, and applying my Corrosives to so many, or so few of his Sores. I
fear you will be weary of seeiug him Dressed: Yet I hope no Physician, or
Surgeon, no, nor Gentleman, or Lady, but may see something worth their
while; being if not so pleasant, yet of useful Consideration. Therefore I shall
no longer detain you at the Door of my Lazar-House, but take you in to hear,
and see, the Badness of my Patient, and what sort of Medicines I have Prepared
for him. And though you will hear him Talk sometimes Talk like a Madman (his
Disease being much in his Head) and abuse those that have done for him, as he
has always done, calling all his Physicians, Scoundrels, except Dr. Tuthil who
got a little into his Favor; yet you need not fear if you don't come too near
him, any more than I do, though I am resolved to handle him closely, that if
possible the poor Young Man may have the benefit, and I the Credit of so great
a Cure. But however it happens, I confess, I am almost ashamed of Preparing so
many Remedies for so mean a Patient: But long Bills are Fashionable, and my
medicines given Gratis.

A DIALOGUE BETWEEN ALKALI, and ACID.
Al. WELL met Mr. Acid, whither are you hurrying so fast, to some Hero run
through the Lungs, or the Heart?


Ac. I should hardly stay to tell you Mr. Alkali, but that I am engaged to
oppose you wherever we meet, you Principle of Death and Corruption, I am
always provoked by you, you have done so much mischief in the World: And now to
your farther reproach, I have a fresh instance of your badness, by a Messenger
from my Lord Lazington, whom you have plagued with a fit of the Gout, and that
a desperate one if I come not in time to his assistance, none can help him but
I, and he thinks it 7 Years e're I come to him.


Al. You are very sharp Mr. Acid. I sometime since heard indeed, that you have
reptoach'd me in all Companies, even in Coffee-Houses, as well as wrote Books
against me, but now I find it true: I am glad I have met with you, to tell you,
you have scandalously reported diverse things of me, which if you cannot prove to
my Face, I shall not easily put up the Injury, nor part with you willingly
without Proof, or Submission. Let my Lord Lazington roar a little, you will be
the welcomer when you come; and I know you can tell how to excuse your delay;
some Duke or other had sent for you before, and perhaps my Lord will do as well
without you. Let us try whether you can maintain your Charge: You call me the
Principle of Death and Corruption, and I hear you say, I am the cause of all
Diseases, and that you alone are the Dr. that can do any thing considerable in
the Cure of them, and that by destroying and expelling Alkali: And this you
make an Hypothesis of, and call it a new one, of your discovery.


Ac. I am so far from denying what I have said against Alkali, that I continue
still to assert my Hypothesis. That all the Alkali in the Blood is most
certainly an Excrement in a way of being carried off by some of the
Emunctories, and when any of the Emunctories chance to be stopped, that the
Alkali has not room to pass out, then there is a Disease. And the matter of all
our Dstempers is the same. And whereas Acids are contrary to Alkalies (there
being a conflict between them wherever they meet) their being given in due
proportion, will lessen the matter of the Distemper, and in time, totally
extirpate it. Similia similibus gaudent, and contraria contrariis curantur. And
I am so absolutely confirmed in the truth of my Hypothesis, that I am sure it
is not in the power of any one to overthrow it. Nay the Hypothesis on which I
build, I am sure is true. And I have in all my Writings, Truth for my Guide:
But the opposition I have met with, has been almost insupportable. Truth at
its first appearing never wants Opposers. But the New Doctrine I have advanced
has gained so much Ground, that few Authors in their own Lifetime, have scarce
seen the like. This unwonted and unexpected Encouragement, has filled me with a
sense of Gratitude, to me inexpressible. Reason is the true Touchstone, by
which we ought to Examine every thing, and I have never advanced any thing,
till weighed in the Balance of my best Reason, and yet, lest Reason should
deceive me, and I so impose on the World; I have always joined Experience to
it; so both being conjoined, I could not well deceive my self, nor lead others
into Error. That Prodigy of Nature. Mrs. Anne Baynard, said in my hearing,
that, Reason was that Eternal Standard God Almighty, as a Ray of his own Image
has impressed upon Man, to the election, or dislike of what may hurt, or
succor him; and where this is raised and improved, makes him an Angel, where
sunk and depressed, a grovelling Brute.


Al. I find your Confidence, Mr. Acid, as great as I have heard it reported,
which is no Argument to me, that you are in the right; Confidence and Ignorance
being usually Companions: And I am the more persuaded it may be in the power,
of some one or other to overthrow your Hypothesis. If you were sure of the
truth of it, I confess, it would be impossible it should be found untrue: But I
supopse you only fancy your self sure. That you have Truth for your Guide, I
suppose (if you know what you say) you mean, you have some certain Truths, as
Rules to guide you to the invention of others: But perhaps, you may as other
fallible Men, take some things for Truths that are not true, or not know how to
use them as Rules, if they are so. What opposition you have met with I know
not, it seems it was what you could hardly bear, I doubt you have thereby
confessed, your strength to be but weak. Why Truth should always have Opposers
at first, I see not, unless when it is not clearly demonstrated, as your
Hypothesis (to let you suppose it true) is not, as you will go near to find,
before we have done. And as for the ground, you say your new Doctrine has
gained in your (but yet short) lifetime, beyond the Inventions of other
Authors, which so surfeits your Heart with Joy, I think no body else sees it;
for I could never yet meet with any one Ingenious Man of your Opinion. And if
any few unwary Tyros, or Person not studious of Nature, have been pleased with
your Fancies, I believe, if they will but use their Reason, which you say is
the Touchstone of Truth, by which we are to examine all things; they will find
Reason to alter their Opinion, and find their Master Acid's best reason was but
a false balance, and did indeed deceive him, and that his experience was but
mistaken experience, and so imposed upon the Master, and Scholars too. But that
Reason is an eternal Standard, I do not see; though the prodigious Mrs. Ann
Baynard said so: I rather think her and you, too prodigious Metaphysitians; For
I take Reason to be peculiar to Creatures, and that Creatures and whatever
belongs to them are not Eternal, unless in the same sense, as an ignorant
pretender in Physic in the Beaux Language, would be called an eternal Quack.
Neither can I see by any of your reasonings Reason so improved in your self, as
to give any body any ground to take you for an Angel. Mrs. Ann Baynard might be
a great Wit for ought I know, and Wit and Beauty in a Woman, might possibly
make a youngster mistake her even for a Goddess, and to be said to be Witty and
Pretty would please most Women, and by pleasing the Women, a Doctor may be
likely to meet with an Angel sometimes you know Sir.


Ac. The Doctrine I have advanced is so directly contrary to every thing that
has been wrote yet, it is enough to startle any young Man, nay some old ones
too; but I have so inquired into Diseases, as to be altogether certain of the
Truth of my Hypothesis, but not so as to make People Immortal, which I believe
some expect from me: But let People lay aside prejudice and set themselves to
make Experiments, I am sure they will lay aside their old Notions, and embrace
my new Hypothesis, and I am morally certain that my new Doctrine of Acids at
present so much decry'd, will soon obtain the public vogue, carrying a
self-evidence along with it, and some People will be so enamored with it, as
to use Acids with as much reason, as others now use the Cortex; which has been
brought so extravagantly in vogue, that some use it in all Distempers, and I
believe it will in time, be put into Plasters to Cure Corns. By this may be
seen the instability of Humane Nature that is more governed by Fancies than by
Reason, so that what is to day condemned is to morrow in great value. But the
Doctrine of Acids being a thing of Universal extent, it is impossible any one
should do so much mischief with them, as with the Cortex.


Al. If your Doctrine is directly contrary to every thing yet wrote, it is very
likely to be contrary to Truth; for doubtless there has been some Truth wrote
before. But I am not at all startled at your Doctrine Mr. Acid, though I confess,
I am neither very young, nor old. What a Novice, or an Old Dotard may be, I
know not; but if any thing be startling, it is your Impudence, which indeed
seems Monstrous: That a Mushroom in Physic should so confidently oppose all
that has been yet wrote by all the Learned Physicians of all Ages, and pretend
to have so inquired into Disease since Yesterday, as to be certain that the
long Study and Practice of all other Men gave them nothing but mistakes; but
your little time has produced absolute certainty. But truly, notwithstanding
your Opinion of your self, I dare say no body expects Immortality from you. As
for prejudice, you would have us lay aside, I believe I laid it aside, for some
time before you began with the study of Pharmacy, and have ever since made
Experiments, and I believe, have had more opportunity, as well as time, to
carry on a course of experimental Philosophy, than your self; (not to disparage
you) yet I cannot lay aside all my Notions thereby gotten, and embrace your new
Hypothesis. Your moral Certainty that it will obtain the Public Vogue, is no
better than to say, an uncertain certainty. Nor is your Doctrine self-evident
to any but Mr. Acid's own sharp self; whose Eyes perhaps are Microscopes in
comparison to other Men's. But there is no fear, People will be enamoured with
your Hypothesis it has so sour a Countenance. But the instability of Humane
Nature, (I confess) is such, and some other Men are so much governed by Fancies
as well as you, that possibly Acids may be used with the like reason, and
extravagance as some have used the Cortex; but they will hardly mix them with
Plasters. But though Alkalies should be to day wholly condemned, perhaps they
may be to morrow in as great value as ever. And if it be not possible to do so
much mischief with Acids, as with the Cortex; yet I believe, some Persons may
find enough done with them to dissuade us from using them as you would have us:
But I am certain, a confident Empirick may do a great deal of mischief with
Acids, Alkalies, Cortex, or any thing.


Ac. People must long since have known my Hypothesis, or they must not; if they
have not they have groped in the dark, and cured Diseases as a blind Man may
catch a Hare; if they have known it, their giving Alkalies is an Argument, they
have not acted like honest Men. But no one can charge me with any thing
selfish, unless it be to leave a Name to Posterity. I want University-Glosses
to polish over my Discourse, but Truth like Diamonds will sparkle among
Pebbles, yea appears best naked; and I am sorry, I am forced to promulgate this
Doctrine in Terms that look so like self-commendation but I have been too long
meal mouthed, whereby Truth has suffered, and my over modesty has caused me to
be oppressed: But a constant series of success has raised me many Friends, and
nothing but an extraordinary Providence could have supported me against so many
Enemies: All the Ch^rurgeons in the World, and after the Physicians, but from
these, I have had the fairer play, and they grow more civil, and among the
Surgeons I gain Friends daily.


Al. How should People have known your Hypothesis long since, when it is not
long, since you conceived it, and brought it forth; pray you Sir excuse them:
And let us come to the trial of Skill, whether your Hypothesis be well grounded
or no, and see whether you can prove, that all People that have not known your
Hypothesis have groped in the dark, and cured Diseases either by a very rare
accident, or not at all, that you are the only Man God has given Eyes to, till
which is done, I cannot but look upon you as a Person of great Impudence, to
accuse all the World of Learned PHYSICIANS as Fools, or what is worse, as
Knaves, and uncommon Arrogance to assert your self the only Wise, yea and
honest Man pretending to Physic; and that you have nothing selfish in you, but
to leave a Name to Posterity. Truly methinks, you are as selfish as any body:
But as for a a Name to Posterity, it is pity you should want it, I Will help you,
that you may be sure to have it, and not for nothing. I wish you could have
written in Latin, that all the World might have known you. Though you say, you
want University-Glosses, you are Rhetorical enough indeed Sir; for you have
abundance of Hyperboles, nor want you other choice Foiles to set off your
Diamonds, nor are your Truths naked, but so dressed up (if you have any) that I
cannot see the Faces of them. But you commend your self so much, it looks not
like force put upon you; nor do you seem so mealy-mouthed, or over modest as
you say you are, but speak roundly enough. It Is pity Truth should suffer, or
you be oppressed for your Virtue, Poor young Man: but it may be hoped you will
grow stronger. But you have had extraordinary Helps, constant Success, and
uncommon Providence has got you Friends, and supported you against so many
Enemies, all the Surgeons in the World, and after the Physicians. Has your
Fame spread so largely? Certainly this must be by some uncommon Providence, for
I cannot find, that half the Surgeons, or Physicians in England have heard
of you, (but I will endeavor that they may) much less all the World of them,
when your Books are wrote but in your own Language. But prithee John let me
hear no more of these brags, but lets come to the contest: I Will give you as
fair play as you can well wish, and will be added to the number of your
Friends, if possible.


Ac. In all Diseases, Physicians have unanimously agreed, that Acids have
abounded; and if to such a Degree, that their Alkalies could not conquer it,
then the Patient Died. And as for Alkalous Medicines, I dare be positive, they
never yet Cured any one Distemper; but frequently have done a great deal of
mischief. If any ever received any advantage by them, I dare be burnt. If they
be given in acute Diseases, and Nature be strong, she throws off the load in
spite of them; if weak, they add to the load, and she falls under it. In
Chronical Diseases, such as the Gout, poor Mortals are let alone to languish
under the Distemper. But you may say, If my Hypothesis be true, how have
others, mistaken Physicians, Cured Diseases? I answer, I own they have Cured
some Diseases, but they could never tell how: They have given Steel, Antimony,
and other Preparations, without enquiring into the nature of them, supposing
them Alkalies; when they at the same time are Acids; as also many Vegetable
Productions, and so Cured Diseases, they being Acids.


Al. Truly John, your Discourse begins to grow nauseous: You are not yet Forty
Years old, and could you have spent Thirty of them in reading the Writings of
Physicians, you could not have read the Tenth part of what they have Writ, much
less have known, what success they always had in their Practice. And as
positive as you are, I believe, I shall give you matter of Fact, as well as
Reason, enough to convince any modest Man, that Diseases have been Cured by
Alkalies, and when you are convinced, I would counsel you, to burn your Books,
rather than your self, as dareing as you are. And for shame forbear to accuse
all Physicians at this rate, either never to have Cured Diseases, or now and
then to have done it ignorantly, they knew not how, by giving Acids at
unawares. Do you think others have not took as much pains to know the nature of
Antimony, Steel, and Vegetable Productions as you? Had none of them any way to
know Acids from Alkalies? Van He^mont, whom you sometime, called your Master,
says, he wrought Forty Years with great labor and charge (and others have
done the like) in Analizeing the materia Medica. Fie John, fie! prithee give
over, I believe, you will sometime find you have done your self no Credit, nor
kindness to cry your self up, and cry down all Physicians at this rate.


Ac. I have made reflections on Physicians indeed, but they are principally
Foreigners; they all to a Man, asserting the Doctrine of Alkalies. What I have
said, is not to reproach the Physicians of our own Nation, who are many of
them, as Great Men as ever were of the Profession, and this City abounds with
such; but my design, is to undeceive Young Physicians, who have been imposed
upon by Foreigners, and to excite them not to rely upon Men, who have broached
the Chymera's of their own Brain, without making Experiments, whether their
Notions were true, or false; my design being, not to Reflect upon that Noble
Society the College, the Glory of our Nation, and of the whole World; but I
have the greatest Reverence and Respect for them.


Al. Mr. Acid, you do not know what all Foreigners have done, neither do they
deserve your reproach more than the Physicians of our own Nation, or are they
less Men: You cannot well be ignorant, that some of the College you applaud so,
are Foreigners, and as deserving as any of the rest. Nor have Foreigners
imposed on Young Physicians, more than those of our own Nation, nor have they
been always Men more full of Chymera's, or less acquainted with Experiments; as
every one acquainted with the Medical World must acknowledge. Nor was Young Mr.
Acid the fittest Man to undeceive Young Physicians; he should have left it to
Older Heads, or have stayed a little longer. Was there none of the Fathers of
the Noble Society, whom after you had abused in general, with all Physicians,
you now sweeten up so, as the Glory of the whole World: I say, was there none
of them that understood the Virtue of Acids? Or, none of them so kind as to
undeceive the Youngsters, that they left it to you? Or, had none of them such a
Capacity to Write as Mr. Acid? I must tell you truly Sir, you are no Credit to
them, of what profit soever you may be, notwithstanding your Professing
Reverence and Respect for them. But I believe, after all your bouncing of a New
Hypothesis, we shall find, that Physicians have used Acids, knowing them to be
such, long before you were Born; thinking rightly, that neither Acids nor
Alkalies alone Cure Diseases; but a Physician using them all with other things,
when, and where he sees occasion. And to convince you, and show you how apt you
are to contradict your self, (your Memory as you have sometime confessed, being
a very treaeherous one) To confirm the truth of your Doctrine, you told us, Dr.
Jones commended Acids in diverse Diseases, a Man of such clearness of Reason,
that you never heard him mention any thing, but he was fully able to
demonstrate it. But if what you say of him, be true, and your Doctrine may be
supposed not false; I think he is more like to be the Author of it than you,
though he lets you take the Name; and I would advise you, to get him to
demonstrate your Hypothesis; for I am sure you have not done it. And Dr.
Baynard had also wonderful Success, and his Practice run upon Acids, and those
Gentlemen embraced Acids out of a Life-saving principle (you say) in opposition
to the multitude. Likewise you tell us at another time, that, Dr. Watson used
Acids for Ten Years, which was before the birth of your Hypothesis, if you were
the Parent of it. Nay, you tell us Oil of Vitriol is commended in Theatro
Chymico, page 86, and 87. Vol. I. And your Master Helmont by advising a Man to
take two Drops of Oil of Sulphur every Meal, preserved him free from Diseases
to an Old Age; which advice was given, long before you were born, and doubtless
he knew, Oil of Sulphur was an Acid. Nay, Riverius also comes in for a Snack,
by your leave, when you are kind or forgetful, Curing a confirmed Pthisis with
Conserve of Roses and Oil of Sulphur. Here are Foreigners Sir, though you say,
All of them to a Man, asserted the Doctrine of Alkalies. But, your treacherous
Memory, once gave away all your glory; when you were almost positive, that
there was no Physician in Christendom, of any business, but had made use of Oil
of Vitriol, that dangerous Acid, though asserters of Alkalies. But then you sting
them in the Conscience for such practice, how they can answer for it you cannot
tell, that if Acids are the Cause of Diseases, how they dare with a good
Conscience give the most temperate Acids, you cannot understand. But I Will
undertake to be Casuist for them, for once; seeing you cannot resolve it. They
used Acids, when they saw occasion, with better reason than you do, and
Alkalies, as they found the nature of the Cases required; being wiser, than to
think Acids alone, or only Alkalies the Cause of all Diseases, And to name one
for instance, to convince you of the truth of the matter, Frederick Hoffman
Published an ingenious Treatise, 1689. against the fancy of some few, who would
make Acid and Viscid the Causes of all Diseases; wherein he commends Acids in
many Cases, yet confesses, that Acid and Viscid are the Causes of many
Distempers. Certissimum porro est (says he, page 5.) and cuivis practicorum
obvium acidum, and viscidum plurimorum morborum fomitem, ac mineram existere,
and gives several Instances and Arguments to make it appear, and that a
Physician cannot be without Alkalous Medicines, and sane (says he again, page
10.) nisi velimus dissimulare, nullus gratiosus medicus facile carere potest
salibus istis Alkalinis Volatilibus, interquae paimas tenet Spiritus Oleosos
Sylvii: Spiritus salis armoniaci vinosus cum ol^is aromaticis, and carminativis
vary essentificatus: Spiritus Vini a sale Vol. C. C. abstractus, Salia fixa,
and illorum solutiones, Lapides Canerorum, Coralia cum lixivio salis Tartari
imbibita and impri^^s sali^ fixa Sulphuri metallico amicissimo conjugio juncta,
etc. And concludes, Aci^^^, ac viscidum motui sanguinis nimis hostile;
plurimorum morborum causam evadere posse, and contra Medicamenta Alkalina
acidum destructiva decenter exhibita genenerosissima magnorum morborum existere
praesidia. And this was wrote several Years before your Essay (as you call it)
concerning Alkali and Acid. Where are you now John?


Ac. It is true. Some few other Physicians have used Acids, but the assistance
I had from them is inconsiderable as to the establishing my Principles, and if
I have made any good steps, it is owing to my own industry; for though I was not
bred at University, I have taken as much true pains to inform my self in all
parts of Physic, perhaps as any Man ever did: And spent as much Money to
qualify me for the practice of Physic as most Men, who have spent their time
in the Universities, and I have had ocular demonstration for my Money, when as
some of our University-Men have had only the fusty Notions of Old Aristotle for
theirs. And though I have not said all that is to be said in behalf of my
Hypothesis, yet I have said so much, that I believe I may boldly say, it is the
best and clearest Hypothesis now extant, on which the cure of Diseases may be
attempted on greater certainty, than on any other Public.


Al. At one time you say, all the Physicians in Christendom of any business
have used Acids, now but some few; we must conclude either you contradict your
self, or else the Men of business, in all Christendom have been but few: But if
by Men of business you mean such as your self, then I believe indeed they have
been but few, and the assistance you have had from them, toward the
establishing your Principles, has not been great I grant; for your reading has
been little. Yet some assistance I am confident, you have had; for your
Discourses smell pretty strong of Dr. Andre, of Acid, and Alkali Published in
English, 1689. But when you say, you have taken as much true pains to inform
your self in all parts of Physic as any ever did, you cannot be excused of
Arrogance; for we well know, you neither have had the Years, Abilities nor
Opportunity many have had. Besides you are so extraordinarily accomplished in
that one Qualification of a Doctor of Physic fashionable Language, that it
must needs have taken up much of your time to acquire it, and hinder your
learning other parts of Science. But as for your spending as much Money, as
most who have been bred at Universities, we know very well you never had it to
spend. But why could not University-Men have Ocular demonstration for their
Money as well as you: Or, How come they to be confined to the fusty Notions of
Aristotle? for want of other Books? I hope you will supply them with fresh
Notions for the future. But you have not said all that should have been said in
behalf of your Hypothesis, that is if it were to be made probable. Here you are
in the right, and I should have perceived it, if you had not told me so. And I
grant you believe, or would have us think your Hypothesis is the best, and
clearest in Physic now extant to all intents and purposes, and you have said
as much as this comes to over and over. 'Twas a thousand pities you were not
able rightly to handle it, that it might have proved the most glorious of its
kind that ever appeared on the stage of the World. But after all these braggs,
and stir for a Name to Posterity (not to talk of getting a little Money to
purchase an old Coach for the present) your Treacherous Memory so far failed
you, as to let you say, you did not pretend to be sole Author, or first
broacher of the Doctrine of Acids, it having long since been the opinion of
some of the most happy Practitioners in the World, and is now embraced by some
of the greatest Men, and most happy Practitioners our Age affords, and that you
don't pretend to be so great a Man, nor deserve so well of Mankind as Helmont,
Paracelsus, etc. who treading out of the common Path, did not want maligners;
therefore why should you who don't pretend to have arrived at those great
Perfections they had, take it amiss to be abused, and evil spoken of? Here you
are over modest and mealmouthed. For these Men were Foreigners, and often used
Alkalies, and were ignorant of your Doctrine, that Acids are the cure of all
Diseases, and yet deserved better of Mankind than you. What fit of Modesty is
this John? It Is to be feared your cause will suffer for this. But I see in all
this you would commend your self by comparing your self to such great Men; but
you have not done it ingeniously yet you should let others praise you, and not
your own Mouth.


Ac. I have had several congratulatory Letters from diverse Learned Men in
praise of my Discovery of the Doctrine of Acids, as for instance from Dr.
Jones, beginning thus, Dear Sir, As for Acids, Dr. Baynard and your self deserve
eternal praise, etc. From N. Tyrling, Dignissime, contra Justitiae, morumque
normam peccarem si virum cui Deo proximo vitam debeam silentio preterirem.
Nuper, enim cum e luce pene evasissem, tu mihi propitius adste^isti, candide
effulsisti, Tu meus Apollo, etc. And from Dr. Watson thus, Tractatus tuos
summis cum deliciis and voluptate perlegi, and tuum in promovendo illo
nobilissimo Medicinae studio institutum maxim demiror in humani generis bonum
universale: Macte Bone vir Melioribus Avibus, and momos aspernare, etc. And in
the beginning of my Relation of the Person bitten by a Viper, you will find the
following Panegyric. To the Unknown Dr. Colbatch, upon his most Ingenious
Tracts, especially that of Alkalies and Acids.

Physic for Ages past has grop'd her way
In Paths of Darkness, without any Ray
Of certain Truth, and still was going astray:
When COLBATCH rose, who with reviving Light
Dispelled the Clouds, and chased away the Night,
By him the important Secret is revealed
Through Fraud, and Ignorance so long concealed:
No sordid hopes of Gain, ever swayed his mind,
His only Aim's the good of Humane kind;
Who first with Pains, and Labor dug the Oar
Then freely gave us all the Golden store.
Let Juggling Quacks grown envious of thy Name
Combine together to obscure thy Fame;
Such are the Mysteries which thou do unfold
They Will write thy Name in Characters of Gold,
To thee alone Mankind's indebted more
Than t'all the Doctors that have gone before.
J. C. Junior.

Al. These Men praise you at a great rate Mr. Acid, one thinks eternal Praises
your due, another owes his Life to you his Pagan Deity, another is ravished
almost in reading your lusceous Writings, and admires your Capacity in
promoting Medicine, claps you on the Back, and bids you despise your Carpers;
But the fourth outdoes them all, and sings you too. I wonder no body did it
sooner, for you are a Subject enough to inspire the dullest Muse: But the Poet
might have let us have had his name at length, sure he needed not to have been
shie of owning his Opinion of you any more than the other Gentlemen; Besides he
might perhaps have prevented our mistaking him: For I cannot be persuaded but
that it was John Colbatch Junior, that was the Poet, however I am sure that
John Calbatch Junior, caused it to be printed in his Book, and had he not been
a Junior it had never been there. To the Unknown Dr. Colbatch is a very odd
Epithet on so Famous an Author, it cannot sure be an Ironie, but hold; John
Colbatch Jun. may be very well thought to be unknown to himself, otherwise he
could never have Published his own Praises at so extravagant a rate. As for his
Poetry I say, in short it is Poetry, and it is well it is so; for nothing but
Poetica licentia can excuse it, it being all fiction: And perhaps for this
reason Tom Saffold chose to Publish his Bills in Verse, knowing the liberty of
the Muses to lie. And now I mention the Famous Tom Saffold, it brings into my
mind what a Friend of Mr. Acids, who saw what J. C. Junior had written would
have added, which was this: Whilst Saffold lived (could you believe him) he
Outdid all other Quacks in Pharmacy.
'Twere Saffold's Pills so called among the rest,
Deservedly had gaind the name of best.
Since J. C. Junior rose his greater fame
Defaced the Monument of Saffold's Name:
Believe him, or his Friend, he merits more
Than all the Saffolds that have gone before.
His rarest Tincture, and his great Wound-Powder,
Do praise him every day louder and louder.
In Villers-street near to the Ass his head,
John Acid Lives, now Tom Saffold' s dead.
Acid like Saffold mighty Tales has told,
And here his famous Drops are to be sold.
But to deal plainly with you Mr. Acid, this is but playing the Quack, and
least you should take it unkindly if I should handle him only in rough Prose,
who now comes dressed out so finely in Verse. I Will give the Quack his Character
in the same fashion. As follows, A Quack's a Medicaster, setting forth
By base, unhandsome means his feigned worth,
Whether on Saddle, moving Stage he sit,
Boasting his Remedies, from street to street.
Whether he keep a Fool to act his part,
To draw a concourse there to Preach his Art.
Whether at Coffee-House he does appear
At such an Hour, plying for business there:
Whether his Story he described has
O'th paper Hangings of a pissing-place.
Or though his Tales unto a Volume rise,
To speak him Learned in the Peoples Eyes
The Quack's the same in differing disguise.
But I long to see whether John Acid deserves all his great Encomiums, and
whether his new dug Oar will yield him any Metal that will stand the Test, I
doubt it will not go through the fiery Trial.


Ac. As for the great threats daily thundered out of my being confuted, they are
but Scare-crows to me, I am far from being afraid of it, and whoever shall make
it appear by solid Experiments, that I am in the wrong, shall be my Great
Apollo, and the first thing I do, shall be to write a Public Recantation.


Al. Upon your word Mr. Acid you will vomit up your so well digested Hypothesis;
if I can help you to an Emetick, that will work upon you: I believe you would
never offer so fairly, but that you are confident that nothing will turn your
stomach: I Will try. I fancy Antimony may yield a Medicine strong enough for you;
you say, ' It Is an Acid, therefore I hope you will be willing to take it, if
that will not do, we will try your own Vulnerary Powder, that is vomitive too, and
we will prepare them with Acids. I Will give you a process I Will warrant you, and
you shall prepare it, in your own Elaboratory, You are a professed Chemist you
know, and a Disciple of Helmont, and know nothing so delightful as Cbymical
Operations. Helmont purged himself of the Galenical Hypothesis, by what he
wrought out of the Fire, and if you follow my directions it may be you may
clear your self of yours, and you know you are Apothecary enough Master Doctor,
to dispense your own Medicines skilfully, when you have prepared them.


Ac. I confess I was bred nn Apothecary, and under a Man that was not the
greatest Master in his Business; but taking notice of my Master's
imperfections, I applied my self, for Four Years of his time, to those things
my Master could not Teach me in some measure; and when I was become a Master in
Pharmacy the foundation on which Physic is built; I was induced to look into
the Body of Physic it self; and though I don't pretend to absolute Mastership,
yet I shall endeavor to improve my Talent. The greatest part of my time I
lived in Worcester, and though I kept an Apothecaries Shop, my dependence was
wholly upon my Practice. And since I speak of my being an Apothecary. I shall
give the necessary Qualifications of one of that Profession; that you may judge
such a one has made a large step toward being a good Physician. 1. An
Apothecary must have good acquaintance with the Vegetable Kingdom, not only to
know the Faces of Plants; but their Natures and manners of Operation on Humane
Bodies. 2. He must well understand the Nature and Operation of Minerals and
Metals, which is not to be attained without much Reading and hard labor in the
fire, and 3. of Animal Bodies, amongst which is Man, there being scarce a part
of his whole Body, but what is sometime or other to be used as a Medicine; but
first requires the Apothecaries Skill for its Preparation. The famous Etmuller
was not ashamed to own that he served Eight Years to an Apothecary; yet he
became one of the most Eminent Physicians in Europe: And for ought I know, the
loss of him at that Age he Died, deserves as much to be lamented as the loss of
any one private Man, from him so much might have been expected.


Al. One might have guessed you to be an Apothecary, if you had never told us
so, you talk so like an Apothecary: But I am sorry you had no better a Master;
it had been well you had met with one that could have taught you a little good
Manners; for truly John, you show none in publishing your Master's
imperfections. But pray you, who taught you for that Four Years you went so far
beyond your Master's Capacity, as to become a Master your self in Pharmacy?
Truly I can hardly believe you are a Master in Pharmacy yet. For though you call
your self a Doctor, I am sure you talk as if you knew not what Pharmacy means,
when you tell us it is the foundation on which Physic is built. You have
looked into the Body of Physic at a fine rate: But indeed, you don't talk like
an absolute Master, to tell us, That Pharmacy, that is the making of Medicines,
is the foundation on which Physic, that is Natural Knowledge, is built. Surely
John, you never read any Institutions, or if you did, what you read slipped out
of your treacherous Memory; but it may be, you would speak with the Vulgar,
while you think with the Learned, and then the sense of it is, That the making
of Medicines, is that upon which Medicine^ is built. But if you would talk with
the Doctors, they place Physic or Physiology in the first place, as the
foundation, meaning the consideration of Nature it self, in its sound state, or
due order. Then Pathology, the account of its Defects. And thirdly, Semeiotice,
the consideration of the events or issues of those Defects. Then Hygieine which
teaches to preserve from those Defects, as much as my be. And in the Last
place, comes Therapuetice, the method of reducing the Defects of Nature, and
the fitting the Instruments for that purpose is Pharmacy: So that it is far
from the foundation of the Building. What Practice you built on your foundation
of Pharmacy, I know not, or whether your dependence were on that Practice. You
are very kind in giving us the necessary Qualifications of an Apothecary, you
are willing to inform the World, how fit a Man Mr. Apothecary would be thought
to be to make a Doctor of. But by your Mastership you show in Pharmacy, and
your acquaintance with Materia Medica, I believe before we have done, it will
appear, you have not made that large stride an expert Apothecary has took
toward being a good Physician: But I shall remark here only, what acquaintance
you have with Animals; especially such an one as your self, of which you say,
There is scarce a part but is sometime or other to be used as a Medicine. I
believe your Brains would make an excellent one, but they would hardly yield
one Grain of sharpness in Distillation. And as I suppose, you would not use
Man's flesh crude (except in some few Distempers of Women) because you say it
ought to be prepared: If the Fire must be used, it will produce Alkalies
copiously from both fluids and solid parts of Man's Body; and Alkalies acording
to your Hypothesis are the principle of Death and corruption; and yet all parts
of Man's Body are sometimes to be prepared for a Mediaine. You forget your self
so often John, I am ashamed of you. The famous Etmulier was a Foreigner and an
asserter of Alkalies to be good Medicines, and Acids the cause of many
Diseases: How comes he in so much Credit with you here Sir? He should be rather
infamous methinks for his Fraud or Ignorance; but you forgive him I see for
sake, sake; that is, he was an Apothecary, and yields you an Argument for us,
thus, Etmuller was an Apothecary; and yet became one of the most Famous
Physicians in Europe! one whose loss is much to be lamented, he might have been
so useful: Ergo, Mr. Acid who was an Apothecary, may nevertheless be one of the
most Famous Physicians in Europe; and so, much to be prized: This is the Logic
of it. But truly I can see no such great hopes of him, he is so apt to forget
what ever he says and does; but a blind man may catch a Hare, they say.


Ac. I wrote my Essay of Alkalies and Acids, during the Siege of Namur, when I
had not the opportunity of consulting Books, nor the benefit of coming at my
own Papers, wherein I had set down my Observations; wherefore, I only made use
of those occurred to my Memory, which is a very taeacherous one, so they are not
so numerous and exact as I designed them; but yet I was willing to venture them
abroad as they were, for some reasons; they being not in the least designed to
entertain the Learned, but to undeceive the Multitude. I have aimed at
certainty, if I can once arrive to that (which I will never rest till I have
done) I care not. If we could have a public Laboratory at the Nation's Expense
I should hope to see the matter sooner effected. It costs the Nation some
Hundred thousand's a Year in Powder and Ball to destroy Mankind: Why not One
Thousand in Experiments to save their Lives? There is a Noble Laboratory
already Built at the College the fittest place for such a thing, and the
Governing Officers are Men of Fidelity, and of such Public Spirits, that they
are fit to be trusted with a greater Sum.


Al. I think it had been well Mr. Acid you had let alone Writing till you could
have consulted Books, as well as your own Papers, that you might have helped
your Memory (which you now confess to be a very treacherous one, and so show, I
have not abused you) for truly your Observations are not so exact as they
should be. But you had Reasons to venture them abroad, not to entertain the
Learned; but to undeceive the Multitude. What Is the meaning of this Sir, who
are the Learned? The Asseyd Doctors such as your self, Dr. Jones, Dr. Watson,
Dr. Baynard? etc. And are all the rest the Multitude? Those perhaps whom you
call Young Physicians, though for Years they may be Old Men. Or, do you mean by
the Learned, all Physicians, and by the Multitude all other Men who understand
no thing of Physic. These last you rather seem to mean: But what do you Write
to teach them Physic? What will become of the Doctors then? There is Vinegar,
Crab-Verjuice, Lemons and Oranges enuough to be had and you tell them, They can
never over Dose it, for the Stomach wont fail to reject whatever is to much,
and the damage is but a puke or two: We shall have them all turn Doctors, your
method is so easy. But by undeceiving them, I rather suppose, you mean you
would convince them that the Alkali-Doctors are dangerous fellows, or at best
good for nothing; that they may Employ you Mr. Acid, and your Disciples, if you
have any: There Is the knack of it; and I confess, there needs not much
exactness in putting our Bills to invite those that know nothing of Nature, or
good Sense; and this consideration makes me inclinable to fancy, you may be as
sharp a Fellow in Politics as Tom. Saffold, who once showed himself more Knave
then Fool, when being told, his Bills were Nonsense; He wittily replied, he
Lived not by Men of Sense. And I confess Fools are soonest caught. I applaud
you for aiming at Certainty; but if you mean Certainty in Physic, and will
never rest till you arrive to it; I think, I may ptomise the World a perpetual
motion on your Credit. A Public Laboratory at the Nation's Expense, would be a
brave thing (but that would never make you an infallible Doctor, though you were
the Director of it) and a Thousand a Year; yea, Ten Thousand would be better
spent in such a Design to save Men's Lives, than some Hundreds of Thousands to
destroy Mankind. But methinks Mr. Acid, you give the Nation a hard Complement,
and especially His Majesty the Supreme Director of our Expenses, to say so much
Money is spent to destroy Mankind. I don't believe, any such wicked Design; but
that you abuse both King and People. But we have a Noble Laboratory to our wish
at the College, the fittest place for such a thing. But John, you do not only
bespatter every body else, but you disgrace the College too, by begging Money
to buy them Coals and Glasses, as if they were either not able to defray the
Charges of the design themselves, or so covetous they would not, unless the
People give Money to instruct them in their Art, as well as pay their Fees for
the effects of it. What the Governing Officers are as to trust, and Public
Spirit, I shall leave to those that best know them. But indeed John I have no
hope that those Men who understand Philosophy enough already, will ever be
eager in the design you talk of, either with their own, or others Money; and
submit it to your teachings: I could never find them so solicitous about
Instructing young Physicians as your self Sir; but if they were, I should still
fear a public Laboratory, as you would direct it, would rather be a public
Pest, than a public Benefit; there would be so much Oil of Vitriol, of
Sulphur, and other sharp Corrosives made, and given to the Sick, as would
destroy ten to one more than Powder and Ball does: When not one in ten but
sometimes may want a Doctor; but not one in ten thousand go's to the Wars: And
these things would be so much more dangerous; because (like White-Powder) they
would do execution, without giving a report. For John I must tell you, I still
believe, that Acids-may be the Cause of many Diseases; especially in the Hand
of a four Hypothetick: And Alkalies may in many cases be very good Medicines:
And this will go near to be my Opinion, till you have convinced me by good
Reasons, grounded on sufficient Experiments, that your new Hypothesis is any
more, than a new Method of Quacking.


Ac. Every Man may be capable of judging, whether my Hypothesis is true or
false, from this easy Method. Every Apothecary's Boy knows that all Acids
poured on Syrup of Violets, or a solution of it, will turn in Red, and as the
Acid is stronger, or weaker, so will the Red color be: So on the other hand,
all manifest Alkalies, lixivious or Volatile will turn the Syrup Green, and as
the Alkali is stronger, or weaker, so will the Green Color be. Whence I infer
if the Serum of Blood did turn the Syrup Red, it would be plain, that the Serum
did abound with Acids; but if on the other hand it turns the Syrup Green it is
more, or less impregned with Alkalous Particles. I positively assert, I could
never find the Serum turn the Syrup into any color but Green. All manifest
Alkalies thus change the Syrup to a Green. Ergo, If the Serum too does so
change it, it must needs abound with Alkalous Particles. This is an easy way
of Arguing, and the plainest Demonstration in the World. And no one that
labors under the Gout, or any other Distemper Chronical, or Acute; but will be
glad to lose two or three Ounces of Blood, to make this Experiment, on which so
much depends. Every Gentleman, may thus reason with himself: My Physician tells
me, my Blood abounds with Acids, and upon that score, gives me Alkalies to
correct them; but if he should be mistaken, and my Blood abound with Alkalies,
his giving me Alkalies will increase the Distemper: Therefore since I have so
fair an opportunity, my own Eyes shall be judge, what my Blood abounds with:
Whether Dr. Colbatch's Enemies, being almost all the World of Physicians, or he
are to be blamed. If my Blood abound with Acids, he ought to be Kicked out of
the Commonwealth; if on the other hand, it abounds with Alkalies; he deserves
all the Encouragement in the World; for discovering so useful and necessary a
Truth, and thereby exposing himself to the malice and rage of so many. This
Experiment is liable to no Objection, I know of; and by it I can refer my self
to every Gentleman, and from Gentlemen, I shall have Justice. Physicians have
endeavored to expose me, because owning me to in the be right; would be owning
their own mistakes: But by this Experiment, I have appealed to more just Judges.


Al. You being to talk like a Philosopher, and a Logician too; now Mr. Acid, I
hope, that I shall have some Work, and that we shall leave Playing: And I am
very glad, I am capable of judging of your Hypothesis, by your own concession,
since you say, every Man is so: And I hope, some Men will be capable of judging
of what I shall say to it; though perhaps, every Apothecary's Boy may not: For in
some places they do not teach them for the first thing, the change of colors
in Syrup of Violets, by Acids and Alkalies. But I shall appeal to Physicians,
and Gentlemen too, if Men of Sense. Gentlemen you know, are many of them,
troubled with the Gout; and I remember you have told us, Tbat all that are
afflicted with the Gout, are Men of Sense; for you never met with one
Block-head that was troubled with it. This is good Logic, could we suppose,
you had met with all the Men troubled with the Gout. But I shall love Alkalies
the better for this trick: For if all that are troubled with the Gout, are Men
of Sense, and all that are troubled with the Gout abound with Alkalies (as you
have affirmed) it looks something like an Argument that Men abounding with
Alkalies, are Men of Sense; and then on the contrary, Men abounding with Acids,
are likely to be Block-heads; and I should always be afraid of an Acid Doctor,
not only least he should be an Ass himself, but least he should make me a Fool
too, by destroying the Alkali in my Blood; which gives me more happiness in a
sensible Understanding, than infelicity in the sense of a Gouty Paroxysme. But
though I appeal to Gentlemen, as well as Physicians; I shall not like, you so far
disgrace my Profession, as to suppose, Gentlemen better Judges in Physical
matters, than Physycians themselves: Should I do so, I should show my self no
wiser, than the Barrester who woulld be judged by his Clients, whether he
pleaded Law, or no. I will not accuse Physicians, as either less Wise, or less
Just, than Gentlemen; however Mr. Acid, or other Gentlemen may take it: But
assert their Education for the generality, in all respects equal to, if not
exceeding Gentlemen; and if their accomplshments in Physical Knowledge be not
greater, it is a great shame, and Gentlemen are unwise in using them. But let
us come to the reason of your Hypothesis. All Alkalies turn Syrup of Violets
Green, Tarbox the Blood abounds with Alkalous particles. This is an easy way
of argueing; but truly your Argument is far from a Demonstration; you are out
in your Logic here, and have not proved the Point. For unless you could have
made a regular Category, and have said, Whatever turns Syrup of Violets Green,
is an Alkali. But Serum of Blood turns Syrup of Violets Green; therefore it is
an Alkali, or abounds with Alkali: and then have proved your Major: It will not
follow, that the Serum abounds with Alkali: For though all Alkalies will turn
Syrup of Violets Green; yet it wants to be proved that whatsoever turns it
Green, is an Alkali, or that nothing but Alkali will do so: Which I am sure,
you will never be able to do, but by denying some of your assertions; as may
appear before we have done. But I grant, that the Blood abounds with Alkalous
particles; if by abounding, you mean only that it yields, or contains a great
deal of Alkali, and not that it has always too much. And what then Mr. Acid?
You don't deserve all the Encouragement in the World for this necessary
Discovery; because truly, it is none of your Discovery; being well known, long
before you were born, to your Master Helmont, and a great many more Famous Men;
yea, I dare say, all that at present deserve the Name of Physicians, knew it
before you ever saw Blood Distilled, or knew it would yield a Salt, or that
Serum would turn Syrup of Violets Green. But you have discovered one thing
indeed, in asserting this your Discovery, that is your self, unacquainted with
the World of Physicians, or arrogant and foolish in publishing that, as your
Invention, which was generally known, long before you knew any thing of
Physic. And truly John, you deserve to be laughed at and hissed, if not kicked
out of the Company of Physicians, for this Discovery. But to the Argument, It Is
true, the Blood abounds with Alkali, whoever discovered the truth of it. What
then, does it follow, that the Blood's abounding with Alkalies, is the Cause of
all Diseases? Not at all. For, if it abound with Alkalies, I say, it should do
so, as it naturally does in Persons most healthy; and it no way follows, that
the abundance of that which ought to abound; is the Cause of Diseases: But the
want of the due quantity of that which ought to abound; or the abounding of
that which should not, or does not naturally abound, is much more likely to be
the Cause of a Disease. It is well known to those Physicians who have (as they
ought) been exercised in Experimental Philosophy, that Man's Body by a
Pyrotechinal Examination yields a great quantity of Volatile, Alkalous Salt;
but the quantity of it is much exceeded by the other Products; yea, even by one
of them, viz. Water, the abundance of which, a Hypothetick Brain, might as well
have fancied the cause, not only of a Dropsy; but of all other Diseases; there
being more of it to be carried off by Perspiration, than of any other Matter.
It is beyond all doubt, that the Particles constituting the Humane Frame, are
of different Figures and Sizes, and have their determinate Proportions, as to
quantity; from whence arise the different appearances of the Parts in their
Natural Shapes and Constitutions; as also the different qualities of the
Artificial Products from one, and another of them. But for a Man to say, That
the abounding of any one of these (though by abounding, he mean one of them is
too much in quantity) is the Cause of all Diseases; looks so unlike a
Philosopher, or even a Rational Man, that I admire any one fond of a
Reputation, should be guilty of such a folly, as either to assert it, or
believe it! It is evident to all Men, that in any sort, study the Nature of
Bodies, that a due Proportion of the component Parts is requisite to the proper
Constitution of a Compound Body. And if a Body consisted but of two sorts of
Particles: For instance, Acid and Alkalous (supposing them themselves to be
simple Bodies) in all Reason, as there ought to be a certain Proportion; the
abounding of one, as well as of the other, would make an undue Constitution, or
Disease. But the Body of Man, consists not wholly of Acid and Alkalous
Particles; so that one of these two must needs abound, to make a Disproportion;
but of diverse others, either Natural Constituents, or Artificial Products: And
that it should be said, that but one of these can possibly abound, is without
any color of Reason; when not only our Food, which increases and maintains the
bulk of our Bodies, is so different, abounding now with one, then with another
sort of Particles Homogeneous to those our Bodies consist of; but also the
various Excrements to be Egested, may be now one, then another retained, or too
hastily carried off, and so cause a disproportion; and what the proportion
ought to be between these diverse Particles, I doubt, will be found a matter too
hard for a better Philosopher than Mr. Acid, certainly to determine. Moreover,
the Body of Man is to be considered as consisting of solid and fluid Parts,
containing and contained; besides which, there is in Man (...) Impetum faciens,
and as we consider Diseases, with relation to this threefold Division; the
fancy of Alkalies abounding to be the cause of all Diseases, will still appear
more groundless, too narrow and insufficient. In the solid Parts, there is to
be considered, their undue Conformation; too little, or too great, too narrow,
or too wide in proportion to one another; and so their unequal strength, their
being too hard or too soft, solid or poreous; with many unperceived Solutions
of Continuity, etc. from which, diverse Diseases, on diverse occasions, may
proceed; and all which, undue Conformations, unequal strengths or breaches,
cannot be supposed so different and contrary, to proceed from the single
abounding of Alkalies in the Blood. For instance, a large disproportionate
Liver, small Lungs, narrow Veins, Cartilaginous Aorta, single Kidney, inward
imperceptible Breaches, are impossible to be accounted for, from the abounding
of Alkali. 2. The Liquors or Contents of the Body may be too thick, or too
thin; moved too fast, or retarded too much, Extravasated, or Coagulated in some
Vessel or other; of which contrary Effects, the abounding of Alkalies only,
cannot be always either the occasional or formal Cause. 3. As to the (...) of
Hippocrates, or Archeus of Helmont; because some more thinking Heads, than Mr.
Acid's sour one, have thought it too abstruse or subtle a Notion: I shall first
tell you plainly, what I mean by it, leaving others to determine, whether
Hippocrates and Helmont meant the same. By the (...) I mean the Soul, or Mind
of Man in its extravagant Appetities: And that nothing else ought to be
understood, by that of Man which is considered as an Agent; but his Mind is
apparent from This, (which all considerate Metaphysicians must acknowledge as a
Truth) That there is no Being we have any Idea of, but Mind and Body; the one
being Active, the other Passive: And though all created Minds may suffer, as well
as do; yet all Body is universally un-active, and can do nothing. Though this
Notion may seem a Paradox to some, I shall say no more of it here, than what
relates to my present purpose; because I may have occasion to speak farther of
it, if I live to finish a Discourse I have for some time spent some thoughts
upon, Of the ^oot of Diseases, and their Cure in Humane Nature. But to return
to the business in Hand, It is apparent, that the exorbitant Desire or violent
action of the Will of Man; is that which often produces such an alteration in
his Body, as when perceived becomes a Disease. For instance, the Blood is too
much retarded, or accelarated in its course, as well as the more subtle
Liquors variously disordered; from whence proceed diverse ill Effects, which
cannot be thought to proceed from the Production of too much Alkali, or
retarding its supposed necessary Evacuation in a Moment. The unsatisfied desire
in its most sudden Disappointments, cannot be thought to be so great a Chemist,
as to produce in an instant a greater quantiyt of Alkali Salt than the Body can
bear, or so soon separate the Acid that should attemper it; but is rather to be
thought, to produce its Effects in a more subtle way. The force of Imagination
and Desire upon the Body, is very well known, though the way of working those
various Effects is little understood: But I shall consider it no farther here,
than in relation to Alkali, which is with no color of Reason to be thought
either the Cause of those Mental Disorder, or the instrument of the Effects
produced thereby. But to come a little closer to the Term of abounding either
of Alkali or Acid, in the liquid or solid Parts: When may either be said to
abound, so as to be likely to be the Cause of a Disease? I answer, When there
is too much of the one or the other. And how shall we know that? May Gentlemen
say (for we will appeal to Gentlemen; yea, and Ladies too, if they will Read
us: Poor Men and Physicians we shall get but little by; though they should think
us Skilful Doctors.) I must tell you, Sirs and Madams, there ought to be some
Consideration of the due Proportion, before we talk of abounding; and it is
certain, That there is abundantly more Alkali in, or produced from the Blood
and other Parts of Man's Body than Acid, and ought to be so in a sound Man, as
we have seen Demonstrated by abundance of Experiments. The proportion of Alkali
to Acid, we need not scruple to suppose, no less than as twenty to one, when we
have found the Alkali to the Salsum as seventeen to one: But we will not
pretend to ascertain the Proportions; it being a very difficult matter to find
them. But we will suppose, twenty to one, or but ten to one if you please, to
show you that your Doctor John has talked like an Ass-ey'd Doctor to you. For
if there ought to be but one part of Acid to ten of Alkali, and there be just
that proportion; neither can be said to abound, or thought to cause a Disease:
But if there be two, or more parts of Acid to ten of Alkali, the Acid must be
said to abound, or be too much, not the Alkali. And as for the little Trick
John has showed you with Syrup of Violets, at the expense of two or three
Ounces of your Blood (which in some Cases ought not to be spared.) I think, I
should undervalue your Parts, if I should suppose, you cannot see through the
Juggle and make an Objection, where your Doctor says he can see none. For though
Acid greatly abound, or be a deal too much; yet the Serum will not turn Syrup
of Violets Red, unless there were more Acid then Alkali. And such a quantity of
Acid (if it were possible, in a Living Humane Body) would be a Distemper too
great, for either an Acid or an Alkali-Doctor ever to reduce. And that you may
satisfy your own Eyes, and judge whether Doctor Acid, or all the Physicians in
the World, ought to be Kicked out of the Commonwealth; without the trouble,
and sometimes hazard of losing two, or three Ounces of your Blood. Take Syrup
of Violets, and drop into it a quantity of an Alkalous Spirit: and you will
find it presently turn Green, and then take an Acid, and drop but a little in,
and you shall not find it turn Red; but drop in till you have overpowered the
Alkali, it will turn Red; then drop in again of the Alkali, and as soon as you
have overpowered the Acid, it will turn Green again. By this Experiment you
may be rationally persuaded, there may be too much Acid in the Blood, and so
enough to cause a Disease; though the Blood does not contain more Acid than
Alkali; and so turn the Syrup Red. And that there may not be too much Alkali,
though there is enough to turn the Syrup Greeen.


Ac. The Physicians of our own Age, more particularly of our Nation, and among
them (most especially of our College) have made greater Discoveries in the
Anatomy of the solid Parts, than ever were made before; but as for the fluids,
wherein the Cause and Seat of Diseases lurk, they have in a great measure been
neglected: But the College abounds with Men of such large Capacities, that if
once they set about the Work, I doubt not, but they will perfect it. Being
Skilled in the Anatomy of the solid Parts. A Noble Qualification! Enables a Man
to talk finely; but does not in the least enable him to Cure Diseases. For it is
an exact skill in the Anatomy of the Juices, that makes a Man a good Physician.
And I have made it the business of my Life, to understand rightly the the
Juices of Humane Bodies in their Natural and Morbid States; and by that means
have been capable of doing more than other People; and I tell you, that the
Blood has never any Acid in it; but when People are in a perfect state of
Health: Nay, I tell you, the Blood cannot over-abound with Acids, neither in a
Morbid nor Healthy State: For though manifest Acids, are things the Stomach much
more covets and delights in, than any thing besides: When she is loaded with
more than the Body has occasion for, she will not fail of rejecting them by Vomit;
which may be experienced by an over large Draught of Vinegar; but although it
cannot over-doe; yet it is very defective in conveying a sufficient quantity
into it, through its own fault, or the Physicians. But the Blood of Diseased
Persons has more Alkali, than that of the Healthy; as in Fits of the Gout, it
abounds with Alkalous Particles, more than in Health as six to four, or five
and a half, or as five to four; which you will find in my Book of Blood, where
my Experiments are as clear Demonstrations of my Hypothesis, as what is given
by the greatest Mathematicians. So in the Smallpox and in Scorbutic Persons
it does appear by many Trials, that the Blood of such Persons does more abound
with Alkalous Particles, than that of sound People, and a Sick Person's Serum
will turn Syrup of Violets Green sooner than a well Person's. And if Physicians
would Critically Analize the Blood in all Distempers, I believe, thereby the
Cause of all Diseases would be certainly known.


Al. Mr. Acid, you are very lavish of your praises where you place your favor;
I wonder the College who have so great a share of them, are not sufeited. They
have made more Discoveries in the Anatomy of the solid Parts, you say, than
ever was made before. What Discoveries have they made I pray you? Wherein have
they outdone others, either of the foregoing Age, or Foreigners of this? What
improvements have they made in the Anatomy of the solid Parts? You know
perhaps, but you will not tell us: and it is no matter, whether it be any thing or
nothing. For being skilled in the Anatomy of the solid Parts is a Noble
Qualification you say: But how does it Ennoble a Man? Why, only enables him to
talk finely; but does not in the least enable him to Cure Diseases. It is an
exact Skill in the Anatomy of the Juices, that makes a Man a good Physician;
which Anatomy has been neglected even by our College. What is the inference of
this? Why, our College have a Noble Qualification of Talking finely; but not in
the least an ability to Cure Diseases. Pray you Sir, what are the People the
better for the Colleges Ability to Talk finely; if they have none to Cure
Diseases. No, but they are Men of large Capacities! Capable of perfecting the
Anatomy of the Juices too, if they would but once set about the Work. But when
that will be, who knows? They understand Philosophy enough already (though their
Friend John says no) and while they are in that Opinion, they will hardly learn
more. While they think the Anatomy of the solid Parts is enough for them; they
will never set about the Anatomy of the Fluids by Mr. Acid's Direction: And so
for ought we know, they are like to remain Physicians in Verbo only; Fine
Talkers. But Mr. Acid is the only Physician in Re, indeed, amongst them. 'Twas
great Prudence in them to take you into the College Sir, that they might have
one real Physician to actuate the rest; that they might not be a Body without a
Soul: You know Acid is the Soul of the World. And an Ass-Ey'd Doctor may as
well be the Soul of the College. I can hardly think, they would so readily have
given you a License; but that they expected you would do something for them,
they could not do for themselves; run down the Badger, catch the Salmon, or
some other piece of Difficulty. You, who have made it the Business of your
Life, to understand rightly the Juices of Humane Bodies in their Natural and
Morbid States; by that means have been capable of doing more than other People
(if you say true) more than all the rest of the College. But you are a Particle
of the College, and what you do; is the doing of the College. It Is well they
have you, that they may not only be said to do something; but more than other
People; though not in the whole, yet in one part of them, viz. Mr. Acid. But
truly John, your crying down the Skill in the Anatomy of the solid Parts, is
but a dull way of excusing your Ignorance therein, and you do but as
Block-heads commonly do, cry down as useless, all Knowledge they themselves have
not; that Fools may think them Wise enough. But I must tell you John, and the
Gentlemen too, That the Skill in the Anatomy of the Solids, is so far
necessary, that the Anatomy of the Juices signifies little to a Physician
without it. The Animal Economy can never be well understood in its due Order
and Defects, by one that knows nothing of the Structure of the Parts. For
instance, though I knew the Gall to be of such, and such, a Nature and Quality,
and by a Pyrotechnical Analysis, to yield such, and such different Bodies, or
Sets of Particles: What am I the wiser, as a Physician, unless I know where
this, thus qualified Liquor, is separated and discharged? How otherwise, can I
determine of the Use, or Defects of this Liquor? So likewise as to the other
Liquors of the Body: How can I know their Motions, Secretions and Uses, unless
I know which way they pass, and where separated? Was the Famous Harvey, or
Servetus before him, nothing the better for being aware of the ways of the
circular Motion of the Blood, but only that they could Talk finely. Fie John,
you don't talk like a Light in Physic, much less in Surgery. I must tell
you, if you had been skilled in the Anatomy of the solid Parts; you would not
only have talked more finely; but more truly than you do, as we shall see in a
Material instance before we have done. And as you have foolishly confessed your
Ignorance in the Anatomy of the solid Parts (a shame to any Physician,
especially to one that Writes himself of the Noble College) so I believe, I
shall find you ignorant of the Anatomy of the Fluids too; and that it will
appear, you have not done more than other People in any thing, but Impudent
Boasting! You tell me, that the Blood has never any Acid in it, but when People
are in a perfect state of Health; and that it cannot super-abound, neither in a
Morbid, nor Healthy state: For though the Stomach covets Acids more than any
thing else, she will not fail to reject what is more than enough, by Vomit; but
though she cannot over-doe, yet she is very defective through her own, or the
Physician's fault. You are a cunning Man! Of a she Stomach. You once told us,
That all Persons have some degree of Sickness. Now that the Blood has never any
Acid in it, but in a perfect state of Health. But I answer, If all Persons have
some degree of Sickness; then none are in perfect Health; and if none are in
perfect Health, according to you, none have any Acid in their Blood. Yet again
you tell us, That Leanness is for want of enough Acid in the Blood, and Fat is
nothing but a concrete of Acid and oily Parts; and overmuch Fatness, if it may
be called a Disease, is caused by Acids. What a misery it is for a Man to have
a Treacherous Memory; so to contradict himself. If Fat be a concrete of Acid
and Oily Parts, wherever there is Fat there is Acid; but there is Fat in Persons
under many Diseases: I have opened a Body, before now, that Died of another
Disease than Fatness, that cut two or three Inches in Fat upon the Abdomen: And
Fatness in some, is Disease enough; and if your Doctrine were true, nothing
could be more proper than Alkalies to Cure it. But farther Sir, If there be
never any Acid in the Blood; but in a State of perfect Health: How can Acids
Cure the Diseases of the Blood: Mortify and Expel the luxriant Alcalous
Particles, reduce the serum to fluidity, make the too thick Blood thin, and the
too thin Blood thick, The Miracles of Acids! That he that can show how this can
be, what Acids taken in the Latitude can do, must be as Wise as Solomon, the
Wisest Man that ever was, or shall be. Yet you tell us, That Acids produce
these different things, by being differently specificated with other things,
but Acid is the soul of them. And so Solomon is not the Wisest Man, for you are
as Wise as he. But though I believe there has been, or may be, one Man at least
Wiser than Solomon, and you too Sir, I much question whether he would be
cunning enough to tell, how all these fine things come to pass, which you say
are done in the Blood of Diseased Persons by Acids, if as you say, there never
comes any Acid there, but in a state of perfect Health; or how he could make it
appear, that the stomach so unerringly rejects to a grain, whatever of its
beloved Acid is too much to be conveyed into the Blood, and yet is foolishly
defective in letting in enough. But to leave these contradictions to their
Author, and to persuade you (at least the Gentlemen, who are such impartial
Judges) that there is even too much Acid in the Blood in many Diseases, I might
first give you a Hundred Authorities from Famous and Learned Authors, but that
Authority is nothing to you, who have cried down all the Physicians in the
World. Yet methinks the judgment of some of them might be of some weight with
you, especially those you have commended, and perhaps the Gentlemen may believe
them as soon as you. Your Brother Etmuller asserts Acids in the Blood as the
cause of many Diseases: It would be endless to recite the Passages; so I shall
give you but two or three. Of the Gout, says he, page 361. Partis secundae.
Quoad causam efficientem Acidum volatile Spirituosum sui tamen generis, seu
specifici saporis spiritui influo maritatum synoviam imprimis, and parts
vicinas membranaceas inquinans, and affligens primarius Tortor est. And page
394. De malo Hypochondriaco, and scorbuto, says he, Causa proxima horum malorum
complicatorum est Stomachi cruditas Acida, sive Acidum ventriculi vitiosum, ex
defectu vitioso digestionis primae in stomacho enatum, a quo omnia reliqua
symptomata originem ducunt. And as for Fevers, says he, page 251. Partis
primae. Consistere dicimus Febrim formaliter in fermentatione sanguinis
praeternaturali. And page 252. Aestus omnis occasionalis fit ab Acido crafin
sanguinis immutante, and inde fermentativum ejus motum, hinc Spirituum
alterationem and majorem incalescentiam, and fervorem inducente. And goes on to
prove by many Arguments, that Acid is chiefly in the fault in Fevers. And page
369. he saiys, the same in relation to the Smallpox. The forementioned Hoffman
(the rather to be noted, because he Writes on purpose to contradict the fancy
of those that would make Acid, and viscid the cause of all Diseases) gives us
Instances, and Arguments to prove Acids the cause of some Diseases. Cap. 2. De
acido and viscido, says he, Caeterum quantas torturas acidum vitiosum in
corpore nostro excitet, testantur Hypocondriaci, hystericae, scorbutici qui a
levissimo acido mire saepe laeduntur exacerbatis omnibus symptomatibus:
testantur quoque, id ipsorum vomituae, saepe tam corrosivi, ac tanta aciditate
praediti ut vasa aenea, imo ipse linteamina, instar aquae fortis, corrosa inde
videas. And gives us a relation of two Brothers, who by accustoming themselves
to drink Vinegar, were brought, the one into an incurable hectic Fever with a
Cough, and leanness of his whole Body, and horrid pain of his Feet; and the
other, into very great disorders. And adds he, Tandem observatu dignum quosdam
qui quoties utuntur aceto, altero mane pruritum in fontanellis sentire
manifesto indicio acidum intactum, and integrum penetralia corporis subire
posse. And your Master Helmont, because you have confessed him a greater Man
than you, may be heard saying, page 319. Tormina ab acido intestinorum, in
lotio stranguria, in ulceribus corrosio, in pelle Soabies, in artubus podagra,
etc. Quod si experire velis ad manum, emictae noviter absque dolor urinae,
aliquot saltem guttas vini aciduli immisce, and per syringam injice. Experieris
te invito quod vera doceam. In latice quoque pluritidem notham, suscitat. Ast
si Archeus in cruoris gremium leviculam sibi sinistro applicatam aciditatem
deposuit; statim extravenatur, ejicitur a venis spreta, and apostema parit
ubicunque id locorum contigerit: sin vero profundius in venis eveniat pestilens
aliquod Pathema insurgit. Quod probo quippe eruor aut caro nunquam aceserunt
absque actuali putrefactionis consecutione (quod alibi per carnes belluarum,
sub canicula ocissime putrefientes, ideo jusculum acidum dantes probavi ex
instituto) cruor enim acescens mox contra naturam venarum totiusque carnis
indolem (quandiu vivit) coagulatur. But if your Master Helmont be despised with
you, be pleased to hear what Father Hippocrates says, an Old Gentleman so
venerable among Physicians, that I never met with any one yet that had the
confidence to despise him; though many that never read him. Says he in his
Discourse De veteri Medicina; (...). And again, (...). And a little after,
(...). Which, least you should complain of Heathen-Greek, and say, Non potest
legi; I will give you in English, thus: For thereis in Man Bitter and Salt, and
Sweet and Acid, and Astringent and Humid, and others innumerable; having all
Kinds of Faculties abundance and Strength. These indeed, being mixed and
contemper'd with one another, are neither apparent, nor hurt a Man: But when
either of these is separated, and is of it self; then it is apparent and hurts
a Man. And again, says he, of our Food, Whatsoever things are disagreeing and
hurt a Man being taken in; each of these is something Bitter and Intemperate,
or Salt or Acid, or something else intemperate and strong; and for this Cause
we are troubled by them, as also by those things which are separated out of the
Body. And a little after, says he, If the sweet Juice is changed to another
Form, not by mixture; but being of it self what it was before, Bitter, or Salt,
or Astringent, or Acid; but the Acid Juice is disagreeing, the rest being for
the most part profitable, but the Sweet Juice of all is most agreeing. But if
the Judgment of these Famous Men, be not enough; let me reason with you a
little farther my self. How can Diseases if caused by Alkali (as you say) be
Cured by Acids, but by Acids coming into the Blood. Must not there be some time
for their Operation there, before they can mortify and expel the Abundant
Alkali, so as that Acid must be in the Blood, while the Person is yet Diseased?
Or, does Alkali leap out at one Door as afrighted, seeing Acid with his sour
Face coming in at another? Are your Cures all so sudden? No John, I suppose
not. But although there were no Acid-Doctor to convey sour Liquors into the
Blood; yet I say, there may be Acid, and that too much, in the Blood of a
Diseased Person, as the cause of his Disease. It Is undoubted among Physicians,
that the Health of the Body, very much consists in the due Temper and
Consistence of the Blood, and other Liquors of the Body, that they be neither
too thick nor too thin. If they be too thick, they cannot puss freely through
the small Vessels, and circulate through the Aanastomoses of the Arteries and
Veins, but stick and cause Obstructions; whence arise Swellings and Pains, by
distention of the Parts, and the Liquors stagnating; get a fermentavive Motion,
and so corrupt and corrode the solid Parts, and produce Ulcers: But if the
Obstruction be sooner opened, and the Coagulated Parts be carried along again
into the Mass of Blood; it is thereby retarded in its motion, before the
Particles can be separated; from whence may proceed diverse Disorders. Now it is
certain, that Acids coagulate and thicken the Blood, and other Juices of the
Body, as any one may see by mixing a little Acid Liquor, as Oil of Vitrol, sp.
of Niter, Oil of Sulphur, etc. with a little Blood, or Serum: The Acids turning
the Serum into thick white Corruption, and the Red part into a tough black
Matter. So Acid Liquors injected into the Veins of Animals kill them by
coagulating their Blood: When on the other Hand, Alkalous Liquors make the
Blood more thin and florid, on which account it cannot be thought, by any Body
that has his Senses, that when the Blood is too thick, or coagulated, 'its
caused by Alkalies, and not by Acids. You said Mr. Acid, that Whoever should
take upon them to Answer any thing you have said, unless they back their
Arguments with Experiments, you should take no notice of them. But truly Sir,
you have not backed your Assertion. That Acids make the Blood thin when too
thick with Experiments. I would counsel the Gentlemen to do it for you, and
they will see how friendly your Acids are to the Blood. Besides, that there is
too much Acid in the Blood, in some Diseases, may fairly be argued, a
Juvantibus and laedentibus. It being commonly seen, that Persons afflicted with
some Diseases, are very much hurt and the Symptoms exasperated by the use of
Acids, as Hypocondriacks, Hysterical and Scorbutic Persons; those afflicted
with diverse kinds of Ulcers and that have Issues: On the contrary Relieved,
Eased and Healed by Alkalies; as is well known to Physicians and Surgeons.
Farther, to satisfy you, because by all the ways you could yet contrive, you
have not been able to procure one Grain of pure Acid from the Blood either of
Healthy, or Sick People. I Will teach you. From the Blood of either Diseased or
Healthy Persons, as also from their Urine which is separated, from thence you
may get a Sal salsum, like Sea Salt, which you say, is an Acid; but I say,
yields an Acid by Distillation, and from Flesh and Blood, as well as from
Urine, may be got the Phosphorus, which is an Oil coagulated into an open
Sulphur, by an Acid; which Acid may be as easily separated, as the Acid is from
common Sulphur, which is eaise enough, though you say, ' it is no easy matter to
do it. And from Urine, an excrement of the Blood, besides Phosphorus, I have
made a perfect burning Sulphur, without any addition of any Body that could
yield it, or help to compose it; which Sulphur would make good Matches, and
might be Distilled into Oil of Sulphur, per Campanam as easily as any other
Sulphur; and every thing is dissolved, you say, into that of which it was made.
But I say, not by every sort of Dissolution. But that in a common Distillation
of Blood, by such a Distiller as your self, there is no Acid produced, is easy
to answer, by an Experiment or two. For instance, I will take an Alkali, and
mix with it a considerable quantity of an Acid, and you shall Distill them, and
shall not get one Grain of Acid; but an Alkalous Liquor. Again, I will take an
Alkali, and mix an Acid with it, and you shall Distill them, and shall not get
one Grain of Acid; but they shall both unite, and both come over in a Liquor,
neither an Alkali, nor Acid but a salsum. Again, I will take an Alkali, and mix
an Acid with it, and you shall Distill them, and shall get neither Acid, Alkali
nor Salsum; but a burning Oil. Which things, if you are a Chemist, as you
profess, you cannot be Ignorant of. From which Experiments, it may easily be
believed, that though there may be a small quantity of Acid, actually in the
Blood, yea, a large quantity in comparison of what there should be; yet the
Alkali far exceeding it; the Acid may be so far altered by the Fire, or locked
up with the Alkali, as to come over as an Alkali, or remain a Salsum? And
though a mere Salsum cannot truly be said to be either an Acid, or an Alkali,
or have an affect as either, Whatever separations or alterations the Fire, may
make from it, or upon it; yet it is certain that the Natural or Artificial
Conjunction of an Acid with an Alkali, does make a Salsum, and nothing is more
common, than to have the Blood apparently Salt, even to the taste, in many
Cases, in some more, some less; which Salsum (though the Acid that is coagulated
with the Alkali were not separate in the Body first, and so capable of hurting)
is very likely as a Salsum, to be the Cause of diverse Diseases, when it too
much abounds; which we may easily believe, from this Consideration, That it is
well known, that the Eating too much common Salt, is the Cause of many
Disorders. As for instance Seamen (as you confess) who live upon Salt-meat, and
Salt-fish, are more troubled with the Scurvey than others, not as you say,
because they eat more Flesh and Fish (which abound with Alkalous parts) than
others: For others that cat as much Flesh and Fish, and that fresh too, are not
so much troubled with it, but because their Flesh and Fish is more Salt, and is
also kept longer, whereby the Spiritous and Volatile parts are exhaled, and so
yield a grosser Chyle. Nor as you say, That the moist Air hinders perspiration;
For it is well known, That Men at Sea generally eat more, and void fewer
Excrements of the Belly, than at Land, and consequently perspire more. Nor is
the Sea Salt carried off all by Urine, it being to be found in a greater or
lesser quantity in the Blood, and other Liquors of the Body. Nor can Sea Salt,
and any Alkali make a Sal Armoniack, as you tell us, either in the Body, or by
a Pyrothechnical Conjunction; unless the Sea Salt be first an Acid, as I have
found by experience, and any body may see that will try to make a Sal
Armoniack. And though the Air at, Sea should hinder sweat, as you say, yet it
furthers Perspiration; whereby the Alkalies if they could do any hurt, may be
carried off, if that be supposed the course they ought to go. And that we
perspire more when we don't sweat, than when we do (though it may seem strange to
some) might be urged by diverse Reasons, if it were necessary, and may be tried
by Staticks. How an Acid Spirit should be Distilled from Sea Salt while in the
Blood, or other Liquors of the Body, I confess I see not, but I know by certain
Experience, that there is often separated, or produced in the Stomach, a
Praternatural Acid, a kind of Vinegar, from things taken in, that are
fermentable into Vinegar; as Sugar, Honey, Bread, strong Liquors; which though in
their first ingested Form, could not be truly called Acids, yet become very
strong ones, and if they were Acids grow stronger. Besides, every one knows,
that we Eat and Drink things already sour, both which we know, are not always
rejected by Vomit (as Mr. Acid says) But notwithstanding, there is a more
strict Guard for keeping the Acids out (...) the Blood, viz, the Gall pouring
out its forces upon them in the small Guts; yet it is very probable that some
Acid Particles more than should so do, may pass this Watch, and get in with the
Chyle into the Veins; of which Enemy, we are after aware, by the disturbance
made in the Vital Economy, which Physicians of any considerable Judgment and
Practice will easily be persuaded of. But I shall here give you two or three
Instances of Acids found even separate in farther Recesses than the Stomach and
Guts. One instance was in a Cancerous-Breast, Cut off by one Mr. Smith a
Surgeon of the Hospital (diverse other Person testifying the truth of the
matter, being present) who when he had done the Operation, and came to examine
the Breast, ope^^ing a Cistus, found therein a Liquor, which being poured on
the Ground fermented as it were Aqua fortis; which when he adventured to taste
was an Acid, and withal so penetrating and venomous, that he could not wash
away the taste; but it Infected his whole Body; so as to be the occasion of his
Death within some few Months, as he himself affirmed, on his Decth-bed, to an
Eminent Physician, who gave me the Account, and was also at the Amputation.
Again, Etmuller tells you, in Medicina Hippocrates Cap. 2. That he was
acquainted with a Youth vehemently afflicted with the Itch, whose Itchey-Ulcers
being opened by scratching, poured forth a serous Liquor of a manifestly Acid
odor, as it were of a subtle and penetrating Vinegar. And that he saw a
Scorb^tick Young Man, who in a Morning yet fasting, spit such a sharp bloody
Spittle upon a firm double Paper, that it was thence in a short time corroded.
Another instance you have in Act: Med: Haffn. Vol. 4. Page 174. Where it is
observed that the Sweat of an Hydropick Person was Acid coagulating Milk.
Besides, the Cure of Ulcers, Itch, Erysipelas's, etc. which I have often done
by Absorbents and manifest Alkalies, arguing Acids to abound in these Cases. I
don't question, but if we try other proper ways, Acids would be found in diverse
Ulcers, though Mr. Smith's fate, is enough to discourage one from Tasting. But
you say, the Blood of Diseased Persons contains or yields more Alkali, than
that of Sound Persons. I answer, It Is a more difficult thing than you, or any
other young Chemist would imagine, exactly to find the quantity of Alkali-Salt
in a parcel of Blood. To separate the Volatile-Salt wholly from the Phlegm, and
from the Oil, and both of them from the Caput mort. will be found too hard a
Task for an older Workman than your self. The difficulty of giveing an exact
account of the contents of a parcel of Blood, will appear from diverse
Considerations. Blood is a Body that will swell up as it drys, so that the top
of the matter will have less Heat than the bottom, and retain some of the
Volatile Parts; so that if you don't take it out and Distill part of it again in
another Retort, you will not get all, and notwithstanding all the care
possible, some of the Volatile parts will be lost in working; so that the most
wary Artist, do what he can, will not be able to say, Here Is all the Alkali, or
Oil, contained in so much Blood. But there will be still greater Difficulties
in giving the true Contents in diverse parcels of Blood; for if you should take
a Pound, or any other quantity of Blood, and divide it into equal parts, and
Distill one half in one Retort, the other in another, the products would not be
the same. For the different degrees of Fire that might happen, different time
of Distilling, and taking off, and separating the Phlegm, Oil, and Salt, the
different closeness of Luteing, yea, the very shapes and sizes of the Retorts
and Receivers, would almost in inevitably cause different Products. Farther,
the Bloods of diverse Persons, though all in Health, or of one healthy Person,
took at diverse times, would as much differ in the Products, as that of the
Diseased and Healthy, as well as vary upon other Trials. As I have seen the
Sweat of a Person in perfect Health, turn Syrup of Violets Green readily, when
the very ichor and corruption in the pustles of the Smallpox, would hardly
alter its color into a discernable Greenness. So the Blood of the same
Diseased Person, taken at one time or state of the Disease, would as much
differ from that taken at another time, as either of them would from a Sound
Person's; having sometimes more, sometimes less Serum. So that I must tell you,
you have not been a Chemist long enough, to deserve Credit, since it appears
you have not yet Learned to speak modestly and wyrily; but confidently give us,
from small and odd quantities of Blood (the more difficut, to be exact in) so
many Drachms, Scruples, and Grains as the certain Contents of Phlegm, Salt,
Oil, and Caput mort. from which exact account the sagacious Mr. Boil excused
himself: And no expert Chemist will readily pretend to give. But you Sir,
pretend to give us the true Proportion of Alkalies in a Gouty Man's Blood, and
a well Man's; when you have Distilled perhaps but two or three well Men's
Blood, and one or two Gouty Men's Blood. Do you not think the Bloods of Gouty
Men differ, as well as the Bloods of well Men? Let us have the products of a
Pound of Blood, from one hundred well Men's Bloods, or so many sick Men's
Bloods; and if they are exactly the same, then you may do something toward
persuading us to harken to you: Or if you can tell us the exact proportion and
difference of the Products of an Acid Doctor's Blood from those of an Alkali
Doctor's: Till which, I shall never expect to find your Experiments in your
promised Book of Blood, as clear Demonstrations of your Hypothesis, as what is
given by the greatest Mathematicians; unless you mean, as clear Demonstrations,
as they give of your Hypothesis, and not of their own Propositions* And if all
the vast Capacities of the College, and you to direct them, should ever so
Critically (Analize, as you call it) the Blood of Persons in all Diseases
(which by the way, I tell you could not well be done, when Phlebotomy in some
Diseases is pernicious,) I say, they would be far from knowing certainly the
Cause of all Diseases; if all Diseafes could be thought to (...) in the Blood:
For many Reasons, apparent to every considerate and experienced Naturalist:
Though a Tyro may believe, by his (...) he can do all things; even show a Man in
the Distillation of a little of his Wifes Blood, without ever seeing her, that
she has (...) the Pox; and the very Face of the Spark that Clapped her, with as
great confidence, as some young Logicians, believe, by a Sy^logisme, they can
prove the Moon made of Green-Chese: (...) as I have heard one seriously assert,
That by Logic, one might prove a Man to be a Horse, or a Horse to be an Ass.
But let us suppose, that John has guessed right (though not Demonstrated that a
quantity of the Blood of one, or another Diseased Person is some Distempers
being Distilled yields more Alkali, than as much of the Blood of some one, or
other Healthy Person (for he has made but few trials:) It will not prove, that
in those Distempers, too much Alkali was the cause of the Disease, and not too
much Acid. For instance, in the Smallpox, Scurvey, Go^^ where he particularly
asserts, he has found the Blood abounding with Alkili more than in Sound
Persons: I say, that in those, an^ some other Distempers we may reasonably
suppose, that the Acid Particles meeting some of the Alkalous, are
Precipitated, and fix^^ in the exttemities; so that the rest of the Mass of
Blood flowin^ in the Veins and Arteries is depurated, and more free from
Acidity, and so in Distillation, may possibly yield a greater proportion of
Alkali. But I find you Mr. Acid, make a few slight and in acurate Experiments,
making them all serve your Hypothesis running away with your (...) with as
little consideration and as great mistakes, as any body I have met with. You
boast your self better Skilled in the Anatomy of the Juices, tha^ others, and
that, you are able to do more than other People Truly Sir, I find no Argument
of your greater Skill, or doing more than others; we have but your greater
Skill, or doing more than others; we have but your own word for it. But pray
you, let me hear what knowledge you have got of the Nature and Properties of
some other of the Liquors of the Body? What may you to the Saliva, the first we
meet with.


Ac. The Spittle is highly impregnated with a penetrating Saline Spirit, which
appears from its killing Mercury, which nothing will do, but things manifestly
Saline: This matter separated by the Oral Glands, is impregnated with a
Volatile Acid, as manifest^^ appears: And was designed to impregnate our Food,
and to dissolve it in the Stomach, and turn it into a substance fit for
^utrition: For there is no innate ferment in the Stomach: And that this
Menstruum the Saliva, is an Acid, appears by numerous Experiments; yea, all
noble Menstruums, I know of, are Acids, in the three Kingdoms.


Al. You still go on to show your dareing Confidence and Indiscretion, in
asserting positively, things you have but the least appearance of Reason for.
You say, the Spittle is highly impregnated with a Saline Spirit, with a noble
volatile Acid: That it manifestly appears to be an Acid and that from numerous
Experiments; when you have made none: And give us no other Argument, but that
of its killing Mercury, which you say, nothing will do, but things manifestly
Saline. Here is a Liquor, I find you have never Anatomized; here Mercury alone,
resolves your Question, who as the Old Woman says, is killed by
Fasting-spittle: But I must tell you, the Old Woman had but one Eye, and so
thought that Mercury was dead and buried, when the Wagg lay granning, on the
Blind-side of her: And you are as Blind a Chemist as she, if you talk of
killing of Mercury thus, to Physicians and Philosophers. But you talk as a
Mountebank, to the Vulgar. Well, Spittle in a Vulgar sense, kills Mercury: But
what does it really do to it? Why it divides it, being rubbed together, into
small Particles, that a dull Eye cannot perceive them. And this is done by
nothing, but things manifestly Saline, say you. I see the Clerk has forgot that
ever he was a Sexton. Mr. Doctor, if your Memory had not been Treacherous, you
might have remembered, That when you was an Apothecary's Boy at Worcester, your
Master was not so imperfect in his Art, but that he taught you, that
Turpentine, would thus kill Quicksilver, and Turpentine, it is well known, is
not manifestly Saline: I believe, you would be hardly put to it, to get me a
Salt from it, or any thing of a Saline nature. Greese likewise is a Body,
whereby the Particles of Mercury may be divided; or almost any Body of a soft
clammy Consistence; not from any thing Saline in such Bodies, but from their
consisting of ramous flexible Parts, whereby they are apt to enwrap and
entangle the globules of Mercury; yea, even dead and insipid Calxes, or other
Powders, may be rubbed with Mercury, so as to do, what you call killing, though
with more labor. As (...) things manifestly Sali^^ (except those Acid Spirits,
that dissolve Mercury) they are sti^^ farther from doing the business, than
Unctuous Bodies. As if you take common Salt, you shall find it more difficult
to kill Mercu^^ therewith, than with Turpentine or Grease; and with some Sal^^^
Liquors it will not be done at all. But if you had made as man^ Experiments on
the Saliva, as you would have us believe, you would have found, that according
to your own method of trying things it is not manifestly Acid: (Not to mention
the judgment by the Taste) you know, that manifest Acids turn Syrup of Violets
Red^ Spittle in all the Trials that I have made, (which have not been ^ few)
never turned the Syrup Red, but Green, more or less* which though I will not say,
is alone an infallible Argument, ^prove it an Alkali; yet I say, it is enough
to prove it not a^ Acid. I acknowledge indeed, as it is most Reasonable to do,
the the Saliva, must be thought to differ, as the Blood from whence it is
separated, differs in diverse Persons, and may be Acid in some Diseases, as I
noted before: And the most of the Trials I have made on this Liquor, were on
the Saliue of Sound Persons. I will not venture to determine, that Mr. Acid's
Saliva must be as Alkali: When he uses so much Vinegar, Lemons and Oranges, Oy^
of Vitriol, etc. or that his old Patients, may not spit Acid: (...) what I have
tried, has been from those that often Eat and Drin^^ Acid things, and are
sometimes troubled with too much Acidity i^ their Stomachs, and yet I could
find no signs of Acid in their Saliva Though I mixed it with Milk, and let it
stand to see whether it wou^^ thereby turn sour the sooner: I found that
another parcel tha^ had none in it, was turned sooner than that. But this is
Observable though Spittle is often more thick and clammy than the Serum o^ Blood;
yet it will not so soon be coagulated by the Fire, and no^ at all by Acid
Spirits, as Blood and its Serum will: And as Blood Serum, and other Animal
substances evaporated on the Fire, will giv^ but an unpleasant Smell; on the
contrary, I have always found Spittle when evaporated (if not so far as to be
burnt) yield a grateful Savor. But let us see what this Liquor appears by
Pyrotechnical examination, taking your own Rules for the present (though I may
dissent from them another time) That those things which by Distillation yield a
greater quantity of Acid than of Alkalous Substance, are to be reputed Acids,
and evice versa, and that every thing is dissolved into that of which it was
made. Take the Saliva of a Sound Person (as I did, a good quantity; because it
yields but little beside Phlegm^ Distill it gently in a Retort, and you will
find the greatest part of it come over in an ins^pid Water, or Phelgm; when you
see the matter in the Bottom dry, increase the Fire, and there will come ^^er
an Alkalous Spirit in White fumes, and after that a black ^^nking Oil: The
Spirit is very like that Distilled from Blood, turns ^^rup of Violets Green
presently, and ferments with Acids, and ^ the first Distillation I have
observed a volatile Salt, stick in the Neck of the Retort. From the Caput mort.
is Extracted with Water, a small quantity of Sal salsum, very like common Salt;
(...) is so far from turning Syrup of Violets Red, that it inclines into a
Greenness, and is dissolved by and ferments with Oil of Vitriol, like common
Salt. Where shall we find your Noble Acid Menstruum now Sir? And where are the
numerous Experiments, whereby it appears to be Acid? You first concluded the
Saliva to be a Noble Menstruum, I suppose, and all the Noble Menstruums, in the
Three Kingdoms, you know of, being Acids: Therefore this must be an Acid. I
dare say: you know no Noble Menstrum in either of the Three Kingdoms; and I
question, whether you ever saw an Ounce of Acid Menstruum from the Animal
Kingdom, though there is such a thing to be had in great quantity. It has been
the Opinion of many Physicians, That there is an Acid Menstrum, or Ferment in
the Stomach: You say, there is no innate Ferment there: But the Saliva was
designed to impregnate our Food, and dissolve it in the Stomach. I must tell
you, thereis no need of an Acid Menstruum, or Ferment in the Stomach, either
there generated, or brought from some other Part. As for my own Stomach, I have
a Capacity of knowing what is in it at all times, which few Men have; and I
always obse^ve, when my Stomach is in best order, there is no Acid there; not
so much as to curdle Milk, or turn Syrup of Violets Red: But whenever there is
an Acid, is is produced from something or other ingested, and is preternatural,
and disagreeing: And I very seldom find my Stomach out of order, but from
things ingested, that are, or turn sour, or else from things too fat and oily.
I will not here contend with those who make the Saliva the Menstruum, or
Ferment of the Stomach, if it has any thing properly so called; But I see no
more reason to think, that the separation, division, or alteration of out Food,
is performed by virtue of that small quantity of Alkali, Salt* Oil, or Salsum,
produced from the Saliva, by the Fire; than that the in^briating quality of
Wine proceeds from a volatile Alkalous Spirit, that by Art, is therehence
obtained. But I conclude, that unless Mankind have diverse sorts of Ferments, or
Menstruums in their Stomachs, there is never any manifest Acid required there,
or produced, but what is preternatural.


Ac. It Is well known, few People are troubled with Acidity in their Stomachs,
but those that use very little Exercise, or live a sedentary Life; by which
means, the Chyle when made, for want of motion (the fibers of the Stomach also
having lo^^ their tone, and become lax) is not soon enough carried one of the
Stomach, and lying there too long, the greatest part (...) turned into a
substance like unto the Ferment, which at first dissolved it; it being the
nature of Ferments to endeavor the^ change of those things they are mixed with
into their own (...) And that some may say, How shall this Acid be kept from
being conveyed into the Blood, and so being the Cause of Diseases. (...)
answer, Those that have an extraordinary Acidity in their Stomachs, 1st. Make
Water often, and in large quantities. 2dly. A^ very Lean. 3ly. Are Costive, all
which Symptoms are for want o^ the Acid of the Stomach's being conveyed into
the Blood. The^ make more Water, because the solid Food is by too much (...)
attenuated, and converted into a thin substance, which by the^ pressure of the
Liver on the Stomach, instead of passing through the Pylorus, is squeezed through
certain Vessels which pass from the botto^ of the Stomach to the Kidneys, and
so carried off by Urine. An^ that there are such Vessels, see Doleus
Enhcyclopaed. Med. page 359. I suppose says he, liquid Substances may be
conveyed from the Stomach through the Omentum to the Kidneys, hence those Animal^
that have no Gall, make no Water, as Birds and Fishes: For confirmation of
which Opinion, I have Dissected Animals gorging the^ with Water before, and
found the Vessels of the Caul very turgid. In Hydropical People I have
Dissected, I have found the Caul either torn, putrified, or obstructed with
Oedematous Tumors whence it follows, Liquids contained in the Stomach, must
fall into the Abdomen. Also a Person Cut for an Omental Rupture, part of the
Caul being Cut away, had a difficulty of making Water and if he Drink much has
a pain and weight at his Stomach, and (...) always Loose: Hence in my
Conjecture, some Vessels that carry the Uirne right on to the Emulgents were
Cut, by which means, all the Drink he drank, was carried into the Duodenum. It
is therefore certain, that Liquid Substances lying at the bottom of the Stomach
pass through in that part which is joined to the Caul, and if those Vessels, or
the Caul it self are broken, putrified, or obstructed it necessarily follows,
that the Liquid Substances contained in the Stomach, must be let fall into the
Cavity of the Abdomen, and for Dropsy is caused. Thus Doleus. From this
Doctrine may be great consolation to People laboring under the Stone. A reason
I believe, Persons have not made such diligent search for such Medicines, has
been a supposition, that scarce any Medicine could retain its Virtue through so
many alterations: But were they satisfied of this shorter Cut, they would not
think the dissolving the Stone* so hard a Task: Farther to prove the Existence
of these Passages, ^^d that the Medicines may pass unaltered to the Kidneys and
Blad^^r: Take these two Cases, 1st. A Person that had not made Wa^^^ in two
Days, and had an intolerable pain in his Back, I gave him some Medicines, and
in an Hour and half's time he was well, having pissed two Chamber-pots full,
and in the first two ^^oonfulls of small Stones. Now had these Medicines been
conveyed through the Lacteal Veins and so on through the ^^ood, it had been
impossible the Effect should have been so soon, or the Medicines not altered,
or totally destroyed. Another Person afflicted with the Stone in the Bladder
Nine Months, and despaired of a Cure, all common means being used in vain, was
at last prevailed with to send for me, and to try what I could do for her: Upon
Monday Morning she began to take my Medicines, and on Wednesday Night, I
Examined her Water, and found some small pieces of Stones in it, and Tasteing
the Water, I could discern the Taste of the Medicines, as vigorous as they were
before they were taken: On Thursday Morning she sent to acquaint me, she was
perfectly well; and visiting her, I found she had voided a stone an Inch and
half and a quarter long, three Inches and a half round. I could add several
instances of this nature; but these two I think sufficient, and plain
Demonstrations that there are such Vessels. Nay, I don't question, but suddenly
to make it appear by ocular Demonstration. Secondly, Those People who abound
with Acidity in their Stomachs are Lean, because the solid Food, being over
attenuated, is made capable of passing through these Vessels, and the grosser is
conveyed to the Guts; and having but few Nutritious Particles, Leanness must
needs follow: And as I said, that Leanness is for want of Acid in the Blood,
appears that Fat is nothing but a concrete of Acid, and Oily Parts: When the
Blood is destitute of Acids, and abounds with Alkalies, as it does with all
People who have too much Acid in their Stomachs, the Blood destitute of Acids
to coagulate the Oil, there can be no Fat produced: And that already generated,
having its Acid mortified by Alkalies, looses its consistence, and is turned
into a thin Oil, and when the Oil is gone, the Alkalies prey on the Muscles,
Nerves, and Fibers, and cause general Disorders. Thirdly, Those troubled with
Acidity in the Stomach, are Costive, because the more thin Parts are carried
off by the Urinary Vessels. But it may be objected, How comes it to pass that
Steel which is an Acid Cures Atrophies, and does not exasperate them, by
increasing the Acidity in the Stomach. I answer, Steel cannot be conveyed into
the Blood before it be turned into Vitriol, and therefore it is necessary to
give it unprepared to People of Acid Stomachs: By in the Acid is so embodied
that it cannot pass through the Urinary Vessels, and is hindered from attenuating
the Chyle, and so being mixed with the Chyle, they are together conveyed into
the small Guts, and so on to the Blood, where by its Styptick Acidity it
confirms the texture of the Blood, and mortifies the Alkalous Particles.


Al. That few People are troubled with Acidity in their Stomachs, but those
that live a Sedentary Life, or use little Exercise* is not true; unless by a
sedentary Life, you mean sitting much at Taverns and Alehouses, where the
Drinking fermentable Liquors, produce too much Acidity in the Stomachs of many
Persons: but of those that seldom use such sitting, but live the most stirring
Lives, I have known more three to one, troubled with sour Stomachs, than of
those that use little Exercise. The Saliva which you account the ferment of the
Stomach, I have showed is not an Acid in its natural State; and though from the
small quantity of Salsum got from it, an Acid may be Distilled; yet in the
Stomach, it acts not as an Acid, and so it cannot change the Food into Acidity,
by being too long retained in the Stomach, for want of Exercise: But when
there is any Acid in the Stomach, it is as I have said, from things ingested,
consisting of diverse Particles apt to ferment, assisted by the Heat and
Moisture in the Stomach. As to your assertion, that those People that have too
much Acidity in their Stomachs, make Water often, and much, are very Lean are
Costive, supposing it true (for it wants proof) and that they and so, because
by this Acidity, (which you say, ought to be conveyed into the Blood) the Food
is attenuated, and converted into a thin Substance; and so by the pressure of
the Liver squeezed through certain Veffels, which pass from the bottom of the
Stomach to the Kidneys, and so is carried off by Urine. I say, you should first
be sure that there are such Vessels; which you can never be, but by being
skilled in the Anatomy of the Solid Parts, and so having a Qualification to
talk finely: For to talk truly of things seen with ones own Eyes, is the
finest talk that can be in Anatomy. You should not have built so great a
Superstructure, on a Foundation you have no Knowledge of: But had better have
stayed a little, till you had given an Occular Demonstration of these Vessels;
since you believe, you shall so suddenly be able to do it* and when you had
found them, you might have Talked more finely. For your two Observations, and
Doleus's to help you, are not sufficient and plain Demonstrations, as you say.
Let us consider both your Author's and your own Arguments. Doleus does but
suppose there may be such a Passage through the Omentum to the Kidneys; but to
strengthen his supposition, he tells us, those Animals that have no Caul, make
no Water: He should have said* those Animals, but have no Caul, have no
Kidneys: And if that had been true, it might have looked like an Argument that
they do not Piss: But if there are Animals that have no Caul, and yet have
Kidneys, as Birds have: what use are they for, if not to separate some serous
matter from the Blood? and though they do not Piss in the manner, as some Animals
do, being more dry and perspiring much; yet there is, as is well known, a
passage from their Reins, into the common passage of the thicker Excrements. In
his Dissection of Animals first gorged with Water, and finding the Vessels of
the Caul turgid; he should have certify'd himself, that those Vessels were
turgid with the Water that was reciev'd into the Stomach, and have seen that he
could press it out of the Stomach into them, and out of them into the Kidneys,
and where they were inserted. And as for the Dissection of Hydropical Persons,
though he found the Caul so affected* it might be but the concomitant, or Effect
of the Dropsy, and not the Cause; unless he could assure himself, it was so in
all Hydropicks. The Caul's being obstructed, rather argues against him, that
the Liquid Matter could not pass that way. As to the Person whose Caul was part
Cut away, it cannot be Rationally thought that a difficulty of making Water,
should be caused by the Urinary Liquors not being transmitted to the Kidneys,
but rather, from its being obstructed in the Bladder, from some other Cause
than the Cutting of his Omentum: Nor is he certain, that the pain and weight in
the Man's Stomach, and looseness when he Drank much, was not from some other
Reason. As for your Consolation, for Persons trouble with the Stone; you see of
what use, Skill in the Anatomy of the Solid Parts would be now, if you had it.
But I know no Physicians that have Studied the Nature and Causes of the Stone,
and the possible and likely ways of its Dissolution in the Reins, or Bladder;
but have at the same time, concluded nothing likely to Dissolve it, but what is
as well unchangeable by any of the Ferments of the Body, as inoffensive to the
passages of Urine; neither of which Requisites are to be found in your Noble
Acid Menstrunms, being coagulable by Alkalies, where ever they meet, and so
offensive and intolerable to the Urinary Vessels, that were there indeed such a
short cut as you fancy, for them to pass unchanged to the Reins and Bladder,
you might Cure the Patient quickly; but it would go near to be by Death more
painful than that by the Stone it self: And woe be to all your Patients Reins
and Bladders; the giving of Catharides would be nothing to your Acids, which
will not only cause intolerable Stranguaries, but even corrode the Bladder, as
any one may find, if he has a mind to try. But you Mr. Acid, who think you have
found a nearer way to the Wood than others, and so do not think the Dissolution
of (...) Stone so hard a Task, I am apt to presume, will be long enough before
you can do the College and Mankind, so great a piece of service as to spoil Dr.
Groenvelt the Famous Lithotomist's Trade. As for your two Cases, you think
Demonstrations of the aforesaid Passages, the Man Cured of the stoppage of
Urine in an Ho^r and halfs time, and the Woman troubled with the Stone (as you
say) who took your Medicines on Monday Morning, which you Tasted on Wednesday
Night in her Urine, and was well by Thursday Morning: I don't question, though
you give no more than these two, but that you could give us a Hundred more such
Stories: But if we suopose, these matters of Fact true, I say, the speediest of
your Cures is not so sudden, as to make it necessary to conclude, that the
Medicines could not go a longer March, and through more defiles than if they be
supposed to pass by the way of the Lacteal-Veins. Almost every one's
Experience, will certify them of more sudden Effects of things taken into the
Body, in the remotest Parts from the Stomach. When we are faint and weak by
Fasting, and take Meat and Drink, we soon feel a sensible Refreshment and
Strength throughout the whole Body, and those that take too much Vinous
Liquors, in a very short time, will feel the Effects there of in their very
Finger-ends. Besides its well known, that diverse things taken into the Stomach,
will in half an Hours time produce their Effects in the very Skin, causing
copious Sweats. And what is more, I my self, have Experienced that the mere
Tasting a thing, has in a few Minutes time wrought by Sweat, Vomiting and
Purging: Nay, some things applied outwardly, will very soon both Purge and
Vomit; the Particles of which cannot be communicated to the Stomach, but by a
longer way than from the Stomach to the Kidneys by the Lacteals. And as for the
Tasting of things in the Urine; I say, you never Tasted any of your Acids
there: But whatever you might Taste in the Urine, it is no Argument of your
short passage: The Taste of things is often found remaining, where they must be
supposed to have passed the Lacteals. Every Country-Woman knows it by
Experience, that Crow Gerlick will not only be very strongly Tasted in her
Cow's-Milk, but will hardly ever be lost in the Cheese made thereof. As for the
total destruction of things, you talk of; there is no such thing in Nature. And
as to your fancy, that those troubled with sour Stomachs, make Water often, and
much; I in my self Experience the contrary, being commonly troubled with too
much Acidity, if I Drink any considerable quantity of Fermented Liquors, and
yet I have seldom met with any but will Piss once, or twice, before I have any
such motion; neither do I find my self make more Water, when troubled with a
sour Stomach, than at other times. Nor are Acids so apt to attenuate the
Nutritious Parts of our Food: Every one that knows how to make a Posset can
tell you, that the more Nutritive part of Milk, is curdled, and hardened by
Acieds: And our Chyle it self is of the Nature of Milk. As for leanness, that
it is caused by want of Acid in the Blood to coagulate the Oil, it is but your
fancy. If you had examined Fat by the Fire, or any way whereby you may judge of
it, you would not have found it more Acid than Flesh or Blood, but have found
it past your Art to separate it into an Acid and an Oil; nor did you ever take
Acid and Oil mixed with a great deal of water, and coagulate them into Fat by
such a heat, as that of our Body. You may indeed coagulate Oil into Brimstone
by an Acid, but you must use such a heat, as cannot be supposed in the body of
an Animal, and your Acid must be stronger, and your Oil more undivided than
they can be supposed to be while diluted, and mixed with the aqueous, and
Alkalous Liquors of the Body. If you had understood Sope-making, you might have
seen Oil and Greese coagulated, and hardened by strong boiling with fixed
Alkalies instead of being made thin, and you should have tried whether Volatile
Alkalies would turn Fat into a thin Oil, before you had so positively asserted
it: For it is well known on the contrary, that Vinegar is given with success to
those that are too fat: An example of which, see Cattieri, Obj. 13. p. 44. in a
Military Man that was very fat, who by continual use of Vinegar, decreased
eighty seven Pounds. As for the costiveness of those troubled with sour
Stomachs, I also experienced the contrary, being seldom or never costive
especiolly when troubled with too much Acidity in my Stomach. But we come to
your own raised Objection: How can Steel, an Acid, cure Atrophies, and not
rather exasperate them by increasing Acidity in the Stomach? Here Mr. Acid you
had given us some of your deep thoughts in a rare discovery, that Steel has
that excellent property to carry the preternatural Acid of the Stomach into the
Blood, there to do fine feats: But we must take it upon your word, for you have
not proved by any Experiment, that Steel thus ushers the Acid in through the
Lacteal Veins, which would without its assistance, have been let down at the
invisible trap-doors in the bottom of the Stomach. You suppose the Acid too
gross, when turned into Vitriol to pass those fine outlets, which I confess are
so fine, that I could never see them; but Vitriol I know when dissolved (and it
cannot be supposed long in a coagulated form in the Stomach) will pass very
fine filters, and insinuate itself through the pores of Vessels, that will hold
diverse other Liquors: And here is another Mystery still, that one Acid is
dissolved by, and coagulated with another. But the truth of the matter spoils
all your discovery, which is that Steel by all trials is found to be an Alkali,
fermenting with, and absorbing Acids, and certainly hindering them where ever
they go together with it from having the effects of Acids. And a far better
reason of the good effects of Steel, where it is found a beneficial Remedy, is
that as an Alkali, it absorbs the Acids in the Stomach and Bowels, and so
hinders them from doing mischief, either there, or in any farther recesses,
passing any way into the Blood, or urinary Vessels, sheathing their offensive
points, carries them off with itself among the Excrements of the Belly. But
farther, to show how repugnant your fancies are to reason, and themselves, you
shall suppose your Urinary Vessels from the Stomach to the Kidneys, and that
Acids have the power of attenuating things, and passing that way: Then
according to your Doctrine we cannot suppose them to take any other course, this
being the readiest way, and how freely soever you give your Acid Medicines,
they will be still preternatural Acids in the Stomach, (and woe be to the Gouty,
they use but little Exercise) and you can never hope to do any thing in the
Blood with them, they passing all off by Urine, with the attenuated nutritive
Juice, and leave occasion for Atrophies; and all Diseases you suppose coming
from the abounding of Alkalies, and want of Acids in the Blood, unless Nature
knows your Acids from others, or that they are embodied, as you say, by Steel,
or some other Alkali, and then in truth actum est de Acido; since there is no
fire in the Blood, (if those Vitriols or other embodied Acids ever come there)
capable to distill Oil of Vitriol or separate the Acid from those other Alkalies
it is embodied with. But if some part of your Acid should escape falling through
the holes at the bottom of the Stomach, and run along for company uncoagulated
into the Guts, there will still be a difficulty for it to pass into the
Lacteals from the Bile; if it be not defectctive, or the Acid too much in
quantity: This guard sallying forth into the small Guts, being the most
Alkalous Liquor of the whole Body, and most necessary for its health, opposing
the entrance of Acids into the Animal Palace, entangling them, and thrusting
them out with the Excrements at the backdoor.


Ac. The Bile is an Excrement, and seems to be as genuine an Excrement of Fire
as any thing whatsoever, both from its burnt Taste, Color, etc. and I am sure
if it be detained in the Body will play the Devil.


Alk. If by Excrement you mean only a matter separated from the Blood, we
acknowledge it may be called an Excrement, and so may the Saliva, the Mucus that
lines the passages of the Nose, and Larynx, yea the Su^^^s Nervosus, and Semen;
but if by Excrement, you mean something separated, and rejected as useless to
the Body, merely to be cast out, as the Dung, and Urine are; I deny the Gaul to
be an Excrement, any more than the Saliva, Mucus, Succus Nervosus, and Semen,
all which have their special and proper ends toward the conservation, or
propagation of the Body. That the Gaul cannot be rationally supposed to be an
Excrement in the proper sense, is apparent from the manner and way of its
separation. The Liver the largest Bowel in the Body, having no other assignable
use, but the secretion of this Liquor, which is ejected most commonly into the
Duodenum, rarely into the Jejunum, and there mixed with the Chyle, as all that
are skilled in the Anatomy of the solid Parts know. But it cannot well be
thought, that a mere Excrement should be thus discharged into the bosom of the
nutritious Juice, being the most Alkalous matter in the whole Body, and so
according to Mr. Acid, the most Pernicious: But on the contrary, this Liquor
discharged into the Chyle, so soon after its egress from the Stomach, is
necessary there for the hinderance of too much Acidity, from passing through the
Lacteals into the Blood; which appears from the Consideration of the Nature of
this Liquor, which by Distillation yields a volatile Alkalous, in the Caput
Mort. a Lixivious-Salt running in the Air, which I have not found in any of the
Liquid, or Solid Parts of the Body besides, except the Dung, which has a fixed
Salt somewhat like it, but not so strong: Whence I conclude, it has some Acids
mixed with it carried down by the Gall: With these Salts, the Gall yields also
a Faetid Oil, as other Animal Substances do, but the Particles of this Liquor,
as mixed together in their Natural State, make such a Compound as is presently
thickened, or coagulated by Acids, more, or less, as the Acid is stronger, or
weaker, into a clammy glutinous Matter, whereby the abounding Acid Patticles,
that are sometimes contained in the Stomach are inviscated and hampered, and so
in great measure hindered from passing into the Lacteal-Veins. But I could never
see the Gall make any such effervescency with Acids, as some Authors talk of;
though I have Tried all sorts of Acids, and many kinds of Galls: And as it is it
self coagulated by manifest Acids, so it hinders the temperate Lacteal juice
from being so soon coagulated; as is seen in this, that Milk into which, a few
Drops of Gall are put, will stand in its due consistence un-coagulated, when
Milk alone will be turned and sour'd: So that the proper use of the Gall, seems
to me, to be for the attemperating the Nutritious-Juice, and so in the
Duodenum, Jejunum and Ileum, is a great friend, though detained in the Body, will
play the Devil, you say. By being detained, I suppose, you mean not duly
separated from the Blood, and discharged into the Chyle. To which, I answer,
Its remaining in the Blood is not so bad, but its absence from the Offl^ine of
the Chyle, is as great an evil to the Animal Economy; in which a
proportionable and harmonious mixture, is that in which Health consists: In
which, the Wisdom of the Author of Nature is seen, that all the Parts, and
Particles in the Hydraluico-pneumatical Engine the Body, are so ordered, that
they help, and are again helped by one another; as here there is provision made
for separating the Particles that make up the Bilious-Juice ever they abound in
the Blood, and when they are Ejected, they become as useful to prevent another
sort of Particles passing into the Blood, which would be as hurtful there, as
their detentation in it would be prejudicial. And there are not seen more evil
Effects from the Gall's retention in the Veins, than from its absence in the
Guts. Fernelius relates in Pathol. Lib. 6. cap. 5. That many Died in whom no
other Cause of Death appeared, but that the Bladder of Gall was empty. And
Moebius in Fundam. Physiol, page 168. That in three Infants that Died of an
Atrophy, there was no Gaul found. But that the Bile should be as genuine an
Excrement of Fire, as any thing, is one of Mr. Acid's hot Fancies. Nothing but
Organical Vital Bodies, are properly said to have Excrements: But should we
allow him to talk of Fire's Dung, neither the yellow color, nor bitterness of
the Bile, would be any Argument of its being the Excrement from Fire's
Victuals, any more, than the same color, and taste, would argue Vegetables in
their Natural State, to be made after the same manner. And as for Empyreuma,
whoever Tastes it, will find it has none. But before you had given us your
Fiery Fancies, you should have been sure there is a Fire in Man, and
whereabouts the Kitchen is placed: I believe it is not in the Liver, but only in
some few Hot Brains.


Ac. The Life of Man I take to be a Fire, or Flame, and all we Eat or Drink,
together with the Air we draw in, to be as fuel for this Flame, and what is
not proper fuel for it, is cast off as Excrements: That part of the Chyle that
is fit to make Blood is made Blood, the rest confusedly mixed with it, called
S^erum, is for nourishing the Parts, the Blood being not at all used for
Nutrition, but is the Red Substance wherein is contained the Biolychnium, being
its Paul^^. Now I appeal to all conversant in Chemistry, whether the Excrements
of the Fire, viz. Ashes and Soot, be not Alkalies. That our Lives are nothing
but a Flame, or Fire of the same Nature with that commonly used, or very
analogous to it, I think is plain. Its the Nature of common Fire, to consume
whatever is a proper Pabulum or fuel for it, and to leave its Excrements
behind it, which are Ashes and Soot. The Body of Man would soon be consumed,
unless supplied with proper Food, and how could this be, and what would become
of what we Eat and Drink, I cannot understand; unless there were a Fire, or
Flame within us to consume it. Common Fire cannot subsist without Air: Is it not
the same thing with the Life of Man? Let him be enclosed in a place where Air
cannot come at him, he immediately Expires, as is well known to Miners. Heat and
Warmth are the constant Concomitants of Fire, and that there is Heat and Warmth
in the Body of Man, none, Master of his Senses, will deny. How is it possible
for the Heat of our Bodies to be sustained, unless there were a Fire in us to
do it; mere Motion, will never cause any Heat in Fluid Bodies, although excited
never so much. There is a Maxim, That there is no Smoke, but there is some Fire.
Every Body must be sensible what vast quantities of Steams are continually
discharged from all parts of our Bodies: How this can be, unless from some Fire
within us, I cannot understand. And I have the Conc^rrence of some of the
greatest Men the World has afforded, that the Life of Man is a Flame. The
Phosphorus, which is as much Fire as any thing we know, is a true Animal Fire,
to be Extracted from all Animal Substances; and if it did not actually exist in
them, how can it be Extracted from them I know not: It is an Acid Sulpherous
Substance, and the Pabulum of Animal Fires, is a Sulpherous Acid: Common
Sulphur, Tallow, Pitch, do abound with Sulphur, and are inflammable; yet from
none of these is by any known Artifice the least Phosphorus, or any thing like
it attainable. Upon the stroaking of Cats in the dark, flashes of fire will
follow. This gentle stroaking can never cause so violent a motion, as you make
Fire to be, unless it were actually in the Animal. I confess Fire is a
substance constantly in motion, and a brisk motion, yet all brisk motion is not
Fire: But I know several fluids the more briskly moved the colder; as a River
is always colder where the Current is most swift. And which is none of the
least Arguments to prove our Life is a Flame; let a Man be seizsed with a
Fever, or any Distemper attended with a total loss of Appetite, the Fat will
first be consumed, and a Corpulent Man soon brought to a Skeleton, when the
evacuations of Urine and Stool are less than in Health: Which could not be,
unless there were a Flame to cause that Consumption. There is a difference in
some respects between Animal and Culinary Fire, in many they agree. Neither
will burn without due access of Air; both cause warmth: Neither can subsist
without a supply of Sulphurous Acid Particles, but Animal Fire (so I call
Phosphorus) immerg'd in Water, and taken out will retain its properties without
being applied to other enkindled Bodies: This common Fire will not do. Now
where ever there is a Fire or Flame, especially when supplied with gross
matter; there must be a throwing off of Excrements: The Alkali found in Animals
is the Excrement of their Fire, and all the Excrements of Animals are Alkalous.
As for the Blood, the Volatile Alkali to be obtained from it is only the
Excrementious part of it, or rather of the vital Flame, or of its Pabulum, in a
way of being carried off by some of the Emunctories, which if it chance to be
obstructed in its passage affects the Body with some Distemper or other.


Al. The substance of your whole Doctrine seems to lie scatterd in what you
have here asserted. That the Life is a real Fire of the same, or very like
Nature with common Fire, to the conservation of which, there is required a
Fuel which whatever we eat or drink, and the Air we breath in supplieth; in
which Sulphurous Acid Particles are the proper Food, which are contained in the
red part of the Blood, but what is not proper Fuel for this Flame is rejected
as Excrement, and this Excrement is the Alkali; which if not carried off, is
the cause of Diseases. I shall oppose in the first place, to your great Men you
say concur with you, (I say rather from whom you borrowed the fancy) what your
Elder Brother Etmuller says (who I Am sure had a double yea treble Portion of
Learning to what you have) De ahstruso respirationis negotio, Cap. X. Veterum
enim quem in cord finxerunt Igniculus ac flammula sanioribus Medicis, ac
Philosoph's dudum expirasse visa sunt, si modo unquam arserint. Ideoque ut ad
illa quid regeramus operae pretium non est. Haud equidem ignoro praeclaros
quosdam Cartesianos Willisium, Sylvium, ejusque cultores levi admissa mutatione
igniculum huncce e cineribes resuscitasse, docendo illum potissimum in dextro
cordis ventriculo vigere, etc. Plausabilius prae ceteris rem proposuit clar:
Sylvius Disput. med. 6ta and 7ma in quibus Scriptis Incendium illud in cord
vitale uti vocat, ex bilis lixiviae, cum sanguine adscendentis cordique
advectae, nec non lymphae and Chyli subacidorum mutua, in dextro cordis
ventriculo effervescentia, ne speciose magis quam vere vereor deducit, etc. sed
paucis respondeo Hypothesin illam prae ertim de bilis accensu, vigorem
rationum, and experimentorum Diemmerbrocii personati illius Leoniceni, atque
Malphigii haud quaquam far, Ideoque nec pro adstruendo Igniculo concludere.
Moreover, I say, those great Men, and you, should have had some certain notion
of Fire, and first have told us what it is. For to tell us that the Life of Man
is a Fire, and not tell us what Fire is, is all one, as to tell us, That the
Life of Man is a something, you know not what. But that this something, may not
continue like the Philosopher's undetermined Matter, and so all that is said
remain uncertain; let us consider, what it is that is properly called Fire. I
say therefore, 1st. That Fire is something in Bodily Nature, 2dly. That Bodily
Nature, is nothing but Matter consisting of Particles of all Figures and Sizes.
3dly. These Particles* as they have different Figures and Sizes, are capable of
different degrees and manners of Motion. 4thly. That all the different Ideas,
or Perceptions we have of Bodies, are caused by means of the different Figures,
and Motions of the Particles. 5th. That there is no sort of Particles, of what
Figure, or Size soever, that merely on that account of Figure and Size, can
Properly be called Fire; so that the old Notion of Fire's being an Element of
any thing, is false. 6th. But to the Being of Fire, there is required a certain
degree and manner of Motion, of such Particles, that as to Figure and Size, are
capable thereof. 7th. That these Particles, must have such a degree and manner
of Motion, as to produce on our Bodies, the two Sensations of Light, if not at
too great a distance, and Heat, if no hindering Medium interpose. 8th. To the
production of which Sensations, a certain quantity of Matter, fit for such
Motion, and actually so moved, is requisite to come together. 9, That those
Particles are more readily excited to, and longer continued in this degree and
manner of Motion, in some Bodies, commonly called Fuel, than in others. 10th.
That they more or less separate the Parts, or spoil the Form of such Bodies.
11th. To assert positively this, or that to be the particular Size and Figure,
or determinate degree and manner of Motion, of Fire making Particles, would be
too great a presumption; because they are too small to be Objects of Sight; yet
we may suppose them rigid and inflexible Particles, moved most briskly to and
fro, because they break and separate many Compounds, and when applied too near
our Bodies, occasion the most displeasing Sensation of Burning; but at a
convenient distance, please us by justling against us more smooth and flexible
Bodies. These Propositions if well considered, I think, may give us some
determinate Notion of Fire: There Is never any Fire, but where there is a brisk
Motion; and you grant me, that all brisk Motion is not Fire, but such a Motion
as I have described; and no other that I know of, will determine the matter so,
as that we may not say, every Motion is Fire, or no motion is Fire. Now Fire,
as I have said, being a congeries of a quantity of subtle, rigid and inflexible
Parts so moved, as to cause the sensations of Heat and Light, and if too near
the Body that of Burning, there can be no such thing found in the Body of Man.
But let us consider your own Arguments, you use to persuade us of the Existence
of a Fire, or Flame in the Blood. The Nature of common Fire, say you, is to
consume its proper Pabulum, or Fuel, and to leave Ashes and Soot as its
Excrements, which you appeal to Chemists are Alkalies. The Body of Man would be
consumed, unless supplied with proper Food (fuel you mean for the Fire) and
how this could be, and what should become of all we Eat and Daink, unless there
were a Fire in us to consume it, you don't know, and the Alkali found in
Animals, is the Excrement of their Fire. I answer, that change wrought upon
combustible Bodies by Fire, and what alteration is made on our Food in the
Body, is vastly different, and neither is a consummption in the vulgar sense,
not one Particle of Matter being to be rationally thought to be destroyed. But
real Fire by a violent Motion separates the Parts of many compound Bodies, both
the combustible and incombustible ones. Those Bodies we call combustible,
abound more or less, with Oily Parts, which are as it were the Vehicle of the
Igneous: But there are few of those Bodies but are compounded of other kinds of
Parts, besides Oleous, which in the hurry are separated from one another, and
not only so, but sometimes altered, either broken into smaler Parts, or by
strikeing together, are connected one with an other otherwise than they were in
the natural compound; whence new resulting Bodies, or artificial compounds
arise, such as Soot, and six'd Alkalies, being separable again. Now which of
these separated Bodies, should rather be called an Excrement (if the fancy of
calling any of them so must be allowed) is merely Arbitrary: In most of them
Water is the greatest quantity, of that which is cast out as most unfit for the
continuance of this hurry, and so might rather be called the Excrement. The
Acid and Volatile Alkalious Bodies are carried off next, and the Oil it self,
though commonly altered, is most of it separated before the Fire goes quite out;
the fixed Alkali, and those portions of Oil, and Acid, that stick in it to make
it such, abiding in the Earth last with the Igneous particles. Now whatever, is
done here, is done by a violent separation, and sticking together of the Parts
of Matter. But what alterations of things are made in the Body, are made by the
gentle Motions of Natural ferments, and separations by peculiar Strainers of
the curiously composed Organical Frame, wherein there is no such degree and
manner of Motion, as can properly be called Fire. As for the Consumption of the
Body, you say, would soon be, if there were not a supply by Food; I answer, The
forbearance of Food, would not consume the Body, but the Organical Frame of it,
yea, and Blood, both containing a great quantity of Oil, will re^main
unconsum'd in spite of Hunger. And the Fat, which you say, is first consumed
in Fevers and Diseases where there is a total loss of Appetite is carried off,
not because it is combustible, and so Burnt away; but because its apt to be
attenuated, and does not so firmly adhere as other Parts. The Evacuations by
Stool and Urine, must needs be little, when the Appetite is lost, and little
Eat: But at all times, its well known, the Evacuations by the Pores, are the
greatest. And as for what we Eat and Drink, though you cannot tell what should
become of it, if there were not a Fire to consume it: Yet any one that is led
more by Consideration and Experiment, than Fancy, may as easily give an account
of the waste of it, as of wearing out a Coat, or a pair of Shoes, without
supposing some Fire or other that Burns them to pieces. The Food is first
somewhat separated by Chewing, then in the Stomach by a gentle Heat, and
Motion, and probably by some sort of Fermentation; the things we Eat, most of
them being capable thereof, if kept in a moderate Heat, and sufficient
Moisture, even out of the Body: Then in the small Guts there is a separation
made, and great part is carried down, and rejected as Excrements, which Coals,
(if you please,) you may catch as hot as ever they were without Burning your
Fingers. That part that is not thus rejected is Percolated into the Lacteal
Veins, which convey it into the Ductus Chyliferus, and so into the Blood, for
the nourishing the Parts, both Liquid and Solid; the Serous part being but the
Vehicle for the more solid, and the Globules of the Blood. Whilst a Man grows,
the different Particles of this Nutritive-Juice, as they are fit some for one
thing, some for another, adhere, and are added to the Parts of the Body, and so
increase its Bulk; those Parts that are more thin, and fluid, add to and
increase the Liquors of the Body, out of which, great part is separated by
Urine. When a Man has done growing, there is no need of addition, but only of a
supply of as much as daily wastes, which considering the Poreousness of the
Body in all Parts, and the continual natural, and voluntary Motions thereof,
for the feveral Works of Life, cannot easily be supposed to be little, though we
can find no Focus for a Fire to consume us. It Is very well known that Laboring
Men, and that in Cold-Weather, have better Stomachs, and Eat more, than those
that live Idly, though kept hotter than the Laborious; which may well be
thought to proceed from their using more Motion, whereby the Particles of Food
are carried about more swiftly and at length worked out, and this all done
merely by rubbing, where there is no Fire, which you say, rejects as Excrements
Soot and Ashes, the one of which may be farther separated into Volatile Salt,
and Oil, the other into Earth and fixed Alkali, either of which you may call an
Excrement of the other, as you love or hate, this or that: But you are fallen
out with Alkali, and stercus humanum, offends your squeemish stomach, ergo,
Alkali Merda est, Alkali is the Excrement. Which I think, as good a Reason as
any you have given. But yet whatever analogy may be in the consumption of
combustibles by common-Fire, and of our Food by any thing in the Body, there is
this vast difference; In this there is no Soot nor Ashes made of what we Eat
and Drink, much less of the Air, The other Fuel as you call it, which we
breath in. Here neither the Flame, not the Coal will Burn you, enkindle the
most combustible Matter, or give you any Light. And though a Volatile Alkali and
an Oil, something like what may be got from Soot, may be separated from the
Liquid, or Solid Parts of the Body, they must first be wrought upon by a common
and greater Fire, than any is in the Blood: And though from the Gall, and Dung
may also be separated a small quantity of fixed Salt, they must first be
exposed to a real and violent Fire, and so must the other Parts, before there
can be produced any thing that may be called Ashes from them. Common Fire, you
say, cannot subsist without Air, and the like you affirm of the Life of Man; so
they must be both Fires. I answer, Though both require Air; yet not for the same
Reason. The Air is an Elastick or Springey Body, capable of being expanded, or
contracted, and in its Expansion by Heat, or the Motion of the Igneous
Particles (which begins when ever a quantity of them, sufficient to produce the
Effect can be connected) I say in its expansion, or the receeding of its Parts
from the place where the Fire is begun, it carries off the Particles of the
combustible Matter, that are separated, and become no longer combustible, and
so there is more room for the Igneous Particles to move on; as is evidently seen
in Chemical Furnaces, where the strength of the Fire, depends on the quick
carrying off the Smoke, which is done by a stream of Air passing through the
Bodies in combustion, and carrying off those Particles that would hinder the
Motion of the Igneous Bodies: The Air where the Fire is being rarified, that
below being more compressed, expands it self into the place where is most room,
and other Air succeeds it, (the Air being more dilated the higher it is) the
more compressed Air still passing that way; so still the stronger the Fire, the
stronger the Draught of Air, and the faster the separated Parts that would
hinder the motion of the Igneous Bodies are removed. But the Life of Man
requires Air, not to blow a Fire, carry off Soot, or displace Ashes, much less
as a Fuel for a Fire; but besides many other Ends and Uses, chiefly to
continue and carry on the Circulation of the Blood: Which I take to be done
after this manner, The Air by its Elastick Property, rushing into the Lungs,
upon the dilation of the Thorax, expands them, and thereby sets the
Sanguiferous Vessels free and right for the passage of the Blood out of the
right Ventricle of the Heart into the Vena Arteriosa, at the rise of which,
there are Valves to hinder its passage back again; this Vessel and the Arteria
venosa by their Anastomoses being filled with Blood, the Thorax is again
contracted, the Air pressed out, and the Lungs fall together; whereby the
Blood Vessels are pressed: But the foresaid Valves hindering its going back, it
is drove into the Left Ventricle of the Heart, whence it cannot return into the
Lungs, by reason other Valves hindering it; the Thorax being again dilated, and
the Lungs by the Air rushing in expanded, and the Vessels, whose Blood was
pressed out into the Left Ventricle of the Heart, again free; the Blood flows
into them again from the Right Ventricle, by which filling and emptying of the
Vessels of the Lungs, the Blood is as it were pumped and carried along in its
Circulation: And is there as it were ground, its adhering Globules separated,
and divided from one another, its Heterogeneous Particles more exactly mixed,
and so is attenuated, and made more capable of passing the smallest Vessels
through the whole Body. So that the principal reason, why a Man cannot live long
without Air, is because the Blood cannot otherwise circulate through the Lungs
which way it must go; which evidently appears from the consideration of a Child
unborn, who lives diverse Months without respiration, the Blood being carried on
by the force of the Circulation of the Mothers Blood through the Foramen Ovale,
from the Right to the Left Ventricle of the Heart; which is stopped when the
Child is born, and becomes a distinct, and separate Animal, needing a force of
its own to carry on the Circulation. The reason why Persons are often killed in
Mines, is not because there is no Air, it being impossible almost to keep it
out, but that they sometimes breath in with the Air Arsenical, Sulphurous, or
other noxious Fumes, of which one would think a Professed Chemist could not be
ignorant: But you may soon try; the Fumes of Antimony, Arsnick, or the beloved
Sulphurous Acid, steaming from enkindled Brimstone drawn into your Lungs, will
in a little time be found no good Fuel for your supposed Biolychnium. As to
your Argument from Heat and Warmth the concomitants of Fire, and in the Body of
Man. I Answer, Heat is most certainly the concomitant of Fire, and also brisk
Motion, but as you confess all brisk Motion is not Fire; so I say, all Heat and
Warmth is not Fire, and the briskest Motion in the Body of Man, either in
Health or Sickness, is not brisk enough to make a real Fire in the weakest
degree. And though you cannot see how Heat and Warmth could be sustained without a
Fire; you may as well say, you cannot see how a Man can walk unless he be
running. Warmth, Heat, and Fire it self, is nothing but mere Motion in several
degrees and manners, and wherever there is motion there is some degree of
Warmth, though we may not perceive it, for there is no such thing as absolute
cold unless where all things are in absolute rest, which place would be hard to
find. Whatever Heat, or Warmth is caused in Fluids, is caused by mere Motion,
even where they are set over a Fire, but the nature of watery Bodies, such as
the Liquors in Man, will not admit a real Fire or Flame to be mixed with, and
continue in them; and though by Motion they may be brought to a Heat inconsistent
with the Life of the Body; yet this very Motion is not Fire. But doubtless the
Heat in Man's Body is caused by some kind of Motion, and probably a
fermentative one; the Blood and other Liquors containing diverse salts and Oily
particles may well be thought so to move together, as to cause the greatest
Heat in the Body of Man. I confess a mere Oil, and some very strong Acid
Spirits, will by their mixture be enkindled into a real Flame, but there never
is nor can be such a mixture flow in the Veins of a living Man; so there is
never Heat enough to enkindle the most inflammable Bodies. You may take
Phosphorus without any fear of its being set on fire in your Belly, which though
as little Heat would enkindle, yet not immerg'd in a watery Liquor, or without
the sufficient access of Air; for which very reason there can be no Fire in the
Blood. And Phosphorus it self, though so apt to be enkindled, I have known lie
for a Month, and might have done as long as one would, in a Glass sealed up
without any Water, or the Air excluded, and not at all take Fire. The
continuance of our Heat is very easily conceived to be by a continual supply of
Saline, and Oleous Particles apt to jostle against one another in a watery
Liquor, and move sufficiently to keep us warm. We know that diverse Liquors
mixed together, will cause a Heat, even where there is nothing inflammable in
either of them. It has been found by experience, that the heat of hot Springs
proceeds from a certain Bed where are Salts of diverse natures, which the Water
coming to dissolves, and so their Motion produces the Heat, something like
that, produced by pouring Water upon Lime, which I think no Man in his Wits can
ascribe to a Fire or Flame in the Water. That you say some Fluids the brisker
moved are the colder, is your mistake; that a River is not coldest in the
current appears from this, that the Current is not so soon froze; and though the
wind by its ^^tion causes the sense of cold, yet it is not merely by its
Motion, but because the Particles moving straight on in a line hinder the
hurrying Motion, which is the formal cause of heat, of the Sun Beams, which
luminous Particles while dispersed and separate have not force enough to cause
the effect of Fire, or burning; yet when collected, and bundled up in the Focus
of a Burning-glass, are in a posture to cause that sensation, when an Inch
distant from the Focus they have not such an united force. As to your maxim,
There is no Smoke but there is some Fire, I answer, the steams of our Bodies
are not Smoke, nor if you could catch them, would they have a Grain of Soot,
but are very little besides Water, as I could show any body by a method whereby
one may collect, Four, Five, Six, Seven, Eight Ounces, or more of Sweat from a
Man at any time: And Water we all know is rarefied, and carried up by a very
small heat, as is seen in the coldest Weather, and the Water rarefied by the
Sun, will appear somewhat like smoke. As for the Phosphorus, it is not an
Animal Fire, or any Fire at all till enkindled; when set on fire nothing burns
fiercer, or burns out sooner, otherwise it is but a very inflammable Sulphur,
or Fuel apt to take fire, being not so much as sensibly warm till enkindled.
And to the difference you fancy between this Animal Fire, as you call it, and
the common: I Answer, Phosphorus will not have the properties of Fire after
immersion, or before, unless its Particles are excited by sufficient Motion;
and so will other Combustible Bodies be enkindled by sufficient Motion after
Immersion, yea some incombustable Bodies as a Flint, and a Steel by a brisk
Friction will give fire, or a piece of Iron by vigorous hammering light a
Match, never the less for being immerg'd. But Mr. Acid, were his Biolychnium
under Water but one Week would never burn again, without a miracle, or the
application of some enkindled matter. Farther, Phosphorus may easily be
supposed to be extracted from Animal Substances without being thought to be
actually in them, and though I grant that it was materially in them, I deny that
it was formally: For the Particles that compose this Artificial Compound were
dispersed, and mixed with others, and so composed no such Body, but are brought
together by Art, and stuck to one another, and then are in that state called
Phosphorus, and may be separated again as easily, and then are not Phosphorus.
As Glass of Antimony, or Lead was not really Glass in those Bodies before the
Operation of the Fire, but made by it, and they may be reduced again to
Antimony, and Lead, as they were before, and then are no Glass. Yea some
products of Art were not so much as materially, as to their whole, in the
matter wrought upon by the Fire, as Zink Lead, and some other Bodies some way
operated on without any addition, will not only give Bodies of quite another
form, but will be increased in weight considerablely. Phosphorus is an
Acido-Sulphurous Substance you say, I say rather an Acido-oleous; for Sulphur
is a Body compounded of an Acid, and an Oil, and to say Acido-Sulphurous is
allone, as to say, Acido Acido-Oleous. And if the Pabulum of Animal Fires were
a Sulphurous Acid, and Phosphorus a Sulphurous Acid, it will follow only, that
Phosphorus may be a Pabulum for Animal Fires (were there any) and not the
Animal Fire it self. Common Sulphur, Tallow, Pitch, abound with Sulphur, you
say; That is Sulphur abounds with Sulphur, and is inflammable: A Wit! Mr. Acid
abounds with Mr. Acid, and is sour; this is deep! Tallow and Pitch abound with
Brimstone too you fancy, but I Am sure you never got any Brimstone from them,
nor can there be any got without the Addition of an Acid, if then. But whether
there can be any Phosphorus made of these? I readily yield, there cannot by any
Artifice known to Mr. Acid, but there are very many things done by Artifice
unknown to him. But you said Sir, a little before, that Phosporus might be got
from all Animal Substances; yet now it cannot be got from Tallow, etc. by any
Artifice; but you forgot again, that Tallow is an Animal Substance; it slipped
your memory, being a greasy body. Upon stroaking of Cats in the dark, flashes
of Fire will follow, you say. Your Puss perhaps may serve you to strike Fire
with, but it will only prove a Ignis fatui, which no Wise Man would call a
Fire, or think actually in the Animal as its Vital Principle, any more than the
shining of a dead and stinking Whiting, or of a piece of rotten Wood can be
thought their life, or a real Fire. For though in these there is a light; yet
there is wanting the other qualification a burning Heat, as your Assertions
Sir, commonly want two things, without which conjunct they cannot be more than
uncertain Fancies, viz. Experiment and Reason, whereby you should have examined
the Nature and Properties of Bodies, that you might not have grounded your
Judgment upon false Principles.


Ac. The Principles of mixed Body; I take to be Acid and Sulphur, as the Vital
Active ones; Alkali the Principle of Death, and Corruption: There being since
the Fall a Principle of Death in opposition to that of Life implanted in our
Natures, and not only in our Natures, but in the Natures of every thing else
for our sakes. [God said to Adam, Cursed be the ground for thy sake, etc. I
confess, many of our Age will Laugh and Ridicule me for having recourse to
Sacred Writ, especially the Writings of Moses, which they look upon as a kind
of Romance: But let them Laugh on. If there were not a Principle of Death
within us, how is it possible for a Man one Hour to be in a good state of
Health, and the very next Expiring* Then there is Water and Earth, the two
passive Principles: And from these I can more easily account for the Phenomenon
in natural Bodies, than from the five old ones, Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury,
Water, and Earth, or any other Principles broached in the World.


Al. By Principles, I suppose, you mean the same as some others do by Elements,
viz. Simple Bodies, of which, all Compounds are supposed to consist, and into
which, they may at last be resolved. To which, I answer, That neither these
Five Things you call Principles, and would have us believe New, and rather of
your Invention, than of Doctor Andre's, nor the Five old ones (as you call
them, between which and yours there is but little difference) are indeed, the
Elements, or Principles of Compound Bodies, and so sufficient to solve their
Phaenomena's: Which may appear by a little Consideration. But in the first
place, I shall observe, that your division of Principles into Active and
Passive, is not good, or allowable any farther, than as a compliance with an
improper and vulgar way of speaking: For in strict Speech, nothing can be said
to do, or be Active, but what has a Will, and those Bodies by which we receive
the strongest impressions on our Senses, and have thence been called Active,
have indeed no more Will than the other, that is none at all: To be figured, and
moved (which is all that belongs to Body) in what manner soever, is not to
Will. As for Earth, I shall next observe, That, that which you call Earth, is
not that which is properly called the Earth: Your Earth or Caput Mort. being as
different almost, as the Bodies in which it is found, and consequently not
simple, but it self a Compound. That which is properly called the Earth, is the
Quick-Sand, of which and Water, this Globe chiefly consists; it being the Basis
of other Bodies, and seems to be a Body consisting of Homogeneal Particles. And
as to the Water that is moved through the interstices of these Sands, and is
found in the Pores of many Bodies, and the Air that also rusheth into all
Porous Bodies, where it can have passage, and compasses them about; they are
as it were the Vehicles of grosser Bodies, themselves probably consisting of
their peculiar similar Particles, and are not to be thought Elements of other
Bodies. For instance, Wood though it is Porous, and some of its Pores hold Air,
some Water; yet they are not to be called Elements of the Wood, any more than
Water running in a Leaden-Pipe, or Air within the Walls of a House, are to be
called Elements of Lead, or of the House. The Air, and Water, I say, are the
Vehicles of the Particles of Compound, and changeable Bodies, carrying them to
and fro, in the Production of all the changes we see them undergo. But to come
to your supposed Principles, they will appear not to be the Principles or
Elements of Compound Bodies, from these Considerations. First, Whatever are
supposed as Elements, or Principles of mixed Bodies ought some way or other to
be proved really, and actually to Exist in the Compounds as Parts of them. 2.
They ought to be unchangeable, and consequently simple Bodies themselves. As to
the first, I say, these Bodies you call Principles, are not, nor ever were
(that we know of) proved so much as likely to Exist in, and make up some mixed
Bodies, or us Principles to be in any. For instance, Gold is a Body in which
you cannot demonstrate, that there is one Grain of Acid, or Oil, or of
Alkali-Salt, no nor of Water, or of Caput Mort. so far it is from being to be
thought a Compound of your Five Principles. But I remember, you have asserted,
That Gold is nothing but a pure Acid and Sulphur, which you said, has been made
appear, by some of the most strict enquirers into Nature's Secrets. But who
those were you will not tell us: But upon this supposition, your Five Principles
are excused here. And the more Acid with Sulphur, any thing has. the more
perfect it is, you say. By Sulphur, I suppose, you mean an inflammable
Substance, and according to this Fancy, Brimstone which is all Acid and
Sulphur, would be as perfect as Gold, and perfecter too, for I Am sure, you
never saw any thing inflammable, or Acid in Gold. But the reason of this your
Opinion, I suppose, is this, you have a very great kindness for Acid and
Sulphur, and as much for Gold; therefore Gold is Acid and Sulphur. Again, you
shall take Crystal, Talk, Diamonds, Pearls, Mercury, Silver, or diverse other
Bodies, I might name, and your strict enquirers into Nature, Dr. Andre, and all
to help you, shall not be able to separate any two of your Principles from
them. Again, many of those Bodies from which some, or most, of those your
Principles are got, may not without sufficient ground, be thought not actually
to contain them such as they are produced, but that they are New Products, not
as to Matter, but as to Form; resulting from the combinations of more simple
Particles united together by the violence of the Fire. As for Acids, we well
know, there are apparent ones, Naturally in some Bodies, Animal and Vegetable,
and from others, produced by Art; but even from those Bodies, I can easily get
an Alkali instead of an Acid, when I please, without any addition, merely by
the different ways of Working. For instance, I will take a quantity of a Green
Herb, and divide it into two parts, from one half I will get an Acid Liquor,
from the other half a Volatile Alkalous Salt, merely by Distillation. So
likewise, I will get a large quantity of fixed Alkali, and none or very little
Volatile Alkali, or a larger quantity of volatile Alkali, and little or no
fixed, which I please, from the same Herb, without any addition, merely by the
different ways of Operating. From these and many other Considerations of Things
well known to Chemists, it is highly probable, these Bodies are rather Products
made by Combinations and Alterations, than the simple Elements of Bodies. And
your asserting, That if Alkali were the product of Fire, the Caput Mort. burnt
again, would produce more Alkali, is very weak: For the Caput Mort. has not the
matter left whereof to make it. 2. Principles ought to be unchangeable, or else
they cannot be supposed to be simple Bodies, but Acid, Alkali, Oil are
changeable. As for an Acid, I can change it into an Oil, or into an Alkali. Oil
I can change into an Acid, and into Oil again, or into an Alkali. Alkali, I can
change into an Acid, and then that Acid, into an Alkali again. Which things are
so well known to all that deserve the name of Chemists, I need not recite the
Processes; and as for those that don't understand Chemistry, it is besides my
purpose, here to teach them. But as for you Mr. Acid, though you may think your
self incapable of being Transmuted into an Alkali-Doctor, because The making
Acids Alkalies, and Alkalies Acids, is contrary to your Experience, or the
producing Alkalies or Acids out of those Bodies, in which they did not Exist: I
can show you such an Experiment at any time, and then you are obliged upon your
Word, to own your self my humble Servant. As to the Accounting for the
Phenomenon of Natural Bodies from Acid, Sulphur, Alkali, etc. they will soon
appear too narrow, and insufficient (especially if we could take them for
simple Bodies) to any Considerate Person that does not serve an Hypothesis. I
challenge any Man for instance to give me a reason of the following Phaenomona,
from the mixture of any of your Principles. First in Vegitable, or Animal
Poisons, how a very small quantity of matter, sometimes not the hundredth part
of a Grain should have such dismal, various, and sudden effects from any
mixture of Acid, Alkali, Oil, etc. When these in themselves may be took
separate, yea or conjunct, however we can join them again in considerable
quantities without any harm. What Hypothetick could ever make a mixture of
Acid, Alkali, Oil, etc. to have the effects of Opium, or of a Cathartick Drugg,
that I have known work so violently as to bring a Man exceeding weak, by only
holding it in his Mouth a Minute or two, and so spitting it out. The same may
be said of Specificks, of which Mr. Acid himself in a little fit of
consideration, has owned, There are many that are niether Alkalies nor Acids,
yet seldom fail of curing Distempers. Should he deny the Doctrine of Specifiks,
says he, he should deny matter of fact, which he promises never to do, till he
is totally deprived of his Reason: And gives us some Instances of the
Operations of Specificks, which cannot be supposed to proceed from their being
Acids or Alkalies. Another Instance wherein these Principles will be found
short, is the Phenomenon of Magnetism; to name one thing, Take a Lodestone and
rub one end of a poised Needle on the North Pole of the Stone, you will find
that Point will be attracted to the same Pole when ever it is brought near it:
But offer the other end of the Needle to that same Pole, it will be driven from
the Stone as much as the other rubbed end is attracted; but force the end that
is driven off, to the North Pole of the Stone, and keep it there some time, it
will be attracted as much as it was driven away before, and the end that was
first attracted will be driven away. Now here can be no conceivable alteration
of the proportions of Acid and Alkali, or any other of your supposed Principles
in so short a time, by the bare contract of the Needle and Lodestone, and this
done at pleasure, without the least alteration of the texture of the Needle or
Lodestone. Again the gravity of Gold can no way be accounted for, by supposing
it compounded, howsoever of your Principles; this Metal being heavier than
either of them, more than as twenty to three, so far is it from consisting of
meet Acid and Sulphur, as Mr. Ass-Ey'd asseydly asserts; The heaviest Acid
commonly known being lighter than this Metal about eighteen times, and Sulphur
not much heavier. Now it is impossible that two light Bodies should compose a
heavy one. I might recite many other Phenomenon in Bodies no way to be
accounted for by these supposed Principles; as in Colors in the Rainbow, in
the prisme and even permanent ones, as in the forementioned Metal, which cannot
receive its color from things which on the account of their lightness, can be
no Ingredients of it. I might also demand the reason of sounds, their Harmonies
or Discords; but I should tempt our Hypothetick Oracles in vain. But I think I
have more reason to conclude, that the Phenomenon of Bodily Nature, or the
different Ideas we receive from Bodies depend upon, or result from a far
greater difference, and variety of Figures, Sizes, Textures, and Motions of the
Particles of Matter, created at the beginning, of all Sorts and Sizes to us
innumerable. From the Adhesions and Combinations of sometimes more, sometimes
fewer of these Simple Particles, all the varieties of mixed Bodies result.
Where there are Particles together, whose Figures are more or less apt for
Motion, there is a Body more or less fluid. Where the Particles hang together,
and are more or less unapt for motion, there is a Body more or less solid.
Where are fewer of the Simple Particles, there is a Body less compounded. Where
there are more sorts of differing Particles, there the Body is more compounded.
Where there is a congeries of Particles of one Figure, there is a Simple Body;
as probably the Particles of Air and Water may be, tho they do not touch one
another exactly, or rest together, and so are porous and fluid, and capable of
receiving other Bodies into their Pores. And perhaps some other Bodies, whose
Particles firmly adhere, and so are called Solid, may also consist of similar
Particles. This innumerable variety is large enough to make all the most odd
properties of Bodies. The Divisions and Combinations of these Simple Particles
by Art (though perhaps seldom or never divided into sets Similar or Simple) is
that whereby all the Artificial new resulting Bodies are made. But a single
Particle, let it be of what Figure or size it will, cannot be supposed capable
to be divided; because it consists of pure Matter continuous, and not of Parts
merely contiguous; and so there is no Vacuum, or room for any other Body to
come in to divide it, as there is between the contiguous parts of Matter. And
though the least Particle in Nature might be supposed Mathematically or
Imaginarily divisible; yet really and Physically the greatest Particle cannot
be so thought; though some inconsiderately assert a Physical infinite
Divisibility. I should her leave your Principles to their Master; with these
few Considerations, but that poor Alkali is so abused by you, there needs a
word or two here to be spoken for him. And I must tell you, it is from mere
spite and ill will, and no reason, that you say, he is the Principle of Death
and Corruption, and created since the Fall in opposition to Life. I must oppose
Moses to you, who tells us (and he had it written by the Finger of God) That,
in six days God made Heaven and Earth, the Sea, and all that in them is, Exodus
20. 11. Wherein Alkali must needs be concluded (if it be a Creature of God) And
God saw every thing that he had made, and behold it was very good, Genesis 1. 31.
Adam was flesh and bones, Genesis 2. 23. made within the Six Days, and had no part
of his Body made since; because all things were made within that term, and so
must have his Alkali in him before the Fall, as well as it was in other things,
though not as you say in every thing else, either then, or now, which you would
not have asserted had you not had a Treacherous Memory: For you before denied
it to be in that incorruptible yellow substance you love as well as Lemons and
Oranges, which you say consists only of Acid and Sulphur, though it is as
insipid, as most of your Discourse. And though we read, God said unto Adam,
Cursed be the Ground for thy sake, yet (...), where there is no Verb may be
supplied as well with is, or will be, as let be or shall be. The word (...)
Translated for thy ache, comes from (...) transivit thence (...) and (...)
Propter, denoting a passage from the Cause to the effect; and the Curse may
rather be attributed to Adam, as the Cause, than to God. Adam was to pass out
of Paridise to Till the Ground, from whence he was taken, and he and his
Posterity should bring a Curse upon it, or rather on themselves in the abuse of
it by their evil deeds, according to which the Septuagint, transtate the word
we read for thy sake, (...) in thy works: And as (...) properly signifies red
Earth, Man was made of, it will not be extravagant to suppose thence, that
nothing was cursed but Mankind, and that by their own evil doings, and and not
by God the Fountain of Goodness. Nor are Thorns, and Thistles to be supposed
created after the fall, or not good in themselves, but the Earth would bring
them forth without Men's Cultivation when more useful things must be planted
with labor, and toil, and Man turned out of Paradise, must no longer enjoy the
Fruits of God's immediate planting. But if the Curse must needs betook for
something God did, or would do to the Earth it may probably, as some suppose,
be meant of the Deluge, from Genesis 8. 21. I will not again curse the ground for
Man's sake. The word we have for Curse is (...) ad maledicendum from (...)
vilipendit, intimating, as if God did not esteem the works of his Hands, but
let them go to wrack. But here the Curse is taken off. God would for the future
uphold all things in their order. But however let the Earth be Cursed for thy
sake, be to be understood, I think it will not easily be read. Let it bring
forth Alkali for thy sake. Moses tells you, God pronounced all that he had
made, very good; you say a part of the Creation is bad. But hear what Solomon
says, Wisdom 1. 12, 13. (...) seek not Death in the error of your Life, nor
destroy your selves through the works of your own hands. For God has not made
Death neither has he pleasure in the Destruction of the Living, for he has
created all things in their being, and the Generations of the World Salutary,
and there is not in them a Medicament of Destruction. From the Fountain of
Goodness nothing evil can be supposed to come. But may be some may Laugh and
Ridicule me for having recourse to Sacred Writ, especially the Writings of
Moses, which all those look upon as a kind of Romance, who Suppose Dr. Burnet's
Hypothesis true, which Mr. Acid sees no reason to doubt of. But for my part I
confess, I believe Moses a better Philosopher, and a Truer Theorist, than
either the pretended, or real Author of that contrary Hypothesis. If Moses
understood the Mysteries of Nature as well as any Man, and was guided by an
Infallible Spirit, as Mr. Acid once said, how is it that he can see no reason
to doubt of that which contradicts him. But Mr. Acid cannot see how a Man can be
in a good state of Health one hour, and the next expiring, without supposing a
Principle of Death within us. I Answer, his Memory is treacherous; one while he
says, All Persons have some degree of Sickness: Now he talks of Persons being
in a good state of Health: At another time, When he considers the structure of
our Bodies, of what multitudes of minute Parts they are composed, instead of
being surprised at our being sick so often, he is almost amazed to think that
we are ever well. So say I, Man's Body is a delicate piece of Mechanism,
consisting of a multitude of small and tender Vessels, bound up in a thin
porous Skin, consisting mostly of soft and tender Matter: Man's Mind is a
foolish and violent Agent, often forcing this curious Engine to that it is not
strong enough for; and it is no wonder to see a Man now well, and anon expiring
by the excess of Eating and Drinking, of the Passions of the Mind, or other
Forces upon Nature, which doubtless would have destroyed even Adam in
Innocence, could they have been, where was no culpable defect in Wisdom and
Goodness; without supposing a Principle of Death. As Christ himself in whom
there was no Sin, was found capable of Bodily Miseries, and a Violent Death.
Swords and Pistols, and other the inventions of Man's Cruelty, are not the only
things, whereby a Man's Life may be destroyed in a short time, but the most
innocent and wholesome Food abused, and taken in excess, even Bread, in which
some reckon so much Acid, will soon do the business. As I once knew a Woman by
eating Bread very freely, got such a Distemper, that broke out in large Boils
in many parts of her Body hardly escaping with Life. And I think I may affirm,
that where one Person dies by the abuse of the Creature Alkali, there are ten
that lose their Lives by your beloved Principles Acid and Sulphur, or Oil, in
the one instance of excessive, and unseasonable drinking of Vinous Liquors. And
I believe no Man of any considerable Reason and Experience, but by Observation
may find, that though Acid and Alkali are both good Creatures, ordained for their
proper Uses and Benefits to Man; yet Acid things in their abuse are more
frequently, and strongly penricious to the Vital Economy.


Ac. Acids hinder Putrefaction, and reduce things from Putrefaction, already
Putrified, and so must be great Medicines: For there is no Disease but proceeds
from some sort of Putrefaction of the Fluid Parts of our Bodies. Acids every
Body knows, preserve Animal Substances from Corruption and Stench, and if Dead,
Bodies were full of Acids, it is difficult to conceive how they could so soon
Putrefie; nay, it were impossible they should. For Acids cannot undergo
Putrefaction. And the more perfect, and durable any Vegitable is, the greater
quantity of Acidum and Sulphur, it affords, and the less of excrementious
Alkali: Alkalies presently cause Rottenness and Putrefaction in Animal
Substances, as may be seen in making of Glovers Leather: Mr. Yardly a Glover of
Worcester, the most Ingenious Man, perhaps, that ever was of his Trade, he
being (which is very strange for a Man of so Mechanic a mean Trade) a curious
Philosopher; tells me, that in making Leather, they first throw their Skins
into a Pit filled with a strong Alkalious lixivium, which makes them in a
manner Rotten: After they make a strong Acid Solution, into which they throw
their almost rotten Skins, which again reduces them to their Texture; nay,
makes them firmer than they were at first. From whence it may be naturally
inferred, that Alkalies break the Texture, and destroy the parts of Animal
Substances, and moderate Acids preserve them, and restore them to their Tone
and Texture, when they are before spoiled by Alkalies. Nay, Alkali is the only
destroyer of all Bodies, and what brings them to a state of Putrefaction and
Corruption. Again, Acids suppress Fermentation. Alkalies excite Fermentation,
in fermentable Liquors, as is too well known by the Brewers of this Town.
Alkalies are the cause of all Praeternatural Heats in the Body. Acetum is good
in Inflammations, Erisypelas, etc. And Acids are the only things that quench
Thirst. Oil of Vitriol is one of the best Medicines known, in continual
Fevers. Acids are the most Effectual things in the World to ease Pains, and if
Pain be caused by Acids, it is by giving them in too small a quantity. Sal
Alkali is Caustic, and burns the Skin. Inwardly given without being diluted
with an Aqueous, Vehicle causes Vomiting, and depraves the Appetite and
destroys it, Alkalies conveyed into the Blood, by breaking its Globules, and
destroying its Texture, cause Scorbutes, Rumatismes, Sciatica's, Consumpsions,
Gouts, Palsies, or some other Chronical Diseases. An Ingenious Person, not long
since, who had formerly embraced the Doctrine of Acids, was willing to try what
Effects the Transfusion of Acid and Alkalous Liquors into the Veins of a Dog
would produce: And the Oil of Sulphur injected into the Veins of one Dog made
him brisk and lively, and hungry, instead of disordering him, Oil of Tartar on
the contrary, injected into another Dog's Veins, made him dull, and in a few
Days he dyed,


Al. How Acids hinder Putrefaction in Animal Substances, any one may see by
easy Experiments; Oil of Vitriol, or Spirit of Nitre. poured upon the red part
of Blood, presently turns it into a black Corruption, and the Serum into a
white purulent Matter: So Leather, Bladder, Flesh, Tendons, Skin, have their
Texture destroyed by these Acids, and are Rotted and turned into a purulent
Matter; yea, the very Bones are dissolved by Acid Liquors: So far are Acids
from hindering the dissolution of the Texture of Animal Substances; much less
will they do the Miracle of reducing things already Putrefy'd, from
Putrefaction, and so, being such great Medicines. And as inconsiderate, have
you shown your self Mr. Acid, in asserting all Diseases to proceed from some
sort of Putrefaction of the Fluids of our Bodies: For if there be ever any such
thing as Putrefaction in the Juices of the Body, it cannot be reckoned the Cause
from whence a Disease proceeds; but the Effect or Product of the Disease: But
there are many Diseases, where there has not been one Rational Argument, or
certain Experiment given to persuade a Putrefaction of Humors, properly so
called, so much as an Effect. The difficulty of conceiving Dead Bodies
impossible to be Putrefy'd, if full of Acids; is only to Mr. Acid: Others know
very well, that even those Animals that abound so much with Acid, that in
Distillation, they will yield one half of their weight of a strong Acid Liquor,
will notwithstanding Putrefie, and that as soon, or sooner, than some others
abounding with Alkali. And that a Man's Body may be kept without Putrefaction,
or Stench a Thousand Years, without the help of Acids: Yea, Alkalies
themselves, we know, are great Preservatives of Flesh and Blood, if used in due
quantity, from Corruption and Stench: As the Honorable Mr. Boil tells you, in
his Book Of Humane Blood, page 142. Where twelve Drachms of Blood, were put up
with two Drachms of Spirit of Blood, and was thereby preserved a Year, of a
florid color, almost totally Fluid, had no ill Scent, or any sign of
Putrefaction, and it would no doubt, have preserved it much longer. In which
Book, he also gives an account, of diverse considerable good Effects of the use
of the Spirit of Humane Blood, as a Medicine, inwardly and outwardly, in
instances too long here to be recited; and tells you, page 206. That Volatile
Alkalies in general, had been prosperously used in Physic in England, since
the Year 1656. about which time, he had the good Fortune, to contribute so to
introduce them, as to bring them by degrees into request, and sees small cause
to doubt, but that they would be more generally esteemed, and employed. The
Judgment of which every way Learned Person, can hardly be opposed to a young
Medicaster, without diminishing him. The truth of whose Narratives, in matters
of Fact, known to him, are beyond question, to any that knew him, as I not only
well did, but was either an Assistant, or Beholder in the making those
Experiments, that are the substance of that Useful Book of Humane Blood. To
this may be added, the method of Preserving Dead Bodies of Dr. Gabriel Clauder,
recited in the Memorials for the Ingenious, Oct. 30. 1882. Which is with a
Lixivium of Oak Ashes, and Sal armoniack, in which, both a fixed and volatile
Alkali, are conjoined, and found to go beyond most former Methods of Embalming.
And though Acid Salts and Spirits will not undergo a proper Putrefaction; yet
Vegetables, that yield most of Acid, and Oil in Distillation, will Rot as soon,
or sooner than some others: Yea, Crabbs, Oranges, and Lemons, every Boy knows,
will Rot sooner than some Apples that are not sour, and many of those
Vegetables that yield most Acid, by burning will yield the greatest quantity of
fixed Alkali; which Product, is as far from being capable of Putrefaction as
any Acid, or of Rotting the Coal in which it lies; though it has lost the
supposed preserving Acid. But the chief ground of your Belief, that Alkalies
will presently Rot and Putrefie Animal Substances; I find, is a story you heard
(but could not well remember) from your curious Philosopher and Countryman,
Mr. Yardly the Glover of Worcester, who may be a good Glover, for ought I know;
but I Am sure, you have not learned Dressing of Leather of him (whether it be
his fault or yours) any better than you did Pharmacy of your Master the
Apothecary. As for Philosophy, whether the Glover or you be the Master, I know
not, but probably he might teach you the Four Years, you out-did the
Apothecary; but I believe you are both Philosophers of the same Pitch. But as
to Leather-Dressing, the strong Lixivium you talk of (to help your Memory) I
tell you is Lime, which is not used to Rot the Skins, in order to make them the
stronger (the Glover knows better) but to get off the Wool, or Hair. And though
by letting the Skins lie in the Lime-Pit too long, they may possibly be spoiled
beyond the recovery of all the Acids in the World; yet we all know, that
Limewater is but a mild Alkali, and a Medicine of great use in Surgery, and
is so far from having any caustic, or violent Effect, on Living Bodies; that
it may be safely, and to good purpose used even in Ophthalmicks, being a mild
Remedy not so much as making the Eye, that most sensible Part, to smart; and
not only so, but may be used to good purpose inwardly in some Distempers,
without any fear of rotting one's Belly, or making Leather of it; though you give
an Acid afterward. But what you take for the Acid Solution, I am not certain,
whether the infusion of Bran they use, or the Allum-Water. The first we know
becomes very sour, and if the Skins lie in it too long, will indeed rot and
spoil them beyond recovery; but the Alum is not an Acid, as you may find by
its turning the Syrup of Violets Green, which it will soon do; nor has it any
of the Effects of an Acid: For though an Acid Spirit may be Distilled from it,
there is no such heat in Dressing of Leather, as can separate the Acid from the
Chalkey Substance, with which it is already saturated, and made incapable of
having any operation as an Acid upon the Skins. But Alum is used in making of
Leather, on the account of its Astringency to make the Skins more compact, and
the Acid before used, is washed out, and not left in the Leather as a
Preservative against Corruption, which every Body may easily try, and see soon
brought upon Leather, by even a mild Acid; so far is your Inference from being
Rational, or grounded upon Experiment, That Alkalies break and destroy Animal
Substances: But Acids do the Miracles of reducing them when rotted and spoiled,
a priviatione ad habitum, or from Rottenness to Integrity. And let me ask you
here Mr. Acid, if you are Mentis compos, if all Alkalies break the Texture, and
destroy the Parts of Animal Substances; How does the Bladder, the Veins, the
Vesica Fellis, etc. hold out forty, fifty, sixty, seventy Years, against this
Corrupter in Sickness, and in Health, and come to be found strong, and entire
after Death? And how do the Bones that have no Acid, but abound with Alkali,
remain so firm, and entire; when the Coffins made of Oak, or the more resinous
Fir with all their Acids and Oil, are rotten and consumed? But what follows,
That Alkali is the only Destroyer of all Bodies, and that which brings them to
a State of Putrefaction, and Corruption, is so Extravagant, one might suspect
you delirious; but I would ask you, if out of your Paroxysme, did you ever see
Gold, Silver, Stones, Sand, to which Alkali is strictly bound in Glass,
Mercury, and a Thousand other Bodies I might name, destroyed and brought to a
State of Putrefaction by Alkalies? Could you prove your Words, you would
persuade us, that Alkali is the universal Dissolvent, and that Fire destroys
nothing. Well but another mischief of Alkali is it excites Fermentation in
fermentable Liquors: I tell you it is well it will do so, and that the Brewers
know it; for we should have but bad Drink without Fermentation: But I know, you
are no Master-Brewer, any more than a Master in Leather-Dressing; if you were,
you would know, you could have no Vinegar without Fermentation, and that no
Liquors can Ferment, but those wherein are Materially both Alkali and Acid, and
that all Fermentable Liquors, at length turn Acid. Alkalies again, say you, are
the cause of all Praeternatural Heats; I answer, not till they meet with Acids,
which may as well be said, to be the cause of the Heat excited between them, as
the Alkalies. Vinegar may be good in Inflammations, etc. and so may Alkalies,
say I, which I have used with good success in the Erisipelas. Neither are Acids
the only things will quench Thirst: For Water is the only thing Nature
requires, to allay a Natural Thirst, which is nothing but the sense of the
Latex being deficient; and Thirst in Diseases, is sooner allayed by Nitre, or
some other neutral Salts, than by all your Acids. Oil of Vitriol may be the
best Medicine in continual Fevers, you know, in the World, I will grant; but I
know a better, and it is an Alkali, and such an one, as you never saw. As for
easing Pain by Acids, let any one try on a Cancer, or other painful Sore, or on
a Wound: You may try your Tincture, as you call it, but try it on your own
Flesh, and you will soon be convinced of the contrary, and the more you use the
worse; unless you mortify the Part, then indeed, the pain is so far over, as
the Mortification goes. But as to inward Medicines, every Body knows, a little
Opium, will do more in easing Pain, than a large quantity of Acid; if it were
true, That Acid would ease Pain, and Opium does not ease Pain by any Acidity in
it, as is easily demonstrable. But I have found by long Experience, on my self,
and others, That Alkalies, in some Cases, are more powerful to ease Pain, than
almost any thing else; as in the Toothache, which I have been often troubled
with. Strong fixed Alkalies, every Body knows, applied alone to the Skin, are
Caustic, and so are Acids, as Oil of Vitriol, Butyr of Antimony, and the Lunar
Caustic. But no Alkalies are to be taken inwardly without being Diluted with
an Aqueous Vehicle; being too keen for the Parts they are to pass: So are
Acids, which without being given in a Vehicle that mitigates them, will even
corrode the Mouth, Pharynx and Stomach; and both Alkali, and Acid, imoderately
and unduely given, will deprave the Stomach. For I have known those troubled
with sour Stomachs, yet want an Appetite, as well as a good Digestion. That you
say, Alkalies being conveyed into the Blood, and breaking its Globules, cause
Scorbutes, Rheumatismes, etc. is but mere fancy (if it be so much) without
ground: For you never saw, or heard of any of those Diseases, caused by giving
Alkalies. As for the injection of Oil of Sulphur into the Veins of a Dog,
making him brisk and hungry, and Oil of Tartar, into the other Dog's Veins,
making him heavy, and at last killing him: You warily conceal who the ingenious
Person was; but we have the same Story in Etmuller's Discourse de Chirurgia
Infusoria, Cap. 10. And he was a more Ingemious Person, than to embrace the
Doctrine of Acids, or Alkalies either, or any such little Hypothetick fancy of
a Tyro, and Died too long ago, to be one of your Disciples; as you would
willingly have us believe, the Ingenious Person to be. But he does not tell
you, that he made the Experiment himself, but relating the pernicious Effects
of the Infusion of Spirit of Vitriol from Fracassatus; he subjoins that of Oil
of Sulphur not killing, but seeming to make the Dog hungry. And this Relation,
says he, may seem strange, to him that considers the great affinity of Oil of
Sulphur and Spirit of Vitriol, that they should produce such different Effects:
But being animated, and assisted by a certain Friend, I made the Experiment,
and injected j. of Oil of Sulphur per Camp. in j. of Water, and having made a
convenient Ligature, let the Dog loose; from whence he soon began to have a
short Breath, and to be troubled with Convulsions, especially of his Mouth,
with a great deal of Froth, which continued till he was as it were strangled,
and so Died in half an Hour's time, a great deal of thin red Water flowing out
of his Mouth, when he was Dead, with a great deal of Froth swimming upon it. He
gives a particular Account of what various Disorders were found in Dissecting
him, too long here to Relate; but he concludes thus, It seems that the Blood by
the injection of the Acid of Sulphur, being made thick, unfit for Circulation,
stagnated in the Lungs, and there by the Motion of the Air was turned into
Froth, and Red Serum, and being driven on into the smaller Arteries, and thence
into the Vena Cava, nothing could Circulate through the Lungs; from whence the
Viscera, and greater Branches of the Arteries were found empty. So far
different is the Account of this Experiment he made himself, from what he had,
as a Relation, which we may therefore question. But as for Oil of Tartar,
whereby another Dog was Killed, not mentioning the quantity injected; he tells
us, the Blood was made very Red, and more Fluid, than usual: From whence says
he, it appears, that too much coagu^ation of the Blood, like as too much
Dissolution of it, does Kill. He also gives an Account of the Injection of Aqua
Fortis, and Sp. of Nitre; both which suddenly Kill, Coagulating the Blood: And
from all which, every Man that can reason, may certainly conclude, that the
thinning of the Blood by Alkalies cannot be the Cause of of all Diseases. And
you Mr. Alkali, as sharp as you would seem, I believe, will find it yet more
difficult still, to make your fancy of Alkali's being the Cause of all
Diseases, appear but a little likely; if you come in particular to consider,
some of the Maladies, common to Humane Nature: For which I will prick up my
Ears.


Ac. The first thing I begin with, is the Smallpox, that fatal Distemper to
Three Kingdoms, and even to all Europe in that by the means of it, God was
pleased to deprive us of a Princess whose worth was such, as a sufficient value
can never be set upon it, or Loss sufficiently Lamented. It Is the common
Practice of Nurses, and the generality of Practitioners, as soon as they
perceive the Symptoms of this Distemper, to give Gascoin's, Countess of Kent's
Lapis de Goa, or some other Testaceous Powders, known Alkalies: The one Party
to drive the malignity from the Heart, in which it is impossible for any
malignity to lodge, more than in any other Part, by reason the Blood moves at
least tentimes faster through the Heart, than any other Part, the Lungs
excepted: For the Cavities being large no Stagnation is to be feared; but if
any where, it is in the extreme Parts, where the Blood moves slowly. The second
sort, give them to correct the Acidity, they suppose to be in the Blood. Now I
could never hear of any one, that by Analizeing the Blood in the Smallpox,
could find the least footsteps of Acidity (as I before hinted) but on the
contrary, it appears after many trials, That the Blood of such Persons, does
more abound with Alkalous Particles than that of sound People: So in this Case,
the giving of Alkalies must be superfluous, if not highly pernicious. The
Causes of the Small Pox, with most other Fevers, and acute Diseases, I suppose
to be from a quantity of such Particles, being some way or other admitted into
the Blood, which being Heterogeneous, or of a quite different Texture from that
of the Blood, and so not capable of being mixed with it, causes a hurry and
disorder. Now a Fever always preceeds the eruption of the Pustles, and when
the Heterogeneous Particles are thrown out to the surface, then the Fever
ceases. Now to assist Nature in throwing out these Heterogeneous Particles,
which they pretend, are hindered by Acids in the Blood, they give Testaceous
Powders, and other Diaphoreticks, which seldom fail of their intention, of
throwing out large quantities of Pustles, more than Nature is able to bring to
maturity, and if shedoes chance to Cope with them, is the only occasion of
spoiling so many Angelick Faces, we every Day observe. But that is not all, but
by Alkalies the Globules of the Blood are broken; when as the Excrementitious
Serum only, ought to be separated, according to the Rules of Nature, and not
the least Drop of Blood, when in its Natural State, and its Globules unbroken.
But by the means of Alkalies the Globules being broken, are made capable of
being received into the cutaneous Glands, which is the occasion of the purple
Spots in the Smallpox, and Fevers, which never fail of being the certain
Prognosticators of Death. But this is not all, those broken Globules getting
into the Maeanders of the Brain, hinder the motion of the Animal Spirits
through the Nerves, and cause Deliriums, and all those fatal Disorders of the
Brain too frequently seen: Likewise the Blood being capable of being contained
in its proper Channel, is the occasion of violent Bleedings, bloody-Urine, etc.
None of the best Symptoms. Besides, by their Diaphoretick quality they waste
the Serum that there is not sufficient left to supply and bring to maturity the
Pustles, those Medicines alone had thrown out: So about the 9th. 11th. or 13th.
Day, the Pustles fall, and the Acrid Matter being absorbed into the Veins,
Causes Secondary Fevers, of dangerous Consequence: The Small Pox requires the
giving as few Medicines, as any Disease whatsoever, unless in extraordinary
Cases: Yet the Eye of a careful Physician, is as convenient as in any. Indeed,
I have heard some complain, such a Doctor had so many Fees, and yet never Wrote
a Bill: But let me tell them, in many Cases, especially in this, the Physician
deserves his Fees better for not Writting at all, than for so doing. In this
Distemper, Acids are the things skilfully and timely given, which I have seen
not only by my own, but other Great Men's Practice, to be the only safe,
effectual, and never erring Medicines. And why should we fly to Acids
Chymically prepared, when Nature has provided Oranges and Lemons, Citrons and
Limes, which answer our intentions? For in Five Hundred, at least Patients I
have had, of all Qualities to do with in this Distemper, where I have been
called in the beginning, I don't know, that I have had one that has Died, or
been Disfigured: Nay, some that have been brought into ill Cirumstances by
Alkalies, I have retrieved from the Jaws of Death by proper Acids. To allay the
hurry of the Blood, and to confirm its Texture, I give Juice of Oranges,
Lemons, Limes in Barley-water, or Small-Beer, acidulated with Oil of Vitriol,
Vinegar, or Verjuice Posset Drink: If the Brain be disturbed, and the Patient
Delirious, I find it absolutely necessary, to let Blood in good quantities, and
use more powerful Acids, which sets all to rights. So the method I take in the
Cure of this Disease, being according to Nature's Dictates, is short and easy:
It being in the Cure of this Disease, as in the accounting for the Phenomenon
of Nature; they that go upon fewest Principles, generally Discover most of her
Secrets, and can give the best Account of them.


Al. The Small Pox has been Fatal to English Princes, more than once; though not
so much in it self, as through the ill Practice of Ignorant, or worse
Physicians: But that God should be pleased with any Evil, be the Cause, or
Sender of Diseases, or the Taker away of any such Good, whereby Obedience to
his Laws, might be promoted; I think, cannot be believed, but by inconsiderate
Sinners, looking on God, as if he were like themselves. If I did believe, that
the Sickness of him that is Sick, and the Death of him that Dies, were the
positive Will of God, I think, I should be wicked, as well as foolish, in
endeavoring to Heal. But it is common with Physicians, when through their
Ignorance, Carelessness, or other fault the Patient Dies, injuriously to say,
God took them away, and dareingly to lay their own faults upon their Maker. As
for Nurses giving Testaceous Powders to drive Malignity from the Heart, I have
nothing to say, toward their information: It Is Physicians business to look to
them, that they only obey their Directions, and do their proper Office: Nurses
know not what Malignity is, and you need not prove to them, that there cannot be
Malignity in the Heart, any more than any where else, or so likely, as in the
Extremities. But the Reason you give, though it might serve Nurses (who may
believe any thing) if you offer it to Physicians, viz. That the Blood moves ten
times faster through the Heart, than any other Part (but the Lungs) shows your
great Ignorance and inconsiderateness. If you but count the Pulses of your
Heart and Wrist, you will soon find your Mistake: And if the Blood should move
faster through the Heart (as you fancy) than through other Parts, it
Circulation could not continue, the Fountain being emptied faster, than again
supplied. As for the use of those Powders, you call Testaceous, by Physicians,
whom you honorably place, Second to Nurses, and I suppose, Third to your self,
I think, none of them so foolish, as to give them to correct Acidity in the
Blood, any otherwise, than by Absorbing it in the Stomach. [And Mr. Acid
himself once told us, That none pretend Crab's-Eyes, Pearl, Corral, etc. to be
useful any farther, than to absorb Acids in the Stomach, where we know, and you
grant, it is sometimes too much,] and so hindering a supply of Acid in the
Veins: Where though you could never find any, I have told you the Reason before,
and how it is Demonstrated, that there is an Acid in the Blood. I have also
answered already, your Assertion that the Blood of Persons in the Small Pox,
abounds more with Alkali, than the Blood of Sound Persons: To which, I farther
add, this Observation, That I have seen the Sweat and Serum of a sound Person,
turn Syrup of Violets Green readily; when the very Ichor and Corruption in the
Pustles of the Small Pox, would hardly discolor it: On which account it
appears, there was not so much Alkali, or so little Acid, as in the Sound
Persons. And contrary to your Accusation of Alkalies, as pernicious: I say, I
have never found the giving of Alkalies in this Distemper, in the least
hurtful, but very beneficial, if duly given; and I have used Alkalies here,
more than any other Medicines, and never had one Patient Dye, or Deformed, in
two Seven Years Practice. But if the Cause of this Disease, and of most
Fevers, as you affirm, be from Particles admitted into the Blood, which are of
so Heterogeneous, or different a Texture from that of the Blood, as that they
are not capable of mixing with it; then it will certainly follow, that these
Morbifick Particles in those Diseases, are not Alkalies; Alkealies being
Homogeneal to, mixable with, and requisite in making up the Natural and sound
Texture of the Blood: There being no Blood from whence they may not be gotten
in great quantity, and the Globules, or Red part of the Blood yields a greater
proportion of Alkali, than the Serum. And thus you have unwarily thrown down,
what you had Built before. But here is another Cramper, viz. How any Particles
that are incapable of being mixed with the Blood, should (as you say) be
admitted into it, and flow with it: None but your sharp sight can see this. As
for the hurry of the Blood, or Fever, Caused as you say. by those unmixable
Particles, being mixed with it. I say, first it is certain. That Blood naturally
contains, or yields abundantly more Alkali than Acid: Now the Alkali alone
cannot be put into a hurry, or fermentative Motion, and so grow too Hot,
neither will the smsllest quantity of Acid, cause it so to do; but more Acid
added may produce a greater Heat; as any Body may see, by mixing Acids and
Alkalies. Now these Acids (which probably never are a tenth to the Alkali)
being subdued, and having lost their Force by being coagulated with the Alkali,
stick in the Extremities, here and there, and cause little Inflammations, and
at length Suppurate, which when they are once thus fixed, the Fever ceases.
Now to assist Nature in Precipitateing, and subduing these Acids, rather than
some unknown, unmixable Particles; the most Rational, and Experienced
Physicians have given Testaceous Powders, and other Absorbents to hinder a
supply of them from the Stomach, the chief Officine of Praeternatural Acids,
and also volatise penetrating, and Diaphoretick Alkalies to help to subdue them
already too abundant in the Blood. Which things, as you (shall I say
ingenuously or unwillingly) confess seldom fail of their intention of throwing
out plentifully the Morbifick Matter which Nature is more able to bear, and
bring to maturity in Pustles in the Skin than to Cope with in the Blood, there
detained through the weakness of Nature wanting help, or by Acids given
hindering the Eruption. And though in gross Bodies (which you your self reckon
have always more Acid, having more Fat) the large quantity thrown out to the
Skin, often spoils those Angelick Faces, you seem so tender of, to get the Ladies
Favor; yet the not coming forth of this Morbifick Matter, often makes a greator
spoil of the whole Bodies of those Angels, laying their Beauty in the Dust. But
as few Patients choose rather to Die with a smooth Face, than Live with a rough
one; so it is the Physician's part, rather to take care of Life, than Beauty:
And it had been well it had been so in the Case of that Princess, whose inward
Form, transcended that of her Face; whose fair Soul, would have been
Conspicuous through a rougher Skin, and no less useful; had not her Life been
thrown out, instead of the Morbifick matter. As for the breaking of the
Globules of the Blood you talk so much of; it is mere fancy, grounded upon no
Experiment. The attenuation of the Blood made by Alkalies, as also by the
working of the Lungs, is not to be thought a breaking of the Globules; but
rather a separation of them from adhering together, whereby they are more
equally mixed with the Serum: Thence also the Blood becomes more florid, the
surfaces of those little round Bodies, when more disjoined, being capable of
reflecting more Light. Nor is the Extravasation of the Blood, at any time, to
be attributed to the breaking of the Globules, and making them small enough to
pass out of the Vessels, which at the same time sufficiently contain the Serum,
whose Particles are perhaps a Thousand times smaller than the Globules, though
you should suppose, every one broken into Twenty pieces: But rather from some
breach of the small Vessels, from some Corrosion, or other violence, either
from without, or from the rapid Motion of the Blood. Neither is the stoppage of
the Animal Spirits, from what cause soever, to be thought to produce Deliriums,
and such like Diseases: But on the contrary, their over swift Motion from too
great Heat. The stoppage of the Nerves, if there be any such thing is more like
to cause Palsies, Lethargies, Apoplexies, etc. The Serum is not wasted too much
by Alkalies, or other Diaphoreticks, if given with Discretion; and so
administered, they prevent the falling of the Pustles, and return of the
Morbifick Matter. As to the few Medicines, you say, the Small Pox requires, I
readily agree that it requires fewer than are commonly given, and so do all
other Diseases: For the giving of many Medicines, as is the Custom of
Prescribers, is a Practice wherein the Physician will for ever remain
uncertain, whether he do good, or none, or harm, and by what: The Judgment, and
Care of a Physician in this Disease, I agree, is also necessary, and the
Patient had better hire some Practitioners, especially sour Doctors, to do
nothing, than to disturb and hinder Nature in throwing on the Morbifick matter,
by large and improper Prescriptions. As for Acids being the only safe,
effectual, and never failing Medicines, as you say, you have seen by your own,
and other Great Men's Practice: I must tell you, though you reckon your self
among Great Men, That many Physicians Greater in all commendable Greatness,
than you, or any other of your great Crabb-Tree-Heads, have had better success
in a contrary Opinion and Practice. I my self can assure you, that Alkalies are
Medicines, in this distemper a Judicious Physician can hardly want. For as the
Ebullition, and Expulsion are not to be too much promoted, or hastily carried
on; so when they are too slow, they ought to be excited, and hastened, which
may well be done by volatile Alkalous Medicines. A Judicious Physician will not
give Alkalies, or Acids he knows not why, only because they are Alkalies, or
Acids, or follow always one Intention, the retarding the motion of Nature, or
allaying the hurry, as you do Great Sir, with your Oranges and Lemons, Crabbs
and Limes, which though they ate milder, than some Chemical Acids; yet a drop or
two of Oil of Vitriol in an Aqueous Vehicle may be a milder Acid than the Juice
of Oranges or Lemons taken alone. As for your boast, that in Five hundred
Patients in this Distemper of all Qualities, viz. Emperors, Kings, Dukes,
Earls, Madmen, Tinkers, Cobblers, and their Consorts, etc. to whom you have sold
your Lemons, and Oranges, not one died, or was disfigured; you may as well be
believed as the Quack, who said in his Bills, amongst other Brags, that he had
been Counselor to the Counselors of Twenty Christian Kings: When there are
not so many in the World. Nor have you ever had a quarter so many Patients sick
of this Distemper. And you might have told us of retrieving from the Belly of
Death, as well as from the Jaws thereof, since you believe People expect you
should make them Immortal. But truly it is unlikely you should do such Miracles,
especially in this Disease, when you endeavor nothing but to hinder the
motions of Nature, or to allay the hurry, as you call it, which truly is not a
method according to Natures Dictate's: Short it is indeed, and may be a short
way to the Grave, and easy it is, for the Doctor to give always the same
things; but often very uneasy for the Patient. But if those that go upon the
fewest Principles in discovering Nature's Phenomenon, discover most of her
Secrets, and can give the best Account of them, as you say, then those that
have but two Principles, as Figure and Motion, Alkali and Acid, Acid and
Sulphur, are like to outgo you Sir, for you creep upon Five Legs. As for your
absolute necessity of Letting Blood in good quantities, where the Patient is
Delirious, and the Brain disturbed, it is absolutely Dangerous, and were well
let alone for proper Sedatives, for it often proves pernicious in this Distemper:
As in the Case of the best Princess England ever had: Neither Alkali, nor Acid,
was so effectual toward terminating the Disease, as the Officious Lance,
weakening, and disturbing the Motion of Nature. But methinks we have been long
on this Disease, What shall we have next.


Ac. I come to the Scurvey, where I expect the cry of all Mankind will be
against me, what say they, is there no Acidity in the Blood, the occasion of
those breakings out of Scabs, Pimples, Botches, and of wandering Pains? Have
Patience, and I will make it appear those Symptoms come from Lixivious Alkalous
Particles, and First, it appears, That the Blood of Scorbutic Persons, has
more volatile Alkali, than that of Sound Persons, besides, a quantity of
lixivious fixed Alkali, which I could never find in Sound Person's Blood.
Another Argument is, that I have been told that Seamen having had the Scurvey
in long East India Voyages, Landing at Cadis, have by Eating of Lemons and
Oranges, been soon perfectly Cured: But in these Cold Countries, we are forced
sometimes to have recourse to more powerful Acids: Some object that more than
ordinary saltness is found in the Blood of Scorbuticks, which they take to be
an Acidity, but instead of Acidity, if they will enquire, they will find it to
be a Lixivious Alkalous one. And here I shall insert a Preparation of Antimony,
I have found of extrrordinary use in inveterate Scurveys. Take White Fowers of
Antimony viij. vol. sp. of Tartar lbij. digest 14 Days, decant it, then Distill
off half the Liquor, and keep the remains for use. The Spirit of Tartar is made
thus, Ren: Tartar lbxx. Distill it in an Iron-Pot with a Moor's-Head, with a
large Worm fitted to a Tub of Water: Distill by degrees as long as any thing
will come over, take out the Caput Mort. Calcine it to Greyness, put lbiij. of
it into a Cucurbit, pour on it the Spirit freed from the Oil, draw off half,
with a moderate Fire, pour out the remains as useless: put lbij. more of the
Caput Mort. on which pour the Spirit drawn off, and with a gentle Fire draw off
half, which keep for use. It is a Noble volatile Spirit, and as Noble a
Menstruum, as I have met with. Of the Tincture, I give Four, Six, Eight, or Ten
Drops, Morning and Evening, in a strong Decoction, or infusion of Juniper.
Berries half a Pint. This answers every thing said of a true Panacaea.


Al. If the cry of all Mankind be against your Opinion of the Scurvey, it is no
good sign you are in the right; for we know your capacity too well, to believe
you wiser than all Men. And you have never yet made it appear, that the Blood
of any Diseased Persons abounds with Alkalies, more than that of the sound
People. You have not made sufficient trials, nor been aware of the difficulties
of finding the true Quantities of the Products of Blood, nor have you
demonstrated, That there is any thing Lexivious in the Blood of Scorbuticks. A
Salsum more or less may be found in the Blood of both sick and healthy Persons,
and probably more in the Blood of those that have the Scurvey; which possibly a
Man of hasty conclusions (as Mr. Acid so often shows himself to be) may take it
for an Alkali; because it will turn Syrup of Violets green, as common Salt, and
some other Salsums will do, and for a Lixivious, or fixed one; because it does
not rise easily in the Fire. But if you knew how to work, you would find an
Acid Spirit come from it in Distillation, as from some other things you take to
be Alkalies. But a Lixivious Salt, as you have acknowledged, is the Product of
Fire, and the Fire in the Blood is nothing but a hot fancy, that makes no
ashes. But you must make use of another Fire, before you can get any fixed
Salt, or Volatile either out of the Blood. But if you could produce such a
resulting body as a fixed Alkali, by burning the Blood, or other parts of a
Scorbutic, or other Diseased Person* it would not prove, That an Acid, was not
actually therein before, or that this Alkali was: For I have never found a
Lixivious Salt, so strong and copious in any Animal Substance, as where there
was a manifest and plentiful Acid; nor will any other Substance as far as I
have observed, yield so much fixed Alkali in burning, as those that otherwise,
give most Acid and Oil. As for your Scorbutic Seamen cured at Cadis (if the
Story be true) it may be more rationally thought they were recoverd by eating
Fresh Meat, and drinking Generous Wine, than by Oranges and Lemons, unless they
had been the only things they fed upon. Your preparation of Antimony, you say,
you have found of such extraordinary use in inveterate Scurveys, shows your
Ignorance in Chemistry, and argues against you, doing all that a true Panacaea
can be said to do, if any one can be so all-believing as to credit you, when no
one Acid (as you have sometime said) will do so: For what Acid will cure an
acute Disease, will not Cure a Chronick; Volatile Acids being most effectual in
Acute Diseases, fixed ones in Chronick, [to which I must tell you by the by,
that you never saw a fixed Acid in your life] but your Panacaea does all
things, and yet if made according to your Prescription is no Acid: For though the
Tartar by Distillation yields an Acid Liquor, yet the pouring it on the Caput
Mortuum, and distilling off but half twice the fixed Alkali retains the Acid,
and sends up only a Phlegmatic Liquor, which is a very poor Mensiruum; the
greatest Virtue remaining behind, though Mr. Chemist throws it away as useless:
But as your Liquor may retain some Particles of the Flowers of Antimony when
digested together, so as it is Vomitive, it may do something on that account,
but not as an Acid; the Vomitive qualitiy of Antimony depending on something
else; but giving it with half a Pint of the Decoction, or infusion of
Juniper Berries, spoils the credit of the other things; the Juniper Berries
justly claiming the greatest share in the Cure, if it do one. But what shall we
have next? What say you to the Gout?


Ac. It has been constantly handed down from Generation to Generation, that the
Gout is a Distemper not to be cured, and in spite of the noise the last Age
has made of Experimental Philosophy, no Man ever went out of the common Road,
to try whether that were true or false: But now it does evidently appear that
the Gout is not such a Fury, but that it may with ease be overcome by proper
and powerful Acids. Now if my Predecessors have been so notoriously Ignorant,
as to the Cause and Cure of common Distempers, it is not unreasonable to
believe they have been so in others: Nay, they have been so. And the reason why
People have hitherto in vain attempted the Cure of the Gout, has been from
their prejudice against Acids, which only can do service. What would not People
give to save their Lives, and be free from pain? Physicians as the case stands
can do neither with any certainty; but by making multitudes of Experiments upon
the Foundation I can lay down, the case may be altered. If People were once
satisfied, That the abounding of Alkalies is the cause of the Gout, it follows
that Acids are the only proper things to correct it. That the Gout is caused by
Alkalies, may appear from the Chalky substance generated in the extreme Parts,
which is generated in the time of the Fit only, and is a Collection of
Homogeneal Particles, Particles of one determinate Figure, by reason the Fire
will not totally destroy its texture; which were it a Body composed of Particles
of different Sizes and Figures (which are what we Chemists call Heterogeneous
ones) the Fire would destroy it. And that they are Alkalous, none I suppose
will dispute, they answering all the Phenomenon that most known Alkalies will
do, viz. cause an Ebullition with Acids, and when calcined turn Syrup of
Violets green, and sometimes (though not always) will do it without. I take
notice few People are troubled with the Gout, but those who drink much Wine, or
other generous Liquors, abounding with Vinous Spirits: These Spirits meeting
with Volatile Alkalous Salts, by means of the Salt the Vinous Spirit is
coagulated into what Helmont calls Offa Alba, which not being capable of moving
through the small Vessels, causes Obstructions and Pains, and by the addition
of Terrestrious Particles, is turned into the Chalky Substance, I cannot agree
with those Gentlemen, who assert all Pain proceeds from a Solution of
Continuity. I don't argue, that there is no Pain prooceeds from a Solution of
Unity, but there are vilent Pains where the Union is entire, as in a blow with
a blunt thing. But I lay it down as a positive Assertion, that all Pain is
caused by a Stagnation of Juices, causing a Compression of the Membranes: But
as the Stagnation is greater or lesser, and as the Stagnating Matter is more or
less Acrimonious, so is the Pain greater or less, but there is no Pain in any
part without Stagnation. People have more reason to believe there is a Solution
of Unity in the Palsy, where there is a visible Consumption, though there, they
are altogether void of Sensation. The Medicines I use are few, and mostly
well-known, but never used in the manner I have done: The general Basis of them
is the same, they being all Acids; and my Medicines will put no force upon
Nature, have no hazard, but strengthen all the Parts. I have given as clear
hints, nay clearer than ever were given of the Cure of the Gout, which has
hitherto been vainly attempted, but my method will as certainly Cure the Gout,
as the Cortex, Agues, or Opium make Sleep, and I have known it fail but two or
three times, and those were to be imputed rather to the Perverseness of the
Patients.


Al. I cannot forbear to tell you Mr. Acid, there has not been a more Ignorant
Calumniator of all Physicians, or Confident Praiser of one little Quack, than
You; perpetually showing us, that you have neither Read others, nor known your
self. All the Physicians of the World, from generation to generation, have
affirmed the Gout incurable, and though the last Age has made a noise of
Experimental Philosophy; yet to spite them, no Man would go out of the common
Road, to try whether that were true, or false. Till Colbatch rose, who has
made it appear, that the Gout is not such a Fury, but it may be overcome by
powerful Acids. Colbach's Predecessors have been notoriously Ignorant of the
Cause and Cure of common Diseases; much more of the Gout, or else Colbatch has
been notoriously ignorant and abusive of his Predecessors. For every Body
acquainted with Authors, knows there is not one of any Note, but has Writ more
Learnedly and Judiciously of this, and other Diseases; and whose Observations
of Cure, are abundantly more Credible than Mr. Acid's, whom we can prove a
Liar, by his own Words. For he has acknowledged his Master Helmont to deserve
better, of the World, and to be a greater Man than himself. Yet he among the
rest, his Scholar John says, has affirmed the Gout incurable, and been
ignorant of the Cause and Cure of common Diseases. But Helmont has asserted
the Gout Curable, and professes himself Master of a Medicine, viz. Arcanum
Coralinum of Paracelsus, which radically Cures that Gout, and many other
Diseases, and it is not an Acid neither, being a fixed Medicine. And Paracelsus
before him* whom you couple with him in your contradictory Praises and
Dispraises, if we may give no credit to his own words seeing by you, that great
Doctors will lie, has a sufficient Testimony of his Abilities in Curing the
Gout, as well as other difficult Diseases in his Epitaph on the Church-wall at
the Hospital of Saltzburg, as following: Conditur hic Philippus Theophrastus,
insignis Medicinae Doctor, qui dira illa vulnera Lepram Podagram Hydropisim,
etc. Mirisica art sustulit, etc. And he was one as well as Helmont, that had
no prejudice against either Acids or Alkalies. That nothing but Acids can do
any service in the Gout, is an assertion contrary to the Judgment and
Experience of all the Physicians that have Writ of this Disease, and the
Practice of Mr. Acid himself, as I believe, we shall find before we have done;
and so universal, that no Man would have said so, but one Confident enough to
say, he knows all Things, and foolish enough to contradict himself. What would
not People give to save their Lives, and be free from Pain? Physicians in
general, the College themselves, if they be Physicians, can do neither for
them, with any certainty, till they have made multitudes of Experiments on
Chym^st Colbatch's Foundation, which may be long a doing. Therefore Sirs, if
you are Wise, come to their Master himself, he can do both, if you can believe
him, and be sure to pay him well for his Lilly, White Vinegar. it may be a
great while ever many of the People called Physicians come to be satisfied,
that the abounding of Alkalies is the cause of the Gout; but if they were, it
will not follow on your Hypothesis, that Acids are the only proper Correctors
of it. We will suppose, that in the Gout, or any other Disease, there is too
much Alkali in the Blood: What is to be done? Why, it ought to be carried off
by the Emunctories, say you. By what means? By Acids say you. How can Acids do
it? Why, they are contrary to Alkalies, say you, and fight them wherever they
meet, conquer them, and make them quit the Field. No say I, it is a mistake,
they are not contraries, or Enemies, but as good Friends as any old
Sweet-hearts, separated against their wills. They rejoice when they meet fall a
Dancing till they are hot again, and when tired they lie down together in
mutual and close embraces, and are so wedded by the Law of Nature, that they
will not be divorced, unless one of them can be tempted to Adultrey; then
indeed the other does not beat, but leave its Companion with disdain. Your
Master Helmont tells you. There are no contraries in Nature (he means Bodily
Nature) but contrariety is only in Wills: And he gives you good Reason, for
what he says: But could Alkalies and Acids, any way be said to be contrary,
What then? It don't follow, that one must needs thrust the other out of Doors;
and if they did, one would think the Destroyer of all Things, being too much
for the other, must thrust it out: What is stronger than Death. But experience
tells us, that wherever they meet, they so combine that they are both harder
to be drove out, than either of them single. You have an instance in Sal
Armoniack, made of the Acid Spirit of Salt, and Volatile Alkali of Urine; which
Alkali alone is so Subtle and Dissipable, that it will fly with the least heat,
and is hardly kept without wasting, except with well fitted Glass-stopples; but
combined with Spirit of Salt, they are coagulated together into a Body, that
will be kept open without any loss of Substance, if urged with heat will indeed
fly but together, and that not without a considerably strong Fire. But if the
Volatile Alkali be united with some Acid that is not coagulable into a Body, it
will nevertheless be rendered less Volatile, requiring a greater Fire to raise
it, than it did alone. Now if Alkalies and Acids can be thought to meet so
copiously in the Blood, as to make what you call a Conflict, but I with better
reason term a Dance or Playing together, and produce an ebullition, and Heat;
that Heat may deserve the name of a Fever, and be a disturbance in the Vital
Economy equally, whether it be a Dance, or a Fight, if there be too much of
the Sport; and these two Bodies combined, especially if the Acid be of any
considerable quantity, will be less apt to be carried off by Transpiration,
than the one of them ever so abundant. But if there cannnot be so much Acid
poured in, as to make an Effervescence and Coagulation with the Alkali, which
is in Sikness, and ought to be in Health abundantly more than the Acid can be;
yet the Acid may have this effect, as to thicken, and hinder the motion of, the
Blood, and thereby render it more unapt to discharge the Alkali; if we suppose
it ought to be discharged. And that Acids do coagulate and thicken the Blood,
we have often seen upon trial with Oil of Sulphur, as well as Oil of Vitriol:
So far is Acid from being the thing, much less the only thing that can
discharge, and drive out your fancied noxious, and to be discharged Alkali. And
though Acid may be proper enough in some Diseases, where the Blood is too thin
and moveable to thicken it; yet in such Diseases as Scurveys, Rehumatisms and
Gout, where the Blood is already too thick, and apt to Coagulate, and stick in
the small Vessels; the making it thicker by Acids must needs be improper,
contrary to all Indications of Cure. The Chalkey substance generated in the
Fits of the Gout, does not prove the Disease caused by Alkalies rather than by
Acids: For Alkalous Salts when in solution, are not Coagulated alone, but by
meeting with Acids; except by evaporation of the humidity they are dissolved
in, which cannot be supposed here. Neither is the Creta a Salt, and were it as
you say produced of the Volatile Salt of the Blood and Homogeneal, it must be
all Salt. But you never saw a Salt insipid, or a Volatile one constant in the
Fire, as you say this matter is. Nor are all Bodies consisting of Particles of
different Sizes, and Figures (which is what you are so kind as to tell us you
Chemists mean by Heterogeneous) totally destroyed by the Fire, as you may see
in Bricks, Bones, Glass, Metals and a Thousand things. But the Podagrick
Matter, as Kerking tells us, Spicileg Obj. 28. by Distillation yields a Spirit
of a middle nature, between Spirit of Tartar and Spirit of Sal Armoniak more
Acid than one, and more mild than the other, and an Oil very like Oil of
Tartar, leaving a fixed Salt in the Caput Mort. much like Salt of Tartar: Where
are your Homogeneal Particles Sir? But the abounding of Alkalies, right or
wrong you will have it, is the cause of the Gout. But how I pray you Sir, after
what manner? Why, few are troubled with the Gout, say you, but those that drink
Vinous Liquors; and so the Blood abounding with Vinous Spirits, these Vinous
Spirits meeting with Volatile Alkalous Salts, are by the Alkali Coagulated into
what Helmont calls Offa Alba; which not being capable of moving through the small
Vessels causes Obstructions and Pains, and by the addition of Terrestrious
Particles, is turned into a Chalkey Substance. Now John I have caught you, and
you cannot come off your Contradiction, but by begging Pardon on the account of
your very Treacherous Memory. The Chalkey Substance was but now a collection of
Homogeneal Particles (that is, Particles of one determinate Figure, as you
pleased to English it for us) but now it is a Compound of a Vinous Spirit, an
Alkali. Salt, with an addition of an Earthy Matter. This is the result of
abundance of Experiments no doubt; these are Grounds to build your Practice
upon, whereby you are able to do more than other People, that is, than all the
Physicians of all Ages. But I must tell you for all that, that you grossly
mistake Offa Alba, not knowing what it is. But I tell you, it is not a
Coagulation of a Vinous Spirit, but a Precipitation of the Urinous Salt out of
its Phlegm, by the affusion of the Vinous Spirit; but unless the Vinous and
Urinous Spirits be both strong it will not do; nor will all Urinous Spirits
make the Offa Alba. The reason of this Phenomenon where it succeeds is this,
The Volatile Salt not being Soluble in strong Spirit of Wine, and having but
little Phlegm of its own, more than what will dissolve it, the Vinous Spirits
being apt to mix with that Phlegm, fills its Pores, and so it lets fall the
Salt. But it is impossible to find a Livings Man's Blood so strongly Alkalous,
as that there should be but just enough Latex to dissolve the Salt: Nor were it
possible, can there be added Vinous Liqours in quantity, and strength enough to
make such a Coagulation. We Physicians all know, Mr. Chemist, that the Blood
never abounds so much with Alkalous Salt, as to make so much as a weak Spirit,
nor can the Spirit of the Wines we drink, be separated from the Phlegm in our
Bellies, nor can we drink Vinous Spirits strong enough to Coagulate an Alkalous
Spirit. Moreover, this Offa Alba which Helmont talks of, is so very Subtle and
Volatile, that it would easily find passage, and be carried off through the
smallest Pores by a gentle Heat, and would be so far from Coagulating into a
Chalkey Substance, as that it is a good Medicine to thin the Blood, and hinder
Coagulations; as also very beneficially used externally in pains, of the Gout
it self. As for Rain though you grant some Pain, may proceed from a Solution of
Continuity; yet you cannot agree with those that say, all Pains do: But there
are violent Pains where the Union is entire as in a Blow with a blunt thing.
Truly Mr. Acid, you are a Man of a blunt Understanding, for all you have a
sharp Name, or else you would easily perceive, that in any Blow that is
painful, there is a violent* pressure made upon the small Vessels which bursts
them, and forces the Blood out of them; which is the cause of the Blackness
often following Blows, and there can be no Extravasation without asolution of
Unity more or less. So all violent distentions, all Corroding Matters make
Solutions of Unity, breaking some of the small Fibers, at which we have the
Sensation of Pain. But your positive Assertion, that all Pain is caused by a
Stagnation of Humors, and thence a Compression of the Membranes must be
excused as a fault of a very Treacherous Memory: Some Pains come from Solution
of Unity you grant, and yet presently say you, all Pains proceed from a
Compression of the Membranes. Truly Doctor, I should be afraid to trust my
Life and Health with a Man of such Brain; I should be afraid he would forget to
morrow, and Prescribe contrary to to day's Prescription. But I will ask you a
Question or two, because you are very sharp at a present thought. Are there no
Pains but in Membranes? And does not a Stagation and Flux of Blood into a Part,
cause the Swelling and Distention of one Part as much as the Compression of
another? And does not Distension, as well as Corroding Acrimonious Particles
break the Fibers? And are not Wounds both Inci^ions and Punctures in many Parts
presently painful, where we can suppose no present Stagnation? If you cannot
say no, and snew us better Reason than you have done yet, we shall hardly be of
your opinion, That all Pain proceeds from Compression of Membranes. As for
Paralysis, though it sounds something of Solution; yet supposing you do not much
insist upon the mere Greek of it, we will deny it to be a Solution of
Continuity, and rather take it to be a Relaxation of the proper and natural
Tension of the Instruments of Motion; but we suppose Mr. Acid suffered a
Solution of his Senses, when he said Paralyticks were altogether voy'd of
Sensation; for the want of Sensation is another thing, the Greeks call it
(...). As for the Medicines you use in the Gout, I believe you, that they are
few, and well known, and were so before you knew them; but never used in the
manner you use them: That Is with so little Discretion. For Physicians use to
consider various Indications, and so give diverse kinds of Medicines; but you
have no more Indications in your short and easy method, than the Quack had,
who gave a Glister for every thing; to the Old Woman for the Toothache, and to
the Man that lost his Cow: He was for nothing but discharging the Excrements of
the Belly; you for nothing but Purging the Veins of Alkali, your supposed
Excrement of the Blood. Whether your Medicines be all Acids, as you say, I
shall know when we come to consider them particularly. The clear hints you say
you have given of the Cure of the Gout, seem no clearer to me than what we had
before, from your Predecessor Atkins the Tailor, who was famous in his time, as
you are now, for Publishing the Wonders of the Gout-Balsam, which is a Medicine
(if I may call it one) so far from putting no force upon Nature, that it will
corrode, blister and excoriate the Parts, doing nothing but as a Caustic; and
what has been done before you were born, by the burning with Moxa. We see
nothing you have done which has been attempted in vain by others, nor the
certainty you brag of Acids Curing the Gout as well as the Cortex does Agues,
or Opium make sleep: Your own Observations you have given us, which doubtless
are not the least of your Cures, Certify us, that your Patients have been
Three, Four, Five, Six, Seven, or more Weeks under your Hand, not only in the
Gout, but in mere Fevers even acute ones (if you don't miscall them) which is
as long or longer than others keep them with Alkalies. So far have you been
from showing us the Wonderful and Astonishing Success in Curing Fevers you
have bragged of. Nay, you have not given us any assurance, that you have Cured
any of the Patients you mention, (though you say but two o^ three have failed)
they might have been well as soon, or sooner by a contrary method, or without
any Medicines, for ought you know. But a Fit of the Gout being even with a Sour
Doctor a tedious long thing, and when over, the Disease not Cured; let us dwell
upon it no longer, but come to consider some other Distemper: What say you of
Consumptions?


Ac. I have seen numbers of People under this Circumstance, to whom have been
given large quantities of Alkalies, and all sorts of Balsamicks and Pectorals
without any advantage; though I have seen others who have had the manifest signs
of a confirmed Ph^hisis or Consumption, by the plentiful use of Acids, reduced
from a state of dying, to that of perfect Health. The English Consumption is
from an Ulceration of the Lungs, and I believe without Vanity I may say, I have
Cured more true Consumptions in the space of one Year, than any Physician in
England has done. My reason for the use of Acids, and disuse of Alkalies here,
are as follow. The Globules of the Blood by being mixed with a great quantity
of Acrid, Alcalous, Lixivial Particles, are broken and confusedly mixed with
the Serum, and so admitted with it into the small Glands of the Lungs, and not
being capable of being discharged cause Inflammations and Hectic Fevers. Now
by Alkalies the extravasated Globules are not thrown out, but the Blood made
worse, and by Balsamicks the Pustules from the extravasated Globules are
brought to suppuration; whence come Ulceration, and he must show himself an
Artist indeed that can heal such Ulcers. Now proper Acids being given in due
time confirm the texture of the Blood, and reduce the Serum into Fluidity; by
which the Fever and Inflammation are taken off; the extravasated Globules by a
thin Serum; and the motion of the Part carried off; and so the Pustules
disappear. But how comes it to pass that the broken Globules are admitted along
with the Serum into the Glands of several Parts, and yet cannot by the same
reason be carried off? I Answer, the broken Globules just coming out of the
extremities of the Arteries are hot, and their sides lax, and so capable of
being compressed, but admitted into the Glands; the motion of the Serum being
slow they soon grow cool and firm, and from the different Figure of those
broken Globules, from the Pores the Serum passes, they are not suffered to
pass; so being without motion they corrupt, whence are the Simptoms. Now to
confirm what I have said, besides my own Observations, Riverius says, that
with Conserve of Roses acidulated wirh Oil of Sulphur, he has several times
Cured a confirmed Phthisis: And of Oil of Sulphur Helmont tells you, that he
advised a Man to take two Drops thereof every Meal, and not to exceed that
Dose, who thereby lived to Old Age free from Diseases. By which instance it
appears Acids are not the cause of Diseases, but Preservatives, and what ever
is a Preservative from Distempers, by the same parity of Reason must be of use
to repel them.


Al. That you say, you have seen, and done such, and such strange things, is
very little Ground of our Faith, That it was so. I have heard a Montebank ever
now, that could neither Read nor Write, Boast as great Experience, and promise,
That he would Cure those, whom all Men in the World had left off, as Incurable*
From a state of Dying, to that of perfect Health, is a great Change; especially
to one who has affirmed, That, none are in perfect Health: But I suppose, you
would have as well said from a state of Death, to perfect Health, if you could
have hoped for Credence. If you had said, you had Cured as many of
Consumptions, viz. Ulcerations of the Lungs, as any Physician in England, such
a Year; you might possibly have been believed: But to say, you Cured more,
implies, you Cured some. But you are witness for your self Sir. And that an
Ulceration of the Lungs, is peculiar to England, is a fancy peculiar to Mr.
Acid. And that there are not diverse Consumptions, where there is no Ulceration,
is his single Opinion* But as to your Reason for the use of Acids, and disuse
of Alkalies, viz. That the Globules of the Blood are broken, by acrid Alkalous
Lixivial Particles, and so admitted into the Glands, with the Serum, and not
being capable of being carried off with the Serum; growing Cold and hard, cause
Inflammations, and being suppurated Ulcerations; is a mere incoherent Fancy:
Not being in the least valid with me, being not confirmed by well Attested, or
any Experiments. You never saw the broken Globules you talk so of, but in your
Wild Imagination, and cannot assure us, into what Figures they are severed; how
differing from the Pores they cannot pass with the Serum whilst broken thus
into lesser pieces; but can, when once united again, and confirmed by Acids.
The Pustles you fancy in the Lungs, you never made appear, or felt the broken
Globules there cold and hard, or heard the Biolychnium (that keeps them lax and
soft, or if you please, in flux) hiss, quenched in the cool extravasated Serum
of the Lungs. Besides, you must suppose, That this Disease is still procured by
Physicians, whenever caused by means of Lixivial Particles: For as we told you
before, there can be no Lixivial Salt in the Blood; it being a product of real,
yea, common Fire. And still one would think, That if the Globules of the Blood
can be broken by Alkalies, they might be broken still by more into lesser
Parts, and so pass out by the Diaphoretick power of Alkalies; rather than when
confirmed again by Acids. That Balamicks Cause Suppuration, is contrary to the
common Experience of all Physicians, who know they hinder Corruption. When the
Lungs are Ulcerated he must be an Artist indeed, that can heal such Ulcers:
True, And it is such a piece of Art, I believe, an Acid Doctor never performed,
though he himself may Boast such Cures: It Is no uncommon thing for Quacks, to
persuade their Patients, if they have but a Cough, and Spit a little, that they
have a Consumption, their Lungs are corrupted, ulcerated, and wasted; with as
great Confidence as if they could see through them: When the Patient is well
again, a mighty Cure is Bragged of: And who can then disprove it? but he that
sees an impossibility in the thing. That Acids confirm the Texture of the
Blood, and make the Serum thin; is so far from Truth, that they do the
contrary, as any one may see by Trial, and find, That Mr. Acid says any thing
merely for his Hypothesis sake, without the least Reason, or Experience. As for
Riverius's Curing a confirmed Phthises with Conserve of Roses Acidulated, the
matter is to be questioned, especially, whether Oil of Sulphur were the only
thing used with benefit; if Riverius ever said so: For you could not tell us
where. And the Man that Helmont advised Oil of Sulphur to, might have Lived as
long and healthy, without that trivial thing, as he calls it, for ought you, or
Helmont either knew, who charged him not to exceed two Drops, being sensible of
the danger of taking too much of so keen an Acid. Acids, or any thing else,
being supposed Preservatives, does not conclude. That they must be Curatives:
For Food. Air, Exercise, Content. etc. are Preservatives; but none will
therefore expect to Cure all Diseases by them. But Mr. Acid is resolved upon
the Fancy. That Acids do all Things, confirm the Blood, and make it thin if
thick, or thick if thin. or what he pleases. But how this is done, Mr. Acid
must be Wiser than Solomon to tell: But what say you to Rheumatisms?


Ac. This is another Distemper said to proceed from Acids, but falsely: For here
having analiz'd the Blood by the Fire, I have found it abound more with
Alkalous Particles, than that of sound Persons, from which alone it may be
inferred, That it proceeds not from Acids, but from Alkalies. But it may be
objected, Whence comes the sizyness and viscosity of the Serum, if not from
Acids? Every Body that knows what Hart's Horn is, knows that the reason of its
making Gelly, is from its abounding with Volatile Alkalous-Salts: For the same
reason, Calves-Feet and Isingglass make Gellies. And if the Viscosity of the
Blood can be taken off, this Distemper vanishes: But this is not to be done by
Alkalies; but by proper Acids, such as the forementioned Tincture of Antimony
and Chalybeats. But People will say, I have caught my self in a Trap, when I
bring Chalybeates in as Acids; when all own them to be Alkalies; inasmuch as
Fileings of Iron will make as great an Effervescence with all sorts of Acids,
as any of the Alkalies. From this difficulty, I shall endeavor to extricate my
self, and to prove, That Iron or Steel till it be converted into Vitriol (and
every Body will allow Vitriol to be an Acid) cannot act upon the Blood and Serum
to cause an alteration, nor any way enter into the Veins and Arteries: Skillful
Practitioners before they give Steel-Medicines, ask their Patients, Whether
they have any Acidity in their Stomachs (where I allow Acids sometimes abound
exorbitantly) and if they are sensible of any Acidity there; then they give
Iron without any Preparation, which by the Acid in the Stomach, is turned into
Vitriol, and so made capable of being carried into the Blood: Whereas had it
been before satiated by Preparation, it had had no Effect at all: If there be
no Acidity in the Stomach, it is carried off by Stool, and not admitted into
the Blood. And most of the Preparations of Steel, I know of, good for any
thing, are made by Acids, which turn it into Vitriol: But Alkalies do so lock
up the Body of Iron, as to make it unfit to be taken as a Medicine. The
Preparations of Mars I generally use, are that which goes by the Name of Doctor
Willis, and that which follows, R. Fileings of Mars lbiss. sal Armoniack, lbij.
pulverise and mix in an Iron-Mortar, let it stand a Week in a Cellar, then put
it into a Crucible and keep it almost Red Hot an Hour, when cold make it into
fine Powder, and keep it in a Glass-Bottle. These Medicines I have known of
great use in Rheumatismes, and the last has never failed me in the most
inveterate Obs^ructions of the Menses: Father, in answer to the Objection, That
Steel cannot be an Acid, because it makes an Effervescence with Acids: I say,
all Sulphurs mixed with Acids, will cause an Effervescence and some of them
take Eire: And that all Metals are full of Sulphurs is past Dispute; and from
this way of arguing, Sulphur must be an Alkali. But besides the Preparations of
Steel, I have often used Cinnaber of Antimony, or common Cinnaber with good
Success, mixed with Gum Guajacum in confirmed Rheumatismes and Sciaticaes. I
did believe Cinnaber to be an Alkali, but I find by a peculiar management, a
large quantity of Acid Spirit may be got from it.


Al. As to your Assertion, That the Blood of Rheumaticks, in Analizeing it is
found to abound more with Alkali than that of Sound Persons, I have answered
you before. I shall only add your own Confession about Analizeing the Blood,
That it would be almost inpossble for any private Man to make a sufficient
number of Experiments requisite. And we find in the Experiments you have
favored the World with, you have Analiz'd the Blood of but one Healthy Person,
when you ought to have tried rather an Hundred Sound Person's Bloods first, and
have seen the difference of their Products, and have made your Trials in large
and equal quantities, and not such little odd parcels as you have done; if you
would be at any certainty. As for your Reason of the Viscosity of the Blood in
Rheumatismes: I Answer, Every Body that knows what volatile Alkalies are,
knows, That they have not only nothing of Viscosity in them themselves, but
also render the Blood and Serum thin. And you make a mighty noise, how Alkalies
break the Globules of the Blood; but if you had any Consideration, you would
not think, division into smaller Parts, is the way to thicken. But perhaps
Alkali is such a bad thing as to thicken, and make thin both, according as
there may be Mischief done: Being the Destroyer or Executioner of all things,
has more ways of Killing than one; As Acids will thicken and make thin, when
you would have them. But as for Hart's-Horn, Ising-glass, Calves-Feer, if it be
from Alkalies that they make Gellies: Why, don't other Animal Substances
abounding as much, and more with Alkali make Gellies as well as these? And why
do Vegitables (that you say abound most with Acids) make Gellies, as well as
Hart's-Horn, etc. as we see in Mallow-Roots, Comfrey, Quince-Seeds, etc. The
Viscosity of the Blood is to be taken off by proper Acids, you say: But I have
said enough already of the contrary Effects of Acids, to show your Mistake in
this Opinion, and Ignorance in relation to your Tincture of Antimony: But as
for Chalybeats, People may well say you have caught your self in a Trap, by
bringing in Chalybeats as Acids; for every Physician knows, That Metals,
especially Iron, blunt and Absord Acids making an Effervescence with them, and
are dissolved by them. But let us see how you get out of this Trap? Why Iron
say you (as you told us once before) cannot act upon the Blood and Serum, nor
enter the Veins and Arteries, till turned into Vitriol. How prove you this Sir,
that Iron will not be admitted into the Blood till turned into Vitriol, and that
it will then? It is only because you fancy so, for you have never showed us by
any good Experiment, that Iron either unprepared, or turned into Vitriol will
pass into the Blood. But if your squeemish temper would have suffered you to
meddle with the Subject, you might have took a T -- d, and a like quantity of
Blood from some of your Patients under a Steel-course: First of unprepared
Iron, then of Iron prepared with some of your Noble Acid Menstruums; from one
of a sour Stomach; from another without a sour Stomach, and have got some body
that knows how to reduce Metals to assist you (your wondrous Friend Mr.
Stringer, sure would not have denied his help) and when you had seen which way
the Iron goes, you might have been confidently positive, or modestly silent, or
have been convinced that Physicians do not give Iron supposing it will pass
into the Blood, but to absorb Acids in the Stomach and Bowels, and to hinder
them from passing into the Blood, which if they were z turned into Vitriol by
sour Stomachs (which I believe has not been proved) and so necessarily carried
into the Blood, and could act there as Acids, would frustrate the Physicians
intention, who only aims at cutting off a supply of Acid from the Stomach the
grand Officine thereof. But suppose Iron either unprepared, or turned into
Vitriol, will or will not pass into the Blood, What Is this toward proving Iron
an Acid? Why Iron may be turned into Vitriol by an Acid? Tarbox, Iron is an
Acid: Here Is Logic for you Sirs: Or, the Acid in Vitriol is an Acid, therefore
the Alkali in Vitriol is an Acid. You might as well say, the Volatile Salt of
Urine is an Acid, because the Spirit of Salt which is embodied, and coagulated
with it in Sal Armoniack while separate was an Acid. But say you, every Body
allows Vitriol the whole Compound to be an Acid; and therefore you infer, that
Iron one of the Ingredients is an Acid. I Answer, Neither is the Premiss
alow'd, nor your Consequence Natural. I deny Vitriol the whole Compound to be
an Acid, it being but a Neuter, and the Acid in it never acts as an Acid in
this form; being absorbed, sheathed, and spoiled of its Acid force (the
Compound being but a Salsum) till separated again, which cannot be but by a
Fire great enough to calcine an Ass-eyed Chymist's Bones. As for your Argument,
That Steel may be an Acid, though it makes an effervescence with Acids; because
all Sulphurs mixed with Acids will do the like: I say, that all but Ignorant
Tyros know the contrary; that no Sulphurs properly so called, viz. Brimstones
will make an effervescence with Acids, or be easily touched by them. Some Oils
indeed will grow hot, and make an effervescence with some Acids even to a
Flame, but not all with all, as is well known. But as for Metals. I tell you,
you never saw a Brimstone, much less an Oil extracted, or separated from them
in your Life; though it is past dispute with you, and so we need not argue Sulphur
to be an Alkali: But we cannot think it an Acid unless we deny our Senses, much
less are those Oils that will grow hot with Acids to be thought so. But I think
you have caught your self in another Trap, by allowing Acids sometimes to
abound exorbitantly in the Stomach, which exorbitant abundance of Acids must be
supposed a Disorder or Disease (as you elsewhere confessed) as well as
exorbitant Alkali, and so all Diseases are not from too much Alkali. But I
believe there is never more exorbitant Acid in the Stomach or any where else,
than in the Patient, who is so unhappy as to fall into the hands of Mr. Acid,
who though he acknowledges The Heart-burn caused by Acids, yet absorbents are far
from being useful in this case, says he, but the Heart-burn is as often cured
by Acids; such as Oil of Vitriol Dulc. etc. as by Alkalies. Here Is that which
hangs together finely* All Diseases are caused by Alkalies, yet some by Acids
as the Heart-burn, and too much fatness; yet Alkalies are far from being
useful, but the Heart-burn is as often Cured by Acids, such as Oil of Vitriol,
as by Alkalies; that is not oftener than by Alkalies which Cure it sometimes,
though they are far from being useful: So in this Disease, if you come to Mr.
Acid, you must be Cured by that which does it no oftener than that which is far
from being useful. Truly every rational Man will think Acids so far from being
useful to Cure a Disease from too much Acidity, that he will account it no less
than Ignem oleo extinguere. Woe be to your Patients, Here Sir you will make the
Biolychnium Blaze. But truly, I must tell you, These Contradictions cannot be
the faults of a Treacherous Memory, but rather the want of Wit. Well, as to
Mars, again all the preparations of it you know good for any thing are made by
Acids. That may be I confess, if the Pestle and Mortar are Acid Menstruums; but
I tell you John I know good Preparations of Mars not made by Acids, and yet the
Body of Mars opened more than by any of your great Acid Menstruums. But if no
preparations of Mars were good for any thing but those made with Acids, why do
you use others, and so trap your self again? That which you give us the process
of is not made by an Acid; Sal Armoniack being no such thing, but a Composition
of Sea Salt and Volatile Alkali of Urine; the Sea Salt it self being no Acid
while in this form, or till altered by a strong Fire. You have sometime
confessed, that some Preparations of Steel and Antimony given as Alkalies, did
you great service; but since you have well examined them, you find them most
Noble Acids. Sure your Trials have been very unhapy to lead you into Mistakes,
or you have forgot your Rule, That whatsoever in Distillation yields a greater
quantity of Alkali, is an Alkali, et Vice Versa; or I believe, it would not do
here; for you may Distill Steel, and Twenty things more, long enough before you
can get either Acid or Alkali to come over: Nor could you prove by this Rule,
That Cinnaber is an Acid, which you so mightily commend in this, and other
Cases, and say you, can speak Ten times more than Hoffman in its Praises; though
he Wrote a Treatise of it, which I believe you can a Hundred times more, but
your Credit will be a Hundred times less. But I must tell you, That Cinnaber is
so far from being an Acid, that if Analiz'd a lb will yield xiij, or more of
running Mercury, one of the greatest Absorbers of Acids in the World, and the
rest, viz. the Sulphur, is not an Acid; but a Compound of an Acid and an Oil;
whereby it is so sheathed and entangl'd, that it cannot act as an Acid, nor be
set at liberty so to do, but by a burning Fire, You never found a larger
quantity of Acid got from Cinnaber, than what may be got from the Sulphur that
goes into the Compound, which is so much less than the Mercury. And now John,
considering your continuing Ignorance of the Medicines you use, I think I may
say truly of you, as you say falsely of all Physicians; if you Cure Diseases it
is by chance, as a blind Man may catch a Hare, giving some tolerable Medicines
as Acids, when indeed they are Alkalies; seeming incapable to judge, or make
fair Trials; since your Brain is turned in the Production of your sour
Hypothesis, and the Idea of Acid so strongly fixed in your Imagination (like a
true Bethlehemite) whatever is good is Acid, and whatever is bad is Alkali with
you: Your Tongue so strongly impregnated by all sorts of Sowrs, no Alkalies are
strong enough to overpower them, and give you their genuine Tastes. And I
don't question if you let me know farther of the Medicine you prescribe, and
let Men in their Senses be Judges, I shall find you mistaken in other things
besides Mars and Cinnaber, and shall be forced to reckon you with one of these
two Quacks, he that gave every Patient the Receipt that came uppermost in his
Budget, wishing him good Luck; or he that made such a horrid noise against
Mercury, Cure without Mercury, great is the Danger of Mercury, etc. when he
himself. gave even crude Mercury in his Pills, envying (as it is like) other
Persons the profit of useing it. Here Is Fool and Knave, Which will you be for
John? Do you Ignorantly prescribe Acids or Alkalies, as they happen to lie
uppermost in your sour Noddle? Or, do you decry Alkalies with a Design if
possible, to have the sole use of them. For really if you can persuade me out
of Conceit with Alkalies, I shall never use Mars, Cinnaber, nor a great many
other things you prescibe.


Ac. I confess, I have formerly been a stickler for Alkalies (being carried
away by the common Vogue) and seeing the insufficiency of common ones, have
been at great Expense, and vast Trouble to Volatize Salt of Tartar, till at
last by Daily Observations, I was satisfied that Alkalies though never so
exalted, would do me very little, if any service in the Cure of Diseases.


Al. Then I find you were always inclinable to be a Stickler for one thing or
other, First for Alkalies then for Acids: And what will you stickle for next?
For I believe, you will go near to meet with the condition of your promised
Recantation, and you must stickle: Well, but you quickly left stickling for
common Alkalies; I wish you had stayed, and not stickl'd against all Alkalies,
till you had made some Trials with Volatile Salt of Tartar, which is so much
commended by the Chemists. Your Master Helmont (to name no little Men to you)
commends it, and all fixed Salts Volatiliz'd, at a great Rate, Page 386. Fixa
Alkalia si volatizentur Magnorum Pharmacorum potestates adaequent -- Quippe vi
incisi^^is, resolutionis, and abstersionis delata usque ad limen quartae
digestionis, tenacitatem coagulatorum in vasibus fundamentaliter tollunt. And
it is pity you were at so vast Trouble and great Expense to no purpose. But at
last by Daily Observations you were satisfied the most exalted Alkalies would
do you little, or no service in the Cure of Diseases. This is very fine, that
you could make Daily Observavations, of the insufficiency of those things you
never saw, nor knew used. The fixed Salt of Tartar Volatilized, is not the
only Volatile Alkali you never saw, but there other Noble Volatile Alkalies
you never heard nor dreamed of, much less can imagine, what can be done by
them: I will undertake to oppose one to all your Acids: For instance, The
Quintescence of Wine, you shall use nothing but Acids, I nothing but this; and
if I don't do most Cures, you shall be my Master, and I will become an Acid
Disciple. But pray you Sir, let us have a little farther account of what things
you take to be Acids, and what Alkalies; for you have said, an exact knowledge
of the Materia Medica, is an absolutely necessary Qualification for a
Physician, and that you should be unwilling on any occasion, to prescribe a
Medicine the manner of whose Opperation you are unable to give an account f^r,
which I have a shrewd guess you have always done.


Ac. almost all the Products of the Vegetable and Mineral Kingdoms are Acids,
and there are manifest Acids, and occult ones; some work by Stool, others by
Urine; some Diuretics, others Diaphoreticks; some Emeticks, and others are
Alteratives; having no visible sensible Operation. I may without Presumption,
reckon all sorts of Balsams Pinguedinous and Oleous Substances among the number
of Acids; by Reason that in the most bare, and simple Distillation, they afford
large quantities of Acid Substances; nothing that is Alkalous. Bread the staff
of Life, by Distillation yields a large quantity of Acid: Sugar though in Taste
it seems nothing less, by a Philosophical Management appears nothing else, but
a Congestion of Acid Particles. All Mettaline Sulphurs are to be ranged amongst
the number of Acids, being nothing but a Congestion of Acid Particles.


Al. If almost all the Products of the Vegetable and Mineral Kingdoms are
Acids, we need not care what we give, we cannot miss giving Acids. But what will
you do for your Five Principles, I doubt they will be so occult that you can
never find them: But your occult Acids that have no visible sensible Operation,
will be found to have no visible or sensible Effects, as Acids; and so will
never appear to be Acids. Those diverse Operations you ascribe to Acids, are not
the Effects of Acidity: You never saw an Acid Vomit or Purge, but you must be
beholden to some Particles of another Nature, to whom those Effects are to be
attributed. To say such an Acid Purges, such another Vomits; is as profound
Philosophy, as to say, such a Bottle of Sack Purges, such another Vomits, when
it is the Particles of Gallap in one, of Antimony in the other, that does the
Business. As for Balsams (which you discommended, speaking of Consumptions)
^inquedinous and Oleous Substances, I will excuse your Presumption, for it is
from Ignorance you say they are Acids: Every Chemist knows, That they yield by
Distillation some none, others, but very little Acid, but the greatest part of
them is Oil. Though Bread the Staff of Life Distilled, yields a great deal of
Acid, which may be of use in some Operations, its more grateful to the Stomach
when it comes only from the Oven, than when its drawn from the Re^ort, which
makes it a Sword of Destruction, rather than a Staff of Life, if taken
inwardly: However Sugar by Distillation, or Fermentation, may be brought to an
Acidity by such a Philosopher as you; yet I can show you by a more
Phylosophical way than any you ever walked in, how to make either a fixed or a
volatile Alkali of it, and as strong ones as ever you saw. But you must burn
your Fingers at common Chemistry a little if you will be a Chemist; before its
fit to teach you any thing Uncommon: Sulphurs I have told you, are separable
into an Acid and an Oil, and so cannot be nothing but a Congestion of Acid
Particles, and Oils are far from being Acids. But whether there are any
Sulphurs of Metals, or what those dogged Bodies consist of, or how they differ,
I dare afirm has hitherto been occult, and out of the ken of any Ass-Ey'd
Pretender in England.


Ac. I could rang my self into the Mineral Kingdom, but the different
Operations of them are so well known to every Body, I think it needless to take
any particular notice of them; yet thus much I will presume to say, That after
having made all the Enquiry into the Nature of Metals, that Humane Industry is
capable of. I am perfectly satisfied that they differ one from another only in
Degree of Purity, and therefore for ought I know, the business of Transmutation
is not so Ridiculous a Thing as some would make it.


Al. Mow Sir John you have said all: For if you have made all the Enquiry into
the Nature of Metals, Human Industry is capable of; and tell us also that the
business of Transmutation is not so Ridiculous a Thing as some make it: We
cannot do less than believe you have the Phylosopher's Stone, besides all other
Mettalline Arcanums. For the greatest Adept Prince or Potentate, never made
more Enquiry into these things, than Human Industry is is capable of. But I
admire your Boldness, how you dare so openly disclose your self. But since you
have said so much, I hope you will let us see Transmutation, and convince the
Unbelievers. But whatever you may persuade us about the Transmutation of
Metals, I doubt we shall never see Mr. Acid Transmuted into a Wise and Modest
Man, that is contrary to the Nature of his Composition. And though you tell us the
different Operation of Metals is so well known to every Body: I tell you there
are scarce Six Men in England that know so much of Metals, as to reduce them
dexterously out of their Oars, and perhaps not two (setting aside your self)
that know any thing of making a true Medicine of these Bodies. But Sir, if you
have such a large Knowledge, possibly you may have the Alkahest too, and when
you talk of Alkalies being so universal a Destroyer, you make us fancy it may
be made of that; but like a Cunning Adept, to hide from us the subject Matter:
You every where diswade from meddling with Alkali, but you would do well to be
so kind as to undeceive us poor Seekers.


Ac. The Alkahest that universal dissolvent, is a thing has made a very great
noise in the World, and though many People have been at vast Charge in quest of
it, yet I have scarce met with any one (except one Person) in our time, who has
been Master of it: but upon some late Experiments made upon the Pyrites, I am
perfectly satisfied the said Noble Menstruum is with very little Trouble and
Charge to be obtained, from this so Common, yet most Valueable Subject! I have
already procured a Menstruum from it, that will readily dissolve all the Metals
and Minerals I have met with, but the utmost Extent of it I do not know; but as
soon as I do, the World shall have an Account of it. I have mentioned this for
the sake of some honest Virtuosi, who will be very glad to be informed of the
Subject from whence this Noble Menstruum is to be obtained. I have reserved but
one Secret in my Book Of the Gout, and that is a Medicine obtained from the
Pyrites; and to all those that will but give themselves the trouble of nicely
enquiring into the said Stone (which to me seems one of the greatest Mysteries
in Nature) the said Secret will very easily be Discovered.


Al. Good News for poor Chemists! But thanks to the Honest Virtuosi* The
Alkahest is to be had with very little Trouble and Charge from the Mystical
Pyrites. Mr. Acid has got a Menstruum already from it will Dissolve all the
Metals and Minerals he has met with, if you will believe him: (But I dare lay a
Wager against it.) And a Secret for the Gout, which we may easily Discover by a
little nice Enquiry. Doubtless this Noble Menstruum and the Alkahest also, are
Acids, for all the Noble Menstruums he knows are Acids in the Three Kingdoms.
But thus Acid will be the Universal Destroyer of Bodies, being the Universal
Dissolvent. But pray you Sir, are there no Alkalies in the Mineral Kingdom?


Ac. Arsenick is the highest, and most exalted Alkali, as Oil of Vitriol is the
most exalted Acid. As for the external use of Arsenick. I know nothing
experimentally, but being a thing of pernicious consequence inwardly taken, I
suppose it can have no very friendly operation externally applied. Internally
taken, it causes Vomitings, Convulsions of the Stomach, cold Sweats,
Palpitations of the Heart, Swoonings, violent Thirst; and seems to be a direct
enemy to Life; which it fails not soon to destroy: All which Effects it will
not fail to have, given in never so small a quantity. And those People who have
been so vain, as to pretend to correct the poisonous quality of Arsenick, so as
to convert it into a good, and safe Medicine; have attempted it only by the
means of Acid Salts: as Sea Salt, Niter, Tartar, Vitriol, etc. wherein I cannot
tell whether any man has been so happy as to succeed. To prove Arsenick to be
an Alkali, and as such the cause of those dreadful Symptoms attending those
that take it; I give you this Relation. A certain Young-woman taking a large
quantity of Arsenick, was immediately attended with all the most violent
Symptoms imaginable: A Doctor gave her large quantities of Salad-oyl, the usual
Remedy, without the least abating the Symptoms; upon which he gave her the
Juice of Lemons plentifully, which soon took off those direful Symptoms; tho
the operation of the Acid might be impeded by the quantity of the Oil she had
taken before.


Al. What you mean by exalted Alkalies, or Acids, I don't know, unless most
volatile, or most strong. But as for Arsenick, it is far from being the most
volatile or strongest Alkali; neither is Oil of Vitriol the most volatile or
strongest Acid. But whatever Arsenick is, it will not produce its effects in
the smallest quantity, having been given as a Medicine, a grain or two in some
cases. Neither have all those People who you say have been so vain as to
attempt to correct it, done it by Acid Salts. For I my self have a Medicine
from it, wherein is not a grain of any kind of Salt, which I can give to the
quantity of a scruple, or more, to good purpose, in some cases; giving Nature
no such disturbance as is common in the use of many vulgar Medicines. And
outwardly I have used Preparations of it, doing in some cases what I could
never do with any thing else; never seeing any ill effects of it. But that
Arsenick is an Alkali, and produces its evil effects as such, is but your
Fancy, not knowing what it is. Your Argument to prove it an Alkali, is such a
slight one as you usually give for other things. A Person took Arsenick, and
was not presently cured by taking Oil, but as by taking Juice of Lemons, I
answer; the thing to be done (...) this case was, to get the Arsenick out of
the Body as soon as pos^^ble; and till that could be done, to hinder its
operation upon the coat of the Stomach; to both which intents Oil was proper:
and when the Arsenick was vomited all up (if timely done) then (...) Symptoms
would cease. Now the discharge of the Arsenick, and defense of the Stomach,
must in all reason be attributed to ^he Oil, not to the Juice of Lemons, which
was given upon it; (...) having no power to work upon, or alter the corrosive
nature of Arsenick, which is a body that makes no effervescence with Acids, ^or
does it turn Syrup of Violets green (the ways you try Alkalies by) but is a
very sulphurous Mineral, and Sulphurs consist ^^rtly of an Acid, which may be
separated from the Arsenick; and certainly that which contains an Acid, and has
none of the signs of an Alkali, cannot be the strongest, or most volatile
Alkali. But Alkali being fixed upon in your Hypothesis for the Principle of
Death, and Arsenick producing such mortal effects, you presently concluded it
an Alkali. And were you not resolved that whatever is good must be an Acid, and
whatever is bad an Alkali; you could not be so ignorant of the nature of
things, and so contradict your own Principles as you do, in almost all your
Prescriptions, giving Alkalies, Absorbents, or other Mitigators of Acids. For
instance, Steel and Cinnaber before mentioned, Lapis haematitis, which is a
Mineral of Iron, from which you never got a grain of Acid, yet you highly
commend it, and give it not first turned into Vitriol, Antimonium
diaphoreticum, [that is, Antimony and Niter fixed together, and it is well
known that Niter with all sulphurous Bodies, is turned into a fixed Alkali,
some of which Alkali remains in the fixed Powder of Antimony, notwithstanding
the lotions.] Cochinel, an Animal, abounding with Volatile Salt. Vinous
Spirits, Aromatic Oils, and diverse other things, which will much take off the
edge, if not wholly blunt yuur Acids. You cry out against the nauseous Tribe of
Alexipharmacks, which you say are very rarely of any other use than to send the
Patient to his long-home; and yet prescribe Theriaca, Androm. Diascord.
Confect. de Hyacinth. Aq. Theriacalis, Epidem. Lactis Alex. Cinnam. Mirab. etc.
all sorts of Aromaticks. So that I profess, if you had not declared your self
an Acid Doctor, I should hardly have smelt you out by the Prescripts you have
published. And I suppose you have given us those that you think will do your
Cause the most credit. Yea, I remember you have commended as an admirable
Remedy, and the next thing to your Balsam, in the Gout, a L^xivium (as you call
it) of Cows-Vrine and Sea Salt; when every body knows Urine is full of Volatile
Alkalous Salt: and Sea Salt it self, in its natural form, has not the effects
of an Acid.


Ac. It is, I suppose, allowed by all, that Sea Salt is an Acid For which
cause, we that eat Flesh cannot live without it: For Flesh abounding with
Alkalous Salts, they are in a measure locked up by Sea Salt. And People who
lived before the Flood, it is to be believed, did not eat Flesh, but lived upon
Vegetables; which, I suppose, was one great reason of their long Lives: If they
ha^ eat Flesh as we do, I cannot imagine what they would have done for Salt. For
supposing Dr. Burnet's Hypothesis true, which I see no reason to doubt of, I
suppose their Rivers must have been void of Saltness; and for them to have
eaten Meat without Salt, must have prejudiced their Healths, and shortened their
Lives. As we saw in the Irish Wars, by eating Meat without Salt, whole
Regiments were swept away by Fevers and Fluxes. Now the Antidiluvians eating
Vegetables, had no need of Salt; there being a sufficient quantity of Acidity
in them to confirm the texture of their Blood. Farther note the efficacy of
Salt Water, to prevent the dreadful Symptoms of persons bitten with mad Dogs.
On which occasion also, a Child at Worcester was cured of a Tympanitis by being
dipped with others, also bitten by a mad Dog; who not many hours after she was
dipped, pissed several Quarts, and was perfectly cured. And a Person in
Herefordshire, I am told, has cured several by the same method. Common Salt, I
allow, will excite Thirst not quatenus Acid; for Spirit of Salt will take it
off: But I assure you, I have stumbled more at this thing of Common Salt's
exciting Thirst, than any thing else besides, and therefore have spared no Cost
to find the Reason; but at last, after much Labor and Sweat, I found there was
no Salt but had more or less of a damned thing called Bittern mixed with it.
Now this Bittern is the most corroding fixed Alkali in nature; and tho it be
inconsiderable in quantity, in respect of the Acid, yet it will fix it self on
the Parts after the Acid of the Salt is all dissolved, and so excite Thirst.


Alk. It is so far from being allowed by all, that Sea Salt is an Acid, that I
know none that can taste will allow it, except you Mr. Acid, who are either
resolved to deny your Senses to serve your Hypothetick Fancy, or have so used
your Mouth to Acids, you can taste nothing else; as Persons in some Distempers
taste every thing bitter. But let the healthy Countryman taste it, and I will
engage he will not say it is sour. That it may be by the Fire changed into a
sour Liquor, is no better an Argument, that it is now sour* than that Sugar,
because it may be turned into Vinegar, is Vinegar; or into an Alkali, is an
Alkali already; or that an Ass-ey'd Doctor is a wise man, because possibly he
may learn Wit. It is not true, that those that eat Flesh cannot live without
Salt: for not only diverse kinds of Animals that live wholly on Flesh eat no
Salt, but abundance of People in North America, who live very healthy, and
strong, and mostly upon Flesh, have no Salt a tall; as Hennipen tells us in his
late account of those Parts, and I don't question but we might do the same were
we accustomed to it, without hurting our selves by Alkali. Neither do we use
Salt to lock up Alkali in Flesh, which it will not do; Sea Salt no way uniting
with, or retaining volatile Alkalies, except it is first turned into on Acid
Spirit; as you may easily see, either by distilling Salt-meat, Urine, or
Sea Salt, and a volatile Alkali mixed together. But we use Salt to preserve and
relish our Meat, neither of which would be done by its Acid Spirit. Nor can the
Longevity of the Antediluvians be ascribed to their living upon Vegetables,
much less from an Acid in them, when all Vegetables that are commonly eaten
turn into an Alkalous Chyle. And if living upon Vegetables would so much
conduce to long Life, why have not some in our time, who would eat nothing
else, lived longer, or at least more healthy, than others? And tho you, not
doubting of Burnet's Hypothesis, cannot imagine what they would have done for
Salt before the Flood, yet I and others, not doubting of Moses's Hypothesis,
can very well imagine, That they might have had Salt to relish diverse sorts of
Vegetables, as well as for other uses, from the Sea, from Fountains, or from
the Rock the original of that useful Body. As for the Cure of Persons bit by
mad Dogs, by dipping; it cannot be well thought to depend upon the Saltness of
the Water, much less on the supposed Acidity of the Salt: If it did, why would
not the drinking Salt Water, or Spirit of Salt, or washing with them, rather do
the Cure; which has not been found effectual. But the reason of this, is more
rationally thought to lie in the blotting out and destroying, or preventing the
Idea of Rage, by the contrary Idea of Fear impressed upon the Spirits of the
Persons bit. Which is apparent from the manner of dipping, as I have had the
Account from Persons dipped; which is till the Person has an apprehension or
fear of being drowned: Therefore they dip some twice, some thrice, more or
less, as they find them fearful, or courageous. On the same account, dipping
might provoke Urine, and so do something toward curing the Dropsy. And I
believe the inducing a contrary Idea, would be a more effectual way of curing
other sorts of Madness, than any of the common Methods; if Physicians would
give themselves to consider of, and put in practice the several ways, and means
by which it might be done. I agree with you, That Salt does not excite Thirst
quatenus Acid; because that would be to do it quatenus what it is not; neither
does it do it quatenus Alkali. And tho it has cost you so much Money and Sweat,
to resolve this stumbling Question, you must stumble, and Sweat again, or
remain under a Mistake. For the Damned thing Bittern (to repeat your Beauish
Expression) is not where, and what you suppose it: First it is not in all Salt;
for it is that which will not shoot with the Salt into regular Grains, and if
Boiled up, will not continue in a dry Form, but runs into a Liquour in the open
Air. Therefore that Salt that is shot into its proper Chrystals and keeps dry,
has no Bittern. But if this will not do, Distill your Salt into an Acid Spirit,
and then you will be satisfied there is no fixed Alkali in it: Turn this Spirit
into Salt again, the same in quantity and Quality (as every Chemist knows how)
and this Salt shall make you as Thirsty, as any other Common Salt. Secondly
Bittern it self is not the most corroding fixed.- Alkali in Nature, for though it
will turn Syrup of Violets Green (as Alum also does) more readily than
Common-Salt; yet it is not corroding as an Alkali, as any one may Try by
Tasting it, and the mildest fixed Alkali, and they will find a difference, much
more between this and the most Corroding ones: Nor is it a fixed Alkali, for it
will rise in the Fire, and come over good Spirit of Salt, even per^se without
any addition of Earth, leaving nothing behind but a white insipid Earth, which
will not so much as make an Effervescence with Acids; Neither will Bittern fix
it self on the Parts after the Salt is dissolved, for it is dissolved much
sooner than Salt it self. Thus you see Sir, by a little Skill in Chemistry your
Damned fixed Alkali is become a Blessed Volatile Acid. But Bittern in its
Natural Form just Boiled up into a dry Form is but a Salsum, not fermenting
with Acids much more than Common-Salt will, and may be taken in as large a
quantity as Common-Salt, producing no more Thirst than that does. But you are
such a Slave to your Hypothesis, that every ill Effect must needs be attributed
to an Alkali, even as far as to make Poisons Mortiferous merely as Alkalies; as
you have Asserted in Arsenick. And I hear, also you have the same Opinion in
Animal Poisons, as that of the Viper, which if it be an Alkali, and therefore a
Poison, I should think, a far more exalted one than Arsenick, and Damned one
than Bittern, performing its violent Effects in far less quantity. What say you
is it your Opinion?


Ac. Yes, And for a farther Confirmation of my Doctrine of Acids, you have the
Cure of one Mr. Phillipson, that showed a Collection of Rarities, who was
Bitten by a Viper, and Cured in a few Days by Acids: Which Cure, considering
the Symptoms (which were as severe as possible) I may without vanity say, There
has not been a more Extraordinary Cure wrought in so short a time. Now if the
Poison of the Viper did consist in a volatile Acid, as some would make us
believe, How is it possible the Symptoms could be taken off by giving Acids,
and that in such large quantities? Nay, had it been Acid, it is reasonable to
think the Symptoms would have been Aggravated. So in a Relation Dr. Stubbs
gives a Person Bitten by an Adder, was Cured by the Mixtura siimplex a Noble
Acid. And Lemery in his Course of Chemistry, confesses, That the Viper does
more abound with Volatile (Alkalous) Salts, than most other Creatures; by
reason of the closeness of the Cutaneous Pores hindering Prespiration, and that
their Poison consists in an Emission of a very great quantity of Volatile-Salts
at the time of their being enraged. But then to square with the Vulgar Opinion,
he tells us, Those Volatile Alkalous Salts are instantaneously at the time of
their Emission, during the time of the Viper's short Rage, turned into Acids of
the most Volatile Nature; which is such Jargon, the Transmutation of Metals to
those that are its greatest Enemies, is a Jest to it. Charas also gives us an
Account of a German Bitten at his House, who after all the pother that he makes
about his Volatile Salt of Vipers, was Cured not without great Hazard and
Trouble, by the intermixture of many other Medicines and those even Acids, as
Treacle-Water, Citrons; but those Acids could not be so effectual, by reason of
the Alkalies given him.


Al. The Recovery of Mr. Phillipson was not so speedy, nor what you did toward
it so apparently Effectual, as to give you just occasion to Brag of so great a
Cure: Nay, you cannot certainly prove to your self, or others, That what you
did, did the Cure, and that other things did nothing toward it; yea, or that
he would not have been well as soon, or sooner without any of your Acids. The
Patient himself said, He could not tell whether he had any benefit by what you
gave him. But I am sure, had he had some more proper Things, or even the
Viper-Man for his Doctor, he might have been well sooner than he was. But let
us suppose the best we can of what you did, and take what you borrow from Dr.
Stubbs, and Charas together; you do not make an Argument out of all sufficient
to make a Considerate Man believe, that the Poison of Vipers consists in an
Alkali. Suppose you did do the Man some little good, and Dr. Stubb's Mixtura
simplex were an Acid (which if it were that of Paracelsus, I deny, being but a
Salsum) and Charas's Alkalies, were not so soon Effectual on the German; but
wanting Patience and larger Doses, they gave some Acids, I say suppose that the
Acids did some good, it will not follow, That the Venom of Vipers is an Alkali.
For if an Acid has done some things toward the Cure of the Bite, in one or two
Cases, you cannot deny but that Alkalies have done it in many. For though in some
Cases Acids were used, they were not used alone, and so could not certainly
demand the Credit of the Cure. But you have many Cases, where the Volatile Salt
used without Acids Cured. Can it be supposed Volatile Alkali Salts did the
Cure, if the Poison were nothing but a Volatile Alkali? Or, did you ever see
any Volatile Alkali in so little (yea or in a large) quantity, put into a
Wound, and produce such dire Effects? No, the Infusion of Volatile Alkali in an
Hundred times the quantity into the Veins will not do it, or so much as cause a
Disorder. Can the Poison of Vipers consist in a Volatile Alkali, and their
whole Body abound therewith, and yet their Flesh be wholesome Food? No surely.
Can the Poison of Vipers consist in an Alkali, and yet be Cured by an Alkali?
And that even by an outward Application: As I my self have seen in the
following Experiments I some Years ago was Assistant in the making of, at the
Honorable Mr. Boyle's, which were made upon Pullets and Pigeons, thus* We
plucked the Feathers off the Breast of one of them, and taking a Viper when he
was enraged, we caused him to Bite; letting the Fowl go, he Died in three or
four Hours. Then we took anoher and caused him to be Bitten in like manner, by
an enraged Viper, and applied the Viper-Stone to the Wound, which not only
prevented Death, but all the dire Sypmtoms the other Fowl Died with; which
Stone being taken off after some time, the Wound was Healed by ordinary means.
Now this Stone is an Arid-Body, making an Effervescence with Acids, which could
not have such great Effects in the Biting of Vipers, if the Poison were an
Alkali, and to be destroyed by an Acid. But though the Poison of the Viper cannot
Rationally be thought to be an Alkali; yet neither do I think this Poison
consists in an Acid. Those Persons that have ventured to Taste the Liquor in
the Viper's Gums, tell us nothing of any Acidity, or Alkalous Taste, nor give
us any Experiments to confirm their Opinion of its being an Acid. Nor do we see
such Mortal Effects of so small quantities of either Acid, or Alkali in Wounds.
But this Poison doubtless does consist in something more subtil^ than any of
these manifest Qualities. The Ingenious Lemery, I confess, is of the Opinion
that the Poison, of the Viper is an Acid; but he (nor no Mortal I believe) has
any such Jargon as you falsely accuse him of, who is a Man capable of Teaching
you Pharmacy this Seven Years yet. To show how grossly you have abused him, I
will recite his Words in this matter: I conceive, says he, what they call the
Venom of Vipers, consists only in the abundance of Acid Volatile Salts, which
the Animal throws out when it Bites, and these Salts passing into the Veins and
Arteries, coagulate the Blood and hinder its Circulation, and the course of the
Animal Spirits, even as it happens when an Acid Liquor is Syring'd into a Vein,
which may be sufficient to explicate all the Accidents which happen upon the
Biteing. And afterward says he, The difference between the Effects of an Acid
Liquor syring'd into the Veins, and those of the Venom of Vipers is this, an
Acid Liquor being immediaiely infused into a large Vessel fixes all the Blood
of a sudden, and causes strong Convulsions, which are followed shortly with
Death: Whereas the Acid Salts that flow from the Viper when he Bites, do not
Work so quickly; their Acidity being probably not so strong as that of an Acid
Liquor, and have long passage into the Mass of Blood: And there is one
Circumstance, adds he, which makes my Application still more probable, That the
best Remedics used for such as are Wounded by Vipers, are those that destroy
Acids, and dissolve the Coagulation of the Blood, as Volatile Alkali-Salts
drawn from Animals. But to understand this more fully, continues he, it is fit
to consider several things, First, Vipers are more filled with Volatile Salts
than other Animals, and so not think it strange that they throw out much of it
in their wrath. Secondly, Though these Salts turn Alkalies by Distillation, they
are Acids in their own Nature, before the Fire works upon them, as I have said
when I spoke of the Principles. Thirdly, Vipers are covered with a close
compact Skin; so that the Salts they contain do Circulate and Subtilize much
better, and do Evaporate less than other Animals. Fourthly, The shape of the
Viper being long, straight, and round, like a small Gun, the Salts they throw
out in the Biting are driven with much more violence, than if they came from a
more open place. Fifthly, The two long Teeth of the Viper being straight and
sharp, make deep Wounds, but which shut up so quickly, the Acid-Salts which
enter, have no passage to come out. But it may be Objected farther, says he,
If the Venom of Vipers proceed from their Volatile Salts, then the Salt of
Vipers should increase, rather than Cure the Malady. Answer, Volatile Salts
which flow from Living Vipers, and enter the Flesh by the Bite, are very
different from those drawn by the Fire from Dead ones, which are taken at the
Mouth, the first are Naturally pointed, Acid, and Coaglating; the others have
been blunted by the Fire, and rendered Poreous, are Alkalies, very Rarifying, or
Dissolving, so are qualifyed to break and destroy the first. Secondly, The
Volatile Salt of Vipers taken at the Mouth, has another determination then that
which enters the Flesh, and so produces different Effect; not being forced in
its Motion, spreads every where, and dissolves the Coagulum the other had made
in the Blood. Thus much I have Transcribed, not for the sake of Lemery's
Opinion, seeing no ground to believe the Viper abounds with Acid Salts, but out
of love to Justice, that it may be seen how the Abuser of all his Betters, has
abused this Author in particular. But I have one thing more comes into my Mind
to tell you of, Mr. Acid, since we are Talking of Wounding, which is that I
have heard, you have formerly Boasted great Things in Surgery, and have Wrote
a Book called Novum Lumen Chirurgieum. What is there in it pray you Sir?


Ac. There Is nothing but Truth contained in my Novum Lumen Chirurgicum, and
it is Built upon a pair of Medicines, the one Internal, the other External,
which I did not think fit to make public. But here lies my Misfortune common
to all those who make new Discoveries; a great many believe the Truth of what I
said, that my Medicines will perform what I promised; but amongst those who
believe matter of Fact, many say, This Man was not the Author, others, that
they have the same Medicines. I very well know it is the Nature of most Men not
to allow any Person the Honor of his own Discoveries. But my Medicines are
entirely New, and will stand the severest Test, and I am certain my Medicines
will Cure any Wounds, whether in the Flesh, or in the Cavity of the Body: Where
as dangerous Wounds were ever Cured by former Applications, and that with much
greater speed and safety to the Patient; since they prevent Fevers, and
Mortifications: My Medicines if timely used, Cure all sorts of Wounds without
Suppuration, but where Suppura^ion is begun, are the best Digestives now known.
But all Probes and Tents, all Digestive and Suppurating Medicines, all
Cauteries and straight Ligatures are Injurious and Procrastinate the Cure. To
show wherein lies the unreasonableness of common Methods of Surgeons in the
Cure of Wounds, wherein they hinder and oppress Nature in her regular
Operations, let a Wound be made where it will, and how, whether by Cutting, or
Contusion, it matters not, the Nutritious juice is brought immediately to the
extremities of the wounded Vessels. Now all the Medicines made use of in the
common Methods of Surgery relax the divide Fibers, that they cannot retain
the Nutritious Matter, but let it pass into the Wound, where by the same
Medicines it is turned into the Substance commoly called Matter, and this
Corruption cannot be without a sort of Fermentation, and the Fermenting
Particles fret the Fibers, cause Inflmmations, and by entering the Blood, and
dividing its Texture cause Fevers. Now it is evident, whatever will cause Pain
such as will create a Fever, must be of a Heterogeneous Nature, and an Enemy
to the Body (for I positively believe it is from the Medicines applied, only are
occasioned all those ill Symptoms that attend Wounds) to which it is applied, or
into which it is received. The truth of which, the nature of a Fever is
sufficient to confirm, which is in the Terms of many great Men nothing but a
Nixus Naturae to throw off its Enemy. And a Late Learned Author in a Treatise
of Intermitting Fevers, the only Rational Piece in my Opinion that ever was
Writ upon that subject, plainly makes it appear, That the Seat of Agues is in
the Cortex of the Brain, from whence at certain Periods of time, the Matter is
thrown off by the Nerves to all the Parts of the Body, which causes the
coldness; this Matter afterward received into the Blood by the Capillary Veins
being ^erogeneous to it, puts it into a violent motion, which ceases not till
the matter is thrown off by the Pores. Now after the Surgeons have generated
Matter (though many times instead thereof they cause Mortifications) they then
use mundifying Medicines, and when Nature is oppressed, leave her to do her own
work. This is their practice in External Wounds, but what is to be expected
where the Lungs, Liver, Guts, etc. are wounded? Here they own their Medicines
insufficient, and if any so wounded chance to recover they count it almost
miraculous. But I leave it to every Man's judgment which method is best to be
confided in, either that where scarce one in ten miscarieth as in mine, or
where not one in ten recovers as in the Common Method of Surgeons: Besides
there remains another thing, that is when any large Blood-Vessel is wounded how
to stop the Flux of the Blood which they cannot do without actual, or potential
Cauteries, whose inconveniences every body knows; and strict bandage often
causing Mortifications. But the methods I use are short and easy, thus; I make
a solution of my Powder in Water, or for want of it in Urine, and squeese or
inject with a Syring into the Wound if it be deep, then close the Wound, and if
large, stich it up and lay a Pledget upon it. If any large Artery be cut, I
hold the Pledget close with my Hand till the Flux of Blood ceases which will be
in a small time; then bind it on with an easy ligature, and give my Tincture
in Wine. Now to prove my Medicines agreeable to the nature of Humane Bodies,
and of that Juice by which I conjecture the Body is nourished, and more
efficacious than the Medicines used by Surgeons, the following Arguments
will evince. 1. They never cause Pain unless just at the Application, and that
very little more than would be caused by-Spring Water. 2. No Pain
afterterwards. 3. If there has been Pain before, it has been taken off in a
short time. 4. There has never been any Fevers be the Wound external or
internal. 5. All incised Wounds are cured if timely used in a few days time,
without Suppuration: Gunshot Wounds in fleshy parts are cured after the same
manner, only require longer time. And by my Medicines most wounds within the
Cavity of the Body may be cured with all the ease imaginable. For Instance
Experiment. 1. John Mahulton.


Al. Hold Mr. Acid, let your Experiments alone now, you may tell them to the
Physicians and Surgeons that were in Flanders with you, and saw them made.
Seeing is believing, they say: But I who have not seen shall hardly believe you
did any Miracles, or that all contained in your Novum Lumen Chirurgicum is
true. Because I know your pair of Medicines, not capable to perfom such
Wonders: The very appearance of which Arcanums, is enough to Extinguish your
Novum Lumen, Your Tincture of the Sulphur of Venus, as you falsely and foolishly
call your Internal Medicine, and your Powder, are not your Invention* but
Originally Rebel's, I might say, every Bodies: The one being nothing but Spirit
of Roman or Dantzick Vitriol Twelve Parts mixed with Spirit of Wine Eight
Parts: And the other nothing but Roman Vitriol Calcined to Whiteness, which you
Colored with a little Dragon's Blood: And we know how you come by these
Secrets: These are the great Medicines you would so fain steal the Honor of
being thought the Inventer often* These are your fire-new Medicines! The Birth of
the Mountains! And least you should deny this (being given to the faculty) any
one that understands any thing of Chemistry, may know your Tincture (as you
call it) if not by Sight and Taste, by bare Distillation. And as for your
Powder, let them Dissolve it in Water, the Dragon's-Blood (if you still Color
it) will not Dissolve, but may be separated, and put upon a hot Plate, is known
by the Smell: Let them put some Urinous Spirit to the Powder, it will presently
discover the Copper by its Blew Color, and every Body knows by the Taste, that
it is a Vitriol. And now let People judge, whether a little Roman Vitriol be so
strange a Discovery beyond all hitherto known in Surgery? Or whether all
Surgeons have been ignorant thereof? Whether Vitriol will Cure all Curable
Wounds inwardly, and outwardly, with more speed and safety than any thing else?
If it would, there are better Vitriols to be had than this you falsely call,
your Invention. Whether Copper Corroded by an Acid, with its fretting
Astringency be likely to Cure all sorts of Wounds without Suppuration, and yet
is the best Digestive in the World. This is like Acids making Thick, Thin,
Purging, Vomiting, Binding, Loosening, and every thing; because it is Acid, and
you are in love with it. Roman Vitriol Digests, yet hinders Digestion; but only
while a Secret in Mr. Acid's Hand, if you can believe him. All Probes and
Tents, all Digestive and Suppurating Medicines. all Cauteries and straight
Ligatures, are Injurious and Procrastinate the Cure: Yet Mr. Acid's Digestive
does not. But I Answer, Your Digestion-hindering Digestive as well as others,
and the rest of the Things you cry out against, may be Injurious and
Procrastinate Cure, where Fools or Knaves act instead of Chirurgions: But in
the Hands of Experienced Artists, all these are necessary sometimes; but when,
and where, you are not a capable Judge. Let a Wound be made where, and how it
matters not, say you. Here you show your Ignorance, for Surgeons to Laugh
at: They well know the place and manner of the Wound, much alters the
Indications of Cure. That all the Medicines made use of in the common Methods
of Surgery, relax the Fibers, and turn the Nutri^ious Juice into Corruption,
is a false Assertion, by a Person ignorant of the Materia Medica. All the
Surgeons that I ^ver was acquainted with, were not ignorant of more kindly
(...) ^stringents, and better Balsamicks than Roman Vitriol. And before ever
Mr. Acid was heard of, I my self have healed Wounds, and that in the Joints,
without Pain, Soreness or Corruption, by Medicines that might be taken inwardly
in considerable Doses. But Roman Vitriol, or any sort of Corrosion of Copper
with common Acids will cause Pain, and Inflammation in the Wounds, and thence
Fevers. Let any body try it on himself, and he will be satisfied. Now what
will cause Pains and Fevers, must needs be of a Heterogeneous Nature, and I
positively believe, that it was from your Medicine, that your Patients in
Flanders had so many ill Symptoms. Nature striving though in vain to cast out the
extraneous body of Corroded Copper, far more mischievous than Lead or Iron,
with which Soldiers more mercifully wound one another. That a Fever is Nixus
Naturae to throw off its enemy might perhaps be believed as a great fancy of
Great Men, if they could tell us who Nature is. The Late Learned Author of the
Treatise of Intermitting Fevers, if what you say be true, seems to be a Man of
great Brain, and the Seat of Agues by him discovered, a Witty Invention: I wish
you had named him, that I might have seen also what he makes the matter of
these Fevers. I fancy they must be Maggots, who every time they discharge
their Bellies after repast, drop down their Excrements through the Nerves,
which being of an Alkalous Nature disolved in the aqucous Vehicle of the Succus
Nervosus causes cold, but being received into the Blood, and Heterogeneous to
its Acid, causes a Fermentation and Heat, till the Excrementitious Alkali is
cast out by the Pores. But as for the Surgeons when they have generated
Matter; then, for want of Roman Vitriol they mundifie, and so leave Nature
oppressed. Roman Vitriol prevents all, and helps all, but I believe Mr. Acid's
direction, I would say his Word is the chief thing in the business. Another Man
using it will do or tell of no Mi^acles. But what is to be expected in the
Wounds of the Lungs, Liver, Guts? Why here a recovery is counted a Miracle by
the Ignorant Surgeons, who know nothing of the new discovered Roman Vitriol.
But let any Man judge which method is best, that which depends upon Roman
Vitriol alone, used alike in all differences of Wonds, or that which relies on
all sorts of Medicines in the Hands of Artists: Mr. Acid says in the first
method not one in ten miscaries, in the last not one in ten recovers. I must
tell you Sir, you have not proved by Evident and well attested Experiments, you
ever cured any one Wounded in those Parts; so far are you from curing Nine in
Ten. If you could have done what you pretended, I can never believe you would
have left your famous Practice. As for stopping of Blood, you know well where
your Vitriol has failed, but let any one that has a mind to be satisfied of its
Virtue try it. But you abuse others to say, they cannot stop Blood without
actual or potential Cauteries Actual Cauteries are seldom used, or any
potential greater than calcined Roman Vitriol. But we know better things,
Medicines that may be taken inwardly, they are so mild and wholesome, that will
stop Blood with much more ease, speed safety, and heal far better when that is
done, than your calcined Vitriol; though we never thought fit to Quack with them.
Besides every Surgeon who deserves the Name, can stop Blood in many cases
without any Medicines at all. That your Medicines are as agreeing to the Nature
of Human Bodies, and the juice by which they are nourished as Copper is to
Flesh, and Oil of Vitriol to Blood; I readily grant, but that they are indeed
friendly, your Practice has not proved, we have only your bare Assertions, ask
the Marquess of Carmarthen else. That your Vitriol never causes much more Pain
than Spring Water in the Application, nor any afterward, takes off former Pain
in a little time, suffers no Fever, Cures all incised Wounds in a few days
without Suppuration, Gunshot Wounds in a little lo^^er time, most Wounds in
the cavity of the Body with all the ease immaginable. I Answer: First, Your
Method is short, and your Se^^^s are known, let whoever will try how sweet.
Secondly, Why durst you not go into Flanders again? And why did you quit your
pretensions to Surgery, and take another method of Quacking; leaving your
first new Light, to go out like an Ignis Fatui, and rub your Cat for another,
You began to see at the Seige of Namur, that your Chirurgical sham would not
take, and therefore had some reason for another Essay. You found the Practice
of Surgery too plain, and sensible a work to deceive Mankind in. The
Internal part of Medicine is more abstruse, and you may tell People they have a
Fire in their Hearts, which is fed by Acids, long enough ever they will have
them searched to disprove you. A Discoverer you would fain be thought, and a
Light to the World; but I don't Question, but by that time what has been said,
is well considered, you will see your self but a falling Star, which appears
but in a very little part of his Passage to the Earth. And now Mr. Acid you may
go home and think: And if possibly you can be persuaded to become Considerate
and Modest, and what you have Foolishly said, and done can yet be retrieved,
you will acknowledge me, as I am, no Enemy, but a Friend; though I have blunted
the Sharpness of your Acids.


FINIS.

