Rogero-Mastix.

A ROD FOR William Rogers, In Return for his Riming Scourge, etc.

By Thomas Ellwood.

Printed in the Year 1685.

TO such as ask, why I in Verse have writ?
This Answer I return, I held it fit,
Verse should in Verse be answered, Prose in Prose.
My Adve^ry his o^ Weapon ^se.
(...) chose ^ore in Prose to wri^, and the
I ans^ him in Pro^. (...) now again,
Since he his Style from Prose to Verse has changed,
And in the Muses Walks has boldly ranged,
In his own Method him I chose to Treat,
Lest he should wise be in his own Conceit,
Prove. 26. 5.

A Rod for William Rogers, in return for his Rhyming Scourge, etc.
THe Preacher tells us, that beneath the Sun
There Is no new thing: for, That which shall be done, Eccles. 1. 9. and 3. 15.

Has been before, And what is now a doing
Shall acted be again, in Times ensuing.
^t none be shaken, therefore, in his Mind,
(...) he Gods People now Reviled find,
Reproach't with bitter Words, and Vilifi'd,
With filthy Slanders loaded, and belied
By Wicked men: Such was the Church's state
Of old, as sacred Story does relate.
That Railing Herald of the Assyrian Host,
The foul-mouthed Rabshakeh, that man of Boast,
Who from Senacherib, Assyrian's King,
Did a proud Message unto Judah bring; 2 Kings 18.

When he designed the faithful Jews to draw
From their Observance of the holy Law,
He labored to persuade them they had left
The way of God already, and bereft
Themselves, by that means, of all ground of hope
That God would them defend. This was the scope
Of his false Reasoning with them: If, said he,
(...) answer, In the Lord our God trust we;
Is not that He, whose Altars and High Places Verse. 22.

Your Hezekiah takes down and defaces;
And has to Judah and Jerus'lem said,
Your Worship at this Altar shall be made?
By this, he hoped their Confidence to shake,
In God the Lord, and them (...) make
Of God's Protection, and from thence afford
An open Ear to his seducing Word.
And that he might the more amuze them, he
Pretends his Mission from the Lord to be.
Am I, says he, come up without the Lord
Against this place, to put it to the Sword? Verse. 25.

The Lord (adds he; for in a Lie he will stand)
Unto me said, Go up against this Land.
Then let not Hezekiah make you trust
Still in the Lord, saying, The Lord (who is just) Verse. 30.

Will surely us deliver, and this City
Shall not be subject to Assyria 's Pity.
To this effect that Wretch, with strained Voice
Proclaimed, and in his Lewdness did rejoice
A little while; but, ever 'twas long, the Rod
Taught him what 'twas to Rail at Israel's God.
When Treacherous Sanballat and Tobiah
Perceived the godly zeal of Nehemiah,
The care and pains he took, his Diligence
The holy City with a Wall to fence,
How hard he labored (in despite of them)
To build the Breaches of Jerusalem;
Set up the Gates thereof, and hang the Door,
That they no longer could, as heretofore,
Go in and out at pleasure, and profane,
With unclean Mixtures, Jacob's Seed again;
Bring in mixed Marriages, and thereby make
God's People him offend, him them forsake:
At first it grieved them sore to hear some tell
Of one that sought the good of Israel. Nehem 2. 10.

Then when they found the Work would be begun,
They laughed, and into scornful Scoffs did run;
And by Derision and Disdainful Cries, Verse. 19.

Declared how much they did the Work despise.
But when they understood the Work went on,
And was in likely posture to be done, Chapter 4. 7.

They waxt exceeding wroth, and strait combined
Together to oppose it; with them joined
The Arabian, Ammonite and Ashdodite,
In League, against Jerusalem to fight: Verse 8.

And all to the intent, to bring to naught
The Work, which God had by his Servants wrought.
Their Warlike Preparations proving vain, Verse. 11.

They use a Stratagem, they lay a Train Verse. 15.

To catch the Innocent; thus him they greet,
Come, let us in one place together meet. Chapter 6. 2.

Fair the Pretense appeared, but their Thought
Was, by that Medium, to have Mischief wrought.
Good Nehemiah saw their Snare, and escaped
The hands of them that for his Ruin gaped.
I am, quoth he, about a Work too great
To leave it, and come down, with you to treat.
Four times (so did they long to circumvent Verse 3.

The Righteous) They the self same Message sent
And the same Answer did as often receive, Verse. 4.

I may not stop, the Work's too great to leave.
When thus Sanballat saw his Counsels fail,
That nor by Force, nor Guile, he could prevail;
With Rage and Envy swelled, at length he burst,
And cast up Gall, and whatsoever was worst;
Not only Nehemiah to defame,
But bring an Odium on the Jewish Name.
And that he might his Slander public make,
(As public as he could) this way did take.
He gave unto his Servant a command, Verse. 5.

To bear a Letter open in his hand,
In which he did suggest an Accusation
Upon Report, (a sly Insinuation)
That Nehemiah had employed the Jews
To build the Wall, that he might them abuse,
And thrust himself upon them for their King, Verse. 6.

And thereby double Bondage on them bring.
And, that he might the Crown the better reach,
He had appointed Prophets too, to Preach Verse. 7.

So of him at Jerusalem, and say,
There is a King in Judah at this day.
Thus wrought Tobiah, Sanballat, and those
That with them joined, the Work of God to oppose.
One while, by Scoffing, Scorning and Deriding,
Another while, by Force and Factious Siding;
Then by Deceit, and many a subtle Wile,
In hopes they might the Innocent beguile;
And lastly, by a public Defamation,
To make the Jews a Scorn to Gentile-Nation.
When proud Diotrephes, whose swelling Breast,
Love of Pre-eminence had long possessed,
Had by Surmize and false Insinuation,
Leavened a Party in the Congregation,
The Rancour of his Venomed heart brake forth
Against some, in the Church, of greatest Worth,
Prating against them, with Malicious words,
As, in his third Epistle, John Records; Verse. 10.

Nor only Prating, but from Words proceeds
To work Division by Mischievous Deeds,
Opposing what the Inspired Apostle writ
Conducing to the Churches Benefit.
By these Examples, plainly it appears,
How Satan played his Pranks in former years,
What Arts he used, how craftily he wrought,
What Instruments, w^ereby to work, he sought;
One while, professed Enemies, and then
Another while he chose false Brethren.
And though those Agents now are dead and gone,
Satan remains the same, the Evil One.
He Mischief always to the Church intends,
And Mischief to effect, his Agents sends.
Though Rabshakih be dead, Tobiah Rotten,
Sanballat and Diotrephes forgotten,
The Wicked Spirit that in them did strive
Against Gods Truth and Church, is still alive;
And other Instruments does daily raise,
To hinder Truth's fair Progress, in these days.
He Agents has, great store, of every size
And sort. How numerous are Truth's Enemies!
Yet blessed be God! A greater Number's those
That stand for Truth, than those that it oppose.
I list not here a Muster-Roll to make
Of all who, from without, in hand did take
To Battle against Truth, and shake their Spears
At Israel's Camp within these twenty years.
Nor do I purpose to enum'rate all,
Who, in that time, themselves did Quakers call,
That through Misguided Zeal, or Discontent,
Their Bows against their Brethren have bent.
But since some few, of late, appear to be
With Rage and Envy filled, to that degree,
That with more Bitterness than all the rest,
Their Malice against Truth they have expressed,
My purpose is to single out from these
Him, that appears as their Diotrephes.
And that is ROGERS: For though Crisp and Bug,
With other some, do at the same Oar Tug,
And Toil hard at it too, with all their Might,
Yet can they do no more but show their Spite.
And for the rest, that lie behind the Skreen,
And move the Wheels, but like not to be seen;
Although they help to carry on the Work,
I take less notice of them, while they Lurk.
Them therefore leaving, I return again,
To view Will. Rogers his Poetic strain;
Who having been too often foiled in Prose,
To try his Fortain, now in Verse has chose;
If Verse, without Offense, that may be called,
Which is delivered in Rhimes so bald,
So flat, so dull, so rough, so void of Grace,
Where Symphony and Cadence have no place;
So full of Chasmes, stuck with Prosie Pegs,
Whereon his Tired Muse might rest her Legs,
(Not having Wings) and take new breath, that then
She might, with much a do, hop on again.
His [ P 11.
Words to that effect, -- p 3. 11. 16.
Why so? -- p. 9. 17
How so?
p. 5.
Hence I observe, -- p. 20. See more p. 12.
Hence I conclude -- ] do show,
His Pu^sy Muse was often out of Wind,
And glad when she a perching place could find.
What drew thee, William, to this Rhiming fit,
Having no more p^opensity to it?
Could think such hobling and unequal Rhimes,
That make a Iangling, like disordered Chimes,
Could of a Poem ever deserve the Name,
Or ever be read without the Author's Shame?
What Clouds of Darkness in thy Lines appear!
How is thy Style perplexed! how far from clear!
Thy Muse is wrapped in thickest Fogs of Night,
Which shows thou art departed from the Light.
Nor Sun, nor Moon, nor Star throughout thy Book
Is to be seen. No Spring nor Crystal Brook
Glides through thy Margin. No, thy Waters run
Black, like the Streams of Styx, or Phlegeton.
I will not, William, take the pains to trace
The Snakey Windings of thy crooked Race;
Nor do I mean to give my self the trouble
To hunt thee, foot by foot, through every double;
Nor do I purpose here to spend my time,
To sweep away the stinking Mud and Slime,
(The Sanious matter of a Putrid Brain,
Which does well nigh each page of thine distain)
Which in base Terms, and for the basest Ends,
Thou belchest forth against those worthy Friends,
Who, maugre all thy foul Calumniation,
Have in the Church an honorable Station.
I hold it needless now to make Defense,
Against plain Envy, for plain Innocence.
Besides, they are more able far, I know,
Thy Vomit back upon thy face to throw,
(...) they think fit; or, with a noble Scorn,
and, silent, set their feet upon thy Horn.
^oiding therefore that Scurrility,
^herewith upon some Persons thou do fly,
^purpose more especially to look
^to those envious Parcels of thy Book,
which seem to have a more extenc^ relation
To all the faithful Friends in every Nation;
^ot only those whom God has called to be
^is Servants in a public Ministry,
^t even all, beneath the Cope of Heaven
Now living, who their Names to Christ have given
And, in this Search, I make no doubt to find,
And manifest, that, with malicious Mind,
Like Sanballat, Tobiah, and the rest,
Whose envious workings are before expressed,
^ou either chargest Friends with what is not true,
(...) blam'st their doing what they ought to do.
After thou have, in Misty Phrases, told
What those called Quakers used to preach of old,
(Which yet thou do in Language so unclear,
That common sense does not therein appear:)
Thou slily do suggest, That Friends are gone
From that great Truth they first insisted on.
But thy Suggestion's false: We firmly hold
The sure Foundation that was laid of old.
Quakers (thou say) in Christ's Name thus did preach,
Christ's Light's our Guide, it fallen Man does teach. Page 1.

And Quakers still (say I) do preach the same,
[Christ's Light's our Guide] and preach it in Christ's Name;
And that it fallen man Would teach, if he
Would be persuaded by it taught to be.
^ut fallen man rebels, and often kicks
Against this inward Teacher, when it pricks. Acts 9. 5.

And that is the soundest Reason can be brought,
Why thou, being fallen from Truth, remain'st untaught.
Christ's Teaching by his Spirit few denied,
Thou say. Why Few? Let Truth the case decide.
If [few] relates to Friends, there was not any:
If to the World, not few, but very many,
Christ's Teachings by his Spirit did deny,
And against immediate inward Teachings cry.
Now take which course thou will, it is plain in view,
That what thou have asserted is Untrue.
Thus run'st thou on, till thou thy way have lost,
And run'st thy heedless head against a Post.
Look not, said they, to us, it is our concern,
That you from the Light within your duty learn;
So thou report'st. The same concern remains
Upon Friends still, say I: Their Care, their P^ns;
Is exercised in this, that all may learn,
From Light within their Duty, and discern
The Light's true Voice, which never did oppose
In some, what from the same in others rose.
And, if some said, Look not to us (which yet,
I never saw proved in aught that thou have writ)
It cannot well in other sense be took,
That they would not others so should look
To them, as thereby to neglect or slight
The inward Teachings of the heavenly Light.
And that, all faithful Friends at this day are
As careful to prevent, as ever they were.
But that Friends ever ^eemed it unright,
To look to one another, in the Light,
To help, encourage, comfort any Brother,
Be good Examples one unto another,
To stir the pure Mind up, provoke to Love,
And to good Works, ^s God thereto does move;
That ever this by Friends condemned was,
I never heard, ^or to believe see cause.
We read, that the Apostles, (chiefly Paul)
On the believing Christians often did call
To follow them, as they themselves were found 1 Cor 4 16. and 11 1. Phil. 3.
17. (...) Tim. 4. 12. 1 These 1. 7. and 2. 14. 1 Pet. 5. 3. Antidote, p 17, etc.

The followers of Christ: Was this unsound
In them? If not, how comes it now to be
Exclaimed on, as so high a Crime, by thee?
But of this Subject, William, thou have writ
Before; and I at large have answered it.
What in thy Book comes next, is very dark,
And, as it stands, seems quite besides the Mark.
From the Scriptures they Light, such a Teacher proved,
As into Corners could not be removed:
These are the words; If Printer be in fault,
(Which I to know, have the Errata sought,
^t find no mention of it there) then he
The blame must bear, and set the Author free.
^an while, so far as I thy meaning guess,
(...) will Reply, and readily confess,
^at every one, who in the Gospel-Path
^th walk uprightly, such a Teacher has,
(...) cannot into a Corner be removed,
which from the holy Scripture may be proved. Isa. 30. 20.

which if it be of the inward Teacher meant,
^s I to take it here, am well content)
^t do the Scriptures plainly too declare,
^d Paul himself does Testimony bear,
^at Christ, when he ascended up on high,
^e Teachers for the Work of the Ministry. Ephesians. 4. 11, 12.

^d gave those Teachers Gifts to fit them to
^e Work he had appointed them to do.
^e of those Teachers too, in downright Terms,
(...) Apostle Paul himself to be, affirms. 1 Ti^. 2. 7. 2 Timothy 1 11.

(...) which we plainly see, our gracious Lord
(...) outward Teachers to his Church afford,
^ough they had the inward. And to them
(...) outwardly, he said, who do condemn Luke10. 16.

(...) me contemns; who yield to you the E^r, Mat 10 40.

(...) you receive, me too receive and hear. Joh. 13. 20.

I have enlarged, because I see you are bent
To vilify those Teachers Christ has sent.
Thou add'st (while speaking of Teacher proved,
That into Corners could not be removed)
But did not preach it up, a slight to bring,
On holy Scriptures, penned for our Learning.
What means this, William? Do thou any know
Amongst the Quakers, who do now preach so?
Name, if thou can, among us all, one Friend,
That slights the Scriptures for our Learning penned.
Such dark Suggestions do from Envy ^ow,
And a malicious concred Mind they show.
For selfish ends, thou say, some thus did se^,
You see not right, your Light directs not well. Page 2.

Thy drift is here, the Quakers to compare
With the Worlds Teachers, who in Darkness are;
And so art thou. The cases differ quite:
For their Objection was against the Light;
But so's not ours. You see not right, they said,
The fault whereof upon the Light they laid.
We see, and truly, that you see not right,
But far be it from us to reproach the Light.
We never say, the Light directs not well:
We tell you, That you from the Light are fell.
Their case with ours, does no proportion bear,
But serves to make thy Envy more appear.
In all these Passages that I have quoted,
And diverse others that I have not noted,
Of the same tendency with these, thy aim
Is, by Insinuation to defame
Gods faithful Servants, and beget suspicion,
That they have lost their primitive condition:
Whenas it is indeed thyself, and those
Who with thee join. Truths Order to oppose.
That art from Truth and Godliness departed,
And leagued in War against the honest hearted;
Whom, with malicious Mind, and words untrue,
Thou, in the following Lines do thus pursue.
What Hypocrites, are all such Quakers then,
As touching Souls concern, have said Amen,
On the mere credit of auother's Lines,
That seeking Self, from Scripture-Truth's declines.
Here Is Slander by the Lump: A Wholesale Trade:
Who are the Quakers thou do thus upraid?
Come to Particulars; leave general Work:
Deceit, thou know, in Generals does Lurk.
Name none against whom thou dare undertake,
The charge thou here have published, good to make,
And make it good too: I will then declare,
He and thy self, may make an even pair.
Had thou considered, as it thee behooved,
How many things must in this Charge be proved;
Not only that the Author of those Lines,
Which Souls concern, from Scripture Truth's declines,
And seeks self; but that some Quakers do,
On his mere credit, say Amen thereto:
It might perhaps, have thee more wary made,
And the loose Ramblings of thy Pen have staid.
But when dark Envy once the Eye does blind,
It bars Consideration from the Mind.
Have any told thee, that they said Amen
On the mere credit of another? Then
Prithee conceal them not, disclose their Names,
And let them of their Follies bear the Shames.
But if none so have told thee, prithee, whence
Assum'st thou to thy self the Confidence,
To dive men's Hearts, and undertake to know
The only Motive whereupon they go?
Thou, that have so derided inward S^se,
Wilt not pretend, I hope, to judge from thence.
And if thou have not been expressly told
By themselves, how dare thou be so bold
And positive, that some have said Amen
On the mere credit of another, when,
For ought thou know, they had an inward sense
The thing was right, and said Amen from thence.
And that Amen may to another's words 1 Cor. 14. 26.

In Truth be said, the Scripture Proof affords.
And for that cause the Apostle does command,
To use a Tongue that People understand.
In thy third page, thy Mouth thou open'st wide,
To Rail at Fox, his Preachers and his Pride.
Thy Railing's slighted, and laid under foot,
And for the rest, I Will say but this unto't;
George Fox is, of the Truth, a faithful Teacher,
And has been from the first: but has no Preacher
That he calls his. They that by thee are meant,
Are Preachers that, as he, by Christ are sent.
I dare thee but one Preacher to impeach,
That was by him commissioned to preach.
And as for Pride, had thou been half so humble,
Thou had not climbed so high, to take this tumble.
Thou say, He framed in the Church a Government.
I say, not he, but Christ, that had him sent. Page 3.

Christ, by his Spirit, first in him did move:
The Church the same, in Spirit did approve.
When Deacons first were in the Church appointed,
By those that with the Spirit were anointed, Acts 6.

Was that appointment to be called their own,
Or Christ's, whose Life and Power through them was shown?
Paul in the Church did sundry things ordain,
(Bear with the word, the Scripture speaks it p^in)
For Order sake. Was therefore the Order his? 1 Cor. 7. 17. and 16. 1.

No sure, not his, but Christ's: And so in this.
Thou Cavil'st too, that (after Government)
Preachers, approved by man, beyond Seas went. Page 3.

This too, perhaps, may serve, at least is meant,
(...) kindle Jealousies and Discontent
^raw unsettled Minds: Let Us therefore scan
^e meaning of those words [Approv'd by Man]
(...) Man thou mean the Church (for so I find,
^hou have a few Lines off expressed thy Mind:)
^d to approve, imports to own, receive,
^end, or like: This then no room does leave
(...) Cavil: For he must be stupid grown,
^at thinks Christ's Church should not Christ's Preachers own.
^des, I note that here thou have not said
^ose Preachers were by man ordained or made;
^t that that they were approved. Now it is most plain,
(...) thing to Approve, another to Ordain.
^ey had their Ordination from above:
(...) Christ Ordains, his Church may well approve.
^d to receive the Churches Approbation,
(...) to Christ's Servants no Dis-reputation.
(...) that in Righteousness and Peace, says Paul,
(...) Christ, and in the Spirit joy withal, Romans 14. 17, 18.

(...) ^to God acceptable, and then,
^dds he, Approved also is of men.
Thou giv'st an hint, as if of them that went.
Beyond the Seas, some by G. F. were sent.
How prov'st thou that? I Proof thereof demand:
Thy proofless Affirmation will not stand,
^ch less dark Hints. Come, name the man that went
A preaching at G. F's commandment,
Without an inward Motion from the Lord,
To sound abroad his everlasting Word.
(...) solemnly profess, I do not know
One Friend amongst us all, that ever did so.
Thou say, The Church has cried once and again
Against Black-Coats, for their being sent of men.
Thou Envy-blinded art, and much unlearned
(...) Truth, nor have thou Right from Wrong discerned.
See thou no odds? Put'st thou no difference then
'Twixt those that run, as only sent by men,
Who neither waited for, nor yet believed
The Spirit's motion was to be received,
And did (...) Mission too from such men take,
As have against the Spirit's sending spoke:
And them that ^wait for, and in Truth rejoice
At hearing, in themselves, the Spirit's Voice
Giving a certain Echo to the sound
Of the same Voice, when in another found?
Have thou not read, how, in the purest state
Of Christian Faith, (as Scripture does relate)
The blessed Apostles sometimes others sent,
And sometimes also, sent by others, went?
How often did Paul send 1 Cor. 4 17. Phil. 2. 19. 1 Timothy 3. 2.
Timothy and 2 Cor. 8. 6. and 12. 18.
Titus,
Beloved Ephesians. 6. 21. Col. 4. 7, 8. 2 Timothy 4. ^2.
Tychicus, Phil^. 2. 25.
Epaphroditus,
Col 4. (...)
Onesimus, Acts 19. 22.
Erastus, and 2 Cor. 8. 18 22
some others,
True Gospel-Preachers, and beloved Brothers?
Was this like Black-Coats sending? Blush for shame,
That ever thy Envy did thy Black-Coats name.
Can thou imagine, they who thus were sent,
On the mere Motion of the Apostle went?
No: They, no question, in themselves did find
The same good Motion stirring up their Mind.
With what the good Apostle did advise,
The holy Ghost in them did harmonize.
Titus his case so clearly is expressed,
That it may serve to open all the rest.
Him Paul to Corinth had desired to go;
He thereunto a Readiness does show: 2 Cor. 8. 6.

But why? God put it in his heart to do V. 16, 17.

What the Apostle did exhort him to.
Peter and John, Luke tells us, being sent
By the Apostles, to Samaria went.
The Church too, after Stephen's fatal Stroke,
Sent Barnabas as far as Antiock.
Examples of this kind are many found,
The holy Scriptures do therewith abound.
One Instance more is in my mind to give,
Of some that in the purest Age did live,
Even holy Barnabas and blessed Saul,
(Whose Christian Name was after called Paul) Ch 13^, (...)

That these were sent by Simon, and the rest,
In Scripture positively is expressed: V. 3.

Yet in the very words that follow next,
It is recorded in the holy Text,
That they were by the holy Ghost sent forth:
Whence plainly follows, (and indeed it is worth
Our Observation) that what those men did
Is to the holy Ghost attributed.
And there is great Reason that it should be so,
Since what they did, did from the Spirit flow,
Yet, think I, not the other two did go
Without a Motion, in themselves, thereto.
But, William, that which frets thee most of all,
And makes an overflowing of thy Gall,
I^, that the Church has Money to supply
The just occasions of her Ministry,
When they, to preach the Word, are moved to travel
Beyond the Seas. At this thou thus do cavil;
S^h Church men unto Christ's Church strangers are,
And most rely upon their Churches car:
Unlike those whom Christ sent in the Ministry,
Without a Scrip, to sound the Gospel free:
^d therefore when her Cash was emptied, she,
^v'd Money for to serve the Ministry.
Hence prating Preachers turned the Silver Bait,
^ught not a few of the Church with zeal to wait.
As favor was obtained by Parasites,
They labored hard to ga^n more Pro^elites.
Thus, like a troubled Sea, thou' castest up
The Mire and Dirt that is in thy filthy Cup:
Then, in a paltry kind of Bal^d Tone,
Like scoffing Ishma^l, thou thus go on;
At length her Papers, like to Briefs, did e^y.
For Money, Money for the Ministry.
And in the fifth page, having given a yerk
A^ R^chardson, for being an hired Clerk,
Thou say, Its true, that some do frequent say,
Both Cl^ks and Priests from the Flock obtain their pay.
Thy envious term of Priests, as it is applied
To Friends, is by the Truth in Friends denied.
The Apostle Peter called the Saints of old 1 Pet. 2. 9.

A Royal Priesthood: We no other hold.
But that Christ's Ministers should be supplied
With necessaries, by the Church (his Bride)
Is such a known and certain Truth, as none,
Perhaps, has ever opposed, but thou alone. (...) ^0 10 (...) 107 ^im 5.

Read but the Scriptures in the Margin set,
And thou wilt be forced to grant (though with Regret)
That it is the Churches duty, to supply
The needful wants of all her Ministry. Cor 9. ^l. 6 6.

I know, these Texts which I have here inserted,
Have often been misapplied, and much perverted
B^ Parish-Preachers, who these Scriptures strain,
To draw unto themselves dishonest Gain.
But what of that? Truth must not be refused,
Because it is by Evil men abused:
And truth it is, too plain to be denied,
Christ's Church should for Christ's Ministers provide.
What carp'st thou at then, William? Would thy Muse
Plead that St. Paul did not his Priv'ledge use?
I grant he did not, in some special cases,
And that too only in some factious places:
And I, perhaps, if need required, could name
Some scor^s of Friends too, that have done the same,
That at their own charge have a Warfare gone,
And crossed the Seas, being chargeable to none.
But what of that? The Apostle Paul we find
His Right assert^d, though he had no mind ^r. 9.

To tak^ it there: And elsewhere does declare, 2 Cor. (...). (...).

That other Churches did of him take care;
That what was lacking to him, privately
The Macedonian Brethren did supply. 2 Cor. (...) 9.

Thus it appears, the Apostle did partake Phil. 4 (...) 18.

Of that Provision, which the Church did make.
And what, but Envy, has bewitched thy Mind,
With what was then approved, now fault to find!
Pretend thou can not, that the stock is given
To such as have no need thereof; for even
Thy self here say, The Church supplied the need
Of those that wanted Moneys to proceed
To go beyond Seas. What a groundless Cavil
Is this of thine! How should such Preachers travel
Beyond the Seas, whom Christ thereto does move,
And whom the Church, as faithful, does approve,
If neither have they Moneys to proceed,
Nor Church may, with her Stock, supply their need?
May none beyond Seas go, but who can spare
Sufficient of their own, the charge to bear?
Must Christ be so confined, he may not send
Any, but such as have Estates to spend?
God bless us from such Doctrine, and such Teachers,
As will admit of none but wealthy Preachers.
Peter, we read, nor Silver had, nor Gold, Acts (...)

(So he the Cripple, at the Temple, told)
Yet after that he traveled far and near,
By Sea and Land, pray, who the Charge did bear,
Unless the Church? And is that now a Crime,
Which was a Virtue in the purest time?
No sure: Though Dissolute Apostates slight
Her care, the Church then did, and now does right Tit. 3

Christ's Messengers to furnish, and their need
Supply, when they want Moneys to proceed
In this Work. As for what thou add'st, to wit,
[If they their Motion freely did submit
To ^h' London Church, and do as she thought fit:]
I count it a malicious Slander, and
Of thee an Evidence thereof deand.
^duce one I^iance, if thou can; declare
One Person's Name, with whom it did so fare.
Name one (or else thou may be thought a Liar)
Of whom the Church in London did require,
That he his Motion freely should submit
To her, and do therein as she thought fit.
I know, it is usual with thee to suggest
The false Surmizes of thy envious Breast,
Void of all Proof, and many a Calumny,
By thee flung at us, yet unprov'd does ly.
I know, the Friends of London, to whose Care
And Trust, those Services committed are,
Are faithful men, and tender of the good,
By whom true Motions will not be withstood.
They Are such as would not break a bruised Reed,
Nor quench the smoking Flax. Yet they had need
Be satisfied, how they dispense that Stock,
Which is the Free Will Offering of the Flock,
Not limited to any single use,
(As thou insinuatest in Abuse)
But is impl^d in a more general way,
The Churches common Charges to defray.
And, William, ask thy Friends, T. C. E. M.
If the Accounts were not perused by them
Within these In 1681.
few years, and each set his Name
Thereto, to show he did approve the same.
Thou say, Her Papers, like to Briefs did cry
For Money, Money for the Ministry:
But thou say falsely; I thy words deny:
Prove them, or Falsehood at thy door shall ly.
Thy naming Briefs, on this occasion, shows
Thy Cavil from a Scoffing Spirit flows. 1 Cor. 16.

Paul to the Church did his Epistles send, 2 Cor. 8, and 9.

In which he to their care did recommend
Collections for the Saints. Why do not flout
At those Epistles too? Why cry'st not out
Against the Papers of the Apostle Paul,
That They, like Briefs, for Money, Money, call?
Thy Cavil does as match against him ly,
Is against us: and 'twas thy subtilty,
Not openly of Paul to show dislike,
But rather through our sides at him to strike.
Thy Work is seen; thy Undertaking's vile;
Thy Spirit scornful; frothy is thy Style.
But, William, art thou sure, thou never yet
To what thou termest Briefs, thy Name have set?
Take heed, lest while thou Stones do upward throw,
They fall not back, and give thy self a blow.
Thy flurt at Richardson, for taking pay
for what, as Clark, he writes, does much bewray
Thy Folly and Injustice: Is It not fit,
Who works for others, should be paid for it,
And that by them, who him, to work, desire?
The Labourer is worthy of his Hire.
Have you no things, called Clerks? From whom, I pray,
Do your Apostate-Clerks obtain their pay,
Save from the Herd to which they do belong?
And is Reward due only to the Wrong!
Come, William, come; one Heaven, instructed Scribe
Will weigh down all your Pharisaical Tribe. Mat. 13. 5^.

Thou mention'st Impositions, Humane Laws, Page 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.

^ms, Yokes, Decrees, Pales, any thing to cause
Strange Apprehensions, Fears and Jealousies,
(Whence Discontent and Prejudice might rise)
In some professing Truth, who have not taken
Root deep enough therein, not to be shaken:
And that thou also might the Church expose
To the Contempt and Fury of her Foes.
But (blessed be God) though thy mischeivous Heart
Be desperately Wicked, yet thy Art
Has failed thee: for thou art so full of Fiction
Confusion, Envy, and Self-Contradiction,
That he must be already more than blind,
Who to believe thee can persuade his Mind.
One while thou say, (but in deriding-wise)
The Churches Laws, are, to her Members, Eyes.
This is a plain Acknowledgment, that she
Would have her Members with their own Eyes see.
Yet, ten Lines further off, thou say, she cries,
Dark Spirits, he that sees not with our Eyes.
This needs no Comment: It Is so plain, that he
Is blind, that don't the Contradiction see.
But, William, here is not only Contradiction,
But a foul Slander too; a Lying Fiction.
Thou, speaking of the Church, here say, She cries
Dark Spirits, he that sees not with our Eyes.
This is a downright Falsehood, I declare;
Make Proof on it, if thou can, and do not spare:
Acquit thy self thereof, or it shall ly
Upon thee, as a Badge of Infamy.
It Is by such base dishonest tricks as these,
Thou thy misguided Party, seek'st to please,
And captivated hold: But Truth thee strips,
And thy deceitful workings open rips.
Fox is termed Head, thou say. I ask, By whom? Page 8.

Such terms never from the Church of Christ did come.
This is another Slander: One would think
Thy Heart were full of Falsehoods to the Brink,
And these run over. What a horrid Sin
Is this of Lying, when its once let in!
And thou have let it in so deep, that now
Thou tumblest out thy Lies, thou car'st not how.
Thou say, External Forms by Fox decreed,
Are set as Marks to know the Chaff from th'Seed. Page 9.

This is another Whisker, like the rest,
Hatched by the Lying Spirit in thy Breast,
^rought forth by cancred Envy, with design
To shake the weak, and cause them to decline
The way of Truth. Thus does the Serpent lay,
His baited Hooks, the simple to betray,
^ut by the Truth, his Wi^es discovered are,
That the most weak may see, and shun the Snare.
^n thy last cited words I do detect
^o most notorious Falsehoods, and expect
Thy Proof; for what thou chargest, I deny,
and turn't back on thee as a double Ly.
One, That External Forms have been decreed
^y FOX: This is a shameless Lie indeed.
Bring that Decree forth, that it may be seen,
(...) ever any such Decree has been,
That every one may with his own Eyes see,
and not be fain to pin his Faith on thee.
Thy other Falsehood is, Those Forms decreed,
^e set as Marks to know the Chaff from the Seed.
^his also, as a Slander, I reject,
By which thou would unstable Minds infect.
^o Forms, as Marks to know the Seed, are set.
^he Seed is known by weight and Virtue; yet
(...) is not void of Form, but does receive
^s proper Form, which thou can not bereave
(...) of, with all thy Railing: Truth remains
^e same, not blemished by Envy's stains.
The Chaff too, William, is by lightness known:
^y lightness has thy chaffy Spirit shown.
^rnt up, the Chaff shall be with quenchless Fire:
^h William! unto thee that day is nigher
^han tho'rt aware. My Spirit mourns to see
Thee raving on the brink of Misery.
Some scatt'red flurts, with hideous Exclamation,
Thy Pamplet has at Excommunication, Page 10^ 1^.

Wherewith thou make a rumbling noise, to scare
^ch as thou apprehend'st unsettled are.
Thou talk of BULLS and Persecution too:
And with thy BULLS thou make a great a-do.
Rome thou upbraid'st us with; but prithee whence
Had thou thy Bullish Term, if not from thence
Sp^ak plainly, William, tell us, who thee hope
U^o that title [BULLS] unless the Pope.
(...) ^ham'd the Pope should thee so gull,
To make thee take a Paper for a Bull!
That whilst thou of a Paper wast a Treating,
The thought of B^lls strait made thee fall a Bleating.
Come, William, whilst thou writ such Paltry Trash,
Ne'e, wonder, if thou sometimes get'st a Lash.
Thou (...) whose Back, the Wise man says, The (...)
Is for: Henceforth let Wisdom's Path be trod. Prove. 26. 3.

Leave thy Scurrilities; cease to Revile:
And, if thou will write, learn a more cleanly Style,
Thy Language is most Loathsome: Take a taste
Thereof, in what thou in thy tenth page say;
[Hence Sixty Six, like Mercenary Judges,
Or rather like Self-seeking slavish Drudges,
By Satan led:] What N^sty Terms are these!
How Foul must that Mind be that this can please!
No question. William, but thou, at this rate,
May all the Scolds out scold at Billings-Gate.
As to thy Cavil, that what was prepared
By one, was past against thy John unheard;
Thy STORY's false: He had been fully heard,
And faulty found, as at Drawell appeared.
But this same Cavil has before been brought,
And Answered fully in my Antidote,
To which I now refer thee, not delighting, Page 98. etc.

On the same ANVIL to be always-smiting.
Thy Curtailling the Number of the Beast, (...)

To make thy g^ddy Folk a j^lly Feast,
Is such a Beastly Prank, as n^'er was played
By any, that of Truth Profession made.
What? To profane the Text with frothy wit,
And sport at what the Holy Ghost has writ?
He that shall dare invent such slippery Tricks,
May shrink the Number of the Beast to six.
But William, nothing can more plainly show
How scard that Conscience is, from which did flow
Thy scoff, than that thou therewith do belie
The Chief of Christian Virtues, Charity.
Thy Clamor against Excommunication,
She^ws what thou would be at* A Toleration
For Unclean Spirits in the Church to l^rk,
And uncontrolled to carry on their work
Against the Truth; that so they might effect?
The Mischief the^ design, and not be checked.
That such as in their practice do Oppose
The principles of Truth, as do all those
That pay the Priest for preaching (though they may
It do, in never such a covert way)
That these, and other such (who are no less
Unfaithful to the Truth which they profess)
Might notwithstanding from Reproof be free,
Upon pretense they don't the Evil ^ee.
That such as will, when Persecution shall
Arise, may let Truth's Testimony fall;
Forsake their Meeting Places, Skulk and hide,
And closely into Obscure Places glide;
Meet now and then, by stealth, in pit, or Gill,
And set a Lad to watch upon an Hill,
Or Hireling like, into a Cock loft creep, See Line of Truth, page 14. and (...)

Themselves to save, what e're befalls the Sheep.
And though by such Unfaithfulness they break
The strength of Others, and make many Weak*
Though they Examples so pernicious show,
Yet should f^r Friends, and Preachers, blameless go
That such as have in Truth's Profession stood,
May now, as ^me such did before the Flood, Genesis (...)

In Marriages with Unbelievers link,
And yet expect, the Church, at least, should wink.
That Zimri might his Cozbi (without fear Numb. 25.

Of being peirced by a Phineas-Spear,)
From Mid^an fetch; And with her (as befell
Of old) the Plague bring upon Israel.
That by such Mixtures, They the Holy seed
Might Stain, and introduce a Mungrel Breed, Ezra. 9 2.

Which half the Language should of Ashdod speak;
And make God's Warth against his People reak. Neh. 13. 24

That such as list might in their Discontent,
The seamless Garment of our Savior rent:
Make Breaches in the Church, D^ssention sow,
And cause Divisions amongst Friends to grow;
And that they might, although they Guilty be
Of All these Crimes, from all Reproof be free;
Nor only so: but to be owned expect
Even by that Church, whose Power they reject.
This pleases wondrous well the Libertine;
The loose Licentiats think it very fine.
And to be loose and yet retain their Station,
They baul amain at Excommunication.
But (blessed be God) our Savior has not left
His Church so void of power, nor her bereft
Thereof to be will suffer; but that she
Has in her selffull power her self to free
From such Pretenders, who unto her cling,
Only that they may Scandal on her bring,
Our Savior his Disciples has directed,
That such, as private Warnings had neglected, Mat. 18.

Should to the Churches Censure be referred,
(Which plainly shows, The Church is to be heard) Verse. 17.

And ^whoso Her neglects to hear, says He,
Let him be as an Heathen Man to th^e. 1 Timothy 1. 20 1 Cor. 5. 5. Romans 16. 17
Gal. 5. 12.

And that the Church did such Cut off declare
From her Communion, as unruly were,
In the Apostles days, the Texts here set
Sufficient are a Credence to beget.
This is a Principle that has a place
Even in Nature too as well as Grace.
In living Bodies how does Nature strive
The foul and penant Humors out to drive?
And reason good: for why should that remain
Which would corrupt the Health, or Beauty stain?
All Liquors that have life, by defectation,
^urge out their Dregs, and make a separation.
And shall Christ's Church alone less power have,
Than unto natural Bodies Nature gave,
That she must to Communion those receive,
Who her of Life and Honor would bereave,
No, no our Savior has his Church indu'd
With power, from her Communion to exclude
^ruly spirits, Evil Workers, Those
That Christian Order in Christ's Church oppose.
That which to other Churches is a stain,
(...) that they don't within due Bounds contain
Themselves; but outward paenalties impose,
^n Body, or Estate, or both on those
They Excommunicate: which does not stand
With Christian Practice, or with Christ's Command.
But William, no such things can charged be
On Friends; Nay, that they from such things are free,
Thy Self have owned, than whom where is any more sparing,
To own a Truth, or to Asperse more daring?
That which of Persecuting thou do tell us, P. 17. 18.

(...) but what Hymeneus, or Phygellus,
Dimas, Her^ogenes, Philetus, with
^rim Alexander to^, the Copper-Smith,
^ight have Objected to the Apostle Paul,
^ad they as Envious been, and apt to braul. (...) Tim. 1. 19. 20. 2 Ti^ 1. 15.
and 2. 13. 18. and 4. 10.

^or Two of these the Apostle does declare,
^or their bold ^lasphemies, delivered were
^y him to Satan: And of all the rest,
^ome Evil Note, or other, is expressed.
These thought, no doubt, St Paul was much to blame,
For casting such a Blemish on their name.
It Is like, They took it for a Defamation;
As thou, a Wounding of their Reputation:
And might against St Paul have learnt to prate,
Had they but had thee for their Advocate.
But, William, One short Answer may Suffice,
To stop the Clamor of thy causless Cries
All they that into such disorders run,
As cause the Church their Fellowship to shun,
And to the World ev'n-force Her to declare,
That they in her Communion have no share:
These on themselves do that Discredit bring,
Which thou so fain upon the Church would fling.
It Is They themselves their Reputation wound:
The Church is only in Her duty found.
But O the Impudence? that Friends should be*
With Persecution tax't, and that by thee,
By thee, who with some others did combine
At Bristol, and a kind of Warrant sign,
By which you took upon your selves, O base!
To Order him that kept the Meeting Place,
That Friends he should not there to Meet permit,
Because (forsooth!) to you it seemed not fit.
By Thee, I say, who but a while agoo,
Did keep Friends out at Olston-Meeting too;
And did to such their Meeting House deny,
As had therein a rightful Property*
By thee, whose Party to your foul disgraces R. Sading. Chippenham* Clan.

Has done the like in diverse other places
Now after all these Arbitrary Tricks,
The same which now, on Friends the World inflicts,
Who can, without a just Abhorrence, view
Thy charge against Friends, for persecuting you!
Thou spend'st some pages, William* to inherse
Thy John in dobefull Weeds of Threadbare Verse;
^mickle Pains thou take it to gain some glory,
^king Rimes, unto thy lifeless STORY.
(...) dead: His Memory, perhaps, may want
(...) Odours than his Friends can cast upon it.
^ll, make the best on it: I no pleasure have
^et my foot upon a Dead Man's Grave.
(...) William, let me tell thee, Could thou free
(...) Story from the Faults, that fastened be
^n him, by The Line of Truth (A Book
which thy Title page some notice took)
^ld unto his Credit more conduce,
(...) all the hobling Rimes thy fumbling Muse
(...) tag together, to Revive his Name,
^ile still that Book, unanswered, Speaks his shame.
^t leaving John to moulder in his Urn,
^en does, William, unto thee return,
^d to thy Work Some notice I have took
(...) what seemed most material in thy Book.
(...) all the Filth that Thou, and Others Spaul,
(...) honorable Friends, in course will fall
upon your Selves; On them it never can stick:
(...) selves your Vomit up again must lick.
^iam, Thy work is weighed, thy Spirit tried;
^d both thy Work and Spirit are denied.
^y Spirit is the same that wrought of old
(...) Sanballat, Tobiah, and the bold
^yrian Railer, Rabshakeh, who sought
^d's Work and People to have brought to naught,
(...) thou have done: And what the Prophet cried
(...) that case, may to thee be well applied.
^he Virgin has despised thee, Zion's Daughter 2 Kings 19. verse. 21. 22.

^akes thee the Object of her Scorn and Laughter.
(...) Daughter of Jerusalem has shook
(...) thee her head (with a disdainful look:)
^or, whom have thou Reproached and Blasphemed,
And against whom have thou so loudly Scream'd,
And life thine Eyes on high? Thy spleen does swell
Against the Holy One of Israel,
To this effect the Prophet did declame
Against the proud Assyrian, from whom came
That cursed Railer, who even seems to be,
In railing Blasphemies, a Type of thee.
What Nehemiah, to Samballa^ said,
(When he foul Slanders to his charge had laid)
That I to thee, of all thy Slanders, Thus,
There are no such things acted, amongst us,
As thy abusive Pamphlet does contein;
But out of thine own heart thou do them feign*
And where thou carp'st at what we do aright, Neh. 6. 8.

We can for Truth's sake, in Reprocah delight.
The Lord rebuilding is his Holy City,
Which thou and Others envy (more's the pity)
And put forth all the strength and Art you have,
The work to stop, the Workmen to deprave.
But never be so vain, to think you can
The work obstruct: it is not the work of man. Neh. 2. 20.

The God of Heaven, he will prosper us;
And therefore we his Servants, (strengthened thus)
Will rise and build, as God shall us indue
With courage, Strength and Counsel for it: But you
No Portion have, who do the work condemn,
Right, Nor Memorial in Jerusalem.
My soul laments your state, who once have felt
That tend'ring Power, which stony hearts can melt,
And have been in some measure, tend'red by it,
But now so hardened are as to defy it:
All you I mean, who have in Print appeared
(With Envious hearts and Conscience doubly seared)
To fight against the Truth, and to expose
God's People to the Fury of their Foes.
And all you too, who do that work abet,
Although your Names thereto ye have not set
Ah? had ye kept unto the heavenly Grace,
(Which in your inward Parts the Lord did place)
And not, in discontented Humor, run
After Lo-heres, Lo there is, as you have done;
Ye mi^ht, in Truth, the Bond of Peace have known,
And in the Spirits Unity have grown,
Which is the Churches Girdle, highly prized
By all the Faithful, though by you despised,
Whereas (by letting in first false Surmisings
Of others, which ere long Produced Despisings,
And so made way for Prejudice to enter,
Till cancred Malice in your hearts did center)
Ye now are broke, and into pieces Shattered,
And from the Body and the Head are Scattered.
Without the Camp ye stand (Oh dismal State!)
^rling amongst the Dogs, without the Gate;
^elching forth Slander and Calumniation Rev. 22. 15

^ainst those that in the Light have kept their Station.
Oh! may the God of Heaven stop your Way,
That Ye no more the Simple may betray.
THE END.

