THE Bishops downfall OR, THE PRELATES Snare. Briefly discovering them to have
been the sole authors of all our miseries both in Church and State, the
fomenters of all the Ielousies betwixt the King and his Sujects. And the
supposed evil Counselors, who have brought this heavy accusation upon those
worthy members of the House of Commons. A Poem: Humbly dedicated to this
Honorable City, which by sad experience have found the same to be true.
Whereunto is added a hearty exhortation to all good Christians, to join in
prayer, that God would be pleased to heal all the breaches, these enemies of
our Church have made, and to restore a happy union betwixt the King and his
People.

By E. E. Gentleman.

Let them all be confounded and turned back that hate Zion.

Psalm. 129. verse 5. THE Bishops Downfall OR, The Prelates Snare.
Dear Muse awake, In these tempestuous times
Rouse up the rage of thy invective rimes,
Unto the world proclaim the plots of those
That would Christ from his sacred throne depose,
I mean the prelates, whose insulting pride
Begot these evils and would more beside.
Let no distracted fears possess thy heart,
With humble boldness to the world impart,
The joyful tidings and what cause we all
Have to triumph in these proud prelates fall
Not as they are men we do their downfall pray
But as they are foes to Christ our King we may.
And (reader) here observe how heaven's high hand
Does all their plots and consultations Brand
With ruin to themselves: how they are betrayed?
Caught in a snare which their own hands have made
Gods providence does all their counsels rule
His wisdom makes Achitophell a Fool,
Here likewise view the spring from whence does flow
The streams of all distempers, hence does grow
Those great convulsions in our Church and State
Which makes the Christian world to wonder at,
It Is not the Brownist, nor the Puritan
Nor the Tumultuous Prentises that can
Raise these combustions; they are but the fruit
Which soon would wither if the cursed root
Were once destroyed, it is these whom we may well
Term the sole troublers of our Israel,
These are the flaming meteors, that portend
Destruction to our Kingdom, these do bend
Their forces, and have labored to bring in
That cursed Monstrous beast; the man of sin.
These nourish supperstition mental vice
These would the precious souls of men entice
To Idolizing vanities, It Is these
That are the courts best parasites, they please
The ears of Princes with their flattering baits,
But all their counsels prove but vain deceits
That tend to ruin, not their Sovereigns good:
They aim at honor, and they thirst for blood.
They Are those malignant spirits that oppose
The Kingdoms good, they are the Kingdoms foes,
The wholesome laws those worthies do prepare
For all our goods, by them they blasted are,
Like Sampsons foxes they have raised a fire
That will our state consume: but we desire
The god of peace he would vouchsafe to heal
The great dissentions of our commonweal
For these conspire our ruin, and foment
The discords twixt our King and Parliament
These are the cursed authors of our fears
They have breathed poison in the sacred ears
Of Princes in all ages: and I doubt
(If once their treacherous counsels were found out)
They would appear the men that have abused
Those worthy members that stand now accused
Our choicest plants these Locusts do annoy
These Catter-pillers do our fruits destroy.
But that a venging hand that judges right
Will one day bring your counsels all to light
And then all those that against his Church conspire
Shall find he is an all consuming fire:
And vengeance will be recompensed on those
That are the Churches and the Kingdoms foes.
It Was well proud prellates, it was a happy hour,
That you were sent for safety to the Tower
Had you been out, and this division been
A wretched case I fear yee'd all been in
The Prentises with one consent does swear
They would in pieces all those Magpies tear.
Here (reader) breifely may thou take a view
Of what sad ruin's likely to ensue,
Upon our state, what mischiefs are begot
By those proud Prelates, how they cast a blot
Upon the glory of our Sovereigns fame
How they disturb our peace, and sure the blame
Will one day light upon their heads, that raise
The fire of this rebellion in our days.
Thus are the prelates proved in the state to be
The cursed authors of our misery
And in the Church, O there like Wovles they tear
The Flock of Christ, they hunt the Lambs, they bear
The sole command of souls, and void of sense
They play the Tyrants over the conscience
Like treacherous swains, they drive their flock to streams
That are corrupted, and denies them means
Of wholesome food, and Wolf like to their power
They would the sacred flock of Christ devour.
Yea in a word should I at large relate
What evils they have wrought in Church and State.
How they do from Gods sacred precepts vary
How they in all things are to Christ contrary
I might whole vollumes fill yet never the less
Should not one footstepp from the truth digress
This is a subject I confess would yield
Abundant matter, it is a spacious field
In which my muse may wander, but that I
Have to my self proposed brevitie.
Let this suffice to let my Reader know,
Gods vengance waits the prelates overthrow.
YEt one word more, Since these proud imps of Rome
Have sought our ruin, and Contrived a Doom
For those brave worthies, Let Us with one Consent
Join all in prayers for our parliament
That God would all their Consultations bless
Add Crown their Labors with a full success
That he would grant them Courage to defend
The Innocent from wrong: that he would send
His Angels for their guardians and likewise
Protect them from all close Conspiracies
That god would please to op'e our Soveragines eyes
To view the cause of all our miseries
And that at last he may discern twixt those
His Loyal subjects and his trayteous foes
That all our great divisions may be
Cemented in the band of amity
That King and People may conioyne in one
TO advance Christ's scepter, and to exalt his throne
Which is our souls desires, Let each one then
That wishes peace to Zion, say, Amen.
FJNIS.

