coat of arms of the Artillery Company ARMA PACIS FVLCRA Printed for T. Basset
and H: Brom. 1668:

monogram incorporating "R" sculpsit


THE COMPLETE BODY OF The Art Military.

In THREE BOOKS.

I. The Postures of the Pike and Musket, with their Conformities, and the
Dignities of Ranks and Files: their manner of joining to the completing of a
Body: their several Distances, Facings, Doublings, Counter-marches, Wheelings,
and Firings. II. Twelve Exercises, viz. Three with 24, three with 32, three
with 64, and three with 144 Men. III. The Drawing up and Exercising of
Regiments after the manner of Private Companies; with the forming Brigades and
Armies, and the placing of Cannon and Artillery according to the practice of
several Nations.
ALSO, The Duties of all Soldiers and Officers: Of Military Watches; and the
ordering of Regiments and Private Companies to Funeral-Occasions. With the
Postures of the Musket performed without the Rest.

By RICHARD ELTON, Lieutenant-Col.

To which is added A SUPPLEMENT Comprehending these Particulars: 1. The Duties
and Qualifications of all Officers belonging to an Army. 2. The Enrolling,
Arming and Exercising of the CAVALRY both in Posture and Motion. 3. The
Marching of an Army both Horse and Foot, with Train of Artillery, etc. 4. The
Designing and laying out of the QUARTERS for the Encamping of an Army both
Horse and Foot, with the Train of Artillery, etc. 5. The manner of securing the
Quarters by Intrenchments and FORTIFICATION. 6. Some of the practick part of
the Art of GUNNERY.


Formerly written by Capt. Tho. Rudd, chief Engineer to K. Charles the First.

LONDON, Printed for W. L. and are to be sold by Henry Brom at the Star in
Little-Britain, and Thomas Basset under St. Dunstans Church in Fleet Street.
1668.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Sir John Robinson, Knight and Baronet, PRESIDENT; Sir
Joseph Sheldon, Knight, VICE PRESIDENT; Colonel John Mew, TREASURER; And the
rest of the COURT of ASSISTANTS Of the Ancient and Honorable ARTILLERY-COMPANY
OF LONDON.

THE COMPLETE BODY OF The Art Military. The First BOOK.
CHAP. I. A discourse of the Postures, and handling of Arms.
HE that will be a complete Soldier, must first begin to learn the use of his
Arms, laying that down in his thoughts for his first foundation. But this has
been the neglect of many in our times, who have strived to know high thoughts
in the Art Military, before they can well perform their Postures. Therefore, my
advice shall be unto all such that desire to thrive in this Art, that they will
not soar too high: but first learn the A, B, C thereof, after which they may
proceed by degrees to pronounce to the Soldier with boldness their proficiency
therein. He therefore that with safety, ease, and delight desires to handle
his Arms, must set times apart frequently to practice himself therein. And here
I cannot but much blame the Officers of our Trained Bands in London, of two
great neglects: The first, in making men File-leaders either out of respect or
favor they bear unto them, or else because one man has a better Buff-coat
than another: I speak not this to encourage any man to come slovenly habited
when he shall march forth with his Captain, but rather advise all Soldiers to
fit themselves with the best array they can; and could wish all the Sergeants
in drawing up their Files, to pitch upon such Gentlemen to be File-leaders, as
may take charge of his File, and shall be able, willing, and ready upon all
convenient times, to instruct and teach his File in all their Postures, and
neat handling of their Arms; which if carefully observed, they would reap the
benefit of much ease to themselves and the private Soldiers: readiness in the
performance of the Postures, would much redound to the honor of the Captain
that shall lead them. But for the farther satisfaction of the ingenious
Soldier that shall enquire what Posture is, I shall briefly resolve them thus:

Posture, as I conceive, is a garb or figure that a man stands in, in the
handling of his Arms; which he uses for the better grace and becoming of them.

There are several motions belonging to each Posture, which some call Postures,
but they much deceive themselves, as shall appear clearly unto them (by the
survey) as they shall be set down in order. And first, we will begin to set
down the Postures of the Pike.

CHAP. II. Several Reasons why the Pike is the more honorable Arms.
FIrst I shall begin to set down the postures of the Pike, before the postures
of the Musket, for these reasons following, as conceiving, First, They are the
more honorable Arms, in respect the Colors flying upon the head of them, and
upon the drawing up of the Company there is the most properest place for the
Captain to be, either upon a Stand or upon a March, provided he have ground
sufficient to March them all abrest. If upon a Stand the Captain shall have
occasion to engage against an Enemy, thither his Officers may repair unto him
upon the head of the Pikes, there to receive directions. And if the Captain
shall cause the Sergeants to draw off part, or all the Musketeers from the
Body of Pikes to fire against the enemy, the Gentlemen of the Pikes in the mean
time stand undauntedly to undergo the cruel shot of the Cannon from the
contrary part for to preserve their Colors, who are likewise a place of
Randezvous for the Musketeers to repair unto when they shall retreat from
fight. Farther, it has been the ambition of many Gentlemen, both in Holland,
France, and in these our late unhappy Wars in England, to trail Pikes with
several Commanders whom they shall think fit. And lastly, to conclude all, that
the Pike is the more honorable Arms, it is so in respect of antiquity; for
there has been the use of the Pike and Spear, many hundred years before there
was any knowledge of the Musket, as in many Histories you shall find. And so
for present I will conclude this discourse of the Pike, desiring the
Musketeers to have a favorable censure of me: for I intend not by it to
persuade all Soldiers to the handling of the Pike, and none to be Musketeers,
for that cannot be; I should rather advise all Captains that have occasion to
raise their Companies, to have two thirds of Musketeers, and but one of Pikes:
that is to say, if they should have 18 Files, to cause twelve of them to carry
Muskets, and the other six files Pikes. And in my judgment they shall perform
the better service unto any Nation where they shall be employed: and I shall
farther desire the Soldiers (especially those that be of low stature) to
handle and take delight in the use of the Musket; for it is an exceeding great
honor to him so to handle his Musket, as that he does it with ease, and in a
comely manner; and he that shall become expert therein, I have often observed
this commendation to follow him, by the report of others; Such a one is a good
Muskettier, and an able Soldier: concluding thereby, he that will take the
pains to be a good Muskettier, certainly cannot be idle, but has gained
something more to make him capable of such praise. To conclude, I shall desire
the Gentlemen of the Pikes and the Gentlemen of the Musketeers to go hand in
hand in love like dear Brothers, and neither of them to envy each other; and in
so doing, God will give a blessing to their undertakings. But now fearing I
have dwelt too long upon this discourse of the Arms, I shall next proceed to
set down, first the postures of the Pike, then the postures of the Musket, with
all the words of command tending to their Motions; after collect them in order
in a brief way, and then set forth unto you the equality of number that the one
Arms has with the other in the postures, as follows.

CHAP. III. The Postures of the Pike.
THE Pike lying on the ground, the first word of Command will be, Stand to your
Arms. Handle your Pike to your Open Order, Handle your Pike to your Order,
Raise up your Pike to your Close Order.
Charge with the But-end of the Pike, at the inside of the right foot, your
Pike in the left hand, drawing your Sword over your left arm. Charge to the
Front Right Flank, Left Flank, Rear,
Order your Pikes, and put up your Swords.
This way of charging to the Horse, I have set down, as being practiced
sometimes amongst us in our private Meetings; but I conceive it to be of little
use to receive a desperate charge of the Horse, for by these charges the
Soldiers are in so lame and weak a posture, that the Horse cannot choose if
they come on with a full career, but beat the Pikes and Pike-men down to the
ground: Therefore in my opinion, the best way of opposing the Horse-charge, is
that which we learned of our ever-honoured Captain, Major Henry Tillier, in the
Military Garden; which was, Files closing to the midst to their closest Order,
insomuch that there was not above half a foot interval of ground between File
and File, the Pikes Porting, and after closing their Ranks forwards so close,
that they locked themselves one within another, and then charged on. Which in
my judgment is so secure a way from routing, that it is impossible for any Body
of Horse to enter therein: and farther, to my best remembrance, I never could
meet with any Soldier that has been a broad upon any service, that ever saw
any charging of the Pikes at the Foot; therefore I will further proceed.

From Order Advance Shoulder Port Comport Cheek Trail
Your Pike. Order as you were.
From your Order charge to the Front, Right, Left, Rear.
Order as you were.
Advance your Pike. Shoulder Port Comport Cheek Trail
Your Pike. Advance as you were.
From your Advance charge to the Front, Right, Left, Rear,
Advance as you were.
Shoulder your Pike. Port Comport Cheek Trail
Your Pike. Shoulder as you were.
From the Shoulder charge to the Front, Right, Left, Rear,
Shoulder as you were.
Port your Pikes, Comport your Pikes, Cheek Trail
your pikes Comp. as you were.
From the Comport charge to the Front, Right. Left, Rear,
comport as you were.
Cheek your Pikes, Trail your Pikes, Cheek as you were.
From the Cheek charge to the Front, Right, Left: Rear,
Cheek as you were.
Trail your Pikes, from your Trail charge to the Front, Right, Left, Rear,
Trail as you were.
Order your Pikes, Lay down your Pikes.
Here is to be observed by this Method an endeavoring to perform all the
postures of the Pike, from each particular posture, only shortning it by
degrees, leaving out what was before commanded until we come unto the Trial.
Yet notwithstanding I spared not the charges, but have shown them from every
posture, in their due order. Next follows the postures of the Musket,
wherein, in answerableness to the Pike, I shall lay them down in full, and
afterward contract them in a shorter way.

CHAP. IV. The Postures of the Musket.
THE Musket lying on the ground, the first word of Command will be, as to the
Pike.

Stand to your Arms, Take up your Bandiliers, Put on your Bandiliers,
Take up your Match, Place your Match,
Take up your Rest, Put the string of your Rest about your left wrist,
Take up your Musket, Rest your Musket.
Here the Soldier may perform the saluting posture, if he shall find any
occasion so to do, for the honoring of a friend, or any Gentleman of worth.

Poyse your Musket, Shoulder your Musket,
Un-shoulder your Musket and Poyse, Join your Rest to the outside of your
Musket,
Open your pan. Clear your pan. Prime your pan. Shut your pan.
Cast off your loose corns, Blow off your loose corns, and bring about your
Musket to the left side.
Trail your Rest, Balance your Musket in your left hand.
Find out your charge, Open your charge, Charge with powder,
Draw forth your Scouring-stick, Turn and shorten him to an Inch,
Charge with Bullet,
Put your scouring-stick into your musket Ram home your charge,
Withdraw your scouring-stick, Turn, and shorten him to a handful, Return your
scouring-stick,
Bring forward your Musket and Rest, Poyse your Musket and recover your Rest,
Join your Rest to the outside of your Musket,
Draw forth your Match, Blow your Coal,
Cock Your Match, Fit Your Match,
Guard your Pan, Blow the ashes from your Coal,
Open your Pan, Present upon your Rest, Give fire brest-high,
Dismount your Musket, joining the Rest to the outside of your Musket. Vn-cock
and return your Match,
Clear Your Pan, Shut Your Pan,
Poyse Your Musket, Rest Your Musket,
Take your Musket off the Rest, and set the Butt-end to the ground. Lay down
your Musket, Lay down your Match,
Take your Rest into your right hand, clearing the string from your left wrist,
Lay down your Rest,
Take off Your Bandiliers. Lay down Your Bandiliers.
Here ends the postures of the Musket, from the taking of them up from the
ground, to make ready, and the proceeding in them to the laying of them down
again. Now if the Soldier will take his Rest into his right hand, for to be a
support and help to him in his march, he must observe the following words of
command.

Lay your right hand upon the Butt-end of your musket, The Musket being
shouldered, you may proceed in these words of command, to recover the Rest into
the right hand.
Lay your left arm over your musket,
Shift your match between the fingers of your right hand, Take your Rest into
your right hand, clearing the string from your left wrist,
Return your match, and take your Rest into your right hand, 'twill cause you
to be in a fit capacity for to march.
CHAP. V. The Postures and Charges of the Pike, to be performed in a shorter
way, all things acted in order, and nothing done twice.
THE Pike lying on the ground, the first word of Command will be, Stand to your
Arms, Handle your Arms,
Raise up your Pikes to your Open Order, Order, Close Order,

From your close Order charge to the Horse, Front Right Left Rear
Recover your Pikes, and put up your Swords,
Advance your Pikes, Charge to the Front. Port your Pikes, Charge to the Front.
Shoulder your Pikes, Charge to the right, Comport your Pikes, Charge to the
left,
Cheek your Pikes, Charge to the Rear. Trail your Pikes, Charge to the Rear.


After lay the narrow end of the Pike to the ground, face about to the left to
your first Front, and move forward with the butt-end of your Pike on your right
side in your Funeral posture. After face about to the right, raise up your
Pike, face then again to your first Front, you may lay down the Pike to the
ground, and march from your arms, having ended all the postures and charges in
their due courses. And here Fellow-Souldier, whoever thou art, thou may
perceive that there are no more then eight Postures of the Pike, and four
Charges, that is to say, to the Front, Rear, and both Flanks. There are some
would fain have another posture added to these, which they call the Lazy
posture, which sometimes I have perceived upon a Stand, that then the Pike-man
lets slip his Pike from the shoulder, until the butt-end rest upon the ground;
then laying his right arm over it, he stands in an ill-favored lazy way. Such
postures as these are not fit to be ranged among the former, but rather to be
condemned, in regard the Soldier will be apt enough to find out such postures
as these of himself, if not prevented by the discretion of the careful
Officers; for upon a Stand, the Soldiers properest posture is to Order his
Pike. And thus much in brief concerning the postures of the Pike.

CHAP. VI. The Postures of the Musket collected in a brief way.
ACcording to my former promise, I shall endeavor to give the best
satisfaction I can to the Musketeers, as well as to the Pikes, that there is
an answerableness of number in the proper postures of the Musket to them of the
Pike: and they are eight (as I conceive) and may be proceeded on in order, from
the taking up, to the laying down of the Musket, and nothing acted twice: The
words of Command for the postures follows, Stand to your Arms, Handle your
Arms.


Now you are to take notice, that in taking up the Bandiliers, putting them on,
taking up the Rest, putting the string about the left wrist, the taking up of
the match, placing of it, the taking up of the musket; these, or the like, are
no postures, but motions to the first posture. Therefore I will proceed upon
them all in order as they lie, leaving out the words of command tending to the
Motions.

1 Order your musket, 2 Rest your musket, 3 Poyse your musket, 4 Shoulder your
musket, 5 Balance your musket and Rest on the right side, with the barrel
upwards, 6 Trail your Rest, and balance your musket on the left side with the
barrel downwards, 7 Recover your musket, and perform your Sentinel-posture. 8
From this perform your funeral-posture.
This being ended, a man may recover his musket and rest, that knows how to
perform this last posture, without bringing him again upon the Rest; and may
lay down his Arms again, observing the former Rule, where the postures of the
musket are set down at large.

CHAP. VII. There is also a conformity of Posture with the Musket to those of
the Pike, and Words of Command to be given, as may in many things be received
by both Arms.
THe musket and pike lying on the ground, these words of Command may properly
be employed to both; That is to say, Stand to your Arms, Handle your Arms.


The butt-end of the musket standing, or resting on the ground, at the outside
of right foot, is conformable to the Pike ordered.

The musket poysed; to the pike advanced.

The musket shouldered; to the Pike shouldered.

The musket porting; to the pike porting.

The musket reverst; (as in the funeral-posture) to the Pike trailing.

The musket rested, to the pike cheeked; which is his proper sentinel-posture.

The musket presented; to the pike charged.

As for the motions of posture, which conduce to the lading and priming of the
musket, as to cast about, trail, recover, and the like; they are all included
in that general word of Command, properly to the musketeers belonging, which
is to make ready.

Now, methinks, I hear some ingenious Soldier begin to ask me, What are the
use of these postures so fully laid down by you? To whom I shall be so
courteous, as to satisfy them, according to my former Method, beginning with
the Pike, as follows.

CHAP. VIII. The use of the Postures of the Pike.
The use of Ordering the Pike.
THe Pike being ordered is the proper posture of a Soldier upon a stand, which
he ought ever to mind upon any such occasion, so to make use of it. And I have
likewise seen in many places, in the daytime, this posture to be used by the
Soldier standing sentinel.

The use of Advanceing the Pike.
The Pike advanced, is useful for the Soldier upon a Troop, when they are to
march swiftly, either for the relieving of some Court of Guard, or to repair to
their place of Randezvous, or upon some sudden approaching to an Enemy to make
a Charge; for then he will be in a fit capacity to clap down quickly his pike
upon the breast of the Enemy. It is likewise very useful in the time of
exercise to the half-files and bringers up, upon any doubling to the Front, for
then they are always to be advanced in respect of a longer march in their
doublings, then those that double ranks and files; but having doubled, they
must always conform in posture to the part doubled.

The use of Porting.
The use of Porting was invented for the ease of the rear half-files, upon a
charge; for the front half-files are only for to charge; the rear half-files in
the mean time are to port. It is likewise very useful at such times when the
soldiers are marching through a gate or sally-port, from whence I conceive it
does derive its name porting.

The use of Shouldering.
The use of shouldering the pike is only properest upon the march, and in some
kind very useful upon a stand in time of Fight, provided they are at convenient
distance from the Enemy. For it much preserves the pikes and pike-men from the
danger of the shot, the bullets then gliding off from their Arms; which if they
stood at such times, either ordered, or advanced, the bullets would make such a
clattering amongst the Pikes, that what with breaking of them, and the shivers
flying from them, may much endanger the soldiers which carry them.

The use of Comporting.
The comporting of the Pike is only useful to the soldier marching up a hill;
for if then he should be shouldered, the butt-end of the Pike would always be
touching of the ground, to hinder him in his march, and much endanger his
fellow soldiers that shall come after him. Neither can he march advanced; for
if there should be any wind, it would be ready to blow him down. Therefore as
above, that which is most commodious for the soldiers marching up a hill, is
to comport his pike.

The use of Trailing.
The Trailing of the Pike is seldom used, but when the soldier shall march
straight forward through a Wood, the File-leader before he enters in, trails
his pike, and consequently all the rest in his file: then stooping down, they
take up the butt-end of their leaders pikes, which they may easily gripe with
their own in their right hands, and after march forward through the busling
leaves in a straight line, every file single by himself, but as near each other
as possible they can march, for more security sake; that when they are clear,
they may find each other, and be in a condition to rally up again, as occasion
shall require. The trailing of the Pike may also be of excellent use in a
Trench, that at such time when they shall have intelligence where the Enemy are
preparing to make a breach, they may then move forwards unto that place
undiscovered, and may defend the same.

The use of Cheeking
The cheeking of the Pike is the proper sentinel-posture, and then to be used.

CHAP. IX. The use of the Postures of the Musket.
I Conceive it will not be material to go over every posture of the musket, to
describe the use of them, in respect the greater part of them have conformity
to the Pike. Those that shall remain, and of the chiefest consequence, I shall
not be wanting to satisfy the soldier in.

The ballancing the musket, and rest, on the right side, The use of ballancing
the Musket on the right side.
with the barrel upward, is one of the chiefest postures belonging to the
musket; from thence he begins to make ready, as to open, clear, and prime the
pan, all being motions to this posture.

To traile the rest, and balance the musket on the left side with the barrel
downward, is a posture likewise of as great consequence; The use of ballancing
the Musket on the left side.
for there are several motions belonging also to this posture, as to find out
the charge, to open it, to charge with powder, to take bullet out of the bag
and to charge with bullet; with diverse other motions before you can recover
your musket and rest again.

How a Muskettier shall perform the Sentinel-posture.
THe Sentinel-posture is to be performed after this manner; first, the musket
is to be laded with powder and bullet; afterward he is to cock his match, and
to stand with his pan guarded, his musket being upon his rest, until such time
he is relieved: but as concerning him, I shall more fully set forth his duty,
treating upon the duty of the Sentinel.

CHAP. X. The manner and way to do the Funeral-posture.
NExt follows to show how to do the Funeral-posture: the properest and the
best way to begin this posture, is when the musket is rested, and is to be
performed after this manner: You must first slip up your musket upon the rest,
so high, until the fork of the rest be within a handful of the cock; after you
must bring your right hand under the barrel of the musket, close to the fork of
the rest, and then lift him off, and after cast your Rest backward, trailing
him on the left side, and bring your Musket under your left arm, with the
barrel downwards, bearing the butt-end upward, with your two fore-fingers and
your thumb, holding off the pan, and that with the left hand. Now if you begin
to be weary in the march, by reason of the weight of the musket, you may to
ease your self, bring your right hand backward, and there take hold of the
musket, keeping still your left hand in its first place, until you shall reduce
him to the Rest again.

The reducement of the Musket from the Funeral-posture.
FIrst, raise up your Musket a little with your two fingers and thumbs of the
left hand, as you formerly held him; then turn the Musket until you perceive
the barrel to be upward; after lay your right hand upon the barrel, much about
the lazy pin; and then taking him, bring him up forward on the outside of the
Rest: recover your Rest, fall back with the right leg, you may with ease
bring your Musket again upon the Rest, as at first. This posture being so
seldom used, makes the Soldier much to seek in performance of the same; but
he that takes pleasure in handling of the Musket, and shall exercise himself
therein, cannot choose but find it very easy, and much delightful to him: And I
know no posture more becoming a Muskettier then this, if it be near, and well
performed by him. And here I shall conclude, and end discoursing of the
postures.

CHAP. XI. The Soldiers desire to know every particular place of Dignity, as
they stand in Rank and File.
THe Soldier now having obtained some pretty knowledge, skill, and ready
aptness in the managing and performing the postures, begins to look about
himself what next is needful for to fasten upon, to make a further progress in
this Art; and straight he meets with some that whispers to him, That it were a
gallant thing to know the Dignity of a File true and rightly stated: To which
he answers, But where can it be found? the opinions of soldiers are so various
and differing therein, that none knows where for to attain it. My Captains eye
(says he) is upon me, because I do the postures well, which causes the
Sergeants to make me a File-leader, and that I know to be the chiefest and
first place of Honor in the File; the second place to be the bringer-up; the
third, the half-file-leader; the fourth, the bringer-up of the Front
half-files. Thus far, no soldier of any known judgment can deny: but now
a-dayes our Files being drawn up six deep, makes me altogether ignorant of the
honor of the rest; neither know I the Dignity of a File eight or ten deep,
which still in some places they do retain, drawing them up so deep. If my
ambition were but now fully satisfied herein, I should in time come for to know
the Dignity of the Captains, as they are drawn up all in a Regiment; by which
Rule I am informed they walk. And in my judgment, there cannot be a truer
stating the Dignity of a Rank and File, then that which shall conform to the
Dignities of the Captains, as they are drawn up abrest all in a Regiment. Now
for as much as many Regiments consist of several numbers of Captains, and
Companies in them; as some six Companies, others eight; some greater, as ten,
and twelve Companies: It is expedient therefore, not only for my self, but for
every soldier that will be truly knowing, to be resolved herein concerning
those several numbers; and as occasion shall alter to any other, they may
inform themselves by these how to fit their purpose. And therefore not to keep
the apt and forward soldier longer in suspense, but that he may proceed, I
shall amongst the rest, declare my thoughts therein, and set it forth unto
their view, ever hoping from my fellow soldiers a favorable censure of my
good meaning to them and to my Country, for to employ that little talent which
lately my endeavors have obtained to do them service: And shall forthwith set
down unto them four Tables of Dignity, both of Ranks and Files, which shall be
first of twelve abrest, and twelve deep. Secondly, ten abrest, and ten deep.
Thirdly, eight abrest, and eight deep. And lastly, six abrest, and six deep:
wherein every ingenious soldier shall easily know his particular place of
Honor and Dignity, both in Rank and File, wherein he stands.

The places of Dignity 12 in Rank. 2 11 5 8 10 3 4 9 6 7 12 1 The places of
Dignity 12 deep. The places of Dignity 10 in Rank. 12 2 9 5 8 3 4 7 6 10 1 The
places of dignity 10 deep. 7 The places of dignity 8 in Rank. The places of
dignity 8 deep. 10 6 2 5 8 3 4 7 6 1 6 9 Places of dign 6 in Rank. Places of
Dignity 6 deep. 6 7 4 2 5 3 4 6 1 7 4 3 6 4 3 10 4 3 8 8 3 8 5 5 5 5 9 11 2 2 2
2

The Table being thus set forth unto the soldiers view, as is before expressed,
methinks I hear some say, Sir, we like the drawing forth, and the manner of
your Table very well; we see clearly there the particular places how every man
stands in his Dignity both in Rank and File, according to your several Figures;
but we beseech you, Sir, be so favorable as to make us understand it by a
farther demonstration of the same, and be pleased out of your courteous nature
to explain your self a little farther therein; and to afford us some reasons to
confirm and back the same, that it may clearly appear to our judgments the
truth thereof, and that we may sit down and rest our selves with fullest
satisfaction therein. To answer, methinks it should be strange to make denial
here to the modest desire of any ingenious soldier, and clear repugnant to my
wonted custom; and therefore without any more delay, I shall farther let them
know

CHAP. XII. Reasons for the places of Dignity both in Rank and File, for the
first four in a File eight deep.
THat which gives most life for the true explaining of the former Table is, to
show the several places of Honor and Dignity of the Captains, how they are
drawn up abrest all in a Regiment. Be pleased therefore to go along with me,
and you shall understand that the Colonel has the first place of honor, as
being Commander in chief, whose Company stands upon the right, which makes the
figure (1). The second place of honor in the Regiment is the
Lieutenant Colonel, whose Company is drawn up upon the left, as being the
outmost there, and is described by the figure (2). The third place of honor is
the Majors Company, which is drawn up upon the right of the left half Ranks,
whose place is described by the figure (3). The fourth place of honor is the
eldest Captains Company, which is drawn up upon the left of the right half
Ranks, and is set forth by the figure (4). And now we have proceeded thus far,
we will make Alt, and begin to examine whether we have rightly hitherto
proceeded, or no; therefore, for the more clearing and understanding herein,
you must take notice, it is the discretion of every knowing Commander, so to
aim and state his Battle, as that he makes his Front equivalent in worth,
strength, and dignity to that of the Rear, and with equal proportion of number;
and in like manner so to order his right half Ranks, as that they may carry an
equal balance in worth, number and dignity with the left half Ranks. Now
therefore to begin to make some trial or experiment herein, by examining the
first worth with the fourth, and that will make the number (5) and then put to
trial the second worth and third, and you shall easily discern it to carry the
same proportion of number. So that it may appear clearly in the judgment of any
discreet soldier a true and equal proportion, the Front with the Rear, the
right half Ranks suitable to the left half Ranks, and that both in number,
honor, and dignity.

Having thus far entered into the discourse, it remains to describe and show the
reasons of the other four of their places and dignity as they stand.

CHAP. XIII. Reasons of the places of the second four, as they stand in Rank
and File, the File being eight deep.
NOw for the further resolution herein, there is to be taken notice of, That
the general drawing up of Regiments, when they consist of so few Companies as
8, 6, or 7, is commonly in two grand Divisions, that is to say, two bodies or
two stands of Pikes which are flanked with Musketeers. Therefore you may
observe, the discretion of the Major, who commonly is appointed to draw up the
Regiments, does so order the places of the Captains, that they may aptly fall
into their due places of honor, upon a stand and upon a march; and does so
order their dignities as before is expressed, as to make both the Front, Rear,
right and left half Ranks equal in number, strength, and dignity. And therefore
he draws up the third and fourth Captain between the Colonels Company and the
eldest Captain, which makes their number (13) and in like manner he draws the
second Captain and the youngest Captain between the Lieutenant-Colonels Company
and the Majors, whose number likewise carries equal proportion to be (13). Now
if you please to examine the whole number of the right half Ranks, and that
makes (18) make trial likewise of the left half Ranks, in casting up of his
account, and you shall find the same proportion of number as is clearly set
forth within the Table, both of Ranks and Files; for as the honor of every
soldier stands in the Rank, you will find the same to stand so in the File.

CHAP. XIV. Other Reasons to clear it further to the Soldier.
TO give you farther satisfaction, and Reasons for the placing of the second
four, in respect it is contrary to the Rule and Judgment of some Soldiers,
therefore farther observe with me this, When a Regiment is drawn up in the true
Order of a Regimental way, there, is as before expressed, two bodies, or stands
of Pikes, flanked with Musketeers; and it is the Office of every Major to give
forth in writing notes of paper unto every Captain, and Lieutenant, where their
place shall be upon a Stand, and where upon a March, that he may with more
readiness know where to lead, and where to fall in, or to bring up, as occasion
shall require. Now, for as much that it has been the practice here in England,
and in most Countries also besides, as I have been informed by very able
knowing soldiers, that the first place of honor that is appointed out unto
the Captains, is first unto the eldest, who always leads the Colonels Colors,
or first grand Division of Pikes, which is the greatest honor that can be
appointed out unto the Captains, and therefore most properest and due to him as
being eldest: If so, as that it is then generally granted, that the leading of
the Colonels Colors, or the first body or stand of Pikes in the Colonels grand
Division, is the first and chiefest place of honor amongst the Captains; why
then, certainly, I must conclude the second Captain, which carries the number
(5) would be infinitely wronged and injured, if he were denied, and not brought
into the left half Ranks, for there he aptly stands to fall in, to lead the
Lieutenant-Colonels Colors, or the second body or stand of Pikes, which is the
second place of honor. Now having resolved, that it is clearly the due and
right for the second Captains place, to lead the second body of Pikes; we must
then of necessity bring in the youngest Captain into the left half Ranks
likewise, who carries the number (8) and that will make up an equal proportion,
as before expressed, to the third and fourth Captains, carrying with them the
figures (6 and 7) which are drawn up in the right half rank.

CHAP. XV. Reasons given for the last Table of every particular Place of Honor
and Dignity, as they stand.
I Conceive what formerly has been expressed of the middle Table, may give full
resolution of the particular places of Honor and Dignity as they stand both in
Rank and File. It further now remains to speak somewhat of the rest, and
therefore I shall go downward, clearing still the first four places of honor;
which being rightly understood, the rest will naturally fall into the capacity
of any ingenious soldier. Therefore further pray observe with me this again in
examining of the sutableness and equal proportion of worth and number of the
first and fourth worth, carrying unto that of the second and third. And thus
far you may rest, and satisfy your self therein. We have therefore now no more
to place and settle, but the fifth and sixth worth, and then our work in this
Table will be quickly finished. Therefore of necessity, as formerly expressed,
we must bring in the fifth worth into the left half Ranks, as being the second
Captain, whose proper place, as I said before, is to lead the
Lieutenant-Colonels Colors, or the second body or stand of Pikes. He being
there thus fixed, we have no more to place but the sixth worth, which is the
last, or youngest Captain; and we have no other place to bring him in, but
between the first and fourth worth; or if you will have it more clear, between
the Colonel and eldest Captain. But, here by the way, I am like to meet with
some Objector that will say, Sir, What Is become of your equal proportion here?
Your right half Ranks, with your left, as you have so formerly stated them;
your right half Ranks carries or exceeds one more in number then your left
half Ranks does; and where we find the greater number, we must conclude the
lesser dignity; and if so, Why do you not rather contrive it on the left, then
upon the right? To which I answer, first, That in raising up of Companies into
a Regiment, those that are the Field-Officers by right should have the most
men, and greater Companies, then the private Captains have: therefore if you
will observe in the stating of this Dignity of a Rank six abrest, you will find
in the left half Rank two Field-Officers, whose Companies are the greater then
any private Captains; certainly, they must needs countervail with any number of
men with the right half Ranks; for although the Colonels Company is, or ought
ever to be the greatest, yet there is no more Field-Officers, but himself in
his Division. And again, secondly, where there cannot be an equal dividing of
number (as here you will find it of six abrest, or six deep) but that there
will fall out some odd, either on the right half Ranks, or on the left; and
likewise the same either in the Front half files, or Rear half files, as by
example in the trial you will easily find, by casting up the whole number as
they stand abrest, and they will fall out to be (21) divide this number into
two parts, and you cannot but must cast the odd either on the right or on the
left: Therefore to conclude, since that there is a great possibility that there
will be an equality of number of men in the left half Ranks suitable to that of
the right, where there shall fall out an odd number, that you cannot cast it
into the left half Ranks, but that you must remove the fifth worth; in this
extremity I say you may not do it, but rather place it on the right. For the
Major having no certain place to march in a Regiment, it is the proper place of
the second Captain to walk along with the Lieutenant Colonel, taking his due
place of honor in his Division, as the first shall do by marching with his
Colonel; And thus much shall suffice to be spoken of the last Table.

CHAP. XVI. Reasons likewise to be given for the Table 12 abrest, and 12 deep.
FOr as much as formerly has been spoken, That it is the discretion of every
Commander so to order his men, as to make an equal balance throughout the
battle, that his Front carry with it an equal proportion of worth, number, and
dignity with that of the Rear; and likewise so to steer and order his right
half rank, or right flank, suitable to that of the left: The next way then to
receive further satisfaction herein, is by an examination thereof as it lies,
and is set open to view.

2:11: 5:8: 10:3: 4:9: 6:7: 12:1: 39. 39.

Compare now the worth and dignity of the right half Ranks, and you shall
quickly perceive them to carry a like proportion of number and worth with the
left. To make it a little more clear unto those that shall desire to be more
satisfied herein, you may take notice, and observe a true qualification
throughout the whole rank. As first, begin with the Colonel, who is the
chiefest man of honor in the Regiment; and next to him is placed the ninth or
youngest Captain, to qualify his dignity, and makes his number (13). The
Lieutenant Colonel being the second man of honor, has placed to him the
eighth, which qualifies him in like manner to the Colonel, and makes his number
(13). Next come we to the Major, and next to him is placed the seventh Captain,
which makes him suitable with the rest in his figure and qualification, and to
bear the number (13). After we are to speak of the eldest Captain, who has the
sixth Captain joined unto him, and makes his number (13). And so comparing all
the rest, dividing them by two's, they will stand as follows.

2:11: 5:8: 10:3: 4:9: 6:7: 12:1: 13 13 13 13 13 13 39 39

Thus much, I conceive, may give a right understanding to any coming-on
Soldier of the true and right stating of a Rank twelve abrest, being a thing
very needful for to know, in respect that there are many Regiments which do
consist of twelve Companies; and when in course, as in the sequel of this Book,
when as I shall show the manner of drawing up of twelve Companies; there will a
little more light appear unto them to their farther knowledge of the same. But
thus much for the present, as concerning a Rank twelve abrest: And now I shall
come to speak or to touch a little of a Rank ten abrest, and a File ten deep.

CHAP. XVII. Brief reasons to be given of the Dignity of places of a Rank ten
abrest, and of a File ten deep.
WHat has been formerly declared concerning a Rank twelve abrest, as before
showed, by every particular place of honor, as they stand with the reasons for
the same; it may give a clear understanding by the same rule to find the
Dignity of places ten abrest. For walking by the same way and rule of
examination, and you will find them to carry by dividing by two's, being added
to the four first places of honor, and they will carry suitable proportions, as
underneath is set forth.

2:9: 5: 8:3: 4:7 6: 10:1: 11: 11: 11: 11. 27: 28:

But for as much that in this Range of ten abrest, there will fall out some
odd; we must then of necessity-sake place it upon the right, and not on the
left, for the reasons as formerly for a File six deep declared. I might now
here conclude with other flourishing Tables, which might be little profitable
unto the soldier, though holding out discourse more fuller in an Arithmetical
way. But I have no desire to fill this subject with plenty of unprofitable
words and frothy flourishes, but rather driving really in a souldierly way, to
make all things both plain and easy to every courteous Reader that shall be
pleased for to peruse the same. And therefore, here for present, I shall
conclude, what more might here be spoken by Dignities of Ranks and Files,
leaving what shall remain until such time in course I shall again meet with
them by the way in drawing up of Regiments.

CHAP. XVIII. What Distance is, and the reasons for the first beginning of the
same, with all their several uses.
HAving thus now passed over several reasons, and with as much brevity as I
could, to satisfy the longing desire of the young soldiers request of every
particular place of honor as they stand in dignity both in Rank and File;
which being passed over, the next will follow by course, before we come to join
the Files into a Body, to satisfy the soldier of each particular Distance,
with the several reasons and uses of the same: for next to the Postures it is
the first thing or part of the Military exercise, and most necessary for the
soldier to be knowing in. Yet I must confess no Commander is so tied up or
limited in the exercising of his men at all times to begin with Distances
first, so as to show them all throughout; but nevertheless, in all and every
one of the motions in the exercising of a Body, care must be taken that the
soldier have his proper distance for performance of the same. Neither can any
Leader exercise his men, but first he must command them to some distance
suitable to what he will begin. As some I have seen begin their exercises with
Facings, some other with Doublings, others with Counter-marches and with
Wheelings. Yet nevertheless, whoever they be that will so begin, as I said
before, must command his soldiers to some Distance, which may be proper for
the same. But for my own part, my purpose is to go throughout all parts of the
Military exercise of Foot, and therefore will go on in order as they lie; and
first, as most properest, I shall begin with Distances, to show them all
throughout, and what the nature of them be.

Distance therefore really considered in it self, is no Motion; but there are
several motions to the attaining of each particular Distance, both in length
and depth. Therefore briefly thus: Distance is a place or interval of ground
between every particular File and File, and betwixt every Rank and Rank as they
stand, and attained by the several motions of Ranks and Files, and consisting
of several proportions of ground, as easily may be understood by their several
words of command as they follow.

CHAP. XIX. The several sorts of Distances which are fit and proper for the
Soldier to be exercised in.
CLosest Order, Which is both in Rank and File Half a foot, Close Order, Which
is both in Rank and File One foot and half, Order, Which is both in Rank and
File Three foot, Open Order, Which is both in Rank and File Six foot, Double
Distance, Which is both in Rank and File Twelve foot, Twice double Distance,
Which is both in Rank and File Twenty four foot.
Having thus set down every Distance with their several proportions of ground,
I shall next proceed to the words of command to the opening of the Ranks and
Files from their closest Order, and after satisfy the Soldier with Reasons,
and the uses of every particular Distance, as they go along in order.

CHAP. XX. Words of Command for the opening of Ranks and Files to all their
Distances, with their closings again.
THe Commander craving silence, and that they be commanded to close Ranks and
Files to their closest Order, the words of command for Distances are as
follows, Files open to the right, to your Close Order, Ranks open backward to
your Close Order, Files open to the left, to your Order, Ranks open backward to
your Order, Files open to the right and left to your Open Order, Ranks open
backward to your Open Order, Files open to the left, to your Double Distance,
Ranks open backward to your Double Distance, Files open from the midst, to
Twice double Distance. Ranks open backward to Twice double Distance.


The Ranks and Files being thus opened unto their twice double Distance from
their closest Order, I conceive it to be a more souldierly-like way in the
Opening and Closing of Files, that the discretion of the Commander do vary, and
alter the hand in the commanding of them, then always from every Distance to
tie himself to any particular hand; as to open to the right, and close to the
right. But as concerning the opening of Ranks, the properest way in my judgment
is to open them always to the Rear, in respect it is performed with more
facility: For every Rank from the first takes his due Distance as he is
commanded, without any further trouble, or to a half-facing to the right, by
taking it from the Rear, if from that place they shall be opened; and so
likewise it were a great deal better in the closing of Ranks, to close them
forwards, in respect it is for the more convenience of their closing, then to
the Rear. For then, again, they must perform a half- facing, which is not only
unhandsome, but troublesome to the soldier. All that can be said to maintain
it, (as I conceive, in opening Ranks forwards) is because they have not room in
the Rear; which seldom happens so in any exercise, if discreetly ordered by
him that leads them. As for closing of the Ranks backwards, I cannot conceive
any solid reasons to confirm the same, and therefore will pass over it, and
come to close our Ranks and Files to such Distance, from whence they first were
opened.

Files close to the right and left inward, to Double Distance. Ranks close
forwards, to Double Distance. Files close to the right, to your Open Order,
Ranks close forwards to your Open Order, Files close into the midst to your
Order, Ranks close forwards to your Order, Files close to the left to your
Close Order, Ranks close forwards to your Close Order, Files close to the right
to your Closest Order. Ranks close forwards to your Closest Order.
Concerning the words of Command for Distances, in the openings and closings of
Ranks and Files, what before is set down, may be sufficient for any soldier to
use in time of his exercise: But now it will be expected to give some reasons
for every one of these, to show them in their proper uses.

CHAP. XXI. The use of each particular Distance, and at what time to be used.
WHerefore, first note, that your distance of closest Order, is of chiefest use
unto the Pike, in these particulars; as first, Charging against the Horse, for
that the Ranks then clapping in their left legs behind their Leaders right,
locking themselves so firm and steadfast, one within another, which 'twere
impossible for any Body of Horse to enter in amongst them. Secondly, it is of
excellent use for to maintain a breach, and to keep out an enemy. Thirdly, it
is very useful to both Arms, at such time when a Commander has any thing of
consequence to discover unto his Company, which he may have many occasions so
to do; as before his Exercise, to advise them to silence, to observe their
words of command, and their directions; and when they are to fight against an
Enemy, to persuade and keep them off from fear, by assuring them good reasons
of hopes of overcoming. These, or suchlike speeches, many times a Captain may
have just occasion to express himself unto his Company; and being at so close a
Distance, they may more aptly hear his words, and obey his Commands. But here
now by the way, too much preaching upon the head of a Company concerning
matters of Exercise, is too much a dulling of the soldier, who rather would
fall into action, then so to be confounded with much talking.

Close Order may be of very good use also for most things which have been
spoken of the closest Order; only here the soldier has a little more liberty
in the handling of his arms by being at a wider distance. This distance also is
of good use, before wheelings, because many times upon their moving, they are
apt to fly out to their proper distance of Order, which they always should be
at in their wheelings; where note, if first they were at Order, they would fly
out to wider distance.

Order is the distance which the soldier does fight upon, and is to be used
skirmishing against an enemy; it is also useful at such a time, when the Drum
shall beat a Troop, and that the soldiers are marching to relieve some Court
of Guard, or making some expedition against an enemy, for then they are in a
fit capacity of distance for to fight. It is also very useful, and to be
observed upon facings, for all entire doublings, and for wheelings; Order
likewise in File, and open Order in Rank, is to be used at such time when the
Drum shall beat a March, and the Body upon the moving or marching.

Open Order is the distance proper for all doublings of Ranks and Files, by the
half-files or by the bringers-up, wherein they have interval of ground
sufficient to move in. It is also a very proper distance for facings, and ever
to be observed in time of Counter-marches. It is the properest distance for the
Ranks to be in upon a march, but the Files are then to be at Order, as is
before expressed.

The use of double Distance is to be observed at such times when the soldiers
shall stand, or happen to be in some eminent danger of the Cannon-shot from the
Enemy; for standing then so thin, they may be much preserved from danger: it is
likewise very good for Inversion, and Conversion.

You may take notice of these brief directions, in openings of Ranks and Files;
when the Files are commanded to Open to the right, the left hand File stands,
and all the Files take their distance from the left; observing always in the
motions of Files, their Leaders, and to move altogether along with them. If it
be an opening of Files to the left, then contrary-wise the right hand File
stands, and they take their distance from the right. So likewise for closings
unto what hand soever they be commanded to close, the out-most File is to
stand, the rest are to move and close to that. In opening or closing of Ranks,
the first Rank is always to stand, the rest are to move either opening or
closing, according as is commanded; always observing in their motions their
right-hand-men, and moving altogether.

CHAP. XXII. Directions of the way and manner of drawing up a private Company.
THe Postures being formerly described forth, the dignity of places in a File,
and words of Command made known unto the soldier for their several distances;
It next follows to show the joining of Files, and drawing up a Company; where
first pray mind at such times when the Drums are beating about the Quarters,
and in several places make Proclamation, (as by order from their Captain) for
all Gentlemen Soldiers that are under his Command, to repair unto his
Randezvous, unto such a place, and at such an hour; then it must be the
immediate care of every Officer under his Command, punctually at that hour and
place, thither to repair, for the more encouraging of the soldiers as they
shall come in, and not to stir themselves from thence, without some order from
their Captain, for fear of giving bad examples unto others. And when they shall
perceive some considerable number of men to come in, the Sergeants then may
take advice with their Lieutenant and Ensign, which of them they will appoint
out to draw forth the Musketeers, and which the Pikes, and whom they shall
make the right hand File-leader of the Musketeers, and who shall be the left;
and again, who shall be the leader of the right hand File of Pikes, and who
shall be the left: For these four, being such remarkable places of Honor unto
the knowing soldier, that special care must be had in placing deserving men to
be there. Now it is, or ought to be the discretion of every Lieutenant, and
Ensign, (as being Commission-Officers) to resolve the Sergeants herein, that
they may with more alacrity go on to draw the rest up between; and so to order
unto each of them their particular duties, as to carry equal pains in drawing
forth the Files. Therefore in respect that for the most part in every Company,
they have three Sergeants, two of them ought to take charge in drawing forth
the Musketeers, (being helped by the advice of their Lieutenant,) and the other
to draw forth the Files of Pikes, being assisted in counsel by their Ensign:
for at such times the Officers ought not to be idle, and to stand gazing upon
each other; but every one, according to his particular place and relation,
should be very active and assisting to each other. In the drawing up the
Company, the properest way will be then, as you may understand, in perfecting
up a Company, to draw them forth into Files, and to make them fix deep; as
being our custom here in England: and farther to have care in choosing able
soldiers to be File-leaders, who having spent some time and pains in their
Files in showing them their Postures, they may be called to join into a body.

For farther direction herein unto the Sergeants (whose proper place it does
belong unto) to observe this order in drawing up their Files, that they may
ingrosse the Pikes into one body by themselves, and the Musketeers into
another, and not to flank the Pikes until such time they shall perceive that in
both Arms they are complete: There are likewise several places of honor that
the Sergeants ought to take notice of, and to be informed of placing of men of
worth and desert in both Arms, that is to say, in the body of Pikes, and of the
Musketeers, which underneath by figures I shall set forth for farther
satisfaction therein.

formation

Here I have set down the manner how the Sergeants should draw up their Files
in each Arms apart by themselves, and have figured forth unto them the four
chief places of honor in both Arms. It concerns them therefore very much to
mind and have regard to these particular places, and to order such men of worth
there, which may be well deserving of the same; and those Gentlemen whom they
shall think fit after to be worthy of File-leaders places, they are to draw
them up between the figure (1) and the figure (4), and between the figure (3)
and the figure (2) and that Rule to observe in both Arms; and to be careful to
place good soldiers in the Rear, and such who may be able soldiers for
half-File-leaders, because there may be much occasion by Doublings to bring
them up for to assist the Front.

Thus much, I do confess, may be sufficient for the present to give directions
to the Sergeants for the drawing up the Files, and joining them together. Next,
after I have shown how to flank their Pikes with Musketeers, I will set forth
unto them and the Drums, where their places are upon a stand, and where to be
put upon a march.

Next follows to flank the stand of Pikes with the Musketeers; command the
Gentlemen of the Pikes to face to the right, and left half-Ranks of Musketeers
to Face to the left, and then to march and interchange ground, facing after to
their leaders, and closing Files inward to order, they will stand as underneath
is set forth.

formation

formation If it should happen, as sometimes it does, for a Company to be very
large, as in a Colonels, why then they may have just cause to have four
Sergeants, as I have thus placed them. But here again it will be expected of
diverse Soldiers to show some Reasons for the placing of the Sergeants being
thus drawn up and upon a stand; which I shall endeavor fully to do, after I
have set down where their places are upon a march. Now before we shall come to
treat of the Company upon their long march, the Captain perceiving for his most
convenience of marching in the street or in a lane, that it will be convenient
to divide his Musketeers into equal divisions for their march, and therefore,
according to this number here set down, they may be divided into four
divisions; that is to say, two to march in the Van, and two in the Rear, and
two divisions of Pikes. But before they are moving, it is the Sergeants duty to
come unto the Captain to be informed of him where their proper places are to
march, and what divisions each of them shall lead; and likewise so the Drums,
to know their places where to beat upon the march. To answer to them all, in
the first place, the Captain ought to give directions to his youngest Sergeant
to lead the second division of Musketeers in the Van; the first division of
Pikes being led by the Ensign: he commands the second for to be led by his
second Sergeant, and after orders or appoints the eldest Sergeant to lead the
first division of Musketeers of the Reer-guard, and the third Sergeant to lead
the last division of Musketeers, the Lieutenant bringing up the Rear; and
Drums commanded to fall in behind the two first Ranks of each division, and to
beat between the second Rank and fourth.

Having thus stated to them all their proper places, next it will be convenient
for the Captain to command them to shoulder their Arms, both Pikes and
Musketeers; and the Officers and Drums taking all their places, as before
directed, they may begin to move and draw forth into a long march, as here you
see.

CHAP. XXIII. Several reasons given for the placing of the Sergeants after this
manner.
WHen a Body is drawn up in manner as before expressed; the Captain being
Commander in chief, his discretion is to balance the Officers as near as he
can with equal dignity and worth, his Front proportionally with the Rear. To
which purpose he takes unto himself the youngest Sergeant, and places him on
the right Angle in the Front, whereby he may be there ready to march down into
the Body or elsewhere, according unto the discretion of the Captain, to fulfill
his commands; as also to stand there as a spectator of the Captains actions,
and an assistant, which may be much improvement to him. And in like manner he
commands the third Sergeant to the left Angle in the Rear; as being the second
youngest, and may be a help unto his Lieutenant there, as the fourth is to him
in the Front. The eldest Sergeant he orders to the left Angle in the Front, as
being the most honorable place for him, being there ready to lead upon a march
the Van of the Reer-Guard; and the second Sergeant he is appointed to stand on
the right Angle of the Rear, to make them equal in dignity unto the Front. Now
if you please to examine the dignity of the Sergeants in the first place, as
the first Sergeant and the fourth, making the number (5) and after take a view
of the second place, or Rear, and there you shall observe that the second
Sergeant, and third, may every way balance themselves, to be equivalent in the
worth with the first and fourth, carrying with them alike the same number. So
that it is clearly evident, that the Sergeants are rightly stated in number and
dignity, the Front proportionably with the Rear, in the judgment of any
knowing Soldier. Something more may be spoken of the second Sergeants place,
which you may take notice in his march, to lead the second Division of Pikes,
which is the most honourablest place of leading that is appointed forth unto
the Sergeants, the first only excepted; and upon a stand, when they shall lead
up their Divisions, every Sergeant is to betake him unto his place, as they
were at first placed, and to continue there until such time they shall receive
further order from their Captain. Thus much, I conceive, may give satisfaction
unto the discreet Soldier in these particulars, leaving them liberty to judge
according unto their own best thoughts, while we endeavor to draw up our
Divisions all abrest again, and to make some description of a Body.

The Captain upon his March having attained some convenient place to draw up
his Company, makes Alt, and commands the Sergeants to lead up their Divisions
upon the left, and causes the Musketeers to open from the Pikes, making
sufficient intervals for the Drums, to beat two abrest, even with the Front,
the first two between the right-hand-File-leader of Pikes, and the Musketeers
upon the right; the second two Drums doing the like upon the left. And always
the Captain ought to march his company after this manner all abrest, provided
he have ground sufficient for the same. And being far more graceful so to do,
then to march them straggling upon a long march, for it does represent in some
kind the manner of marching of a Regiment; and at such times the Sergeants are
to march upon the Angles, as is before described, moving to and again sometimes
upon the Flanks, and causing the Soldiers to keep their Distance of order in
File, and open order in Rank, and to march all even abrest, and after to return
again unto their places.

CHAP. XXIV. Before I come to make description of a Body, I shall show some
further Reasons of the Sergeants places of lesser Companies, with the placing
of the Drums.
IT happens many times some Companies falls not out so large, as is before set
forth, and that they have but three Sergeants, and therefore it would be known,
when that they have but one Division of Musketeers in the Van, two Divisions
of Pikes, and one Division of Musketeers in the Rear, which is the Reer-Guard,
where then the placing of these three Sergeants, and three Drums shall be upon
their long March, and where to be marching all abrest. To which, I answer, in
the first place, the youngest Sergeant is always to attend the Captain, and
having no Division to lead, he is to be upon the right Angle of the Front,
there expecting his Captains pleasure and commands; and the second Sergeant is
to lead the second Division of Pikes, and the eldest Sergeant to lead the last
Division of Musketeers, or the Reer-Guard: here are their places upon the long
march.

But when they are drawn up, and so march even abrest, the youngest Sergeants
place, as is before expressed, is to march upon the right Angle in the Front, and
the eldest upon the left, the second Sergeant is to march in the right Angle in
the Rear. They having their places thus stated, are to move sometimes up and
down upon the Flanks in their marching, causing the Soldiers to keep their due
distance of order in File, and open order in Rank, and to march even abrest,
and after they may return to their places again.

But here, methinks, I meet with some Objector by the way, who says, the
eldest is much wronged herein; for that it is his proper place to be upon the
right; that when Forlorns are drawn off against an Enemy, he is there ready
first to lead them on, claiming it as his due to give the first on set, and
therefore far more honor for him to be on the right then on the left, and the
eldest Sergeant rather placed on the left then on the right. As for the second
Sergeants place, it is fit he should be in the Rear, to assist the Lieutenant
there, he having none but he to help him, if any occasion should require. To
which I answer, that it is the youngest Sergeants place to be upon the right
Angle, either upon a Stand, or upon a March, and not the eldest, for these
reasons following. The youngest Sergeant is not placed there for any honor
that it is to him, for he has no Division at all to lead upon the March
(except the Company be very great) and if so, he is placed so near the Captain,
to be serviceable to him, to carry and convey his pleasures unto all the rest
of the Officers. As for the leading of the Vanguard upon the March, the
Captain takes that place unto himself; and it is far more honor unto the
eldest Sergeant to be a Leader of the Reer-guard, or entirely the left Flank,
then to lead a Subdivision of Pikes. And besides that, it is properest for his
place to be upon the left, when they are all drawn up upon a breast, for these
two reasons; as first, he is thereupon in readiness to take his due place, upon
the sub-dividing on the long March; and again, upon a Stand, when they are all
drawn up, and ready to engage against an Enemy, and the Forlorns to be drawn
forth, equally alike from both Flanks, he is then as ready in the Front to
execute his Captains Commands, the youngest Sergeant being likewise sent to be
something helpful to him, and attending after for further order from his
Captain, to send him relief by the second Sergeant, as occasion shall require.
So that in my judgment, take it either upon the long March, or otherwise, when
drawn all up even abrest, all things are so stated, for his due honor and
place, that he has no reason to complain, nor any of the rest, having all
their due and proper places which does belong unto them.

As for the placing of the Drums upon the long March, every Division ought to
have his Drums fall between such Ranks as before expressed; excepting only the
second Division of Pikes, which may be excused, when they are to beat a March,
as being all drawn up, they are to fall in two, to beat even abrest upon the
right, and one upon the left, as is before set down. If it should chance
further in a Company, to be so small to have but three Divisions, that is to
say, one Division of Musketeers in the Van, the Body of Pikes in the midst,
and another Division of Musketeers to bring up the Reer-guard, and having but
two Sergeants and two Drums; the youngest Sergeants place will be as before
mentioned, upon the right in the Front, and the eldest Sergeant upon the left,
and to take his place to lead the last Division of Musketeers upon the long
March; and the first Drum to beat in the first Division of Musketeers, and the
second to beat and to march along amongst the Pikes. I have a little more
enlarged my self in this Discourse of placing of the Sergeants, then I at first
intended; but meeting many times with several Soldiers, desiring satisfaction
in every one of these particulars, I shall perhaps undergo here the hard
censure of some, for this my tedious Discourse; but such others which desire to
be knowing herein, I hope they will have a more favorable opinion of my good
meaning unto them. And here I shall conclude for the present, concerning the
particular places of the Sergeants in every private Company; and now supposing,
as by order from the Captain, the Sergeants have brought up their Divisions,
standing again, as before, expecting something more to be spoken unto them,
they silently stand to hear what follows.

CHAP. XXIV. A Description of a Body of men throughout, with all their several
parts and kinds.
IT is very necessary knowledge to every particular Soldier, to be acquainted
throughout with all the parts of a Body of men drawn up, with their several
extents and bounds, and with the true understanding of the same. Where first
note the Description of Files; a File is a Sequence of men, consisting of
Leaders and Followers, from the first unto the last; the joining of Files
flank-wise makes Ranks, and is the completing up of a Body: for one File
alone cannot be said to have any Ranks in it, but joining two or more Files
together unto one, you may account them (provided they be six deep) to have so
many Ranks for number, as does extend from their Leaders to their Bringers-up.
And further know, that a Rank is a Row of men, standing shoulder to shoulder,
in an even line from the left Flank to the right; or from the outmost man upon
the left, unto the outmost man upon the right; standing all in a row File-wise.
Neither can it be said of one Rank, to have any Files in it; for as the closing
of Files to Files, makes Ranks; so the adding of Ranks to Ranks, makes Files.

As for the Depth of Files, they have in these latter Ages much varied therein;
sometimes making them sixteen deep, others ten, and eight deep, and now lately,
they have brought them unto six deep, as being the custom of the Swedes and the
French, and altogether now the practice here in England. In which form and way,
I purpose to walk. But to proceed to my former promise to the Soldier: There
is in every Body of men drawn up, consisting of Pikes and Musketeers, whether
of greater or smaller number, it makes no matter; A Front, a Rear, a
Right-flank, and a Left-flank; there is also Front-half-files, and
Reer-half-files; there is a Right-half-ranks, and a Left-half-ranks; and there
is a Length and Depth of the Battle: and of every one of these in their
several kinds. They have their particular extents and bounds, according to
their number of men.

Therefore, take notice in the first place, that the Front is the first Rank,
or Row of men, which are the File-leaders, and chief men of their Files, who
properly ought to take charge of their Files, being as it were their Captains,
and leads them first on in the Brunt against a furious Enemy. The extent of the
Front is from the left hand File-leader, unto the Leader of the right hand File.

The Rear is the last Row or Rank of men, being the Bringers-up of the Files,
who next the Leaders are the chiefest men of honor in the File, and are as it
were unto them, their Lieutenants; and in the absence of their Leaders, they
are to take charge of the File, and to instruct them in their postures: the
extent of the Rear, is from the Bringer-up of the left hand File, unto the
place of the Bringer-up of the right.

The right Flank is the outmost File upon the right, where always ought, by the
way, to be very able Soldiers placed, because they first give onset, or fire
against the Enemy, if on that part they shall be charged; the extent of the
right Flank is from the Leader of the right hand File, unto the Bringer-up of
the same.

The left Flank likewise is the outmost File upon the left, and his extent is
from the Leader of the left hand File, unto the Bringer-up.

The Front half-Files extent or bounds, reaches no farther then from the
Front, unto the midst of Ranks, or to the Bringers-up of the Front half-files,
which being but six deep, is the third Rank from the Front; and the length of
the same reaches from the outmost part of the left Flank, until you come unto
the right.

The Rear half-Files begins from the midst of Ranks, or from the fourth Rank
from the Front, and runs downward in his depth to the Bringer-up of the
whole File; and the Length of the same is to be taken side-wise, as they stand
shoulder to shoulder, from the outmost man upon the left, unto the outmost man
upon the right.

The right half-Ranks in their Length runs no farther, then from the outmost
man upon the right, unto the midst of Files, or to the left hand File-leader of
the right half-Ranks; the Depth of the right half-Ranks reaches from the
Front, running down unto the Rear.

As for the left half-Ranks, as much may be said, to take his Length from the
midst of Files, or from the right hand File-leader, of the left half-Ranks unto
the outmost Files upon the left; the Depth of the left half-Ranks, may be
understood in form and manner conformable to the right.

Next come we to speak of the Length and Depth of the whole Battle: the Length
of the Battle is ever to be accounted of the number of men in a Rank, and not
in a File; for the Files perhaps may not be above six deep, when that there may
be hundreds in a Breast in the Ranks: and farther, the Length of any Battle is
to be taken from the outmost point of the left Flank, or left hand File-leader,
stretching it self forth by an even Line along, until you come to the outmost
point of right Flank, or right hand File-leader; the Depth of the Battle
always is to be taken from the Front or first Rank, and going down backward in
a straight Line down to the Rear, to the last Rank, or to the Bringers-up of
the Files. For as the Length of the Battle is to be taken from the left Flank,
going along in Front unto the right; so the Depth of the Battle is to be taken
from the Front, going backward down to the Rear.

There is also to be understood, that in every Battalia drawn up, there are
other parts and Denominations, very considerable to be known, that is, in every
such an one, there is a Vanguard, a Reer-Ward, and Main-Battail. The Vanguard
are the Musketeers upon the right, or the right Flank; or as most commonly
called amongst us in these days, the Right-wing, or the Left-wing, which are
the Musketeers, and the Flankers of the Body of Pikes; the reason, as I
conceive, the Musketeers are accounted and called Wings, is because they are
first drawn off, as by flying motions in Forlorns, to engage against an Enemy;
but of this by the way. To proceed: the Reer-Ward or Reer-Guard, are the
Musketeers on the left Flank; and the Battle is the Body of Pikes; and here I
shall conclude concerning the description of a Body.

CHAP. XXVI. Directions to all such as shall desire to exercise a Foot-Company,
with some admonitions to the Soldiers as shall be exercised by them.
HE that intends to exercise a Body of men, must truly know what he shall
command, and so to give his directions unto the Soldiers, as they may aptly
make ready execution of the same. He must at such times above all the rest,
assume unto himself the confidence and presence (as near as he is able) of a
complete Soldier. He is also to stretch out his voice so, as he may
conveniently be heard, and understood by the inferior Officers and Soldiers;
which will cause them more readily to obey his commands. He ought to carry a
cheerful countenance unto them, provided they do well; but otherwise, if
carelessly disregarding his Commands, he may look harshly upon them. His eyes
ought to be quick and nimble, observing all their motions, whether it be to the
right or left, to the Front or Rear, and nimbly stepping to them, to stay them,
if disorderly they swerve awry from what he first intended. He must likewise
order all his words of Command so, as that they may be proper, and clearly
pronounced forth unto the Soldier, without any faltering. And in every one of
these, to see the Soldier leasurely and easily perform the same in a complete
manner. He must not be too quick in his words of Command, but carefully see
what before commanded well done, and then he may proceed unto the next. In time
of his Exercise, he must seriously mind what he is to do, and not to have his
thoughts extravagantly carried away upon any other Subject, for fear he be out;
but if any such thing should happen through forgetfulness, he ought not to be
daunted, but to pull up the spirit of a Soldier as well as he can, and
endeavor to reduce them again. For it is a rare thing to be found, for a
Leader to be so exquisite in his Exercising, as not to be sometimes out; and in
my observation of most, at one time or another, I have found them so to be. His
discretion also ought to be such, as to cull out, and choose those things that
be chiefest, as flowers out of a Garden, to fit and complete up his Exercise in
a Souldier-like way; which may be most properest for service and use, which
will bring to him far more commendations and praise in the judgment of every
knowing Soldier, then to spend his time upon unnecessary toys; but yet
sometimes, to please the fancy of the curious, at their private meetings he may
use some things for delight, to support and uphold their private Exercises,
which have nursed up here in London many able Soldiers and Commanders, who have
been serviceable to our Nation. It is a very necessary thing likewise that a
Leader sometimes do acquaint the Soldiers of the use of their several
Distances, Facings, Doublings, Counter-marches, and Wheelings, and of all
things else he shall command; but in such a manner, that he dwell not too long
upon any thing he shall declare unto them, for dulling of the Soldiers, who
rather would be pleased with more actings, then by too much talkings; which
spins out the time, as sometimes ordered, to very little purpose. He must be
very careful of every word of Command he gives, that the Soldiers be ordered
in their due Distance, suitable to the same, of what kind soever it be; and if
it shall be lost in their movings or marchings, he must endeavor to bring them
to it again. He is likewise to acquaint the Soldiers when they are drawn up,
to look about them, and to mind their several places, how they stand in the
Body, whether they be in even Ranks from the Front, or odd; if even, and upon
any doubling of Ranks, they are the men to double the odd; if
half-file-leaders, that they be commanded to double the Front; they must
advance their Arms, and are Leaders of that Motion to come up to double the
Front; if Bringers-up commanded to double, they are alike to do the same; if
Bringers up of the Front-half-files, and that they be commanded to double the
Rear, they likewise are to advance their Arms, to face about, and are to begin
to lead them down to the Rear. They should likewise take notice how they stand
in their Files, whether even from the right, or no; if even, and there be any
command to double Files to the right, they all are to move, and double the odd;
if commanded to double to the left, they then stand odd; and the others are to
move, and double them. They likewise are to mind their places, who are upon the
Flanks, for a doubling either to Front or Rear by the half-Files; they first
begin to march, and how they stand there as right and left hand men in even
Ranks; for by any doublings of Ranks entire, or by Division, they likewise are
the Leaders of the Motion. There ought also advice be given to the middle
File-leaders, to know their places; for if there should be any doublings of the
half-Ranks, they then are first to move, and to begin the motion.

This caution being sometimes quickly run over in advising of the Soldiers,
that they should ever mind when they are first drawn up into a body these
particular places, they would not stand so carelessy and so ignorantly in a
Body, as many times they do, not knowing which way to move without a great deal
of pains and directions from their Leader; for there being so many occasions of
doublings of these kinds, that it is a necessary thing for every Soldier to be
acquainted with the same.

Yet it is not only sufficient that the Soldiers do mind their places as they
stand in a body, according to the direction of their Leader, as before set
forth unto them, but that they be likewise, in the time of their Exercise, very
silent in the body, and helpful unto their Fellow Soldiers, by pointing out
unto them with signs with the hand, where they should march, to perform what
was before commanded, and to be very civil and orderly in their carriage to
each other, and to mind their Exercise so as a matter of great weight, and high
consideration in the well regarding of the same. And if a word of command (as
sometimes may happen) slip out of order, as by the mistaking of a hand or the
like, yet nevertheless it should be their modest care, if not prevented by
their Leader, to be ready to execute what they conceive he intended; and
walking along in this civil and respective way unto him that shall lead them,
it will not only be a great encouragement unto him, but they will also reap
much benefit unto themselves.

And thus much briefly may be spoken in way of advice unto every Leader before
his beginning of his Exercise, and unto each particular Soldier as shall by
him be exercised.

CHAP. XXVII. Of Facings, of their several kinds, and of their use, with the
words of command for performance of the same.
FAcing is the altering or turning of the Aspect to either hand upon the ground
they stand, according to the words of Command, whether it be to the right,
left, Front or Rear, or to the midst of Files or Ranks, or to any of the
outward or inward Angles, or to the Center.

The manner of execution of the same, it is a particular turning of every
Soldiers countenance unto each of those hands or places as above expressed, and
to be performed after this manner. The left foot is always to be kept fixed
like the hinge of a door, and unto what hand or part they shall be commanded to
face, every particular Soldier is immediately to turn his body upon the Ball
or Center of his left foot by wheeling, until he has brought his Aspect unto
the place commanded.

Facings is one of the most necessary and usefullest motions amongst all the
rest: for when the body shall be in such a straight that they cannot bring
their faces against an enemy by Countermarch, or by a Wheeling, to bring their
best Soldiers there to fight; and likewise being debarred of room that they
cannot double it, nevertheless Facings are of such excellent use, that they may
with ease, although standing at close Order, turn every particular face to
charge upon that part where they shall be assaulted by an enemy: and farther,
this motion is performed with more facility then all the rest of the motions.
For in the others they alter the form of the Battle, or changes the place,
but in this they preserve both, and it is ready for any attempt of an enemy: if
they should be charged all at once in Front, Rear, right and left Flanks, they
may be commanded so to face, as to answer them all in every one of their
charges.

Facings likewise are so necessary, that they can hardly be spared in any other
of the motions, having relation in one kind or other to them all for to be
used. There is likewise farther to be understood, that there are Entire-Facings
and divisional. Entire Facings are when they turn their Aspects all one way:
Divisional Facings are when they divert or turn their faces several ways, as to
the Front, Rear, and both Flanks, all at one instant of time as shall be
commanded.

There are likewise facings to the Front and Rear Angles, that is to say, of
their outward and inward Angles. Outward Angles are when they are commanded to
face to the right Angle or to the left, or both facing to the inward Angles, as
when they are commanded so, as to face to the inward Angles toward the midst
of Files. There is likewise facing to the inward Angles toward the midst of
Ranks as to the Center; where note, when there is any use of these Facings unto
the inward Angles, it is occasioned by some former words of command, that has
made some large intervals in the midst of Ranks or Files, and therefore they
may give them such commands as these for to open or stand so, that they may
march and close again as at first.

This Facing to the Center, I do conceive to be very useful, when the Captain
or Leader has any thing of importance to speak unto the Company; they standing
at close order, he may side-wise move down into the midst of the Ranks and
Files, and command them to face all to the Center; they standing all round
about him so close, cannot choose but hear and know what his pleasure and
command will be, and in obedience thereunto, be very ready in performance for
the execution of the same.

But before I come to set down the words of Command for Facings, I shall desire
all Leaders not to tie themselves up so as not to begin in their Exercise to
command Facings, until they have brought the Soldiers to stand at open order,
both in Rank and File, as if it were not proper for them to command them to
face till then. Therefore rather, for the reasons before set forth, command
them to choose upon such close Distances to face, that they may know the true
use of them, and at such times when they want ground that the other motions
cannot be performed.

CHAP. XXVIII. The words of Command for Facings.
Face to the RIght, Left, To both Flanks, Right about, Left about, To Front and
Rear, Midst of Files, Midst of Ranks, Right Angle, Left Angle, Outward Angles
in the Front, Inward Angles in the Front, Right Angle in the Rear, Left Angle
in the Rear, Outward Angles in the Rear, Inward Angles in the Rear, Inward
Angles of the right Flank, Inward Angles of the left Flank, Outward Angles both
of Front and Rear, Inward Angles both of Front and Rear, Inward Angles of both
the Flanks to the Center, Front, Rear and both Flanks from the Center, To the
outward Angles of Front and Rear from the Center,
As you were, or, To your Leader.

Having concluded the words of Command for performing of plain Facings, there
must be notice taken, when any word of Command shall be given to face to any of
the Reer-Angles, they must be first faced to the Rear, and they will make more
easier performance of the same; and likewise, if any word of Command be given
to face to the inward Angles upon the Flanks, they must face them there
likewise first, and it will be easier fulfilled: and likewise if any command be
given to face to the four Angles, or to Front, Rear, and Midst from the Center,
care must be first had that they may be first faced to the Center.

I might have proceeded a great deal farther in this place upon this Subject of
Facings, to have shown several figures of Battle that might be produced and
drawn forth, affording much variety of forms and number, and with much ease to
be performed upon their several marchings, according as they are ordered to
face, which might be very useful for service, and affording much matter for any
particular Exercise, to use several firings upon the same. But I shall have
occasion in another place to make use of diverse of them, and setting them forth
in the view, when I shall begin to set down in any particular Leadings of my
own, which I have performed in our private meetings at Town-Ditch in London,
every Thursday-morning, for the satisfaction of those loving Gentlemen who
still do Exercise there, and to such which shall come after.

CHAP. XXIX, The many variety of Doublings, with their parts and uses set forth
for the practice of any Commander, to make use of according unto his own
discretion.
SInce there is in the true account, no other dimension of a Battle, but the
Length and Depth, so likewise it is to be understood, that the Length of the
Battle is doubled by the doublings of Ranks and half-Files; and the Depth of
the Battle is doubled by the doubling of Files, and of the half-Ranks. Now
there are several Words of Command for the performance of each of these, as to
double Ranks and Files, which do consist either of the doubling of number of
men and persons, and not of place, or else the doubling both of number and
place. As for Example, command either the Ranks, the half-files, or Bringers-up
to double the Front to the right; here only is the doubling of number of men,
and not of place, for it adds but one man more to that hand, whereunto they
were commanded, and gains but his particular place. Again, double Ranks to any
hand entire or double, the Front by the half-Files to the right entire, it will
be not only a doubling of the number of men, but a doubling of the place, and
the Length of the Battle. The use of doubling the Length of the Battle may be
for two Reasons, the one to over-wing an Enemy, the other to avoid over-winging
our selves. Yet there must be care taken, that in doubling of the Length, that
we fail not, or be too weak in our Depth: for the want of both, either Length
or Depth, may be very dangerous to our selves, and may give great advantage to
the Enemy. For if there should want a sufficient Depth, by gaining much Length
in the Front, we may perhaps be so weak there, that an Enemy may quickly break
through, whereby much danger may ensue upon the same, if not timely prevented
by the discretion of the Commanders.

There is likewise in the doubling of Files, or the half-Ranks doubling to
either Flank, a doubling of number of men, and not of place, carrying much
variety of words of Command; but the doubling of Files, and of the left
half-Ranks entire, the Depth of the right Flank is not only a doubling of the
number, but a doubling of the place and Depth of the Battle. In this doubling
of the Depth care likewise must be had, that we make not the Front too narrow,
lest we give opportunity to the Enemy to encircle, and encompass it. To
conclude therefore, take notice that Doublings were invented to strengthen any
part of the Body that shall be weak, whether in the Front, or Reer-right-flank,
or left, whether it be in number of men or place, Length or Depth, it is to be
used according to the discretion of the Commander. There is likewise farther to
be considered in Doublings, whether they double the number or place, Length or
Depth, it is to be performed by one of these two, either entire, or divisional
Doublings: therefore I shall proceed, and go on to show what I conceive to be
the properest way in the progress of them in a right order; and therefore I
will begin to set down the words of Command; First, to double the Front, and so
farther proceed to show the Doublings of the Flanks. And first of entire
Doublings, and next of the divisional; and in the mean time, I shall crave
pardon from the courteous Soldier, that I put not down several Pricks or
Figures to set forth the same, endeavoring rather to give him the words of
Command for each particular Doubling, with directions for performance of the
same, together with their several Reducements, leaving it to his ingenious
study and practice, to make use of what he pleases, where he may cull and
choose out such as shall be convenient and fit, either for service or delight;
by the way advising him to retain in his memory, what he intends to practice,
and not to meddle with any thing, but what he assuredly knows will carry such
weight and able reasons for their use and service, as shall admit of no
controlment from the judicious Soldier.

CHAP. XXX. The words of Command for all Entire Doublings to the Front, to be
performed one time or other in time of Exercise.
Command. RAnks to the right double.

Direction. Every even Rank move forward with the right-leg, and with three
steps double the odd.

Reducement. Files to the left double; Or, Ranks as you were.

Command. Ranks to the left double.

Direction. Every even Rank from the Front, move forwards with the left-leg,
and at three steps double the odd.

Reducement. Files to the right double; or, Ranks as you were.

Command. Ranks to the right and left, double outward.

Direction. Every even Rank move outward from the midst, and at three steps
double the odd.

Reducement. Files to the right and left, double inward; or, Ranks as you were.

Command. Ranks to the right and left, double inward.

Direction. Every even Rank from the Front move inward from the Flanks, and at
three steps double the odd.

Reducement. Files to the right and left double outward; or, Ranks as you were.

Command. Half-files double your Front to the right.

Direction. Half-files advance your Arms, and move forwards to the right into
the Front.

Reducement. Files double your Depth to the left; or, Half-Files as you were.

Command. Half-files double your Front to the left.

Direction. Half-files advance forwards to the left into the Front.

Reducement. Files double your Depth to the right; or, Half-Files as you were.

Command. Half-files double your Front to the right and left, outward.

Direction. Half-files advance forwards to the right and left, from the midst,
and move up into the Front.

Reducement. Files double your Depth to the right and left inward; or,
half-Files as you were.

Command. Half-files double your Front to the right and left inward.

Direction. Half-files move forwards from the Flanks inward into the Front.

Reducement. Files double your Depth to the right and left outward; or,
Half-Files as you were.

Command. Bringers-up double your Front to the right.

Direction. Bringers-up advance your Arms, and move forwards with the right leg
into the Front.

Reducement. Files double your Depth to the left, every man falling behind his
Bringer-up.

Command. Bringers-up double your Front to the left.

Direction. Bringers-up advance forward to the left into the Front.

Reducement. Files double your Depth to the right, every man falling behind his
Bringer-up.

Command. Bringers-up double your Front to the right and left outward.

Direction. Bringers-up advance forward from the midst of the Rear, to the
right and left into the Front.

Reducement. Files double your Depth to the right and left inward, every man
falling behind his Bringer-up.

Command. Bringers-up double your Front to the right and left inward.

Direction. Bringers-up advance forwards from the Flanks, inward into the Front.

Reducement. Files double your Depth to the right and left outward, every man
falling behind his Bringer-up.

Command. Double your Ranks to the right entire.

Direction. Every even Rank from the Front face to the right, march forth, and
double the odd.

Reducement. Right half-Ranks double your left Flank; or, Ranks as you were.

Command. Double your Ranks to the left entire.

Direction. Every even Rank from the Front, face to the left, march forth, and
double the odd.

Reducement. Left half-Ranks double your right-Flank; or, Ranks as you were.

Command Double your Ranks inward entire.

Direction. Every even Rank from the Rear, move away outward until you be clear
of the standing part; and after every even Rank from the Front, move forwards,
and double the odd.

Reducement. The inmost Files double your Flanks to the right and left outward,
and after close.

Command. Double your Ranks to the right entire, every man placing himself on
the outside of his right-hand-man.

Direction. Every even Rank from the Front, move away to the right, and place
your selves on the outside of your right-hand-men, and double the odd Ranks.

Reducement. Right half-Ranks double your left-Flank, every man placing himself
on the inside of his left-hand-man.

Command. Double your Ranks to the left entire, every man placing himself on
the outside of his left-hand-man.

Direction. Every even Rank from the Front, move away to the left, and double
the odd Ranks by placing your selves on the outside of your left-hand-men.

Reducement. Left half-Ranks double your right-Flank, every man placing himself
on the inside of his right-hand-man.

Command. Half-files double your Front to the right entire.

Direction. Half-files face to the right, and march clear of the standing part;
after face to your Leader, move up even abrest, and double the Front.

Reducement. Right half-Ranks double entire the Depth of your left-Flank.

Command. Half-files double your Front to the left entire.

Direction. Half-files face to the left, and march clear of the standing part,
after face to your Leader, march up, and even the Front.

Reducement. Left half-Ranks double entire the Depth of your right Flank.

Command. Half-files double your Front inward entire.

Direction. Front half-Files face outward, and march clear of the standing
part: facing after to their Leader, the Rear half-Files may move up, and double
the Front.

Reducement. The inmost Files double entire the Depth of the outmost Files, and
after close.

These are, as I conceive, the properest and plainest Doublings for any
Soldier to use in his Exercise, out of which he may choose as many of them, as
he shall think fit, being all entire Doublings to the Front. Next follows to
show some Divisional Doublings to the same.

CHAP. XXXI. Divisional Doublings to the Front.
Command. DOuble your Ranks to the right and left by Division.

Direction. Every even Rank from the Front face outward, march forth and
double the odd.

Reducement. The outmost Files upon each Flank that moved, face inward, march
in and strengthen the Body.

Command. Double your Ranks to the right and left by Division, every man
placing himself on the outside of his right and left-hand-man.

Direction. Every even Rank from the Front, move forth to the right and left
outward, and double the odd, placing your selves on the outside of your right
and left-hand-men.

Reducement. The outmost Files upon each Flank that moved, double the inmost
Files to the right and left inward, every man placing himself on the inside of
his right and left-hand-man.

Command. Half-files double your Front by Division.

Direction. Half-files face outward, and march clear of the standing part:
after face to your Leader, move up even abrest, and double the Front.

Reducement. The outmost Files upon each Flank that moved, double entire the
Depth of the inmost Files.

CHAP. XXXII. Entire Doublings to the Front by Wheelings.
Command. WHeel off your Rear half-Files, and double your Front to the right
entire.

Direction. Half-Files face about, and wheel about to the left; march up and
even the Front.

Reducement. Wheel off your right half-Ranks, and double your left Flank entire
to the left. Face outward, and right half-Ranks wheel about to the right,
moving forward until they range even abrest with their left Flank; to your
Leader.

Command. Wheel off your Rear half-Files, and double your Front to the left
entire.

Direction. Half-files face to the Rear, and wheel about to the right, move
forwards, and double the Front to the left entire.

Reducement. Wheel off your left half-Ranks, and double your right Flank
entire to the right. Face outward left half-Ranks, wheel about to the left, and
move forward until you have doubled the right Flank, to your Leader.

Command. Wheel your Rear half-files inward into the midst, and double your
Front inward entire.

Direction. Front-half-files open from the midst, until you be clear of the
standing part, then face to your Leader; half-files face about, and wheel your
Rear inward into the midst, move forward until you have doubled the Front.

Reducem nt. The inmost Files that doubled, The inmost Files must have distance
from the outmost Files, before they can begin to wheel.
wheel about to the right and left outward, and double entire the Depth of the
outmost Files, after face to your Leader, and close Files to the midst to Order.

CHAP. XXXIII. A divisional Doubling to the Front by Wheeling.
Command. WHeel off your Rear half-files, and double your Front by Division.

Direction. Half-files face to the Rear, and wheel about to the right and left,
move forward, and double the Front.

Reducement. The outmost Files upon each Flank that doubled, wheel about to the
right and left inward, Here likewise must convenient distance be given from the
midst, for the outmost Files to wheel about.
and double entire the Depth of the inmost Files, face to your Leader.

Here ends the Doublings that properly belong unto the Front according to the
practice of these times, whether they be Entire or Divisional, and of their
several kinds; as first, take them of themselves in the plain way, after by
Counter-marches, as by the Bringers-up. Lastly, by Wheelings, and that first by
Entire, after by Divisional. But here by the way, no Leader is tied to do all
these Doublings in his Exercise at once, but to use part of them what he shall
think fit. Yet, again, if he desire to be thoroughly knowing in all the
Doublings of Front, Rear, and both Flanks, and to show them unto the Soldiers,
he may then begin first to go over all the words of Command for Doublings to
the Front, informing his Soldiers of their several uses for service, at one
time or another, and then proceed to show the use of the several Doublings to
the Flanks, and next to the Rear, which in this place I hold needless to give
words of Command for the Doubling thereunto, in regard the former words of
Command used to the Front, with small alteration will serve to the Rear.

CHAP. XXXIV. Entire Doublings to the right Flank.
Command. FIles to the right double.

Direction. Every even file from the right by a half-turning at three steps
double the odd.

Reducement. Ranks to the left double; or, Files as you were.

Command. Files to the right and left, double outward.

Direction. Every even File from the Flanks move, and by three steps double the
odd.

Reducement. Ranks to the right and left double inward; or, Files as you were.

Command. Double your Files to the right and left inward.

Direction. Every even File from the midst move inward side-wise, and double
the odd.

Reducement. Ranks to the right and left double outward; or, Files as you were.

Command. Double your Files to the right advancing.

Direction. Every even File from the right move forwards, and by three steps
double the odd.

Reducement. Ranks to the right double.

Command. Double your Files outward advancing.

Direction. Every even File from the Flanks, move forwards, and by three steps
double the odd.

Reducement. Ranks to the right and left double outward.

Command. Double your Files to the right and left inward advancing.

Direction. Every even File from the midst move forwards, and by three steps
double the odd.

Reducement. Ranks to the right and left double inward.

Command. Left half-Ranks double your right Flank to the right.

Direction. Face all to the right, and left half-Ranks move forwards to the
right, and double your right Flank to your Leader.

Reducement. Double your Ranks to the Left entire; or left half-Ranks march
forth into your places.

Command. Left half-Ranks double your right Flank to the left.

Direction. Face all to the right, and left half-Ranks move forwards to the
left until you have doubled the right Flank to your Leader.

Reducement. Double your Ranks to the right entire to the Rear, face to the
Rear, and the even Ranks from the Rear, move forth, and double the odd to your
Leader.

Command. Left half-Ranks double your right Flank to the right and left outward.

Direction. Face all to the right; and left-half-Ranks move to the right and
left outward, and double your right Flank to your Leader.

Reducement. Front and Rear half-Files double your Ranks entire to the left
Flank; Front half-Files face about, and every even Rank from the midst move
forth, and double Ranks entire toward the left Flank, face to your Leader.

Command. Left half-Ranks double your right Flank to the right and left inward.

Direction. Face all to the right; and left half-Ranks move forwards to the
right and left inward, and double the right Flank, face to your Leader.

Reducement. Front and Rear half-Files double your Ranks entire to the left
Flank; half-Files face about, and every even Rank from the Front and Rear, move
forth, and double your Ranks entire toward the left Flank, face to your Leader.

Command. Left half-Ranks double your right Flank to the right by Countermarch.

Direction. Right half-Ranks face to the right, left half-Ranks turn off to the
left, move forwards, and double your right Flank, face to your Leader.

Reducement. Double your Ranks to the left entire, every man placing himself on
the outside of his left-hand-man.

Command. Left half-Ranks double your right Flank to your left by Countermarch.

Direction. Right half-Ranks face to the right, and left half-Ranks turn off to
the right, and double your right Flank to the left, face to your Leader.

Reducement. Double your Ranks to the right entire to the Rear, every man
placing himself on the outside of his right-hand-man; face to the Rear, and
every even Rank from the Rear, move forth to the right, and double the odd;
face to your Leader.

Command. Left half-ranks double your right Flank to the right and left outward
by Countermarch.

Direction. Right half-Ranks face to the right, and left half-Ranks face to the
left, and turn off to the right and left, moving forward until you have doubled
the right Flank to the right and left outward; face to your Leader.

Reducement. Front and Rear half-files double your Ranks entire to the
left-Flank, every man placing himself on the outside of his right and
left-hand-man. Front half-Files face about, and every even Rank from the midst
move forth to the left-Flank, and double the odd, placing your selves on the
outside of your right-hand-men, and every even Rank from the Rear half-Files
move forth, and double the odd, placing your selves on the outside of your
left-hand-men: face to your Leader.

Command. Left half-Ranks double your right-Flank to the right and left inward,
by Countermarch.

Direction. Face all to the right and left outward, left half-Ranks turn off to
the right and left inward, move forward until you have doubled the right Flank;
face to your Leader.

Reducement. Front and Rear half Files double your Ranks entire to the
left-Flank, every man placing himself on the outside of his right and
left-hand-man; half-Files face about, and every even Rank from the Rear, move
forth to the left-Flank, and double the odd, placing your selves on the outside
of your right-hand-men, and every even Rank from the Front move forth, and
double the odd, placing your selves on the outside of your left hand men; face
to your Leader.

Command. Double your Files to the right entire advancing.

Direction. Every even File from the right, move straight forth until you be
clear, and double the odd.

Reducement. Half-files double your Front to the right, or Front half-Files
double your Rear to the right.

Command. Files double your Depth to the right entire.

Direction. Every even File from the right face about, move down until you are
clear of the Rear, and double the Depth of the odd Files; face to your Leader.

Reducement. Half-files double your Front to the left, or Front half-Files
double your Rear to the left.

Command. Double your Files inward entire to the right.

Direction. Half-files of every even File from the left face about, even Files
from the left move forwards until you are clear of the standing part, after
face all to the right, and then every even File from the right, move forwards
into the Intervals, and double entire the odd; face to your Leader.

Reducement. The three first, and the three last Ranks double the six
middlemost Ranks to the right; the three first Ranks face about, and move down
to the midst by their own left-hands; and the three last Ranks move forwards to
the midst, to their own right-hands; face to your Leader.

Command. Double your Files to the right entire advancing, every man placing
himself before his Leader.

Direction. Every even File from the right, advance forwards, and double the
odd, every man placing himself before his Leader.

Reducement. Front half-Files by Countermarch double your Rear to the right;
Front half-Files turn off to the left, and double the Rear; face to your Leader.

Command. Files double your Depth to the right, every man falling behind his
Bringer-up.

Direction. Every even File from the right, face about to the right, and double
the odd by placing your selves behind your Bringers-up.

Reducement. Bringers-up double your Front to the left.

Command. Left half-Ranks double your right-Flank entire advancing.

Direction. Left half-Ranks march straight forth, until you are clear of the
standing part, after move to the right (being first faced there) and double the
right-Flank; face to your Leader.

Reducement. Front half-Files double your Rear to the right entire, face to the
left, and move clear of the standing part, after face to the Rear, move down,
and even the Rear; face to your Leader.

Command. Left half-Ranks double entire the Depth of the right-Flank.

Direction. Left half-Ranks face about to the right, and move down until you
are clear of the standing part, after face to the left, and move forward until
you have doubled the Depth of your right-Flank; face to your Leader.

Reducement. Half-files double your Front to the left entire, face to the left,
and march clear of the standing part, after face to your Leader, march up and
even the Front.

Command. Left half-Ranks double your right-Flank inward entire.

Direction. Half-files of the right half-Ranks face to the Rear, right
half-Ranks move forward until you are clear of the standing part, face all to
the right, and left half-Ranks move forwards, and double the right-Flank; face
to your Leader.

Reducement. The three first, and the three last Ranks double the six
middlemost Ranks entire to the right-Flank; the three first, and the three last
Ranks face to the right, and march until you are clear of the standing part,
after face inward; march, and close your Divisions, and face to your Leader.

CHAP. XXXV. Divisional Doublings to the right Flank.
Command. DOuble your Files to the right by Division.

Direction. Half-files of the even Files from the right, face to the Rear; even
Files march clear of the standing part, after move to the right and left, and
double the odd Files; face to your Leader.

Reducement. The three first, and the three last Ranks, double the three
middlemost Ranks to the left; the three first Ranks face about, and march down
by your own right hands into the midst of Ranks; and the three last Ranks move
forwards to the midst, to your own left hands; face to your Leader.

Command. Double your Files to the right by Division, every man placing himself
before his Leader, and his Bringer-up.

Direction. Half-files of the even Files from the right, face to the Rear, the
even Files march, and double the odd, every man placing himself before his
Leader, and Bringer-up; face to your Leader.

Reducement. The three first, and the three last Ranks, double the six
middlemost Ranks to the left, every man placing himself before his Leader, and
his Bringer-up; the three first Ranks face about to the left, and move down to
the midst of Rrnks by your own right hands, placing your selves before your
Bringers-up; and the three last Ranks march forwards unto the midst, placing
your selves before your Leaders; to your Leader.

Command. Left half-Ranks double your right Flank by Division.

Direction. Half-files of the left half-Ranks face about to the right, the left
half-Ranks move clear of the standing part; after face all to the right-Flank,
the left half-Ranks moving forward, until they have ranged even abrest with the
right-Flank; face to your Leader.

Reducement. The three first, and the three last Ranks, double the six
middlemost Ranks entire to the left-Flank; the three first, and the three last
Ranks, face to the left-Flank, and move clear of the standing part, after face
inward, march and close your Division; face to your Leader.

CHAP. XXXVI. Entire Doublings to right Flank by Wheeling.
Command. WHeel off your left half-Ranks, and double your right Flank entire to
the right.

Direction. Face outward, and left half-Ranks wheel about to the left, and move
forward until you have doubled the right Flank entire to the right; face to
your Leader.

Reducement. Wheel off your Rear half-Files, and double your Front to the left
entire; half-Files face to the Rear, and wheel about to the right, and march
forwards until you have ranged your selves even with the Front.

Command. Wheel off your left half-Ranks, and double your right Flank entire to
the left.

Direction. Face outward left half-Ranks, wheel about to the right, and move
forward until you have doubled the right flank entire to the left; face to your
Leader.

Reducement. Wheel off your Front half-Files, and double your Rear to the right
entire; half-Files face about, and Front half-Files wheel about to the left,
move down, and double the Rear to the right; face to your Leader.

Command. Wheel the left half-Ranks inward into the midst, and double your
right Flank inward entire.

Direction. Half-files of the right half-Ranks face about, right half-Ranks
move clear of the standing part, then face to the right, and the left
half-Ranks face to the left, and wheeling inward into the midst, moving forward
until they have doubled the right Flank inward entire; to your Leader.

Reducement. In wheeling the six middle Ranks from the right Flank, they must
have ground sufficient for them to wheel about.
Wheel off from the right Flank the six middlemost Ranks, and double your Front
and Rear entire to the left Flank: the six middle-Ranks face to the right, and
wheel about to the right and left, moving forward until they are clear of the
standing part; and after facing to the Front and Rear, they move again, and
double the Front and Rear toward the left Flank; face all to your Leader, march
forwards, and close your Divisions.

Or if they continue their Aspect to the right Flank, then command the six
middlemost Files to wheel off to the right and left, and to double entire the
depth of the outmost Files, then face to their Leader, and close their
Divisions.

CHAP. XXXVII. A Divisional Doubling to the right Flank by Wheeling.
Command. WHeel off your left half-Ranks, and double your right Flank by
Division.

Direction. Face outward, and left half-Ranks wheel off to the right and left
about, and move forward until you have ranged even, and doubled the right
Flank; to your Leader.

Reducement. Wheel off the three first, and the three last Ranks, and double
the six middlemost Ranks entire to the left Flank the three last Ranks face
about, and wheel to the right about, moving up toward the midst of the
left-Flank, and the three first Ranks at the same time wheel about to the left,
and move down to the midst of the left Flank; face to your Leader.

Or if they continue their aspect to the right Flank, then command the outmost
Files too that doubled to wheel about to the right and left inward, and double
entire the Depth of the inmost Files, to your Leader.

Here ends all the plain Doublings to the right Flank, performed by several
Counter-marches and Wheelings, which to any ingenious Soldier are sufficient
directions to know how to double the left Flank, only altering the hand by the
words of Command.

And here fellow-Souldier ends all the several kinds of Doublings, which if
any shall seem hard or difficult unto thee, either in their Commands,
Directions, or Reducements, thou may (care being taken) with much ease and
delight perform the same. And here the Captain is to take special notice, when
he comes to the point of Doublings, that his properest way will be first to
double the Front, as being the most honorable part of the Body, and next the
Rear, and after either to the right or left Flank, leaving it to his discretion
to use as many of them as he shall think fitting, and convenient for his
Exercise. And although I have somewhat varied from the practice of former times
in using more plenty of words of Command, the ripeness and curiosity of Wits in
these our days, enforced me unto it; for they having much refined the Military
Discipline, will not be pleased with ordinary stuff (as to say, As you were)
which, I confess, would save the Captain a great deal of pains, and be more
easy to the apprehension and capacity of every private Soldier, for his
returning back unto his place again. Yet if Command should be given to double
any part of the Body, that Leader would quickly lie under a hard censure, and
be judged in most men's opinions insufficient, that could not find out some
other words of Command to reduce them again. Endeavoring therefore to give
full satisfaction to both parties, I have taken the pains to set down other
words of Command for Reducement, whereby those which shall profess themselves
curious, may cull out such plenty as may best please their genius; advising
them withal not to presume in the exercising of their private Companies, before
themselves be first well verst, and truly knowing in all and every of the
several Commands, Directions, and Reducements before mentioned; which being
obtained, they may confidently and boldly proceed, so to inure their Soldiers
in the practice thereof, that their own knowledge in a short time will reduce
them to their former places without using these threadbare words, As you were;
variety being more profitable and delightful unto them, (provided they
understand it) then to accustom them in an ordinary and plain way of reducing.

But here some men will be ready to carp and say, that I have troubled my self
to little purpose, in setting down more Doublings then are used abroad upon
service. To whom I answer, that there are none (if rightly understood) but are
of singular use one time or another, either in private Meetings, or in those
great Nurseries of Military Discipline, the famous Academies of this our
Island, the Artillery and Military Gardens, who for Field-service have trained
up, and sent forth many worthy, able and gallant Soldiers into the Armies
lately raised in our Nation between the King and Parliament, whom I pray God
happily to reconcile. But, suppose many of these Doublings have not been seen
by some to be used in the field; Are they not therefore useful? perhaps not at
such time they have had no occasion for to use them all; which if not, must
they be rejected? I answer positively, that being rightly enquired into, they
have in them very useful and serviceable things against an Enemy, whether it be
in the Field, or in Garrison. As for Example; the Musketeers being brought
either all into the Front or Rear, or upon one of the Flanks, which often
happens, an Enemy appearing there, then they would be of sigular good use for
our advantage, and very disadvantageous to the Enemy. The like may be spoken of
the Pikes, who are by several of these Doublings brought into those places,
being there very serviceable to receive a desperate Charge of Horse, if upon
any of these parts they should fall on. Observe, further, that in many of these
Doublings, as the one arms shall face or charge against an Enemy, so
contrariwise the other lies more secure in safety to be preserved from danger
of the shot. Moreover, (according unto the number of men either in Length or
Depth) a Leader may by these words of Command or the like, at the same time
double his Front, Rear, or Midst, by doubling of Ranks; and may farther make
use of them at one and the same time to double by Files his right, left Flank
and Midst, all at one instant. But I shall not need to set down words of
Command for the doubling Front, Rear, Flanks and Midst, after this manner, but
leave that unto the apt Soldier to make use of such words of Command formerly
shown, and to frame them suitable for any such purpose so intended. But before
I shall conclude concerning the use of these Doublings, as I said before, there
are many of them, which by command will bring any men in the Body to fight,
unto that part which shall be most weak, or assaulted by an enemy. And again,
he may cast them so into the Body by a doubling, as shall preserve from danger
whom he shall think fit. And to say more, there is no part of the Body or Arms
but by words of Command in doublings may be brought forth as Frontiers against
the enemy, and may be placed again into the midst of the Body for more
security, and others in like manner may be brought forth for their relief.
Therefore it much concerns all Soldiers and Commanders to be truly knowing in
all the several kinds of Doublings, out of which he may make singular good use
according to his discretion, at all such times as need shall require, whether
it be in Field, or otherwise in Garrison.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Of Inversion and Conversion.
NOt to omit any thing which may be beneficial for the knowledge of all them
that intend to be good proficients in the Art of Military Discipline, my
subject in this Chapter shall be of Ranks filing, and Files filing, and Ranks
ranking, and Files ranking, which are by some called Inversion and Conversion;
yet seldom mentioned by any Leader in the time of his Exercise, for this
reason, as I suppose, because the Soldiers for the most part are unacquainted
with them; which causes all our Leaders in our private Meetings here in
London, to deliver forth unto their Soldiers such words of Command as may
readily and aptly be understood by them, which are, Ranks, File to the right or
left; or, Files, File to any hand; which is no other then Inversion. And again,
Ranks, rank to the right or left, either in equal or unequal parts, or entire
to the Front; or Files to rank in the like kind, may be termed Conversion: And,
in my opinion, they do the better that shall thus express themselves to the
capacity of every Soldier, then for to puzzle them with the words Inversion
and Conversion. I intend therefore without curiosity plainly to set down their
several Commands, Directions, and Reducements, keeping my former method
concerning Doublings. For in all and every one of them, they do either double
the length or depth of the Front, Rear, Midst, or Flanks; no part of the
Military Exercise affording more plenty of matter then they, carrying always
along with them many things of excellent use. For example, suppose a Prince,
General, or any other person of quality were to pass through the Company, a
discreet commander would presently command their Ranks to invert, or file to
the right and left outward, which immediately becomes (as it were) a Street or
Gallery, for the honoring and securing of their persons. Moreover, it is of
use for the lodging of the Colors, or upon Funeral-occasions, or taking their
leave from their Captain, where they may pour forth their Volleys of shot all
at one and the same time. To be short, being necessitated to march against a
Battery, it avoids the danger of the great Ordnance, and likewise secures the
Front of the Battalia from the imminent danger of any great shower of small
shot poured forth by the Enemy. As likewise it is of excellent use to march
over a narrow Bridge, or through a Lane, Thicket, or Salliport, or such like
difficult passages; or if any Commander have a desire to use ancient Figures,
by it he may make the Saw, Sheers, or Diamond; or being in one File, they may
aptly be drawn into a Ring, where he that is an able posture-man standing in
the midst, may show unto them their several postures, and after easily reduce
them again: and thus much briefly of Inversion, or Ranks filing.

Next come we to show the excellent uses and services which may be performed by
Conversion, as first perceiving any man of worth to stand before the Front of
the Battle, or to pass by either of the Flanks, then Ranks ranking, or Files
ranking into the Front, or Ranks wheeling to either of the Flanks, by these
Commands the Soldiers aspects are thither brought to present unto him a volley
of shot. It is likewise very useful for the making of a Line against a
Breast-work, or lining of Hedges, carrying it self several ways secretly to lie
in Ambuscado, whereby they may fire upon the Enemy as he marches by. Or
approaching against any Fort or place of danger, they may daringly make a large
Front and firing upon them; after filing to the right or left, making large
Intervals, they much preserve themselves from the danger of the great shot
proceeding from the Enemy. Again, Ranks ranking either in equal or unequal
parts, is of singular good use upon a narrow passage, where they can march but
two, three, four, or six abrest; the Commander, notwithstanding they marched
before twenty abrest, may by it bring them to such small numbers, whereby he
may much preserve them in time of imminent danger and peril. To dwell no longer
upon this discourse, Inversion and Conversion many times require larger
distance then any other of the Motions, as sometimes double distance: or twice
double distance, wherefore being so many occasions for the use of them both, I
hold it requisite for a Leader frequently to practice his Soldiers in them; no
part of the Art Military affording more commendations to the Soldiers that
shall readily and handsomely perform the same. Briefly therefore passing over
what might be more spoken concerning them, I shall in the next place set them
all forth in their full view, leaving every discreet Soldier to his own
liberty, to make use of as many of them as he shall think fit, and to use them
after what manner he pleases.

CHAP. XXXIX. The words of Command for Ranks ranking, and Files ranking to the
Front, they being twelve abrest, and six deep.
Command. RAnks, rank to the right 2, 3, 4, or 6, as occasion shall require.

Direction. If to two, the two outmost men upon the right are to move away, the
next two to fall behind them until the first Rank has made six Ranks, and the
rest doing the like until the first six Ranks are become thirty six.

Reducement. Ranks, rank twelve to the left; the first Rank is to stand, the
rest are to move away two and two, until they have made up twelve in one Rank,
and the rest are to do the like until they are made up all again as at first;
or, command, Ranks, rank as you were. The same rule is to be observed if you
rank to any of the other numbers, to divide them accordingly.

Command. Ranks, rank three to the left.

Direction. The first three men upon the left are to move away, the next three
are to fall in behind toward the left, until the first Rank have made four
Ranks; the rest are to do the like, until they have made them 24 Ranks.

Reducement. Ranks, rank 12 to the right: the first Rank is to stand, the rest
are to move forth by three and three, until they have made twelve in one Rank;
the rest are to do the like, until they be as they were at first; or, Ranks,
rank as you were.

Command. Ranks, rank three to the right and left outward.

Direction. The three outmost men of the first Rank upon the right, and the
three outmost men upon the left, move away; the next three of each hand in the
same Rank are to do the like, and every Rank throughout to follow successively,
dividing themselves three to one hand, and three to the other, until they have
made twelve Ranks in each Division, and falling in the Rear successively to
each hand of the first Rank.

Reducement. Ranks, rank 12 to the right and left inward; or, Ranks, rank as
you were.

Command. Ranks, rank entire to the right into the Front.

Direction. The first Rank stand, the rest face to the right, and move away,
every Rank placing it self successively to the right, until they stand all in
one Rank in the Front.

Reducement. Ranks, rank 12 to the left; the first 12 men upon the left are to
stand, the next 12 are to face to the left, and to move and fall in the Rear of
the first, and so consequently all the rest; or else to command, Ranks, rank as
you were.

Command. Ranks, rank entire to the left into the Front.

Direction. The first Rank stand, the rest face to the left, and move until
they have successively placed themselves, and made one entire Rank into the
Front.

Reducement. Ranks, rank 12 to the right, the 12 outmost men upon the right
stand, the rest face to the right and move, making 12 in every Rank: or, Ranks,
rank as you were.

Command. Ranks, rank outward into the Front.

Direction. The first Rank stand, the rest face outward, and place your selves
successively into the Front, facing after to your Leader.

Reducement. Ranks, rank 12 to the right and left inward; the 12 middlemost men
stand, the rest face inward, and move, ranking 12 successively behind the first
Rank, and after facing to their Leader, and to even their Ranks.

Command. Ranks, rank inward into the Front.

Direction. The first Rank is to move away to the right and left, the next Rank
moving up into his ground, doing the like, and consequently so all the rest,
until the last Rank be come up entire into the Front.

Reducement. Ranks, rank six to the right and left outward, the first six upon
the right, and the first six upon the left stand, the rest move outward,
falling in the Rear of the first Rank, ranking six to the right and left, and
after closing their Divisions.

Command. Files, rank to the right into the Front.

Direction. Files, open to the left to your double Distance, and Ranks close
forwards to Close Order, and move up to the right into the Front.

Reducement. Ranks, file six to the left; the first six upon the left are to
fall into a File, the rest doing the like, until you have made 12 Files, as at
first: or command, Ranks, file as you were.

Command. Files, rank to the left into the Front.

Direction. Every man is to move forward to the left into the Front, beginning
from the Leader of the Files, and moving up successively, making one entire
Rank.

Reducement. Ranks, file six to the right; the six outmost men upon the right
are to fall into a File, the rest in like manner are to do the same: or, Ranks,
file as you were.

Command. Files, rank outward into the Front.

Direction. Right and left Half-ranks close into the midst, to Close order;
after move to the right and left outward, until they be come up into the Front.

Reducement. Ranks, file six to the right and left inward: the middle men are
to stand, the rest are to move side-ways to the right and left inward, and to
file as before commanded; or, Ranks, file as you were.

Command. Files, rank inward into the Front.

Direction. Right and left Half-ranks open from the midst to twice double
distance, and Files move up to the right and left entire into the Front.

Reducement. Ranks, file six to the right and left outward, the outmost men
stand, the rest move to the right and left outward, filing according to
Command, and after to close their Divisions.

CHAP. XL. Ranks ranking into the Front by Countermarch.
Command. RAnks, rank entire into the Front, every man placing himself on the
outside of his right-hand-man.

Direction. The first Rank stand, the rest move away to the right successively
into the Front, placing themselves on the outside of their right-hand-men.

Reducement. Ranks, rank twelve to the left, every man placing himself on the
outside of his left-hand-man; the first twelve upon the left are to stand, the
rest are successively to fall in behind the first Rank, placing themselves as
before commanded; or, Ranks, rank as you were, placing your selves on the
outside of your left-hand-men.

Command. Ranks, rank entire to the left into the Front, every man placing
himself on the outside of his left-hand-man.

Direction. The first Rank stand, the rest move away to the left successively,
placing your selves on the outside of your left-hand-men.

Reducement. Ranks, rank twelve to the right, every man placing himself on the
outside of his right-hand-man; or, Ranks, rank as you were, every man placing
himself as before.

Command. Ranks, rank outward into the Front, every man placing himself on the
outside of his right and left-hand-man.

Direction. The first Rank stand, the rest move forth to the right and left,
and successively to fall into the Front, every man placing himself on the
outside of his right and left-hand-man.

Reducement. Ranks, rank twelve to the right and left inward, every man placing
himself on the inside of his right and left-hand-man; the twelve middle men are
to stand, the rest are to move to the right and left inward, six to one hand,
and six to the other, making twelve in Rank, and falling behind the first.

Command. Ranks, rank inward into the Front, every man placing himself on the
inside of his right and left-hand-man.

Direction. Right and left Half-ranks open from the midst to twice double
Distance; the first Rank of each Division is to stand, the rest are to move
successively to the right and left inward into the Front, making one entire
rank.

Reducement. Ranks, rank six to the right and left outward, every man placing
himself on the outside of his right and left-hand-man; the first Rank of each
Division stand, the rest move to the right and left outward, ranking as before
commanded, falling successively in the rear of the first rank, and after to
close their Divisions.

CHAP. XLI. Files ranking into the Front by Wheeling.
Command. FIles, rank to the right into the Front by wheeling. The Files are to
be at double distance, and ranks at close a Order.


Direction. Face to the right, and wheel to the left, until they stand even
abrest in one entire Rank in the Front.

Reducement. Ranks, file six to the left by wheeling; face all to the Rear, and
the first six men then upon the right, wheel to the right, and so consequently
all the rest wheeling by fixes to the right, their Leaders that were before,
being the hinges of the motion, and after face to their Leader.

Command. Files, rank to the left into the Front by wheeling.

Direction. Face to the left, and wheel to the right, until they make all one
entire Rank in the Front.

Reducement. Ranks, file six to the right by wheeling; face to the Rear, and
the six outmost men upon the left, wheel to the left, the next six are to
follow, and consequently all the rest, until they have made twelve Files as at
the first, and after face to their Leader.

Command. Files, rank outward into the Front by wheeling.

Direction. Right and left half-Ranks close into the midst to Order, and face
outward, wheeling to the right and left, until you are one entire Rank.

Reducement. Rank, file six to the right and left inward by wheeling, face
about to the right; and the twelve middlemost men are to wheel to the right and
left inward, and the rest are likewise to do the same by Sixes, until they have
made themselves into twelve Files; after face to their Leader.

Command. Files, rank inward into the Front by wheeling.

Direction. Right and left half-Ranks open from the midst to twice double
distance, after face inward, and wheel to the right and left inward, until they
are all in one Rank in the Front.

Reducement. Ranks, File six to the right and left outward, face all about, and
wheel by Sixes to the right and left, the Leaders being the hinges of the
Motion; after face to the Front, and right and left half-Ranks may close into
the midst again to their double distance.

Here ends the ranking into the Front, with all their several kinds: the Rear
challenges next place, but I shall spare the pains and labor to set them
down, in regard that he who has a mind to rank his men thither, may, if he
please, make use of all the former words of Command for the performance of the
same, facing them upon every Command to the Rear. I come therefore in the next
place only to mention the ranking into the midst by Ranks and Files, which may
likewise be performed by the former words of Command, provided they have
convenient distance, and be faced to the midst, and after the Command is
executed, to face them to their first Front. Yet there is remaining a ranking
unto all these places at once; for the performance of which, observe these few
words of Command following.

CHAP. XLII. Ranks ranking, or Files ranking at one and the same time into
Front, Rear, and Midst.
They are to stand at Order in Rank and File.
Command. RAnks, rank outward into the Front, Rear, and Midst.

Direction. The two last Ranks are to face about; the first Rank, and the last
Rank, and the third Rank from the Front, are to stand; the other three are to
move forth, six to the right, and six to the left, until they have ranked unto
all these places, after face to the Front, and the last Rank moving f r ward to
open Order.

Reducement. Ranks, rank twelve to the right and left inward; the last Rank
face about, the twelve middlemost men of each Rank are to stand, the six
outmost men of each Rank are to face inward, to move and fall into the right
and left behind the middlemost men, after the two last Ranks are to face to the
Front.

Command. Ranks, rank inward into the Front, Rear, and Midst.

Direction. Right and left half-Ranks open from the midst to twice double
distance, the two last Ranks face to the Rear, the first and last Rank, and the
third Rank from the Front stand, the rest move to the right and left inward,
ranking into Front, Rear, and Midst; after that the last Rank is to face to the
Front, and to close forward to open Order.

Reducement. Ranks, rank six to the right and left outward, the last Rank face
about, and the outmost six men upon each Rank are to stand, and the middle men
are to divide themselves six to the right hand, and six to the left, and to
fall in the Rear of the first, last, and middle Rank; after the last Rank is to
face to the Front, and then to close Ranks and Files to their Order.

Ranks ranking by Countermarch
Command. Ranks, rank outward into the Front, Rear, and Midst, every man
placing himself on the outside of his right and left-hand-man.

Direction. The two last Ranks face about, the first and last Rank, and the
third Rank from the Front stand, the rest move forth to the right and left,
ranking into Front, Rear, and Midst, placing themselves on the outside of their
right and left-hand-men; face to your Leader.

Reducement. Ranks, rank twelve to the right and left inward, placing your
selves on the inside of your right and left-hand-men, the last Rank face about,
the twelve middlemost men in each Rank are to stand, and the outmost six men in
each Rank are to move to the right and left inward, placing themselves in the
Rear of the former Ranks, and on the inside of their right and left-hand-men,
facing to their Leader.

Command. Ranks, rank inward into the Front, Rear, and Midst, every man placing
himself on the inside of his right and left-hand-man.

Direction. Right and left half-Ranks open from the midst to twice double
distance, standing then at Order in each division in Rank and File; the two
last Ranks face about, and the first, last, and third Rank from the Front
stand, the rest move inward, placing themselves on the inside of their right
and left-hand-men; after the last Rank may face about, and move forward to open
Order.

Reducement. Ranks, rank six to the right and left outward, every man placing
himself on the outside of his right and left-hand-man, the last Rank face
about, the six outmost men of each Rank stand, and the twelve middlemost men in
each Rank are to divide themselves six to the right, and six to the left,
falling in the Rear of the outmost men, placing themselves on the outside of
their right and left-hand-men; after face to the Front, and Ranks and Files
close to the midst to Order.

Of Files ranking into Front, Rear, and Midst.
Command. FIles, rank outward into Front, Rear, and Midst.

Direction. The two last Ranks face about, the first, last, and third Rank from
the Front stand, the rest move to the right and left, after the manner of
doubling of Ranks, and rank to Front, Rear, and Midst, as before commanded; and
after the last Rank face to the Front, closing forward to Order.

Reducement. Ranks, file six to the right and left inward, the last Rank face
about, and the even men from the midst of Files are to fall in behind the odd,
after the manner of doubling Files to the right and left inward, and after the
two last Ranks are to face to the Front.

Command. Files, rank inward into Front, Rear, and Midst.

Direction. They standing at the distance of Order in Rank and File, command
right and left Half-ranks to open from the Midst something more then to open
Order, after the two last Ranks are to face about, and the first, last, and
third Rank from the Front are to stand, the rest are to move to the right and
left inward, after the manner of doubling Ranks to the right and left inward;
after the last Rank is to face to the Front, and to close forwards to open
Order.

Reducement. Ranks, file six to the right and left outward, the last Rank face
about, and every man from the Flanks is to move outward, after the manner of
doubling Files to the right and left outward; then the two last Ranks are to
face to the Front, and the whole Body may close their Ranks and Files into the
Midst to Order.

CHAP. XLIII. Of Files ranking by Wheeling.
Command. FIles, rank outward into Front, Rear, and Midst, The Ranks must be at
Close Order, and the Files at Open Order for these three words of Command
following; and it would be better to divide them into three Divisions, that is
to say, between every two Ranks to have some six foot of ground interval, that
they may more distinctly perform the same.
by Wheeling.

Direction. The two last Ranks face about, after face all outward, and wheel to
the right and left, by two and two, until they be ranked into Front, Rear, and
Midst: the last Rank may after move forwards unto the same distance the former
stands at, being first faced to their Leader.

Reducement. Ranks, file six to the right and left inward by wheeling, the
first two Ranks face about, and then every particular Rank to wheel by two and
two toward the midst of Files, until they have made twelve Files as at first;
and after face all to the Front.

Command. Files, rank inward into the Front, Rear, and Midst by wheeling.

Direction. Right and left Half-ranks open from the midst something more then
to open Order, the two last Ranks of each Division face about; after face all
inward, and wheel by two and two to the right and left, until they have ranked
into Front, and Rear, and Midst to the right and left inward; the last Rank is
after to face to the Front, taking his distance conformable to the rest.

Reducement. Ranks, file six to the right and left outward by wheeling, the two
first Ranks face about, and each particular Rank is to wheel by two's toward
the Flanks, until they have made twelve Files, as at first; after facing all to
the Front, and closing their Ranks and Files into the midst to Order.

Command. Files, rank inward into the midst by wheeling.

Direction. Right and left Half-ranks open from the midst to twice double
distance, after face inward, and let them know that the Bringers-up of the
Front Half-files and the Half-file-Leaders are the hinges of the Motion; after
face them to the Front, and they will be in two Ranks.

Reducement. Ranks, file six to the right and left outward by wheeling, the
last Rank face about, and both Ranks wheel to the right and left by threes,
until they have made twelve Files as at first; after face all to the Front, and
close Files into the midst to Order.

Command. Files, rank outward into the Front and Rear by wheeling.

Direction. Right and left Half-ranks close into the midst to Order, after face
outward, and wheel to the right and left: the Bringers-up and the Leaders are
the hinges of the Motion; and when they are brought into two Ranks, one in the
Front, and the other in the Rear, face them to the Front.

Reducement. Ranks, file six to the right and left inward by wheeling, the
first Rank face about, and both Ranks are to wheel by threes toward the midst
of Files, until they have filed according unto Command; after facing to their
Leader, evening their Ranks, and straightning their Files.

And thus much of Conversion, or Ranks ranking, or Files ranking, they having
more variety in them, then many times can be useful, except it be to present
unto the Soldiers some things that are new in the Motions, which many times
they love to see. I could upon this Subject have much more enlarged my self;
but conceiving what is already set down may be sufficient for the knowledge of
any intelligible Soldier, I come therefore briefly to treat of Inversion, or
of Ranks filing, and Files filing.

CHAP. XLIV. Of Ranks filing, or of Files filing, or of Inversion, with their
several sorts and kinds.
Command. FIles, file to the right.

Direction. The right hand File is to move away clear of the standing part, and
after the next File to fall in the Rear of the first, and consequently so all
the rest until they become one File.

Reducement. File-leaders, lead up your Files to the left; or, Files, file six
to the left.

Command. Files, file to the right entire advancing.

Direction. The right hand File stand, the rest move away successively, placing
themselves in one direct File before the Front.

Reducement. Files, file six to the right into the Rear, face all about; or,
Files, file six to the right toward the Front.

Command. Files, file inward into the right Flank.

Direction. Half-files face about, and the outmost Files then upon the left as
they are so faced, are to move away forward, and consequently all the rest are
to fall in behind them; the like is to be performed by the Front, the outmost
File at the same time is to move away, and the rest successively falling in
until they have made one entire File, after they are to face to the Front.

Reducement. Front Half-file, file three to the left; Rear Half-file face
about, and file three to the right; face to your Leader, and close your
Divisions.

Command. Files, file to the right by Division.

Direction. Half-files face about: the outmost File upon the right is to stand,
the rest are to move forward, and to place themselves successively into one
entire File, going forward after each other, and after face to the Front.

Reducement. Front-half-files, file three to the right, and Reer-half-files
face about, and file three to the left; face to your Leader, and close your
Divisions.

Command. Ranks, file to the right, every man placing himself behind his
right-hand-man. Ranks filing by way of Countermarch.


Direction. This may be done marching or standing; if marching, the
right-hand-man of the first Rank does first move away, the rest in the same
Rank do fall in behind him, and consequently all the rest, until they make one
entire File; if upon a Stand, the Ranks are to open backward to such a
Distance, as they may conveniently fall into one File.

Reducement. Files, rank 12 to the left; or, Files, rank as you were.

Command. Ranks, file to the right, advancing, every man placing himself before
his right-hand-man.

Direction. The outmost File stand, The Ranks are to be at twice double
Distance, and the Files at order.
the rest are to move forward with their right leg, placing themselves before
the right-hand-man.

Reducement. Files, rank 12 to the left; or, Files, rank as you were.

Command. Ranks, file to the right, every man placing himself before his
Leader, and his Bringer-up.

Direction. The Half-files are to face about, only the right-hand-file is to
stand, the rest are to move forward, filing to the right Flank, every man
placing himself before his Leader, and his Bringer-up; face to your Leader.

Reducement. Front-half-files, rank 12 to the right, Reer-half-files face
about, and rank 12 to the left; face to your Leader, close your Divisions.

Command. Ranks, file inward into the right Flank, every man placing himself
before his Leader, and his Bringer-up.

Direction. Half-files, face about: Front and Reer-half-files are to march to
such convenient distance, as the Ranks may fall into the midst of the right
Flank; after they are to face about, or to face to the midst of Ranks; and then
they are to move forward into the right Flank, every man placing himself as
before commanded, and after face to their Leader.

Reducement. Front-half-files, rank 12 to the left, Reer-half-files face about,
and rank 12 to the right; face to your Leader, and close your Divisions.

Command. Files, file to the right, every man placing himself behind his
Bringer-up. Files f^ling by way of Countermarch.


Direction. The outmost File stand, the rest face about, and move forward each
particular File to the left, placing themselves behind their Right-hand-file,
and their Bringers-up.

Reducement. Files, file six to the left, every man placing himself before his
Leader.

Command. Files, file to the right, every man placing himself before his Leader.

Direction. The Right-hand-file stand, the rest move forwards, every File
successively placing themselves before their Leaders, and their Right-hand-file.

Reducement. Files, file six to the right into the Rear, every man placing
himself before his Bringer-up; face all about, the last six men stand, the rest
are to move, and to file six to the right, placing themselves before their
Bringers-up, and after to face to the Front.

Command. Files, file to the right Flank by Division, every man placing himself
before his Leader, and his Bringer-up.

Direction. Half-files face about; the Right-hand-file is to stand, the rest
are to move forward to the right Flank, placing themselves before their
Leaders, and their Bringers-up, making one entire File to the right; face to
your Leader.

Reducement. Front-half-files, face about, and file three to the right, every
man placing himself before his Bringer-up; and Reer-half-files, file three to
the left, placing your selves before your Leaders; face to your Leader.

Command. Files, file inward into the right Flank, every man placing himself
before his Leader, and his Bringer-up.

Direction. Half-files face about, and Front and Reer-half-files move forward,
until there be sufficient Distance to file into the right Flank; after face
them about to the midst of Ranks, then the files may move successively into the
right Flank, placing themselves before their Leaders, and their Bringers-up;
face to your Leader.

Reducement. Front-half-files, file three to the left, every man placing
himself before his Leader; and Reer-half-files, face about, and file three to
the right, every man placing himself before his Bringer-up; face to your
Leader, and close your Divisions.

CHAP. XLV. Ranks wheeling into the Flanks.
They ought to be at twice double Distance in rank and at Close order in file.
Command. RAnks, wheel to the right, into the right Flank.

Direction. Every particular Rank is to wheel to their right hand, until they
have brought their Aspects unto the right Flank; after face to the Front.

Reducement. Files, rank 12 to the right: the first man is to stand, the rest
are to move forward to the right successively, 12 in a Rank to the right.

Command. Ranks, wheel to the left to the right Flank.

Direction. Face all about, and Ranks wheel to the left, until you have brought
your Aspects unto the right Flank; face to your Leader.

Reducement. Files, rank 12 to the left: the first man is to stand, the rest
are to move forwards, making up 12 abrest to the left, until they have made six
Ranks as at first.

Command. Ranks, wheel outward to the right Flank.

Direction. Half-files, face about; the first three Ranks wheel to the right,
and the three last Ranks wheel to the left; to your Leader.

Reducement. Front-half-files, rank 12 to the right; Reer-half-files, face
about, and rank 12 to the left; face to your Leader, march up and close
forwards to your due Distance.

Command. Ranks, wheel inward into the right Flank.

Direction. Half-files, face about; Front and Reer-half-files, march from the
midst to twice double distance; after Front and Reer-half-files, face about;
Front-half-files, wheel your Ranks to the left; Reer-half-files, wheel your
Ranks to the right, to your Leader.

Reducement. Front-half-files, rank 12 to the left; Reer-half-files, face
about, and rank 12 to the right; face to your Leader, and close your Divisions.

The left Flank challenges the next place; but I shall spare that pains, in
regard it is to be done by the same words of Command, only altering the hand:
I come therefore in the next place to show how Ranks and Files may file outward
to both Flanks and midst at one and the same time by proper words of Command,
as follows.

CHAP. XLVI. Of Files filing, or Ranks filing to both the Flanks and the Midst
at one and the same time.
Command. FIles, file to the right and left of both Flanks, and the midst of
Files.

Direction. The outmost File upon each Flank, and the two middle Files are to
move away; the rest are to fall in successively behind to the right and left,
filing to both Flanks, and to the midst; after to stand, and even their Ranks,
and streighten their Files.

Reducement. Files, file six to right and left inward, moving between the
Flanks and the middle files.

Command. Files, file to both Flanks, and to the midst of Files advancing.

Direction. The outmost File upon each Flank stand, and so likewise the two
inmost Files; the rest move forth and place themselves successively filing,
advancing toward both Flanks, and the midst of Files.

Reducement. Files, file six to the right and left inward to the Rear, placing
yourselves between the Flanks and the middle files; the moving part is to face
about, and to march down according to command as before expressed, after face to
their Leader.

Command. Files, file to both Flanks and the midst by Division. They must be at
order both in rank and file.


Direction. The outmost File upon each Flank, and the two inmost Files, stand;
Half-files of the other Files, face about, and march forth, and file by threes
to the right and left into both Flanks and the midst; facing to their Leader,
they will stand in four Files eighteen deep.

Reducement. The six middlemost men in each File stand; the three first and the
three last Ranks, file six to the right and left inward: the three first Ranks
face about; then moving by threes between the outmost File of each Flank and
the middle Files, after facing to their Leader.

Command. Files, file inward into both Flanks and into the midst of Files.

Direction. Half-files, face about; march all, and open from the midst to twice
double distance; face all about to the right: the two inmost and the two
outmost Files stand; the rest move successively by threes, until they file into
both Flanks and into the midst; face to your Leader.

Reducement. Files, file three to the right and left inward into the Front and
Rear; Half-files, face about; the three first and the three last Ranks, stand;
the 12 middlemost men move inward by threes into Front and Rear, between the
outmost and the middlemost Files: face to your Leader, and close your Divisions.

Command. Files, file both Flanks and to the midst of Files, every man placing
himself before his Bringers-up.

Direction. Face all about; the two outmost Files and the two middlemost Files,
stand; the rest move forth to the right and left, placing themselves
successively before their Bringers-up, filing toward both Flanks and the midst
of Files; face to your Leader.

Reducement. Files, file six to the right and left inward, following your
Bringers-up between the Flanks and the middle Files; the first six Ranks are to
stand.

Command. Files, file to both Flanks and to the midst of Files, advancing,
every man placing himself before his Leader.

Direction. The outmost File upon each Flank, and the two middlemost Files
stand; the rest advance forward, placing themselves successively before their
Leaders, filing both Flanks and to the midst of Files.

Reducement. Files, file six to the right and left inward into the Rear,
following your Leaders, between the Flankers and the middle Files; the six last
Ranks face about; and after they have filed, they are all to face to their
Leader.

Command. Files, file to both Flanks and to the midst by Division, every man
placing himself before his Leader and Bringer-up.

Direction. The outmost File upon each Flank, and the two inmost, stand;
Half-files of the other Files, face about; and then command them to move,
filing to both Flanks and into the midst, placing themselves before their
Leaders and Bringers-up; to your Leader.

Reducement. The six middlemost men in each File stand; the three first and the
three last Ranks, file six to the right and left inward; every man placing
himself before his Leader and Bringer-up: the three first Ranks face about; and
then with the three last, they are to move forward between the outmost and the
middlemost Files; that is, by threes to place themselves before their Leaders
and their Bringers-up; face to your Leader.

Command. Files, file inward into both Flanks and into the midst, every man
placing himself before his Leader and Bringer-up.

Direction. Half-files, face to the Rear; march all, and open from the midst to
twice double distance; face all about to the right, the two inmost and the two
outmost Files upon each Flank stand; the rest move successively by threes,
placing themselves before their Leaders and Bringers-up, filing into both
Flanks and the midst; face to your Leader.

Reducement. Files three to the right and left inward, into Front and Rear,
every man placing himself before his Leader and his Bringer-up; Half-files,
face about; the three first and three last Ranks stand; the 12 middlemost men
move forwards by threes, between the outmost and the middle Files, placing
themselves as aforesaid; face to your Leader, and close your Divisions.

CHAP. XLVII. Of Ranks wheeling to both the Flanks.
They are to be at double distance in Ranks, and at order in Files.
Command. RAnks, wheel to the right and left to both Flanks advancing.

Direction. The outmost men upon the right and left in every Rank are the
hinges of the Motion; the rest are to divide their Ranks by wheeling, six to
the right, and six to the left, until they have brought their Aspects unto both
the Flanks; after face to their Leader.

Reducement. Files, rank 12 to the right and left inward into the Rear; face
all to the right and left about inward, and begin the Motion from each File, to
rank six to the right and six to the left, making up 12 abrest in the Rear; the
rest following until they have made six Ranks in a breast; face to your Leader.

Command. Ranks, wheel to the right and left toward the Rear.

Direction. Face all about. The outside-men are the hinges of this Motion, who
are to wheel from the Rear to the right and left, until they have brought their
Aspects unto both the Flanks; face to your Leader.

Reducement. Files, rank 12 to the right and left inward; the Right-hand-file
is to begin to rank six to the left; the Left-hand-file is to rank six to the
right, making up even abrest 12 in number, the rest doing the same.

Command. Front and Reer-half-files, wheel your ranks outward into both Flanks.

Direction. Half-files, face about; and Front and Reer-half-files, wheel
outward into both Flanks, until you have brought your Aspects unto the right
and left; face to your Leader.

Reducement. Front and Reer-half-files, rank 12 to the right and left inward,
toward the midst of Ranks; Front-half-files face about, and begin the Motion
from the Bringers-up of the Front-half-files, and the Half-file-leaders;
ranking six to the right and left from each File, making 12 abrest; face to
your Leader.

Command. Front and Reer-half-files, wheel your Ranks into both Flanks.

Direction. Half-files, face about, and march all until you be at twice double
distance in the midst; then face all about to the right, and wheel to the right
and left, until you have brought your Aspects unto both Flanks, by wheeling
inward to them; face to your Leader.

Reducement. Files, rank 12 to the right and left inward into Front and Rear;
Half-files, face about, and rank in Front and Rear, six to the right and six to
the left, making 12 abrest; after face to your Leader.

CHAP. XLVIII. Of Ranks wheeling to the midst of Files.
Command. FRont and Reer-half-files, wheel your Ranks inward to the midst of
Files.

Direction. Half-files, face about; and Front and Reer-half-files, wheel your
Ranks to the right and left inward, until they face in opposition; to your
Leader.

Reducement. Files, rank six to the right and left outward unto the midst of
Ranks; Front-half-files, face about, and Rank six to the right and left
outward; Reer-half-files do the same to your Leader.

Command. Front and Reer-half-files, wheel your Ranks inward into the midst of
Files.

Direction. Half-files, face about; Front and Reer-half-files, march until you
have attained twice double distance in the midst of Ranks; face all about to
the right, and wheel to the right and left inward into the midst of Files; to
your Leader.

Reducement. Files, rank six to the right and left outward into Front and Rear;
Half-files, face about; and Front and Reer-half-files, rank six to the right
and left outward, as before commanded; to your Leader, move forward, and close
your Divisions to your double distance.

CHAP. XLIX. Of Ranks wheeling to both Flanks, and into the midst, at one and
the same time.
They ought to be at more then Open order in Ranks, and at order in Files.
Command. FRont and Reer-half-files, wheel your Ranks to the right and left
into both Flanks, and the midst of Files.

Direction. Half-files, face about to the right; and the middle Files, and the
outmost Files upon each Flank, are the hinges of this Motion; the rest are to
wheel their Ranks to the right and left toward both the Flanks, and to the
midst of Files; face to your Leader.

Reducement. Files, rank six to the right and left inward to the midst of
Ranks, and between the Flankers and the middle Files: Front-half-files, face
about, and rank six to the right and left inward toward the midst of Ranks,
and between the Flankers, and middle Files; the Reer-half-files doing the same,
face to your Leader.

Command. Front and Reer-half-files, wheel your Ranks inward into both Flanks,
and into the midst of Files.

Direction. Half-files, face about; and Front and Reer-half-files, march until
you be at double distance in the midst; after face all about to the right, and
wheel your Ranks to the right and left inward into both Flanks, and into the
midst of Files; face to your Leader.

Reducement. Files, rank six to the right and left inward into Front and Rear,
between the Flankers and the middle Files; Half-files face about, and rank six
to the right and left inward to the Rear between the Flankers and the middle
Files, the Front-half-files doing the same to the Front, after facing to their
Leader; and Half-files move forwards, closing their Divisions to the distance
of the former Ranks.

Having dwelt thus long upon this subject of Inversion and Conversion
(occasioned thereunto by their great variety and difficulty in the performance
of them,) I hold it convenient to give a breathing space unto the wearied
Soldier, whilst I in the mean time prepare further matter for his longing
desire.

Yet before I enter in any other discourse of the Art Military, I hold it
requisite to give some admonitions to those that shall venture upon them. For
being very difficult, they are not easily understood by every puny; my advice
therefore is, to wave such things in time of Exercise, which the Soldiers are
unacquainted with, providing for them such matter as is both plain and easy;
and being frequently practiced in such, he may after drill them on to harder,
till by degrees he has brought them unto such perfection and knowledge, that
they shall be able to perform and execute what is commanded; not gazing upon
one another, (as I have often observed) neither knowing their Leaders meaning;
or if they did, they are altogether ignorant how to fulfill his commands.
Frequent practice therefore makes the Soldier expert, witness our gallant
Soldiers and Citizens of London, who are most of them so well grounded (by
frequent practice) that their Leaders can scarce give a word of Command, which
is not easily apprehended by them, they being in their exercises so often
inured to such difficult expressions as these of Inversion and Conversion.

CHAP. L. Of Counter-marches, with their several sorts and kinds, affording
much variety in time of Exercise.
THose which have a longing desire to be thoroughly knowing in this part or
branch of Military Discipline, must take notice of these four sorts, (viz.)
Counter-marching of Files, next of Ranks, after the Front and Reer-half-files,
and lastly, of right and left Half-ranks: all which are performed either by
entire or Divisional Counter-marches, or else by the entire changing of ground;
and that by many ways, the Front-half-files with the Rear, the right Half-ranks
with the left: So that an expert Leader may venture so far in them, as to
continue his Exercise (without reducing) almost for an hour, and not to express
himself twice in any one word of Command; they affording such plenty and
variety in them, that with pleasure, using but four words of Command, he may
bring each Soldier into his proper place again; observing these directions
following. As first, to look down in the Body, where his File-leaders are, and
where his Bringers-up: and likewise marking the several places of his
Half-file-leaders, and the Bringers up of his Front-half-files, together with
his Flankers and his middle Files: this special care being taken, he may begin
and proceed to the Reducement, after this manner.

If by some former Counter-marches his File-leaders are in the place of his
Half-file-leaders, and that his Bringers-up are in the room of the Bringers-up
of the Front-half-files, then he may proceed in this, or the like kind,
commanding them to countermarch their Front and Rear into the midst; which
being performed, they will stand in some pretty way of reducing; after facing
them to the Front, where he meets with his Bringers-up, in stead of his
File-leaders; which by one Countermarch will bring them up again into the
Front. Yet perhaps the Flankers have inter-changed ground with the middle
File-leaders: if so, then Countermarch their Flanks into the midst, and face
them to the Front: and if it happen that the right Flank is become the left,
and the left the right; then Countermarch their Ranks to any hand, and after
face them to the first Front they are reduced. And farther, take this for a
general rule, that when Files or Ranks Countermarch to any hand, command them
to Countermarch to the contrary, and it will reduce them; or countermarching
your Front and Rear into the midst, counter-marching of them back again from
the midst will bring each man into his proper place again. The same rule being
observed, reduces the Flankers, or Front and Reer-half-files, counter-marching
of them from the midst.

Counter-marches rightly considered, branch themselves forth into these three
particulars.

The Macedonian. Lacedemonian. Chorean.


The Macedonian is a Countermarch of gaining ground, for that it leaves the
ground it formerly stood upon, and in lieu thereof takes the ground before the
Front, and turns their Aspects unto the Rear.

The Lacedemonian is a Countermarch of losing ground, for that it leaves the
ground it first stood upon, and in room thereof, takes the ground which is
behind the Rear; thither likewise altering the Soldiers Aspects.

The Chorean is a Countermarch maintaining ground, keeping the ground the
Battalia formerly stood upon, every Soldier taking another place; it likewise
turns the Aspect toward the Rear.

Thus you see (for all their great variety which latter ages have invented)
they consist but of three sorts or kinds, either maintaining, gaining, or
losing of ground; and may be performed (as I said before) either by entire or
divisional Counter-marches.

It may now be expected that I declare unto the Soldier the meaning of each
particular Countermarch; briefly therefore, thus: Files counter-marching is,
when every Soldier follows his Leader; Ranks counter-marching is, when every
Soldier follows his side-man, whether it be to the right hand or to the
left: Front and Reer-half-files counter-marching is, sometimes when every
particular Soldier follows his Leader or Bringer-up; or else when they
follow their Half-file-leaders, or their Bringers-up of the Front-half-files,
or the like: Right and left Half-ranks counter-marching is, when every Soldier
in the Rank follows the outmost men upon the right and left; or when they
shall follow their inside right and left-hand-men, or the like. What has
hitherto been spoken may be sufficient, both for the instruction and direction
of any discreet Soldier: I come in the next place to set them all before them
as they lie in Order.

CHAP. LI. Entire Counter-marching of Files.
Command. FIles to the Right Left
Hand, Countermarch, maintaining ground.

Direction. File-leaders, turn off upon the ground you stand; the rest moving
up successively into the File-leaders place, turning off until the Bringers-up
come up into the Front; after face to your Leader.

Command. File-leaders, stand; the rest pass through to the right or left, and
place your selves before your Leaders.

Command. File-leaders, face about; the rest pass through to the right or left,
and place your selves behind your Leaders; face to your Leader.

Command. File-Leaders face to the Rear, the rest pass through to the right or
left, following your Bringers-up, and placing your selves behind your Leaders;
face all to your Leader.

Command. File-leaders stand, the rest pass through to the right or left, and
place your selves before your Leaders, following your Bringers up.

Command. Files to the right and left Countermarch losing ground, placing your
selves before your Bringers-up.

Direction. Every File-leader turn off upon the ground he stands on, the rest
successively doing the same until they come to the last Rank, who need do no
more then face about; after face all to their Leader.

Command. The last Rank stand, the rest pass through to the right or left,
placing your selves behind your Bringers-up, every man following his Leader.

Direction. File-leaders turn off to the right or left, the rest following
successively until they are all clear of the Rear, then face to their Leader.

Command. Bringers-up stand, the rest face about, pass through to the right or
left, and place your selves behind your Bringers-up.

Command. Bringers-up face about, the rest pass through to the right or left,
and place your selves before your Bringers-up.

Direction. Face all to the Rear, and begin the Motion with the second Rank
from the Rear, moving forward, every man placing himself before his Bringer-up;
to your Leader.

Command. Countermarch your Front and Rear into the midst.

Direction. Half-files face about, and turn off to the left; Front Half-files
turn off to the right; to your Leader.

Command. Front and Rear Half-files Countermarch to the right or left.

Direction. This is to be done distinctly, the Front half-files turning off to
the right by themselves, the Rear half-files turning off in like manner; face
to your Leader.

Command. File-leaders, and half-file-leaders stand, the rest pass through to
the right or left, and place your selves before your Leaders and
half-file-leaders.

Command. Countermarch your Front and Rear half-files to the right and left
from the midst.

Direction. Front half-files face about, and turn off to the right; Rear
half-files turn off to the left; to your Leader.

Command. File-leaders and half-file-leaders face about, the rest pass through
to the right or left, and place your selves behind your Leaders, and your
half-file-leaders; to your Leaders.

Command. File-leaders and half-file-leaders stand, the rest pass through to
the right or left, and place your selves before your Leaders and
half-file-leaders, every man following his Bringer-up, and the Bringers-up of
the Front half-files.

Command. File-leaders and half-file-leaders face about, the rest pass through
to the right or left, and place your selves behind your Leaders and
half-file-leaders, following your Bringers-up.

Direction. The File-leaders and the Half-file-leaders (being first faced) are
to stand; and the Bringers-up of the Front and Reer-half-files are to move
forwards, until they be clear of the standing part; after they are to face to
the Rear; which being ended, they are again to face to the Front.

CHAP. LII. Divisional Counter-marching of Files.
Command. FIle-leaders and Bringers-up, stand; the rest pass through to the
right or left, and place your selves before your Leaders and your Bringers-up.

Direction. Half-files, face about; the Countermarch being ended, and faced
again to the Front, command them to move forwards, and close their Divisions.

Command. File-leaders, face about; the rest pass through to the right or left,
and place your selves behind your Leaders and your Bringers-up.

Direction. The two last Ranks from the Rear face about; and then they are to
begin the Motion together; which being ended, face them to the Front, and the
Half-files are to move forward, and to close their divisions.

Command. File-leaders and Bringers-up, stand; the rest pass through to the
right or left, and place your selves before your Leaders and your Bringers-up;
following the Half-file-leaders, and the Bringers-up of the Front-half-files.

Direction. Half-files, face about: this Motion is begun by the Bringers-up of
each Division; which being ended, they are to face to their Leader; the
Half-files moving forwards, closing their Divisions.

Command. File-leaders, face about; the rest pass through to the right or left,
and place your selves behind your Leaders and your Bringers-up, following the
Half-file-leaders, and the Bringers-up of the Front-half-files.

Direction. The two last Ranks from the Rear, face about: this Motion is begun
by the Bringers-up of each Division, who are to lead away the rest following,
until they be clear of the Front and Rear; and after to face about, placing
themselves behind their Half-file-leaders and the Bringers-up of the
Front-half-files; then facing to the Front, the Half-files moving forwards,
closing their Divisions.

Command. Countermarch to the right and left; your Front and Reer-half-files
from the midst (losing ground) every man placing himself before his Leader and
his Bringer-up.

Direction. Front-half-files, face about, and turn off to the right, and the
Half-file-leaders turn off to the left, and march clear of the Front and Rear,
and after the File-leaders; the Bringers-up are but to face about, and the
Countermarch will be ended; then face the Half-files to the Front, let them
move forward and close their Divisions.

Command. Front and Reer-half-files interchange ground to the right or left,
marching clear each from other.

Direction. Front-half-files, face about; and pass through to your own right
hands, until you be clear six foot of each other; then face to the Front, the
Half-files moving forwards, and closing their Divisions.

Command. Front and Reer-half-files, Countermarch to the right, and
interchange ground.

Direction. Half-files, face about, and turn off to the right; and
Front-half-files at the same time doing the like, moving forwards until they be
clear one of another six foot; then facing to their Leader, close their
Divisions.

CHAP. LIII. Entire Counter-marches of Ranks.
Command. RAnks to the right hand, counter-marching maintaining ground.

Direction. Face to the right; the Right-hand-file that was, turn off to the
right, the rest moving up into the same ground, turning off likewise; to your
Leader.

Command. The outmost File upon the right, face to the right; the rest pass
through to the right or left, and place your selves before your Right-hand-men.

Direction. Face to the right, and pass through as before expressed; to your
Leader.

Command. The Right-hand-file face to the left; the rest pass through to the
right or left, and place your selves behind your right-hand-men.

Direction. Face to the right, and move forwards, and place your selves behind
your right-hand-men; to your Leader.

Command. Ranks to the left hand countermarch losing ground.

Direction. The outmost is to turn off to the left about until he has brought
his Aspect unto the right Flank; and so consequently all the rest, moving still
forwards until they have gained upon the outside of the right Flank so much
ground as they have lost, or that they have placed themselves before their
right-hand-men, by following their left-hand-men; face to your Leader.

Command. The Right-hand-file, face to the left; the rest pass through to the
right, following your left-hand-men, and placing your selves behind your
Right-hand-file.

Direction. The outmost File upon the left, face to the right, and march
through the Intervals toward the right Flank; and when he is moved away, the
rest upon the left are successively to do the same, until they have in lieu of
that ground they formerly stood, gained so much upon the out-file of the right
Flank; then facing about toward the left Flank, after face to your Leader.

Command. Ranks to the left hand Countermarch, maintaining ground.

Direction. Face to the left, and the left-hand-file that was turn off to the
left on the same ground he stands, the rest moving up successively doing the
same; to your Leader.

Command. The left-hand-File stand, the rest face to the left, pass through,
and place your selves on the outside of your left-hand-men.

Direction. The left-hand-File face to the left, the rest pass through to the
left, and place your selves before your left-hand-men; to your Leader.

Command. The left-hand-File face to the right, the rest face to the left, pass
through to the left, and place your selves behind your left-hand-men.

Command. The left-hand-File face to the left, the rest pass through to the
left, and place your selves before your left-hand-men, following your
right-hand-men.

Direction. Face all to the left, and the outmost Files upon the right move
forward upon the left, the rest successively doing the same, until you have all
placed your selves before your left-hand-men; to your Leader.

Command. The left-hand-file face to the right, the rest face to the left, pass
through to the left, and place your selves behind your left-hand-men, following
your right-hand-men.

Direction. The right-hand-File that was, is to begin this Motion, the rest are
consequently to follow until they have gained as much ground on the outside of
the left Flank as before they lost; after face about to the right, and after to
their Leader.

Command. Ranks to the right hand countermarch, every man placing himself on
the outside of his left-hand-man, by following his right-hand-man.

Direction. The left-hand-file stand, the outmost File upon the right, is to
turn about to the right, until he has brought his aspect to the left Flank;
then moving forward until he be clear of the second File, after the rest are to
do the like, forsaking the ground they stood upon, and in lieu thereof to gain
so much upon the outside of the left Flank, placing themselves on the outside
of their left-hand-men, their aspects being to the Front. Or you may command
the outmost File upon the right to face to the left, and so begin to lead until
he be clear of the second File, the rest doing the same until they have all
placed themselves on the outside of their left-hand-men, their aspects being to
the Front; which I conceive to be the easier way.

Command. Countermarch your Flanks into the Midst.

Direction. Face to the right and left outward; right Flank turn off to the
right, left Flank turn off to the left, until they meet in the midst; to your
Leader.

Command. Right and left half-ranks Countermarch to the right or left.

Direction. Face all to the right: the right Half-ranks are to turn off to the
right by themselves, and the left Half-ranks in l ke manner; to your Leader.

Command. The outmost File upon the right, and the right-hand-file of the left
Half-rank stand, the rest face to the right, pass through, and place your
selves on the outside of your right-hand-men; face to your Leader.

Command. The outmost File upon the right, and the right-hand-file of the left
Half-rank face to the right and stand; the rest pass through to the right, and
place your selves before your right-hand-men; face all to the right, and the
motion being ended, face to your Leader.

Command. The outmost File upon the right, and the right-hand-file of the left
Half-rank, face to the left and stand, the rest face to the right; pass
through, and place your selves behind your right-hand-men; to your Leader.

Direction. For these three last Counter-marches is for the moving part to
begin to Countermarch, who are the next Files of the standing part, and so to
follow successively until they have performed the command, and after to face to
their Leader.

Command. The right-hand-file of the left half-rank, and the outmost File upon
the right, stand, the rest pass through to the right, and place your selves on
the out side of your right-hand-men, following your outmost Files.

Direction. The outmost Files are to face to the right, and to lead away until
they be clear of the next, who likewise are to follow successively.

Command. The outmost File upon the right, and the right-hand-file of the left
Half-rank face to the right and stand, the rest pass through to the right, and
place your selves before your right-hand-men.

Direction. Face all to the right; and the outmost Files that were, are to
begin the motion, placing themselves before their right-hand-men, the rest
following successively; to your Leader.

Command. The outmost File upon the right, and the right-hand-file of the left
Half-rank face to the left and stand; the rest pass through to the right, and
place your selves behind your right-hand-men.

Direction. The outmost Files are to turn about until they have brought their
aspects unto the right Flank, then move away until they be clear of the second
File, and in like manner they are to turn off, doing the same until they have
placed themselves behind their right-hand-men; then facing to the left about,
and after to their Leader, to even their Ranks and straighten their Files.

Command. Countermarch your right and left Half-Ranks from the midst.

Direction. Face inward, right Half-ranks turn off to the right, left
Half-ranks turn off to the left; to your Leader.

CHAP. LIVE. Divisional Counter-marches of the right and left Half-ranks.
Command. THe outmost File upon each Flank stand, the rest pass through to the
right and left, and place your selves on the outside of your right and
left-hand-men.

Direction. The rest face outward, and begin the motion by the next Files, the
others following in order, and after to close their Files into the Midst to
open Order.

Command. The outmost File upon each Flank face outward and stand; the rest
pass through to the right and left, and place your selves before your outside
men.

Direction. The rest are to face outward, and the next Files unto them that
first faced are to begin the motion, placing themselves before their outside
men; after face to their Leader, and close Files into the midst to Order.

Command. The outmost File upon each Flank face inward, the rest pass through
and place your selves behind your outside men.

Direction. The rest are to face outward, and to pass through to the right and
left, placing themselves behind their right and left-hand-men, and after to
move forward, and close their Divisions, and face to their Leader.

Command. The outmost File upon each Flank stand, the rest pass through to the
right and left, and place your selves on the outside of your right and
left-hand-men, following your inmost Files.

Direction. The inmost Files are to begin the motion, moving away to the right
and left, until they be clear of their second Files, and then they are to move
away successively until they have all placed themselves on the outside of their
right and left-hand-men, and then close files into the midst to open Order.

Command. The outmost Files upon each Flank face outward, the rest pass through
to the right and left, placing your selves before your right and left-hand-men,
following your inmost Files.

Direction. The rest are likewise to face outward, and the inmost Files are to
begin the motion, the rest following in order until they have placed themselves
before their outside men; after face to the Front, and close Files into the
midst to open Order.

Command. The outmost File upon each Flank face inward, the rest pass through
to the right and left, and place your selves behind your outside-men, following
the inmost Files.

Direction. The rest are to face outward; the inmost Files begin to move
forward to the right and left, the rest consequently do the same, until they
all stand behind their outside-men; then facing to the right and left about,
closing their Divisions by moving forwards; after face to the Front.

Command. Countermarch your right and left Half-ranks from the midst, losing
ground, and placing your selves before your outside-men.

Direction. Face inward, Right-half-ranks, turn off to the right; and
Left-half-ranks, turn off to the left, and move forwards until you have placed
your selves before your outside-men; after face to your Leader, and close Files
into the midst to open order.

Command Right and Left-half-ranks interchange ground.

Direction. Face inward, and pass through to your own right hand, until you be
clear six foot each of other; after face to your Leader, and close Files into
the midst to open order.

Command. Right and left half-ranks, Countermarch to the right and left, and
interchange ground.

Direction. Face outward, Right-half-ranks, turn off to the right;
Left-half-ranks, turn off to the left, and march clear each of the other; after
face to the Front, and close Files inward to open order.

Thus much may suffice to be spoken of all the several sorts and kinds of
Counter-marches; which if any shall conceive my pains fruitless in culling out
such plenty and variety, there being so few of them practiced among able and
knowing Soldiers; my best apology will be, The high and venerable esteem I had
of Antiquity necessitated me thereunto; as also to give full satisfaction to
the Leaders of our private Meetings, who of late have labored to inure their
Soldiers in the full practice thereof, made me the willinger rather to undergo
the censure of some, then to incur the displeasure of many. Yet by the way,
give me leave fully to declare my self concerning the use of them: for my
opinion is, that of all the Motions tending to Martial Discipline, these may
the best be spared, as being of little use, and not so much as practiced abroad
upon service; and therefore the fewer of them any Leader shall use in his
Exercise, in my judgment he does the better, not spending time in needless
speeches, telling of his Soldiers that this is the Macedonian, this is the
Lacedemonian, or Chorean Countermarch. Not to lie under the censure my self of
mispending time, I come therefore briefly in the next place to treat of
Wheelings, being a subject more profitable for the intelligible Soldier.

CHAP. LV. Of Wheelings, with their several uses.
HAving proceeded thus far in showing all the several sorts and kinds of
Military Motions, it will now in the next place be expected that I speak
somewhat of Wheelings, and as formerly, so now, to set before the Soldier
their several kinds and uses. Wherefore take notice of two sorts, Wheelings
Angular, and VVheelings on the Center, (which latter is commonly called the
Prince of Orange his VVheeling) being acted or performed by the Soldier two
several ways; that is to say, Entire or Divisional.

Entire VVheelings to the Angles, are when the Soldiers turn their Aspects
from the Front proper to either of the Flanks or Rear, whereby they may gain
the VVind or Sun, or some like advantage, bringing their best Soldiers thither
for to encounter an Enemy. For the better performance of this Motion, it will
be convenient to close Ranks and Files into the midst to order, and to keep
their due distance both in Rank and File, observing in their Ranks their right
and left-hand-men, and following their Leaders, always conforming themselves in
their Motion to the most commendable Posture, which is Pikes advanced, and
Muskets poysed. Wheeling the Battle on the Center, is when they are so
straightened with ground, that they have not room to wheel to the right or
left, as in the former, which gains as much more ground before the Front, as
formerly they stood on. This Wheeling brings their best Soldiers to either of
the Flanks or Rear. I could wish that this Wheeling were more often practiced
amongst us, for by it the Soldiers are better kept together in their Motion,
being not so apt to fly out, as in the former.

Divisional Wheelings (provided they have sufficient number of men) are of
singular good use to encounter several Enemies at one and the same time, which
the Front of our Battalia bringing our best Soldiers for to skirmish with
them. It is likewise useful to bring either Arms into Front, Rear, or both the
Flanks: for suppose the Musketeers to be upon the Flanks, and fearing a
desperate charge of the Horse to fall upon them by a Division of Wheeling, the
Pikes are thither brought to receive their onset; and in the mean space, the
Musketeers have time to recruit their Bandiliers again. Much more might be
spoken, but my intent is not to fill my Book with impertinent discourses,
knowing what is already spoken is sufficient for the intelligible Soldier.

CHAP. LVI. Entire Wheelings.
Command. WHeel your Battle to the Right. Left. Right Left
about.

Direction. The right or the left-hand-men in the Front are the hinges of these
Motions; the rest have a greater compass to march then they, to bring their
Aspects unto the place commanded, following their Leaders.

Command. Wheel your Battle on the same ground to the Right. Left. Right Left
about.

Direction. The Left-half-ranks moves forwards wheeling to the right; and the
right Half-ranks contrariwise faceth to the left side-wise falling backward,
moving still unto the place commanded.

CHAP. LVII. Divisional Wheelings.
Command. WHeel the Battle off by Division from the Front.

Direction. Turn off to the right and left.

Command. Wheel the Battle off by Division from the Rear.

Direction. Face to the Rear, and turn off to the right and left.

Command. Wheel the Battle inward to the Rear.

Direction. Open from the midst to convenient distance, and turn off to the
right and left.

Command. Wheel the Battle inward to the Front from the Rear.

Direction. Face to the Rear, open from the midst, and wheel inward to the
Front.

Command. Wheel off the Body by Division from the right Flank.

Direction. Face to the right.

Command. Wheel off the Body by Division from the left Flank.

Direction. Face to the left.

Command. Wheel the Body inward to the left Flank from the right.

Direction. Face to the right, and open outward to convenient distance to wheel
inward to the left Flank.

Command. Wheel the body inward to the right Flank from the left.

Direction. Face to the left, and open outward to convenient distance to wheel
inward to the right Flank.

Command. Wheel off your Front and Reer-half-files by Division.

Direction. Half-files, face about; and Front and Reer-half-files, turn off by
Division.

Command. Wheel your Front and Reer-half-files inward to the midst of Ranks.

Direction. Half-files, face about; and Front and Reer-half-files, open outward
to convenient distance to wheel inward to the midst of Ranks.

Command. Wheel off your Front and Reer-half-files by Division from the midst
of Ranks.

Direction. Front-half-files, face about; and Front and Reer-half-files, wheel
off to the right and left by Division.

Command. Wheel Front and Reer-half-files inward, both to the Front and Rear
from the midst of Ranks.

Direction. Front-half-files, face about; and Front and Reer-half-files, open
from the midst to convenient distance, and wheel inward into Front and Rear.

Command. Wheel off your right and left Half-ranks by Division.

Direction. Face outward, and wheel off to the right and left by Division.

Command. Wheel your right and left Half-ranks inward to the midst of Files.

Direction. Face outward, and open to the right and left to convenient distance
to wheel inward to the midst of Files.

Command. Wheel off your right and left Half-ranks by Division from the midst
of Files.

Direction. Face inward, and cause them to move backward to convenient
distance, to wheel off by Division from the midst of Files.

Command. Wheel your right and left Half-ranks inward to both Flanks from the
midst of Files.

Direction. Face inward, and open to the right and left to convenient distance
to wheel inward to both Flanks.

Command. Wheel the outward Angles to the right and left about, to the Center.

Direction. Face to the outward Angles, and close Ranks and Files to close
order; and the Angles on the right, turn off to the right; the Angles on the
left, turn off to the left.

Command. Wheel the inward Angles to the right and left about inward from the
Center.

Direction. Face to the inward Angles, or to the Center, and wheel about to the
right and left inward from the Center.

These are all the entire and divisional Wheelings that have hitherto been
practiced by any, according to my best observation: there are other Wheelings
which may properly be termed Doublings, which I have placed amongst the
Doublings, where they more properly belong. Now if any shall demand of me a
reason why I have omitted the Reducements to each particular Command; my answer
thereunto is easy: for as in the Counter-marches, so in these, they may be
reduced by three or four words of Command, except a Commander shall of set
purpose keep them off from the same, to make some experiment. After any
wheeling is performed, face them after to the first Front, and command them to
even their Ranks, and straighten their Files, they will be as at first; and
unto what hand soever they wheeled, command them to wheel to the contrary hand,
and they will be reduced unto the first Front; or what part is wheeled off by
Division, wheel them inward again from that place, and it will easily reduce
them. Thus you see that it is almost impossible for a Leader to be out, unless
he be extremely ignorant; therefore he need not fear to venture far in the
progress of them, before he shall reduce them, provided he use no Doublings:
which if he shall, great care must be had that he be not put to a stand; for
the prevention whereof, let him look back unto those doublings by wheelings,
wherein one does reduce another, where he may find some remedy to help himself
forth again.

CHAP. LVIII. Of Firings, either for delight or service.
THe chiefest thing required of the Musketeers next their Postures, by which
they are taught how to handle their Arms with delight both marching or
skirmishing, is Firing; which to speak the truth, is the full accomplishment of
all the rest; for unless they be really performed, the rest are of no great
advantage. For to what end is it for any man to Prime, Lade or Cock, if he
Present not answerably? therefore Firings are the execution of all the former;
in so much as my advice shall be to all Commanders, that they be careful and
diligent to have all their Musketeers often practiced with false Firing; whch
is, Firing in the Pan only, and falling off, as hereafter follows, to the end
that in time of need they may not spend their Powder and Bullets in vain. And
that they may likewise know where to fall off, that others may do the like, and
where to place themselves securest from danger; yet so as they may be still
aiding the one unto the other: I shall therefore for the good of my Country,
and for the benefit of all such as are herein concerned, collect forth some
Firings, which shall be every one differing from the other in one kind or
other, either in the execution or reducing, whereby the ingenious Soldier may
cull forth such as he best likes to make use of, what he shall think to be most
fit and pertinent to his intended purpose, be it either for delight or service;
briefly therefore thus. Firings really considered, can be performed but five
ways, that is to say, to the Front, Rear, right or left Flank, Oblique or
Angular; but there is so much variety to be expressed in the performance of
each of these, that it makes them seem so many several Firings, as by the
following discourse shall be fully demonstrated.

CHAP. LIX. Several Firings to be performed with any number of men.
THe Front being the head of the Body, and therefore the more honorable part,
challenges the superiority, or first place; and therefore, without any further
circumstance, I come directly to the Firings as they lie in order, as
follows. Draw all the Musketeers before the Pikes, before you begin your
Firings.

Firings to the Front.
1 Two Ranks advancing ten paces, falling in the Rear of themselves.

2 By single Ranks, advancing three paces, falling in the Rear of themselves.

3 Fire and flank the Pikes.

4 Fire by Files, advancing 10 or 20 paces, first single, secondly ranking
inward, 1, 2, 3, 4, or more, falling down into their places again.

5 Fire by Ranks filing, and advancing 10 or 20 paces, and moving down, and
ranking in the Rear of their own Divisions.

6 Fire by Divisions drawn off 10, or 20, or 30 paces, and returning again.

7 Fire even with the Front, and falling in the Rear of their own Divisions.

8 Fire even with the Half-files, and fall in the Rear of themselves.

9 Fire by way of Introduction, thus, the first Rank fires and stands, the last
Rank passes up between the Files, and placing themselves before the
File-leaders or first Rank, then stand and give fire, the rest doing the like
till the File-leaders come up again into their places, and fire the second time.

10 Fire by Introduction after this manner: the first Rank gives fire and
stands, the rest moving forward until the next Rank has placed themselves
before the first; then stands and gives fire, the rest moving up and doing the
like, until they have all fired twice.

11 Fire even with the Front, falling into the Rear of Pikes.

12 Fire by Extraduction, the first Rank passing from the Rear upon the outside
of the Pikes upon the right, until they have placed themselves in a Rank before
the Pikes, the rest successively doing the like, until they have fired all
over, and brought themselves as at first.

Here the Musketeers are upon the Flanks again.
13 Fire by the outmost Files, wheeling or ranking outward into the Front,
falling off likewise, being led off by Bringers-up, leading up next the Pikes:
this done twice, reduces.

14 Fire two Ranks together, falling off, or falling down.

15 Fire four Ranks together; two kneeling, and two standing upright falling
off, or falling down.

16 Fire six Ranks together, two kneeling, two stooping, and two standing
upright.

17 Fire some Ranks drawn forth to the right left
or by Division, and in again.

Note also, if you please, you may draw forth one Rank to the right, and
another to the left, at one and the same time together.

18 Fire by Files drawn forth oblique; then face about, and move into their
places. Note also that several Figures may be made by these kinds of Firings;
as the V, the W, or the Fort-battail, and the like.

19 Fire by Ranks, ranking into the Front, or Files ranking into the Front, and
ranking or filing as they were.

20 Fire by Files wheeling outward or inward into the Front, and filing again
as they were.

Thus much briefly of Firings to the Front: the Rear challenges the next
place, where suppose all the Musketeers to be in the Rear of the Pikes, the
Body marching.

1 Fire to the right left
about, falling in the Front of their own Divisions. Firings to the Rear.


2 Fire, and fall off to the right and left, and rank with the first Rank of
Pikes into the Front.

3 Fire even with the Rear, and fall off before the Front of your own Divisions
of Musketeers.

4 Fire even in the Rear or last Rank, and fall off to the right and left with
a swift motion, placing your selves 10, 20, or 30 paces before the Front of
Pikes, still facing to the Body, and making ready again, and opening to the
right and left until they be clear of the Pikes.

5 Fire by Introduction to the Rear twice over until they come down even with
the Rear, and flank the Pikes.

6 Fire to the right and left, about to the Rear, Ranks drawn forth, and in
again.

7 Fire to the Rear, every Rank drawn forth clear each from other, and falling
in again, and flanking the Pikes.

8 Fire to the right and left about, Files ranking downward to the Rear, and
filing as they were.

9 Fire to the right and left about, Ranks ranking downward to the Rear, and
ranking as they were.

10 Fire losing ground, falling off to the right and left about, just before
the Front of Pikes.

11 Now if the Enemy pursue eagerly, and that you cannot make a safe retreat
marching, face all about, and fire upon them by way of Extraduction, or by
half-ranks divided, as formerly has been shown.

And thus much likewise briefly concerning Firings to the Rear; Firings to the
Flanks marching.
in the next place I shall show some Firings to the Flanks: for performance
whereof, it will be expedient to bring all the Musketeers upon one of the
Flanks; but for order sake, I will begin with the Firings from the right Flank.

1 Fire to the right, and gather up your Files; it is to be performed after
this manner, The outmost File upon the right is to face to the right, and to
give fire; and after to face to the Front and stand, until the next File have
fired in like manner; and then the first File gathers up unto him upon the
right even abrest, and standing until the third File have faced to the right,
and fired in like manner; and after facing to the Front, the other Files moving
up in the like way as before; and following successively this rule until all
have given fire, and then to march up and even the Front of Pikes, the
Musketeers will stand as at first, when they were brought upon the right Flank.

2 Fire to the right, File-leaders leading up their Files next to the Pikes.

3 Fire to the right, Bringers-up leading away next the Pikes; which being
twice done, reduces them.

4 Fire to the right, leading up on the contrary Flank, either by the
File-leaders or Bringers-up.

5 Fire to the right, and leading up by Bringers-up between the Pikes, and
passing through to their places again, doing the same, reduces them.

6 Fire to the right, and leading up between the Pikes by the Leaders; and
passing through the Pikes again to the right, they will be as at first: the
like may be done to the left, or in some kind to both Flanks, at one and the
same time.

7 Fire to the right by Ranks wheeling; and Ranks to rank as they were to the
right, upon their marching, reduces them.

8. Fire to the right by Ranks inverting or filing, and upon the March the
Soldiers ranking reduces them.

9. Fire to the right Files, filing and gathering up their Files to the left
reduces them.

These Firings being performed marching, the next shall be upon a Stand; where
note, you must cast all your Musketeers upon that Flank where you conceive the
Enemy will fall on, whether right, left, or both; but for order sake we usually
begin with the right; wherefore face to the right, and proceed as follows.

Firings to the right Flank upon a Stand.
1. Fire and fall in the Rear of your selves.

2. Fire and flank the Pikes.

3. Fire even with the Pikes, and fall in the Rear of themselves.

4. Fire even with the Rear, moving forth to the right and left, by Ranks
falling in the Rear of themselves.

5. Fire by extraduction by half-ranks drawn forth, and falling Rank after Rank
in the Rear of the Pikes; after to reduce them as at first, cause them to
double their Front by Division.

These Firings may as well be performed to both Flanks as to one, the Body
being faced accordingly, which would make many Firings more; but these already
set down may be sufficient for any ingenious capacity to work upon for the
present; observing this rule, that in every Firing he shall make use of in time
of his Exercise, he may reduce them by another; which will be more pleasing to
the Soldier, by reason of the great variety it affords unto them. Now now in
the last place, I know it will be expected, that I should speak something of
the use of Firings: wherefore briefly thus:

Firings to the Front marching or moving, when we either pursue after, or
approach to an Enemy.

Firings to the Front, maintaining ground when two Bodies encounter one another.

Firings to the Front, losing ground, when either we are forced thereunto by
necessity, or that we do it out of policy, to draw the Enemy into a train or
snare.

Firings to the Rear marching, when we are pursued by an Enemy, yet would
continue our March until we have gained some place of importance or advantage.

Firings to the Rear upon a Stand, when we are compelled thereunto by the
violent pursuit of an Enemy; or else when we have gained a place of advantage
of ground, or have recovered the Wind or Sun, whereby we are the better able to
encounter with them.

Firings to the Flank or Flanks marching, when we are assaulted by some
Ambuscado secretly placed to hinder our passage; or supposing two Armies are
marching to one and the same place, a River being betwixt them.

Firings to Flank or Flanks standing, when the Enemy charge on with a
resolution to cut off or divide part of the Army from the other.

Having thus briefly set down several Firings to Front, Rear and both Flanks,
with their uses, either marching or standing: I hold it convenient in the next
place to give some short directions in time Battle, both to the Officers and
their Soldiers.

First, that the Drummers have a vigilant eye upon their Commanders, whose
voices are drowned by the loud thundering of the Cannon or Musketeers; as also
by the neighing of Horses, or the lamentable cries of the maimed and wounded
Soldiers; at which time the Leaders Staff, Half-pike, or what else he carries
in his hand, may be sufficient for to instruct them to continue their charge,
retreat, or else to charge home.

Secondly, that the Sergeants be careful in time of Battle, that their
Soldiers be at their due distance of order both in Rank and File; and that
upon their Firings, whether they be Forlorns either of Files or Ranks drawn
forth, or otherwise by Divisions, they see them neatly and handsomely performed
by cocking their Matches, and presenting something lower then brest-high, and
after Uncocking and returning them, wheeling off either to the right, left, or
both, falling in the Rear of themselves, or elsewhere as shall be appointed, in
an orderly manner, whereby they may decently come up again to Fire against the
Enemy.

Thirdly, that the Soldiers present and give fire upon their Rests, not using
that slovenly posture of popping their Matches into the Pan, their Muskets
being on their left sides; which is not only hurtful unto themselves, but much
endangers their Fellow Soldiers; and by so doing, they scarce or ever do any
execution against an Enemy. But here I meet with an objection framed by the
Soldiers after this manner: Our Rests are of little or no use unto us in time
of skirmishing; fit they are, we confess, in the Military Gardens, but in time
of Battle both troublesome and cumbersome unto us. To whom I reply, what if
they be a little cumbersome at first, must they therefore be rejected and
carelessly thrown away? nay, rather they ought frequently to practice themselves
in the use thereof; which if they did, they would find the same very
serviceable unto them in the time of skirmishing; wherewith they Fire better,
and in a more comely and graceful way, far more securing both themselves and
Fellow Soldiers from danger; and likewise upon their March it is both a help
and support unto them.

Fourthly, their eyes ought likewise in time of Battle to be fixed steadfastly
upon their Captain, always conforming to him in Posture when he shall prepare
to charge or retreat; and likewise they ought to be knowing and well verst in
the several Beats of the Drum; which if well observed by all, there would not
be so much confusion in time of Battle amongst them, as many times by sad
experience has been found, when disregarding their Officers commands and the
bearing of the Drum, they ignorantly and rashly run on in a disorderly manner;
by which means they have cut off their own Officers and Fellow Soldiers, many
times, more then they have dangered the Enemy.

Thus you see what great necessity there is of instructing and training up the
Soldiers in their Postures; and how requisite it is to conform themselves to
their Officers in time of Battle, performing thereby better execution against
their Enemies; and by their decent and comely array preserve themselves from
eminent dangers and perils.

The Soldiers having now all the groundwork of the exercising a Body of men
laid down before them, in the next place he labors to make experiment thereof;
but being no Officer, he cannot attain thereunto without special leave from his
Superiors; and therefore (being a File-leader) he craves leave for to exercise
his single File both in their Postures and Motions, contenting himself for
present with that small number, whereby he is able to run through many plain
things of Distances, Facings, Doublings, Counter-marchings and Wheelings. But
being not fully satisfied, he presumes upon the former favor had from his
Superiors, to go on to make every man in his File a File-leader; first by
succession, and after (being not called away by the beat of the Drum, or by his
Officers, to lead up his File and to join into a Body) according unto Dignity,
and after endeavors to reduce them again by proper words of command.

This liberty being granted at convenient times unto a File-leader, much
indeers the Soldiers good affections unto their Officers; and is a means
whereby many others are brought in to be true lovers of Military Exercise, as
being much taken and well pleased with the sight of the former things. And
therefore, I could wish that they were not hereafter prevented, as formerly I
have observed by the malice of some, who have had places of command bestowed
upon them, more through favor, or by reason of their riches, then for any
worth or desert found in them: They perhaps hold it a great dispargement unto
them to be eclipsed; but a judicious and discreet Captain accounts it a great
honor to lead such gallant men that are as able and as well knowing as himself.

CHAP. LX. The way to make every man in a File six deep according to succession
a File-leader, The file.
by
Command. FIles, rank two to the left Bring the second man into the Front.



Command. Half-files, double your Front to the left.



Command. Bringers-up, double your Front to the right.

Double your Files to the left entire advancing.

Command. Bringers-up, double your Front to the left.

Double your Files to the right entire advancing.

Command. File, rank two to the right.

Files to the right double.

Reducement. File, rank to the left into the Front.

Rank, file six to the left.

CHAP. LXI. The way to make every man in a File six deep File-leader according
to dignity, The Dignity of the File.
by a doubling, not using one Word of command twice.
Command. HAlf-files double your front to the left.



Command. Front half-file double the rear to the left.



Command. Bringer-up, double your Front to the right.

Files, double your depth to the right, every man falling behind his

Command. Half-files, double your Front to the right.

Files, double to the left entire advancing

Files, rank two to the right.

Files, to the right double.

Bringer-up, double your Front to the left.

Files, double your depth to the left, every man falling behind his

Reducement. File, rank two to the left.

Files to the left double.

CHAP. LXII. The way to make every man in a File eight deep File-leader by
succession, The File.
and that by
Command. FIle, rank two to the left.



Command. Half-file double your front to the right.



Command. Files, rank two to the right.



Command. Front half-files, double your rear to the right.

Double your files to the left entire advancing.

Command. Files, rank two to the right into the rear.

Ranks, invert to the right.

Command. Half-files, double your Front to the left.

Double your files to the left entire advancing, every man placing

Command. File, rank two to the left into the Rear.

Face to your Leader.

Double your Files to the right advancing.

Reducement. File, rank to the right into the Front.

Rank, file eight to the right.

CHAP. LXIII. The way to make every man in a File eight deep, The Dignity of
the File.
a File-leader according unto dignity, by a doubling.
Command. BRinger-up, double your Front to the left.

Double your Files to the right entire advancing.

Command. Half-files, double your Front to the left.

Double your Files to the left entire advancing.

Command. Bringer-up, double your Front to the right.

Files, double your depth to the right.

Command. Files, rank two to the right.

Double your Files to the right entire, advancing, every man placing himself

Command. Front-half-files, double your Rear to the right, following your
Leaders.

Double your Files to the right by Division, every man placing himself before

Command. Front-half-files, double your Rear to the left, following your
Leaders.

Double your Files to the left by Division, every man placing himself before

Command. The two first and the two last men double the four middle-most men to
the right, following your Leaders and your Bringers-up.

Files, double your depth to the left.

Reducement. Half-files, double the Front to the right.

Bringers-up, double your Front to the right.

Files to the right and left double inward.

Double your Files to the left entire advancing.

Although I have here set down words of Command to make every man a
File-leader, both by Succession and Dignity, a Commander is not thereby tied
up, but may, if he please, practice the same upon a whole Company, altering but
a little some words of Command. As for Example, we cannot say in a File, Double
your Ranks, there being none, until there be some other Files joined thereunto:
and therefore if we intend a doubling by a single File, we command it to rank
two to the right or left, which in a Company must be expressed, Ranks to the
right or left double. Thus you see with a little alteration every man is
brought up into the Front, either by Succession or Dignity; whether the Files
be even numbers or odd, great bodies or small. But here by the way, I must
crave pardon to speak something in commendation of these Doublings, in answer
to them that account them but Toys: to whom I will be so bold as to tell them,
that it is not for want of ignorance they so slightly esteem of them; for were
they truly knowing in the Art of Drilling, they must of force confess abundance
of variety in them, affording much delight to him that shall command, and great
content unto them that are commanded, perceiving themselves to be made
File-leaders by the skill and worth of their Leaders. And besides, there may be
just cause (at one time or other) many times to alter the Ranks, exchanging the
one for the other, bringing thereby their best deserving Soldiers into the
chiefest places of honor; and casting others into their rooms at the
discretion of the Commander. Therefore, I could wish all Leaders whatsoever to
be well skilled and verst in these Doublings; the frequent practice whereof
will make them more apt in the Exercise of more difficult things in the Art
Military. To which ingenious study, I leave them; and in the next place proceed
to show them several Figures of Battle to be performed by single Files,
consisting of several Depths of men.

CHAP. LXIV. Concerning Figures of Battle to be performed by singles Files,
with some admonitions to those that shall practice themselves therein.
THe great plenty and variety of matter that may be performed in the exercising
of a single File, makes me wonder at the ignorance of those who are famed
abroad for able knowing Soldiers; who after they have passed over the Postures
are at a stand, as if there were nothing else to be done with the same. But did
they truly understand what dishonor and disparagement it is unto them, they
would not be so idle and backward, but set times a part, often inuring
themselves to the practice thereof, going through all the Motions, Distances,
Facings, Doublings, Counter-marches and Wheelings; and may farther, if he
please, with his single File draw forth diverse Figures of Battle, declaring
unto his Soldiers their several reasons and uses. The exercising his Company
after this manner, affords unto them both content and delight; and it is
likewise very useful in greater Bodies, when time of need shall require, as
shall appear in the sequel of this Book.

But here, me thinks, I hear some say, Of what use are your Figures? seeing for
the most part in pitched Battails, or skirmishes in the field, they commonly
fire one against another in Square, or by Forlorns drawn forth from the Body,
and being relieved, return into their places again. To whom, I answer, that in
one respect it is true, there being scarce any pitched Battle in the field
fought in these latter times, but it has been with even Fronts, who are first
engaged; whether it be by Divisions drawn off by way of Forlorns, Wings or
Battle, they fight with even Fronts or Squadrons, as having every five or six
Files divided a part from each other, having six foot ground interval betwixt
the abovesaid number of Files for the convenience of the Ranks, wheeling off
after they have fired. As concerning such Figures as are framed like the Wedge,
Saw, Sheers, or Diamond; I must confess there is little or no use at all,
except it be for delight, or for the practice and experience of some young
Soldier, whereby he may plainly see the custom of the Ancients in setting
forth such ancient Figures. But to let this pass, and to come to the place
where we left; I shall show unto the Soldier how needful it is for him to be
well skilled in the framing of Figures of Battle, and likewise to be thoroughly
acquainted with their several uses. Wherefore take this for a general rule,
that there was never any pitched Battle, but there were Reserves appointed out
unto all the parts thereof, whereby they might bring off, and at time of need
relieve each other; and if so, certainly they must of necessity carry along
with them several forms and Figures of Battle, according to the discretion of
the Major General, or the Commanders in chief whom it shall concern. It will
therefore be expedient (since there is a necessity of Figures of Battle, and
for the setting apart of Divisions for the relieving of each other) for every
Commander that will be truly knowing, to have always some imprinted in his
memory; that in time of need, he may not be to seek, or wanting in them. To
which purpose I have collected some few, putting them to their view, being
formerly practiced by me, for the satisfaction of those loving Gentlemen which
have private Meetings in London; but more especially for those of the
Town-ditch, unto whom I am especially bound. And therefore without more delay,
I shall lay before them certain Figures of Battle upon all the Depths of Files
set forth in the former Table, leaving them to their own discretion, to make
use of what shall best comply, and suit to their intended purpose.

CHAP. LXV. Military experiments upon a File six deep, branching forth eight
several Figures of Battle, with their reducement.
Command. FIle, rank two to the left.

2 1 4 3 6 5

Command. The middlemost Rank open to the right and left to open order.

2 1 4 3 6 5

Command. The last Rank advance forward into the next Rank that is before you,
and to open from the midst to open order; and the first Rank move forward one
pac e.

2 1 4 6 5 3

Command. The first Rank open outward two foot beyond open order; the last Rank
close forward to Order.

2 1 4 6 5 3

Command. Division upon the left face about; march all till you be clear each
of other, face all to the left, and march two paces; face to your Leader: the
last Rank open outward to double distance.

1 5 3 2 4 6

Command. The first Rank open outward to double distance; the first man in the
Front face about, move down, and double the middlemost man to the right
Rank-wise.

5 3 2 1 4 6

Command. The left-hand-man of the middlemost Rank face about, the middlemost
Rank march two paces before the Front and Rear; face to your Leader, and close
Ranks and Files to Order.

1 5 3 4 6 2

Command. The second Rank from the Front double the first to the right and left
outward by Division; the last man in the Rear close forward to Order.

1 4 5 3 6 2

Command. The out most men of the middle Rank face about, and move down even
with the Rear; to your Leader.

1 5 3 4 2 6

Reducement. The middlemost man in the Rear advance forwards to the left into
the Front.

Files, close inward to your Order.

Files, to the right double.

Half-files, double your Front to the left.

Files, double your Depth to the right, every man falling behind his Bringer-up.

Files, rank two to the right.

Ranks, rank entire to the left into the Rear, every man placing himself on the
outside of his left-hand-man.

Direction. Face about; and after being faced to their Leader, they will stand
after this manner, 6, 5, 4, 3, 2, 1.

Rank file to the right, they are reduced.

CHAP. LXVI. Words of Command to produce the first Eight Figures of Battle,
with their Reducement.
Command. HAlfe-file double your Front to the left.

5 1 6 2 7 3 8 4

Command. The last Rank face about, the two middle Ranks face outward; march
all some two paces; to your Leader.

5 1 6 2 7 3 8 4

Command. The first Rank move forwards two paces; the third Rank close inwards
to open Order.

5 1 6 2 7 3 8 4

Command. the third Rank from the Front face outward, march all three paces; to
your Leader.

The first Rank stand, the rest face outward, and move two paces; to your
Leader.

5 1 6 2 7 8 4 3

Command. The first Rank face about, march all until you be clear one of
another; to your Leader.

6 2 7 8 4 3 5 1

Command. The last Rank move to the right and left, and place your selves three
foot behind the Front-Divisions.

6 2 7 8 4 3 5 1

Command. Division on the right face about, march all until you be clear one of
another; then face to the right, and march until you stand even abrest of each
other; face to your Leader.

6 7 8 5 2 4 3 1

Command. Reer-Division face about; the last man in each Division move forwards
into the midst of the Rank that is before you; face to your Leader, a^^ close
your Divisions to Order.

6 7 5 8 4 2 3 1

Command. The last man in the (...) move forwards to the right in the Rank of
him that stands before you, the last Rank open outward to Order; to your
Leader.

6 7 5 8 4 2 1 3

Redueement. Face all about; the last man in the Rear move forwards on the left
into the Rank that is before you; even your Ranks, and straighten your Files;
to your Leader.

Files, double inward by Division. Double your Ranks to the left entire into
the Front and Rear.

Direction. Halt-files face about; after face to your Leader; and the last Rank
close forward to Order, and even your Ranks, and straighten your Files.

Wheel Front and Rear to the left Flank.

Direction. The last Rank face about; then face to your Leader, and
Countermarch the File, they are reduced.

CHAP. LXVII. Words of Command for the second Eight Figures of Battle, with
their Reducement.
Command. FIle, rank to the left, one, three, and four; the last Rank face
outward, and move three paces; to your Leader.

1 4 3 2 8 7 6 5

Command. The two inmost men of the last Rank close inward to close Order, the
two outmost men of the last Rank fall back two paces.

1 4 3 2 7 6 8 5

Command. The middlemost man in the first Rank face about, march all till you
are clear one of another; to your Leader.

1 4 2 7 6 8 5 3

Command. Files, close into the midst to Order, the last man move forward to
Order.

1 4 2 7 6 8 5 3

Command. The middlemost Rank open to the right and left to double distance.

1 4 2 7 6 8 5 3

Command. The outmost men upon the Flanks face inward, the last man in the Rear
face about, the first and the last Rank face to the four Angles, move all three
paces; to your Leader.

1 4 2 7 6 8 5 3

Command. The first man in the Front, and the last man in the Rear stand, the
rest face outward, and march three paces; to your Leader.

1 4 2 7 6 8 5 3

Command. The last men of the outmost Files move forwards to the right and
left, until you range even abrest with the middle-men.

1 4 2 8 7 6 5 3

Reducement. The last man in the Rear move forward, and range even abrest with
the first Rank. Ranks, file to the right, following your Leader; they are
reduced.

CHAP. LXVIII. Words of Command for the third Eight Figures of Battle, with
their Reducement.
Command. BRingers-up, double your Front to the left.

8 1 7 2 6 3 5 4

Command. The first and the last Rank stand; the third Rank double outward
Rank-wise, the Middle-rank face outward, march all two paces; to your Leader.

8 1 6 7 2 3 5 4

Command. The middle Rank stand, the rest double to the right File-wise; face
all to the Center, and march some two paces to your Leader.

1 8 6 7 2 3 4 5

Command. The Middle-rank double inward File-wise, and move a little forward.

1 8 7 6 6 3 4 5

Command. Half-file of the middle file double your Front to the left;
Front-division face to the right, and move one pace; to your Leader.

4 1 5 8 7 2 6 3

Command. The left-hand-File in the Front, face about, and march clear of the
Rear; face to your Leader. The middle File double to the left Rank-wise; Files
close into the midst to Order; Files rank outward into the Rear, and then begin
from the right to wheel them about to the left in a Ring.

1 2 8 3 7 4 6 5

Command. Files close into the midst to Order, the first Rank close inward to
colse Order; the third Rank open outward to open Order: the last man in the
Rear move even abrest with the Rank that is before you.

1 2 8 3 7 4 5 6

Command. Files, open to the right and left until you stand straight with your
Bringers-up, the rest moving forwards until they have ranged even abrest with
the first man.

2 1 8 3 7 4 5 6

Command. Angle-men, face to the four Angles; the middle-men in the outmost
Files face inward; the middleman in the Front face about: march ail three
paces; Face to your Leader.

2 8 1 3 7 5 4 6

Reducement. The last man in the Rear of the middle File face about; middle
File march clear of the standing part; Files close into the midst to Order: the
last man in the Rear fall in the Rear of the right-hand-File, the first man in
the Front move to the left, and fall in the Front of the left-hand-file; close
your Ranks and Files forward to Order, and make an even Front; Files double
your depth to the left, every man falling behind his bringer-up, reduces them.

CHAP. LXIX. The way to make twelve several Figures of Battle, with a File ten
deep, with their Reducement.
Command. FAce to the right, and wheel your Front into the midst; Face after to
your Leader.

5 4 3 2 1 6 7 8 9 10

Command. The last men in the Rear of the outmost Files face about; outmost
Files move clear of the standing part, face inwards, and close your Divisions;
to your Leader.

5 1 4 3 2 7 8 9 6 10

Command. The last man of the middle File, and the last Rank, face about; the
first Rank, and the last Rank, and the middle File, move forwards two paces;
the rest open outward two paces; to your Leader.

5 1 3 4 2 7 9 8 6 10

Command. The last man in the Front-division advance forward three foot before
the Front; the first man of the Reer-division, face about, and move three foot
behind the Rear; the outmost Files double ranks inward; Ranks, close forwards
to Order, and face to your Leader.

3 5 1 4 7 9 2 6 10 8

Command. The first man in the Front, face about; the last man in the Rear,
stand; the rest face outward, march all until the first and the last man meet,
face all to your Leader; middle-men, double to the Right rank-wise, and close
outward to Order.

5 1 4 7 3 8 9 2 6 10

The two middle-men in the Body face about, and move clear of the Rear three
foot; face to your Leader; middle-men of the outmost Files close inward to
order.

5 1 4 7 9 2 6 10 3 8

Command. Middle-man upon the right of the second Rank, advance forward three
foot before the Front; the three first men in the Front, and middle-man of the
second Ranks move forwards three paces, the rest closing inward one pace.

9 5 1 7 4 2 6 10 3 8

Command. The last Rank open outward to double distance, and the next Rank open
outward to open Order, and the third Rank from the Rear to close inward to
Order.

9 5 1 7 4 2 6 10 3 8

Command. The second man from the Front, face about, move down and range even
with the Rear: outmost men of the last Rank advance forward, and range even
with the second Ranks from the Front: the last Rank move forwards until they
have exceeded three foot the next Rank that stands before them: Divisions on
the Wings, face outward, move two paces; to your Leader.

9 5 1 6 10 3 4 2 8 7

Command. Front-division, face about, and march down even with the Rear; the
last man move forwards to order, to your Leader.

6 9 10 3 4 5 1 2 8 7

Command. Middle-division advance forward clear of the standing part; Divisions
in the Rear close inwards to order; wheel your Rear into the midst; to your
Leader.

9 5 1 7 4 2 6 10 3 8

Command. The last Rank close inward to order, and to double to the left
File-wise; the second man from the Rear move forwards into the second Rank that
is before you.

9 5 1 7 4 3 2 6 10 8

Reducement. The first man in the Front move a little to the right, the second
man from the first Rank double the first man to the left Rank-wise; the first
Rank wheel off by Division, and double the last man in the Rear to the right
and left Rank-wise; Ranks close forwards to Order, and face to your Leader.

5 1 4 3 2 6 10 7 8 9

Reducement. The first and second Rank face about; the first Rank double the
second to the right and left outward; to your Leader: the last Rank move
forward, and even your Ranks, and straighten their Files; wheel Front and Rear
to the left Flank; the last Rank face about before they wheel; then facing to
their Leader, they are reduced.

CHAP. LXX. Twelve several Figures of Battle with a File twelve deep, with
their Reducement.
Command. FRont Half-file double your Rear to the left; face to your Leader.
Half-files double your Front to the left.

10 7 4 1 11 8 5 2 12 9 6 3

Command. The middlemost men upon each Flank face outward; the two middle-men
of the last Rank, face about: Those that are thus faced, and the two middle-men
of the first Rank move forward to your Leader three paces; the first and the
last Rank stand, the rest move outward two paces; face to your Leader.

7 4 10 1 11 8 1 2 12 3 9 6

Command. The outmost Divisions open from the midst almost to twice double
distance; the first Rank face about, and rank even with the midst of Ranks;
face to your Leader. The last Rank double to the right File-wise, the second
man from the Rear advance forward, and place himself three foot before the
middle-men, the last man at the same time closing forward to Order.

10 6 1 11 8 7 4 5 2 12 9 3

Command. The outmost Division upon the right move away, the rest successively
falling in the Rear of them until they stand straight after the first Division.

1 5 2 3 6 7 4 9 10 11 8 12

Command. The outmost man upon the left of the middle Division to open to the
left to double distance; the rest of that Division to face to the right, and to
move clear of the standing part; face to your Leader; the last man in the
Front, face about to the last Division; the first man of the Front-Division,
and the first man of the Reer-Division to move forwards, and to close to open
Order: after facing to the left Flank, closing to the outmost man to Order;
face to your Leader: and after face all to the Center, and move a little
forward, to your Leader.

1 5 2 3 6 7 4 10 9 11 8 12

Command. The outmost man upon the right, and the outmost man upon the left,
close inward to Order.

1 5 2 3 6 7 4 10 9 11 8 12

Command. The two middle men move forth to the right and left three foot clear
of the standing part; the first man in the Front face about: the first man in
the Front, and the last man in the Rear, move into the second that is before
you: to your Leader.

5 2 3 1 6 7 4 10 12 9 11 8

Command. The two outmost men upon each Flank, close inward to open Order.

5 2 3 1 6 7 4 10 12 9 8 11

Command. Face all to Front, Rear, and both Flanks, and the four middle then
move forwards into the Rank that is before them, and they will stand in a
Square; face to your Leader.

5 1 2 3 6 7 4 10 9 11 12 8

Command. Files, rank outward; the middleman of the first Rank move forward,
and place himself three foot before his right and left-hand-man; the outmost
and the middle man of the last Rank move backward, and place himself three-foot
behind the Reer-division; close forwards to open order.

1 5 2 10 7 3 6 4 9 11 8 12

Command. The first and the last Rank move to the left one pace, and after
double to the right File-wise; the Middle-rank close inward to order.

1 2 5 10 7 3 6 4 9 8 11 12

Command. The two outmost men of the Middle-rank, face about; move down and
range even abrest with the middle-man of the Reer-division, closing inward to
order, and facing to the Front: even men from the left, move forwards, and rank
even abrest with the middle-man of the Front-division, and close inward to
order; the outmost-men open outward to double distance.

1 3 2 4 5 7 6 8 10 11 9 12

Command. Reer-division, face about, and move two paces; the outmost-man upon
the left, face about to the right with the last man in the Rear of each
Division; face to your Leader, and move forward two paces.

1 3 2 4 5 6 7 8 10 11 9 12

Reducement. Reer-division, face about; middle man of the first Rank of each
division move forward, and rank two to the left into Front and Rear: Files
close into the midst to order: Ranks, close forwards to order: Half-files,
double the Front to the right entire: Ranks, rank outward into the Front, every
man placing himself on the outside of his right and left-hand-men: Ranks, file
to the right and left inward: Files, double your depth to the left; face to
your Leader.

It might be expected that I should show the several Charges upon all these
Figures; but in regard I may, perhaps, meet with some of them again in greater
Bodies, or the like; I shall for present pass them over, and in those places
endeavor to give them the best satisfaction I can. In the mean time they may
with ease find out in every one of them such Charges as may instruct the
Soldiers how to fight; whether it be Front, Rear, both Flanks or Angles, they
may be shown and exercised in them according to the discretion of him that
shall command them, whether they be Musketeers or Pike-men. And therefore,
thus much shall suffice concerning the exercising of a File for matter of
Figures. In the next place follows Exercise of greater Bodies.

The end of the first Book.
THE COMPLETE BODY OF The Art Military. The Second BOOK.
CHAP. I. Concerning the Artillery and the Military Gardens, together with the
Private Meetings, in and about the City of LONDON.
THe great delight in handling of Arms in Military Exercises, makes the City of
London and the Suburbs thereof famous through the whole World, by reason, as I
conceive, of those two great Nurseries or Academies of Military Discipline, the
Artillery and Military Garden, from whom, as out of pure Fountains, all other
our Private Meetings (as of Townditch, and Cripplegate, etc.) are derived.

The Artillery Gardens deserves the first place, in respect it is the greatest
Meeting, from whence, as it were out of a Nursery, have been transplanted many
able knowing Soldiers both at home and in foraign Countries, to the great
honor of our Nation.

The Military Garden is famous likewise for the great improvement of diverse
worthy persons of quality daily thither resorting, whose excellent skill in
Military Exercises has raised many of them to high preferment here at home,
and to places of honorable command abroad. The Captains in chief of these
Academies are Major General Skippon, and Major Henry Tyllier, which later was
the first that ever showed in the Military Garden (of which I am a member) the
marching of the Soldiers in a Regimental way; whose great pains amongst us
deserves much honor and high commendation; showing unto us such variety of
matter in a Souldier-like way, as was never before seen by any member thereof.

Not to eclipse the forementioned Private Meetings in London, but to give them
that due which belongs unto them, they likewise are of great honor and fame
for their frequent exercising of their Soldiers in the handling of their Arms,
whether it be of the Pike or Musket, and instructing them in the knowledge of
Drilling, and drawing up of Companies, and Bodies of men, furnishing both
Kingdoms with able knowing Soldiers. My hearty wishes therefore are, that all
and every one of them may be propt up, and supported to all ages, that when
need shall require, we may draw from these Fountains such skilful and
experienced Commanders and Officers as may be, as it were, a Bulwark to this
our Nation.

Not to dwell any longer upon this discourse, I come therefore briefly to set
forth several Exercises (formerly practiced by me amongst those loving
Gentlemen of Town-ditch) according to the usual numbers there appearing,
whether they be great or small, practiced for the most part with 24 or 32 men,
and sometimes (although seldom) with 64 men, unless it were upon general days,
when they were drawn forth into the field; at such times, perhaps, there might
be an appearance of greater numbers, as 120 and upwards.

My purpose therefore is to pitch upon, and to make use of all and every one of
these numbers, making 12 Exercises, dividing them by threes, until I have run
over them all, conceiving them sufficient for the industrious to gather from
thence matter enough for his intended Exercise. And for the more enabling of
them, I shall endeavor (in these curious times) to walk along in as plain a
way as possibly may be, giving directions unto all Words of Command, for the
better performance of the same; wishing all my loving Fellow Soldiers to
conceive well of my good meaning intended to them: desiring withal to be
rightly informed of what part soever they fall upon, that they proceed
leasurely and orderly in the same; which will not only be an encouragement unto
the Author from whom they gather their Exercises, but will bring much praises
and commendation to themselves. But to leave every one to their own best
thoughts, whilst I proceed to practice what before promised concerning the
several Exercises following.

CHAP. II. The first Exercise of four Files six deep.
EAch File-leader (as being his duty) having gone over the Postures, showing
and instructing his File with their uses, and neat handling of their Arms,
hearing the Drums beat a Call for all to repair and stand to their Arms, begin
to lead up their Files according to Order; the Leader then closing their Ranks
and Files to close Order, craving their silence, may proceed to show unto them
all their several Distances and Facings, according unto the former rule set
down, and after he may proceed to Doublings (if he pleases) as follows.

CHAP. III. A Doubling consisting of sixteen in number, every one differing
from the other, and not reduced until the last Word of Command.
Command. FIles, file to the right entire advancing.

Command. Bringers-up, double your Front to the left.

Command. Half-files, double your Front to the left.

Command. Front-half-files, double your Rear to the right entire.

Command. Right-half-ranks, double your left Flank entire advancing.

Command. Half-files, double your Front to the right entire.

Command. Left-half-ranks, double entire the Depth of your right Flank.

Command. Files, file to the left entire advancing.

Command. Bringers-up, double your Front to the right.

Command. Front-half-files, double your Rear to the right and left outward,
following your Leaders.

Direction. Reer-half-files, face about; the File-leaders are to turn off to
the right and left, the rest are to follow them until they are marched down
into the Rear, and have doubled it to the right and left outward.

Command. Half-files, double your Front inward entire.

Command. The two outmost Files upon each Flank, double entire the Depth of the
inmost Files.

Direction. The two outmost Files face about inward, and move straight down
clear of the standing part; afterward face inward, march, and close your
Divisions; to your Leader.

Command. Front-half-files, double your Rear inward entire.

Direction. Reer-half-files, face about, and move outward clear of the standing
part; Front-half-files, face about, march down and even the Rear to your Leader.

Command. The two outmost Files upon each Flank double entire, advancing the
four inmost Files.

Direction. The two outmost Files move forward clear of the standing part; face
inward, march and close your Divisions; face to your Leader.

Command. Double your Files inward entire, advancing, every man placing himself
before his Leader.

Direction. The two inmost Files stand; the two outmost Files move forwards,
and double your inmost Files entire advancing, placing your selves before your
Leaders.

Command. Half-files, double your Front to the right, they are reduced.

CHAP. IV. Eight several Counter-marches, with their Reducement.
Command. FIle-leaders, stand; the rest pass through to the right, and place
your selves before your Leaders.

Command. The Right-hand-file, stand; the rest pass through to the right, and
place your selves on the outside of your right-hand-men.

Command. File-leaders and Bringers-up, stand; the rest pass through to the
right, and place your selves before your Leaders and your Bringers-up.

Command. The outmost File upon each Flank, stand; the rest pass through to the
right and left, placing your selves before your outside-men.

Direction. Face outward, and pass through to the right and left, placing your
selves before the outmost Files; to your Leader, and close your Divisions to
open Order.

Command. Bringers-up, stand; the rest pass through to the right, and place
your selves behind your Bringers-up.

Direction. The five first Ranks are to face about; the next Rank to the Rear
is first to begin the Motion; the rest are successively to follow, until the
Leaders are become the Bringers-up.

Command. The Left-hand-file, stand; the rest pass through to the left, and
place your selves on the out side of your left-hand-men.

Command. File-leaders and Bringers-up, stand; the rest pass through to the
right, and place your selves behind your Leaders and Bringers-up.

Direction. The first and the two next Ranks from the Rear, face about; the two
first Ranks from the Front, and the two last Ranks from the Rear move forwards,
placing your selves behind your Leaders and your Bringers-up; face to to your
Leader, and close your Divisions.

Command. The outmost File upon each File face inward; the rest pass through to
the right and left, placing your selves behind your right and left-hand-men.

CHAP. V. Ten several Wheelings, with their Reducement.
Command. WHeel the Front-half-files inward into the midst, and double your
Rear inward entire.

Direction. Half-files, face outward, and march clear of the standing part;
after face to the Rear: Front-half-files, open from the midst to open Order,
after Wheeling to the right and left inward into the Rear; to your Leader.

Command. Right and Left-half-ranks, double the depth of the Battle by
Wheeling into the Front.

Direction. Right-half-ranks, wheel to the left; and Left-half-ranks, wheel to
the right; to your Leader.

Command. Wheel off the Front-half-files, and double the Rear by division.

Direction. Half-files, face about; and Front-half-files, wheel off by
Division, moving down even with the Rear; to your Leader.

Command. Wheel off your right Half-ranks, and double your left Flank to the
right entire.

Direction. Face outward, and Right-half-ranks wheel about to the left and move
away, and double the left Flank to the right; to your Leader.

Command. Front and Reer-half-files, double the Depth of the Battle by
wheeling into the Front and Rear.

Direction. Half-files, face to the Rear; and Front and Reer-half-files wheel
to the right and left inward; face to your Leader, and close your Divisions.

Command. Wheel off your Left-half-ranks, and double your right Flank by
Division.

Direction. Face outward, and Left-half-ranks wheel off by Division, and move
even with the right Flank; to your Leader.

Command. Wheel off your Reer-half-files, and double the Front to the right
entire.

Direction. Half-files, face about, and wheel to the left, until you have
ranged even with the Front.

Command. Wheel your Battle off by Division from the Front.

Direction. Right-half-ranks, wheel about to the right and left; Half-ranks,
wheel about to the left, and move down to the Rear; face to your Leader, and
close into the midst to order.

Command. Wheel off your Left-half-ranks, and double your right Flank to the
left entire.

Direction. Face outward, Left-half-ranks wheel about to the right, and move
forward, and double the right Flank to the left entire; to your Leader.

Command. Wheel off your Front-Half-files, and double the Rear to the left
entire.

Direction. Half-files, face about; and Front-half-files, wheel about to the
right, move down and range even with the Rear; face to your Leader, reduces
them.

CHAP. VI. Six Figures of Battle, with several Firings thereunto belonging.
Command. RAnks and Files close to order, they will stand us underneath is set
forth, from which we will draw our Figures after we have fired upon this
Platform three or four times.

formation

Command. Double your Files inward entire advancing.

The first firing. Let the first two Ranks advance forward ten paces, give
Fire, and fall in the Rear of themselves; after wheeling off to the right and
left, placing themselves before the Front of Pikes: the next two Ranks, and so
the rest successively doing the like until they have Fired once over, which
reduces them.

The second firing. Let the first Rank advance three paces, give Fire, and fall
in the Rear of themselves; the rest doing the like until all have Fired once
over, as before.

The third firing. Let them give Fire on the ground they stand, and fall off to
the right and left, and Flank the Pikes.

The fourth firing. Let them Fire even with the Front, and fall in with the
Rear of the Pikes; which being ended, let the Pikes charge on.

Reducement. Musketeers, double your Front by Division.

Command. The first two Ranks, stand; the rest face outward and move clear of
the standing part; to your Leader: the two last Ranks move outward side-ways
two paces.

formation

The first firing. Let every Division give Fire on the same ground they stand,
and fall in the Rear of themselves.

The second firing. Let them advance forwards until they be clear of the Pikes;
give Fire, and fall in the Rear of themselves, after moving down into their
places.

Command. Front-division, advance forward three paces; the two next Divisions
move outward one pace: Pikes in each Division face about, and move two paces;
to your Leader: Divisions of Musketeers in the Rear advance forwards, and
range even in Front and Rear with the Middle-divisions of Pikes; the first Rank
of Pikes in the Front-division move three foot clear of the standing part.

formation

The first firing. Let them give Fire to the Front, and fall in the Rear of
themselves.

The second firing. Let them give Fire to Front, Rear, and both Flanks
altogether.

Direction. Reer-divisions, face outward; the last Rank of Pikes and
Musketeers of the Front-division, face to the Rear; the last Rank of
Musketeers move down clear of the Rear, and close inward to order; then last
the Pikes port, and after the Musketeers have Fired, charge on, then
retreating into their places again.

Command. The first and the last Rank of Pikes, face about, and move down clear
of the Rear, and close Ranks forwards to order; outmost Divisions of
Musketeers face about, move down and flank your own divisions of Pikes: The
first Division of Pikes move forward, and range even abrest with your own
Division of Musketeers; the Front-division of Musketeers closing into the
midst to order.

formation

The first firing. Let the Front-division give Fire and fall in the Rear of
themselves; after wheeling off to the right and left, move down and Flank the
Reer-division of Pikes.

The second firing. Let the Front-division of Musketeers Fire and fall in the
Rear of themselves; then face about, and move down upon the inside of the next
division of Pikes; and after face to their Leader.

The third firing. Let the Musketeers upon the Flanks move up into the room of
the former, and Fire, falling in the Rear of themselves; and after face about,
and move down into their places again; the Musketeers on the inside moving up
into their places again.

The fourth firing. Let the Reer-division face about; then let them Fire to
Front and Rear, and fall in the Rear of themselves; let the Pikes charge, and
after ordering their Arms, their Reer-division facing to their Leader, the
Musketeers thereof may move up into their places again.

Command. The outmost divisions face outward, and move two paces; face to your
Leader, move up until you range even abrest with the second divisions next the
Front; Reer-division move straight forward two paces.

formation

The first firing. Let them all give Fire, and fall in the Rear of themselves.

The second firing. Let the Musketeers advance forwards until they be clear of
the Front-division, and then rank outward and Fire altogether; after filing
inward as they were, move down again into their places: the Pikes at the same
time charging, and after order their Arms.

Command. Front-division advance forward three paces; the outmost division upon
the Flanks move up, and range even with the Front.

formation

The first firing. Direction for the same: let them all face to the Rear, and
the middle-division of Musketeers move forwards, and flank the Reer-division
of Pikes; after let all the Musketeers advance forwards three foot clear of
their own divisions of Pikes, and give Fire, falling in the Rear of themselves;
and after facing about, move into their places again.

The second firing. Let them Fire as they stand, and fall in the Rear of
themselves; and the Pikes in the Rear may charge on, and after facing to their
Leader.

Command. The outmost divisions face inward, march three paces; and the next
two divisions face outward, and move two paces; to your Leader: Reer-division,
move outward until you stand straight with the Front-divisions.

formation

The first firing. Let the Front-Division of Musketeers give fire, and fall in
the Rear of themselves; and after moving down in the room of them in the Rear:
they at the same time moving up into the Front firing, in like manner moving
down, and exchanging places with them in the Rear.

The second firing. Let the Musketeers upon the Flanks move forward even with
the Front, give fire, and fall in the Rear of themselves; and after move down
into their places again, and face to their Leader.

The third firing. Let them face to the Front, rear, and both Flanks, and let
the Pikes port, and the Musketeers give fire.

The fourth firing. Let them give fire on the ground they stand, and fall in
the Rear of the Pikes; the Pikes charging whilst the Musketeers make ready
again.

The fifth firing. Let the Pikes charge at foot, and the Musketeers give fire
over their heads; then recovering their Arms, face to their Leader.

Reducement. Front-Divisions face about; Front and Reer-Divisions march, and
interchange ground, to your Leader; The out-most Divisions face inward, and
close your Divisions, to your Leader: even your Ranks, and streighten your
Files, and close to Order, they are reduced.

The Captain may now command the Musketeers to poyse their Arms, and file away
to the right and left, making as it were a Street or Gallery for him to troop
away the Pikes, and lodge his Colors.

CHAP. VII. The second Exercise, with four Files six deep.
THe Soldiers being the second time summoned to appear at their place of
Rendezvous, the Sergeants having drawn forth the Files, may give liberty to the
Leaders thereof to exercise them in their several Postures; which being ended,
their Captain or other Officers may command them to lead up their Files, and to
join them into a Body; after which he may show unto them their Distances, and
Facings, with their several kinds, following the former rule, and after proceed
to these or the like Doublings following.

CHAP. VIII. Eighteen several Doublings with their reducements.
Command. HAlf-files, double your Front to the left.

Command. Double your files to the right entire, advancing.

Command. Front half-files, double your Rear to the right entire.

Command. Left half-ranks, double your right Flank to the left.

Direction. Face all to the right, and left-half-ranks move forward; and double
your right Flank to the left, to your Leader.

Command. Double your Ranks to the left entire.

Command. Right half-ranks, double your left Flank entire, advancing.

Command. Left half-ranks, double your right Flank inward entire.

Direction. Half-files of the right half-ranks, face about; right half-ranks,
move clear of the standing part; face all to the right: left half-ranks, move
forwards into the right Flank, to your Leader.

Command. The three first, and the three last Ranks, double the six middle-most
entire to the left Flank.

Direction. The three first, and the three last, face to the left, march clear
of the standing part, face inward, move, and close your Divisions, to your
Leader.

Command. Right half-ranks, double your left Flank to the right.

Direction. Face all to the left, and right half-ranks move forwards, and
double your left Flank to the right, to your Leader.

Command. Double your Ranks to the right entire.

Command. Right half-ranks double your left Flank inward entire.

Command. The three first, and the three last Ranks, double the six middle-most
Ranks entire to the right Flank.

Command. Left half-ranks, double your right Flank entire, advancing.

Command. Front half-files, double your Rear to the left entire.

Command. Half-files, double your Front to the right.

Command. Double your Files to the left entire advancing, every man placing
himself before his Leader.

Command. Front half-files, double your Rear to the right, following your
Leaders.

Direction. Half-files, face about; File-leaders, turn off to the left, and
move down upon the right of the Rear, the rest following successively; to your
Leader.

Command. Files double your Depth to the left entire; they are reduced being
faced to their Leader.

CHAP. IX. Twelve several Counter-marches, with their reducements.
Command. FIles to the right hand countermarch, losing ground.

Command. Ranks to the right hand countermarch, losing ground.

Direction. Face all to the right.

Command. Front and Rear half-files, inter-change ground.

Direction. Front half-files, face about to the left.

Command. Right and left half-ranks, inter-change ground.

Direction. Face inward.

Command. File-leaders, face about; the rest pass through to the right, a place
your selves behind your Leaders; face to the Front.

Command. Countermarch your Front and Rear into the midst.

Command. Countermarch your Flanks into the midst. Face out-ward.

Command. File-leaders, and Half-file-leaders, stand; the rest pass through to
the right, and place your selves before your Leaders, and Half-file-leaders.

Direction. The second Rank from the Front, and from the Half-file-leaders, are
to begin the Motion, placing themselves, as before commanded.

Command. The out-most File upon the right, and the second File from the stand;
the rest pass through to the right, and place your selves on the outside of
your right hand men.

Command. Files to the left hand countermarch, losing ground.

Command. Front and Rear half-files, countermarch to the right.

Direction. Front and Rear half-files, turn off distinctly by your selves, on
the ground you stand; face to your Leader.

Command. Right and left Half-ranks, countermarch to the right.

Direction. Face to the right; and right and left Half-ranks, turn off
distinctly to the right; face to your Leader, they are reduced.

CHAP. X. Twelve several Wheelings, with their Reducements.
Command. WHeel your Rear Half-files inward into the midst, and double the
Front inward entire.

Direction. Right and left Half-ranks, open from the midst to double distance;
Rear half-files face about, and wheel your Rear inward into the midst, moving
forward, doubling the Front inward entire.

Command. Wheel off your Right half-ranks, and double your left Flank to the
left entire.

Direction. Face outward right Half-ranks, wheel about to the right, and double
your left Flank to the left; to your Leader.

Command. Right and left Half-ranks, double the Length of your Battle by
wheeling outward to the Front.

Direction. Face outward, and right Half-ranks, wheel to the left, and left
Half-ranks, wheel to the right, and after close Files into the midst to order.

Command. Wheel off your right Half-ranks, and double your left Flank by
Division.

Direction. Face outward: right Half-ranks, wheel about to the right and left
outward, moving forward, and doubling the left Flank to the right and left
outward.

Command. Wheel your left Half-ranks inward into the right Flank.

Direction. Face outward, and open from the midst to double distance; the Front
and Rear half-files, and after the left Half-Ranks may wheel inward, and double
the right Flank inward entire.

Command. Wheel off your Rear Half-files, and double your Front to the left
entire; Half-files face about.

Command. Wheel your right Half-ranks inward into the midst, and double the
left Flank inward entire.

Direction. Face outward; and Front and Rear Half-files that were, are to open
from the midst to double distance, and right Half-ranks wheel inward, and move
forward into the left Flank.

Command. Wheel off your Rear Half-files, and double your Front to the right
entire; Half-files face about.

Command. Wheel off your left Half-ranks, and double your right Flank by
Division.

Command. Wheel off your Front Half-files, and double your Rear to the right
entire: Half-files face about.

Command. Double the Depth of the Battle by wheeling Front and Rear into the
midst of each Division.

Direction. Front Half-files move forward four paces, then the last Rank of
each Division face about, and wheel into the midst of Front and Rear of each
Division; face to your Leader.

Command. Wheel off your Front Half-files, and double your Rear to the left
entire; Half-files face about.

Command. Wheel your Battle off by Division from the Rear.

Direction. Face all about, and right Half-ranks wheel about to the right and
left outward to the Front; and closing Files into the midst to Order, they will
be reduced as at first, and stand as underneath is set forth.

formation

CHAP. XI. Several plain Firings upon this Exercise of 24 men, with Figures of
Battle belonging to the same.
A Commander having thus passed over the Motions, may next prepare for Firings;
and calling up his Sergeants, he may give them order how the Musketeers shall
fire in Front and Rear: but before he begin his Firings, it will be expedient
that he double his Front to the right and left inward by the Bringers-up, which
being ended, he may proceed as follows.

The first Firing. Let them fire by Divisions drawn forth ten paces before the
Front of Pikes, and fall in the Rear of themselves.

The second Firing. Let them fire again, and fall off to the right and left,
moving down before the Front of Pikes, and closing their Divisions.

The third Firing. Let the first Rank kneel down, the next stoop, and the last
stand upright, and give fire altogether; the Pikes in the mean time are to
advance their Arms, and open to the right and left, charge on to the Front,
until they be clear of the Musketeers, and then face inwards, and close their
Divisions; then facing all about, they may give fire to the Rear marching.

The fourth Firing. Let the last Rank face about to the left, and give fire,
and fall off to the right and left, placing themselves before their Leaders of
their own Divisions of Musketeers.

The fifth Firing. Let them face about to the left again, give fire; and fall
off to the right and left, and flank their Pikes, the Pikes at the same instant
facing about, and charge on clear of the Musketeers, the Musketeers after
facing inward, and close their Divisions: the Pikes may charge to the Horse,
and the Musketeers may give fire over their heads after this manner.

The sixth Firing. Let the first Rank stoop, and the other two stand upright,
and give fire altogether; after recovering of their Arms, they may all face to
the Front, commanding the Pikes to double the Front inward entire, and
afterward Files to double their Depth to the right and left outward, every man
falling behind his Bringer-up, closing Files into the midst to Order, and
wheeling about into the first Front, he may proceed as follows.

Command. Front Half-files advance forwards three paces; the middle Rank of
each Division face outward, and move clear of the standing part; face to your
Leader.

formation

The first Firing. Let the inmost Divisions of Musketeers in the Front fire,
and fall off in the Rear of themselves; after facing about, move down, and
interchange ground with them in the Rear; they at the same instant moving up,
firing, and in like manner interchanging ground with them in the Rear; and at
the same time the outmost men are to move up, and fire to the Front, and to
fall off to the right and left, into the place of them in the Rear, they at the
same time moving up, and firing in like manner: this firing may be continued
twice over.

The second Firing. Let them face to both the Flanks, and let the Divisions of
Pikes in the midst open outward until they be clear of the standing part, then
Porting; let the Musketeers give fire on the same ground they stand, and the
Pikes after may charge on until the Musketeers make ready again, and then
retreating into their places again, the Musketeers may give fire, as before is
mentioned, the Pikes in like manner charging on, then retreating to their
places; face all to their Leader.

Command. Inmost Divisions of Pikes move to the left one pace, and double to
the right File-wise, and face to Front and Rear, and march three paces; middle
File of Front and Reer-Divisions open from the midst to double Distance; face
to your Leader.

formation

The first firing. Face to Front and Rear, and then give Fire, and fall in the
Rear of themselves.

The second firing. Let the Musketeers move forwards, and the inmost Division
rank outward into Front and Rear, and then give Fire altogether, and file as
they were; the Pikes may charge whilst they make ready, and fall into their
places again, they may continue upon this Firing a second time.

The third firing. Let the Musketeers, and the two outmost men of the Pikes,
face to both Flanks; and likewise the Middle-divisions of Pikes are to face to
both Flanks after this manner: the first two of the Reer-division are to face
to the right, and the two last men of the Front-division are to face to the
left; then let the Musketeers give fire to both Flanks; and the Pikes may
after charge to the Front, Rear, and both Flanks until the Musketeers make
ready again; this Firing may be continued twice; to your Leader.

Command. The outmost single men of Musketeers in the Front-divion, face
about; the two outmost men of Musketeers, both of Front and Reer-divisions
move forward and close to order; face to your Leader, and close inward to open
Order.

formation

The first firing. Let them give Fire to the Front, and fall in the Rear of
themselves, then face about and move down into the Rear; the rest moving up
successively, giving Fire and falling off in like manner; this may be continued
twice over; then face them to the Rear, and let the Musketeers rank to the
right and left outward.

The second firing. Let the first Rank of each Division give Fire, and fall off
to the right and left in manner and form of the former Firing, until they have
Fired twice over; then to file as they were, and face to their Leader.

Command. Front and Reer-divisions of Pikes move to the right one pace; the
second Division of Pikes move forward, and double the Front to the left; the
second Division of Pikes from the Rear, face about; move down and double the
Pikes in the Rear to the left; to your Leader: Middle-divisions of Musketeers
open outward to twice double distance; face all to the Center, and march two or
three paces; to your Leader.

formation

The first firing. The three last Divisions, face to the Rear; the two outmost
men both of Pikes and Musketeers, face to the Flanks; then let them all give
Fire, and fall in the Rear of the Pikes; the Pikes may charge while the
Musketeers make ready again.

The second firing. Let the Musketeers move forth and give Fire as at first,
and after fall in again.

The third firing. Let them give Fire by Extraduction, and fall again in the
Rear of the Pikes.

The fourth firing. Let the Pikes charge the Horse, and the Musketeers give
Fire altogether over their heads; then move forth into their first places, and
face to their Leader.

Command. Front and Reer-divisions of Musketeers open outward to double
distance; the outmost men of Pikes close inward to open order: the third Rank
of Pikes from the Front, face about; the third Rank of Pikes from the Front,
and the third Rank of Pikes from the Rear, move forwards to order; face to your
Leader: Front and Reer-divisions, stand; the rest face outward, and move two
paces, to your Leader.

formation

The first firing. Let the first Divisions Fire, and fall in the Rear of
themselves; then wheeling off to the right and left into the place of those
Musketeers in the Rear; they at the same time moving forward into their
places, and firing, falling off in like manner; the Musketeers may give Fire
on the ground they stand, falling in the Rear of themselves: This firing being
twice performed, we proceed to another.

The second firing. Let the Front-divisions of Musketeers and those upon the
Flanks give Fire, and fall in the midst of Pikes; in the mean time the last
Division of Pikes may open outward until they be clear of the standing part;
then let Pikes charge all whilst the Musketeers make ready again: This firing
may be performed twice; after which, let them move forth into their places
again; and face to Front and Rear, and give Fire, and fall off in the Rear of
themselves: the Pikes may charge, which being ended, face them to their Leader.

Command. The last Rank of Pikes of the Middle-division, face about;
middle-division of Pikes move forward, until you range even abrest with the
midst of the Front and Reer-divisions of Pikes; to your Leader: the last man of
the outmost divisions of Musketeers, face about; outmost-men move forward
three paces, and face to your Leader: Ranks of the Front and Reer-divisions
open from the midst to open order; Reer-divisions move forward two paces.

formation

The first firing. Let them Fire to the Front, and fall in between the Pikes:
this may be done twice; after which, face to the Front and Rear, and Fire there
in the same manner: then let Pikes and Musketeers intercharge ground, let them
give Fire altogether unto Front and Rear; then facing about, interchange ground
with the Pikes, who are to charge on whilst the Musketeers make ready; then
retreating, let them all face outward, and they will stand in form like a Saw,
after they have moved two paces.

The second firing. Let the Musketeers give Fire altogether to both Flanks,
and the Pikes to charge on; after retreating, they may order their Arms, and
face all to their Leader.

Reducement. The outmost Musketeers upon the Flanks, move to right and left
inward, placing themselves in the midst of their own divisions; the outmost men
of Pikes to stand, the rest to double Ranks to the left; and the first Rank of
Pikes to double to the right File-wise, and the second Rank from the Rear to
double to the left File-wise; after let the outmost men of Pikes double their
inmost Files into the midst; then moving forward their divisions, evening their
Front, closing Files to the midst to order, they are reduced.

And now we will lodge our Colors, and repose our selves, until by the beat of
the Drum we shall be summoned to make our appearance.

CHAP. XII. The third Exercise, with four Files six deep.
BEing the third time brought into the Field completely armed, where being
drawn forth into Files, and by the Leaders thereof exercised, as before; they
are commanded to lead up their Files; yet not presuming to place themselves,
but leaves that to the discretion of their Superior Officers, who knows best
the desert of each particular man. But by the way, give me leave in this place
to tell the Soldiers and Leaders of our private Meetings, that this decorum is
not rightly observed: the Soldier thinking himself wiser then his Leader,
presumes to chop and change by Counter-marching of his File, making some part
of the Rear to be more honorable then the Front, which cannot be; for the
youngest Soldier there is of more honor then the eldest in the Rear, in regard
it is the more honorable part of the Battalia, therefore it is plain, that they
take more upon them then becomes them; for no File-leader ought to meddle with
his File in matter of motions, without consent of the superior Officers;
neither ought the Leader either through favor, or out of malice, when all the
Files are joined into one complete Body, to Countermarch the Files, (and after
proceeding to other Motions) depriving thereby the Leaders thereof of their due
honor; for else, why (just in the time of Exercise or Marching) should one
single File, as the right or left, be Countermarched, if he bore not malice to
some, thrusting them by this unsouldier-like way out of their places, and
through favor or affection often times putting men of little desert into their
places? To leave this discourse, not pleasing to some, let the Commander draw
forth one File of Pikes, and double it by the Half-file, and send a Sergeant to
fetch the Colors; and after closing his Ranks and Files to Order, he may begin
to make some alteration in the exercising of them in their Motions, spending
his time altogether upon Inversion and Conversion.

CHAP. XIII. Thirty several Words of Command of Inversion and Conversion.
Command. RAnks, rank entire to the left into the Front.

Direction. The first Rank stand, the rest face to the left, and successively
move into the Front.

Command. Ranks, rank four to the left.

Direction. The first four upon the left stand, the rest face to the left, and
by fours fall successively behind the first four upon the left.

Command. Files, rank outward into the Front.

Direction. The inmost Files stand, the rest open outward to double distance,
and after rank outward into the Front.

Command. Ranks, file three to the right and left outward by wheeling.

Direction. The three outmost men upon the right and left wheel to the right
and left outward, the rest doing the like by threes; after close into the midst
to Order, and face to their Leader.

Command. Files, rank inward into the Rear.

Direction. Face to the Rear, and move to the right and left inward into the
Rear; to your Leader.

Command. Ranks, file six to the right and left outward, advancing.

Direction. The outmost man upon the right and left stand, the rest move
outward until they be six in a File, and the next outmost men are to stand, the
other doing the like, and after close Files into the midst to Order.

Command. Files, rank inward into the midst of Ranks.

Direction. Front Half-files face about, and right and left Half-ranks open
from the midst to double distance, the rest open outward to Order, and move to
the right and feft inward to the midst of Ranks; to your Leader, and close
Files inward to Order.

Command. Ranks, file 12 to the right and left inward, every man placing
himself before the Leaders and Bringers up of the middle Files.

Direction. Ranks, open backward to double distance, the middle File stand, the
rest advance forwards, and file twelve to the right and left inward, placing
themselves before the Leaders, and Bringers-up of the middle Files.

Command. Files, rank six to the right and left inward.

Direction. Files, open from the midst to double distance, and move three to
the right, and three to the left inward, until you have made four Ranks six
abrest; after close Ranks forward to Order.

Command. Ranks, rank outward into Front and Rear, every man placing himself on
the outside of his right and left-hand-man.

Direction. Half-Files face about, and rank to the right and left outward into
Front and Rear as is commanded; face to your Leader, and close Ranks forward to
Order.

Command. Ranks, file 12 to the right and left inward, every man placing
himself behind the Leaders and Bringers-up of the middle Files.

Direction. Ranks, open backward to double distance, the middle Files stand,
the rest move side-ways to the right and left, and place your selves behind the
Leaders and Bringers up of the middle Files.

Command. Files, rank six to the right and left inward into Front, Rear, and
Midst.

Direction. The three last Ranks of the Front and Rear Half-files face about,
and Files open outward to double distance, and move to the right and left
inward into Front, Rear, and Midst, making four Ranks six abrest; after face to
your Leader, and close Ranks forward to Order.

Command. Ranks, rank outward into the Midst.

Direction. Front Half-files face about, and move outward, and rank to the
Midst, and face to your Leader.

Command. Ranks, wheel to the right and left outward.

Direction. Half-files face about, and wheel to the right and left outward into
both the Flanks; face to your Leader, and close Files into the midst to Order.

Command. Files, rank six to the right and left outward into Front, Rear, and
Midst.

Direction. The three last Ranks of the Front and Rear Half-files face about,
and rank outward, three to the right, and three to the left into Front, Rear,
and Midst; face to your Leader, and close Ranks and Files to their distance of
Order.

Command. Ranks, file to the right entire, advancing.

Direction. The outmost File stand, the rest move forward, and file to the
right entire, advancing.

Command. Files, rank three to the right.

Direction. The first three men from the Front rank three to the right, the
rest successively doing the same, closing Ranks forward to Order.

Command. Ranks, wheel to the left.

Direction. Ranks, open backward to open Order, and wheel to the left.

Command. Files, rank six to the left.

Direction. The first six men rank six to the left, the rest successively doing
the same, until they have made four Ranks six abrest, then close Ranks forwards
to Order.

Command. Ranks, rank outward into the midst, every man placing himself on the
outsidst of his right and left-hand-man.

Direction. Front Half-files face about, and Front and Rear Half-files rank
outward into the midst, placing your selves on the outside of your right and
left-hand-men; face to your Leader.

Command. Ranks, wheel three to the right and left outward.

Direction. The last Rank face about, and wheel by threes to the right and left
outward toward both Flanks; face to your Leader, and close Files to the right
to Order, they will stand four abrest, and six deep.

Command. Files, file outward entire, advancing.

Direction. The outmost File stand, the rest advance forward, and place your
selves before the outmost Files; after close Files into the midst to Order.

Command. Files, file to the right.

Direction. The right-hand-File stand, the rest face about, and fall in the
Rear of your right-hand-File; to your Leader.

Command. Files, file twelve to the right.

Direction. The first twelve stand, the other move forward, filing twelve to
the right.

Command. Files, wheel inward into Front and Rear.

Direction. Files open from the midst to twice double distance, after face
inward, and wheel six to the right, and six to the left, until you have made
two Ranks twelve abrest; face to your Leader, and close Ranks forwards to Order.

Command. Ranks wheel inward to both the Flanks.

Direction. Ranks, open from the midst to twice double distance; the first
Rank, face about; the first and the last Rank, wheel six to the right, and six
to the left inward to both the Flanks; face to your Leader, and close Files to
the midst to order.

Command. Files, file three to the right and left outward into Front and Rear.

Direction. Half-files, face about; the three first and the three last Ranks
are to stand; the rest are to move by threes, filing to Front and Rear to the
right and left outward; and after face to the Front, and close their Ranks
forwards to order.

Command. Files, file to the midst by Division.

Direction. Half-files of the outmost Files, face about; and the outmost Files
move forwards, and file by Division unto the midst of Files; face to your
Leader.

Command. Files, rank inward into the Front.

Direction. Files, open from the midst to twice double distance, and move
forward to the right and left inward into the Front.

Command. Ranks, file six to the right and left outward.

Direction. The outmost men are to stand; the rest are to move side-ways to the
right and left, making six in a File; and then the next outside men in like
manner are to stand, the rest successively are to file as before.

CHAP. XIV. Next follows several Figures of Battle, with Firings upon the
same, for the performance whereof,
Command. BRingers-up to double their Front to the right and left inward, and
Ranks and Files to open to open order, and Musketeers to close outward to
close order; the inmost Files of Pikes close outward to the same distance, and
they will stand in four Divisions; after let the Middle-rank in each Division
open outward to open order, they will produce the first Figure.

formation

The first firing. Let the first Rank give Fire, and wheel off to the right and
left, and place themselves in the room of them in the Rear; and they at the
same time moving forwards in their places, and give Fire as the first; after
wheel off into their places again.

The second firing. Let the Middle-ranks advance three foot before the Front,
and give Fire; face about, and move down into their places again.

Command. The last Rank in each Division move to the left one pace, and double
to the right File-wise; and then advance forward, until their first men exceed
two foot the Front of each Division; then let the first Rank open outward to
open order, and the last Rank close inward to the same distance.

formation

The first firing. Let the middle File give Fire to the Front, and fall in the
Rear of themselves.

The second firing. Let the first Rank give fire on the ground they stand, and
after fall off to the right and left into the room of them in the Rear, they at
the same time moving forward into their ground, and give fire in like manner,
and fall off into their places again, and then the Pikes may charge on whilst
the Musketeers make ready again.

Command. Face all about: middle File, move forward three foot clear of the
Rear; the first Rank close inward to Order, the last Rank open outward
something more then to open Order.

formation

Upon this Figure let the first man in each division kneel down, and then to
give fire altogether over one another heads, the Pikes at the same time
charging brest-high to the Horse; then face all to their first Front.

Command. The last men in the Rear double to the left Rank-wise; Files, close
into the midst to Order; Musketeers, double your Pikes inward entire
advancing, and move forward three paces; Files, double your depth to the right
and left outward of each Arms, every man falling behind his Bringer-up; Front
Half-files, double your Rear entire into the midst; Files, double to the right
and left outward; Files, file to the right entire advancing: which being done,
wheel them to the right about into a Ring, in form as follows.

formation

Upon this Figure let the Pikes charge round, and the Musketeers give fire all
together; which being ended, let the Commander go to the place where the
File-Leader stands, and wheel them off again to the left until he has brought
them into one straight File, and then proceed.

Command. Half-files, double your Front to the right; Ranks, double to the
right and left inward; Files, double outward entire, advancing; Half-files of
each Arms, double your Ranks forwards to the left; Front Half-files, double the
Rear to the left; Files, file to the left entire, advancing, and wheel about
into a Ring; then face all to the Center, and close Files of each Arms to the
right and left inward to close Order.

formation

Command. Middle-men in each Division move backward, and place your selves two
foot behind your right and left-hand-men; face all about to the right, and
close Ranks inward to Order.

formation

Upon this Figure let them Fire by circumduction after this manner; let the odd
men of Pikes port; and then the odd Muskettier, where the first Front was, is
to give Fire, and to move away to the left; and the next odd man of Musketeers
upon the right, immediately comes stooping underneath the Pikes into the first
man's place, Firing in like manner, moving away into the next odd man's place of
the Musketeers upon the left; the rest doing the same until the Muskettier
come into his place again.

Command. Face all to the Center; odd men move forwards and place your selves
two foot before the right and left-hand-men; after face all to the right about.

formation

Upon this Figure you may Fire likewise by way of circumduction: the Pikes
porting all round, and having performed one Firing in this manner; in the next
place, let the odd Musketeers and Pikes move forth again, and kneel down; the
odd Pike-men charging at foot, the Musketeers may give Fire altogether; then
let them face to the Center, and let the odd men move forwards, and place
themselves between the right and left-hand-men; then moving and closing their
ring, let them face all about to the right: Then let the Captain go where the
Leader of the File stands, and wheel him about to the left; the rest following
until they be all brought again into one straight File.

Command. Files, file three to the left into the Front; Files, double to the
right entire advancing; Front-half-files, move forwards three paces; Files,
double your depth to the right of each Division; Half-files, double your Front
entire into the midst. The two first and the two last men of Pikes upon each
Flank, face inward; the two Middle-ranks, face outward; the two last Ranks of
Musketeers, face about; march all three paces; to your Leader.

formation

To pass by the Firings which may be performed upon this Figure, I shall
proceed from hence to draw another.

Command. The outmost divisions of Musketeers close inward to order; Front and
Rear Divisions of Pikes, open outward to double distance; Pikes, double inward
Rank-wise, and they will stand as follows.

formation

Upon this Figure Fire to the Front in their several Divisions one after
another, and fall in the Rear of themselves; then wheel off to the right into
the Rear, the rest of the Divisions moving forward in their room, doing the
like until all have fired over twice.

Command. Musketeers, double your Ranks outward in each Division, and they
will stand as underneath.

formation

Upon this Figure, as in the former, they may Fire likewise to the Front,
falling down into the Rear; and after every Rank successively moving up into
the Front, may Fire and fall off in like manner: this Firing may be done twice
to the Front; and being faced to the Rear, they may there give Fire after this
manner, and after face to their first Front.

Command. Musketeers, double to the right and left inward File-wise;
middlemost division of Musketeers, face outward, and march until you have
placed your selves in Front and Rear of the outmost Divisions of Pikes: The
last Rank of Front and Reer-divisions of Musketeers, double to the right
File-wise, and move forward until your first men exceed two foot the Front of
each division, which occasioneth the next Figure.

formation

It is now high time that we put a period to this Exercise; wherefore let the
Ensign unfurl his Colors, the Soldiers shoulder their Arms, and the Drum beat
a march; upon which the Ensign being in the midst may display his Colors so
long as shall be convenient, and after the Leader may proceed to their
reducement, as follows.

Reducement. Middle-file of Musketeers, face about, and march clear of your
own Divisions, and double to the left Rank-wise; Musketeers, close inward to
order; Pikes, double to the right and left outward File-wise: Files, close into
the midst to order; Ranks, close to order; Pikes, move forward and even your
Front; Pikes and Musketeers interchange ground, they are reduced.

Now the Leader may command the Musketeers to troop away, and after he may
lodge his Colors, thereby refreshing both himself and his Soldiers, until the
next summons by beat of the Drum.

CHAP. XV. The fourth Exercise, consisting of four Files eight deep.
THe Soldiers upon the fourth summons coming unto the place of Exercise, make
fuller appearance then before, insomuch that their Files are drawn forth eight
deep; the Leaders thereof having spent some time in exercising them in each
particular posture, are called upon to join into a body; where their Leader
stands, bethinking of himself what new matter he should delight them with,
there being sufficient in any one particular motion for their Exercise, pitches
for present to spend his chiefest time in motions upon facing, continuing
longer in them, in respect of the several Figures of Battle demonstrated by
them.

Now for the more ready performance thereof, I shall only give the several
words of command for each particular Figure which may be drawn from these
facings, referring the Reader to the Figures themselves, where I shall have
occasion to make use of them upon Firings, which shall be made known unto him
by Alphabetical letters, pointing from each facing to the Figure it produces.
To come briefly to the exercise in hand, silence being craved, and Ranks and
Files closed to order, the Leader may proceed to these or the like particular
facings, producing eighteen Figures of Battle Alphabetically set forth, with
their reducements.

Command. Half-files, double your front to the left.

Direction. Files, open from the right to open order; Half-files, advance your
Arms, and move forward to the left, and double the Front.

Command. Files, open from the midst to open order; Musketeers, close outward
to close order; the inmost Files of Pikes, close outward to close order; Ranks,
close to Front and Rear to order, and they will stand in eight Divisions.

formation

Command. Reer-division of Pikes, face about; Musketeers, face outward, move
all three paces, to your Leader; points to the first Figure marked by the
Alphabetical letter A.

Command. Musketeers, face inward; Division of Pikes, face outward, march all
until the Pikes are clear three foot of the Musketeers, to your Leader: this
forms the Figure demonstrated unto you by the Alphabetical B.

Command. Reer-division of Musketeers upon the left; face about to the right;
Reer-division of Musketeers upon the right, face to the right: Front-division
of Musketeers upon the left, face to the left; Divisions of Pikes, face to the
Center; move all until your Musketeers be clear three foot of Front, Rear, and
both Flanks; then let them stand, and face the Divisions of Musketeers to the
left, and the Division of Pikes to face about to the right, and to move all two
paces; then face all to the Center, and close their Divisions a little; after
face to their Leader C.

Command. Reer-divisions of Musketeers, stand; the rest, face to the Rear,
march all until your Reer-division range even abrest with those upon the
Flanks; to your Leader D.

Command. Reer-divisions of Pikes, face outward, march all until the
Reer-divisions of Pikes be clear of the outmost Divisions of Musketeers; then
let the Reer-divisions of Pikes face to the Front; the rest face to the Rear,
march all three paces; to your Leader E

Command. Divisions of Musketeers in the midst, face about; march all until
the Middle-division of Musketeers range even with the Rear; to your Leader F.

Command. Front-divisions of Pikes, face to the outward Angles: Reer-division
of Pikes, face about, and after face to inward Angles of the Rear: outmost
divisions of Musketeers, face to your inward Angles: Front-division of
Musketeers, face about; as you are now faced, move all some three paces to
your Leader G.

Command. Musketeers, face to Front, Rear, and both Flanks; Divisions of
Pikes, face to the Center; march all until you be even abrest in Front, Rear,
and both Flanks; to your Leader H.

Command. Reer-divisions of Musketeers, face about; the outmost Divisions,
face inward; Divisions of Pikes, face to the Center; march all three paces; to
your Leader I.

Command. Divisions of Musketeers upon the left in the midst, and the three
last Divisions of Pikes and Musketeers, to face to the Rear, and move three
paces, and stand; Middle-divisions, face to the left; and the rest face to the
right, and move three paces; to your Leader K.

Command. The four last Divisions, face to the left; the four first Divisions,
face to the right; move all until you be clear one of another; then face to the
right, and march until you range even abrest in Front and Rear; face to your
Leader L.

Command. The two inmost Divisions of Pikes, stand; the rest face inward; march
all until the Middle-divisions be three foot clear of the Front; to your Leader
M.

Command. Front-divisions of Pikes, face outward; the rest, face outward; march
all until the Front-divisions range even with the outmost Divisions of Pikes;
face your Leader N.

Command. Front-divisions of Musketeers, face outward; the rest, face inward;
march all until the Front-divisions of Musketeers are clear of the Pikes; then
stand, and the six last Divisions to face about, and move three paces; to your
Leader O.

Command. Reer-divisions of Musketeers, face outward; march all some six
paces; Reer-division of Musketeers, face to the Front; the rest, face to the
Rear, and move until the Reer-divisions range even abrest with the Front; to
your Leader P.

Command. Front-division of Pikes upon the left, face about; march all until
that Division be six foot clear of the Rear; then stand, and Front and
Reer-divisions of Pikes, face to the left, and move two paces; to your Leader Q.

Command. Front-division of Pikes, face about; march all until the
Front-division of Pikes range even abrest with the first Division of
Musketeers; to your Leader R.

Command. The two outmost divisions of Musketeers, face about; outmost
divisions of Pikes, face outward; move all until the outmost Musketeers stand
straight with the Front-division of Musketeers; then face to your Learder S.

Reducement. Divisions of Pikes, face inward; the three last Divisions, face
about: march all some six paces; Front and Reer-divisions of Pikes, face to the
left: Musketeers, face about; move all two paces; to your Leader: Divisions,
move forwards, and double your Front; close Files inward to order, and Ranks
forward to order; double Files to the left entire advancing, reduces them.

Thus much, I conceive may be sufficient at one time for a Leader to exercise
his Company with the motions upon their Facings, so that he shall not need to
trouble himself with any more then Firings: Where first, as is most properest,
we will begin with some plain Firings to the Front; for the performance
whereof, let the Half-files double their Front to the left; and Ranks and
Files, close forwards and inward to order.

The first firing. Let them Fire by Divisions drawn forth ten or twenty paces,
and fall in the Rear of themselves.

The second firing. Let the Musketeers close their Divisions before the Front
of Pikes, and give Fire, and fall all off upon the right Flank.

The third firing The Body moving or marching, let the outmost Files face to
the right, and give Fire, and lead away by the contrary side of their Pikes, by
the Leaders of the File; the next File may do the same, and consequently all
the rest until all have Fired; then let them face to the right; the Pikes in
the interim charging on whilst the Musketeers make ready again

The fourth firing. Let the Pikes open from the midst, that the Musketeers may
come up between them: two Ranks may kneel down, and the other two stand
upright, and Fire altogether; the Pikes then charging, and after retreating,
they may close again into the midst, continuing their Aspects to the right
Flank; the Pikes may port, and the Musketeers may slieve up upon the right and
left of the Pikes; the first Rank giving Fire, and presently falling before the
Front of Pikes; the next Rank doing the same, falling still behind their own
Musketeers, and before the Front of Pikes, as they are then faced; and having
all Fired after that manner, they may Fire again, and flank their Pikes; then
facing to Front and Rear, they may give Fire to both places, and fall off to
the right and left, and Flank their pikes from Front and Rear; and after face
to their Leader.

Command. Files, open outward to open order; Musketeers, close outward to
order, the inmost Files of pikes, close outward to order; Ranks, close to Front
and Rear to order; Reer-divisions of pikes, face about; Musketeers, face
outward; move all three paces; to your Leader. And now you have the Figure of
battle pointed out in the first place unto you by the Alphabet.

formation

The first firing. Let them Fire to the Front, and fall in the Rear of
themselves; then wheel off to the right into the place of those Musketeers in
the Rear, they at the same time moving up into the Front, firing in like
manner, and moving down into their places again.

The second firing. Let the Reer-divisions face about; and after let them give
Fire both to Front and Rear; and falling in the Rear of themselves, the Pikes
may charge while the Musketeers make ready again: they may Fire a second time
in the same manner.

The third firing. Face all to both Flanks; then let them give Fire, and fall
in the Rear of themselves; the Pikes after charging on three paces, and the
Musketeers retreating three paces; after facing to their Leader, produces
this Figure following.

formation

The first firing. Let the two first Divisions advance three paces before the
Front give Fire, and fall in the Rear of themselves, and after move down into
the places of them in the Rear; they at the same time moving up into their
rooms, giving Fire, in like manner falling down into their places again: this
may be performed twice over; after face them to Front and Rear.

The second firing. Let them give Fire, their Divisions advancing three paces
before the Front and Rear, falling in the Rear of themselves; the Pikes
charging on, and the Musketeers retreating into their places again, facing to
their Leader.

Command. Reer-division of Musketeers upon the left, face about; Reer-division
of Musketeers upon the right, face to the right; Front-division of Musketeers
upon the left, face to the left: Musketeers, march all clear of the Pikes,
then stand; after face them in their several Divisions to the left, and move
two paces; to your Leader.

formation

If you find by the words of Command given to make the former Figure, that
your Divisions stand too thin; you may face them all to the Center, and move
forward every Division two or three paces; then face to their Leader.

The first firing. Let the Front-division of Musketeers give Fire, and fall in
the Rear of themselves; after wheel off to the right into the room or place of
them in the Rear; they at the same time moving up into the Front, Firing and
falling off in like manner: this Firing may be performed twice.

The second firing. Let the Musketeers upon the Wings advance forward three
paces; give Fire, and fall in the Rear of themselves; after face about, and
move into their places.

The third firing. Let the Front-division of Musketeers move to the right two
paces; Reer-division, move up upon the left of them; then let them all both in
Front and Rear give Fire on the ground they stand, and fall in the Rear of
themselves; the Pikes after closing forward, their Divisions may charge on, and
after retreating into their places again, the Division of Musketeers upon the
left in the Front in the mean space facing about, and moving down into their
places.

The fourth firing. Let the Musketeers face to the Front, Rear, and both
Flanks; the Pikes, face to the outward Angles of Front and Rear, and Port; then
let them give Fire on the ground they stand, and fall in the Rear of
themselves: Pikes may charge on to the four Angles; then ordering all their
Arms, move the Reer-division of Musketeers forward even with them of the
Wings; then face all to their Leader.

formation

The first firing. Let the first division Fire, and fall in the Rear of
themselves; after face about, and move down into the Middle-rank of
Musketeers; they at the same time marching up into their ground, Firing, and
falling off in like manner.

The second firing. Let the Musketeers upon the Wings advance forward, even
abrest with those in the Front, and Fire altogether; the three Divisions
falling in the Rear of themselves, and after the outmost Divisions facing
about, and moving into their places again.

The third firing. Let the Front-Division of Musketeers face about, move down,
and double the middlemost by division; after let the Musketeers face outward,
and move three paces, and give Fire to both the Flanks, falling off to the
right and left; the middle-divisions making good their ground, and firing in
like manner, falling off.

Having Fired twice over to both the Flanks, face them to their Leader, and
draw forth the outmost Files of Musketeers of the middle-division before the
Front of Pikes, and close their Files inward to Order.

Command. Reer-division of Pikes, face outward, and move two foot clear of the
standing part; to your Leader.

formation

The first firing. Let the first division of Musketeers give Fire, and fall in
the Rear of themselves; and after wheel about, and fall in the midst of the
Rear, and range even abrest between the outmost divisions of Pikes; after face
to their Leader.

The second firing. Let the three other divisions advance forwards altogether
three foot before the Front, and give Fire, and fall in the Rear of themselves;
the Pikes charge on, and the Musketeers still preserving their ground, making
ready again whilst the Pikes retreat into their places.

The third firing. Let them give Fire again in like manner; the Pikes charging
on, and retreating as before; then let the last divisions of Pikes move inward
in a straight line with the outmost divisions of Musketeers in the Front, and
they will stand as follows.

formation

The first firing. Let them give Fire to the Front, and fall in the Rear of
themselves: this may be performed twice; then face to the Front and Rear; the
last Rank of the middle-division is to face about; the first Rank are to
continue their Aspects unto the Front.

The second firing. Let the Pikes port to Front and Rear, and the Musketeers
give Fire to Front and Rear, and fall in the Rear of themselves; and after the
Pikes may charge on, and retreat again: they may continue this Figure twice,
the Pikes charging; and after face to their Leader.

Command. Reer-divisions of Pikes, face about, and move three paces, and face
to their Leader; Front-divisions of Musketeers, face about, and move down into
the midst, as before, interchanging ground with the Reer-division of
Musketeers: the two last Divisions of Pikes move outward, until they be two
foot clear of the next range of Musketeers; middle Division of Musketeers
move backward even with the Rear Division of Musketeers; to your Leader.

formation

Upon this Figure face the three last Divisions of Pikes and Musketeers to the
right about, and let them give fire to Front and Rear, and fall in the Rear of
themselves, the Pikes may afterward charge on to Front and Rear: and retreat
back again into their first places; they may perform this firing twice, the
Pikes likewise charging up before, and retreating into their places again; face
all to their Leader.

And now it will be expedient, having almost tired the Musketeers with these
several Firings, to end our fourth Exercise, and lodge the Colors; but first
we will reduce them.

Reducement. The outmost Division of Musketeers on the right, move forward,
and fall in the Rear of them in the Front: Rear Division of Musketeers move
forward, and fall in the Rear of the left Division of Musketeers, then let
them move straight forwards and join with them in the Front, and close the
Pikes into the midst to Order, and their Ranks forward to Order; let the Pikes
double the Front inward entire, and after Files to double to the left entire,
advancing, closing Files inward to Order; they are reduced.

CHAP. XVI. The Fifth Exercise, with four Files Eight deep.
THe Soldiers having made timely appearance according to the Drums summoning
unto such places as was appointed by their Commander, and being by the
Sergeants drawn forth into Files, the Leaders thereof being permitted to
instruct and teach their Files the Postures, and handsome handling of their
Arms, are forthwith by warning of the Drum to lead up their Files, and being
joined in a Body, according to the discretion of the Superior Officers, do
there stand, silently expecting what will follow. The Captain, or other that
shall Exercise them, first commands the Bringers-up to double their Front to
the left, and after appoints one of the Sergeants to fetch the Colors; to
which purpose he draws off the two inmost Files of Pikes; and advancing their
Arms, the Drum beating a troop, they may move away, and bring them to the
Company, being led thither by the Ensign, the Sergeant falling in the Rear of
the Pikes; and they falling into their places again, they may be commanded,
Files to double their depth to the right, every man falling behind his
Bringer-up. Now the former days Exercise being chiefly spent in the Motions by
several Firings, they may be spared in this, and in lieu thereof the Leader may
out of the former plain Doublings collect one that may continue long in
exercise before reduced, and in this Exercise he shall not need to trouble
himself with Counter-marches or Wheelings, but fall immediately alone upon the
Motions with this Doubling or the like, as follows.

CHAP. XVII. Thirty several Doublings, with their Reducements.
Command. HAlf-files double your Front to the left.

Command. Double your Files to the right entire, advancing.

Command. Half-files double your Front to the right and left outward.

Direction. Half-files advance your Arms, and move to the right and left
outward, and double the Front.

Command. Double your Files outward entire, advancing.

Direction. Even files from the Flanks move forward and double the odd, and
after close Files into the midst to Order.

Command. Half-files double your Front to the right entire.

Command. Right Half-ranks double the left Flank to the right.

Direction. Face to the left, right half-ranks move forward, and double the
left Flank to the right; to your Leader.

Command. Double your Ranks to the right entire.

Command. Right half-ranks double your left Flank entire, advancing.

Command. Half-files double your Front inward entire.

Command Left half-ranks double your right Flank to the left.

Direction. Face to the right, left half-ranks advance your Arms, and move
forward to the left, and double your right Flank.

Command. Double your Ranks to the left entire.

Command. Left half-ranks double your right Flank entire, advancing.

Command. Half-files double your Front inward entire.

Direction. Front half-files face outward, and march clear of the standing
part; to your Leader; half-files move forward, and double the Front inward
entire.

Command. Right half-ranks double entire the depth of the left Flank.

Direction. Left half-ranks stand, right half-ranks face about, and march clear
of the standing part; then face to the right, and move forward even with the
left Flank; to your Leader.

Command. Front half-files double the Rear to the left entire.

Direction. Front half-files face to the right, march clear of the standing
part, face all to the Rear; Front half-files move down, and double the Rear to
the left.

Command. Right half-ranks double your left Flank to the left.

Direction. Face all to the left right; half-ranks move forward, and double the
left Flank to the left; to your Leader.

Command. Double your Ranks to the left entire into the Rear.

Direction. Face all to the Rear, and every even Rank from the Rear move forth,
and double the odd; to your Leader, and close forward to Order.

Command. The two outmost Files upon each Flank double entire, advancing the
four inmost Files.

Command. Front half-files double the Rear to the right entire.

Command. Right half-ranks double your left Flank inward entire.

Direction. Half-files of the left half-ranks face about; left half-ranks move
clear of the standing part; face all to the left: right half-ranks move
forwards, and double the left Flank inward entire.

Command. The four middle ranks double your Front and Rear inward entire.

Direction. Half-files face about, the two first and the two last Ranks open
outward, until you be clear of the standing part, then the four middle Ranks
move forward two to the Front and two to the Rear, doubling entire to both
places; face to your Leader, and close your Divisions.

Command. The two outmost Files upon each Flank, double the four middlemost
Files by Division.

Direction. Half-files of the two outmost Files face about, outmost Files move
clear of the standing part, then close inward to Order, and face to your Leader.

Command. The two first, and the two last Ranks double the four middlemost
Ranks inward entire.

Direction. The four middle Ranks face outward, and move clear of the standing
part; then face to your Leader: the two first Ranks face about, move forward
with the two last, doubling the middlemost inward entire; to your Leader.

Command. The four inmost Files double entire, advancing the two outmost Files.

Direction. The two outmost Files stand, the inmost Files move forward clear of
the standing part; then face outward, and move straight with the outmost Files;
to your Leader, and close Files into the midst to Order.

Command. Front half-files double the Rear by Division.

Direction. The four middle Files double the two outmost Files inward entire.

Direction. Half-files of the two outmost Files face about, outmost files move
forward clear of the standing part, face all to the right and left outward;
inmost Files move forward, and double the outmost inward entire; to your
Leader, and close Files into the midst to Order.

Command. Front half-files double your Rear to the left.

Command. Files, double your Depth to the right.

Command. The two first and the two last Ranks double the four middle Ranks by
Division.

Direction. The two first and the two last Ranks face outward, and march clear
of the standing part; then face inward, and move forward, doubling the inmost
Files by Division; face to your Leader.

Command. The two outmost Files upon each Flank double entire the Depth of the
four inmost Files, reduces.

CHAP. XVIII. Plain Firings and Figures of Battle.
HAving passed over these Motions of Doublings, in the next place we will
proceed to Firings; command therefore Files to open from the midst to open
Order, and after let the Bringers-up double the Front to the left.

The first firing. Let the Musketeers give fire even in the Front, and fall in
the Rear of themselves.

The second firing. Let the first Rank give fire, and fall in between the
Pikes, every Rank doing the same until all have fired; then let the first Rank
move forth by Division, give fire to the Front, and fall in again, every rank
doing the same.

The third firing. Let them face to both Flanks and give fire, and fall off to
the right and left, and flank their Pikes to Front and Rear: the Pikes may now
port, and move all forward three paces; the Musketeers may give fire again,
and fall in the Rear of the Pikes, the Pikes charging on, and after retreating
to their first ground may charge at foot, and the Musketeers may give fire by
two Ranks all together over their heads; after recovering their Arms, let them
face to Front and Rear, and let the Musketeers move forth clear of the
standing part, then stand and give fire to Front and Rear, and fall off to the
right and left, and flank the Pikes, who after may charge on to Front and Rear;
then retreating, face all to their Leader.

Command. Half-files of Pikes face about, Musketeers face outward, march all
three paces; Pikes face to the right and left; Musketeers face about to the
right, march all three paces; then let the last Rank face about, the first and
the last Rank double File-wise inward, advancing; Pikes face to the outward
Angles of Front and Rear; Musketeers face to Front, Rear, and both Flanks, and
move all two paces; to your Leader.

formation

The first firing. Let the first Division of Musketeers fire to the Front, and
fall in the Rear of themselves, and after wheel off to the Right, moving down
into the place of the Rear Division, who may at the same time move forward into
their ground, and fire in like manner, wheeling off as the former did.

The second firing. Let the two outmost Divisions move forward into the Front,
give fire, and fall in the Rear of themselves, and after move down into their
places.

The third firing. Face all to the Rear, and let the Musketeers give fire
there in the same manner as they did to the Front.

The fourth firing. Let the Musketeers face to Front, Rear, and both Flanks,
and the Pikes face to the outward Angles of Front and Rear, then let the
Musketeers move forth three foot clear of the Pikes, and fire to Front, Rear,
and both Flanks, and fall in the rear of themselves, after facing about, move
into their places again.

The fifth firing. Let them face as before, and give fire on the same ground
they stand, and fall in the Rear of themselves; the Pikes may after charge on,
and retreat into their places again.

Command. Musketeers move forth, and range even abrest with the Pikes into
Front, Rear, and Midst, and they will stand in a square as follows.

formation

The first firing. Upon this Figure as they are faced to Front, Rear and both
Flanks, and the Pikes to the outward Angles of Front and Rear, it will be best
to fire on the ground they stand, and to fall in the Rear of themselves; the
Pikes may after charge to the four Angles.

The second firing. Let them double their Ranks outward, and give fire; after
face about and move three paces into the midst of Pikes, and having made ready
again, let them face about, and move forward and fire as they did before, and
after dismount their Muskets, taking them in both hands, they may, as occasion
shall require, make use of the Butt end thereof against the Horse, and the
Pikes may stand upon their charge.

The third firing. Let the Musketeers double inward File-wise, the Pikes keep
their Aspects to the four Angles, the Musketttiers, as before, may give Fire to
Front, Rear, and both Flanks, and fall in the rear of those Pikes next their
right hand; and having their Aspects unto the same Angles, they may fire there,
if they please, by way of Extraduction, and move forth to the left into their
places again; then let the Pikes face to the Front, and Musketeers upon the
wings face about to the right, and Musketeers move forward three paces; face
to your Leader forms the following Figure.

formation

The first firing. Let the first Division give fire together, and wheel off
into the Rear, the next two Divisions moving forward into their ground, giving
fire all together, and wheeling off to the right and left into the Rear, the
rest still moving forward until the Reer-division is likewise come up into the
Front, and gives fire in like manner, and falling off to the right into his
first place again; this firing may be continued twice.

The second firing. Let them give fire all together to the Front after this
manner; let the middle Divisions move forth to the right and left clear of the
Pikes, the Reer-division at the same time moving forward upon the outside of
those in the Front, and give fire and move into their places again, making
ready whilst the Pikes close forward, and charge on five or six paces, they
may retreat again into their places.

The third firing. Let them face all to the Rear, and fire after this manner,
the first Division kneel down, the middle Divisions move forth clear of the
Pikes; the Front-division marching down into the Rear, may give fire all
together, the outmost Division and the Front-division over the heads of them in
the Rear, and move in, and back again into their places; then face to their
Leader.

Command. The outmost Division of Musketeers upon the left in the midst, and
the three last Divisions of Pikes and Musketeers face about; march all three
paces, and stand: Middle Divisions face to the left, and move two paces; face
all to your Leader: Divisions of Pikes face inward; Front-division of
Musketeers, and the second from the Rear face about, and move little, and
close your Divisions; to your Leader.

formation

The first firing. Let the first Division give fire and fall in the Rear of
themselves, then wheel down into the Rear, the other Divisions successively
moving up into the Front, and firing in like manner; this firing may be
continued twice over.

The second firing. Let the Divisions of Musketeers double their Ranks to the
right and left outward, and give fire in single Ranks as they did before, until
all have fired twice over.

The third firing. Let them double their Files to the right and left inward,
and the Rear Divisions to face about, then let them give fire both to Front and
Rear, falling first in the Rear of themselves; after to wheel off into the
midst, and facing to Front and Rear, the middle Divisions may move forth into
their ground, firing in like manner; the Pikes may after charge whilst the
Musketeers make ready again, and after retreating into their places, they may
continue their firing, as formerly, the Pikes charging on as before.

The fourth firing. Let each Division of Musketeers double Ranks outward, and
fire to Front and Rear, and to wheel off in one single rank to the right and
left, and rank again in the midst, and after double inward File-wise, and face
to their Leader.

Command. The four last Divisions face to the left, the four first Divisions
face to the right; march all until you be clear one of another; then face to
the right, and move until you be even abrest in Front and Rear; to your Leader.

formation

The first firing. Let the first Divisions give fire, and fall in the Rear of
themselves, after wheeling off to the right and left into the Rear, they at the
same time moving forwards into their places, firing and falling off in like
manner; they may perform the same firing to the Rear, being thither faced.

The second firing. Let the Reer-Divisions move to the right and left outward,
clear of the standing part; then face to the Front, move up even abrest with
the Front-Divisions, and let every Division fire to the Front, and fall in the
Rear of themselves; the Pikes may charge, and after both they and the outmost
Divisions may move down into their places.

Command. The inmost Divisions of Pikes advance forward three foot before the
Front, the rest face inward, and move two paces; to your Leader.

formation

Upon this Figure let the first Ranks of the Front-Division fire, and fall
behind the Front-Divisions of Pikes; the next rank may fire and fall behind the
first, then let the Reer-division move up and give fire, and fall in the rear
of themselves; and after wheel about to the right and left inward, moving down
clear of the rear, and facing again unto their Leader: then they may fire a
second time in the same way, the Front-divisions moving forth and firing first,
and falling behind the Pikes, the reer-divisions coming up into their places,
firing and falling off again by wheeling about inward, until they be clear
three foot of the rear; then facing to their Leader, they will stand as
follows, where the Ensign may display his Colors, if the Leader pleases to
march upon it.

formation

Having now spent much time in these particular Firings, it will be convenient
to give the Soldiers some respit to refresh their almost tired spirits, that
they may more cheerfully appear upon the next summons of the Drum; and
therefore we will conclude this Exercise, and prepare for the lodging of the
Colors.

Reducement. Reer-Divisions of Pikes move straight forward, until you range
even abrest with the Front-Divisions of Pikes; Reer-Divisions of Musketeers
move forward, and range inward even abrest with the Front-Divisions; Files,
close into the midst to Order; Front and Rear half-files, open from the midst
to double distance; the four inmost Files of Front and Rear half-files face
inward and interchange ground; then let each two Files of Pikes close outward
to Order, and after to double their Divisions to the right File-wise, and to
close Files to the left to Order; the two outmost Files of Musketeers upon the
right double Ranks inward, and lead them away before the left half-ranks of
Musketeers; the next two Files double Ranks outward, and lead them away behind
the Rear by first facing them about; Pikes face to the left, and move straight
before the Musketeers, and then double the Rear inward entire; after Files to
double their Depth to the right, every man falling behind his Bringer-up; they
are reduced.

CHAP. XVIII. The Sixth Exercise, with four Files eight deep.
THe Soldiers being met at the place appointed, and their Files being drawn
forth according to the usual custom, the Leaders being to show each Soldier
how to handle and use his Arms, and after leads up their Files, and joins them
into a Body, where the Commander having sent for his Colors, stands at the
head of them, commanding their silence and attention to the words of Command.
Now having in his former Exercise spent most of the time upon plain Doublings,
he may in this show unto them the great variety of Doublings by
Counter-marches; and although they are very difficult, yet they will afford
much delight and content unto the Soldiers.

GHAP. XIX. Thirty Doublings by Counter-marches, with their Reducement.
Command. BRingers-up, double your Front to the left.

Command. Double your Files to the left entire advancing, every man placing
himself before his Leader.

Command. Front half-files double your Rear to the right and left outward,
following your Leaders.

Command. Double your Files outward entire, advancing, every man placing
himself before his Leader.

Command. Bringers-up, double your front to the right and left inward.

Command. Double your Files inward entire, advancing, every man placing himself
before his Leader.

Command. Front half-files double your Rear to the right and left inwards,
following your Leaders.

Command. Files, double your depth to the right and left outward, following
your Bringers-up.

Command. Double your files to the right by Division, every man placing himself
before his Leader and his Bringer-up.

Direction. Half-files of the even files from the right, face about; even files
advance forward, and double the odd according to command; to your Leader.

Command. The four first, and the four last Ranks, double the eight middlemost
Ranks to the right and left inward, following your Leaders and your Bringers-up.

Direction. The four first, and the four last Ranks advance your Arms, and the
File-leaders and the Bringers-up begin the Motion, the rest are to follow;
after order their Arms, and face to their Leader.

Command. Double your files to the left by Division, every man placing himself
before his Leader and his Bringer-up.

Direction. The eight middle ranks double your Front and Rear to the right and
left outward, following the Half-file-leaders, and the Bringers-up of the Front
half-files.

Direction. The four last ranks of the Front and Rear half-files face about:
the middle are to begin this Motion, and to advance their Arms, and to turn off
to the right and left, every rank following them until they have doubled the
Front and Rear: then face all to the Front, order their Arms, and close their
Divisions forward to open Order.

Command. Double your files inward by Division, every man placing himself
before his Leader and his Bringer-up.

Direction. Half-files of the outmost Files face about, the outmost Files
advance your Arms and move forward, placing your selves before your Leaders and
your Bringers up; face to your Leader, and order your Arms.

Command. The four first, and the four last Ranks, double the eight middlemost
Ranks to the right and left outward, following your Leaders and your
Bringers-up.

Direction. The four first, and the four last Ranks, advance your Arms, and
move away to the right and left, and double the eight middlemost Ranks; to your
Leader.

Command. Front half-files, double your Rear to the right, following your
Leaders.

Command. Files, double your Depth to the right, every man placing himself
behind his Bringer-up.

Command. Right half-ranks, double your left Flank to the right, following your
right-hand-men.

Direction. Face outward, and right half-ranks turn off to the left, and double
the left Flank to the right; to your Leader.

Command. Double your Ranks to the right entire, every man placing himself on
the outside of his right-hand-man.

Command. Left half-ranks, double your right Flank to the left, following your
left-hand-men.

Command. Double your ranks to the left entire, every man placing himself on
the outside of his left-hand-man.

Command. Double your Ranks by Division, every man placing himself on the
outside of his left-hand-man.

Command. The inmost Files double the outmost Files, placing yourselves on the
outside of your right and left-hand-men.

Direction. The inmost Files advance your Arms, face outward, and move forward,
and double the outmost Files, placing your selves on the outside of your right
and left-hand-men; order your Arms, and close Files into the midst to open
Order.

Command. Double your Ranks by division into the Rear.

Command. The two outmost Files, double the four inmost by following of your
outside-men.

Direction. The inmost Files, face inward; the rest face outward, and turn off
to the right and left toward the Rear; and double the four inmost Files; to
your Leader.

Command. Double your Ranks by Division into Front, Rear, and Midst; every man
placing himself on the outside of his right and left-hand-man.

Direction. The two last Ranks of the Front and Reer-half-files, face about;
even Ranks from the Front, Rear, and Midst; advance your Arms, and face
outward, and move forth, and double the Front, Rear, and Midst of Ranks,
placing your selves on the outside of your right and left-hand-men; face to
your Leader, and close Ranks forward to open Order.

Command. Double your two outmost Files to the right and left outward, and
Midst, following of the inmost Files.

Direction. The two outmost Files, face outward; the rest face inward; and
Front and Reer-half-files distinctly turn off to the right and left, and double
the outmost Files to the right and left outward; and Midst following of the
inmost Files; to your Leader: Files, close into the midst to Order.

Command. Double your Files to the right entire advancing, every man placing
himself before his Leader.

Command. Bringers-up, double your Front to the right.

Command. File-leaders, double your Rear to the left.

Command. Double your Files to the left entire into the Rear, every man placing
himself before his Bringer-up.

Direction. Face to the Rear, and even Files from the left; advance your Arms,
and move forward, and double the odd, placing your selves before your
Bringers-up; to your Leader.

Command. Files, double your depth to the left, following your Bringers-up.

Command. Half-files, double your Front to the right and left inward, every man
placing himself before his Leader, they are reduced as at first.

CHAP. XX. Plain Firings, and Figures of Battle.
HAving spent so much time upon these Doublings by Counter-marches, in the next
place I shall proceed to Firings, and several Figures of Battle; where first
command the Half-files to double the Front to the left, and then go on to your
Firings.

The first firing. Let them fire even with the Front, and fall off, and Rank
even with the Half-files, and fall in the Rear of themselves; the Pikes may
after charge on, and the Musketeers may give fire again, and fall in the Rear
of the Pikes.

The second firing. Let the Pikes port, and the Musketeers give fire by
extraduction.

The third firing. Now the Musketeers being upon the Rear, fire them there
upon the march; wheel them about to the right, and let them fire after this
manner: face about to the right and left; let the last Rank fire, fall off, and
Flank the first Rank of Pikes; and so consequently all the rest; after fire
them to the Rear, and fall off to the right and left some six paces before the
Front of Pikes, and in the Rear of themselves; then face the body about, and
let the Pikes charge to the Rear, and after port; the Musketeers may give fire
to the Rear by way of extraduction.

The fourth firing. Next fire to the Rear by dividing the Musketeers, and
bringing them even with the Rear, and ranking outward, and falling again as
they were; face to your Leader.

Command. Ranks and Files, open to your open Order; Musketeers, close outward
to Order; the outmost Files of Pikes, stand; the rest close outward to Order:
Front-half-files, open forward three paces: Ranks, close to Front and Rear to
Order: Pikes, move forward two paces; Pikes, face outward; Musketeers, face
inward, and move clear one of another; to your Leader.

formation

The first firing. Let them give Fire to the Front, and fall in the Rear of
themselves; then wheel off to the right and left into the Rear, they at the
same time moving up into their ground, give Fire, and falling off as before;
the Pikes may after charge on while the Musketeers make ready.

The second firing. Let Pikes and Musketeers Rank outward and give Fire, and
fall off in like manner, as before; after let them Fire, and fall in the Rear
of the first Rank of Pikes of the Front-divisions; then the Pikes may port;
then let the first Divisions give Fire, and fall in behind the Pikes; the
Reer-divisions after moving up into their places, may give Fire, and face
about; march down into their places; then face to their Leader: This firing
being continued twice or oftener over, you may fire them to the Rear (they
being thither faced) after the very same manner, the Pikes there charging;
after facing all to their Leader, let them double Files to the right and left
inward of each division.

Command. Front-divisions of Pikes, face outward; Front-divisions of
Musketeers, face outward; the rest face about; move all six paces; to your
Leader; Reer-divisions, move forward two paces.

formation

The first firing. Let the Front-divisions give fire, and fall in the Rear of
themselves; then wheel off to the right and left into the Rear; they at the
same time moving forward into their places may give fire, and fall off as
before: this may be twice performed.

The second firing. Let the Front-divisions give fire, and fall in the Rear of
the Front-divisions of Pikes; the Reer-divisions of Musketeers moving into
their ground, firing, and falling behind the Reer-divisions of Pikes; then they
may move forth clear of the Pikes, and fire, and fall in again: they may fire
after the same manner to the Rear: But I shall let that pass, and go on to the
next.

Command. Reer-divisions of Musketeers, face outward, and march three paces
clear of the Reer-divisions of Pikes; then face to your Leader, and move
forward until they range even abrest with the Reer-divisions of Pikes.

formation

The first firing. Let the first divisions of Musketeers give fire to the
Front, and fall in the Rear of themselves; after wheel off to the right and
left into the room of them in the Rear; they at the same time moving up into
their places, firing and falling off in like manner: this firing may be
continued twice over; then the Pikes may charge whilst the Musketeers make
ready again.

The second firing. Let the Reer-divisions move forward even abrest; then let
the Musketeers give fire altogether, and fall in the Rear of themselves: this
firing may be continued twice over, and the Pikes may charge; after let those
Divisions that moved, march down again into their places.

Command. Front-divisions of Pikes upon the left, face about, and move down
four paces clear of the Rear; Front and Reer-divisions of Pikes, move to the
left two paces, to your Leader.

formation

Upon the former Figure fire first to the Front, and fall in the Rear of
themselves; then wheel down into the place of them in the Rear, they at the
same time moving up into their places, firing and falling off in like manner.
This firing being twice performed, let the Reer-divisions of Musketeers move
up even abrest with the Front-divisions, and fire altogether, and fall in the
Rear of themselves; after let the Pikes charge on, and the outmost Divisions of
Musketeers face about, and move down into their places.

Command. Front-division of Pikes, face about, and march until they range even
abrest with the Front-division of Musketeers; to your Leader; Reer-division of
Pikes move forward three paces.

formation

Upon this Figure let each division fire as they stand, and fall in the Rear of
themselves, performing it twice over; the Pikes may charge on, whilst the
Musketeers make ready again, who after may give fire by two Ranks together, as
they stand in each division; the Pikes charging as before.

Command. Outmost divisions of Musketeers, face about, march until you range
even with the Rear; face inward, and move until you stand straight after the
Front-divisions of Musketeers; to your Leader: middle-divisions of Pikes, face
outward, and move clear of the standing part; to your Leader.

formation

The first firing. Let them give fire to the Front, by divisions relieving each
other; after face them to both Flanks, and let them give fire upon the ground
they stand, and fall in the Rear of themselves: This firing may be continued
twice; and after the Pikes may charge on, whilst the Musketeers make ready
again; and after retreating into their places.

The second firing. Let the middle-division of Pikes in the Rear, face about;
and the middle-division of Pikes, face to the Front; and Musketeers to face to
the outward Angles of Front and Rear; and let them give fire to the four
Angles, and fall in the Rear of themselves, or fire altogether; and the Pikes
may after charge on to Front, Rear and both Flanks, being all faced unto those
places; and retreating again to their places, they may, if they please, fire a
second time, and charge on in manner as before. Now if the Leader have a desire
to fire to Front and Rear, let him face them thither, and let them fire on the
ground they stand, and fall in the Rear of themselves; the Pikes after charging
on, and retreating again into their places; face them all to their Leader, and
open the Front and Reer-divisions from the midst to sufficient distance, and
let the Ensign display his Colors.

Reducement. Reer-divisions of Pikes, advance forward unto the left into the
Front; outmost division of Pikes, face inward, march and close your divisions;
Musketeers in the Rear, move and close Ranks forward to Order; Files, double
your depth to the right, every man falling behind his Bringer-up, reduces them.

Then let the Musketeers poyse their Muskets, if they be near the place of
lodging the Colors, and to move unto that place making a guard; their Muskets
being rested, after which the Colors being furled up, and the Pikes advanced;
the Leader being on the right hand, and the Lieutenant on the left, and the
Ensign in the midst; the Sergeants following them, and in the Rear of them the
Drums beating a troop; let them march away and lodge the Colors, the
Musketeers giving of a volley, they may all betake themselves unto their
several habitations, until they shall be summoned again by beat of the Drum
unto their place of Rendezvous.

CHAP. XXI. The seventh Exercise, consisting of sixty four men, eight Files
eight deep.
THe Soldiers appearing unto the place of Exercise, according unto the
appointment of their Leader, or accustomed thereunto by beat of Drum, are drawn
forth into several Files, as is the usual custom. And the Soldiers being
instructed of the use and handling of their Arms, by the Sergeants, Corporals,
or Leaders of the Files, spending such time therein as shall be convenient
until the fetching of the Colors; to which purpose they draw up their Files,
and join into a Body, doubling the Front to the left by the Half-files, and
send for the Colors. Which being brought unto the head of the Company, and the
Soldiers returned unto their several places, and that the Body is closed in
Rank and File to close Order; then silence, and the well minding of their
Directions, and their obedience is required of them, being three main
properties belonging unto every Soldier. Now for more variety sake in matter
of Motions; the Leader may spend his chiefest time in Doublings, by Wheelings,
giving upon all occasions, the Soldiers their due distance unto every word of
Command, and instructing them with their several reasons and uses, and so
proceed to this that follows.

CHAP. XXII. Two and twenty several Doublings by Wheelings, with their
Reducement.
Command. WHeel off your Reer-half-files, and double your Front by division.

Direction. Half-files, face to the Rear, and wheel about to the right and
left, until you come up even with the Front.

Command. Right and left Half-ranks, double the Depth of the Battle, by
wheeling into the Front.

Direction. Right-half-ranks, wheel to the left; Left-half-ranks, wheel to the
right; to your Leader.

Command. Wheel off your Front-half-files, and double the Rear by Division.

Direction. Half-files, face to the Rear; and Front-half-files, wheel about to
the right and left, and move down even with the Rear; to your Leader.

Command. Wheel off your right Half-ranks, and double the left Flank to the
right entire.

Direction. Face outward; and right Half-ranks, wheel about to the left, and
double the left Flank to the right entire; to your Leader.

Command. Wheel off your right Half-ranks, and double your left Flank by
division.

Direction. Face outward; and right Half-ranks, wheel about to the right and
and let, and double the left Flank by Division; to your Leader.

Command. Front and Reer-half-files, double the length of your Battle, by
wheeling into the left Flank.

Direction. Face to the left; and Front-half-files that were, wheel to the
left; Reer-half-files, wheel to the right; to your Leader.

Command. Wheel of your Left-half-ranks, and double your right Flank by
division.

Command. Front and Reer-half-files, double the length of the Battle by
wheeling into the right Flank.

Command. Wheel your Left-half-ranks inward into the midst, and double the
right Flank inward entire.

Direction. Front and Reer-half-files, open from the midst to more then double
distance; after face outward; and Left-half-ranks, wheel inward into the midst,
and move forward, and double the right Flank inward entire; to your Leader.

Command. Wheel off your Front-half-files, and double the Rear to the right
entire.

Direction. Half-files, face to the Rear; and Front-half-files, wheel about to
the left, and move down upon the right into the Rear, and face to your Leader.

Command. Wheel your Right-half-ranks inward into the midst, and double your
left Flank inward entire.

Command. Wheel off the Front-half-files, and double the Rear to the left
entire.

Command. Wheel your Reer-half-files inward into the midst, and double your
Front inward entire.

Direction. Right and Left-half-ranks, open from the midst to more then double
distance; and Half-files, face about, and wheel inward into the midst, and move
forward, and double your Front inward entire.

Command. Right and left Half-ranks, double the Depth of your Battle, by
wheeling into the Rear.

Direction. Face to the Rear; and right-half-ranks, wheel to the left; and
left-half-ranks, wheel to the right until you meet; to your Leader.

Command. Wheel your Front-half-files inward into the midst, and double the
Rear inward entire.

Command. Wheel off your left-half-ranks, and double your right Flank to the
right entire. Face outward.

Command. Wheel off your Reer-half-files, and double the Front to the left
entire. Half-files, face about.

Command. Wheel off your Left-half-ranks, and double your right Flank to the
left entire.

Command. Wheel off your Reer-half-files, and double your Front to the right
entire. Face outward.

Command. Wheel off your Left-half-ranks, and double entire the Depth of the
right Flank.

Direction. Left-half-ranks, face to the left, and wheel about to the left,
until you come down in the Rear of the right Flank; to your Leader.

Command. Wheel off your Reer-half-files, and double the Length of your Front
to the right.

Direction. Half-files, face about, and wheel round to the left, and move
forward, and double the length of the Front to the right, they are reduced.

CHAP. XXIII. Several Firings, and Figures of Battle, with sixty four men.
HAving passed over these several Wheelings by way of Doublings, it will be
sufficient time to proceed unto Firings; wherefore, first, command to open
their Files from the midst to open Order; and the Bringers-up thereof to double
the Front to the right and left inward.

The first firing. Let them fire to the Front, by Ranks ranking outward, and
after to rank as they were.

The second firing. Let them give fire to the Front, by ranks ranking inward,
and ranking again as they were, and closing again to the Body of Pikes.

The third firing. Let the Half-files face about; and let them give fire to
Front and Rear by Ranks ranking outward, and ranking in again as they were.

The fourth firing. Let them advance forwards by two Ranks, some ten paces
before the Front and Rear, and give fire, and fall in the Rear of themselves;
then face about, and fall before the Front and Rear of Pikes; and then fire
again, falling off to the right and left, and Flank the Pikes; then the Pikes
may charge on, and the Musketeers may fall in the Rear of the Pikes, and then
Pikes may charge at Foot, and the Musketeers may give fire altogether over
their heads.

The fifth firing. Let the Pikes port, and the Musketeers move forth to the
right and left, and fire by extraduction; then the Pikes may charge again, and
the Musketeers may move forth as before; and the first Rank of each division
may give fire even with the Front and Rear, and stand; the rest may after move
forth clear of them, and give fire, falling behind their own Divisions of
Musketeers; then face all to their Leader, and close their Divisions forward
to Order; and then proceed to Figure of Battle.

Command. Half-files, face about; Musketeers, move forward until you be clear
of the Pikes; the two inmost Files of Musketeers, stand; the two outmost Files
of Musketeers move forwards, until you be clear of the inmost Files; the two
outmost Files of Pikes, face outward, and move three foot clear of the outmost
Divisions of Musketeers; and after to face to Front and Rear, and to move
forward until they range even with the Reer-divisions of Musketeers; then let
them face all to the Front, and stand straight in their Divisions, both
Rank-wise and File-wise; and they will stand as in the next Figure.

formation

Upon this Figure let the first divisions of Musketeers give fire, and fall in
the Rear of themselves; after wheel off to the right and left into the room of
them in the Rear; they at the same time moving up into their places, firing and
falling off in like manner. Then let the inmost divisions give fire in like
manner, as the former did; and wheel off to the right and left, and be relieved
by their own Reer-divisions of Musketeers; then let the Pikes chaege on, and
after retreating back again into their places.

Command. The two middle-ranks of Pikes, face outward, and move clear of the
standing part; then let the first Rank of Pikes face about; and the first and
last Rank of Pikes to move forward to Order; face all to your Leader.

formation

The first firing. Let the Front-divisions fire, and fall in the Rear of
themselves; then wheel off to the right and left into the room of them in the
Rear; they at the same time moving forward into their places, firing and
falling off in like manner: Next let the inmost divisions of Musketeers do the
same, who may be relieved by the inmost divisions of Musketeers in the Rear.

The second firing. Let them all face to the Rear, and give fire as they did to
the Front.

The third firing. Let them face to Front and Rear, and give fire, and fall in
the Rear of themselves first; after falling off, and interchanging divisions,
relieving each other; then let the Pikes charge on to Front and Rear, and after
retreating back into their places.

Command. The inmost divisions of Musketeers to move forward until they be two
foot clear of the standing part; then let them face all inward, and move until
the outmost divisions of Musketeers range even abrest with the
middle-divisions of Pikes; to your Leader.

formation

Upon this former Figure, fire them to both Flanks; where first face them
outward; let the first division give fire, and fall in the Rear of themselves;
and after wheel off to the right and left into the places of the
Reer-divisions, and they move up at the same instant of time into their rooms,
giving fire, and falling in the Rear of themselves; afterward into their
places. Next let them fire, and fall in the Rear of themselves; and after move
inward, and fall in the Rear of the next division of Pikes; and then the first
division of Musketeers move forth, and give fire in the ground they formerly
stood on, and fall in the Rear of themselves, and stand; and the next division
of Musketeers is likewise to move forth where formerly they stood, and to fire
and fall in the Rear of themselves; the Pikes may after charge on, and after
retreat back again into their places; and face to their Leader.

Command. Reer-divisions of Musketeers, move to the left two paces, and double
to the right File-wise; the two middle-divisions of Pikes, face outward, and
move two paces; to your Leader: Reer-divisions of Musketeers move forward,
until the first division of Musketeers be placed three foot before the midst
of the middle-divisions of Pikes, and the second division be three foot behind
the same, standing straight with the Front-divisions of Musketeers in the
midst.

formation

Upon this Figure they being faced to Front and Rear, both Pikes and
Musketeers; let the first divisions give fire, and fall in the Rear of
themselves, and stand; let the rest move forward until they be clear of the
Front-divisions of Musketeers, and fire, and fall in the Rear of themselves,
and after face about and move down into their places again; then let the Pikes
open a little outward, and charge all to Front and Rear; and when they shall
retreat back again into their places, the Musketeers may fire again as they
did before, and continue it as long as they please. Or they may fire upon this
Figure either to Front or Rear, according to discretion, as long as they please.

Now in respect much time has been spent in the Motions by wheelings in plain
firings and Figures of Battle, we will draw forth one Figure more from the
former, that the Colors may be displayed, and that we may conclude our seventh
Exercise, to refresh the Soldiers for a space, until they shall again have
warning from their Commander for another appearance.

Command. The last Division of Musketeers in the midst to face about, middle
Divisions of Musketeers advance forward until you be three foot clear of the
Front and Rear; to your Leader: each Division of Pikes face outward, and move
to convenient distance for the Colors to display; to your Leader.

formation

Reducement. Front and Reer-division of Musketeers face about, Front-division
move down and double the Reer-division to the left rank-wise; to your Leader:
the two first Divisions of Musketeers in the Front face about; then let them,
and the two last Divisions of Musketeers in the Rear, move forward until they
be even with the next Divisions of Musketeers; to your Leader. The two middle
Divisions of Pikes close into the midst to Order, and to open their Ranks from
the midst to something more then open Order; the two outmost Divisions of Pikes
face inward, and move forward into the midst of the two middle Ranks in the
Body; to your Leader. Front-divisions of Pikes face about, and Front and
Reer-Divisions to move forward and to close their Divisions; to your Leader.
Files close to the right and left inward to Order. Musketeers in the Front and
Rear, double your Pikes by Division. Files, double your Depth to the right and
left outward, every man falling behind his Bringer-up, they will be reduced as
at first.

Now the Sergeants may draw off the Musketeers, filing them to the right and
left outward, thereby making a guard for the Captain and other Officers to
march through, trooping away and lodging the Colors; which done, one of the
Sergeants command the Musketeers to face about to the right, and to present
all, and no man to give fire until they hear the beat of Drum; no man pulling
his Tricker but once, which will be a means that they all fire handsomely
together; which being ended, every man may depart home until he shall be called
forth again.

CHAP. XXIV. The Eighth Exercise, consisting of sixty four men, eight Files
eight deep.
THe Soldiers being again brought into the Field, or place of Exercise, the
Sergeants, according to their wonted manner, drawing forth the Files, bids each
File-leader to take his File into some convenient place apart, to exercise them
in their several Postures and Charges, and after what manner they may fire,
whether it be to Front, Rear, or both Flanks. Which being performed, they are
called up to join into a Body, and commanded to close their Ranks and Files to
their distance of Order, and the Front doubled to the right and left inward by
the half-files distance beforehand, being prepared for their moving up. The
Leader appoints one of the Sergeants to fetch the Colors, which being brought
up to the head of the Company, the Leader for variety sake may spend the
chiefest of his time in Firings, as follows.

The first firing. Let the Musketeers move forward until their Bringers-up
range even with the Front of Pikes; after let the two outmost Files of
Musketeers move forward until their Bringers-up range even abrest with the
Front of the two inmost Files; Let the Front or foremost Divisions give fire,
and fall in the Rear of themselves; then let them face about, and move down
into their places where they were last, then let the two inmost Files of
Musketeers of each Division advance forwards until their Bringers-up range
even with the Front of the two outmost Files, and then let them give fire, and
fall in the Rear of themselves; and after face about, and march down into their
places again where they were last drawn off.

The second firing. Let them give fire on the ground they stand in each
Division, falling off to the right and left in the Rear of themselves.

The third firing. Let the first Rank in each Division fire as they stand, and
after move inward in a straight line before the Front of Pikes, which gives way
for the next Rank to fire in each Division; and after to move inward into the
Rear of the first Rank, and so consequently all the rest to fire in like manner
until they have all fired, and stand straight before the Pikes.

The fourth firing. Let their Ranks rank outward into the Front, and then give
fire all entire in one Rank, and ranking again as they were.

The fifth firing. Let the half-files of Musketeers double the Front by
Division, and give fire by two Ranks together, and after to move back again
into their places.

The sixth firing. Let the two first Ranks kneel down, the other two stand
upright, and give fire four Ranks together.

The seventh firing. Let the half-files, or Pikes to face about, and move three
paces; to your Leader: and then Files to double their Depth to the right and
left outward of each Arms; then let them give fire eight Ranks together after
this manner, two kneel down, two kneeling, two stand upright, and the two last
to be drawn off to the right and left; and so to fire all together; which being
ended, command the Pikes by their Files to rank outward into the Front, and
then open outward to the right and left, and charge on in the Front, and file
again as they were.

The eigth firing. Let the Pikes open their Files from the midst to double
distance; then command the Musketeers to face about, and move down into the
midst of the Pikes, then let the half-files face about, and let the Musketeers
be at open Order in their Files, and the Pikes at Order; and then let them give
fire first to Front and Rear by Intraduction after this manner: Let the first
Rank in Front and Rear present and give fire on the ground they stand, and
presently make ready again; the next Ranks may move forward, and place
themselves three foot before them, and fire in like manner, and after stand,
the other Ranks still moving forward into the next Rank until the first have
fired, and then immediately to clap before them, and fire in like manner, until
all have fired twice over.

The ninth firing. Let them close their Files into the midst to Order, and fire
on the same ground they stand, and fall in the Rear of themselves.

The tenth firing. Let them fire and fall off to the right and left into the
midst of Pikes again, then let the Pikes charge on to Front and Rear; and when
they are clear of the Musketeers, let them close to the right and left inward
to Order.

The eleventh firing. Let the Pikes port, and let the Musketeers be drawn
forth one whole Rank to the right, and another to the left, both to Front and
Rear give fire, and fall into their places again; then let the other four be
drawn forth in like manner, and fire, and fall into their places again; the
Pikes, if occasion shall require, may again charge on.

The twelfth firing. Let the Musketeers range to the right and left outward,
and fire even abrest with the Rear of each Division, and move in again into
their places.

The thirteenth firing. Let the Musketeers rank outward, and move even abrest
with the Front and Rear, and there present and give fire: and whilst the Pikes
are charging on, they may rank again as they were, and fall in the Rear of the
Pikes, and make ready again.

The fourteenth firing. The Pikes being retreated into their first ground, you
may open them to the right and left, and then the Musketeers may move forward,
and fire two Ranks kneeling down, and the other two standing upright; then the
Pikes may continue their charge till the Musketeers make ready again, and
after they may retreat, and fall in the Rear of the Musketeers, and close
their Divisions inward to Order. These firings being all upon a stand, and the
Musketeers being now in Front and Rear, they may be moved away, and may give
fire upon the march to Front and Rear after this manner.

The fifteenth firing. Let the first Rank in the Front nimbly advance forward
ten paces, then present and give fire, in which interim, the rest will be moved
up unto them; the others having fallen off to the right and left in the Rear of
their own Divisions of Musketeers, the next Rank may give fire in like manner,
until all have fired thus once over; the Rear are to fire at the same time with
the Front, facing about the last Rank, who are to fall off, and to place
themselves before their own Divisions of Musketeers.

The sixteenth firing. Let them fire as before, and the first Rank of the
Front-division to fall off, and flank the Pikes to the right, the rest of that
Division falling off, and placing themselves in the Rear of them; and likewise
the first Rank of the Reer-Division, when they have fired, let them fall off,
and range even abrest with the half-files of Pikes, and still preserving
themselves in their places to be right-hand-men to those which were at first,
and the rest to give fire and fall in the Rear of them.

The seventeenth firing. Now the Musketeers being all upon the right Flank,
let the outmost File face to the right and fire, and lead away the Bringers-up
between the Musketeers and the outmost File of Pikes; let this be continued in
the same manner until all have fired.

The eighteenth firing. The Body still marching, let them fire again after the
same manner as before.

The nineteenth firing. Let them fire by Ranks wheeling to the right Flank, and
after to rank to the right, so many abrest as they were at first, marching
along with the Body.

The twentieth firing. Let them fire, and fall off on the contrary Flank.

The one and twentieth firing. Let them give fire upon the gathering, firing
after this manner; let the outmost File upon the left, face to the left, give
fire, and then face to the Front, and stand until the rest be clear; and then
the next File to face to the left and fire, and after face to the Front, and
then the first File may gather up even abrest upon the left of the second File;
then the third File may face to the left and give fire; after face to the Front
and stand, until the other two march up on the left, and join even abrest with
him, and consequently so all the rest, until every File have fired, and that
they be all moved up even abrest with the Pikes.

The two and twentieth firing. Let them wheel Ranks to the left, and fire, and
after rank four to the left as they were at first, and march even abrest with
the Pikes.

The three and twentieth firing. Let them fire to the left Flank, Ranks
inverting, and after face to the Front, and to rank again as they were.

The four and twentieth firing. Let them fire by Files, filing to the right,
and facing after to the left, and fire to the left Flank; and then facing to
their first Front, and to lead up their Files to the left again as they were.

The five and twentieth firing. Let them fire by the outmost Files to the left
Flank, and lead away by the Leader, up between, or in the middle of Pikes.

The six and twentieth firing. Let them face outward, and fire upon a stand
after this manner by Ranks dividing, moving forth to the right and left, and
fire and fall in again into their places, the Pikes may after charge on, and
retreat again into their places.

The seven and twentieth firing. Let them fire by Ranks, ranking outward into
both the Flanks, and moving forward, and firing even abrest, and ranking again
as they were, but not returning again into the midst of Pikes from whence they
were drawn forth, but fire to both Flanks, and fall in the Rear of themselves.

The eight and twentieth firing. Let them fire again, and fall in the Rear or
midst of Pikes.

The nine and twentieth firing. Let the Pikes port, and let the Musketeers
fire by Extraduction to both Flanks, and return again into their places.

The thirtieth firing. Let the Pikes open to the right, and the Musketeers
move up into the midst, and the first Rank give fire, and slieve up to the
right and left, and place themselves before the Pikes, the next Rank moving
forward into his ground, and slieving away in the Rear of them until all have
fired.

The one and thirtieth firing. Let them close their Divisions, and fire, and
fall in the Rear of themselves.

The two and thirtieth firing. Let them fire by Files ranking outward, and
filing again as they were.

The three and thirtieth firing. Let them fire by Ranks wheeling outward into
both Flanks toward Front and Rear; the half-files are to face about, the left
half-ranks are to wheel to the right, the right half-ranks to the left, the
Front-half-files doing the like, may give fire, facing after to the right and
left inward, ranking as they were into the midst of Ranks, and facing again to
the Flanks.

The four and thirtieth firing. Let them fire two Ranks together, and slieving
presently away, and flank the Pikes.

The five and thirtieth firing. Let them face to Front and Rear, and after move
outward, and facing to the outward Angles of Front and Rear, and let them fire
and fall in the Rear of themselves.

The six and thirtieth firing. Let them close Files into the midst to Order,
and fire again, and let them fall off to the right and left, and flank the
Pikes, then face all to their first Front, they are reduced.

Having spent all this time in the plain Firings, we will in the next place
proceed to Firings upon such Figures of Battle as follows.

CHAP. XXV. Several Figures of Battle.
Command. HAlf-files double your Front to the left, Musketeers double your
Pikes entire, advancing; Files open from the midst to double distance: the two
outmost Files close outward to open Order, and the two inmost Files close
outward to the same distance; half-files of each Division double the Front
inward entire; Ranks and Files close to Order; the four outmost Files upon each
Flank stand; the four inmost Files upon the left face to the Rear; then let the
four inmost Files upon the left, and the four inmost Files upon the right, move
forward three foot before the Front and Rear, and then face to the left, and
move two paces, then face all to the Front, and move straight in their
Divisions, both Rank-wise and File-wise, they will stand as follows.

formation

The first firing. Let the Front-division of Musketeers move forward, until
they be clear of the standing part; then give fire, and fall in the Rear of
themselves; and then closing their Files into the midst to Order before the
Front of Pikes, the Reer-division of Musketeers may move forward unto the
Front of the first division of Pikes, and there rank outward, and give fire
altogether, and file again as they were, and after face about, and move down
again into their places; the two outmost divisions of Musketeers may next move
forward some six paces; there stand and rank inward, and fire; face about, and
file again as they were, and move forward to the Front of their own divisions
of Pikes; and face to their Leader.

The second firing. Let the Front-division of Musketeers fire, and fall off to
the right and left, and flank their Pikes; and at the same time let the
Reer-division of Musketeers move forward as they did before, and fire even
abrest with the first divisions of Pikes, and fall in the Rear of themselves;
then face about, and move down into their places, and face to their Leader;
then let the two outmost divisions upon the Flanks give fire on the ground they
stand, and fall off to the right and left, and flank the Pikes: they may fire
to the Rear in the same manner, being thither faced.

The third firing. Let them face to Front, Rear, and both Flanks, and fire the
first Rank of each division, and fall off to the right and left in the Rear of
the Pikes; and the last Rank at the same time move forth, and give fire, and
fall into their places again: but before they thus fire, the Front and
Reer-divisions are to be wheeled to the left, and then let them fire by Move
forth those Musketeers into their former places, before they fire by
Extraduction.
Extraduction; and the Pikes may after charge on, and then retreat back again
into their places.

Command. Each division as they are faced to move forward three paces;
Half-files of each division, open to the right until they be clear of the
standing part, they will stand as follows.

formation

Upon the former Figure being faced to Front, Rear, and both Flanks, fire then
according unto all those places, the foremost Divisions fire first, and let them
wheel off to the right and left, and fall in the room or place of them in the
next Divisions, firing twice in this kind. Then let the foremost Divisions fire
and fall in the Rear of the Pikes; then let the Pikes port, and the Musketeers
in each Division may move forth again, and give fire by Extraduction; then let
the Pikes charge on, and after charge at foot, and let the Musketeers give
fire over their heads, which being ended, let the foremost Rank of Musketeers
in Front, Rear and Flanks move forward, and interchange ground with the Pikes,
and face all to the Front; and after the third Divisions from the Front, and
the third Divisions from the Rear, face inward, and move three paces; then face
to their Leader, and close Files outward, and Ranks forward to Order in each
Division, and stand straight and even in their Divisions, both Rank-wise and
File-wise, and then proceed to the next Figure.

Command. The outmost Divisions upon the Flanks, face about, and move down two
paces; to your Leader. Half-files of the two outmost Divisions double to the
right and left inward Rank-wise, and after move that part that doubled two
paces to the right and left inward; face all to your Leader.

formation

Upon this Figure let the first and the last Rank of Musketeers double to the
right and left inward File-wise; then let the first Division give fire to the
Front, and fall in the Rear of themselves, then wheel off to the right about
down into the Rear, and let every Division that are in the midst move up
successively into the Front until all have fired and fallen off in like manner
as the first, and every Division become again into his place, and the Front and
Reer-Divisions have doubled Ranks to the right and left outward; then command
the first and the last Rank of Musketeers from the Front and Rear to double to
the right and left outward File-wise, and let them give fire and fall in the
Rear of themselves, and after fall off into the Rear in like manner and form of
the firing of the former Divisions; either of these firings may be continued
twice over: after command the first Division of Musketeers from Front and Rear
to double to the right and left inward Rank-wise, and then proceed.

Command. The third Division from the Front, and the third Division from the
Rear to face outward, and to move three paces until they stand straight in
Front and Rear between the middle Divisions, and after face to their Leader.
Then let the Front-Divisions face about, and Front and Reer-Divisions move
forward until they range even abrest with the second Divisions that stands
before them, and then face to their Leader: it occasioneth the next Figure.

formation

Upon this Figure you may fire them to Front, Rear, and both Flanks; therefore
face the two outmost crosses to the Flanks, which contains on each side four
divisions of Pikes and Musketeers; and let the rest face to Front and Rear,
and let all the Musketeers in the Rear of each division of Pikes, move forth
to the Angles of the Pikes, give fire, and fall back again into their places;
and whilst the Pikes are charging on, the Musketeers may make ready again, and
fire in like manner as before, and fall back again into their places; the Pikes
charging on to Front, Rear and both Flanks as before; and retreating again into
their places. Then face them all to the Front, and let the second division from
the Rear face about; and then the second division from the Front, and the
second division from the Rear, move forward until they be three foot clear of
the Front and Rear; then face them to their Leader, and they will stand in a
convenient Figure for marching, wherein the Colors may display so long as a
Commander shall think fit.

formation

Reducement. The two middle-divisions, face to the right and left outward, and
march clear of the standing part; to your Leader; then let them double to the
right and left outward file-wise. After let them face to Front, Rear and both
Flanks, and close their Files into the midst to Order. Then command Front and
Reer-divisions that formerly wheeled to the left, to wheel back again to the
right; then face all to the Front, and let the Front-division. face to the
right, and move three paces; and then face to their Leader then let the
Reer-division move up upon the left of them in the Front, and let the Pikes in
each division double their depth to the right and left outward; and let them
close files into the midst to order, and ranks forward to order, and to move up
even with else front, they standing in their distance of order, both in rank
and file, let the half-files double their Front inward entire, and after Files
to double their depth entire to the right, they are reduced.

Then the Leader may appoint one of the Sergeants to draw off the Musketeers,
and file them away to the right and left outward, either by Ranks filing, or
Files filing, and every Muskettier to poyse his Musket; then the Pikes may
advance their Arms, and the Drums beat a Troop, and the Commander may lead them
away and lodge his Colors.

CHAP. XXVI. The ninth Exercise, consisting of 64 men, eight Files eight deep.
IN this Exercise a Commander may in matter of Motions present unto the
Soldiers farther variety to delight them withal, in bringing each man into the
Front to be a File-leader, according unto succession and dignity, by proper
words of Command, by doublings, with their Reducement. Therefore, to avoid any
further circumstance, we will pass over the Postures, and fetching of the
Colors; and suppose the Soldiers standing in a condition to be exercised,
begin first to make them all File-leaders by succession as follows.

Command. Ranks to the left double.

Command. Files to the left double.

Command. Half-files, double your Front to the right.

Command. Double your Files to the right entire advancing, every man placing
himself before his Leader.

Command. Ranks to the right double.

Command. Files to the right double.

Command. Front-half-files, double the Rear to the right.

Command. Double your Files to the left entire, advancing.

Command. Double your Ranks to the right into the Rear; face all about.

Command. Double your Files to the left, advancing.

Direction. Every even File from the left move forward to the left, and by
three steps double the odd, advancing.

Command. Half-files, double your Front to the left.

Command. Double your Files to the left entire, advancing, every man placing
himself before his Leader.

Command. Double your Ranks to the left into the Rear; face all about.

Command. Double your Files to the right, advancing.

Reducement. Files, rank to the right into the Front.

Ranks, file eight to the right, reduces them.

Next follows to make every man File-leader according unto dignity, with
their Reducement.

Command. Bringers-up, double your Front to the left.

Command. Double your Files to the right entire, advancing.

Command. Half-files, double your Front to the left.

Command. Double your Files to the left entire, advancing, every man placing
himself before his Leader.

Command. Bringers-up, double your Front to the right.

Command. Files, double your depth to the right.

Command. Ranks to the right double.

Command. Front-half-files, double your Rear to the right, following your
Leaders.

Command. Double your Files to the right by division, every man placing himself
before his Leader and his Bringer-up.

Command. Front-half-files, double your Rear to the left, following your
Leaders.

Command. Double your Files to the left by division, every man placing himself
before his Leader and his Bringer-up.

Command. The two first and the two last Ranks double the four middlemost Ranks
to the right, following your Leaders and your Bringers-up.

Direction. The four middle-ranks stand; the File-leaders are to turn off to
the right, and the next Rank is to follow them until the Leaders Rank even with
the Bringers-up of the Front-half-files; and at the same instant of time the
Bringers-up are to move forward to the right; the rest following until the
Bringers-up range even abrest with the Half-file-leaders; to your Leader.

Command. Files, double your depth to the left.

Reducement. Half-files, double your Front to the right.

Bringers-up, double your Front to the right.

Then divide every four Files distinctly apart, making five divisions.

Files, double to the right and left inward in each division, and close Files
into the midst to Order.

Files, double to the left entire, advancing; reduces.

CHAP. XXVIII. Eight several Counter-marches, with their Reducement.
Command. FIles to the right hand, Countermarch, maintaining ground.

Command. Ranks to the left hand, Countermarch, losing ground.

Command. Countermarch your Front and Reer-half-files into the midst of Ranks.

Direction. Half-files, face about, and turn off to the left; and
Front-half-files, turn off to the right until they meet the Front and Rear into
the midst; to your Leader.

Command. Right and Left-half-ranks, Countermarch into the midst of Files.

Direction. Face outward; Right-half-ranks, turn off to the right;
Left-half-ranks, turn off to the left; to your Leader.

Command. Files to the left hand, Countermarch, losing ground by following
your Leaders.

Command. Ranks to the right hand, Countermarch, maintaining ground.

Command. Countermarch your Front and Reer-half-files to the right and left,
following the Half-file-leaders, and the Bringers-up of the Front-half-files.

Direction. Half-files, face about; the Bringers-up of the Front-half-files and
the Half-file-leaders are to begin the motion; the rest are to follow until
they have gained so much ground beyond the Front and Rear, as they formerly
possessed in the midst; to your Leader, and close your divisions.

Command. Countermarch your Half-ranks to the right and left, by following of
the inmost files.

Direction. Face outward; the inmost Files are to begin the motion moving
forward, the rest following, until they have gained so much ground beyond the
Flanks as they formerly possessed in the inmost Files; to your Leader, and
close Files into the midst to Order, they are reduced.

CHAP. XXIX. Ten several Wheelings, with their Reducement.
Command. WHeel the Battle off by Division from the Front.

Command. Wheel the body off by Division from the right Flank; face to the
right.

Command. Wheel the Battle off by Division from the Rear; face about.

Command. Wheel the body off by division from the left Flank.

Command. Wheel your Battle inward to the Rear from the Front. Close Ranks
forward to close Orderr, and Files into the midst to close Order.


Direction. Open outward to convenient distance; to your Leader.

Command. Wheel your battle inward to the left Flank from the right.

Direction. Face to the right, and open to convenient distance, to your Leader.

Command. Wheel your battle inward to the Front from the Rear.

Direction. Face about, and open to convenient distance, and wheel inward into
the Front.

Command. Wheel your battle inward to the right Flank from the left.

Command. Wheel the outward Angles of Front and Rear to the right and left
about into the Center; face to the outward Angles.

Command. Wheel the inward Angles to the right and left about from the Center.

CHAP. XXX. Plain Firings, and Figures of Battle.
IN the next place I will proceed to some plain firings; wherefore, first,
double your Ranks forward to the left by Half-files, and fire even with the
Front of Pikes, and fall in the Rear of themselves; then fire, and fall between
the Pikes; then move forth after this manner; one Rank drawn forth to the
right, and another to the left, fire, and fall in again as before. Then command
the first Rank to stand, and the rest to move forth, both Pikes and Musketeers
to the right and left, until each Rank be clear of other; then let the Pikes
charge, and Musketeers give fire altogether, and after fall behind each Rank
of Pikes; then let the Pikes charge at Foot, and let the Musketeers give fire
over their heads: after let Pikes port, and let the Musketeers come forth
again, and give fire by extraduction; and after command the Ranks to face to
the right and left inward, and to close their Divisions: then let the
Musketeers move forth again into their first places, and Flank their Pikes.
And having passed over some half a dozen firings after this manner, then
command Half-files to double their depth to the right entire, and proceed to
Figures of battle, and firings which comes in the next place to view for a
Leader, to spend his time further in the exercising of his Soldiers therein.

Command. Half-files, face to the Rear, and march six paces; to your Leader;
Half-files of Musketeers of each Division, face to the Rear. Musketeers,
march all until you be clear of the Pikes; to your Leader. The two middlemost
Ranks of Pikes of each division, face outward, and move clear of the
Musketeers; to your Leader: The first and third Ranks of Pikes in the body,
face to the Rear, and close Ranks into the midst to Order, the following Figure
will appear.

formation

The first firing. Let the Front-divisions give fire, and fall in the Rear of
themselves, the rest of the Divisions moving up into their ground, and fire,
wheeling off to the right and left, having all fired over once, they will be
reduced.

The second firing. Let the four inmost Divisions of Musketeers face outward,
and move clear of the Pikes; then face to their Leader; then let the eight last
divisions of Pikes and Musketeers face to the Rear; then let them fire to
Front and Rear, falling in the Rear of themselves; there being intervals for
the Pikes to move forward upon their charge, and being retreated back into
their places, will produce the following Figure.

formation

After the Figure is reduced unto his first aspect, command the Musketeers, or
Divisions upon the wings, to face to the right and left inward, and to march
until they stand as in the first Figure; then face to their Leader: and command
the eight first Divisions of Pikes and Musketeers to face outward, marching
until you perceive an interval for the eight Reer-divisions to move up, and
make an even range with the Front-divisions; which being done, they will appear
as follows.

formation

Upon this Figure let the Front-divisions of Musketeers give fire, and fall in
the Rear of themselves; then wheel off to the right into the room of them in
the Rear, they at the same time firing, and wheeling off into their places
again.

Then let the Commander face them all to the right, and they will stand in four
crosses, with Musketeers on the wings File-wise; upon which facing they may
march, the Officers being placed according unto discretion; and after they have
marched, let them face again to their first Front.

Command. Front-divisions of Musketeers, face to the right, and move two
paces; to your Leader. Reer-divisions of Musketeers, move up, and double the
Front-Divisions to the left Rank-wise, which produces the next Figure.

formation

Upon the former Figure let all the Musketeers give fire together, and fall
off to the right and left in the Rear of themselves, the Pikes after charging
through the intervals, and after retreating again. Then command Musketeers
that doubled to face about, and to move down into the Rear, until they be clear
of the Pikes, and stand; then let the Musketeers both in Front and Rear face
to the left, and march until they stand straight in their Divisions; then face
to their Leader, and they will stand as in the former Figure: then proceed.

Command. The four inmost Divisions both of Pikes and Musketeers on the left,
face to the Rear; inmost Divisions both of Pikes and Musketeers both upon the
right and left, march clear of the standing part; then let them face to the
left, and move three paces; to your Leader. The four outmost Divisions both of
Pikes and Musketeers upon the right, wheel to the right; the four outmost
Divisions upon the left both of Pikes and Musketeers, wheel to the left, which
will set forth the next Figure.

formation

Tht first firing. Let them face to the Front, Rear, and both Flanks, and give
fire, and fall in the Rear of themselves; after wheeling off to the right your
Divisions on the outside of the Pikes into the place of the Reer-Divisions,
which are to advance forward into the Front, performing the like as the other
Front-Divisions.

The second firing. Let the Front-divisions of Musketeers move to the right
two paces; after command Divisions of Musketeers to double to the left
Rank-wise, and let them give fire in Front, Rear, and both Flanks all together:
the Pikes may after charge to all these places, whilst the Musketeers make
ready again, and retreat again into their places.

The third firing. Let them give fire again, and fall in the Rear of
themselves; which being ended, you may proceed to another Figure.

Command. The left Division of Musketeers, wheel off to the left, and place
your selves in the left interval between the Pikes, which occasioneth the next
Figure.

formation

Upon this Figure let the Musketeers give fire in the Front, Rear, and Flanks,
and Angles, falling in the Rear of themselves, and the Pikes may after charge
on. Many other firings might be performed upon this Figure, but I shall not be
tedious to relate any more, but leave them to the discretion of every Leaders
genius, and shall now show the way to reduce them.

Reducement. Divisions of Musketeers upon the Angles, face to the Center, and
move three paces; after wheel the Divisions a little to the right, until they
be brought in the Rear of their own Divisions of Musketeers; which being done,
command the four Divisions of Pikes and Musketeers on the right to wheel to
the left; and the four Divisions of Pikes and Musketeers upon the left to
wheel to the right. After command the four Divisions of Pikes and Musketeers
upon the left, to face to the left, and march to such a convenient distance, as
that the four last Divisions, both Pikes and Musketeers, may move up on the
left to range even with the Front, they on the Flanks moving up also until they
stand all even abrest. After command the inmost eight Divisions to face to the
Rear, and let them all move until they be clear one of another, then face to
their Leader; and let the eight Front-divisions face inward, and to move until
they stand straight with the Reer-divisions. After let the Pikes in the Body in
each Division open their Ranks to Front and Rear to their open Order. And then
command Divisions of Pikes upon the Flanks to face to the right and left
inward, and march in and strengthen the Body of Pikes; which being done, let
the Front-divisions of Musketeers face to the Rear, commanding them all to
close their Ranks forward to Order, and face to their Leader, they are reduced.
Which being performed, the Leader may lodge his Colors, having finished his
ninth Exercise.

CHAP. XXXI. The tenth Exercise, consisting of 24 Files being six deep,
according to the first drawing up of a private Company.
THere being a greater number appearing upon this days Exercise then in the
former, it concerns a Leader more especially to give special charge to the
inferior Officers to be careful in the drawing forth the Files, that they make
no man a File-Leader, Bringer-up, Half-file-Leader, or Bringer-up of the
Front-half-files, but such able Soldiers as may be deserving of the same;
whose diligence and care upon all motions is principally required, being, as it
were, the hinges of the Leaders several words of Command. Wherefore supposing
them to be drawn up in Battalia, and the Colors being brought to the head of
the Company, the four Sergeants ready at hand attending their Captains
commands, and the body being closed in Ranks and Files to their distance of
Order, and silence craved at the Company, he that shall exercise them may
begin, after Distances and Facings shown, with this or the like doubling
following.

CHAP. XXXII. Eight entire several Doublings, with their Reducement.
Command. FRont half-files double your Rear inward entire.

Command. The twelve inmost Files double entire the depth of the six outmost
Files. Inmost Files face about.

Command. Half-files double your Front to the right.

Command. Double your Files to the right entire, advancing.

Command. Half-files double your Front inward entire.

Command. The six outmost Files upon each Flank double entire, advancing the
twelve middle Files.

Command. Half-files double your Front to the right entire.

Command. Right half-ranks double your left Flank entire, advancing; which
being performed, they are reduced.

CHAP. XXXIII. Eight several Countermarches, with their Reducement.
Command. FIle-Leaders stand, the rest pass through to the right, and place
your selves before your Leaders.

Command. The right-hand-file stand, the rest pass through to the right, and
place your selves on the outside of your right-hand-men.

Command. Countermarch your Front and Rear into the midst of Ranks.

Direction. Half-files face about and turn off to the left, Front-half-files
turn off to the right; to your Leader.

Command. Countermarch your Flanks into the midst of Files; face outward.

Command. Files to the right hand Countermarch, maintaining ground.

Command. Ranks, to the left hand Countermarch, losing ground.

Command. Countermarch your Front and Rear half-files from the midst of Ranks,
maintaining ground.

Direction. Front-half-files face about, and turn off to the left, the rest
turn off to the right, every man moving up into his Leaders ground; to your
Leader.

Command. Countermarch your right and left half-ranks from the midst of Files,
losing ground.

Direction. Face inward, and turn off every Rank on the ground they stand; face
to your Leader, and close Files into the midst to open Order, they are reduced.

CHAP. XXXIV. Eight entire Doublings by Wheelings, with their Reducement.
Command. WHeel off your Reer-half-files, and double your Front to the right
entire. Half-files face about.

Command. Wheel off your left half-ranks, and double your right Flank entire to
the left. Face outward.

Command. Wheel off your Rear half-files, and double your Front to the left
entire. Half-files face about.

Command. Wheel off your right half-ranks, and double your left Flank to the
left entire. Face outward.

Command. Wheel off your Front-half-files, and double the Rear to the right
entire. Half-files face about.

Command. Wheel off your right half-ranks, and double the left Flank to the
right entire. Face outward.

Command. Wheel off your Front-half-files, and double the Rear to the left
entire. Half-files face about.

Command. Wheel off your left half-ranks, and double your right Flank to the
right entire. Face outward.

CHAP. XXXV. Plain Firings, and Figures of Battle.
The first firing. LEt the two outmost Files of Musketeers upon each Flank
advance ten paces before the Front give fire, and fall in the Rear of
themselves, after face about, and move down into their places again; then face
to their Leader. Then let the next two Files upon each Flank move away in like
manner, and fire as the former did, and move down into their places again.
After let the other remaining Files be led forth by the other two Sergeants,
and give fire as before, and fall back again into their places.

The second firing. Let two Sergeants draw four Files upon each Flank, and move
them away 10 or 20 paces before the Front, and give fire, and fall in the Rear
of themselves, and after face about, and move down into their places. And
whilst they are moving down, let the other two Sergeants draw forth the
remaining four Files upon each Flank, and fire as the former did, and after
return again into their places.

The third firing. Let all the Musketeers move forth clear of the Pikes, and
let them open from the midst, until they stand in four Divisions, leaving
sufficient intervals for their wheeling into the Rear of themselves; first, let
them fire in each Division, falling in the Rear of themselves, until they have
all fired over two or three times after this kind.

The fourth firing. Let them close their Files before the Front of Pikes into
the midst to Order, then let the two first Ranks kneel down, the next two
stoop, and the last two stand upright, and give fire six Ranks all together;
then let the left half-ranks of Musketeers be wheeled about to the left into
the Rear of the Pikes, and the right half-ranks move to the left until they
stand straight before the Front of Pikes.

The fifth firing. Let the half-files face about, and let them give fire to
Front and Rear after this manner by two Ranks drawn off ten paces before the
Front and Rear, and fall off to the right and left into the Rear of themselves:
then facing about, let them open outward, and give way for the next two Ranks
to come forward into their places, who are to fire and fall off as the former
did, the other two Ranks doing the same. This firing may be continued as long
as the Leader pleases.

The sixth firing. Let them give fire on the ground they stand, and fall off to
the right and left into the Rear of themselves.

The seventh firing. Let them rank outward into Front and Rear, and give fire
all together, and rank again as they were.

The eighth firing. Let them give fire on the ground they stand, and flank the
Pikes, those in the Front flanking the Pikes on the right, they in the Rear
flanking them on the left; after let the Pikes charge on, and being retreated
into their places, let them face all to their Leader, and in the next place
proceed to Figures of Battle.

Command. Files, open outward to open Order; Ranks, open backward to your open
Order; then let every four Files close outward to Order; and Ranks close to
Front and Rear to Order, they will stand in twelve Divisions as follows.

formation

Command. The two inmost Divisions of Musketeers in the Rear, face about;
inmost Divisions of Musketeers in Front and Rear, move forward clear of the
standing part, and stand; Pikes face outward, Musketeers upon the Flanks face
inward, the rest face about to the right, move all two paces; to your Leader.

formation

The first firing. Let the Front-divisions of Musketeers give fire, and fall
in the rear of themselves; then wheel off to the right and left into the room
of them in the rear, they at the same time moving up into their ground, firing,
and falling off in like manner as before. Then let the Front-divisions upon the
Flank fire, and fall in the rear of themselves, and after wheel off to the
right and left into the ground of those divisions that stand in the rear of
them, they at the same time relieving them, firing and falling off as before;
then let the Pikes charge on, and after retreat into their places.

The second firing. Let them face to Front and Rear, and let the first
Divisions give fire, and fall in the Rear of themselves; then wheeling off to
the right and left, and interchange ground with the next Divisions, who are at
the same instant of time to move up into their places, and to give fire in like
manner, and to fall off and return where they were before; then let the Pikes
charge on to Front and Rear, and after retreat into their places, and face all
to their Leader.

Command. The four last Divisions next to the Rear both of Pikes and
Musketeers, face about, move down, and range even abrest with the Rear;
Reer-divisions of Musketeers that are faced to the Front, move forward, and
place your selves three foot short of the next Divisions that stands before
you; to your Leader.

formation

Upon this Figure let the Front-divisions give fire, and fall in the Rear of
themselves; then wheel off to the right and left, and range even abrest with
the next divisions; yet keeping themselves distinctly from the other divisions.
Then let those divisions of Musketeers that stood in the Rear of them, move
forward into their ground, and give fire, and fall in the Rear of themselves;
after face about, and move down again into their first places; then let those
that first fired move up again into their ground, and let the outmost divisions
begin to fire after this manner; let the first divisions fire, and fall in the
Rear of themselves, and after fall off to the right and left, and place
themselves in the room of the Reer-divisions, who are likewise to move up into
their ground, and there to fire, and fall off as before; the Pikes may after
charge on, and retreat back again into their places. The same firings may be
performed to the Rear, they being thither faced: but to let that pass, we will
fall upon the next Figure, wherefore,

Command. Divisions of Pikes, move forward until your Reer-divisions range even
abrest with the outmost divisions of Musketeers; Reer-divisions of Musketeers
face inward, and move straight in the Rear of the Reer-divisions of Pikes; to
your Leader.

formation

The first firing. Let the two last divisions of Musketeers face about, and
the other divisions of Musketeers to face to the right and left outward, and
let them give fire on the ground they stand, and fall in the Rear of
themselves; the Pikes may charge on, whilst the Musketeers make ready again.

The second firing. Let them face all to the Rear, and let the Reer-divisions
move forth to the right and left outward, and give fire altogether, and fall in
the Rear of themselves.

The third firing. Let the four first divisions of Musketeers, and the two
first disions of Pikes face to the Front, and let them give fire to Front and
Rear, and fall in the Rear of themselves; then face all to the Front, and
proceed farther.

Command. The Front and Reer-divisions to move outward two paces: Reer-division
of Pikes upon the left, face about; Reer-divisions of Pikes, move three foot
before the Front and Rear; to your Leader; divisions that moved outward, close
inward to your first ground, then they will stand as follows.

formation

The first firing. Let the first divisions of Musketeers give fire to the
Front, and fall in the Rear of themselves; then face outward, and march clear
of the standing part; then face to their Leader: then let every division of
Musketeers come successively into that ground, fire, and fall in the Rear of
themselves; then face about, and move down into their places; then let the
Front-divisions of Pikes charge on, and after retreat back into their places.

The second firing. Let them face all to the Rear, and let every division give
fire on the ground they stand, and fall in the Rear of themselves.

The third firing. Let half the Musketeers, and three divisions of Pikes, face
about to the right, and give fire to Front and Rear on the ground they stand,
and fall in the Rear of themselves; then let the Pikes charge on, and after
retreat back into their places; face all to their Leader.

Command. The outmost divisions of Musketeers, face outward, and move two
paces; to your Leader; the other divisions, both Pikes and Musketeers, open
your Files outward to open Order: the five first divisions, face about; the
five first, and the five last divisions, move straight forward, and interchange
ground; and after face to their Leader, and close Files inward again to Order;
then lead up the two outmost divisions of Musketeers to stand even abrest
against the middle-divisions of Pikes; face all to your Leader: then move the
two outmost divisions to the right and left inward, to stand straight in the
middle of the Front and Reer-divisions of Musketeers.

formation

Upon this Figure several firings might be performed, to Front, Rear, both
Flanks, and four Angles, all at one and the same time; but being so easy to
the view, I shall leave them unto the discretion of those which shall be
pleased to make use of them, and in the next place endeavor to reduce them.

Reducement. Middle-divisions of Musketeers upon the Flanks, face outward, and
move clear of the standing part; to your Leader: the five first Divisions, face
about; the five first and the five last Divisions, open Files outward to open
Order, and move forward, and interchange ground, and close Files inward again
to Order; outmost Divisions, face about, and move down again into your first
places; face all to your Leader. Here the Captain, if he please, may command
the Ensign to display his Colors; which being ended, he may proceed,
commanding Reer-divisions of Pikes to move forward, and to place themselves in
the Rear of the outmost division of Pikes upon the left in the Front; then let
the Front-division of Pikes move down, and place themselves in the Rear of the
second division of Pikes upon the right; then close Pikes into the midst to
Order. Inmost divisions of Musketeers move forward to Order, and march up even
with the Front; Reer-division of Musketeers, face outward, and move until they
stand straight with the outmost divisions of Musketeers; then face to their
Leader, and close Ranks forward to Order, and march up and make an even Front,
and close Files into the midst to Order; they are reduced.

CHAP. XXXVI. The eleventh Exercise, with 24 Files six deep.
THe Soldiers being met at the place appointed, and the Officers being
vigilant and careful in their several places, in drawing forth the Files, and
joining them into a Body; the Leader without any farther delay may crave their
silence, and close their Ranks and Files to Order; and after some distances and
facings shown unto them, drawn forth from the former Rule, he may proceed to
this following doubling, making every man a File-leader according to
succession, and after reduce them again.

Command. Ranks to the left, double.

Command. Files to the left, double.

Command. Half-files, double your Front to the left.

Command. Files, double your depth to the left.

Command. Bringers-up, double your Front to the right.

Command. Double your Files to the left entire, advancing.

Command. Bringers-up, double your Front to the left.

Command. Double your Files to the right entire, advancing.

Command. Ranks to the right, double.

Command. Files to the right, double.

Reducement. Files, rank to the left into the Front.

Rank, file six to the left, they are reduced.

CHAP. XXXVII. Eight Counter-marches, with their Reducement.
Command. BRingers-up, stand to the rest, pass through to the right, and place
your selves behind your Bringers-up. The rest face about.

Command. File-leaders and Bringers-up, stand; the rest pass through to the
right, and place your selves before your Leaders and Bringers-up; Half-files,
face about.

Command. Ranks to the left hand, countermarch, maintaining ground; face to
the left.

Command. Right and Left-half-ranks, Countermarch from the midst of Files,
maintaining ground; face inward.

Command. File-leaders, face about to the rest; pass through to the right, and
place your selves behind your Leader; to your Leader.

Command. Countermarch your Front and Reer-half-files from the midst of ranks,
losing ground; Front-half-files, face about.

Command. Ranks to the right hand, Countermarch, losing ground.

Command. Countermarch your right and left-half-ranks, every man placing
himself on the outside of his right and left-hand-man, they are reduced.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Eight several Wheelings, with their Reducement.
Command. WHeel your right and Left-half-ranks inward to the midst of Files.
Face outward.

Command. Wheel the battle off by division from the Rear.

Command. Wheel the battle inward to the right Flank from the left. Face to
the left.

Command. Wheel Front and Reer-half-files inward to the midst of Ranks.
Half-files, face about.

Command. Wheel off your right and Left-half-ranks by division from the midst
of Files. Face inward.

Command. Wheel off your Front and Reer-half-files by division from the midst
of Ranks; Front-half-files, face about.

Command. Wheel off your Front by division.

Command. Wheel your battle inward to the left Flank from the right; face to
the right.

CHAP. XXXIX. Plain Firings, and Figures of Battle.
The first firing. LEt them give fire to the Front by Introduction; where,
first, command to open their Files outward to open Order, and then let the
first Rank give fire on the ground they stand; then let the next Rank move
forward, and place themselves before the first Rank, and give fire likewise,
and stand; and so successively every Rank is to move forward, and place
themselves before the Rank that fired, until all have given fire: this being
twice performed reduces them, and is termed a firing of gaining ground.

The second firing. Let them fire by Files inward to Order, and fire on the
ground they stand, and fall off to the right and left into the Rear of
themselves.

The third firing. Let them close their Files, ranking outward into one entire
Rank into the Front, all at one and the same time, and to File again as they
were.

The fourth firing. Let the Musketeers double Ranks to the right and left
outward, and give fire three Ranks together; the first kneeling, the second
stooping, the third standing upright, and after to double Files to the right
and left inward.

The fifth firing. Let them fire again, and fall off to the right and left, and
flank the Pikes, who may after charge on, and after retreat back again into
their places.

The sixth firing. Let them face outward, and give fire to both Flanks on the
ground they stand, and fall in the Rear of themselves.

The seventh firing. Let the Half-files of Musketeers face outward, and move
clear of the standing part; then let every division give fire again, and fall
in the Rear of themselves, and then close their divisions.

The eighth firing. Let them give fire eight Ranks together (viz) two kneel
down, two stooping, two standing upright, and the last two to be drawn forth,
and so fire them altogether.

The ninth firing. Let the four first Ranks upon each Flank fire again, and
fall off to the right and left, and flank the Pikes, and let those Musketeers
face to Front and Rear, and draw forth the last Rank of Musketeers upon the
Flanks to the right and left outward, and place them in the midst of those
intervals upon the Angles; the Pikes being impaled, then Fire them to Front,
Rear, and both Flanks, and four Angles, and fall in the Rear of themselves.
This firing may be continued as long as a Leader shall think fit; then face
about those Files standing at the Angles, and move them in the Rear of those
divisions of Musketeers upon the Flanks, from whence they were first drawn
forth; then let them face all to their Leader.

The tenth firing. Let the Musketeers in Front and Rear face outward, and
march clear of the standing part; then let them face to Front and Rear, and
give fire, and fall in the Rear of themselves; then let the Reer-divisions of
Musketeers face to the Front, and the outmost divisions of Musketeers in the
Front, face to the Rear; then let the outmost divisions move, and close ranks
forward to Order; and let the Pikes charge on, and being retreated back again
into their places, face all to the Front, and proceed to Figures of Battle
according to the next direction.

Command. Half-files of Pikes, face about; Half-files of the four outmost Files
of Musketeers, face to the Rear; the four outmost Files, and the body of
Pikes, move forward clear of the standing part; to your Leader: then let them
face outward, and move two paces; then face to Front and Rear, and move the
like; face all to your Leader, and close Ranks forward, and Files inward in
each division; they will stand as follows.

formation

The first firing. Let the Reer-divisions face about; then let the first
divisions give fire, and fall in the Rear of themselves; then wheel off to the
right and left, and fall in the room or place of the next divisions, and they
at the same time are to move up into their ground, giving fire, and falling off
in like manner.

The second firing. Let them give fire on the ground they stand in each
division, and fall in the Rear of themselves; then let the Pikes charge on,
whilst the Musketeers make ready again.

The third firing. Let the Reer-divisions of Musketeers move up, and range
even abrest with the first division; then let them fire altogether, and fall in
the Rear of themselves; then let those that formerly moved up, face about, and
march down again into their places; then let the Pikes charge on again as
before, and being retreated, let them face all to both Flanks, and give fire in
form and manner as they did to Front and Rear.

The fourth firing. Let the middle-divisions of Musketeers advance forward
until they be clear of the standing part; then let them all fire, and fall in
the Rear of themselves, and the middle-divisions to move back again into their
places; then face to their Leader, and move the inmost division of Musketeers
upon the right in the Rear, to the left three paces, then proceed.

Command. Inmost divisions of Musketeers in the Rear, double to the right
filewise, and after that division that doubled to face about, and pass through
the intervals of Pikes, and place themselves three foot behind the Rear; and
the other division that was doubled to advance forward through the interval of
Pikes, and place themselves three foot before the Front; then face to their
Leader. Let the second division of Musketeers from the Front stand, and all
the rest move forward three paces; then move the second divisions of
Musketeers to the right and left inward, until they stand straight between the
Front and Reer-divisions of Pikes; Front-division of Musketeers, face about,
and let them and the Reer-division move forward and inward three paces; and
after face to their Leader.

formation

The first firing. Let the Front-division of Musketeers fire, and fall in the
Rear of themselves, then wheel off to the right by the outmost divisions of
Musketeers, and come down into the place or room of them in the Rear; and they
at the same time are to move straight forward up into the Front, and to give
fire, and fall in the Rear of themselves; then to wheel off to the right, as
the Front-divisions did, until they come into their places again. Then let the
first outmost divisions give fire, and fall in the Rear of themselves; and
after wheel off to the right and left into the ground of the Reer-divisions,
who at the same time are to move forward into their places, and give fire, and
fall off as the former did. The same firings may be performed to the Rear, they
being thither faced.

The second firing. Let them face to both Flanks, and give fire, and fall in
the Rear of themselves in each division; then let the Pikes charge on to both
Flanks, and being retreated back again into their places, let the
Reer-divisions of Musketeers move forth clear of the standing part; then let
them double Ranks to the right in each division, and give fire altogether;
after let them double Files to the left, and fire again four Ranks together,
two kneel down, and two stand upright; then let the Pikes charge on, and being
retreated, you may farther proceed.

Command. Front-divisions of Musketeers, face about, and march into your first
places; face all to your Leader: middle-divisions of Musketeers, face outward,
and move clear of the standing part; Front-divisions of Musketeers, face
about; Front-division, and Reer-division of Musketeers, move forward until you
be clear of the next divisions of Pikes that stand before you; face all to your
Leader, and they will stand as follows.

formation

The first firing. Let them face all to the right Flank, and let the
Front-division give fire, and fall in the Rear of themselves; then let them
wheel down into the Rear, they at the same time moving up into their ground,
firing, and falling off, and moving down accordingly into their first places;
then let the other six divisions fire after this manner: First the
Front-divisions, and fall in the Rear of themselves; then wheel off to the
right and left into the Rear of their own range, and the next division may move
forwards into their ground, give fire, and fall off in like manner: and so
successively let every division move up into their first ground, relieving each
other, until they have fired two or three times over in this manner.

The second firing. Let them face to both Flanks, and let the inmost divisions
of Musketeers move forth to the right and left, until they be clear of the
Pikes, who are to port; then the Musketeers in each division may give fire,
and fall in the Rear of themselves; then the Pikes may charge on, whilst the
Musketeers make ready again; and being retreated into their places again, you
may proceed to another Firing.

The third firing. Let the outmost divisions of Musketeers face to the Front
and Rear, and the Pikes to the four Angles; then let them give fire to Front,
Rear, and both Flanks on the ground they stand, in each division, and fall in
the Rear of themselves; then let the Pikes charge on to the four Angles, and
being retreated into their places, move in the outmost divisions of Musketeers
into their places again; and then face all to their Leader.

Command. Outmost divisions of Musketeers, face to the right and left inward,
and march until you range in the midst of Front and Reer-divisions of Pikes; to
your Leader.

formation

Upon the former Figure, let the Front-divisions of Musketeers upon the Flanks
move even with the Front of Pikes; then let them fire, and fall in the Rear of
themselves; then wheel about to the right and left into the place of the
Reer-divisions, who are to move forward into their ground, and to fire and fall
off accordingly. Then let the middle-divisions of Musketeers in the Front move
forward likewise, until they range even abrest with the Front; give fire, and
fall in the Rear of themselves; and then move clear forth, and wheel off to the
right about into the ground of the reer-division of Musketeers standing behind
them; and they at the same time to move up into the Front, and to give fire in
like manner, and to fall off accordingly, until they have attained their first
places. Then let the three last divisions of Musketeers, and the
Reer-divisions of Pikes, face about; and let the two middle-divisions of
Musketeers face outward, and move clear of the standing part; then let the
Musketeers in Front and Rear move forward clear of the Pikes, and let them
fire to Front, Rear, and both Flanks, and fall in the Rear of themselves; then
the Pikes may charge on to Front and Rear, and being retreated back into their
places, the Musketeers in Front and Rear may face about, and move down again
into their first ground; and the Musketeers upon the Flanks are to face
inward, and to move into their places where formerly they stood; then face them
all to their Leader, and proceed.

Command. Reer-division of Musketeers in the midst, face about;
middle-divisions of Musketeers move forward three foot before the Front and
Rear; Division of Musketeers in the midst upon the right, face to the left
Angles, and move until you stand even and straight in the next range of
Musketeers; the next division of Musketeers in the midst upon the left, face
about; and then likewise face to the left Angle, and move down into the next
range of Musketeers to them, and to stand straight in the Rear of the
Reer-division; face all to your Leader, produces the next.

formation

Upon the former Figure, let the six last divisions face about, and let the
first divisions give fire, and fall in the Rear of themselves; then wheel them
about to the right, and interchange ground with them that stand in the Rear,
who just upon their wheeling about, are to move up clear of the Pikes, to make
them room to fall down through the middle interval into their places, who also
are immediately to give fire, and fall off accordingly. Then let the outmost
divisions give fire, and fall in the Rear of themselves; then let the Pikes
charge on to Front and Rear; face them after to the Front at such time when the
Pikes have retreated back into their places again. Now if you will fire them to
the Front, the Musketeers stand in such good order, that you may fire them by
divisions, by their several turns as long as you please, they relieving each
other. After you may fire them to Front, Rear, and both Flanks, the Musketeers
standing in fit condition for the same. But fearing to keep the Soldiers too
long in Exercise, debarring them thereby of their wonted refreshment, I will
hasten to the Reducement, and for present lodge the Colors, and conclude the
eleventh Exercise.

Reducement. Outmost Divisions of Musketeers face outward and move six paces;
to your Leader. The two first Divisions of Musketeers in the midst face to the
right, and move clear of the Pikes; then face to the right and left inward, and
move, and interchange ground, then stand, and face to your Leader. The two last
Divisions of Musketeers in the midst, face to the left, and move clear of the
Pikes; face all to your Leader. Then let every Division close forward to Order,
and move up even abrest with the Pikes, they are reduced.

CHAP. XL. The twelfth Exercise, consisting of 24 Files, six deep.
THe place of Exercise appointed for the Soldiers to meet, they upon a just
summons make full appearance, being indeed the very life of any Exercise,
affording much comfort to him that shall lead them. And therefore seeing their
readiness and forwardness (as in duty they are concerned) the Leader cannot
choose but forthwith to give order unto his Officers for the completing up of
the Body; who knowing his commands, go nimbly and cheerfully to work in drawing
forth the Files, and joining them together, after fetching the Colors, and
bringing them to the head of the Company. So that nothing being wanting, the
Leader craves their silence and attention, commanding them to their distance of
Order, both of Rank and File, and after some few distances shown unto them, he
may proceed in the next place to such Facings as follows.

Command. Face to the right and left outward, and move four paces. Face to
Front and Rear, and move three paces. Face to the outward Angles in the Front.
Face to the inward Angles in the Front. Face to the inward Angles of the right
Flank. Face to the inward Angles in the left Flank. Face to the outward Angles
in the Rear. Face to the inward Angles in the Rear. Face to the outward Angles
both of Front and Rear. Face to the inward Angles both of Front and Rear. Face
to the midst of Files. Face to the midst of Ranks. Face to the Center. Face to
the outward Angles of Front and Rear from the Center. Face all about to the
right. Face to Front, Rear, and both Flanks from the Center.
As you were; To your Leader.

CHAP. XLI. A Doubling to make every man a File-Leader by dignity.
Command. HAlf-files double your Front to the left.

Command. Double your Files to the right entire, advancing, every man placing
himself before his Leader.

Command. Front-half-files double your Rear to the left.

Command. Double your Files to the left entire, advancing, every man placing
himself before his Leader.

Command. Bringers-up double your Front to the right.

Command. Files double your depth to the right, every man falling behind his
Bringer-up.

Command. Half-files, double your Front to the right.

Command. Double your Files to the left entire, advancing.

Command. Ranks to the right double.

Command. Files to the right double.

Command. Bringers-up double your Front to the left.

Command. Files double your depth to the left, every man falling behind his
Bringer-up.

Reducement. Ranks to the left double. Files to the left double.

CHAP. XLII. Several Wheelings, with their Reducements.
Command. WHeel off your Reer-half-files, and double your Front by Division

Command. Right and left half-ranks double the depth of your Battle by
wheeling inward to the Rear. Face to the Rear.

Command. Double the length of your Battle by wheeling inward to Front and
Rear. Half-files face about.

Command. Front and Rear half-files double the depth of your Battle by
wheeling outward to the right Flank. Half-files face about, and wheel to the
left; Front half-files wheel to the right.

Command. Front and Rear half-files double the length of your Battle by
wheeling inward to the left Flank; face all to the left.

Command. Front and Rear half-files double the depth of both Flanks by wheeling
to the right and left outward. Half-files face about.

Command. Front and Rear half-files double the length of the Battle by
wheeling inward to the midst of Ranks. Face inward.

Command. Front and Rear half-files double the depth of your left Flank by
wheeling to the right and left outward. Half-files face about.

Command. Front and Rear half-files double the length of your Battle by
wheeling inward to the right flank. Face to the right; and as they then stand,
right half-ranks wheel to the left, and left half-ranks wheel to the right
until the right Flank meet together, they are reduced.

CHAP. XLIII. Plain Figures, and figures of Battle.
The first firing. LEt two Ranks advance forward ten paces and give fire, and
fall in the Rear of themselves, and after wheel off to the right and left
outward, and move down in the Rear of their own Divisions of Musketeers; and
then the next two Ranks are to move forward, and to give fire, as the former
did, and so consequently all the rest, until all have fired, and reduced back
again into their places.

The second firing. Let them fire even with the Front, and fall in the Rear of
themselves, and let the Pikes charge on whilst the Musketeers make ready again.

The third firing. Let single Files be drawn off, and Ranks inward into the
Front, and fire, and File again, face about, and move down into their places;
then let two Files be drawn off clear, and let the inmost Files rank inward,
the outmost Files rank outward, and give fire, and File again as they were, and
fall into their places.

The fourth firing. Let the four outmost Files upon each Flank be drawn off
until they be clear of the Front; then let them close before the Front of
Pikes; face then the inmost Files of Musketeers to both the Flanks, and let
them give fire to the Front and both Flanks on the ground they stand, and fall
in the Rear of themselves.

The fifth firing. Let them give fire all together, six Ranks at once in the
Front, and four in the Flanks, observing the former Rules in firing so many
Ranks together, as you may find in the place of description of firings.

The sixth firing. Let those Musketeers upon the Flanks face to the Rear, and
move clear of the Pikes; then close to the right and left inward to Order; then
let the half-files of Pikes face about, and let the Musketeers give fire to
Front and Rear, and fall in the Rear of themselves.

The seventh firing. Let the Pikes move forth to the right and left outward,
until they be clear of the Musketeers; then let the Musketeers give fire in
an oblique manner, thus; let every two Files open to the right and left outward
to something more then open Order; then close the two first Ranks of the four
inmost Files to the Front to Order, and let the other two Ranks close likewise
almost to that distance; but the two last Ranks only are to face to their
Front, and after in the same kind close the four Ranks inward to the Rear of
the four outmost, in manner and form there, as the other Files were to the
Front, and so let them give fire in each Division, an oblique way, two Ranks
kneel down, two kneeling, and two stand upright.

The eighth firing. After the former firing, close the four inmost Files to the
right and left outward to Order, and to join with the outmost Files, when their
aspects being to the outward Angles of Front and Rear, let the Pikes port, and
Musketeers give fire to the four Angles, and fall in the Rear of themselves;
then let the Pikes charge on whilst the Musketeers make ready again, and after
retreat back into their places again.

The ninth firing. Let them give fire again the first rank in each Division,
and wheel about to the right, and move down into their first places where
before they were drawn forth, and every rank consequently fall in the rear of
them; then let the Pikes close into the midst to Order, and face all to their
Leader.

Command. Musketeers face to the right and left outward, and move twelve
paces; then face to the rear, and move likewise twelve paces; after face to
their Leader. Front-half-files of each Division move forward three paces; right
and left half-ranks of each Division move outward two paces; Front-Divisions of
Pikes and Musketeers stand, reer-divisions of both Arms move to the right and
left outward, until you be clear of the Front-divisions; then close ranks and
files in each Division to Order, and face to their Leader, they will stand in
the first Figure.

formation

The first firing. Let the Front-divisions of Musketeers move forward, and
range even abrest with the Front of Pikes, give fire, and fall in the rear of
themselves; then face about and move down into their own ground again, and face
to their Leader; then let the outmost Divisions of Musketeers move in like
manner as the former did, and give fire, and fall off in like manner, and down
again into their places. Let the Musketeers in the next place face outward,
and move three paces, and after face to the Front; then let the reer-divisions
of Musketeers advance forward until they range even abrest with the
Front-divisions; then let them give fire all together in each Division, and
fall in the Rear of themselves, and after let the outmost divisions that moved
up, move down again into their places; then let the Pikes charge on, and after
retreat into their places.

The second firing. Let the outmost Divisions of Musketeers in the Front move
forward before the Front of Pikes, and the inmost Divisions of Musketeers in
the Front, let them likewise move at the same time before the Reer-divisions of
Pikes; then let the Pikes port, and Musketeers in each Division give fire on
the ground they stand, and after fall in the Rear of themselves; and those
Musketeers that formerly moved forth from their places, let the Sergeants
wheel them off to the right and left into their first ground, and face to their
Leader.

Command. Inmost Divisions of Musketeers in the Front, face to the Rear;
Divisions of Pikes upon the left in the Front face about to the right;
Divisions that are thus faced, move down three foot clear of the Rear of each
Arms. Front-divisions both of Pikes and Musketeers, and those that last moved,
face to the left, and move two paces; face all to your Leader; and Musketeers
move forward until your middle Divisions range even abrest with the
Reer-divisions of Pikes, and they will stand as follows.

formation

Upon this Figure let the Front-divisions give fire, and fall in the Rear of
themselves, and then wheel off to the right and left, into the ground of the
Reer-divisions, and they at the same time are to move up into their places, and
to give fire, and fall off accordingly into their first places. Then let the
middle Divisions move forward until they range even with the Front of Pikes,
and let them give fire, and fall first in the Rear of themselves, and after
face about, and move down into their places again, and face to their Leader;
then let the Pikes charge on, and after retreat back again into their places.
They may fire to the Rear after the same manner as they did to the Front, they
being thither faced; and after they have all fired, face again to their Leader.

Command. Let the four Divisions of Musketeers upon the right move away, and
let the Divisions of Pikes fall in the Rear of them, and the four Divisions of
Musketeers on the left to fall in the Rear of the Pikes; then standing
straight in their Divisions both Rank-wise and File-wise, and they will stand
as follows.

formation

Upon this Figure let the Rear Divisions face about to the right, and let the
first Divisions give fire to Front and Rear, and fall in the Rear of
themselves; then let them advance forward three paces, and after wheel about to
the right, and interchange ground with the Reer-divisions, and they at the same
time are to move up and give fire, and fall off accordingly. Then let the other
Divisions move forward until they range even abrest with Front and Rear, give
fire, and fall in the Rear of themselves, after face about and move down into
their places; then face all to their Leader.

Command. The four first divisions stand, the rest face to the left, and march
clear of the standing part; then let the Pikes face to the Front, and march up
even abrest with the Musketeers; Reer-divisions of Musketeers face to the
Front, and move up likewise; Musketeers face inward, move all three or four
paces until they stand in form of the second Figure; face all to your Leader.
Reer-division of Pikes face about, and move down three foot clear of the Rear;
to your Leader; which produces the last Figure.

formation

Upon this Figure let the Reer-division of Pikes face about, and Musketeers
face outward; then let Pikes port, and let the first Divisions of Musketeers
give fire, and fall in the Rear of themselves; then face about, and interchange
ground with the Reer-divisions, and face again to Front and Rear, and let those
that came up into their room give fire in like manner, and fall off and down
again into their places. Then let the next Divisions give fire, and fall in the
Rear of themselves, and let the Pikes charge on; and being retreated back again
into their places, command the two middle Divisions of Musketeers to face to
the Rear, and move down and range even with the Rear; then let every Division
of Musketeers give fire on the ground they stand, to both flanks and Rear, and
fall in the Rear of themselves; the Pikes may charge on again, and those
Musketeers that moved down into the Rear, may face about and move back again
into their places, and face all to the Front.

Reducement. Reer-division of Pikes advance forward to the left into the Front,
the two inmost Divisions of Musketeers face about, and march clear of the
Rear; then face to the right and left outward, and place themselves behind the
Reer-divisions of Musketeers: outmost divisions of Musketeers face inward,
and move straight in the Rear of the Front-divisions, and let the Pikes fall in
the Rear of their Front-divisions, and face all to their Leader. Half-files of
Musketeers double your front to the right and left inward, and after move
forward, and even the Front, they are reduced.

The end of the Second Book.
THE COMPLETE BODY OF The Art Military. The Third BOOK.
CHAP. I. Concerning the drawing up of Regiments, with their several Numbers,
Fronts, Manner and Ways.
HE that shall be desirous to be truly knowing in this point of Military
Discipline, in the drawing up of Regiments, whether they be of lesser or
greater Bodies, as in some 6, others 7, 8, 10, or 12 Companies, they must be
drawn up into Battalia, either in one, two, or three Squadrons (or grand
Divisions) of Pikes flanked with Musketeers, having always in the Rear a
sufficient number of Musketeers for the guard of the Bagage, Cannon, or to be
Convoys for to convey Ammunition and Victual to the rest of their fellows; who
are to be drawn forth (by the discretion of the Major) from each particular
Company, according to their several strengths, as in greater Companies more
Files then in those which be lesser, ordering them timely relief, whereby the
several duties amongst the Soldiers throughout the Regiment by an equal way
may take their turns. Now for as much as the true stating of the Dignities of
every particular Officer, in the opinions of many, differ very much, and our
former Military Authors have been very sparing in their pains in setting down
their due places of honor; I shall, for satisfaction of those which desire to
be rightly informed, collect out of the many forms practiced abroad and at
home, one good way to perfect it.

But here, by the way, I must crave pardon from the courteous Reader, by reason
I foresee certain Objections like rubs or blocks lying in my way, to digress a
little from my intended purpose, to give answers unto each of them: which are,

First, That I seem to slighten the pains of former Authors.

Secondly, That it will be a means to occasion much idleness in the Soldiers.

Thirdly, That it is too great a knowledge to be laid open to their view.

To the first I answer, That the reason, as I conceive, why they have been so
sparing of their pains in this kind, was not for want of Abilities or knowledge
amongst any of them, whose works for the most part I highly honor and esteem,
but rather believe that they left it forth for the curious search of such who
are called unto Field-Officers places, knowing well, that before they are
capable of that preferment, they must be good proficients in this part of
Military Exercise.

2. Although many that know but a little, may be puffed up with high conceits of
themselves, conceiving what the Author has done, 'twere easy for any man to
perform the same; yet to them of riper Judgments, the more variety in this
kind is presented to their view, the more painful they are in the curious
practice thereof, thinking every moment lost which is not spent in the
searching after, and informing of their Judgments in this point of Military
Discipline.

3. If it had not been for the worthy pains and labors of our Ancestors
published to the view of the world, this our age might have been ignorant both
in this, and all other Sciences; for from them we borrowed our first light, God
putting it in their hearts to publish their several gifts to after-Generations,
which though at this day much refined, yet for our first grounds and principles
we are beholding unto them. Therefore, give me leave, according as God has
enabled me, not to conceal or keep back any thing which may concern the good
and welfare of my Country; for, I conceive there is none worthy to receive
benefit from those that have gone before him, if he conceals that good to such
as shall come after him. And if I happen to lie under the hard censure of some
for my pains, it makes no matter, so the major part receive benefit thereby;
for as I gathered somewhat of others, so my desire is, that others may do the
like by me.

The opinions of Soldiers in the drawing up of Regiments are very various both
in their Forms and Figures, according to the custom of their Countries,
commands of their Generals, or Officers in chief, which nevertheless may prove
very good and serviceable when need shall require. I shall therefore for the
satisfaction of the ingenious Soldier set before them the best Collections
drawn from them all, such as may be most useful for to fight against the enemy,
according to the situation of the place, the number of men, and aptness of
ground to contain them, which in the next place comes to be handled.

CHAP. II. The manner of drawing up a Regiment consisting of six Companies,
containing in it a Colonel, a Lieutenant Colonel, a Major, and three Captains,
every one having 108 men in a Company, and the three Field-Officers 144. which
makes completely up 756 men, whereof two thirds are Musketeers, and one third
of Pikes, the Files being six deep.
THe general place of Rendezvous being appointed out unto the Major, it is his
care to take a timely view thereof, that there be ground and room sufficient
enough for the drawing them up. And having received Orders from his Colonel,
Major General, or other superior Officers for the Regiments marching thither,
he may appoint the Companies to march either of these two ways, either by
succession or dignity. If by succession, first the Colonels Company moves away;
next the Lieutenant Colonels in the Rear of him; then the Majors, and so
consequently all the rest from the eldest to the youngest, who brings up the
Rear of all. If by Dignity, first the Colonels Company; and in the Rear of him,
the youngest Captain; and after him the eldest; then the Majors; then the
second Captain; the Lieutenant Colonel bringing up the Rear of all. But it
concerns the Major before their marching to give notice to the Lieutenant
Colonel and the eldest Captain to countermarch their Ranks of their two
particular Companies, as soon as they come into the place of the general
Rendezvous before he shall draw them up, to preserve the honor of the right
File-leaders, and Bringers up of both Arms. He is likewise to be there
beforehand, attending their marching in, and after the Colonels Company have
made Alt, to draw up each particular Company on the left of him, all in one
even range, commanding them to close Ranks forward to Order, and Files into the
midst unto the same distance. He is likewise to inform himself of the Captains,
Lieutenants, and Sergeants, how many Files of Pikes and Musketeers they have
in each particular Company, and accordingly he is to enter it down in his
Paper-Book, and to make use thereof as follows.

He is to require one single File apiece of Musketeers to be drawn off from
the three smallest Companies, and two Files apiece from the greater, which
makes nine Files, and contains 54 men, which are to be led away by an able
Sergeant into the Rear, for to be a guard to the Bagage, or other occasions.
From thence he may proceed, commanding all the Musketeers to stand, and the
Pikes to advance their Arms, and move forward ten or twelve paces; and then to
stand, and close their Files outward to Order; three of their Colors moving
with their Pikes to the right hand; the other three moving away to the left.
After he may command Musketeers to close their Files outward to Order, and
they will stand in four Divisions, two of Pikes, and in the Rear of them, two
of Musketeers, as underneath is set forth; the Captains being all upon the
head of the Pikes, with their Ensigns, and the Lieutenants in the Rear; the
Sergeants attending upon the Flanks of each division.

formation

This being done, command each division of Musketeers and Pikes to face
outward, and to move to such convenient distance, that being faced to the
Front, there may be room sufficient upon the subdividing of each division of
Musketeers for their moving up, and flanking each body of Pikes. After which
the Major may assign unto every Captain and Lieutenant his due place of honor,
as they stand all abrest; and that they may also naturally fall into their
proper places upon the march, which shall be set forth in the next Figure
standing in two grand Divisions, the one in the Rear of the other, which may
happen sometimes for want of ground; but provided they have ground enough, they
ought to stand in one even range, as in folio 5. The Major, after they are thus
drawn up in one even range, will find three Files of Musketeers more in the
second grand Division, and two of the Pikes, then is in the first; therefore he
must take from thence one File of each Company, and add them to nine Files in
the Rear, which makes them twelve, and then he will have balanced the
divisions equal, taking off one File of Pikes, and placing it amonst the eldest
Captains Pikes.

formation

CHAP. III. The Reasons follow for the placing of the Captains, their Colors,
and their Lieutenants, after the manner before set down.
WHat has formerly been declared concerning a Rank or File, six abrest, or six
deep, may be satisfactory in some kind unto this point, which takes his rule
from hence. For all private Companies, smaller Bodies, or single Files, must,
or ought to be as near as they can conformable to greater Bodies, as to
Regiments, and consequently they to Brigades. Therefore take notice that this
rule ought ever to be observed in the drawing of Regiments, that the right
Flank, as near as may be, ought to be suitable with the left, both in strength,
number, and dignity; and likewise to be so when they are drawn forth upon a
long march, the Front equal with the Rear. Now, suppose these two grand
divisions stood even abrest; we will begin to examine the first worth, which is
the Colonels; and the fourth worth, which is the eldest Captains, and placed
upon the right and left of the first grand division, with the second and third
worth, who are the Lieutenant Colonel and Major, drawn up upon the right and
left of the second grand division; and you shall find they are every way
equivalent in number, worth and dignity, with that of the first.

In the next place, there are no more to place, but the fifth and sixth worth,
who are the second and third Captains: and therefore since it is the first
place of honor among the Captains in a Regiment, to lead the first Body or
Stand of Pikes; it must then consequently follow, that the second place of
honor must be to lead the second grand division of Pikes; and therefore the
fifth worth is brought into and placed between the second and third, that he
may stand there to lead the second Body of Pikes; wherein the
Lieutenant Colonel, the Major, and his own Colors are placed: so that there
remains no more but the sixth worth, or youngest Captain to place, who is to be
drawn up between the Colonel and eldest Captain. Now if we shall further
proceed to balance it more clearly, consider them by dividing them by two's in
their places; as first, we will begin with the Colonel, the first worth, who
has joined to him the youngest Captain, which is the sixth worth, and they two
make the number (7); then compare the Lieutenant Colonel, who is the second
worth, unto the second Captain joined with him, which is the fifth worth, and
they make alike the same number; after that compare the Major and elder
Captain, who are drawn up into the midst of the Regiment, whose places carry
the third and fourth worth, and their number is suitable with the rest. And
thus much may be spoken in general: now I shall come more particularly to give
further satisfaction, both for them, and for all the rest; and therefore I will
give reasons for the placing of the Officers of the first grand division; and
clearing that, the second will quickly be laid open to the view.

CHAP. IV. More particular Reasons for the placing of the Captains and
Lieutenants of the first grand Division.
IN this grand Division, there is the Colonel, the eldest Captain, and the
youngest drawn up into the midst, and they having each of them Lieutenants;
take notice therefore of these reasons for their placing thus; That always upon
such small Bodies as these, the first honor is ever placed upon the right, and
the second upon the left; and that which remains, must of necessity be drawn up
into the midst; they standing all abrest. These three Companies being ordered
into a right and left Flank, and one Stand of Pikes, or Vanguard, Reer-ward,
or Main-battail, as they may be termed, the reasons follow for the thus
standing of the Officers, whether marching all even abrest, or upon a stand: it
is the Colonels proper place to be on the head or midst of his grand division;
which is his chiefest place of security, and where he ought to fight; for
standing there, the other may more conveniently repair unto him for their
orders, as occasion shall require. Now the Colonel being a Field-Officer, is
not absolutely tied to any one place to fight, as the rest are, many occasions
calling him from thence; the eldest Captain therefore is appointed to take
charge of the Body of Pikes, whether it be upon a March to lead them, or upon a
Stand to fight them, he ought never to forsake them, but upon special command
from his Colonel, or other Field-Officers. Now the reason why the first Body of
Pikes is the most honourablest place to lead, is, as I conceive, because the
Colonels Colors are there flying; and besides, being the more ancienter Arms,
far more honor it is to lead them; for most commonly the gallantest men of the
Infantry desire rather to trail Pikes, then to carry Muskets. Moreover, it has
been a constant practice in most places, that the eldest Captain should have
that place to lead on foot, although many times his Colonel being on
horseback, may be a little before him. Having spoken of these two, it remains
to speak something of the youngest Captain, who is appointed either upon the
Marching all abrest, or upon a Stand, to take charge of the Reer-ward, or left
Flank of the first grand Division to fight them; but upon the long March, it is
more honorable for him to fall down in the Rear, and to bring up his own
Lieutenant, coming up into his place; for it is greater honor (though many
times not believed) to bring up a grand division, then to lead a Sub-division.
In the next place, it may be supposed that the Captain-Lieutenants place is too
honorable to lead the Vanguard. To which I answer, That the Colonel himself
is confined thither; for upon the long March he draws off the Vanguard, and
leads them himself, being attended on horseback by the Martial and
Quartermaster of his own Regiment. Now leading away the Musketeers of his own
particular Company, the Captain-Lieutenant being subservient unto him, marches
a foot upon the head of the first Division of Musketeers, and takes charge of
them, as assisting to his Colonel, and fighting them, if he receives no command
to the contrary, when they are all drawn up again even abrest, it concerning
him especially to be there resident in the absence of his Colonel, for the
better regulating of them. The eldest Captains Lieutenant is always placed in
the Rear of the Pikes, either upon a Stand, or upon a March, it being very
honorable unto him to bring up a grand Division of Pikes. The third Captains
Lieutenant is ordered to bring up the left Flank, except it be upon the long
March, and then he is to exchange places with his own Captain. There is yet one
place vacant, which is to bring up the right Flank; and the Captain-Lieutenants
Bringer-up many times through courtesy is called a Lieutenant, therefore a
Major may be so courteous as to assign him that place. And here I shall
conclude with the reasons of the places of the Officers of the first grand
Division.

CHAP. V. Reasons for the placing of the Officers of the second grand Division.
ALthough the Colonel is Commander in chief, yet his discretion is such, as to
leave the ordering of places to his Major; and as he takes charge of the first
grand Division, so he leaves the second to his Lieutenant Colonel, who stands
upon the head or midst of the same, being drawn up all even abrest; and many
times leads the second grand Division, as the Colonel does the first, as was
the practice in the Regiments upon their March under the command of the Earl of
Essex, General of the Parliaments Forces. To such as shall approve of this way
(which may be very good) they shall not need to Countermarch the Ranks of the
Lieutenant Colonel, as is before expressed, before the drawing up of the
Lieutenant-Colonels Company, but draw them up on the right of that Division,
and to Countermarch the Ranks of the Majors, and draw his Company up on the
left. But I shall leave that to the liberty of those that shall best fancy
this kind, and proceed to that which is of more use.

The second grand Division standing in an even range with the first, it will be
convenient for the Lieutenant Colonel to be upon the head thereof. As
concerning the Major, he being an Officer at will, has no certain place
assigned unto him, by reason of his moving as occasion shall require to both
Divisions, whereby he may give orders unto them all, minding the good order of
the Regiment throughout every part. But if he will take his place, to march in
the properest place for him, if they march all abrest, will be in the Front,
between the Colonel and Lieutenant Colonel; but in the long march, in the midst
of both grand Divisions, whereby he may have freer access unto them both, whose
vigilant eye in the well ordering of the Regiment is chiefly concerned,
observing all the passages, whether there be need of sub-dividing their
Divisions; and if at any time they shall be divided, when there is ground
sufficient enough, he must give order again for the drawing them all up even
abrest, it being far more graceful to the Regiments marching. In the next
place, the second Captain may claim it as his due, to lead the second Body of
Pikes, as the eldest Captain challenges the first; and the reason given for
his place, may suffice for both. The eldest Lieutenant in this grand Division,
which is the Lieutenant-Colonels Lieutenant, is assigned unto that place, where
he is set down for to be an assistant there unto his Lieutenant Colonel, for
the well regulating of his men which march in the Rear, as the
Captain-Lieutenant is to the Colonels men, who march in the Front; and his
Lieutenant Colonel bringing up the whole Regiment, is the second place of
honor. Some may conceive the Majors Lieutenant has too great a place of
honor in leading the Van of the second grand Division. To which I answer, If
the Lieutenant Colonel marches not there himself, but shall bring up the
Regiment; certainly it must be clear, that it is the Majors due, for to march
there himself at times convenient; and being so, there is good reason in his
absence his Lieutenant should lead his men, or in his presence to be there as a
helper unto him, for the well regulating of his men, as the other Lieutenants
are to the other Field-Officers, who every one of them according to their
several places may have several occasions to call them off; their Lieutenants
therefore ought to be at hand, and to march with them in their places, whereby
they may receive Orders from them, and know how to act in their absence
concerning their own particular Soldiers. The second Captains Lieutenant is
ordered to bring up the second Body of Pikes; which being a grand Division, it
falls to him as due there, as the eldest Captains Lieutenant does in the first,
it being the greatest place of honor that can be given him in the Rear, next
to the Lieutenant Colonel. Having spoken thus much concerning every
Field-Officer, the Captains and their Lieutenants, where their places are to
march, with the reasons for the same, it will be expected to supply two places
which are vacant in the Rear of the second grand division. To which I answer,
Upon the long march the Lieutenant Colonel himself moves down there, and brings
up the Rear of the whole Regiment; and therefore it is left vacant for him. But
then you will say, There wants an Officer to bring up the Rear of that Division
wherein the Majors Lieutenant is placed. To which I answer, That there is none
remaining to do it, except it be the Majors Lieutenant himself. For if the
Major shall lead the second grand Division, then his Lieutenant may move down
to bring up that particular Division for to supply the same; but in regard the
Major (as has been shown before) has many occasions to call him off, it
concerns his Lieutenant to keep his place which was first assigned unto him, to
avoid the trouble of moving up again in his Majors absence. Some are of opinion
it would be convenient to place the Lieutenant-Colonels eldest Sergeant there;
but in my judgment, it is very unhandsome to see any Halberdeer, either to
lead or bring up any Division marching in a Regimental way; and rather then I
should do it, I would let it go unsupplyed; but if he shall be there placed to
bring up, his best way of marching is either with Pallizado, or half-pike, and
not with his Halberd.

CHAP. VI. The ordering of a Regiment to the long March, with the placing of
the Officers, and the leading of Carriages.
THe Major giving to every Captain his proper place to march in, and what
Divisions they are to lead, and what to bring up, in written notes under his
hand, commands the Drum-Major to bea^ a March, and so consequently all the rest
to take it formation from him. The Soldiers being warned thereby, begin to
shoulder their Arms, and prepare to move; the Colonel on Horsback being
attended on by his Martial and Quartermaster, draws off the first Division of
Musketeers, his Captain-Lieutenant being six foot behind him; which Division
is brought up by the Captain-Lieutenants Bringer-up. The eldest Captain follows
next, leading the first Division of Pikes, and brought up by his own
Lieutenant. The next Division of Musketeers is led by the third Captains
Lieutenant, and the Rear of the first grand Division is brought up by the third
Captain. There ought to be full 18 foot of ground betwixt each Division; he
that brings up a Division, ought to be clear six foot behind the same; and he
that leads, to be six foot before; so that there will be six foot proportion of
ground betwixt them both, for the better distinguishing of their Divisions, the
Leaders and Bringers-up thereof. And where there is not room sufficient for the
marching so many abrest, as they are now ordered, they must subdivide, being
careful to preserve their Divisions, marching in greater depths, at their due
distance of open order in rank, and order in file. For the Sergeants must not
presume upon any sub-dividing to bring them down in the Rear of them that march
before, and keep them entire in all their respective Divisions. And it must be
their observation to attend upon the Flanks, even abrest with those Leaders of
Files that were taken off; that when there is ground and room enough, they more
readier know where to find them, and to lead them up again as they were at
first. Care likewise must be had upon any sub-dividing of the Pikes, that there
be none of the Colors divided, who are in a Regimental way to march all three
together, according to their first placing. These rules and observations
concern both grand Divisions. Now the first being led away, as is before
expressed, there ought to be sufficient ground betwixt each grand Division for
the leading of the Carriages; and in the first place there is to be considered,
that to most Regiments there is allowed two Wagons, for the Baggage and
Ammunition, and two Fieldpieces, or great Cannon, besides other Carriages
which more concern the Victual for the Soldiers, as occasion shall require:
now concerning the ordering, and securest placing of all these upon the March,
will be in the midst of the Regiment, and to have those which are ordered for
their Guard, to be Firelocks, or to have Snap-hances, for the avoiding of the
danger which might happen by the Cole of the Match; and being placed where any
attempt of the Enemy shall fall on, either to Front, Rear, or either Flank, the
Cannon may thus be easily drawn forth to fire upon them; and all the wood of
the Carriages, with their Guard, to be ordered in the Rear, wherever the
assault should happen, for their better security and safety. The Major in the
next place, if he please, may lead the second grand Division; to which purpose
he draws off (with the assistance of his own Lieutenant) the first Division of
Musketeers, his Lieutenant being six foot behind him, and so much before the
Musketeers. The next that follows, is the second Body of Pikes, which is led
by the second Captain, and brought up by his own Lieutenant. The last Division
of Musketeers is led by the Lieutenant-Colonels Lieutenant: and the Rear of
the whole Regiment is brought up by the Lieutenant Colonel. The Sergeants are
to march upon the Flanks, attending their own men, that when they are to be
reduced into Companies, they may know more readier where to find them; and
according to order they may draw them off to complete up their Captains
Companies. As for the Drums, the care thereof belongs to the Drum-Major to
place, and to ease them timely by reliefs, to beat as many or as few as he
shall think fit; to which purpose, he orders them to fall in betwixt the second
and third Rank of Musketeers and Pikes of each Division; but when they are all
even abrest, the Drums are placed according as you see them marked. The Figure
for the long-March in the next place follows.

CHAP. VII. The first Exercise of a Regiment in the plainest and easiest way.
THe Major finding the commodiousness of the ground, may draw them up all even
abrest again, and proceed to exercise them in a Regimental way, conferring
beforehand with the Captains, Lieutenants, Ensigns, and Sergeants, what he
intends to do. Whether he will exercise every Maniple, or Division (as is usual
in a private Company) in all their plain Motions and Firings, which may be very
proper, and easily done, or otherwise proceed to more variety in every
Division, to give them commands as one man, either to face, double, or
otherwise according to discretion. And having fully instructed them of all his
intents and purposes, he must begin to consider of the best manner for the
managing of the same. To which end, he shall do well to command the first grand
Division to advance forward 12 paces clear of the second, and after face them
to the Front, and they will stand in manner as in Folio 147. After he must
consider how many Files of Musketeers there are, and whether he can branch
them forth into equal Divisions suitable to the Pikes; but finding them to stand
but 18 of a side, he shall do well for time of his Exercise, to draw off eight
Files of Musketeers from the Rear, which were formerly appointed to guard the
Ammunition, or Baggage, and add two to every Division of Musketeers, which
will make them 20 Files of each side of the Pikes, and then he may thus proceed.

Command. Files, to their open order, and Ranks to close forward to order in
each grand Division: every five Files of Musketeers of each Division close to
the right to order: the first six files of Pikes in each grand Division close
to the right to order, the rest of the Pikes close every five Files to the
right, to the same distance; then there will be in each grand Division four
Divisions of Pikes, and eight of Musketeers, in manner as set forth to your
view in Folio 147.

Before the Major shall begin his Exercise, he shall do well to appoint unto
each Division, the Captains and their Ensigns, (whose Colors in the mean time
may be stuck in the ground, or given to any of the File-leaders of Pikes, to
hold during the time of Exercise) to take charge of them, to order them
according unto every word of command, and the Lieutenant and Sergeants to each
Division of Musketeers, that after silence is craved throughout the whole
Regiment, the Major by stretching out his voice in every word of Command, the
rest as his Echo are immediately to give it out along the whole Front, and
from thence unto the Rear, and every Officer to lead his men accordingly.

The Major having stated all things according to the former directions, may if
he please, either face, double, countermarch, or wheel, to Front, Rear, or
both Flanks in every particular Division; And may after fire them by way of
Divisions drawn off ten or twenty paces before the Front, firing them 7 or 8
times over, relieving them by other supplies, marching up into their ground.
And may after face the Reer-divisions about, and fire them to Front and Rear on
the same ground they stand, there being sufficient intervalls for their
wheeling off in the Rear of themselves. And after several firings in this
kind, the Pikes may charge on; but before they begin their firings, the Pikes
must close into the midst to order, and Musketeers to close their Pikes to
open order, and every Division to preserve so much ground betwixt each other
for their conveniencie, that after firing they may wheel off.

Now if you will fire, or skirmish the one with the other, then draw off the
Rear, or second grand Division, and move them away, and draw them up in
opposition 100 foot distance of ground betwixt each Front, and let the
Lieutenant-Colonels Company be drawn up upon the right, and the Majors upon the
left of that grand Division, that it may carry some answerableness with that of
the Colonels. The Musketeers having six foot interval of ground betwixt each
other before they begin to fire, they may continue their firings of this
nature, as long as they please, and the Pikes may after charge on to such
convenient distance, as that they come not within three Pikes length one of
another, for avoiding doing hurt the one to the other, the Musketeers still
continuing their firing, and falling in the Rear of themselves; and when they
come within distance, not to present above knee-height, for the abovenamed
reasons. Now the Soldiers being almost tired, and all their Powder spent, and
retreating from each other, that side which falls out to be strongest, (as
being the Colonels grand Division or party) may beat a parley, to invite the
weaker to come in to mercy, offering them all fair Quarter, provided they
timely and presently receive it, and that they will cheerfully and willingly go
along with them, and never any more revolt, but be on their side, to fight with
them upon all just occasions, as shall be required. After which, the
Lieutenant Colonel yiedling, they may wheel about, and march into the same
ground from whence they were first drawn forth, and be reduced to the same
order and condition as they were before they began to skirmish. And thus much
shall suffice concerning the ordinary plain way of exercising of Regiments: but
those that shall desire a little more curiosity, they may observe such
Exercises as in the next place shall be set forth unto them.

CHAP. VIII. A second way of exercising Regiments of the same number of men.
THe first grand Division being in the Front, and clear of the second 12 paces,
every five Files being 18 foot of ground a part from each other, and at their
distance of order, both in Rank and File, in their own particular divisions, as
was mentioned in Folio 146. comes in this place to be set forth to their view.
And having past over some of the distances to bring them to this Station, in
standing in 24 Maniples, or Divisions, the next thing that I shall show for
Exercise, shall be four several Figures of Battle, branched from thence, by
proper words of Command, with their reducement.

formation

Command. Divisions of Musketeers face outward; Pikes and Musketeers march
all twelve paces and stand; to your Leader. The two middle Divisions of Pikes
and Musketeers in the Rear next the Flanks, face about; outmost Divisions of
Pikes and Musketeers in Front and Rear, face outward; march all four paces,
and stand. Again, let the outmost Divisions of Pikes and Musketeers face about
to the right, then march all three paces; then stand, and face to their Leader,
it produces the first Figure.

formation

Each of the former Divisions containing five Files apiece, excepting the
outmost Division of Pikes upon the right in Front and Rear, and they contain
six Files in each of them.

Command. Divisions of Musketeers face outward; Pikes face about to the right;
march all, until the Pikes range even with the Rear; then face to their Leader,
occasioneth the next.

formation

Command. The four last Divisions of each Arms in the midst, face about; the
six outmost Divisions of each Arms face outward; the two middle Divisions of
Pikes in the Front face about: march all four paces, and stand; then face the
six outmost divisions about to the right, and the four middle Divisions of
Pikes about to the left; then march all four paces, and face to their Leader.

formation

Command. The two next Divisions of Pikes in the midst from the Rear, face
about; middle Divisions of Pikes move forward six foot before the Front and
Rear; to your Leader.

formation

Reducement. The twelve last Divisions face about; then set every Division
march forward, until they range even abrest with the Front and Rear, and face
to their Leader; then let the Reer-divisions move forward within eighteen foot
of the Front-divisions, and they will be in two grand Divisions, the one in the
Rear of the other, as at first when they began their facings.

Having past over part of the Distances and Facings, the next which in order
falls to be handled is Doublings; and having by command gained eighteen foot
distance betwixt every five Files, if in their former motions they should
chance to lose it, you may then proceed to Doublings by way of Divisions, as
shall be in the next place set down.

CHAP. IX. Doublings belonging to a Regiment.
Command. DIvisions, double to the right File-wise.

Direction. Every even Division from the Front face to the right, and march
down clear until you stand straight with the next Interval; then face to the
left, and move in, and double those Divisions on the right File-wise; to your
Leader.

Command. Divisions double to the right Rankwise.

Direction. Every even Division from the Front face to the right, and march
forward six paces; then face to the Front, and move forward, and double your
Divisions to the right.

Command. Divisions double the Length of the Battle to the right and left
outward.

Direction. The 12 last Divisions face outward, and march clear of the standing
part; face to your Leader; move up all even abrest, and double according to
command.

Command. The 12 inmost Divisions double the six outmost to the right and left
outward, advancing.

Direction. The 12 middle Divisions advance forward until you be six foot clear
of the standing part; then face outward, and march until you stand straight
before the six outmost; face to your Leader: and after face inward, and move
forward, until they stand again unto eighteen foot distance from each other; to
your Leader.

Command. Divisions, double the Depth of the Battle to the right.

Direction. Every even Division from the right, face about to the right, and
move down eighteen foot clear of the Rear; face to the left, and move until you
stand straight with those Divisions on the right which you are to double; to
your Leader.

Command. The 12 last Divisions in the Rear, double the Front to the right.

Direction. The 12 last Divisions face to the right, and move six paces; then
face to the left; march forward, and double the Front to the right, and they
will be reduced.

CHAP. X. Four several Wheelings, with their Reducement.
Command. DIvisions wheel about to the right, and move down into the Rear.

Direction. Front-divisions wheel about to the right, and move down into the
Rear; the rest march up into the same ground, wheeling to the right hand, and
following successively; after face to your Leader.

Command. Divisions wheel about to the right to the left Flank.

Direction. Face to the right, and the outmost Divisions wheel about to the
right, and march away unto the place of the left Flank, the rest moving up into
the same ground, wheeling about to the right, and following accordingly; to
your Leader.

Command. Divisions wheel about to the right from the Rear into the Front.

Direction. Face to the Rear, and let the first Divisions wheel about to the
right, and move up into the Front, the rest marching forward into their ground,
wheeling off, and following in like manner.

Command. Divisions wheel about to the right, to the right Flank.

Direction. Face all to the left, and let the outmost Divisions wheel about to
the right, and move forward to the right Flank, the rest marching up into their
ground, following after in the same kind, reduces them.

CHAP. XI. Countermarches not fit to be used in the Exercising of Regiments.
IT might be expected after Doublings, that I should show some kinds of
Countermarches amongst the Military Motions, in the exercise of a Regiment; but
being of very little use or practice amongst Commanders in these times,
especially in such great Bodies; and for my own part, I fancy them not,
therefore have passed them over, and pitched upon such wheelings, which by some
are accounted Countermarches. Whose judgments my desire is better to inform by
these several reasons following, wherein, and in what kind they differ from
them. As thus: by these wheelings, they keep their distance in Rank and File
unto Order, and wheeling entire unto any hand down to the Rear, cannot be
performed but by gaining in the Motion before the Front, and unto all places as
they move, so much ground as is the Length of their particular Divisions; and
in the execution thereof, they still preserve the honor of the right and
left-hand-file-leaders, and all others as are concerned in their particular
Divisions, unto any accidental Front which they shall be brought unto. Now
concerning Countermarches, they are to be performed either by single Files,
Ranks, Half-files, or Half-ranks, and at their distance of Open Order, their
words of Command having relation to all these particulars. Their
Countermarching of Files to the Rear gains no ground before the Front in the
Motion, but only the room of one particular File upon the right; it preserves
not the honor of the right and left-hand-file-leader at one time by any one
word of Command formation unto any of their Motions to such accidental Fronts
they shall make, but ever loses it to some, and gives it to others. And
therefore it may appear clearly unto any ingenious capacity, that the former
Wheelings cannot be accounted, or given in their Motions in that kind to the
Soldiers for Counter-marches, but by such terms as in their place are set
down. In the next place, I shall speak something of the great benefit or use
that may be made of these sorts of Wheelings: as first, a Commander may use
them in the Motions of Doublings to Front, Rear, right-flank, or left, or
double either the length or depth of the Battle unto all needful places, as
occasion shall require; which I shall forbear to set down, but leave them to
the discretion of the ingenious Soldiers practice, when time and opportunity
shall serve him to make use of them. In the next place, they are very necessary
to draw off any part, and to bring them unto such needful places for Service,
as are in eminent danger. Therefore passing over for present what might be more
spoken of in this kind, I come in the next place to show one Figure of Battle
to fire upon; and then conclude my Exercise upon this Regiment, and go on unto
the rest.

Command. Pikes, close Files to the right to Order; then let them in the Rear
double their Front to the left entire: Musketeers, advance forward until your
Front-divisions exceed six foot the Front of Pikes; the two inmost Divisions of
Musketeers in the Front, move forward 20 paces, and close inward to open
Order; the two inmost Divisions of Musketeers in the Rear, face about, and
move down six paces, and close inward to open Order; to your Leader:
Musketeers upon the Flanks, close to the Body of Pikes to open Order:
Middle-divisions of Musketeers in the Rear by each Flank, face about;
Middle-divisions of Musketeers by each Flank, move forward six foot clear of
the standing part; face to your Leader, and it will set forth the Figure, as it
stands in Folio 151.

CHAP. XII. Several Firings to be performed upon the former Figure, and how to
be managed by the several Officers.
THe Regiment being drawn up into the former Figure, they may proceed to
Firings upon it; first let the Forlorns fire five or six times over, being
commanded by the eldest Captains Lieutenant, who is to be assisted by a couple
of able Sergeants; after let him wheel them off to the right and left, and
bring them down in the Rear of the Pikes. Then let the second Captains
Lieutenant, being assisted by two Sergeants, lead up the reserves by the
outside of the Pikes, at such time when the Forlorns begin to come off, for the
better securing of them from danger upon their retreat; then let them move
forward to their ground, and give fire in like manner, falling in the Rear of
themselves, and after wheel them off to the right and left, and bring them down
in the Rear of those Musketeers that are behind the Pikes. Then let the Front
and Reer-divisions of Musketeers next the Flanks advance forward 12 paces; the
Musketeers upon the right to be led away by the Captain-Lieutenant, and those
upon the left by the third Captain, being assisted by four Sergeants apiece;
let them fire the first Divisions some six or eight times over, falling in the
Rear of themselves; then wheel them off to the right and left into the ground
of those Divisions that follow them; and facing again to their Front; then let
the Reer-divisions advance forward into their places, and give fire in like
manner to the former: which being ended, let those four divisions be led down
into their first places. Then let the next eight Divisions by the Pikes advance
forward, until they be clear of the standing part; those four Divisions upon
the right, are to be led away by the Majors Lieutenant, and the
Captain-Lieutenants Bringer-up; and those four Divisions upon the left, by the
Lieutenant-Colonels Lieutenant, and the third Captains Lieutenant, assisted by
12 Sergeants; then let them fire some half a score times, the Front-divisions
falling in the Rear of themselves; after wheeling off to the right and left
into the ground of their Reer-divisions, they then moving up into their places,
may fire after the same manner; and having ended, they may be led down all
again into their first places.

Then Command the first Divisions of Musketeers to face about to the right,
and let them and the two last Divisions move forward, and range even abrest
with those that stand before them, and after face all to the Front; then let
the Musketeers face outward, and move 12 paces, and after face again to the
Front; then move up those divisions that were the Forlorn-hope, to the right
and left into the Front, unto their first places; and those that were the
Reserves up even abrest with the Rear, from whence they were taken, after let
them fire in, and even Front altogether, some half a score times over, and fall
in the Rear of themselves; then let the Colonels eldest and second Captains
move forward the Pikes, and charge on if they please, the Colors falling in
the second Rank, being furled up; and after let all order their Arms, and
reduce them into Companies again.

Reducement. Left-half-ranks of Pikes, face about, and move down until you
range even with the Reer-divisions of Musketeers; face to your Leader:
Right-half-ranks of Pikes, advance forward, and range even abrest with the
Front-divisions of Musketeers; Files, close to the left to Order of each grand
Division; then they will stand in two grand Divisions as at first, the one in
the Rear of the other: then draw up the second grand Division, provided there
be room upon the left of the first. Then let a Sergeant of each particular
Company draw off those thirteen Files, which before were taken off to balance
the Divisions into equal number, and were appointed for the guard of the
Ammunition, or Baggage, and bring them to join with their own Arms, where their
Captains Companies stands. Which being done, let every Captain draw off his own
men, being assisted by his Lieutenants and Sergeants, and completing them up
into a Body as at first; his Pikes to be flanked with Musketeers, they may
after march away in single Companies after such manner, unto their several
Quarters, as shall be appointed to them by the Major. And here I shall conclude
concerning a Regiment of six Companies.

CHAP. XIII. The manner of drawing up a Regiment, consisting of seven
Companies, containing in the four Captains, twelve Files of Musketeers, and
six of Pikes, in each of their particular Companies, and in the three
Field-Officers, sixteen Files apiece of Musketeers, and eight of Pikes, which
amounts to the number of 864 men.
IT has been my observation in the City of London, and the Suburbs thereof,
there being eighteen Regiments, nine of the Trained Bands, and nine of the
Auxiliaries, that their Regiments in some have but six Companies; others, and
that for the most part seven; and again in some, and but a few to have eight
Companies. I shall therefore for the better satisfaction of such as remain
unskilled herein, go through them all, partly to show the practice of this our
City in their several drawings up, with the reasons to confirm the same. And
having passed over as much as is convenient, to satisfy any ingenious Soldier
concerning the drawing up of six Companies in a Regimental-way, with the
confirmation and reasons of every particular Officer, as he there stands, it
may in many things give full light to this that follows of seven Companies. Yet
nevertheless, for more fuller satisfaction herein, I shall show the true manner
hereof, that I may not be wanting to any Soldiers benefit that he shall
receive thereby. Where note, for better Order herein, that I have pitched upon a
particular number of men, although it may many times fall out so, that the
Captains Companies, and the Field-Officers cannot be so full as I have here set
down. Or again, it may chance to fall out (as in our Trained Bands of London)
that they be a great deal fuller, as sometimes they are; for I have led a
particular Company my self upon a general day, being drawn into the Filed
consisting of above 300 men. Yet nevertheless, whether the Companies be great
or small, observe this general Rule; make two grand Divisions, and balance
their number equal in both Arms, and make no more Sub-divisions then what you
have Captains to lead, and Lieutenants to bring up; and let the Sergeants march
by the Flanks, and not presume either to lead, or bring up any divisions, being
conceived by most to be very improper. And again, if you fight the Regiment,
let your Musketeers as near as you can be equal alike in their Sub-divisions,
as they may most conveniently fall out, whether four, five, or six abrest, it
makes no great matter, always leaving in time of fight, between such numbers of
Files, six foot of ground interval, for to wheel off their Ranks after they
have fired.

Now, suppose the whole Regiment were marching to their general place of
Randezvous; the Major being there beforehand, attending the Companies coming
in, he Orders to the Colonels Company the most convenient place for their
drawing up; and next to him, the fourth Captains Company upon the left; and
next to him, the third Captain; and after him, the eldest or first Captain,
which makes the first grand Division. In the next place, he orders the
Lieutenant-Colonels Company to be on the left of the whole Regiment, standing
in even Front with the Colonel; upon the right of him, the second Captain is
placed, and after him the Majors own Company, which make up the second grand
Division.

Having thus far proceeded, let the Major command the Pikes and Colors to
advance forward ten paces, before the Front of Musketeers; then let him close
the Pikes of the first four Companies to the right to Order, and the Pikes of
the last to the left to Order, and the like of the Musketeers in the Rear to
those hands, to the same distance; then they will stand in four Divisions; two
of Pikes in the Front, and two of Musketeers in the Rear. In the next place,
let him count how many Files of Pikes there are in each Division, and he will
find in the Colonels Divisions 26 Files, and in the Lieutenant-Colonels but
twenty two. To make these even, he must take off one File apiece from the
youngest Captains, and bring them into the midst of the Lieutenant-Colonels
Division; and then he will make them equal, there being in each grand Division
24 Files of Pikes. The Pikes being made thus equal, let him move down into the
Rear, and examine the Musketeers; where upon the right he will find 52 Files,
and upon the left but 44; to make these even in number, he must take off one
File apiece from the four Companies of the first grand Division, and lead them
away up into the midst of the second; and then there will be in each grand
Division of Musketeers 48 Files apiece. In the next place, let him face them
to the right and left outward, and move them to such convenient distance, as he
may after divide his Musketeers into four Divisions to move up, and flank the
Pikes.

This being performed, he ought appoint unto every Captain and Lieutenant his
place where to lead, and where to bring up, and what men upon all occasions
they are to fight. To which purpose, there being in the first grand Division
four Captains, there must be four places to lead, and four to bring up; and
therefore having their four Colors upon the long March, that Body of Pikes may
be divided into two Divisions, and to march with two Colors in the first
Division of Pikes, which are to be led by the eldest Captain, and brought up by
the Captain-Lieutenants Bringer-up. The second Division of Pikes is to be led
by the fourth Captain, and to be brought up by the eldest Captain-Lieutenant.
The Reer-guard of Musketeers in this grand Division, is to be led by the third
Captain, and to be brought up by his Lieutenant; who upon the long March, his
Captain if he pleases, may exchange places, being more honor to him to be
there to bring up, then to lead that Division, as has been formerly expressed.
As concerning the Captain-Lieutenant, his place is to be fixed according as in
the Figure to lead the first Division of Musketeers, and to be brought up by
the fourth Captains Lieutenant: but at such time when they are drawn up all
abrest, they are to take their places as at first fixed, both in their leading
and bringing-up, as shall be set forth in the following Figure, with all their
several places appointed thereunto. As concerning all the rest, they are placed
in manner as was showed in my discourse of a Regiment consisting of six
Companies.

But here it may be objected, that in the first grand Division I have placed
the Colonel, eldest Captain, third and fourth, and by casting up their number
of dignity, we find it to amount unto 18; and in the second grand Division,
the Lieutenant Colonel, Major and second Captain, whose number amounts but to
ten. Here we find (say they) a great deal of difference and alteration, your
intentions principally tending to make them equal in dignity; for certainly,
where the greater number is, there is the lesser dignity; and therefore a wrong
unto that part where ever it so falls out.

To which I answer, Where there is no just exceptions to be made to the
contrary, the former Rule ought ever to be preserved in the keeping an equal
balance of the number of dignity; but herein it does not: For the Colonel
ought always to have placed in his Division the eldest Captain, who is to lead
his Colors, and the first Body of Pikes, which is the first place of honor
among the Captains: And in the second place, the Majors Company is always drawn
up upon the outmost part, on the right of the Lieutenant-Colonels grand
Division, to carry an equal proportion of number, they being the second and
third worth unto that of the first or fourth, as is in the Colonels. In the
next place, the second Captains turn comes to be regarded, who by the same
Rule, as the eldest Captain lays claim to carry the first honor, by leading
the first Body of Pikes, and the Colonels Colors; so the second Captain cannot
expect any other, but to be placed to lead the second Body of Pikes, and the
Lieutenant-Colonels Colors. Now there being an odd Captain, he must be either
placed upon the right or left; he is therefore thought in discretion to be
rather placed with the Colonel in his Division, that his Colors may there
fly, marching four together, being far more honorable and graceful then that
of three, as in the Lieutenant-Colonels; and therefore where there is an honor
in that kind which cannot be divided, it is very fit and requisite to place
and fix it with him that is the Commander in chief. As for number of men, both
Divisions are equal alike; and therefore, I conceive, what has been spoken may
take off all objections of this nature.

And now according to my promise, I shall set forth the manner of the standing
of seven Companies in a Regimental way, with all the several places of honor
appointed forth unto them, either marching, or standing all even abrest: If
they be upon the long march, they are to observe that manner set down in six
Companies, only to mind that alteration before expressed: the Figure of their
drawing up, and the Officers stated in their proper places, follows in Folio
156.

From which Figure I shall draw up another, placing the Soldiers in Battalia,
which may be useful for them to fight-upon.

Command. Pikes in both Divisions, face inward, inmost Divisions of Musketeers
face outward, march, and interchange ground with other; face to your Leader.
The four inmost Files of Musketeers next the Pikes, Let them be at open Order
in their Ranks and Files, and the two grand Divisions standing in one even
Front together.
face about, and march six foot clear from the Pikes, and stand; then close
their Files to the right and left to Order, in their own particular divisions;
then face inward, and march all together, until they stand six foot clear of
each other; face to your Leader. The next five Files of Musketeers in each
side of Pikes, advance 18 foot before the Front; then close their Files into
the midst to Order, and Ranks forward to Order; Pikes, close your Ranks forward
to Order, and Files into the midst to Order: every five Files of Musketeers
close inward to Order, and Ranks forward to Order; then face to the Pikes, and
march forward, being betwixt every five Files of Musketeers six foot of ground
distance each from other, and the same distance from the Body, of Pikes; face
all to your Leader. The 12 outmost Files of Pikes and Musketeers, advance
forward six foot clear of the standing part; then move forward the three
outmost divisions of Musketeers 12 paces; then face them inward, and move them
until they stand straight before the five remaining divisions; face all to your
Leader. The middle-division of Musketeers of those three taken off before from
each Flank, move forward six foot clear of the standing part; the three
middlemost divisions of the five remaining upon each Flank, move up until you
stand six foot short of the divisions which are before you; the two outmost
divisions of the last three that moved, face outward, and march six foot clear
of the former divisions between them: The two remaining divisions by the
outside of Pikes move inward, until you stand straight in the Rear with the two
Front-divisions, facing all to their Leader, they will stand as is set forth
unto your view in Folio 156.

Notwithstanding the former directions of drawing forth the Figure, make this
alteration; wheel off the first two divisions of Musketeers before the Pikes,
and place them six foot behind the Rear of those upon the Flanks, and before
you reduce them, carry them into their first places.

In this Figure you have Forlorns, aptly standing to the Wings and main Body of
Pikes, with Reserves to them all, so that I shall not need to trouble my self
for to describe what firings might be here performed upon the same, they lying
so apparent to the view; the divisions being clear each of other, any ingenious
Commander may fire them according unto his own best discretion, continuing the
same as long as he shall think fitting; and therefore passing it by, and
leaving it to their own liberty, I come in the next place to reduce them again
into private Companies.

Reducement. Pikes of the main Body, advance forward, and range even abrest
with the Pikes before you; the two last divisions of Musketeers in the Rear
move up, and Flank the Pikes; the two divisions of Musketeers before the
Front, face about, and move down upon the right and left of the other two
divisions of Musketeers; to your Leader. The two last divisions of Musketeers
in the Rear of the Flanks, advance forward to the right and left, and range
even abrest on the outside of those three divisions that stands before you:
Single divisions of Musketeers in the Front of each Wing, face about, and move
down even abrest with the Rear of the next divisions. The eight divisions of
Musketeers upon each Wing, face about; the five first Divisions move down, and
range even abrest with the Rear; the three last move to the right, and left
outward, until you be clear of the rest; face to the Rear, and move down in
like manner, and Rank even with the rest; after face all to the Front, and they
will all stand in one even Front. Next command the Pikes to face outward, and
the five inmost divisions of Musketeers in each Flank, face inward; then march
and interchange ground each with other, and face to their Leader; they will
stand again in two grand Divisions all even abrest in the Front. In the next
place, let those six Files be taken off by the Sergeants of their own Companies
from the two grand Divisisions, and be brought into their first places. After
the Major may give order to every Captain to draw off his men, and put them
into Companies again, which is easily done; after the Regiment may be ordered
to march home in single Companies, either by succession or dignity, which he
pleases. And here I shall conclude concerning a Regiment of several Companies.

formation

formation

CHAP. XIV. The manner of drawing up and placing the Officers of a Regiment
consisting of eight Companies, having in it a Colonel, a Lieutenant Colonel, a
Major, and five Captains: their number of men in each Company, being equal with
the former Regiment, they amount unto 972 men.
IT concerns a Major (provided he have room enough) to draw up every Company
even abrest, and to give unto every Captain his due place of honor; after
which, he may proceed to order them in a regimental way. Wherefore, briefly
thus; observe the manner of the Dignity of every Captain, how they ought to be
placed, first the Colonels Company being drawn up in its convenient place; next
to him upon the left stands the third Captain; and next to him the fourth; and
the next that follows is the eldest: these four Captains being drawn up after
this manner, makes the first grand Division; and therefore I shall endeavor to
give Reasons for to confirm this, before I shall proceed upon the second, as
being the right half-ranks, which ought to carry an equal proportion of Worth,
Honor, and Dignity with that of the last. Where, first, take notice, that the
Colonel being the most worthiest man, is placed upon the right, and is the
first place of Honor; and the outmost upon the left is the eldest Captain,
which is the fourth Worth, there being the Colonel, Lieutenant Colonel, and
Major above him: now consider that the first and fourth Worth makes the number
five; betwixt these two is drawn up the third and fourth Captains, which are
the sixth and seventh Worth, whose number carries 13; add them to that number
above, and it makes 18. In the next place, since it is the judgment of most
Soldiers, that there should be an equal proportion of Skill, Valor, and
Worth, the Reer-half-files answerable to them of the Front: so likewise the
same rule is to be observed between the right and left half-ranks; That whether
we consider the Front-divisions, or Rear, right or left half-ranks, they may be
so balanced in every kind of respect, with true proportion; so near as the
knowledge of the Soldiers, and number of men will give leave. To which
purpose, I will proceed to draw up the second grand Division, and compare it to
the first; The Lieutenant-Colonels Company being drawn up upon the left of the
whole Regiment; upon his right, is the second Captain drawn up; and next to him
the fifth Captain; after, the Major upon the right of the Lieutenant-Colonels
Division. Now, if we consider, the Lieutenant Colonel he is the second man of
Honor, and therefore ought to be upon the outmost part of the Front on the
left, when the Companies are marching all even abrest; but upon the Long-march
he is to fall down into the Rear; the outmost upon the right of his Division is
the Majors Company placed, and he is the third man of Honor. Now the third
Worth and second will carry equal balance of number with that of the first and
fourth: and so have I set forth the four first places of Honor, which, I
suppose, no knowing Soldier can deny. Betwixt the second and third Worth is
drawn up the second Captain and fifth; the second Captain is the fifth Worth,
and the fifth Captain is the eighth, which makes the number 13, and will carry
an equal weight of number with those in the midst of the first and fourth
Worth. Now having stated the several Worths of the second grand Division, being
compared together, makes a like number of 18 unto that of the first Division.
And to take off all Objections that might be made concerning the second Captain
and fifth, why they should not rather be placed in the first Division, then in
the second, because it has been held by the opinion of some, it should be so,
but never any substantial reason to be given for the same: Therefore, unto this
I shall say, that they ought to be there where I have placed them, in respect
of what I have formerly said, that as it is the first place of Honor amongst
the Captains to lead the first Body of Pikes, where the Colonels Colors does
fly, and to make them of the second Division equal in number with the first;
the youngest Captain, which is the eighth Worth, is brought in, and joined to
the second Captain, who is the fifth, and therefore a File or a Rank ought to
be set forth in Dignity after this manner, in respect 2585 4761 18 18 there is
no truer stating the Dignity of a single File or Rank, then that which shall
conform to greater Bodies, as that of Regiments. And thus much briefly shall
suffice to be spoken concerning the second grand Division, for the placing the
second and fifth Captains betwixt the Lieutenant Colonel and the Majors, in
respect the second Captain stands very aptly there to receive his proper place,
and the youngest Captain is brought in to balance their Dignities unto that of
the first.

In the next place, I shall show how they ought to be drawn up in a Regimental
way: being all even abrest as before, command Musketeers to face about, and to
march down 12 foot clear of the Rear, then face to the Front, after close Files
outward to Order of each Arms, then subdivide each Division of Musketeers, and
move them up to flank each Body of Pikes. And having accounted and cast up the
number of Files of each Arms in each grand Division, you will find the
Colonels Division to have in it 26 Files of Pikes, and 52 Files of Musketeers;
next the Lieutenant-Colonels Division being examined, you will find that to
have in it 28 Files of Pikes, and 56 Files of Musketeers. Now to make these
equal in number, there must be taken forth one File of Pikes, and two of
Musketeers from the second grand Division, and place one a piece in the midst
of the first Division, in every one of their particular Divisions, and they
will contain equal alike in each grand Division 27 Files of Pikes, and 54 Files
of Musketeers. In the next place, the Major may assign unto every Captain and
Lieutenant where his place shall be to lead, and where to bring up; the Colonel
being upon the head of his Division, and the Lieutenant Colonel upon the head
of the second grand Division, the Major in the Front betwixt them both, or
where else he pleases, being an Officer always to act through the whole
Regiment. And in the first place he appoints the Captain-Lieutenant to be on
the head of the first Division of Musketeers, and to be brought up with the
fourth Captains Lieutenant; next he orders the eldest Captain to be on the head
of the first Division of Pikes, and to be brought up by the Captain-Lieutenants
Bringer-up; and the fourth Captain to be on the head of the second division of
Pikes, and to be brought up by the eldest Captains Lieutenant; and the second
division of Musketeers he appoints unto the third Captain, and to be brought
up by his own Lieutenant; and upon the Long-march, let him and his Captain
change places until such time they shall draw up again. After he orders his own
Lieutenant to be on the head of the third division of Musketeers; and the
third division of Pikes he appoints to the fifth Captain, and to be brought up
by his own Lieutenant; the fourth Division of Pikes is ordered to be the second
Captains place, and brought up by his own Lieutenant; the Lieutenant-Colonels
Lieutenant is appointed to the fourth and last division of Musketeers, the
Lieutenant Colonel upon the Long-march bringing up the whole Regiment. It might
be supposed the Captain-Lieutenant, Lieutenant-Colonels and Majors Lieutenants
have too great places of Honor: but to answer them all, their Captains being
Field-Officers, and upon several occasions moving off, their Lieutenants do
officiate there in their rooms, and are but as assistants unto them; for
likewise upon several occasions they come to those places themselves to lead,
marching there before their Lieutenants. As concerning the placing of all the
rest of the other Officers, they lie clearly, for as much as formerly has been
spoken in their proper places, without (as I conceive) the exceptions of any.

Secondly, upon the Long-march the Colonel draws off the first Division of
Musketeers, and leads them, marching some 12 foot before his
Captain-Lieutenant; and that division is brought up by the fourth Captains
Lieutenant, the Colors marching two and two upon every division, whereof the
first is drawn off and led by the first Captain, and brought up by the
Captain-Lieutenants Bringer-up; the next division of Pikes falling in the Rear
of the first, and led by the fourth Captain, and brought upon the first Captains
Lieutenant; the second division of Musketeers is led by the: ^ird Captains
Lieutenant, and brought up by his own Captain; the fourth or first division of
Musketeers in the second grand Division is led by the Major, when he pleases,
some 12 foot before his own Lieutenant; and the third Division of Pikes is led
by the fifth Captain, and brought up by his own Lieutenant; the fourth and last
division of Pikes is led by the second Captain, and brought up by his own
Lieutenant; the fourth and last Division of Musketeers is led by the
Lieutenant-Colonels Lieutenant, the Rear of the whole Regiment being brought up
by the Lieutenant Colonel. Thus every Division is to march by succession, the
one in the Rear of another, keeping eighteen foot distance betwixt every
Division, until they shall have room to march all even abrest, and then with
very little alteration with the third Captain, changing places, with his own
Lieutenant, they are all to take their places again, as at first.

Having now set forth the true Dignity of every Captains and Lieutenants place,
what men they shall take charge on to fight, where to lead, and where to bring
up; I shall spare the Figure in respect I shall show (with very little
alteration) the manner of drawing up and marching of diverse Regiments that were
under the command of the late Earl of Essex.

The first grand Division in respect of every Officer and place, is to be
ordered as the former; only in the second, there will be this small alteration,
the Lieutenant-Colonels Company and the Majors are to enterchange places, the
rest are to remain as they were, only with this alteration following; the
Lieutenant-Colonels Lieutenant is to lead the first Division of Musketeers,
until such time that his Lieutenant Colonel shall come unto that place; and
then he is to bring up that Division being near at hand, that if his
Lieutenant Colonel should upon some just occasions be called off, he may
immediately move up, and lead there in his absence. For upon the Long-march, as
the Colonel leads the first grand Division, so it is conceived by some, (they
marching in two grand Divisions some twenty paces distance from each other in
manner of two regimental Marchings) that the Lieutenant Colonel ought to lead
the second. Next, let the First Division of Pikes be led by the second Captain,
and to be brought up by the fifth Captains Lieutenant; and the second Division
of Pikes to be led by the fifth Captain, and brought up by the second Captains
Lieutenant; the last Division of Musketeers to be led by the Majors
Lieutenant, and the Rear of the second grant Division being left for the Major
to bring up, at such time as with convenience he may be spared. Therefore, to
march thus, it being a very good way, and with very little alteration to be
made, I was unwilling to pass it by, leaving it to the discretion of every
ingenious Soldier, to make use of which way he best pleases, or likes of,
whilst I in the next place shall set forth the Figure, which follows in page
161; affording more variety in the same.

CHAP. XV. How to make the Figure of a Ring, with its use and service.
THe way to make this Figure in the most readiest manner, is to be performed
after this kind; both the grand Divisions standing all abrest in even Front:
First move forward all the Musketeers some ten foot clear of the Pikes, after
let them close Files both of Musketeers and Pikes into the midst to Order;
then they will stand in two Divisions, one of Musketeers, and in the Rear of
them, one of of Pikes: then open the Files outward to open Order of each Arms,
and after let them double the Front to the left of both Arms by Bringers-up,
and they will be but three deep of each Arms, having in the Fronts the best
Soldiers; then command them to face all to the right, then wheel them about
still to the right of both Arms, the Pikes wheeling all in the inside of the
Musketeers, until you have brought them into two Rings; provided thus, that
you close your Rings unto that place which was your first Front; then face them
all to the center, and after face them about to the right, and they will be
then faced round, and stand suitable to the following Figure, page 163. And to
have it in two Rings, formation Place this Figure betwixt Fol. 160 and 161.
the one of Musketeers, the other of Pikes, some ten foot short on the inside
of them. And by reason it cannot be well otherwise, in respect there are as
many Musketeers again as there are Pikes, and the Officers following the
Soldiers in their places formerly fixed in this Motion, will also naturally
stand in manner and form as is set down in the Figure.

But, methinks, I hear some say, Of what use or service upon any occasion may
this Ring be unto the Soldier? To whom I answer, that it is one of the most
serviceable Figures that can be made, to secure the Soldier from danger
against the furious charge of Horse in Campania; the accomplishing, or making
of it up, being easily and suddenly performed, the Musketeers having
Pallizadoes, may advance three or four paces, and stick them down in such
manner, as they may keep the Horse from breaking in among them. And after, if
they should be charged round, they may give fire over them against their
enemies, and fall in the Rear of themselves; yet nevertheless, if the Horse
should be undaunted, and attempt to come on again, they may resist them with a
more desperate charge after this manner, bringing all hands to fight, and to
pour out their shot, or to fire altogether after this kind. Command first the
Pikes to move forward, until they be three foot behind the Musketeers, then
let every File rank to the right, which will make them to stand but one abrest
in one single Ring behind the Musketeers. Now that all hands may be brought to
fight together, command the first Rank of Musketeers to kneel down, the second
stoop, and the third stand upright; then let all close forward to close Order,
and let the Pikes, as occasion shall require, charge betwixt the Musketeers,
who may fire altogether, and the Pikes may charge on whilst the Musketeers
make ready again. The Pallizadoes formerly stuck, keeping off the Horse from
breaking in upon them, they may fire after this manner, as often as they
please. And so much may suffice to be spoken concerning the service and use
that may be made of it in time of fight; and now in the next place I come to
reduce them into Companies again as at first.

Let the Pikes that ranked to the right, file three to the left as they were,
and let the Bringers-up that doubled face about to the right, and march forth
into their places. Then let the Major come to that place where he closed the
Ring, and brake it off, wheeling them all along about to the left, until he
has brought them to stand in one even Front as at first; the same in like
manner to be performed of the Pikes, and to stand in the Rear of the
Musketeers. Next, let the Musketeers and Pikes face outward, and move to such
convenient distance, that after the Musketeers may be subdivided again, and
the Pikes move up, and double their Front inward entire in each grand Division.
Which being brought into that form, each Captain may draw off his men, being so
commanded by the Major, and complete up his Company again, and be after
disposed of to farther duty, or to march home to their Quarters according to
command. And here I shall conclude this Regiment of eight Companies.

formation

CHAP. XVIII. The manner of drawing up a Regiment consisting of ten Companies,
having in it seven Captains, and three Field-Officers, being in each particular
Company the former numbers, which in all amounts unto 1198 men.
THe Major having ground sufficient for the drawing up the Regiment, after the
Colonels Company has made Alt, next to him upon the left he draws up the
youngest Captain, which is the tenth; and the next to him the third Captain,
which is the sixth; after that the fourth Captain, which is the seventh; then
the first Captain, which is the fourth: then the Majors, which is the third;
next to him the fifth Captain, which is the eighth; and after that the second
Captain, which is the fifth; then the sixth Captain, which is the ninth. All
these being drawn up upon the left of the Colonels Company, the closier of all
upon the left, is the Lieutenant-Colonels Company, whose figure carries the
number 2. Place now all these numbers of Dignity according to the former
Figures, and they will stand as follows in a Rank.

2:9:5:8:3. 4:7:6:10:1. 27 28.

In the next place compare the Dignity of the right Half-ranks with the left,
and they are balanced as near as can be possible to be equal, there being one
odd, which of necessity must be cast upon the right Half-ranks, for the reasons
formerly expressed, in placing the second Captain into the Lieutenant-Colonels
Division. Then according to the former rule, draw forth the Pikes, and ingross
them into two Bodies, and the like of the Musketeers; after sub-divide the
Musketeers, and make them four divisions, and move them up to flank the Pikes,
and then they will be in two complete grand Divisions. In the next place, let
the Major order forth unto the Captains and Lieutenants their several places to
lead and to bring up, after this manner. There being two grand Divisions,
having in them five Captains, and five Lieutenants, it will be necessary to
appoint our five several Charges in the first grand Division to lead, and five
to bring up, after this manner. As first, divide the Vanguard into two
Divisions, the first to be led by the Captain-Lieutenant, and brought up by his
Bringer-up: the second Division of Musketeers in the Van to be led by the
third Captains Lieutenant, and to be brought up by the fourth Captains
Lieutenant. The first division of Pikes is to have the three first Colors to
fly upon the head of them, and to be led by the eldest Captain, and brought up
by the seventh Captains Lieutenant: the next division of Pikes to be led by the
fourth Captain, having his own and the eldest Captains Colors flying upon the
head of them, and to be brought up by the seventh, or youngest Captain in the
Regiment: the Reer-guard of Musketeers of the first grand Division to be led
by the third Captain, and brought up by the eldest Captains Lieutenant, who
upon the Long-march these two are to inter-change places if the third Captain
desire it, and having such permission from the Major, being more honor to
bring up, then to lead, as was said before in the former Regiments.

Next follows the placing of the Officers in the second grand Division: let the
Vanguard of Musketeers there be led by the Majors Lieutenant, or by himself
when he pleases, and be brought up by the fifth Captains Lieutenant: next let
the first Division of Pikes be led by the fifth Captain; having two Colors
flying in the head of them, the Majors, and his own, and to be brought up by
the sixth Captains Lieutenant: let the next Division of Pikes be led by the
second Captain, having three Colors flying on the head of them, the
Lieutenant-Colonels, his own, and the sixth Captains, and let that be brought
up by the second Captains Lieutenant: let the last Division of Musketeers be
led by the sixth Captain, and brought up by the Lieutenant-Colonels Lieutenant;
the Lieutenant Colonel upon the Long-march bringing up the Rear of the
Regiment, some 12 foot behind his own Lieutenant.

I shall in the next place show the Reasons for the thus placing of the
Officers, where first I shall endeavor to clear the first grand Division,
which will occasion the second to be more easily resolved. Where briefly thus,
as concerning the Colonel, eldest Captain, third Captain, and
Captain-Lieutenant, I shall pass them over, having formerly spoken sufficient
to satisfy any Soldier therein. It follows therefore to speak of the fourth
Captains place, which is the next man of Honor after the former, and therefore
is placed to lead the second Division of Pikes, which is more honor to him to
lead there, then to lead a sub-division of Musketeers. In the Vanguard next
to him in Honor in this Division, is the seventh Captain, who is appointed to
bring up the first grand Body of Pikes, which likewise is more Honor unto him,
then to lead or bring up any sub-division of Musketeers; as before expressed.
Having thus resolved of all the Captains, and Captain-Lieutenants place, next
follows the reasons of the Lieutenants places; where first take notice that the
eldest Captains Lieutenant is appointed to bring up the Reer-guard, which next
the Pikes is the greatest place of honor in the rear, and a very honorable
place unto him; or if he alters places with the third Captain upon the
Long-march, yet nevertheless he has the chiefest place of honor after the
Capt. Lieut. amongst all the Lieutenants unto those places he is ordered unto.
The third Captains Lieutenant is assigned to the next place, who leads the
second Division of Musketeers in the Vanguard, which is more honor to him
then to bring up any such Division; after follows him the fourth Captains
Lieutenant, who brings up the Rear of the Vanguard, which is more honor to
him, of the places remaining, to be there, then to bring up either the first
Division of Musketeers, or the first Division of Pikes. Lastly, the seventh
Captains Lieutenant is placed to bring up the first Division of Pikes, which
being the more honorable Arms, it adds more honor to him to be there to bring
up, then the first Division of Musketeers, which being the last place of
honor, it is given to the Captain-Lieutenants Bringer-up to be there. And thus
much shall suffice for the reasons of the places of the first grand Division.

Now for placing of the Officers of the second grand Division, I shall not need
to speak any thing concerning the Lieutenant-Colonels Major, Second Captain,
and the Majors Lieutenants place, in regard in the former Regiments I have
endeavored to give the Soldier satisfaction therein. Therefore next to those
in this grand Division follows to be spoken is the fifth Captain, who is the
next man of honor, and therefore has his due place appointed out to him to
lead the first division of Pikes, where the Majors and his own Colors fly,
which is more honor to him to lead there the Van of the Pikes, then the
Reer-guard of Musketeers. Next to him is the sixth Captain, which next the
Pikes has his due place of honor remaining to him to lead the Reer-guard.
Having thus resolved the Captains places, I shall in the next endeavor to show
the Lieutenants, where first it falls to the Lieut. Colonels Lieutenant to be
placed first, who is ordered to bring up the Rear, to be an assistant unto his
Lieut. Colonel, who is a Field-Officer, and may have many occasions to fall
off, and therefore he requires his Lieutenant to be present with his men there,
as the Colonels does his in the Front. And as much may be said of the Majors
Lieutenant, but passing him by, I come next to the second Captains Lieutenant,
who is appointed to bring up the Rear of the second Body of Pikes, which is the
greatest place of honor that is in the Rear next to the Lieu. Colonels
Lieutenant. After him follows the fifth Captains Lieutenant, who is placed to
bring up the Rear of the Vanguard of this division, which is more honor then
to bring up the Van of the Pikes, whose turn being the last place of honor,
falls to him that is the youngest Lieutenant, which is the sixth Captains
Lieutenant.:

And thus as briefly as I could I have run over all the reasons for the placing
of the Officers in the Regiment drawn up after this manner, that I might not be
wanting unto the desire of any such who are willing to be informed therein,
being always ready to employ my self in as plain a way as I can for the benefit
of all true loving Soldiers, who are concerned herein. And therefore, for
their better satisfaction, let them cast their eye upon the Figure, as it is
demonstrated between Folio 161 and 162, where they shall see every man placed
according to my former Discourse.

CHAP. XVII. The manner both of the drawing up, and the order of the Long-march
of Colonel Rainsborough his Regiment, bringing up the Rear of the Foot of the
Army under the Command of the Lord General Fairfax, at their first marching
through the City of London, on the seventh of August, 1647.
THe first order of drawing up the Regiment at their first place of Randevous,
before they marched or joined with the Army, was thus: The Colonels Company
being upon the out-most part of the right of the Regiment; next to his left by
succession was drawn up the second, sixth, fifth, and first Captain, which make
up his Division, or the right Half-ranks in their first drawing up to be
complete, and may in their Figure of Dignity standing in a rank be demonstrated
as follows, 4:8:9:5:1: This number of Worth being cast up, amounts to 27.
And thus much for the Colonels Division.

Now for the left Half-ranks, or Lieutenant-Colonels Division, (as many times
it is so ordered and appointed) his own Company being drawn up upon the outmost
part on the left of the Regiment; and next to his right after each other is
drawn up the third, seventh, fourth, and Majors Company; whose Figure of
Dignity standing Rank-wise, may be thus described, 2:6:10:7:3: and their number
of Dignity in all amounts to 28. Where you may perceive a rule that the
Discretion of the Major walks by, in the drawing up of the Regiment, to
balance with as near proportion as he can the Number, Worth, and Dignity of
his right Half-ranks, or right Flank, suitable with that of the left. For it
would be unreasonable that all the best men should be on the right, and that
the left of the Regiment who are to oppose the Enemies right should have the
weakest or meanest men of Worth: therefore without all question, that Body of
men that shall be drawn up so as to make all parts of equal Worth, and
Strength, as the right Flank with the left, the Front with the Rear, so that
wherever the Enemy shall fall on to charge any one of these parts, being all
made equal in Strength, and Worth, it must needs prevent all murmuring
complaints, and carry best approbation to all knowing Commanders. And thus much
briefly may be spoken in the commendation of the ordring of his Regiment thus
far.

The Captains now standing by their own Colors, on the head of the Pikes, and
their Companies being drawn up all, and standing in an even Front, the Major
next commands the Musketeers to stand, the Pikes and Colors to troop forth
some ten or twelve paces clear of the Musketeers, and then they likewise to
stand, and after to close their Files to the midst to order.

Next he commands the Musketeers in their Files to close outward to order,
commanding them afterward to move up, and flank the Pikes, after which he
orders the Body into thirteen remarkable Divisions, four Divisions of
Musketeers upon each side of the Pikes, and the Pikes into five divisions,
having their Colors fly by two and two, and to be led by the Ensign-bearers
that do belong to each of them, excepting the first and middle divisions, for
they have Leaders in chief, as the first and fifth Captain, and the third
Captain, to bring up the Rear of the whole Body of Pikes. For more fuller
illustration of the leading and bringing up of each division in the Regiment
upon their Long-march, observe these following directions.

1 The Regiment being upon their march, the first division upon the right is
led by the Colonel, his Captain-Lieutenant marching in the Rear of him several
paces, and that particular division is brought up by the Captains-Lieutenants
Bringer-up.

2 The second division of Musketeers is led by the second Captain-Lieutenant,
and brought up by the first, or eldest Captains-Lieutenant.

3 The third division of Musketeers is led by the sixth Captain, and brought
up by his own Lieutenant.

4 The fourth division of Musketeers is led by the fifth Captains Lieutenant,
and brought up by the fourth Captain.

5 The first division of Pikes is led by the eldest Captain, having the
Colonels, and second Captains Colors flying in the head of them.

formation

Place this between page 162 and 163.
formation

This Regiment being thus drawn up, they stand in the length of their Front or
Battalia, 150 abrest, and six in their depth, having two thirds of Musketeers,
and one of Pikes, their number amounting in all to 900 men; each particular
Company consisting of fifteen Files, and containing in each of them 90 men a
piece; but the Field-Officers Companies are many times larger.

Place this between page 164 and 165.
6 The second division of Pikes is led by the fifth and sixth Captains Ensigns,
having their own Colors flying upon the head of the same.

7 The third Division of Pikes is led by the fifth Captain, having the Majors
and eldest Captains Colors flying upon the head of the same.

8 The fourth division of Pikes is led by the fourth and seventh Captains
Ensigns, having their own Colors flying upon the head of the same.

9 The fifth and last Division of Pikes is led by the Lieutenant-Colonels, and
third Captains Ensigns, having likewise their own Colors flying upon the head
of the same; and the Rear of the Pikes is brought up by the third Captain.

10 The first division of Musketeers on the left Flank is led by the second
Captain, and brought up by the fourth Captains Lieutenant.

11 The second upon the left is led by the third Captains Lieutenant, and
brought up by the Majors Lieutenant.

12 The third division is led by the seventh Captain, and brought up by his own
Lieutenant.

13 The fourth or last division of Musketeers is led by the
Lieutenant-Colonels Lieutenant, and the Rear of the Regiment is brought up by
the Lieutenant Colonel.

Notwithstanding I have thus laid down the manner of the Divisions, with the
placing of the Officers, there are also from all these divisions both of the
Pikes and Musketeers, sub-divisions drawn off upon the Long-march betwixt
every fifth or sixth File, as they can equally divide them with even
proportions to march. And for the leading of such divisions, there are
Sergeants cast in that properly belong unto them which do lead and bring them
up; so that upon this account they make in their Long-regimental-march some
thirty divisions, by reason, as I conceive, upon any Alt, or convenient place
of drawing them all up even abrest, the Sergeants as well as the
superiour-Officers may be helpful to bring up the File-leaders again as at the
first into their proper places. And thus far I have endeavored for the
satisfaction of all ingenious Soldiers to set forth the manner of Colonel
Rainsboroughs Regiment of their drawing up, disposing of Colors, and placing
of Officers, as was the Observation of my ever-honor'd Friend, and most
exquisite knowing Soldier Thomas Walker, one of the Captains of the same
Regiment, and a true lover of the Military-art, who frienly communicated to me
the practice of their Regiment. Which although it differs from the drawing up
of all others in our Army (as I am informed, they varying in one kind or other
by their several ways) I question not, but this may be as good as any of the
rest, which I leave to the judgment of the curious searchers into this Art,
whilst I proceed to show the Figures following.

CHAP. XVIII. A third way of drawing up a Regiment of Ten Companies, after the
manner used amongst the Swedes.
THe Companies meeting altogether, whether it be in the Alarm place, otherwise
at their general Randezvous, where they have ground and room sufficient enough
for their drawing up: The Major appointing forth unto the Lieutenant-Colonels
Company a place most convenient to stand, he draws all the rest of the
Companies upon the left of him after this manner. The seventh and the second
Captain, then the Colonel, after him the sixth, fourth, and first Captain, then
the Major, after him the fifth and third Captain, who closes up the left of the
whole Regiment; the figures of their Dignity standing after this manner.

6:8:3:4:7: 9:1:5:10:2 28 27

Here you may perceive they follow a rule to Balance their number of Dignity
as near as they can, carrying their odd number on the left Half-rank, and not
upon the right; for these reasons, as, I conceive, following. Their Regiments
being so full of men, they draw them up for the most part into three Squadrons,
or grand divisions, giving unto the Lieutenant Colonel the right Wing; the
Major, the left; and the Colonel, the Main-battail. The Colonels grand Division
consists of the four middle Companies, where you are to take notice, being
drawn off some ten paces clear from the rest they stand after this manner by
way of Figure, 4:7:9:1. The Lieutenant-Colonels Division after this manner,
5:10:2. and the Majors after this kind, 6:8:3. Wherein I do observe in each
grand Division this Rule, that by succession and degrees they put the best
Soldiers upon the right, and the second according to course upon the left, and
the rest between them. As first, the Colonel being the chiefest man of honor,
is placed upon the right of his Squadron; next to his left is the sixth and
fourth Captain, and the closing up of his grand Division is placed the first or
eldest Captain. The Lieutenant Colonel being the second man of honor, is
likewise placed upon the right of his Squadron; and next to his left, the
seventh Captain, his grand Division being closed up by the second Captain. In
the next place, the Major, he being the third man of honor, is placed upon the
right of his Squadron; and upon hisleft, the fifth Captain; and his grand
Division is closed up upon the left by the third Captain. So that you may
observe in the closing up of every Division, that as every Field-Officer is
upon the right of their Squadrons, so they take by degrees upon the outmost of
their left to close their Divisions, the Captains according to their degrees by
succession. As first, and more clearly, the Colonel takes the eldest Captain to
him on his left, who will aptly fall in to lead his Body of Pikes and Colors;
the Lieutenant Colonel takes the second Captain for to lead his Stand of Pikes
and Colors; the third Captain being placed upon the left of the outmost part
of the Majors Squadron, to lead likewise his Colors and Body of Pikes. And
further, if you observe the number of worth and dignity, that the right Wing
has with the left, you will find them to be equally balanced, and to be
seventeen alike in number. Now in respect there cannot be an equal Division of
the Colors by threes, there is very good reason that the odd should be placed
in the Colonels Squadron, who is Commander in chief, and to whom it properly
belongs unto.

In the next place, I shall show you how to draw them forth in a
Regimental-way; the four middle Companies being advanced forward ten paces
clear form the three outmost Companies, may stand; then draw forth the Pikes of
each Squadron, until they be ten foot clear of their Musketeers; then close
Pikes into the midst to Order in their Files in each Division, and they will be
in three Bodies; after close the Musketeers into the midst to Order, then
sub-divide them in as equal a way as you can; and let them move up upon the
right and left, and flank each Body of Pikes. Then let the Major examine the
Files in the Colonels Division, how many they exceed in number the other two,
and he will find twelve Files of Musketeers, and six Files of Pikes, more
then in the rest. Now to make them equal alike in each Squadron, let him take
off from each particular Company of the Colonels Squadron, one File of Pikes,
and place two of those four in the midst of the Lieutenant-Colonels Squadron,
and the remaining two in the midst of his own Squadron; which being done, each
body of Pikes will have in it 22 Files. After let him take off from each
Company two Files of Musketeers, which will be eight Files, and let him place
two Files in the midst of each Flank of Musketeers, both in the Divisions of
the Lieutenant-Colonels and his own; and then there will be in each particular
Division of Musketeers 21 Files. This being likewise a very good way to draw
up a Regiment of so great a number of men, I was unwilling to pass it by, but
to present it unto the view of all loving Soldiers, which will more fuller
appear in the Figure following (Folio 167) in which Figure I shall show the
several places of the Captains, and their Lieutenants, where they are to lead,
and where to bring up.

But before the former Figure be drawn up, it will be convenient for the Major
to take off from every Company four Files of Musketeers, (excepting the
Colonels) and move them down by 12 Files a piece, some ten foot clear of the
Rear of Pikes of each Division; then close them in their Files inward to Order,
and formation face them after to the Front, and they will stand there ready
upon all occasions to be Reserves unto the Wings, or any other part of the
Body, or to be Conveys to fetch in Victual, Ammunition, or any thing else that
shall be wanting unto the Regiment. I shall not need to draw any other Figure
of Battle from this, they standing in a very good form to fire upon, opening
every five Files clear from each other six foot, that the Musketeers may have
room enough to fall off, and to move down in the Rear of themselves, after such
time their Ranks have fired. Neither shall I need to give any further reasons
for the placing of the Officers, in respect it lies clear and easy to the view
of every ingenious Soldier to apprehend. As for matter of marching, if they
have ground sufficient, it will be very graceful to them for to preserve this
Figure; but if they have not room, but must be constrained to draw off, and
march in particular Divisions, it will be convenient to keep this decorum, if
the Colonel thinks fit to change places every day, after this manner: He that
leads the Vanguard one day, falls off the next, and brings up the Reer-ward;
and he that before led the Main-battail, comes to lead the Van; and he that led
the Reerward, comes to be in the place of the Main-battail. And thus they
change, and take their turns by course to lead the Van, the Battle, and the
Reer-ward. They ought likewise in their March to have thirty foot of ground
distance betwixt each grand Division; and when they have ground sufficient,
they may draw up again into their first Figure. Now in respect I purpose to go
on upon the next drawing up of a Regiment of twelve Companies, I shall break
off to discourse any more of this. For the reducing of them again into
Companies, it will be easy, let the Sergeant of each particular Company fetch
off those men of theirs which were drawn off for Reserves, and to make the
Squadrons even in number, bring them to join with their own men; then let every
Captain take off his Pikes and Musketeers, and complete them up into one Body,
they will be ready to receive Orders, and be in a condition for marching away,
either to their Quarters, or other Duties, which they shall be appointed unto
by their Major.

CHAP. IX. The way of drawing up a Regiment consisting of twelve Companies, the
nine Captains having eighteen Files in each Company, and the three
Field-Officers every one of them twenty four Files; whereof, there are two
thirds of Musketeers, and one of Pikes, in each particular Company, amounting
in all to 1404 men.
THe Major having convenient place, he first orders where the Colonels Company
is to stand, and after draws all the rest of the Companies upon the left of
him, after this manner: The ninth, the fourth, the third, the sixth, and the
first Captains; then the Major, next the seventh, the fifth, the second, and
the eighth Captains, and the outmost of all upon the left, the
Lieutenant-Colonels Company, in manner of the dignity of a Rank, as they thus
stand.

2:11:5:8:10:3: 4:9:6:7:12:1. 39. 39.

The dignity of places cannot be better stated, then in this of twelve
Companies; as first, the Right-half-ranks is equal with the left in number of
dignity. Again, divide them into three parts, and their number of dignity falls
out to carry along with it an equal number of twenty six all even alike.
Consider likewise, the stating of every Captain in the Regiment, and they are
qualified equal throughout, the best and the youngest Soldiers joined
together, as by examining them how they stand by two's, their number of worth
and dignity throughout carries thirteen all equal alike. In the next place,
draw forth all the Pikes, and ingross them into two Bodies; then divide the
Musketeers into four parts, and move them up, and Flank those Stands of Pikes,
and they will be in two grand Divisions; then, place the Officers after this
manner; beginning first with the Colonels division, make two Divisions of
Musketeers in his Van, let the first be led by the Captain Lieutenant, and be
brought up by his Bringer-up; let the next Division of Musketeers be led by
the fourth Captains Lieutenant, and brought up by the third Captains
Lieutenant; let the Pikes be divided into three Divisions, the Colors flying
two and two upon the head of them* let the first Division be led by the eldest
Captain, and brought up by the ninth Captains Lieutenant; let the next Division
be led by the sixth Captain, and brought up by his own Lieutenant; let the last
Division be led by the fourth Captain, and the whole Body of Pikes be brought
up by the ninth Captain. Then let the Reer-guard of the Colonels Division be
led by such observations as is set forth in other Regiments, by the third
Captain, and brought up by the first Captains Lieutenant.

Having placed the Officers in the first grand Division, he may proceed unto
the next; let the first Division of Musketeers be led by the
Majors-Lieutenant, and brought up by the fifth Captains Lieutenant. Let the
Pikes be divided into three parts, the Colors likewise flying, two and two
upon the head of them; then let the first Division be led by the fifth Captain,
and brought up by the eighth Captains Lieutenant; next let the second Division
be led by the eighth Captain, and brought up by the seventh Captains
Lieutenant. Lastly, let the third Division be led by the second Captain, and
brought up by his own Lieutenant; let the last Division of Musketeers be led
by the seventh Captain, and brought up by the Lieutenant-Colonels Lieutenant:
The Colonel is to be on the head of his Division, and the Lieutenant Colonel
upon the head of his, and the Major between them both in the Front. The
Officers before they are thus placed, are to have their grand Divisions of both
Arms equally balanced for number of worth, observing still the former Rules in
the execution of the same. It might be here expected I should show reasons for
the thus placing of the Officers, after this manner: but to satisfy such, if
they please but to observe and take notice of the reasons given in the former
Regiments, which will give satisfaction unto this, carrying with it the same
order and way. And likewise it might be expected, that I should here set forth
a Figure for the thus drawing them up as before expressed, and placing of the
several Officers. But since this Regiment falls out to be so full in number, I
shall set it forth after the manner of drawing up a Brigade, according to the
Swedish practice.

CHAP. XX. The manner of drawing up a Regiment according to the Swedish Brigade.
AFter that the Major has placed the Lieutenant-Colonels Company in such a
convenient place, that he may draw all the rest up on the left of him, he thus
proceeds in bringing up the Companies; he first places to him the eighth
Captain, then the fifth, after that the second, then the Colonels Company, next
to him the ninth Captain, then the sixth Captain, and first Captain; after the
Majors, then the seventh Captain, after the fourth Captain; then upon the
outmost part of the lest, is placed the third Captain, in manner and form as
they thus stand.

6:7:10:3:4:9^ 12:1:5:8:11:2. 39 39

Having thus far proceeded, he may command the four outmost Companies upon each
Flank, to advance forward some ten paces clear from the four middle Companies;
then let them stand, and after let him draw forward the Pikes clear from the
Musketeers, and close their Files outward to Order; then let the Musketeers
be divided into four parts, their Files being closed to Order, let them move
forward, and flank those two Bodies of Pikes. After in the same manner move
forward the Pikes in the four middle Companies, until they be clear of the
Musketeers, and close their Files into the midst to Order, and divide their
Musketeers into two parts, and let them move forward, and flank the Body of
Pikes; and then they will stand in their Squadrons or grand Divisions, their
dignities standing after this manner in the Colonels division, thus, 4:9:12:1.
In the Lieutenant-Colonels division, thus, 5:8:11:2. and in the the Majors,
thus, 6:7:10:3. So that you may perceive this to be a very good way amongst the
rest, each particular Squadron bearing the number of 26, and having unto every
one of them their Dignities and worths equally divided, and stated alike. In
the next place, the Major ought to inquire of the number of men they carry in
each division of both Arms; where as first, he shall find in the Colonels
Squadron, to have in it 26 Files of Pikes, and 52 Files of Musketeers; and
examining all the rest, they will fall out to the same proportion of number. So
that in each Division there contains, whether they be Pikes, or Musketeers, to
have in every particular thereof 78 Files. In the next place, he shall do well
to appoint forth unto them their several places to lead and bring up; and
first, of the Colonels grand Division, he being on the head thereof, the
Captain-Lieutenant leading the first division of Musketeers in his Squadron,
being brought up by his Bringer-up; the first two Colors, and his half Body of
Pikes to be led by the eldest Captain, and brought up by the ninth Captains
Lieutenant; the next two Colors, and half Body of Pikes to be led by the ninth
Captain, and brought up by the eldest Captains Lieutenant; the last division of
Musketeers in his Squadron, to be led by the sixth Captain, and brought up by
his own Lieutenant. The first division of Musketeers in the
Lieutenant-colonels Squadron, is led by his own Lieutenant, and brought up by
the eighth Captains Lieutenant; his first two Colors, and half Body of Pikes
is led by the seventh Captain; and the next two Colors, and half Body of
Pikes, is led by the eigthth Captain, and brought up by the second Captains
Lieutenant; his last division of Musketeers is led by the fifth Captain, and
brought up by his own Lieutenant; himself standing as the Colonel does upon the
head of his Squadron. The first division of Musketeers in the Majors Squadron
(himself being upon the head) is led by his own Lieutenant, and brought up by
the seventh Captains Lieutenant; his first two Colors, and half Body of Pikes
is led by the third Captain; and the next two Colors, and half Body of Pikes,
is led by the seventh Captain, and brought up by the third Captains Lieutenant;
his last division of Musketeers is led by the fourth Captain, and brought up
by his Lieutenant; as in the next place, in the Figure set forth in Folio 170,
more fully appears.

They standing according to the former directions in three Bodies of Pikes
flanked with the Musketeers, before they come to the Figure set forth, you
must command in each grand division the six inmost Files of Musketeers next
the Pikes to face about, and to march six paces clear of the Rear, and then
close inward to Order. Afterward open every four Files outward to open Order,
of those 12 Files, and let the middle-division there face about, and move down
six foot clear of the Rear; and after face to their Leader. Then there will
remain 20 Files of Musketeers upon the Flanks of each Body of Pikes; after
move forward the eight middle Files of particular division of Musketeers, some
ten foot before the Front. Then command the left-half-ranks, or the four Files
of Musketeers upon the left of those divisions drawn forth, to face about, and
to move down ten foot clear of the Rear, and after face to the Front. Then let
the 12 remaining Files of Musketeers close to the Pikes to open Order; and let
every four Files of those remaining 12 upon the Flanks, open outward six foot
of ground betwixt each four Files, and move the Front and Reer-divisions of
Musketeers just against the midst of those three divisions of Musketeers that
are the Flankers to the Pikes, and they will stand in the Figure as it is
placed in Folio 170.

formation

formation

formation

Place this between page 170 and 171.
They standing now in a perfect Order of a Brigade, the number of men in this
Regiment allowing it in a full manner, according to the small Brigades of the
Swedes; I shall not need to point out of what service this Figure, or drawing
up may be, in respect there is no ingenious Soldier, but may clearly perceive
they stand in a very good Order to fight against an Enemy; their Commanders
being appointed forth to manage it accordingly. Therefore I shall leave it to
the practice of such who in time of need shall have occasion to make use of it;
and in the next place show the manner of reducing them again into Companies.

First move forward those 12 Files of Musketeers in the Rear of each body of
Pikes, six to the right, and six to the left, next to the outside of their own
body of Pikes: After command the Reer-divisions of Musketeers to advance
forward upon the left of those Divisions of Musketeers in the Front; then face
them about, and move them down into the midst of those Musketeers that were
the Flankers. After let every Captain draw off his Pikes and Musketeers, and
ingross them into particular Companies, and they will then be ready to march
away to their several Quarters. And here I shall conclude concerning a Regiment
of twelve Companies.

CHAP. XXI. The manner of drawing up a Brigade or Tertia, being a third part of
an Army, according to the practice of the Netherlands, under the command of the
Prince of Orange.
BEfore I shall begin to draw up this Tertia, Army, or Brigade; I shall set
down the observation of Col. Hen. Hexam, in his Book treating of the Office of
the three Serjeant-Majors of the Tertia, otherwise called the three
Field-Corporals. His words are these:

The States Army by order of his Highness, is divided upon a March into three
Brigades or Tertia's; and a Serjeant-Major of a Tertia, being one of the great
Captains of the Field, receives his Order immediate from the Lord-General, or
the Lord Martial, but most commonly of the Serjeant-Major-General of the Army,
how he shall form and order his Brigade or Tertia; and how many Regiments of
Horse and Foot are to march under it, and with what Ordnance and Baggage. He
assigns and shows him the place where they are to draw out into Battalia, and
receives Orders from the Serjeant-Major-General, whether they are to march in
the Vanguard, the Battle, or the Rear: So that in marching in every one of
these, he shall attend upon his Brigade and several Divisions; and in the
absence of the Serjeant-Major-General, see that the order of marching and
embattailing be duly kept and observed. And every one of these three
Serjeants-Majors of Brigades, are to be at the command of the Colonel, General,
or be that leads or commands that Brigade or Tertia; and is to be sent to the
Lord-General, Lord-Martial, or Serjeant-Major-General upon any occasion
belonging to the service.

These three Majors of the Tertia's are to be lodged as near the
Serjeant-Major-General, as conveniently may be; and those three which attend
upon the Vanguard, the Battle or Rear, which the Serjeant-Major shall make
choice of ground for the placing of Guards, and assign them to the
Serjeant-Majors of every Regiment. They are to go the Round, and to visit the
Guard commonly every night, and at such an hour as the Serjeant-Major shall
appoint them either by day or night.

If any of these three Serjeant-Majors of the Field shall find any want of
Powder, Ammunition or Victuals, either in the Vanguard, Battle or Rear, as
well upon the march, as when the Troops are quartered, or during fight, he is
presently to advertise the Serjeant-Major-General of the Field with the said
wants. And then by his direction shall go with an Officer of every Regiment of
that Tertia, to the General, or Lieutenant of the Ordnance, or to the
Commissary General of the Ammunition, or Victuals.

A Serjeant-Major of a Tertia, to conclude, having received his Orders from the
Lord-General, the Martial, or Serjeant-Major-general, gives them to the
Serjeant-Majors of every particular Regiment. But because the Word and Orders
are to be sent to Quarters far distant one from another, the Serjeant-Major of
every Regiment cannot come conveniently to the Serjeant-Major-General.
Therefore the Majors of every Brigade are to attend every morning and evening
upon the Serjeant-Major-General, to receive their Orders, and to carry the Word
to the several Quarters, whither the Serjeant-Majors of Regiments comes to him,
and from him receives the Word and Orders.

The drawing up of Brigades in the next place comes to be handled after the way
of the Hollanders; therefore, first take notice, that Brigades are not tied to
a set number of Companies or Regiments, but are ordered according to the
several strengths of an Army. As sometimes they consist of 12 Companies, some
of two Regiments, others of three, or four, having in them not alike number of
Companies or men, which ought accordingly unto the several Divisions of a
Brigade to be balanced alike, both in number of men, dignity, and worth, as is
in particular Regiments fully set forth. And in respect that several Divisions
make a Brigade, and that according to the disposition of an Army, all the
Officers and Soldiers are divided into three parts, called Brigades or
Tertia's, each of them having a several name; to wit, the Vanguard, Battle
and Reer-guard. Now that Tertia which is to march first, is called the
Vanguard; that which marches next in the middle, the Battle; and that which
comes up last, the Rear. Every one of these upon march, as was formerly
expressed in the Swedish Brigade, take their turns interchangeably; for the
second day of the March, the Battle becomes the Vanguard; and the Rear, the
second day the Battle; and the third day, the Tertia, that had first the Rear,
is become the Vanguard. So likewise, there ought to be in every particular
Brigade or Tertia, a Vanguard, Battle and Reer-guard, to each of them; which
with more conveniencie may be orderly brought to fight by him that shall be
Commander in chief, for the relieving each other, according as occasion shall
require.

In the next place, for a Brigade, I shall point forth four Regiments, having
in them eight Companies a piece, after the manner of a Regiment of eight
formerly set down, which amounts to 3888 men, which number may serve for a
third part of an Army of foot, and make up a very complete and sufficient
Brigade. And I shall order in this Brigade to have in it four Divisions; that
is to say, a Vanguard, Battle and Reer-guard, represented in the three first
Regiments; but the fourth shall be a reserve, standing in the Rear of the
Main-battail or Brigade, whereby upon all occasions of the other retreating, or
being driven backward, that Regiment may move up to relieve each part thereof
that shall be distressed. But upon the Long-march of this Brigade, the two
middle Regiments according to their order of dignity, are to make the Battle,
which in the Figure were made the Vanguard, and Reer-guard; and that which
formerly was the Vanguard, is become the Battle; and the Reer-guard, the
Reserve; but where they have ground sufficient, it will be better to march in
that form of Battalia, set down according to the Figure, Folio 176.

This Brigade consisting of four Regiments, must be drawn up according to the
dignity of their Captains; but with this alteration of Arms, for the former
Regiments consisting of two Divisions, this has but one, after this manner:

First, when the Captains Companies are all drawn up into an even breast in
their true dignity; then let the Pikes be all drawn forth, and engrossed into
one Body; after let the Musketeers be closed in their Files into the midst
into another Body; after let those Musketeers, as near as is possible be
divided into two parts, (if there should be an odd File, let it be carried to
the right) and let them move up and flank the Pikes, which will make up one
complete Battalia, or grand Division. Now let the Officers be placed according
to the manner in the next place, as in every Regiment shall be set forth, which
may be a satisfaction unto the Soldiers, to know a third way of drawing up,
and placing the Officers of a Regiment consisting of eight Companies. Four
Regiments thus drawn up makes a complete Brigade, to be ordered according to
Dignity in their Regiments after this manner. The chiefest Commanders Regiment,
or eldest Colonels, is to be on formation Place this between page 172 and 173.
the right of the Brigade; the next man of Honor to be on the left; the third
to be on the right of the second; and the fourth on the left of the first,
after the manner of these Figures, 2. 3. 4. 1. wherein it clearly appears that
their number of Worth is equally divided. In the next place, as concerning
Command, and ordering of such great Bodies into Brigades, the shortest and
soonest way is the best; wherefore command the outmost Regiment upon the right,
or the Vanguard to advance forward 18 foot before the Front, then face to the
left, and move until they stand straight against the midst of the two middle
Divisions, or Main-battail that was; then face to the Front; then let the
outmost Regiment upon the left face about, and move down 24 foot clear of the
Rear; then face to the left, until they stand straight in the Rear of the
middle Regiments or Vanguard, then face to the Front; next let the two middle
Regiments move forth to the right and left, until they stand clear for the
Reer-guard, or Reserve to come up and relieve each part, as occasion shall
require; they being all faced to the Front, will stand in a complete Brigade,
as formerly was expressed. The former Brigade being imbattelled into so many
Divisions, and joined so near on the other, can best second and relieve each
other, better then your great Battalia's, which unwildy Bodies being once
broken, and routed, can hardly be rallied again, neither can they bring so many
men to fight in that good order, as the lesser Bodies will do. As for example,
three of these Brigades, or Tertia's, make a complete Army of foot, the
Battle; one of the Tertia's of the Army being placed in the midst, that of the
Vanguard may be drawn upon the right, and the Rear on the left Flank of the
Battle. The first Divisions that are to fight, are those that stand in an even
line of the first range, and are so ordered, that if they should be
overcharged, and forced to give ground, then the second range may move up, and
relieve the first, and may give the second charge against an Enemy, whilst the
first move down into the midst and ra^ly again, or may move and enterchange
ground with those that are the Reserve. The second range having fired, may be
relieved by the third, who may move up into the ground of the first Divisions,
and there may take their turns to give a third charge, whilst the second
Divisions rally up again. And thus they may maintain their fighting in this
order, so long as there shall be just occasion; provided the Musketeers make
six foot ground interval betwixt every five or six Files for their Ranks to
wheel off either to the right or left, and to rally themselves in good order in
the Rear of their own Divisions. There is likewise another way to make a
Brigade, by engrossing all the Pikes of every Regiment into one Body, flanking
them with Musketeers; or by making them into two or three stands of Pikes, and
flanking each body of Pikes with Musketeers. But, I conceive the former way to
be one of the best, and chiefest amongst them all; and therefore I shall spare
the pains to make any other Figure, having placed every Officer where he is to
lead, and where to bring up. And upon the Long-march this rule must be observed
in every Regiment; where they cannot march all abrest, they must make in every
Regiment seven Divisions, three of Pikes, the first three Colors to fly upon
the head of the first Division; the next two Colors to fly upon the head of
the second; and the three last upon the head of the third Division; and they
must likewise make two Divisions of Musketeers in the Van of their Regiments,
and two Divisions in the Rear; the Officers are accordingly placed down upon
these sub-divisions, where to take their places both to lead and to bring up.
The Regiments are to march after this manner; first, his Regiment in the Van
who is Commander in chief; next to him the fourth man of Honor; after him the
third; these two making the Battle: and let the Rear be brought up by the
second Colonel, or second man of Honor, his Regiment likewise marching there.
And here I shall conclude concerning a Brigade.

CHAP. XXII. How to draw up an Army of twelve Regiments of Foot, and three of
Horse, the Foot amounting unto 11664 men, and the Horse unto 3000; in all 14664
men.
THe drawing up or an Army most properly belongs to the Serjeant-Major-General,
whose place and charge is of an high degree, his commands being full of action,
and therefore ought to be a wise, grave, and able person, and an experienced
Soldier, in respect he has the ordering and disposing of the Divisions and
Battalions, according to that form which the General shall command him. And
upon all occasions he must be active, and stirring up and down to spy out all
advantages which might offend an Enemy; and wisely to foresee all disadvantages
that may bring the Troops into any disorder or confusion. He has absolute
command over the three Serjeant-Majors of the Brigades, otherwise called the
three Grand Corporals of the Field, who are to be his assistants, and his
mouth, as he is the mouth of the Lord General, or Martial of the Field; and
therefore must have a vigilant eye over all things, seeing that the Generals
command delivered to him be strictly kept and observed; and withal acquainting
and informing the three Serjeant-Majors of the Brigades of the Generals
pleasure, that they may forthwith put the same into execution.

Now the Method (that I shall observe) shall be according to the form of the
former Brigade; wherefore in the first place, the Serjeant-Major shall do well
to appoint out unto the eldest Serjeant-Major of the Brigades, how to draw up
that Brigade which shall be the Battle, wherein the Lord Generals Regiment,
and the Colonels is to be upon the right and left of that Brigade, and betwixt
them the eldest Colonel, and ninth Colonel, according to this rule of Dignity
in the Figure set forth, 4:9:12:1. In the next place, let the next
Serjeant-Major of the Brigades in seniority draw up that which shall be the
Vanguard, and place the second Colonels Regiment upon the right, and the fifth
upon the left, and between them the eleventh and eighth Colonels, after this
manner of this Figure, 5:8:11:2. Let the last Serjeant-Major draw up that
Brigade which shall be in the Rear, and let him draw them up after this manner;
the third Colonels Regiment upon the right; and upon the left the sixth
Colonels; and between them the tenth and seventh Colonels Regiment after this
manner, 6:7:10:3: This charge being given by the Serjeant-Major-General unto
the three Serjeant-Majors of the three Tertias or Brigades, how each particular
Regiment shall be drawn up, being every one single, and compared alike each to
other, being rightly stated according to the rule of Dignity, avoiding thereby
confusion and disorder. In the next place, for the better expedition in drawing
up the Army, every Serjeant-Major of each Brigade draws the former Regiments
assigned unto them, unto such place as shall be appointed forth unto them by
the Serjeant-Major-General, being helped and assisted by the Field-Officers of
the same Regiments, the Serjeant-Major-General being an assistant unto them
all, seeing thereby all the Commands of the General rightly observed and
fulfilled.

Having drawn up the twelve Regiments according to the former directions, let
the Serjeant-Majors of the Brigades order them to stand all even abrest
according to the form and Figure of that single Brigade formerly set down.
Wherein to every Brigade there will be a Vanguard, Battle, and Reer-guard,
and Reserves to them all three. Next, inquiry must be made of the several
strengths of the Brigades, some of them perhaps having many more Files then the
other; for remedy whereof, there must be Files drawn forth (provided there be
convenience of time) from each particular Company and Brigade, and added unto
those which shall be weaker, to make their strengths equal alike. Next it lies
in the breast of the Lord General, to appoint unto every one of these Brigades
Commanders in chief, there being in every one of them Officers above the three
Field-Corporals, or Serjeant-Majors of Brigades. Wherefore, it is conceived,
that he will appoint the most Honorable men to be Commanders thereof; as
first, himself of that Brigade which is the Battle in time of fight; the
Vanguard to the Martial-General; and the Reer-guard either to the
Major General or Commissary-General. But whosoever the Lord-General shall
appoint to be Commanders in Chief, to them the Serjeant-Majors of every
particular Brigade are to be sub-servants, assisting them in all their
Commands. These several Orders and Directions being formation AN ARMY OF FOOT,
OR THREE SINGLE BRIGADS CONSISTING OF 11664 MEN, DRAWN UP AND EMBATTELLED;
TOGETHER WITH THE PLACING OF THE CANNON
Let these three Sheets be pasted together at length, one after another, so
that they may appear as one single Leaf, and let them be placed between Page*
174 and 175.

thus equally divided amongst the Commanders of every Brigade, an Army may
quickly be brought into any form of Battle to fight against an Enemy,
according to the ground and situation of the place, which may afford the best
advantages for the same.

After this, the General of the Ordnance, his duty and care must be in the day
of Battle, to see that the Ordnance be well placed; for at such time his
wisdom is most discerned, keeping (with the assistance of his Lieutenant) the
Train of Artillery together in good order. He must have a vigilant eye upon all
accidents that may fall but, and make choice of such ground for their planting,
as the General of the Army and he shall think most fit and convenient. He must
be careful that all things be in a readiness, putting the Master, Gunners,
Gentlemen of the Ordnance, and Commanders in mind of their duty, that they do
their best endeavors, and acquit themselves like men. It is likewise partly
his charge to see that the whole Army be well provided with Ammunition, because
the Ammunition marches under his Train. He must also be near the General of
the Army upon all occasions, to receive his Directions and Commands, and to
know from him after what manner he will make his Battle, that he may plant his
Ordnance accordingly, finding out Hills and Heights to play over his own men.
And when the Enemy shall present himself, and come up to charge, he must draw,
and plant his Ordnance as near their Horse as possible may be, to hinder them
from breaking in upon the Divisions of Foot, taking along with him Saylours,
and Pioneers, to help to draw up the Ordnance, and sufficient Guards to defend
them.

As concerning the planting of the Ordnance, when the Battalia is drawn up,
they may be disposed of several ways; as sometimes they are placed upon the
head of the Battalia; others again between them, by two and two; and others
threes, upon the Flanks and Wings of the Musketeers. Some are of opinion, that
they ought to be planted upon the Flank, and in the Rear of the Battalia, by
leaving a free place for Arms which may give no offense to their own men. But
as concerning this last way, it might be answered, it can no way be expedient;
for if an Enemy should perceive that the Frout is left bare without Ordnance,
it will give them cause to come up with more courage to fall on upon the
Charge. Therefore, the best way amongst the ancient experienced Soldiers, is,
that the Artillery be divided, some here, some there, both before the Front,
between the Battalions, and upon the Flanks, and to be placed some 50 or an 100
paces one from another; and then there will be no danger when the Enemy shall
come up to shock to encounter you, or to offend our own men: Especially, when
they are fastened to them by drawing Ropes and Iron Rings, that upon an instant
they may be removed, and turned for the advantage of our own Troops, giving
fire as fast as they can charge and discharge against the Enemies Troops, it
being a matter of great moment for the obtaining of a Victory, and gaining the
day from the Enemy.

But that many times the Ordnance cannot be planted in such convenient places
as could be wished for, in respect an Army may be driven into such places, as
the Ordnance must be planted according to the best ground it will afford, by
reason of Woods, Hills, or Marish-grounds; and such like disadvantageous
places, may be oftentimes met withal; for which no certain Rule may be given,
but that the General by his wisdom and discretion may make choice of the best
advantages, which might annoy an Enemy most, and give the least offense to his
own men, either by dazzling them by the Sun, or by raising of the dust,
observing the wind which drives the Smoke both of the Ordnance and Small-shot
full upon them. To conclude, it is conceived the best way for every Captain of
the Ordnance, and Master-Gunner, to use some light Field-peeces and small
Drakes, which upon any occasion may be removed from one place to another, being
with ease planted upon such places of advantage, as may most annoy the Enemy.

In the next place, 3000 Horse may be a good proportion for 10000 or 12000
foot, which ought to be equally divided in their Troops, and placed upon the
Flanks of the foot in such good order, as the Troops may come with conveniencie
to fight, for the relieving of each other. But in case you shall perceive the
Enemies Horse, as sometimes through necessity of ground, or by other political
ends, may be interlaced and placed between the Intervals and Divisions of their
foot; it will be needful then that we should observe the same form, and
likewise have Horse to come forth, and encounter with their Horse, lest they
should break in upon our Divisions of Foot; which by this means and good order,
may be timely prevented. Next follows the Figure of the Army, as before
described, and ordered to be drawn up, Folio 176.

CHAP. XXIII. The several duties belonging to the Foot in a Regiment, as
follows by degrees from a private Soldier unto a Colonel of the same: and
first, of a Private Soldier.
A Private Soldier ought to be very active, not slothful and idle, informing
himself of his duty, learning from his Corporal, or other Officers, the true
use and well handling of his Arms, always keeping them neat, clean, and well
fixed. Upon the beat of the Drum, he is to repair to his Colors, Squadron; or
Company; upon the march, he must observe his Leader, and his right and
lefthand-men, that he may march straight in file, and even in rank; in time of
Exercise he must be silent in the Body, well minding the words of Command and
Directions, which are given forth by the Leader. He ought likewise to be well
versed in all the ordinary words of Command; and to mind the place wherein he
stands, that he may the more readier move, and not be to seek at such time when
he shall be commanded, whether it be to face, double, countermarch, or wheel.
He must inform himself of all the several beats of the Drum; as first, or a
Call; second, a Troop; third, a March; fourth, a Preparative; fifth, a Battle
or Charge; sixth, a Retreat, and also of the Revalley and the Tattoo.

By the first, he is summoned to hear present Proclamation, or else commanded
to repair to his Colors; upon the beat of the second, he is to advance his
Arms, and to close in Rank and File, to the distance of Order, and to Troop
along unto such places and services, as he shall be commanded unto; upon the
hearing of the third, he is presently to shoulder his Arms, and to take his
distance of six foot in Rank, and three foot in File; upon the fourth, he is to
close both in Rank and File, unto the fighting distance, which is called Order,
and to prepare himself for skirmish; upon the beat of the next, he is
undauntedly to move forward, boldly stepping in good Order, into the place of
his fellow-Souldier that shall happen to fall down dead before him; upon the
beat of the last, he must orderly fall back, either for relief or advantage of
ground, or other political ends whereby he may draw the Enemy into a snare. The
first of the remaining two, gives warning in the morning for some of the
Sentinels to fall off, or to be taken in; the latter is used in the night to
give notice unto the Soldiers, or others, for their repairing to their several
Guards, Watches, and Lodgings. To conclude, a private Soldier ought to avoid
all Quarrelling, Mutinies, Swearing, Cursing or Lying, and to be content with
his wages; and likewise to be a good Husband in the well managing of his means,
keeping himself neat and handsome in his apparel; avoiding drunkenness, and all
manner of gaming; truly to serve and fear God, and to be obedient unto all the
commands of his superiors, cheerfully going on upon all Duties, and to be
loving, kind, and courteous unto all his Fellow Soldiers.

The duty of a Sentinel.
A Sentinel must be very vigilant, carefully casting his eyes about him, and
harkning whether he hear the noise or approach of any drawing near him; which
if he perceive, he is presently to command them to stand, presenting his Musket
or Pike to their breast, after calling his Corporal for to take the Word, unless
he should be commanded to come in silently. He is not to come off until he be
relieved by the Corporal or Lanspassadoe.

His proper Posture, being a Muskettier, is to have his Musket rested, and
loaded with Powder and Bullet, his Match cockt, and his Pan guarded; being a
Pike-man, if he stand Sentinel in the night, he must have his Pike cheek'd; if
in the day, his Pike ordered: Or it may be a very proper Posture for a Pike-man
to stand Sentinel with his Pike in his left hand, holding it a little below the
cheeks thereof, and with his Sword drawn, being held in his right hand, which I
leave to judge, or to be made use of according to discretion, and as occasion
shall require.

Of a Gentleman of a Company.
A Gentleman of a Company ought to have such worth in him as may make him
capable to be a File-leader, or Captain of his File; and he more especialy
above the rest ought to be well skilled in all the Postures of such Arms he
wears; and at convenient times instructing and teaching his File in the neat
and graceful handling of their Arms. He ought to be of an undaunted courage and
gallant resolution, for the better Example and imitation of the rest; whose
worth and valor many times indears them so much into the favor of their
Commanders, that they raise them up to greater places of preferment. In the
Low Countries a Gentleman of a Company has his full pay, having nothing kept
back for after-reckonings, as common private Soldiers have. At his first
entrance he sometimes stands Sentinel, to inform himself of the Duties thereof;
but most commonly he is placed to be a Sentinel perdu in time of imminent
danger, either in the Field, or upon approaches. He is to lie perdu with his
Sword and Pistol, not removing from his place till he be relieved; nor is he to
retreat for one man, but in case of more, then he is to fall back to the
second; and discovering an Enemy, he is to come off betimes, and silently to
give the Alarm, whereby the Corpse du Guard or Company may be provided for
their own defense. A Gentleman of a Company does many times go the Round with
the Captain of the Watch, or his Fellow-Gentlemen, who are likewise Rounders,
either in the Field, or in Garrison; and do give the Corporals of the Guards
the Word, charging the Sentinels to look well about them. To conclude, he ought
truly to love, respect, and obey his Captain, and to stick close unto him,
vindicating him upon just occasions, when he shall be wronged and injured by
any Mutinies of the common Soldiers, or others.

Of a Barber-Chyrurgion.
IN every Company there ought to be a Barber-Chyrurgion for the trimming of the
Soldiers, who ought likewise to have some skill in Chyrurgery; that when the
Soldiers are upon the Watches and Guards, where imminent danger may be, he may
be then at hand, to be ready in the absence of the Chyrurgion of the Regiment
to bind up, and dress the hurt and wounded men. He is free from duties
belonging to the Company; and in some places, is allowed to be an Officer in
the List of their Armies, which I conceive it ought so to be, in respect they
allow but of one Chyrurgion to a Regiment; and if it should happen many to be
wounded, as oftentimes in field-fights there are, one man is not able scarce in
three days to bind up the wounds, and dress the sores of them that are maimed.
And therefore it concerns every Captain to be provided, and to have in the
absence of the Chyrurgion, a Barber-Chyrurgion attending on his Company.

Of a Clerk of a Company.
HIs carriage ought to be very just and honest; his chiefest duty is to keep
the Muster-Roll, and to have it ready upon all occasions for the entering of his
men upon the Muster-Roll, and Pay-bill. He is many times entrusted to receive
the Service-mony of the Company, and pays such moneys unto the Soldiers as
shall be ordered him from his Captain to pay. He must inquire out in their
Quarters where they lie, and duly for to pay them, and every pay-day to deliver
up a true bill, giving an account unto his Captain of all such moneys he has
either received or paid forth.

Of a Drum-Major.
THere ought to be in every Regiment a Drum-Major, being skilful in his
Profession, instructing the others in the true beating of a March, with all
other points of War. A Drum-Major must likewise be well skilled in several
Languages and Tongues, and to be wise and courteous when he shall be employed
or sent to an Enemy: He is in a discreet manner upon the marching of a Regiment
to order part of the Drums where they shall beat, seeing them truly and duly
relieved by the others for the better performance of their service. For upon
the march, if all the Captains Drums should beat together, it would quickly
tire them out; therefore for their ease, it is his place and duty to order them
according to discretion to take their turns to beat, and to be relieved by each
other. He is, moreover, to take into his charge such Drums as shall be brought
in from the Enemies by their Drummers, when they come to ransom their
prisoners; and upon their return to deliver them again unto them. He ought to
be lodged near the Serjeant-Major, in respect he is to give instructions to the
rest of the Drummers, and may upon fail of their Duties give them correction.

Of the Drummers to a private Company.
EVery Captain ought to have two good Drummers, that knows-how to beat all the
several points of War before mentioned. It is likewise expedient that he should
be a good Linguist, in respect sometimes he may be sent unto an Enemy for the
ransoming of Prisoners: His duty is, coming to the Camp or Garrison of an
Enemy, having his Generals Pass in his Hat, to beat a Call, till he is fetched
in; and because he shall not discover the weakness of Guards, Works or
Trenches, he is led blindfold, and so carried to the Commander, and place
where his Prisoners are: With whom (after he has ransomed them) he is to
return to his own Quarters, giving an account of such things he has seen or
heard, which may prove advantageous to his own party, or of any other thing he
had opportunity by their neglect to take notice of.

Of a Gentleman of Arms.
HIs Duty is to see that the Soldiers keep their Arms neat and clean, and that
they be well fixed; and if any thing be amiss or broken, he is to have them
carried to the Armourers to be repaired. And if any Soldier shall be sick,
dead, or have leave to return to his own Country, he is to bring his Arms to
his own Lodging, there preserving and keeping them clean, until he shall have
occasion to deliver them to some other newly entertained. He is likewise to
mark and figure the Arms of the Company, and to preserve and keep a List what
number of figure each Soldier should bear upon his Arms. He is likewise to
keep the Powder, Bullet and March, and to deliver it forth upon occasions to
the Corporals, or Lanspassadoe.

Of a Lanspassadoe.
HIs Duty is concerned in the absence of his Corporal to officiate in all
things belonging unto his place, and is at all times to be an assistant unto
him, for his ease and help-mate upon all occasions, for the better managing of
his place; and many times they are Rounders and Sentinel Perdues in time of
great necessity.

The duty of a Corporal.
THe Corporals of a Company are not tied to a set number, but to be ordered
according to the several strengths and divisions of the same, for each to take
his charge and care of every Squadron thereof. And unto each of them there is a
Lanspassadoe for an assistant: for their Rule of Dignity, I conceive, it makes
not much more matter then to make them the right hand File-leader in every
particular division; but if any will be so curious to order them according to
that, let them apply themselves unto the former Rules for directions to the
same. The Corporals duty in his Squadron is to teach and instruct them in the
use of the Pike and Musket, and to have a Roll and List of his men in his
Division or Squadron. And when a Soldiers name is crossed out, he is to give
notice unto his Sergeant; and when a new one shall supply his place, his care
must be to instruct and enable him in the Postures of such Arms as he shall
bear. Being with his Squadron upon his Guard, he is to provide them with Wood,
Coal, Candle and light. Having an Out-guard, his care must be to strengthen it,
his little Corpse du Guard and Sentinels must be forth according to the avenews
or comings on of the Enemy, whereby he prevents their cutting off or surprisal;
the negligence whereof proves both dangerous to themselves, and the whole Army.
Wherefore it behooves him to be very careful and vigilant to visit them, after
giving them an especial charge to be both faithful and careful in the great
trust reposed in them. He must likewise preserve and keep the Word constant in
his memory; when the Captain of the Watch goes the first Round, he shall with
his Sword drawn against his breast give it him, and receive such Orders from him
as he shall command him; but afterward when the Round shall come again, he
shall cause the Rounders or Gentlemen (with his Sword drawn) to give the Word
to him before they pass. He ought never to go alone, being called forth by the
Sentinel, but to have a Guard of three or four Musketeers along with him,
selected out of his Corpse du Guard. He must advise his Sentinels how to demean
themselves upon the discovery of an Enemy, either to give an Alarm, or else to
give notice without making a noise. And if upon his Guard he shall either
observe, or be advertised by his Sentinels of the approach of the Enemy, then
he is to have his men in readiness with Bullets in their Muskets, and their
Matches lighted; himself secretly coming in, giving intelligence unto his
Captain, or other Superior Officer, whereby they may all be in a readiness
before the Alarm be given. He is likewise to distribute Victual, Powder,
Bullet and Match, unto his Squadron, and to take notice of the best experienced
men, and accordingly to employ them upon action upon the Watches. He must cause
respect to be given to the Corpse du Guard; and silence to be kept, whether it
be about the Walls or Gates, that so the noise may not hinder the hearing of
the advertisement from the Sentinels. He is likewise to have an eye to their
lives and manners, and to take care of the Baggage and Money of such as are
hurt or sick, and to be in his own carriage sober, wise and discreet, for the
avoiding ill example unto others.

Of the Martial of a Regiment.
HE ought to take into his custody all persons committed unto his charge by the
chief Officers of the Regiment; and if they be called to justice, he is to
bring them to the Martial-General, who are to be carried from thence to the
Council of War. It is also his care to see that all Women, Boys, Servants,
Bread, and Aquavita-sellers, belonging to the Regiment, do march in the Rear,
and not before, or upon the Flanks. He is likewise to set such prizes upon Beer
and Victuals, as the Lord-Martial, or Serjeant-Major-General shall appoint;
which Order he shall receive from the Provost-Martial of the Army, and to see
it duly executed within the Circuit of the Regiment: And that the Sutlers do
not sell their Beer and Victuals above the set rate, lest they grate upon the
Soldiers. After the Captain of the Watch has gone the first Round, he is to
see that the Sutlers keep no tippling or disorder in the night, but make them
put out their Candlelight and Fires. During the time of Divine Service, he is
to go the Round, for fear any disorders should be committed in the Quarters.

Of a Quartermaster.
IF the Regiment be marching with the Army, (and not alone) he is then every
evening to attend upon the Quarter-Master-General, to receive his directions,
and to take the place, ground, and houses, appointed by him, for the Quarter
and Lodging of the Regiment; who presently is to acquaint and advertise his
Colonel of the same, and after to follow his charge. First, he appoints or
prepares the Colonels Lodging, and other Officers of the Field, in the Center
or midst of all the Quarters; and near them himself, and all the other Officers
of the Staff. After, according to the seniority of the Captains, and their
marchings, to distribute forth their Quarters as may be designed. Having thus
far acted through the help of the Constables and Head-boroughs of those places
where the Regiment is to Quarter; and having drawn forth their Billets in a
good and orderly way, he is before the Regiments entering the Quarters, to
deliver the same to the Colonel, or other Field-Officers of that Regiment; and
they to deliver it to the rest of the Captains, to direct them to their
Lodgings, with the particular Soldiers of their Company. And during the time
that he is about the visiting the distribution of the Lodgings, all the Troops
are to keep watch round about the place, and to send out to discover: he must
also be informed of the Lodgings of the whole Army, to know whom to give, or
whom to receive Supplies in case of necessity.

If the Quarter be in the open field, the Quarter-Master-General shall appoint
to each Quartermaster the place and ground which he shall take, which he is to
distribute to the Sergeants of every Company of the Regiment, who are to assist
him in taking the depth, length and breadth of their Quarters, with the
distances of the Alarum-place between the head of the Quarters and the Trench,
and the true distance of the Streets betwixt the in-getting of each Captains
particular Company.

When an Army or Regiment shall sit down before a Town, or forraging place, to
besiege it, they are employed sometimes to be Forragers to fetch in provision
for the Army, or particular Regiments. Which when they shall be required, they
ought to have sufficient Convoys and Guards, both of Infantry and Cavalry to
secure them; who are to be commanded by able Officers; and the Provost-Martial,
or one of his Assistants is to go along with them, to punish such as are
exorbitant, or do straggle. It will be expedient to the Regiment, that the
Quater-Master upon the Service may be employed twice in a week, to bring in a
fresh Victual to the Soldiers; but not to go twice to one place, lest they be
discovered by an Enemy, and be waylaid by their Forces, who may sometimes
prove stronger then themselves, to prevent, or to cut them off by the way,
laying of them secretly in some Ambushments: Which being truly considered of,
care may be taken accordingly of Supplies in other remote places, free from the
danger of the Enemy. To conclude, a Quartermaster ought to carry himself
honestly and carefully in his place, and to be well skilled in the Art of
Mathematics, that he may the better give Directions for fortifying and
measuring of ground, quartering of his whole Regiment, and in hutting of the
particular Soldiers.

The duty of a Sergeant.
HE that is a Sergeant to a Company, ought to be well skilled in the Postures
and all Military Motions, whereby in the first place he may endeavor to
correct the errors of such who handle not the Arms in a handsome, or a
serviceable way. And secondly, that he may be helpful to his Captain, or other
Superior Officer. In time of his Exercise, his duty is to draw forth the Files
according to such depths as shall be appointed unto him by his Captain, or
other Superior Officer, and to order them in the drawing up, and joining
together the Soldiers unto such places of honor as they shall direct him
unto. In a single Company he leads oftentimes a Division, but ought not
always there to march, in respect he is concerned to see that the Soldiers
march even in their Ranks at their distance of Order in File, and open Order in
Rank. To which purpose, he ought many times to be upon the Flanks, and
perceiving any Soldier out of order, he may cast in his Halbert between their
Ranks, to cause him to march even abrest with his right and left-hand-men. He
is likewise either in Field or Garrison to lead his Squadron to their Guard,
and to carry to prison such Offenders as his Captain or other Superior
Officer shall commit to the Provost-Martial. He is to see that the Musketeers
in time of skirmishing present all even abrest, with their Matches all cockt,
giving fire all together in good Order; and to direct them how to fall off, and
rally again in the Rear of their own Divisions. His duty likewise is to fetch
Ammunition, Powder, Match, and all other Materials for the Company. He is,
moreover, every particular evening to attend at the place of Parade, or at the
Majors Lodging, to fetch the Word, and carry it to his Captain, Lieutenant,
Ensign, and Corporals; and likewise as soon as he is come unto his Guard, he
must direct the Corporals where to set out the Perdues and Sentinels, and how
to order his Watch. He must likewise make Rounds; and if he find a Sentinel
asleep in the Field, he is to commit him to the hand of Justice. And thus much
concerning the duty of a Sergeant.

Of an Ensign.
AN Ensign being a Commission-Officer, in the absence of his Captain and
Lieutenant, is Commander in chief of the Company, and ought to march upon the
head of the same, leading them with a Half-pike. His Captain and Lieutenant
being present, and upon a Stand, his Colors ought to rest upon his side, being
held by his right or left hand, and unfurled; upon the March, his Colors ought
to be shouldered, taking up the corner-end of them in his right hand, and to
let them be half flying; the Pikes and Muskets all conforming unto the same
Posture. Marching through a City, for the more grace, his Colors may be wholly
flying, being advanced and held up by his right hand, or resting upon his right
side. He ought to be a proper man, grave, valiant and discreet, and to be well
skilled in the Postures of the Pike; in respect he leads them, and they expect
from him to be taught the Postures thereof. He ought to be well skilled in all
the lofty Figures of the displaying of the Colors above the head, and to make
use of them according to discretion and command; which is not only a
healthful exercise to his body, but also most becoming to him, or any other
Gentleman or Commander whatsoever, that shall sometimes make use of the same;
although condemned through sloth and ignorance by others, who will not take the
pains to learn it. An Ensign upon a Troop, lodging he Colors, or in time of
skirmishing, may fold them up, and retreat into the second Rank for the
securing of his Colors, which he ought to stick by, and not to stir from them
at such a time, although he hazardeth his last drop of blood, or makes them his
winding sheet. When the General shall pass by, or any such man of worth, he
ought a little to vail his Colors, inclining the head, or narrow end thereof,
a little downward; but not to bow his knee, or uncover his head. He may
sometimes for his ease or recreation upon the March, request some Gentleman of
knowing trust of the Pikes to carry his Colors for him, until such time as he
shall come again for to take them. In the absence of his Lieutenant, when his
Captain shall exercise the Company, he may stick his Colors in the ground, or
deliver them to some Gentleman of the Pikes, and fall down himself in the Rear
with a Half-pike or Cane, there to be an assistant to his Captain in supplying
the Lieutenants place, except his Captain should command him to the contrary.
He ought to have a Guard along with him, as well to the lodging of his Colors,
as to any other place. He ought to perform all courteous offices for the
Soldiers unto his Captain, which will gain him both love and reputation
amongst them, they thereby better respecting him, and more courageously
following of him.

Of a Lieutenant.
HE that is a Lieutenant to a Company, ought to be a good and able Soldier,
and well to understand the Duty of a Captain; in respect that in his absence he
is as Captain and Commander in chief over them. He is likewise to receive all
Orders, Charges, and Commissions from his Captain, assuming no authority unto
himself; but in the absence of his Captain he is to see all such Orders he has
received duly executed, for the better ease unto him. He is likewise at such
times frequently to exercise the Company in all their Military Motions,
Skirmishings, and False-firings in the pan. He is to hold the Sergeants and
Corporals strictly to their duty, causing them to provide all things necessary
for the Company, and to be assistants unto him where he shall see cause. He is
to teach and instruct the Soldiers in the use of their Arms, and sometime for
their ease, he may command every File-leader to draw forth his File, and to
show them their postures. By which means he shall do such good service to his
Captain, that when he shall exercise them himself, he may find them more apter
and readier to fulfill his Commands; at which time the Lieutenant ought to be in
the Rear, and to see all things there truly executed according to the Captains
commands. He is in time of danger and great importance to advise with his
Captain about the welfare of the Company; for knowing his Captains intentions
and purposes beforehand, he may be the better provided to withstand the furious
onset of the Enemy. He ought to have the Ensign, and all other Officers of the
Company as near him as may be, there being oftentimes urgent business to make
use of them as occasion shall require. He must neither cashiere nor punish any
man in the presence of his Captain, but ought to make him acquainted therewith,
that he may punish the offender by committing him either to prison, or cause
him to give recompense to the party wronged. To conclude, he ought to know how
far his power does extend, either in the presence or absence of his Captain,
always demeaning himself so, that he may gain the love of his whole Company, by
acting those things amongst them as may be just and honest.

Of a Captain.
HE that is a Captain of a Company, ought in respect he leads the same, and
is Chief, to appoint unto the Officers their several places, what Divisions
they shall lead, and where they shall march, and according to the number of
Files to make his Divisions answerable thereto, by dividing his Musketeers as
near as he can, the one half upon the right of the Pikes, and the other upon
the left: for they being the Flankers, ought equally to be balanced; but if
there be an odd File, it ought to be contrived, and carried to the right. In
the Van, Battle, or Rear, he must according to the number of his men, order
his Officers places, and draw them off accordingly in as equal a way as they
will afford. He is, as well as his own, to know all the several duties of his
Officers, and to be a good Postureman himself, that when he sees any of his
Soldiers handling their Arms in an undecent and slovenly manner, he may the
better reprove them for the same. And although many Captains regards them
not, but leaves them to be instructed by the inferior Officers; yet it is a
great deal of honor to him, when his Soldiers shall be taught by himself,
they more cheerfully and confidently marching along with him, when as they
perceive that he is thoroughly knowing in all things belonging to his charge. He
shall do well to exercise his Company sometimes himself, teaching them how to
fight upon all occasions, whether it be to Front, Rear, or Flanks, or upon
surprise of an Ambuscado, or any other disadvantage which may befall them,
informing them how to fall off and rally again in good order. And at such times
he must courageously and wisely behave himself, and encourage his Soldiers of
hopes of Victory, casting off all appearances of fear or danger whatsoever,
cheerfully animating his Soldiers to fall on, taking care, and making much of
them, and not to forsake them until such time they may be relieved by others.
He is to have a fatherly care of his Soldiers, timely providing for the
maimed, wounded, and sick, such helps and remedies as their present conditions
requires. He must likewise see that there be no want of Victual, Arms, or
Ammunition. He ought not to be covetous, nor keep back his Soldiers pay, but
to see them duly paid, visiting and relieving them according to their several
wants and necessities. His care must be to execute Justice, appease quarrels,
punish offenders; by doing whereof, he will maintain the honor and dignity of
his place. He ought to carry a very even hand over his Soldiers, and to be
very courteous and kind unto them; yet with that restriction of familiarity,
that he come not under contempt. And again, he must not be too rigid and harsh,
caning or beating them without just cause, lest he incur their hatred, who
secretly, or in time of Battle will seek to be revenged of him, endeavoring
to kill him, before their enemy; therefore he ought to be wise and discreet in
his commands and carriage toward them. His place of marching with his Company,
is some six foot before the first Division of Musketeers; but if his Company
be drawn up, he is either upon a Stand, or upon the March, to be on the head of
the Pikes, six foot before the Ensign. In time of Battle, although he leads
his men up first against the Enemy, yet he is not always tied to be in the
Front, having often just occasion to remove down into the Rear, Midst, or
Flanks, carefully casting his eye upon all parts of the Body, thereby
preventing the least error or neglect of his Soldiers, directing them what to
do, keeping them in good order as long as occasion shall require. Moreover, he
ought to be very religious, temperate, and discreet, faithful in his trust,
valiant in the field against the face of his enemy, and being besieged in
either Town or Fort, (for to preserve his honor) never give his consent for
the yielding it up, until it be past hope, that there is no possibility to hold
it out any longer.

Of a Serjeant-Major.
HIs duty is every morning and evening, or upon any other occasion, to attend
upon the General, Martial of the Field, or Serjeant-Major-General of the Army,
to receive his Orders how, or in what manner the Regiment shall march, whether
in a single Battalion, or else in two, to be joined with others. After which he
gives order accordingly unto the Captains how to draw up their Companies and
orders them accordingly. At which time of embattelling or marching, he ought to
be as near the midst of the Regiment as he can, for the better regulating of
the same. He is to place all the Officers according to their Dignity where they
are to lead, and where to bring up, and which men they shall take charge of to
fight, causing the Drum-Major (after they are all drawn up) and the other
Drummers to beat a March, and to move all at one instant, as occasion shall
require. He ought to make all the Divisions as near equally alike as possible
he can. He must likewise be well verst in the several drawing up of Regiments,
with their various forms of Battle, that according to the condition of the
place, ground, number of men, and Orders received from the Major General, or
Majors of the Brigades, he may not show himself a Novice, or one that is to
seek: nor ought he to go dully or slothfully upon his charge or place, but to
be very ready, quick, and nimbly performing with much ease and readiness his
Battalions and grand Divisions. In their drawings up he may be permitted to
have Pen, Ink, and Paper for to take an account of the several strengths of the
Captains Companies, and to order his men accordingly, and ought to give unto
all the Officers of the Regiment notes in writing of their several charges and
places. In time of fight, or otherwise marching with the Regiment, he is to be
on horseback, in regard he is the eyes, hands, and feet thereof: in time of
Battle he is to see every Officer to perform his charge, and Soldier his
duty, forcing and compelling them forward, if in case they turn their backs. He
is also to distribute to the Captains and other Officers such Orders as he
shall receive from his Colonel or other Superior Officer. In marching with the
Regiment, not alone, but with the Army, he must know from the General, Martial,
or Major General, whether the Regiment be to march in the Vanguard, Battle,
or Rear. He ought to have some knowledge or information of the Country, whether
it be long or straight, thereby judging how to order his marching so, as he may
not be disturbed by the enemies Horse, or Artillery. Being troubled with
Baggage, if there be any difficult passage, he ought to be there present to
prevent such disorders as may happen; giving directions for their placing and
marching, as they may not be any hinderance to the Regiment, putting them in
order again before the Regiment shall enter into their Quarters; at which time
he may give license to the Captains and their Ensigns to take their lodgings,
excepting only those who are appointed for Guardians, who must enter the Corpse
du guard, and place their Sentinels until such time as they shall be relieved
by others.

Now if a Regiment be to be quartered or lodged either in the Field, or under
shelter; if in the Field, he must cause it to be barracado'd, or entrenched by
the Wagons, or other defenses of the Field; after which he is to place his
Corpse du guard round about the Quarters, and the Sentinels at so near a
distance, that they may hear one the other speak, being about 80, or 100 paces
off from the Corpse du guard, being placed double, a Pike and a Musket; and five
paces from them, other single Sentinels are to be placed, which are called
Perdues. And in case of Alarm, the Sentinel Perdue shall retreat to the double
Sentinel; and in case of necessity, all together, having given fire, are to
retreat to the Corpse du guard. He must likewise at diverse hours of the night
visit the Corpse du guard, and if an Alarm be given in the Field, he is to
betake himself to the Alarm-place of the Regiment, and there to form his
Battalion, and to send men to double the Guards on that part where the Alarm
was given, and to give notice thereof to his Colonel, or other Superior
Officer, if they be present, of what passes. The Ensigns ought not to retreat,
unless their Colonel or he give leave: no Order at any time ought to be
altered, but by him, in respect he gives none but such as he receives from
the Colonel. It is his duty to speak for Ammunition, as Powder, Bullets, Match;
and for Victuals, if there shall be any want in the Regiment, which provisions
ought to be delivered unto him, and he to see it equally distributed unto the
Companies according unto the proportion given out. And likewise he is to give
Order what proportion or number of workmen, or commanded men, shall be drawn
forth to work.

If under shelter, then he is to view the place, both within and without,
appointing the places for the Corpse du guards and Sentinels, and the way of the
Rounders, that it be free. It will be expedient for him to choose the
Alarm-place, whither the Companies upon the Alarm given are to repair, being
the Rendezvous for the whole Regiment; being careful to place sufficient
Guards, both upon the Walls, and about the Gates, for their more security.
Which being ended, he may give leave to the Captains to go to their Lodgings,
and several Quarters, there to remain until they shall be called upon Duties;
for the due performance whereof, he is to cause them to cast Lots, whereby they
may know what part of the Walls may fall to their turn. He is to command the
Captains to enter the Guards about ten or eleven a clock in the morning; he is
likewise to open and shut the Gates, at the rising or setting of the Sun, and
to place the Watches upon the Walls presently upon the shutting of the Gates,
and to relieve them upon the opening thereof.

And as he does receive his directions for marching, imbattelling, viewing of
ground, and placing of Guards, from the Serjeant-Major-General, or
Serjeant-Major of that Brigade: so he is to deliver them over to the Captains
and Officers of that Regiment, and to call upon them to whom it appertains, to
see them duly executed. In the presence of his Colonel, and Lieutenant Colonel,
he is to be an assistant unto them, in seeing all orders and directions duly
performed; and in their absence, he has the same authority and command as
they. He ought after he has received the Word and Orders from the
Serjeant-Major-General, or Serjeant-Major of the Brigade, he presently delivers
them to his Colonel and Lieutenant Colonel; and afterward to the Sergeants of
every Company, drawn in a Ring, according to the Seniority of their Captains,
which are to come, and attend upon him for the same. In the absence of his
Superior Officers, he gives the Word himself; every night he is to visit all
the Guards of the Regiment, commanding them duly to keep the turns of their
Watches and Marches, seeing that one Captains Company perform not more duty
than another, to the end, that both the honor and labor may be equally
divided among so he may exercise the whole Regiment, being thereunto required
by his Colonel, or Lieut. Colonel, in all their Distances, Facings, Doublings,
Wheelings, and False firings; or in their absence, of himself he has full
power so to do. To conclude, he ought to be well grounded in all Military
Affairs, and to be both wise and valiant.

Of a Lieutenant Colonel.
HE that is a Lieutenant Colonel to a Regiment, has a very honorable place,
having power and command over all the Regiment in the absence of his Colonel,
and may also at such time exercise the Regiment in all the Military Motions,
and is to lead the Regiment upon the head thereof: but when his Colonel is
present, he brings up the Rear, if they march in one Division; but if in two,
in some places he leads the second, as his Colonel does the first; or if in
three, as formerly is shown, he commands the Vanguard, the Colonel the
Battle, and the Major the Reer-guard. His place is not of so great pains and
toil as the Majors is; therefore he ought in the drawing up of the Regiment to
be helpful and assisting unto him in that particular, and in all others where
he shall think fit. To conclude, the greatest affairs of the Regiment being
carried forth by the Major, there is the less remaining to be spoken concerning
him, but that he see all things duly observed throughout the Regiment,
according unto such orders received from those which are above him.

Of a Colonel.
IT concerns every Colonel to take care that his Companies be full and
complete (if it may be) that they be well provided of Arms, and to take
cognizance what Exercises are continually performed by them, communicating
Orders, and commanding all Officers of his Regiment what is to be performed by
each Company respectively, whenever they shall happen to be upon their March.

In the Head of his Regiment is his most honorable and proper place, and there
he ought to be most frequent. He is to be subservient to the Lord General, Lord
Martial, and Serjeant-Major-General of the Field, to whom he is to pay like
respect and observance as he himself expects, (and that justly) from all
inferiors to him. For from those his superior Officers, by him are received in
charge all such Orders as refer to the place of Alarms, Marchings,
Imbattellings, Guards, or Convoys. Furthermore, it is requisite that every
Colonel should acquaint himself at least once every week, how and in what
manner the Soldiers of his Regiment have deported themselves in their several
Quarters, by a due and strict examination of the qualities of all such offenses
as have occurred, and been committed by the several and Distinct Soldiers
under his command, hereby preparing every several misdemeanor for a readier
hearing before a Council of War, or Court Martial; and this is easily effected
by convening the Captains, or other Officers under them, at such convenient
times as may suit with his occasions; every Colonel being bound to make his
appearance at each Council of War, as Assistant to the Lord Martial, and
President of the said Council, for the hearing and determining of all such
propositions and matters in question relating to the Army.

In all matters of Advice and Counsel, but more especially when any Stratagem,
Siege, or intended Battle is in agitation to be put in action, the Colonel
ever as one of the primary Field-Officers is summoned to consult with the
General, and with all freedom to deliver his opinion in all things that shall
be there discussed, for the best advantage (as he shall conceive) for the
designs in hand, how weighty and important soever, and to be ready to go upon
any such service as shall be cast into his charge to be executed by the major
part of the said Council, and to express his obedience to his General, although
it be a service that correspond not with his own opinion at the first, but
being cleared by the larger number to be more conducing to the good of the
Design, courageously to undertake it, and faithfully to perform it.

In the quartering of his own Regiment, which is always ordered for Quarter in
two grand Divisions, regard is to be had that his own Lodgings be ever taken up
in the most equal place between his grand Divisions, that so he may with more
facility and celerity dispense and import his commands to either Party. What
commands soever shall descend unto him in charge from his superior Officers, as
relating to the Guards, disposing of Marchings, appointing Imbattellings,
ordering of Quarters, etc. he is carefully to see executed. He must do justice
unto all without partiality, so far as he exceed not his proper Authority, and
at all times to be diligent in suppressing of Mutinies, even in their first
growth, by a discreet punishment of the principal offenders, for prevention of
further mischief and inconvenience.

Of Guides.
MAps, with the right use and knowledge of them, are great helps toward the
finding out of the best and most convenient ways. Skilful and expert
Inhabitants of the Country, are most proper to be elected for Guides; and it
is necessary, for their better encouragement, and the Armies sudden and
necessary use of them, to have them listed in Soldiers pay. For the finding
out of the fittest and ablest persons for this employment, it is most
especially the duty of the Waggon-Masters, who are to see and enquire
certainly, that they be men known and practiced in all possible Bypath,
Cross-ways, etc. That they be able to give an account of the distance of
places, of the evenness and straightness of them, whether they be plain or
crooked, hilly or stony, and difficult for passage; what Rivers, Hedges,
Ditches and Bridges lie in the way, and which way (if there shall be several
ways) is the safest and shortest, which the nearer or farther to or from the
Enemies Quarters, which more probable for their approaches, as likewise for
Quarter; what Forage, what Water is to be had, and how convenient the way is
for Baggage. If it shall happen that these Guides may be chosen partly out of
the Soldiers, and partly from the Countrymen, and so any scrumple, jar, or
difference happen in opinion, such Officers and others as are best skilled in
those parts and places, are either to reconcile the difference, or from the
most probable intelligence, to conclude upon the most convenient passages. In
respect of the danger and great hazards, if not utter ruin, that the Guides
sometimes do, and often may draw the Soldiers into by treachery and false
play, they are many times caused to ride haltered about the neck, to put them
in mind of capital punishment, if they shall mislead the party they guide; but
in case they discharge their trust faithfully and ably, they ought to be as
well rewarded for their encouragement, as otherwise to be punished for the
terror of others.

Of Scouts.
AN active Enemy is always watchful, and diligent to apprehend every
opportunity that may make for his advantage, and therefore it concerns every
Commander by way of Counter-mine, as it were, to be careful that he rightly and
fully inform himself of their ways and courses, for prevention of his own
danger, in case of sudden assaults, and the better infesting of his enemy. And
to this end, he must make choice of such as are approved for their valor and
fidelity, discretion and vigilance, not probable to be corrupted with gain, or
daunted through fear. These men are not only to take direct, plain, or high
ways, but also by private and unsuspected passages, and scouring as they scout
all places whatsoever that are accessible; and when they have made diligent
observation in all places, to inform of nothing but what they can give the
ocular proof of, lest by their error and mistake, the whole Army possibly may
be led into an irreparable ruin; and whosoever is the Conduct or Officer of
these Scouts (for one, and an able one they must have always with them) must be
exceeding careful of his reputation, that he inform of nothing more then what
he can justify from his own eyes or ears; and if he inform further, to inform
them also, that that information is but from report, that it may be considered
of accordingly, and his repute preserved entire.

Of Spies.
OF all men, these are at all times necessary for an Army, and in all Armies of
all men they will deserve to be most certainly and liberally rewarded, to the
intent that they may at all times cheerfully and faithfully undertake any
employment of the greatest trust, hazard, or danger. And he that will make
choice of able and trusty men in this kind, must after diligent observation,
and weighing of their dispositions and courage, select them out of his own
Soldiers, who under pretense of some discontent for want of pay, etc. may
thereby with less suspicion receive entertainment from the enemy, and (if it be
possible) to be listed with the Horse, whereby they may gain the fairer
opportunities in Field or Garrison, to give certain intelligence of all Designs
and Occurrences in the enemies Quarters.

Before their departure from you, let them take their several instructions (for
the more you have, the better, if they be designed for several places, and
unknown unto each other) both for times and places of conveyance, which places
must be strictly observed, and duly searched for such informations, as your
Spies shall convey thither; and thither let your answers and advices be
reconveyed for their further instruction.

Sometimes there may arise matters of such importance and consequence, that it
will not only be convenient to certify by Letter, but most necessary to make
appearance in person, and there to consult and advise together, if perhaps the
enemy shall be resolved to fall upon some of the opposite Quarters suddenly,
etc.

For Cursary Spies, and present Intelligence, the people of meanest rank and
quality are the fittest Instruments; as common Peasants, Pedlars, Sellers of
Strongwaters, or Tobacco, and the like, who may pass unsuspected, and with more
security effect your purpose.

There are yet another sort of Spies of another nature, who are denominated
double, who being chosen to this Office upon great experience of their trust
and constancy, may in some cases be allowed to inform the enemy aright, in some
such affairs of yours, as may not be prejudicial to you, but to insinuate and
win belief upon the contrary party; and hereupon let them secure themselves
into the private service of some of their Prime Officers, whence they shall (as
being better acquainted) more easily discover, and more certainly inform of the
enemies proceedings and intentions.

CHAP. XXIV. Of Military Watches.
HOw necessary these Watches are in all Armies, is evident to all men; the
grand and chiefest care whereof, for order and direction, rests in the
Serjeant-Major, who issues out such precepts therein to the Captains or
Companies, as he himself before received from his superior Officer; and
according to the said precepts received, whether it be in Garrison or Field,
the work and duty required is to be performed either by Squadrons or full
Companies, having respect unto the strength or weakness of the place to be
guarded, and in such places as are most likely for the Enemy to make his
approaches in, and that there they be careful to fortify the Guard above other
places of less concernment; which must be observed by the Major, in surveying
the Guards, and Guard-places, in his walking of the grand Round, and so,
according as his discretion shall see fit, to take from the stronger places of
Guard such Soldiers as may supply the defects of the weaker.

The appointment of particular Guards unto particular Captains, is in the power
of the Major; or otherwise, he commands the Sergeant of each Company to
attend him at his Quarters at any hour of the day, as he shall think fit, where
every one that is to do duty upon the Guard that night, takes his lot in
order, (which lots are shuffled together in an Hat) which directs him upon
what Guard to attend that night. This being done, all the Sergeants that have
their direction for the duty of the Guard, are to make a Ring, or Circle,
according to their degrees in Seniority. To the Senior of all which Company of
Sergeants, the Major gives the Word privately in his ear, who after the same
manner passes it to the next, and so from man to man unto the youngest, who
whispers it in the ear of his Major, who sends it back again in the former
manner for securities sake, until it come to the senior Sergeant again, who
then leaves it in the ear of his Major, which preventeth all mistakes for each
particular Company.

The Guards being thus set in order, the Officers relieved ought to inform the
Officers of the Relievers; of all the several duties of their several Guards,
etc.

Every Commander in Chief of that particular Squadron which he is appointed
unto, leads up his own Squadron from the Parade to their appointed Guard, to
which when they approach, the Officer in Chief delivers the Word to the
Corporal, or his Lanspassadoe, and they to their Superior Officers.

The manner of relieving is by planting a guard of Pikes next to the Relievers,
and adjoining to them in the Rear a guard of Musketeers, through whom the
Relievers are to pass, and the Relieved to march back to their Quarters. After
all things thus set in order, the Captain of the Guard in person by strict
injunction commands every man to his duty, from which no man either. Officer
or other is to depart without an especial license, and in all Alarms to stand
close and quietly to their Arms, expecting further instruction and command what
they are to do. And all this time, and constantly, a Sentinel is appointed to
guard the entrance into the Main-Guard.

Every Officer and Soldier in a Regiment is worthy of Honor, Pay, and
Encouragement, according to his Merit and Seniority; and to this end there
ought to be a perfect List of the names and number of all particular Soldiers
and Officers in every Squadron; which List or Catalogue is to remain in the
hands of the several Corporals or Lanspassadoes; which Corporals are diligently
to see what defects there are of all several necessaries in their Corpse du
guard, and to be careful that they be continually supplied; which he must do by
information to his Major, and (in case of his absence or neglect) to his
Captain, who may inform the Governor, that all wants of Fire, Ammunition, or
Lights be made good, and completed.

The Corporals according to order and precept given to them, are to dispose of
the several Sentinels, as well Pikes as Musketeers, and to have an especial
care that they keep their Muskets prim'd and laden, and their Match cockt and
lighted, with their Pan guarded; which must be observed by their often visiting
the several Sentinels, to see that all things be in due order, and with
silence, to the end that the Sentinels may always be heard, as often as
occasion is offered.

The Office of every Sentinel after he is placed upon his duty, and in his due
posture (according as is above declared) is to enquire of every passenger, or
other that shall but stir, Who goes there? yea, though it be the Captain
himself: and howsoever the remotest Sentinel from the Corpse du guard, is to
permit him with his Retinue to pass; yet he is bound to have an eye upon them,
till he approach the nearest Sentinel to the Corpse, who upon the like demand,
is answered, The Captain of the Watch; which latter Sentinel commands him to
stand, and therefore with a loud voice calls forth his Corporal, the Sentinel
not stirring from his place or posture, until the Corporal with his Sword drawn
shall approach with a Guard of Musketeers, who are to be all armed, and
appointed, as the Sentinels, ready to present; whereupon the Corporal with one
only Muskettier advancing, and perceiving him to be the Captain of the Watch
indeed, is to give him the Word in his ear, having respectively cast down the
point of his Sword: afterward receiving further instructions from him, he
conducts him to his furthest Sentinel. But if it shall appear that he be not
the Captain, or the Corporal knowing him not justly to be so, by a just
suspicion, he may then detain him (although he shall give him the Word) and then
he shall further demand the Word of some other attending him, from whom having
received it, he may more safely permit them to pass; but of all others
whatsoever that shall attempt a passage, he is to receive the Word from them,
and not deliver it to them.

The Captain himself having done the duty in person of passing the first Round,
upon his return, he is to send forth others upon the like duty, such as he
shall out of his discretion choose from his Main-guard, and may most confide in,
to whom he is to impart the Word at their setting forth upon the duty, and not
before, with strict admonitions, and full instructions what they are to do, and
what way to take.

Now if he shall be supplied with men enough upon his own Guard, he may at the
same time command out several Rounders to be taken several ways; who are
diligently to observe their directions given them, and to be very vigilant in
the observation of all things in their passage, both by the eye and the ear,
and to admonish the Sentinels (in case of neglect) that all things be more
carefully looked unto in their duty. And of these Rounders likewise (as before)
the foremost Sentinel demands, Who goes there? When being answered
satisfactorily, as by the name of the Round, or Friends, the permits them
passage to the nearest Sentinel, who having stopped them there, takes a further
account, what, and who they are: Which is done by calling forth his Corporal,
who placing the point of his Sword at one of their breasts, takes the Word
privately, and so passes them by conduct to the furthest Sentinel. But if there
shall happen a mistake in the Word, the Corporal is either to secure them with
himself, or by Guard to transfer them to the Main-guard.

Such as shall walk the Round, are to take a strict account of all they meet,
what, and who they are; and in case of deficiency of answering justly on the
one side, or suspicion of the other, they are to secure and guard them to the
Captain of the Watch.

Now setting aside those Queries which some do make between Rounders and
Counter-Rounders, if they meet, who shall give or take the Word; the best and
safest course is for them all, that before the Word be either given or taken,
they go together to the nearest Corpse du Guard, and there to give the Word;
after which they are to pass upon their duty again; and so having finished the
Round, and returning to the Captain of the Watch, he takes account of them of
the things that they have done and observed in their duty and course upon the
Round; and thus the Captain still supplies the Rounds successively by such
others as he shall take by seniority, and dispose off for the like service.

Furthermore, that all disorders, irregularities, and such persons as shall
cause the same in a Town or Garrison, may be found out and rectified, and that
all dangerous accidents by fire or otherwise may be prevented; the Captain of
the Watch commands out a Guard of Firelocks or Musketeers, to view the
Streets, and all suspicious and irregular persons as they take, they are to
bring to the Main-Guard of this Guard, which is always conducted by a Sergeant,
and is called the Patrouille: and if they happen to be Musketeers, and not
Firelocks; then they are to be every one provided of such an instrument as may
cover the lighted Matches, and keep them from discovery. From these also, as
from the Rounders, the Captain of the Watch takes full account of all their
passages and observations on their duty.

When at any time any sudden approach shall be made, or any Enemy discovered,
the Sentinel (who is to be firm and constant to his Place and Posture, till he
shall be relieved) forthwith by firing gives the Alarm, and immediately seconds
it by crying with a loud voice, Arm, Arm. When the Alarm is thus given, the
other two Divisions immediately led by their Officers, are orderly to march up
to the Captain of the Main-Guard, to the intent that all Guards of the Garrison
may with expedition be made good; and it is necessary that these instructions
be given them indeed by the Serjeant-Major, when he shall give the Word to the
Minor-Serjeants, who must likewise inform their chief Officers of it, and from
them the Soldiers are to be charged and acquainted therewith, that so upon all
occasions they may not be ignorant of this part of their duty, but ready to
perform it.

The duty of a Sentinel, is to stand in the Place and Posture, a full hour, and
no more; at which time the Corporal, or (in case of his absence) his
Lanspassadoe is to relieve him, and not only him, but all the Sentinels that
are out upon duty, relieving the farthest Sentinel first (who falls in the Rear
of the rest) and so all the others backward in the like Order, and then
conducts the relieved Sentinels back to the Guard again.

At an early hour of the morning appointed for beating up the Revally, the two
Sentinels next unto the Guard are to retreat into it.

At the time appointed in the morning for opening of the Gates, the
Serjeant-Major attended with a sufficient Guard, repairs to the Governor, or
place elsewhere allotted, and there receives the Keys; which being done, he is
to unlock first that Gate which is most remote from danger of the Enemy, and
the rest in order answerable: but if it happen to be in place and time of
imminent danger, the Major commands forth a party of Soldiers conducted by
an able Officer to go first, and make diligent search for discovering of
Ambuscadoes, which may happen to be in any close suspected places, as Lanes,
By-ways, Hedges, ruinous Cottages, Churches, Pits, or Hollow-trees, Woods,
Gardens, and all suchlike enclosures; at which time he opens not the
Main-ports, but only the Wickets. And except upon command to the contrary,
which is not usual, both the Guards and the Watches at the Gates are to be kept
night and day, and all persons upon them to continue upon their duty until they
shall be relieved by order.

Upon the discharging of the Watch, to the end that every Officer and Soldier
may have notice to make speedy repair to their several Guards, each several
Drum first beats a Troop, and afterward a March in the Main-guard. Hereupon,
it is to be supposed the Relievers are advanced toward the Main-Guard, where
the relieved are to be drawn off, and to make a stand, expecting till the
Relievers shall come up; which being done, the relieved then are to troop
homeward; and after that they have attended and seen their Colors lodged, they
are to disband, and not before.

And now, further to satisfy the expectation of the Lovers of the Art
Military, it shall not seem unseasonable here to declare somewhat concerning
the manner of Field-Watches, or Vigils de Camp, denoted unto us by the Expert
and Ancients, under these three Notions. The first are Castra temporanea,
aleager ad placitum, pitched only for the present, and may perhaps alter and
change it is Station in a day, or an hour, according to the pleasure and
judgment of the General, and Commanders in chief. Secondly, there are Castra,
a select or constant Camp, so called, because of their intentions of
continuance in the besieging of a Castle, or Town, etc. until they shall have
taken the same, or by some other necessity, or further advantage, forced to
raise their Seige. The third and last, called Castra, Such a Camp as is pitched
before or near some Rivers side, to oppose and frustrate the Incursions of the
Enemy, who otherwise might this way break in for the infesting or taking of a
Country. Now concerning such Watches or Guards, which shall relate unto several
Camps, both in regard of the several and most convenient places for securing
the Camps by Sentinels and Perdues, they are to be primarily appointed and
ordered according to the discretion and command of the Masters of the Field,
whether Generals, or Majors of Brigades; and afterward the Serjeant-Majors and
Captains of Regiments, according to their commands and relieved order, are to
design them for the aforesaid place.

To enlarge the several Arguments and Disputes that might further arise
in-point of Field-duties relating thereunto, would be too tedious, and to
little purpose, in regard that whosoever shall but diligently observe what has
before been set down concerning the duty of Watches in Garrison and Fortresses,
may sufficiently be able to apprehend and perform all manner of Duties that
shall concern this Field-service, provided that he be careful to adhere to the
directions of the Field-Officers in all points, and diligent to observe the
manner of managing of all things according to their instructions. And therefore
to avoid prolixity and fruitless disputes, I refer the Reader to what has been
above related.

CHAP. XXV. The ordering of a private Company unto a Funeral-occasion.
WHen any Commander or Soldier of worth shall be deceased, a private Captain
that would show respect and honor by marching along with his Company attending
the Corpse to the place of burial, must order his Soldiers after this manner.

They being summoned by beat of the Drum, to meet at their usual place of
Rendezvous, they may be drawn up according to the usual manner, having a
Vanguard, Battle and Reer-guard: being thus ordered, and each of the
Soldiers having either in his Hat a black Feather or Ribbin; the Captain may
draw them off, and order them to their Long-march; moving them away in an
orderly manner unto the place of him that is deceased, and there make Alt.
After which he may command the Musketeers in the Van to open to the right and
left outward to such convenient distance as the Pikes may move up between them,
and take possession of their first ground; and those Musketeers may face
about, and move down clear of the Pikes, and after close their Files inward to
Order, and face to their Leader.

Now being in two Divisions, let them so continue with their Arms ordered,
until such time as they shall perceive the Corpse to be brought forth into the
Street; then the Captain may face them all about, and move them some three
Pikes length before the Corpse; after which he may command his Musketeers to
perform their Funeral-Posture, which is to have their Muskets under their left
Arm, with the But-end upward, their Rests likewise on that side trailing. After
which the Pikes are to face again to their first Front, and to lay the narrow
end of their Pikes down upon the ground; after facing about to the left, and
bringing up the But-end of their Pikes on their right side, conforming
themselves with the Musketeers in their Funeral-Postures. In the next place,
the Ensign strips his Colors off from the Staff, and ties them about his right
Wast; putting a black Ribbon toward the very end of his Staff, he after faceth
to the Body of Pikes, standing in the Rear of them, and trailing his Staff in
the same Posture. Next follows the Captain, having in his hand a Half-pike or
Leading-staff, conforming himself likewise to his Funeral-Posture. Thus being
all ready to march, and rightly faced toward that place where the Corpse are to
be interred, are after this manner following to lead and to bring up.

The first Division of Musketeers, which was the Reer-guard, is led by the
Lieutenant; the next Division of Musketeers, that was formerly the Vanguard,
is led by the second Sergeant; the Body of Pikes, is led by the eldest
Sergeant, he trailing a Half-pike upon the head of them; the Ensign bringing it
up, and the Captain twelve foot short of him bringing up the Rear of the whole
Company. And after him the Ministers marching just before the Coffin; and in
the Rear, and next unto it, the nearest kindred, and after them those that are
invited to the Funeral.

Having thus stated the manner and order of the Military Part, with all others
belonging thereunto, for any ordinary Funeral-occasion; I shall in the next
place proceed to show their Order upon the March, and how each Arms ought to be
disposed before the Corpse enter into the Church, with the rest of the Train.

All persons being ordered as before expressed, the Drums being covered with
Black-bays, and placed betwixt the second and third Ranks in each Division; and
all being ready to move, the Drums may begin to beat their Funeral-March, and
the Lieutenant leading them away, with the But-end of his Pattison upward and
comported; the rest following, and marching in a leasurable and slow way along
together, until they come within a hundred foot of the Church-door, or place
where the Corpse are to be interred, there making Alt. After which, let the
Musketeers in their Ranks File to the right and left, not advancing ground;
and face in opposition, making a Guard for the rest to pass through, and
resting their Muskets, or putting the But-end thereof to the ground, with the
Barrel toward them (which is a conformity to the Pikes being ordered.) In the
mean time, let the Pikes advance their Arms, and immediately after move forward
betwixt the Guard of Musketeers, and let their Ranks afterward file to the
right and left, making also a Guard, their Pikes being ordered, and they as the
rest, facing in opposition. Then let the Captain, who brings up the Rear of all
his whole Body, move forward with the rest to the Church-door; then falling off
in respect of ordering his Company, the rest of the Train Marching into the
Church.

After which the Captain may cause them all to face to the Church, or to their
Leader; he standing then before the Church-door, commanding them to Rank again
as they were. After every Leader may draw off his File, and set their Arms
apart in each File by themselves, and go in to hear part of the Sermon, if
there should be any such order beforehand from their Captain, placing
Sentinels to look to their Arms. And when Sermon is almost done, they ought to
go forth of the Church, and draw forth the Files by some little warning of
Drums, to be in readiness to answer such directions as they shall receive from
their Captain; who may, if he have convenience of room, draw all his
Musketeers into a Ring, and the Pikes in like manner on the outside of them;
and as soon as the Soldiers have notice (being all ready and presented) that
the Body is laid down in the grave, they may upon warning of the Drum, give one
volley of shot all together, and after make ready again, performing the same
twice over more. After which, the Ensign may put his Colors upon his Staff,
and furl them up; then the Pikes may be drawn up again into one Body, and the
Musketeers into another; and falling in the Rear of the Pikes, they may troop
away. And a little before the place of lodging the Colors, they may make Alt,
and the Musketeers may sleeve up by the outside of the Pikes from the Rear,
filing to the right and left, making a Guard for the Colors and Pikes to march
through them; and being clear, and the Colors lodged, they may face about
again to the right, and give another volley of shot: but if there should be
such a straight of ground, that the Musketeers cannot be drawn into a Ring;
then they must be otherwise disposed of, by making them into two Ranks, the one
on the one side of the Street, and the other on the other side, facing them
either in opposition, or in an oblique manner: if in opposition, they must
present very low, and give fire three times all together as before, with one
volley after another; if oblique, the one Rank is to be faced toward the upper
end of the Street, and the other toward the lower end, and so may fire with
less danger to each other; the Pikes to be filed away to the right and left,
behind the Musketeers before they were thus faced. And again, where they have
not length of ground to contrive the Musketeers into two single Ranks, they
may fire all together as they stand at Order, mounting up the Muzzles of their
Muskets into the Air, without offending each other. Therefore according to the
convenience of the ground, it must be the discretion of every Commander to
order his men accordingly to perform his three volleys of shot in the most
gracefullest way; which being ended, they may all return to their Quarters. And
thus much may suffice for satisfaction to any Commander in ordering his single
Company to any Funeral-occasion, marching along of it self.

CHAP. XXVI. The ordering of a Regiment to a Funeral-occasion.
WHen Companies are to march in a Regimental-way, care must be had that the
Regiment be first drawn up according to this Rule. The Pikes to be in one Body,
and the Musketeers equally divided to flank that Body; after which let the
Major make his Divisions, appointing the places of every Captain and
Lieutenant, where they shall lead, and where they shall bring up. After that
they may move away toward the place or lodging of him that is to be interred,
and there make Alt, opening the Vanguard or Musketeers, and facing them to
the Rear; then let the Body of Pikes and them interchange ground, that the
Pikes may march next the Hearse, in manner as before expressed of a private
Company, whose smaller Bodies take Rule from the greater. Then let the
Lieutenant Colonel lead the Regiment, and the Colonel bring it up; and so in
like manner in every Division, the Bringers-up are to lead, and the Leaders to
bring up. All Officers and their Arms being thus reverst, the Front becomes the
Rear, and the Rear the Front, they must move slowly away* and before the Corpse
pass into the Church, there must be ground reserved, that after the Musketeers
have first made a Guard, the Pikes may move through them, and may also in like
manner file in their Ranks as the Musketeers did, joining to them, and making
a Guard in like manner of each Arms. After which the whole Train may pass
through in an orderly manner into the Church; the Soldiers in the mean time
attending without until Sermon be passed over. And being all in a readiness,
they may give three several Peals, or Volleys of shot, according to such
warnings as shall be given them. After which the Soldiers being ranked again
as they were, if they have convenience of ground, the Major may cause the
Captains to draw off their Companies, and troop home to their several Quarters,
according to their best convenience. But if they have not room, it will be most
properest for the Major to command the Musketeers to stand, and first to rank
the Pikes again as they were. Then let the Drums beat a Troop upon the head of
the Pikes in the Rear of the Colors; and let the Ensigns and Pikes first troop
away, through the Guard of the Musketeers; who being clear of them, and being
led by the Colonel and other Officers there appointed, the Musketeers may also
rank again in like manner, and fall in the Rear of the Pikes, following them
until they come unto a convenient place or ground for the Captains drawing off
their Companies, as they shall receive order from the Colonel,
Lieutenant Colonel or Major. And here I will conclude my Discourse concerning
the Exercising of the Infantry in all their Military Motions and Exercises.

FINIS.
The Postures of the Musket to be performed without the Rest.
The Musket lying on the ground, with Bandeliers and Match, the first Word of
Command will be, Stand to your Arms. Take up your Bandeliers. Put on your
Bandeliers. Take up your Match. Place your Match. Take up your Musket, letting
the Butt-end rest upon the Ground. Rest your Musket in your left hand, bringing
the Butt-end to your right side. Poyse your Musket. Shoulder your Musket.
Unshoulder your Musket and Poyse. Balance your Musket in your left hand with
the Barrel upwards. Open your Pan. Clear your Pan. Prime your Pan. Shut your
Pan.
Cast off your loose Corns. Blow off your loose Corns, and bring about your
Musket to your left side, carrying the Barrel downwards. Balance your Musket
in your left hand. Find out your Charge. Open your Charge. Charge with Powder.
Draw forth your Scowring-stick. Turn, and shorten to an inch. Charge with
Bullet. Put your Scowring-stick in your Musket. Ram home your Charge. Draw
forth your Scowring-stick. Turn, and shorten him to a handful. Return your
Scowring-stick. Bring forward your Musket and Poyse. Balance your Musket in
your left hand, with your Barrel upward. Draw forth your Match. Blow your Coal.
Cock your Match. Filt your Match.
Guard your Pan, Blow the Ashes from your Coal. Open your Pan. Present upon
your left hand. Give fire Brest-high. Dismount your Musket, holding him still
in your left hand. Uncock, and return your Match. Clear your Pan. Shut your
Pan. Set the Butt-end of your Musket to the ground.
Lay down your Musket. Lay down your Match. Take off your Bandeliers. Lay down
your Bandeliers.


An Advertisement to the Soldiery of the Nation.
WHereas this Book in the several Tracts thereof, with much variety does set
forth at large, as to their several kinds and changes, all your Military
Motions and Postures, which may not only serve to give light to the
unexperienced, and lead them by the hand into the Military Gardens of Honor,
and other * Place this Sheet betwixt Bb and Cc *
places, where they are trained up, until by degrees they arrive unto
perfection; but may delight and confirm the most able and most knowing
Soldiers, whilst here they read over those several forms, in which heretofore
they stood, when in so many Battails, with such admirable success they have
both opposed and overcome their Enemies. And whereas even from hence may be
extracted many excellent Directions and Rudiments of War, which may encourage
and fully enable all active and gallant Spirits in this City of London to
perform such Commands, and to follow those Conducts to which they shall be
disciplined by those exquisite and most expert Soldiers, who shall train them
up, either in the new Artillery, or any other ground of such Honorable
Employment, and hereby be so fitted and furnished with all directions, that the
performance of them shall render them most acceptable: yet I cannot but
confess, that through the usual variety of this most Noble Profession,
proceeding from the great plenty which these times afford thereof (the exercise
of Arms being every where so frequently shown) that the most plain and ordinary
Rules, though far more useful, are not so well rellished, many men looking more
in such your public Trainings after novelty and delight, then solidity; which
was purposely contrived by the Authors of it only for variety, and for drawing
of one another to the love of Arms, and not for any prejudice to the
Fundamentals of War, on which the Ruin or the Safety of the Kingdom and
Commonwealth of the World depends. If peradventure it be alleged, that he who
can perform things of difficulty, will be more apt to carry on things of more
facility: It may be speedily answered, that the plain Rudiments and Principles
of War, being of greatest use and importance, and practiced in all Armies, both
in this and other Nations, they are by no means to be neglected or omitted, but
to be preserved and esteemed in that high manner which they do deserve; for the
ability in the performance of them, will no doubt more readily prefer a man,
and render him more capable of any employment, then the practice of any useless
or impertinent things in War. Add unto this, that the more easy and plain a
man is in his command, the more readily it is received by the Soldiers, and
more promptly obeyed; for new coined, and Sesquipedalian words of Command do so
puzzle and torment the apprehensions with directions and expositions to have
them understood, that not only they oftentimes transcend the reach of those
that are to give them; but they do much amaze and confound the capacities of
those who are to be led and ordered by them. I do the rather make mention of
this in this place, that a discreet care be taken, that no man make himself
ridiculous in his undertakings or Commands; but that he may be able to give an
absolute account of any Branch, which in the whole Body of the Art Military
shall be propounded to him, to give satisfaction therein to any judicious
Soldier, as concerning the use, purpose, and property of it; for otherwise it
would signify nothing at all. But when a man being required thereunto can
render a sufficient reason for what he does, or shall voluntarily give it
himself, as to this or that management of any service in War, it will very much
both content him, and inform them who shall be under his Command, and give them
a just encouragement to proceed in it: but if he should fail in this point of
Knowledge and Judgment, there is but little benefit to be expected from his
Conduct; for it were far better that a man did but a little in a Souldierly
way, which is proper, and carrying good approbation to men of understanding,
then to spin forth a long thread with new expressions and inventions, that are
of no use or profit, but tend rather unto laughter, and to the loss of time,
and the offense of many, and to the bringing of a general contempt upon the
Art.

And although there be many Rules which may be sufficient forms to direct, and
to teach to be expert in War, and doubtless are of great concernment to them
who have both the. Theorick and the Practick part; yet nevertheless there is no
rule, but at some time or other does admit of some exception, there being
espepially so many cross events in War, that no Commander can positively tie
himself up to any Rule; for occasions do vary so in several places, that the
chiefest Rule a man can walk by, is his Eye, and his Intelligence, wherein
accordingly he must accommodate himself to encounter his Enemies. And although
a Commander should be qualified with much Knowledge, Courage and Faithfulness,
the only accomplishments of a true Soldier; yet they are to be attended with
diligence; for in all his undertakings and performances, delays being always
dangerous, it is usually said, That which is soonest done, and well done, is
best done. But above all, he is to have an eye to order, which is the very life
of an Army. And in acting against an Enemy, great care is to be taken not to
puzzle the Soldiers, by confounding their understandings, which may occasion
their utter overthrow. And this makes me to reflect on what has been mentioned
heretofore. Let every Commander that truly delights in Military exercises,
study to be exact in all plain things, and practice the Soldiers much in the
exercise thereof; for this is the only use, and is altogether practiced and
observed in the Field. If a man will be curious in new fancies, there are
stratagems enough to be found out, in which he may exercise himself with much
variety, to delight the curious, and find much matter in them to be highly
valued, and esteemed. But this is to be carried on in a plain way, the study
whereof would ask some time; and it is not easily obtained by ordinary
capacities, which should content themselves to learn of such who are of higher
abilities. And on this account the Art would be more highly prized, and not
only bring more Honor to the Professors thereof, but even the Learners
themselves would become more capable of good preferment abroad, and our
Military Gardens and Meetings would much more flourish, and be beheld with more
delight and satisfaction, not only by the Soldiers themselves, but all other
Spectators whatsoever.

I do not desire to be mis-understood by this Discourse, that herein I should
go about to startle any ingenious Soldier, or dissuade him from any thing that
shall be new to his Invention, which is proper: I shall rather encourage him,
and be glad to understand of him what Reason he can give for every thing he
does, and of what use it may be unto the Public, and then it will admit of no
controulment. But vacant seasons may be used for variety and delight, in making
experiments of wit, fancy, and ingenuity; provided they do not dwell too much
upon them. But the substantial and solid things of War are above all things to
be precisely regarded, without which an Army, though of the most valiant men,
will be exposed to the greatest dangers, and fall into a most certain Ruin.

I should here humbly offer my Advice to the most eminent Meetings in the
Artillery and Military Gardens, in the latter of which I was heretofore a
Member, and still am a true Lover, and honourer both of that, and all other
places like unto it: My advice is, that on their days of public Meeting, they
would have chiefly before their eyes the main Grounds and Principles in the Art
of War, which (through permission) I am persuaded, would cause greater
appearances, and make their Ground to flourish more then ever; to the Honor of
our Nation, and the increase of experienced and able Commanders, if ever this
Commonwealth should stand in further need of them. And because the Ambition of
some does strive to aim at higher things in their thoughts then what is
practiced abroad, I have thought good to set down the plain way of exercising a
Company, as usually it is practiced in the Army, our Companies consisting of
one hundred men, two parts being Musketeers, and a third Pikes, the depth of
our Files being always six deep in the Armies of England, Scotland, and
Ireland: the Company being drawn up abrest, the Exercise is as follows, they
standing in their closest Order in Ranks and Files.

First, Command. Open Ranks backwards to Order.

Command. Files open to the Right to your Order.

Command. Ranks open backward to open Order.

Command. Files open to the left to open Order.

Command. Ranks open backward to double Distance.

Command. Files open outward to double Distance.

Command. Ranks close forward to open Order.

Command. Files close inward to open Order.

Command. Ranks close forward to your Order.

Command. Files close to the left to your Order.

Command. Face to the Right as you were.

Command. Face to the Left as you were.

Command. Face to the Rear as you were.

Command. Face to the Front as you were.

Command. Face to the Center as you were.

Command. Face to Front and Rear. as you were.

Command. Face to the Right and Left outward. as you were.

Command. Face to the Right and left inward as you were.

Ranks and Files being at Open Order.
Ranks to the Right Double.

Files to the Left Double.

Ranks to the Left Double.

Files to the Right Double.

Command. Half-files Double your Front to the Right.

Command. Files Double your Depth to the Left.

Command. Half-files Double your Front to the Left.

Command. Files Double your Depth to the Right.

Command. Bringers-up Double your Front to the Right.

Command. Files Double your Depth to the Left, every man falling behind his
Bringer-up.

Direction. Bringers-up Double your Front to the Left.

Files double your Depth to the Right, every man placing himself behind his
Bringer-up.

Command. Double your Ranks to the Right or Left entire as you were.

Command. Half-files double your Front to the Right entire.

Command. Right Half-ranks double entire the depth of your left Half-ranks.

Command. Half-files double your Front to the Left entire.

Command. Left Half-ranks double entire the depth of your Right half-ranks.

Direction. The same may be done to the Rear.

Command. Files to the Right hand Countermarch, and maintain Ground.

Command. Files to the Left hand Countermarch, and maintain Ground.

Direction. The same may be done in Ranks, as also both in Ranks and Files,
either maintaining, gaining, or losing ground; of these in the Army we use but
little.

Command. Wheel your Battle to the Right.

Command. Wheel your Battle to the Left.

Command. Wheel your Battle to the Right about.

Command. Wheel your Battle to the Left about.

Command. Files, file to the Right or Left.

Command. Ranks, file to the Right and Left.

First, The Musketeers being on both flanks, first firing, let the first Rank
stand and fire, every Rank passing through before his Leader, after standing
and fire, till all have fired over twice, or four times, the Pikes moving
slowly in the mean time; they will upon a stand be reduced as at first.

Secondly, Bring all the Musketeers before the Pikes, then let them fire in
the Front, falling off, and flank the Pikes upon the Right. Fire upon the right
flank, the body marching, and the Musketeers to pass on the left flank: after
the Pikes may charge to the right, the body moving again. Let the Musketeers
fire on the left flank, and fall in the Rear of the Pikes, who may after charge
their Pikes on the left. The body marching, the Musketeers may fire in the
Rear, and fall off to the Right and Left, and flank the Pikes as at the first;
the body facing about, the Pikes may charge to the Rear. We usually fire in the
Front sometimes two ranks standing, the rest passing by turns; then standing
after they have gained the ground before their Leaders, do fire, till all have
fired twice: other times three Ranks fire together; the first kneels down, the
second stoops, the third stands upright; then falling down, the three last
Ranks pass through, and do the like. This being done twice, reduces them all as
at first, the Pikes moving slowly; this being the usual way of exercising our
Companies in the Army.

Rich. Elton, Lieut. Col.

FINIS.
A SUPPLEMENT TO THE COMPLETE BODY OF The Art Military.

THE PUBLISHER To the READER.
HAving now an opportunity of reprinting the preceding Treatise of Military
Discipline, written by Lieutenant Colonel Richard Elton, containing the
Discipline and Exercise of Foot-companies, Regiments, Brigades, etc. I thought
it not convenient to let the Infantry March into the Field of the [World] any
more, without the Cavalry, nor they without their Train of Artillery: I have
therefore endeavored to make good the words of the Title, namely [The Complete
Body of the Art Military] by adding the following Treatises: wherefore, to the
Infantry here is added Cavalry, and Instructions for them, both in Posture and
Motion; and for both, here is provided Quarters; and for the securing of the
Quarters, we have surrounded them with Intrenchments, Redoubts, Bulwarks,
Hanworks, etc. and for the defending and maintaining of these Works, we have
brought hither our Great Artillery.

The additional Treatises in brief are these:

1. The Names, Offices, Duties and Qualifications of all Officers belonging to
an Army, from the General to the Private Soldier.

2. The manner of Enrolling, Arming and Exercising of the Cavalry, both in
Postures and Motions.

3. The manner of the Marching of an Army, both Horse and Foot, with its Train
of Artillery, Bag and Baggage, and all other necessaries thereunto belonging.

4. The order of Designing, Measuring and laying out the Quarters for the
Encamping of an Army, either of Horse or Foot, or both; together with the
Artillery, and all requisites; with Orders for Watching, and other Orders to be
observed in the Quarters.

5. The manner of Fortifying and securing of these Quarters, by Intrenchments,
etc. and how to Erect a Fort of any number of sides from four to ten, with
their several Ramparts, Bulwarks, Parapets, and all other the appurtenances
thereunto relating.

6. There is added some part of the Gunners Art, namely, so much thereof as is
necessary for a Soldier in general to know, and in case of necessity, to put
in practice; with the making and use of the two most material and serviceable
Fireworks, namely, the Petard and Granado.

Other things I could have added, but I (with the advice and probation of my
Military acquaintance) deemed these sufficient: and as the Book is Entitled,
The Complete Body of the Art Military; so I am persuaded that he that can
attain to perfection in what is here delivered, may be accounted a Complete
Soldier: And that all Practitioners in the Art Military may attain to be such,
is the hearty wish of

W. L.

A SUPPLEMENT TO THE COMPLETE BODY OF The Art Military.
How the Officers of an Army in general ought to be qualified.
IN every Soldier (especially a Commander) these essential qualities are
required, viz. Knowledge, Experience, Valor and Dexterity; of which, how many
are there that take upon them the profession of a Soldier, that hardly know
what any of the Words mean; but think their patrimony a sufficient Commission
for them, to take a Command upon them, they wanting Knowledge how to manage the
men under their Command; Experience in the Art Military being a stranger to
them. But certainly, if such men did but seriously consider how various and
changeable the state of a Soldier is, that in a moment he may loose that
honor and reputation he has been many years obtaining, and seen the ignominy
and disgrace which some have come unto by their miscarriages, they would
doubtless be very cautious, and not run headlong into an employment of such
importance.

But he that has had experience by being under command for a time, and arrived
to the degree of a Captain gradually, as from a Corporal to a Quartermaster,
thence to a Cornet, and so to a Lieutenant; he is then well prepared for a
Captains charge: for having passed these inferior Offices, depresseth those
vehement passions which by nature otherwise are apt to arise in young men,
which in a Commander are dangerous: Besides, his accustoming himself to the
former employments, makes him Valorous; so that if he be suddenly assailed, he
can recollect himself without astonishment; and to the forementioned
Qualifications add this, his accustoming himself to hardship, as to Watch,
Travel, Labor, endure Hunger and cold, etc.

His chief end must be Honor; to attain which, he must be vigilant, and let no
opportunity slip to attempt any brave exploit or stratagem. And for that end he
will be always observing his Enemy, and contriving how to circumvent him in his
designs; knowing that in War no material matter can be effected without
vigilancie and danger. But let him not always trust to his own judgment, but
advise with his Officers also; and upon any such enterprise let him take to his
assistance such of his Soldiers as he sees deserve well, and quit himself at
such a time of the debauched part of his Soldiery. He must always aspire to
higher degrees of Honor. Let him hate Covetousness: for nothing more will
continue his Soldiers good affections toward him then Liberality. Gaming let
him detest; and instead of gorgeous Apparel, let him delight in good Arms and
Horses. Let L^^^ry and Drunkenness be enemies to him, which his Soldiers
perceiving, will be the more vigilant to rec^^m in themselves by his Example.

But above all, let him see before his eyes the fear of God, deporting himself
internally and externally blameless. Thus by good Example of the Commander, the
commanded will be reformed.

Having given you an account how every Commander in general ought to be
qualified, I will now show you the Office, Duty, and Qualification of every
Commander in particular. And

I. Of the General of the Horse.
THe General of the Horse was wont to supply the place of Lieutenant General of
the Army, and in the absence of the Lord General to command the whole Army. It
is true, that the Lord Marshal, forasmuch as he gives the Orders (according to
the opinions of some) used to have the superiority of Command; whence it is,
that the Lord General absenting himself from the Army, used to take along with
him either the General of Horse, or the Lord Marshal, to avoid competition
between them.

He must be a man of Experience and Valor, having in charge the nerves of the
principal Forces, and upon whom the success of many designs and actions depend,
they being usually executed by the Cavalry, where the charging of the Enemy
orderly usually gives Victory; and the disorderly charging, disturbs oft-times
the whole Army. Witness that Battle at Gembloers described by Meteren, where
the Infantry were overthrown by their own Horse. He is to take particular
notice not only of the Officers, but the private Soldiers also, rewarding them
when vigilant, and upon some signal act advancing them to higher preferment,
and punishing Delinquents and such as are deficient in their endeavors: by
which means the good will love, and the bad fear him. He is to see the Cavalry
be furnished with all necessaries, and be always in good equipage. A Troop
being to march, he is to see that they be provided with Naggs, for the
preservation of the Soldiers Horses; for with them they must go to forage
after their March, and presently enter into Guard or Quarter without rest, to
refresh their Horses. The Captains are not to absent themselves from their
Companies, nor to place of displace Officers without his leave and approbation.
He has his particular Officers a part; and in that which concerns the
Cavalry, neither Lord Marshal nor General himself dispose of any thing without
his advice. When he passes through the Quarters either of the Cavalry or
Infantry, his Trumpets are to sound; but not where the Lord General is present,
or where he lodges. When he commands in the Army (in absence of the Lord
General) upon occasion of fight, his place is in the Battle, that he may the
better give Order to all. Usually he has a Company to lodge with him, to serve
him as his Guard, and six or more of his Company attending on him. He should
not resolve upon any enterprise, unless he consider of all that might happen,
and propound to himself greater difficulties in the action then in reality
there be, and so prepare remedies surpassing the said difficulties, it being a
singular benefit to be able to foresee (with good judgment) those things which
might succeed in the uncertain and variable accidents of War. As Sertorius
says, A good Commander should rather look behind him then before him.

II. Of the Lieutenant General of Horse.
THe Charge of the Lieutenant General of the Horse is of great importance, and
must therefore be supplied by a Soldier of known Experience and Valor:
careful and vigilant he must be; he marches and lodges for the most part with
the Cavalry: he ought to be well versed in the ways of the Country, that he may
either meet or avoid his Enemy as occasion shall required. He must be always
busied about his Enemies motion, considering with himself from what place they
may show themselves, with what number, whether Infantry or Cavalry; in what
time they may probably come upon him, and where to place himself to advantage
to prevent them.

He must be circumspect and wary in the choice of the place appointed for
Quarters, in preparing good Guards, causing the Highways to be cleared, and
by-ones discovered, placing men on those places where he supposes the Enemy may
make head; sending forth Scouts continually, and placing Sentinels, omitting no
diligence to secure the Quarter where the Cavalry finds it self to be exposed
to most danger, especially if they be lodged without Infantry. He must be sure
to have Spies in and about his Enemies Quarters. He must look that the Captains
wrong not their Soldiers, but that he see them well armed, and kept in good
Order, and that they and his Officers observe good Orders and Discipline. As he
ought to be severe in punishing, so he must be ready and willing to hear his
Soldiers just complaints, and relieve them. He must not suffer any extortion
to be used by himself or others, by which the Country is ruined, and the
Soldiery hated: for too great liberty of the Soldiers produces bad effects.

He ought to be knowing in the command of the Infantry; for upon occasion of
sending a good part of the Cavalry to several places, he has the charge not
only of the Horse, but of the Foot also: And in the absence of the General, the
Orders from the Lord General or Lord Marshal come to him, and to him are all
reports made of the occurrences of the Cavalry and Army. He may suspend a
Captain of his command, upon just cause; but cannot restore him again without
order from the General, who must first give notice thereof to the Lord General.
When he passes the Quarters of Cavalry, the Trumpets sound; but not in the
presence of the General, or in his Quarters. When the General of Horse commands
the whole Army, and therefore takes his place in the Battle, the
Lieutenant General places himself in the Vanguard of the Cavalry, where
otherwise the General uses to be.

III. Of the Commissary-General,
HE ought to be a good and experienced Soldier; for that in the absence of the
Lieutenant General he is to have the command. He must reconcile Differences
which at any time arise among the Soldiers, as having most to do with the
Soldiery. He is to keep Lists of the Guards, Convoys and other services, and
is to distribute the Orders. Every evening he is to go and receive the Orders
and the Word, and having given it to the General and Lieutenant General, he is
to give it to the Quartermaster-General, for him farther to distribute. He is
upon all occasions of singular use, and entrusted with the Execution of the
Orders. In appointing the places or lodgings in several Exploits, he must be
free from partiality; and such as at one time have cause of discontent, he must
make them amends the next; that so he may see it was of necessity, not of
partiality. His place being of great importance, ought therefore to be supplied
by one knowing and experienced.

IV. Of the Quartermaster-General.
THe Office of the Quartermaster-General is to a appoint the Lodgings or
Quarterings; wherefore he must be well acquainted with the Country, with the
Towns and Villages about it, not only by Maps (which in some measure will
inform him) but by his own experience, that he may the better know where to
place the Corps-du-gards and Sentinels, and visit them by day and night, and
order what ways to secure them: and is to keep a List of all the Guards,
Convoys, Cavalcadoes (or exploits by Horse.) He must show the Allarm-place to
the particular Quarter Masters when they receive the Word of him in the
Evening. He must be very cautious in giving in his reports true; and if any
Order for haste be delivered him by mouth, he must not trust it to others, but
must himself deliver it.

V. Of the Captain.
A Captain ought to be a man Sober, Continent, and modest in his Apparel,
aiming rather at good Arms and Horses, then gorgeous Apparel; to see his
Soldiers punctual in their respective Duties, and often calling them to
exercise. Let him be generous, and not given to Gaming, lest the Soldiers pay
by that means be diminished, which will overthrow his credit. He is diligently
to observe the Orders he receives; and to be punctually ready with his Troop
where appointed, himself being first on Horsback, seeing his Troop complete and
full before he march. He ought to know every Soldier in his Troop by name,
that upon any Exploit he may draw forth such as he discerns most fit for the
business he has in agitation. The Captains taking notice of a Soldier does
very much animate and encourage him. He must cherish his well-deserving
Soldiers, and cashier the idle and debauched. Let him always have 2 or 3 of
his Soldiers well skilled in the Country, for they may serve him as Guides,
for that those of the adjacent Towns or Villages are not always to be had, nor
is it at all times safe to entrust them: to these Soldiers he is to contribute
something extraordinary besides their pay.

Out of his Troop he is to choose his Lieutenant, Cornet, etc. impartially by
their merit, and not for favor or affection; by which he shall be beloved of
his Soldiers, and not be forced to alter his choice by the Generals Order.

In the absence of the Captain, the Lieutenant commands the Troop.

VI. Of the Lieutenant.
THe Lieutenant of a Troop ought to be an experienced Soldier, having attained
thereunto by the experience he attained in being a Corporal and Cornet, from
which by desert he attained to be a Lieutenant. In the Captains absence he
commands the Troop. He must be diligent to see the Soldiers do their duties,
and see that their Horses and Arms be in good case. He is to bring up the Rear
of the Troop, and see the Soldiers keep Rank, File, and Distance orderly after
the Captain and Cornet, and to permit none to depart from the Body or Troop. In
fight he is to be still in the Rear with his Sword drawn, encouraging the
Soldiers, and cutting, if not killing such as shall presume to flinch. He is
to keep a List of the names and sirnames of the Soldiers in his Troop, and
know the sufficiency of each Soldier, that he may make use of them accordingly.

The Troop being to go to Guard, when near, the Lieutenant is to go before to
the Lieutenant that is to be relieved, and take notice of the Corps-du-guard,
and receive information from him, when and where the Sentinels are to be
placed, what ways to clear, and all other things necessary; and he must visit
the Sentinels often both by night and day, he first himself having placed them.
If the Troop be lodged in a Village, the Billets must be signed by the
Quartermaster of the Troop, and distributed to the Soldiers before the Cornets
lodging, where the Alto is made to attend the said Billets; so that in case of
an Allarm, the Soldiers may know whither to repair. If they stay longer then a
day in one place, the Lieutenant is to visit the houses to see that the
Soldiers keep good orders; and being to go away, to bid them be careful to put
out their Fires. If they go to be lodged in a Town or Fort, and there to keep
Garrison, the Lieutenant is to accommodate their Lodgings according to their
degrees and deserts; and wheresoever they lodge longer then a day, he must
write the name of the Soldiers upon the said Billets, that if the Soldier
commit any Misdemeanor, he may be the readier discovered and punished.

When the Troop is to March, and the Trumpets sound to Horse, he must be first
mounted, and see the Soldiers do the same with all speed; and finding any
lingering, either out of idleness, or an intent to Plunder, severely to
chastise them. He ought to have knowledge of the ways: And if the Troop be
charged by the Enemy, himself with some of the most experienced Soldiers, and
best mounted in the Troop, are to stay behind.

VII. Of the Cornet.
IN the absence of the Captain and Lieutenant, the Cornet is to command the
Troops, but in the Captains presence upon a March, his place is in the Front
before the first Rank, but behind the Captain: in his charging of an Enemy, he
is to charge with the Captain, and endeavor to break his Standard upon the
Enemy; and being broken, and falling to the ground, he is not to regard taking
it up again, his honor lying much in the breaking of his Standard in chase
either of Horse or Foot: But if the Enemy should take the Cornets Standard
unbroken, it were to him a great disgrace. And this is contrary to the practice
of an Ensign in the Infantry, the preserving of whose Colors is ever esteemed
his greatest glory; as is evident in the Example of one Jaques Martaeus, who,
when most of his Soldiers had forsaken him, he fought so long as he could; and
finding himself over-powred, wound himself up in his Colors and dyed.

The Cornet of Cuirassiers in march has his place at the head of the Troop,
and presents himself in the Alarm-place; but in fight, in the midst of the
Troop, having two third parts of the Soldiers behind him. [And this is the
place of his marching in these times, which does most agree with the manner of
marching of the Infantry, where the Ensign marches before the division of
Pikes.] The Soldiers in the Front-division of the Troop, must be those best
armed, and the most courageous. He must keep a List of the Troop, and send so
many to the Guard, as the Captain or Lieutenant shall appoint. Once every day,
he is at the Lord-Generals passing by the Troop to do obeisance to him, by
inclining his body and Cornet toward the ground.

VIII. Of the particular Quarter Masters.
THe Quarter Masters duty is, (when all the Troops are lodged together) to
accompany the Quarter-Master-General in his laying out of the general Quarters;
but if they are to be lodged in several places, some of the particular
Quarter Masters accompany the Lieutenant General, others the
Commissary-General; and if a Captain command the Quarters, then the particular
Quartermaster makes the Quarter. There is much trust reposed in him, as the
distributing of the Word and the Billets; and therefore ought to be honest and
true to his charge. When he goes with the Quarter-Master-General to make the
Quarters or Lodgings, he must be very diligent, taking with him two or three of
his Soldiers, which are to return to their Troop, as guides to conduct the
rest to their Quarters.

IX. Of the Corporals.
THe Corporal is to assist his Lieutenant in placing the Sentinels; the
Harquebusiers are to discover and scour the ways, and to officiate as
forerunners or Scouts, under the charge of one of their Corporals, who must be
an experienced person in respect of the ways. If any place of importance be to
be guarded, a Corporal with his Squadron is sent thither; he must be capable of
good literature, for that he must keep a particular List of his Squadron.

X. Of the Trumpeters.
A Trumpeter ought to be a politic, discreet and cunning person; for that the
delivery of Embassies to and from the Enemy, are by him performed. In going
upon any such, he ought to have a vigilant eye upon their Works, Sentinels, and
other things that lie in his passage, and privately conceal them till his
return. And in his discourse with his adversary, very cautious and catching, or
circumventing him, by trapping him in his parley: Besides this, he must sound
all the sounds of the Trumpet; as the Bontezelle, that is, Set on the Saddle;
the Cheval, which is, Mount on Horseback; the Standard, that is, Repair to
your Colors. One Trumpet must always lodge with the Cornet, (for which the
Captain must give allowance) and he must always have his Trumpet about him upon
a sudden Alarm.

XI. Of the Auditor.
THe Auditor ought to be a man of great integrity, and understanding in the
Law: In the absence of the Auditor-General, he hears and judges the causes
of the Cavalry, and makes report thereof to his General, or in his absence, to
the Lieutenant General; without whose order he cannot execute any of his
sentences. He is to keep near the person of the General or Lieutenant General,
who are to see him respected. He is to take notice of the prizes of Victuals
brought to the Quarters of Horse, that they be sold at reasonable rates; and to
see that the Victuals suffer no extortion by the Provost-Marshal, or his
Officers.

In the States Army, and at this time with us, the Horse and Foot have but one
Auditor-General, who passes no sentence himself; but it is done by a Council
of War, in which every Captain has a Vote.

XII. Of the Provost-Marshal.
THe Provost-Marshal ought to be an honest man; for that he is to look to the
Weights and Measures, and to protect the Victuallers and Sutlers from the
insolences of the Soldiers. Himself, or one of his men, must always be in the
Marketplace, and is to inform himself at what rates the Sutlers buy their
Victual, that the Commissary and Auditor may rate them accordingly. He must see
the Orders published in the Horse-quarter strictly observed, and he must clear
those Quarters of vagrants and idle fellows. He must always carry his Truncheon
in his hand; and having the same, it is death for any Soldier to lay hands on
him. If he be to take a prisoner, he is not to enter the Quarter without leave
of the Chief, who is to cause the Delinquent to be delivered up to him; but if
the Delinquent offer to make escape, he may then enter the Quarter by his own
Authority. In marching, he is to clear the Ways, and to prevent the straggling
Soldiers of Pillaging.

CONCERNING The Enrolling, Arming, and Exercising OF THE CAVALRY.
ALl things must be presupposed in a Soldier to be enrolled into the the
Cavalry, which are common to him with the Infantry; as soundness of Body,
vigor of Members, of fitting Age, between 20 and 40. a Resolution to addict
himself to that Profession, and a Desire to learn it; a virtuous emulation of
Advancement by Merit, due Obedience to his Superiors, and a strict observation
of Military Discipline; above all, the fear of God, which will direct him to
follow Virtue, and abhor Vices: with these general Qualifications he ought to
be endowed; and as to the Profession he has now undertaken, these particular
Faculties are necessary. He ought to be active, nimble, and to know well what
belongs to a Horse; he must be curious and careful to keep his Horse and Arms
in good order. He must wear a Scarf of his Princes or Generals Colors, and not
put it off though he go out of his Quarter, whether alone or in Company, by
which means (besides the Ornament) they will (by the thoughts of whose Badge it
is) forbear many unfitting Words and Actions, they being subject by that to be
discovered.

I. Of the Arming of the Cuirassier.
THe Cuirassier is to be armed in this manner. His Horse being about 15 hand
high, strong, swift, and well managed. His Arms, a close Casque, or Headpiece,
Gorget, Breast, Pistol and Caliver-proof, the Back, Poldrons, Vanbraces, two
Gauntlets, Tassers, Cuissets, Culets, or Guard de vain, all fitting to his
Body. A good Sword, very stiff and sharp pointed, with Girdle and Hangers so
fastened upon his Cuirass, as he may readily draw it; a Buff-Coat with long
skirts, to wear between his Armor and his Clothes.

He must have two Cases with good Fire-lock-Pistols hanging at his Saddle, the
Barrel being 18 Inches long, and the bore fitting for Bullets of 20 or 24 in
the pound to roll in. He is to have a Boy and a spare Nag to carry his spare
Arms and Oat-sack, and to get him Forage. His Saddle and Bit must be strong,
made after the best manner: he must wear his Scarf, and must have his Bridle
made with a Chain, to prevent cutting.

II. Of managing of the Horse and Arms.
COncerning the Horse (supposing him to be of sufficient stature and strength,
nimble of joints, and sure of foot) he must of necessity be made fit for
service, so that you may have him to be ready at command, to pace, trot,
gallop, to run in full carreer; also to advance, stop, retire, and turn readily
to either hand, and all with alacrity and obedience. Now to bring him to this
ready turning, he is to be ridden the Ring, and Figure of 8. first in a large,
then in a narrower compass. First upon his pace, then upon the trot, and so to
the gallop and carreer. He may be taught these things by using the Hand, Leg,
and Voice: for the Hand (observing not to move the Arm, only the Wrist) if you
would have him to face to the Left, a little motion of the little Finger on
that Rein, and a touch of the left Leg (without using the Spur) does it. If to
face or turn to the Left about, then a little harder. If you would have him to
Trot, move both your Legs a little forward; for the gallop, more forward; and
for the carreer, to yerk them most forward, and to move the Body a little
forward also with it. After every motion performed, it were good to keep him
some small time in that motion: As when you bid him stand, to stand a while,
etc. Also it were not amiss (after every thing well performed) to give him some
Bread or Grass for a reward. For the Voice, you may use the Words, Advance,
Hold, Run, or the like: but because the Voice cannot always be heard, it were
therefore best to use him most to the motion of the Hand and Leg. It is also
very necessary, that you teach him to go side-ways; this he may be brought unto
by laying his Provender somewhat far from him in the Manger, and keeping him
from turning his head toward it. You must use him to the smell of Gunpowder,
the sight of Fire and Armor, the hearing of Shots, Drums, and Trumpets; all by
degrees, and with discretion. When he is at his Oats, you may fire a little
Gunpowder at a good distance from him, and so nearer by degrees: Afterward a
Pistol at a distance, and so nearer by degrees; and in like manner may a Drum
or Trumpet be used. He may sometimes be dressed in Armor, and eat his Oats upon
a Drum-head. It will be useful sometimes to cause two Musketeers, at
convenient distance from you, to fire at each other, and thereupon to ride up
close to him. Also to ride him upon a complete Armor upon a stake, and
overthrow it, and trample upon it; by which means he will grow bold, not
fearing to attempt any Object. You may use him to mountanous and uneven Ways,
and teach him to Leap, Swim, etc.

Of Exercising the Cuirassier.
BEfore I speak of the particular Postures belonging to the exercising of the
Cuirassier, I will begin with this necessary preparative to Posture, viz.

Command. 1. To Horse.

Direction. Both Reins hanging in a loose posture, over the Horse-neck, and
upon the Pummel of the Saddle, the Horsman is first to take the end of the
Reins, above the Button, in his right Hand, and with the Thumb and two first
Fingers of that Hand, to draw them to an even length. Then putting the little
finger of his left Hand between both Reins, under the Button, with the other
three fingers of the same Hand, on the farther Rein, and the Thumb on the
nether side of the Button, to grasp both Reins, that so (before he endeavor to
mount) he may have his Horse-head in balance and at command; then grasping the
Pummel of the Saddle with his left hand, and standing with his full body close
to the Horse-side, and just between the Bolster and Cantle of the Saddle
(always on the nere side of the Horse) with the help of his right Hand, he
shall put the left Foot into the left Stirrup, and with his right Hand taking
fast hold on the highest part of the Cantle behind, he shall (by the help of
both Hands) gently (but strongly, and in an upright posture, without inclining
his body to either hand) raise himself until he may stand perpendicular upon
his left Foot, and then casting over his right-leg, place himself in the
Saddle. He being now mounted, his Postures are as follow:

Command. 2. Vncap your Pistols.

Direction. Turn down the Caps of your Pistol-cases (or Holsters) with your
right hand.

Command. 3. Draw your Pistol.

Direction. Draw your Pistol out of the Case with your right hand, (always the
left Pistol first) mounting the Muzzle of it.

Command. 4. Order your Pistol.

Direction. Sink your Pistol into your Bridle-hand, and remove your right hand
toward the Muzzle, and rest the But-end upon the right Thigh.

Command. 5. Span your Pistol.

Direction. Sink your Pistol into your bridle-hand, and take your Spanner in
your right hand, and put it upon the Axle-tree, winding it about till it stick,
and return your Spanner to its place.

Command. 6. Prime your Pistol.

Direction. Holding your Pistol in your bridle-hand, (as when you Span'd it)
take your Priming-box in your right hand, pressing the Spring with your
forefinger to open the Box, put Powder into the Pan.

Command. 7. Shut your Pan.

Direction. Press in the Pan-pin with your Thumb, and shut it.

Command. 8. Cast about your Pistol.

Direction. With your bridle-hand cast about your Pistol, and hold it on your
left side with the Muzzle upwards.

Command. 9. Gage your Flasque.

Direction. Take your Flasque in your right hand, and with your forefinger
pull back the Spring; then turn the mouth of the Flasque downwards, and let go
the Spring.

Command. 10. Lade your Pistol.

Direction. Press down the Spring which opens the Flasque with your
forefinger, and bringing, the mouth thereof to the Muzzle of the Pistol, turn
the Powder into the Barrel.

Command. 11. Draw your Rammer.

Direction. Draw your Rammer with your right hand turned, and hold it with the
head downwards.

Command. 12. Lade with Bullet, and ram home.

Direction. Hold the Rammer-head in your right hand, and take the Bullet out of
your mouth with your thumb and forefinger, and put it into the Muzzle of your
Pistol, and your Rammer after it, and so ram home.

Command. 13. Return your Rammer.

Direction. Draw forth your Rammer with your right hand, and return it to its
place.

Command. 14. Pull down your Cock.

Direction. Bring your Pistol toward your rightside with your bridle-hand; and
resting the But-end upon your thigh, with your right hand pull down the Cock.

Command. 15. Recover your Pistol.

Direction. Take your Pistol into your right hand, and mount the Muzzle.

Command. 16. Present and give Fire.

Direction. Your Pistol being in your right hand, with your forefinger upon
the Tricker, incline the Muzzle thereof toward your Mark (with a fixed eye,
and by degrees) on the right side of your Horse-head, turning your right hand,
so that the Pistols Lock may be upwards; having obtained your Mark, draw the
Tricker and give Fire.

Command. 17. Return your Pistol.

Direction. Return your Pistol, and with your right hand put it into your Case.

Concerning the Snap-hans Pistol, those Postures wherein it differs from the
Fire-lock Pistol, are these.

Command. 18. Bend your Cock.

Direction. Hold your Pistol in your Bridle-hand, and with your right hand bend
your Cock.

Command. 19. Guard your Cock.

Direction. Pull down the Back-lock with your right hand, it will secure the
Cock from going off.

Command. 20. Order your Hammer.

Direction. Draw down the Hammer upon the Pan, with your right hand.

Command. 21. Free your Cock.

Direction. Thrust back the Back-lock with your right thumb, thereby to give
the Cock liberty.

For the more easy and speeding lading of the Pistol, for the gaining of time,
and avoiding the carrying of either Flask or Touch-box, there is an invention
of a Spanner or Key, which contains six Charges of Powder at the least, and
priming-Powder sufficient for those Charges, and for the Cartouches wherewith
the Pistol-cases be furnished; which the Cuirassier will find to be of very
good use.

The Cartouches are made of white Paper, cut into convenient breadth and
length, and rolled upon the Rammer or other small round stick; the edge being
passed down, and the Rammer drawn out, one end of the Paper is to be doubled
in, to keep the Powder from falling out: these Cartouches are to be made so
big, as to fill nearly the bore of the Pistol, and of length to contain as much
Powder as the Pistol requires for a Charge. When the Powder is in, tie it with
thread, and then put in the Bullet also, tying that also; these the Soldier may
make at spare hours, and have them always by him. When he uses his Cartouches,
he must bite off the Paper at the head of it, and so put it into the Barrel of
the Pistol with the Bullet upwards, and then ram it home: these being
beforehand prepared, it will much expedite the work of lading his Pistol.

The Cuirassier being well mounted, and thoroughly exercised in his Postures,
the next thing he should apply himself unto is, to be a good Marksman; to
attain which, he must be frequently shooting at Marks on Horsback, having such
set upon a Tree, some higher and some lower.

The Cuirassier being armed Pistol-proof, he must not give fire but at a very
near distance, being careful to make his Bullet do execution: the principal
place of advantage to aim at is, the lower part of the belly of his Enemy, his
armpits, or his neck. Some are of opinion, that it is not fitting for a
Cuirassier to give fire, till he have his Pistol under his Adversaries Armor,
or against some unarmed place; and if he miss of an opportunity of hitting the
man, he may aim at the head or breast of his Horse. He is commonly to give the
charge upon a Trot, and seldom galloppeth, but upon a pursuit. Having spent
both his Pistols, and having no opportunity to load again, he must then betake
himself to the last refuge, his Sword, placing the Pummel of it upon his right
thigh, and with his right hand to direct the point thereof by his eye, raising
it higher or lower as ocsion serves, aiming at his Enemies Neck, Armpits,
Eye, or about the Pummel of the Saddle at his Belly, etc. but being past his
Enemy, he is to make a back-blow at him, aiming to cut the buckle of his
Poldron, thereby disarming one of his Arms, etc.

Of Exercising the Harquebusier and Carbine.
NOtwithstanding there be some difference between the Harquebusier and Carbine
in their Horse, their Arming, and their Piece; yet in regard the Harquebus
differs nothing from the Carbine in length, only in the Bore, the manner of
using them is one and the same.

In Marching he is to carry his Carbine hanging at his Belt by his right side,
or else to order it upon his right thigh. In Fight he is to strive to gain the
left side of his Enemy (contrary to the Curassier) because that in presenting
he is to rest his Carbine on his bridle-hand, placing the butt-end on the right
side of his Breast near his Shoulder. He must exercise himself, that he may use
his Carbine with exactness and dexterity, and be exquisite in shooting at Marks.

For the manner of handling the Harquebus or Carbine, the directions before
delivered may serve for sufficient Instruction; but forasmuch (as now adays)
our Carbines are made with Snaphans, and somewhat differ from the former, I
will set down the order of handling of it in the several words of Command.

Postures for the Snaphans-Carbine.
1. Order your Carbine. 2. Sink your Carbine into your Bridle-hand. 3. Bend
your Cock. 4. Guard your Cock. 5. Prime. 6. Shut your Pan. 7. Cast about your
Carbine. 8. Guard your Flasque. 9. Lade your Carbine. 10. Draw your Rammer. 11.
Shorten your Rammer. 12. Lade with Bullet, and ram home. 13. Withdraw your
Rammer. 14. Shorten your Rammer. 15. Return your Rammer. 16. Recover your
Carbine. 17. Order your Hammer. 18. Free your Cock. 19. Present. 20. Give fire.
He is to use his Sword in all respects as the Curassier.

Of Exercising the Dragoon.
THe Dragoon is of special use and service to assist the Cavalry as Infantry;
for there be many considerable Exploits which cannot be effected by the Cavalry
alone.

The Muskettier must therefore exercise himself to give fire on Horsback. When
they come to guard a Passage, or do other the like service, they are to alight,
and to demean themselves as Infantry; and being alighted to do their service,
every of them is to cast his Bridle over the neck of his Sides-mans Horse, in
the same order as they marched, keeping them so together, by some purposely
appointed to attend them.

Of Exercising the Cavalry in their Motions.
THe Horsman being sufficiently instructed in the managing of his Horse, and in
the use of his particular Arms; it is time now that he be taught how to demean
himself being joined in a Body.

The Horse being to be exercised, is to be drawn up into a Body, not by Ranks
(as in the Infantry) but by Files, and those of 5 deep, according to most
Authors; or of 6 deep, according to others, that of 5 being a number not
divisible by 2, so that in doubling of Ranks, or Half-files, or the like, there
will always remain an odd Rank. Others would have them (especially the
Harquebusiers) to be 8 in File, making the Troop to consist of 64 Men, being
drawn up into a square Body. Being thus put into Battalia, the first thing they
are to be instructed in, is Distance; and herein there is a disagreement among
Authors; Some making Close order to be 2 paces; Open order 4 paces, and so
forward to a triple, quadruple Distance proportionable. Others make but two
kinds of Distances; Close order, which is 3 foot; and Open order, which is 6
foot. And here a difference is to be observed between the manner of taking the
Distance of the Cavalry, and that of the Infantry; for in the Foot, the
Distance is taken from the Center, or middle of the Soldiers Body, which here
cannot be understood but only of the space of Ground between Horse and Horse.
But the best and latest Authors are of opinion, that the Cavalry being to be
exercised in their Motions, should be at their Distance of 6 foot or Open
order, standing right in their Ranks and Files.

The Motions which belong to the Exercising of the Cavalry are principally
four, viz.

1. Facings. 2. Doublings. 3. Countermarches. 4. Wheelings.
And here note, that in the exercising of the Cavalry we use to this day the
same words that the Graecians and Romans did of old: for a File the Romans
called Versus and Decura; a Rank, Jugum; a File-leader, Ducanus; (because their
Decurae or File consisted of 10) Bringer-up they termed Tergi-ducor; a Leader
(being every odd man in a File) Phrastes; a Follower (which is every even
number) Substes; a Side-man, Astes.

Their Distances also were the same with ours; their two Cubits (every Cubit
being a Foot and a half of our Measure) agrees with our three Foot; their four
Cubits, our six Foot: and so increasing upon occasion.

They ordered their Horse-troops at six Foot Distance between File and File in
March, and three Foot in fight.

In all the motions, we also retain the same words of Command which they used.

Facing, they called Declinatio: to the Right, Left, Hastam. Scutum.



Facing about, Immutatio.

Doubling by Ranks, Files
Duplicandi duo genera, per juga. versus.


Their Countermarches the same which we use:

Evolutio Chorica, Macedonica, Laconica,
per Decurias. Scutum.


Wheelings, the same with us, Conversio ad Hastam. Scutum.


Reversio est conversionis restitutio. Inflexio, Wheeling about.

The use of Facings is to make the Troop perfect to be suddenly prepared for a
Charge, on either Flank or in the Rear.

Doubling of Ranks, or doubling by Half-files, or by Bringers up, is used upon
occasion of strengthening of the Front.

Doubling of Files, or doubling by Half-ranks, serves to strengthen the Flanks.

Countermarches serve either to reduce the File-leaders into the place of
Bringers-up, and so have the best men ready to receive the charge of the Enemy
in the Rear; or to bring one Flank into the place of the other, or Front and
Rear, or either Flank, into the middle of the Body.

The use of Wheelings is to bring the Front to be ready to receive the Charge
of the Enemy, on either Flank or Rear.

For the better information and satisfaction, and for the easy apprehending of
what has been said, those several Motions are here following represented in
Figures, by a Troop of Harquebusiers of 64 men; and in every Figure, the
file-leaders are represented by this kind of A. the Bringers up by this kind of
a. and the rest of the Body by this kind of a.

The form of the first standing.

To face them to the Right, is done by commanding,

formation

Direction. This is done by turning (all at one and the same time) to the right
hand.

The Front is where the right Flank was.

To reduce them to their first form, the word is,

Command. As you were.

Direction. It is performed by turning to the left hand.

From thence to face them to the left, the Word is,

Command. To the right hand.

formation

Direction. It is performed by turning to the left.

From hence they are to be reduced, by saying,

Command. As you were.

Direction. It is performed by turning to the right.

Now to face them to the Rear, though it be proper first to do it by the right
hand, yet for the more ready way, I would say,

Command. To the left hand.

formation

Direction. It is done by turning toward the left hand, until their faces
front to that place which was before the Rear.

To reduce them to their first form (as that must be observed) the word is,

Command. To the right hand about as you were.

Command. To the left hand about.

formation

Command. Ranks to the right double.

formation

The use hereof has been showed before; but to perform it, this is the

Direction. Every other Rank, that is, every even Rank, is to pass into the odd
upon the right hand of his Leader, the second Rank into the first, and so
successively.

To reduce them, the Word is

Command. Ranks as you were.

Direction. It is best done by causing those Ranks which doubled to stand, and
those that stood to advance.

Command. Ranks to the left double.

formation

Direction. The difference of this Motion from the former is nothing, but that
here they which double do it to the left hand of their Leaders, which before
they did to their right hands, as the Figure makes it plain.

This done, they must be reduced by commanding,

Command. Ranks as you were.

Command. Files to the Right Double.

Direction. Let the second File pass into the First (every man behind his
side-man) accounting from the right hand, the fourth into the third, and so the
rest; which must be done through the whole Company at one instant.

But because the first Rank of the Troop is as the edge, and the Files are for
the most part appointed but five deep, there seems no great necessity of
doubling Files.

To reduce them, the Word is,

Command. Files to the left as you were.

formation

Command. Files to the left double.

Direction. The Difference between this and the former Motion, is the
difference of hands only. And by this means, those Files which stood before,
must move now; and they which moved before, now stand; as appears by the
Figure. They are reduced by commanding,

Command. Files as you were, or, Ranks to the Right double.

formation

Command. Half Files to the Right hand, double the Front.

Direction. Middle Men, double the first Rank on the right hand; the other
three Ranks, double the threee following Ranks.

To reduce them, the Word is,

Command. Half files, as you were.

But it is better to cause them that doubled to stand, and the first Division
to advance.

formation

Command. Half-Files to the Left hand, double the Front.

Direction. This Motion differs from the former, in the hand only.

There is also doubling of Ranks by the Half Files entire to the right or left,
or both by Division; but because the Files (especially of Guirassiers) are
seldom above five deep, the doubling of Ranks, Half-files, etc. is little used.

The reducing of them is showed in the former Motion.

formation

Command. Bringers-up, to the right hand double the Front.

Direction. The last Rank must pass into the first, and so successively every
one by the right hand of his Leader, as in the figure.

It is of goood use, but troublesome for the Horse to perform (especially in
the reducing) so it may be used or omitted as shall be thought fit.

To reduce them,

Command. Bringers-up, as you were.

formation

Command. Files to the Left hand Countermarch.

Though it were fit to begin with the right hand, yet for the convenient
turning of the Horse to the left, I think it not amiss to prefer the left.

Direction. The Figure sufficiently represents the manner of the Motion, which
represents the Choraean manner; there be also Countermarches after the
Macedonian and Lacedemonian ways, which for brevity are here omitted.

formation

Command. Files close to the right and left, to your close Order.

Direction. Being about to wheel the Troop, they must be closed, first the
Files, and then the Ranks.

And being to open them again, the Ranks are first to be opened, and then the
Files.

All the Files close to the right and left toward the middle of the Body.

formation

Command. Ranks close forward to your close Order.

Direction. All the Ranks move forward, saving the first, which stand.

The second Rank having their distance, stand; and so all the rest.

The Horse being to wheel, it must be conceived, that it cannot be performed by
them in so exact a manner, nor in so strait a room as the Foot, therefore the
Commander is to ride a reasonable compass, that so the Horse may do it with
convenience.

formation

Command. To the left hand Wheel.

Certain Authors, as Melzo and Basta, would have the Horse in all their
Wheelings, to do it by the left (which is the readier way, unless the ground or
other hinderace will not permit it:) the Wheeling to the Right, is here
omitted, which should in order go first.

Direction. All the Body must move to the left upon the left File-leader, who
is the Center or Hinge upon which the whole Body turns.

To reduce them,

Command. Wheel as you were.

formation

There is also Wheeling to the Right or Left about, Wheeling Wings into the
Front, etc.

To reduce them into their first Order,

Direction. First the Ranks are to be opened, then the Files, which brings
them to their first form.

In opening of Ranks, the only way is, to do it by opening forward.

formation

These and such like Motions are directed and commanded by the Voice of the
Commander; but because the Voice cannot at all times be heard (especially in
gross bodies) by reason of the clashing of Armor, trampling and neighing of
Horses, tumultuous sounds, and noise of the Multitude (and that especially in
fight) Antiquity has invented helps, making three kinds of Military Signs or
Directions: 1. Vocal, which is by the Commanders Voice pronounced by the
inferior Officers, to the Ear. 2. Semivocal, by Drum, Trumpet, or other Warlike
instrument, to the Ear. 3. Mute, By Signs to the Eye; as by the Ensign,
Standard, etc.


The Cavalry therefore must be taught distinctly to know the Sounds of the
Trumpet, as when to clap on their Saddles, when to mount, when to repair to
their Cornet, when to Troop away, when to give a Charge, when to retreat, when
to attend the Watch, and the like. All which being the louder Voice of the
Commander, they must perfectly observe and obey.

Notwithstanding I have here propounded a Troop of 64 Horse to be exercised in
their Motions, and those of eight in File, yet the general opinion is, that a
Troop ought not to be deeper then five in File, though the Troop do consist of
100 Horse.

Every Troop must be furnished with A Captain. A Lieutenant. A Cornet. A
Quartermaster. Three Corporals. Two Trumpetters. A Clerk. A Sadler. A
Ghyrurgeon. A Farrier.


When the Troop is to March, they are to be divided into three equal parts,
according to the number of Corporals; which parts are called Squadrons, and
distinguished by these Names, The Captains, Lieutenants, and Cornets Squadron.
The first Squadron is to be led by the Captain, the second by the Cornet, the
third by the eldest Corporal: the Lieutenant and Quartermaster are to march in
the Rear.

The manner how a Troop of 60 Horse, besides Officers, should March into the
Field to be Exercised, as it is in use at this day.
formation

Let this suffice for their particular Marching and Drawing up into Battalia:
as for their Marching in gross, we shall next come to speak of that.

Concerning The MARCHING of an ARMY Both HORSE and FOOT, With the Train of
Artillery, Baggage, etc. Exemplified in an Army of 22000 Foot, and 5000 Horse.
With the manner how the Prince of Orange Marched to besiege Groll.
The Marching of an Army.
I Come now to let you see an Army of 22000. Foot, and 5000 Horse, with thirty
pieces of Ordnance, to wit, eight Half cannon, six Quarter-cannon, and sixteen
Fieldpieces, march in a Country where they may be charged either in Front or
Rear; then shall I give you some rules for passing of Straits and Rivers: And
lastly, I will show you the form and Order that the Prince of Orange observed
in some of his Marches.

You are to observe, that the Army is to be divided into Vanguard, Battle and
Rear; and because the Van is the most honorable place, they change every day,
so that he that has the Van this day, has the Rear to morrow; and he that had
the Battle, marches in the Van; so likewise he that had the Rear the first
day, marches in the Van the third day: and this Order does the Regiment in
every Tertia also follow.

Being thus divided, they are all upon Order given by the General to stand
ranged in Battalia, either in their several Quarters, or in some place of Arms
appointed for the whole Army; and standing so in readiness, Command being given
to March,

There shall first set forwards 500 Horse, in one or more Troops, as occasion
shall require, to discover and clear all the Passage that the Army is to march
by; they shall advance an English Mile or more, according to the Quality of the
Country, before the Army, and send a Corporal out of every Troop, which best
knows the Country, with fifteen or sixteen Horse, to search and scour all
suspected ways; those Corporals shall also advance as much before their Troops,
as their Troops are before the Army, or thereabouts, according as the Country
is opened or covered, and always keep three or four Horse a Musket shot before
them, to prevent any sudden surprise; and if they discover any Enemies, they
are presently to send a Horseman to advertise their Troops, and they likewise
to give notice to the Army.

They must also diligently inform themselves, as near as possibly they can with
the strength of the Enemy, and still send Messengers with advertisement; by
whom they shall also receive Order, how they shall retire or dispose of
themselves.

After them shall follow 1000 with Firelocks and Half-pikes, divided into
several Troops, as well to succor the said Horse, as to guard the Ordnance of
the Vanguard that follow; and they shall also send fifty men on either Flank,
with sufficient Officers to discover and keep off small parties.

Then shall march two Companies of Pioniers, to even the way for the Artillery;
and with them one Wagon with Materials, and an other with Victuals.

Next eight Fieldpieces all ready charged, and attended by two Gentlemen, four
Gunners, two Wagons laden with Powder, two with Bullets, and one Conductor.

Then three Quarter-cannon likewise charged, and attended by one Gentleman, two
Gunners, one Wagon laden with Powder, one with Bullets, and one Conductor.

After them four Half-cannon upon their Carrages, attended by two Gentlemen,
four Canoniers, four Wagons laden with Powder, four with Bullets, one with a
Bucks head, and other Instruments necessary to mount and dismount the Pieces,
and two Conductors.

Next shall follow 2000 Horse, marching in a good distance by Regiments or
Troops, and in good Order.

After them the Vanguard of Foot consisting of 7000, and marching orderly by
Regiments, at their appointed distances.

There shall follow them half the Ammunition and Victuals for the Army; then
the Generals and Chief Officers Wagon; and lastly, the particular Wagons
belonging to the Vanguard, and half of that which belongs to the battle,
marching, and taking place in the same Order, as do the Regiments they belong
unto in their several Bodies.

Then shall march the Battle, consisting likewise of 7000 Foot, followed with
the rest of the Ammunition, Vivers and baggage of the Battle; and also with
that which belongs to the Rear.

After them shall march in well ordered Divisions, the Rear of the Foot
consisting of 6000 Foot, and next 2000 Horse, as aforesaid.

Then (in the same order as is mentioned in the Vanguard) shall march four
Half-cannons, three Quarter-cannon, and eight Fieldpieces accomplished with
their appurtenances, as Powder, Bullets, necessary Instruments, and sufficient
persons to manage and attend them.

Next them 1000 Firelocks to guard the Ordnance, and succor the Forlorn-hope
of the Rear, as is aforesaid.

Lastly, (to close up the Army) shall march 500 Horse, observing the same Order
as is prescribed them in the Vanguard.

Many there are that dislike the placing the baggage among the Troops,
especially when the Army is to pass any narrow way or straits, because the
Wagons take up so much ground, and separate the Troops so far, that upon
occasion they will not be able to succor each other; and it is certain, that
an Army thus divided may easily be affronted: But there is no General so ill
advertised, being to pass a strait, that has not intelligence where his Enemy
attends for him, whether it be in Front or Rear: And if his Enemy waits for him
a head, he can let his baggage come in the Rear, next after the Rear of the
Foot. If he follow him, he may place his baggage before the Vanguard of the
Foot, ever taking care to appoint a sufficient guard to attend it: and in an
open Country, where the Troops may march in Battalia, the Wagons may well
march between the Troops, placing themselves likewise in Ranks, and making a
Front as large as the Body they follow; so shall they take up but little
ground, and be no trouble at all: and there they are out of danger, which
otherwise they will be subject to, if an Enemy be near, and strong in Horse.

The Order that the Prince of Orange Marched in, going to besiege Groll.
FIrst marched the Horse belonging to the Vanguard.

After them two Companies of Pioniers, with two Wagons laden with Victuals,
and one with Quarter-poles.

Next the Enginiers and Quarter Masters a Horseback.

Then followed the Guards, and after them three Fieldpieces of six pound
Bullet, and six Chambred-pieces of twelve pound Bullet, with all things
belonging to them, upon ninteen Wagons; five for the Fieldpieces, and
fourteen for the Chambred-pieces.

Next came the Vanguard of Foot, consisting of six Regiments, and followed by
three Wagons laden with 3000 pound of Powder, one with 1000 pound of Match,
and one with 1000 pound of Musquet-bullets, and upon them sixty or seventy
empty bags to deal out the Powder.

Then followed a Lieutenant with fifty men taken out of the Vanguard to guard
the Wagons.

Next marched the Battle of Foot, consisting of four Regiments, and after them
(as before) three Wagons with 3000 pound of Powder, and one with 1000 pound of
Match, and one with 1000 pound of Musquet-bullets, with empty bags, as
aforesaid.

After them followed the Reer-guard of the Foot.

Then the Wagons belonging to his Highness, the States, and all the Officers
of the Army, as also of the Foot-voluntiers.

Next the Ammunition, Materials, and other necessaries belonging to the Army,
upon 485 Wagons, under the Command of Commissary Martien, followed by four
Troops of Horse.

Then the Ammunition and necessaries belonging to the Artillery, under
Commissary Bockbout.

After followed the rest of the Artillery, to wit, twelve Half-cannon, six
Chambred-pieces of twenty four pound Bullet, twenty four Drakes of six pound
Bullet, and twenty four of three pound.

Next came the Officers and Train belonging to the Artillery.

After them, one Company of Pioniers with fifty Firelocks, and one Wagon
laden with Victuals; then the Commissary of the Vivers with 100 Wagons,
laden with bread and provision.

After him eight Troops of Horse, followed with one Wagon, laden with 1000
pound of Powder, and one with 1000 pound of Match, as also empty Bags to deal
the Powder.

Then a Lieutenant with a Guard, as is aforesaid.

And last of all, six Troops of Horse.

Note, that his Highness in place of this Lieutenant and his Guard, does
usually appoint a Regiment of Foot to come in the Rear to guard the Wagons.

How to pass a strait.
WHen you come to any Passage or Strait, Let your Vanguard make a Halt, until
the rest of the Army be come up and drawn in order of Battle, and then divide
the Troops, and fit them to the breadth of the place you are to pass through,
and let every Troop when it is passed, put it self into the same order it was
in before it came to the Strait, and advance so far forwards, as that the
Troops that follow may have room likewise to draw in order, and then stand
until all the Army be come through. If the passage be Woody where no discovery
can be made, send not above twenty or thirty Horse before, for discovery of the
Passage in Front, but let the rest of the Horse of the Vanguard march between
the Vanguard and Battle of Foot, until they be past the Strait.

The manner of passing a River.
IF you be to pass a River, and that the Enemy be not at the Passage, but on
his way to hinder you; First, draw your Army in Battalia, and plant some pieces
of Artillery in places most advantageous, to succor your Troops in their
passage; and if you find that he is stronger then you in Foot, let your Horse
pass first over, and choose a fit place to stand near the way that the Enemy is
to come, and let them send some Light Horse before to discover: then let your
Vanguard of Foot with some Field pieces follow, and find a place to stand in
Battalia; after it let the Battle march, and place it self on the left hand of
the Vanguard, then the Reer-guard, which shall likewise take the left hand of
the Battle, each with their Fieldpieces belonging to them.

The Troops being past, the rest of the Ordnance with their Train shall follow,
then the baggage of the great Officers; and lastly, the baggage of the Troops
in the order of March.

But if your Enemies chief strength consist in Horse, then shall you send no
more Horse over then shall be fit for discovery; but let the Vanguard of the
Foot pass first, and after it the Horse belonging to the Vanguard, which shall
place themselves in Battalia on the right hand of the Foot; then shall follow
the Battle, which must stand on the left hand of the Vanguard; after it the
Horse of the Battle, which shall cover the Flank of the Battle, until the Foot
of the Reer-guard be come up, and then they shall edge to the left hand, and
leave room for the Rear to come in between them and the Battle, and stand on
the left Wing, which is their due place; then shall follow the Horse of the
Rear, which must be divided indifferently between the two Wings; and last of
all shall march the Artillery, Ammunition and baggage in the order aforesaid.

If you be to pass a River, and have an Enemy at your back, when you have made
your Bridge, send over eight or ten Pieces, and place them in places most
convenient to annoy your Enemy, if he offer to come to trouble you, and then
cast up a Horn-work, or fair half Moon upon the side you are on, and place
therein five or six Fieldpieces; then let the rest of your Ordnance be drawn
over, and planted likewise on the other side in places most commodious for the
advantage aforesaid. After them shall follow your Ammunition and baggage; then
the Horse; and lastly, the Foot in good order, bringing with them the Pieces
left in the Works, which shall pass safely under the Command of the Ordnance
planted on the other side, and break up the bridge after them.

Having thus far proceeded, I should in the next place let you see a List of
the Ammunitions, Materials, and other Warlike provisions, which the Prince of
Orange takes with him in Shipping when he goes to the Field; as also what he
takes out of it to be carried upon Wagons, when he marches by Land, with the
Wagons thereto necessary. But since I have first spoken of the marching of an
Army with eight half-Cannon, six quarter-Cannon, and sixteen Fieldpieces, I
will set down what Ammunition and other things are needful to march with them,
allowing every half-Cannon to shoot an 150 shot, every quarter-Cannon 100, and
every Field-piece 80.

A List of Ammunition and other necessaries to March with eight half-Cannon,
six quarter-Cannon, and sixteen Fieldpieces, allowing every half-Cannon 150
Shot, every quarter-Cannon 100. and every Field-piece 80. with the number of
Wagons thereto needful.
BUllets for half-Cannon 1200 whereof 40 upon a Wagon 30 Wagons. Bullets for
quarter-Cannon 600 upon each wagon 80 8 Wagons. Bullets for the Fieldpieces
1280 upon each wagon 160 8 Wagons. Powder 24400 24 Wagons. Boxes for
Cartridges 160 upon each wagon 40 4 Wagons. Capravens, or great Joysts 30
upon each wagon 10 3 Wagons. Small Joysts 40 upon each wagon 20 2 Wagons.
Oaken planks for bedding 60 upon each wagon 10 6 Wagons. Deal or Firr-planks
100 upon each wagon 25 4 Wagons. Spars of all sorts 100 upon each wagon 50 2
Wagons. Two Bucks-heads or Gins with the appurtenances belonging to them, to
mount and dismount the Pieces 2 Wagons. For Hurdles 4 Wagons. For spare
Ladles, Rammers, Spunges and Leavers 1 Wagon. For Traces, Lines to draw
Ordnance, and Collars for Horses 3 Wagons. For the preparation for Ropes 1
Wagon. For the Harness-maker and his Tools 1 Wagon. For Spades, Shovels,
Axes, Hatchets, Chopping-knives and Mattocks 3 Wagons. For Lanthorns, Candles,
Lamps, Tucks, Grease, and other like necessaries 1 Wagon.
Wagons for the Officers.
For the General of the Artillery 4 Wagons. For the Lieutenant General 2
Wagons. For the Controuler 2 Wagons. For the Commissary 1 Wagon. For 12
Gentlemen of the Ordnance 4 Wagons. For the Mr. Gunner 1 Wagon. For the
Commissary of the drawing Horses 1 Wagon. For every Engineer 1 Wagon. For
each Captain of the Pioniers 1 Wagon. For the Mr. Smith 1 Wagon. For each Mr.
Carpenter 1 Wagon. For the Fire-workers each one 1 Wagon. For the Captain of
the Cannoniers 1 Wagon. For the Bridge-Master 1 Wagon. For the Mr. Petardier
1 Wagon. For the Maker of Cannon-baskets 1 Wagon. For the Battery-Master 1
Wagon. For the Quartermaster 1 Wagon. For the Provost 1 Wagon.
A List of Ammunition and such Warlike necessaries as the Prince of Orange
takes with him in Shipping when he goes to the Field.
Powder for Muskets lib. 50000 Bullets for Muskets lib. 50000 Match lib. 80000
Hair-cloaths to cover the Powder lib. 60 Woodden-hammers to open the
Powder-barrels lib. 12 Ladles to melt the Lead in lib. 12 Moulds for
Musket-bullets with 12 holes lib. 12 Pincers to cut off the tayls of the
bullets lib. 6
Arms and other necessaries.
Muskets spare lib. 300 Bandeliers lib. 300 Rests lib. 100 Scowring-sticks for
Muskets lib. 100 Pipes to hide light Matches in lib. 3000 Half-Pikes lib. 300
Long Pikes lib. 2000 Lope-staves lib. 100 Quarter-staves lib. 200 Crooked
Iron-shovels with long Poles to them to cast the earth forwards in a Gallery
lib. 12 Iron-shovels like the former with shorter Poles to cast up earth to
cover the Gallery lib. 12 Great Iron-hammers lib. 8 Great Pincers lib. 8
Hatchets with hammers at one end, some great some small lib. 20 Iron-bars, some
forked at the end lib. 30 Sythes complete lib. 25 Draggs to draw things out of
Water lib. 25 Small draggs with Iron-chains to them of three fathom long, and
an iron Wing thereto lib. 12
Nails of all sorts.
Double Spikes lib. 4000 Single Spikes lib. 24000 Nayls of seven Inches lib.
10000 Nayls of six Inches lib. 10000 Nayls of five Inches lib. 10000 Double
middle-nayls lib. 40000 Single middle nayls lib. 70000 Nayls for Doors lib.
30000 Lat-nayls lib. 60000 Broad-headed-nayls lib. 30000
Wood-work.
Oaken-planks lib. 160 Deals lib. 8000 Sparrs lib. 3000 Gapravens or great
Joysts lib. 6000 Firi-balks of 10 Else lib. 800 Balks of 12 Else lib. 800 Balks
of 16 Else lib. 400 Small Sparrs lib. 1200 Masts of 40, 50, and 60 foot long
lib. 100
Arms and other necessaries.
Complete Arms lib. 200 Arms of proof lib. 100 Head-pieces of proof lib. 100
Targets of proof lib. 100 Haspels complete lib. 50 Rings to shut the Haspels
together lib. 25 Haspel-staves by provision lib. 15000 Long Palisadoes lib.
2000 Short Palisadoes lib. 6000 Wooden beetles to drive the Palisadoes lib. 200
Pinns for Palisadoes lib. 10000 Nagers to boar holes for the Pinns in
Palisadoes lib. 30 Iron-hammers to beat the pinns into the Palisadoes lib. 50
Nagers to search for Mines, some great some small lib. 10 Ladders of all sorts
lib. 150 Foot Angles lib. 20 Ice Spurs lib. 6000
Instruments of all sorts necessary to work withal.
Carrs for one Horse, with all things necessary for Carr and Horse lib. 100
Crew-waggons complete lib. 6000 Spare wheels for Crew-waggons lib. 300 Spindles
or Axels spare lib. 1000 Cloven Deals to repair the Crew-waggons lib. 200 Small
Nayls for the same purpose lib. 1000 Hand-barrows to carry Sodds lib. 150
Shippers-hooks long and short lib. 150 Spades to dig sods with lib. 300
Pitch-forks with two and three forks lib. 150 Other Spades lib. 10000 Shovels
lib. 2000 Mattocks lib. 1000 Pike-Axes lib. 600 Great Axes lib. 1200 Hachets
lib. 600 Chopping-knives lib. 600 Pursnets with Iron-hoopes and long Poles to
them to dragg Mud out of Motes lib. 50
Other Necessaries.
Foursquare Baskets lib. 4000 Round baskets lib. 3000 Hurdles lib. 1000 Great
Blocks drawn up with Pullies to drive in great Palisadoes lib. 2 Small blocks
for the same use lib. 10 Beefe-bridges of ten foot long lib. 50 Small Lines to
make cordage lib. 4000 Great Packs to wind up timber lib. 20 Buckets to carry
water to quench fire lib. 3000 Lanthorns as well of lattin as horn lib. 40
Secret Lanthorns lib. 12 Candles lib. 400 Pans to burn Lamp-oyl in lib. 25
Turks lib. 6000 Torches lib. 25 Pitch tun lib. 6 Tair tun lib. 4 Hurds lib. 400
Fire-panns lib. 200 Unsleckt Lime in Tunns last lib. 1 Lines of 200 fathom long
to draw up the Ammunition-Ships, when the Wind is contrary, lib. 60 Canvas
blindes of 150 foot long lib. 2 Ship-windlaces of all sorts good store.
A List of what his Highness takes out of this to carry upon Wagons, when he
marches by Land; with the number of Wagons thereto necessary, allowing every
Wagon to carry 1000 weight.
Wagons. Powder 20000 20 Bullets 20000 20 Match 15000 15 Muskets complete 100
2 Pikes 300 3 Loop-staves 100 2 Spades 4000 18 Shovels 1000 4 Mattocks 400 2
Pike-Axes 100 1 Great Axes 400 2 Hatchets and chopping-knives 400 1 Deals 200
20 Capravens or great Joysts 200 3 Small Joysts 100 1 Crew-waggons complete 100
4 Hand-barrows 25 1 Beese-bridges 10 5 Quarter-staves 100 1 Firr-Spars of all
sorts 200 1 Pieces of beese-bridges with their appurtenances 10 5 A quantity of
all sorts of Nails 1 Lanthorns 10 Dark Lanthorns 4 2 Candles lib. 100 Lamps 6

One Commissioner, with 24 Conductors, each mounted and armed with a Sword and
a Case of Pistols.

The Commissioner that has the Charge and oversight of these necessaries, has
for his assistance 24 Conductors or more, according to the number of Wagons,
each mounted and armed with a Sword and Case of Pistols.

The ART of Designing, Measuring and Laying out Of the QUARTERS, For the
ENCAMPING Of an ARMY In the FIELD. With ORDERS to be given out in such a
QUARTER. Also ORDERS for WATCHING, And other General Observations.
By Capt. THOMAS RVDD, Enginier to K. CHARLES the First.
The Argument.
HAving given you an account of the several Officers belonging to an Army, with
their respective Offices, Duties, and Qualifications, with which they ought to
be endowed: As also how, and in what manner the Cavalry is to be Enrolled,
Armed, and Exercised both in his Postures and Motions, and how a Troop or
Company, and a whole Army both Horse and Foot, with Train of Artillery and
other necessaries is to March: I think it now time to bring you to a Quarter,
and therein I shall declare,

I. What Rules are to be observed in the choice of the Ground to Quarter in.

II. How the Quarter-master-General is to design the Quarters, the Ground being
chosen.

III. The Geometrical or Instrumental manner of laying out the Quarters in the
Field.

IV. How the building of the Huts is to be managed, and by whom.

V. The manner of securing the Quarters by Intrenchments, Redoubts, Horn-works,
and other Fortifications.

The manner of Quartering in the general being thus largely discoursed of, I
proceed next to the particular Quartering of the Soldiery: Giving you

VI. Examples of Quartering a Regiment, both after the Old and New way. With
the Reasons which moved the Prince of Orange to alter the old Form.

VII. I have discovered the manner of Quartering the Horse, giving you an
Example of Quartering four Cornets, by which President a whole Regiment or
Regiments may be quartered in the like manner.

VIII. You have the manner of Quartering of a Foot-Army: and

IX. An Example of Quartering of a whole Army both Horse and Foot: and for an
Example have added a Scheme of the Form in which the Prince of Orange Quartered
his Army both Horse and Foot, Artillery, Wagons, etc.

And to bring up the Rear, for the farther satisfaction of the Reader, I have
added diverse Orders for Watching, and other General Orders to be observed in
the Quarters, with what else is necessary for the Encamping of an Army, either
in part or in whole.

What Rules are to be observed in the choice of the Ground to Quarter in.
IN choosing your Ground for your Quarters, let it as near as you can be upon
high Ground, lest your Enemy being higher, may have an advantage of you by that
means.

2. Let it be near no Woods nor Groves, where your Enemy may lie in ambush, and
sally out upon you, and vex you; yet let it not be very far from neither Wood
nor Water, they being two as necessary things as can be. But let the Ground be
champion, the better to discern your Enemy at a distance; and if possible, near
some River, for the relief of Men and Cattle, and for the cheaper conveying of
necessaries for the use of the Soldiery.

3. See that the Ground you quarter upon be not at any time subject to overflow
with Water, nor that any Water be let in upon you by Sluses or otherwise.

4. That no boggy, moorish, or unwholesome Grounds be near your Quarters, which
may be a means to bring Diseases and Sickness among the Soldiers.

5. That Forage, Wood, and Straw be near you, or may be easily conveyed to you.

6. That the Quarters be not too near your Enemy, for fear of their Cannon; nor
very far distant, but that timely relief may be given to the approachers.

7. That the Ground be of a competent largeness to contain the number of
Companies, Horse, Foot, Artillery, and other necessaries thereunto belonging,
with allowance of fit dimensions for every particular.

But it will rarely fall out that any place you can choose will have all these
conveniences, wherefore gain as many of them as you can, and for the rest you
must by industry supply. Wherefore (above all) let the Fortifications and
Intrenchments about your Quarters be well made and guarded, lest by the
neglecting of them you be surprised, and your Enemy hinder your relief.

How the Quartermaster is to design his Quarters when the Ground is chosen.
THis work is not to be done of a sudden, but the Quartermaster knowing the
place where the Quarters are to be, let him go to his Chamber, and there
consult with his List which he is to quarter; namely, how many Regiments of
Horse, how many of Foot, what Wagons, what Artillery, and whatsoever else, as
Sutlers, etc. he is to quarter; also how many Companies there is in each
Regiment, and how many men in each Company.

He having collected and gathered them all together in a Note, let him take
some pieces of fine past-board, and cut them into pieces 300 foot (by some
small Scale) deep, and so broad as to contain the number of men of such a
Regiment, either Horse or Foot, he is to quarter; allowing true distance, of
Ground both for Hut, Passage, Stable, etc. and at that length let him cut off
his past-board square, and write upon that past-board the Colonels name, and
number of men; and thus must he do for every Regiment both of Horse and Foot.

In like manner for the Generals Quarters and his Retinue, for the Provost,
Quartermaster, Minister, Surgeon, and all others that require single
Quarters; and likewise for the Wagons and Sutlers. All these must he lay one
according as he finds their Numbers greater or lesser in his List, and cut his
past-boards accordingly, writing upon them as before.

His past-boards being thus prepared, let him upon a Table, or rather upon a
sheet of Imperial or Royal paper, draw diverse occult parallel lines at 50 foot
distance for Streets, and spaces of 300 foot for his several Regiments.

By help of these parallel Lines he may lay his past-boards upon this paper,
and move them this way and that way, till he have brought them into a Square,
or Parallelogram, or as regular a form as they will permit.

He having thus disposed them to the best advantage in his judgment, he may
draw a Scheme or Plat thereof upon fair Paper or Parchment, writing the name of
every Colonel and his number of men upon his particular Quarter, with the
Generals Quarters, Market, Streets, Lanes, etc. making thereof a perfect Map;
and adding a Scale thereto, he may measure the distance of any part thereof at
pleasure. This being done, he may repair to his General, and show him his
design; which if he approve of, he may proceed to the laying out of the
Quarters in the Field.

layout of quarters The Past-boards laid together.


How the Quarters are to be laid out in the Field.
THe paper-design being approved on, the Quarter-master-General repairs to the
Field, the several Quarter Masters of every Regiment accompanying him, each of
them having four staves of nine or ten foot high, painted of the Color of
their Regiment, with a Standard or Banner at the top thereof.

Then the Quarter-master-General coming to the Field with a Surveying
Instrument, pitcheth it down at one of the angular points of his Quarter, and
taking his sights, sets off a right Angle from the point where his
Instrument stands, and measures from thence with a Chain, the whole length
of his Quarter; and at the end of that measure, he sets up a Standard of the
Color o^ that Regiment that is to be quartered in that angle of the General
Quarters. Likewise from his Instrument at right angles, he measures out the
breadth of his Quarters; and at the end of that measure he causes another
Standard to be erected, of the Color of that Regiment that is to be there
quartered: and going to his Instrument, he causes another Standard to be
erected there, of the Color of the Regiment that is there to be quartered.

Then removing his Instrument from this first place, let him carry it to any of
the other Standards, and there place it; laying his Index and sights upon the
Diameter thereof, and turning it about till he see his Standard that was set up
where his Instrument last stood; then fixing it there, turn the Index to a
Right-angle, and looking through the sights, measure out the length or breadth
of your Quarters that way, and at the end of that measure set up a fourth
Standard, of the color of the Regiment there to be quartered.

layout of quarters The Quarters laid out in the Field.


Example.

Let the Ground made choice of for the Quarters be Q; then the Quartermaster
coming into the Field, makes choice of the Point A for one of the Angles of his
Quarters; and there erecting of his Instrument, the Index lying upon the
Diameter thereof, he directs his sight to B; and because the length of his
Quarters are to be 3000 foot, he causes so much to be measured out from A to
B; and at the point B causes a Standard to be rected of the Colors of that
Regiment which is to be quartered in that Angle. Then going to his Instrument,
let him turn the Index about to a right Angle from the line A B, and looking
through the sights toward C, let him cause 1700 foot (the breadth of his
Quarters) to be laid out upon the ground from A to D, and at D, let them cause
another Standard to be erected, of the Colors of the Regiment that is there to
be quartered.

This done, let him remove his Instrument from A to D, and at the place where
his Instrument stood, let there be erected another Standard. The Instrument
being placed at D, and the Index laid upon the Diameter thereof, let him turn
the Instrument about, till through the sights he see the Standard at A, and
then fixing it there, turn the Index about till it be removed a right Angle (or
90 degrees.) from the Diameter; then looking through the sights, cause 3000 foot to
measured from D to C. Lastly, remove your Instrument to C, and laying the Index
on the Diameter thereof, turn it about, till through the sights you see the
Standard at D, and fixing the Instrument there, remove the Index to a right
Angle from the Diameter; and then looking through the sights (if you have
performed the former work truly) you shall exactly look upon the Standard which
was first erected at B, and the distance between B and C being measured, shall
be found to be exactly 1700 foot.

Thus are the four grand Angles of the Quarters found in the Field. Then
beginning with any of the Regiments that are to be quartered in any of the
Angles, as with that at B, look in your Draught, and see how many foot in
length is allotted for it, which is 676; then measure that out from A to O, and
set up a Standard there; then see how many foot broad that Quarter is, viz.
300, and measure that out from B to K, and there also set up a Standard. Then
the length 676, and the breadth 300, being measured both ways from K to S, and
from O to S, then erecting a Standard also; these two last Standards at O and
K, will find the place where the fourth Standard at S is to be erected. So is
the ground laid out for one of the Angular Regiments; the like must be done for
the other three, and also for all the rest.

As Soon as any Quarter for a Regiment is laid out by the
Quarter-master-General, the particular Quartermaster of that Regiment begins
to subdivide his Quarter according to the number of his men, putting down a
stick at each end of every row of Huts and Streets end.

Then the Sergeants of every Company presently fall a dividing the Soldiers
Huts, and set up four sticks at the corner of each Hut: then the two Soldiers
that lodge together build their Huts; and so the rest.

In the Soldiers building of their Huts, the Serjants are to see that they
build them regularly, and not incroach one upon another, but as their Ground is
allotted them. And to this the Superior Officers also are to have an eye.

What is hitherto delivered, I suppose, is plain enough to be understood
without a farther addition either of Words or Schemes; the Figures and
Directions here delivered being sufficient (in my judgment) to give full
satisfaction to the Reader.

Concerning the securing of the Quarters by Entrenchment, Redoubts, etc.
THe Quarter-master-General having done his part, and the particular
Quarter Masters theirs; the Enginier next is to act his part: who drawing
Parallel lines to the outside of the General Quarters at 206 foot distance,
200 foot being for the Alarm-place, and the six foot for the Parapet.

At this 206 foot distance, the Pioniers dig a Trench or Furrow of about half a
foot broad, and so much deep. Without or in this Furrow is the beginning of a
Ditch six foot broad, to be dug round about the Quarters, which is to be
done by the Foot-Souldiers, it being for their security.

Then the Enginier is to consider how many foot of Ditch there is about the
whole Quarters, and with that number goes to the Quarter-master-General, and
enquires of him the number of the Infantry; and by these two they compute how
much of the Ditch each Regiment must dig: thus,

If the number of ditching be 7500 foot, and the number of the Infantry is 8560.

Now suppose one Regiment contain 1320 Soldiers, how much of that Ditch must
that Regiment dig?

Multiply 1320 by 7500, and it produces 99100. which being divided by 8560
gives 1157 and about three quarters, and so many yards must that Regiment dig
which has 1320 men in it.

layout of quarters The Old Form.

The New Form.



The Description of the foregoing Figure.
The old manner of Quartering a Regiment. A Colonels Tent and Gallery. B
Colonels Pavilion. C Two Huts for his servants. D His Kitchen. E Two Huts for
Buttery and Pantry. F His Stable. G Quartermaster and Ministers lodgings. H
Places for the Wagons of the Regiment. I Captains lodging. K Place for Pikes.
L Place for Muskets. M Lieutenants lodging. N Ensigns lodging. O Servants
lodging. P Soldiers Huts. Q Sutlers. R Place of Arms. S Entrenchment.
The new form of Quartering a Regiment. A Colonels Tent and Gallery. B Colonels
Pavilion. C Two Huts for his servants. D His Kitchen. E Two Huts for Buttery
and Pantry. F His Stable. G Place for Wagons of the Regiment. H Chirugeons
lodging. I Ministers lodging. K Quarter Masters lodging. L Provosts lodging. M
Captains Huts. N Lieutenants Huts. O Ensigns Huts. P Places for Pikes. Q Places
for Muskets. R Sergeants Huts. S Soldiers Huts. T Sutlers Huts. V Place of
Arms. W Entrenchment.

THe reasons that moved the Prince of Orange to remove the Captains from the
Front, and place them as they are lodged in this last Quarter in the Rear, I
take to be three; First, because the Soldiers upon any sudden occasion, could
not readily draw out into the Alarm-place, by reason of the narrow Streets
between the Captains Huts. Secondly, because the Colors and Arms lay hid by
the Captains Huts, which now stand open in the eye of the Alarm-place, and make
a handsome show, being likewise readier for the Soldier to draw out in an
instant. Lastly to prevent the many insolences and disorders committed among
the Sutlers, which he presumed the Soldiers durst not do, not the Sutlers
suffer, the Captains being lodged so near them.

You may observe, that in this lust form of Quartering, there are 20 foot of
the 200 allowed the Soldiers in depth taken off, and added to the street
between the Captains and the Sutlers; for the street being in the former
Quarter but 20 foot broad, was found to be too narrow for the Wagons, and
Carriages to pass to and fro, which did continually go and come through it with
Provisions for the Army.

And whereas in the allowance of 200 foot in depth for the Soldiers, there
were but two allotted to lodge or hut together, it happened sometimes that they
came to quarter in places where there was small store of Provision to but,
withal so that the Soldiers could neither fit the ground allotted to them, nor
make any uniform or handsome huts; therefore it was thought fit to take from
them the said 20 foot, and to allow them but 180.

Note, that the Officers must see the Soldiers build formally, and that they
make their Beds a foot and half or two foot from the ground, to prevent
sickness, which they will be subject to fall into by lying upon the ground.

Note, that when the Regiment is quartered in one Division, the Colonels
Company quarters on the right hand, the Lieutenant-Colonels on the left, the
Sergeant-Majors next the Colonel, the eldest Captain next him, and so all the
rest of the Captains by seniority in order from the right hand.

But if the Regiment be quartered in two Divisions, then the
Lieutenant-Colonels Company quarters on the right hand of the second Division,
and the Sergeant-Majors in his place, on the left hand of the first, the eldest
Captain next the Colonel, the second on the left hand of the second Division,
the third next the eldest, the fourth next the Lieutenant Colonel, the fifth
next the third, the sixth next the fourth in the second Division, and so all
the rest of the Captains according to this Order: Observing (if it may be) that
the youngest Captain be always placed next to him that closes the left flank
of the second Division.

Quartering of Horse.
THe Horse (unless pressed by an Enemy) are always or most commonly quartered
in Houses, both for the commodity of Forage, and that their Horses may stand
under covert; which otherwise, by standing three or four nights in rain and
cold, would be in danger to be spoiled and made unserviceable.

So careful (says Melzo) was the Duke of Alva of his Horse, that he not only
quartered them in Houses, but made Courts of Guard upon the Avenues and places
where they watched, to shelter them from the weather. But seeing they may be
sometimes forced to make Huts, I will show you their manner of Quartering,
which is the same as the Foot, but that they have more ground allowed them,
especially in breadth: for their main streets are twenty foot broad, and the men
have ten foot allowed them; whereas the Foot have but eight foot for either
Hut: their Horses are allowed ten foot in breadth, and four in depth: so the
ground allowed for 100 Horse, is 300 foot in depth, and 70 in breadth.

The Explanation of the following Figure.
The Quartering of four Cornets of Horse. A Alarm-place. B Lieutenants lodging.
C Cornets lodging. D Soldiers Huts. E Stables. F Street between the Soldiers
Huts. G Street between the Soldiers and Horses. H Street between the Captain
and Soldiers. I Captains. K Street between Captain and Sutlers. L Sutlers.
The Quartering of an Army of Foot. A Alarm-place. B Entrenchment. C Generals
Pavilions. D General of the Ordnance his loding. E Ammunition and Ordnance. F
Divisions of Foot.

layout of quarters The Quartering of four Cornets of Horse.

The Quartering of an Army of Foot.



A Good Commanders Judgment is to be discerned by his well choosing of ground to
quarter on; for he must not only choose a place advantageous to resist an Enemy,
but where there is plenty of Forage, Water and other Necessaries, and where
the Air is wholesome; and how necessary it is to entrench a Quarter, and what
ease and safety it brings to an Army, daily experience tells us; and whereas by
lying open you are subject to be affronted, and forced to fight by an Enemy, it
is in your choice being Entrenched, whether you fight or not, which is no small
advantage; besides, your Watches will fall nothing so often, nor your Guards so
troublesome.

The Romans were the first that found out the right use of the Spade; and the
benefit of Intrenching; and it is from Caesar that our late great Generals have
learned the way to Beleaguer and single Towns with Works and Trenches, though
the use of Powder have made them alter the form and manner of working; and how
advantageous it its to make such Works, the taking (not to speak of Alexis and
other places by the Prince of Orange) but of Groll, Bolduke, Mastricht, and
Breda within these few years, in the view, as I may say, of an Enemies Army,
are sufficient testimonies: and as diverse Armies have in vain attempted the
relief of Towns thus beleaguered, so have some out of negligence, and want of
care in making their Lines of circumvallation, been forced to quit their
design, and rise with dishonor.

The manner how the Prince of Orange his Army was Quartered, with the General
Officers, Artillery, Wagons, etc.
layout of quarters

A His Excellency. B Count William. C Count Henry. D Strangers of Quality. E
Du. of Kessel. F Wagons. G Sutlers Marketplace. H Ryhoven 3 Troops of Horse.
R John Bax 3 Troops of Horse. S Wageman 3 Troops of Horse. T La. Salle 3 Troops
of Horse. Y Stabenbrook 4 Troops of Horse. Z Co. John 3 Troops of Horse. D
Marquette 3 Troops of Horse. TH M. Bax 4 Troops of Horse. PH Count Henry 3
Troops of Horse. P Guardens 4 Troops of Horse. O Quaet 3 Troops of Horse. S
Smelsing 3 Troops of Horse. I Dragoons. K Count Ernest 6 Dutch Companies. X 8
Companies of Frisons. O Rob. Hinderson 19 Scotch Companies. W Count John Ernest
16 Companies of Wallons. P Bechune 19 French Companies. Q Chastillon 19 French
Companies. L Hollis 10 English Companies. M. Cheek 10 English Companies. N.
Cecil 10 English Companies. V. Horatio Vere 15 English Companies.
Orders to be given out in a Quarter.
1 NO man without leave of his Officer shall go further then Cannon-shot out of
the Quarter, or lie in the night out of the Quarter, upon pain of the
Strappado; and if he have done any man hurt, he shall be hanged without mercy.

2. No man shall do hurt to such as are under Neutrality or Safeguard, upon
pain of bodily punishment.

3. No man shall fight within the Quarter, draw his Sword, or make any uproar
in the night, upon the like pain.

4. No man shall molest any Sutler, or such as bring Provision into the
Leaguer, spoil or take any of their Goods from them within or without the
Leaguer, upon the like pain.

5. No man shall sell any Booty or Goods in the Leaguer without sound of Drum,
and by consent of the Fiscal, and knowledge of the Marshal-General, upon
forfeit of the Goods, the one half to the poor, the other to the Marshal.

6. No man shall buy any Goods without sound of Drum, as also notice to be
given to the Marshal, upon forfeit of the Goods, and six Gilders in money.

7. No Sutler, Saylor, or any other person, shall buy any Iron, Metal, or any
other thing belonging to Bells, Arms, Bullets, Powder, or any thing belonging
to Ammunition, or any other forbidden Wares, or take any such thing to pawn,
upon forfeit of the same, and also to be openly whipped.

8. No man shall make any Arrest, or go to Law upon any old Action or Debt made
before or without the Leaguer

9. All Prisoners, as well of our own men, as of the Enemy, whether deserving
bodily punishment, or otherwise, are to be delivered to the Marshal-General,
with true notice of their offenses and accusations.

10. All Marshals of Regiments, Admiralty, Artillery, Guards, or others, shall
stand under the Marshal-General.

11 No man shall set any price upon Victuals, or any Leaguer-provision within
the Leaguer, without the consent of the Marshal-General, upon pain of being
severely punished.

12. No man shall abuse the Marshal-General or his servants by word or deed, or
offer them any violence, upon pain to be hanged without mercy.

13. No man shall Subtle in the Leaguer before he has given up his name to the
General of the Victuals and Provision, and also to the Marshal, upon pain of
six guilders.

14 All Sutlers that come into the Leaguer shall give notice to the General of
the Victuals, or to his Commissary, of their Wares; and must not Subtle without
his Commission upon the like pain.

15. No Sutler shall set up his Cabin in any other place then where is
appointed by the Marshal, upon the like pain.

16. No Sutler shall buy any Provision within the Leaguer, until it be brought
to the place appointed for Market, and there prized and taxed, upon forfeiture
of half the goods so bought or sold, to the use of the Poor and Marshal
aforesaid.

17. No Sutler shall use any Weights or Measures, but such as are ordained them
by the Marshal-General, upon pain of six guilders; and those that are found to
use false Weights or Measures, shall forfeit their goods, the one half to the
poor in general, the other to the poor of the Regiment, and also to be severely
punished.

18. No Sutler shall tap Beer or Wine in the morning before the Sun rise, or at
night after the Warning-Piece goes off, upon pain of forfeiting for every
offense three guilders.

19. No man shall kill any meat within the Leaguer, but shall carry all
garbage, and filth thereof without the Leaguer, and there bury it, upon pain of
forfeiting of six guilders for every default.

20. No man shall do his easment within the Quarter, but in the place
appointed, (which must be 100 foot without the Intrenchment, and be marked out
by the Marshals of every Regiment) upon forfeiture of his upper garment.

Orders for Watching.
A Company having the Watch at an Avenue or Trench, the Soldiers shall place
their Pikes in Battalia a little distance from the Parapet, and their Muskets
in order upon the Parapet.

No Captain, Officer, or Soldier whatsoever, shall absent himself being in
health from his Watch.

No Soldier shall be suffered to hire his duty, or to put one of his fellows
to stand sentinel for him: if he do, he is to be punished without favor.

Every Sentinel shall stand full armed, and not stir from his station until his
Corporal relieve him, upon the like pain.

The Corporals shall instruct the Sentinels how they must behave themselves,
and be careful to set them out at such a distance, as they may see each other.

A Sergeant-Major, or some better qualified Officer, shall every night go the
Round, and see the Watches be well ordered, and the Sentinels duly set out; and
if he find any defect or fault in the Guards, he shall acquaint the
Sergeant-Major-General with it, that it may be amended.

When the Round comes, an Officer accompanied with some Musketeers shall
readily give the Word, and not hold the Round long up.

The Corporal in taking the Word shall do the same.

Note, That some are of Opinion, that the Corporal in the Field ought to give
the Word to no man, but take it from all that pass, to prevent the
inconvenience that may happen by giving it to an Enemy, which coming secretly,
may pretend to have the Round: and I have known that the Prince of Orange has
ordained that the grand Round should give the Word to the Officer that had the
Watch.

One of the chief Officers of the Company or Troop shall continually keep
waking and stirring, to keep the men by their Arms; and there must be never
less then the third part of the Company or Troop afoot, to be ready upon all
occasions.

The Officers must have a care and see that the Sentinels be well and orderly
placed, and must go themselves, and often send to visit them.

The Officers must be careful to keep all their men upon the Guard, and to
punish such as go off without leave.

Imbatteling.
OUr modern Wars seldom bring Controversies to the trial of Battle, for men
now make War rather like Foxes then Lions; yet Germany has of late given us
some Examples; and necessary it is to know in what order an Army may best
receive, or charge an Enemy. To give you therefore some satisfaction therein, I
will let you see diverse forms of Imbatteling Foot and Horse apart and together,
as they have been ordered by the Princes of Orange and others, whereby you may
learn how to range Troops when occasion does require. But I believe it will not
be impertinent first to give you some observations considerable before, and
when you come to fight; as also to speak a little of a Chase and Retreat.

Observations.
IF you be upon Defense, venture not your Game at a cast; your Enemy can loose
but his Army, you may loose your Country: have a care that you be not forced
to fight: hinder him of Provision, by cutting off his Convoys, or burning all
before him, that he may gather none in the Country; use some means to call him
home by diversion, or wait upon him in places of advantage, as Straits and
narrow Passages, when he must march in small Divisions, and draw his Troops
into such a length that they cannot easily succor each other; then finding
opportunity, attach him resolutely; so shall you be sure, if he be not a
vigilant and expert Captain to do him an affront. Many Examples there are in
History, of men that perished by pressing an invading Enemy to fight: the
Battails of Cressy, Poitiers, and others, are fair warnings to persuade men not
to presume, or wilfully to hazard all in one day. Had the Cardinal Infanta
fought with the Prince of Orange and the French when they were in little
Brabant, without doubt he had lost his Country. In a word, if you fight, you
set your fortune upon the Dice; if you husband your business warily, the storm
will over.

If you be an undertaker, the sooner you bring your Cause to trial, the better
you are like to speed; delays are dangerous: for change of Air, Diet, and other
inconveniences, may breed sickness and diverse ill humors in your Army: and if
your Enemy will not fight, but make a Fabian or lingering War, he may put you to
your shifts; therefore first acquaint your self with the strength and quality of
your Enemies forces, with the state of his Country, with his own disposition,
and the disposition of those that are nearest about him; and before you declare
your self gain some of his great men (if it be possible) to take your part:
maintain good Spies in his Court.

Forecast all that can further or hinder your design, before you undertake it;
and let your Cause be just, left you draw the vengeance of God and jealousy of
other Princes upon you. In your preparation, let your first care be of the
belly: want of Victuals has been the loss of many a brave design, and the
ruin of great Armies. Let your men be well trained, and such as have been used
to exercise and labor (if you can) let them be all of your own Subjects:
provide plenty of materials and other necessaries for your design, and use the
means to begin your War with some notable loss to your Enemy; so shall you
terrify him, and discourage his Allies and friends from giving him assistance.

When you come to fight, choose ground (as near as you can) to fight upon proper
for the number and quality of your men: if you be strong in Horse, choose
champion; if your strength be on foot, and that you want Horse, choose uneven,
bushy, or enclosed ground, and place some Musketeers in the distances between
those Troops you have, which may advance, and give fire upon the Enemies Horse:
if they offer to charge, cover one of your Flanks if you can with some River,
Morass, or Wood. Make your Front so large, that your Enemy may not be able with
his Wings to charge you in Flank. Let your Battalions be small, as of five or
six hundred at the most, which may nimbly move, charge, retire, or succor each
other at their pleasures; for great Bodies are unweildy, and being forced to
move, cannot keep their order unless the ground be very even; for upon uneven
ground, they will either fall foul, or be forced to open; and if an Enemy can
then make use of his advantage, and charge, they are easily broken, and being
broken are irrecoverable; whereas small Troops, although they break, may under
the favor and succor of their seconds, put themselves again in order, and be
able to do good service. Use means to draw your Enemy off the ground he has
chosen to stand upon; it may to your advange, perhaps bring some disorder in
his Troops. Be sure to have store of Seconds, and always keep some Troops in
reserve: rather give, then attend the charge; it will encourage your own men,
and dishearten the Enemy. Charge on that hand you think your self the
strongest. Let the distances between the Battalions, as also between the
Ter^^a's of your Army, be carefully kept; and get the advantage of Sun and Wind
if you can.

Of a Chase.
IF your Enemy turn his back and fly, let the third part of your Vanguard,
Battle, and Rear, as also a third part of both the Wings of Horse, be
appointed for the Chase; and let one third part of them so appointed chase the
Enemy disbanded; the rest following in their order to succor the disbanded
Troops, if the Enemy should turn head and make resistance: and let the other
two thirds of the Army leisurely advance in good order to countenance the
Troops in Chase if occasion should require. When you would have the Chasers
retire, let the Drums and Trumpets of those Chasers that keep their order,
sound the Retreat, that the disbanded Chasers may know where to find their
Troops: and if it be night, let the Drums and Trumpets of the rest of the Army
likewise sound. And let there be fires made in diverse places in the Army,
whereby all the Chasers may the better find the way to their Quarter.

Of a Retreat.
TO make a good Retreat, is one of the Masterpieces of a General; nor is it
dishonorable for him to take the advantage of any time that he finds useful for
the safety of his Army, and good of the Cause; although some young Soldiers
(more hardy then wise) think it a disparagement to retire in the night: but he
that will not retire in the night, when reason and the benefit of his party
does require, may stay and be beaten in the day. Many Examples there are in
Histories, of Armies that have been lost by such gallantry, and their party
thereby ruined. There is no experienced General so indiscreet or ill advised,
as to follow a retiring Enemy with his Gross in the night, especially if he
find him retire in good order; for so he may be drawn into Ambuscadoes, or his
enemy may wait for him in places of advantage, and do him an affront, and what
knows he when he finds the Retreat made orderly, but his Enemy seeks to draw
him out purposely to entrap him? by this means the party retiring may before
day get into a place of safety; whereas if he retire by day, his Enemy may
safely follow him with his whole Army, and pass upon all advantages, whereof he
shall find plenty in a well-ordered Army, if he know how to make use of them,
and take his opportunity. I therefore conclude, that to retire by night,
without sound of Drum, with matches covered, or to use any other secret way to
avoid an Enemy when occasion does require, is not dishonorable, but the duty of
a good Captain.

The Order that the Prince of Orange retired in from Gelders.
FIrst, He possessed a high piece of Ground that lay halfway between Gelders
and Rhineberk, to which Town he was resolved to March; and lodged there 2000
men well entrenched, with some pieces of Ordnance: then he made ready three
ways for the Tertia's of the Army to march in Front: before the Troops began to
march; he sent away the Baggage and great Ordnance, with some part of the
Ammunition. An hour before day, or thereabouts, he gave Order that the Army
should march, and the three Tertia's drew out of the Quarter, without sound of
Drum, and marched in even Front, about 200 paces distant from each other, until
they came an English mile or more from the Quarter; and then Command was given
that the Drums should beat. In the Rear of each Tertia came ten or twelve
Fieldpieces, with Ammunition and all other necessaries belonging to them. On
either Flank marched sixteen Troops of Horse; and after the Foot, at a large
distance came the rest of the Horse. In this Order did he march from thence to
Rhineberk without the sight of an Enemy, although the Cardinal Infanta were
lodged within an English mile or little more of his Quarter.

geometrical formation The names of all the several lines contained in the
table page: 2

A.B. the Semidiameter

BB the Polygon interior

BY the neck or gorge

IH the 1. wing

IL the 2. wing

GHF The angle made between the wing and the face

IBI The angle of the Polygon

HGH the angle of the Bastion

BAB the angle at the center equal to the angle MBI made by the two Polygons

GBM The angle between the captiall line and the Polygon,



The names of all the several lines contained in the table page: 2 AB. the
Semidiameter B B the Polygon interior B I the neck or gorge IH. the.1. wing I L
the.2. wing G H F The angle made between the wing and the face IBI The angle of
the Polygon HGH the angle of the Bastion B A B the angle at the center equal
to the angle MB I made by the two Polygons G B M The angle between the capital
line and the Polygon.

Place this between Page 238 and 239.
MILITARY ARCHITECT: Or, a short Treatise of FORTIFICATION, Regular and
Irregular. With the manner how to strengthen the said Fortifications with
Redoubts, Ravelins, Half-Moons, etc.
Two Principal Propositions Geometrical, useful in Fortification.
ALthough all the fundamental Problems and Propositions in plain Geometry are
necessary and useful for an Enginier, especially to raise and let fall
Perpendiculars, draw Parallels, divide Lines into equal parts, and other
proportional parts required to make Angles of any quantity, and also to divide
them; these are absolutely necessary; for without most of them, few others can
be resolved: wherefore supposing him to be so much a Geometrician, I will
proceed to these two, necessary in this Art.

Prop. I. A Circle being given, to find the side of any Polygon that may be
inscribed within the same Circle, the number of Sides not exceeding ten.
Let the given Circle be A F C G. First, through the Center thereof at E, draw
the Diameter A E C, dividing the whole Circle into two equal parts.

Secondly, Take in your Compasses half the Diameter A E, or E C, and setting
one foot in A, with the other foot make the marks B and D, and draw the line E
D, which shall be the side of a Triangle, or Polygon of three sides, which will
be inscribed in that Circle.

Thirdly, Draw the Line F G through the Center, cutting the Diameter A G at
right Angles. Then draw the line A F, which shall be the side of a Square or
Polygon of four sides.

Fourthly, Set one foot of your Compasses in H, and extend the other to F,
drawing the Arch-line F I; then draw the right line F I, and it shall be the
side of a Pentagon, or Polygon of five sides, that will be inscribed within the
given Circle.

Fifthly, Half the Diameter, as E A, E F, E C, or E G, are either of them the
side of an Hexagon, or Polygon of six sides.

Sixthly, Half the line B D, viz. H B, or H D is the side of an Heptagon, or
Polygon of seven sides.

Seventhly, Divide the Line A F into two equal parts in M, and draw the Line E
M K, cutting the Peripherie of the Circle in K. So shall the Line A K be the
side of an Octagon, or Polygon of eight sides.

geometrical formation

Eighthly, Divide that part of the peripherie of the Circle D A B into three
equal parts, one third part will reach from D to L; then draw the Line D L, and
it shall be the side of a Nonagon, or Polygon of nine sides.

Ninthly, The Line E I is the side of a Decagon, or Polygon of ten sides, which
will be inscribed in this Circle.

Prop. II. To find out the length of the Semi-diameter of a Circle, that the
side of the Polygon therein inscribed, shall be in length equal to a right Line
given.
Let the given Line be A B. First, Take in your Compasses the length thereof,
and setting one foot in B, with the other make the small arch C D; Then set one
foot in A, and make the other small arch E F, cutting the former in O.

Secondly, Divide the Line A B into two equal parts in K, and draw the Line K O
at length toward H.

Thirdly, With the length of the given Line A B, set one foot of the Compasses
in O, and with the other foot draw the Arch-line A S B.

Fourthly, Divide this Arch-line A S B into six equal parts, at the points 1,
2, 3, 4, 5. And opening the Compasses from B to 1, describe the small Arch 1 a;
also with the distance B 2, describe the Arch 2 b, likewise 3 c, 4 d, and 5 e.

Fifthly, Take with your Compasses the distance from A to a, and set it upon
the Line H O K, from O to 7, and from O to 5.

Sixthly, Take the distance A b, and set it from O to 4, and from O to 8.

Seventhly, Set the distance A C, from O to 9.

geometrical formation

Eighthly, Set the distance A d from O to 9.

Lastly, Draw the Lines B 4, B 5, B 6, B 7, B 8, B 9, B 10, and they shall be
the semi-diameters of so many several Circles, as the given Line A B will be
inscribed Polygons of 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10 Sides. For.

If a Circle be described upon the Semi-diameter, 4 B 5 B 6 B 7 B 8 B 9 B 10 B


The Line A B in that Circle will be the side of a Square. Pentagon. Hexagon.
Heptagon. Octagon. Nonagon. Decagon.


Two useful and necessary Tables, containing the Quantity of all the Lines and
Angles in all Regular Fortifications; from a Fort of four Sides, to one of ten
Sides.
The first Table of Lines.
Number of the Sides of the Polygon. V V VI VII VIII IX X Semidiameter. 585 484
587 694 802 913 1024 The interior Polygon. 544 569 587 602 614 624 633 The
Neck, or Gorge. 92 104 114 121 127 132 136 The first Wing. 77 87 95 101 106 111
114 The second Wing. 71 112 129 138 143 147 149 The Capital Line. 97 207 216
223 230 236 241

The second Table of Angles.
Number of the Sides of the Polygon. IV V VI. VII VIII IX X d. m. d. m. d. m.
d. m. d. m. d. m. d. m. The Angle of the Polygon. 90 0 108 0 120 0 128 34 135 0
14 0 144 0 The Angle between the Wing prolonged and Face. 75 0 73 0 67 30 65 20
63 45 62 30 61 30 The Angle between the Curtain and Capital. 45 0 54 0 60 0 64
17 67 30 70 0 72 0 The Angle made by the two Polygon. 50 0 72 ^ 60 0 51 26 45 0
4^ 0 36 0

The use of the two foregoing Tables in the delineation of a Regular Fort of
five Sides or Bastions.
BEing provided of a Scale of equal parts for the setting of your Lines, and
likewise of a Line of Chords for the setting of the Angles; both which Scales
may be upon one and the same Ruler:

First, Take from your Scale of equal parts 484, which you shall find under V
in the line of Semi-diameters; and with the length describe the Circle A F B E;
then take from the same Scale 569, which is under V in the Line of the interior
Polygon, and this will reach in the Circle from B to B, and will divide it into
five equal parts; according to the number of Sides of the Fort.

Secondly, Set off from the Point B, B I, equal to 104, which shall be the
Gorge and Neck: from the point I erect two Penpendiculars I G H, and I H to the
line B B, making I H 87 parts of the Scale, which is in the line under V,
belonging to the first Wing.

Lastly, Make B G 207, which is your Capital Line, and draw H G, completing
your Bulwark.

And in this manner may you finish all the several Bastions of this or any
other Fort, working according to the Measures belonging to that Polygon you are
to fortify.

But it may so fall out sometimes, that you cannot readily find the Center of
your Figure, by reason some House or other obstacle may stand in the way, so
that you will be troubled to draw the Line A G, upon which your Capital line is
taken, nor perhaps know what Angle it makes with the Polygon interior
continued; though in truth that Angle is always equal to half your Angle of
Circumference: you may make use of your Table, and find the quantity of the
Angle contained between the Wing continued and the Face, namely, the Angle G H
F in the Figure, which in this Example will be found to be 70 degrees 30
minutes. This being set off on both sides, you may finish your Bastion without
help of the Capital Line. This done draw lines parallel to the Face of your
Bastion, delineate your Ditch which is to be made round about your Fort, as you
see in the second Figure, which is the side of a Pentagon fortified.

Concerning the farther strengthening of your Fort by Half-Moons, Horn-works,
Redoubts, etc.
YOur Fort thus finished, you may farther strengthen it with Half-Moons,
Ravelines, Horn-works, Redoubts, and such like, according as the place shall
require, and the number of Soldiers you have for defense will permit.

I. Of the Half Moon.
A Half Moon has either relation to the Curtain or Bastion, and in the second
Figure are marked with: that which has relation to the Curtain, is properly
called a Raveline; and that at the point of the Bastion, a Half Moon.

How to delineate a Raveline.
Divide the Curtain into two equal parts by the perpendicular n o: from p, the
middle of your Wing, draw p o, p o; and from o, their intersection, set off o
q, equal to the Wing of your Bastion H I, or thereabouts; but this is left to
the discretion of the Enginier, as also at what distance they shall be made
from the Curtain or Bastion. But he must not make the Angle of the Raveline too
acute, but so to proportion the distance, that the Angle may be near or equal
to the Angle of the Bastion.

The Half Moon is alike with the Raveline, but that it has relation to the
Bastion, and is drawn after the same manner; all which is plain in the second
Figure, where the Half-Moons are marked with.

II. Of the Horn-work.
The Horn-work is most conveniently defended from the face of your Bastion;
which if you intend to do, make H F equal, or near equal to G L your line of
defense, and draw F F, which shall be equal to I I your Curtain; and let M L
the Curtain of your Horn-work be about one third part of I I, but somewhat
more, viz. 130 such parts as your Curtain is 360 or more; if you please to 150;
and from n, the middle of F F, set off n o, n o, equal to 65 of your Scale, and
draw o m, o l, right Angles at o. Then set off the Angles F K S, each of them
65 degrees. as you would have the Angle of your Horn-work contain. Draw the Lines F
S, and F S, and bisect the Angles S F F, which shall cut off F K equal to M L,
the Curtain of your Horn-work, of which k m, k l shall be the Wings.

Of Irregular Fortifications.
TOuching Irregular Fortifications, I can give no new Precept; only in the
general, it is best, if possible, to reduce them to regular Forms: but if the
place will not permit it, take first the Plot of the place, and observe what
Angles are made between every two sides thereof.

Then look in the Table, in the cell of the Angles of Polygons, and see what
Polygon the observed Angle comes nearest to, and make that Bastion according to
the measures belonging to that Polygon, and so of the rest; so shall you have
unequal Bastions, but alike defensible. Wherein likewise it is be noted, that
if the two sides of your interior Polygon be of unequal length, the Bastion is
best framed according to the measures taken upon the shorter side.

Example. Let it be required to draw Bastions to the side of an inordinate
Pentagon, whose Angles are, as they are marked in the third Figure.

First, I observe 134, the Angle comprehended between two of the sides, comes
nearest to the Angle of an Octagon in the Cell of the Angles of Polygons; I
conclude therefore, that Bastion is to be drawn according to the measures
belonging to an Octagon, taking the measures from the shortest side A B.

Now because the measures of the Polygon interior belong to an Octagon, is 614,
you must make a Scale, of which 614 parts shall be equal to A B; then set off
the Neck or Gorge A E, B E, 127 such parts, as A B is 614; then measure 106 for
the Wing. Lastly, because the Center of the Figure is not known, by which the
measure of the Capital line should be taken, I take the Angle between the Wing
prolonged and the Face, and take off 240 such parts as the Curtain is 360, and
so finish the Bastion belonging to the Angle 134

The next Angle 113, which is nearest to a Hexagon, therefore that Bastion must
be framed from the shorter side, according to the measures of a Hexagon; and so
must all the Angles be fortified by those measures which come nearest to the
Angle comprehended between the sides thereof.

But in all Irregular Fortifications, much is attributed to the judgment of the
Enginier, either to increase or diminish the Angles as he finds most
convenient, but in such manner as the line of defense may scour the face of
the Bastion, and that one part thereof may defend, and be defended by the other.

It now remains to treat of the manner of making of Ditches about Forts, of the
quantity of earth required to make a Fort, with Walls of any determined breadth
and height; as also what inclinations they ought to have, both on the inside
and the outside; within, of that sloapness, that the Soldiers may (without
much difficulty) go up and down; but without, sloaping so little, that they may
not be scaled by the Enemy; yet so much, that the foundation may be strong. But
this I shall omit for the present, my design not being to write here all
necessary to be known in this Art, but only so much as might enable the
Ingenious Soldier to be able to fortify any place in the absence or want of
an Enginier.

Some Principles of the GUNNERS-ART: Containing so much thereof as is
absolutely necessary for a complete Soldier to be acquainted with, and (in
case of necessity) to put in practice.
HE that will be a complete Cannonier, must have knowledge and skill in the
Sciences Mathematical, especially in Arithmetic, and some part of Geometry; he
must be able to Multiply, Divide, and work the Golden Rule both Direct and
Retrograde, either in whole Numbers or Fractions, or both. He must be ready at
the Extracting of the Square and Cube Roots, two of the chief hinges upon which
many Questions in Gunnery do depend. His skill in Geometry must be so much, as
to take all manner of Heights, Depths, and Distances, either accessible or
inaccessible, with many other the like Qualifications.

But it was not intended to make an absolute or entire Treatise of this
Mysterious Art of Gunnery in this place, but to give the curious (and he that
desires to be an accomplished) Soldier, such satisfaction therein, that in the
absence of the Cannoneer or Gunner, either by sickness, lameness, or by being
taken away by death, the expert Soldier may take upon him the Command of his
Artillery, to his own Commendations, and for the Honor of the General under
whose Command such Soldier is.

In order whereunto, I have laid down such Rules and Directions, that the
Soldier may safely and commendably attempt the management of any Piece of
great Artillery against his Enemy.

First, I have given you the names of the several Pieces of Great Artillery now
in use.

Secondly, Their Diameters, Weights, both of Powder and Shot, their Heights,
and Quantity of Powder each of them spends every Shot.

Thirdly, The proportion of the Carriage to the Gun, and all other its
appurtenances.

Fourthly, How to Load his Piece with judgment and safety.

Fifthly, How to Disport his Piece.

Sixthly, To discharge his Piece.

Seventhly, To amend his second Shot, his first being defective.

Eighthly, To shoot at his Enemies Quarters in the Night-season, and also as
they pass by in the Day. With other Warlike Stratagems.

And lastly, I have declared the making and use of the two Destroying and
Invincible Engines of Fire, the Granado and Petard. The perusal and practice
whereof I leave unto the ingenious Soldier: Bidding him heartily

Farewell.
The names of such Pieces of Artillery as are now most in use.
TO mention the names of Pieces of Artillery particularly relating to several
Countries, would be almost endless; they often changing and giving new names to
Pieces upon the least alteration thereof, from some other very near thereunto.
It shall suffice therefore to make mention in this place, only of such as are
in use with us, and our neighboring Nations; and they are chiefly these: Whole
Cannon Demi-Cannon Largest. Ordinary.
Culvering Largest. Ordinary. Least size.
Demi-Culvering Largest. Ordinary. Least size.
Saker Large. Ordinary. Least.
Minion. Large. Ordinary.
Faulcon. Faulconet. Rabant. Base.


These are the Pieces which are now most in use, either for Land or
Sea-service, the Dimensions and Weight, both of the Pieces themselves, and the
appurtenances to them belonging, this following Table does plainly declare.

The Names of the Pieces. Diamet. at the bore in parts. Weight of the Piece.
Length of the Piece feet. in. Height of the Shot in parts. Weight of the Shot.
lib. oun. Weight of Powder. lib. oun. Length of the Ladle in parts Breadth of
the Ladle in parts Cannon. 8 0 8000 12 0 7 58 0 32 8 24 0 ^4 Demi-Cannon
Largest. Ordinary
6 6000 12 0 6 36 0 18 0 22 12 0 6 5600 10 6 6 32 0 17 8 22 0 12 0 Culvering
Largest. Ordinary. Least size.
5 4800 10 armor 5 20 0 12 8 16 0 10 0 5 4500 12 0 5 0 17 5 11 6 15 0 9 5 0
4000 12 0 4 15 fer^ 10 0 14 9 0 Demi-Culvering Largest. Ordinary Least size.
4 3000 12 or 13 4 12 11 8 8 13 8 4 2700 10 0 4 10 10 7 4 12 8 0 4 2000 9 or 10
4 0 9 0 6 4 12 0 8 0 Saker Largest. Ordinary. Least.
4 0 1800 9 or 10 3 7 5 5 0 11 0 7 3 1500 9 0 3 6 0 4 0 10 6 3 1400 8 0 3 4 2 3
6 9 6 Minion Large. Ordinary.
3 1000 8 0 3 0 3 2 3 4 9 0 5 0 3 0 750 7 0 2 3 4 2 8 8 5 0 Faulcon. 2 750 7 0
2 2 8 2 4 8 4 Faulconet. 2 400 6 0 2 1 5 1 4 7 0 4 Rabana. 1 300 5 6 1 0 8 0 12
4 2 Base. 1 200 4 6 1 0 5 0 8 4 0 2 0

Having described unto you the Names of all such Pieces of Artillery as are now
in use, together with the Quantity of each their Diameters at their Bore in
feet and inches; as also their several Weights, their Lengths, the Heights and
Weights of their Shots, the Quantity of Powder they spend at each Shot, etc. I
shall now proceed to give you the Names and terms of Art belonging to the
several parts of any Piece of Ordnance, and also of the Proportion that every
Carriage ought to have to the Piece he bears.

The Ichnographical Description and Names belonging to the several parts of a
Cannon, or other Piece of Artillery.
WHereas in the following Discourse, there is continual mention made of the
several parts of a Piece, which cannot well be defined nor rendered easy
without the Figure thereof represented in Plano; in order whereunto, I have
drawn the Figure following, representing the Ichnography of a Piece; and to the
several parts thereof I have set several letters of the Alphabet directing to
the same, by which at one view all will be visible.

ichnographic

A B Represents the Diameter of the Bore of the Piece, which is sometimes
called, The Diameter of the Concave Cylinder, sometimes the Diameter of the
Muzzle, etc.

C D The Neck, and C the Freese of the Piece.

E F The Cornice Ring.

G H The Reinforced Ring.

I and K The two Trunnious upon which the Piece rests when it is laid in his
Carriage.

L M The Chamber of the Piece, which is so much of the Concave Cylinder, as
contains the Powder and Shot.

N The Base Ring, and also the Touchhole, which must fall just at the end of
the Concave Cylinder, or Bore of the Piece.

O The Pummel, sometimes called the Cascabel.

A L B M The Concave Cylinder.

M O The Breech of the Piece.

M N The thickness of the Metal at the Breech.

The Metal of the Piece which is about the Mouth above A and B, is called the
Muzzle-Ring.

Thus much for the Description of the parts of the Gun; now for its Carriage,
etc.

What proportion the several parts of the Carriage ought to bear to the Gun it
is to carry, as also of the Rammer, Ladle, Lanade, or Sponge, etc.
EVery Carriage ought to be in length once and an half the length of the
Concave Cylinder of the Piece. The Planks at the fore-end of the Carriage ought
to be in depth four Diameters of the Bore of the Piece. At the middle of the
Planks, three Diameters and an half; and at the end next the ground, two and an
half. And they ought to be in thickness one Diameter.

For the Traverses (or bars of Wood) that join these Planks together, the
foremost must be three Diameters and an half in length, and must enter one half
of a Diameter in length into either of the Cheeks or Planks. That in the middle
must be four Diameters in length, and enter into the Cheeks as the former. And
that at the foot or lower end of the Carriage must be in length five times the
Diameter, and entered into the Planks as the former.

The Wheels must be in height one half of the length of the Piece; the Circles
must be equal both in breadth and thickness to one Diameter of the Bore; the
Spokes or Arms three times the Diameter. The Cube three Diameters in thickness,
and three and an half in length. The Bore of the Cube must be one Diameter, and
the length of the Axle-tree eight Diameters and two third parts more.

The Wheels for the Saker and Minnion must be in height the half length of the
Piece and 1 part more. And the Faulcon and Faulconet half the length and part
more.

Of the Ladle.
It is by some taken for a general rule, that the Circumference of a Bullet
being divided into five equal parts, that three of those parts must be the
breadth of the Ladle.

The bottom of every Ladle must be one Diameter and long, and of such a
thickness as may with ease enter into the Bore of the Piece.

Of the Rammer.
The Rammer of every Piece must be made of hard Wood, once and an half the
Diameter long; and so thick, as it may with ease enter into the mouth of the
Piece. It must be bound at the lower end with a plate of Brass, set on with
brass or Copper-nails to strengthen it.

Of the Lanade or Sponge.
The bottom of the Lanade must be one Diameter and parts in length, and parts
of a Diameter in thickness, covered with Lambs or Sheeps-skin the Woolside
outward, and made fast to the bottom with small brass Nayls.

The Staff both for the Lanade and Rammer must be one foot longer then the
Cylinder of the Piece.

To every Piece there must be Coyns of several sizes, some great, some small;
and also Leavers proportionable to the Piece: the Coyns to keep the Piece at
any elevation it shall be set to, and the Leavers to move the Piece and
Carriage upon the Platform.

Cautions.
Before you attempt to charge your Piece, see that the Ground or Platform be
level, that the Wheels of your Carriage be of equal height, that the Trunnions
of your Gun lie right in the Carriage; If they be not, cause them to be
amended, or expect to make no perfect shot.

How to Load any piece of Ordnance both surely and fafely.
BEfore you load your Piece, take care to cleanse the Touchhole, and sweep the
Piece clean within with a dry Lanade or Sponge; then (observing the Wind) set
your Powder-barrel to weather your Piece, and your Linstock on the contrary.
Then filling your Ladle, give it a gentle knock on the foot, that the loose
Corns may shake off into the barrel; then put your Ladle into your Piece, and
being come to the bottom of the bore, draw it back two fingers breadth, and
turn it over; then take it out, and with your Rammer (you standing on the right
side of your Piece) ham the Powder close into the Chamber of the Piece, another
(in the mean time) holding the Finger or Thumb upon the Touchhole, that the
Powder may not fly out that way: If the Touchhole be full, it is a sure sigh
that the Powder is well rammed; and if your Piece be to be charged at twice,
you must do this after each Ladle-ful.

Then take a wisp of Hey or Straw, and chrust it hard into the mouth of the
Piece after the Powder, that no loose Corns may remain in the empty part of the
Cylinder, and ram that hand home upon the Powder.

Then again, take a dry Lanade, and cleanse the Cylinder of the Piece, that
^oothing be left in the hollow Cylinder, to hinder the Bullets way.

This done, make your Bullet very clean, that neither Earth nor Sand hang upon
it, and put it gently into your Piece, and after it a wad of Hey or Straw
easily rammed.

And here note, that in doing this you must not stand right before the mouth of
your Piece, but on one side, for fear of mischances; and having charged your
Piece, you must lay your Ladle, Lanade, Scowrer and Rammer on the right side of
your Piece, the Ladle and Lanade their heads toward the mouth, and the Rammer
and Scowrer toward the Breech of the Piece.

Your Piece being thus charged, direct her to the intended Mark, and then Prime
her; in the doing of which, First, with your Priming-iron enter the Touchhole,
and let your Powder come from the Touchhole to the Base-ring, for there you
may fire safely; for if you fire at the Touchhole, your Linstock may be forced
out of your hand: therefore some use to prime their Gun two or three inches
forward off the Touchhole; for if that be large, the more care must be had in
firing.

In firing of any Piece, take your Linstock in your right hand, and coming to
the side of your Piece, set forward one Leg, keep your Body upright, and your
Arm extended at full length; the cole of your Match being cleared, give fire to
the Powder, so shall you perform your work both safely and gracefully.

Another way of Loading a Piece of Artillery.
There is another way used to load Guns, which is by Cartredges; these
Cartredges are made, either of Canvas or Paper, rolled upon a Former or Rowler,
turned something less then the hollow Cylinder of your Piece; these being sewed
or pasted, and having bottoms put to them, are filled at spare times (in
Garrisons or other places) with a due charge of powder belonging to the Piece
for which they were made, and are ready whenever occasion shall require: one
of these being put into the mouth of the Piece, together with the Bullet, and
well wadded and rammed, with your priming-iron at the Touchhole, make a hole
through the Cartridge, and then having primed it, you may give fire as before.

How to Dispart any Piece of Ordnance.
THere are several ways to dispart a piece of Ordnance; I will mention one or
two in lieu of all the rest. -- Now, to Dispart a piece, is, To bring the Metal
of the Muzzle-ring, equal to that of the Base-ring; or, it is, To find the
difference of the Metal at the Muzzle and the Base-rings. To effect which,
either of these ways will declare.

First, Take a small straight Stick or Wire, and put it downright into the
Touchhole of your piece, and even with the top of the Metal of the base-ring;
this Stick taken out of the Touchhole, apply to the bottom of the Metal, at
the bo^e of the piece; and that part of the Stick or Wire which stands above
the Metal of the Muzzle-ring, is the true Dispart for that piece.

Secondly, Or take with a small silk or thread the Circumference of the Metal at
the base-ring; and also with another silk the Circumference of the Metal at the
muzzle-ring divide either of these lengths into 22 equal parts, and from each
of them cut off seven parts; half the difference that is between the length of
these two strings, is the true Dispart. This way is in it self exact enough;
but I prefer the former far before it, both for ease and exactness, if
carefully handled.

How to level your Piece to shoot at any Mark within Point Blank.
YOur Piece lying upon his Carriage well fixed, the Ground or Platform clean
and even, and your Gun cleansed, loaded and wadded, as is before directed, and
having disparted the same as was last taught;

Place the dispart upon the top or upper part of the muzzle-ring of your piece
perpendicular or upright, fixing it there with wax or the like: then going to
the breech of your Gun, cause one of your Matrosses with a leaver to turn the
piece toward the mark: then the carriage there standing, cause him to raise
the piece or depress it, till with your eye (at about 2 or 3 foot distance from
the breech of your piece) you can see the very top or highest part of the Metal
of the base-ring, the very top of your dispart, and the mark you are to shoot
at, all three in a right line; which when you have found, cause the piece to be
kept there by, putting a Coin under it; and when it is coined, look again, and
see if all be as you before left it; if it be not, cause it to be altered: but
if it be you may, prime and give fire.

The first Shot being defective, how to amend it in the second.
A Shot is said to be defective, when it is either over, under, or wide of the
mark aimed at: to remedy this, you must observe these few Directions following:

First, If your Shot be right to your Mark, but yet over, it is a sign your
Dispart is too short, which you may remedy by placing a dispart upon the
muzzle-ring of such a length, that looking by the base-ring and the mark the
shot last made, you may see the top of the dispart: with this new dispart level
your piece to the mark, prime and give fire, and doubtless your shot will prove
good.

Secondly, If your Shot be just under the mark, then look how much the dispart
is over the Mark of the Shot last made, and cut it so much shorter, that
looking at the breech of the Piece, you see the mark of the last Shot, and the
top of the dispart in one right line; then by this dispart level your Gun to
the Mark, and give fire.

Thirdly, But if your first Shot had been level with, but yet to the right hand
of the Mark; to remedy this, stand at the breech of the piece, looking over the
dispart at the mark the last Shot made, and upon that part of the base-ring,
which you then look over, set up a pin with a little wax; so this pin will be
in a right line with the dispart and Mark of the Shot: then level the piece
again, by help of this pin and the dispart, to your assigned Mark, and without
Question you will make an effectual shot.

Fourthly, But if your shot be both wide, and too high, or too low, then both
the former rules must be applied to regulate it, which reason will best direct
how to perform.

And here note, that these defective Shots last spoken of, are not, or may not
be in the fault of the Gunner; for let him dispart and level his Gun never so
well, he may make a bad Shot; for, 1. The Wind may alter the Range of the
bullet. 2. The irregularity or inequality of the thickness of the Metal of the
piece may much impede. 3. The uneven lying of the piece in the Carriage; and
many other reasons not here to be enumerated.

To make a good Shot in a dark Night at a Mark that has been shown you in the
Daytime.
MOunt, level, and dispart your piece at the assigned Mark in the daytime,
according as has been before directed; the piece thus remaining, from the
bottom of the muzzle-ring, let fall a Line with a plummet at the end thereof
having a point; and where the point touches the platform, there make a Mark,
and take also the length of that string, or run a pin through the string in
that place; do the like by letting fall the same line and plummet from the
breech of the piece, and make a Mark upon the platform as before, and the
length of the string. Then (though your Gun be moved out of its place, yet) you
may in the darkest night (by help of a dark Lanthorn) bring your piece to the
former position; which being primed and fired, will doubtless come near, if not
hit the Mark.

How you may shoot at your Enemies Lights in his Quarters in a dark Night.
BRing your piece upon your platform to lie right against your Enemies Lights;
then take two pieces of lighted match, one so much longer then the other, as is
the true dispart of the piece you are to shoot with; place the longest of them
upon the muzzle-ring of your piece, and the shorter upon the base-ring thereof,
and there fix them upright with wax; then elevate or depress your Gun, till at
a distance with your Eye, you espy both your Matches and the Enemies Lights all
in a right line; which done, prime and give fire.

How you may make a Shot at a party of Horse or Foot, as they pass by; as also
at a Ship Sailing up or down a River.
Your piece being charged, let it be laid in the Carriage at little or no
elevation, that it may shoot about brest-high; then dispart it, and direct it
against some Mark that lies just in the way they are to pass: if the ground
they are to pass be higher then your platform, mount your Gun accordingly; if
lower, depress it; if level, then as before: your Gun thus prepared, in their
passage you may give fire at pleasure: and in the ordering of your Gun for this
Stratagem, let it (if possible) be parallel with the plain of the Horizon, that
so it may shoot short, especially if the place be stony; for the grazing of the
bullet among the stones, may do more execution then the shot it self: but above
all, have a special care you shoot not wide nor over.

What has been said concerning an Enemies passing by Land, the like may be
done by an Enemies Ship sailing along a River. For, if you plant your Gun, and
direct it to some mark, as Tree, Beakon, etc. on the other side of the River;
then when the forepart of the Ship shall come between your sight and the mark
you observed, immediately give fire.

And thus much for shooting in great Artillery.

The composition, making, and use of the two Principal Fireworks belonging to
WAR, viz. THE GRANADO and PETARD.
I. Of the Granado.
OF Grenades there are several sorts; some to cast with men's hands, others to
be shot out of great Guns, and others so large that they require a Morter-piece
on purpose for the discharging of them.

grenade Granada.


The Shell is made of Copper cast in form of a Sphere or Globe, allowing half
an inch, and sometimes more (according as the Shell is in bigness) for the
thickness of the Metal, which ought to be cast very exactly, to be equally
thick in all parts. They are to be filled with fine powder; they are to have a
pipe screwed into them, which is to be filled with a slow composition to prime
it, the composition of which I shall show you anon.

These Grenades are made proportionable to the weight of the bullet belonging
to the piece out of which they are to be shot; and if they in bigness exceed
the bore of a Cannon, then they are to be shot out of a Morter-piece.

II. Of the Petard.
THese Petards are made of Copper and brass mixed; and their dimensions are
fitted according to the use for which they were prepared; there being three
chief uses of them, and so many sorts there are, viz. Some for blowing up and
breaking of bridges. Others, for Gates that have Perculles belonging to them.
And the third sort for ordinary Gates.

petard The Petard.


1. Those for Bridges are commonly eleven inches long, and at the breech seven
inches and an half about, and five inches wide within: the Metal at the breech
must be one inch and a quarter thick, and at the neck half an inch thick,
besides the muzzle-ring. The mouth must be ten inches wide, and to the
Touchhole must be added a pipe, as in the Figure.

2. The second sort for Gates with Perculles, must be nine inches long, almost
half an inch thick at the neck, and an inch thick at the breech; the mouth must
be about seven inches wide, and the outside of the breech must be six inches
wide, and the inside four inches.

3. The third sort, which is for Gates and Palisadoes, must be seven inches
long, one fifth part of an inch thick at the neck, and three quarters of an
inch thick at the breech: the mouth must be four Inches wide; at the outside of
the breech it must be three inches and an half, and at the inside thereof three
inches.

The Charges for these Petards are to be of the finest powder that can be got,
beaten hard into the Petard, yet not to break the Gun; then must it be stopped
close in with a Wooden board of about an Inch thick; justly fitted thereunto,
with wax melted to stop the crevise about to keep out water. You must not
charge it up to the top, but leave the breadth of almost two inches empty,
which must be filled up with tow close stopped in, and a linen Cloth bound
about the Petards neck to keep it close in.

The Touchhole must be stopped with a Cork, and over that a Sear-Cloath to
keep it from wet.

The charge for the greater sort of Petards, is five or six pound of powder.
Those of the second, from three to four pounds. And for the smallest, from one
pound and an half to one pound.

To prime your Petards and Grenades, use this following Composition.
TAke of fine Powder three parts, of Sulphur six parts, and of Saltpeter nine
parts: beat all of them severally into fine powder, and mix them together,
putting to them Oil of Peter by little and little till it become a paste; dry
this leasurely but thoroughly, and with it lade your pipe.

FINIS.
The CONTENTS of the Chapters.
The First Book.
A Discourse of the Postures, and the handling of Arms. Page 1 Several reasons
why the Pike is the more honorable arms. ibid The Postures of the Pike. Page 2
The Postures of the Musket. Page 3 The postures and charges of the Pike to be
performed in a shorter way, all things acted in order, and nothing done twice.
Page 4 The Postures of the Musket collected in a brief way. Page 5 There is
also a conformity of posture with the Musket to those of the Pike, and words of
command to be given, as may in many things be received by both arms. ibid. The
use of the postures of the Pike. Page 6 The use of the postures of the Musket.
ibid. How a Muskettier shall perform the Sentinel-posture. Page 7 The manner
and way to do the Funeral-Posture ibid. The reducement of a Musket from the
Funeral-posture. ibid. The Soldiers desire to know every particular place of
Dignity, as they stand in rank and file. ibid. Reasons for the places of
dignity both in rank and file, for the first four in a file eight deep. Page 8
Reasons of the place of the second four as they stand in rank and file, the
file being eight deep. Page 9 Other reasons to clear it further to the
Soldier. ibid. Reasons given for the last Table of every particular place of
Honor and Dignity as they stand. Page 10 Reasons likewise to be given for the
Table 12 abrest, and 12 deep. Page 11 Brief reasons to be given of the Dignity
of the places of a rank ten abrest, and of a file ten deep. ibid. What distance
is, and the reasons for the first beginning of the same, with all their several
uses. Page 12 The several sorts of distances which are fit and proper for the
Soldier to be exercised in. ibid. Words of command for the opening of ranks
and files to all their distances, with their closings again. Page 13 The use of
each particular distance, and at what time to be used. ibid. Directions of the
way and manner of drawing up a private Company. Page 14 Several reasons given
for the placing of the Sergeants after this manner. Page 16 Reasons given for
the placing the Sergeants and Drums of lesser Companies. Page 17 A description
of a Body of men throughout, with all their several parts and kinds. Page 18
Directions to all such as shall desire to exercise a Foot-Company, and
admonitions to the Soldiers to be exercised. Page 20 Of the several kinds of
Facings, and their use, with the words of Command to perform the same. Page 21
The Words of Command for Facings. Page 23 The varieties of Doublings, with
their parts and uses. ib. The words of Command for Entire Doublings to the
Front. Page 24 Divisional Doublings to the Front. Page 26 Entire Doublings to
the Front by Wheelings. ibid. A divisional Doubling to the Front by Wheeling.
Page 27 Entire Doublings to the right Flank. ibid. Divisional Doublings to the
right Flank. Page 30 Entire Doublings to the right Flank by Wheeling ibid. A
divisional Doubling to the right Flank by wheeling Page 31 Of Inversion and
Conversion. Page 32 The words of Command for Ranks Ranking, and Files ranking
to the Front, they being 12 abrest, and 6 deep. Page 33 Ranks ranking into the
Front by Countermarch. Page 35 Files ranking into the Front by Wheeling. ibid.
Ranks ranking, or Files ranking at one and the same time into Front, Reet, and
Midst. Page 36 Of Files ranking into Front, Rear, and Midst. Page 37 Of Files
ranking by Wheeling. ibid. Of Ranks filing, or of Files filing, or of
Inversion, with their several sorts and kinds. Page 38 Ranks wheeling into the
Flanks. Page 40 Of Files filing, or Ranks filing to both Flanks and the Midst
at one and the same time. ibid. Of Ranks wheeling to both Flanks. Page 42 Of
Ranks wheeling to the midst of Files. ibid. Of Ranks wheeling to both Flanks
and into the Midst at one and the same time. ibid. Of Countermarches, with
their several sorts. Page 43 Entire countermarching of Files. Page 44
Divisional countermarching of Files Page 45 Entire Countermarches of Ranks.
Page 46 Divisional Countermarches of the right and left half-ranks. Page 48 Of
Wheelings, with their several uses. Page 49 Entire Wheelings. Page 50
Divisional Wheelings. ibid. Of Filings either for delight or service. Page 51
Several firings to be performed with any number of men. Page 52 The way to make
every man in a File six deep, according to succession, a File-leader, by
doublings, not using one word of command twice. Page 56 The way to make every
man in a file six deep, File-leader, according to dignity, by a doubling, not
using one word of command twice, ibid. The way to make every man in a File
eight deep File-leader by succession, and that by doubling, not using one word
of command twice. ibid. The way to make every man in a File eight deep, a
File-leader according unto dignity by doubling. Page 57 Figures of Battle to
be performed by single Files, with some admonitions to those that shall
practice themselves herein. ibid. Military experiment upon a File six deep,
branching forth eight several figures of Battle, with their reducement. Page
58 Words of command to produce the first eight Figures of Battle, with their
reducement. Page 59 Words of command for the second eight Figures of Battle,
with their reducement. Page 60 Words of command for the third eight Figures of
Battle, with their reducement. Page 61 The way to make twelve several Figures
of Battle with a File ten deep, with their reducement. Page 62 Twelve several
Figures of Battle with a File twelve deep, with their reducement. Page 64
The Second Book.
Concerning the Artillery and Military Gardens, together with the Private
Meetings in and about the City of London. Page 67 The first Exercise of four
files six deep. Page 68 A doubling consisting of 16 in number, every one
differing from the other, and not reduced until the last word of Command. ibid.
Eight several countermaches, with their reducement. Page 69 Ten several
Wheelings, with their reducement. ibid. Six figures of Battle, with several
firings thereunto belonging. Page 70 The second Exercise with four files six
deep. Page 73 Eighteen several doublings, with their reducements. ib. Twelve
several countermarches, with their reducements. Page 74 Twelve several
wheelings, with their reducements. ib. Several plain firings upon this Exercise
of 24 men, with figures of Battle belonging to the same. Page 75 The third
Exercise with four files six deep. Page 79 Thirty several words of Command, of
Inversion and Conversion. Page 80 Next follows several figures of Battle,
with firings upon the same, for the performance whereof Page 82 The fourth
Exercise consisting of four files eight deep. Page 87 The fifth Exercise with
four files eight deep. Page 93 Thirty several doublings, with their reducement.
Page 94 Plain firings, and figures of Battle. Page 95 The sixth Exercise with
four files eight deep. Page 99 Thirty doublings by countermarches, with their
reducement. ibid. Plain firings, and figures of Battle: Page 101 The seventh
Exercise consisting of 64 men, eight files eight deep. Page 104 Two and twenty
doublings by wheelings, with their reducement. Page 105 Several firings, and
figures of Battle with 64 men. Page 106 The eighth Exercise consisting of 64
men, eight files eight deep. Page 110 Several figures of Battle. Page 112 The
ninth Exercise consisting of 64 men, eight files eight deep. Page 116 Eight
several countermarches, with their reducement. Page 117 Ten several wheelings,
with their reducement. ibid. Plain firings, and figures of Battle. Page 118
The tenth Exercise consisting of 24 files being six deep, according to the
first drawing up of a private Company. Page 122 Eight entire several doublings,
with their reducement. ibid. Eight several countermarches, with their
reducement. ibid. Eight entire doublings by wheelings, with their reducement.
ibid. Plain firings, and figures of Battle. Page 123 The eleventh Exercise
with 24 files six deep. Page 127 Eight countermarches, with their reducement.
ibid. Eight several wheelings with their reducement. Page 128 Plain firings,
and figures of Battle. ibid. The twelfth Exercise consisting of 24 files six
deep. Page 133 A doubling to make every man a File-leader by dignity. ibid.
Several wheelings, with their reducements. Page 134 Plain firings, and figures
of Battle. ibid.
The Third Book.
Concerning the drawing up of Regiments, with their several numbers, forms,
manner, and ways. Page 139 The manner of drawing up a Regiment consisting of
six Companies, containing in it a Colonel, a Lieut. Colonel, a Major, and three
Captains, every one having 108 men in a Company, and the three Field-officers
144, which makes completely up 756 men, whereof two thirds are Musketeers, and
one third of Pikes, the Files being six deep. Page 140 The reasons follow for
the placing of the Captains, their Colors, and their Lieutenants, after the
manner before set down. Page 142 More particular reasons for the placing of the
Captains and Lieutenants of the first grand Division. ibid. Reasons for the
placing of the Officers of the second grand Division. Page 143 The ordering of
a Regiment to the long-march, with the placing of the Officers, and the leading
of carriages. Page 144 The first Exercise of a Regiment in the plainest and
easiest way. Page 146 A second way of Exercising Regiments of the same number
of men. Page 147 Doublings belonging to a Regiment. Page 149 Four several
wheelings, with their Reducement. Page 150 Countermarches not fit to be used in
the exercising of Regiments. ibid. Several firings to be performed upon the
former figure, and how to be managed by the several Officers. Page 152 The
manner of drawing up a Regiment consisting of seven Companies, containing in
the four Captains, 12 files of Musketeers, and six of Pikes, in each of their
particular Companies, and in the three Field-officers 16 files apiece of
Musketeers, and eight of Pikes, which amounts to the number of 864 men. Page
153 The manner of drawing up and placing the Officers of a Regiment consisting
of eight Companies, having in it a Col. a Lieut. Col. a Major, and five
Captains, their number of men in each Company being equal with the former
Regiment, they amount unto 972 men. Page 158 How to make the figure of a Ring,
with its use and service. Page 160 The manner of drawing up a Regiment
consisting of ten Companies, having in it seven Captains, and three
Field-Officers, being in each particular Company the former numbers, which in
all amount to 1198 men. Page 162 The manner both of the drawing up, and the
order of the Long-march of Col. Rainsborough his Regiment, bringing up the Rear
of the Foot of the Army under the Command of the Lord General Fairfax, at their
first marching through the City of London, on the seventh of August 1647. Page
164 A third way of drawing up a Regiment of ten Companies, after the manner
used amongst the Swedes. Page 165 The way of drawing up a Regiment consisting
of 12 Companies, the nine Captains having 18 Files in each Company, and the
three Field officers every one of them 24 files, whereof there are two thirds
of Musketeers, and one of Pikes in each particular Company, amounting in all
to 1404 men. Page 168 The manner of drawing up a Regiment according to the
Swedish Brigade. Page 169 The manner of drawing up a Brigade or Tertia, being a
third part of an Army, according to the practice of the Netherlands, under the
Command of the Prince of Orange. Page 171 How to draw up an Army of 12
Regiments of Foot and three of Horse, the Foot amounting unto 11664 men, and
the Horse unto 3000, in all 14664 men. Page 173 The several duties belonging to
the Foot in a Regiment, as follows by degrees from a private Soldier unto a
Colonel of the same: and first of a private Soldier, etc. Page 176 Of Military
Watches. Page 187 The ordering of a private Company unto a Funeral-occasion.
Page 190 The ordering of a Regiment to a Funeral-occasion. Page 192
Last of all, the Postures of the Musket performed without the Rest.

The CONTENTS of the SUPPLEMENT.
HOw the Officers of an Army in general ought to be qualified. 197 Of the
General of the Horse. 198 Of the Lieutenant General of the Horse. ibid. Of the
Commissary-General. 199 Of the Quarter-master-General. ibid. Of the Captain.
200 Of the Lieutenant. ibid. Of the Cornet. 201 Of the particular
Quarter Masters. ibid. Of the Corporals. ibid. Of the Trumpetters. 202 Of the
Auditor. ibid. Of the Provost Marshal. ibid. Concerning the Enrolling, Arming,
and Exercising of the Cavalry. 203 Of the Arming of the Cuirassier. ibid. Of
the managing of the Horse and Arms. ibid. Of the Exercising of the Cuirassier.
204 Of Exercising the Harquebusier and Carbine. 207 Postures for the
Snaphans-Carbine. ibid. Of Exercising the Dragoon. 208 Of Exercising the
Cavalry in their Motions. ibid. The Marching of an Army. 217 The Order that the
Prince of Orange marched in to Besiege Grel. 219 How to pass a Strait. 220 The
manner of passing a River. ibid. A List of Ammunition and other necessaries to
march with. 221 A List of Ammunition and Warlike necessaries that the Prince of
Orange takes with him into the Field. 222 What rules are to be observed in
choosing Ground to Quarter in. 227 How the Quartermaster is to design his
Quarters when the Ground is chosen. ibid. How the Quarters are to be laid out
in the field 228 The securing of Quarters by Entrenchments, Redoubts, etc. 230
Quartering of Horse. 232 How the Prince of Orange his Army was Quartered, with
the General Officers, Artillery, Wagons, etc. 233 Orders to be given out in a
Quarter. 234 Orders for Watching. 235 Imbatteling. 236 Observations. ibid. Of a
Chase. 237 Of a Retreat. ibid. The Order that the Prince of Orange retired in
from Gelders. 238 A short Treatise of Fortification Regular and Irregugular,
etc. 239 Two principal Propositions Geometrical, useful in Fortification. ibid.
Two useful and necessary Tables. 242 The strengthening of a Fort by Half-moons,
Redoubts, etc. 243 Of the Half Moon. ibid. How to delineate a Raveline. ibid.
Of the Horn-work. ibid. Of Irregular Fortifications. ibid. Some Principles of
the Gunners art. 245 The names of the Pieces of Artillery most in use. 247 The
Ichnographical Description and names belonging to the several parts of a
Cannon, or other Piece of Artillery. 248 What proportion the Carriage is to
bear to the Gun: as also of the Rammer, Ladle, Lanade or Sponge, etc. ibid. How
to load any Piece of Ordnance both surely and safely. 249 How to Dispart any
Piece of Ordinance, 250 How to Level a Piece to shoot at a Mark within
Point-blanck. 251 The first Shot being defective, how to mend the second. ibid.
To make a shot in a dark night at a Mark shown in the daytime. 252 How to
shoot at the Enemies Lights in a dark night. ibid. How to make a shot at a
Party of Horse or Foot as they pass, or at a Ship sailing. ibid. The
composition, making, and use of the Granado and Petard. 253
FINIS.

