REFLECTIONS UPON Some Passages, IN A BOOK, Entitled REFLECTIONS upon the
Conduct of HUMAN LIFE. With Reference to the Study of Learning and Knowledge.
BY EDMUND ELYS.
REflection 1. Sect. 4. Perhaps we shall be found to be as much out in the
Conduct of our Understandings, as in that of our Wills.

Answ. There is no Irregularity in the Understanding, but what Proceeds from
the Irregularity of the Will.

Sect. 10. True Knowledge (whatever it be) must be supposed to be a thing of
Uncommon difficulty, and the Study of it a Work fit only for sublimer Wits; the
more Elevated, and Awakned part of Mankind.

Answ. Purity of Heart, is that which does Principally conduce to the
Attainment of True Knowledge.

(...),
(...).
Sophocles. The Soul that is truly Just, and Kind;
Truth, hid from subtle Wits, shall Find.
Sect. 37. A thing may deserve to be known, not as Perfecting the
Understanding; but merely as touching upon our Interest.

Answ. No Man can have any True, or Real Interest, but what has some Reference
to the Enjoyment of the SOVEREIGN GOOD: Therefore any thing that deserves to be
Known because it touches upon our Interest; deserves to be known as Perfecting
the Understanding: The Perfection of the Understanding consisting in the
Apprehension of the Truth, for the satisfaction of the Will, in the Possession
of the True Good.

I agree with this Ingenious Author in that he says, No Truth is Perfective of
the Understanding, but only necessary Truth. By necessary Truth I understand
the DIVINE ESSENCE, and all those EFFECTS of infinite Wisdom, Power, and
Goodness, which it is Our Duty to Contemplate.

Reflection 2. Sect. 10. If now it be further demanded how this may be done; (
viz. to apply our selves to the Divine (...) to consult the Ideal World) I
Answer that there are Three ways of doing it, and I can think of no more: The
First is by Attention; The Second by Purity of Heart, and Life; and the Third
by Prayer.

I do not Charge these Words with Falsehood, but the Reader will fall into an
Error, if he conceit that he may apply himself to the Divine (...) by any other
Attention of the Mind, but what proceeds from such a Temper, or Disposition of
Will, which implies an Aversion from any other Speculation, but what may be
Useful unto him, in doing the will of God.

This holy Disposition of the Will, is the only true Purity of Heart, and the
Exercising of it is an Effectual Prayer, a Worshipping of GOD in Spirit, and in
Truth.

These words Sect. 29. are most perfectly agreeable to my Conceptions: We ought
to prosecute Learning and Knowledge, no further than as it is conducieve to the
great ends of Piety, and Virtue. And consequently whenever we Study to any
other Purpose, or in any other Degree than this; we are Unaccountably,
Impertinently, I may add, Sinfully employed. But, then, say I, it must be
considered, that no Sinful Exercise or Employment of our Intellective
Faculties, can ever tend to the Improvement of the Brightness of the
Understanding, or Intellectual perfection. Nothing can properly be called
Wisdom, but the Practical Understanding of true Goodness. Such expressions as I
find in the 27 and 28 Sections, seem to come short of that Accuracy which is
requisite for a Christian Philosopher, that has the Confidence to pass so
severe a Censure upon our Academical Education, and Learning. Certainly
Rectitude of Will is a greater Ornament and Perfection, than Brightness of
Understanding; and to be good is more Divine than to be Wise and Knowing. The
Question is, whether we ought to be more Solicitous for that Intellectual
Perfection, which we cant have here, and shall have hereafter, or for that
Moral perfection, which we may have here, and cannot hereafter.

A Lover of this present World is a Fool and an Ignorant Wretch: They that Love
the LORD JESUS in Sincerity, are the only Wise and Knowing Men. It Is one and
the same thing to be Good, or to partake of the Divine Nature, and to be Wise
and Knowing. I think it my Duty to Declare to the World, that it seems to me,
that this Author deals most Incuriously with the People called QUAKERS in
speaking so Contemptuously of their Notion of the LIGHT WITHIN. I pray GOD that
He, and I, and They, and all those that Profess themselves to be Followers of
JESUS CHRIST, may have our Hearts duly Affected with the Sense of these Sacred
Words, Proverbs 4. 18, 19. The path of the just is as the shining light, that
shines more and more unto the perfect day.

The way of the wicked is as darkness: they know not at what they stumble.

John 1. 9. This was the true light, which lights every man that comes into
the world.

John 8. 12. Then spoke Jesus again unto them, saying, I am the light of the
world: he that follows me shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the
light of life.

John 14. 6. Jesus says unto him, I am the way, and the truth, and the life:
no man comes unto the Father, but by me.

(...).
FINIS.

