DIA POEMATA: POETIC FEET STANDING UPON HOLY GROUND: OR, Verses on certain
TEXTS of SCRIPTURE. With EPIGRAMS, etc.

By E. E.

Non fuit hoc Artis, sed Pietatis opus.

Printed in the Year, 1655.

TO THE TRULY NOBLE Sir William Courtney, Baronet, and his most Virtuous LADY.
Honors GEMINI,
'T Would be an Injury to your unfaigned Worth, to be praised by a Poet: I
shall therefore wave the Common Method of Dedicatory Epistles, and pass by
your Commendation, which (proving a Pardon) comes most decently from your
selves, whose Illustrious Merit (like the Sun) cannot be shown, but by its own
light. Whatever Actions are purely yours, essentially imply their own
Encomiums. To both of you my Muse humbly Dedicates her I wotopt Parnassus. The
Luster of your known Virtues, by its powerful Influence upon my Thought,
Attracts these Vapors of my Brain, as so many. Exhalations: Excuse then my
boldness in presenting you this small Offering: I do not bring it; your Desert
draws it. If my Verses feet any where seem to stumble, may the Reader conceit,
it Falls prostrate to you, to whom (as the chief Commanders of my Best
Respects) I am

Wholly Devoted.

To my FRIEND, Mr. E. E. on his Divine Poems.
RAre must the Chymick Art of thy Muse be,
To distill Humor into Poesy.
The clear streams of thy Hypocrene o're-flow
Those wholesome Plants that in blessed Eden grow.
Thy zealous Muse does Lustful Heats defy,
Warmed by the Sun beams of Divinity.
To speak thy praise at large, Ilesilent be,
For praise in thought befi^s thy Modesty.
W. Williams, Esquire.

On the sacred Poems of my Ingenious Friend, Mr. E. E.
LEt those who earthly Subjects dote upon,
Go scour their dirty Brains in Helicon.
Our Poet's Head's his Fountain, Wit the Streams,
Poured through the Conduits of his holy Theams,
So, gliding through the Channel of each line,
Cleanses the ground which was before divine.
It Is in this Holy Place the Nine do meet,
And wash the ground that it may wash their feet.
Fancy and Phrase contend, each sublimate:
Wit, and Divinity concorporate.
I Will say no more; it is labor spent amiss,
To praise the Book, when I have said it is his.
R. S. Esquire
.
In Amici mei E. E. Dia Poemata.
Frontem apage phaniccam.
Ne crubescas ingens Libelle stylo digne Adamantino.
Ne famininam induas verecundiam cui ingenium Masculum.
Nec inter Centones Lateas Monasticos.
Et ^ine typis apoc yphos
In Lucem prodeas lure Canon^^o:
Dentes ne vereare Sa^y^icos
Tam Sacra pagin^ haud ^^n^ Schism^t^
Nec blasphem(...) erit Criticus.
Non Leves Sotadis Schedu'ae
(Quibus nil, p ae(...)er Licc^ttam, Poeticum)
In tuos (L^ctor) involant amp ^xus.
Nec (...) sluctuantis Cereb^i (...) amplexu^ us es,
Emergentes v^n(...),
Sed piae m^tr^^ diam s(...)b^^em.
Bacchans Ac^to in pectore caren(...) R^psodus
Evomi^ Poematia.
Hic Musarum opsonator apis instar mi^e Aletymi(...),
E Bibli^rum fol^is collegit mells poctic^,
Nec, 'Laurta nempe cinct as fuit astro percit(...).
Suo haud navigat Anticyras Helicone. 'L^urea (...) (...). Caussia (...) Sot

Minervae fi ioli,
Latinum hunc ^i^emi^i Prometh^um,
(Cuj^s ferulae quaelibe subd: catur manus)
Qui divino raptu cae i^us detulit ingenit ign(...)los,
(...) Ita u^ ipse (...)e vi(...) ur Ph^^us,
N(...)st^is^ l^cet vatis p(...)usqu^m D^l^hici audi^s,
Silescu(...) Ap(...) O (...).
Invictissime Juvenis,
Palmas tibi pro^ert Terra S(...)a,
Quatum dactyl^^ saltent Poetici Pedes,
In quibus tantae probantur vires
Ut jam (...) -- expede Herculem.
Pa^nasso vix credam somniasse sed Libano,
Te Cedro digus l^ (...).
Quid testat?
Plas^^ de^^t Licet Poeticum,
Habes tamen, Lector, Pegasi alarm in Cherubicas,
Inque coe^^cas modulatrices
Harmonicon ^^leste nu^c edentes
Pegasidum Metamorphosi^.
T. P.

To his honest Cousin, E. E. on his Dia Poemata; or, his setting Feet on Holy
ground.
GOod Journey (Ned) at this first step you are gone
Beyond the longest line my Muse e're spun.
But were I loose from Natures's tic, I then
Would roave out in thy praise like other men.
Ran but our Blood thin, as my Ink does now,
How clear, how quick Encomiums should flow?
Yet since thy divine Muse has testified,
We Are only Cozens on the Fathers side:
I Will dare to praise thy Muse, although not thee,
And Hum the Base to thy sweet Poetry,
Laud modestly thy Wit, though not thy Brains,
Though we are allied in Blood, yet not in Veins.
It Is true (our Modern Counsels voted it)
Good Verse is Scandal, nothing's Sin but Wit:
Yet could thy teeming Muse long since despise.
The Humble Epithets of Good and Wise;
Let molded Fancies, and worm eaten Brains,
Whose crawling Genii breed naught else but Pains,
Beg the salt Froth of an Adultera^e Phrase
To season them, and pickle up their Praise.
Let addle Wits, Muses with stinking breath,
Yawn after Perfumes, and kiss sweet in death.
Let Chap-falne Hags, gnawing over some tough Ditty,
Like Homer's Spittle, spue, and so seem witty.
Whom Phoebus Sun-burns, when he should inspire,
Cold crackling Cinders of Poetic Fire;
Faint dwindling lights, snuffs of old Virgin-tapers,
Useless to the Muses but for blotting-papers:
Dry saplesse Poets, whose wan Poems are
Just as their Subjects, only painted fair.
Let such crampt Phant'sies hop on crutches, alas
They Will 'scape no Critics Nose without a pass.
Take off the Pattens of your Approbation,
Their feet are all bemir'd, and out of fashion.
It Is thy diviner Muse with heaven spun Lays,
Commands a Reverence, and begs not Praise.
One whose high birth boasts nobler parentage,
Than the poor grov'lling Songsters of our Age.
Whose squeaking Ela's never dare outstretch wretch:
The short breathed quave^s of some green-sick
Who scra^ a sniv'lling Reed up, till it speaks
Over those black Cro^chets, on their Mistress cheeks.
Thy sanctified Min^iva, that sweet S^ee,
Jove's brain sublimed to holy Poetry,
Puts on her Sunday's dress, and humbly comes
Without black Patches of Encomiums.
Prophaner Beauties stand her foils, the Arts
Are but mute Heralds of her nobler parts.
No wanton Current of lascivious Blood good.
Plays through her veins, but sober, chaste, and
Whose azure color speaks thus much (though all
Should contradict, they are pure celestial.)
Thy steadfast feet not damned to giddy wheelings,
Lost in Meanders of their own wild reelings,
Have got sure footing on the Holy land,
Where they two Pillars of Gods glory stand.
Thy zealo^s Muse too keeps the precept sound.
Puts off her shoos because it is holy ground.
Her Helicon's no gold, nor silver stream,
But milk and honey flowing from thy Theme:
How'l Cleavelands Maccabees brook this abuse?
An holy Grace profaned into a Muse?
To see Apollo thus Evangelize?
And in Bethesda Helicon Baptize?
Now thy Angelick Muse has moved the waters,
Thou'st shown the way to our poor leprous creatures;
Our cripled Girls may tumble in, and so
Return all sound, if not to run, to go.
How'l our Pot-Poets belch up wit who can
Piss wine out water, and so play the man*
To see new Miracles? That power's Divine
Which turned thy Helicon to sacred Wine.
Well Ned, march on, until thy nimble feet
Out run thy Name, and sound a sad Retreat
To those fool hasty, hot spur wits, who can
Think for an Heaven, never dream of Canaan.
Farewell.
It Is for such black Egyptian wits as we,
Safe taking leave on this side the Red sea:
In Hippocrene, which once sprang earth, and found
For thee a Boat, our leaden wits lie drowned.
Our slow Encomiasticks buz behind,
And spend their breath, all for a prosperous wind.
But since you are safe in Canaan, thy praise
Is, thou'st worn out a wilderness of Bays:
And wrought this happy Metamorphosis,
The Muses Garden now is Paradise.
There grows thy tree of life, and there let grow
That living Laurel shall surround thy Brow.
Only, since thou have won the Mount, O stoop
And lend a hand to help us Infants up.
Then shall we praise thee right, then only we
Shall on thy shoulders see as far as thee.
Clem. Elis Art. Bac. C. R. T.

To my Friend, the AUTHOR.
AMongst your other Friends (Dear Sir) that bring
Unto your Sacred Muse their Offering,
Accept a Verse from him, who how to pay
Due praise in Verse, did never till now essay.
It Is you make me a Poet, and I Am bound,
T'offer my First Fruits to your Holy ground.
For why? who reads your Book may dare thereon
Swear he has washed his lips in Helicon.
An't may be proved, the argument runs thus,
Where Feet Poetic are, there is Pegasus.
R. Inglet e Col. Exon. A. B.

To his Honored Friend M. E. E. on his Incomparable Poems.
NOw Helicon runs Holy Water, and
Parnassus is Mount Sion, on each hand*
Muses with graces are enameled, see
Wit and Devotion wedded (Friend) by Thee.
Thy Blossoms are Ripe Fruits, which do invite
Our Eyes both unto Profit and Delight.
The Mint's thy own: sure then there cannot appear
Adulterate Coin, which does thy Image bear.
Profit hence Momus, yet Carp at this Deed,
Your Envious Teeth bite that on which you Feed.
Allegiance says these Verses (Sir) are due:
Our Muses dutifully wait on you.
Your Muse i'th'Throne as Queen of Wit we see:
Let ours, Attendants, Maids of Honor be.
T. Tomkins,
A. B. e Coll. Bal.
To Mr. E. E. on his DIAPOEMATA.
They Are Heathen Poets, whom Phoebus does inspire,
But you are Divine, and tun'st a Sacred Lyre.
David's Majestic Music, which can Quell
Base Envious Spirits, and make our Minds to Swell
With Holy Raptures. Thy sweet Poetry
Keeps even Time to the Soul's Harmony.
Jordan's thy Helicon, thy Muse goes on
From Mount Parnassus unto Lebanon;
Thus Double Honor is most due to thee,
As Poet Laureat in Divinity.
Some do affect (for Rattles still please Boys)
Quibbles, and Puns that make a Gingling Noise:
Others do Aim at Wit, but miss the White,
And rather Laughter move, than cause Delight.
No such thing here: Thou scornst this Vanity,
Thy Quick Wit's Balla'st with Solidity.
No more: it is Praise enough, The Book's thine own,
Itself best speaks thy Commendation.
Will: Read. Art. Bac.

To Mr. E. E. on his Book, etc.
YOur Muse has well Inspired you, since that she
Has made you, Sir, Clove-Tong'd in Poetry;
For your Poetic Heat makes from your Quill
Water of Life, and Helicon Distill:
Your Muse was sure some Mer-maid, that could Tie
Two things so different in one Fantasy.
Your Pia Matter here her Twin does bring
To the Reader as her First-Fruit-Offering:
He Will like it; in your Cloven Quil He Will see
Parnassus, shown in an Epit^^^.
G. H.

To the AUTHOR.
THine Alpha-Bet d^d Nonplus Momus Rage,
He Is quite struck dumb by this profounder page.
Thy Fancy is Divine indeed: by Wit
Each Leaf is Sealed and Signed by Holy Writ.
For Helicon thou Bath'st in Sions Spring;
And not of Gods, but the only God do Sing.
Loose are some Poems, though their Feet be tied:
Thine's Cannon-proof, and more severely Tried.
My Muse but Homely Threads of praise can Spin,
Yet withered Bushes show there is Wine within.
Robert Carrell.

To the Laurel* worthy Mr. E. E. on his Excellent Poems.
INgenious Friend, I do presume to blow
A Trumpet here, before thy rarer Show;
But be a Gentleman Usher who can choose,
To Wait on such a beauteous Lady Muse?
Since Love which to the Muses i do bear
And Thee, makes me a Prologue now appear;
Though Wit as precious every Scene does hold,
As Shakespeare's Lease, or Johnson's Massy Gold,
Though thou with swelling Canvas sail beyond
Hercules Pillars, Fletcher and Beamont,
And though Thou art (what ever Fools repute)
A Poet in all Numbers Absolute;
Yet will I not wrong Thee so much (my Friend)
As to be speak the Reader to Commend,
Thy Ware is not of that same baser Sort
That sells not, 'lesse a good Word's spoken for it:
Let not thy Sack, but Foggy Ale go pray
To Customers to come and helped away;
It Is only for the Poor in Poetry
Basely to beg the Readers Charity;
Let Subtle have a Captain Face who tells
That he can work (Lord knows what) miracles;
Thy Muses Beauty needs not to Catch
After a Spokesman, to make up the Match:
Therefore Ben^^ Apophthegme I Will only say,
In troth it is good, and if you liked you May.
John Tomkins.

To the AUTHOR.
DEar Friend, I Have viewed thy Book, wherein each Page
Shows me thy Fancy, antidates thy Age.
Thy Epigrams have such Poetic Heat,
As makes their Feet drop Wit instead of Sweat.
So that the Muses say they will have no Son
But Thee, the apparent Heir to Helicon:
And if they chance t'adopt a Ganimede,
Their Drink shall be thy Brains, their Cup thy Head.
Jo: Ford.

To his most Deserving Friend, Mr. E. E. on his DIAPOEMATA.
I AM bash'd to read thy Verse, as I begin
To Scan thy Worth, my Muse comes Trembling in:
When I turn over this foul leaf, I Would never
Look back again, but that Thy Name is here;
Thou art no Pedling. Poet, what is here Writ.
Is at whole Sale; Thy Book's a Shop of Wit*
The Poets Nurshell, a Volume in each Page,
W'admire thy Youth in thy ripe Muses Age.
I cease to praise thy Book, what e're we see,
In that of Worth, I Am sure there is more in Thee.
Thou art a Poet, and Divine, Who Is thus
Does ride to Heaven on Winged Pegasus.
John Parker.

In Dia Poemata; Or, Poetic Feet standing upon Holy Ground.
Ad Encomiastas Authoris.
You might have saved your Labor, the Author sure
Doubts not to stand on his own Legs secure.
Let those on Churches go, whose Muses All
Bring forth but Cripples for an Hospital,
Whose Fame by others must supported be;
Their Commendation's but a Charity.
He Is Self sufficient, and as the Sun,
Whose scattered Beams through every Quarter run;
Maintains it self in its own Luster, by
That Font which does within its Bosom Lie)
Scorns all Recruits from others, th'lesser Stars
Are but this Greater Planets Pensioners.
What Hel^^on, each Pen distilleth, can
Add little to this boundless Ocean.
Here fix Poetic Ra^ble, whilst his Grace
The Muses High Priest enters the Holy Place.
G. Towerson, Art. Bac. e Col. Reg.

(...). All is Vanity and vexation of Spirit.
ANd is the world like its Black Monarch made,
That being graspt we find it naught but shade*
Hell fiends need walk no more; the World's their own,
Converted to an Apparition.
It Is nothing else but Empty shape; and thus
It seems to be our Malus Genius.
It Is of the Old Serpents nature, being Warm
With Love, its venom is empowered to Harm.
Its Kisses still are Treacherous: and so
It often Huggs, not to Embrace, but Throw.
Since then, when t'r we are happy here below,
Grief but gives back, to fetch the harder blow:
Since Nothing tipped with Essence is th'World's All,
And the Earths Globe, but Fortunes Tennis Ball:
Fly up my Mind; thy Pearches are Heavens Pole,
Earth's Gotham Hedge confines not Winged Souls.
Surely men of low degree are vanity, and men of high degree are a lie: to be
laid in the balance they are altogether lighter then vanity, Ps. 629.
HOw light is Man! by every wind
Of fortune here, or there Incl^n'd!
Her blasts dispell his chiefest Trust:
And toss him to and fro, like Dust.
He Is often Puffed up by the Peoples Breath,
And, bubble-like, so vanishes:
Often whirled on the wings of Fame,
And swallowed up by a Great Name.
Inferiors scorned are: Great men cursed;
Or swollen with Pride until they Burst.
Praise, Honor, Riches, Earthly Glory,
Like man, are Pilgrims, Transitory:
Till th'Night of Ignorance decline,
These Glow worms seem to him to shine.
So light's his Head! that Sov'raigne Part,
He'th nothing Heavy, but his Heart;
Which Drunk with Pleasure, still does reele,
Or else is Broke on Fortunes Wheel.
Vain's all his Labor: vain his thought:
Himself's but once removed from naught.
Void of all Solidity,
He Is lighter then vanity.
All is Vanity; but He Is
Vanity of Vanities.
Have pity upon me, have pity upon me, O ye my Friends, for the hand of God
has touched me. Job. 19. 21.
ON me, my Friends, o pity take! My Bowels quake!
The hand of God has touched me Most terriblie:
Within, without from top, to Toe,
I Am closely girt about with woe.
A wounded Spirit I must bear, Overwhelmed with Fear:
Gods Terrors (ah me!) have Confined My troubled Mind
(Shrunk from the Hope of all relief)
Within the straits of restless Grief.
My flesh is all beset with sores, Its very Pores
Are Blocked up by this Siege of Death. I cannot vent breath,
But it is so loathsome, that you would think,
'Twere a Dead Body's odious stink.
My Goods, my Health, my Friends, and All Together fall:
I Have only Life enough to Cry When shall I die?
Clothed with Clods of Dust, e're dead,
My Flesh in it self is Buried.
Mine eye is dim, can only see My misery:
My breath's left but to frame my Moans, And waft out Groans.
To Pity now, my Friends, incline!
Your hearts if Stony, will break mine.
Lavatus Aethiops.
And he commanded the Chariot to stand still, and they went down both into the
water, both Philip, and the Eunuch, and he baptized him. Acts 8. 38.
MOst happy Eunuch! that has
Cured his Sick soul in this Bath.
By Baptism, He Is Washed within;
Wrapped about with his old Black Skin.
His soul, Penitently sad,
Seems to be in Mourning clad.
This water Him t'Heavens Port bears,
Mixed with Paenitentiall tears:
Aqua vitae't proves to Him
Dead in T^espasses, and Sin.
His soul's a Diamond that is set
In a Cabinet of Jeat:
In dark-Lanthorns thus there is Light,
Thus a Star shines in Dark Night.
In's Jesus is his Delight;
He shall walk with him in white
Such Candid Aethiopes are seldom seen;
Fa^r People often arc Aethiopes within.
On Christmas day.
Unto you is born, in the City of David, a Savior, which is Christ the Lord.
Luke 2. 11.
THis Day the LORD of Heaven and Earth
Subjects Himself to Humane Birth:
By this Transcendent Mystery,
God, and Man are at Unity.
Strange! He, that is, was, is to come,
Thus wrapped up in a Mortal Womb!
Would the Sun of Righteousness thus shroud
His Glorious Luster in a Cloud
Of humble Flesh, and Blood? and can
Man's Maker be the Son of Man?
Hyperbole of wonder, How!
Times Ancestor come forth but Now!
Nay, Stranger Yet: we may dare say
Eternity was Born This Day.
Blessed Angel! Who these Tidings bring,
Ambassador from the King of Kings.
The articulate air, that wafts this news,
To the Soul does the Breath of life infuse,
This heavenly sound the Shepherds ears
Judge the best Music of the Spears:
As Orpheus's courser art drew sense,
This ravisheth intelligence:
Souls rapt up by this harmony,
Unto the Throne of Grace do fly.
Faith comes by hearing: He that hears
This Angels voice, annoints his ears
With the Oil of Gladness: and by Faith
Shall Live, although he pass through death.
O Jesu! who wast Born Jesus to me,
Grant that, this day, I be Newborn to thee.
I am distressed for thee, my brother Jonathan, very pleasant have thou been
unto me: the love to me was wonderful, passing the love of women. 2 Samuel 1.
26.
I AM slave to grief (not mine own man)
For thee, my brother Jonathan.
Twixt us, who were in life all-one,
Death could cause no division:
I cannot forsake thee dead, but I,
Since thou art dead, must daily die.
Tearing thee off, my souls best part,
Fate could not choose but break my heart.
Those arrows, which thou shot'st did prove,
The arrows of our mutual love.
Most pleasant have thou been to me:
No Woman ever loved, like thee.
W'had more then Marriage-union;
Our souls had copulation.
Our heart-blood was so mixed, that we
Were'kin by CONSANGUINITY.
Thus't could not be thou should be slain,
And I not feel the utmost pain.
Thy fate strikes at me: in thy knell,
Methinks I hear my Passing Bell.
I scarce survive! with sighs disturbed my breath,
Seems to be seized on by the pangs of Death.
How shall we sing the Lords song in a strange land? Psalm. 1374.
TO light hearts only such light mirth belongs:
Our fortune weeping will allow no songs.
These rivets yield us the fitt'st music: we
Account their murmures our best harmony:
In them the Emblem of our fate appears:
Their murmures show our groans, their streams our tears.
How shall we sing in a strange land? our tongues
Benumbed with sorrow, are unfit for sengs.
He profanes sacred melody, that dares
To sing in anguish, and mix Sighs with Airs.
Our unregarded Harps hung up you see,
Like Trophies, to adorn griefs victory.
Our Ears so glutted with continual Moans,
Cannot relish the Sweetness of such plealant Tones.
Then Mirth farewell (...) our mournful Gestures shall
Still solemnize our Countries Funeral.
Whilst she, a Captive, lives a woeful Death,
We will not, by Songs, let any Joy draw breath:
Unless once more that Queen of Cities Reign,
We Will never lift up our Drooping Heads again.
And they stoned Stephen, calling upon God, and saying, Lord Jesus receive my
spirit. Acts 7. 59.
RApt with Hot ^eale (Elias like) Blessed Stephen
Went, in a Fiery Char o^, up to Heaven.
By this fair Gale of Holy Breath, He is
Arrived safely at the Port of Bliss.
His last words Summon Heaven: and by them He
Gives Christ His Spirit for a Legacy.
And thus he died, so filled with the Heavenly Dove,
That his Soul fled out on the wings of Love.
Where are the nine? Luke 17 17.
OF the Ten Leapers, Lord, the world claim's Nine:
The Tenth turns back to thee; for Tithes are Thine.
Take, Eat, This is my Body. Mark 14. 22.
OH Lord, shall we thy Glorious Body Eat?
Can Earthworms relish such Celestial Meat?
O Blessed Lamb of God! shall we be Fed
On thee, whom our Dire Sins have Butchered?
And have we slain thee thus to Feed on thee?
And are we Pious Anthropophagi?
Stretch Faith! O Mystic table! where each guest
Is b^d to Eat of the Master of the Feast:
Nay, where the Meat it self Invites, and where
Our Bodies Eat, but souls digest the Fare.
Draw near, my Son! to this strange Truth, and fly
Out of thy self, by Holy Ecstasy,
Into the Bosom of the Light of Men,
Who here will make thee to be Born again.
I come; but Faintly, Lord, as Sick folk do:
Thou find st us Meat, o find us Stomachs too.
Open thou mine Eyes. that I may behold wondrous things out of thy Law. Ps.
119. 18.
LOrd, on my Heart write thou thy Law, that I
May read it over with my Internal Eye.
Let the Light of thy Countenance appear
To make thy Law's mysterious Wonders Clear.
The Works of Darkness, in my Earthly Mind,
Have made mine Eyes (like Moles, Earth's Prisners) blind.
Thou that make th'Blind to see, Help I thee pray,
Not putting to, but wiping off the Clay.
Those Fogs, which youthful heat exhales, do rise
Like misty clouds 'twixt Heaven and mine Eyes.
Shine on me Sun of Righteousness: the night
Is now far spent: O Day spring, bring the Light.
To behold wondrous things my sight's too dull,
Unless through Him, whose Name is WONDERFUL.
I am weary with my groaning, all the night make I my bed to swim, I water my
Couch with my tears. Psalm. 6 6.
MY Lungs are worn with Groaning; often Moans
Infect my Breath; my very words turn groans.
Drawn through (that Pipe, so blown with sighs) my Throat,
Their sound is tainted with a dole full note.
My Panting heart breathes after some relief;
But still it is Heavy, through the weight of Griese.
It weeps, so Stony, its own Misery,
Like (Sorrows Emblem) stupid NIOBE.
This Rock ^ields (Teary) water, smote by the Rod
Of Moses Teacher, our, and Moses God.
In silent night, when closed eyes look for rest,
I hear the outcries of a troubled breast:
Then Clouds of Melancholy (by th'wind of Fears
Blown to and fro) drop into Showrs of Tears;
Which stream so fast, as 'twere to wash mine eye
Polluted by beholding Vanity.
I make my bed to swim with Tears) as tho
'Twere Charons Boat, tossed on the Flood of woe.
My Body thus, and soul (at once) want-light;
The one Black Fate orewhelmes, the other Night.
Wretch that I am! nothing quite vanquisheth
These I wins of Darkness, but the Day of Death.
I see another law in my members warring against the law of my mind, and
bringing me into captivity to the law of sin, Romans 7. 23.
AH! Shall my restless Mind for ever be
Thus Captive made by too much liberty?
When, Lord, will thou me bind,
With th'Cords of thy Soul-keeping Love,
That my affections may not rove,
But justly be confined?
My Thoughts so Froathy are, as though they came
Out of the Bosom of the Cyprian Dame:
But yet I hate my Folly;
And when I laugh, as heretofore,
I do but throw Mirth out at door,
Within I Am Melancholy.
My Lust submits not to my Will's command,
Can my Souls Household thus divided stand?
That these Home-wars may cease,
Come to my Soul, and speedily
Confirm't in Christian Unity.
Come quickly, Prince of peace.
Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth. Eccle. 12. 1.
THy Youthful Heat should still Aspire
To the Bright Flame of Zeals pure Fire:
That will (no Atheist dares control)
Prove Vital Heat unto thy Soul.
Those Youthful Veins, That Proudly Swell,
Do Boil, as 'twere with the Fire of Hell.
He, whose First Years are spent in Evil,
Shows that He is the Child o'th Devil.
Remember then, in the Days of Youth,
To find the WAY, and learn the TRUTH.
Wash thy New Soul, and keep it clean
With the Well of Life's continual Stream;
Now Fortify Thy Self within;
Maintain it against Approaching Sin:
Be Pious, and Live Strictly (...) so,
Shut up, thou will keep out thy Foe.
Whilst that thy Growth in Grace, and Years are even,
Degrees of Age are but the Steps to Heaven.
In Obitum VITAE.
On the Death of JESUS.
He gave up the Ghost. Luke 23. 46.
GAve up the Ghost? how so! O where could He
Dislodge his Soul, who had Ubiquitie?
Could God be Mortal? and could He that made
The Worlds Great Lights, become Himself a Shade?
O Mystic Truth! which cannot on Earth be Shown:
He Knows it best that thinks it cannot be Known.
Thus Mat. 27. 55.
Darkness set it forth; by which the Sky
Seemed the Emblem of some losty Mystery:
Whilst that bold Death durst to assault the Joh. 1. 5.
LIGHT
The Heavens wore Mourning, and the Day turned Night.
That we might Live, so did our Jesus Die;
'Sthough He Gave us His Life by Legacy:
But He Is Revived, and now has made us be
Partakers of His Immortality:
So shall we find, when the whole World vanishes,
Our selves Refreshed by the sleep of Death.
I have washed my feet, how shall I defile them? Cant. 5. 3.
I Have washed my feet, even in the Blood
O'th'Lamb of God;
How shall I them again defile?
I Will fly Sins Guile,
Which draws to those foul Paths that lead
Down to the Chambers of the Dead.
No more I Will wallow in the Mire
Of Fond Desire:
I Will ever shun Uncleanness: I
Th'Worlds Sp(...) defy:
To show them th'Clean way (as (...) meet)
Gods Word's a Lamp unto my Feet.
Oh let me walk (through holy Aw)
LORD, in thy Law,
That Ps. 119. 1.
undefiled still I may
Be in the Way:
Make me to go (led by thy word)
In The Path Ps. 119. 35.
of thy Commandments Lord.
Then Herod, when he saw that he was mocked of the wise men, was exceeding
wroth, and sent forth, and slew all the children etc. Mat. 2. 16.
THrice happy Babes! weaned from the world so soon,
They suck the breasts of consolation.
They pass to Canaan through a crimson flood,
They die for Christ, baptized in their own blood.
O wrathful Herod! were thy storms so stout,
To blow the Tapers of their lives quite out?
Could nothing, but young (half milk) blood assuage
The boistrous WILDFIRE of thy dismal rage?
Fond man! (whom wrath beside himself has hurled)
Would kill the Life, that is come to save the world.
Most cruel Fox! that would have sucked the blood
Of (sheep, and Shepherd too) the Lamb of God.
Lament not, Rachel, Moans bring no relief:
These brinish tears exasperate thy grief.
Grudge not thy Children the happiness to die;
They could do nothing in this life, but cry.
Their bitter cup they but a potion found,
Which purged their souls of flesh, and made them sound.
I'th'body, pierced by that Rabble-rout,
There Is made a breach to let the soul' escape out.
And so they went to their long home, this day,
The soldiers showed them (mist themselves) the WAY.
BACKSLIDING: OR, A Spiritual Relapse.
A wounded spirit who can bear? Prove. 18. 14.
MY Heart bleeds: Wounded spirit! oh!
'Twas Sin gave me this deadly blow.
Sin thus Revived I Die: for neither
Can be content to Live together:
We fight like two fierce Combatants, that meet
To get a Trophee, or a Winding Sheet.
But, must I Die indeed? and can
The Sinner thus Destroy the Man?
Self-Murtherer I am: O! I
Have Slain my self, yet would not Die.
Ah! I am Dead in Trespasses and Sin:
The Worm already feeds on me within.
Heal my backslidings, LORD: O draw
Me from the Roaring Lions Paw,
That tears my Soul: O Jesu, give
Me once more Will, and Power to Live.
Cure but the wounded spirit that I bear,
I Will fight th'Good Fight; be more than Conqueror.
How can I do this great wickedness and sin against God? Genesis 39 9.
HOld! hold! I will not do it: Shall I
Turn Traitor to Heavens Majesty?
Shall I do this? Sin against my God?
Such Folly will provoke his Rod.
Dread, my soul, this Impiety,
Startle into an Ecstasy:
So may thou seem Thy Self to Flee,
Which is thy Greatest Enemy.
O! shall I sin against God, whose Arm
Protects me from Eternal Harm?
How! sin against God, whose gracious Eyes
Dispel my Clouds of Miseries?
Without whose Countenance's Light,
My Mirth is Anguish, Day is Night.
I will not do it: but, Lord, do Thou
Now make me Able not to Do.
Homo Lapsus.
She took of the fruit thereof, and did eat, and gave also to her husband with
her, and he did eat. Genesis 3. 6.
THe Universe at once the Old Serpent Stung:
A World of Mischief in a woman's Tongue.
She Tempts her Husband: and her Noisome Breath
Blasts Him, and His Posterity to Death.
And he did Eat (by th Counsel of a wife)
Not to Sustain, but to Destroy His Life.
But, ah! He Erred not thus alone: He Fell
On Us so hard. He pressed Us down to Hell:
Where we had stayed, but that the Jesus of Men
Went down Himself to fetch Us up again.
His Mouth was made our Slaughterhouse: and we,
Being in His Loins, had there our Destiny:
His Jaws Crush his own Happiness; and Ours:
We Surfeit too at that which He Devours.
Oh! we are Sick to Death; cannot Eased be
But by the Fruit, Born on a better Tree,
Which is our Living Food: yea, (strange! yet true)
'^is both our Physic, and Physician too.
I said of Laughter, It is mad, and of mirth, What does it! Eccl. 2. 2.
THrice Cursed be Wanton Pleasure, Hell's Fine Daughter,
That Tickles us into such Fits of Laughter!
What is it on Earth can make us be so Jolly?
Like Fools in grain, Laugh we at our own Folly?
Solace, by Laughter, breaks forth to Excess,
Out-goes its self, and turns to Heaviness.
Laughter's but the last Blaze of Mirth: Full-Blown
Our Joys straight Fade: from greatest come to none.
He Laugh no more for Mirth: but, if thou see
Me Laugh, vain World, be sure I Laugh at Thee.
FINIS.
EPIGRAMS, etc.

By E. E.

Carpere vel noli nostra, vel ede tua.

ENCOMIAST: To J. C.
NO Verse, Grand Poet, can express
Thy Praises, they are Numberless.
Thy worth's so Weighty, it is not meet
'T should stand upon Poetic Feet,
Which (hence they mount to such a Height)
Like Poets Heads, are always Light.
But, since I am thus thrown upon
Thy Muses Commendation;
Blots (my Pen's lssue) I shall place,
For some Black Patches, in Her Face.
So may thy Phoebus dart His Rays
More Bright out of my Cloud of Praise.
Thy Verse Runs in a Way so rare,
That it must needs be Singular:
Thy Muse so Chaste thus seems alone
To Bath her self in Helicon.
That Offspring, which from Her we see,
Was only sure begot of Thee:
Mixture of Fancy she does fly
As if 'twere Wits Adultery.
Thy Lines have such a glittering Strain,
'Sthough Tagus had washed over thy Brain.
Thy Sense does with huge Myst'ries swell,
As 'twere Apollo's Oracle.
Our Judgment should dig deep to find
The Hidden Treasure of thy Mind.
Thy Wit (like Tersian Kings) we see,
Keeps close in show of Majesty.
Thy Fancy to such Height is Flown,
No words can reach it but thine own:
To show how much a Poet can do,
Thou make new Matter, and Words too:
Thus in Arts most curious Schools,
The Best workmen make their own Tools:
Thus some Limners I could name,
Who make both Picture, and its Frame.
Each Verse of thine with Luster streams,
As though 'twere one of Phoebus Beams.
Who e're dislikes thy Book, his sight
Of Judgement's dazzled at its light.
On a dull Poet, but good Logitian.
IF his Verse charactered may be,
It Is Laurel 'graft on P^r^h'ry^s tree:
He dresses his Poor Poetry
In The rags of Old Philosophy:
As if indeed on Feet Poetic,
He Would seem a true Peripatetick.
(...). On a Little Gentleman of Great Parts.
DOes Nature act the Limner's part,
Shaping less things with rarest Art?
Or (like some Ladies) does she set
Her best Gems ^'th' less Cabinet?
Great Volumes useless often we see,
He Is Natures quaint Epitome:
Or else he may deserve the name
Of her wittiest Epigram.
So small in Stature and in Age,
Yet learned he seems Minerva's Page:
No wonder then if she him dress
In such abundant gaudinesse.
Short (like him) are my Verses Feet;
O were they also (like him) sweet.
To a false-hearted Poet.
You Are double-Tongu'd, and double-Foot'd to boot;
Thy false Verse savours of a Cloven foot.
On a Gentlewoman of a Brown Complexion, but Handsome Features.
WHilst Lovely Her Black Features prove,
They seem like COALS 'oth' Fire of Love.
On a Gentleman who Died with Lord in his Mouth.
WHen he had breathed out LORD! His Soul thought fit,
As loath to leav't, to leap forth after it.
On the Death of Leander.
THe Saying proved too true, by his Distress,
That FIRE and Water, are both Merciless.
But, Cold Death did assuage his Hot Desire:
The Fatal Water served to Quench His FIRE.
To one that gets his Living by writing Satyrs.
THou Feed'st on thine own Brains, it is said:
With thy wits Tooth thou Eat'st thy Bread.
Nec Font labra prolui Caballino.
MY Moldy Brains I never washed clean
In the fond streams of HIPPOCRENE:
To which some wisely have recourse
To be made Poets: Gra' marcy Horse.
-- Vino pellite Curas.
HORACE, you are out: Bacchus, thy Wits harsh Master,
But lops thy Cares to make them grow the faster.
Be Drunk at Evening, and thou'^t find o'th Morrow,
That too much Liquor pickles up thy Sorrow.
Of Vulgar Critics.
THeir Blindfold Censures out of Order Range;
Their words are WIND indeed, as often Change:
Sometimes they are Tempests too: but I Defy them;
I Will never be Puffed up, or be Blasted by them.
To the Eye Adulterer.
LEnd Eyes to Cupid: View thy Handsome Lasses:
Drink Streams of Pleasure in those Crystal Glass.
But yet consider that this Splendid show
Can only light thee to the Shades below.
On a Gentlewoman that would be married to none but a Rich man.
THus her Example proves, that Ovid told,
That Cupids Arrow must be gilt with Gold.
Lasciva est nobis Pagina, vita proba. To the Author.
VVRiting's a Poets Life; then, sure, if thou
Do Write Lasciviously, thou Liv'st so too.
To the same.
THou studiest Mischief when thou writest it:
Thy Bawdy Verse is but Adulterate Wit.
To an Epigrammatist, that inveighs against Women.
THe Muses, Man, are Female; may thou know it,
A Foe to their Sex cannot be a good Poet.
On the perfect Conclusion of a fierce War.
THose Thunderbolts of Mars, which lately fell,
Were but a V^ll^y to bid War Farewell.
To a Virtuous Gentlewoman, weeping for the Death of her Eldest Brother, my
Bosom-Friend.
ALas! sweet Lady! must you sup
So deeply of this Bitter Cup?
Your Brinish Tears increase the Smart
Of The Wounds of my Afflicted Heart.
Your Griefe's Infectious, I believe:
I Am Grieved afresh to see you Grieve.
Double Grief my Thought endures,
My Sighs, like Ecchos, answer Yours.
My Plaints are most; beside mine own,
I Have yours too by Reflection:
I cannot hear Moans for Him, but I
Must be engaged to Sympathy.
Lament not you; let me ingrosse
The Lamentation of this Loss.
You Have now a Second-self, but I
Lost such a one when He did die:
Nay, more than such did's Title Merit,
You are One Flesh, we were One Spirit.
How sadly then may I complain?
Grief! Break my Heart, and Crack my Brain.
To the same.
YOur wet Eyes are (as I may say)
Like Sunshine in a Rainy day.
On the Tempestuous season of Wind and Rain, 1654.
FOr the Growth of our Iniquity,
I fear, our Fields will Barren be:
For Sin that has ^a'n Root so deep,
The Heavens sure thus Sigh, and Weep.
Strong Drink.
DRink's Strong indeed: with Stygian water Purl'd,
Like Alexander, it o'recomes the World.
Charity.
Where Charity takes Cold, the Country's Sick:
That Is the Vital Heat of the Body Politic.
-- Stupet hic vitio -- -- Nescit quid perdat: and alto Demersus summa rursus
non bullit in ^^da. Per. Sa. 3.
HIs Soul's so Dark all over, He cannot see
The Ugly Face of His Iniquity.
Fallen so in love with Vice, He cannot Rise:
For, Sampson like, He'th lost both Strength and Eyes.
His Dread- Cooled Heart's Benumbed: He Is void of Sense
His Burning Lust has Scared His Conscience.
An unquiet-bad Conscience.
THe Worm of Conscience Feeds on
Our natural Corruption.
Whiles Hell, and Death lodge in our Breast,
Our Hearts may Sleep, but cannot Rest.
Temptation.
THe Devil only Tempts: but (wretched Elves)
We often turn Devils, and so Tempt our selves.
Pride.
PRide's the Soul's Blister, scall'd by the fire of Hell;
Ill Humors only make the Mind to swell.
The World never saw one yet, did entertain
Pride, Thought's I^postume, but in a Sick-brain.
To a Lascivi^m P(...).
FOr shame, for shame, leave off: for, as we are told,
Cupid, and Phoebus have been (...) of old.
On Poetry.
THe Muses Sauce, my Study's Strong-meat: These
Shall be my Play-mates, not my Mistresses.
Of Partiality.
Men's Judgments often Err, that are too kind:
They See not what they Say, for Love is Blind.
The World's Fine Gentleman.
HE makes a Dainty Leg, and Nod, thus He
Is every Inch well-bred, even Cap-a-pe.
To Unlearned Critics.
WE don't estrange at your Grammatick War,
We know Rough Judgments must be prone to Jar.
To an Hireling Poet.
Winged Riches Hatch thy Muses Young; and thus
Thou make an Hackney of thy Pegasus.
To his Displeased Pater in Phoebo, Mr. F. M.
YOu're not in earnest, sure: and thus
It Is but Furor Poetic(...).
Your Anger's Faign'd, though it seem so Great,
You're Incensed by Poetic Heat.
Why man! I spoke but like a Poet:
I said 'twas bad; I will not stand to it.
Come, let us be Friends: and do not move
Phoebus again to Quarrel with Love.
How much I Am Grieved, Good Sir, pray think:
My Muse for Mourning wears this Ink.
On a NEWES-MONGER.
FAr, and near all the News He hears:
Asses always have long Ears.
To an Honorable Lady Rarely Accomplished with Wit, and Beauty.
FAir Venus and Minerva show,
That They Are at length made Friends by you:
Yo've given both Content: both prize
The APPLES of your Glis'tring Eyes,
Which t'each of them Assigned are:
For, still you look both wise, and Fair.
Your winged Soul at each Glance does Fly
Out of the Casement of your Eye;
Whose Splendid Beams, like Phoebus Rays,
Create new Blossoms to my Bays.
My Muses weak Eye, gazing on
This Daz'ling Sight, Drops Helicon:
But its Streams are at best too base,
To wash your Ladyships Sweet Face;
Which is set in such Symmetrie,
That, like the Soul, 't seems Harmony,
Which, since it comes not to our Ears,
Is like the Music of the Spheres.
Your Body is (ail Symptoms show it)
So Fine that your Clear Soul shines through it:
It Is Quaintly ordered, as we find,
By the Lady Governnesse, your Mind.
Both your Parts thus, as 'twere, All-one,
Are like a Constellation.
Your very Face (my Muse dares say)
Is Parallel to the Milkie way.
Your Wit and Beauty thus take Equal Place;
Your self make up these Twins; A MUSE and GRACE.
On the fifth of November.
THus rend the Bowels of the Earth! it is well;
Dig deeper yet, and so dig down to Hell:
Incarnate F^ends! seek out the way, by the Light
Of your Dark Lanthorn, to Eternal Night.
Think you with Royal Limbs to fill the Air,
Because your Master's Lord and Sovereign there?
Wretches! He cannot help you, but Grim Death
Shall, in the Air, you struggle out of Breath.
Thus of Advancement, which you hoped to see,
The Fruit you will have, but from a Gallow Tree.
So may all Craft taught by the Old Serpent fail,
And Serpent like, still bear a sting in the Tail,
To wound its Owners: so may Trayt'rous Elves,
Find Death ^'th' Pit, which they have Dug themselves.
Kicking at us, the Ugly Beast at Rome
Has spurned his Whelps, and given them the Doom:
Pushing He'th broke his Horns: thus often it is known,
The Stone(...) burst against that at which it is thrown.
Now then that we are safe, and that our Land
Has cast the Vipers, which stuck to her hand,
Into the Fire: Enslam'd with Love let us bring
Our Zeal-fir^d Hearts, as a Burnt off r^ng,
To Great Jehovah, whose Foreseeing Eye
Has struck these Bas'lisks with Mortality.
Let Quick-foot Verse Dance nimbly on the Rope,
Of Hanged Traitors; and let us wish the Pope
Swing'd in our Bell-ropes, or Consumed (...)the Flame
O^ this Night's Bone-fire; so shall His dire Name
Be Cursed in his own Fashion; we handle
No other Curse but his, BELL BOOK and CANDLE.
And now let us fill the Skies with shouts, that even
Our Joys Rebound (from whence they came) to Heaven.
To an Handsome Gentlewoman on this part of her Anagram: EACH BEAUTY SHOOTS.
EACH BEAUTY that your Features show,
SHOOTS at some Mark with Cupids Bow.
Your Beauties pierce through, and melt Hearts,
As though they were Love's Fiery Darts.
Each Beauty Shoots; your Beauteous Eyes
Shed Rays, like Stars shot through the Skies.
To the same.
YOur Fore-head's Semicircled so,
The young God takes it for His Bow.
Swearing and Cursing.
FOnd Oaths, backed on with Curses, are the fell
Oaths of Allegiance to the Prince of Hell.
Such Boyst'rous Breath 'its owners Soul will shake,
And Blow the Fire of the Infernal Lake.
Melancholy.
It Is Pia Matter in Discolored Weeds:
A Checkered Plat form of Fantastic Deeds:
The Brain-Filme wrought into a Dismal Shroud:
The Sun of the Little World in a thick Cloud:
Swift Thought turned Fairy: Wild wit gone astray:
A Fancy, that in the Dark has lost its way.
To Mr. F. M.
YOur Strong-wing'd Fancy, mounting with such Grace,
Is Eagle-ey'd, looks Phoebus in the Face:
He is the Parent of your High born Strain;
His best Blood runs in your Poetic veyn,
To One marrying for Love, not Money.
THou do as all men ought to do:
Heart Strings are best for Cupid's Bow.
Thanks To a Virtuous Gentlewoman, who gave him a Dish of Sweet Meats.
WHat Modest Favour's This forsooth?
T'avoyd my Thanks it stops my Mouth.
My Tongue's confined to ^ast of the Meat:
I Am forced, as 'twere, my Words to EAT.
Your Ears thus ^scape my Thanks, but I
Present them here unto your Eye:
They come at last clad all in Black,
As Mourning that they come so slack.
So High my Grateful Thoughts do Swell,
I like the Dish so hugely well;
I Fancy you're a Goddess, and dare say,
Your Sweet-Meat is Divine- Ambrosia.
To his Honored Friend, W. W. Esquire.
Since that I cannot at full set forth
My great Love, and Thy greater Worth;
My Pen, its hard Task has forsook:
I Will say it By Heart, and not By Book.
To Mrs. M. S. in her Childbed Dress.
IN Childbed look so Fine! thus (all confess)
Phoebus looks Fairest in His Morning Dress,
Come newly out of Bed: my bold Muse says,
Your Sparkling Glances do out vie His Rays.
My Fancy, like the Lark (...) Fowlers GLASS,
Plays in the MIRROIR of your lovely Face:
With wonder Caught, she is at a Non plus Set;
And thinks her self with VENUS in the NET.
To the same, newly Married, on her Anagram: SO! YOV'RE MATCHED.
SO! YOU'RE (well MATCHED: and I dare say,
Love Saw upon your Marriage-Day.
Fit Marriage is a Match, thus) you
May see the Anagram is True,
You're Fitly Married sure (say I)
Fore-joyn'd by Consanguinity:
So you this Paradox make good:
Two may become One Flesh, and Blood.
Mars Togatus: Or, Fighting in the Schools.
Fool! What! do strive with might, and main,
For a Broke Pate to a Cracked Brain?
Thy Brains leake out already, man;
And would for Anger Break the Pan?
Thy Head swollen in this boyish Fight,
By Rising, shows that it is Light.
Thy Black Eyes, by such Marks, as these,
Wear Mourning for thy wits Decease.
Such Apish Braules who'd not despise,
Whose Fume had not put out his Eyes.
Throughout the Schools such Hissings are,
'Sthough all the Furies Snakes were there.
Grave Zabarells, and Aristotle's
(Whose Thirsts nere reach beyond Beer-Bottles)
Come fiercely on (who'd not decline (...)?)
With Argumentum Bacillinum
Young Preachers too stare, stamp, and Hum,
As if they would Kill both all, and some:
Who ^^e but saw their Fifty pushing,
Would swear they learnt to Beat the Cushion.
Mad Poets too come Vap'ring here,
'Sthough Helicon were Bottle Beer.
Each all his Faculties combines
T(...)show his Arm as Strong's his Lines.
Had but ^i^stes seen these men,
He Would Startled into^ wit again:
Here seeing's Emblem, wretched Else,
Act^on-like He d fled H mselfe.
Go, Sirs, you are Fools Rampant: and
(To which even Mad men set their Hand)
The WORM, that gnawes your Pates was Bred
By some Snake on Medusa's Head.
Hac Ignis: Sive Lues Venerea.
BEware, Fond Lads, of a shrewd turn:
Loves Flames at last will surely Burn
Another.
Damned Venus! whose Embrace is Pimp to Slaughter;
Thou burn'st men's Bodies here, their Souls hereafter.
Lust.
WHen Satan shoots such Fiery Darts, to Fl^
Is the only way to get the Victory.
Lust, like a Baited Engine, never annoyes,
If Passed by; but being Touched, destroys.
To the Reader.
I fear no Carping: Reader spare not:
What e're thy Judgment be, I care not.
Young Muses (like Young Men) I hold,
For want of Wit should be more Bold.
To Mr. E. F. The only Son of Sir E. F. Knight.
SO much of Virtues Light appears
In (Ages Dawn) your tender Years:
We hope you will ever show your self to be
True Heir of your Illustrious Family.
Plain Verse.
MY Verse is Plain: I Would have it so: why not?
My Pegasus shall Amble still, not Trot.
To Mrs A. S. on the Death of her Two first Children.
YOur Fair Cheeks with Tears sprinkled show
Like Roses Pearled over with Dew.
But be not so Discomforted:
Your Babes Departed are not Dead.
To keep them from all casual Harms,
Their Savior takes them in His Arms.
These Olive-Branches, by His care,
In Paradise Transplanted are.
So they become, by their Decease,
A Garland to the Prince of Peace.
Allusion.
It Is Janus wit: the Two Splits of a learned Quill
The best Emblem of Two-Topt Parnassus Hill.
To that Pretty Piece of Perfection Mrs L. C.
NAtures Fine Thing! Best Show that e're
Came on the World's The-tre!
My Young Muse takes you out to Hay,
And vows she will have you Queen of May.
But oh, she cannot Deck you more
Then Nature't self has done before:
Whatever of you she can say
Is but to give Light to the Day.
Had sweet Ad^nis but you seen,
How He Would have scorned the Cyprian Queen!
I Would almost thought the Fiction true,
That Gods Beget, when I saw you.
Your Eyes, your Cheeks, are all so Fine,
I Would think 'um, but they are Flesh Divine.
Yet this is but your Beauty's Spring,
What Plenty will the Harvest bring
When you are Ripe, in Years? sure then
Love will begin to love again.
For you Blind Cupid need not shoot:
Your Glances, Darts of the Eyes, will do it.
A Garland Hymen need not seek:
He may have't in your Rosy Cheek:
When e're He shall join Male to you,
May no Division make you Two:
In Virtue, and true Amity
Shine, as Bright's the GEMINI.
So may you be, before all other,
In Goodness Great; even like your Mother.
To Mrs. K. G. having been lately sick of the Small Pox.
TWere Blasphemy against the God of Love to say,
Ought can Deform you, till you're turned to Clay.
Spots by your Eyes are Brightened: each Pock hole
Shows (at a Distance) but like Venus Mole:
Th'Rose spreading over your Cheeks my Fancy spies;
The lovely L^lly in your Sickness Dies.
Your Welfare will Revive't: your Eyes once open,
Their Radiant Beams turn't to an Heli^trope.
You only look, come newly out of Bed,
Like Fair Aurora, at Her Rising, Red.
Always to Shine no Beauties are allo v'd:
The Sun it self sometimes endures a Cloud.
I Have spent my present Stock of Poets Wealth,
In Aganippe thus to Drink your Health.
A Love sick Gentleman to a Fair Lady scorning him.
G. ALas! Love's Darts wound me to Death!
Not t'hear me speak's to stop my Breath!

L. I Would give thee leave to show thy Art,
But thy Sharp Wit would Pierce my Heart.

G. No Subtle wit leads on my love:
I Am Innocent as Venus Dove.

L. Why! has fond Grief now made thee Stupid,
Are thy thoughts Blind, to be like Cupid?

G. Yes; My sharp Wit so Blunt is grown,
By working on your Heart of Stone.

L. Out of this Stone (cease thy Desire)
Thy Love strikes not one Spark of Fire.

G. Have mercy Goddess! Hold! O hold!
Without your Fire my Heart grows Cold.

L. Fie, fie! art not ashamed to Faint?

G. I Fall but to Adore my Saint.

L. Farewell: I cannot persuaded be:
Bid thy vain Love Depart with me.

G. Ah! Life, Z^d, (...).
and Soul she is to me:
Her absence is my Ecstasy.
Why should I keep my Fruitless Breath?
My panting Heart Beats me to Death.
Love's Warriors Die, or Overcome:
Since She is Deaf, I will be Dumb.

To a Fantastic Vagabond, Professor of Satyricall ^^t ^'octrie.
VVIld Colt of PE^ASVS! what would st thou do?
Are th Muses Priests Itinerary too?
Thou art no Poet, man, thy false High strain
Is but the Bubbling of a Froathy Brain.
No Masculine Strength lies in a Drunken Line:
A Tavern Flash is but a Spark o th* Wine.
A mounting Vapor, a Fantastic Fit.
The Off scouring, the Excrement of wit.
Thy best Jests are but Old: for all thy Brags,
Thou rt but a Swaggerer in Scarlet Rags.
Thy Magpie Muse delights to Scold, not Sing:
Thy Crawling Fancy has a Vermines Sting.
Thy Aged Whimsies, like old Wizards, lowre;
And thy Stale Wit (even like Stale Beer) grows sour:
Judicious men Disgust it; they disdain
The Vnsav'ry Outlets of thy Addle Brain:
Our haughty Muse scorns such poor Prey:
The Carr^on Stinks: she flurts away.
Fame.
Who would not shun the Peoples Breath? we find
It Is but a Wind;
Which still has puffed up th Owner, or else blown
The Dangerous Fires of Emu^ation.
To his Book.
COme on, my Book, no Page of thine
Shall Beat men's Brains with a strong line:
You Are Plain (no Phrase- Crags in thee placed)
Apollo's Temples Paved, not Caused.
It Is true; thou art no Gallant, Fine,
Clad with Silk W^rds, and full of Wine:
But yet, I doubt not, some confess,
You Are Comely, though in a Plain Dress.
Our Eagle-Muse her Young ones Tries
By none, but true Phoebaan Eyes.
But if some Minor Critic Carps,
With Satyr Wit would Fight at Sharps;
His Heavy Censures I Will despise:
Pressed by Lead* Wits my Palm shall Rise.
FINIS.

