LETTERS TO Mr. HVGHES of PLYMOUTH; AND Mr. FORD of EXETER IN DEVON. CONCERNING
The Common Prayer.

From EDM. ELIS, a Minister of the Gospel of JESUS CHRIST.

LONDON, Printed for R. Royston at the Angel in Ivylane, 1660.

TO THE READER.
I Thought to have given thee a full account why I publish these Letters: But
upon second Thoughts, I considered, that if thou art not capable upon a view of
them to discover the Reasonableness, of their Publication, thou would not
apprehend it, though I should express it unto unto thee. Therefore I shall
only say, that I heartily desire that all those, who profess themselves True
Ministers of THE TRVTH, would resolve, as I have done, not to Write, or Talk
any thing in Matters of Religion to particular Persons, or Congregations, which
they are ashamed to lay open (in plain, and clear Expressions) to the view of
all Men.

To Mr. HVGHES.
SIR,
IF you have any thing to object against the use of the Book of Common Prayer,
(I must confess some expressions in the Form for the Burial of the Dead, and
for Baptism are such, that, though I do not dislike them, I do not undertake
to vindicate them, because I do not find that God has directed my mind so
much to the study of those Points): But, Sir, if you have any thing to object
against that Excellent Book (excepting those expressions) either as a form of
Prayer in general, or as an Inconvenient Form, I have no small confidence
that I shall be able (by Gods assistance) to answer your Objection: And to give
you some occasion to conceive some Spiritual Notions concerning Prayer, which
possibly (for want of a due reflection upon your own Opinion concerning Set
Forms, etc.) you have not yet had; I shall entreat you to write me your
thoughts, as briefly as you can with perspicuity, and plainness. Sir, I
ackuowledge your superiority in respect of Years, and Learning; but yet, let
me tell you, I do not think you Infallible, neither so knowing, but that some
of your Brethren, who are much your Inferiors in Parts, and Learning, may have
received from the Father of Lights some particular Portion of sacred Truth,
which as yet you have not received. And therefore, Sir, I beseech you (as you
expect that dreadful Day, wherein you shall answer for all your Actions before
him that shall judge the Quick and the Dead) that you would not despise my
Youth, and scorn to send mean Answer. If you convince me, I doubt not, but the
GOD, whom I serve will give me Grace to acknowledge my self Obliged to you for
it: And if you do not, I firmly hope there shall be such an issue of our
Controversy; that if you be so pious, as some good Men take you to be, you
will not be troubled for having written to me. Sir, Farewell; And if you love
the Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity, be not so Uncharitable, as to think
otherwise, then that it is the love of Him that puts me upon any business of
this nature, which is so great a Trouble to my Outward Man. I am

Sir Your Servant EDM. ELIS.

Mr. Hughes his Answer.
SIR,
Being suddenly surprised yesterday with an unexpected Letter from an unknown
person by a strange hand, and having made a cursory view of it, with respect to
its contents, I thought it best to muse a while, and not hastily return; but
having since reviewed again, I find these heads observable therein.

1. A challenge of me to be an Opponent against an Excellent book of
Common Prayer, wherein, you have no small Confidence, that you shall be an able
Respondent, and give some Occasion to conceive some spiritual Notions
concerning Prayer, which possibly (for want of a due reflection upon my own
Opinion concerning Set Forms, etc.) I have not yet had. Sir, I shall be
heartily glad to catch at any real Notions about the spirit of Prayer, for I
want much of it; but I should strange to see such spirituality to arise out of
the flesh, and of prayer as stated by men; however I should be glad to see your
promise performed.

As for my objecting, and your answering, it will be requisite, that the
Question be rightly stated, and to know what Book you mean, there was that of
Edw the sixth, which since has had many Editions and Additions to make it
unlike it self: and yet of all these it is asserted by men wiser then my self,
that none of them are established by Law; which I suppose is a Basis whereon
you would not a little lean; It were meet that the special Subject were
assigned; or perhaps the quaere may grow higher and more general, whether any
set Forms as imposed by men, are warranted by God; and if none, your particular
will fall in that: but I list not to be an Opponent yet, though provoked by
you. I look for an higher Call.

2. Your censure of me, as to years, etc. yet you tell me, you do not think
me infallible, nor so knowing, but some Inferiors in parts and Learning, may
receive from the Father of Lights some portion of sacred Truth, which as yet I
have not received. All this is truly spoken, I find it as well as you say it;
yet for saving truth, I trust I have received, what the Gospel reveals,
though but in my measure, and I am pressing on. What other sacred Truth you may
intend, I know not, but I am not so old, but shall be willing to learn any
truth of God.

3. Your adjuring of me, ( that as I expect that dreadful day, wherein I shall
give an account of all my Actions before him that shall judge the quick and
the dead) that I despise not your youth, and scorn to send you an answer. Sir,
I tremble at Gods Word, and take it well to be minded of that great day; yet
thus to be adjured upon so slight a matter, as the sending you an answer, I
think is more than you can exemplify from Paul to Timothy, who uses such a
solemn charge upon the highest concernments. I thank God I despise no man's
youth, I rejoice to see them grow in grace; and for your self, I know not how
old, or young you be; yet without scorn, I shall say in Gods presence, among
the many that I have known (if your own word may be taken) you are Iuvenum
confidentissimus. The Lord humble me and you also. You add fair hopes of the
Issue, whether Victus or Victor.

And again, if I be so pious, as some good men take me to be, I will not be
troubled for having written to you. Sir, I hope I love piety, yet it quiets not
my heart that good men think so well, nor much troubles me to be otherwise
judged of the world, I stand not at man's stay or judgment; but I hope, if I
had not written to you, it could not certainly argue with you an utter defect
of piety in me; I trust I shall lay the proof of piety upon better evidence. To
take away therefore that prejudice from you, I have written what you see;
neither do I choose as you provoke me, to be an Obiector, but in general I
desire rather to be a Quaestionist, and ask of you satisfaction to some
Questions or cases about Prayer, which may let you see some difficulties in
your particular instance. Take them thus.

Qu. 1. Whether the Scripture inspired by God be the only rule for Prayer, as
for Faith, which must frame it?

Qu. 2. Whether in this Scripture does appear any precept imposing a set form
of prayer upon the Church, or any practice in the Church of Christ answering
such a precept?

Qu. 3. Whether in case the Law of God does not impose any form of prayer,
even the best upon the Church, it be in the power of men to do it?

Qu. 4. Whether the Book mentioned in your Letter be not so imposed by men,
without precept or example from God?

Sir, in all these is not queried, what may be the lawfulness, or usefulness
of set forms of Payer among some, nor how far prudentiall, good and lawful
forms may be commended; but whether it be lawful for men to impose any such
forms upon Consciences, that those and none but those must be used in the
Church, by any who are able to make use of the Scripture Directory in all cases
of their address to God. Unto these your clear answer is desired if you
please, before we come to a congresse about particulars; wherein if you deal
rationally and ingenuously, I may afford a further Reply; but otherwise, my
work is too much for my time, and I shall not spend hours vainly in such
writing-contests. I shall give you no worse Farewell, than I had from you,
commending to you the Book of books, from which your excellent Book has all
that is good in it. Make the Scripture your rule of your Faith, and Prayer, and
Obedience. I am

Sir Plim. Aug. 23. 1660. Yours to serve you in the Lord, GEO. HVGHES.

To Mr. HVGHES.
SIR,
I Thank you for your Letter, but must crave your pardon for not answering
your Quaeries, being impertinent to my Design in writing to you, which is, To
know, whether or no you have any thing to object against this Position: That a
man may worship GOD in Spirit, and in Truth in the Use of that form of Prayer
for Morning, and Evening, which we call the Common Prayer (simply considered,
without respect to it is being imposed, etc.) I conceive you might easily have
apprehended this to have been my Aim by the expressions of my other Letters.
As for the Forms for the Burial of the Dead, Baptism, etc. Though I do not
except against them, yet because there are many expressions in them, from which
such Controversies may easily arise, as a Spiritual Man cannot well discuss
without loss of Time; I shall not undertake to vindicate them, unless
provoked to it by any that profess that they are scandall'd at my using of
them. I have heard many men speak much against the use of the Letany, if you
have any thing to say against it, I shall entreat you to insist on that in a
particular manner; For, as yet I cannot apprehend any thing that can be
objected against it, but what may easily be resolved into a Phanaticke humor:
And I would feign know where the strength of that Opposition lies that may be
made against that, which I conceive may be of so great use to the Church of
God. As for that I said I might give you some occasion to conceive some
spiritual Notions concerning Prayer, etc. I shall maintain the expression. If
your Opinion be, That a man cannot pray in Faith, using that form we speak of,
I doubt not, but if I shall be able to discover to you the workings of mine own
spirit, moved by God, in the use of that Form, I shall be able to do that I
said I had no small confidence that I should. Good Sir, deal with me, as it is
fit for one Christian to deal with another, and avoid, as much as you can, all
such expressions as may probably be made Isntrumental by the DEVIL, to work
in me that sinful Anger, to which J am naturally inclined upon such Occasions,
as in Writing-Contests (to use your own words) men are apt to give one to the
other: But, blessed be God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, with his Sons
Blood J am able to Quench the Fire of that, and all other Lusts, as soon as J
perceive it to be Kindled in me. Jf you say in your heart at the Reading of
this, Let him that stands take heed lest he fall, I shall entreat you to pray
for me that J may take heed.

As for my Adjuring of you, J take the matter to be of so high Concernment,
that J did well in so doing. You say (reflecting upon some expressions of mine)
For saving Truth, I trust, I have received what the Gospel reveals. God
forbid that J should be so Uncharitable as not to hope that you have received
all the Principal Truths that concern Eternal Life; but there may be some
Subordinate Truths (that I may so speak) the Apprehension of which might make
the Knowledge of the other, more Intense, and more Powerful in their Influence
upon the Heart. Such Truth I meant by that expression which you seem not to
apprehend. Some Discoveries of such Truth ( viz. Particular Notices of the
Means of Grace) I have often received from the Discourses I have had with
Experimental CHRISTIANS, though Persons of no Learning, or Art of Expression:
and therefore, S^r, I do not think that you may justly say that I am Iuvenum
Confidentissimus, because I said (in effect) I had no small confidence that you
might receive some New Apprehensions of sacred Truth from My Discourses. whose
greatest Study for some years has been how I may set forth to others those
Truths, which I find Written with the Finger of GOD upon the Table of mine
own Heart. Sir, That Confidence which I allow in My self, I esteem so highly,
that I pray unto GOD continually to Increase it: I know no Virtue a Minister of
CHRIST has more frequent Occasion to make use of, then true Confidence and
strength of Spirit, drawn forth into the Soul from an Apprehension that GOD is
our Helper.

Sir, I desire to approve my self to all Men, and particularly to your self
(like Him, whom we are Bound to love, and imitate with all our heart, and with
all our soul) Meek, and Gentle; and I hope you will show your self no
otherwise to

Sir Your Servant EDM. ELIS.

Mr. Hughes his Answer.
SIR,
YOur reply of the 4th instant, I received the fifth, and finding your
resolution not to answer my Quaeries, I cannot but in civility return these
lines as a close to your Challenge begun, seeing the matter is not determined by
the Respondent, unto which Objection should be made; for J know, the hinge of
the Controversy about set Forms imposed, depends upon Scripture-Authority
(from which in this case, as in all matters of Faith, J shall not depart, ne
hilum quidem) As to what you write of other men's speaking against the Letany, J
shall not meddle withal, nor as what you can say to other pieces of the book
you mention; But this I shall say, if I understand what Letany is, neither is
the word reciprocal with your matter unto which it is prefixed, nor the matter
with the Word. And however you say, nothing can be said against it, but what
may easily be resolved into a Phanaticke humor, I suppose if you read those
Books written about this Argument, of which J think you are not ignorant, you
may find more reason to be answered, than fancy to be jeered. If you seek for
Objections, I refer you to them. As to other passages in your Letter, I shall
be silent, lest I give you occasion to be angry; Only (I hope) as you urge the
experience of your own heart in your way of prayer to give you proof of its
goodness, so you will allow the experience of others in another way of prayer
than by book, to plead for them. Sir, I shall make this amicable close with
you, as to any more writing; You say my Quaeries were impertinent to your
design: Truly I know not what your design was, but I am sure they were
pertinent to determine the question of imposing forms of Prayer on them, who
have no need of them in the Church of God. You say also (you consider it
simply, without respect to its being imposed:) If you stand to your word, I
come to this issue, if you argue not to impose it on the Church of God, which
can by Scripture directory make their addresses to God without it, I shall not
trouble you nor any that think your selves to stand in need of any lawful
form of Prayer to help you. Only do not bind men to crutches whom God has
enabled to go without them. I have done as to any more Letters about this
matter; And now commending you to the Word of Gods grace, which is able to keep
you, and give you an inheritance among them that are sanctified, I shall ever
rest,

Plym. Sep. 7. 1660. Yours to serve you in the Lord, GEORGE HVGHES.

TO Mr. HVGHES.
SIR,
I Thank you for your last Letter; but should thank you more, but that I find
and expression in it, which I apprehend, as very Scopticall, and Unfriendly:
That is this: As to other passages in your Letter, I shall be silent, lest I
give you occasion to be angry. Sir, if those passages were Evil, I conceive
you should be Bound in Conscience, having so fair an opportunity, to show me
wherein, (and that in such Plainness, and Simplicity of expression, as is fit
to drop from the Tongue, or Pen of a CHRISTIAN, one that carries the Heavenly
DOVE in his Bosom:) if they were not Evil, you ought not to have such a
reflection on them, as I conceive you had in the writing of that expression. I
must confess a Carnal Man might easily have taken an occasion to scoff at
me, if I had written to him as I did to you, desiring that you would avoid all
exasperating Language. But, Sir, I take you to be a Person, who know by your
own Experience that it must needs be an exceeding great Trouble to any one that
would always Repose his Spirit in the GOD of Peace, to be at any time
Discomposed, though it be but by the least Act of Animosity, or Indignation
against any man's person; and therefore that it is not so Foolish to do, or say
what we can to prevent any thing, by which the DEVIL may possibly frame in us a
Temptation to that Sin of Anger, or Roughness of Spirit. If you wonder why I
should fear that you would deal Vncivilly with me, I must tell you, you gave
me too much reason for it in your first Letter: namely by your Iuvenum
Confidentissimus, your so slight a matter, as the sending you an Answer: Your
putting in these words, An Able Respondent, as mine, though they were not to be
found in any part of my Letter: If I had expressed my self in those words, the
expression must have employed a vain boasting of mine own Abilities, whereas
the expression that I used implied only a Confidence of the Goodness of my
Cause, and the Strength that thereupon I should expect from God, when ever I
should (in a pure, and virtuous intention) undertake to maintain it.

Sir, I cannot but wonder that you should say, I know not what your Design
was, when I had told you what it was expressly in these words: To know whether
or no you have any thing to Object against this Position: That a man may
Worship GOD in Spirit, and in Truth, in the Use of that Form of Prayer (for
Morning, and Evening) which we call the Common Prayer: Which, I told you, I
considered simply, without respect to the imposing of it; And I do stand to my
Word. But this I say, that if the KING shall think fit to impose it (by the
reinforcement of that Old Act) I doubt not but there will be men enough found
out that shall be ready to manifest to the World the reasonablenes, and the
piety of such an Action: but this Work GOD has not Called me unto That which
I undertake is, to maintain the Assertion above mentioned; which I shall be
ready to do (God willing) when ever I find any thing like reason proposed
against it. And I shall humbly entreat you to tell me what Book you would
chiefly advise me to read which has any thing in it expressly against the
Letany, which I take to be the best part of the Common Prayer, if any part may
be said to be better then another in a Composition so entirely Excellent. Alas,
Sir, I do not stand in need of a Set Form (I thank GOD) but the generality of
my Congregation do, being not so ready to Apprehend extomporary Expressi^ns, as
I am to Deliver them. Even those that are of the weakest capacities I advise to
use their own expressions when they Pray in secret: I am not against a grave,
modest, discreet and humble use of Ministers gifts even in public, the better
to fit, and excite their own, and the peoples affections to the present
occasions. K CHARLES the First in his (...).
Neither do I ever confin^ my self to a Set Form in the Pulpit either before,
or after Sermon, conceiving that that way of expressing my heart in Prayer,
which I use there, may be more helpful to the Devotion of some of my Auditory,
then the other, and not wholly useless to the Other sort, whose hearts in all
probability are more wrought upon by the Other Service. Sir, I shall not
trouble you any further concerning this business, unless it be in vindication
of what I have already written, if you express those exceptions against it,
which you seem to imply in that saying, Lest I give you occasion to be angry.
If you shall grant me the request above mentioned, I shall take it for a great
favor, and shall be desirous of an opportunity to approve my self

Sir Your thankful servant.

To Mr. FORD.
SIR,
I Have reason to suspect that what has been spoken by you, and others in this
County against the use of the Common Prayer, has begotten in the minds of
several persons such a prejudice against it, as deprives them of many of those
good Thoughts which they might enjoy, when they hear their Ministers say that
Service, if they did duly, and without prejudice attend to it. Sir, If you
think that a man may not worship GOD in spirit, and in truth in the use of that
Form of Prayer, which we call the Common Prayer, I shall earnestly entreat you
to show me what Reason you have (or rather what you take to be a Reason) for
this your Opinion, which I take to be very Erroneous, and very Obstructive to
the Peace of the Church. If you think your Reason Convincing, pray make use of
it, and endeavor to convince me. If you refuse to write to me, how justly may
I Fear that you make it your Business to Draw the Vulgar into your Opinion,
rather then to Guide any one into the way of Truth? If you shall object any
thing against particular expressions, I must tell you, that those portions of
the Liturgy, whose expressions I undertake to maintain, are Morning, and
evening Prayer, and the Letany. As for the Forms for the Burial of the Dead,
Baptism, etc. though I do not except against any passage in them, yet I do not
undertake to vindicate them, because I foresee that such Controversies may
easily arise from them, as a Spiritual Man cannot well discuss without Loss of
Time (as I have said to another Learned Person.) Sir, I beseech you do not
mistake me: I abhor Contention, though sometimes I find it necessary to engage
my self in Controversy: I call no man upon Earth Master; but in all humility I
acknowledge your Superiority, and profess my self

Sir Your Servant.

To Mr. FORD.
SIR,
Since you scorn to answer my Letter, and Despise my Youth, saying, old men know
young men to be Fools, etc. (of which my Friend has informed me at large) I
would have you, and all others who shall Censure me, for writing to you, so
harshly, as you have done, to know this, that I boldly Appeal to his Judgment,
who saw My Heart when I wrote that Letter, and Yours, when you contemned it. I
am

Sir Your servant.

IF these LETTERS shall chance to be seen by Mr Isaac Pennington the younger,
If what has been written by this Pennington, came from his heart, I conceive
it impossible, but that he must needs Abhor that black Hellish act of
Murdering our late KING of Glorious Memory: and also that cursed Opinion, that
it may be Lawful in some Cases for Subjects to take up Arms against their
Prince.
one of those whom they call Quakers, (whom I take to be one of the most Honest,
and Ingenuous of all those, who any way oppose the Doctrine, or Discipline of
the Church of England) I shall entreat him to peruse them seriously, and if he
find upon his spirit any thing to be objected against that Assertion, which I
have tendered to these men, Mr. Hughes, and Mr. Ford, either to be Granted, or
Opposed by them, I shall entreat him to discover it in Exact, and Punctual
Expressions: For from my soul I desire to know where the strength of that
Fancy lies, which holds men so fast in this Error of Disliking the Common
Prayer. I shall further entreat this man to peruse seriously, and to lay deeply
to heart (in the real Fear and Dread of the Great God, whom both He, and I say
We Know) these following Lines, which I sent a while since to the Quakers in my
own Country, who I hope (some of them) will not deny that I am a true Preacher
of Jesus Christ, and Him crucified: And will I hope, e're long, by the Day star
arising in their Hearts, clearly Discover that the opinion that the Church of
England is any way Antichristian, must needs proceed from The Father of Lies.

To all Quakers, or Papists, or any Others, who do, or shall endeavor (upon a
pretense of doing God service) to Seduce any of my Congregation from hearing
the Public Discourses I make unto them, to show them the Path of Life, to
show them what tihey must do to be Saved.
THese are the Truths, which I Edmund Elis, a Minister of Jesus Christ,
Principally endeavor to make known to the sons of Men. 1. That the good Things
of this life, Honors, Riches, etc. unless we make use of them in the service
of God, are but vanity, and vexation of Spirit; And in no wise any more capable
to satisfy, or content an immortal Soul, then Lime, and Ashes, and Cobwebs,
and such like Trash are to satisfy, and keep in health the bodies of those
persons, who through the depravedness of their Appetite, desire to feed on
them. 2. That nothing but the Enjoyment of God, the Fountain of all Goodness
can truly, and really content an immortal Soul. 3. That no man can enjoy God,
but he that loves Him with all his heart, and with all his soul, and (for his
sake) his Nighbour as himself. 4. That, though every sincere Convert, or
Regenerate person loves God continually with his whole heart, as to the Habit,
or Root of Holy Love; Yet whilst he is in the Body, he may sometimes fail of
the Act, or Fruit of it, and may offend God through the love of the Creature.
Which Truth (so much opposed in these days) is clear, and manifest in the Holy
Scriptures: particularly in the Records of the heinous Sins of the Prophet
David, and Peter the Apostle. 5. That the souls of the Faithful are always
growing in grace, whilst they are in the Body, and at the Instant of Death, or
separation from the Body, our Lord Jesus shall present them to the Father
without ^pot, or blemish. 6. That no man can so know God as to love him with
all his heart, and with all his soul, but through the knowledge of Jesus
Christ, and him crucified? Who, by those grievous sufferings which he endured
when he was upon Earth, made satisfaction to the Justice of God for the sins of
all those that believe in His Name: so that it is as consistent with the
Justice, as with the Mercy of God, to forgive them their sins, and make them
Heirs of Eternal Life. God is just, and the Justifier of him that believes in
Jesus. 7. That the ready way to receive CHRIST, the only LIGHT, by which we
may see the Way to Heaven: or so to believe in Him that we may be saved by Him,
is, to forsake all that we have that we may be his Disciples: that is to say,
to take off our Affections from things on the Earth, and to set them on things
above, where Jesus sits on the right hand of God: putting our Trust and
Confidence in the Free, and Infinite mercy of God, through CHRIST, to be guided
by him in all our ways, to be led by his good Spirit in all those ways of
GRACE, and Holiness, through which we must pass before we can attain to Glory:
Which I beseech the great God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, out of the
infini^e Treasure of his love to Mankind in his Son Jesus, to grant even to
those that most wickedly revile me; even to those which call me Deceiver,
though all my Preaching tend to this to enforce these most important Truths
upon the Hearts of those that Hear me: And whether or no any one that has the
Spirit of Christ may not hear his Voice within him Ecchoing unto him (that I
may so speak) the words I deliver in the Expression, or Declaration of those
Truths, I appeal to the judgment of the only wise God, and the spirits of
those men that are truly sanctified. Glory be to GOD on high, and on Earth
peace: Good will toward Menn

FINIS.

