ENDERBIE.


CAMBRIA TRIVMPHANS, OR BRITAIN IN ITS PERFECT LUSTER, SHEVVING THE Origin and
Antiquity OF THAT ILLUSTRIOUS NATION.

THE Succession of their Kings and Princes, from the First, to KING CHARLES Of
Happy Memory.

The Description of the Country: The History of the Ancient and Modern Estate.

The manner of the Investure of the Princes, with the Coats of Arms Of the
Nobility.

By PERCIE ENDERBIE, Gent.

LONDON, Printed for Andrew Crook, and are to be sold at the Green Dragon in
St. Paul's Churchyard. 1661.

TO HIS SACRED MAJESTY Charles the Second, KING of Great BRITAIN, and PRINCE
of WALES, etc.
Most DREAD SOVEREIGN,
HE who is so brainsick as to question or dispute the Antiquity of KINGS and
MONARCHICAL Government, will put the choicest Wits to their Trumps, to find out
a Nomenclation to express his Folly, the Word Fanatic being too weak and
slender. KINGS write in the plural Number, Mandamus, volumus, facimus, etc.
which is GOD's own Style: And in Scripture we often find them called GODS and
Man; as a civil Creature, was directed to that kind of subjection, as if the
sole Observation of Nature had necessarily led this Affections of Men to this
kind of STATE. Whence it is also that whilst Others of the most curious in
Philosophy, tell us of Angels and the Supreme Heavens being immediately
Governed by the Maker of all things, they add together that upon the Earth,
KINGS are in like sort of Government; as if natural Reason had at first
Ordained them on Earth by an unavoidable imitation of their Creators
Providence; and questionless, MONARCHY as far exceeds Oligarchy, Democratie,
Aristocratie, or that so much lately gaped after Anarchy, as the Sun in its
purest and most perfect luster the smallest Star. Why then, O why then should
the Commons of England Vote the Office of King in this Nation (and to have the
Power thereof in any single person) unnecessary and burdensome to the liberty
and public Interest of this Nation! This pleased their palats, whose proper
Advance, and not the common Good was sought after; and therefore one King was
more then laid aside, to whom all Allegiance was due, and Forty Tyrants set up
to whom we owe no allegiance at all. Great Monarch, Man proposes, but God
disposes; and therefore after a dark and tedious night of care and anxiety,
has reduced and placed you in your proper sphere, like to a morning Sun and
Sun of Justice, to drive away our cares and rectify our miseries by this your
auspicious return, assured hope shines in us, that the Prophecy is fullfil'd,
Carolus a Carolo descendens erit Carolo Magno Major.

This ensuing Treatise will lay open and unfold the manner of Great Britains
Government, which was ever Princely, (contrary to this Chymerical Anarchy) the
which your Majesty's most faithful and humble Subject with much of fear and
reverence (as being too rustic and homely to appear before so great a Majesty)
offers up, begging of Almighty God to grant You a long and happy Reign,
Fruitful and Princely Offspring, adorned with all Virtues and heroic
Endowments to Succeed You; that You may say with the Prophetical King and
Kingly Prophet, Blessed be the Lord my God, who has caused my Eyes to see this
day, that one of my own Loins shall sit upon my Throne. And for this all Loyal
Subjects ought pray; and so shall he incessantly, who is,

Your MAJESTY'S Most Loyal And Obedient Subject, P. E.

THE GENEALOGY OF CHARLES THE IId. MONARCH of Great BRITAIN, from the WELSH
Blood.
CAdeth King of South Wales. Howell Dha Prince of South Wales. Owen King of
Wales, who Married Augharad D. and Heir to Lhewely Prince of Powis. Meredith
King of Wales. Lhewelyn ap Sissylht Descended from Anarawd King of North Wales,
by the Marriage of Angharad D. and H. of King Meredith, was King of Wales.
Griffith ap Lhewelyn King Wales. Nest the Daughter of Griffith ap Lhewelyn was
Married Fleance Son of Banquo whose Issue was, Walter Stuart. Alan Lord Stuart.
Alexander Lord Stuart. Walter Lord Stuart. Alexander Lord Stuart. John Lord
Stuart. Walter Lord Stuart Married Margery D. and Heir of Robert the first King
of Scots, and had Issue. Robert the Second King of Scots. Robert the Third King
of Scots. James the First King of Scots. James the Second King of Scots. James
the Third King of Scots. James the Fourth King of Scots, Married Margaret
Eldest Daughter to King Henry the 7th. King of England. James the Fifth King of
Scots. Henry in Right of his Wife Queen Mary, sole Daughter and Heir to James
the Fifth King of Scots. James Monarch of Great Britain. Charles Monarch of
Great Britain. Charles the Second Monarch of Great Britain, whom God of his
infinite Goodness protect from his Enemies.
TO THE Gentle Reader Whether WELSH or ENGLISH, P. E. wishes all Happiness.
Courteous Reader,
LET it not seem strange unto you, that being no Native of Ways, but born as
far remote as Caer luid Coyd, I should attempt to compile a General History and
entitle it The Ancient and Modern British and Welsh History. Sir Walter
Raleigh wrote a History of the whole World; Mr. Knolls composed the
Transactions of the Turkish Empire; both English, both excellent and approved
Authors: many more have done the like. The enducements which drew me on to
attempt this work, were first the marriage of a person of quality of that
Nation; Secondly my long continuance and abode in that Country, which has
rendered me in a manner a Native; the civilities of the Gentry prick me
forwards, and the help of a good Library of Sir Edward Morgans of Lantarnam,
encouraged me to bring the Embrion to its full maturity: many and those most
learned, both Accademicks honored with the scarlet robe; and Martialists
enobled with sword and spurs, have added much luster to the almost perished
British glory, unto whose writings I must acknowledge my self highly engaged;
from their Hives, I have ext acted many drams of honey, and laid it up in store
to present unto the World in a whole Mass, that many may undeceive themselves,
and rectify there misled judgments, who apprehend the thirteen Counties of
Wales, to produce nothing but Barrenness: as for the language, if any seem to
make a question, this I suppose may give satisfaction unto his curiosity: That,
The beginning and original thereof as yet was never fully discovered: some
dream that it was had from the Gallick as Neighboring, others from the Romans
as conquering, yet is it so far different from all the Europaean and VVestern
tongues, (at least as now they are) and has so little affinity and resemblance
of them, that its improbable from them to have either extraction or derivation:
They I think do not judge amiss, who affirm that amongst the rest, it received
its first being at the confusion of Babel, for it sounds most after the Eastern
way, having little or no congruence, or affinity with the West, unless some
few words scattered and left by the subduing Roman, and so lately contracted
and intermingled by the daily commerce of the English: some out of Caesar will
infer a consequence that the Gallic and British language were the same, when
he says Gallis (in more positum) ut qui Druidum disciplinam diligentius
cognoscere vellent, in adversam Britanniam ad Druides proficiscerentur, quod
eis nihil profuisset nisi idem his cum illis fuisset sermo, cum Druides libris
non uterentur sed omnia viva voce explicarent: but this signifies little to
persuade that the language of these two Nations was the same; for the language
in which the Druides taught their mysteries, was that of Greece: Carmina multa
millia interdum viginti annorum studio cogebantur ediscere, qui eorum
disciplinae se tradidissent, quae Graeca fuisse non temere quis conjecerit: so
that the inference is, that those of Gallia, learned from the British Druides,
the use and speech of the Greek tongue only. It is no sufficient proof to
allege that the continent was first inhabited, and that from thence the
Islands took their language, for it is very probable, that some Islands as
being the most safe and securest places, were even with the first inhabited.
Which Theophilus seems to intimate concerning Britain; and sacred writ tells
us, that the Islands toward the North were allotted to the offspring of
Japhet, amongst which some learned Authors place Britain: Those who endeavor
to make good that the Britains borrowed their language from the Latins, let
them stop their mouths with this; Prisca Italiae lingua sub priscis Italiae
regibus quicunque fuerint usurpata, Doricae similis fuisse dicitur, ejusque
initio magna fuit stirilitas quae a poetis Eunio, Plauto, Pacuvio, and aliis,
ab Histiorographis and maxim ab Oratoribus detersa est, facta a vicinis
mutuatione vel novis excogitatis vocibus. And again, sed and veteres Latini
summa linguae inopia laborantes, tum ob aliorum populorum in jus civitatis
admissorum linguis infinita sumpsisse dicuntur, tum maxim a Graecis and
Etruscis quos Aramaea vel Syriaca olim usos credunt, and voces Latinas quae
hodie habentur, non errarit si quis censeat esse Tuscae originis. So that we
see the Latins more fit to borrow, then to lend: some may say that many
British words, sound Latin like, it is true, Est natura hominum novitatis avida.
The Britains call that Rhoud, which the Latins call Rota, in English a wheel,
not that they wanted a significant word in their own language, for they have
two, Troel and Olwyn, they call that Porth, which the Romans call Portam yet
can they if they please call it as properly Moreb: As for their borrowing words
from the Greeks, the like reason may be given: Moreover Bladud, when he went to
Athens to apply himself to the study of Philosophy, at his return, brought with
him many learned Grecian Philosophers, who being conversant with the Druides,
communicating with them in points of doctrinalls, many greek words might become
familiar with the Britains. The most constant opinion is, that before the
confusion of Babel the Hebrew was the sole and only language, and in that grand
confusion, the British questionless was one, probably used in Phrigia where
Troy stood, and from thence conveyed unto this our Island. There was a People
in Italy, in those places which we now call Calabria and Naples, called Brutii
from the name of Brutus; whose nomenclation and language differed very little
from that of the Ancient Britains: this people after the destruction of Troy
was brought into Italy by Nestor, where the Pylians built a City called
Metapontus; the Brutii built another, naming it Nova Troja, after by the
Tarentines called Heraclea. So our Britains in this our Island built Troy
Novant now London, both taking their name from Brutus, and both having the like
affection to the memory of old Troy. As concerning Brutus his coming hither,
(having more at large spoken of it, in the ensuing History) I will only here
insert this out of our own records.

In the time of King Edward I. at Lincoln, where held a Parliament, after much
diligent search of Antiquities and due examination, as the greatest matter of
right of a Kingdom required: Apologitical letters were sent to the Pope of
Rome, sealed with an hundred seals and witnesses thus. Rex Angliae ex
deliberato concilio apud Lincolniam convocato pro jure suo declarando, literam
hujus tenoris rescripsit centum sigillis signatam: wherein is declared and
justified that in the time of Hely and Samuel the Prophet, Brutus a Trojan
landed here, and by his own name called the Country Britannia, before named
Albion: De nomine suo Britanniam sociosque suos Britones appellavit: and having
three Sons, Locrinus Albanactus, and Camber, at his death divided the Island
into three parts or provinces. Loegria now England, (though Welsh keep the old
name) was given to Locrinus the eldest Son; Albania Scotland, to Albanact the
second Son. Cambria, now miscalled Wales to Camber his third Son. Locrino
primogenito dedit illam partem quae quondam Loegria, nunc vero Anglia
nominatur; Albanacto filio Secundo dedit Albaniam, quae nunc Scotia Vocitatur;
Cambrio vero tertio filio dedit Cambriam, quae wallia appellatur, reservata
Locrino regia dignitate; this conjecture may suffice for this business, it
being testified by so many Domestical and foreign, private and public
witnesses, that this his tripartite division was here from the beginning, and
the first name of Britain given by Brutus. Other remarkable things might have
been added to this History, as that of St. Winefreds well, and many more note
worthy, which I leave to other pens, who happily may write the descriptions of
each County in particular; as God willing, I do speedily intend to publish that
of Monmothshire: had I been near the press to have perused every sheet as it
past, I would have affixed an Alphabetical index at the end of this work, of
all memorable passages; but I entreat the courteous Reader to accept in good
part my weak endeavors, and what Errata's he shall find not mended by the
Printer, to dash them lightly with his quill, and not impute them to me who
desire to be esteemed by all.

From my Chamber at Lantarnam in Monmothshire 16. of May 1661. Their faithful
friend and Servant PERCY ENDERBIE.

THE ANCIENT AND MODERN BRITISH and WELSH HISTORY. Beginning with BRVTE and
continued until KING CHARLES the First.
The First Part.
THe state of every Kingdom well managed by prudent government, seems to
represent a humane body guided by the sovereignty of a reasonable soul: the
Country and the Land representing the one; the Actions and State Affairs the
other.

The Island of Great Britain contains the Kingdoms of England and Scotland,
and is of many counted the greatest Island in the world, though Justus Lipsius
gives that praise to Cuba in America, as the Oriental Navigators unto Sumatra,
(taken from Ptolomey's Taprobana) or to Madagascar the Island of St. Laurence,
both which are near or under the Equinoctial line; in which we will not
contend, as pleasing our selves with her other praises, far exceeding her
Greatness; yet with this Honor also, that it was without Question the
greatest Island of the Roman world, and for any thing yet certainly known, of
all the rest: concerning whose positure in respect of Heaven, Lucretius the
first of the Latin Writers that names Britain, seems to place it in the
same parallel with Pontus; where he says, Nam quid Brittannum coelum differ
putamus, etc.
What differs Prittains Heaven from that of Nile,
Or Pontus welking from Gades warmer Isle.


It is by experience found to lie included from the Degree Fifty and thirty
scruples of latitude; and for longitude extended from the 13 degree and 20
minutes, unto the 22 and 50 minutes, according to the observation of Mercator.
It has little Britain, Normandy, and other parts of France upon the South;
Germany, Denmark, and Norway upon the East, the Isles of Orkney and the
Deucalidonian sea upon the North, Hebrides upon the West: and from it all other
Islands and Ilets which do scatteredly environ it, and shelter themselves, as
it were, under the shadow of great Albion (another name of this famous Island)
are also accounted British.

Britain thus seated in the Ocean has her praises not only in this present
sense, and use of her commodities, but also in those honorable Eulogies, which
the learnedest of Antiquaries have collected out of the noblest Authors, that
he scarce does seem to have left any gleanings; neither will we transplant them
out of his flourishing gardens, but as necessity compels, since nothing can be
further or otherwise better said. Robert of Amesbury. Caesar in his
Comentaries. Cornelius Tacitus. Some praises of great Britain.


That Britain therefore is the Seas High-admiral is most Famously known, and
the fortunate Island supposed by some, as Robert of Amesbury does show; whose
Air is more temperate (says Caesar) then France; whose foil brings forth
all grain in abundance (says Tacitus;) whose Seas produce Orient Pearl,
(says Suetonius;) whose fields are the Seat of a Summer Queen; (says Orpheus)
her wildest parts free from Wild Beasts, says the ancient Panegyric; and her
chief City worthily called Augusta, says Amianus. So as we may truly say with
the Royal Psalmist, Our lives are fallen in pleasant places, yea we have a
pleasant Inheritance; which whatsoever by the goodness of God, and industry of
man it is now, yet our English Poet has truly described unto us the first face
thereof, thus: The Land which warlike Britains now possess,
And therein have their mighty Empires raised,
Britain and France formerly one continent by some.
In ancient time was savage Wilderness,
Vnpeopl'd, unmanur'd, unprov'd, unprais'd.


And albeit the Ocean does at this present thrust it self between Dover and
Calice dividing them with a deep and vast entrenchment, so that Britain is
thereby of a supposed Penisle made an Island; yet diverse have stiffly held that
once it was joined by an arm of Land to the Continent of Gallia, to which
opinion Mr. Spencer further alluding thus closes his Stanza, Spencer in his
Fairy Queen.
Ne was it Island then, ne was it praised.
Amid the Ocean waves, ne was it sought
Of Merchants far for profits therein praised,
But was all desolate, and of some thought
By Sea to have been from the Celtick mainland-brought.
Which was a matter merely conjecturall (because it is not plain that there
were no Islands nor hills before Noah's stood.) I leave at large Virgil, sure of
all the Poets the most learned; when describing the Shield which Vulcan forged
(in Virgils brain) for AEneas, he calls the Morini (people about Calice) the
outmost men, does only mean, that they were Westward the furthest inhabitants
upon the Continent; signifying withal, that Britain as being an Island lay out
of the world, but yet not out of the knowledge of men; for the commodities
thereof invited the Famous Greek Colonies of Merchants which dwelt at Marsilia
in France to venture hither, as has been well observed out of Strabo.

And as Julius Caesar was the first Roman which ever gave an attempt to Conquer
it, so will we close its praises, with a late Epigram concerning the outward
Face of the Isle, and the motive of Caesar's coming thither.

Albions high Tops, her woody locks fore-shew.
With quires of chaunting birds, those woods resounding:
Her downs and meadows clad in verdant hue
Meadows and Downs with flocks and herds abounding.
Brutus his three sons.
Latium had greater wealth, yet Caesar thought,
To British glory Latiums wealth was naught.
Wales preferred before Scotland.
Our most ancient Historians begin with Brute, and so continue the succession of
Kings till CHARLES the First; which Brutus divided the Kingdom into three
parts: To Locrinus he gave Loegria now England, to Camber his second son he
gave Cambria now Wales, and to Albanist or Albanact, Albania now Scotland.

Ireland called Britain the less.
Ptolomy naming Britain the great and the less, has been by some mistaken, as
so dividing the Island into two parts; but his proportion and distance from the
Equator, compared with his Geographical description will evince, that he
calls this our Island Great Britain, and Ireland Britain the less.

Howbeit some later writers indeed do make the South and more Champion to be
called Great Britain, and the North and more Mountanous, Britain the less:
whose Inhabitants were Anciently distinguished into Majatae, Why the Romans
were not greedy to conquer Scotland.
and Caledonii, and now by the Scots are into High-land-men, and Low-land-men;
but the Northern Clime being more piercing for the Romans constitutions, and
less profitable and fruitful, they set their bounds not far from Edinburgh,
and altogether neglected the other parts of Scotland more North-wards.

The division of Britain by the Romans.
The nearer part of Britain they sub-divided into two parts, for the more
Southern tract together with Wales, Dio terms the higher, and that more
Northward the lower, as by the seats of their Legions may appear; For the
second Legion called Augusta (which kept at Caerleon in South Wales) and the
twentieth called Victrix (which remained as some say at Chester) he places in
the higher Britain: Caerleon in Monmouthshire.
but the sixth Legion named also Victrix resident at York served as he writes
in lower Britain, which division as seems, was made by Severus the Emperor,
who having vanquished Albinus General of the Britains, and reduced their
state under his Obedience, divided the Government thereof into two Provinces,
and placed two Prefects over them.

Another division of Britain.
After this again, the Romans did proportion Britain into three parts, whose
limits our great Antiquary assigns by the Archiopiscopal seats, grounding his
conjecture on the saying of Pope Lucius who affirms, that the Ecclesiastical
Jurisdictions of the Christians accorded with the precincts of the Roman
Magistrates, and that their Archbishops had their Sees in those Cities wherein
their Presidents abode, so that the Ancient seats of the three Archbishops
here, being London in the East, Caerleon in the West, and York in the North,
Londons diocese as seems made Brittannia prima, Caerleon Brittannia secunda,
and York Maxima Caesariensis.

But in the next age, when the power of the presidents began to grow over
great, A third division of Britain.
they again divided Britain into five parts, adding to the three former
Valentia and Flavia Caesariensis; the first of which two seems to have bin
the Northerly part of Maxima Caesariensis, recovered from the Picts and Scots
by Theodosius the General under Valens the Emperor, and in honor of him
named Valentia; and Flavia may be conjectured to receive the name from Flavius
the Emperor (son of Theodosius) for that we read not of the name Brittannia
Flavia before his time.

So as these five partitions had their limits assigned after this manner. What
places every division contained.
Brittannia prima contained those coasts that lay betwixt Thamesis and Severne,
and the British sea. Brittannia secunda extended from Severne to the Irish
sea, containing the Country which we now call Wales. Flavia Caesariensis was
that which lay betwixt the Rivers Humber and Tyne; and Valentia from the said
Tyne and Picts wall reached to the Rampire near Edinburgh in Scotland, the
furthest part that the Romans possessed when this division was in use. For the
several people inhabiting all those parts with their ancient names and borders
(whether designed by the Romans or old Britains) together with our modern names
and Shires, answerable to each of them, you may read in Mr. Speed, Ortelius,
and others.

The whole Province of Britain, as in our Histories does appear, was highly
esteemed by the Emperors themselves, assuming as a glorious surname,
Brittannicus, coming thither in person over those dangerous, and scarce known
Seas; here marrying, living, and dying; enacting here Laws for the whole
Empire, and giving to those Captains, who served here, many Ensigns of great
honors: yea Claudius gave Plautius the first Prefect of that Province, What
great esteem the Romans had of Brittany.
the right hand as he accompanied him in his Triumphs; and his own Triumph of
Britain was set out with such magnificence, that the Provinces brought in
golden Crowns of great weight, the Governors commanded to attend, and the very
Captains permitted to he present at the same. A naval Coronet was fixed upon a
pinnacle of his Palace: Arches and Trophies were raised in Rome, and his self
upon his aged knees mounted the stairs into the Capitol, supported by his two
sons in Law; so great a joy conceived he in himself for the Conquest of so
small a portion of Britain.

How the Romans found it, held it, and left it, God willing I will endeavor in
this ensuing Treatise, to lay open to the Readers view.

Many, and those as different, have been the opinions of men both learned and
skillful in History, concerning the Nomenclation, or name of this Island. Sir
Thomas Eliot, The several names of great Britain.
a sound and able Antiquary, takes it from a Greek Fountain or Spring, to wit
from (...), but what his conceit was for this derivation, I mean not to beat my
brains about it, being too far off to look after. Mr. Floyd, or Lloyd, a
Cambro-Brittaine, and one who for his knowledge may justly challenge an eminent
place amongst our Antiquaries, will give the honor to his own Language, and
tells us that it is derived from PRID-CAIN, a fair and beautiful form or
prospect, and thinks he has hit the nail on the head. Pomponius Laetus will
fetch it out of Armorica, or little Britain, but let him be merry with his
conceit, whilst Becanus his brain being full of conception, brings forth
another issue, called Mrs. Bridania, for that the Danes wandering to find new
habitations named this Isle so, putting Brye, for Free, as it were,
Free-Denmark: and yet our Histories speak not of any Danes inhabiting this
Kingdom, till long after Christianity flourished, which those cruel Pagans most
cruelly persecuted: by reason of which villainies and outrages by them
committed, it might rather be called the Captived, and enthralled Denmark, then
Denmark the free. Others will have it denominated from Prutenia, a Province or
Region of Germany. Another good fellow, as it seems will have it called
Brittania from Brithin, which as Atheneus tells us, was a certain kind of drink
which the Grecians much used; yet I am confident neither the Britains, nor the
Welsh (though their Cwow exceeded even Greece it self, if we speak of Liquor)
were never so addicted to bibbing as to new name their Country in an Alehouse,
nor after any sort of Tipple whatsoever. Another to dash out the brains of this
monstrous birth, will have it to be called Brittannia from a sort of people in
Italy called Brutii.

Concerning the Inhabitants Mr. Cambden says, Mr. Cambden in his Britannia.
they are of a most excellent composure of body, singular wits, modest, and
civil manners, and most haughty stomachs and courage, whose admirable virtue
and prowess both in Civil and Martial affairs, is most manifest to the whole
world.

As for their manners and customs of this Isle before the Inhabitants were
Civilized, Authors write diversely. Dio Nicaeus says, they Till or Plow not
their Fields, Dio. Nicaeus in Mr. Cambden cited.
but live by prey and hunting, and such fruits as the Trees naturally produce.
Fish, although nature has furnished them with great plenty, they make no use
of. They live for the most part in Pavillions, or Flutes, naked, and without
shoes; their wives are in common, The customs of the ancient Britains.
and so they breed up their children: The Commons for the most part bear the
sway; thieving is a pastime, they war in Chariots, and though their horses be
but small, yet very fleet. The foot men are very agile and nimble: their Arms a
Buckler or small Shield, with a Javelin, at whose lower end or butt is a pomel
hollow, which, whilst they offend, makes a noise, and terrifieth the enemy,
they have also daggers or poniards; but above all with singular patience they
endure hunger, cold, and labor; insomuch that plunged in deep Marshes, or
Pools, even to the very neck, for diverse days together they endure hunger with
great resolution: In the Woods, the rinds of Trees and Roots suffice for food.
They make a certain kind of meat, of which whosoever shall take a quantity of
a Bean, for a long time shall neither thirst nor be hungry.

Heridianus apud. Com.
New fashioned apparel, nay even the ordinary use of Garments is altogether
unknown to them, only they deck their necks and shoulders, as also their wastes
with Iron, taking as much pride and content in that adornment, as did the
Barbarians in their gold: Their bodies depicted with the forms of all kind of
Animals, so that to put on clothes was deemed prejudicial, lest thereby those
pictures should be hid. A Nation most warlike, and thirsty after blood and
slaughter; content with a small Shield and Javelin, yet having a sword
appendent to their naked bodies: breast plate, or helmet they undervalue as
obstacles and impediments to the passing over Fords and Rivers.

Plinius de Magia.
Pliny treating de Magia, or Art Magic, says that the Britains so admirably
honored it with uncough Ceremonies, that they may seem to have sent it unto
the Persians. Another Author says, that the Britains far exceed the French in
Stature and bigness of body: affirming, Strabo apud cundem.
that he himself had seen British youths in Rome to surpass their tallest men
in height at least half a foot, Diodorus Siculus says, Britains spend their
time after the custom of their ancient Forefathers; and in wars used Chariots,
as did the Grecians in time of the Trojan war (and who knows, The honesty of
Britains commended by Di^ Siculus. Mr. Camb. denies not Brute. Mr. Broughton,
fol. 289. The Britains called Gens Bruti. Leges S. Ed Reg. apud. Guli. Lamb.
l. d. priseu legi. fol. 36. Gildas apud Galf. l. 1. c. 17. Vic. l. 1. Pont.
Nen. Hist. Antiq. Land. Eccles. Isiad^r l. Et^m. Thom. Eliot. apud Stow. proof
for Brute. Thaliesnanus apud pris p. 27 Gal. Manus. apud eundem. H^n. Hunting.
Hist. de Reg. Brit. cum maltis aliis ibidem. Brute landed here in the time of
Holy and Samuel the Prophet. Brittannia so called from Brutus. Gualt. Oxor.
apud Hard. c. 16. Bal. 2. cent. Sigib. Gembl. hist. and de regn. Britt. Mariam
apud Hard. c. 10. Liter^ defensoris Ed Reg 1. ad ^apam apud Th n Walsin. Hist.
(...) Y^ lib. Neustr. A^. 1301. Gri^ apud Hi. ea^. M. S. chr^ c 47. Galf. M^n.
l 1. Hist. Britt.
but that custom might be continued from their first founder Brutus.) Their
houses compact of wood, reed, or thatch; their sheafs of Corn they stored under
dry roofs, threshing out every day as much as served for present use; honest
and just in conversation, much differing from the subtilty and cunning of our
men, content with ordinary and indifferent Diet, detesting the gurmandizing of
gluttons and Epicures; the Isle replenished with multitude of men.

In matters concerning the Inhabitants of this Isle, Mr. Cambden is very
copious, producing several opinions; but I find no Commander in chief, whether
King, Duke, or General named ( Brute excepted) of whom he says, shall I (so
mean a man) give a determinate sentence in so weighty a matter? I leave it to
the Senate of Antiquaries undecided. In the mean time I deny not Brute, but
leave every one to his own best liking and opinion. So that it is manifest Mr.
Cambden, naming no other principal Commander or Guide of that people, who first
Colonized and Inhabited this Land, does not altogether deny Brute, but leaves
it to the Counsel, Consent and Decree of the Learned Parliament and Senate of
Antiquaries. Let us hear what others write, Mr. Broughton out of an old
British History says, Having thus invincibly proved by all Antiquities, that
there were among the Gentiles, especially in this Kingdom of Britain, not only
Flamens but Arch-flamens, and they seated in the principal governing Cities in
several Provinces, and how after the coming of Christ, even from the Apostles
time, and by their Ordinance and Institution, their Residences were to be
changed into Archiepiscopal or Metropolitan chief commanding Sees in the
Christian Religion: If we had no other particular proof in this but in general
terms. St. Edwards Laws, the testimony of Gildas, Nonnius the Antiquities of
Landaff, St. Isiodore, who as Pope Eleutherius also calls this Nation, Gens
Bruti, the offspring and Nation of Brute; Thomas Archbishop of York a Norman
by birth, in time of King William the first, Thaliessianus above a thousand
years since; William of Malmesbury, Henry of Huntington, Gualterus Calenus,
Sigibertus, with many others before Galfrid Mon. wrote, and Vicunnius himself
with innumerable after both of this and other Nations, and public Parliament;
as that in the time of Edward the first at Lincoln, who after most diligent
search of Antiquities, and due examination as the greatest matter the right of
a Kingdom required, sent his Apologetical Letters to the Pope of Rome sealed
with an hundred Seals and Witnesses, wherein is declared and justified that in
the time of Hely and Samuel the Prophets, Brutus the Trojan landed here, and by
his own name called the Country Britannia before named Albion. And having three
sons, Locrinus, Camber and Albanact did at his death divide the Land into three
parts or portions; Leegria now England to Locrinus, his eldest Son: Cambria
Wales to Camber; and Albania Scotland to Albanact. This might suffice for this
business, but being testified by so many Domestical and Foreign, private and
public witnesses, that the Tripartite division was here from the first n^me
and beginning of Britain, we must needs for every several part and Province
assign a several Government and order therein, as their Rulers and Governers
were diverse and distinct.

But our Antiquaries carry us further, and inform us that not only London,
Caerlegeon and York, were the several chief Cities in this division, but the
Kings which founded them for such, ordained them likewise to be the Seats and
Residencies of three several Archflamens, or Pr^^^^amens: for the glory and
nobleness of London, thereupon named Augusta, it is the common opinion of
Antiquities, that it is the most ancient City of this Island builded by Brutus,
as not only the British History, Galfridus, Vicunnius, and our English
Antiquaries after them, but G^ldas, Sigibertus, and others sufficiently
witness: And except Mr. Stow be deceived in his Authors Aethieus an old Pagan
Philosopher testifies no less, affirming that Brutus named this Kingdom
Brittannia; and John Harding in his plain Verses, with others Records, how he
there from the very first beginning, Instituted an Archflamens Seat.

At Troynovant he made full especially
An Arch-flamine his See, Harding Chr: fol. 16. cap. 14.
Cathedral certain
A Temple thereof, A policy to obtain
By Trojan Law.
This is commonly written to have been a thousand years before Christ, and it
is a common received opinion among our Antiquaries, that Ebrincus son to
Mempricius, builded the City of York; of which more hereafter in its due place.

That this Island was called Albion before the coming of Brute, all Authors
seem to agree, though there seem to be some difference; the just and most
rational Writers call Albion ab albis Rupibus, from the high and white Cliffs
and Rocks discovered by Navigators, as they sailed by it: yet some will be more
quaint, and fetch it further, as if far fetched and dear bought were always good
for Ladies, and tell of a Damasella, called Albone or Albina, daughter of
Dioclesian King of Syria, and this some of our Histories seem to aver,
notwithstanding no Authentic Writer as yet ever produced any such King to bear
sway and Government, either over the Syrians or Assyrians; nor that he had
thirty daughters, who all slew their Husbands, of which this Albine is supposed
one, and came into this Island, from whole body sprung those Giants which Brute
here found at his first arrival. Such peradventure might be, but rather
conveyed hither by shipping, then produced by the copulation of any such
murdering Harpies.

This Isle is encircled by Neptunes curled tresses and watery furrows round; The
Content of this Island.
and extends it self in length from the South to the North. The longitude from
Totness in Cornwall to Cateness 800. miles, and in latitude from St. David's or
Menevia in Wales to Dover Clifts most men account 300. miles, and from Menevia
to Yarmouth in Norfolk, as diverse affirm, it contains 300. miles. Venerable Bede says, that it is 200. miles over. First, The three several names of this
Isle.
therefore we see it was called Albion. Secondly, Britain from Brute. Thirdly,
Egbert commanded it to be called Auglia from a Nation of which himself
descended; some forsooth will have it so called from a Queen thereof, whose
name was Auglia, but if you consult with skillful Astrologers, and such as
pretend Art in calculating and casting Nativities (with which sort of people
this Island now abounds, especial cashierd Troopers) they will positively
tell you, that this Lady was born in Vtopia, and much about the Greek Kalends:
Albeit this Island has had but three several names, yet has it been four
times conquered; first by the Romans; secondly, by the Saxons; Britain four
times conquered.
thirdly, by the Danes; and fourthly, by the Normans.

Brute descended of that ancient, noble, warlike offspring of the so much
admired Trojans, had to his Fore-father AEneas, who had married Creusa a
legitimate daughter of Priamus, who descended from Dardanus second son of
Camboblascon, and his wife Electra daughter of Atlas. Italus King of Italy, the
eldest brother of this Dardanus was called Jasius Janigena, who married
Cibeles, and lived in such happy condition, that now there wanted not any
terrene, The Travels of Noe into Europe, translated by Rich. Lynch.
or earthborn delight or felicity, which might make this happy-seeming
Potentate more fortunate, mighty or contentfull; but it is a common humor of
Fortune, that amidst the thickest and most abundance of her graces and favor,
she in some angry or fantastic imagination, suddenly snatcheth away her so
liberally bestowed gifts, and leaves the late possessors thereof involved and
wrapped in a world of the miserablest unhappiness and foul vexations that may be
invented as by the fatal Success and end of this Kings life most plainly
appears. For when Dardanus his younger brother; a man indeed of a proud
heart, great courage and inward ambition, saw his brother Jasius thus to float
on the calmer Seas of prosperity, and to taste of the sweet cup of Nectar, he
infinitely repined as living privately, and without command, as an inferior or
some base born person or slave; whereupon he goes to his brother to demand
leave and license, that he might depart out of the Country to seek his better
fortunes, which request Jasins refused to condescend unto, and would by no
means allow of his purposes. Whereupon Dardanus began secretly to enter into
deadly hostility, and to gather many Factions and Parties to his side, which by
reason that he was exceeding well beloved grew to a great number (this happened
much about the time, says my Author, Rich. Lynch. ut supra.
that Sharan King of Egypt persecuted Moses and the children of Israel.) The
fire of discontent between the two brothers being now wholly set on flame, and
diverse attempts passed between them: it happened that Dardanus received the
worst, and upon many encounters was still put to his shifts, so that in the end
he awaited a time when the King his brother went privately to a fountain to
bathe himself, where Dardanus most unnaturally slew him, which done, terrified
with his own conscience, he presently ships himself at the next Haven, and with
all his Jewels, and what else riches portable, he could carry with him away,
with many of his Friends, Followers and Servitors, he secretly set sail, and
departed.

After long travel Dardanus comes to Altius the younger, who was of the same
blood and descent and in respect thereof willingly entertains him, and in fine,
desires of him (his Country being over peopled, and victuals scarce;) That
since he must needs send forth such people for the finding out of new places,
that he would bestow the Charge, Conduct, and leading of them upon him, and
that he would join with them for the provisions and necessaries needful and
convenient for the settling of themselves in such their new places of abode.
This thing King Altius very willingly entertained, especially for that Dardanus
was of his own kindred and consanguinity.

This request of Dardanus thus obtained, he knew no other means to requite so
great a favor, and to be occasion to draw on further kindness, but to offer
unto Altius, and utterly to resign all his right, title, interest and claim in
the Kingdom of Italy for one of his sons, unto which of them the Father was
contented. This proffer of Dardanus being well considered, was thankfully
accepted by Altius, in lieu and exchange whereof was allotted unto Dardanus, a
certain quantity or piece of Land in Phrygia for him to erect and build a City
upon: Thus Dardanus with his people and associates began to build in Phrygia,
By whom Troy was first built, and at what time. Noe his travels, ut supra.
and in short space fully finished a City, which he called after his own name
Dardania, which was before the Incarnation of the Son of God Christ Jesus 1487.
and before the building of Rome by Romulus, 427. years, and before the City of
Paris 70. years, as Eusebius, and most writers do affirm: In few years Dardanus
began to grow unto great mightiness, riches and power, who had also a neighbor
Prince of mighty puissance, wealthy and fortunate, whose name was Teucrus,
whereupon many Authors call this place Teucria, Why Troy called Teucria.
and the Inhabitants Teucri, and this Teucrus was the son of Scamander, and
Idea, and had also himself a beautiful and fair daughter, which he married
shortly after unto Dardanus, which was called Batea, of whom Dardanus begot a
son called Ericthonius, who succeeded him in the Kingdom of Phrygia; this
Ericthonius in process of time arose up unto a wonderful greatness and large
possessions, who (as many writers do affirm) was accounted to be one of the
richest Kings in those days in that part of the World, who had at the least
three thousand horses of his own continually feeding in his Pastures. This
Ericthonius begat a Son whom he named Tros, whom he left to succeed him, and
from whom the people were after called Trojans. This Tros very much enlarged
and beautified the City of Dardania, now called Troia, Dardania from King Tros
is called Troia.
which name long time after it retained. This King had three Sons Ilus,
Assaricus, and Ganimedes, all which he brought up in the knowledge of Arms, and
Martial Discipline, unto which kind of study he himself was much addicted, and
had many years together maintained Wars with the King of Great, named Jupiter,
the fourth of that name there. In which Wars his Son Ganimedes was taken
prisoner, even by the hands of Jupiter himself, who for that in his Ensign and
Colors The Antiquity of bearing of Arms, and badges of honor.
he gave an Eagle (being his arms) it should seem that Poets for that cause,
have feigned that Ganimede as he was hunting was snatched up to heaven by
Jupiter, then transformed unto an Eagle, and that he is now taken for one of
the 12. Signs of the Zodiac called Aquarius. Some other Authors also write,
that one Tantalus King of High Phrygia and Paphlagonia, a most miserable,
covetous, and avaricious Prince had laid certain snares and private means to
entrap Ganimede, and to take him prisoner, as he used to sport himself in
Hunting, thinking by that devise to get a mighty ransom from Tros, for
redeeming of him; and that this Tantalus sent him to Jupiter, for to secure
him, and to have half the ransom that should be paid for his delivery; and
hence it may be that the Poets feign that Tantalus is plagued and tormented in
Hell standing up to the chin in water, and apples hanging down to his lips, and
yet can neither touch the one, nor taste the other. Tros thus having lost his
son, studied upon revenge and in the mean time comforted himself with his two
other sons Ilus and Assaracus, and this Ilus called Troy afterward Ilion, who
begot a son named Laomedon, the father of the renowned Priamus; and of
Assaracus issued and came Anchises who was father to AEneas, who as we said
before married Creusa, a legitimate daughter of King Priamus; so that we see
both by the Male and Female line in this marriage, our Warlike Brute, derives
his lineal descent from Dardanus, and so from Noe.

AEneas after the fatal destruction of Troy, gathered together the remnant and
parcel of the War-shaken and distressed Trojans, with whom he embarked and
hoysing sail, committed himself with the lives and fortunes of all his
followers and fellow Adventurers to Fate, and the protection of the Supreme and
highest Providence; three years was he tossed, not only with the merciless
billows of the ever-unconstant Ocean, but also by such Destinies as seemed no
ways to favor his designs: at last smiling fortune wasted his weather beaten
Navy unto the Italian Continent, where no sooner arrived (having scarce
refreshed his over-toyled Troops) but Mars puts him upon present action.
Latinus king of the Country endeavors to impeach his settling, and denies him
admittance; from words they come to blows, Bellona seems to take no small
pleasure to hear the groans of souls departing from their bodies, ready to
forsake their long enjoyed habitations; many are the assaults, approaches,
conflicts and combats, which daily pass betwixt the two enraged parties; the
one laboring to encroach, the other to keep his own. Venus not willing to have
Mars too long kept from her charming and soft embraces, contrives to set a
period to those bloody broyls; a match must be concluded between the
unparalleld Trojan Hero, and the fair Lavinia, Latinu's daughter, and sole
inheritrix of that vast Kingdom. Lucina favors the design, and from this new
married Couple of Matchless Progenitors, in due time is born a son, from whose
loins, the worlds greatest Emperors, and Britains Warlike Kings deduce their
Progenies: From this branch budded forth our Brutus: Some Writers will have him
to descend from Silvius Posthumus Policronica, Guido de Columna, with others
affirm, that Ascanius the first son of Aenaeas by his first wife had a son
named Sylvius Aenaeas, who was Father to Brutus.

It is commonly held that the mother of Brutus died in Childbed of this son,
and that at his coming to the age of fifteen years casually (many and secret
are the designs of the Celestial Star Chamber) shooting at a wild and savage
beast unfortunately, though not ungraciously, as being an act contrary to his
will or intention, slew his own Father; for which Act (divine Providence having
designed him for this our Island) by the common consent and decree of the
Magistrates of Latium, he was adjudged to exile, and for ever to be banished
from his Country: Necessity compels him to shift for himself; neither yet so
distressed or ill beloved, but that he is followed by Troops of the noblest and
most Heroic Spirits of his time, who partly attracted by that worth which they
find innate in him, and partly pusht forward with an ardent desire to purchase
honor to their never dying fames, engage both lives and fortunes ^ith him;
being now sufficiently stored with all manner of Provisions, they put to Sea,
shaking hands for ever with their beloved Country, Friends, and Parents, as
having Spirits not confined to any one place. Their propitious stars bring them
to a province of Greece, where they find encouragement, as finding there many
scattered Trojans, so that of this unexpected aid, I may say with the Prince of
Poets, Quid minime veris Graia pandetur ab urbe.

The Prince or King of this place, according to some was called Vandrasus;
other Writers call him Vandarus: Geffery of Monmouth proceeds further, and
tells us, that he was lineally descended from Achilles, that mortal enemy of
the Trojan glory, and Hectors valor; but Brute gathering these dispersed, or
it may be captived and enthralled Trojans which he found there, and old Innicie
received from Ulysses, Agamemnon, and other Chieftains of Greece, sticking in
their stomachs of the firing of old Ilium, and the Dardanian Towers, galls the
almost closed sore; whets his memory to call to mind things past, and those
once raked out of the embers of oblivion, gather new flames, and set all on
fire with an unquenchable desire of Revenge, which is so sweet and tickles the
souls of those malcontents, that nothing but fire and sword will serve their
turn. Pandrasus is assaulted in his own Court, and so hardly put to ^, that he
is enforced to purchase his own peace by bestowing his daughter Ignogen upon
Brutus, and such other conditions as the almost conquering strangers please to
demand; the Solemnity of these constrained Nuptials orderly finished; the
Trojans mutually consent to leave that place, and put themselves upon new
Adventures: Ships are provided, and questionless Vandrasus is not backward in
the business, willing to be rid of such unruly Guests, who will take all things
upon score, at their own price and rates; once more to Sea goes this gallant
Chieftain, with his new espoused Consort; and Post varios casus, and tot
discrimina rerum, the whole Fleet safely arrives at an Isle in Africa (as says
Guido and others) called Lergesia or Leogetia, in which the Superstitious and
mis-believing Pagans many Ages past (but now ruinous) had erected a sumptuous
Temple to Dina Diana. This when Brute understood, his zeal moving, and his
particular devotion to that Goddess seconding it, thither attended with his
whole Train, as an humble Supplicant and Votary he bends his course, and
Religiously, according to the manner of those profane Rights and Ceremonies (if
that may be religious, which is profane in the highest superlative) and there
prostrates his Princely knees, and from a soul (as he imagines) full fraught
with pleasing vows and grateful Orasons, to his adored Goddess, he thus
declares himself: Dina potens Nemorum, Terror silvestribus Apris
Cui licet Amfractus ne per aethereos
Inferuasque Domos, terrestria jura resolve
Et dic quas terras, nos habitare velis
Dic certam sedem qua te venerabor in aevum
Qua tibi virgineis Templa dicabo choris.


These verses are translated in Fabian, and because they smell of Antiquity, I
judge it better to leave them as they are, then to dress them in the garb,
mode, and style now in use in England, and therefore courteous Reader, be
pleased to accept of them; as also the others which follow in answer, in the
Language in which they were writ: Celestial Goddess, the weldest Frith and Wood,
The wild Bore and Beasts, thou fear by thy might;
Guider of Shipmen, passing the Rageous flood,
The Infernal Houses for, and the Earth of right,
Behold and search, and show where I shall light;
Tell the certain place where everlastingly
A Temple of Virgins I shall to thee edify.


These Ceremonies, Rights and Occasions ended, the Goddess pleased with the
Sacrifice of his Devotions, sends Morpheus in a thick and drowsy Mist, who
with his somniferous Rod lulls this humble Votary, locking up all his senses
within the sable curtains of a most profound sleep, whilst the courteous Diety
in a Vision or rather imaginary Fancy, distills and infuseth into his
sollicitous Soul this Oracle: Brute sub occasum solis, trans Gallica regna,
The Giants lay destroyed, before Brutes coming. The Language which he brought
must needs be that which we now call Welsh.
Insula in Oceano est, undique clausa mari.
Insule in Oceano est, habitata Gyantibus olim,
Nunc deserti quidem Gentibus apta tuis:
Hic de sobole tua Reges nascentur and ipsis,
Totius terrae subditus Orbis erit:
Hanc pete namque tibi seeds erit illec perennis,
Hic fiet natis altera Troja tuis.


In ENGLISH thus: Brute for the West over the Land of France,
An I Will in Ocean, there is all closed with the Sea.
This I Will with Giants whilone inhabit by chance,
Now being desert as apt for the people and thee.
In this of thy body Kings born shall be
And of this Isle thou shall be Lord and King,
Search this for here a perpetual Sea to thee
And here to thy Children a new Troy shall be.


When our Pilgrim awaked, the Vision had so fully possessed him, that
deliberating with himself what was best to be done, he pitched upon this
Resolution, to call together and Assemble the Noblest and best able for
Judgment, Wit, and Experience of all his Colonie; which done, he imparted the
secret unto them which begat a general rejoicing in them all; and all
Unanimously decree a Thanksgiving to be due unto the Goddess, and therefore
out of hand, the Flamen takes Milk, calls for diverse Aromatic spices; and
several Liquors, of which he composeth an offering of most sweet and precious
Perfumes, to offer to the Diety; great Fires are made, and Wine cast into them
according to the Pagan rights, and when things were performed in thankfulness
to the Numen, in a joyful procession they have toward the Ships not willing to
admit of any delay. In an instant as it were (so desirous was every one to see
the event of this specious Oracle; and enjoy quiet (the object and end of all
travel and labor) the Sayls are hoist, and the Canvas filled with such
prosperous gales, that in a trice, the Navy is without ken of Land, bending
their full endeavors for the West, Thus they sailed for the space of thirty
days, passing by many adventures and dangers; as of Philenes, The Lake called
Lacus-Salinarium, the place where Salt is made, as also the River Maeloa and
Hercules Pillars; at length they enter the Turon or Tyrrhen Sea, where they met
with a small Fleet, and those also Trojans, whereof Corineus Nephew to Brute
was Admiral; great were the acclamations and expressions of joy for this so
fortunate though accidental meeting, an happy omen of future success; and
being thus joined together to sail to a Province of Gallia called Guyan whose
Prince was Groffarius, to whom was brought ^iding of the approach of this
unexpected Fleet, He wisely to prevent ensuing danger, musters his Soldiers
and in a full body marches toward the Sea coast, there intending to fight his
(as yet unknown) Enemy, before he should get any firm footing within his
Territories; but the Trojans whose resolution was either to win or die, so
behaved themselves that Groffarius with all his Knights had the worst and were
put to flight, whilst the Trojan bravely maintained and kept the Field. No joy
on earth so absolute and complete, but it is intermingled with some sorrow or
disaster; great questionless was the solace and mirth of the Trojan for this
so fortunate a Victory; but when the dead bodies were viewed, amongst those who
had ended their lives in the bed of honor, was found Turonus a Nephew to
Valiant Brute, which caused a petty Eclipse to their Victory; but to eternize
the Name and perpetuate the never dying honor of his deceased Nephew and
courageous fellow soldiers: Brute built that well known City in France, which
to this very day is called Turon.

After the atchievment of this Victory, and of the City Brute, which Corineus
and the rest of the Trojans betook themselves again to the Seas, as yet not
having attained to the Island appointed by the propitious Goddess, 2828. III c.
lxxxii. DCCCI.
which happened about iiii M. lxx. before the building of Rome (says Mr. Fabian)
following the foresaid account iiii C lxx, before the Incarnation of Christ xi.
C. xxxvi. and before Alexander the Great conquered the world viii C. xi. also
before any King reigned over the Frenchmen Monarchally, or that they were free
from Tribute to Rome xv. C. lvi.

The Arrival of Brute in Albion.
Brute having now past the pikes of many hazardous passages and exanclated
dangers, arrives at last at the long hoped for Haven of his fore-promised
happiness: the first thing he did, was to progress the whole Island to view
and consider the comodiousnesse thereof which he found no way to frustrate his
hopes and longing expectation, he finds it fertile and well stored with Woods,
garnished with pleasant and enameled Meadows, and embroidered with many goodly
Rivers and purling Brooks and Rivulets (replenished with abundance of Fish)
like so many veins and arteries running through the whole body of the Island;
these things could not but please, but yet they are not solely to be enjoyed
without some danger; for as the Trojans pass from place to place to view the
situation and opportune places to inhabit, they are often encountered with
grisly creatures exceeding humane proportion, who give them but rude and savage
welcome; and these were they whom the Goddess meant, when she said, habitata
Gygantibus olim; amongst these prodigious Caitiffs one exceeded all the rest in
bulk and robustiousnesse, who was called Gogmagog, with whom Corineus Nephew to
Brute wrestled; who although he had a rib broken by this Monster, yet so foiled
him that he cast him down from the Cliffs; for which cause the place afterward
was called, The Fall of Gogmagog, (I have heard some say that in Glamorganshire
there is a place which the Inhabitants in their own Mother tongue, call Cwymp y
Cawr, which is as much as to say, The Giants fall or overthrow,) but that Name
being changed, it was afterward called, The Fall of Dover. For this most
valiant Act and special good Services Brute gave and allotted unto Corineus,
the Province or Country now called Cornwall.

Brute having destroyed that race of Giants formerly mentioned, after a perfect
discovery of the whole Island, passing by the River of Thames for his
Recreation, and finding a place in all respects fit to build a City to make the
Capital and prime habitation of his new achieved Kingdom; set Workmen, of all
Arts and Callings to accomplish and finish this his Design; which being brought
to perfection, to renew like a Phoenix out of Ashes Old Troy, he caused it to be
called Troynovant (i.) new Troy which name continued till K. Lud enjoyed the
Scepter and rule in Great Britain, upon that time (says my Author) of M.
lxviii. Fabian, fol. 10.
who then caused it to be called Luds Town, and now London.

This now Glorious City, ( Rome it self was not built in one day) and formerly
as glorious a style, being called Augusta, for we read in diverse Grave and
Learned Authors, that St. Augulus was Bishop of Augusta, viz. London, in
England, as both Catholics and Protestants expound it, and among them one in a
Sermon before K. James, says, Your City has been anciently styled Augusta:
for we read both in the ancient Roman Martyrologe, Saint Bede, Vsuardus, Ado
Vandalbertus, Petrus de Natalibus and others that this Augulus was Bishop of
Augusta in Brittannia, Augusta or London in Brittanny and was a Martyr; Augusta
in Brittannia natalis beati Auguli Episcopi qui aetatis cursum per Martyrium
explens aeterna proemia suscipere meruit: Baronius says, he cannot tell when
he suffered, Quo tempore passius sit hactenus mihi obscurum. But if we compare
the name of London at that time it was called Augusta with other circumstances,
and with the Catalogue of the Bishops of London after the time of K. Lucius, we
shall very probably find that this our worthy Saint Bishop of London is to be
reckoned one of the first Bishops that were consecrated in this Kingdom, and
long before our common Conversion in the days of K. Lucius, and so
consequently of St. Peter, or his Disciple St. Aristobulus, no other then being
here with eminent Authority to consecrate him Bishop and settle him Bishop of
Augusta: London or first, this City was not called Augusta in the Reign of K.
Lucius when this Nation was generally converted, but only Londinum, London;
nor never since that time or by any before but by the Romans at their first
settling here in the time of Claudius; and that the general opinion was that
London was called Augusta Dio. And Xiphelinus writ, That Legio Augustalis non
nata hibernabat in superiore Britannia, The Roman Legion so termed wintered in
the upper Brittany near London as is thought; it was long before Dioclesian's
time when it was thus called, in the days of Caesar Augustus or soon after,

A late French Author of this our Britain in his History, seems to say or
think, that Caerlegeon was in the time of Julius Agricola and by him named
Augusta, which if it were so, it only varyeth the particular place of his
Martyrdom ( viz. St. Augulus) nothing detracting from him or the glory of this
Nation, and that this Saint was Bishop of Augusta, (i.) London, and not Augusta
Caerlegion, this reason may conclude, for that Tremonius and St. Dubritius be
the first that be named Bishops of Augusta Caerlegion. Certainly Mr. Cambden
observes very well, That London was called Augusta, quia ea dignitate floruit
Londinum, ut Augusta dici caeperit and many foreign Cities very famous were
called Augusta in that Respect: as Augusta Taurinorum; Aug. Trieastinorum; Aug.
Veromanduor m; Aug. Valeria; Aug. Emerita; Aug. Bracchara; Aug. Acilia; Aug.
Tiberii; Aug. Vindeliciorum; Aug. Caesarea; Aug. Vestorum; Aug. Trevirorum.

Now as concerning Bishops, not only Augusta London, St. Anacletus, (it being
ordered by the Church to constitute Primates where Pagans had their
Arch-flamens,) but also other places ordered by his Tome or the Catalogues of
St. Peter, St. Clement, Caerlegion.
and ex Anacleto hujus insulae divisionem Canterbury, London, Caerlegeon, York
and Alba in Scotland (by some taken to be the now St. Andrews) urbs legionum,
(observe in the Latin Caerlegion (i.) urbs Legionum put in the first place)
Cantuaria, Londonia, Eboraca and Alba, unde Albania Provincia, were designed
Sees of such Primates, as Giraldus Came. Sir John Price, Matthew Parker. 1 Arch.
B. Pro. do testify.

Thus much concerning this famous and renowned City of London not without cause
called Augusta. Brute having finished this structure and given name to it to
perpetuate the memory of that City of which the Poet says, Nunc seges est ubi
Troja fuit, gave also a name to the whole Island, calling it Britania, a Bruto;
so did Romulus by Rome, Alexander by Alexandria, and Caesar by Casarea; and so
diverse other great and eminent Commanders and Potentates, named both whole
Kingdoms, Islands and great Cities after their own names, that in them their
Memories might live for ever. Brute having accomplished the thread of life
allotted by the fatal Sisters, and having left Rules for his Britons to live in
civil Amity and orderly Government; after a prosperous Reign, and happy in a
hopeful posterity, he bethinks himself of settling his Estate whereby to avoid
all Contention and Discord betwixt his Sons, which were three, Locrine, Camber
and Albanact, betwixt these three he divides his new acquired Kingdom; to the
eldest he gives Troynovant, with all the Countries adjacent which are now
called England, containing East, West and South; but (as his Father had called
the whole Island Britannia and his Subjects Britannos or Britones,) so Locrinus
after his name called his Share Loegria, and at this very day the Welsh call
England Lloegre; to his second Son Camber, he bequeathed that part which after
the Saxons call Wales, which Nomen-clation it yet keeps; and Camber imitating
his Father and Brother, named his Moiety from Camber Cambria: This partition or
Cambers portion was formerly divided from that of Loegria by the River Severne
in the East, and on the North side by the River Dee, and on the South by the
River Vaga now called the River Wye at the Castle of Stringlinge, Fabian, fol.
11.
(a name which I find not elsewhere) or rather Chepstow Castle, but of this
place what Mr. Cambden speaks, take these his own words, Chepstow in
Monmouthshire.
Hinc fluctuoso volumine descendit in Austrum Vaga in quo Copiosa est Salmonum
piscatura a Septembri ad Aprilem, (and by the way give me leave to tell you
that when Salmons grow out of kind or season in Wye, in the River Vsk which
runs through Caerlegion but ten Miles distant in the same County, Salmons
come in season, so that in the County of Monmouth all the whole year Salmons
are fit to be presented to an Emperors Table,) and if a Wye Salmon chance to
come into Vsk or e contra, the Fishermen are so skillful as to tell you this is
an Vsk Salmon, this of Wye) limes hodie inter Glocestrenses and Monumethenses,
olim inter Anglos and Wallos juxta illud Nichami versiculam. Inde Vagos Vaga
Cambrenses, hinc respicit Anglos. Qui cum jam ad ostium fere devenerit Chepstow
praeterfluit (id est) si e Saxonico interpreteris, Forum (viz.) Negationis
locus, Brittannis Castle-went, (and is this day called Cass. Gwent) Oppidum hoc
est celebre, clivo a flumine surgenti Impositum, manibus circumvallatur magno
cambitu quae agros and hortos in se includunt, Castrum habet ad occiduum latus,
flumini impeudens (in which Castle there is a stately Fabric called Longius or
Longinus Tower, supposed to be built by that Centurion who was present at the
death of our most sacred and blessed Savior, and out of this opinion it is
hard to beat many of the Natives; but who so pleases to read Surius, xv.
Martii, shall find, That Longinus the Centurion, one of the Jews who thirsted
after his blood, (who most willingly shed it for the Redemption of Mankind,)
signis and prodigiis, discussis tenebris, veritatis splendorem, Christi ipsius
gratia quem in Crucem sustulerat videre meruit; and detesting the impiety of
the Jews freely manifested the most glorious Resurrection of our Lord Jesus;
this his so confident and public affirming of the truth, for Crucis ei
custodia ut Centurioni mandata; postquam autem vivificum Christi Corpus
sepulturae mandatum fuit eadem sacrosancti corporis custodia Longino commissa
fuit; caused the Jews to procure from Caesar a Sentence of death against him:
Longinus flies from Jerusalem (leaving all his military Preferments,) with
some religious and devout Christians, he betakes himself into Capadocia, where
he converted many by his instruction and exemplar Life and Virtues, to the
faith, knowledge and adoration of the true Messiah, Jesus Christ; In Capadocia
he is aprehended and there obtains the glorious Crown of Martyrdom, his Head
as a great Trophee is sent unto Pilate, who to ingratiate himself and please
the perfidious and stony-hearted Jews, caused the holy relic to be placed
before one of the Gates of that once holy City Jerusalem, so that Longinus
could not be the Founder or Erecter of that Edifice before spoken of. But to
follow Mr. Cambden a little further concerning Chepstow, he continues his
Discourse, saying; Et e rigione stetit Prioratus cujus part meliore demolita,
quod reliquum est, in Ecclesiam parochialem convertitur, Pons vero quo Vaga
jungitur, sublicius est and admodum excelsus, quia accedente aestu in magnam
altitudinem fli vius exsurgit: hujus Domini fuerunt e Clarensium familia
nobiles, a proximo castro Strigul quod incoluerunt Striguliae and Pembrochiae
comites dicti, quorum ultimus Richardus vir infracto animo, and projectissimis
brachiis StrongBow cognominatus quod arcu intentissimo uteretur and nihil levi
brachio ageret, etc. This place after by a Daughter and Heir came to the
Bigots, and now the Earls of Worcester (or at least before the late Wars)
enjoyed both Town and Castle, the eldest Son of that Family being styled Lord
Herbert of Chepstow.

To Albanact the third Son of Brutus was given the third part of great Britain,
now called Scotland, which as it is now is called the second Kingdom of Great
Britain, and the North part of this Island has on the East the German Ocean, on
the North the Orkneys and Deucalidon Sea, the West affronted by Ireland, on the
South it has the River Tweed, the Cheviot Hills and the adjacent Tract,
reaching to the Sulway Sands whereby it is separated from England.

This Kingdom is spacious and from the South borders spreads it self wide
into the East and West, till again it contracts it self narrower into the
Northern Promontories, furnished with all things befitting a famous Kingdom,
both for Air, Soil, Rivers, Wood, Mountains, Fish, Fowl, Cattle and Corn, so
plenteous that it supplieth these with other Countries in their want; Their
Nobility and Gentry are very studious of learning and all civil knowledge, for
which end they not only frequent the three Universities of their own Kingdom
(St. Andrews, Glasco, and Edenborough, the Nurseries of their Muses, but also
much addict themselves to travel into Foreign Countries, especially France;
whose King has a Guard of Scots, the double Treshure florie in the Arms of the
Kingdom, makes manifest the French Interest in former time in that Nation. If
it is desired to know more of Scotland, read their own Authors; it is enough
for me to say that Albanack from his own name called it Albania. This Country
is divided from Loegria or England, as says Venreable Bid, by two arms of the
Sea, but they meet not: The East arm of which begins about two Miles from
the Minster of Eburcuring in the West side of Penulton, The West arm had some
time a strong City named Alclino, which in the British Tongue was called
Clincston and stood upon the River Clint.

Thus Brute having divided Britain into three Parts, after he had ruled twenty
two or four years after most Concordance of Writers, he died and was interred
in Troynovant commonly called London or Luds Town.

Locrinus second King of Britain.
LOcrinus the first and eldest Son of the late deceased Brutus, takes
possession of his Kingdom of Loegria, now England, in the year from the
Creation of the World, four thousand fourscore and seven. This Kingdom as it
was the largest, so was it the most beautiful, rich and commodious, both in
respect of Navigable Rivers, Ports and Havens; as also fruitfulness of the
Soils, and abundance of stately Woods and Groves, and according to the relation
and assertion of Policronica and Guido de Collumna, it stretched forth and
extended it self as far as to the River Humber, as now it is called, (a name
when Locrinus entered into Sovereignty unknown.)

Locrinus thus invested in his Principality, (as much as could be in a Land not
formerly, or at least by savage People or Giants inhabited) made ready to his
hand; His Brother with such Regiments as were allotted to him to Colonize and
people his Part, being retired into his own Quarters or Patrimony, whilst by
his own Industry and Advice of such as he made use of in a matter of so great
importance, was endeavoring to frame a model how to Govern and Uphold this
his new Plantation, an unexpected Enemy appears; Humber with a Navy arrives,
and having with him a sufficient Army of warlike Huns, sets upon Albanact,
whose thoughts were more busied how to settle his People and frame his
Commonwealth, then to oppose an Enemy; distressed Albanact is put to his
shifts, whilst the Scythian King, for so most ancient Writers only call him,
takes occasion by the Foretop, and making use of his opportunity fiercely
assaults the Albanian Prince, and with bloody slaughter, and the death of
Albanact, makes way for himself and Followers to intrude into his Possessions,
who as yet had scarce time to call them his own.

Fame whose vigilant eyes never sleep, with an exasperating Trumpet quickly
blows this unfortunate News into the Ears of Locrinus; he to revenge the
Dishonor done and the Death of his Brother, and also to enjoy that which now
by right was fallen unto him; but above all to remove so dangerous and powerful
a Neighbor, or rather Enemy, summons all his Nobles, and gathers together all
the force he possibly could make; and with a mind full of Revenge, Resolution,
and Courage Advances, and with speedy Marches sets forwards to Fight the
Scythian before he take to Deep root in Albania. Camber is not slow to second
this action as a thing which he conceives deeply to concern himself; and
therefore unites his Forces with his Brothers that thereby the Victory may be
more certain, and the loss less considerable. Desire quickens actions, and
resolute souls seem rather to fly then walk; The Armies meet, the Britains
inflamed with revenge for the Death of Albanact, who was their fellow Soldier
and Traveller, Son of their Deceased King, brother to the present, breath
nothing but Death and Confusion. The Scythian with like Valor and Courage,
thinks no danger too great to make good by the sword what he already purchased
and gotten by the same. Terrible is the conflict on both sides, but fortune
after long debate, with victory Crowns the Britains, the Scythians are put to
Flight, and flying are so hotly pursued, that many are drowned and the King
himself, (and as the Poet says of Icarus, Icarus Icarias, nomine fecit aquas)
put to such a strait that he was Drowned in that Famous River which from his
name has ever since been called Humber, of which Mr. Cambden says, Est certe
totius Britanniae aestuarium amplissimum and piscosissimum the largest and most
full of Fish throughout Britannie. Ex aestuantis oceani accessibus adauctum,
and iisdem retro remeantibus, suas illiusque aquas vehementissime vasto cum
murmr non sine magno navigantium periculo agit; unde Nichanus.

Fluctibus aequoreis nautis suspectior Humber
Submersis nomen contulit Humbris aquae.
And another Poet much to the same purpose says, Dum fugit, obstat ei flumen,
submergitur illic
Deque suo tribuit nomine nomen aquae.


Mr. Cambden in his Britannia sets down these two Distichons, but speaks not
a word of the cause, or the battle; and the reason is easy to be imagined, for
should he express the death of Albanack and the just revenge of Locrine and
Camber in behalf of their brother, he must needs grant Brute to be Progenitor
of the Britains, and consequently of the Welsh, a Nation which are very little
beholding unto him.

Locrinus is now a Conqueror, no fear of further supplies to affront him, the
day is absolutely his own; but unfortunate Prince, what a proud Foe clad in
steel and with a courage equalizing that of Mars could not effect, is done by
an Amorous Glance of a Female Creature; Estrild Humbers Daughter casts forth
such piercing darts from her Charming Eyes, that maugre both steel and coat of
Male, Locrine is wounded to the Heart; he sighs, complains, beggs compassion
from her who is his Captive; and in conclusion becoms her slave, she his
Mistress, in these bewitching Fetters he reposeth his happiness, her enriching
Arms he deemes the Trophies of his Victories; but fond-man Gwendolena thy
abused Lady disgests not a Corrival, she will make thee know quidfoemina
possit irata; she complains to her Father, he acquaints his dearest Friends,
and all enter into an Association to be revenged; Locrinus awakes out of his
effeminate dalliances, Arms himself to oppose the storm at hand and beat back
the threatened danger; but too late, his Enemies are too powerful, the abused
Gwendolena too well befriended, and leaves justice not to be controuled; and
thus Locrinus a Conqueror after he Reigned by account of most Authors Twenty
Years, through his intemperate lust and wanton affection, was deprived at one
time both of Life and Kingdom, leaving his body to be interred in Treynovant.

Gwendolena Queen Regent of Britain.
LOcrinus for his unjust and unlawful Love being thus justly punished, the
States and Counselors of the Kingdom elect and choose Gwendolena the abused and
injured Queen during the Nonage and Minority of her Son, to fit at the Helm and
manage the Affairs of the Kingdom; this Lady was daughter to Corinaeus, who
joined his navy and came along with Brute, and he who Encountered with Gogwagog
on the Hills by Dover as some write, others say near Plimmouth in Devon-shire,
which place this day is called the HAW, a hill betwixt the Town and the Sea, on
whose brow is a spacious and pleasant down, yiedling a delightful prospect, in
which is a Sea mark called the Compass to direct and guide Navigators passing
that way, of this conflict betwixt Corineus and Gogmagog. Thus writes a
certain Poet, Hos avidum belli robur Corinaeus Averno
Precipites misit, cubitis ter quatuor altum
Gogmagog Herculeo suspendit in aere luctu
Antaeumque suum scopulo detrusit in aequor
Potavitque dato Thetis ebria sanguine fluctus,
Divisumque tulit mare corpus Cerberus umbram.


Gwendolena to the eternal memory and glory of her Name and Sex governed this
Island for the space of Fourteen years, and then her Son coming to maturity and
fit age to undertake so great a burden, with the general applause and
acclamations of all, resigned her Trust and Authority to Madan.

Madan Son to Locrine and Gwendolena Succeeds in the KINGDOM.
MAdan Son to Locrine and Gwendolena and Grandchild to Brute, being now past
his minority, his Mother joyfully resignes her Regency, and is with general
applause and acclamations seated in his Throne and with all solemnity
acknowledged King, about the year from the worlds Creation, 4122. Authors write
very sparingly of the Acts of this King; only all agree that during the time of
his Reign which continued for the space of Forty years (a time too long for any
Tyrant) he ruled insolently with Oppression and Tyranny; Vindex nocentes
sequitur a tergo Deus; for being at his sports of Hunting, he was slain and
torn to pieces by Wolves and other savage Beasts, leaving two Sons, Mempricius
and Manlius.

Jac bus Gordonus Scotus Fol 9.
This King being Grandchild to Brute the Trojan, I think it not amiss to give my
Reader some satisfaction concerning Old Troy; Si 300 annis stetit Regnum
Trojanum, caepisse oportet ante 4 annos in Dardano 1. Rege 2520. sed Dardani
regnum rectius sub finem Ducatus Moysis and ab hoc anno 2524. exortum putatur;
Nam a Dardano ad Ilii excidium sunt anni 296. Contigit igitur Ilii casus anno
nostro 2820. sic enim peritiores numerant hos reges. Dardanus regnavit annis
65. Erichtanus 46. Tros 40. Ilus 49. Laomedon 44. Priamus 52. Ex quibus
colliguntur anni illi 296. hunc Regum Catologum ad suas neomenias reducit
Scaliger. lib. 2. Can. sub finem and nostris annis probe consentit.

As for the Destruction of Troy, what Homer the Greek, and Virgil the Prince of
Latin Poets have written, I pass by, as being Poetical fictions, each striving
to advance the glory of his own Nation; But Gordon in the same Folio, tells us,
Circae haec tempora, praesertini sub Ducatu Judicis Aod, ponitur Tros Dardaniae
Rex tertius, quem sequuti sunt alii, Hic Tros ( a quo Trojani) belium intulit
Tantalo regi Phrygiae ob raptum Ganymedem; and for this, Gordon cites Eusebius
99. cap. 8. and so proceeds, Juxta regum Catologum anno 2524. notatum sequitur
hunc annum 5. quo regnavit Tros, quod recte consentet tum cum Ilii excidio, tum
cum chronologia inter hunc Troem and Tantalum; ac denique cum anno quo
Pelopidae Mycenis soli regnaverunt, pulsis Heraclidis: a Trois autem morte
usque ad Atreum Tantali ex Penelope nepotem vix sunt anni 71. juxta regum annos
notatos; Dardania quidem anno Orbis 2524. and Mycaenarum 99. c. 8. Consurgunt
quoque anni tantum 20. ab obitu Trois usque ad mortem Acrisii, caesi a Perseo
nepote quando caepit Mycenarum regnum: nec ab his alienus est Tatianus qui
Pelopei e Phrygia exitum refert ad Acrisii tempora.

De Trojano Excidio.
Si, quod supra indicavi, condita Troja est anno Orbis 2524. Gordon fol. 11.
inquem incidit initium Ducatus Josue: Cum steterit Ilium annis 296. ut
probatissimi Autores magno fere consensu testantur, necesse est excidium hoc
incidisle in annum 2820, ab orb condito, and recte sunt enim sic ab eversa
Troit ad primam Olympiadem anni 407. quod intervallum doctissimi quique
probarunt. Scaliger. lib. 5. de Emen. pro hac suae ac vera sententia veteres
citat, Ephorum, Calisthenem and Damascen. Sane tabula Eratosthenis quam habet,
cap. 18. an Appen. idem perspicue refert, Hanc tabulam laudat and sequitur.
Dionysius Halic. Idemque intervallum ex Diodoro colligit citatus Scaliger; ab
hoc autem excidio ad Palilia anni consurgunt 432. hunc numerum saepe repetit
Dionysius Halicar. quem Glareanus and alii libenter sequuntur, etc.

MEMPRICIVS.
MEmpricius the Eldest Son of Madan, his Father being dead, by right of
Inheritance was Crowned with the Royal Diadem of Britain about the Year of
the worlds Creation 4142. but long he enjoyed not his Sovereignty without
Troubles and Opposition; for Manlius his younger brother, a man of an Ambitious
spirit, Haughty and aspiring to Royal dignity, would not content himself with
any Titles of Honor under the degree of a King; and therefore to bring this
his Design to his wished for Period, he resolves either to subdue or to expel
his brother: and to this purpose he insinuates himself into the bosoms of the
Nobles, casts Aspersions upon his brother, Detracts and Malignes all his
Actions; and so far prevails, that Rebellion is raised, and an unnatural
War taken in hand, which was eagerly prosecuted on each part, and continued a
long time; at length both Nobles and Commons finding Bellum minime bellum, and
perceiving these intestine broils, to wast their Country and threaten an utter
Ruin, incline to peace; no fitter way can be thought upon then an atonement
and reconciliation between the brothers; and therefore a day of meeting is
appointed, and great hopes conceived of a final peace and Concord; but
Mempricius having now got his brother under the fair pretense of becoming
friends into his power, to avoid all Jealousies and Fears of future deceit and
Treachery, becomes a Traitor himself, and by Treason caused his own brother to
be slain, making that saying of the Poet good, Rara est concordia fratrunt.
This perfidious and tragical scene performed, Mempricius, (his brother Manlius
being taken away) enjoyes as he conceives a happy peace; this peace makes him
forgetful both of his person and Honor, and now fearing nothing he contemns
even the Deity, and precipitates not only himself but his subjects also into
Sloth, Idleness, and Treachery; and when the Gate is set open, and free scope
given to sin, though nemo repent fit pessimus, yet those who forsake Grace and
Abandon themselves over to unlawful lusts and pleasures, fall from one sin to
another till they arrive at last at the very Jaws of Hell: so fares it with
Mempricius, his Wife or Wives give him not content, the fairest and choicest
beauties must be his Concubines, and these as many as his own wandering fancy
shall think fit, in these horrid sins he wallowes with all sensuality. I know
some of Epicurus his Scholars or rather Atheists will excuse Mempricius for
this his Platonic as it is now commonly styled, love, and tell you that
whatsoever is natural is no sin, and out of this deduce a most damnable
consequence or conclusion, which chaste ears abhor to hear: but this natural act
as it is called, ^^^fied not Mempricius, he falls to that which is most
unnatural, the sin of Sodomy, with wild and brutish Creatures, and by this
means becomes hateful both to God and Man, but not without just punishment from
Heaven: for intending to disport hemself in hunting becomes a prey to wild
beasts, and by them is torn to pieces, after he had enjoyed the Kingdom twenty
years, leaving to succeed him in his Throne, a son by his lawful wife called
Ebrank. Mempricius his Reign is observed by those who write of him to have been
Tyrannical. Plutarch though a Panim says, De sera numinis vindicta.
that God does serve himself of wicked Tyrants as of Hangmen to execute his
justice upon others, no less or more wicked then they; and that as poisons are
sometimes medicinable, and necessary to purge sad humors and cure diseases;
even so Tyrants are necessary to purge the sins and cure the vices of wicked
Subjects, To which end (says he) Phalaris the Tyrant was ordained by Almighty
God to govern the Agrigentins, and Marius the Romans. As for the brutish sin of
Mempricius, holy Gildas brings it in, as one amongst the rest, for which God so
severely punished the Britains; De excidio Britanniae.
and touching briefly the lives of some of the Kings and Princes that were in
his time, as of Constantius, Aurelius, Conanus, Vortiporius, Cuneglasus and
Maglocus, taxing them with Tyranny, perjury, sacrilegious murders and
parricides, committed even before the holy Altars, etc. yea, and two of them of
Sodomy; for which and other general corruptions and wickedness Gildas
threatens or rather prophesyeth the utter ruin and destruction which was to
follow; which also Geffrey of Monmouth acknowledges saying, that King
Cadwallader the last of the Race of the Britains used these words as he fled by
the Sea into France with the relics of the British Nation, Vae nobis
peccatoribus ob immania scaelera nostra, etc. And truly so great is the sin of
Lust, especially in Kings and great Dukes and other Commanders in the sight of
God (how little soever in these our sinful times we make of it) that whole
Kingdoms for it have been destroyed. The Kingdom of Spain when it had
flourished as well in Religion as Power from the time of King Richard (the
first Catholic King thereof) for the space of 120 years, the wicked King
Vitiza being a man given over to all lust and carnality infected and corrupted
all Spain, not only with the bad example of his one dissolute life (having
many Wives at once besides Concubines) but also with abominable laws whereby
he gave leave to all sorts of men to have as many Wives and Concubines as they
listed; yea and forced Priests and such as lived Chaste to Marry, by which means
all Spain became within a while to be no better then a common stew or brodel:
and although Almighty God according to his accustomed manner expected their
conversion and amendment all the time of his Reign, and laid only the penalty
thereof upon him, whom he deprived both of his Crown and of his Eyesight by
the means of Roderick who succeeded him in the Kingdom; yet when the said
Roderick followed his steeps as well in his vicious life as in the maintenance
of his abominable Laws; it pleased God of his justice to permit him to give the
occasion both of his own ruin as also of the overthrow of all Spain by the sin
of the flesh wherewith the whole Kingdom was, as it were, overflowed.

For as whereas King Roderick had sent a Kinsman of his own called Count Julian
Ambassador into Africa, and in the mean time Ravished his Daughter, or (as some
write) his Wife; the Count understanding it at his return, was so incensed
therewith against the King, that for revenge thereof he practiced with the
Moors to bring them into Spain, who with his assistance Conquered it so
speedily, and with such destruction of the people, that the punishment of God
was most evident therein: for having first overthrown King Roderick (whose body
could never after the battle be found) they subdued almost all Spain in Eight
months or in Fourteen as some say, and slew 700000. of all sorts of people,
besides great numbers of Captives which they sent prisoners into Barbary: and
from that time forwards they remained in the possession of that Kingdom or in
some great part thereof for the space of 700 years.

This example of the Conquest and subversion of Spain for the sins of the
flesh, was so famous and so much observed by Godly and Wise men, at the same
time when it happened that St. Bonifacius a Countryman of ours and Bishop of
Mentz in Cermany, who lived in the same age and converted the Saxons and
Frisons from Paganism to the Christian Faith, proposed it to one called
Etholbud King of the Mercians to withdraw him from his dissolute life, and
tells him that in old Saxony where there was no Christianity, there if either
Maid or Wife did commit Adultery or Fornication, she was first strangled and
after burnt: and he that corrupted her, Hanged over her, or else she was
stripped naked to the middle and whipped by chaste Matrons from Town to Town,
and pricked with sharp Knives till she dyed therewith.

EBRANCK.
EBranck, after the unfortunate death of his Father, by the general consent and
Approbation of both Nobles and Commons, is invested in the Regal Dignity Anno
mundi Creationis, Policronica Gaufride and others.
4182. Authors affirm, that he had a thing, in those times not unusual, one and
twenty wives; by whom he was enriched with a plentiful and numerous
offspring, to wit, twenty Sons, and thirty daughters, whereof the most fair
and beautiful was named Guales, or Gualea; these daughters (intending to
uphold the Trojan blood) he sent to Alba Silvius, the eleventh King of Italy,
or seventh of the Latins, there to be espoused unto Trojans: This Ebranck, was
a comely man, Majestical, and well proportioned; of incomparable valor, and as
desirous of Martial Attempts, as his Progenitor Brutus; and therefore providing
all Warlike Engines and Furniture correspondent to his designs, he attempts to
invade France, which is testified by Jacobus Bergomas in the sixth of his
Chronicles, and Jacobus Lessabeus in the description of Henalt affirms the
same, and that he was driven back by Brunchildis Lord of Henalt, with some loss
of his men: Yet Fabian affirms this Voyage to have been prosperous and
successful; insomuch that what by his own fancies, judgment and policy,
being assisted by the Trojan-Latines, or Latine-Trojans, where he had espoused
his daughter, he overran and conquered a great part of Germany. Some Authors
ascribe this Conquest and good fortune to Assaracus the second Son of Ebranck,
with the rest of the younger brothers, and esteem it no great service or
enterprise of moment; for that Europe was then scarce peopled and Colonized,
unless toward the Sea Coasts, as Dalmatia, Italy, and the coasts of France: of
these Brethren, had Germany the name, a Germanis fratribus, who subdued it.

Ebrank thus fortunate either in his own undertakings, or in these of his
children, having settled his affairs to his hearts desire, begins to take into
consideration, the beautifying and strengthening Britannia; and as Brutus about
an hundred and forty years (if he built it in the second year of his Reign)
before to his eternal glory had built Troynovant, Ebranck, with no less
ambition to continue and perpetuate his name and memory, lays the foundation
of a glorious City, calling it, being fully finished, after his own
nomenclation Caer Ebrank, which now we call York.

A late learned Author says, it is a common received opinion among our
Antiquaries, Mr. Brough. fol. 280. 2.
that Ebrancus son to Mempricius, a hundred years after the building of London
(or thereabouts) builded the City of York, calling it then Kair Baruch, as both
Britains and Saxons ancient and modern agree; where as Harding and Stow, with
others, affirm he seated an Arch-Flamen.

He made a Temple in Ebrank City
Of Diane where an Arch-Flamen he set, Harding.

To rule Temples at that time was his det.
In the twentieth year of his Reign (says Mr. Stow) he built Kaer Ebrank by
the Saxons called Evorwick, now corruptly York, wherein he builded a Temple to
Diana, and set there an Arch-Flamen, and was there buried, when he had reigned
sixty years. Thus ancient these our Historians make Arch-Flamens in Britain,
as I have related their very words; not that I think the name and word
Arch-Flamen, but only their Office and Calling among the Gentiles to have been
so ancient, as the time assigned to our Brutus, but of younger continuance and
age by diverse hundreds of years; the word Flamen, not known till the time of
Numa Pompilius, and taken from a kind of Attire worn upon their heads upon
Festival days, yet the Office of Flamen and Arch-Flamen, Pontifex and Summus
Pontifex was always the same among the Pagans.

Three Arch-flamens, he made through all Britain, Harding.

As Archbishops now in our Laws been,
Three Temples all to govern and Domaine,
At Troynovant, one Logres to overseen,
Her false gods to serve and to queme,
At Ebranch another for Albany,
And at Caerleon for Cambre one soveranly.
And this is so evident a Truth in Histories, that the Bishop himself, which
before with one only opposed against Arch-flamens, freely confesses that at
this time Arch-flamens, Bishops, were placed in these three Cities in Britain,
and in them only, Mr. Broughton, fol. 281. 3. 2. Age. Godwin. Cat. of Bish. in
Land. Edit. Anno 1615.
where so many (says my Author) have testified, and shall testify hereafter
further, these Arch-flamens were resident. Thus he writes. At what time
Christian Religion was first publicly received in this Island, there were
established in the same 28. Sees, or Cathedral Churches (which were the Seats
of Arch-flamens and Flamens, as shall be showed hereafter with their names)
whereof three were Archbishopricks, York whose Province was Scotland, and the
North of England, etc. Another Author says, Eboracensi vero (scilicet
Archiepiscopo) tota terra Northumbrina ab arcui Humbri fluminis cum tota
Albania: To him of York all Northumberland from Humber, with all Albania (i.
e.) Scotland, which is confirmed by these words, Eboracensi Deira and Albania,
under York, Deira and Albania.

Giraldus Cambrensis according to the Tome or Book of St. Anacletus, M. B. fol.
167.
which divided this Island into five Provinces, relates, as diverse modern and
others in this manner; Giral. Com. l. de sedis Mean vensis dignitate. Matthew
Parker, lib. Antiq. Brit. p. 24. T. Pris. defen. Histo. Brit. p. 73. 74. To.
Leland Indice Brit. aut. v. Brit. Beat. Renanus etc. ibidem.
as he says he found it then both in Papal and Imperial Acts and
Constitutions, Juxta Provinciarum numerum quas tempore gentilitatis habuerit
Insula, quinque Metropoles Juxta Tomum enim Anacleti Episcopi Romani, sicut in
Pontificalibus Romanorum gestis, and Imperialibus continetur directum Galliarum
Episcopis; juxta statum Gentilium ante Christi adventum Britannia habuit
provincias numero quinque Britanniam primam, Britanniam secundam, Flaviam,
Maximiam, Valentiam. Prima dicta est occidentalis Pars Insulae, Britannia
secunda Cantia, Tertia Flavia, quae and Mercia; Quarta Maximia id est Eboraca.
Quinta valentia scilicet Albania quae nunc abusive Scotia dicitur. According to
the number of Provinces, which it had in the time of the Pagans, the Island of
Britany has five Metropolitan Cities; for according to the Tome of Anacletus
Bishop of Rome, as it is contained in the Decrees of the Popes of Rome, and
Emperors, directed to the Bishops of France, according to the State of the
Gentiles, before the coming of Christ, Britain had five Provinces, Britain
the first, Britain the second, Flavia, Maximia, Valentia; the first was the
West part of the Island, the second Kent, the third Flavia, called also Mercia,
the fourth Maximia, that is to say York; the fifth Valentia; Albania, now
corruptly, called Scotland: The Metropolitan City of the first Britain was
Caerlegeon: The Metropolitan of the second Dorobernia, now Canterbury: In the
third London; in the fourth York; and in the fifth, Alba taken to be the City
now named St. Andrews. Thus far Giraldus of St. Anacletus Tome, extant in his
time, as he has witnessed:

Caerlegion the first Metropolis, of the five in this Isle.
York is now esteemed the second City of England by some (though others think
Norwich, and not a few Bristoll) both for fame and greatness; a pleasant large
and stately place, well fortified and beautifully adorned, as well with private
as public Edifices, and rich and populous withal; seated on the river Ouse,
which cutteth it as it were in twain, both parts being joined together with a
fair stone bridge, consisting of high and mighty arches. A City of great fame
in the Roman times, and of as eminent reputation in all ages since, and in the
several turns and changes which have befallen this Kingdom under the Saxons,
Danes, and Normans has still preserved its ancient Custom; adorned it was with
an Archiepiscopal See in the time of the Britains, nor stooped it lower when
the Saxons received the Faith: Richard the second laying to it a little
Territory on the west side thereof, made it a County of it self, in which the
Archbishops of York did enjoy the rights of Palatines: and for a further luster
to it, Hen. 8. appointed there a Council for the Government of the Northern
parts, consisting of a Lord President, certain Counselors, a Secretary, and
other Officers: And yet in none of these has York been more fortunate, then
that it has adorned so many Princes of the Imperial Line of Germany, and blood
Royal of England.

The Line of YORK.
1461. 36. Edward the IV. 23. 1483. 37. Edward the V. 1483. 38. Richard the
III.

With the Title and Honor, Style, and attribute of Otho of Bavaria, Earl of
York. Gules two Lions Passant Gardant, Or.



Edmund of Langley, fifth Son to King Edward 3. Earl of Camb. and D. of York.
Edw. Plantagenet Son of Edmund of Langley, Earl of Rutland, and D. of York.
Richard Plantagenet, Nephew of Edmund of Langley, by his Son Richard, Earl of
Cambridge, D. of York. Richard of Shrewsbury second Son to King Edw. 4. D. of
York. Henry 2. Son to King Hen. 7. D. of York. Charles 2. Son to King James D.
of York. James 2. Son of King Charles, D. of York.
Let us return again to our valiant and fortunate King Ebranck, who having
happily and with great Success finished his Foreign Wars, and living in peace,
the mother of plenty, at home, lends all his cares and endeavors, both to
beautify and strengthen Brittania, as we may partly see in what is already
declared of York: which work finished, he proceeded to a second Erection; and
laid the foundation of Alcuid or Alcluid in Albania, now Scotland, which Hector
Boethius, M. B. f. 336. 6.
the Scotch Historian, in honor of his Country, imagines to be Dunbritta n:
but another Author, to whom I give more credit, says: And the old Flamens City
Alcluid or Alclucht, was also founded by the same King (viz. Ebranck) of
Britain. There is a question where this City for certain was, but all agree,
near the wall of division, and so the privileges and power thereof must
probably extend on both sides of that division. The City Caerlile or
Lugugablia, was a place of this prerogative, builded by Leil, the seventh in
number of the British Kings; and out of doubt had power and prerogative in
both sides of the wall, both in Leogria and Albania, having as our Antiquaries
say, and experience yet proves, in it, part of that famous Wall of Separation,
habet haec urbs aliquam partem illius muri famosi qui transcindit Northumbriam,
Ranulphus Higedon, and others, places an old City Vrbs Beble, Vrbs Regia, a
Regal City upon the River of Twyde, super ripam Twydi, which divides England
and Scotland; and if it was a Flamen or Bishops See, as the ancient glory of it
persuades to think, the jurisdiction of it must needs extend into Albania.

The third notable place which this Ebranck founded was the Castle of Maidens,
which stands at the one end of the City of Edenbrough, a Castle by the Scots
thought so impregnable that the grand Seignior himself with all his numerous
Armies could not be able to surprise it, but the valor and courage of the
English in these late wars maugre all their Scotch juglings, and sanctity, made
them know the contrary, who now have it in their possession as a curb to check
that -- Nation. This Castle of Maidens or rather Edenborough it self was also
an ancient Flamins City and Residence, and after Converted into an Episcopal
See.

Ebrancus not yet content with such Edifices as he had already erected lays a
fourth Foundation, and called it Bamburgh, but whether this was the place which
we now call Bambury, Burgh, and Bury in their several Languages signifying the
same thing I will not decide: if it were, Mr. Cambden says, Hic Banburie
quondam Bananbyniz primum perfundit ad quod Kinricus visisaxo Britannos pro
aris and focis fortiter Dimicantes memorabili praelio olim fudit; and superiori
saeculo Ricardus Nevill comes Warwicensis dum a Lancastrensibus partibus staret
Eboracenses profligavit, ut statim etiam ipsum Edwardum 4. consilii innopem
caeperit and abduxerit: Nunc autem conficiendo Caseum notissimum. Here Kinricus
the Visisaxon in a most memorable battle overthrew the Britains most valiantly
fighting for their lives, liberties and Religion; and in later times, Richard
Nevill Earl of Warwick being for the Lancastrian party, so vanquished King
Edward the Fourth that ignorant which way to turn himself, he took him and
carried him away; the place is now famous for excellent Cheese, etc.

To end his days with famous glory, this heroic King laid the Foundation of
that long continued and learned University now called Oxford, which was first
known by the name of Caer Mennix, and after Bellesitum a name most fit for so
pleasant a place, and after Caer Bossa Rhydohen, in conclusion Oxenford of a
certain. Ford called Isis, in English Ouse, Howes fol. 9.
and so instead of Ouseford, Oxenford or Oxford, upon which word a Student
there, to prefer his own University before Cambridge for Antiquity, Quibles
thus; the Ox went over the Ford and then Camebridge: Others call it Caer
Mennip. Galfridus calls it Caer pen huelgoit, Leland from the Antiquities of
Dover, writes that it was a City before the time of K. Arviragus that builded
the Castle adjoining, and names it a most renowned city, and that King Lucius
builded a Church in the said Castle, Referunt and idem Annals Lucium regem
Britannorum, etc. Whosoever desires a further and more large satisfaction
concerning the erecting of the several Colleges Churches. Monasteries, Halls
and Schools, let him peruse Mr. Cambden in Oxfordshire.

Ebranck after he had reigned Forty years and builded so many goodly Cities,
departed out of this life, whose Corpse were buried or burned, at York his
Obsequies being celebrated with great solemnity, and left to succeed him in his
Kingdom his Son Brutus the second surnamed. Green shileld.

BRVTE GREEN-SHIELD.
BRute the Second, eldest Son of Evranck, succeeded in the Kingdom, and for
that his Father had received a repulse as some write at the hand of Brunchildis
Lord of Henalt, Hanolt or Hannonia which lies on the East of Flanders, 60
miles long and 48 broad, containing 950 Villages and 24 Towns besides Castles.
The chief are Banais supposed to stand in the same place where the ancient
Belgium was built, Mons, Conde Valencennes, etc. he in revenge thereof Invaded
Henalt with a great Army in the Fens and Marsh land at the mouth of the River
Scaldis (in old time called Stadus) and encamped himself upon the River Hania
where between Brutus and Brunchildis was fought a fierce and bloody battle in
that place, which to this day is called Estambruges of the station and Camp of
Brutus, as Jacobus Lessabeus writes in his description of Henalt, This Brute
of his lusty courage, was surnamed Greenshield he reigned twelve years and was
buried at Caer Ebranck or York.

LEIL.
LEillus, or Leill Son of Brute the second commonly called Green-shield, began
his Reign over the Kingdom of Great Britain in the year of the worlds
Creation Four thousand two Hundred fifty four, he was a just man and one who
highly esteemed Justice and Dignity, and imitating the worthiest of his
Predecessors in erecting ornaments for his Kingdom; he laid the foundation and
in time fully built the City of Carliele. The Romans and Britains had several
appellations for this place, sometimes calling it Lugu-vallum, and
Lugu-ballium, and sometimes Lugu-baliam, and Caerliel. The Saxons after they
had possessed themselves of this Island called it Luell as Saint Bede affirms,
Ptolomeus as some seem to affirm called it Leucopibiam and Nennius caer Lualid;
the old Prophesies of the Britains, which Mr. Cambden calls ridicula
Britannorum vaticinia, indeed he never was Friend to the Britains and Welsh.)
Vrbem Duballi at this day well known it is by the name of Caerlile, and by the
Latins, Caeliolum, Lugum or Lucum, priscis Celtis, who spoke the same language
with the Britains, as Mr. Cambden imagines and but imagines; Pomponius Mela
tells us it signified a Tower or Fortification, and Caerlile or Lugu vallum is
as much as to say Turris or munimentum ad vallum; certain it is that this City
flourished and was in high esteem with the Romans as may appear by several
Monuments of great Antiquity which have been dug up and found there, and
although it suffered great detriment and ruin by the irruptions and inroades
of the barbarous Picts and Scots, yet it ever retained the style and dignity of
a City. In process of time, to wit, in the 619 year of the Incarnation of our
Lord and Savior Christ Jesus, Egfridus King of the Northumbers gave it to St.
Cuthbert, these are the words of the Donation, Donavi etiam civitatem quae
vocatur Caerlile Luguballia and in circuitu ejus xv. Mr. Camb. in Cumberland.
milliaria, at which time the walls were firm and whole: venerable Bede
affirms, Cuthbertum duxerunt cives ut maenia videret fontemque in ea quendam
Romanorum opere extructum, The Citizens led Cuthbert to behold the walls and
view a Fountain which the Romans formerly had made; who as says the Register
or book of Durham, congregationem sanctimonielium and Abbatissam ordinavit
scholasque ibi constituit, who instituted there a Cloister of Religious Virgins
or Nuns, and also Schools; but the fury of the Danes afterward so demolished
and destroyed this City that for the space of near upon two hundred years it
lay buried in its own ashes. William of Malmesbury says, That in this City
Visum erat triclinium Romanum ex lapidibus fornacibus concameratum quod nulla
unquam tempestatum injuria aut ignium flamma labefactare potuit, in cujus
front scriptum erat Marii VICTORIA, some suppose this Marius was that gallant
Arviragus the Britain, of whom we shall have occasion to speak much hereafter.
William commonly called Rufus reedified this so long buried Caerlile, and
furnished it with stately Buildings, strengthing it with a Princely Castle,
though some think that Richard 3. by reason of his Arms found there in the
building, erected it. These are Mr. Cambden's words, Ad occidentem est castrum
satis magno ambitu quod Regem, Ric. 3. ex insignibus vendicat: The same Author
further says, that Caerlile est Vrbs vetustissima a Septentrione Itunae, (i.)
Eden, alveo, ab Ortu Peterillo (i.) Peterell, ab occasu Cauda (i.) Cauda and
praeter haec defendentis naturae munimentis firmis maenibus e saxo, Castello,
and Citadella quam vocant armata: And a little after, Ad ortum vero Citadella
quam propugnaculis variis firmo opere posuit Hen. 8. defenditur. Thus much for
the honor of our British King Leill the Founder of this ancient and strong
City, a Bulwark against the Scots, of which I could say more, but it may be it
would be out of season; and therefore I will only tell you that Caerlile has
given the honor of Earl only to two Families.

1. To Andrew de Harcla, who did bear for his Arms, argent a cross gules, upon
the canton point a Mertlet sable; but for proving a Traitor, his Arms
reversed, his Spurs hackt from his heels, and all his Honors being taken from
him, he was Drawn, Hanged, and, Quartered. The second, James Hay Viscount
Doncaster, Created E. of Caerlile, 18 Jac. Sept. 17. James Hay, etc. Argent 3
escoucheons Gules.
King Leill also repaired Chester, which Ptolomy calls DEVNANA, Antoninus,
DENAM from the River Dena or Dina. The first Inhabitants of this Isle, the
ancient Britains, called it Caerlegion, Caerleon Vaur, Caerleon or Dufyr Dwy;
and Caer as who would say the City, or the only City in way of eminency and
superiority. The Saxons called it Leze acentep, names which without all doubt
were taken from the Legion which was called Victrix, sent into these remote
parts, the Pretorian and Consular Legates standing in fear of it: Some, as Mr.
Hen. Bradshaw for one, will bring and deduce the Name from a terrible Giant
long before Brute, and to make their invention good, they call this Giant Leon
Vaur; but being before Brute how he came by this British name, my brains
cannot find, and therefore as a fictitious imagination and mere Chymera I leave
it: but that the xx. Legion called Victrex resided in this City, it is most
apparent by the Coyns often found there: the one side having this Inscription,
Col. DINANA LEG. XX. Victrix: but now there remains very few Marks and Signs
of the Roman magnificence and state, unless some small parcels of checker or
Mosaic, work, which are usually found where the Romans formerly inhabited.
Hear what Ranulphus once a Monk of this City says concerning these
Antiquities, these are his words, Viae sunt hic subterraneae lapideo opere
mirabiliter testudineatae, triclinia concamerata, Insculpti lapides praegrandes
antiquorum nomina praeferentes; hic and numismata Julii Caesaris aliorumque
illustrium inscriptione insiguita quandoque sunt effossa; Here are passages
under ground with stone-work most wonderously vaulted over, banqueting rooms
with arched roofs; vast stones inscribed with the names of ancient Romans;
Coyns stamped with the Inscription of Julius Caesar and other famous
Commanders. Rogerus Cestrensis in Policratico says, Intuenti fundamenta
lapidum in viis, ingenio videtur potius Romano sive Gyganteo labor quam
Britannico sudore sundata, Whosoever shall view the foundations and consider
the vast proportion and huge bulk of the stones, shall judge the work rather
finished by the toil and labor of Giants or the ingenious Roman industry, then
by the sweat of any British brow: the City is quadrate, the Walls containing
four Miles in compass; the building beautiful and neat, the prime Streets so
decked with Galleries, that in rainy days passengers walk dry; the Castle is of
late erection: this City has been defaced several times, once by Egfride King
of the Northumbers, after by the Danes; often repaired by Adelfleda Lady and
Queen of the Mercians. Over the River Dena or Dee a fair stone bridge leads,
built upon eight Arches, at either end whereof is a Gate from whence in a long
quadran-wise the Walls do encompasse the City, high and strong built, with four
fair Gates opening unto the four winds, besides, three Posterns with four
Watch-towers, extending in compass 1940 paces.

On the South side is mounted a strong and stately Castle, on the North side is
the Minster first built by Earl Lerfrick to the honor of St. Werburga the
Virgin, and after most sumptuously repaired by Hugh the first Earl of Chester
of the Normans; Now the Cathedral of the Bishops See. Herein lies interred (as
report does relate) the body of Henry the 4. Emperor of Almain, who leaving his
Imperial estate, led lastly an Hermits life.

Who built this stately and ancient City appears not, but in that it was
repaired by the British Leill, to him the glory must needs belong; to the
Romans thanks belong for its first name, or at least to the twentieth Legion
called Victrix; a Legion of the Romans (as Vigetius reports) contained 6000
Soldiers or more, and was divided into ten bands, the first exceeding all the
rest both in number and estimation; For this band bare the Eagle which was the
chief Standard of all the Romans; it contained 1105 Foot men, heavy armed;
Horsemen 132. and was named Cohors Miliaria, that is to say, a company of One
thousand and more soldiers. This Band has the pre-eminence above all the
Legions when they go to Fight; for they are placed in the Forefront and begin
the battle. The second Band contains 555 Footmen and 66 Horsemen of heavy
Armor, and is called Cohors Quinquegintaria. The third band has also 555
Footmen and 66 Horsemen. The Fifth had as many. These Five bands are set in
array in the first battle; The other Five bands have equally each band the like
number; so that these ten bands make a complete Legion, containing 6100 Footmen
and 726. Horsemen. King Leill in the end of his Reign fell to sloth and lust,
whereby civil dissentions arose, which ended not in his life. He reigned 25
years, and was buried at Caleile alias Chester, which has given the honor of
Earl to these honorable Families.

1. Hugh surnamed Lupus, Azure, a Wolfs head erased Argent. 2. Richard Son of
Hugh, Gules crutely Or, a Wolfs head erased Arg. 3. Randolph de Meschines, Or,
a Lion rampant with his tail erected Gules. 4. Randolph de Gernoniis, Gules a
Lion rampant with his tail erected Arg. 5. Hugh Kivilioc son of Randolph, Azure
6 garbs 3. 2. 1. 6. Randolph Blondevil Son of Hugh, Azure 3 garbs, Or. 7. John
le Scot Son to the Lady Maud, eldest sister of Randolph, Or, 3 piles Gules.
Edward eldest Son to K. Ed. 3. England, a label of 3 points. Simon de Montfort
E. of Leicester, after whose death Chester was laid unto the Crown, and has
been since united to the Principality of Wales.
Lud or Lud Hurdribras alias Cicuber.
KIng Lud, his Father being Dead, with general applause and consent ascends the
Royal Throne of great Britain, in the Year of the Worlds Creation, 4279. as
Mr. Fabian accounts; the First business which he took in hand was to settle
his Kingdom, for his Father toward the latter end of his Age addicting himself
to sloth, and giving way to the youthful sin of lust, a vice most hateful in
an old Man, gave occasion to his Subjects who lived in Ease, Wealth and
Delights to stir up commotions and dissentions, these, broyls, Lud though young
yet wisely endeavors by all means and diligence to suppress, knowing that
peace and quiet is the Object and chief effect which all distempers and Wars
how just soever aimed at; by his studious endeavors and assistance of faithful
Friends and careful Councillors, he obtains his desire; and having settled all
distempers and reduced them to their due order and motion he set his mind
wholly upon the beautifying of Britanny, and therefore in imitation of his
Royal Progenitors, he begins a City which he calls Caer gant or Kaer kin, which
afterward the Saxons call Canterbury, which is to say, the Court of Kentishmen.

True it is that Canterbury is now a Metropolitan Church and Archbishops See,
but it never had an Archflamen. St. Augustine out of an affection of his own
(though some Authors affirm London according to the general rule of placing
Archbishops where Archflamens were, and bishops where Flamens was appointed by
Pope Gregory) to be the place, there settled his Archiepiscopal chair.

For Canterbury, it was first a Flamens Seat, And the old Manuscript History
called Abbreviatios Chronicorum says in this time, and settling of Bishops in
King Lucius his Reign, That the old Church of St. Martins was builded, tunc
constructa est extra Cantuariam Ecclesia sancti Martini, and to notify that he
meant thereby a Cathedral and Episcopal Church, he adds this when he speaks
of changing Flamens into Bishops; and all Histories testify, that the holy
Bishop Lethardus which came hither with Queen Bertha before St. Augustin's
time, used it as his Episcopal See; And Canterbury besides the Archbishop had
another Bishop in that Church of Saint Martin diverse hundreds of years, and Mr.
Lambert the Antiquary of Kent says from Antiquities, St. Martins Church built
by the Romans in Canterbury was a bishops See until the Normans came in, and
so two in one City thus substitute to the Archbishop.

Gi^^^us.
And that Canterbury was a Primates See, Mr. Broughton, fol. 178. out of other
Authors, Ex Anacleto hujus Insulae divisionem, Canterbury, London, Caerlegion,
York, and Alba in Scotland, by some taken to be St. Andrews, Vrbs Legionum
Cantuaria, Londonia, Eboraca and Alba, unde Albania Provincia were designed
Primate Sees, for such, as Giraldus Cambrensis in his second book to
Innocentius the 3. Sir John Price, Matthew Parker the first Archbishop of
Canterbury with others testify.

Mr. Cambden calls this City Dorovernum, saying, that the River Stoure runs
most swiftly by it, which seems partly to give name unto it, for that Durwherne
signifies in the British tongue a swift or fierce running river; he says it
is, Vrbs pervetusta Romanoque seculo proculdubio illustris: And Malmesbury tells
us, Nec adeo magna, nec euiliter parva, quae and terrae positione soli assinis
maxima ubertate, and integro murorum ambitu, fluviis irriguae, nemorum
opportunitate inclyta, praeterea maris vicinitate piscium faecunda: if any
desire to satisfy himself further concerning this famous and glorious British
City, let him read Mr. Cambden in his description of Kent.

The next City which King Lud founded was Caerguent; Ptolomeus and Antoninus
call this City Venta Belgarum, the Saxons thinvancesvor, the Latins Vintonia,
at this day Winchester: some seem to derive the Etymology from Vento, others
from Vine, and not a few from Wina the Bishop. But Lelands conjecture pleases
better, who from the British word Guin or Guen i. e. white, does derive it,
and so makes Caer Guin, the White City; so ab albedine prisci latini Albam
Longam, and Albam Regiam nominarunt; for this venta, as the other two Venta
Icenorum, and Venta silurum, in the midst between Chepstow and Caerleon in
Monmouthshire, in times past a Flamens Seat, a City, and an University or
School of Philosophers, Nunc seges est ubi venta fuit, the high way ^or road is
through the midst of it: This City was remarkable in the Romans days, In qua
textrina sua sacra Imperatores Romani habuisse viderentur, their weaving
houses; for according to Guidus Pancirolus, illa Gynecia constituta sunt
texendis principis ut militum vestibus, navium velis, stragulis, aliis, and ad
Instruendas mansiones necessariis, to weave vestures and garments for Princes
and Soldiers, sails for ships, linen coverings or coverlids, and other
necessaries to furnish habitations; the Cathedral Church of Winchester (says
Godwin) according to a respect that I find in an old Manuscript, was first
built and erected by King Lucius, and to speak further in his words; This
Church was hallowed and dedicated October the 29. 189. by Faganus and Damianus
Bishops; and he proves from the same Antiquity, that in the year 309. one
Constance was Bishop there; and in Saint Dubritius time, Godwin. Catal. Epist.
by the British History, Dinuanius was also bishop there, Episcopatus
Guintonia Dinvanio decernitur; the same author produces an old Manuscript,
which testifies another (Monastery) founded at Winchester; only his error is
(which the Antiquity does not say, that it was the Cathedral Church,
confounding them as one, whereas both the British History and Matthew of
Westminster, make them two several Churches; otherwise he thus truly writes, a
Church in Winchester, according to a report that I find in an old Manuscript,
was first built and erected by King Lucius, who abolishing Paganism, embraced
Christ about the year of our Lord 180. and placing Monks in the same, allotted
for their maintenance large Revenues, which heretofore had belonged for the
most part unto the Flamens, and other Heathenish Priests; and this Monastery
so continued until the persecution of Dioclesian, when it was destroyed and
the Monks martyred or dispersed; yet upon the ceasing of the persecution, it
was presently within one year and thirty days new builded, and the Church
hallowed and dedicated unto the honor and memory of Amphibalus (who was a
noble Britain) that had suffered death for Christ in the late persecution, by
Constans bishop of Winchester, in the year 309. the 15. day of March, at the
request of Deodatus the Abbot: The first Dedication of that Church in King
Lucius time, (...) B^ough. ^^l. ^09.
by the two Legates Faganus and Damianus bishops was by that old Antiquity,
October the 29. 189. The Antiquities of Winchester make it more ancient: and it
thus continued a famous Monastery until the year 519. at which time Cerdick
the first King of the West Saxons, converted the Church into a Temple of Dagon,
and either slew or chased away all the Monks. This was that holy Sanctuary,
whither to the Altar of this Church one of the Sons of Mordred did fly for
succor against Constantine the younger, who there cruelly slew him before the
Altar, Constantinus filios Mor^redi caepit and alterum juvenem Wintoniae in
Ecclesiam Sancti Amphibali fugientem aute altar trucida^it, in the year 543.
others say that it continued within 17 years of St. Augustin's coming hither,
others continue Christians there for longer time.

Winchester has honored both Earls and Marquesses with their Titles; As
first: 1. Saer de Quincy, E. a Fess. and labell of xi. points. 2. Robert de
Quincy, Gules 7. Mascles, Or 33. 1. 3. Hugh de Spencer, Quarterly the first and
4. arg. the 2. and 3. each charged with a fret, Or, a bond sable. 4. Jews de
Bruges, Azure, 10 Mascles, 4. 3. 2 and 1. Or on a Canton Gules a Lion passant
gardant, of the second. 5. William Pawlett E. of Wiltshire and Marquess of
Winchester. 6. John Pawlett. 7. William Pawlett. 8. William Pawlett. 9. John
Pawlet Marquess of Winchester, 1657. Sable, 3 swords in pile, Argent hilts and
pomels, Or, a mullet for difference.


The Third City which this King built was Caer Septon now called Shaftsbury,
and Caer Paladur ut falso vulgus putabat, says Mr Cambden; for he takes and
draws what he can from British glory: it seems the Welshmen gave him no
liberal hospitality in his travels; for he is no friend of theirs, he will by
all means ascribe the building of this place to King Alfred producing this
Monument and Malmsburiensis for his Author.

Anno Dominicae Incarnationis
Elfridus Rex fecit hanc Vrbem
DCCCLXXX. Regni sui VIII.
The Saxons called this place Scheafverbyryg it may be from the broach or
spice, which in their language they call Scheaf, in this place one Aquila,
whether Man or Eagle is uncertain, by the report of Historians is said to have
prophesied the future times of this Empire, and that after the Reigns of the
Saxons and Normans it should again return unto the Government of the British
Kings. In this City was St. Edward the Martyr Son of Edgar, and one and
thirtieth Monarch of the English Nation interred, 972. being murdered at Corf
Castle by his Stepmother Aelfrith to make way for her own Son to the Crown. But
as concerning Mr. Cambden, who would gladly take away the glory of building
this place from the Brittons the Predecessors and Forefathers of the Welshmen,
so abusively called by their Enemies, and confer it upon the Saxons; Hear what
a learned Writer says, and a deep Searcher into Antiquities, having
demonstrated where the Primates and Metropolitans of this I Will have their Sees
(which I will show you as occasion requires) after tells you where the
Suffragans or ordinary bishops had theirs; taking two Rules for his direction,
From Antiquity the one, that they were placed as the custom was in our British
Cities; the other, that they were ordained where the Pagan Flamens were before.
Gildas writes that Britain had 28 Cities besides strong Castles, bis denis
bisque quaternis civitatibus instructa, but he names them not; but Ranulphus
Higeden the Monk of Chester citing Alfridus, tells us thus, Regio Britanniae
erat quondam civitatibus nobilissimis 28 Insignita; The Country of Britain was
in old times adorned with 28 Cities, beside innumerable number of Castles
defensed with strong Walls, Towers, Gates and Locks. The Names of the Cities
were these, Caer Lud, (i.e.) London. Caer Ebrane, (i.e.) York. Caer Kent,
Canterbury. Caergorongon, Worcester. Caerlyrion, Leicester. Caer Glau,
Gloucester. Caer Golden, Colchester. Caerrei, Chichester, which the Saxons
anciently called Cissancester. Caer Ceri, Cirencester. Caer went, Winchester.
Caergrant, Cambridge. Caerlile Lugubalia, Caerlile. Caerperis, Porchester. Caer
drom, Dorchester. Caerludcoit, Lincoln. Caer Merthin, (i. e.) the City of
Merlin, Caersegen, Silcester was, is seated upon Thames not far from Reading.
Caerthleon or Caerlegion, (i. e.) the City of Legions, which first was called
Lenscester, but now Chester. Caer Badon, Bath, which sometime was called the
City of Achamannus. Caer Paladur, (now ut falso credebat vulgus, good Mr.
Cambden here are Authors above vulgar people) Septona now called Shaftsbury;
there are also other names of Cities sound in Chronicles. This King reigned 29
years, or as Fabian says 39. who calls Septon or Shaftsbury Mount Paladur, by
reason that it is seated upon a Hill.

BLADVD the Son of Lud Hardibras
BLadud the Son of Hardibras, took upon him the Crown of this Island in the year
of the Worlds creation, 4318. This King was much addicted to Learning, insomuch
that he undertook a Journey to Athens, the most famous City in the World, for
the knowledge of Philosophy, Astrology, and all other Sciences whatsoever,
there fully to be instructed by the grave Philosophers of that place; neither
was he content to become learned himself, learning indeed being the greatest
ornament a Prince can have, but he endeavored likewise to confer so great a
Treasure upon the Nobles of his Court and Subjects of his Realm, and to that
end he brought from Athens with him into our Britain, four learned
Philosophers to lay a platform, and found an habitation for the Muses and
Nursery for Learning making choice of Stamford in Lincolnshire for his design
and purpose. Mr. Cambden according to his wonted custom not willing to write
any thing which may advance the glory of the Welsh or British Nation, gives a
slender account of this place, saying that the Saxons called it Sveanford ex
Saxo structili; and that Edward the Elder, built them a Castle against the
Danes, which at this day is quite demolished; and that Henry the Second, gave
totam Villatam de Stanford quae erat in Dominio suo exceptis feodis Baronum and
Militum ejusdem Villae Richardo de Humetz sive Humete, etc. and that afterward
Gulielmus comes Warrenae eandem tenuit per voluntatem Regis Joannis; that in
the time of Edward the 3. by reason of a division and falling out amongst the
Scholars of Oxford, the one Part came hither and here opened Schools and began
a third University, of which as yet the Citizens boast: but the intestine
broiles between the Yorkists and Lancastrians so defaced this famous place,
that as yet it has scarce recovered its pristine glory; yet it so flourishes
at this day, that it has an Alderman and twenty four Brethren, seven parish
Churches, two Hospitals, the one very fair and ancient, built by a Citizen of
that place, called William Brown; the other of late Erection, founded by
William Cecill Baron of Burleigh, the Nestor of his times.

But let us look a little beyond the Saxons by Mr. Cambden's leave; the Author
cited in the Margent writing of K. Bladud says, Richardus Vitus l. 2.
Hunc principem diustuduisse Athenis, indeque secum abduxisse quatuor
Philosophos qui Scholas aperirent in Britannia eo loco quo post Vrbs dicta
Stanfordia structa fuit, and quo universi litterarum artiumque studiosi magno
numero undicunque convenerunt adeo ut Juvenalis Saty. 15. dixerit.

Nunc totus Graias nostrasque habet Orbis Athenas. This Prince studied long at
Athens, and from thence brought with him four Philosophers who taught School at
Stanford, whither such as desired Literature and the knowledge of Arts flocked
from all places; nay, he further brings in Caius Plinius, lib. 3. c. 1. to
tell you that propter illicitas arts Magicas usitatas in Britannia, scripserit
Magiam esse transgressam quoque Oceanum, and ad inane naturae provectam,
honorari quidem tantis ceremoniis in Brittannia, ut ipsa illam Persis dedisse,
atque in ea re toti mundo quanquam ignoto sibi longeque distanti consentire
videatur.

M. B. fol 206. 8.
And again another Author, having spoken of Cambridge, proceeds and says; so
may we more then probably hold of our other Schools and Universities in this
our Britain then, namely Stanford founded by King Bladud and furnished with
Philosophers of Athens by him, and so continued a place of Learning until the
coming of St. Augustine hither, when it was by the Pope interdicted for
Heresies.

This King not only founded Stanford and furnished it with Philosophers to
instruct Youth in learning and other qualities to inform and beautify the
intellectual part, but built the famous City now called Bath, and so provided
Waters and hot Springs that his Subjects might not alone take pleasure and
delight in those warm and pleasing Baths, but even by their occult Virtue find
ease and relief for their infected and diseased limbs and members. William of
Malmesbury will have Julius Caesar the Author of these Baths: But Richardus
Vitus tells the old Monk, Id opus falso a quibusdam Julio Caesari assignari cum
ille ad illum locum nunquam pervenisset; That work is falsely attributed to
Julius Caesar who never came so far as that place: Another Monk will have St.
David to have been Causer of the hot baths saying, At the place now called
Glastenburie, Father Hierom F^^ter in his Saints Lives, printed at D^ray, 1632.
in the life of S. David, 1. Ma^t /
He (viz. St. David) built a Church new from the ground; and coming thence to
Bath, he cured the Infection of the Waters thereabouts, and with his holy
prayers and benedictions, gave them a perpetual heat, and made them very
healthful and sovereign for many diseases ever after, as to this day is
experienced, to the wonderful comfort and commodity of all England. But this
Relation is as true, as is that other of his, where out of ignorance, he
places the Metropolitan See of Wales at West-chester; and that is as true as
that the Sea burns; for I will make it appear in the sequel of this Book, that
Caer leon upon Vsk, and not Caer leon gaur, was the Archbishops See. Ptolomeus
calls this Caer Badon, Aquas folis and Thermas, and aquae calidae; some called
it Akmanchester (i. e.) the City of such as are sick or troubled with aches.
Stephanus calls this city Badiza, the Latins Bathonia, the English Bath.
Cambden will have this city to be Caer Paladur, that is the city of warm or
hot-water, but will not admit Bleyden cloyth (i. e.) Bleyden, the Magician to
be the builder; and therefore rather then allow the Foundation thereof to a
Britain; he produces no Founder at all. Solinus, cap. 24. says, In
Brittannia sunt fontes calidi opiparo apparatu exculti ad usus mortalium quibus
fontibus praesul est Minervae numen, in cujus aede ignes perpetui, etc. In
Brittannie there are hot baths adorned with exquisite buildings for mortals use
and convenience, dedicated to Minerva, in whose sacred Temple is kept perpetual
fire which is never permitted to go out. Athenaeus scribit Herculi balnea
consecrata esse quae sua natura scatent e visceribus terrae, sane quidem Graeci
Palladem Herculi post labores exantlatos lavacra primum administrasse den
onstrant.

These two Acts of this learned King, had he proceeded no farther, had left his
Name famous to all Posterity; as likewise his building a Temple to Apollo and
placing therein a ^^amen, which after in King Lucius his time became the Sea of
a Christian bishop; but pride and vainglory made him become ridiculous, (as
indeed these two Vices have the power to make all men who follow them;) his
vain thoughts being composed more of Air then any other Element, tickle him
with ambition to leave the Earth and live in the Air, he beats his brains how
to bring this his new conceived invention to a timely birth, he provides
feathers, wax, glue, and all such Utensils as his abused brains apprehended
necessary to quillifie him into the nature of a fowl or rather a fool: and thus
like Esops crow decked with feathers not his own, he appears more formidable and
monstrous then the Griffons in the Mountains of Armenia.

Et ignotas animam dimittit in arts
Naturamque novat, nam ponit in ordine pennas
A minima caeptas longam breviore sequente.
Et postquam manus ultima caepto
Imposita est, geminas opifex libravit in alas
Ipse suum corpus, motaque pependit in aura,
Coelique cupidine tactus
Altius egit iter; rapidi vicinia Solis
Mollit odoratas pennarum vincula ceras,
Tabuerant cerae: nudos quatit ille lacertos,
Remigioque carens non ullas concipit auras.
And so destitute of help he falls headlong, a just reward of his temerity, and
breaks his neck upon the Temple of Troynovant, as some affirm, having Reigned
20 years.

The Greeks and Latins gave Names to this place according to the nature and
condition of the Waters or Baths, there being (...) hot waters, Aquae solis
waters of the Sun. Bath is the chief City in Somersetshire, seated in a very
low plain, and round about environed with Hills very high and steep; From
whence come many Rivulets and fresh water-springs to the great commodity of the
people; but that which brings most wealth unto the place, are not the Waters
from without but those within, sending up from them much thin vapors and a
strong scent withal, which springs are very medicinable for many diseases.
Three of those Springs there are in all, the waters of which being received in
large and fitting receptacles for the public use, they call the Kings Bath,
the Cross Bath, and the hot Bath: the Cathedral a fair Church, but belonging to
Moncks, found the heavy hand of K. H. 8. but it is now in indifferent repair.
Earl it had none till the time of Hen. 7. since it has had diverse.

Earls of BATH.
1. Philbert de Chandew of little Britain. 2. John Bourchier Lord Fitzwarren
Created E. of Bath. Hen. 8. July 10. 3. John Bourchier. 4. William Bourchier.
5. Edward Bourchier. 6. Henry Bourchier.
Argent a Cross engrailed Gules inter 4 water bougets sable, a label of 3
points Azure charged with 9 flower de luces, Or.



LEIR the Son of BLADUD.
LEIR the Son of Bladud, (his Father through his own Arrogance, Ambition and
Vanity, or rather Foolery, saepe feruntur in altum ut lapsu graviore ruant;
having soared to too high a place, and so in a hasty stooping broke his neck)
began his Reign in the year from the Worlds creation, iiii M. CCC. XXXiii. This
King was of a most Noble and Heroic mind, as being questionless bred under
the Discipline of those Philosophers which his Father had brought from Athens,
besides a natural Propension of his own to moral Virtue; insomuch that his
Kingdom flourished in great Peace and abundance of Wealth.

This King to imitate his worthy Predecessors, laid the Foundation of a Famous
city, calling it after his own Name Caerlirion, and after Leircester: this is
one of those 28 cities where Flamens were. Mr. Cambden tells us that it was
called Ligecestria, Leogora, Legeocester and Leicester, saying it rather
savoured of Antiquity then handsomeness; yet acknowledeth that it was formerly
a bishopric, but that the Sea being removed, it much decayed in renown, till
at last Edelfleda optima Foemina the best of Women or a very good woman in the
year 913. did repair it, and enclose it with new Walls; insomuch that Matthew
of Paris in his lesser History says, Legecestria Vrbs pulentissima and
munitissim a muro indissolubili, qui si Fundamento roboraretur nulli Vrbium
secunda fuisset; Leicester a most rich city with a wall unbreakable, had it had
a sufficient Foundation, second to no city whatsoever. In the time of King
Henry the 2. this Town was in great distress and much affliction, by reason
that Robert Bossu (i. e.) bunch-backt, Earl of Leicester attempting innovations
and conspiracies against his Prince and Sovereign, forced, Henry; Propter
contumaciam comitis Roberti contra Regem recalcibrantit obsessa est and per
Regem Hen. subversa Nobilis civitas Leicestria and murus qui videbatur
indissolubilis funditus in circuitu dirutus, Vrbs enim muris Fundamento
carentibus, sub fossis, and fulciminibus tandem combustis maenium fragmenta,
ceciderunt quae usque in hodiernum diem propter caementi indissolubilis
tenacitatem scopulorum retinent cum integritate magnitudinem.

King Leir beginning now to be aged and full of years, having no Heir-male, he
called unto him his three Daughters, Gonorilla, Ragan and Cordeilla, intending
out of the discovery of their love and filial affection and duty toward Him to
settle his Kingdom upon them: to the Eldest he said, Daughter, I shall desire
you to express unto me, how well and dearly you love and esteem me your aged
Father; the young Lady hearing a question of so high a nature and so much
concerning proposed unto Her, First that her answer may not seem forged or to
have any smack or relish of dissimulation, calls the immortal Gods (being then
the custom amongst Pagans) and all the celestial Powers to witness her
Assertion, and then replies; My Princely Lord and Father, I love you more then
my own soul: the feeble old man was much taken with this Answer, resting
satisfied, that his Daughter did cordially and entirely love him: He calls for
the second, propounds the same question; she thinking to outvie her Eldest
sister, and thereby to endear and engratiate her self into the old Man's favor,
spares no oaths or invocations and imprecations, assuring him that her Tongue
was too slender a Messenger to deliver the depth of her affection and duty, and
that she loved him far beyond all creatures; Leir is tickled and exceedingly
solaced with these two Answers and thinks no mortal Man more happy in his
children then himself. Cordeilla is called for, the same interrogatory used;
she wittily perceiving the deep dissimulation and fawning of her Sisters,
replies; My dearest Father, I am much joyed to see you so well pleased with the
expressive Answers of my two sisters; for my own part as a Father I have ever
honored, obeyed and loved you, and for ever shall and if you desire further
expression from me, Know honored Sir, That as much as you deserve to be
beloved so much I love you and no more.

King LEIR being nothing pleased with the integrity of his third Daughters
answer, Obsequium amicos veritas Odium parit; bethinks himself how he may best
dispose and bestow his two eldest Daughters to their most content, honor and
advancement, the Eldest therefore he espouseth to the Duke of Cornwall, the
second to the Duke of Albania, which is now called Scotland, dividing his
Kingdom betwixt them in Reversion, and a Moiety for their present maintenance
and livelihood, nothing being left for the poor Lady Cordeilla, whose tongue
was the true Ambassador of her heart, and whose heart hated all dissimulation
and hypocrisy.

Fame who is never slow in reporting the transactions of eminent persons
especially Kings, sounds this passage of King Leir in France, and with a shrill
Note echoes forth, the beauty, modesty, virtue, and all the adorning graces
which wait upon Cordeilla. Aganippus (an eminent personage and by some styled
King of France, through a great mistake; for as Policronicon, Petrus
Pictaniensis, Robert Gagwine, Antonius Episcopus, and diverse others affirm the
name of France was not then known, neither were there any Kings, the
inhabitants being called Galli and Tributaries to the Romans, and so continued
till the time of Valentinianus the Emperor,) hearing Cordeilla's beauty so
highly extolled, her virtue so superlatively commended, deems her a fit
companion for his Princely bed and fortunes, if so rare a Jewel may be
purchased: Upon a mature resolution he sends his Agents to the court of King
Leir with full instructions to demand Cordeilla in Marriage: The offered Fortune
pleases the King, yet he fears the success; by reason of his own folly which
had given all to the two sisters, and left nothing for the third: Leir returns
thanks to Aganippus by his Ambassadors, shows a willingness to comply with
their Masters request; and withal lays open his unsufficiency to bestow any
Dowry upon her; Aganippus informed by Letters of these passages, is glad his
suit and motion finds friendly acceptance, and far valuing the rich endowments
of his so much affected Cordeilla before all terrene riches so he enjoy the
beloved treasure of his heart, desires no more: the espousals are with all
solemnity celebrated, and Cordeilla answerable to the greatness of her birth
and quality, conveyed to Aganippus, who (by the opinion of those who write that
France was then governed by twelve Kings) was one, and so Cordeilla a Queen.

Leir having thus happily as might be thought, disposed of his three daughters;
being aged, betakes himself to ease and quietness, and so intends to spin out
the remnant of his time, but his Sons in Law Monaghlanus and Henninus the Dukes
of Cornwall and Albania, envy the happy tranquillity of the feeble old King; and
each daughter, for all their deep and large expressions of filial love and
duty, Patris inquirit in annos: Leir lives too long, too much at ease, his
bones would better become a Sepulcher, then a Throne; and since the fatal
Sisters will not of their own accord cut off his thread of life, his daughters
by the hands of their ambitious and covetous husbands will undertake that task:
nothing is now heard in Britain but the clashing of arms, neighing of horses,
thundering of Trumpets, and warlike Music. The impotent King is begirt on all
sides with Martial Troops, and not able to resist two such powerful enemies,
to preserve that small span of life, is forced to fly for succor, being quite
forlorn, to his daughter Cordeilla, whom formerly he had so much slighted; The
arrival of the Father is not long unknown to the daughter, who acquaints her
husband with so sad an accident; Aganippus out of an heroic spirit,
compassionating the calamity of a distressed Prince, especially his wives
Father, puts on a resolution to chastise and revenge so gross an injury, and to
reinvest him in his throne again. Cordeilla is not idle in the mean time, but
with all obsequious behavior like a dutiful child cherishes her drooping
Father, accomodates him with all Princely provision, with pleasant speeches
drives away his melancholy thoughts, and leaves nothing undone or said, which
may add vigor and alacrity to his pierced heart: Aganippus arrives in Britain
with his Father in Law, gives battle to the disobedient Rebels, gives them the
overthrow, and again establishes Leir in his Regal dignity; but the Author of
so great happiness lived not long after, leaving Cordeilla a sad and
disconsolate widow.

King Leir once more holding and guiding the stern of the British Monarchy,
passed his time with perfect quietness, the space of three years; after which
time he left this transitory world, leaving his daughter Cordeilla, as well she
deserved, to succeed him in his Kingdom; his body was buried at Leicester in a
Vault under the River side, John Rous apud Hows in Stow.
which he himself had built and consecrated to Janus Bifrons, where the workmen
of the Town, when the solemnity of the day came, began all things which they
had to do the year following.

Those who undervalue the Britains call this History in question; yet diverse
Authors relate it, out of which I will produce one in the same Language, in
which he writ, Cum in Senectutem vergere Leir coepisset, Vitus ex Gaufrid. fol.
173.
Regnum dividere filiasque tres suas idoneis Maritis in manus cum part regni
been gubernanda tradere cogitavit; Prius tamen ex amore singularum tentare
voluit quaenam illarum potiore regni part censeretur digna. Itaque Gonorilla
interrogata respondit, Patrem sibi chariorem esse cord atque anima suae
propria qua viveret; Ragana dixit ipsum super omnes creaturas se diligere.
Cordeilla videns his adulationibus acquiescere senem, vicissim tentando
quaesivit An usquam filia sit quae patrem plus quam patrem amare presumat. Ego
te semper ut patrem dilexi and diligo, siquid amplius requiris audi signum
amoris in te mei: Quantum enim habes and quantum vales tantum te diligo. Pater
Iratus eam cum stomacho sic loqui putabat quasi suam senectutem sprevisset:
proinde dixit illam cum sororibus nullam in suo regno partem habituram, and
consilio procerum regni duas primas nuptui dat, Cornvalliae and Albaniae
ducibus, una cum part media Insulae donec ipse viveret and alteram dimidiam
post obitum ejus accipere jubebat. Quo tempore Francorum Rex Aganippus fama
motus pulchritudinis Cordeillae nunciis missis eam petit in matrimonium sibi
dari: Quibus humaniter acceptis pater ait, se daturuni, sed sine terra vel
pecunia: Aganippus qui tertiam Galliae ( ut Zerixaeus ait) Belgicae partem
possidebat; virgin tam nobile sola contentus erat. Polidorus, Virgillius.
Quam Polidorus Virgilius natura praecocis ingenii fuissi dicit, sed
interogatam de amore in patrem respondisse; se quidem i lum oculis far
semperque laturam licet deinde contingeret (de Marito intelligens) amaret
ardentius; Quo responso tam etsi pleno sapientiae Leir indignatus indotatam
nuptui collocat Regulo Gallo (inquit Polidorus) puellae forma capto. Sed haud
multo post a generis ejus mortem expectare censentibus esse nimis longum,
spoliatus regno ad Cordeillam fugere coactus est, a qua restituitur in Regnum
and generis interfectis triennium regnat. Hanc inter novem Bellicosas hujus
insulae foeminas numerat Gerardus Leighus: Thus much I have added, to confirm
the History of our British Leir, and his daughters; I forbear to translate it,
having already out of other Authors related the same in effect.

Robert Bossu having put his Sovereign King Hen. 2. to much trouble in
repentance of these mischiefs, built the Monastery of St. Marie de Pratis,
wherein he became a Canon Regular; and for fifteen years continuance, in sad
lamentation, served God in continual prayers: with the like devotion Henry the
first, Duke of Lancaster, built an Hospital for an hundred and ten poor people,
with a Collegiat Church, a Dean, twelve Canons Prebendaries, as many Vicars,
sufficiently provided for with Revenues, wherein himself lies buried; and it
was the greatest ornament of that City, until the hand of King Henry the eight
lay over heavy upon all the like foundations, and laid their lofty tops at his
own feet: In this City also was buried another Crouch-back, viz. Richard the
third, in the Church of the Gray-Friers; but now nothing remains of his
Monument, but only the stone chest, wherein he was laid, a drinking Trough now
for horses in a common Inn.

This place has given the Titles of honor to many Honorable Families.
Algar the Saxon. Edwin died 1071. 3. Robert de Bellamonte, Gules a cinquefoyle
Ermine. 4. Robert de Bellamont. 5. Robert de Bellamont L. Steward. 6. Robert de
Bellamont, L. high Steward. 7. Simon de Montfort married Amicia sister and
coheir to the last Earl Robert, L. high Steward. 8. Simon de Montfort, L. high
Steward, Gules a Lion rampant, his tail double forked salteir wise Argent. 9.
Edmond Earl of Lancaster, L. high Steward. 10. Tho. Earl of Lancaster L. high
Steward. 11. Hen. D. of Lancaster, L. high Steward. 12. Henry D. of Lancaster,
L. high Steward. England a Label of 5. points Ermine. 13. William of Bavaria,
Earl of Heinalt, married the Lady Maud of Lancaster, Bendis losenge, Argent and
Azure. 14. John of Gaunt, D. of Lancaster, L. high steward. Henry D. of
Lancaster, Lord high steward. Quarterly France and England, a Label of 3.
points Ermine. Robert Dudleigh, Lord Denbigh, etc. Or, a Lion rampant, his tail
double forked, Vert. Robert Sidney, Viscount Lisle descended, of a sister of
the said Robert. Robert Sidney, Earl of Leicester. Or, a Phaon Azure.
CORDEILLA.
THis Heroine Lady, after just revenge taken upon her two sisters husbands, and
her fathers and husbands death, by the consent of most Writers, by the joint
suffrages and votes of the Britains, was admitted to the Royal Scepter, in the
year from the worlds creation, four thousand, three hundred, and ninety eight
years; she governed her people and subjects, for the space of five years, with
great applause, and general liking; but the two sons of her sisters, Morgan of
Albania, and Cunedagius of Cambria and Cornwall, envying her prosperity, and
thinking themselves injured in their birthright; their grandfather Leir having
divided the kingdom equally betwixt their Mothers upon their Marriages,
conspire together, and mustering their forces, invade Cordeilla, and reduce her
to that necessity, that she is taken prisoner, and by her merciless Nephews
cast into Gaol, which she patiently a while endured, but perceiving no hopes to
regain her freedom, or repossess her kingdom; scorning to be any longer a slave
to her insulting enemies; seeing she could not free her body from bondage; with
true Trojan and masculine Heroic Spirit, she makes a divorce between her purer
soul and encaged carcass, giving it free power to pass into another world,
leaving those parts which participated of drossie mold, to be interred again in
the earth, from whence at first it came, at Leicester in the Temple of Janus by
the Sepulcher of her father.

Cunedagius and Morgan.
THe obstacle which hindered the designs of these two aspiring Princes (
Cordeilla the gallant British Amazon and Virago, being by violent death
perpetrated by her own hand, taken out of the way) divide the kingdom betwixt
them; and became both kings, in the year of the world, four thousand four
hundred and three; but this gallantry lasted not long; for the Court-Gnats,
whose life is a perpetual buzzing of news and flatteries, fall upon the ear of
Morgan, and so fill his head with projects, that he highly conceives he is
injured by the equal dividing of the kingdom, and thus discourses with himself,
And am not I the son of Gonorilla, and she the eldest daughter of my
Grandfather; to me then as lawful Heir, Britains Crown belongs? Why then do
I admit a corrival, competitor, and coequal; one firmament admits not two
Suns, nor one kingdom two kings; no reason I should lose my birthright, no I
am resolved, I will not: Cunedagius shall know that Morgan can rule the
Britains without his help: this fire once kindled, his flattering parasites
bring fuel enough to augment it: Cunedagius must bear rule no longer, a
private life or none at all, must content him; it is no small policy for
Princes to have Spies in neighboring Courts: Cunedagius is quickly informed of
all the passages of his Cozen Morgan, and thinks there is no security in
delays; and therefore puts himself into a posture as well to offend as defend;
yet to make his case the better, and to ingratiate himself with the subjects,
he sends Messengers to Morgan (who is already firing and destroying his
Territories) to Treat of a reconciliation and atonement; but Morgan puffed up
with his imagined good success, and thinking the offer of his kinsman to
proceed either from fear or want of ability to resist him, lends a deaf ear to
the Treaty of peace, and will have no other Arbitrator but the sword;
Cunedagius now resolved, comes into the field and offers battle to his enemy,
his cause being just, the Celestial powers seem to second his attempts, and he
who would have all or nothing is put to flight; where the Conqueror makes use
of his advantage, and taking occasion by the foretop, to prevent all hopes of
recruiting, and rallying again, so hotly pursues his victory, that Morgan is
chased from place to place, from Province to Province, till being beaten into
Cambria, now Wales, a Territory belonging to his Mortal Foe, and there being
most sharply put to it, lost his life; yet with this honor, that that Country
ever since from him has had the appellation of Glanmorgan, which is as much as
to say, in the vulgar tongue, Morgans Land; and thus after two years joyntlie
reigning with his kinsman, Morgan departed this life, leaving Cunedagius to
rule alone.

Cunedagius to show an humble thankfulness to his Gods for so great a Victory,
having fully settled his Kingdom, erects a stately Temple to Mars at Perth
(which is now St. John's town) in Albania, now abusively called Scotland, then a
part of Brittannia, and inhabited by the British Nation.

We find, says my Author, in several Authors and Antiquaries, to speak in
their words, that 800. years before the coming of Christ, Cunedagius, King of
all Britain, Mr. Broughton, fol. 336. 6.
builded a Temple of Mars at Perth, that is now St. John's town in Scotland, and
placed there a Flamen: Therefore we may not singularly deny unto this old city
a Flamens Seat, which Antiquaries generally grant unto all such in this time,
to have been changed into a Bishops See. If any one ask what I have to do with
Scotland, my Scene being only the British History? I answer, that to the great
glory of the Britains, that which is now called Scotland, was formerly
Albania, and was a part of Brittany; for in the conversion of the Scots, which
happened in the time of Pope Victor; for Sacerdotibus praeceptoribus quos victor
pontifex maximus ad Christi dogma propalandum in extremam miserat Albionem:
which farthest part of Albion is 300. miles distant from that part of Albania
which joined with Loegria, England; Therefore we see clearly that the Scots
only, then lived in the furthest and most remote parts of Albion, or some
Islands thereof, and possessed not our great Albania, the Britains Country and
possession; and in such sense they may call their small places of abode Scotia
or Scotland, yet could it be very small when Josephus in the Age before had
testified that it had no Land at all, J^seph. orat. ad Judaeos apud Egisip.
lib. 3 cap. 13.
Scotia terris nil debet; of which and there place of habitation, hear what Mr.
Cambden says, That neither Caesar nor Volanus penetrated so far (into
Britain) as the Caledonians; for as Pliny does testify in his time, three
years after Claudius, the Roman Arms knew no further of Brittany then to the
Caledonian Woods; for Julius Agricola under Domitian, Mr. Cambden in Scotland.
Galgacus a stout Britain.
was the first who entered Caledonia, where Galgacus commanded (Galanc ap
Liennanc) who is reckoned one of the three Heroes of Brittany, a man of strong
courage, and valiant spirit, who so stoutly defended his Country (the 11.
Legion of the Romans being put to the worst) that he never gave over, till
Fortune rather seemed to forsake him then his own valor or courage. These
Northern Britains were the last, who enjoyed the Liberty, and also the
furthest part of the Island according to Catullus.

Caesaris visens monumenta magni
Gallicum Rhenum, horribiles and ulti.
mosque Britannos.
In the time of the Emperor Severus (as Xiphilinus reports) Argeticoxus a
petty King reigned in those Northern parts now called Scotland, but then
Albania, or Caledonia, whose Lady being upbraided and taunted by Julia Augusta,
answered, We British Ladies, if we transgress it is with Noble men both of
valor, worth and quality; whereas you Roman in hugger-mugger prostitute your
selves to every base varlet and inferior groom. Not far from the River Taw
stands Perch, in Latin St. Joannis Fanum, vulgarly St. John's John's, a place of
late erection; the ancient Town of the same name long since being swallowed up
by the waters, of which Nichanus, Transis ample Tai per rura, per oppida, per
Perch
Regnum sustentant ist^us. Vrbis opes.


Rous, Homes and Stow.
But of Cunedagius the builder, because a Britain, not a word from Mr. Cambden.

Cunedagius having founded Perch in Albania, casts his eye upon Cambra, and
there in the remotest part begins a new Erection at Bangor; which Mr. Cambden
also calls Banchor a choro pulchro, from the fair Quire, or as other derive it
Locus chori, the place of the Quire, Owen Glendoverduy the most wicked and arch
Rebel, amongst many other Towns and Cities of Wales set this also on fire and
consumed it, Bangor built by Cunedagius the British King.
which was again in the time of Henry the 7. reedified by bishop Henry Den^ or
Denaeus, but not to the pristine glory; for formerly it was so large and ample
that for the greatness thereof, it was called Banchor vaur, and fortified with
a Castle whose very Ruins are not now apparent.

M. B. fol. 602. Age 4. Ca. 28.
We may have some apprehension of the great Devotion of our Britains both men
and women in this age ( viz. 4. Age) to chaste and monastical life, by the
Example of St. Vrsula, and so many thousands of holy Virgins with her devoted
to that Profession, which we may further confirm unto us by the Examples of the
Britains, Jo. Bal. cent. 1. in Pela. Calph. Agric. and Congello. Bed. hist.
Eccles. l. 2. c. 2. Galf. Mon. Hist. Britt. l. 2. cap. 12. Mat. West super
Galf. Mon. Hist. Brit. l. 9. c. 12. and l. 11. c. 1. Matthew. West an. 541. Galf.
Mon. Hist. Brit. l. 11. c. 3. Manusc. antiq. and cap. in vita St. David Mean.
and Pits aetat. 6. in ead.
which were then in that part of Brittany now called Wales more free from the
Saxons persecution, whose Antiquities, although not well preserved, not naming
many Archbishops of Caer legion, and very few bishops in that Province, having
many from the first receiving of their faith; yet they do propose and record
unto us many Monasteries, and of great name and honor, as that of Bangor,
stiling it Fumatum Collegium, where Pelagius before his Heresies lived, and by
some was Abbot Praepositus there, having 2100 Monks in it, and divided as it
were into seven Monasteries, every one of them having 300 Monks; which
Monastery, as St. Bernard, our late Authors and others write, was the head or
chief of principal Monasteries and brought forth many thousands of Monks. In
vita Malachiae Hibernensis Episcopi Bernardus Clarovallensis hunc locum tradit
primorum extitisse Monasteriorum Caput and multa generavisse Monachorum mill.
This was the most noble Monastery of this Country, nobilissimum Monasterium, as
Saint Bede and others term it, and so justly did, having so many Monks, that
being divided into 7 Companies under 7 Pryors, under their chief Abbot, every
one had 300. or more Monks, and amongst them most Learned men; Viri doctissimi
plures de Nobilissimo Monasterio Bancornabury lingua Anglorum, Inter caeteras
erat in civitate Bangor quaedam Nobilissima Ecclesia in qua tantus fertur
fuisse numerus Monachorum, ut cum in 7 portiones esset cum praepositis sibi
Prioribus Monasterium divisum, nulla harum portio minus quam trecentos Monachos
haberet.

Cunedagius builded a third place in Cornwall where he was born, but yet I
cannot come to a certain knowledge of the place, where he erected a Temple and
a Flamen to Mercury. He Reigned thirty three years and was buried at Troynovant
or new Troy now London.

An Author calls Perth before spoken of Berth, and says, no less strange,
but more lamentable is the remembrance of the great innundation, happening by the
sudden rising of Tai, which bare away the Walls and Town of Berth or Perth, and
with it the Cradle and young Son of King William into the Sea, wherein the
Royal Infant with many others perished, the King and his Courtiers scarcely
escaping the Danger: The ruin of this Town raised another called St. John's
Town.

RIVALLVS.
RIvallus the Son of Cunedagius, took upon him the Government of this Kingdom
in the year of the Worlds creation, four thousand four hundred and thirty
eight; this King was styled the Fortunate and Peaceful: for that during the
time of his Reign he governed his Subjects with all lenity, meekness and
prosperity; yet Authors leave little recorded of this Prince; for indeed
Tragical Acts and Warlike Scenes better please most Writers in smooth and calm
times: yet it is noted that whilst Rivallus governed Brittanny for the space of
three days it continually rained Blood, out of the corruption whereof were
engendered a multitude of those which we call animalia insecta, which are
Vermin, divided as it were between the head and belly, having no flesh, blood
or sinews, as flies, gnats, pismires, caterpillars, and such like, which ^id so
swarm and grew infectious, that by the contagion many people died; and that
again, caused a great and strange mortality, insomuch that the Island seemed in
a manner unpeopled. Thus after Rivallus had Reigned 46 years he departed this
life, and was buried at York.

In the Reign of this King, Rome was builded by the two brothers Romulus and
Remus 356 years after Brute came into England, Et ejus (speaking of this King,
says Vitus) Tempore Romam in Italia per Remum and Romulum fratres esse
conditam post adventum Bruti Prisci ad Britanniam anno plus trecentis
quinquagesimo sexto: Sane quidem Alexander ab Alexandris l. 2. c. 22. In
Palilibus sacris inquit hoc custoditur ne qua mactetur hostia, quia eum diem
qui patriae natalis est, a caede and sanguine deceret esse parum, fuit enim is
dies 12. Calendas Maii quo fausto and faelici omine jacta sunt primum
fundamenta urbis Romae, quo die mos erat ovilia purgare, flammas transilire,
sapa and milio sacrum facere, geniales Dies agere, caenas apparare, a litibus
abstinere, quae singula prosperos rerum successus decernebant: Sed quia
Gaufridus per consequentiam literarum scribit undecimo Calendas Maii qui est
21. Aprilis conditam esse Romam, fortasse mendosus est Codex Alexandri, per
literas numerales Scriptas ad 12. Calendas qui esset Dies 20. Aprilis. Nam
Plutarchus in vita Romuli scribit Romam fuisse conditam 21. die Aprilis and
Palilia esse celebrata prius quam urbs Roma conderetur, circiter annum tertium
Olympladis 6. est autem Olympias spatium 4. Annorum sic appellatum quod inter
duos ludos Olympiacos haberetur, eorum fiebat initium, ut in Theatro suo
Lycosthenes scribit, anno 19. Amulii Silvii Regis Latinorum, qui erat ab orb
condito super ter mill ac contum annus ^8. cui si addantur Olympiades quinque
cum annis tribus Olympiadis 6. atque sic 23. anni, videbitur Roma condita
fuisse anno undecimo supra ter mill ducentos, atque sic 26. Rivallonis.

In his time (viz. Rivallus) Rome in Italy was built by Remus and Romulus after
the coming of old Brute into Britany 356. Alexander ab Alexandris, lib. 2. c.
22. says that in the Palilibus (or Festival days of the Shepherds in honor of
Pales their Goddess) order is taken that no Hostia (or Sacrifice where in blood
was shed) should be offered, because being the Birth day of the Country, as it
were, it ought to be pure and clean, and not polluted with any slaughter or
bloodshed; this day happened on the 12. of the Kalends of May, in which with
happy and auspicious Omens the foundation of Rome was laid, in which day the
Custom was to purify and purge their Flocks, skip over fires, to Sacrifice in
boyld or burnt wine, millets or hyrse; to keep Wakes or Gaudy days, and to make
bunquetting and delicious Suppers; and to abstain from all debates; all which
they imagined betokened prosperous success in the succeeding affairs: but
because Gaufridus writes Rome to have been built, it may be the book of
Alexander may be faulty, or mistaken in the numeral Letters, concerning the
xii. of the Calends, which is the 20. day of April; for Plutarch in the life of
Romulus says, that Rome was built the 21. day of April, and that the Palilia,
or Shepherds Festivals, was celebrated before the building of Rome, about the
3. year of the 6. Olympiade, contains 4. years, which was the space between
two Olympic Games, which Games as Lycosthenes in his Theater writes, had their
beginning in the 19. year of Amulius Sylvius, King of the Latins, which was in
the three thousand one hundred and 88. year since the worlds Creation, to which
if you add five Olympiads, and three years of the 6. and so 23. years, it will
appear that Rome was built the 26. of Rivallus: others as Fabian, say that Rome
was built 470. years after London, and in the 32. year of Rivallus.

GVRGVSTIVS.
GVrgustius the son of Rivallus, whom some call Gorbodian, and his father
Reignald began his Reign over the Kingdom of Great Britain 4483. the flower of
Histories says, that he reigned thirty and eight years, otherwise little
mention is made of him in History, only Mr. Howes in his continuation of Stow
says, that he was a common drunkard, whereof followed all other vices; he died
after a Reign of 38. years, and was buried at York, leaving no issue behind
him to succeed.

SISILLIVS.
SIsillius, or according to Sylvius, the brother of Gurgustius, as affirms
the old Author, says Fabian, was elected King of Britain, in the year of the
worlds Creation, 4521. he is called by the English Chronicle Seizil; little is
recorded of this King, only some Authors say, that he reigned only two years;
but the most common opinion is, that he was King 49. years, and after died and
was buried at Caer Badon or Bath, leaving no issue of his own body.

JAGO or LAGO.
JAgo or Lago the cozen of Gurgustius, and his next heir took upon him the
Government of this Island, in the year of the worlds Creation, 4540. whether
this Kings life, as the two precedent, was so foul, that Learned and modest
Writers were ashamed to let them come to light, or that they lived in such
sloth and ease, that nothing was done worth recounting, I cannot affirm; all
that is recorded of him is, that he ruled 25. years, and through ill and
disordinate living, he fell into a Lethargy, whereof he died, and was buried at
York without issue.

Kymmacus or Kynimacus.
KYmmacus or Kynimacus, the Son of Silvius, or more likely, as says the old
Chronicle, the brother of Jago, was invested in the royal dignity of this
Island, in the year of the worlds Creation, 4595. as little is said of this
King, as of his three immediate predecessors, only that he ruled 54. years, and
was buried at York, leaving after him a son, who as testifies Flos
Historiarum, was called Gorbodug.

GORBODVG.
GOrbodug the Son of Kynimacus was made King of great Britain, in the year of
the worlds Creation 4650. this King crod in the footsteps of those whom he
followed, leaving nothing to be recorded, only that he ruled to complete the
account of Histories 63. years; so that these five last Kings, Rivallus,
Gurgustius, Jago, Kynimacus and Gordobug died ingloriously leaving nothing to
perpetuate their memory, saving that they were Kings, the last whereof was
buried at Troynovant, and left two sons to succeed Ferrex and Porrex.

FERREX and PORREX.
FErrex and Porrex the Sons of Gorbodug were jointly made Rulers of Great
Britain, four thousand, seven hundred and eleven, or as some say, thirteen;
this amity continued for a while betwixt the brothers; but ambition of sole
command, and a Spirit not brooking a Colleague, so inflamed Porrex the younger,
that he intends to lay violent hands upon his elder brother; these tidings are
brought to Ferrex; but the warning comes not so speedily, but that the danger
is at the heels of it; and the elder brother, to avoid the snares laid for him,
has no other way but to fly into Gallia, and there as an humble suppliant to
crave aid and succor of a Duke whom Gaufride calls Gunhardus or Suardus; who
most willingly accords to his desire, and furnishing a Navy well provided with
Munition, as well men as weapons, and the very nerves of war, sends him back
into Britain: Porrex who lets no occasions slip which may advantage his
design, attends his landing, and at his very arrival, scarce affording him
leisure to order and marshal his forces gives him battle; wherein Bellona was
so propitious unto him that victory crowned his Soldiers, although with the
death of his brother, and loss, or at least discomfiture of all his Army.
Porrex (though some mistake, who make Ferrex the surviver) being now an
absolute King without a Competitor, makes himself sure of all the kingdom, but
long he enjoyed not his unnatural Conquest. For the more unnatural mother,
Idone, Widen, or Idone, whose affection more inclined to her elder Son, vows
revenge, and arming her self with cruelty, cruelty indeed before not heard of,
and taking her Maids to assist her in the night, enters Porrex Pavilion, where
finding him profoundly sleeping, these she devils became his Hellish
Executioners, and after inhumanely tear him to pieces; after this most horrid
murder followed a Race of people wholly addicted to war and bloodshed, daily
inventing and contriving broyls and seditions, and even in the quietest times
of peace blood thirsting, insomuch that the weakest went to the wall; and he
who imagined he had strength enough, presumed he had right enough to the
Kingdom; thus had the Britains daily domestic Wars, till at the length the
whole power came into the hands of five Tyrants, or petty Lords and Governors,
who Ruled questionless with Arbitrary power, with a sic volo sic jubco; but
deserve not to be named as Kings of this Island.

Gaufride affirms, that after the death of Ferrex and Porrex, great discord
and civil dissension arose amongst the Britains, which continued long;
insomuch that five Kings were erected, which was a great plague and oppression
to the Country: Guido de Columna relates, that the Britains so abhorred the
lineage and offspring of Gorbodug, partly for the unnatural quarrels and hatred
betwixt the two brothers; but above all, for the horrid, inhumane and barbarous
cruelty of the mother, that had there been any Lawful Heir to succeed, they
resolved none of that issue should enjoy the Government: this caused a mighty
distraction in the Commonwealth; insomuch that one took upon him the guiding of
Albania, or Caledonia now Scotland: another seized upon Loegria, or England: a
third took Cambria, or Wales: and the fourth usurped Cornwall for his share: a
fifth there was, but by many Authors not distinctly specified. This difference
continued till Mulmutius, which Fabian says, was 51. years: and to give some
light what the names of those five Kings should be, he brings,

An Addition of Robert Record thus.
The five Kings that be omitted here, are found in certain old Pedegrees; and
although their names be much corrupted in diverse Copies, yet these are the most
agreeable.

Rudaucus King of Wales. Lotenus King of Cornwall. Pinnor King of Loegria.
Statorius King of Scotland. Yevan King of Northumberland.
Quocirca Piremen Loegriae Regem aggreditur and praelio interfecit; Vitus fol
181. lib. 2. notius ad Mulmut.
inde factus victor arma tendit in Rudacum Cambriae Regem, qui faedere inito
cum Albania Rege Staterio conabatur junctis viribus exercitum movere in
provincias Mulmutii, quibus ille obviam and comitatus triginta millibus
fortissimorum virorum, comissoque diu praelio, cum videret differri victoriam,
usus est fraud similitudinis armorum quibus induti erant hosts ejus, atque
sic pessundatis regibus ipsis caeteros palantes fugavit ad urbes and oppida,
quibus incensis agrisque devastatis totam omnino insulam suae potestati suaeque
Jurisdictioni subjecit, ac primus ex auro factum Diadema capite gestavit. Quis
erat rex quintus Cantii nescitur ex historia Brittanica, quae numerat reges
quinque, nec alios quam cos qui bella gesserunt commemorat tres, fortasse quod
illi reliqui in societatem venerint, aut sponte se subjecerint.

Where Mulmutius sets upon Piremen (or Pinmor as the other Author calls him)
and kills him in the field; and being now victorious, and a Conqueror in his
first attempt, full of courage and boldness, he bends all his power and forces
against Rudacus King of Wales, who having made an offensive and defensive
League with Statorius King of Albania, with joined forces, and banner
displayed, had invaded his Territories; Mulmutius delays no time, but being in
the head of a gallant Army; consisting of thirty thousand experienced
Soldiers, gives them the meeting, and joins Battle; but thinking victory to
hover too long before she inclined to his part, he makes use of a stratagem,
and counterfeiting the Arms, Weapons, and habits of his enemies, in a friendly
appearance gives them a most discourteous and unfriendly overthrow, insomuch
that the two Kings being quite overthrown, he pursues the straggling Soldiers,
who fly to Towns and fortified places, which he presently sets on fire, and
destroying all round about, brings the whole Kingdom under his own power and
subjection; and being an absolute Monarch, he encircles his conquering Temples
with a Diadem of purest Gold, being the first of the British Kings that ever
did the like.

Who was the fifth King either in Kent (or as others say) in Northumberland,
the British Histories do not fully declare, only the three who waged war
against Mulmutius, are expressly treated of, the other, either for that they
combined or submitted, are silently passed over.

After the death and murder of Ferrex and Porrex, ended the lineal descent of
old Brute; but here a curious diver into Antiquities may object, How then was
the promise in the Prophecy by the Oracle made good, that to the Kings of his
seed, Totius terrae subditus orbis erit,
This Universe shall them obey.
If after the space of 600 and some few years his Race should be extinct; this
objection is nothing to the Oracle; for it was not specified, whether it should
be fulfilled in the direct or collateral Line: so that if any of a British
offspring should obtain the Dominion over the whole world, that is, so far as
ever any Emperor had command, the prophecy is fulfilled: which was made good
in Constantine the Great, who as both King of Great Britain, and son of
Hellen, the daughter of Coillus, a British King, born in this Isle, and
Emperor of Rome, which is as much as to say, of the whole world; Rome being
styled, Totius terrarum orbis Regina or Domina, Lady and Queen of the whole
world.

Vitus sets down the order and succession of the Kings of Brutus his Lineage,
with the terms and continuance of their Reigns, but differs much from the
account of Fabian, and other Writers; for he says.

1. Rex Brutus Priscus, began in the year from the worlds Creation, 2855. and
Reigned four and twenty years. 2. Locrinus 2879. and reigned 10. 3. Madanus
2889. and reigned 40. 4. Membritius 2929. and reigned 20. 5. Ebrancus 2949. and
reigned 40. 6 Brutus Junior, 2980. and reigned 12. 7. Leilus 3001. and reigned
25. 8. Rudibras 3026. and reigned 39. 9. Fladus 3065. and reigned 20. 10. Leir
3085. and reigned 60. 11. Cordeilla 3145. and reigned 5. 12. Morganus and
Cunedagius began to reign 3150. 13. Rivallo 3185. and reigned 46. 14.
Gurgustius 3231. and reigned 38. 15. Sisillius 3269. and reigned 49. 16. Jago
3318. and reigned 25. 17. Chynemarces 3343. and reigned 54: 18. Gorbodio 3397.
and reigned 63. 19. Ferrex and Porrex 3460. and reigned 5.
Which computation, as he tells us, compleats six hundred and ten years; during
all which time the Progeny of Brute held the Scepter of Brittany, and then
followed the Pentarchy.

Epilogus Libri Primi.
BY reason that diverse and various are the opinions of Authors and Antiquaries,
concerning the computation of years since the Creation of the world, and
framing of the first Adam, the overthrower of mankind and his whole posterity,
unto the birth of the second Adam, that sacred Messiah, that long looked for
Emanuel, and most blessed Jesus, who repaired that loss by his Incarnation,
death and passion, opening to the sons of Eve, the gates of the Celestial
Paradise, which until his glorious Ascension were close locked up against all
mankind; It will not be amiss to give a brief Compendium and abridgement of
the variety of opinions: The Hebrews account from the said Term three thousand,
nine hundred and forty three. The seventy Interpreters, assign five thousand,
one hundred, ninety and nine: others there are, who number five thousand, two
hundred and twenty eight. In the third or fourth Book of Policronicon, there
are other conceits and judgments showed concerning calculation of these years;
whereof (says Fabian) the most certain is five thousand, and two hundred
years; there are not wanting others, whereof some reckon some more, some less:
some account from the first building and structure of Rome; some from the
overthrow and subversion of the most famous City of Troy, others from the
founding of Troynovant or London; and not a few from diverse Edifices and
Foundations. But since that the account of the Septuagint, or seventy
Interpreters both by venerable Bede, and other Learned Writers is esteemed as
most authentic; I will follow their judgment; and accordingly give you to
understand, in what year of the world Brute first entered this Isle then called
Albion now England.

First, therefore from Adam to Noe, was two and twenty hundred and forty two
years.

From Noe to Abraham, was nine hundred and forty two years.

From David to the captivity of the Jews, three hundred and five years.

And from the Captivity to the Incarnation of our blessed Savior Jesus Christ,
five hundred fourscore and ten.

The which in all make 5199 years.

After which account (although diverse Authors have their several Computations)
the ancient, and glorious City of Troy was subverted and felt its dismal
Catastrophe by the hands of the Conquering Grecians, as Learned Eusebius, and
others testify in the year of the worlds Creation, four thousand and twenty
three.

It was the first year of Achas, and before Hezekias xvi. years, after
Eusebius, iiii. M cccc xliii.
And according to the same Eusebius, the foundations of Rome were laid in the
eleventh year of Hezekiah then King of Judah; the which year makes after the
computation of the said Authors, 4470. who also affirm that the said City was
edified, after the destruction of Troy, four hundred and forty seven years, so
that it must by consequence follow, that it was built Anno mundi, as before.

Peter Pictaniensis, and others, testify, that Brute entered first this ^sle of
Albion, called now England in the eighteenth year of the Priest and Judge of
Israel, named Hely; and Hely, as diverse Writers avouch, began to rule the
Israelites, the year of the third Age, that is, from Abraham to David, eight
hundred and forty one years, which makes the years of the world four thousand
and five.

Whereunto if there be joined the abovesaid eighteen years, then must it follow
that Brute entered this Land, Anno mundi four thousand sixty three; to this
agrees the Author of Policronicon, who says that Brute entered Albion forty
years after the subversion of Troy, which forty years joined to the former
saying of Eusebius, iiii. M. lxii. xlii.
complete the number of four thousand and forty three years.

Another Historian called Jacobus Philippus says, that Troy was taken by the
Grecians in the third year that Abdon or Labdon judged the Israelites, who
began his Rule over the said Israelites, iiii. M. xviii.
after the accord of most Writers Anno mundi, four thousand and twenty,
whereunto if there he added three years for the third year of his rule, in
which year, as before is declared, iiii. M. xviii.
Troy was sacked and destroyed; and forty years which passed before Brute
entered Albion: It must follow, that Brute came into this Island in the year of
the worlds Creation, xlii.
four thousand threescore and three.

MVLMVTIVS DVNWALLO.
MVlmutius Dunwallo, or as others please Dunwallo Mulmutius the Son of Glotene
Duke or King of Cornwall, as the English book and also Gaufride affirm after he
had fully subdued and conquered the five petty Kings or Princes before
mentioned, and had brought the Island into a Pentarchy took upon him the
Government of Brittany in the year of the worlds creation 1748. This Prince in
some Histories is called Donebant, iiii. M. vii. C. lxix.
and was of a Noble and Heroic Spirit; but much (after he came to be fully
settled in his Government) inclined to peace, insomuch that in the City of
Troynovant, in a place, which now as some are of opinion is called
Blackwell-Hall, he builded a Temple, calling it the Temple of Peace or Concord:
The Laws which he made and established, were of such Authority and esteem, that
holy Gildas translated them out of the British Language into Latin, and
Aluredus King of England out of Latin into English; Vitus tells us, that these
Laws, or at least the heads of them were, Vt deorum templa tantam dignitatem
consequantur, nequis illo confugiens extrabi possit prius quam ab eo quem
laeserat veniam impetraverit: That the Temples of the Gods should enjoy such
immunities and privileges, that no malefactor flying unto them for succor
should be drawn from thence, until he should obtain pardon from him, whom he
had offended. Vt hujusmodi privilegium immunitatis habeant etiam ipsae viae
quae ducunt ad templa and urbes: that the high ways, leading to the Temples and
Cities should enjoy the like immunities and privileges, Immo and jumenta
quoque illa quae rei rusticae subserviunt, denique Colonorum aratra ipsa tali
prerogativa libertatis perfruantur; nay even the Cattle which were employed in
husbandry should have like privileges; Ne qua terra vacaret cultura, neve
populus inopia rei frumentariae premeretur, aut ea minueretur si pecora sola
occuparent agros qui ab hominibus coli deberent, constituit quot aratra
quaelibet Diaecesis haberet, ac paenas statuit per quas ille numerus aratrorum
minueretur: Least any Land should lie until'd, or the people be famisht for
want of bread-Corn; or Grain be diminished, by feeding Herds and Flocks, where
Tillage ought to be; to which end he appointed how many Ploughs should be in
every Diocese or Shire, inflicting a punishment upon whomsoever should diminish
the number of them: Item vetuit bovem aratorem pro debito pecuniae assignari
creditoribus si alia bona creditoris essent; He also prohibited the working
Oxen, or Plough-bullock, to be distrained upon for any debt, if any other
Chattels or personal estate be to be found: Ita fore ne compendii causa homines
pecuarii agros incultos redderent, sic enim fore nequid earum rerum quas natura
praebet hominibus usquam deesse posset, that by that means Grasiers and Drovers
for their own private interest should not deprive their fellow Subjects of
natures benefits, and liberal gifts; Optimus iste Rex viros incumbentes ad
bonas arts and opibus and favore juvit adeo ut exemplo suo principes regni ad
faciendum idem and juventatem totam ad virtutes capessendas excitaverit. This
good King was such a patron to those who endeavored to learn Arts and
Sciences, that he not only graced them with his countenance; but also assisted
them with competent subsistence; by which his example he invited other Nobles
of his Realm to do the like; a great encouragement to youth to endeavor to
train themselves up in virtuous education: Item pondera and mensuras rebus
emendis vendendisque posuit, fures and omne noxium genus hominum severissime
punivit. Itaque sub hoc principe latrocinia, rapinae saevitia generis omnis
aberat a populo, nec audebat quisquam vim alteri infer vel injuriam propter
exquisitam legis observationem; He caused weights and measures to be made for
buyers and sellers: Thieves and all loytering idle vagabonds he severely
banished; so that none was found who durst to offer either force or violence to
any man, being terrified with the severity of the Laws.

Having now regulated all things for the due and requisite Governing of the
Commonwealth, by the general request and advice of his Nobles and Council, he
caused a Diadem of Gold to be made, with which according to the Rights and
Ceremonies of those times he was solemnly Crowned, in so much that properly
speaking we may call him the first King or rather Monarch of Great Britain.

He caused several Cities and Towns to be made, amongst which Malmesbury seems
to have been the chief, a verity which Mr. Cambden seems not much to deny: Dum
exilis est Malmesburie collem sibi imminentem substringit receptoque profluente
fere incingit. Oppidum sane elegans and pannis laneis sane celebre, quod ut in
Historiarum Eulogio le itur, Dunwallo Mulmutius Brittannorum Rex una cum Lacok,
and Tetbury castris adjacentibus construxit and Caer Bladon nominavit,
Malmesbury a polite and neat Town, and famous for Woollen Clothes, which as it
is written in the Eulogy of Histories was founded by Dunwallo Mulmutius as also
the Neighboring Castles Lacock and Tetbury, which Town he called Caer Bladon.
The Saxons called this Town in their tongue Ingelborn which appellation
continued a long time till Maildulphus a Scot, a man of singular learning and
piety being much taken with the shades and solitariness of the Woods and
Groves, he resolved there to live an Heremetical life; and there setting up a
school, he himself together with his Scholars and Auditors addicted himself to
a monastical rule of living, so that from this Maildulphus, the old
appellations both Caer Bladon the British and Ingleborn the Saxon, being by
little and little worn out, the Town got a new name and was called
Maildulfesburge, Bid calls it Maildulphi Vrbs, others Meldunum, corruptly
Malmesbury. Amongst the Disciples of this Maildulph the chiefest and most
remarkable was Adelmus his appointed Successor: who by the help of Adelmus a
West Saxon Bishop, to whom the jurisdiction of that place belonged, built there
a most famous Monastery, and was therein the first Prior or Abbot, insomuch
that in an ancient manuscript this Town is called Adelmesberg: but this new
nomenclation quickly vanished, though the memory of Adelmus continued in
esteem, he being canonized and registered amongst the happy number of the
Saints; (after his death, not as the Saints in these our times who are Saints
while they live, and I know not what after death) upon the feast day of this
St. the Fair is kept, where soldiers were appointed to guard and watch, least
jangling and discord should arise amongst so great concourse of people; Truly
(says Mr. Cambden) he deserved that his name should everlastingly flourish,
being the first who writ in Latin, and taught the English Art of Poetry and
versifying as he himself witnesses.

Primus ego in patriam mecum modo vita supersit
Aonio rediens deducam vertice Musas.
If Heaven lend life, from Helicon I Will bring
The Aonian Muses in this Isle to sing.
Athelstane the great who had made choice of this Saint for his patron, for his
sake honored this Town with many privileges, and enriched the Monastery with
many princely gifts, making choice of it for the place of his Sepulcher, as the
Inhabitants will inform you to this day, showing his Monument. From Athelstanes
time this Monastery flourished in abundance of wealth, and was the prop and
upholder of the Town, when by the love and expenses of Robert Bishop of
Salisbury, it was fortifyed with a Castle and enclosed with Walls in the time
of the Wars, betwixt Henry the Son of Matilda, and King Stephen: in which
season it endured a siege by Hen. 2d. but shortly by the permission of K. John
in favor of the Monks it was demolished, thereby to enlarge the precincts of
their Monastery, and so continued till the fatal hand of Henry the 8. laid it
level with the ground; yet a wealthy and rich Clothier whom Mr. Cambden colls
Stumpuis, partly by petitioning and supplications; but without doubt not
without emptying his bags; obtained that the Church might stand which is now
the Parish Church.

This Town says a new Author Anonymus, was by Antoninus in his Itinerarium
called Cunetio from the River Kennet, and Marleburgh as being seated in a
Chalkie soil, which in some places still well called by the name of Marle.
Here Hen. 3. held a Parliament in which were many statutes; and as the preamble
says, right necessary for the peace and tranquillity of the people; now a title
of honor and has given style of, EARL to
1. James L. Ley L. Tr. Created Earl of Marlborough 1. Car. Feb. 7. 2. Henry
Ley. 3. James Ley, E. of Mal. Argent a cheveron between 3 Bears Heads Couped
Sable.


The next place which Mulmutius Dunwallo built was The-Vies, which Florentius
Wigorniensis calls Divisio, another De vies, and Nubrigensis, Divisae: Here was
a Castle built by Roger the rich Bishop of Salisbury, for situation and
workmanship giving place to none: but Fortune is a Goddess both blind and
fickle; for he who even now was the second Head in the Kingdom, by the frowns,
or rather avarice of K. Stephen, is not only plundered of his vast and almost
inexhaustible Treasure, but also cast into a loathsome Gaol, where the poor old
Man with Hunger, and what with Afflictions and Miseries, betwixt the fear of
death and torments of his life, would feign have died yet knew not how to die.

Mulmutius Dunwallo having with great honor ruled the Britains by the space
of forty years, yielded to death what was mortal, and was buried in the Temple
of Troynovant, which he had built, leaving his two Sons Bellinus and Brennus,
jointly to succeed in the Kingdom.

BELLINVS and BRENNVS.
BEllinus and Brennus the two Sons of Mulmutius, began to Reign jointly as
Kings of great Britain, in the year of the World, four thousand eight hundred
and eight. To Bellinus, according to the agreement of Partition, fell Loegria,
Cambria and Cornwall; that is to say, England, Wales and Cornwall; and to
Brennus, by the same accord, all the Land beyond the River of Humber. This
Partition, according to Policron and others, pleased and gave full content to
both the Brothers for the space of five years. The reason why Bellinus had the
bigger and better share, was, Quia erat primogenitus, Vitus fol. 209.
and Trojana consuetudo requirebat ut dignitas Haereditatis perveniret ad eum.
Hanc vero fuisse consuetudinem Trojanorum scribens Herodotus; ad Alexandrum,
ait, non erat perventurum Regnum, cum Hector and major natu, Herodotus.
and virtute praestantior quam ille, Regnum defuncto Priamo suscepturus esset.
Idem scribit Messala Corvinus, in libello de Augusti Progeny, Troem, a quo
dicta Troja est, Regem Trojanorum habuisse duos filios Ilum and Assaracum,
atque Ilum defuncto patre quod ipse major natu esset obtinuisse Regnum; Messala
Corvinus.
Denique is qui dicitur Dares Phrygius in libro de excidio Trojae narrat
Priamum commone fecisse filios quos habebat multos, ut majores natu minoribus
Imperarent, ex quo sequitur, ut minores majoribus subderentur. Adeoque Legem
hanc latam in Anglia esse propter ius istud Trojanae consuetudinis, atque
servatam esse scribit Andreas Taraquellus in praesatione primogenitorum:
Andreas Taraquellus. Bartolus.
and Bartolus ad l. 1. Codicis de summa Trinitate; Consuetudinis est in Anglia
inquit ut primogenitus succedat in omnibus bonis; Because he was eldest, and
the Trojan custom was, that the Inheritance should fall to the Eldest; and
this to have been the Trojan custom, shows Herodotus, saying, that the
Kingdom of Troy after the death of Priamus was not to fall to Alexander but to
Hector, who was both the more Valiant and also the Eldest by birth; and Messala
Corvinus, in his Book of the Progeny of Augustus, confirms as much, saying,
that King Tros from whom Troy took its Name, had two Sons, Ilus and Assaracus,
and that Ilus, his Father being dead, for that he was the Eldest enjoyed the
Kingdom; and he also (who is called Dares Phrygius) in his Book of the
Destruction of Troy, tells us, That Priamus, who had many Sons, admonished
them, that the Elder should have Power over the Younger, etc. and this Law to
have taken root in England, as being derived from the old Trojan Custom,
affirms Andreas Tarquellus. After five years thus in brotherly love and amity
expired, Brennus supposing himself injured and intending to enlarge his
Territories, raised Forces, and in hostile manner sets upon his brother
Bellinus: but as his quarrel was unjust, so the sequel proved Fatal; for he was
totally Routed, and to save his life, compelled to fly into Armorica, now
called Little Britain, or as Gaufride will have it, into the Country of the
Allobroges; others affirm, that without the knowledge or consent of his
Brother, he sailed into Norway, and there married the Daughter of Elfunge or
Elfinge, Duke of that place; which tidings when they were brought to Bellinus,
he seized into his hands all the Lands of Brennus and fortified his Cities,
Castles, and other strong Holds with his own Garrisons. Fame quickly brought
these Rumors to Brennus, who neglected no time, but gathering a strong Army of
Norwegians, ships himself for his own Principality, where by the way he was met
by Guilthdacus or Guiclidacus, King of Denmark, who being inflamed with the
Love of the Lady, whom Brennus had espoused, awaited his coming; and being now
met, the two Fleets strongly encounter each other, and in short time come to
grappling, a most bitter and bloody Conflict ensues: But the Danish King,
having surprised the Vessel, in which the Object both of his love and anger was
embarked, though he had totally dispersed his Enemies Navy, pursued no further,
thinking himself highly rewarded with the beautiful prize which he had already
taken, and there withal resolves as a most victorious Conqueror to return to
Denmark; yet whether Fortune to show her accustomed fickleness and cross the
Designs of such as think themselves most fortunate and her darlings, or rather
Neptune incensed to see so violent a Rape committed within his watery Kingdom,
with his revenging trident turned up and undermined the calm waves and ploughed
them into hideous ridges; such a tempest arose, that the Heavens were darkened,
the winds blustered, the billows roared and made such a hideous noise, that
Guilthdacus each minute expected to be swallowed up in the merciless surges of
the angry Ocean; this death-threatning storm continued for the space of five
days; at the end whereof, the skies began to clear, the winds and waves to
leave their Violence, and the Danish King to understand he was driven upon the
coasts of his Enemies Country, for his tattered Fleet so much as was left of it
was now arrived in Northumberland.

Bel^inus to make good that he had already begun, and to prevent all
opportunities which might help and further his Brother at his landing, was now
in Northumberland; and having intelligence of the Danish Kings Arrival, with so
small a Company, he commanded his person with the rest of his Followers to be
secured and committed to safe Custody; upon which discovery Brennus sends
peremptorily to his brother, not only to surrender his territories injuriously
(as is complained) taken from him, but also his then (in his possession) a
prisoner, violently ravished from him by Guilthdacus the King of Denmark: These
Proposals or rather Demands, Bellinus absolutely denies; insomuch that Brennus
having gathered together his scattered and dispersed Navy, new rigs his Fleet,
reinforceth his Army, and with fresh Supplies and strong Recruits, once more
puts forth to Sea, and with more prosperous gales and auspicious fortune,
arrived in Albania; and having given a short refreshing to his Soldiers,
marches toward his Brother (already resolved to give him a hot Entertainment)
near Calaterium, a well known and famous Wood; there these two incensed
Brothers meet, the Officers and ordinary Soldiers equally bent to live and die
in their Commanders quarrel; The signal is given to battle, and a strange
confused noise from both the Camps pierces even the skies; terrible was the
Encounter, and with Martial and Heroic mettle and courage maintained on both
sides; the groans of dying men, whose souls (as the phrase now goes) left their
bodies in the beds of Honor, were hideous, and so great a destruction and
havoc was made that day, that forty thousand bodies wanted Forms to give them
being. Victory at length decided the business and crowned Bellinus with a
trimphant Laurel; compelling Brennus with his foreign Adherents and Assistants
to fly from his native Soil.

Bellinus now thinking himself to have run through all his Disasters, applies
his mind to rectify things and settle his people: and in the first place
casting his eye upon the Danish King and his beloved Lady (as then his
Captives) he released Guilthdacus upon Articles of Agreement and Composition,
That he should hold and do Homage for the Kingdom of Denmark unto the King of
Brittany, and pay a yearly Tribute of one thousand pounds: Upon this accord
Hostages being given, the captive King had free liberty to depart for his own
Country; and Bellinus prosecutes and makes good that which his deceased Father
had designed and begun, (to wit,) the finishing of the four Highways; the
first of which was named Fosse, stretched out of the South into the North, and
began at the Corner of Totness in Cornwall and passed forth by Devonshire,
Somersetshire, and so by Tutbury upon Cotteswold, beside Coventry and
Leicester, and from thence to Newark, and ends at the City of Lincoln.

The second Way was named VVatling-street, the which stretches overthwart the
way of Fosse over the South East into the Northast, this began at Dover and
passes by the middle of Kent, over Thames, besides London, by West of
Westminster, and so forth by St. Albans, in the West side of Dunstable, of
Stratford, of Touceter and of VVedon, and by South Killingborne or Killebourne,
by Athriston unto Gilberts Hill, that now is named VVrekin, and so forth by
Seuarum, passing by Worcester, and thence to Stratton and so to the middle of
Wales unto a place called Cardigan.

The third Way was named Erming-street, the which stretches out of the West,
North-west unto the East, South-East and begins at Menevia at St. David's in
Wales, and so stretches forth unto Southhampton.

The fourth and last Way was called Kikeneldis-street the which stretches
forth by Worcester, by Wickham, by Bermingham, by Lichfield, by Derby, by
Chesterfield, by York and so forth unto Tinemouth, the which was sufficiently
made. Belinus granted or confirmed unto these places all such privileges as
formerly Mulmutius had done; which together with other Laws made by the King,
are translated out of the British tongue by Gildas, but are here for brevity
sake omitted.

Whilst Belinus thus employed his time in providing for his Country and
Subjects necessary conveniences, Brennus after his late and almost
irrecoverable overthrow, like a forlorn Pilgrim spends his time in Gallia,
and there summons all his wits to Counsel how he may in some sort recover his
Country and former Glory and Renown; and as great spirits will leave nothing
unattempted to bring their designs to the wished period; so he resolves being
accompanied only by twelve Cavaliers to address himself unto a Duke who had
great power and command in those parts: where it is to be observed by the way
that (as Vtropius and other writers affirm) the Galli at that time possessed
diverse Counries; upon which ground Titus Lavius who writ the Acts of the
Romans, tells us that those Soldiers who followed Brennus when he sacked Rome
were Galli Senonenses, to wit, those who inhabited the Country where the City
Sena stood and yet does, (as testifyeth the Author of Cronica Cronicorum and
others) in a part of Italy, in succeeding ages known by the name Etruria;
which Sena, as diverse affirm was built by Brennus when he there inhabited,
before the Incarnation of our Savior Jesus Christ, iii. C. lxxx. and vi. years.

Brennus finding favorable admittance into the Court of Duke of Seginus of
Allobroge (for so Gaufride calls him) which after was called Armorica, and now
little Britain according to Policronicon and the English Chronicle; the Duke
beholding the comely person, manly proportion, and princely carriage and
behavior of Brennus, and much condoling and compassionating the calamity of
his Fortunes, which he with a singular grace had declared, (set out in the most
lively colors and flowers of Eloquence,) entertained him in a most friendly
manner, and observing that he delighted and was most expert in hunting and
hawking, and was fully accomplished with all the parts belonging to a Gentleman,
cast such favors upon him, that in short time he became the most eminent man
in the Court, and the only favorite of the Duke; insomuch that Seginus being in
admiration of his endowments, and gallant behavior, resolves to make him his
Son in law; with this promise also, that if the Gods shall call for him hence
without other Heir, that then the issue of Brennus should succeed in the
Dukedom; or at least, in case the Duke should be made happy by the birth of a
Son, that then he would use all possible endeavors to reestablish Brennus in
his own Possessions, and upon these Conditions and Articles the Duke espouseth
his only Daughter and Heir to this Heroic British Prince: these Nuptials are
no ways displeasing to the Nobles of Allobroge, they all jointly giving their
approbation and full consent. Not long after, death summons Seginus to appear
before a greater Tribunal then his own, and a convenient space being allowed to
the Duchess Dowager, the term whereof expired, she was found not to have
conceived nor to be with child; all sorts did Homage to Brennus as their lawful
Liege and Supreme. Brennus being not only a titular Prince, but possessed of
large Territories; and finding great plenty of Treasure congested by his wary
and careful Predecessors, was not close-fisted, but with a liberal hand
imparts a large Proportion to men of Action and gallant Resolution, and
determines once more to hazard both life and fortunes with his Brother, rather
then lose Albania. The sons of Mars and fierce youthful spirits, applaud their
Princes gallant Resolution, and each equipps himself to the rank of his birth
and height of his desire. Bellinus hearing of these great and warlike
Preparations like a prudent Prince, perceives this threatening cloud to bend its
course toward Brittany; and therefore seeing he cannot prevent the coming
thereof, makes such provision that wheresoever it shall disgorge it self, it
may do as slender hurt as may be; thus he stands in a readiness with Weapons
to receive this menacing storm with the point of his Sword. Brennus maugre all
oppositions arrives with his Navy: These heavy tidings pierce the very soul of
Connuvenna or Conwenna the poor afflicted Mother, whose affectionate love was
equally divided betwixt her dearest children; and having long time been
deprived of the tender imbracements of her younger Son, carried with the most
Noble passion of love, she casts her self betwixt the Brothers, and with most
bitter sighs and floods of tears shows those breasts which once they both had
sucked; she pleads, commands, entreats, nay begs to make them friends. An
ancient Poet in few Verses makes Conwenna to speak thus: Proh dolor hic quid
erit, quid Vos, mea viscera turbat?
Fraternas a cies quae mala causa movet?
Tota tenere nequit modo vos Brittannia, quondam
Quos tenuit venture unicus iste meus
Non vos maternae lachrimae sparsique capilli
Nec quae suxistis ubera nuda movent?
Oh Heavens I my Sons why do you let me see
your naked swords unsheathed for butchery?
Cannot you two in one great Kingdom live?
my narrow Womb life to you both did give
Behold my Tears, my Locks with Age grown Gray,
the Breasts you sucked, then cast your swords away.


The brothers with this unlookt for spectacle stand gazing each at other, which
Convenna wisely perceiving, takes time fast by the fore-top and prosecutes her
complaints with the very depth of sorrow, and rising up with a discreet
motherly compassion, now embraces the one, now the other, and never leaves
till she locks them close in the Arms of a most firm and brotherly
reconciliation, and so as it were hand in hand to the amazement of both Armies,
but unspeakable joy of the overjoyed Convenna they came to Troynovant; where
after a due settling of the affairs of Britain, those forces who not long
before were mortal Foes are now become confederates and fellow soldiers, and
uniting strength to strength, a new employment is set on foot; Gallia is the
mark aimed at, at which they level so directly, that as Gaufride, they sailed
into a part of Gallia burning and wasting the Country without regard or pity,
and in short time subdued a large proportion not only of Gallia, but also Italy
and Germany. As yet Belmus and Brennus according to Gaufride were together and
performed many worthy deeds and feats in Arms; but because Livius makes only
mention of Brennus in the Roman Histories, I suppose Belinus was again returned
for Brittany, his own Kingdom, leaving the managing of what followed to his
brother. What hereafter I shall speak of Brennus I have collected out of
Plutark, in the life of Camillus, whose words translated by Sir Thomas North
Knight. are these. Now as touching the Gauls they came of (as they say) the
CELTAE, whose country, being not able to maintain the multitudes of them, they
were driven to go seek after other countries to inhabit in, and there were
amongst them many thousands of young men of service and good soldiers, but yet
more women and little children by a great number; of those people some of them
went toward the North Sea passing the Mountains Riphei and did dwell in the
extreme parts of Europe, others of them remained between the Mountains Pirenei
and the Mountains of the Alps near unto the Senones and the Celtorii; there
they continued a long time until they fortuned in the end to taste of the wine,
which was first brought out of Italy to them; which drink they found so good,
and were so delighted in it, that suddenly they Armed themselves, and taking
their Wives and Children with them they went directly toward the Alps to go
seek out the Country that brought forth such fruit, judging all other
Countries in respect of that to be but wild and barren. It is said that the
first man that did bring wine to them, and did procure them to pass into Italy
was a Noble man of Thuscany called Arron, and otherwise of no ill disposed
Nature; how be it he was subject to this misfortune following. He was Tutor to
an Orphan Child, the richest that was in that time in all the Country of
Tuscany, and of complexion wondrous fair, he was called Lucumo. This Orphan was
brought up in Arrons house of a Child, and though he was grown to state, yet he
would not depart from him feigning he was well and to his liking: but indeed
the cause was that he loved his Mistress, ( Arrons wife whom secretly he had
enjoyed a long time, and she him) that made him like his continuance there.
Howbeit in the end love having so possessed them both, that neither party could
withdraw from other much less conceal it, The young man stole her away by
force from him, and so kept her; Arron put the matter in suite but he prevailed
not, for Lucumo over-weighed him with Friends, Money, Gifts and Charges: which
he took so grievously that he left his Country and having heard talk of the
Gauls he went unto them and was their guide to bring them unto Italy. So they
conquered at their first coming all that Country which the Tuscans held in old
time, beginning at the foot of the mountains, and stretched out in length from
one Sea to the other, which invironeth Italy as the names themselves do
witness: for they call yet that Sea which looks unto the North the Adriatic
Sea, by reason of a City built some time by the Tuscans, which was called
Adria: The other which lies directly over against the South is called the
Tuscane Sea; all that Country is well planted with trees, and has goodly
pleasant pastures for beasts, and cattle to feed in, and is notably watered
with goodly running Rivers. There was also at that time, eighteen fair great
Cities, all of them very strong and well seated, as well to enrich the
Inhabitants by Traffic, as to make them live delicately for pleasure: All
these Cities the Gauls had won, and had expulsed the Tuscans; but this was done
long before time. Now the Gauls being entered further into Tuscany, did besiege
the City of Clusium, thereupon the Clusians seeking aid of the Romans, besought
them they would send Letters and Ambassadors unto those barbarous people in
their behalf. They sent unto them three of the best and most honorable persons
of the City, all three of the house of the Fabians. The Gauls received them
very courteously because of the name of Rome, and leaving to assault the City,
Brennus a Britain King of the Gauls.
they gave them audience. The Roman Ambassadors did ask them what injury the
Clusians had done unto them, that they came to make Wars with them; Brennus
King of the Gauls hearing this question, smiled, and answered them thus, The
Clusians do us wrong in this; they being but few people together, and not able
to occupy much Land, do notwithstanding possess much, and will let us have no
part with them that are strangers, and out of our Country, and stand in need of
seat and habitation; the like wrong was offered unto you Romans in old time by
those of Alba, by the Fidenates and Ardeates, and the Volsci, against whom ye
have taken, and do take Arms at all times, and as often as they will let you have
no part of their goods, ye imprison their persons, rob, and spoil their goods,
and destroy their Cities; and in doing this you do them no wrong at all, but
follow the oldest Law that is in the world, which ever leaves unto the
stronger, that which the weaker cannot keep nor enjoy, beginning with the gods,
and ending with beasts; the which have this property in nature, that the bigger
and stronger have ever the advantage of the weaker and lesser; therefore leave
your pity to see these Clusians besieged, lest you teach us Gauls to take
compassion also of those you have oppressed.

By this answer the Romans knew very well there was no way to make peace with
King Brennus; wherefore they entered into the City of Clusium, and encouraged
the Inhabitants to sally out with them upon these barbarous people, either
because they had a desire to prove the valiantness of the Gauls, or else to
show their own manhood and valor: so the Citizens went out and skirmished with
them, hard by the walls, in which one of the Fabians, called Quintus Fabius
Ambustus, being excellently well horsed, and putting spurs to him, did set upon
a goodly big personage of the Gauls, that had advanced himself far before all
the Troop of his Companions; he was not known at the first encounter, as well
for the sudden meeting and skirmishing together; as for that his glistering
armor dimmed the eyes of the enemies. But after he had slain the Gaul, and
came to strip him. Brennus then knew him, and protested against him, Brennus
reproacheth Fabius for breaking the Law of Arms.
calling the Gods to witness how he had broken the Law of Arms, that coming as
an Ambassador he had taken upon him the form of an Enemy. Hereupon Brennus
forthwith left skirmishing, and raising the Siege from Clusium, marched with
his Army to Rome gates. And to the end that the Romans might know that the
Gauls were not well pleased for the injury they had received; to have an honest
color to begin war with the Romans, he sent an Herald before to Rome, to
demand livery of the man that had offended him, that he might punish him
accordingly. In the mean while he himself came marching after, by small
journeys, to receive their answer. The Senate hereupon assembled, and many of
the Senators blamed the rashness of the Fabians, but most of all the Priests,
called the Heralds very ancient.
Faeciales; for they followed it very closely, as a matter that concerned
Religion, and the honor of the Gods, declaring, how the Senate in discharge of
all the residue of the City for the offense committed, should lay the whole
weight and burden of it upon him alone, that only had done the Fact. ( Numa
Pompilius, the wisest and most peaceable of all the Kings of Rome that had
been, was he that erected the College of those Heralds.
Faeciales, and did ordain that they should be Keepers of Peace, and Judges to
hear and allow all the causes for the which they should justly begin any War)
Nevertheless the Senate in the end turned over the ordering of the whole matter
to the Will and Judgment of the people, before whom also the Faeciales, or
Heralds did accuse Fabius Ambustus: The people made so little account of their
propounded Religion, and honor of the Gods in that case, that instead of
delivering this Fabius to the enemy, they did choose him for one of the
Tribunes of the Soldiers with his brothers. The Gauls understanding this, were
so furious and angry thereat, that they would no longer linger their journeys,
but marched with all speed to Rome. The people that dwelt by the Highways
where they should pass by, were marvellously afraid to see the multitude of
them and their brave and gallant Furniture, and beginning to doubt the fury of
their rage, they imagined that first of all they would destroy the Champion
Country before them, and afterward would take the strong Cities. They
contrariwise did take nothing at all out of the Fields, neither did any hurt or
displeasure unto any body; but passing by their Cities, cried out, They went to
Rome, and would have no Wars but with the Romans, and how otherwise they
desired to be friends with all the world. These barbarous people march on in
this wise toward Rome, the Tribunes of the Soldiers brought their Army to the
Field to encounter them: they were no less in number then the Gauls; for they
were 40000 Foot men; howbeit most part of them were raw soldiers that had
never served in the Wars before. They were very careless of their Gods, and
dissolute in matters of Religion; for they passed neither for good signs in
their Sacrifices, neither to ask council of their Soothsayers, which the Romans
were religiously wont to do before they gave any battle. To make the matter
worse; the number of the Captains, having Power and Authority alike, did as
much (or more then the rest) disorder and confound their doings; for oft-times
before, in far less Matters and Dangers then these, One Supreme better then
Many.
they did use to choose special Officers that had sole and sovereign Authority,
which they called Dictators; knowing very well of how great importance it is in
dangerous times to have but one Head and General to command all, to have
supreme Authority of justice in his hands, Monarchy.
and not to be bound to deliver account of his doings to any. The injury also
which they had too ungratefully done to Camillus, brought great mischief then
and inconvenience upon them; for the Captains after him durst no more command
the people roughly, but ever after did flatter them much. When their Armies
were now brought into the Field, they Encamped themselves by a little River
called Allia, about the eleventh stone from Rome, and not far from the place
where the same River falls into Tiber; thither came Brennus with his Army to
them, who overthrew them in battle by their disorder and lack of Government:
For the left point or wing of their battle was broken off at the first by the
Gauls, who charged them so furiously that they drove them headlong into the
River. The right wing then retiring out of the plain before they had any Charge
given, and having gotten certain Hills hard by them, they had little hurt, and
most of them did recover Rome again; the rest that escaped after the Enemies
were weary of killing, fled by night unto the City of Veies, thinking Rome had
been lost, and all the City put to the Sword: this overthrow was on the longest
day in Summer, the Moon being at the Full. The Romans were very superstitious
in days Fortunate and Unfortunate, which I here pass over as not material to
our business in hand.

The day of this overthrow is one of those which the Romans take for one of the
unfortunatest days that ever came unto them. Now after the battle lost, if the
Gauls had hotly pursued the chase of their flying enemies, nothing could have
saved Rome from being Taken, and the Inhabitants thereof from being put unto
the Sword; for the Romans that fled from the battle brought such a fear upon
those that received them, and filled the whole City of Rome with such grief and
trembling that they wist not what to do. The Gauls again believing little
their Victory was so great as it was, fell to make good cheer for so great a
joy received, and divided among them the spoil of their Enemies goods they
found in the Camp. So gave they time and leisure by this means to the multitude
of people that fled out of Rome to seek them some place of safety, and to such
as remain still they left good hope to save themselves and to make some
provision for defense.

Thereupon they all fortified themselves within Mont Capitol, and storing it
with all kind of Victuals, Armor, and Ammunition they wholly did forsake the
rest of the City; but the first work they took in hand was this, they did bring
into their said Fort, part of their sacred relics, and the professed Vestals
brought thither all their holy Fire, and all their holy Monuments, etc.
Furthermore the Priests of other Gods, and the most honorable old men of the
City of Rome (that had been Consulls aforetime or had past the honor of
triumph) had not the heart to forsake Rome; but putting on all their costly
Robes and Vestments did vow and most willingly sacrifice themselves unto the
fortune that should befall them for the safety of their Country. And using
certain words and prayers which their high Bishop Fabius had taught them, they
went even thus apparelled unto the great market place, and did sit them down
there in Chaires of Ivory, expecting the good will and pleasure of the Gods
what should become of them. Within three days after Brennus came to Rome with
his Army, who finding the Gates of the City all open, and the Walls without
watch, he doubted some devise in it, and feared some privy ambush had been
laid, as one hardly, believing to have found the Romans of so base a mind as
to forsake their City. After being informed of the truth, he entered into Rome
by the gate Collina, and took the same: little more then 360 years after it was
first builded, if it be true at the least that there remained any certain
Chronicles of those times unto this present day; considering the trouble and
confusion of that time has made many things more certain then that, doubtful
unto us; but so it was that the rumor ran to Greece incontinently how Rome was
taken, but yet withal somewhat doubtfully and uncertain; but Brennus having now
entered Rome did appoint part of his soldiers to besiege those that were gotten
in Mont Capitol, and he with the residue of his Army marched on toward the
marketplace, where when he saw the ancient Senators sit gravely on their
Chaires and speak never a word, nor offered once to rise, though they saw their
enemies come Armed against them, neither changed countenance nor color at all,
but leaned softly upon their staves which they had in their hands seeming to be
nothing afraid nor abashed, but looked one upon another; he wondered
marvailously at it; this their so strange manner at the first did so dump the
Gauls that for a space they stood still, and were in doubt to come near to
touch them, fearing least they had been some Gods; until such time as one of
them went boldly to Marcus Papirius and laid his hand fair and softly upon his
long Beard, The Majesty of the old Senatry set in the Market place of Rome.
but Papirius gave him such a wrap upon his Pate with his staff, that he made
blood run about his Ears. The Gaul was in such rage with the blow, that he
drew out his sword and slew him, the other soldiers also killed the rest
afterward, and so they continued many days afterward spoiling and plundering
all things they found in the houses; and in the end did set all on fire and
destroyed them every one, Rome rased by B^ennus the British Prince
for despite of those that kept the Capitol, and would not yield upon their
Summons, but valiantly repulsed them when they scaled the Walls. For this cause
they rased the whole City and put all to the Sword that came into their hands,
young and old, man, woman and child. Now this Siege continuing long and the
Romans holding them out very stoutly, victuals began to grow very scant in the
Camp of the Gauls, insomuch as they were driven on force to seek it abroad
without the City; Hereupon they divided themselves, whereof some remained still
with them at the Siege of the Capitol and the rest went a foraging and spoiling
all the Champion Country and Villages there abouts, scattered as it were by
Bands and Companies, some here, some there, fearing nothing, nor passing upon
watch or ward, they lived in such security of their Victory. Howbeit the
greatest Company amongst them, went by fortune toward the City of Ardea where
Camillus dwelt living like a private man meddling with no matters of State from
the time of his Exile, until that present: But then he began not to bethink
himself as a man that was in safety and might have escaped the hands of his
enemies, but rather sought how to devise and find all the means he could to
subdue them if occasion were so offered: whereupon considering that the
Citizens of Ardea were enough in number to set upon them, though faint-hearted
and cowardly by reason of the sloth and negligence of the Governors and
Captains who had no manner of experience in wars, he began to cast out these
words among the young men. That they should not think the Romans misfortune
fell upon them through the Valor of the Gauls, nor that their Calamity (who
had refused good Council) had happened unto them by any work or act of the Gauls
having done nothing for their part to make them carry away the Victory, but
that they should think it was no other thing but fortune alone, who would needs
show her power. Therefore it were now a notable and honorable Enterprise
(although somewhat dangerous) to drive those strangers out of their Country,
considering that the only end of their Victory was but to destroy and consume
as fire all that fell into their hands; wherefore if they would but only take
a good lusty heart and courage, he would with opportunity and place assure them
the Victory without danger. The young men were pleased with these words of life
and comfort; whereupon Camillus went to break the matter also unto the
Magistrates and Counselors, and having drawn them by persuasions unto this
Enterprise, Camillus persuades the Ardeans to take Arms against the Gauls.
he armed all that were of age to carry Armor, and would not suffer a man to
go out of the City for fear lest the Enemies (which were not far off) should
have intelligence of the same.

Now after the Gauls had run over the Champian Country, and were laden with
all sorts of spoils, they did encamp themselves negligently in open fields, and
never charged Watch nor Ward; but having their full Carriage of Wine, laid them
down to sleep, and made no noise at all in their Camp. Camill.
Camillus being advertized thereof by his several Scouts, caused the Ardeans,
with as little noise, as might be, forthwith to go out into the fields, and
having marched somewhat roundly the distance between the City and the Camp of
the Gauls, they came thither much about midnight: Then he made his Soldiers
make great shouts and cries, and the Trumpets to be sounded on every side to
put a fear in their enemies, who yet with all the loud noise they made, could
hardly be made to wake, they were so deadly drunk; yet there were some
notwithstanding, that for fear to be taken tardy, did bustle up at this sudden
noise, and coming to themselves fell to their weapons to resist Camillus, which
were slain by and by: the rest, and the greatest number of them, lay here and
there scattered in the middle of the field, without any weapon, dead asleep,
stark drunk with wine, and were put to the sword, and never struck stroke;
those that fled out of the Camp that night (which were but few in numher) were
overthrown also next day by the horsemen, which followed, and killed them as
they took them straggling here and there in the Field. The bruit of this
victory was blown abroad incontinently through all the Towns and Villages
thereabouts, which caused many young men to come, and join themselves to
Camillus; but especially the Romans desired the same, who had saved themselves
in the City Veies, after the battle lost at Allia, who made their moans among
themselves, saying, O Gods, what a Captain has Fortune taken from the City of
Rome? What honor has the City of Ardea by the valiantness and worthy deeds of
Camillus? and in the mean season, his natural City that brought him forth, is
now lost and utterly destroyed; we for lack of a Captain to lead us are shut up
here, within others walls, and do nothing but suffer Italy in the mean space to
go to ruin and utter destruction before our eyes; why then do we not send to
the Ardeans for our Captain? or why dowe not arm our selves and go to him? for
he is now no more a banished man; nor we poor Citizens, since our City is
possessed with a Foreign power of our hateful enemies; so they all agreed to
this counsel, and sent to Camillus, to beseech him to be their Captain, and
lead them. But he made answer, he would in no case consent unto it, unless they
that were besieged in the Capitol had lawfully first confirmed it by their
voices; for those, said he, as long as they do remain within the City,
represent the State and body thereof; therefore if they commanded him to take
this charge upon him, he would most willingly obey them; if otherwise they
misliked of it, that then he would not meddle against their good wills and
commandment. They having received this answer, there was not a Roman amongst
them, but greatly honored and extolled the wisdom and justice of Camillus. But
now they knew not how to make them privy to it, that were besieged in the
Capitol; for they saw no possibility to convey a Messenger unto them,
considering the enemies were Lords of the City, and laid siege unto it. Howbeit
there was one Pontius Cominius, among the young men (a man of a mean house, but
yet desirous of honor and glory) that offered himself very willingly to venture
to get in, if he could, so he took no Letters to convey with him to them that
were besieged; for fear lest they might be intercepted, and so they should
discover Camillus intention, but putting on an ill favored gown upon him, he
conveyed certain pieces of Cork under it, and traveling at noon days, kept on
his way without fear, until he came to Rome, bringing dark night with him; and
because he could not pass by the bridge, for that the Gauls kept watch upon it,
he wrapped such clothes, as he had, about his neck (which were not many nor
heavy) and took the River, and swimming with these Corks which he had brought,
at length he got over to the other side, where the City stood; then taking up
those lanes where he thought the enemies were not, seeing fire, and hearing
noise in other places, he went to the gate Carmentall, where he found more
silence then in other places, on the which side also the hill of the Capitol
was more steep and upright, by reason of the great rocks that were hard to
clime up upon: But he dug and crept up so long amongst them that he got up
with great pain unto the wall of the Fortress, on the which side also the enemy
kept no watch; and saluting the watch of the Capitol, he told them what he was,
so they plucked him up to them, and brought him to the Magistrates that ruled
them, who caused the Senate to assemble presently, to whom he told the news of
Camillus Victory, which they had not heard of before; and therewith also he did
declare unto them, the determination of the Roman Soldiers that were abroad,
which was to make Camillus their Captain and General, and did persuade them
also to grant him the Charge, for that he was the only man abroad, whom the
Citizens gave consent to obey; when they heard this, all that were within the
Capitol consulted thereupon among themselves, and so did choose Camillus
Dictator, and returned the Messenger, Pontius Cominius back again, the self
same way he came unto them; this fortune in returning back was like unto his
coming thither, for the enemies never saw him: And so he brought report to them
that were abroad of the Senates decree and consent, whereof they were all
mavelous glad. Thus came Camillus to take this Charge of General upon him,
and found there were twenty thousand good fighting men abroad and well Armed.
Then got he further aid also of their Allies, and Confederates, and prepared
daily to go and set upon the enemies. So was Camillus chosen now Dictator the
second time, and went into the City of Veies, where he spoke with the Roman
Soldiers that were there, and leavied a great number of Allies besides to go
fight with the enemies as soon as he could. But whilst Camillus was thus
preparing, certain of the Gauls in Rome walking out by chance on that side of
the Capitol where Pontius Cominius had gotten up the night before, spied in
diverse places the prints of his feet and hands, as he had griped and gotten
hold, sti^l digging to get hold, and saw the weeds also, and herbs growing upon
the Rocks, and the earth also in the like manner flat trodden down; whereupon
they went presently unto the King, to let him understand the same, who
forthwith came to view the place, and having considered it well, did nothing at
that time; but when dark night was come, he called a company of the lightest
Gauls together, and that used most to dig in Mountains, and said unto them, our
enemies themselves do show us the way how to take them, which we could not have
found out but by themselves; for they having gone up before us, do give us
easily to understand that it is no impossible thing for us to clime up also,
wherefore we were utterly shamed, having already began well, if we should fail
also to end well, and to leave this place as invincible; for if it were easy
for one man alone, by digging, to clime up to the top thereof, much less is it
hard for many to get up one after another, so that one do help the other.
Therefore Sirs, I do assure you, those that do take the pains to get up, shall
be honorably rewarded according to their just desert; when the King had spoken
these words unto the Gauls, they fell to it lustily, every man to get up, and
about midnight, they began many of them to dig and make steps up to the Rock
one after another, as softly as could possibly, with catching hold the best
they could by the hanging of the Rock, which they found very steep, but
nevertheless, easier to clime then they took it at the beginning, so that the
foremost of them being up to the top, were now ready to take the wall, and to
set upon the Watch, that slept; for there was neither man nor dog that heard
them. It chanced then there were holy Geese kept in the Temple of Juno, which
at other times were wont to be fed till their crops were full: But victuals
being very strait and scant at that time, even to find the men, the poor Geese
were so hardly handled, and so little regarded that they were in a manner
starved for lack of meat: This Fowl indeed naturally is very quick of hearing,
and so also very fearful by nature, and being in a manner almost famished with
their hard allowance, they were so much the more wakefull and easier to be
afraid: upon this occasion therefore, they heard the coming of the Gauls, and
also began to run up and down and cry for fear, with which noise they did wake
those that were within the Castle. The Gauls being bewrayed by these foolish
Geese, left their stealing upon them, and came in with all open noise and
terror they could. The Romans hearing this Alarm every man took such weapon as
came first to hand, and they run suddenly to rescue that place, from whence
they understood the noise; amongst those the foremost man of all was Marcus
Manlius, a man that had been Consul, who had a lusty body, and as stout a
heart. His hap being to meet with two of the Gauls together, as one of them was
lifting up his Ax to knock him on the head, he prevented him and struck off his
hand with his sword, and clapped his Target on the others face so fiercely, that
he threw him backward down the Rock, and coming afterward unto the Wall with
others that ran thither with him, he repulsed the rest of the Gauls that were
gotten up, who were not many in number: Thus the Romans having escaped this
danger, the next morning they threw the Captain down the Rocks from the Castle,
who had charge of the Watch the night before; and gave Manlius in recompense of
the good service he had done, a more honorable then profitable reward, which
was this, every man of them gave him half a pound of the Country Wheat which
they call Far: and the fourth part of the measure of wine, which the Grecians
call Cotile, and this might be about a Quart, being the ordinary allowance of
every man, by the day.

After this Repulse the Gauls began to be discouraged, partly for that their
victuals failed them, and durst no more forage abroad in the fields for fear
of Camillus; and partly also for that the Plague came amongst them, being
lodged amongst heaps of dead bodies, lying in every place above ground without
burial, and amongst burnt houses destroyed, where the ashes being blown very
high by the wind, and vehemence of heat, did give a dry piercing air, that did
marvellously poison their bodies, when they came to draw in the breath of it.
But the greatest cause of all their mischief, was the change of their wonted
Diet, who coming out of a fresh Country, where there were excellent pleasant
places to retire unto to avoid the discomodity of the parching heat of the
Summer, were now in a naughty plain Country for them to remain in, in the later
season of the year. All these things together, did heap diseases upon them,
besides the long continuance of the siege about the Capitol (for it was then
about the 7. month) by reason whereof there grew a mavelous death in their
Camp, through the great numbers of them that died daily and lay unburied.

But notwithstanding all the death and trouble of the Gauls, the poor besieged
Romans were nothing helped, and the Famine still did grow upon them: And
because they could hear nothing of Camillus, they were almost grown into
despair; and send unto him they could not, the Gauls kept so strait a watch,
upon them in the City; whereupon both parties finding themselves in hard
estate; first, the Watch on each side began to cast out words of peace amongst
themselves; and afterward by consent of the heads, Sulpitius Tribune of the
Soldiers came to parley with Brennus. In which parley it was articuled, that
the Romans should pay a thousand pound weight of gold; and that the Gauls
should incontinently, after the Receipt of the same depart out of their City,
and all their Territories; this decree being passed by oath from both, the gold
was brought: And when it came to be weighed, the Gauls at the first, privily
began to deal falsely with them; but afterward they openly stayed the balance,
and would let them weigh no more, whereat the Romans began to be angry with
them; then Brennus in scorn and mockery, to despite them the more, plucked off
his sword belt and all, and put it into the balance where the Gold was weighed.
Sulpitius, seeing that, asked him, what he meant by it? Brennus answered him,
What can it signify else, but sorrow to the vanquished? This word ever after
ran as a common Proverb in the Peoples mouths. Some of the Romans took this
vile part of theirs in such scorn, that they would needs take the Gold from
them again by force, and so return unto their Hold to abide the Siege still, as
they had done before; others were of opinion to the contrary; and thought it
best with patience, to put up this scorn of theirs, and not to think it was
shame to pay more then they had promised; but only to pay it by compulsion as
they did by misfortune of time, was rather to think necessary then honorable.

And as they were debating the matter thus, as well amongst themselves as the
Gauls, Camillus came to Rome gates with his Army, and understanding all that
had passed between them, he comands the rest of the Army to march fair and
softly after him in good order; and he himself in the mean season, with the
best choice men he had, went before with all speed. As soon as the other Romans
within the City had spied him, they shouted for joy, and every one with great
reverence received him, without any more words, as their Sovereign Prince and
Captain, who had power over them all: And Camillus taking the gold out of the
scales, gave it unto his men, and commanded the Gauls presently to take up the
scales, and to get them going; for said he, it is not the Romans manner to keep
their Country with gold, but with the sword: then Brennus began to be hot, and
told him it was not honorably done of him to break the accord that had passed
between them before by oath, whereunto Camillus stoutly answered him again,
that accord was of no validity; for he being Dictator was before all other
Officers and Magistrates whatsoever; and their acts by his election were made
of no authority: And seeing therefore that they had dealt with men that had no
power of themselves to accord to any matter, they were to speak to him, if they
required ought; for he alone had also late power to pardon them if they
repented, and would ask it; or else to punish them, and make their bodies
answer the damage and loss his Country had sustained by them: These words made
Brennus as mad as a March Hare, that out went his blade; then they drew their
swords on all sides, and laid lustily one at another, as they could within the
houses, and in open streets, where they could set no Battle in order; but
Brennus suddenly remembering himself, that it was no even match for him, retired
with his men about him into his Camp before he had lost many of his people. The
next night following he departed out of Rome with all his Army, and went to
encamp himself about threescore Furlongs; from thence in the high way that
goes toward the City of the Gabians, Camillus with his whole Army, well
appointed, went after him immediately, and showed himself at his Camp by break
of day. The Romans having taken heart again unto them, did lustily give them
Battle, the same continued very long cruel and doubtful, till at length the
Gauls were overcome, and their Camp taken with great slaughter: As for those
that did escape the fury of the Battle, they were killed some by the Romans
themselves, who hotly followed the chase after the Battle broken; and the
residue of them, and the greatest part were slain by those of the Cities and
Villages near abouts, that did set upon them as they fled here and there
scattering in the field: Hitherto Plutarch; and most likely it is, that the
Heroic Britain, the most courageous Brennus, here also perished; and
therefore we will return to his brother.

Belinus, now absolute Monarch of Britain, after he had lest his Brother in
Foreign Countries, and returned into his own Kingdom, built the famous City of
Caerleon upon Vsk, for confirmation of which verity there are many witnesses,
as the British History, Galfridus, Vicunnius, Matthew of Westminster, Ranulph,
Hegen, Caxton, Harding, Stow, Hollinshead; and to write in his words, Most part
of all our Writers. Galfridus calls this City Kaerose: Vicunnius names it Kaer
Vsk, Matthew. West. Kaer Vsk, Higeden Caer Huth; and it was one of the three Arch
flamens Seats of Brittany. The Priests amongst the old Romans, were called
Flamins, by reason of certain little narrow hats which they did wear upon their
heads, as if they had called them Pilamines; for Pilos in Greek signifies a
Hat: Numa Pampilius, is said to have been the first Founder of the Flamens, by
reason that he added to the Priests of Jupiter and Mars a third, who was called
Flamen Quirinalis.

This City, in succeeding times, was called Caerlegion, that is to say, the
City of Legions, and was the Sea of an Archbishop; to which was subject all
Cambria or Wales, then adorned with seven Bishops, now with four Suffragans,
Seeds Archiepiscoporum in Brittannia tres fuerunt tempore Lucii regis,
Brittannorum primi Christiani, videlicet apud London, apud Eboracum, apud
Caer-hursc, urbem Legionum in Glamorgancia, quibus tunc subjecti fuerunt 28.
Episcopi Flamines tunc vocati, etc. Vrbi Legionum subjacuit tota Cambria 7 tunc
Episcopis nunc vero quatuor suffraganeis insignita, quam flumen Sabrina tunc
Secernebat a Loegria, Mr. Brough. fol. 282.
which Severn then separated from England: and in this City, faith a French
Author was King Lucius born. The same Author speaking further; the Sees of
these three Arch-flamens, Fol. 283.4. The praise of Caerleon.
being the three most noble Cities of Britain, which were London, Everwicks,
and the City of Legions upon the River Vsks in the County of Glamorgan in
Wales, not far from Severn, which is a place delicious, and passing in Riches
all other Cities.

As concerning the Archbishops of Caerleon, they have been many, and of great
note, Godwin in his Catalogue of Bish. Landaf. and St. David's. Fol. 319.
Learning, and Sanctity; We must account (says Godwin) St. Dubritius the first
Bishop, Not that I deny any other to have sat there before him; but because be
is the first whose name is remembered: And it is probable he had no
Predecessors, because the memory of his Successors is so carefully preserved:
But as this man's Authority is so weak to be rested upon (says Mr. Broughton)
that it has often before deceived them who builded upon it; so his reason here
alleged is of as feeble strength; for the memory of the Successors has been
so carelessly preserved by his own confession after, that he having cited two
different Catalogues of their names, only above twenty in number, concludes in
these terms against himself before; Of these forenamed Bishops, until Sampson,
there remains little or no memorial, but their names only. And in the names
themselves, there is difference in the memorials of them. Harpfield Hist. in
five 7. seculi. John Bal. l. de Scrip. Brit. Gent. 1. in Samuele Beulano. John
Leland apud Pits. li. de viribus illa. in Elbode. Harris Hist. Ecclc. Manu. li.
2. c. 20.
And both of them omit their most renowned Archbishop Elbodus, who joined with
St. Augustine and his company, and wrote against his own Britains and Scots
for their untrue observation of Easter. Some think he was created Archbishop by
St. Augustine. Mr. Harris seems to be of opinion, that St. Fugatianus, one of
Pope Elutherius Legates was first Archbishop of Caerleon, and St. Damiunus the
other Legate Archbishop of London, yet with the common opinion he had placed St.
Thean there before, both which may stand with truth in due construction if St.
Damianus resigned it to St. Thean, who, as he says, was Archbishop there
eighteen years; and seeing we find no final departure of these two holy Legates
from hence, but rather a continual abode here, after their return from Rome, as
though they were wholly designed for the spiritual good of this Kingdom, if we
join here with what eminent men and Bishops they were, we may not deny them any
chief place of honor, according to their worth and deservings here.

The old Writer of St. Gudwalus Life, Surius Haraeus, and others say, he was
Archiepiscopus Britannus, an Archbishop of Brittany, and by his life and abode
of no other place, but our old Caerlegion; And if we should follow their
opinions, which hold, that Caerlegion was Augusta, where our renowned
Archbishop Augulus was martyred, we must also make him Archbishop there; and
the old British History with diverse other, testifies, that Tremonus was
Archbishop here, Mr. Brough. fol. 320. age 2. 5.
Tremonus urbis Legionum Archiepiscopus, long before St. Dubritius. And it was
foretold long before, probably, St. Dubritius was born, or Tremonus was
Archbishop of Caerlegion, that this Archbishops See should be translated from
thence to St. David's, and there the Archbishops Pall of Caerlegion should be
worn, Menevia Pallio urbis Legionum induetur, which was after verified in the
time of St. David; as also the prophecy of the translation of London to
Canterbury by St. Augustine: and the seventh Archbishop of York going into
Armorica, performed by St. Sampson, all foretold at one time altogether long
before: Therefore as in London and York there were Archbishops, so in this City
also of Caerlegion there were such wearing the Pall, justifying the undeniable
change and performance of that Prediction. Ibid.
After this time all Histories agree of St. Dubritius, St. David, Eliud,
Theelianus, Kinocus immediately succeeding one another, and Elbodus in St. Aug.
time. And a late Writer says further: In which three Cities of London, York,
and Caerlegion upon Usk, there had been before time three Arch-flamens erected
unto Apollo, Mars and Minerva, but now rased to the ground, and three other
Churches builded in their steads by Lucius, to the intent that the Countries
round about, might have indifferent access unto those places, and therewithal
understand for certain whether to resort for resolution.

The Persecution under the Roman Emperors being general to all Churches and
places, even in the beginning thereof came to the City of Caerlegion, where the
Church being destroyed, and the School founded by King Lucius overthrown, the
holy Priests and other Christians there, had their part therein. Amongst others
St. Julius and St. Aron were then cruelly martyred in that City, being by
consent of all, Citizens and Inhabitants, there: Aron and Julius Legionum urbis
cives, most cruelly torn in pieces, by torments never heard of before, passi
sunt inaudita membrorum discerptione in testimonium Dei excelsi. Others say, it
is evident in Histories they were learned men, brought up in the College or
School, there founded by King Lucius; The old School of Caerlegion brought
forth many noble Martyrs.
thus write two late authors, Ex Sanctorum Historiis constat Amphibalum Aaronem
and Julium Sanctissimos Dei Martyrs coelestem Christi Doctrinam, apud urbem
Legionum inter literas tradidisse. Ex nobili Gymnasio urbi Legionum viri multi
summa pietatis and doctrinae laud conspicui prodierunt, ut Amphibalus Julius
and Aron. By which Authorities, and Testimonies joining these holy Martyrs for
Education, School, Learning, Preaching and professing Christ with that most
renowned Priest and Bishop St. Amphibalus they incline to hold and teach that
they also were Clergy men. This persecution at Caerlegion when these holy
Martyrs were put to death, was at the destruction of the Cathedral Church
there, being at the same time when the like desolation was at Winchester long
before St. Albans Martyrdom, I must needs say the same of these Saints, as the
Annals of Winchester do of their Martyrs. And this the rather, because our
Antiquaries have told us, that S. Amphibalus who converted S. Alban, was born,
bred, instructed in learning, and remained at Caerlegion, and being there in
all probable Judgment, when these troubles began there, was as our British
History witnesses, pursued, and in present danger to be apprehended by the
Persecutors, when St. Alban gave him entertainment and succor; and adds
plainly, that when St. Amphibalus thus fled from Caerlegion, St. Julius, and
St. Aron were, Absque cunctamine, presently Martyred there, having their
members so torn in pieces, as the like had not been heard of before. Inter
caeteros utriusque sexus summae magnanimitate in acie Christi praestantes,
passus est Albanus, Julius quoque and Aron urbis Legionum cives; Julius and
Aaron martyred before St. Alban.
quorum Albanus charitatis gratia fervens, confessorem suum Amphibalum a
persequitoribus insectatum, and jam jam comprehendendum, in domo sua occuluit;
caeteri very Duo inaudita membrorum discerptione lacerati ad egregias portas
Jerusalem absque cunctamine cum Martyrii trophaeo convolaverunt. The very same
testimony hereof is given by St. Gildas, both for St. Amphibalus then flying
the persecution, and the martyrdom of these saints at that time. Saint Bede also
is witness that St. Alban entertained St. Amphibalus flying the persecutors,
Clericum quendam persecutores fugientem hospitio recepit. And that St. Aron and
St. Julius were martyred at that time, Passi sunt ea tempestate Aron and Julius
urbis legionum cives: The like have others; therefore Giraldus Cambrensis does
worthily call them our two Protomartyrs in this time, only in dignity, second
and next to St. Alban and St. Amphibalus, but in time first and before them,
Duo nobiles and post Albanum and Amphibalum praecipui Brittanniae Majoris
Protomartyres. Gild. excid. Brit. c. 8.
These our two Protomartyrs are wonderfully commended in our Histories: St.
Gildas says of them, that they stood out in the Army of Christ, with greatest
magnanimity, Giral. sup. Itin. com. l. 1. c. 5.
Summa magnanimitate in acie Christi praestantes dico. Giraldus Cambrensis is
witness that amongst the Martyrs of that time, they were the chiefest next to
St. Alban, and St. Amphibalus, Post Albanum and Amphibalum praecipui martyrio
coronati, Julius and Aron: How they were honored of the holy Catholic
Christians of that time, with Churches dedicated to them, Pilgrimages to the
places of their Martyrdom, and they both there, and in other places honored,
invocated and prayed unto, presently upon the ceasing of the Persecution.

Now it will suffice to conclude with that their title of glory and renown,
which the ancient and learned Bishop of their Nation before has given them,
and the due and honor to the place of their triumphant death, Jacent hic duo
nobilis Brittanniae Majoris Protomartyres and ibidem Martyrio coronati Julius
and Aron. Here lie (at Caerlegion) the two Noble Protomartyrs of great
Britain, Julius and Aron, and there crowned with Martyrdom. This title to be
the first Martyrs of Britain in the most terrible persecution, and with such
exceeding magnanimity, and Christian constancy, as has been related, in
enduring torments till then never heard of, without any example going before
them, but giving themselves the first example hereof, so wonderful patience,
love of Christ, and Heroical true fortitude to so many thousands, which by
their singular example, with invincible courage imitated them therein, is the
greatest honor we can yield to such blessed Saints on earth; their Festivity
is celebrated by the old Roman Martyrologie upon the first day of July.
Baronius in Indice non Sanct. in Julie and Arone.
On which day as Baronius plainly writes, many others suffered Martyrdom with
them, Julius and Aron Martyrs cum aliis plurimis in Brittania sub Dioclesiano
primo die Julii. So likewise affirms the English Writer, and the Roman
Martyrologe which Baronius glosseth upon, may very well carry that
construction, for setting down for a certain truth, that these two holy Martyrs
were put to death in Brittany upon the first day of July, Primo die Julii in
Brittannia Sanctorum Martyrum Julii and Aron, qui in persecutione Dioclesiani
passi sunt; it presently adds, quo tempore ibidem quam plurimi diversis
cruciatibus torti and saevissime lacerati ad supernae civitatis gaudia
consummato agone pervenerunt: At the same time, in the same place very many
tortured with diverse torments, and most cruelly torn, having ended their
combats, came to the joys of heaven.

And Saint Bede says, that ea tempestate, at that time when St. Julius and St.
Aron were martyred, diverse others, both men and women were put to death, Alii
utriusque sexus passi sunt ea tempestate. So has Henry of Huntington, Passi
sunt eo tempore Julius and Aron alii quoque plures utriusque sexus: And we
cannot probably think that these raging Persecutors, who in places where there
were not in any degree so many Christians, as in this renowned City an
Archiepiscopal See, and Christian University put them to death by thousands,
sent these here by cruel Martyrdom to heaven alone; These holy Martyrs by all
Antiquities suffered Martyrdom at Caerlegion, and both Giraldus Cambrensis and
Ranulphus, Higeden writing at Winchester: As also our late Antiquaries of the
same Country, plainly say it was at Caerlegion in Monmouthshire, which was the
Archiepiscopal City and School, distinguishing it from Winchester, by some
called Caerlegion; also I will only cite one Englished to my hand by a Modern;
In this Region Monmouthshire is seated, the most ancient and most noble City of
Legions, which our Countrymen call Caerleon on Usk, that is to say, the City of
Legions upon Usk for difference sake, between it and the other which is built
in Northwales, upon the River Dee; of which Giraldus writes thus. The same was
a Noble and ancient Town, the tokens whereof remain as yet, an huge Palace, a
Giant like Tower, goodly Baths and Hot-houses, Relics of Churches and places
like Theaters, compassed with beautiful walls, partly yet standing; also
buildings under the ground, Conducts, secret passages and Vaults under the
Earth, framed with wonde^full Workmanship. There lies Julius and Aron, which
had Churches dedicated unto them, Vna Julii Martyris altera Araonis. In the
Church of St. Julius which is now called St. Julians, and is distant from the
now Caerleon a mile, seated fast by the River of Vsk, which runs through the
Town, belonging to the Right Honorable Edward Lord Herbert of Cherbury and
Castle Issand, a most stately house in this Church, formerly Virgineo choro de
corata, was a Nunnery: for in this Town were two famous Monasteries one of
Monks, or Canon Regulars, the other of Nuns, M. Broug. fol. 603. 9. Matthew.
Westminster. an. 541.
dedicated to St. Julius in which Queen Guenhumara wife to King Arthur did
after receive the habit of Religion Guenhumara Regina in Monasterio Julii
Martyris inter Moniales habitum Religionis suscepit.

Not far from Caerlegion, is a place called St. Albans, standing on the ascent
of a hill, at the bottom whereof runs the River of Vsk, where by an old
Tradition, the Inhabitants believe St. Alban was put to death, and will not be
persuaded out of their error by any reason; wherefore to convince that
mistake, Mr. Br. 443*
though the circumstances of the place be something alike, where St. Alban was
put to death; for Saint Bede writes, that the people who came to behold his
Martyrdom were so many, that being to pass over the River by a Bridge, if St.
Alban had not so miraculously dried up the River, they could hardly have gone
over by the Bridge before night, Ita fluminis occupabat pontem ut intra
vesperam transire vix posset: There was scarcely any left in the City, Cunctis
pene egressis, a great multitude of both Sexes, diverse Estates and Ages came
thither by instinct, Vtriusque sexus conditionis diversae and aetatis quae sine
dubio divinitatis instinctu ad obsequium beatissimi confessoris ac Martyris
vocabantur. Therefore so many of diverse conditions, being thus called by the
inspiration of God to such an holy purpose, we cannot but think many of them
were there converted at that time. Saint Bede setetth this to be done at St.
Albans death before the great miracle of Angels, appearing and praising of God,
and honoring St. Alban, the night following at his place of burial: and so
soon as this miracle appeared, the Pagans presently came thither in great
numbers to hear and see it publicly, professing that those Miracles were
wrought by the power of Christ the Son of GOD, and so being converted unto
him, a thousand of them at one time took their Journey to seek Saint Amphibalus
in those parts, which we now call Wales so far distant from Verulamium (now St.
Albans in England) where by the help of diverse Christians in their company
among other others, him that took up St. Albans Cross which he held in his
hands at his Martyrdom, which all to be spotted with his blood, they presented
to St. Amphibalus whom they found preaching to the people of that Country,
Math. West. Anno 303. manuscript. Antiq. in vita St. Amphibali. Cap^r. in eadem
and alii.
and they were Instructed, Catechized, and Baptized by him in Christian
Religion. Cum ad hoc spectaculum subito fieret concursus Paganorum, unus ex
omnibus in hanc vocem prorupit. Haec miranda quae vidimus Christum Dei Filium
liquido operari constat, eamus and inquiramus virum Dei, quia sicut nostis
Albanum praedicando convertit ad Christum: Cumque omnibus ista sententia
placuisset, ad mill hominum versus Walliam iter arripiunt and virum Dei
Amphibalum ibi invenerunt regionis illius hominibus Verbum Dei proedicantem;
Jocob. Genesis in vita S. Alba. and S. Amphi.
cui adventus sui causam exponentes, Crucem quam suo quondam Albano
commendaverat cruore respersam obtulerunt; at ille gratias Deo agens, novis
auditoribus fecit de Religione Sermonem, cui mox illi consentientes signaculum
quod in Christo est ab ejus sacris manibus alacriter susceperunt.

Some Authors will have these thousand Martyrs to have suffered at Lichfield,
because there were so many in that persecution Martyred there; and the very
name Lichfield signifies a Field of Blood, and the bearing the Arms
accordingly belonging thereto: but this Controversy is decided before, when
our Antiquaries assure us, that it was in the County now called Wales, in which
Lichfield never was nor can be accounted, neither was it the way of these
persecutors thither, from Verulamium; nor so long and tedious a journey; Iter
tam laboriosum as they went Dictum est quod omnes pro quibus tam laboriosum
iter susceperant in extremis finibus perierunt; Certainly great and cruel was
the Massacre; for these cruel Pagans Diabolica invecti furia slew all they met;
the Son not sparing his Father nor the Brother his Brother, no Man his
Neighbor; Jacob Genven. Mat. West. 33.. cap. in S. Amp.
but sine respectu sanguinis, aetatis, aut reverentiae, vicini vicinos, and
amicos amici neci tradunt, and atrociter in ore gladii mill viros pro Christo
occidunt, ex hoc sacro Collegio unus omnino superfuit qui in via corporis
infirmitate detentus adesse non potuit. Thus much concerning Caerleon in this
place.

Bellinus having built Caerleon upon Vsk, built also a Gate in London, to this
hour called Bellinus Gate, Historiarum, lib. 3. nota 12.
In cujus summa (says Ri. Vitus) Turrim aedificat and in imo portum
appellentibus per Tamesim navibus idoneum; item aliam Turrim in colle Londini,
Quam hodie (secundum Joannem Lelandum) Turrim Londinensem vocamus quod non est
improbabile, nam Peredurus Rex postea captus in ea custoditus; Hanc igitur
arcem Londinensem, inquit Polidorus Virgilius satis munitam and multis Turribus
(unde nomen habet) exstructam, falso vulgus Anglorum praedicat a Julio Caesare
conditam esse, qui de Londino non meminit quippe quod eo non pervenerit. In
whose top or highest place he caused a Tower to be made, and at the Fort or
Basis a Harbor and safe landing place for ships sailing up the Thames; He also
built an other Tower on the hill of the mount of London, as affirms John
Leland, which at this day we call the Tower of London, nor much unprobable for
that Peredurus, King of this Island, being surprised, In his Notes upon his 3.
Book. Figure 13.
was there kept prisoner; Polidorus Virgilius is of opinion (as Vitus tells us)
that this Tower being strongly built and garnished with many smaller Towers,
from whence it takes its name, was not built by Julius Caesar, as the vulgar
opinion is, for that he makes no mention of London nor ever came so far.

Bellinus autem cum regnasset annos viginti and unum solus, diem obiit
nobilique ceremonia in ignem conjectus uritur primus quidem omnium Brittannorum
Regum qui crematus est, and cineres in urnam auream conditi ponuntur, super
fastigio portae Bellinae; Bellinus after he had reigned alone the space of one
and twenty years, finished the course of his natural life, whose body with
noble but unusual ceremony was cast into a fire, being the first of all the
British Kings, whose body was consumed with Funeral flames; his ashes being
gathered together, were put into a golden Vessel or Urne, and placed in the
highest part of his late built Arch or Gate.

You have already heard how Brennus the heroic British Prince sacked Rome,
besieged the Capitol, compelled the Senators to compound with him for a
thousand pound weight of Gold, and how lastly he was pursued by Camillus the
Dictator, and how he was vanquished and his whole Army routed and put to the
Sword, partly by the country Peasants and neighboring Towns and Villages, in
which sad condition Plutark leaves: but he was a Roman Writer and may speak
partially in the behalf of his own Country. Let us hear therefore what Count
Palatine thinks of the matter; he was born in this Island and will speak as
much for Brennus as did Plutark for Camillus; Ri. Vitus Basing Stochius.
and therefore tells you, Brennus autem domitis Pannoniis and audita Victoria
suorum qui Belgio Duce Macedones vicerant predaque relicta discesserant,
adunatis centum quinquaginta millibus equitum erumpit in Macedoniam; sed pauci
a pluribus, trepidi a valentibus facile vincuntur. Itaque cum victi Macedones
se condidissent intra muros Vrbium, Victor Brennus nemine impediente totius
Macedoniae agros depraedatur, inde quasi spolia sorderent, convertit animum ad
Deorum immortalium Templa, joco dicens oportere Deos locupletes hominibus dona
largiri: statim igitur Delphos iter vertit, Religionis aurum pro praeda Deorum
offensae praefert, eos ait nullis opibus indigere; itaque cum in conspectu
Templum Apollinis haberet, diu deliberavit an confestim rem aggrederetur, an
vero fessis via militibus daret spacium noctis ad resumendas vires. Emidanus
and Thessalonus duces qui se junxerant ad praedaesocietatem jubent moras
amputari dum hosts forent imparati and sui adventus eis esset terrori; sed
Galli ex inopia longa cum invenirent rura referta vino, caeterisque
commeatibus, se per agros sparserant desertisque signis ad occupanda omnia pro
victoribus vagabantur. Prius ergo Delphi viribus sociorum aucti praemunierunt
Vrbem suam, quam Galli vino veluti praedae incubantes ad signa evocantur.
Brennus habebat ex omni exercitu lecta Sexaginta quinque Millia peditum.
Delphorum sociorumque non erant nisi militum instructorum quatuordecim Millia,
quorum contemptu Brennus prae numero suorum de victoria non dubitat; sed ad
acuendos animos militibus ostendit ubertatem praedae statuasque cum quadrigis
fusas auro solido: quarum rerum animadversione Galli magis incitati ac pridie
vino pleni, ruunt in bellum sine ulla cogitatione periculorum. Delphi contra
plus in Deo quam in viribus suis subsidii ponunt, Gallosque scandentes de summo
vertice montis Parnassi quo templum Apollinis est, partim Saxis partim Armis
obruunt, maximoque terrae motu part montis ejusdem erupta, Gallorum Exercitum
prostravit, confertissimique cunei vulneribus dissipati cadebant; Dux ipse
Brennus cum non poterat amplius far dolorem vulnerum suorum vitam pugione
finivit. Brennus having vanquished the Inhabitants of Pannonia, and hearing of
the Victory which his Soldiers had obtained under the Command of Belgius their
Commander against the Macedonians, who fled away leaving the booty and spoils
behind them, rallying up fifty thousand foot, and fifteen thousand horse, he
suddenly and with great violence enters Macedonia; where whilst he plundered,
ransackt, and destroyed both Fields and Villages, Sosthenes with an Army well
appointed made Head and Resistance against him: but being far fewer in number,
and overwhelmed with multitudes of his Enemies, he was forced to Retreat and
give way to his present Fortune: the Macedonians being thus put to the worst,
by necessity are compelled to hide and secure themselves under the protection
of their walled and fortified Towns and Castles; mean time Brennus having none
to oppose him, fleeceth and wastes the Countries round about; and seeing these
spoils too slender for his avaricious and aspiring mind, he devours and
swallows up in his all-devouring thoughts the opulency of the Gods; deridingly,
and as he thinks wittily though profanely, saying, The wealth-abounding Gods
must supply the indigent wants of poor distressed mortals; and therefore bends
all his power for Delphos, preferring their rich and massy oblations, and
consecrate golden offerings before the just and most deserved anger of the
Gods, saying, The Gods could never want; busying himself with these
imaginations, he comes within the sight and view of great Apollos Temple, where
he pauseth, considering with himself, whether it were better suddenly to
assault, or rather give that nights rest unto his wearied Soldiers to refresh
their tired bodies: Euridanus and Thessalonus Captains of great skill and
experience, who had associated themselves merely for lucre and spoil, advise
him by all means to cut off delays as dangerous, and suddenly to set upon the
attempt; the Enemy as yet being altogether unprovided, in regard whereof a
sudden motion would strike them into a terrible fear. But the Gauls having
suffered hunger and hard marches, finding the Country well furished with Wines
and other welcome Provisions, leaving their Colors, disperse themselves every
one according to his own pleasure and liking, and as if already all were their
own, like Conquerors they strut it up and down. This remissness gives
opportunity to the Delphians by the Auxiliary Forces of their Friends and
Neighbors to fortify their Town and reinforce their Garrison; which Brennus
perceiving, sends out Command for every man speedily to repair to his Colors,
whose minds were set upon nothing but looking to their bellies and quaffing
lusty bowls. The Army of the Gauls consisted of sixty thousand Foot; the
Citizens of Delphos had only fourteen thousand fighting Men, Brennus
undervaluing this slender handful of Men in respect of the numerous Troops of
his Soldiers, made himself cock-sure of the Victory; and therefore to
encourage his Men the more, he wished them to behold and consider, the richness
of the Treasure, and greatness of the Spoil which was like to fall unto their
share, the Statues and Images together with their Chariots if not made, at
least covered over with pure and solid Gold. The greedy Soldier easily
swallowed up his golden Bait, and elevated, and inebriated with the blood of
the lusty grape, without either Order or command (being sufficiently armed with
Bachus to set all danger at defiance) runs headlong into Battle; on the
contrary, the wary Delphians, confiding more in the protection of their God
than strength of their humane Forces, from the high and towering Top of the
cloud, kissing Parnassus, (where stood Apollos stately Temple) with stones and
other such Materials, besides the help of their Weapons, beat down, and
headlong precipitated the aspiring Gauls: this their endeavor was seconded by
a sudden and hideous Earthquake, which so broke the Ranks of the amazed yet
furious Assailants, and so disordered their best ordered Squadrons, that what
with a sudden fear and what with those unwonted kinds of wounds, they were
totally dispersed and overthrown. Brennus whose haughty spirit not long before
was puffed up with presumption of winning golden Mountains, is now no longer able
to endure his late received wounds; and therefore with one stroke to put a
period to all his miseries, he sheatheth his fatal Dagger with a more then
manlike thrust in the most remote angle of his own entrails.

Bellinus together with his brother began their Reign anno Mundi according to
Fabian, four thousand eight hundred and eight; according to which Author
jointly and alone: ellinus reigned twenty six years, leaving a Son after him
called Gurguintus, Gurguint, Brabituc or after some Writers, Gurguint
Barberous, that is to say, Gurguint with a red Beard.

Finis Libri primi.
To the High and Mighty PRINCES,
THOMAS HOWARD, Duke and Earl of Norfolk, Earl of Arundel and Surrey, Lord
Howard, Fitz Alan, Mowbrey, Matravers, Segrave, Bruise and Clun. SEYMOUR or De
Sto Mauro, Duke of Somerset, Marquess and Earl of Hertford, Baron Beauchampe
and Seymour, etc. GEORGE VILLIERS, Duke, Marquess and Earl of Buckingham,
Viscount Villiers and Baron of Whaddon, Knight of the Noble Order of the
Garter. CHARLES STEWART, Duke of Lennox and Richmond, Earl of March and
Lichfield, Lord Awbigney, Darneley, Tarbolton and Nethven in Scotland, and
Baron of Leighton Bromswould in England. GEORGE MONCK, Duke of Albemarle, Earl
of Torrington, Baron Monck of Potherige, Beauchampe and Teyes, Capt. General
and Commander in Chief of all his MAJESTY'S Land Forces in his Kingdoms of
England, Scotland and Ireland, and all other his Majesty's Dominions and
Territories, Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter, Master of his
Majesty's Horse, and one of the Lords of his Majesty's most Honble privy
Council.
The Duke of Norfolk.
ROBERT commonly called Consul, Earl of Gloucester, Son to King Hen. 1. by Nest
Daughter to Rees ap Tewder, K. or Prince of South Wales, which Rees married
Gladis, Daughter and sole Heir of Rees ap Kenvin Prince of Powis. Randolph
surnamed De Gernoniis E: of Chester. Matildis or Maud, Daughter of Robert E. of
Gloucester. Hugh Kavilioc Earl of Chester Bertrude Daughter of Simon Earl of
Montford: William de Albeneio Earl of Arundel. Mabell Daughter to Hugh Kavilioc
and Sister and Coheir to Randolph Blundevill her Brother. John Fitz Alan Lord
of Clun and Owalstre, two Lordships in Wales. Isabell D. and Coh. (after the
death of her brothers William and Hugh) to William de Albeneio or Albany.
Richard Fitz Alan Grandchild to John 1. E. of Arundel of that Name. Alizan D.
to the Marquess of Sluice in Italy. Edmund Fitz Alan E. of Arundell. Alice D.
of William and Sister and Co-h. of John, E. Warren and Surrey. Richard Fitz
Alan E. of Arundel, etc. Lord of Yale, Bromfield, Chirkland and Dinas Bran in
Northwales. Elinor D. to Henry Plantagenet, E. of Lancaster. Richard E. of
Arundell, etc. Eliza. D. to William de Bohun, E. of Northampton. Thomas E. of
Arundell, etc. Beatrix base D. to John King of Portugal. Thomus E. of
Arundell, etc. sans Issue, so the Lands of the Earldome of Surrey were divided
betwixt the Sisters, and the Earldome of Arundell fell to John Fitz Alan being
entailed. John Fitz Alan E. of Arundell, Knight of the Garter, great
Grandchild to John. Maud. D. and H. of Robert Lovell and Eliz. his wife D. and
Co-h. to Sir Guy Bryan. To John Fitz Alan and Elinor his wife, sister and Coh.
of Henry Lord Maltravers. Humphrey Earl of Arundell, sans Issue. William Fitz
Alan Uncle and Heir to Humphrey. Margaret D. of Richard Woodvile, E. Rivers,
Sister and Co-h. to E. Rich. her Brother. William Fitz Alan Earl of Arundell.
Ame D. of Henry Piercy Earl of Northumberland, by which Match this Honorable
Family also descends from the Welsh Line, as in that Pedigree shall appear.
Henry Lord Maltravers, sans Issue. Thomas Howard Duke of Norfolk. Mary D. and
Co-h. of Henry Fitz Alan, Earl of Arundell. Philip Howard eldest Son of D.
Thomas did assume the Name and Title of Earl of Arundell. Anne D. of Thomas
Lord Dacres of Gilestand and Sister and H. of George Lord Dacres. Thomas Howard
Earl of Arundell. Alathen D. and Co-h. and at last sole H. to Gilbert Talbot E.
of Shrewsbury, by which Match the Honorable Family descends from the Welsh
Line, as in its proper place shall appear. Henry Earl of Arundell, etc. Eliz.
D. to Elsme Stewart D. of Lennox, by which Match this House again springs from
the Welsh blood, as the Princely Line of the Stewarts do show. Thomas Howard
Duke of Norfolk. Henry Howard second Son Heir apparent. Anne Daughter to
Edward Marquess and Earl of Worcester, etc. by which Conjunction the Welsh
Alliance is strengthened.

NORFOLK is the greatest County of England next to Yorkshire, but far more
populous then that, as comprehending in the whole 660 Parish Churches, of which
27 are Market Towns. The soil according to the variety of places is of
different nature; some fat, rank, and full of moisture, in others very light
and sandy, yet so that one contributing to the other, and the Sea giving help
to both; it is a very plentiful County for Corn, Sheep and Fish. It is
observed by a great Antiquary of this Kingdom, that in this County are 100
Families of ancient Gentry were never attainted of High Treason. The Dukes and
Earls of Norfolk have been as follows.

Ralph de Ware Earl of Norfolk. 2 Hugh Bigot. 3 Roger Bigot. 4 Hugh Bigot. 5
Roger Bigot. 6 Roger Bigot. 7 Thomas de Brotherton Son of K. Edw. 1. E. of
Norfolk. 8 Margaret Daughter of Thomas de Brotherton, Duch. of Norfolk. 9
Thomas Lord Mowbrey, Son of Marg. D. of Norfolk, Duke of Norfolk. 10 John
Mowbrey, D. 11 John Mowbrey, D. 12 John Mowbrey, D. 13 Richard D. of York and
Norfolk. 14 John Lord Howard Descended from the Lady Marg. Daughter to Thomas
Duke of Norfolk. 15 Thomas Howard, D. Lord Treasurer and Admiral. 16 Thomas
Howard, D. L. Treas. 17 Thomas Howard, D. of Norfolk. 18. Thomas Howard, D. of
Norfolk. 1660.
The Duke of Somerset.
THis Honorable Family has been Seated formerly in Wales, whose Habitation
was Penhow in Monmouthshire, where I find their Arms cut in stone, and depicted
in glass in the Church Windows; which Church was Dedicated to St. Maurus, from
which Name questionless that illustrious Family took the Name De Sto Mauro;
and yet to this day there is a Piece of Ground called Park Seymour: and to
confirm this, I judge it not amiss to show you parcel of an ancient Record.

The Saturday after the Feast of St. Michael in the full Court of Strigull, in
the 55. year of Hen. the Son of K. John, before William de Walste, then Steward
of Strigull, who ought to have House, Bote and Hey-bote in Wentwood.

The JVRY.
The Abbot of Tynterne, the Prior of Strigull, Lord Robertson of Pagan, William
Bloet, William Denford of Creek, Richard de More, Robert de St. Maure,
Bartholomew of More, Knights, Matthew Denbane, Robert de More, and John
Morbell, who say in their Faith, that William Lord Bloet, ought to have to his
House at Langston, House, Bote, by complaint or request: Lord William de St.
Maure to his House (or Castle) of Penhow by the same means, etc.

Henry Gray Marquess Dorset and Duke of Suffolk, Descended from Sir John Gray,
Knight. Lord Powis, who married Jane Daughter and one of the Heirs of Edward
Charleton Lord Powis, Son of John of another John Charleton, who married Hawis,
Daugh. and sole Heir of Howel ap Griffith, lineally descended from the Princes
of Powis. Frances D. and Co-h. to Charles Brandon, D. of Suffolk, and Queen
Mary, D. to Hen. 7. who by Owen Tudor descended lineally from the Princes of
Southwales, and from Rees ap Tewdor King of Demetia, who died 1090. and was
buried at St. David's. Edward de Sto. Manro Earl of Hertford. Joan D. to L. Hen.
Piercy E. of Northumberland, by which Match this Family is the 3. time
descended from Wales. Edward Seymour E. of Hertford and Duke of Somerset.
Katharine D. to Henry Gray and Frances D. and Co-h. to Charles Brandon D. of
Suffolk and Mary Queen of France. William Seymor Duke of Somerset, who married
Sister and Coheir to Robert Earl of Essex. Seymor Lord Beauchampe. Daughter
to the Lord Capell, that Loyal and Heroic Spirit, who lost his life on the
Kings behalf. SEYMOR now DUKE of SOMERSET. 1660.

Somersetshire is a Country of a fertile Soil both for Corn and Pasture,
exceeding populous (as comprehending in the whole 385 Parish-Churches, whereof
33 are Market Towns,) and furnished also with commodious Havens for Trade and
Traffic; in the parts toward Wilts, it is hilly and stony, which places about
Mendip especially afford rich veins of Lead; the rest of the Country is very
fertile, abounding with rich Meadows and Pastures: it has formerly been known
by the name of Somertonshire, but now it is ordinarily called Somersetshire, by
which name it has given the Honorary Title of,

Dukes and Earls of Somerset.
1 William de Mohun, E. 2 William Longespe, E. of Salisbury and Somerset. 3
Reynald de Mohun. 4 John Beauford eldest Son of John of Gaunt by his 3. wife. 5
Henry Beauford. 6 John Beauford, D. of Somersetsh. 7 Edmund Beauford, E. and D.
8 Henry Beauford, D. 9 Edmund Beauford, D. 10 Edmund 3. Son of Henry 7. 11
Henry Fitz Roy, base Son of Henry 8. D. of Somerset and Richmond. 12 Edw.
Seymor, Lord Prot. of Ed. 6. D. of Somerset. 13 Robert Carr, E. of Somerset. 14
William Seymor, D. of Somerset. 15 Seymor now D. of Somersetshire. 1660
The Duke of Buckingham.
GEorge Duke of Buckingham married (...) sole daughter and heir of Thomas Lord
Fairfax, and (...) his wife sole daughter and heir of the Lord Vere, by which
affinity this illustrious Family is derived from the British blood, as shall
more at large appear in the pedigree of the Earls of Oxford.

George Villers Duke, Marquess, and Earl of Buckingham, etc. married Katharine,
the sole daughter and heir of Francis Manors, Earl of Rutland, by which match
this honorable Family apparently is derived from British Noble Progenitors,
as is copiously declared in the Genealogy of the Earls of Rutland.

Buckingham, as it is supposed, takes it name from Bucken, that is, Beech
Trees, with which the Country is well stored. It is generally a rich and
plentiful soil, equally good for Corn and grazing, and lies all along on the
bank of Thames, confronting Berkshire; it contains in it 185. Parish Churches,
eleven of which are Market Towns, and amongst them, the chief in name is
Buckingham, a Town of no great note, when it was at best, but more considerable
heretofore then at present, being once fortified with a Castle, now hardly to
be found in the very ruins; as also with a Rampire and certain Sconces built
for the defense thereof against the Danes, now more invisible then the Castle;
the greatest honor it can challenge, that it has given titles of highest
honor to many a brave and worthy personage, as well of the Blood Royal, as
other Families, who by the Kings of England have been hence denominated,

Dukes, Marquesses, and Earls of Buckingham.
1 Walter Giffard, Earl. 2 Walter Giffard, E. 3 Richard Strongbow, E. 4 Thomas
of Woodstock, E. 5 Humphrey Plantagenet, E. 6 Humphrey Stafford, Duke. 7 Henry
Stafford, D. 8 Edw. Stafford, D. 9 George Villiers D. Marq. and E. of Buck. 10
George Villiers D. Marq. and E. of Buck.
The Duke of Richmond.
GHARLES STEWART Duke of Richmond, Earl of March and Lichfield, etc. 1660. by
that Royal Progeny is descended from Cadelm. King of Southwales, Meruin K. of
Powis, Anarand King of Northwales, and Gwaith void K. of Cardigan, and by the
genealogy of the Martiners from Gladiis Daughter and H. to Prince Llewelin, and
by the Daughter of Henry the 7. from Owen Tudor, as is manifest in the Royal
Descents of his Majesty, King Charles the second and James Duke of York.

Richmondshire is no County of it self but a part of Yorkshire, lying toward
the Northwest; the chief Town is Richmond, first built by Alane E. of Bretagne
the first Earl thereof after the Norman Conquest, who fenced it with a Wall and
a strong Castle, and gave it the Name of Richmont, as a place equally
participating of strength and beauty. The Earls of Bretagne for a long time
together continued in the Titles and Possession of this Country: since it has
been bestowed upon other Families, who in their several Times have been adorned
with the Style of,

Dukes and Earls of Richmond.
1 Alan the Red, E. 2 Alan the black, E. 3 Stephan E. 4 Alan E. 5 Conan E. 6
Jeof. Plantagenet who married Constable. D. to Conan, E. 7 Arthur the Son of Jeof.
E. 8 Guido Viscount Towers 2. Husband of Constable. E. 9 Randolph of Chester by his
wife, E. 10 Peter de Dreux, D. of Bret. 11 Peter de Savoy Uncle to Queen
Elinor. 12 John de Dreux, D. of Bret: E. 13 John de Dreux, D. of Bret. 14 John
de Dreux, D. of Bret. 15 John de Dreux, D. of Bret. 16 John to Montfort, D. of
Rich. 17 John of Gaunt, D. of Lan. E. 18 John de Montfort surnamed the Valiant
E. 19. Ralph Nevill, E. of Richmond durante vita. 20 John D. of Bedford. 21
Edm. of Hadham half brother to K. Hen. 6. 22 Henry E. of Rich. after K. of
England. 23 Henry Fitz Roy, D. of Rich. 24 Lodowick Stewart, D. of Lennox, E.
of Rich. 25 Esme Stewart, D. of Rich. Stewart, D. of Rich. 26 Charles Stewart,
now living, 1660. D. of Rich.
The Duke of Albemarle.
George Monck Duke of ALBEMARLE.
Sir Thomas Monck of Powdrich or Potheridge Com. Devon. Knight. Eliz Daughter
of George Smith of Madeworthy juxta Exceter, Knight. Anthony Monck de eodem Armig.
one of the Deputy Lieutenants Com. Devon. Mary Daug. of Rich Arscot of
Ashwater, Esquire Com. Devon. Thomas Monck, Esquire de eodem. Frances 2. D. and Coh. to
Arthur Plantagenet, Viscount Lisle, who as being an Inheritrix brought unto the
Family of her Husband, these Coats, quarterly in the first, France and England,
quartered in the 2. and 3. Vlster, and in the 4. Mortimer a batune Argent.
Arthur Plantagenet, Knight. of the Garter, natural Son to Edw. 4. by the Lady Eliz.
Lucy, as is supposed, was created Viscount Lisle at Bridewel in London, the 26
of April, 1533 This Arthur was Lieutenant of Calis, which Town some of his
Followers intended to betray to the French, for which with their Fact he was
sent unto the Tower; but the truth appearing after much search, K. Hen. the 8.
sent him a Ring from his Finger, with such comfortable words, that at the
hearing thereof, he was so overjoyed, that in the same night he died. Eliz.
Daughter of Edward Gray, Viscount Lisle, Sister and Coh. to the Lord John Gray
her brother, in whose Right her Husband (after the Surrender of Charles Brandon
Duke of Suffolk) he was Viscount Lisle.

King EDWARD the Fourth.
Richard Plantagenet, Duke of York. Cecely D. to Ralph Nevil first E. of
Westmerland. Richard Plantagenet, E. of Cambridge. Anne D. and Heir to Edmund
Mortimer, E. of March and Vlster, her Brother. Roger Mortimer, E. of March.
Elinor D. of Thomas Holland, E. of Kent. Edmund Martimer, E. of March. Philip
only D. and Heir of Lyonel Plantagenet, D. of Clarence and E. of Vlster. Roger
Martimer, E. of March. Joan D. and Heir of Peter Tenivil or Genevil Lord of
Mede, Vancolour and Trim in Ireland.

This Roger lineally in the Male Line descended from Sir Ralph Mortimer, Lord
of Wigmore, who married Gladis, Daughter to Prince Llewelin (and Sister and
Heir to David by the whole blood) who had Issue Roger Mortimer, Lord VVigmore,
and by right of Inheritance, Prince of Wales.

ALBEMARLE.
AVmerle or Albemerle is the Name of a small Town and Territory in the Dukedom
of Normandy, it belonged heretofore to Stephen Son of Odo, descended from the
Earls of Champagne, who William the Conqueror made Earls of Albemarle as being
the Son of his half sister by the Mothers side, and gave unto him for the
further Maintenance of his Estate, the Territory of Holderness in Yorkshire;
this Title he enjoyed and left to his Posterity who enjoyed it also; and when
his Issue failed, the Kings of England honored others with it though they had
long since lost their Estate in Normandy. The Dukes and Earls whereof take thus
in order.

Dukes and Earls of Aumerle.
Stephen Son of Odo, Earl of Bloys, William le Gros. William de magna Villa, E.
of Essex, who married Hawys D. to William le Gros. William de Fortibus.
William de Fortibus. William de Fortibus. Thomas de Fortibus. Thomas of
Woodstock, D. of Gloucester. Edw. Plantagenet, D. Thomas D. of Clarence, E.
Richard Beauchampe, E. of Warwick, created E. of Aumerle by K. Hen. the 6.
George Monck created Duke of Albemarle by King Charles the Second, in the
Twelfth year of his Reign, 1660.
THE ANCIENT AND MODERN BRITISH and WELSH HISTORY, Beginning with BRVTE, and
continued until KING CHARLES the First. The Second Book.
GVRGVINTVS.
GVRGVINTVS or Gurguint Brabtruc, or according to others, Barbarous, which is
as much as to say, with the red Beard or red-bearded, the Son and Successor of
the Renowned Bellinus, began to sway the Scepter of Great Britain, in the year
of the worlds Creation, 4834. This King in the English Chronicle you shall find
named often Corinbratus or Corinbatus; Vitus Comel. Palatinus calls him
Gurguntius Ahenobarbus, and says, Lib. 3. fol. 198.
He was Vir admomodum prudens, qui gesta patris imitanda sibi proposuit,
maximus amator pacis and aequitatis; A most prudent man, and one who set before
his eyes the glorious Acts of his Father as a pattern for himself to follow and
imitate, a great lover of equity, peace and justice.

Being now fully settled in his Regal Throne, and having purchased the Loyal
affection of his Nobles and Commons, he begins to cast his eye upon Denmark
(which as you have heard before, by the taking of Guilthdacus the Prince
thereof, was made Tributary unto the Britain by imposing a yearly Tribute of
one thousand pounds to the Successive Kings of this Isle) which by what reason
induced, or upon what hopes encouraged, utterly refused to be any longer
subject to a Foreign Power; Gurguint not willing to be baffled by those whom
his Father had subdued, nor desirous to pocket up the loss of a thousand
pounds per annum, musters up his Forces, and in short time appears in the head
of a gallant Army; which being in all points equipide, he ships his men in a
Navy furnished, and with prosperous success, in short time arrives in Denmark;
where not delaying any opportunity, he falls to destroy, waste and ransack the
Country, supposing that to be the speediest and most ready way to bring his
business to a wished Catastrophe. The Danes startle at the sudden and
unexpected approach of so dangerous and unlooked for a Guest; the Danish King
at his wits end, not knowing which way to turn himself, seeing all things go to
rack, and no way to give redress or remedy, thinks it better to enjoy his
Kingdom, paying a small Tribute, rather then to be unking'd and thrust out of
all, and compelled to beg Assistance from neighboring Princes be reinvested:
Upon these cogitations, he consults with his Nobles and Barrons, who all accord
to avoid the extremity of peril, to pay the Tribute, and to give what security
the conquering Enemy shall think fit. Gurguintus is not mispleased with their
submission, but after so victorious an enterprise, with great glory and
triumph, endeavors a speedy return into his own Kingdom; but being now with
his whole Fleet on the main Ocean, a Navy of about thirty sail is discovered
upon the Coast of the Isle of Orcades, which seems to make toward them; yet
upon a nearer approach they appear to be Men, Women and Children, who being
expulsed from their native soil. wander up and down to seek some place of rest
and habitation. Gurguint commands the Commander in Chief, whom our Histories
call Bartholomew, to be brought aboard his ship; who after some few
interrogatories, in a lamentable Oration setting forth both his own and his
Companions disasterous calamities, he gave the King to understand that they
were of Spain, and of that Province whose Inhabitants were called Balenses, and
that they had long traveled and wandered up and down to find some propitious
Prince who would compassionate their most sad and lamentable condition, and
grant them some small Angle or Canton to settle themselves and Posterity; for
the obtaining of which laudable favor, they would become his most faithful
Liege-people and Subjects; otherwise, their Victuals and Provision being now
almost quite spent, they were in all probability like to starve and be utterly
ruined. These sad accidents were spoken with such a doleful Expression by
Bartholomew that Gurguint being a King endued with the virtues of Justice and
Mercy, gave compassion free access into his bosom, and consulting with his
Council, it was generally decreed that they should have allotted unto them the
then void and wast Country, which was and is the furthest of all the Isles
toward the West, called Ireland, which was in the time of Aristotle or the
ancient Author of the Book (...), of the world called Ierna; so does Theodoret
name it: Claudius Ptolomaeus calls it Ivernia or Hibernia, and Claudianus
Hyberne: Scotorum Tumulos flevit glacialis Hyberne. And if Ireland has been at
any time named Scotia or Scotland, Mr. Br. f. 28.
it was only among the Scottish and Irish Writers, and such as followed them
therein, these Irish Historians willing to give that denomination unto it,
because many of the Scots with other people dwelt there, when the true name and
among strangers was not so, but as I have declared before from ancient
Histories, Author of the Book of Estates in Ireland, the state of the Q. of
Great Britain. p. 22.
and to speak out of a late Writers mouth, whose words are these; Ireland,
which some of the Ancients called Hibernia, others Ivernia, Innernia, and Irene
and Ogygia, and by the Irish themselves Erim, called by Ptolomy little
Britain, lies between Britain and Spain; where we see the Name of Scotland
is never attributed simply unto it by these Authors judgments, either by the
Irish themselves or other Writers Late or Ancient.

Concerning the Nomenclation Ogygia, the Count Palatine citing Cambden, tells
us, Si sit verum quod Hiberni Historici narrant, eorum insula merito dicta fuit
Ogygia, id est perantiqua; Cesaram enim ante Diluvium incoluisse scribunt; post
secula plurima Hiberum and Hermionem, Hispanos Gurguntis Regis Brittannorum
permissu Colonias deduxisse in hane Regionem pestilentia exhaustam Historia
Brittanica demonstrat. Haec neque affirmare neque denegare mihi in animo est,
inquit Cambdemus; certe ut Hiberniam antiquitus habitatam crediderim, cum genus
humanum seminaretur per universam terrarum orbem; ita perspicuum est ex
Brittania primos Incolas illic migrasse; nam in Hibernico Sermon vis infinita
est Brittanicarum aictionum; atque vetus cultus Hibernorum, ut ait Cornelius
Tacitus, non multum differt a Brittanico. Denique a Scriptoribus antiquis
omnibus Insula ea Brittanica nominatur, praefertius cum Romani suum imperium
undique propagassent, multi proculdubio ex Hispanis, Gallia and Brittannia se
receperunt in Hiberniam, ne potentiae Romanae subjicerentur, quae res fecit
Julium Agricolam persuadere Romany capere Hiberniam, si Britannos in officio
continere vellent. Attamen Hibernia licet ipso situ fuerit Imperio Romano sum
necessaria, ejusque aditus and Portus per commercia cognita Romany, and Julius
Agricola quendam Hibernum Regulum seditionis expulsum retinuerit ad occasionem
capiendae Insulae, nunquam tamen a Romany in ditionem accepta fuit.

If it be true which the Irish Writers affirm, their Island may justly be
called Ogygia (that is, very ancient;) for they aver Cesara to have there
inhabited before the Deluge; and the History of Brittany avoucheth, that
Hiberus and Hermio, two Spaniards many ages after, by the appointment of
Gurguint King of Great Britain, inhabited it with their Colonies and
Planters; I will neither say it nor gainsay it, quoth Cambden, but certainly
it is very probable that Ireland was very anciently Inhabited when mankind was
dispersed and spread abroad over the face of the whole earth; and manifest it
is, the first Inhabitants to have come thither out of Brittannia; for in the
Irish Speech there are a multitude of British words and accents; and as
Cornelius Tacitus tells us, the mode of the Irish differs not much from the
Britains. And for a Conclusion of this Discourse, by the most ancient Writers,
that Island is called Brittanica or British; and evident it is, that when the
Roman valor and glory had conquered and spread it self almost throughout the
whole known world, diverse as well out of Spain as France and Britttain fled
thither for shelter, not willing to submit their necks and shoulders under the
Roman yoke, which was indeed the very cause that moved Julius Agicola to
persuade the Romans to get Possession of Ireland if they ever meant to keep the
Britains in s bjection. And although that Island was of great consequence and
necessary to the Romans, neither were their Ports and Haven by reason of the
constant and daily Commerce and Trafick to them unknown; And Julius Agricola
having got a certain Irish petty King into his clutches, driven by sedition
from his native soil, intended to make him his decoy to seize and fasten upon
the Irish jurisdictions; yet for all these stratagems Ireland never came under
the Roman slavery or obedience.

Gurguint being hitherto victorious and fortunate, returns home, having his
head enriched with Laurels of choicest honor and renown, being a Prince of
singular prudence and justice, and having laid the Sword aside, he applies
himself to build Cities and Towns for the great beauty of his Kingdom; The
first place which he erected, was (as says Howes citing J. Rouse) Caierwerith,
that is, Lancaster; of which place the Learned Cambden speaking, Lancaster
built by Gurguim.
has these words; 'Vbi sub Britanniarum duce ut est in Notitia Provinciarum,
numerus Longovicariorum, qui e loco suum nomen sunt mutuati, stationem habuit;
Whereas we find in the notice of Provinces, a company of the Longovicarians
under the Lieutenant General of Britain lay, which took their name from the
place, that is, from the River Lon, which gave name also to Loncaster, and
Longovicum; this is only a Market town at this day; the ancient Town stood
where after was a Cloister; at the foot of the hill are fragments of old walls,
and oft-times Roman Coyns are found; but above all, there are the ruins of a
very antique structure, which is called Werywall: Recentiori ut videtur hujus
oppidi nomine: Hoc enim oppidum, says Mr. Cambden, ilii Caerwerid (i. e.)
Vrbem viridem dixerunt a viridanti forsitan illo colle; This Town the Britains
called Caerwerid, that is to say the Green town, perchance taking its Name from
the Green hill which is there.

The first time this place became an Earldome was when K. Hen. 3. conferred
that Title on his second Son Edm. and it was destinate to greatness in the
first Foundation, there being laid unto it at the very first, besides this
County, the whole confiscated Estates of the Earls of Leicester and Derby, and
the Barony of Monmouth. And into this by Marriages accrued in time the great
Estates of William de Fortibus, Earl of Aumerl and Lord of Holderness, Beauford
and other goodly Lands in France, the Earldom of Lincoln and good part of that
of Salisbury, the Lordships of Ogncare and Kidwelly in Wales which were once
the Chaworths; John of Gaunt added thereunto the Castles and Honors of Hertford
and Tickhill, and his Son Bullingbroke a moiety of the Lands of Bohun, being
Earl of Hertford, Essex and Northampton, so that it was the greatest Patrimony
(as I verily think) of any Subject Prince in Christendom. Lancaster finally
was made a County Palatine by King Ed. the 3. and has been honored with these

Dukes and Earls of Lancaster.
Edmund Plantagenet 2. Son to K. Hen. 3. E. of Lan. Thomas Plantagenet. Henry
Plantagenet. Henry Plantagenet first D. of Lan. John of Gaunt Son to K. Ed. 3.
married the Lady Blanch Daughter of Henry D. of Lan. Henry of Bullinbroke, Son
of John of Gaunt, after King of England, by whom this County Palatine and all
the Lands and Honors belonging and incorporate into the Duchy of Lancaster,
were brought unto the Crown of England, though governed as an Estate apart then
by its proper Officers, as it continued till the time of K. Ed. 4. who did
appropriate it to the Crown, and dissolved the former Government thereof; to
which it was restored again by K. Hen. 7. and so still remains under the
guidance of Chancellor and other Officers of the same.
The next Town which Gurgunstus (as Howes calls him) built, was Porchester in
Hampshire, of which place Cambden speaking of those parts, says; In cujus
interiori recessu olim floruit Port Peris ad quem Vespasianum appulisse nostri
produnt. Saxones novo Nomine Portchester dixerunt, non a Porta Saxone sed a
portu; Ptolomaeo enim (...) (i. e.) portus magnus vocatur; castrumque sanc
amplum superest quod in subjectum portum long lateque prospectat; where in
times past Port Peris flourished, where in succeeding Ages our Writers affirm,
Porchester built by Garguint.
Vespasian when he came into Britain first landed, the Saxons changed the Name
into Portchester, but not deriving it from Porta the Saxon Chieftain, but from
Port (i. e.) Haven or Harbor, in which sense Ptolomy uses (...), the great
Harbor or Port; this by the ancient Britains was called Caer Peris, and was
one of the eight and twenty Sees where the Flamens were seated; in our times it
is a Garrison, where in King James his time Sir Cornewallis was Captain.

The third and last place which this Fortunate Prince built was Warwick;
Cambden says, Warwick built by Gurgaint.
That the Saxons called this place Warryng-wyc. Mennius and the Britains Cair
Guarvie and Caer leon, all which Names seem to take their derivation from the
British word Guarth, which signifies a Garrison, Sconce or place of Defense;
Hoc illud oppidum est quod praesidium Romany in Brittannia dicebatur, ubi ut
est in provinciarum Notitia praefectus equitum Dalmatarum sub dispositione
Ducis Brittanniorum egit; The situation of this place is most pleasant upon a
Hill rising from the River, over which is a strong and fair stone Bridge, and
her sharp stream upon the Town side checked with a most fair and sumptuous
Castle: It seems this Town has been walled about, as appears by the Trench
in some places seen, and two very fair Gates, whose passages are hewed out of
the Rock, as all other into the Town are; over which two beautiful Chapels are
built; that toward the East, called St. Peter's, and on the South-west St.
James; two fair Churches are therein seated, called St. Mary's and St.
Nicholas; beside these in and about the Town suppressed, St. Laurence, St.
Michaels, St. John Baptist and St. John of Jerusalem, and the Nunnery in the
North of the Town; the Castle which we named, was ruinous, but was of late
Repaired at the great cost and charges of Sir Fulk Grenil, the late Lord Brook,
who therein dwelt; so was it anciently the Seat and abiding Place of the

Dukes and Earls of Warwick.
1 Henry de Newburgh, E. 2 Roger de Newburgh. 3 William de Newburgh. 4 Walleran
de Newburgh. 5 Henry de Newburgh, L^senge, Or, and Azure on a border Gules 8
plates. 6 Thomas de Newburgh, Chechy Or, Azure and a Cheveron ermin. 7 John
Marshall first Husband of Margery, Sister and Heir of Thomas de Newburgh. Gules
a bend fusile, Or. 8 John de Placetis, second Husband of the said Margery. Ar,
6 annulets, Gules 321. 9 Walleran de Newburgh, Uncle and Heir of Thomas de
Newb. Losenge, Or and Azure on a border gules 8 plates. 10 William Manduit Son
of Alice, Sister and Heir of Walleran. Ar, 2 bars, Gules. 11 William Beauchamp
Son of the Lady Isabella, Sister and Heir of William Manduit. 12 Guido
Beauchamp. 13 Thomas ^eauchamp, E. Marst. 14 Thomas Beauchamp. 15 Rich
Beauchamp, Reg. of France. 16 Henry Beauchamp, D. of Warwick. Gules, a fess
between 6 cross croslets, Or. 17 Richard Nevill who married Anne, sister of
Henry Beuchamp, D. of Warwick, Gules, a saltoir arg. a label of three gob. A
and B. 18 George D. of Clarence, who married Anne D. of Ri. Nevill, England and
France, quartered on a label of 3 points, arg. as many cantons G. 19 Edw.
Plant. Son of George, arma paterna. 20 John Dudley descended from the Lady
Margaret, Daughter of Rich. Beauchamp, E. of War. 21 Ambrose Dudley. Or a Lion
rampant, his tail double-sorked, veet. 22 Robert Lord Rich, created E. of
Warwick, 16 Jac. Aug. 2. 23 Robert Rich. Gules, a cheveron between 3 cross
croslets Or.


Gurguntius buried at Caerleon.
After Gurguint had ruled this Kingdom by the space of twenty nine years in
great peace and tranquillity, he departed out of this transitory life, and was
buried at Caerleon, leaving to succeed him his Son Guinthelinus or Guintellius.

GVINTHELINVS.
GVINTHELINVS or Guintellius the Son of Gurguint, his Father being dead, took
upon him the Government of this Island, and was crowned King of Great Britain,
in the year of the World, four thousand eight hundred fifty and three. The
English Chronicle calls this Prince Gwentoline, a man of singular Parts and
Education, understanding exactly both the Greek and Latin Language; he
governed his Subjects with such moderation and judgment, that his Memory
deserves to live for ever; and to make him the more glorious, the heavenly
Providence bestowed upon him a Lady for his wife, who equalized him in all the
Excellencies that can be expressed in her Sex; she was so transcendent being but
a woman, that she had beautified her intellectual parts with the knowledge and
perfection of many Sciences, insomuch that she might justly be styled learned;
but above all, these rich Treasures of her mind she employed not to ostentation
or vainglory that thereby she might be praised, but made use of them for the
common good and utility of the Kingdom. Martiae who was the Paragon of her
time and nature also, she composed a Law so conducing to the good of all, that
in memory of her, it was called the Martian Law, and continued in full force
and power many years, and so well approved of by Aluredus the Saxon Prince,
that he thought it an honor to him to translate it himself out of the British
Language for the good of his Subjects into the Saxon Tongue, and called it
Mathehelage, that is, the Law of Martia; great was her assistance to her Kingly
Consort in the Administration of the Republic, insomuch that after his
decease, their Son being in his minority and very young, all Orders of the
Kingdom, as well Nobles as Commons, for her great Wisdom and Discretion made
choice of her to be Queen Regent, till her Son came to full Age, and in this
condition she ruled for the space of some years; though they be not numbered, by
reason that her Son had the Title of King, yet the Count Palatine tells us,
That Deinceps Martia uxor ejus, Vitus.
a qua conditae sunt Martiae Leges, regnat annis septem cum Filio suo; and then
(viz. after the death of her Husband) Martia his wife who made the Martian Law,
reigned jointly with her Son seven years. De quo Polidorus, Polidorus.
Nutu Dei factum (inquit) est ut Guintolinus ad Regnum civilibus dissensionibus
quassatum perveniret, quod reduceret illud in pristinum statum, id quod
graviter fecit; Eo enim potitus, Rempublicam Brittanicam ejus Legibus ac
moribus velut de integro condere ac ornare maxim studuit; sed ante omnia
civiles discordias quae adhuc tanquam reliquiae factionum durabant, penitus
sedavit. Huic uxor erat nomine Martia mulier praeter caeteras pulchra and
sapiens, quae peperit unicum filium Sicilium; iste mortuo patre cum nondum
esset maturus imperio, Martia multarum rerum perita Regni curam interim
suscepit, quod Reipublicae erat id imprimis sibi faciendum rata, leges tulit
quas posteri Martianas appellarunt.

This King was called by some Guttelinus, and by others, after the Roman
Dialect, Guintelinus; who after he had ruled six and twenty year left this
world, and was buried at Troynovant or London, leaving his only Son Sisillius
to succeed him in his Kingdom.

SISILLIVS.
SISILLIVS or Cecilius Son to Guinthelinus, began his Reign over the Britains,
in the year of the World, four thousand eight hundred seventy and nine. The
English Chronicle calls this King Seizill; either he lived in great peace and
tranquil^ity, as well he might, his most worthy Parents both the heroic Prince
his Father and beautiful and prudent Queen his Mother, having quite extinguished
all, even the least sparks of Sedition and Rebellion, and left the Realm in
perfect quietness, or else the Records of his life perished; for Writers
relate very little of him; only Mr. Howes tells us (as the Scotch Writers say)
that he Reigned seven years, and that in the very first year after his coming
to the Crown, Picts arrive in Britain.
the Picts arrived in Britain and possessed those parts, which now be the
Marches of both Kingdoms betwixt England and Scotland, and confusedly makes no
distinction betwixt Scots and Picts; whereas Authors affirm that the
Highland-men, the natural Scots indeed, are supposed to descend from the
Scythians, who with the Getes infesting Ireland, The Author of a Book of Maps,
printed 1646. printed for Will. Humble Anonymus.
left both their Issue there and their manners, apparent in the wild Irish and
Highlanders even to this day. And from Scythia as is thought the name of Scots
grew; for so the Netherlands by Scutten express indifferently the Scythian and
Scot: so Gildas calls the Irish Britains, Scythians; so King Elfred in
translating the History of Orosius turns Scots in Scyttan; and so says
Walsingbam from one and the same Original, Scythe Scytici, Scotae Scotini take
their names, as from Getae Getici, Goti Gotici have done.

As for the Picts (says the same Author) anciently inhabiting part of that
Kingdom, they were Inborn Britains, and such as thither fled to avoid the
Romans servitude; whose Names began first to be distinguished under Dioclesian
the Emperor, when they were termed Picts from painting their bodies like the
Britains, as says Flavius Vigetius, which is more strengthened, for that the
Northern Britains converted by St. Columb, are called Brittan Picts; but the
Conversion of that Nation may more properly be attributed to Saint Ninian;
Ninianus Bernicius ex Regio Brittannorum sanguine procreatus, Italiam adhuc
adolescens literarum studio petit; Romae apud divini Verbi ministros mysteria
Veritatis edoctus ad plenum, celer in-patriam remigrabat; ubi Magister and
Paedonomus non vulgaris concreditum a Deo Talentum per Brittannorum, Scotorum,
Australiumque Pictorum, terras latissime profudit. Hujus pia industria Picti
primum relicto Idololatriae cultu, St. Ninian a Britain.
veram Christi fidem percepere; Ninian born of the Royal British Blood, being
yet a youth, went into Italy to follow his Studies, and at Rome was fully
taught the Mysteries of Truth by the Teachers of the divine Word, and then
returned into his own Country; where becoming a Master and Instructor above the
ordinary pitch of men, he distributed the Talent bestowed upon him by Almighty
God amongst the Britains, Jo. Bal. li. de Ser. Brit. cen. 1. iu Niniano
Bernicio. Hector Boethius Scot. Hist. li. 7. Fol. 119.
Scots, and Southern Picts, cast off the bondage of Idolatry, and embraced the
sweet yoke of Christianity. And for those holy labors was in former times, as
our Histories testify by all, throughout all Brittanny called by the title of
Doctor and Inctructor of the Scots, Picts and Britains; Scotorum, Pictorum,
Britonumque Doctor and Paedonomus non vulgaris; and eo nomine omnibus qui
Albionem incolunt vel hac nostra aetate in multa veneratione habitus; and in
that respect was had in great veneration by all the Inhabitants of the Kingdom
of Albion. The first King I read of, of that Nation that was Christian, was
Hiergustus, King of the Picts, who with his Pictish people and subjects were
Christians, Mr. Br. fo. 582.
and publicly professed that Religion: but in the time of Maximus all the
Scots were banished out of this Land, which was in the year of Christ, Hec.
Boe. l. 6. Histo. Buchan. Rer. Sco. l. 4. in Rege 39.
379. 'Annus a Christi adventu in carnem, tricentesimus septuagesimus nonus;
the Picts were generally and publicly instructed and professed Christians. And
also in the days of King Fincomark of Scotland, who reigned 47 years, and died
multis virtutibus nobilis; and in the year of Christ, 358. 'Salutis humanae
anno trecentesimo quinquagesimo octavo, the Picts had received the Faith of
Christ, and before that time; For whilst King Fincomark reigned, Annal. Scot.
Hec. Boe. sup. l. 6. fol. 104. Hollish. Hist. of Ireland.
Fincomarko Rege Scotis adhuc imperante, By diverse Writers many of the Irish
people received the law of Christ, by means of a worthy Christian woman of the
Picts, as the Scottsh and other Histories testify. Per id tempus mulier
Christianae pietatis cultrix, Pictici eam fuisse sanguinis, Scotici asserunt
Annals, Regina insinuata Christi nomen illi mirifice praedicavit reverendumque
effecit.

This our British St. Ninian deserves eternal memory for converting the
Picts. Interea Sanctus Ninianus Australes Pictos quibus adhuc error gentilis
inhaerens Idola venerari ac colere compellebat, aggrediens Evangelii veritatem
sequentibus signis praedicabat; caeci vident, claudi ambulant, leprosi
mundantur, surdi audiunt, mortui resurgunt, oppressi a daemonibus liberantur;
sicque fides suscipitur, error abdicatur, destructis Templis Ecclesiae
eriguntur, currunt ad salutis lavacrum divites, pauperes gratias Deo agunt in
insulis quae procul sunt habitantes. Ordinavit Presbyteros, Episcopos
consecravit, and totam terram per certas parochias divisit. In the mean time
St. Ninian going to the Picts, which yet were Pagans and worshipped Idols,
preached the Truth of the Gospel unto them, with these signs following; The b
lind see, the lame walk, lepers are cleansed, the dead are raised, and they
which were oppressed with Devils are delivered. And so the Faith is received,
Error abandoned, Pagan Temples are destroyed, Christian Churches erected, Rich
and poor are baptized, those that inhabit in the Isles a far off, give thanks
to God. He ordained Priests, consecrated Bishops, and divided the whole Land by
certain Parishes.

Bid. Hist. lib. 3. cap. 4. Capgr. in St. Ninio Guli. Malm. l. 4. de gest.
Pont Angl. The first Stone building in Britt.
And having thus converted and confirmed the people unto and in the Faith of
Christ, being the chiefest end of his Mission and coming hither, he returned to
his Church, Confirmatis in fide omnibus ad Ecclesiam suam est regressus; This
House and Episcopal Church which he now returned unto, was the same which he
had built before of stone, called, for the rareness of such building in
Britain, that being the first, as our History says, and thereby named Candida
Casa, the white House or Church, at a place called Witerne, between Scotland
and England, as they are now termed, upon the Sea coast quite environed with
the Sea, excepting the passage on the North side thereof. Candida Casa vocatur
locus in extremis Angliae juxta Scotiam finibus ubi beatus Confessor Niva
requiescit, Natione Brito, qui primus ibidem Christi praedicationem
Evangelizavit. Nomen loco ex opere inditum quod Ecclesiam ibi ex lapide polito
Britonibus miraculum fecerit.

The Count Palatine will have this King to have reigned fifteen years alone,
and speaks some thing favorably in his behalf; Regina Martia (says he)
gubernaculum 7 annorum accepit cum filio unico adhuc puero, qui Sisillius eo
nomine secundus appellatur, and feliciter insequutus vestigia patris,
administrat quindecim annos postea solus, and mortuus Caerleili sepelitur. To
this account of fifteen years agrees the English History, says Fabian; but
the Flower of Histories allows unto his Reign only seven years: howsoever
Death demanded his due, and summoned this King into another world; Sisillius
burled at Caerleon.
whose Body, as Mr. Howes says, was buried at Caerleon, and not at Caerlile;
but the nearness of the Names questionless breeds the mistake. He left behind
him his Son Kimarus to succeed him.

KIMARVS.
KIMARVS Son of Sisilius, after the death of his Father, was with all solemnity
advanced to the Throne and Crown of Britain, in the year of the worlds
Creation, four thousand eight hundred fourscore and six. The English Chronicle
calls him Kymor. Fabian says, that there is no mention made of this King
either concerning his deeds and course of life, or concerning the length of his
Reign; yet he alleges an old Chronicle to aver, that he was a wild young man,
and lived after his pleasure; wherefore as he was at his disport of Hunting, he
was by his Ill-willers slain when he had ruled scarcely three years: but the
Count Palatine says, he was killed by wild Beasts;, Illius filius ( says he,
speaking of Sisilius) Chimarus in imperando successit, moribus adolescens
improbus, suique in rebus omnibus agendis arbitrii ac voluntatis, adeo ut post
tres annos quibus rexit a feris bestiis dum venabatur occisus est. Kimarus
succeeded, a young man of most dissolute life and behavior, who swayed all
things according to the humor of his own vain and fantastic imagination, and
not according to the rule of reason and judgment; insomuch that after the
three years of his Reign he was devoured of wild Beasts. It behooves Princes as
well as others to have a care how they live: For the holy Writ tells us, Fire,
hail, famine and death, Eccles. c. 39.
all these things are created for man's punishment, the Teeth of Beasts for the
utter extermination of the wicked.

It is great reason that Princes should regulate their lives after the true
square of virtue; for a Prince cannot with reason expect that the severity of
Laws, or other Politic means shall repress in his Commonwealth, any Vice
which shall be Authorized by the Example of his own Practice. For as the Poet
says, -- Totus componitur Orbis
Regis ad exemplum; nec sic inflectere sensus
Humanos edicta valent ut vita Regentis.
That is to say, all the World is framed after the model of the King; and no
Laws or Edicts can so move the mind of men as does the life of the Governor;
which Plutarch confirms notably, saying, That even as a Square or Rule must
be straight in it self before it can make other things straight; so the Prince
who is, as it were, the Rule of his Subjects, ought first to rectify himself
before he go about by Laws or other means to rectify his Commonwealth; for he
that is falling, says Plutarch, is not fit to uphold others, nor he that is
ignorant to teach, nor he that is incorrigible to correct, nor he that is
himself disordered to put others in order.

ELIANVS.
ELIANVS the Son of Kimarus, whom some also call Danius, as the Flower of
Histories affirms, but Gaufride says, he was Kimarus Brother, was Crowned
King of Britain, in the year of the worlds Creation, four thousand eight
hundred fourscore and nine. This Prince by the English Book is called Howan:
one Chronicle will have Kimarus and Elianus to be one and the same person,
though others think otherwise, and that he reigned two years; little or nothing
being left to posterity of any memorable Acts of his, either good or bad: only
the Count Palatine tells us, Frater eum sequitur Elianus, natura stupidior, and
legum spretor, quocirca rem administrabat imprudenter, bellis and seditionibus
undecunque vexatus, neque pacem habere potuit vel public vel privatim, illis
december annis quibus imperabat; Elianus his Brother succeeded him, of a most
stupid nature, and a contemner of all Laws, which was the cause that he
governed with great indiscretion his Kingdom and Commonwealth, being
continually vexed and troubled with insurrections and seditions, insomuch that
during the ten years of his Reign he could never enjoy either privately or
otherwise one hour of peace; this was one amongst the British Princes, for
whose sake, as Gildas the wise writes, the whole Nation suffered.

MORINDVS.
MORINDVS the Bastard-son of Elianus, as Gaufride affirms with others, took
upon him the Crown and Government of this Island of Great Britain, in the year
of the worlds Creation, four thousand eight hundred and ninety. Elianus begat
this Prince upon Tanguestula his Concubine, who proved as Bastards commonly
do, being gotten in the heat of Courage, a most resolute and courageous
Chieftain, but so over-swayed by his own passions, especially that of anger,
that in his fury no man's life was secure. To the matchless strength of his
body, Nature added all those features which might make him the most handsome
and accomplished Gentleman in all his Kingdom; these his admirable endowments
he beautified with a most Princely liberality, being very open-handed when the
least merit required. During the Reign of Morindus, there arrived out of
Mauritania (which Country according to Strabo is seated between Hungaria and
Fohemia,) a warlike and most cruel people, which with Fire and Sword consumed
all before them. Morindus having tidings brought to him of those insolences and
misdemeanors, with all speed Levied an Army, and with speedy Marches
encounters his Enemy, and after a most bloody Conflict, compels the greatest
part of the unwelcome Intruders back to their Ships; the rest he sacrifices to
his own anger, causing some to be dismembered, others cast into the fire, some
chopped in pieces, not a few strangled; death acted several parts in this most
horrid execution; no manner of torment imaginable to Morindus was left
uninflicted, so great was the tyranny of his blood-thirsting revenge. After
this great overthrow and most cruel Massacre, this British King progressing a
long the Sea coasts for his Recreation, chanced to discry a most hideous
Monster coming out of the Irish Ocean. Morindus is overjoyed at this presented
occasion to try the edge of his matchless Valor; and therefore putting spurs
to his Horse, stays not but prevents the coming of this hellish Fury, and with
most Knightly Courage and Gallantry (as Guido de Columna and others aver,)
gives a most fierce Encounter to the Fiend; but after a long and cruel
Conflict, having quite spent his spirits, he is swallowed up and devoured by
that Fish, Fiend or Monster, after he had Reigned, according to most Writers,
eight years, leaving after him, five Sons, Gorbomannus or Gorbonian,
Archigallus, Elidurus, Vigenius or Nigenius, and Peredurus; Morindus (says the
Count Palatine) quem Elianus ex Tangustula Concubina suscepit, Rex creatur. Is
magna quidem probitate morum futurus erat vir clarus ad omnem temporum
aeternitatem, nisi nimium indulsisset asperitati, crudelitatique, and incitatus
ad iram se tam insolenter and superbe cum hominibus gessisset, ut omnino
parceret nemini, furoreque percitus nec etiam amicos suos vellet ab hostibus
internoscere; nam quod ad caetera pertinet, homo fuit aspectu pulcher,
muneribusque dandis largiter assuefactus; tantae vero fortitudinis, ut cum eo
luctari vel armis congredi nemo auderet. Maurorum rex quidem ingressus, magna
vi militum dicebatur Northumbriam divastare, cui Morindus, collecta manu
juventutis, fit obvius, ac prae'ium instituens fertur plus efficisse solus,
quam reliqua pars totius exercitus; nam ubi Victor evasit, ne quidem unum ex
hostibus reliquit superstitem; jubebat homo immanis ordine singulos captivos ad
se produci, ut quemlibet ita seorsim perimendo suam feritatem exsatiaret;
cumque fatigatus quodammodo nec dum cessaret ardor ille sanguinis humani
profundendi, hoc amplius jubebat eos qui adhuc superessent pelle detracta de
toto corpore protenus comburi, qua ex re famam and gloriam consequi sperabat;
ideo cum ex Hibernico mari bellua quaedam inauditae feritatis and magnitudinis
quasi monstrum naturae aliquod certum emersisset, appulissetque in Brittaniam,
and Maritimos populos vehementer divexasset, ipsemet Rex clam suis satellitibus
ad littora pergit, and solus cum immani bellua marina congreditur; eamque sicut
ipse interemit, sic ab ea vicissim interfectus est postquam novem imperasset.

GORBOMANNVS.
GORBOMANNVS, or as the English Book calls him, Granbodian, his Father being
dead, is Crowned King of Great Britain, in the year of the worlds Creation,
four thousand eight hundred ninety eight: A Prince, as says Gaufride, just in
all his actions, insomuch that we may call him our British Numa; for his first
care was the honor of his Gods, unto whom he erected Temples for divine
Honor, add repaired such as were ruinous and decayed; to his Subjects he did
Justice, and to all men Right, exactly observing that excellent rule of
morality, Quod tibi fieri non vis, alteri ne feceris; in his time Britain
flourished in abundance of Wealth and Riches; for Peace begot Plenty, and that
plenty caused the Subjects to Honor their Prince as the very Author thereof.
R. Vitus. f. 200.
Gorbomannus primo natus ascendit regni solium, quo viro justior vel amantior
aequi nemo repertus est, aut qui majore cum cura populum gubernaret. Assiduus
illi mos erat, primum. Deis debitum honorem impendere, populis deinde jus
reddere; in fere omnibus civitatibus Deorum Templa collapsa instaurat, and ex
integro nova condit. Art tanta divitiarum honest parandarum utebatur, quanta
nullus in insula princeps unquam; quippe colonos ad agriculturam excitabat, eos
ab injuria virorum potentium defendebat, adolescentes potissimum idoneos ad
bellum gerendum benign accepit, eosque crebris pecuniarum largitionibus a
rapinis faciendis. abstinebat: denique talem inter cives operam suaviter and
amice vivendo praestabat, ut eo regnante, damnum dare aut vim infer nemo
auderet, ne quidem ille qui caeterorum pessimus vulgo existimaretur; cum hac
innata sibi bonitate morum postquam Brittanos opibus affluentes rexisset
undecim annos, vita functus est, Vrbe Trinovanta sepelitur: Gorbomannus the
eldest Son is inaugurated King, surpassing all in his time for justice, mercy
and careful governing of his Subjects; His first thoughts called upon him to
offer up unto the Gods all due reverence and honor, and after that to do
right unto every man; in each place he repaired the ruinous and decayed
Temples, and in many Towns founded new; He exceeded all the Princes his
Predecessors in gathering Riches, and that in so upright a way, that he was
rather highly to be extolled then any way to be grudged at; for he animated the
harmless Husband to agriculture and closely to follow his Plough, keeping them
under his protection, and defending them from the oppression of griping
Landlords, and over-topping great-ones: Youth which he esteemed fit to be
trained up for Martial Discipline, he furnished with large Donatives, Salaries
and advance-Monies, whereby to keep them from plundering and such peccadillio's
as are incident to men of that profession. To conclude, he gave such Example by
his temperate and just living to his Subjects, that even he who was branded
with the infamy of the basest Varlet, durst not presume to offer an injury or
outrage unto his Neighbor. This good King after he had Ruled Britain in the
height of wealth and prosperity, gave way to Fate, and was buried at London.

This King in his devotion toward his false gods, having repaired and new
built so many Temples, questionless allotted Flamens or Druids to offer the
wonted sacrifices; the Druids were of high esteem amongst the Britains, and of
large Antiquity; for Pontalion says, their beginning was in the year of the
worlds Creation, 2900. But the profession of the Druids, which the Britains,
the Inhabitants of Gallia, and a great part of Germany, had many hundreds of
years followed and practiced, was impious, false and idolatrous, damnable and
diabolical. They worshipped for gods, Jupiter, Apollo, Mars, Mercury, Audate,
Berecynthia, and some others. Mr. Br. f. 241. Hen. Pan. l. de vir. illust. Ger.
part. 1. p. 40. 41. Seldom, Anal. Alab. l. 1. c. 1. c. 4 Berosus Nichol.
Vignier. Biblio. Hist. an. Mundi 2200. Hist. Aggregat. de Annal. f. 3. Bernar.
Giunti Chro. in Dryus. Joan. Frisius, Bibliot. Philos. an. Mund. 2070 ante
Christum 1892. Jo. Bal. lib. de Scrip. Cent. 1. in Semothe. Cambd. Britt. p.
11. Pliny. l. 12. c. 1. Lud. Caelius. li. 7. c. 1. Tac. l. de morib. and pop.
Germa. Andu. Altham, in Schol. n. Cor. Tacit. Jul. Caesar. l. 6. bell. Gall.
Hector Boethius. Scot. Hist. li. 2. f. 22. 23.
Their religion and themselves had continued by that Name and flourished in the
world from the time of Druius the great King and high Priest; Druius Germanorum
Pontifex, who reduced the Gentiles Religion into this Order, Founded them a
College, and gave them their denomination about the year of the worlds
Creation, 2900. Druius ille apud Germanorum Celtas, vir magnae authoritatis
Gentilitiam religionem in ordinem redegit, atque Druidorum Collegium religionis
ergo constituit, a quo etiam Druides apud Gallos and Germanos dicti. And the
Town in Normandy Dreux also was named from him, as their Histories say, and the
River Druentia running thereby; what was the exact time of their beginning is
not certain: Pantalion says it was in the year of the world, 2900. Joannes
Frisius says in the year thereof 2070, and 1892 before Christ. Bernard Giunti
will have it in the 420 year after the Flood of Noe. Nicholas Vignier ascribes
the Reign of King Dryus or Cruius unto the year of the World 2200. Therefore I
cannot be of the mind of those late Writers, which say, they were called
Druides of (...) an Oak in Greek, because they used to be sometimes under Oaks
in woods, for so we might call all old Idolators Druids; for the Scriptures
witness, they sacrificed in woods and groves; so does Pliny, Lud. Caelius and
others, Lucos and memora consecrant. And the Greek Writers as Eutropius,
Herodian, Dio, Zosimus and the rest, are silent of this sect, as the Latins
also, but when they speak of Britain, France and Germany, where only and no
where else this Religion remained: And Julius Casar is plain, there were no
Druids in Germany, but they differed much from the Gauls in Religion; Germani
multum a Gallorum consuetudine differunt; Nam neque Druides habent qui rebus
divinis praesunt. And the Scottish Historians say, the ancient Name of those
men in the Language here was Durcergliis, and they were Romans who spoke not
Greek, who gave them the first Name Druides a Druius, to make the strange Name
to take Latin Declension, Hos Romani scriptores Druides, ut peregrinum
vocabulum inflectionem caperet Latinam, appellant. And here were no Greeks in
these parts to give them a Greek Name, neither did their Sect come nere any
part of Greece at any time, or howsoever we will pronounce the Greek word (...)
an Oak, Drys or Drus, we should by the deriving them from thence, call them
Dryssets or Drussets as of Chus and Huss we call Cussits and Hussits, and not
Druides or Druids. But for their Antiquity truly they might make it of so great
continuance.

Neither was their honor and glory in Britain or where else they lived of a
low degree; Vestitus eorum valde preciosus atque ornatus insignis; nam collo
torques, manibus annuli, lacertis armillae addebantur; vestes erant tinctae and
auro pictae: Their apparel was very precious, and attire singular; for they
wore Chains of gold about their necks, Rings on their hands, and Bracelets on
their arms; their Garments were dyed and embroidered with Gold. And their
Habitations and Dwellings were no less stately, the chiefest of them seated in
the best Cities of Britain, and their Mansions converted after to be
Archbishops and Bishops Palaces; sometimes they resorted to woods, as all
ancient Witches, Magicians and Idolaters did, to exercise their Sorceries, and
offer their Sacrifices, especially to such Oaks as bore Misseltoe, naturally
medicinable for diverse infirmities, and therefore to the rude people they
ascribe a certain Divinity to such Trees: Mr. Br. f. 242.
Their Houses as themselves also had exemptions from all Services, Exactions
and Troubles; They were chief Judges in all matters both Temporal and
Spiritual, having all men obedient to their Order, Sentence and Determination,
under the greatest penalty of abandoning and exilement from the society of Men,
and such like, and death it self at their pleasures, designing whom they listed
to be cruelly sacrificed to their Devils and Idols, whom they termed Gods: the
chiefest of them had for a singular sign of honor, Fire born before him; '
Ante quem ignis dignitatis honorisque; insigne deferretur. Ammianus Marcellinus
speaking of these men gives this praise unto them, That they were of great
Wits, and lived in Companies or Colleges, according as Pythagoras ordained;
they were lifted up with questions of hidden and high things, and despising
humane matters, pronounced that men's souls were immortal; Druidae ingeniis
celsiores, ut Autoritas Pythagorae decrevit, sodalitiis astricti consortiis,
questionibus occultarum rerum altarumque erecti sunt, and despectantes humana,
pronunciarunt animas immortales. Which opinion of theirs of the souls
immortality Julius Caesar with diverse others also confirms, but in a lewd
sense of Transmig^ation or going from one body to another; Hic volunt
persuadere non interire animas sed ab aliis post mortem transire ad alios. And
if any man was dangerously sick, in war or peril, and would offer sacrifice or
vow, they used the Druids as Ministers to offer it; Qui sunt afflicti
gravioribus morbis, quique in praeliis periculisque versantur, aut pro victimus
homines immolant, aut se immolaturos vovent, administrisque ad ea sacrificia
Druidibus utuntur. Diodorus Siculus who lived in the same time with Julius
Caesar, gives this reason, that the Druids were thus used for Priests in all
sacrifices of the Britains and Gauls, much to their honor in their opinion,
who were ruled by the Druids, because they hold that sacrifices should be
offered by them, which be acquainted with the divine nature, and are skilful of
the language of the gods; and they think that by these men's intercession good
things should be asked of the gods, by whose Counsel they enjoy peace and war;
Est apud eos moris, nullum absque Philosopho sacrificium facere; existimant
enim per divinae naturae conscios sacra fieri oportere, tanquam linguae deorum
peritos, atque horum intercessione bona a deis censent petenda, quorum consilio
and pace and bello fruuntur. The Authors of the Theater of Great Britain make
Caesar and ancient Writers to speak in this manner; The Druids Office was
employed about holy things; for they had the managing of public and private
sacrifices, and to interpret and discuss matters of Religion unto them, do
resort great numbers of young men to learn at their hands, and they be had in
great reverence; for they determine almost all Controversies and matters in
variance as well public as private: and if there happen any thing to be done
amiss, or if there be any murder committed, if there arise any controversy
concerning inheritance or bounds of Lands, they take the matter into their
power and award either recompense or penalties in the Case; and if there be any
(be it private person or be it Corporation, Theat. of Great Britt. lib. 6.
) that will not stand to their judgment, they interdict him with punishment;
among them it is held most grievous: They that are so excommunicated, are
accounted in the number of the wicked and ungracious; All men shun them, all
men fly their company and communication. This is one of the chiefest things
that they labor most to beat into men's minds, that their Souls die not, but do
after death, pass from one to another, and hereby they think men should be most
stirred unto virtue, when fear of death is nothing regarded. Also they dispute
many other things, as of the stars, of their movings, of the bigness of the
world and the earth, of the nature of things, of the strength and power of the
immortal Gods, and do therein instruct their youth. Thus we have heard what
those Druids and their Followers were.

Now let us a little examine their cause by their own Writers and their own
proceedings; for to write at large of their most gross and inhumane
absurdities, would require a Volume from me, as the like had done of other
Writers against such Pagan Gentiles their superstitions, whereas all Creatures
cry out unto us, especially the more noble as the Celestial bodies (in
searching whose natures and effects these men were most conversant) that there
is an eternal and omnipotent Maker and Causer which created all things, who
being without beginning or ending, was made or caused by no other; Coeli
enarrant gloriam Dei, and opera manuum ejus anunciat firmamentum. Mr. Br. f.
244.
And divine worship is only due unto him, for his Almighty Excellency, and the
benefit which man a reasonable Creature received and further expects and
needs to receive from him, which we commonly call Religion, a Releiging,
Religation, or dutiful binding of man informed with a reasonable intellectual
and immortal Soul, ordained as it were the Lieutenant and Viceroy of God to
govern this inferior world, and by his better eternal part assured that better
and eternal things are ordained for him, if he does not deprive himself of
them, but find out and perform the Will and Commandment of so infinite good and
bountiful a Creator, Preserver and Maintainer of all things, especially for the
use and end of Man, so dignified and exalted among his Creatures, which these
Druids and their Disciples were so far from effecting, that they gave him no
honor at all, never remembering him among those that they worshipped, but doing
the greatest dishonor they could unto him, in giving that glory and majesty
which is only proper and due to him, to his rebellious Creatures and professed
Enemies, damned and infernal souls, hundreds of thousands before them, and
diverse of these by probable Historical accounts of later Time and Creation then
the Author of their own Sect, Druius was. And if we will follow Julius Caesar,
who of all writes most of their pretended Religion living in the time of their
chiefest Sway, and best knew what they professed; he writes of the Germans
that they differed much from the French and their Druids in their Religion,
having no sacrifices, and only accounting for their gods whom they see, and by
whom they are manifestly helped, as the Sun, the Moon, and such visible things,
and heard not of any God; Germani multum a Gallorum consuetudine differunt;
Neque sacrificiis student; deorum numero eos solos ducunt quos ceruunt, and
quorum aperte opibus juvantur, Solemn Vulcanum and Lunam; yet the German Writers
are so confident that the Druids ruled there in Religion, that they show unto
this day in Germany, as far as Bavaria, two especial places where they were
wont to assemble under great Oaks to exercise their superstitions; and in
detestation thereof, two Monasteries called Oberaltaich and Nederaltaich were
founded to blot out their Memory. Pont. de viris Illust. Ger. part. 1. p. 40,
41.
In Bavaria quoque inferiore sub quercu magna superiore and inferiore suam
superstitionem exercebant, quae loca postea in Monasteria conversa etiamnum
Oberaltaich and Neberaltaich appellantur. Therefore these could not be
Professors and Teachers of the true God, his Worship and Religion, which for
diverse People and Countries, and for themselves also had such variety and
change of gods and Religion in diverse times and places; and yet all of them
professing most gross and stupid ignorance or woeful Idolatry, the greatest
irreligion that can be.

And as they thus proved themselves to be Atheists, leaving no possible true
God to be worshipped; so by their error of transmigration of souls from one
body to another, they fell into one of these absurdities, that one soul should
in the end inform many, even hundreds of bodies; or else cease at the last to
inform, cease to be, and made mortal. And as Chimerical a fiction it was of
them, to say (as Lucan expounds them) that when a soul left a body in this
world, it went into another world, and there informed another body.

Vobis Autoribus umbrae
Non tacitas Erebi seeds Ditisque profundi
Pallida Regna petunt; Regit idem spiritus artus
Orb alio long.
For so they must needs make more worlds where generation and corruption is,
besides this terrestrial and sublunary, where we inhabit; and therefore justly
does the same Author call their profession barbarous Rites, a false manner of
worship, and singular against all the world besides, Et vos barbaricos ritus
moremque sinistrum,
Sacrorum Druidae positis repetistis ab armis;
Solis nosse Deos, and Coeli sydera vobis
Aut solis nescire datum.


St. Gildas tells us, that the monstrous Idols in Britain were not inferior in
number to those of Egypt, commonly esteemed the most idolatrous Nation of the
world, and some of them with deformed lineaments remained to be seen in his
time; and the people of Britain gave divine honor even to Mountains, Hills
and Rivers. And yet besides these had Errors and Idolatries common with other
Nations. Non omittentes priscos communesque cum omnibus gentibus errores,
quibus ante adventum Christi in carne omne genus humanum obligabatur
obstrictum, nec enumerans patria portenta, ipsa Diabolica pene numero Egyptiaca
vincentia, Gildas li. de Exid. Britt.
quorum nonnulla lineamentis adhuc deformibus intra vel extra deserta maenia
solito more rigantia torvis vultibus intuemur; neque nominatim inclamitant
montes ipsos aut colles aut fluvios olim exitiales, nunc vero humanis usibus
utiles, quibus divinus honor a coeco tunc populo cumulabatur. The same have
other later Writers, and the sacrifices which they offered to those abominable
idols, were the most detestable, and for such not unworthily ranked by the
Pagan and Christian Writers amongst the most cruel and barbarous savages of the
world. Pro victimis homines immolant, administrisque ad ea sacrificia Druidibus
utuntur; Publiceque ejusdem generis habent instituta sacrificia. They offer men
for Sacrifices, Caesar lib. 6. belli Gallic.
and the Druids be the Ministers of such sacrifices, and such sacrifices be
instituted by public Authority among them; thus has Caesar and others. Cicero
speaking of these Druids, says, His quicquam Sanctum ac Religiosum videri
potest, qui etiamsi quando aliquo metu adducti Deos placandos esse arbitr^^tur,
humanis hostiis eorum aras ac Templa funestant, ut ne Religionem quidem colere
possint, nisi eam ipsam scelere violarint: Quis enim ignorant eos usq ad hunc
diem retinere illam immanem and barbaram consuetudinem hominum immolandorum?
Quamobrem quali fide, Cicero in Orai pro Marc. Fonteio.
quali pietate existimatis eos esse qui etiam Deos immortales arbitrentur
hominum scelere and sanguine facile posse placari? Can any thing be accounted
holy and religious with those men, who when they are afraid of any thing and
would have their Gods pacified, do profane their Altars and Temples with
sacrificed men, so that they cannot exercise their Religion, except they first
violate it with wickedness? For who is ignorant that even to this day they
retain that savage and barbarous custom of sacrificing Men? Therefore can you
think those men to have any Religion or Piety who think the immortal Gods may
be easily appeased with the wickedness and blood of Men? The like has Dio,
Cassius, Amianus, Marcellinus, and others among the Gentiles, all crying out
against those most barbarous proceedings, and yet termed with them Religion;
and to fill up the measure of this their most inhumane irreligion, as Julius
Caesar with others testifies, These men had Idols of huge greatness, whose
members being made of wands, they filled full of men alive, and so setting them
on fire, burned them; Immani magnitudine simulachra habent, quorum contexta
viminibus membra vivis hominibus complent, quibus succensis circumventi flamma
exanimantur homines. And Pliny with others is witness, that they were so far
from doing any homage or duty unto God, that they bestowed all such upon the
Devils, his enemies, and were so far and so long time in his days practiced in
Magic and Invocation, and worshipping Devils, that he supposes the Persians
so far distant and given over then to that most horrible dishonouring of God,
had learned it and received it from hence, where the chief Masters and
Practisers thereof remained.

These Druids permitted many wives to one man; for Caesar says, Caesar bell.
Gall. li. 6.
Vxores habent deni and duodeni inter se communes, and maxim fratres cum
fratribus and parents cum liberis; the like has Zonoras, and in this Country
the people went naked; nudi degunt, mulieribus promiscue utuntur; and this was
accounted a virtue and an honor amongst them, as Queen Bunduice did publickty
profess in her prayer to her Goddess Audraste or Audaste; qui cum caeter ae
omnia, tum liberes and uxores communes inter se putant; they think wives, and
children and all things Common. Thus much of the Druids, their Antiquity and
Institution with their abominable sacrifices and superstitions, of whom as
occasion shall serve we shall speak more hereafter.

Grantham built by Gorbomannus.
Gorbomanuus is reported to have Founded Grantham in Lincolnshire, of which
place Mr. Cambden makes only this mention; post Paunton visitur Grantham,
oppidum non infrequens, Schola a Richardo Foxo Wintoniensi Episcopo, and Templo
specioso exornatum, cujus sacrae Pyramid admirandam in altitudinem surgit, and
fabulis est famigerata; Grantham a Town well peopled, and adorned with a free
School built by Bishop Fox, and a very fair Church, whose Broach or Steeple is
of such height, that it is spoken of far and near.

The same Gorbomannus builded (as the English Chronicle seems to affirm)
Cambridge, anciently called Granta, Cambridge supposed by some to have been
built by Gorbomannus.
Caer Grant and Grantchester; yet Mr. Broughton out of other Authors says,
that Cambridge was Founded by Cantaber a Spaniard many hundred years before
Christ and walled about by Grantinus, Sintque Doctores and Scholares illius
celeberrimae matris Philosophiae civitatis Cantabrigiae a Cantabro aedificatae,
nec non a Grantino Comite honorabiliter muratae, ab omni calumnia,
inquietatione and scandalo liberi; Let the Masters and Scholars of that famous
Mother of Philosophy, the City of Cambridge, built by Cantaber, and walled
about by Count Grantinus, be free from all Calumny, molestation and disturbance
whatsoever; which diverse Oxford Men and Antiquaries (though no Friends to the
glory of Cambridge) yield unto. But of this place more hereafter in the Lives
of Lucius, Morpen-dragon, Arthur and Cadwalader.

ARCHIGALLO.
ARCHIGALLO the Son of Morindus, after his Brother had Reigned by consent of
most Writers, the space of eleven years, ascended the Throne of Britain in the
year of the worlds Creation, four thousand nine hundred and ten. This Prince in
the English Chronicle is called Artogail, who utterly forsaking the model of
exact Government which his Brother had left behind him for him to follow, he
lent too facile an ear to flatterers and sycophants; and where no just cause
could be found, faults were contrived and invented whereby to entrap the
Nobles, and new Plots discovered which never were thought upon but by the
Contrivers, whose Machiavillian brains hatched them for the destruction of the
valiant and wealthy, were they never so innocent: a point of policy so palpably
manifest in these latter days, that the weakest judgment may see it, but the
greatest dare not gainsay it. These state tricks pleased Archigallo; the
ancient Nobility are thrust out of all command and power in the Commonwealth,
Delinquency laid to their charge, or at least a disaffection to the present
Government; and upon these pretenses, many are secured, and more utterly
ruined, either being put to such an intolerable Composition for their Estates,
that they never after rec^er the loss, or else are utterly thrust out of them,
and new Upstarts put in, whose Predecessor never knew how to write himself
Gentleman, nor ever bore Coat unless a threadbare one, in which peradventure
he held an other man's Plough, or used some poor and sordid mechanic Trade; but
by these sinister means Archigallo crammed his Coffers, and raised to dignities
such as best suited with his disposition; so that Beggars ride on horse back,
and Nobles go on foot; And set a Beggar on horseback and ride to the devil;
but too much of one thing is good for nothing, and the poorest Worm trod upon
will turn again. The Nobles and Commons begin to grow sensible of their just
sad Condition and heavy Taxes and Impositions; after which follows a general
grudging and murmuring, when presently despair sends fury amongst them, and
furor arma ministrat; the intolerable yoke will be no longer endured; all join
in an association to take revenge upon the common Enemy Archigallo, whom they
suddenly set upon; and before he could provide means to defend himself, he is
unking'd, and quite difrobed of all princely Command, after he had worn the
purple (by consent of most Writers) five years.

It concerns Princes and great Commanders to make choice of Counselors who not
only have the reputation of virtue and Religion, but also that be indeed truly
virtuous and religious; For two Causes; The first thereby to obtain the
assistance of God's grace, which how necessary it is for the illumination of
man's understanding in all matters of Counsel, is most evident to all good Men.
The second Cause why it behooves a Counselor to be truly religious and
virtuous, is, for that such is the force of virtue that it gives credit to the
Possessors thereof, and makes them the more easily believed, and their Counsel
better accepted; And therefore we see that all men of discretion and judgment
do demand Counsel rather of those who are reputed wise and virtuous, then of
wicked men who have only the reputation of wisdom; For as St. Ambrose says,
Amb. li. de offi. 2. c. 10.
Where wisdom and virtue are conjoined, Magna erit Consiliorum salubritas,
there is all good and wholesome counsel to be had, and all men are willing to
hear the wise and virtuous man, as well for the admiration of his wisdom as
for the love of his virtue. In which respect he also says, that men address
themselves commonly for Counsel to those who are more virtuous then themselves;
for no man has reason to think him who is inferior to himself in manners, to
be his superior in Wisdom and Counsel. Furthermore, such is the dignity and
authority of virtue, that evil men bear a reverend respect thereto, and stand
as it were in awe of good men, whereof we have an Example in Herod, who
although he held St. John Baptist in prison, and would not follow his counsel
in the matter of his divorce, yet for the reverence he bore to his virtue, he
consulted many other things with him, and followed his advice therein; and as
the Scripture also says, metuebat eum, be feared him: and no doubt but wise
and virtuous Princes much more esteem and respect the Counsel of wise men that
are virtuous, then of others of equal wit and judgment that are vicious and
wicked, knowing that as Solomon says, Consilia impiorum fraudulenta, the
counsels of wicked men are fraudulent; Pro. c. 12.
and that he who has no care of his Conscience, will have no care of his Duty
toward Men. Basilius the Emperor advised his Son to choose those for his
Counselors who had given Proof and Experience of their Wisdom in the good
Conduct and Direction of their own private Affairs; and it is very necessary
that Counselors in Conference with their Prince use all sincerity, truth and
plainness, without flattery; for although the common Proverb say, Obsequium
amicos, Veritas odium parit; Flattery gains Friends, and Truth hatred; Yet as
there is nothing more pernicious to Princes then flattery, so by consequence,
there is nothing more unfit to be used of Counselors whose Office is and
special care should be to undeceive their Prince in all things wherein they are
any way deceived, and to labor therein so much the more, by how much less
other men do it, seeing one of the greatest infelicities of Princes is, that
all or most men flatter and sooth them in all things; in which respect Seneca
says, Quid omnia possidentibus deest? ille qui verum dicat: What wants he who
has all? marry one to tell the truth. And Quintus Curtius says, Regum opes,
The States of Princes are oftener overthrown by Flattery then by Force.

But this must be done with great moderation and discretion; for commonly those
do offend in this kind (I mean of being forward and rigorous in admonishing)
who presume over much either of their own wits and power, or of their Princes
weakness, or of his over great favor and familiarity, or of the need he has
of them, or else perhaps are of nature severe, insolent or passionate; for such
sometimes do forget themselves, yea and take a pride in contradicting or
admonishing their Princes with less duty and respect then were convenient; and
such an one was Callisthenes of whom Arrianus writes, that he made himself
odious to Alexander the Great, Tum ob intempestivam libertatem, tum ob superbam
stultitiam, both for his unseasonable liberty of speech, and also for his proud
folly. But Haephestion Counselor to the same Alexander, avoided that error;
for he always admonished him discreetly and freely as occasion served, yet he
ever did it in such sort that it seemed rather to be Alexander's Will and
Pleasure that he should so do, then that he challenged any right to himself;
yea, a Councellor though he should fear to incur displeasure for his plainness,
Plutarch in Themist.
yet he ought to discharge his Conscience, and to say as Themistocles said to
Euribiades (who took up a staff to strike him for his free speech) strike me,
so you hear me after: Seneca most excellently says, Sunt duo contraria
Consilio, festinatio and ira; Two things are contrary to Counsel, haste and
anger. And again, says he, Deliberandum est diu quod statuendum est femel; The
thing that is once to be determined is to be deliberated by leisure. And
Aristotle tells us, That a wise Man ought to counsel slowily, and execute
speedily. Had Archigallo followed with his Counselors these Rules and
Principles, he had not been thrust out of his Throne.

ELIDVRVS.
ELIDVRVS third Son to Morindus and Brother to Archigallo, was by common
consent and applause of all the States of the Britains, chosen and crowned
King, in the year of the World four thousand nine hundred and fifteen. This
Prince in the English Chronicle is called Hesider or Esodir; he was of such a
temperate and mild disposition, that his Subjects called him Elidure the Meek;
but I suppose this Appellation of Meek, in Latin Pius, came upon another
occasion; for the Count Palatine thus delivers unto us the Kings life; Elidurum
tertio natum Morindi statuunt Regem, qui totidem annos Rempublicam, sed diversa
ratione humanitatis and benevolentiae fratri sc. per omnia dissimilem tenebat.
Archigallo jam privatus imperio a provincialibus Regnis ad quae proficiscitur,
auxiliares copias petit. Nusquam auditus pro animi disiderio redit donium,
militibusque december tantum modo comitatus visit eos quos nuper habebat amicos;
transit nemus Calaterium, in quo Rex venebatur, qui forte temere casit Fratrem
non speratum intuens, pietate motus, amplectitur eum, and secum ad Arcluidam
perducit. Ibi concilium cum proceribus capit de fratre restituendo in Regnum,
quam ejus cogitationem graviter and iniquo animo omnes tulerunt, quod nihil pro
sano ab Archigallione sperarent; usus igitur art quad am fingendi morbum,
vocat ad se singulos, and secreto ingredientibus persuadet ac minatur etiam,
nisi Archigallioni ut and tanquam Regi suo fidem spondeant; deinde per alia
Cubicula educi and singillatim custodiri, quibus ita concitatis fratri per
terrorem, suaque oratione confirmatis de morum ejus commutatione, ducit Elidrus
Archigallonem Eboracum, deque suo Capite demptum Diadema imponit Fratri; A quo
rarae pietatis erga Fratrem exemplo cognomentum adeptus est, ut apud omnes
homines Elidurus merito Pius cognominatus est. Elidurus the third Son of
Morindus, was chosen King of Britain, who ruled as many years as his Brother
had done before him, but of a far more excellent temper and behavior, nothing
in condition like him. Archigallo being now expelled his Kingdom, flies to the
Provincial and Neighboring Princes, and there craves Aid and auxiliary Forces
to reestablish him in his Throne; but finding each ear close shut and deaf to
his demands and desires, is constrained to return into his native Country,
being attended or accompanied by only ten Persons; there he visits those whom
he supposes to be his Friends, casually traveling through the great Wood
Calaterium, where it fortuned that his Brother was taking his pleasure in
Hunting; who suddenly, and beyond his expectation beholding Archigallo, struck
with a brotherly love and affection, he with tender embraces expresses how
welcome is his Company, taking him along with him in his Presence to the City
Alcluid. Here Elidurus falls into most serious consultations with his Nobles
for the Restitution of his Brother to his Regal dignity; but they all give the
Italian shrug, and shake their Heads, having no conceit or opinion that ever
any good can be hoped or expected from Archigallo. The King in esse Summons all
his Wits together to bring his designed purpose to perfection, and
counterfeiting a sudden and dangerous sickness, he sends for his Nobles one by
one, and as they come, he uses all possible persuasion, and fearing not to
prevail, he adds Threats and Comminations, whereby to induce them to
reenstall his Brother, and causing them to be secured and closely kept
severally in several places, he persuades them through fear to him who formerly
had been their King; and by a persuasive Speech and Oration in the behalf of
his Brothers reforming all former Errors, and a future happy Government,
prevails so far with them, as to promise faithful Allegiance and Subjection:
and having obtained what he so cordially desired, coming to York, takes the
Diadem from his own Head and setts it upon his Brothers; By which heroic Act,
he purchased to himself eternal fame, with the Title of Elidurus Pius, Elidure
the Pious.

ARCHIGALLO.
ARCHIGALLO being thus by the unparalled affection of his Brother Elidure the
Pious re-enthron'd, made good what was promised on his behalf; he suffered not
his whispering Parasites to abuse his Ear, but with singular care employed all
his endeavors to the right administration of his Affairs and the good of his
Kingdom; and in short time by doing justice and right to all, became so
beloved amongst the Britains as if he never had been the man that had wronged
them. Afflictions often bring Mortals to the true knowledge of themselves; for it
tempereth and setleth the exorbitant humors of men, who so abound commonly in
continual prosperity, that their judgments are greatly blinded and hindered
thereby; in which respect the famous Lady Queen Katharine of England, and
Daughter to Fardinand King of Spain, was wont wisely to say, that if she must
needs make choice either of continual prosperity or continual adversity, she
would choose the latter; For in affliction, said she, n^ good man can want
consolation, whereas in prosperity most men want wit. Iterum regnat Archigallo
december annos ( tells us Comes Palatinus) quibus assumit viros genere, virtuteque
claros, ad Reipublicae munia capessenda; obscuro loco natos qui minus idonei
sunt ad res gerendas, repellit; quodque est suum cujusque id unicuique liberum
esse permittit; in omnes denique homines justitiae officium and aequitatis
exercet; tandem languore quodam extinctus Leircestriae sepelitur. Archigallo
admitted again, reigns ten years, making choice of Gentlemen sprung from
ancient families, and eminent for their education and virtues, to supply the
places of Government in the Kingdom, utterly excluding base-born brats from
intermedling in matters of honor and consequence, as altogether unworthy of
such pre-eminence; and being furnished with such worthy Assistants, Archigallo
buried at Leicecester, or rather York.
he gives to every one what belongs unto him, makes justice flourish, and every
man enjoy what is his own, and in this glory he finished his days, being
seized upon by a disease which stopped his vital spirits. His body was buried at
Leircester, or as the English Chronicle says, at Caer Ebrank or York, and so
also says Howes.

ELIDVRVS.
ELIDVRVS once more for his admirable and singular virtue which he showed in
his first Government, is now the second time, though as Fabian says, much
against his will, (for well he knew Regnum to be but dulce venenum, a sweet and
gilded poison) by the general Votes and Suffrages advanced, or rather thrust
into the Throne of this Land: But Quota pars moritur tempore fati!
Quos foelices Cynthia vidit,
Vidit miseros abitura dies; Seneca.

Rarum est foelix idemque senex.


The two younger Brothers intoxicated with ambition and desire of Princely Rule
(not like Elidurus, who freely surrendered the Scepter to his displaced
Brother;) Vigenius and Peredurus, solicit, tell their Friends, and what with
present Advance-mony, and what with fair Promises, raise an Army; and in a most
mutinous and rebellious way, lay violent hands upon their Brother, and cast him
Prisoner into the Tower of London: after which unworthy Act they divide
Brittany betwixt them. Vigenius is to enjoy all from Humber that famous River,
to the remotest angle Westward; and Peredurus Albania. And thus for seven years
space they Reign in amity, peace and mutual League and concord. After which
time, Peredurus (Vigenius being dead) becomes Lord and Master of all, and so
continues his Reign two years longer; and with so great applause of all sorts,
by reason of his equity and indulgence toward his Subjects, that he is
extolled above all the rest of his Brethren, whose praise is in every man's
mouth; nothing to be heard but his Panegyricks; insomuch that even the Name of
Elidurus the godly, or Elidurus Pius, is locked up in the greatest darkness and
obscurity of Oblivion. Such is the vanity and inconstancy of the Vulgar, varium
semper and mutabilo vulgus; the best Princes are soonest forgot, and no longer
thought upon then their present Fortunes cause them to be present and
remembered. This Peredurus builded the Town of Pickering in Yorkshire. Cambden
speaking of this place, says, Memorandum nihil occurrit, nisi Pickering
Lancastrensis patrimonii oppidum non parvum, colli affixum, and veteri Castello
munitum ad quod plurimi circumsiti viculi spectant, unde vulgi Pickering-Leith,
libertas de Pickering, Forresta de Pickering, quam Edmundo filio suo minori
Lancastriae comiti Rex Hen. 3. elargitus est, regio adjacens nominatur. Nothing
occurs here worth memory, except Pickering belonging to the Lancastrian Family,
placed upon a Hill, and fortified with an ancient Castle, unto which many
neighboring and adjacent Villages belong, being called the Leith, Liberty and
Forest of Pickering, which Hen. the Third gave unto his Son Edmund Earl of
Lancaster. Guido contrary to all other Writers, says, that Peredurus was cruel
and tyrannous to the Britains, and slew and murdered many of the Lords; he
caused him to become so odious, that they rebelled and slew him.

ELIDVRVS.
ELIDVRVS now the third time is made King, 4941, and ruled four years in the
same equity and Princely demeanor as formerly, and then died, and was buried at
Caerleil or Karlile. The Count Palatine gives this Character of him, Vir omni
genere virtutum praestantissimus, animi magnitudine superans ipsam fortunam,
adeo neque prosperis rebus elatus, neque adversis dejectus esse voluit; diceres
fortunam cum eo certasse ut Rex esset, neque tamen animum ejus infractum
constantemque vincere potuisse; quo magis abnuebat, eo frequentius ad regendum
vocabatur; sic honor and gloria persequentes fugit, and fugientes persequitur,
ut umbrae Corpus; after his death he left a son named Gorgonianus or
Gorbomannus to succeed him.

Fabian in the beginning of his Chronicle has a Caveat for the Computation of
years from Elidure to Lud, which I thought convenient here to insert. To make
Histories agree and to keep the order of years begun, we must observe as
Ranulph of Chester tells us, with diverse others, that Julius Caesar made
Britain Tributary to Rome, anno 48 ante Christum natum, or in the year of the
World, 4150. which was in the ninth year of Cassabilane.

From whence taking from the time of Cassabilane before the Tribute paid nine
years, and for the time of the Reign of Lud, eleven years, it followed
evidently that King Lud did begin his Reign in the year of the World, 5131. and
so from the last year of Elidure unto the beginning of the Reign of Lud or in
the time of the 33 Kings there passed 186 years.

GORBOMANNVS.
GORBONIANUS or Gorbomannus, the Son of Regni and Grandchild to Elidure, was
Crowned King of Britain, in the year of the World, 4945. The Count Palatine
speaking of Elidurus says, Ei Gorbonias filius Gorboniani succedit, Patri
similis in rebus prudenter agendis; mira fuit in omnes benevolentia ejus, atque
modus ipse quo in administratione rerum utebatur, fecit illum universis esse
gratissimum: Itaque cum post annos decom quibus optime regit, moreretur,
publico luctu plangebatur, honoreque funeris publico majore quam caeteri
Sepulchro condebatur. Gorbonias the Son of Gorbonian succeeded his Uncle in the
Kingdom, treading in the same paths of good Government; his Benevolence was
admirable, and his Decorum in managing his Affairs so plausible, that he was
generally beloved of all men: Thus when he had ruled with universal good liking
of every one, he departed this life; whose death was lamented with a general
and most doleful mourning, and his Funerals celebrated with greater pomp and
solemnity then any of his Predecessors.

MARGAN.
R. Vitus. f. 204.
MORGAN or Margan succeeded in the Kingdom; he was a younger Son of
Archigallo, and governed this Land for the space of fourteen years in great
Peace and Tranquillity, following the Example of his Forefathers.

EMERIANVS.
EMERIANVS Brother to Margan succeeded, sed long diversis moribus, but of
quite an other temper and disposition; for he swayed all things after his own
Will and Pleasure, and not according to Reasons law and dictamen, practicing
Tyranny toward both Nobles and Commons, which rendered him so odious unto all,
that after the space of seven years, he was deposed and quite thrust out of all
Government and Princely Authority.

YDWALLO.
YDWALLO or Ivall the Son of Vigenius, was promoted unto the Regal Throne who
being admonished by the evil Example of Emerianus, had learned a better Lesson;
he was very indulgent to his Subjects, avoiding Tyranny as the very bain of
Princes, and administered justice and equity to all men; bonos in officio
continebat, upholding honest men in their places, and malos qua debuit
indignatione persequebatur, correcting the wicked with condign punishment; and
like a good Steward relieved as well the one as the other, in their wants and
necessities. After thus he had Reigned twenty years, he forsook this World, and
left to succeed him.

RIMO.
RIMO the Son of Peredurus, a Prince adorned with true and perfect Nobility,
and ambitious of Honor; who after he had most happily Reigned sixteen years,
highly renowned for his heroic Spirit, and activity and glory in martial
Affairs, he gave way to Geruntius to ascend the Regal Throne.

GERVNTIVS.
GERVNTIVS the Son of Elidure, with the general good liking of all, is Crowned
King of Great Britain; a great lover of goodness, Peace and justice; he
commanded a strict observation of the Laws, by which means he preserved Unity
and Concord among his people, and became highly honored of them; yet for all
this, after he had reigned twenty years, death seized upon him, to the great
grief and sorrow of all the Kingdom, leaving to succeed him his Son

CATELL or CATELLVS.
CATELL or Catellus the Son of Geruntius, is solemnly invested with the Royal
Ensigns of the British Monarchy, a great Benefactor to the poor and
distressed; insomuch that he caused all Oppressors to be taken and hanged: Were
such justice put in Execution in these our days, such heavy Oppressions would
not break the hearts of honest-meaning men. This King Reigned in great peace
ten years, and then died.

COILVS.
COILVS Reigned ten years in great peace and quiet.

PORREX.
PORREX the second a virtuous and gentle Prince, Reigned five years.

CHIRIMVS.
CHIRIMVS or Chirinus, through his drunkenness Reigned but one year;
drunkenness is a vice so far unbeseeming a Prince, that we commonly say As
drunken as beggars; yet in our potting times it is now come to that pass, that
we say as drunk as a Lord; drunkenness has been the overthrow of Chieftaines,
Armies and Kingdoms, as we may read in sacred writ of Holofernes that great
General; Borro Holofernes jacebat in lecto nimiae ebrietate sopitus, when
Judith percussit bis in cervicem ejus, and abscidit caput ejus; and the Army of
the Gauls under the command of Breunus was full of wine when Camillus totally
routed it; neither had our Britains so foolishly been Massacred and lost their
Kingdom to the Saxons, had they not been drunken at the entrapping banquet on
Salisbury Downs or Plains; for as there are three things which do maintain
and uphold a Commonwealth, and for the which God does bless and prosper it;
the first Religion and Piety toward God, the second Justice and Equity amongst
men, the third good Discipline in Life and Manners: so there are three other
things contrary to those, which do subvert Commonwealths and provoke the wrath
of God against them.

The first is all sorts of false Religion, Superstition, Idolatry, Heresy, and
Schism, and such sins as do belong thereto. The second is all sort of
Injustice, as Rapine, Immoderate exactions, Oppression of the poor, effusion of
innocent blood, and calumniation or slander and such like, for the which God
punishes Kingdoms and States, at the Holy Ghost signifies in Ecclesiasticus,
saying, Regnum de gente in gentem transferetur, etc. A kingdom is transferred
from Nation to Nation for injustice, injuries, calumniations or slanders and
diverse deceits. The third kind consists of Licentiousness, Drunkenness, and
dissolutness of life and manners. This Drunken King left after him three Sons,
Fulgenius, Eldad, and Androgeos, who successively Reigned in this Kingdom.

FVLGENIVS.
FVLGENIVS the Eldest Son of Chirimus, was Crowned King of Great Britain, but
enjoyed his Kingdom only two years.

ELDRED or ELDREDVS.
ELDRED the second Son of Chirimus, and brother to Fulgenius, was Crowned King,
but enjoyed that honor but one year.

ANDROGEOS.
ANDROGEOS the third Son of Chirimus, and brother to the two precedent Kings,
was Crowned, but lived only one year after.

VRIANVS.
URIANVS the Son of Androgeos, wholly gave himself to lust and the sin of the
flesh; homo (says Comes P.) voluptati deditus more pecudum, he was King only
three years; lust has been the overthrow of many Countries, and cause of much
blood shed: had not Paris seen Helena in the Isle of Cythera, in the Temple of
Venus, whether this Lady out of curiosity to behold the Trojans under pretense
of performing some vows was come; and Paris hearing of her presence and
beauty, entered into the Temple in all Princely bravery; as they mutually
beheld each other, they became so enamoured with the scorching flames of
unlawful love, or rather lust, that presently being now linked together in
equal desires, and haud caret effectu quod voluere duo, they embark together,
which lustful act caused not only a ten years siege but also the utter
destruction and subvesion of Troy.

Hereunto I may add another notable example of the overthrow of the
Lacedaemonians, and the loss of the Empire of Greece by the just judgment of
God, as both Diodorus Siculus and others affirm; the story is this.

Two Lacedaemonians passing over the plain of Leuctra, were lodged and
courteously entertained in the house of one Scadasus, who had two handsome
Women to his daughters, and returning that way shortly after, and finding the
two young Women at home and their Father absent, first ravished one, after
killed them both; their father at his return finding his daughters slain, and
understanding who had been the doers of it, went to Lacedemon to crave justice
against the Malefactors; but so potent were they and their friends there, that
he could by no means obtain it: whereupon after infinite maledictions poured
forth in the sorrow of his heart against them and their state, he went home and
desperately killed himself upon the grave of his Daughters. Not long after Wars
growing between the Thebans and the Lacedaemonians, the soul of Scadasus
appeared to Pelopidas (one of the chief Captains of the Thebans) and
encouraged him to give battle to the Lacedaemonians in the plain of Leuctra,
where he and his daughters were buried: telling him that their death should be
there revenged, and so afterward it fell out; for the Lacedaemonians lost not
only the battle, but also the Empire of Greece: we will omit the burning of
Sodom and Gomorah for the sin of lust, and also the rape which those of the
town of Gabaa committed upon the wife of a Levit, for which percussit eos
Dominus in conspectu filiorum Israel, who killed of them 25100 men that bore
Arms.

But come a little nearer to our times; concerning the punishment of the sins
of the flesh, we have a notable and fearful example thereof in the Kingdom of
Spain, conquered by the Moors, and possessed by them 700 years for that
offense. For when the Kingdom had flourished as well in religion as power,
from the time of K. Recared (the first Catholic King thereof, the space of 120
years: the wicked King Vitiza being a man (like this our Vrianus) given over to
lust and carnality, infected and corrupted all Spain, not only with the bad
example of his own dissolute life, (having diverse Wives at once besides many
Concubines) but also with abominable Laws, whereby he gave leave to all sorts
of men to have as many Wives and Concubines as they listed, yea and forced
Priests and such as would have lived chaste to marry, by which means all Spain
became within a while to be no better then a common Stew or Brothel. And
although Almighty God according to his accustomed mercy expected their
conversion and amendment all the time of that Kings Reign, and laid only the
penalty thereof upon him whom he deprived both of his Crown and his eyesight,
by the means of Roderick who succeedeed him in the Kingdom: yet when the said
Roderick followed his steps as well in his vicious life as in the maintenance
of his abominable Laws, it pleased God of his justice to permit him to give the
occasion both of his own ruin and also of the overthrow of all Spain by the
sin of the flesh, wherewith the whole Kingdom was as it were overflowed.

For whereas King Roderick had sent a Kinsman of his own Count Julian
Ambassador into Afric, and in the mean time ravished his Daughter, or (as
some write) his wife; the Count understanding it at his return, was so incensed
therewith against the King, that in revenge thereof he practiced with the
Moors to bring them into Spain, who with his assistance conquered it speedily,
and with such destruction of the people, that the punishment of God was
evidently seen therein. For having first overthrown King Roderick (whose body
could never after the Battle be found) they subdued almost all Spain in eight
Months, or in fourteen, as some say, and slew 700000 of all sorts of people,
besides great numbers of Captives which they sent Prisoners into Barbary; and
from that time forward remained in the possession of that Kingdom, or of some
part thereof for the space of 700 years.

ELIVD.
ELIVD Reigned five years; he was a great Astronomer, Astrologiae peritissimus
Rex. This vain study, especially of judicial Astrology in these our days, is
much in request even amongst Troopers disbanded; some of whom I know so
ignorant that they cannot write true English, nay scarce read. The Professors
of this Science, especially such as would seem to be learned, would make it
very ancient, fetching the Original from the Egyptians and Babylonians, the
most ancient of all Mortals: Jactabant olim Astrologi Chaldaeos quadringinta
and septuaginta annorum millia in periclitandis, experiendisque pueris
quicunque nascerentur, posuisse, To have spent forty and seventy thousand
years, and yet the Chaldeans had their beginning at the destruction of the
Tower of Babel: And Picus Mirandulanus in his second Chapter of his 12. Book,
to disprove the Name and forged Antiquity of Astrologers, says he can show no
Students thereof before the time of Nebuchodonosor: Benedictus Pirerius.
and Benedictus Pirerius in a Book which he writes de divinatione Astrologiae:
Tanta est Astrologorum (qui vulgo Judiciarii appellantur) vel impudentia vel
Amentia, ut etiam sibi divinam Scripturam suffragari suaeque Astronomatiae
fidem and Authoritatem firmare jactent: etenim verba illa quae dixit Deus
creans luminaria, Et sint in signa and tempora, etc. ad suam referunt
divinationem Astrologicam, per quam ipsi profitentur ex observatione siderum
futura rerum eventa posse praedici: quocirca B. Basilius and Ambrosius, aliique
permulti patres in explanatione eorum verborum been longam and acuratam in
refellendi istiusmodi Astrologorum praedictionibus orationem posuerunt; quorum
nos Patrum exemplis provocati and gravissimis Dei sententiis contra Astrologos
multifariam in divina Scriptura proditis permoti, quin etam justissimo adversus
Astrologos odio propter fraudulenta and perniciosa eorum figmenta librum hunc
ad confutandas eorum praedictiones a nobis scriptum, gratum multis and utilem
fore existimamus; scripsit adversus Astrologos quidem copiose Joannes Picus
Mirandula: sed multos ab ejus lectione deterret prolixitas operis. Nos licet in
praediviti and uberi versemur argumento, eo tamen breves erimus, quod non omnia
quae disputari possent, sed aptiora duntaxat causae firmior aque tractabimus:
quinque autem erunt hujus libri and disputationis adversos Astrologos capita;
primo enim docebimus sacrae and Ecclesiasticae doctrinae aivinationem
Astrologicam esse contrariam; tum ostendemus Astrologos esse rerum caelestium
imperitos; Deinde divinatricem istam artem rectae rationi ac Philosophiae
adversari demonstrabimus; ad haec probabimus astra non solum non esse causas
efficientes rerum futurarum, verum nec esse certa figna quae res futuras
praeuotent ac praemonstrent; ad extremum, cur nonnulla Astrologorum praedicta
sint vera, causas exponemus. This Author reduces his book into five principal
heads against Astrologers. First he shows Astrology to be contrary to sacred
and Ecclesiastical doctrine. Secondly, Astrologers themselves to be ignorant of
Celestial things; and that that divining Art is opposite both to sound Reason
and Philosophy; and that the Stars are not the efficient causes of future
things, no not so much as certain Signs to point out or show us things to
ensue: and lastly, he makes appear the Causes why some Astrological predictions
may prove true. I wish every man of learning would read Pirerius, to laugh at
the folly of our Age, wherein every paltery Almanack-maker will make him to
open the Closets and Cabinets of Princes Counsels, and condemn Personages of
high and eminent Quality to violent and untimely deaths at their pleasure;
where the best of them, even Ly-Ly himself is observed to tell Lies in the
plural Number, and Verites scare in the singular.

DEDANTIVS.
DEDANTIVS or as other call, Dedacus, was after his Predecessor, King of Great
Britain the space of five years also: of this Prince no further mention is
made; atque per tot alios, (scil. quinque annos) Dedacus inde tenuit. Dedacus,
Com. Pal.

DETONVS.
DETONVS Reigned two years, as affirms Mr. Howes; Com. Pa. speaks nothing
of this Prince, but after Dedacus, says, Enimvero Clotenus nisi duos annos
regnabat; and Fabian also next to Dedacus puts Clotenus, and then Gurgenites,
and tells us that Lanquet leaves these out; Com. Pal. puts one Gurguineus, it
may be the same which Fabian calls Gurginetes, to rule three years.

MERIANVS.
MERIANVS by consent of all Writers, was King two years.

BLADVNVS.
BLEDVVS as Fabian says, or Bladunus, as others, ruled two years.

CAPENVS.
CAPENVS or Cap, was King three years.

OVINVS.
OVIMVS, Oenus or Owyn, ruled other three years.

SISILIVS.
SISILIVS or Silius, governed the Bittains two years.

BLEDGABREDVS.
BLEDGABREDVS or Bledgabridus, wore the British purpure ten years, as Mr.
Howes affirms, Fabian says twenty; he loved and studied Music, in so much
that Com. Pal. tells us tanta canendo excellentia superavit omnes homines ut
quidem in art Musica deus esse videretur, he so far excelled all mortal men in
the art of singing, that he seemed to be the god of Music; this he confirms
in his notes, figure the 18. Deinde Galfridus lib. 1. c. 22. Belgridus omnes
cantores quos aetas praecedens habuit, plurimum excellebat tum in modulis, tum
in omnibus musicis instrumentis, ita ut deus faculatorum esse videretur.
Belgridus so far excelled all the singers of the precedent age, as well in
Madrigall and voice as all other Musical instruments, that he was called the
god of mirth, or merry companions; nam ita Cajus, Belgabridem hominem regem
(inquit) tantum fuisse musicum constaet, ut propter excellentem musices
cognitionem musicorum deus appellaretur. Belgabride a Princely man was so rare
and skilful in the Art of Music that for his excellency therein, he was called
the god of Musicians, I dare not say Minstrils, least some should think the
King a Fiddler; many great Princes, Kings and Emperors have singularly affected
the heavenly melody of Music; and much may be spoken in praise thereof, which
I forbear; yet I am of an opinion that no man can be of a good nature who loves
it not.

ARCHIMALVS.
ARCHIMALVS, Archimelus or Archemall, Reigned two years: Isti frater Archimalus
in regno suffectus est, qui and ipse post annos duos accepit Eldolum
successorem.

ELDOLVS.
ELDOLVS, Elden or Eldell, was King of the Britains four years, in whose time
of Government many prodigious signs were seen as Globes of fire bursting out of
the air with great noise; ignei Globi de nubibus erumpentes cum aeris maxim
strepitu.

RODIANVS.
RODIANVS or Redian was King two years.

REDARGIVS.
REDARGIVS Reigned three years, Com. Pal. calls him Roderecius, saying,
Roderecius hunc sequitur pro tribus annis; but Fabian is so far from speaking
of this King, that he quite leaves him out, making no mention of his name.

SAMVLIVS.
SAMVLIVS was King two years; Samulius pro duobus, Com. Pal.

PENISILLVS.
PENISILLVS Reigned three years; rursum pro tribus Penisellus; Com. Pal. Fabian
says that Samul Penisel was but one individuum, and that he Reigned five years.

PYRRVS.
PYRRVS, whom Fabian calls Pyr Phyrrus, Reigned two years.

CAPORVS.
CAPORVS whom Fabian calls Capoir, Reigned two years.

DINELLVS.
DINELLVS the Son of Caporus, whom Fabian calls Glyguell Dinell, Vilus fol. 205.
ruled the Brittain^ four years; Com. Pal. Dinellus autem Caporii filius,
gerendarum rerum scientissimus princeps, pro summa suavitate morum and erga
singulos benignitate laudatur. Quanquam homines ex infima plebe nascerentur,
tamensi erant been periti earum rerum quae in deliberatione ponebantur, ipsorum
sententias libenter audiebat, neque magis a quo quamquae ad rem praesentem
utiliter dicerentur attendebat; etenim consilia sciebat non ex persona
suggerentium sed sua vi esse ponderanda. Idcirco viri condition humilis
opinionem sapenumero praeserebat sententiae viri nobilis ac illustris domi;
poenas male facientibus infligebat, foris annonam and omnia militibus
necessaria procurabat, aegros ac debiles corpore visebat; nec eo contentus, res
quibus indigebant, liberaliter suppeditabat, extinctus morte cum annos
regnasset septem; Dinellus the son of Caporius, a Prince excellently well seen
in managing his Affairs, for his love and affable carriage toward all men had
in high esteem; In his consultations his judgment reflected not upon the
persons of men, whether mean and born of low degree, or sprung from noble and
illustrious Families; but always, in all debates, he gave ear to such as spoak
most to the purpose, not regarding who the speaker was, but what he spoke: for
he rightly knew that matters were not to be balanced after the quality and
condition of the Relator, but according to the essence and truth of the thing:
which caused him often to prefer a mean man's opinion before a Courtiers, or
Nobles; at home he caused condign punishments to be inflicted upon
malefactors, and abroad he was very sedulous and careful to provide all things
convenient and necessary for his Soldiers; The infirm, weak and sick he often
visited; not that alone but whatsoever they wanted, he took order that it
should be brought unto them: after all which good deeds he left this world,
having Reigned seven years. Howes and Fabian say but four.

HELY.
HELY Son of Dinellus, governed the Britains one or not fully one year: Mr.
Howes.
of this Prince the Isle of Ely took it Name, says Geffrey. Hoc vero nomen (
says Mr. Cambden) Beda ab anguillis deduxit, unde nonnulli Insulam anguillarum
dixerunt; Polidorus Virgilius a Greco (...) quod paludem denotat; alii ab Helig
Britannico quod salices significat, quarum, cum aliarum arborum sit impatiens,
est feracissima tum soli natura, tum quod contra irrumpentium omnium impetus
satae, saepiusque caesa innumera haerede, ut Pliniano verbo utar, profuerunt,
ex quibus hic and alibi corbes texuntur, quas nunc Brittanni Baskes vocant. The
Name of Ely (says Mr. Cambden) Beda deriveth from Eeles, insomuch that some
call it the Isle of Eeles; Polidor Virgil will have it named from the Greek
word (...), which signifies a Marrish or Fennish place; others bring it from
the British word Helig, which signifies an Osier or Sallow, which kind of
twigs grow there in great abundance, though otherwise the Isle is bare of Trees
and Timber; but these grow partly from the nature of the soil, and partly are
planted to stop and hinder the irruptions of the water, and bring such a
numerous increase, that they supply Tradesmen for the making of Baskets not
only there but in the Countries round about. This Isle has in it a City of the
same Name, had in account for the repute and holiness of Votary Nuns residing
there, built first by Audrey wife of Tombreta Prince in this Province, who had
in this place a part of her Dowry; Anomus Maps in Camb. sh.
she having departed from her second Husband Egbert King of Northumberland by
his leave and consent, devoted her self to the service of God, and built there
a Monastery whereof she became the first Abbess; This in the Danish
desolations was destroyed, but soon after reedified by Ethelwold Bishop of
Winchester, who stored it with Monks, unto whom King Edgar granted the
jurisdiction over four hundred and a half, within these Fens and the East
Angle-limits, which to this day are called the Liberties of St. Audrey. After
whose Examples the Nobles so enriched it with large Revenues, that as
Malmesbury says, The Abbot thereof laid up yearly into his own Coffers, a
thousand and four hundred pounds. And of latter times the Monks thereof became
so wealthy that their old decayed Church they renewed with new and stately
Buildings, which is now the Cathedral of the Diocese, and for beauty gives
place to no other in England. Comes Pal. speaking of this Hely says, A quo
splendour Imperii Brittannici coepit in orb Romano per filios maximos belli
duces apparere: From whom the splendour and glory of the British Empire through
the Valor of its Martial Children began first to display its beam in the Roman
Orb or Hemisphere. Com. Palate. (though others allow, as Howes and Fabian, but
one year to his Reign) says, Helius Regnum annis quadraginta gubernat, tres
filios generat, Luddum, Cassuellanum, Nennium; whose very names manifest a
certain excellancy: And he further says, that Giraldus affirms, Pirrhi
mansionem fuisse Castrum Manubri, quod aetate sua fuerat adhuc turribus and
propugnaculis eximium, ab occidente portum habebat extensum, a Circio and Borea
sub ipsis maenibuss vivarium egregium tam sui venustate quam profunditate
aquarum valde conspicuum.

LVD.
LVD the Son of K. Hely, by right of Inheritance, and general applause of all
the Britains, is Crowned King of this Island: The first Act worthy of
Observation which he took in hand was to immure the City of Troynovant, which
he enclosed with strong Walls, garnishing the same with many lofty and stately
Towers; which done, he gives command to the Citizens to Erect their Structures
and Edifices within the Compass of the same: the motion proceeding as it were
out of an innate love and respect which he bore to that place, in which he
spent most of the time which he had spared from warlike Affairs and the
public Administation of justice. In this City he built (says Com. Pal.)
Palatium egregtum, a stately and sumptuous Palace; and on the West side
thereof, a strong and defensible Gate of large bigness and solid work, which
to this day is called Lud's Gate. Trinovant being now beautified with most
delicate and pleasing Buildings, peopled and inhabited by rich and wealthy
Citizens, began to shake hands with its old Name, and bid it adieu, resuming a
new Nomenclation from its present Benefactor and Restaurator, and begins to be
better known by the Name of Luds Town then Trinobant, now corruptly London,
then Troynovant. This King Lud surnamed Imanuentius, was a Prince of a most
heroic and warlike Spirit, and remarkable for the Courtship which he used, in
inviting his Nobles and Chieftains to costly Feasts and Banquets; but amongst
all these Interludes and Princely Pastimes, the provident King forgot not to
root out such overgrown and inveterate Customs, as he observed to be obnoxious
to the Commonwealth; and what by experience he found irregular, he quite
abrogated, instituting new and commodious Laws and Edicts in their places; and
knowing that no Republic can be well governed without a due Observation of
Religion and Piety, he builded many goodly Temples in the honor of his gods:
It is in my judgment worthy observation, how zealous Pagan Princes have been
to build places of adoration to their false gods; and in the infancy of
Christianity and primitive Church, with what devotion and piety, not only
Christian Emperors, Kings and Princes, but even Noble Men and private Citizens
bestowed their Wealth and Patrimonies in erecting Churches to the honor of our
most Blessed Savior and his holy and glorious Martyrs; and how those who in
our present times call themselves Saints (sunt autem intus Lupi rapaces,)
pollute, contaminate, deface and destroy Churches, and Chapels, pull down the
Fonts wherein they received the badg of Christianity, the sacred Lavacre of
Baptism, draw down the monuments and shrines of Martyrs, Sepulchers of those
whose Memories are held in Veneration, unclapper the Bells, sacrilegiously take
away the Ropes, (sed dabit Deus his quoque funem;) if these be acts of
Religion, or a Reformation (as forsooth they term it) then will I say, That
Gardener rectifieth and reformeth a good Orchard, planted with the choicest
Fruit-bearing Trees, when he pulls up by the roots all those goodly stocks,
and leaves the ground dug and turned up by the profane snouts of Hogs and
wild Boars, and takes no care to replant young Saplings and Graffts in their
places.

King Lud began his Reign in the year of the World five thousand one hundred
and thirty one; who after he had governed the Britains with great justice and
moderation eleven years, ended the period of his days, and was buried in the
Temple which he had built nere Ludgate in Caer Lud or London, for so hereafter
we must usually call it; leaving two Sons, Androgeus and Tenancius or Temancius.

CASSABILAN.
CASSABILAN brother to King Lud, began to govern the Britains, in the year of
the world five thousand one hundred and forty two; The Nobles and Commons made
election of this Prince, in regard that the two Sons of his deceased brother
were so young, that the eldest of them was held unfit to govern: Cassebilan, as
witnesses the old Chronicle, and also Flos Historiarum, was not Crowned long,
but only elected Protector during the Nonage of his Nephews; but Ambition and
the dazzling aspect of a princely Diadem are able with out the grace of the
Almighty, if it were possible, to overthrow even honesty and justice it self:
yet Cassabilan a Pagan shows far more civility and natural tenderness, then
Richard the third a Christian, who murdered his Nephews being their Protector;
Cassabilan lets them enjoy that breath which God and nature had bestowed upon
them; but so cunningly by his wily practices, by doing justice, showing himself
liberal and bountiful to the subjects, he insinuates himself into their hearts
and bosoms, that as a man immediately sent from the Gods, with general Votes
and suffrages he is Crowned King of Britain: yet had he an after-game to play
full of hazard and difficulty; his two Nephews are living: had Machiavel been
his Tutor, he had sent them long ere this to their Graves; and whilst the
lawful Heirs are in being, the unjust possessor upon what title soever can
never be secure; Cassibalan to stop the mouths of all such as should find
themselves aggrieved with the disinheriting of the Orphans, gives unto
Androgias the City of London, with the Dukedom or Earldome of Kent; And unto
Tenantius the Earldome of Cornwall; but men deprived of their Birthright will
make hard shift, rather then not obtain their Right, or at least be revenged;
This was the present condition of Brittany, about the four and fiftieth year,
before the Birth of our Savior Jesus Christ: Caesar being the Governor of
Gallia for the Senate and people of Rome, and having brought some part of that
Country under obedience, intended a Voyage into Brittany, partly upon pretense
of revenge (for that the Britains had diverse times aided those of Gallia in
their Wars against the Romans) and partly to satisfy himself with the sight of
the Island: and knowing the Inhabitants and their custom, whereby he might be
perhaps the more readily induced by reason of his own natural Inclination to
undertake great and difficult attempts, and with the increase of his own glory
to enlarge the limits of the Roman Empire: unto which at that time the
Soveraignity of the whole world was by divine providence Allotted; And to this
end he thought good to be first informed of the nature of the people, and of
such havens in the Isle as were most commodious to receive any shipping that
should come thither; which things where in a manner unkown to the Gauls, by
reason the Flanders suffered none to have access to them but Merchants only,
neither knew they any other places then the Sea Coasts, and those parts of the
Isle that confronted the continent of Gallia; whereupon Caesar supposing it
necessary to make some discovery before he adventured himself in the action,
sent Caius Volusemus in a long boat, with instructions to enquire of the
quantity of the Island, of the conditions of the Inhabitants, of their manner
of making War, of their Government in Peace, and what places were fittest for
Landing; After which dispatch made, he himself with all his Forces, (which were
newly returned from making War beyond the Rhene) Marched into the Country of
the The ancient Inhabitants of the Guines and Bolonois in Picardie.
Morini, from whence was the shortest cut into Brittany, for there he had
appointed his shipping to meet him.

In the mean time his purpose being known to the Britains, by report of the
Merchants (that traded with them) diverse states of the Isle (either fearing the
greatness of the Roman power, or affecting Innovation for some private
respects) sent over Ambassadors, who promised in their names to deliver
Hostages for assurance of their obedience to the people of Rome; but Caesar
though he was fully resolved to enter the Island, courteously entertained their
offer, exhorting them to continue in that good mind, as a means to draw on the
rest in following the example of their submission; for the better effecting
whereof he appointed Comius the chief Governor of the Attrebates (as a man
whose wisdom and faith he had tried, and whom he knew to be respected of the
Britains) to accompany the Ambassadors in their return, giving him in charge
to go to as many Cities as would permit him acoesse, and to persuade the Rulers
to submit themselves as some of their Nation had already done: and further to
let them know, that himself with all convenient speed would come thither.

The Princes of the Isle being yet altogether unacquainted with any civil kind
of Government, maintained quarrels and factions among themselves, whereby one
sought to offend another, and to enlarge his own part by encroaching upon his
Neighbors (not observing that what they gained in particular one of another,
they lost altogether in a general reckoning) they made an open passage in the
end for the Roman to Conquer the whole (a thing common to them with other
Nations, who have found the like effects, to proceed from the like cause) for
the most part of the Britains in those days, delighted in War, neglecting
Husbandry, or perhaps not then knowing the use of it; Their manner of living
and customs were much, like to those of the Inhabitants of Gallia; Their Diet
was such as nature yielded of her self without the industry of man; for though
they had great store of Cattle, yet they lived (especially in the Inland
Country) with Milk; It was held among them as a thing unlawful to eat of a
Hare, a Hen, or a Goose, and yet they nourished them for Creation sake. Their
apparel was made of the skins of Beasts, though their bodies were for the most
part naked and stained with woad, which gave them a bluish color, and as they
supposed, made their Aspect terrible to their Enemies in Battle. Their Yet had
they Cities wald, and strong; this must be understood of those which we now
call Peasants and Cottagers.
Houses were compact of stakes, reeds and boughs of trees fastened together in
a round Circle. They had ten or twelve wives a piece common among them, though
the issue were always accounted his that first married the Mother being a
Maiden. They were in stature taller then the Gauls; by this time Volusenus (who
durst not set foot on land to hazard himself among the Ilanders) returned to
Caesar (to wit, the fifth day after his setting forth) and made relation of
such things as he had seen and heard by report in roving up and down the Coast
in view of the Island.

Caesar having composed some Tumults in the hither part of Gallia, that he
might leave no Enemy behind him to annoy him in his absenee, pursued the
Enterprise of Britain, having to that end prepared a Navy, which consisted of
about fourscore Ships of burden (a number sufficient) as he thought, for the
transportation of two Legions, besides his long Boats, wherein the Questor, the
Lieutenant, and other Officers of the Camp were to be embarked; There were also
eighten ships of burden (that lay wind bound about eight miles from the Port)
appointed to waft over the Horsemen. P. Pulpitius Rufus, a Lieutenant of a
Legion was commanded to keep the Haven it self with such power as was thought
sufficient. These things being thus ordered, and a good part of the summer
being now spent, Caesar put out to Sea about the third watch of the night,
having given direction, that the Horsemen should embarke in the upper Haven,
and follow him; wherein while they were somewhat slack, Caesar with his
shipping about the fourth hour of the day Arrived upon the Coast of Britain,
where he beheld the Clifts possessed with a multitude of people rudely armed,
but ready to make resistance.

The nature of the place was such, as by reason of the steep hills (encloasing
the Sea on each side in a narrow strait) it gave great advantage to the
Britains, in casting down their darts upon their Enemies underneath them.
Caesar finding this place unfit for landing his Forces, put off from the shore
and cast Anchor, expecting the rest of his Fleet; and in the mean time calling
a Council of the Lieutenants and Tribunes of the Soldiers, he declared unto
them, what he had understood by Volusenus, and directed what he would have
done, warning them that (as the state of War, and especially the Sea service
required) they would be ready to weigh Anchor and to remove Too and Fro upon
all occasions at a beek, and in an instant.

This done, having advantage both of Wind and Tide, he set forward with his
Navy about four League from that place, and then lay at Anchor in view of the
open and plain shore; But the Ilanders upon intelligence of the Romans purpose
had sent thither (before Caesar's coming) a company of Horsemen and Chariots
called Esseda (which they then used in their Wars) and following afterward
with the rest of their Forces, empeached their Enemies from Landing, whose
ships by reason of their huge bulks (drawing much water) could not come near to
the shore, so as the Roman Soldiers were thereby enforced in places unknown
(their bodies being charged with their Armor) to leap into the water and
encounter the Britains, who assailed them nimbly with their Darts, and drove
their Horses and Chariots with main force upon them. The Romans being therewith
terrified, as Men unacquainted with that kind of Fight, failed much of the
wonted courage which they had showed in their former land Services; and Caesar
perceiving it, caused the long boats which seemed more strange to the
Britains, and were more serviceable by reason of the swiftness of their
motion, to put off by little and little from the great Ships, and to Row
toward the shore, from whence they might more easily charge the Ilanders, with
their Arrows, Slings and other Warlike Engines, which (being then unknown to
the Inhabitants, as also the fashion of the ships and motion of the Oars in
the long Boats, having stricken them with fear and amazement) caused them to
make a stand and afterward to draw back a little. But the Roman Soldiers
making no haste to pursue them, by reason of the water which they suspected in
some place to be deep and dangerous, the Standerd-bearer of the Eagle for the
tenth Legion, praying that his attempt might prove succesful, then the Legion
cried out with a loud voice saying, Fellow Soldiers leap out of your Boats,
and follow me, except you mean to betray your Standard to the Enemy; for my own
part, I mean to discharge the duty I owe to the Commonwealth, and to my
General; This said, he cast himself into the water, and carried the Standard
boldly against the Britains; whereupon the Soldiers exhorting one another to
follow the Ensign what fortune so ever befell, with a common consent leapt out
of their long Boats, one seconding another, and so wading through the water, at
length got to shore, where began a sharp and bloody Fight on both sides. The
Romans were much Encumbered by reason that they could neither keep their ranks
nor fight upon firm ground, nor follow their own Standard; for every one as he
came on Land, ran confusedly to that which was next him; some of the Britains
who knew the flats and shallow places, espying the Romans as they came single
out of their ships, pricked forward their horses and set upon them, overlaying
them with number, and finding them unwieldy and unready to make any great
resistance, by reason of the depth of the water, and weight of their Armor,
while the greater part of the Natives with their Darts assailed them fierely
upon the shore, which Caesar perceiving, commanded the Cock-boats and Scouts to
be Manned with Soldiers whom he sent in all haste to rescue their Fellows.

There was a Soldier of Caesar's Company called Cassius Scaeva, who with some
other of the same Band, was carried in a small Boat unto the Rock, which the
ebbing Sea in that place had make accessible. The Britains espying them, made
thitherwards: the rest of the Romans escaping, Scaeva was left alone upon the
Rock, to which Island the fury of the enraged multitude assailed him with their
darts, which he received upon his Shield, and thrust at them with his Spear
till it was broken, and his Helmet and Shield lost: then being tired with
extreme toil, and dangerously wounded, he betook himself to flight (carrying
two little Harnesses on his back) with much difficulty recovered Caesar's Tent,
where he craved pardon for making so bold an attempt without commandment of his
General. Caesar did both remit the Offense, and rewarded the Offender by
bestowing upon him the Office of a Centurion. This was that Scaeva who
afterward gave good cause to have his Name remembered in the Roman Histories
for the memorable service he did to Caesar, in the time of the civil Wars
between him and Pompey at the battle near Dyrrachium. The Romans having at
length got footing on the dry land, gave a fresh charge unto the Britains, and
in the end forced them to turn their backs, and leave the shore, though they
could not pursue them far into the Land for want of Horsemen, Caesar's
accustomed Fortune failing him in this one accident.

The Britains after this overthrow assembling themselves together (upon
consultation had amongst them) sent Ambassadors to Caesar, promising to deliver
in pledges, or to do whatsoever else he would command them: With these
Ambassadors came Comius of Arras, whom Caesar had sent before out of Gallia
into Britain, where having delivered the Message he had then in charge, he was
apprehended and committed to Prison, and now after the battle released. The
chief States of the Britains, seeking to excuse their attempt, laid the blame
upon the multitude, who being the greater number, and wilfully bent to take
Arms, would neither by persuasion nor Authority be restrained: And they
pretended their own ignorance as being a free people, and not experienced in
the Customs of other Nations. Caesar although he reproved them for making War
in that manner, considering that of their own accord, they had sent Ambassadors
to him, before his arrival in Brittany to desire peace; yet was content to
pardon them upon delivery of pledges, whereof some he received presently, and
the rest being to come from remote places, he appointed to be sent in by a set
day; so the Britains were dismissed to return into their Countries; and in the
mean time there came diverse Princes from other parts of the Isle to submit
themselves and their Cities to Caesar. The fourth day after, the Romans Landing
the ships before mentioned, appointed for Transportation of Caesar's Horse men,
having a favorable Gail of wind, put out to Sea from the upper Haven; and
approaching near the Island in view of the Roman Camp, a sudden storm arose
and scattered them, driving some back again to the Port from whence they came,
and some others upon the lower part of the Island Westward, where after they
had cast Anchor, (their Keeles being all most overwhelmed with the Waves) they
were carried by violence of the storm in the night into the Main, and with very
great peril recovered a harbor in the Continent.

The same night the Moon was at the full, at which time commonly the Sea in
those parts is much troubled, and overfloweth the banks by reason of the high
Tides (a matter unknown unto the Romans) insomuch as the long Boats which
transported the Army, then lying upon the shore, were filled with the flood,
and the ships of burden that lay at Anchor were beaten with the storm and split
in pieces, the greater number of them perishing in the water, and the rest
being made altogether unserviceable (the Anchors lost and Tacklings broken)
wherewith the Romans were much perplexed, for that they neither had any other
ships to transport them back again, nor any means to repair what the Tempest
had Ruined; and Caesar had formerly resolved to winter in Gallia, by reason he
was unfurnished of victuals to maintain his Army, during the Winter season:
which being known to the chief States of the Britains (who had met together
about the accomplishment of such things as Caesar had commanded them) they
supposed a fit opportunity was offered them to revolt, while the Romans wanted
Horsemen, shipping and all manner of provisions; the number of their Forces
seeming also the less, in respect of the small circuit of their Camp ( Caesar
having transported his Legions, without any Carriages, or such like Warlike
necessaries) whereupon they concluded to keep them from Victuals, and to
prolong the War till Winter; assuring themselves that if they could either
vanquish the Romans, or bar them from returning thence, there would no
Foreign Nation after them adventure to set foot again in Brittany; and
hereupon they conveyed themselves by stealth out of the Roman Camp, and
gathered company to them privily from diverse parts to make head against their
Enemies.

Caesar, albeit he was ignorant of the Britains purpose, yet supposing that
the State of his Army and the loss of his ships were to them known, and
considering that they had broken day with him, in detaining the pledges
contrary to the contract, he suspected that which afterward proved true; And
therefore to provide remedies against all chances, he caused The Britains not
ignorant of Agriculture, as some aver they then were, as the Author from whom I
took this, seems to say.
Corn to be brought daily out of the Fields into his Camp; and such ships as
could not be made fit for service were used to repair the rest, and such other
things as were wanting thereto, he appointed to be brought out of the same
continent; by which means and the diligence of his Soldiers, by loss of
twelve ships, the rest of the Navy was made able to bear sail, and brook the
Seas again: while these things were in doing, the seventh Legion (according to
custom) was sent forth a Forraging, till which time the Britains revolt was
not certainly known, for that some of them remained abroad in the Fields, and
others came ordinarily into the Roman Camp; The Warders in the station before
the Camp, gave notice to Caesar that the same way which the Legion went, there
appeared a greater dust then was wont to be seen; Caesar mistrusting some new
practice of the Britains, commanded the Companies (that kept Ward) to march
thither, appointing two others to supply their rooms, and the rest of his
Forces to Arm themselves with speed and follow him; when he approached near
the place discried, he perceived his Soldiers to be overcharged by the
Britains, who assailed them on all sides with darts; For the Britains having
commanded their Corn from all other parts (this only excerted) and suspecting
that the Romans would come thither, lay in the woods all night to intexcept
them: and finding them dispersed and unready, they suddenly set upon them (as
they were reaping) killing a few of them and disordering the rest with their
Horses and Chariots.

The manner of the Britains fighting in Chariots
The manner of their fighting in Chariots was thus; First they used to ride
round about their Enemies Forces, casting their Darts where they saw advantage,
and often times with the fierceness of their Horses, and whirling of their
Chariots wheels, they broak their Enemies ranks: and being gotten in among the
Troops of Horsemen, they would leap out of their Chariots and Fight on Foot.
The Chariot-drivers in the mean time withdrew themselves by little and little
out of the battle, and placed themselves in such sort, as their Masters (being
over matched by their Enemies) might readily recover their Chariots, so that in
their Fighting they performed the Offices both of Horsemen in swiftness of
motion, and also of Footmen in keeping of ground: and by daily use and exercise
they were grown so expert in managing their Horses as driving them forcibly
down a deep hill, they were able to stay or turn them in the midway, yea to run
along the beam, to stand firm upon the yoke, and to return thence speedily into
their Chariots again.

The Romans being much troubled with this new kind of fight, Caesar came in
good time to the rescue; for upon his approach the Britains gave over the
Skirmish, yet keeping still their ground as Masters of the Field; and the
Romans for fear, retired themselves to their General, who thought it no point
of wisdom to hazard his Forces in a place unknown: but having staid there a
while, conducted the Legions back again to his Camp, and in the mean time, the
Britains that were in the Field dispersed themselves and shrunk away. After
this there were many days together continual tempests, which kept the Romans
in their Camp, and hindered the Britains from making any open attempt; though
they sent Messengers secretly into diverse parts of the I Will, publishing abroad
what a small number of their enemies were left, what hope there was of a rich
booty, and what apparent likelihood of recovering their liberty, if they drive
the Romans from their Camp: and hereupon in short time they assembled a great
number of Horse and Foot men to put their purpose in execution. Against the
which ( Caesar understanding thereof) made preparation for Defense, having
gotten also about him thirty Horse men, (which Comius of Arras brought over
with him) whose service he supposed very necessary, if the Britains (according
to their wonted manner) should seek to save themselves by flight; The Legions
were placed in battle Array, before the Camp. Then the Britains began to
Fight, which had not long continued, when they gave back and fled, the Romans
pursuing them as far as they durst, killing many whom they overtook, and
burning Houses and Towns as they returned to their Camp. The same day the
Britains sent Ambassadors to Caesar desiring peace, which after long suit was
granted upon Conditions, that the Pledges (which was before required) should be
now doubled, and speedily sent over into Gallia. For the Aequinoctial drawing
near, Caesar made haste thither, doubting his crased ships would not be well
able to brook the Seas in Winter: whereupon taking advantage of the next fair
wind, he embarked his Forces about midnight, and with the greatest part of his
Fleet Arrived in the Continent. The Roman Senate (upon Relation of these his
Services) decreed a Supplication for him, for the space of twenty days.

In the spring of the year following, Caesar having pacified some tumults in
Gallia, prosecuted the enterprise of Britain, and to that end he had prepared
a Fleet of new ships, all appointed and commodiously built for landing his
Forces, (the want whereof he had found before to his great loss) and a
sufficient Army consistent of five Legions, and a proportionable number of
Horse which he embarked at Calis
Portus Iccius about Sun setting: having a fair Southern wind to set them
forward, which failing them about midnight, the Tide diverted their course, so
as in the morning he discovered the Island on his left hand, and then following
the turning of the Tide, he commanded his Soldiers to use their Oars, that
they might reach that part of the Isle, where they had found the best landing
the summer before; wherein they took such pains, as their ships of burden kept
way with their long boats and lighter Vessels; about noon they landed on the
shore, where there appeared no man to make resistance; the cause whereof was
(as Caesar afterward learned by such Prisoners as he took) for that the
Britains having assembled themselves together in Arms at the Sea side, were
so terrified with the sight of the ships (which of all sorts were esteemed
above eight hundred sail) that they left the shore, and ran to hide themselves
in the Upland Countries; Caesar (upon intelligence of Fugitives, where the
British Forces lay) leaving at the Sea side ten Chariots, and three hundred
Horse to guard the ships then lying at Anchor (whereof Quintus Atrius had the
charge) Marched forward with the rest of his Army in the night about twelve
miles into the Land, where he espied a multitude of Britains flocking together
near a river, having gotten the upper ground, from whence they began, to charge
the Romans with their horse and Chariots, but being repulsed by Caesar's
Horsemen, they fled and hid themselves in the Woods in a place which being
notably strengthened both by nature and art, they had used as a Fortress in
their civil War, among themselves; for by reason there were many great Trees
cut down and laid overthwart the passages round about, there could hardly any
entrance be found into the wood: Howbeit the Britains themselves would often
times, sally forth upon advantage, and empeach the Romans where they attempted
to enter, hereupon Caesar commanded the Soldiers of the seventh Legion to make
a A warlike Engine made of bords covered over with raw hides to serve for a
defense against fire or stones in scaling a Wall.
Testudo, and to raise a Mount against the place; by which means after loss of
men on both sides, the Romans in the end got the Fort, and chased the Britains
over the wood; but Caesar would not suffer his Soldiers to pursue them; for in
regard the place was unknown, and a great part of the day being spent, he
thought it fit to bestow the rest in fortifying the Camp. The next day in the
morning he sent out Horsemen and Footmen three several ways to pursue them
that fled; but before they had gotten sight of the Britains, certain Horsemen
sent from Quintus Atrius (who had charge of the shipping) brought news that a
great Tempest the night before had distressed his ships, and beaten them upon
the shore, the Anchors and Cabels being not able to hold them, nor the Mariners
to guide them, or to endure the force of the storm; whereupon Caesar caused the
Legions and Horsemen to be sent for back again, and marched with speed toward
the Sea side, where he found his Navy in ill plight; forty of his ships being
clean cast away, and the rest with great difficulty seeming likely to be
recovered: for effecting whereof he took some ship-rights out of the Legions,
and sent for others out of the Continent, writing to Labienus who had the
charge of certain Legions there, and the guard of Portus Iccius, that he should
prepare as many ships as he could to be sent over to him with expedition; and
though it were a work of great toil, yet he thought it necessary to have all
the ships haled on shore, and to be brought into the Camp where his Landforces
lay, that one place might be a safeguard to them both; in the accomplishment
hereof he spent ten days (the Soldiers scarce intermitting their labor in
the night time) till all was finished.

Caesar having fortifide his Camp, and left there the same Forces, (which were
before appointed to keep the harbor) returned to the place whence he
dislodged, upon Atrius his information, where he found the number of the
Britains much increased by confluence of people from sundry parts within the
Island; The chief Commandment and direction for the War, was by public consent
of the States of the Isle assigned to Cassibelin, the bounds of whose
Territory were divided from the Maritime Cities, by the River Thamesis, and
were cast out from the Sea about fourscore miles. There had been of long time
continual War between him, and some other Princes of the Countries near
adjoining: but now (both parts fearing to be overrun by a Foreign Enemy)
neglected private respects, and joined their Forces together, appointing him to
be their Leader, as a man of whose valor and sufficiency in military Affairs
they had good experience. The Roman Army being come in view of their Enemies
Camp, the Britains pressed forward to begin the Fight with their Horsemen and
Chariots, and Caesar sent out his Horsemen to Encounter them, so as the battle
was maintained with great resolution on both parts, and the event thereof
seemed doubtful, till in the end the Britains gave ground, and fled through
the woods to the hills, many of them being slain in the Chase, and some of the
Romans also who adventurously pursued them so far.

Not long after the Romans (suspecting no danger) were occupied in fortifying
their Camp, the Britains sallyed suddenly out of the Woods and made an Assault
upon the Warders that kept station before the Camp; to whose aid Caesar sent
out two Cohorts (the chief of the two Legions) which making a lane through the
midst of the British Forces joined themselves with their distressed
Fellows, and rescued them from the peril, though Quintus Liberius Durus, a
Tribune of the Soldiers, was slain in that Enterprise: But new Cohorts coming
to supply the former, the Britains were repulsed, and sought to save
themselves by flight. By the manner of this Skirmish (which was fought in view
of the Roman Camp) the Romans perceived the Advantage, which the Britains had
of them, and how ill themselves were appointed for such a fight, when by reason
of the weight of their Armor they could neither pursue such as fled, nor durst
leave their Ensigns, nor were able (without great disadvantage) to encounter
the British Horse men, which oft-times gave ground on purpose; and having
withdrawn themselves a little and a little from the Legions, would leap out of
their Chariots and fight on foot; the manner of their fighting with Horse and
Chariots, being alike dangerous to those that retired, and to those that
pursued; Besides they divided their Forces into Companies (when they fought)
and had several stations, with great distances between them; one Troop
seconding another, and the second and fresh men yielding Supplies to the
wounded and wearied. The day following, the Britains were discried upon the
Hills afaroff, scattered here and there in great numbers together; being not
very forward to begin a new Fight, till Caesar having sent out three Legions,
and all his Horse men under the Conduct of C. Trelonius the Lieutenanant to go
a forraging, they flocked suddenly together from all parts, and set upon the
Forragers, not sparng to assail the Ensigns Legions themselves who strongly
resisted them, and made them turn their backs, when the Roman Horse men also
eagerly pursued them, never giving over the chase (as being confident in the
aid of the Legions that followed them) until they had driven them headlong
before them, killing all those they overtook, and giving the rest no time,
either to gather themselves together, or to make a stand, or once to forsake
their Chariots: after this overthrow many of the Natives (who had come from
diverse parts to aid their Countrymen) shrunk away; and Caesar understanding
what course the rest of the Britains meant to hold in prosecuting the War, led
his Army to the bounds of Cassibelins Country upon the River of Thames, which
was passible on Foot in one place only, and that with some difficulty; when he
came thither, he perceived that the Britains had great Forces in readiness on
the further side of the River, the banks whereof were fortified with
sharp-pointed stakes or piles (about the bigness of a man's thigh, and bound
about with lead) pitched near the shore, to impead their passage, and some
others of the same kind, (the remnants whereof continue to this Age) were
planted covertly under the water in the main River; of this, Caesar having
intelligence (by some Fugitives and prisoners that he had taken) commanded the
Horse men first to enter the River, and the Legions to follow, so as (the
dangerous places being discovered) the Romans waded through (their heads only
appearing above the water,) and charged the Britains with such violence, as
they forced them to forsake the sh^^e and betake themselves to flight.

Cassibelin seeing no likelihood to maintain the War any longer by Force,
dismissed the greater part of his power, and keeping with him, about four
thousand Chariots only, retired into the Woods and places of most Safety,
driving Men and Cattle before him out of the Fields all that way by which the
Romans should pass with their Army, whose Horse men as they ranted up and down
to plunder, he surprised with his Chariots, and distressed them in such sort as
they durst not march forward, but keeping themselves in their strength gave
over their former purpose; and from thenceforth sought only to annoy the
Britains by spoiling and burning their Houses and Towns.

In the mean time the The ancient Inhabitants of Middlesex and Essex.
Troynobantes, one of the chief States of those parts, sent Ambassadors to
Caesar, promising to submit themselves and to be at his Commandment. There was
also one Mandrubratius who had fled over to Caesar, when he was in Gallia, and
was now become a Follower of his Fortune, while preferring the satisfaction of
his own discontented humor, before the advancement of the common Cause, he
served as an instrument to betray his native Country, abusing the credit which
he had with his Countrymen, by working their subversion to his own dishonor,
and advantage of a Foreign enemy. His Father Imanentius (having been sometime
chief Ruler of the City of Trinobantes, and well esteemed among them) was slain
by Cassibelin the present Governor, against whom the Citizens desired Caesar
to protect Mandubratius, and to commit unto him the Government of that City,
which Caesar granted upon delivery of a certain number of Pledges, and a
sufficient proportion of Victuals for provision of his Army. Hereupon diverse
petty states thereabout sent Ambassadors, and yielded themselves to Caesar, who
understood by them that Cassibelina his Town (being well stored with Men and
Cattle) was not far from thence; this Town was only a circuit of ground
enclosed with wood and marshes, or else entrenched with a Ranger of Earth about
it: Caesar coming with his Legion to this place (which he found very strong, as
being fortifyed Naturally, and also by the industry of man) began to assail it
on both sides. The Britains having expected a while the event of the
enterprise, and perceiving themselves unable to withstand the assault, issued
out at a back way, where many of them being slain, and some taken as they fled,
the Town it self and all the provisions within it were left as a spoil to the
Romans: while these things were doing among the Trinobants, Cassabelin
dispatched messengers into Kent or Cantium that lies upon the Sea. The
Inhabitants of these parts were better furnished to make War then any other of
the Isle; the Country at that time was Governed by four Kings, as Caesar
himself calls them, either for that they had among them a kind of absolute
Government in several, or else for that being the Register of his own Acts, he
supposed it would be more for his glory to be reputed a Conqueror of Kings;
their names were Cingetorix, Carvilius, Taximugulus, and Segonax, whom
Cassibelin then required to raise all the power they could make, and on the
sudden to assail the Roman Forces that Guarded their ships at the Sea side.
This was attempted accordingly, but with ill success, for that the Romans
having timely advertisement of their purpose, prevented the execution thereof,
by setting upon them as they drew near the Roman Army: and so after a great
slaughter made of the Britains (Cingetorix a Noble Captain, and one of the
Princes being taking prisoner) the Romans returned safe to their Camp.
Cassibelin hearing of the unhappy issue of his enterprise, after so many losses
sustained on his part, his Country being wasted with War, and himself in a
manner forsaken, by the revolt of the Cities round about, which most of all
disc^uraged him, sent Ambassadors to Caesar by Comius of Arras, offering to
submit himself upon reasonable conditions. Caesar determining to winter in
Gallia (the state of his affairs there requiring it) and the summer being
almost spent, commanded that he should deliver certain pledges for assurance of
his obedience, and that he should offer no wrong, nor give cause of offense to
Mandubratius or the Troynobants, whom he had taken into special protection; and
then having imposed a Tribute to be paid yearly by the Britains to the people
of Rome, he marched toward the sea side, where he embarked his Forces, and
arrived with them safely in the Continent.

Thus Caesar having rather showed some part of Britain to the Romans then made
a Conquest of the whole, supposed he had done sufficiently for his own glory in
undertaking a matter so rare and difficult in those Times. At his coming to
Rome he presented there certain Captives (which he had taken in the British
Wars) whose strangeness of shape and behavior filled the peoples eyes both
with wonder and delight; He offered also in the Temple of Venus Genetrix a
Surcote embroidered with British Pearl as a Trophy and spoil of the Ocean,
leaving to posterity a perpetual remembrance of his Enterprise in this Island,
to the honor both of his own Name and of the Roman Nation.

After the death of Julius Caesar (by reason of the civil Wars among the
Romans) the Isle of Britain was for a time neglected, and Augustus Caesar
being settled in the Empire (which was then grown to such greatness as it seemed
even cumbred therewith) accounted it good policy to contain the same within it
known bounds; Besides the attempt was like to prove dangerous, and a matter of
very great expense to send an Army so far off to make War with the British
Nation for desire of glory only, (no special cause besides moving thereto.)
Howbeit as some Writers Report above Twenty years after Julius Caesar's first
Entrance, Augustus intended a Voyage hither in person, alleging for pretense
of the War, the wrong offered to the Roman State by such Princes of the Isle as
had for certain years witheld the Tribute which Caesar his Praedecessor had
imposed upon them; intelligence whereof being got, the Britains sent over
Ambassadors, who meeting the Emperor in The Country between the Rivers
Garony and Seinin, France.
Gallia Celtica, declared their submission and desired pardon; And the better
to win favor, they had carried over certain gifts of good value to be
presented as offerings in the Roman Capitol (having already learned the Art to
flatter for Advantage, and to appease Princes by rewards) Hereupon a
conditional peace was granted them, and the Emperor having pacifyed some
troubles in Gallia, returned to Rome: then began the Ilanders to pay Tribute
and Custom of all kind of Wares which they exchanged with the Gauls; as
namely, Ivory boxes, Iron chains, and other trinkets of Amber and Glass which
were Transported Too and Fro, both out of Gallia and Britain. The year
following the Britains having failed in performance of Conditions, he prepared
for another expedition; but being set forward on his Voyage, the revolt of the
The Biscayans.
Cantabrians and The Inhabitants between Gallicia and Portugal.
Assyrians stayed him from proceeding any further therein; after which time the
Britains were left to themselves to enjoy their Liberty, and use their own
Laws without molestation of foreign Invaders; for that the Romans having found
the sweetness of peace (after long civil Wars) sought rather to keep in
obedience such Provinces as had been before time brought under subjection, then
by attempting new Conquests to hazard the loss of that they had already gotten.

In those days the Country of the Troynobants in Britain was Governed by
Conobelin, who kept his residence at Malden in Essex.
Camalodunum; he began first to reclaim the Britains from their ill customs,
and to make his state more respected, he afterward caused his own Image to be
stamped on his Coin after the manner of the Romans, a custom never used by
the Britains before his days, and but then newly received by the Romans
themselves; for before that time the Britains used Rings of Iron, and little
plates of Brass of a certain weight instead of Coin; During the time of his
Government, the divine mystery of humane Redemption was accomplished by the
birth of our Savior Christ Jesus; Augustus Caesar then possessing the Roman
Empire, which he afterward left to Tiberius his Adopted Son, a Wary and
Politic Prince, who following the advice and example of Augustus, did never
attempt any thing in Britain, nor maintain any Garrison there: Howbeit the
Britains at that time were well affected to the Romans, as appeared by the
entertainment which their petty Princes gave to some Soldiers of the Roman
Army in Germany, who crossing the Seas were by force of weather cast upon the
coast of Britain, and from thence in courteous manner sent back to Germanicus
their General.

This Conobelin or Kimbelin, was in Rome when the blessed Tidings of the
Incarnation of the Son of God were declared through the world; for Augustus
after the death of Julius Caesar, successor in the Empire (as say our
Antiquaries both ancient and late) by the will of God had established most sure
peace through the world; our Redeemer Jesus Christ, true God and Man was born
in the 42 year of his Empire, in the fifth year of the Reign of Cunobelin or
Kimbelin in this Kingdom of the Britains. A little before which time, by the
great providence of God, to make this our Britain more timely and particularly
partaker of such heavenly tidings before other Nations, Augustus intending an
expedition against this Kingdom, Ambassadors came from Britain to Rome,
entreating for peace, swearing fealty in the Temple of Mars, offering gifts in
the Capitol to the Gods of the Romans, and submitting part of the Isle to
Augustus; Mr. Br. f. 1. and ^
they gave him for security, so many great Nobles of this Land for Pledges and
Hostages, that all here were so quiet, that one band of Soldiers and a few
Horsemen were sufficient to keep the Isle in the Roman possession.

Now by such means the Romans did ever here secure themselves of the Britains,
from their first invasion by Julius Caesar, carrying away from hence, and
keeping at Rome for their glory, honor and quiet not only many of our chief
Nobility, Men, Women and Children: but of the Regal race, and blood, and Kings
themselves; Among which we find that Androgius Son and Heir to King Lud lived
and dyed there; Cassibeline his Uncle, who was subdued by Caesar, gave
Hostages, and made this Kingdom Tributary to the Roman Empire. Theomantius his
Nephew and Successor in the Kingdom paid Tribute to the Romans, which
Cassibeline had granted and Reigned quietly. And his Son Cunobeline King after
him, (his Father) was one of his Fathers Hostages in Rome, and was Knighted
there. Adaminus Son of King Cunobeline, was kept at Rome by Cajus; thus much
and much more Mr. Broughton that eminent Antiquary in his first and second
Folio, out of diverse Authors by him there cited, which I here for brevity omit.

Augustus Caesar the Emperor being urged by the Romans to be made a God, after
the Heathenish manner then, or about the very time when Christ was born, before
he would consent unto it, consulted with Sybilla Tiburtina, then renowned for
her Prophesies. Sybillam Tiburtinam super hoc consuluit, quae post trium dierum
jejunium respondit in hunc modum; Judicii in signum, Tellus sudore madescet; De
coelo rex adveniet per secla futurus: Quorum versuum capitales literae hunc
reddebant sensum, Jesus Christus Dei filius salvator. Eo illico apertum est
coelum; and nimius splendour irruit super eum, and vidit in coelo pulcherrimam
virginem stantem super altar, puerum tenentem in brachiis, and miratus est
nimis, and vocem dicentem audivi, Haec ara filii Dei est. Qui statim projiciens
in terram adoravit, quam visionem Senatoribus retulit, and ipsi mirati sunt
nimis. After she had fasted three days, Sybilla answered in these Achrostical
known verses, whose first letters make this sense, Jesus Christ the Son of God
our Savior; and presently the Heaven opened, and an exceeding brightness fell
down upon the Emperor, and he saw in Heaven: a most beautiful Virgin standing
upon an Altar, holding a Child in her Arms, and he marvelled exceedingly, and
heard this voice saying, This is the Altar of the Son of God; whereupon
presently prostrating himself upon the ground, he adored, which Vision he
related to the Senators, who marvelously wondered at it.

And this miraculous preaching of Christ's birth so far off, then at Rome, was
so much more public and general, that at or a little before this time the same
Emperor, as Suidas witnesses, Suidas in Augusto.
in their than greatest sacrifice, was told by their Oracle that an Hebrew
Child commanded the Gods (as they termed them) to silence; whereupon Augustus
ab oraculo reversus in Capitolio aram erexit, Romanisque literis inscripsit,
Haec Ara est Primogeniti Dei. Augustus returning from the Oracle, erected an
Altar in the Capitol, and made this inscription upon it in Roman Letters; This
it the Altar of the first and only begotten Son of God; our English
Historians with others proceed to more such public testimonies concerning
Christ at Rome, Jo. Herc. in Martin. Polon. Dedic. to Q. Eliz. Martin. Polon.
in Aug. and alii. Mr. B. Fol. 4.
and at that very time; hoc ipso die quo natus est Christus, trans Tyberim fons
olei emanavit, ac per totum diem largissimo rivo fluxit; tunc etiam circulus ad
speciem caelestis arcus circa solemn apparuit; etiam statim ut virgo peperit,
illa statua aurea corruit in Romuliano Palatio quam Romulus posuerat dicens,
Non cadet donec virgo pariat. The very day on which Christ was born, beyond
Tiber at Rome, a fountain of oil flowed, and ran with a most large stream all
the day: The circle like to a heavenly bow appeared about the Sun; also
presently so soon as the Virgin brought forth her Son, the Golden Statue in the
Palace of Romulus fell down, which Romulus placed there (above 700 years
before) saying, it shall not fall until a Virgin be brought to bed of a Child.

Upon these and other such motives this Emperor was so fully persuaded of the
Messiah then born, that he highly reverenced all testimonies thereof; the
Prophesies of the Sybills which are so clear for almost all Mysteries of
Christ, as his Nativity, Life, Passion, Resurrection, Ascension, with the rest,
as if they had been present witnesses, rather then Prophets or Evangelists of
those things, Suetonius in Augusto.
he so respected, that as Suetonius a Pagan writes, Quidquid fatidicorum
librorum Graeci Latinique generis nullis vel parum idoneis autoribus vulgo
ferebatur, supra duo millia contracta, undique concremavit, and solos retinuit
Sybellinos, hos quoque dilectu habito, condiditque duobus forulis auratis sub
Palatini Apollinis basi; he gathered together all books of South-sayers Greek
and Latin, and he burnt about two thousand, whose Authors were either unknown
or of little credit; he only preserved the books of the Sybills, making also
the best choice of them, and those he laid up in two gilded chests under the
Base of Apollo Palatinus; And was so convinced in his understanding by these
means of the truth of Christ, that as our modern Writers with others write,
when the Romans came to him and said, Te volumus adorare quia deus est in te:
si hic non esset, non tibi omnia tam prospere succederent; we will adore thee,
because God is in thee: if he were not here, all things could not succeed so
prosperously with thee; yet he being the greatest Conqueror that ever was in
the world, and was never Conquered and overthrown in battle; Quum ipsum pro Deo
colere vellent Romani, prohibuit, nec se Dominum appellari permisit; when the
Romans would have worshipped him for God, he forbad it, and would not suffer
himself to be called Lord.

And if we may follow our British Histories, Matthew of Westminster, a Man as
all tell us, excellent for History and supputation of years, Quantum ad
Historiam, in recta annorum supputatione singularis, and our late Writers; By
computation of time, our King Kymbeline was then in Rome; Ja. Bal. l de script.
cent. 3. fol. 143. in Math. Flor. Calf. Mon. Hist. l. 4. c. 11. Ponticus aerun.
Hist. Brit. l. 4. Heath. West. Anno Dom. 5.
for we are told, Post Tenantium ad culmen regale Kimbelinus filius suus miles
strenuus quem Caesar Augustus nutriverat, promotus est; After Tenantius
Kimbeline his Son, a Valiant Knight, whom Augustus Caesar had brought up and
promoted to the Kingdom of Britain; Kimbeline was but young, when Augustus
Caesar first brought him up, and he stayed in Rome so long that as diverse, and
also Verunnius affirms, Augustus made him Knight, quem Aug. Caesar nutrierat
and armis decoraverat; and if we follow this exact supputator of times, Matthew
of Westminster, he was come from Rome to be King here but five years before the
birth of Christ. Anno Dominicae Inacrnationis quinto Kimbelonus Rex Brittaniam
december annos tenuisset. And most certain it is by all Histories of our Noble and
Renowned British Hostages resident in Rome all the time of Augustus Caesar,
and after that we had many worthy Britains there, both ear and eye witnesses
to know these passages by themselves, and to testify them to their Countrymen
and Friends at home.

This Kimbeline Son of Tenantius was made King of the Britains in the year
of the world 5180 of his Reign. Authors write diversely, some showing no years,
others very few, Fabian fol. 39. part. 3.
which agrees not well with the Computation of other Writers. The Author of
the Flower of Histories, affirms, that he Reigned thirty five years; after
which time gloriously spent, he died, and was buried at Caer Lud, leaving two
Sons, Guiderius and Arviragus.

The British History (written by a namelesse Author,) yet some suppose him
Noble, and for private reason to have concealed his Name, makes little mention
of Tiberius concerning our British Affairs; but because certain passages with
happened during the time of his Empire, will redound to the glory of the
British Nation, it is expedient, and I hope will not offend the Reader, to
write some things happening in his life time. Kimbeline continued King of England
till the 15 or 16 year after Christ's Nativity, which must needs he in this
Tiberius his time, Mr. Bro. fol. 12.
when the true knowledge of Christ was more clearly manifested unto the world,
and among others, to some Britains of this Nation, especially such (...) then
lived in Rome; For as in the time of this Emperor our Savior began and ended
his preaching, and suffered his Passion for our Redemption: so those things in
such order as they were accomplished in the Land of Jury, they were presently
and truly declared and sent to the Emperor at Rome and others there. Matthew of
Westminster, and Ranulphus Higeden, consent in this with others, that Tiberius
was truly informed at Rome of Christ's miraculous life and preaching long before
his Passion; Mr. Bro. ibid.
and being afflicted with a Leprosy, was so confident in the heavenly power of
Christ, esteeming him then at the least for a great Prophet, Saint and worker
of Miracles, that he sent with great solemnity Volusianus to Jerusalem to
entreat Christ Jesus to come with him to Rome, to cure him of his incurable
Malady; but the Jews had caused Pilate to put him to death before.

The Magdeburgians with others, have published to the World an Epistle of
Lentulus out of the Annals of the Roman Senators, to this Emperor Tiberius
before the death of Christ, thus beginning; Apparuit his temp ribus and adhuc
est homo magnae virtutis nominatus Jesus Christus, qui dicitur a Gentibus
Propheta, quem ejus Discipuli vocant filium Dei, suscitans mortuos, and sanans
omnes languores: There appeared in these time and still is a man of great
virtue named Christ Jesus, who is called of the Gentiles a Prophet, whom his
Disciples call the Son of God, raising the dead, and curing all diseases. And
presently upon the death of Christ, as it is proved both by our own and
Foreign Antiquaries, ancient and later, Greek and Latin; Pontius Pilate wrote
unto Tiberius the Emperor of Rome of the Passion of Christ in this manner. De
passione Dominica Pilatus Tiberio Caesari scripsit in hunc modum. Episcopus
Anacet. de morte Christi. Matthew. Westminster. an. 33. Flor. Wigorn. an. 38. Tertull.
Apolon. c. 5, and 21. Eust. Hist. l. 1. c. 24. Oros. l. 7. c. 4.
Nuper accedit quod and ipse probavi, Judaeos per invidiam se suosque posteros
crudeli damnatione peremisse; nam cum promissum haberent Patres eorum quod Deus
illis mitteret de coelo Sanctum suum, qui eorum qui eorum merito Rex diceretur
ut hunc se promiserit per Virginem missurum ad terram, iste me praside
Haebraeorum Deus cum venerit, ut vidissent eum caecos illuminasse, leprosos
mundasse, paralyticos curasse, Daemones ab hominibus fugasse, mortuos
sucistasse, ventis imperasse, super mare siccis pedibus ambulasse, and multa
alia mirabilia fecisse, cum omnis populus Judaeorum hunc Dei Filium dicerent,
invidiam contra eum passi sunt Principes Sacerdotum, mihique tradiderunt, and
alia pro aliis mentientes, dixerunt illum magum esse, and contra eorum legem
agere; ego autem credidi ita esse, and flagellatum tradidi arbitrio eorum; At
i^i crucifixerunt eum, and sepulto ei custodes adhibuerunt; ille vero militibus
meis custodientibus eum tertia die resurrexit. Sed in tantum exarsit nequitia
eorum ut darent eis pecuniam, dicentes, Dicite quia Discipuli ejus corpus
ipsius rapuerunt; veruntamen milites cum accepissent pecuniam, quod factum
fuerat tacere non potuerunt; nam and illum resurrexisse testati sunt, and a
Judaeis pecuniam accepisse; and ideo suggessi hoc, ne quis aliter referens
mentiatur, and existimet credendum Judaeorum mendaciis. Pilate wrote unto
Tiberius of our Lord's Passion in this manner; It lately chanced which I have
made proof of, that the Jews through envy have destroyed themselves and their
posterity with cruel damnation. For when their Fathers, had a promise, that God
would send unto them his holy One from Heaven, who worthily should be called
their King, and promised him to be born of a Virgin to the Earth: This God of
the Hebrews when he came, I being Praesident, when Men had seen him to cause
blind men to see, to have cleansed the Lepers, cured the diseased with Palsies,
to have driven Devils from Men, to have raised the dead, commanded the winds,
to have walked upon the sea with his Feet, and to have done many other
mavelous things, when all the people of the fews said he was the Son of God,
the principal of the Jews were malicious against him, and delivered him unto
me, and devising many lies, said, he was a Magician, and did against their Law,
and I believed it was so: and having whipped him, delivered him to their will:
but they crucified him, and being buried they appointed Keepers unto him. But
he rose again the third day, my Soldiers keeping him: but their iniquity so
flamed out that they gave Money unto them saying, Say you that his Disciples
took him away: but the Soldiers when they had received the Money, could not
conceal that which was done; for they both witnessed that he rose again, and
that they had received Money from the Jews. And therefore I have suggested
this, lest any Man relating it otherwise, should make a Lie, and think we
should give credit unto the Lies of the Jews; Hitherto the words of the Epistle
of Pontius Pilate himself to the Emperor, not only allowed by our English
moderns and other our Authors, the greatest Chronographers of their time by
their Judgment, but word for word so justified by the German Writers;
Tertulian and almost all ancient Writers and others treating of that age,
approve of it.

And Tiberius the Emperor having sent Volusianus (as before) to to invite
Christ to come unto him to heal his Leprosy, Christ being put to death before
Volusianus his coming thither, he brought from thence with him, as our English
Authors witness, that miraculous Image of Christ which he gave to St. Veronica
in a handkerchief, wherewith he wiped his Face going to his Passion, and with
great reverence presented it to this Emperor at Rome, and he as reverently
received it; Bal. in Flor. Wig. and Math. Floril. Magdebur. cent. l. 1. c. 10.
Col. 354. Tert. Apol. adver. gent. Nauel. in Chron. volum. 2 gener. p. 512.
etc. Eng. Pro. in Math. West. Anno Dom. 37. Ranulph. Higeden. Polychron l. 4.
for say these Authors, Caesar viam pannis sericis sterni fecit, and imaginem
sibi praesentari fecit. Qui mox ut eam fuit intuitus, pristinam assequutus est
sanitatem; and haec imago usque hodie Romae in ecclesia Apostolorum Principis,
populo demonstratur, quae and a portatrice, and a quibusdam Veronica
appellatur: Caesar caused the way to be spread with clothes of silk, and
commanded the Image to be presented unto him, who presently as he had beheld
it, obtained his former health; And this image even to this day, is showed to
the people in the Church of the Prince of the Apostles at Rome, and is called
by the name of her that carried it Veronica; and although Pilate as before, had
so excused himself, and acknowledged Christ for the Messiah unto his Emperor,
yet say the German Writers, Narrat Nicephorus Pilatum ideo maximis Romae
affectum esse contumeliis, quod Maria Magdelena Romam adierit, and salvatoris
res ibi retulerit; Nicephorus makes relation that Pilate suffered most great
reproaches at Rome, for that Mary Magdelen went thither, and there related the
things of our Savior in Tiberius time, whereby Tiberius was so moved and
convinced for acknowledging the truth of Christ's Doctrine, that these English
Authors thus confess with St. Gildas, Tertullian and many others, Tunc Caesar
cum suffragio magni favoris retulit Epistolam ad Senatum, postulant ut Christus
Deus haberetur; sed Senatus consecrationem Christi recusavit, indignatione
commotus quod non secundum morem prius Epistola sibi delata fuisset; Caesar
with his voice of great favor, related the Epistle of Pilate to the Senate,
requesting that Christ should be accounted God; but the Senate refused the
consecration of Christ, moved with indignation, because the Epistle was not
first delivered to them, as the custom was.

Sabelicus l. 2. Eucad. 7.
Sabelicus with others writes that Pilate did truly repent him of delivering
Christ to the Jews, was actually a Christian, and obtained pardon for his
sins; Non defuerunt qui traediderunt Pilatum suae impietatis poenitentiam
egisse, meru isseque adeo veniam; And that in this beginning of the Gospel, the
Faith of Christ might be every where received, without let, or contradiction as
the ancient Learned Father Ferculphus says, God put it into the mind of
Tiberius the Emperor, Ferculphus Lexonien. Epis. l. 1. c. 9. Gildas de excid.
and cong. Brit. c. 6. Math West. ann. gra. 37. Ranul. Hig. in Manusc.
Polychron. l. 4. c. 4. Manus. antiq. Gall. in Tiberio, etc. Fabian fol. 40.
to give it way and suppress the persecution of the Senate: Quod profecto
divina providentia jam tunc Caesaris sensibus ingessit, ut absque ullo
obstaculo in ipsis duntaxat initiis Evangelii sermo undiquaque percurreret. And
our Learned Countryman St. Gildas with others witnesses, he threatened death to
those that should accuse Christians: Tempore summo Tiberii Caesaris, absque
ullo impedimento Christi propagatur Religio, comminata, Senatu volente, a
Principe, morte delatoribus militum ejusdem; which is proved and confirmed by
all sorts of Writers. Tunc Senatus edicto constituit, Christianos ab urbe esse
exterminandos. Sed Caesar haec indigntatus, accusatoribus Christianorum mortem
comminatus est. Then the Senate ordained by an edict that Christians should be
driven forth of the City; but the Emperor being therewith offended, threatened
death to the accusers of Christians. Occasion being here offered to speak of
the Incarnation of the Messiah our most blessed Savior Jesus Christ; Fabian
tells us from the first creation of Adam, to the birth of Christ, was five
thousand one hundred and ninety nine, the which account is approved, as he
says, by Isidore, Beda and others; thus he brings his account.

From No'es Flood or after, two thousand nine hundred and forty seven years.
After Abraham, two thousand and seventeen.
After David King of Israel, one thousand threescore and fifteen.
From or after the Transmigration of the Jews, five hundred and ninety:
After Brute entered Britain, eleven hundred and thirty six.
After Alexander the Great, near upon a eleven hundred and twenty five.
After the building of Rome, seven hundred and twenty nine.
GVIDERIVS.
GVIDERIVS the first Son of Kimbeline, was advanced to the Legal command of the
Britains, who were under his Fathers subjection: he was invested in the year
of the world, 5216. Anno Dom. 170. This King was potent and abounded in
Treasure, which indeed are the sinews of War, and was always a Prince of
Haughty courage: and where wealth and courage meet, almost miracles may be
wrought, if the cause be good, and guided by a celestial providence; but
self-Love, Pride and Arrogance often brings confusion; Guiderius bolstered up
with these supporters, denies the covenanted Tribute to the Romans: which, if
thus confirmed by Authors, Expletis diebus vitae suae, cessit gubernaculum
Regni Guiderio; Mr. Bro. fol. 23. 8.
cum ergo Tributum quod appetebant Romani, ipsis denegaret, supervenit Claudius
qui in Imperium subrogatus fuerat; When Kimbeline was dead, Guiderius
succeeeded in the Kingdom; therefore when he denied the Tribute, the Roman
Claudius came hither being then Emperor. Mr. Br. 335.
And I have read in a very good Author, That in Claudius the Roman Emperors
time, he with his Romans brought the Orchades, and after them Anglesey under
the Roman subjection; though this Act be commonly ascribed to Julius Agricola.
Fabian confirms my Authors Assertion, saying, Wherefore Claudius who was Uncle
to Caius Caligula the Fourth Emperor of Rome, arrived in Britain with a great
Army; and not only as writes Polychronican, constrained the Inhabitants to pay
the Tribute, but also subjected to the Roman yoke the Isles of Orchades, or
Orkeys, which are situate beyond Scotland, and at the end of six Months
returned to his Imperial City. In this Army (as tells us the English Chronicle
and Gaufride) was a Captain called Hame or Hamo, who to compass his purpose
against the Ilanders, changed his Armor and Shield, arming himself like a
Britain, and in this Disguise did extreme Damage unto his Enemies; and still
pressing forward, at length came to the very place where King Guiderius was
fighting, and by this unexpected Stratagem and Policy slew him; which his
Brother Arviragus perceiving, used the like policy, immediately investing
himself in Princely Array, that the Fall of the King was not perceived; and
thus personating a Sovereign in his Regal Ensigns, he encouraged the
Britains, and by his own Example, Courage and Valor, so animated them, that
they did Feats beyond belief, insomuch that they put the Romans to flight.

Thus was Guiderius by the opinion of several Authors slain by Hamo, after he
had reigned the space of twenty eight years, leaving his Brother Arviragus, by
reason that he had no Issue of his own to succeed him.

ARVIRAGVS.
ARviragus the youngest Son of Kimbeline, and brothor to Guiderius, was Crowned
King of Great Britain in the year of Christ's Incarnation forty and four. The
English Chronicle calls him Armiger; he was a Prince of a high Spirit, and
skilful in warlike Affairs, maintaining with great resolution and prosperous
success his Wars against the invading Romans, neither suffered he the death of
his Brother to pass unrevenged; For with his own hands he slew Hamo, the
Murderer of Guiderius, near a Port or Haven, which by reason of that Fact, was
called Hamons Haven, and now with some alteration South-Hampton; a Town,
populous rich and beautiful, from which the whole Shire deriveth her Name; most
strongly walled with square stone, containing in Circuit, one thousand and two
hundred Paces, having seven Gates for entrance, and twenty nine Towers for
Defense, two very stately Keys for Ships arrivage, and five fair Churches for
God's divine Service; besides an Hospital called God's House, wherein the
unfortunate Richard, Earl of Cambridge, beheaded for Treason, lies interred. On
the West of this Town is mounted a beautiful Castle in form Circular, and wall
within wall, the Foundation upon a hill so topped, that it cannot be ascended
but by stairs, carrying a goodly prospect both by Land and Sea, and in the East
without the Walls a goodly Church sometimes stood, called St Mary's, which was
pulled down, for that it gave the French direction of Course, who with fire had
greatly endangered the Town; instead thereof is newly Erected a small and
unfinisht Chapel. In this place, says Learned Cambden, stood the ancient
Clausentium, a Fort of the Romans, whose Circuit on that side extended it self
to the Sea: this suffered many depredations by the Saxon Pirates, and in Anno,
980. was by the Danes almost quite overthrown. In K. Ed. 3. time it was fired
by the French, under the conduct of the King of Sicills Son, whom a Countryman
encountered and struck down with his Club, he crying, Rancon, that is, Ransom;
but he neither understanding his Language, nor the Law that arms does allow,
laid on more soundly; I know thee a Francon, and therefore thou shall die. And
in Richard the Seconds time it was somewhat removed, and built in the place
where now it is. In this Clausentium Canute to evict his Flatterers, made trial
of his Deity, commanding the Seas to keep back from his Feet; but being not
obeyed, acknowledged God to be the only supreme Governor, and in a religious
Devotion gave up his Crown to the rood at Winchester.

Earls of this Southampton have been
1067.
1 Bevis of Hampton, that famous Soldier so much talked of, Azure 3 Lions
passant gardant, Or. 2 William Fitz-Williams. Losenge arg. and Gules. 3 Thomas
Wricthesley L. Chapter created E. by Ed. 6. and King at Arms. 4 Henry Wricthesley.
5 Henry Wricthesley. 6 Thomas Wricthesley. 1641. Azure a Cross, Or, 4 fulcons
closed argent.


Policr. l. 4. c. 8. cited by Fabian, fol. 41.
After diverse changes and alterations in War and Peace, an Agreement was
concluded between Claudius the Roman Emperor and Arviragus, insomuch that the
Emperor sent to Rome for his Daughter Genniss or Gennissa, and espoused her to
the British King, who had by her his Son and Heir Marius, his Successor in the
Kingdom. This King Reigned in Britain when St. Joseph came hither, Mr. Bro.
f. 22.
who gave to him and his Followers a place of Residence, in lateribus suae
Regionis, in the outside of K. Arviragus his Country, in Regionis suae
finibus, says the first Protestant Archbishop of Canterbury in the very end of
his Dominion. Math. Parker.


A late Writer speaking of King Arviragus, says, Quidam Historici testantur,
ipse omnium Regum Brittannorum primus; Joes Pitseus Rel. Hist. in Arvirago.
Fidem Christi cum Sacramentis Christianis, Christianus factus suscepit. Some
Historians witness that of all British Kings he was the first that being made
a Christian, received the Faith of Christ with the Christian Sacraments.
Another thus plainly writes of St. Joseph, He converted to the Christian Faith
Marius and Coillus Son and Nephew to Arviragus; and John Harding is Author,
that he both was a Christian, and Converted by St. Joseph, and plainly
alleges Nennius Authority. Thus he writes: Joseph converted this King
Arviragus
By his Preaching, to know the Law divine;
And baptized him, as written has Nennius,
The Chronicler in Britain Tongue full fine,
And to Christ's Law made him incline:
The Antiquity of the Cross for England.
And gave him then a Shield of silver white,
A Cross end long overthwart full perfect.


Thus writes this Author, but without Warrant of any thing I can find; for
whereas as he cites Nennius to have written thus in the British Language, it
is evident by all Antiquities, that Nennius which wrote in that Tongue, was
long before the Birth of Arviragus or St. Joseph, and dead 50 years before the
Nativity of Christ, and was Brother to King Lud and Cassibelin, and was named
Nennius Helius, and he could not write any such thing; the other Nennius called
Bancharensis, as all Authors agree, wrote only in Latin, and consequently
could not write so in the British Tongue, as that Author thinks, or our best
modern Authors affirm; they find no such thing in any copy of Nennius, Codices
ii quos consuluisse me Nennii antiquos contigit, hnjusce rei parum sunt
memores; Neither is King Arviragus, or St. Joseph named by him.

The places which he allowed to St. Joseph and his companions, were, propter
munitiones Arundineti,, and fluminis, and paludis: so compassed and environed
with Reeds, River and Fens, that they builded a poor Oratory themselves of such
base Elderwands, as that Fenny wilderness afforded, which gives sufficient
testimony how far Arviragus was from being a Christian, that had nothing but
such abject and outcast things to allow to Christ and his servants; when for
the maintenance of the Pagan Idolatry, which he professed, both as the British
History Matthew of Westminster, Ponticus Virunnius, and as well Modern as
Ancient are witnesses; he was Author of stately and sumptuos buildings, and so
far from diminishing any honor that was then given to the false gods of the
Britains, that he added more unto them, namely, worshipped the wicked Emperor
Claudius (whose Bastard-daughter he had taken as wife) as god, dedicated a
costly Temple unto him, soon after his death; yet after this his acquaintance
with S. Joseph; for as I find in an old Manuscript-history (and others do not
dissent) the City of Gloucester then Caer Glou, Anonymus his Maps in
Glocestershire.
the City of Claudius, was built by King Arviragus in the year of Christ 66.
This City was first won from the Britains by Chenlin the first King of the
West Saxons about the year of Christ 570. and afterward under the Mercians it
flourished with great honor, where Offirick King of Northumberland by the
sustenance of Ethelred of Mercia, founded a most stately Monastery of Nuns,
whereof Kinelburgh, Eadburgh and Eve Queens of the Mercians, were Prioresses
successively each after other.

Edelfled a most renowned Lady, Sister to King Edward the Elder, in this City
built a fair Church, wherein her self was interred; which being overthrown by
the Danes was afterward rebuilt and made the Cathedral of that See, dedicated
unto the honor of St. Peter; in this Church the unfortunate Prince, King Ed.
2. under a Monument of Alabaster does lie, who being murdered at Berkley Castle
by the cruelty of the French, Isabell his wife was there intombed: And not far
from him an other Prince, as unfortunate, namely Robert Curthose, the eldest
Son of William the Conqueror, lies in a painted wooden Tomb in the midst of
the Quire, whose eyes were plucked out in Cardiff Castle, where he was kept
Prisoner twenty years with all contumelious indignities, until through extreme
anguish he ended his life, and before any of these, says our British
Historian, the body of Lucius our first Christian King (or rather at Caerleon
in Monmouthshire) was Interred, and before his days the Britain Arviragus.

This City has given Honorable Titles to these Dukes and Earls.
1 Robert Base Son to K. Hen. 1 Earl. Gules three rests Or. 2 William 3 John
Sansterre, Son to K. Hen. 1 who Married Isabell Daughter and Coheir of Will. E.
of Gloucester. England a bend Azure. 4 Geofry de Mandevile, E. of Essex. 2d.
Husband of Isabell. Quarterly Or and Gules, over all an Escurbuncle Pomet and
Flory Sable. 5 Almerich de Evereux, Son of Mabell, another Coheir of E.
William; some put this Almerich before Geofry, but erroneously as I conceive.
Partly perpale endented Arg. and Gules. 6 Gilbert de Clare, Son of Annice,
another of the Coheirs. 7 Rich. de Clare. 8 Gilbert de Clare, who Married Joan
of Acres Daughter to King Edw. 1. Or 3 Cheverons Gules. 9 Ralph de mont Hermen,
2d. Husband of Joan of Acres. Or an Eagle displayed Vert, membred and leaked
Gules. 10 Gilbert de Clare, Son of Gilbert and Joan. Or three Cheverous Or. 11
Hugh de Audley, Married Isabell sister and Coheir of Gilbert. Gules Alfret Or.
border argent. 12 Thomas of Woodstock Duke of Gloucester, and Lord Constable.
Quarterly France and England a border arg. 13 Thomas Lord Spencer, Grandson to
Elinor, Coheir of Gilbert Earl. Quarterly the 1. and 4. or 2. and 3. Gules
there on a fret Or, a bend sable. 14 Rich. Plantagenet, Brother to K. Edw. 4.
Lord Adm. and Constable D. Quarterly France and England, a Label of 3 Ermine,
as many Cantons Gules. 15 Humphrey Plantagenet, son to King Hen. 4. This Hump.
place immediately before Rich. Quarterly France and England, a border argent.
16 Henry 3d. Son of the late King Charles, declared by his Royal Father Duke of
Gloucester, Anno 1641. but not create.


And to demonstrate that he both lived and died a Pagan, this King Arviragus
was, and that by his own order, buried in that Pagan Temple, in the year of our
Lord Christ 73. ten years after St. Joseph's coming hither, Arviragus ut dies
suos explevit, sepultus est Claudiocestriae in quodam templo quod in honor
Claudii dedicaverat ut construxerat. And Scut. Virunnius further adds, that
he did every month offer sacrifice in that Temple, after the Pagans manner; so
much be loved him; singulis mensibus sacrificabat, tanto eum amore
prosequibatur. And it is further evident by many Antiquities, that Arviragus
did many public acts besides this which Christian Religon could not permit; as
that after he had been long time Married to Voada sister to Cataracus King of
the Scots, and had diverse Children by her, he disinherited the Children, put
away and imprisoned the Mother, and Married Genuisse the supposed Bastard,
Daughter of Claudius, and kept her, the other yet living, and left the Kingdom
to Marius her Son: and was so far from repenting this barbarous act, contrary
to Christian Religion, that being challenged for that impiety, he wrote a book
in defense of this his wickedness, Mr. Bron. fol. 132.
affirming therein that it was lawful for him to have plurality of Wives,
because that neither the Roman, nor the British Pagan Laws, as he avouched,
denied that to Princes, never speaking of or regarding the Law of Christ; and
in this state he lived and died.

Moreover all Antiquaries whatsoever of any credit, tell us plainly that
Arviragus was no Christian, but persisted in his Pagan Religion; First William
of Malmsbury says, Rex qui tunc regnabat fuit Barbarus, and praedicationi
eorum consentirie noluit, nec Paternas traditiones commutare volebat: The King
which then reigned was a Pagan, and would not consent to their preachings ^or
would he change his Ancestors Traditions. The Antiquities of Glas^e^^ury,
Capgrave and many other Ancients write, Rex Barbarus cum sua gente tam nova
audiens and inconsueta, nec praedicationi eorum renueb^t. The Pagan King with
his people hearing such new and unaccustomed things, as St. Joseph and his
fellows taught, would not change his Ancestors traditions for the better, but
refused their preaching; The first Protestant Archbishop of Canterbury with
his followers affirms, Quorum praedicatione Rex Arviragus cum proceribus
suis, ab inveterata Druidum religione abduci noluit. King Arviragus with his
Nobles, would not by the preaching of Joseph and his companions be drawn from
the inveterate Religion of the Druids. Thus we see it manifestly declared, that
King Arviragus, was in all his actions, life, and death far from being a
Christian in profession.

Fabian tells us that after the departure of Claudius, Arviragus progressed
through his Dominions, and with great cost, care, and expenses repaired Cities
and Towns which were dismantled and defaced by the Roman Soldiers, and behaved
himself with such gallantry, that he was more beloved, and also feared then any
of his Praedecessors; in tract of time he accumulated heaps of Treasure: but
wealth begot pride, and that again a presumption of his own strength and power,
which caused him to deny payment of the Tribute: but the Senate having speedy
notice of his Transactions, Caius Caligula is speedily dispatched with order to
reduce him to his former obedience; who with certain Legions (a Legion
consists of six thousand, six hundred and sixty six men) arrives in Britain,
forces him to pay Tribute, or rather he is persuaded so to do by his Wife
Genissa,

Caius Caligula had a meaning doubtless to have invaded the I Will of Britain,
had not his rash entrance into the Action, The British History, c. 10.
and his ill success in the German War overthrown the Enterprise, by reason
whereof he brought nothing to Effect, but only made a ridiculous expedition,
(answerable to the vanity of his humor, bringing an Army into the hither parts
of Belgia, and there having received into protection Admimus or Adaminus (whom
Cunobelin his Father had banished) and certain other British Fugitives that
came with him) he Writ vaunting Letters to the Senate as though the whole Island
had yielded it self, giving special charge to the Messenger, that his Letters
should be carried in a Chariot to the Forum, and not delivered to the Consuls
but in a full Senate, and in the Temple of Mars: afterward drawing his Forces
down to the sea coasts of Belgia, where with wonder he beheld the high cliffs
of the I Will possessed with the Natives, he placed his Soldiers in Battell-array
upon the shore, and himself entering into a Longboat, was rowed a little way
upon the 8ea: but not daring to adventure further, he returned speedily to
land, and then commanding a charge to be sounded, as though he would have began
to fight, he appointed his Soldiers to gather Cockels and Muskels in their
Helmets, terming them spoils of the Ocean, and meet to be preserved as
offerings due to the Capitol. For this Exploit he after coming to Rome, was not
ashamed to demand a Triumph, and divine honors to be assigned him; but finding
the Senators for the most part to be unwilling to give their Assent, he burst
out into threats, and had slain some of them in the place if they had not
speedily avoided his fury. After this, himself in open Assembly made a
Declaration of his journey, and what adventures he had passed in the Conquest
of the Ocean (as himself vainly termed it,) whereat the common people either
for fear or flattery gave a general applause; which he taking as a testimony of
their desire to have him placed among their gods, rewarded in this shameful
manner, he caused a great quantity of gold and silver to be scattered on the
ground, and certain caltrops poisoned of Iron to be cast among them, whereby
many were killed, partly with those envenomed Engines, and partly with the
press of one another (each Man being earnest in gathering, and supposing
another Man's gain his own loss, so naturally was he inclined to all kind of
wickedness; as he spared not the lives even of those whom he thought to
deserve best at his hands.

Yet we read not among the many Vices which he had, that ever he was a
persecutor of Christians: for those Outrages which he committed against the
Jews, which amongst others our own Histories do report, were rather in revenge
against the Jews for the death of Christ, and the persecuting Christians, then
for any hatred to Christian Religion. And it was a just punishment of God
toward that incredulous people and their holy Temple, that had been so long
renowned for the true worship and sacrifice of God, To see it now polluted with
the Idolatrous sacrifices of the Gentiles, Matthew. Westminster. an. 40. Theat. of
Britt. in Caius Caligul.
the Idol of Jupiter, and the Emperor himself a vile and wicked man, to be
worshipped and adored there as the Lord of Heaven and Earth. Caesar templum
quod erat Hierosolymis jussit prophanari sacrificiis Gentilium; Jovis statuam
ibi collocat, seque ut Dominum coeli and terrae coli and adorari praecepit;
When as concerning Christians, he permitted the favorable Edict of Tiberius to
remain in force. He banished Pilate, by whom Christ was crucified. He deprived
Herod of his Kingdom, and together with Herodi^ his brothers wife which he kept
(the occasion of the Martyrdom of St. John Baptist) he drove into banishment;
and these and such favors and justice he extended unto Christians, that
although he seemed to make War against the Britains, it was not for Religion
sake.

Though mention be made concerning several passages betwixt Claudius and
Arviragus, yet the Reader must know that Caligula preceded in Government,
Julius being first, Augustus second, Tiberius third, Caligula fourth, and
Claudius fifth; but to conclude with Arviragus, Fabian says, That after he had
nobly Ruled the Britains thirty years, he died, and was buried at Caergloin,
Caerloon, Claudiocestria or Gloucester, leaving after him one Son, named Marius
or Maurius.

MARIUS.
MARIUS the son of Arviragus, was crowned King of Britain, in the year of
Christ's Incarnation threescore and fourteen; the English Chronicle calls this
Prince Westmer-Gaufride says that he Governed his Subjects in great Affluence,
Peace and Tranquillity; some dispute has been, whether this Marius was a
Christian or not. Harding and other witness that he was of a Child brought up
at Rome, with the Emperor Claudius and his Mothers kindred.

Who nourished was at Rome in his Juvent^
With his Mothers Kin, the best of the Empire, Harding Chro. in Marius, c. 49.
fol. 41.

With Claudius also, that was his own Grandfire.
And not returning into Britain until the death of Arviragus his Father, to
inherit the Kingdom after him for any thing we read in History; and by the
common computation of Antiquaries, King Arviragus and St. Joseph, dying within
three years together, it is not a thing to be easily believed that Marius did
or could learn Christianity of St. Joseph; Neither did or could Christian
Religion allow Marius, a notorious known Bastard, to inherit the Kin dom of
Britain as Heir to K. Arviragus, he having diverse legitimate children by his
lawful Wife Voada, Daughter of King Cara^^cus; Ex qua filium unum and duas
filias susceperat. All which, by Christian Religion, should have inherited
before him; and he whether they had been living or dead, by that could not
claim Title to inherit or possess the crown of Brittainas he did. And the
Scottish Historians, who had best reason to keep these things in memory, do
tell us that he was so far a Roman, as by all Antiquities, by his Mother and
Education he truly was; They style him Marius the Roman: Marius nobilis
Romanus. And he was so far from having any true Title to the Crown by being the
bastard son of Arviragus, that he was declared King by the Emperors Authority;
Caesaris autoritate Britonum Rex appellatus; and to take all controversy away,
was forced to marry his own Sister by his Father, the eldest Daughter of
Arviragus, and his lawful wife Queen Voada; Harum natu majorem ut jam Insulae
status pacatior foret, Matrimonis sibi copulavit, which all men know no
Christian could do. And yet this was after the great Victory of Marius against
the Scots and Picts, with their Captain Rodericke; which was as Matthew
Westminster and others write, not above a year before the death of St. Joseph,
that chancing in the 75. and in the 76. year of Christ; In which battle the two
Daughters of Queen Voada (their brother as it seems, being dead,) were taken
Prisoners, and the oldest the next Heir of Britain, after the matters
pacified, which was not in any probability before St. Joseph's death, was as is
said before, married to Marius her bastard-brother; which Marriage (if I may so
term it) was still continued; and by them was begotten in it Coilus, after King
and Father to our first Christian King Saint Lucius.

So that if we speak properly and strictly of Christians, and name them only
such, which actually and really both in Faith and Profession do hold only the
Christian Religion, and no other, it is evident, that none of these three Kings
of Britain, Arviragus, Marius, or Coillus, was a Christian, much less
converted or baptized by St. Joseph. But if we speak of Christianity in an
ample and extended sense, as Tertullian and some Ancients have done of Tiberius
Caius, and some other Emperors, not actually Christians, but so affected
especially in some points, as as he does of Pilate, which washed his hands, and
said, he was innocent of the putting of Christ to death; Innocens sum a
Sanguine justi bujus; I am innocent of the blood of this just person; that he
was in conscience a Christian, pro sua conscientia Christianus; We may speak
the like of these Kings; and go so far with Harding's Author, as to say with
him: Joseph converted this King Arviragus
By his preaching, to know the Law Divine.
For it is not unprobable, but he was persuaded the Law and Religion which St.
Joseph professed, was true: But whereas Harding adds, And baptized him, as
written has Nennius,
A Chronicler in Britain Tongue fall fine.


Except we take Baptizing in a very large and amplifying construction, and say
Harding a Poet did thereby understand the true knowledge of Baptism, and not
the receiving thereof, neither Nennius, nor any approved Author does or can
prove any such thing; By this also we are sufficiently assured, that neither
St. Joseph of Arimathea, nor any of his company though otherwise most Holy and
most Renowned Saints and excellently deserving of this Nation, none of them
converting either the King, Nobles, or People of Brittany, as so many worthy
Authors and Antiquaries have told us, may be named the Apostles which converted
this Kingdom to the Faith of Christ, Mr. Bro. f. 166.
or first founded Christian Religion here.

Marius King of Britain by the opinion of all, was both a Friend and
Benefactor unto Christians, confirming unto the Eremits of Avalon, St. Joseph
and his Associats, those donations, liberties and immunities which his Father
Arviragus had formerly granted unto them; and the Emperor Vespasian was so
friendly and favorable unto holy Christians, that when he was in Britain
before he was Emperor, as Harding from more ancient Authors has testified, he
procured those immunities and exemptions for S. Joseph and his company, which
King Arviragus endowed them with: and I do not doubt but that he was so far a
Christian in judgment, that I may recount him in the number of those first
Emperors of whom Tertullian writes; Tert. Apol. contr. gentil. c. 21.
The Emperors themselves would have believed in Christ, if the Emperors had
not been necessary to the wo^ld, or Men that were Christians might have been
Emperors; Sed and 'Caesares credidissent super Christo, si aut Caesares non
essent saeculo necessarii, aut si and Christiani potuissent esse Caesares.

This King Marius as Matthew. Westminster. and diverse others do testify, died the 78.
year of Christ, Math. West. ao. 78.
and left Coillus his Son his Successor in the Kingdom, Anno gratiae 78.
Marius Brittannorum Rex ab hoc saeculo transiens, Coillum Filium habuit
successorem; by whom he reigned but a short time, not above six years: Others
affirm that he reigned a far longer time, the Publisher of the British History
ascribe, Mr. Bro. f. 169.
52 years. Harding avoucheth that he died When he had Reigned sixty years and
three;
His Tribute paid full well to Roman City,
Hard. in Chron. in Reg. Marius c. 50. fol. 42.
Of Christ's Faith somewhat he was informed;
But much more he needed to have been reformed.


But howsoever the question about his Regiment, long or short be resolved,
certain it is that he was a Friend to Christians; and if he Reigned long,
longer was their peace by his permission.

Fabian in the life of this King tells us, that the Chronicle of England calls
him VVestmer: and that during his Reign, a certain Chieftain, whom Gaufride
calls Londricus, of the Picts, Landing with a great Navy, in the Province of
Albania now Scotland, began to make havoc with fire and sword; which
ungrateful tidings being brought to Marius, he leaves a considerable Army and
marches toward his Enemies to give them battle; in which Londricus, or as
others call him, Rodicus, with a great part of his Army was slain; In
remembrance of which Victory, King Marius caused to be erected a great stone
and thereon to be engraven Marii Victoria or the Victory of Marius; but
William of Malmsbury is of opinion, that this stone was erected in memory of
Marius the Roman Consul, the country round about being called Fince, that time
Westmaria, and now Westmerland; and it pleased K. Ri. the second to add unto
the Titles of the Nevills of Raby the higher and more eminent style of

EARLS of Westmerland.
1 Raph Nevill Lord of Raby, Sir Marshall. 2 Raph Nevill. 3 Raph Nevill. 4 Raph
Nevill. 5 Hen. Nevill. 6 Charles Nevill. Gules a Salton Argent.
Francis Fane Eldest son of Mary Lady Dispencer, descended from the Nevills,
Earl of Westmerland, created Earl of Westmerland, 22. Ja. December. 29. Mildmay
Fane Earl of Westmerland. Azure 3, left hand Gauntlets Or.


The Picts being thus slain and vanquished, those who where left undestroyed,
with all humble submission requested of King Marius to grant them a place of
habitation, who assigned unto them an angle or canton in the remotest parts of
Scotland, which by some Authors was called Cathenesia, which these people the
Britains disdaining to give them their Daughters, the Irish contracted their
children, which in process of time increased into a great Colony, and the
Country as affirms Policronicon in the 37. Chap. of the first book, was first
called Ireland: Secondly Pictania, and lastly Scotland; Marius giving way to
fate, was buried at Caerlile.

Having in short showed you the Lives and Deaths of the British Kings and
Princes, to the death of Marius; let ut cast our eyes a while upon the Romans,
and view the remainder of their proceedings, not yet, related, in this Isle.
The The ancient Inhabitants of the Counties of Gloucester and Oxford.
Boduni then living under the Government of the The ancient Inhabitants of
Buckingham, Bedford and Hertford.
Cattieuchlani, betook themselves to the protection of Plautius, who leaving
Garrisons in those parts, marched toward a River, over which the Britains
supposed that the Romans could not pass without a Bridge: and therefore
imagined themselves safe, having pitched their Camp on the other side of the
water; But Plautius sent over certain Germans, (who being accustomed to swim
over Rivers with swift currents) even in their Armor, found an easy passage
to the further bank, and there set upon the Britains, wounding the Horses,
withdrew their Chariots, and by that means overthrowing their Riders, and
disordering their whole power; Then was Flavius Vespasian (who had the leading
of the second Legion,) and Sabinus his brother, appointed to pass over and to
charge them on a sudden as they were dispersed; if we follow John Harding, he
will tell us that St. Joseph and his Religious company came hither with
Vespasian Lieutenant to the Roman Emperor; and that by the entreaty of
Vespasian, the then King and Queen of the Britains, Arviragus and Gennissa,
those Favors and Freedoms which by our Histories he enjoyed at Glastenbury,
were bestowed upon him; for thus speaking of Vespasian, he says, With whom
Joseph full holy and full wise
Of Aramathie with his fellows fourteen
Into this Land then came, and gave content,
For whom so then Vespasian prayed the King,
The Queen also, to him to be good Lord
And good Lady, which they granted in all thing;
When Vespasian returned to Rome home again,
The King endued Joseph in Meatrine.
Which relation wants no probability to make it good; for Vespasian came
hither out of Germany, by which St. Joseph must needs pass in his journey
toward Britain, from the Asiatical Gallia, and the adjoining Countries;
neither was Vespasian an Enemy, but a Friend and lover of Christians, of whom
we shall have occasion to speak more, when we come to the time of his being
Emperor.

Some of the Britains being slain, and others taken prisoners, the night made
an end of the skirmish; The next morning the rest of the dispersed rout showed
themselves upon the shore, and gave occasions of a new Fight, which continued a
long time with equal advantage, till C. Sydius Geta being in danger to have
been taken, recovered himself, and at the last enforced the Britains to
retire; For which service he had afterward triumphal honors assigned him,
although he were no Consul; in this conflict Vespasian (being beset round about
with the Britains) was in great danger, either to have been slain or taken, if
he had not been timely rescued by Titus his son, who then exercised the office
of Tribune of the Soldiers, and began in his tender years to give some proof
of his valor; After this battle, the Britains withdrew themselves to the
mouth of the River Thamesis, near the place where it falls into the Sea; and
being skilful in the shallowes, and firm grounds, passed over in safety, when
as the Romans that pursued them (not knowing the dangerous places) were
oftentimes in great hazard; Some of the Germans that were most forward to
adventure, by reason of their skill in swimming, as soon as they had got to the
further shore, were compassed about and killed by the Natives, and the rest of
the Roman Army that followed was much distrested in the passage, and sharply
assailed at their coming on land, where began a bloody fight, in the which
Togodumius a British Prince, one of Cunobelines Sons was slain, whose death
did nothing abate the courage of the Britains, but rather enflamed them with
desire of revenge; for the effecting whereof, they gathered together new Forces
from diverse parts of the Isle. Plautius fearing the greatness of their power,
and being straightned in a place of disadvantage and danger, proceeded no
further at that time, but fortifying only such Towns as he had already taken,
advertised Claudius of the doubtful state of his Affairs.

In the mean time Vespasian was employed in the other parts of the Isle, where
fortune seemed to lay the Foundation of that greatness, unto which he
afterward attained; for in short space he fought thirty times with the
Britains, overcoming two Warlike Nations, and tameing the fierce The
Inhabitants of the Countries of Somerset, Wilton and South-Hampton.
Belga: whose Ancestors coming hither out of Gallia Belgica at the first,
either to take booties, or to make war, gave the name of their own Country to
such places as they had subdued (a custom commonly used amongst the Gauls,
when they seated themselves in any part of this Island.)

Which like fortunate success Vespasian proceeded in attempting, and
conquering the Isle Vectis that lies on the South side of Britain; when
Claudius the Emperor being now furnished of all things necessary for the
British expedition, set forward with a mighty Army, consisting of Horsemen,
Footmen and Exphanes; He marched first to Ostria, from hence to Masselia the
rest of the Voyage he made by Land to Bolein in Picardie.
Gessoriacum in Gallia, where he embarked; His forces being safely transported
into the Isle, were led toward the River Thamesis, where Plantius and
Vespasian with their power attended his coming; so the two Arms being joined
together, crossed the River again; the Britains that were assembled to
encounter them, began to Fight, which was sharply maintained on both sides,
till in the end a great number of the Ilanders being slain, the rest fled into
the woods, through which the Romans pursued them, even to the Town of Malden in
Essex.
Camolodanum, which had been the Royal seat of Canobeli^^ and was then one of
the most defensible places in the Dominions of the Trynob^b^; this town they
supprized, and afterward fortifyed, planting therein a Colony of old Soldiers
to strengthen those parts, and to keep the Inhabitants therein obedience; Then
were the Britains disarmed, howbe^^ Claudius remitted the confiscation of
their goods, for which favor the Ilanders erected a Temple and an Altar unto
him; honoring him as a God. Now the states of the Country round about, being
so weakened by the loss of their Neighbors, and their own civil dissensions,
as they were unable to resist the Roman power any longer, began to offer their
submission, promising to obey and live peaceably under the Roman Government,
and so by little and little the hither part of the Isle was reduced into the
form of a Province.

In honor of this Victyro, Claudius was diverse times saluted by the name of
Imperator, contrary to the Roman custom, which permitted it but once for one
expedition; The Senate of Rome also upon advertisement of his success, decreed
that he should be called Brittanicus, and that his son should have the same
Title, as a surname proper and hereditary to the Claudian Family; Massilina his
Wife, the monster of her sex, for impudency and lasciviousness, had the first
place in council assigned her (as Sivia the Wife of Augustas sometime had) and
was also licensed to ride in a Chariot at his return to Rome (which was the
sixth month after his departure thence, having continued but sixteen days
only in this Isle) he entered the City in triumph, performed with more then
usual ceremonies of state, whereat certain Presidents of Provinces and
banished men were permitted to be present; On the top of his palace was placed
a crown set with stems, and fore-parts of ships which the Romans called Corona
Navalis, as a sign of the conquest of the Ocean; diverse Captains that had
served under him in Brittany, were honored with Triumphal ornaments, yearly
plays were appointed for him, and two Arches of Triumph adorned with Trophies,
were erected, the one at Rome, the other at Gessoriacum, where he embarked for
Brittany, to remain to succeeding Ages: as perpetual records of his victory,
and a work of such merit to have subdued so small a part of this Island.

About this time (as it may be probably conjectured) Christian Religion being
yet green, and of small growth, began to cast forth some small sparks of her
brightness in the Isle of Britain; whether Christians of Rome and other
countries, then flying persecution, resorted for safety and quietness, as to a
place remote, and by reason of the Wars and Troubles there, not much subjected
to inquisition; whereas also diverse Britains remaining at Rome (where
Christianity then increased) either for Hostages, The History of Great
Britain, part 1. fol. 35.
or detained as Prisoners, or happily for some private respects of profit and
pleasure, had opportunity and liberty to converse with the Roman Christians,
and to be by them instructed and confirmed in the Faith of Christ. The gate
being now set open by this Author to discourse of our Famous and Saintly
Britains, who even with the very first submitted themselves to the most
heavenly and sweet yoke of their divine Master and Lord eternal, Redeemer of
Mankind, God and Man Christ Jesus; I shall endeavor to make it evident by the
Testimony of Learned and apporved Antiquities, to the great glory of the
British Nation, that diverse of them were the adopted sons and children of
their eternal Father, and the never-erring Catholic Church their Mother,
within few years after the Death and Passion of our most blessed Redeemer.

To begin therefore this intended Relation, I will begin with St. Mansuetus the
Disciple of St. Peter the Apostle, and by him ordained the first Bishop of
Tullum or Teul in Lorain, who was born in that part of Britain which now and
for many years has been called Scotland: but whether he was a Britain or a
Scot, will more fully appear hereafter; and that he was by birth (that part of
the I Will now called Scotland, being at that time a part of Britain, and long
after) which among others, Martial the Poet makes manifest for that time: who
writing to Quintus Ovidius, who was to to travel into those parts, says,
Quinte Caledonios Ovidi visure Britannos.
Caius Calig.
Quintus Ovidius Roman called so;
To view the Caledonian Britains now does go.


St. Mansuetus a Britain, by St. Peter Consecrated Bishop of Tullum.
In the time of this Emperor we read that St. Peter the Apostle consecrated our
holy Countryman St. Mansuctus (whom he had Christened before in the time of
Tiberius) a Bishop, and sent him to Tullum in Loraine. The inhabitants of
Tullum in Loraine had for their Apostle and first Bishop of their Faith in
Christ, St. Mansuetus a Scot by Nation, the Disciple of St. Peter the Apostle,
and companion of St. Clement. This is testified also by many others, as
Gulielmus, Eisengrenius, Antonius, Democharez, Petrus de Natalibus, with
others, saying, Mansuetus by Nation a Scot (so they term our Northern Britains
according to the last Name thereof,) born of a Noble Family, the Disciple of
Simon Bar-Jonas the chief of the Apostles, fellow of Saint Clement the Bishop
of Metz, was consecrated by Saint Peter the first Bishop in the city of Tullum.

Hitherto these Authors; only the difference I find between them, is this, Mr.
Bro. f. 31.3
that Arnoldus Mirmanunus says, St. Clement whose companion Mansuetus was, was
Bishop of Metz by St. Peter's appointment in the 40 year of Christ when Caius
Caligula was Emperor: and Eisengrenius, tells us, that St. Mansuetus was Bishop
of Tullum, in the year 49. eight or nine years after, which may easily be
reconciled together, by saying St. Mansuetus was sent by St. Peter, in the year
of Christ 40. and took not upon the charge of Tullum until the year 49. in the
mean time being otherwise or elsewhere employed in preaching the Gospel of
Christ. Neither will it avail or prove any thing to the contrary for any man to
object, that S. Peter was not yet come to Rome, nor after until the beginning
of the Empire of Claudius; for although he came not thither to make any
residence there til about that time, yet this nothing hindered many of these
Western Nations moved with the Love of Christ, and Fame of St. Peter, to resort
unto him in the parts of the East, where he remained to be instructed by him:
And he both by himself and his Disciples sent from him had Founded many
Churches, in diverse parts of the Western World before this time; as namely at
Tauremonium the 39 year, and at Syracuse the same year. And to have Founded the
Church of Christ in Sicily the same time.

This our Countryman St. Mansuetus was either in the Reign of Caius Caligula or
Claudius Bishop of Tull^^s, and Founded the first Episcopal succession there;
And no Man will think that he alone of this Nation, was either consecrated
Bishop or Priest, or became a Christian. It is a thing scarcely heard of in
Histories that any one Man should only be called to that high dignity and
calling in the Church of God, and to leave his Country to preach to strangers,
except his own Nation was otherways supplied with Clergymen and other
Christians, and except some storm or violence of persecution should separate
him from his natural friends and country, which neither is nor can be pretented
in this case; For neither at any time, nor all the life of St. Mansuetus ^^ing
very long, yet (he not returning into Britain) was there any prosecution of
Christians, but quiet in this Kingdom, and favor and friendship of all in
office and authority to that Religion; and not this only, but a general
inclination and disposition in the whole Island, to be instructed in, and
receive the faith of Christ; And so whether we will say this Holy Bishop of
Britain, went from hence to St. Peter in the Eastern countries, or St. Peter
was there then in these parts, when he consecrated him Bishop or Priest; no man
can be so unadvised to think, that he was the only Bishop, Priest, and
Christian of this Nation then. This cannot enter into a reasonable judgment;
The British Lady Claudia and others of her Family became Christians about this
time. Baron. in Annot. in diem 19. Maii. Martyr. Author of the 3 Conversions.
Mr. Bro. f. 33 Godwyn. Conv. of Britt. p. 17. Godwyn ut sup. p. 17. 2 Timothy 4.
Godwyn sup. Mart. Romans die 19. Maii. Martial Epig. Bal. cent. 1. De Scrip. in
Claud. Christian Britains in Rome the first Entertainers of St. Peter the
Apostle there, and their House the first Church or Oratory for Christians
thereof. These probably converted by our Countryman St. Mansuetus.
If we said St. Mansuetus went out of this Nation to St. Peter in the Eastern
countries (which our late Authors will rather agree to) this makes as much for
the honor of that Apostle, and the love and reverence of our first Christians
unto him, to draw them by such forcible bands thereof, to undertake so long and
dangerous a journey, to be instructed by that holy Apostle; And this holy
Bishop being associate to St. Clement, a Roman born, and so returning by Rome
from these Eastern countries, being their direct way to Metz, Tullum and those
places where they preached; but at their passing by Rome, St. Mansuetus visited
those Britains of this Nation, which then were Hostages and Pledges there;
whereof some at that time in true judgment must needs be thought to be
Christians; as namely, the Parents of the Lady Claudia, which both were
Britains; And that they then were Christians before the beginning of Claudius
his Empire, or St. Peter's coming to Rome, in the beginning thereof, the Romans
themselves shall witness; for they tell us, that the House of Pudens, Husband
of our Counntrywoman St. Claudia was the first lodging of St. Peter in Rome,
and there the Christians first assembled to serve God. And yet certain it is
that this St. Pudens was either but a very young child or not born when St.
Peter came to Rome and so young that a late Writer says of him and Claudia,
Pudens and Claudia were two young persons when St. Paul remembered them in his
second Epistle to Timothy, which they say was in the last year of Nero, or
without doubt not long before, 24 or 25 years after St. Peter's coming to Rome,
in the beginning of Claudius his time by all our Accounts. And these Authors
further say, they were so young that they were not in their judgments married
until the latter end of Trajans time or about the beginning of Domitian. And
the Ancient Martyrology it self is witness, That when St. Peter came to Rome,
St. Pudens was not a Christian but baptized by him. Therefore it was not St.
Pudens, then not born, or a young child and not Christened but after, that did
or could give the first entertainment in his House to St. Peter, or make his
House a Church for Christians. Besides, evident it is that this Saint Pudens
was born in Vmbria in Italy far from Rome, and his dwelling place was there at
Sabinum; of which St. Claudia his wife took another Name unto her, as more
hereafter. Therefore I must entreat the Romans to give me leave to think that
this House which was the first Lodging of St. Peter in Rome, was the House of
the Holy Christian Parents of our renowned country woman Claudia, and they then
Christians, and some of the Hostages of Frittain at Rome when St. Peter came
thither at first, and were so charitable to the Saints of God, that they gave
entertainment to that Holy Apostle before any of the Romans, and made their
House the House of God, and serving him.

Not unprobable it is that those Holy Britains then in Rome which first
received St. Peter there, were first converted by their holy Countryman, St.
Mansuertur disciple of St. Peter, as be returned from that great Apostle at
Antioch, or thereabout, with St. Clement by Rome into those parts, whither St.
Peter sent them Bishops; And by this happy means of that holy Apostle St.
Peter, our Disciple and his Christian countryman at Rome, much spiritual good
redounded after to this Kingdom; neither can we think but very many here in
Britain, were also then converted by the means of St. Mansue^us, and some
other of his holy companions, both in this journey to Antioch to St. Peter, and
in his return into these Countries again to preach the Gospel, especially in
the more Northern parts of Britain; of which Nation he is supposed to be, and
named Scotus a Scot, as all the Britains of the North part beyond the wall or
trench of the Emperors Adrian and Severus were named, because they were so
mixed with the Scots, that in time the Scots were the stronger and greater
Nation in that part, and of that time; and in this sense, it is most properly
true for any thing which we read particularly in the Histories of the
Magdeburians, Magdiburgina centur. 1. c. 2. col. 6. Theater of great Britain.
l. 6. Tertullian lib. adversus Judaeos, c. 7. Petrus Cluina. ad Bernard.
which diverse also of this Kingdom both ancient and modern seem to say; Petrus
Cluniacensis (and I may add Tertullian) tells us, that the people of Britain
in the North (where the Scots now be) were the first Christians; Petrus
Cluniacensis calls the Scots the more ancient Christians; and hereto we may
add the testimony of Tertullian, who says, the places of the Britains which
were unaccessible to the Romans, were subject to Christ, and adds of the
Britains, the name of Christ reigned among them, which our English late
Authors, in their Theater confirm in this manner; It is certain that the
Britains were with the first Converts; and Tertullian who lived within 200
years of Christ's Nativity, shows no less, who the more to provoke the Jews
against whom we wrote, calls to witness the fruitful increase of the Gospel
of salvation through many countries and nations, and among them names the
Britains to have received the word of life; The power whereof says he has
pierced into those places whither the Romans could not come. Whence Petrus
Cluniacensis supposes the Scottish men the more ancient Christians.

The like have other late Writers, and those their cited Authors which cannot
be otherwise verified, but by applying this preaching of the faith of Christ
unto those Northern Britains, either by this their holy Countryman St.
Mansuetus, the first Bishop we ^^n find of this Kingdom, or some other
associate of his, sent hither at or about that time (...) the same holy Apostle
St. Peter; for in all other respects, whether we speak of the British
Christians here in the time of Claudius or Nero (of which these modern
Antiquaries will tell us more hereafter) or the coming of St. Joseph of
Arimathea in his Religious companions into this Kingdom, in the days of Nero,
or the general conversion of the Kingdom of Britain, unto the trenches of
Severus in the time of King Lucius by Elutherius; all these were long before
the conversion of the Scots, in the time of K. Donaldus, either by Pope Victor,
or Zepherinus, as Harrison rather supposes; the first time which is assigned
by any, being in the 203 year of Christ: and if it was under Pope Zepherine, it
was after that time; for he was not chosen Pope until the year 209. before
which time, or the beginning it self of the papacy of St. Victor, which was in
the year 198. this our Britain, on this side the division, had generally and
publicly received the faith of Christ; And the very words of Tertullian living
and dying before the conversion of Scotland, within the first two hundred
years, writing in his book against the Jews, that the places of Britain which
the Romans could never conquer or come to, did acknowledge Christ and his name
did reign in them, do manifestly convince it to be so; For Tertullian living
and writing in Africa, could not possibly take notice of things done here in
an Island so far off, presently after they were first effected, and by no means
could either he, or any other Writer speak of things done so long after; truly
to report them done so long before, he had been the greatest prophet that ever
was.

St. Claudia of whom mention is formerly made, was the daughter of British
parents, which then lived as Hostages at Rome to the Emperor for this land and
Kingdom of Britain, and by that means it was their happiness and honor to
give the first entertainment to that blessed Apostle St. Peter, at his first
coming thither, as that Roman tradition of that their house; after by marriage
with the holy British Lady Claudia, Mr. Bro. f. 53.3
their daughter and heir, with Pudens the Senator; Floren. Wigor. Hist. an. 38.
and 60. Stow and Howes.
and so long after this coming of St. Peter to Rome, named the house of Pudens,
the Senator, assures us, which I prove by another undoubted tradition of the
Romans; That St. Peter was 15 years in Rome, before St. Paul came thither; so
writes Florentius Wigorn, with the common consent of Antiquity and Writers
both ancient and modern. And the Roman Martyrology tells us of this Pudens the
Senator, Mr. Bro. f. 56.
that he was baptized by the Apostles; And there calls him plainly Pudens the
Senator, Father of St. Pudentiana the Virgin, so that being baptized by the
Apostles, St. Peter and St. Paul (for no others were then in Rome) this could
not be by true account, until at the soonest fiveteen years after St. Peter
was first received in that house; And if the Martyrology could carry that
interpretation, to understand by the Apostles in the plural number one Apostle
(one proper constructoin) yet by this Friendly, and more then lawful
interpretation, he must needs be baptized by St. Peter; and so also a most
unprobable thing, that diverse Christians then being in Rome, St. Peter would
first commit himself to a Pagan or Catechumen, and he and the Christians of
Rome make such an house their chiefest Church and place of Assembly for Divine
things; Martial 11. Epig. 54. de Clau. Ruff.
This Lady Claudia, though born of British parents, yet was not born in this
Isle; Martial, says Claudia caeruleis cum sit prognata Brittannis, but not in
Britain; only she is called of the same Poet, peregrina a stranger, as the
children of strangers usually are termed, both with us and other people; And
the time of her birth and age so convince.

And whereas we find no memory at all of any natural parents of St. Pudens
dwelling at Rome, we have sufficient testimony not only of the permanent
dwelling both of the Father and Mother of St. Claudia there, but that by diverse
probable Arguments they dwelled in that very House, where Pudens continued with
them, after his marriage with their Daughter, and were holy and renowned
Christians, although their native Country of Britain has hitherto been almost
wholly deprived of their honor, and so must needs be by the Roman Tradition,
the first entertainers of St. Peter in Rome; for as a late Author writes,
Pudens and Claudia were two young persons, but faithful Christians, Godwin.
com. of Britain, p 17. c. 3. 2 Timothy 4.21.
at that time unmarried when Paul writ the second Epistle unto Timothy, which
was in the last year of Nero as all men suppose that I have read, except
Baronius, and that they were married in the later end of Vespasian, or about
the beginning of Domitian. Therefore Pudens being so young in the end of Nero
his Empire, although we grant him then newly married, yet this was by all
Computations, at the least 24 years after the coming of St. Peter to Rome, and
so it could not possibly be Pudens but the parents of Claudia, our Britains,
that entertained first St. Peter in their House at Rome; who for certain being
Britains of Noble Order and Degree, and living in Rome as Hostages, by all
judgment they enjoyed more freedom and liberty in matters of Religion, then
the Romans did at that time. The Emperors of Rome then nor long after
intermedling with the Britains for matters of Religion, but leaving it
voluntary and free unto them, as other Tributaries, to use the Religion of
their Countries, or as they were best and most disposed, privately at the
least, even in Rome it self without controlment. So by the great mercy and
providence of God, the subjection and temporal captivity or restraint of diverse
of these our worthy Countrymen proved to be the most happy spiritual freedom in
Christ, both of those our Hostages there and this whole Kingdom, afterward
converted to the true Faith, from thence by this original so renowned and
glorious for ever to this Nation, to have in Rome it self the first Harborours
and Receivers of that most blessed and highest Apostle St. Peter, that the
House where St. Peter was first received, was called the House of Pudens the
Senator, may be because he long after was owner of it, as it was also called
the House of St. Novatus, the House of St. Timothy, the House of St. Pudentiana
the blessed children of St. Pudens and St. Claudia our Countrywoman, who all
successively possessed it, termed by their Name for the time, as usually houses
and places be by the owners Names, until the time of Pope Pius the first, it
was by the Donation of St. Pudentiana, as the Roman Antiquities themselves and
their continual kept tradition do declare, absolutely converted to a Church,
and ever since after her death called the Church of St. Pudentiana, which
before was called the house of them, as they possessed it in order, or the
house of them all; sometimes as the old Roman Martyrology calls it, the house
of all the four children of St. Fudens, and St. Claudia; for speaking of them
all by name, St. Novatus Timotheus, Pudentiana and Praxedet; it adds, The
House of these being changed into a Church is called the Title of Pastor.

And it is evident by all probability that the Father of the Lady Claudia owner
of this House where all his children long after lived, was yet living and
possessor thereof both now and when St. Peter was first entertained there; For
Martial the Poet which lived in this time, and wrote in the days of Domitian
and Nerva, long after makes an honorable Memory of the Father of the Lady
Claudia, then living, calling him Socer of Pudens, Martial. l. Epigr. saepe.
Joan Bale. li. de script. Cent. 1. in Claudio Ruff. To. Pit. li. de vir.
illust. in eadem. Godwin Com. Britt. and alii. The British parents of St.
Claudia were Christians. Chrysostom. in Epist. 2 ad Tim. Theodoret in Epist. 2 ad
Tim.
the Father of his wife St. Claudia our Countrywoman by parents; for the word
Socer has no other meaning then a Father in law, father to the wife, whose
Father in law he is, or Father to the husband of that wife to whom he is
surnamed Socer. Evident it is also, that Pudens had no other wife but Claudia,
and she long overlived her husband Pudens. And that this his Father in law was
as noble for his Faith and Religion in Christ, as by descent and birth, we may
easily inform our selves, if from no other ground, yet from the most holy and
virtuous education of his Daughter in that profession, who by the examples and
documents of her pious parents, the best Tutors of children, their greatest
charge, was by their instruction come to that perfection in the law of Christ,
that being yet but young in all opinions, when St. Paul writ his second Epistle
to Timothy a little before his death: she deserved the style of one of four
principal Christians in the judgment of that great Apostle as two great
Doctors S. Chrysostom and Theodoret that part of his Epistle, Eubulus saluteth
thee, and Pudens and Linus, and Claudia, and all the brethren. He remembers
them by Name whom he knew to be more fervent in Faith. And again, Theodoret
upon that place, says, Paul put in the Names of them which were the best and
most loving of virtue: by which we may sufficienty see the great piety not
only of St. Claudia, but her holy parents also, the then honors of this
Kingdom, that had caused her then under their charge to be taught and
instructed in so excellent a manner in true Religion.

And if I may have the like license to write for the Religion of this Father in
law, which a late Author takes to prove Pudens the son in law a Christian, I
may do it with much more reason; for thus he writes, That the same Pudens was
a Christian, Godwin Com. Brit. p. 17.
we have a great presumption in the Epigram of Martial, where for his virtuous
carriage he calls him S. Maritus; but a greater in another of the same
Martial, wherein he yields him thanks for persuading him to amend his
Writings, that for obscenity and lasciviousness are indeed not to be endured by
Christian oars: And this it is, Martial. l. 7. Epigram. 11.
Cogis me calamo manuque nostra
Emendare meos Pudens libellos.
Pudens thou will that I the errors mend
Which in my wanton Verses I have penned.


That by this kind of Argument the Father of Claudia our noble Countrywoman,
was in all degrees as good or rather a better Christian then his son in law
Pudens was, is most evident; Martial. l. 7. Epig. 57. ad Ruffin.
for these Verses which Pudens did well like and allow, yet by the testimony of
Martial himself might not be imparted to the Father in law of Pudens, but would
seem light unto him occupied in more serious things. For he writes unto
Pudens, St. Eubulus named, with honor by St. Paul, probably was the Father of
St. Claudia a Britain.
Commendare meas instanti Rufe Camoenas.
Parce precor socero, seria forsan amat.
Rufus, my lines from thy wives Father keep,
His thoughts are raped with things more grave, more deep.


Where we see that the gravity of the Father in law of Pudens was greater then
his 3. therefore much more may we presume from hence that he was a better
Christian then the other, by that argument. Martyr. Romans 20. Jan. in St. Novato.
And yet we have a better Author both for his Christianity and Name also; for
the other three named by St. Paul to send salutations to Timothy from Rome at
that time, for certain, except Eubulus the first, were continuing in one House;
Pudens and Claudia were then married, as is evident in the ancient Roman
Martyrology and others; and seeing by the Romans tradition and other
testimonies, the house wherein they dwelt, was the chief lodging of the
Apostles, St. Peter and Paul, and their successors until the time of Pope Pius
the first, it was converted to be a Church; we must needs account St. Linus the
Bishop, the third which is here named, to be also of the same family for the
most part; then how to single forth St. Eubulus, which here is first, either
for Piety, or Nobility, or that he was the chief Pater-familias, or Master of
the house, Mr. Broug. fol. 59. 6.
or all, and make him a stranger there, I cannot find it by St. Paul, only
repeating them of one family, or any other warrant; For it was plain here by
the Apostle, that he was a chief and principal Christian in Rome, and first
named among those worthies; and before St. Linus a Bishop then, and Pudens a
Senator, and absolutely there set down as their chiefest receiver, friend and
patron: which cannot agree (...) any other better then to the Father of St.
Claudia, St. Eubulus probably a Britain.
this Father in Law to her Husband St. ^^dens, and first entertainer of St.
Peter the Apostle in Rome, by the Romans tradition; for neither Dorotheus the
continuator of Florentius Wigor, nor any other that write of the Disciples
there, place him among Clergymen; and St. Paul which gives him that honor in
that place, clearly proves he was none of his Disciples then in Rome; for he
writes in the same place, only Luke is with me; No Martyrology speaks of
him, neither any Historian or Interpreter of Scripture, to my reading sets
down of what Nation he was, but leave him for a stranger, as likewise many do
St. Claudia. Therefore except better Authority can be brought against me,
seeing he is by the Apostle so signified and placed the first in that family
and salutation, Eubulus greeteth you, 2 Timothy 4.
and Pudens, and Linus, and Claudia, there is no cause yet I find to deny him
to be the owner and Master of that house that first entertained St. Peter in
Rome, and he himself the first happy man that gave that glorious Apostle
entertainment there; that he was our most renowned Countryman of Britain, and
Father of Lady Claudia; for there is no other, by any probable conjecture was
likely to perform this duty in that house; Pudens as before, was either then
unborn or an Infant; of his own parents, Father or Mother, there is no mention
in antiquities, that either they were Christians, or that they dwelt at all in
Rome, much less in that house, being inhabitants of Sabinum, and by Country
Sabinites, far distant from Rome; And so there is none left unto us to be a
Christian, and left to entertain that heavenly Messenger and Guest S. Peter in
that time and place, but the renowned parents of St. Claudia then dwelling in
Rome, and there confined to a certain house and place of permanency by command
of the Roman power; to whom with many other Noble Britains; they were hostages
and pledges for the fidelity and obedience of this Kingdom, to the Roman
Emperors at that time.

Mr. Broug. fol. 59. 6.
To strengthen this opinion, we may add that St. Paul sends to St. Timothy his
Disciple the salutations of Eubulus before all others; of which sending the
greetings of so few by name, it will be no easy search to find out a better or
more probable reason then this, that St. Timothy so near and beloved a scholar
of St. Paul, lodged usually in this house: he also was there with his Master
entertained by Eubulus the owner thereof, and by that Title of his Hospitality,
obtained the first place in that salutation; otherwise no man will doubt but S.
Linus Bishop by calling, so honorable in the Church of Christ, ought and
should have been named before him; And that this familiar acquaintance between
St. Timothy and these our holy Christian Britains received original from their
ancient entertainment of St. Timothy in their house in Rome many years before
this their salutation, in the Epistle of St. Paul it is evident: for St. Paul
being now lately come to Rome, when he wrote this Epistle, neither he nor St.
Timothy were after St. Paul's first dismission from prison there so long before;
it is manifest that these, though the Lady young in years, were ancient
Christians at that time, and we have an uncontroleable warrant from St. Paul
himself, in his Epistle to the Hebrews, that St. Timothy was at Rome, when he
was first prisoner there in the beginning of Nero his Empire; For thus he
writes, Know you that our brother Timothy is set at liberty; Thus St. Paul
writes from Rome, in the time of his first imprisonment there, and so makes
these our country Christians to be acquaintance of St. Timothy then, to be more
ancient in the school of Christ then either St. Timothy or St. Paul at his
first coming to Rome, when there was none to instruct either them, or others in
Christian Religion at Rome, but St. Peter and his Disciples. I add to this the
charge and warning which Martial the poet gave before to Pudens, Rufus, my
lines from thy Wives Father keep; an evident testimony that they then lived in
one house together, and so the poems sent to Pudens might easily come to his
Father in law his hands and reading, except Pudens hae been so forewarned to
keep and conceal them from him, whereof there had been no danger nor need of
that admonition, if they had lived in distinct places, and not in one House.
And thus much of the Father of the Lady Claudia.

Concerning her holy Mother also, so good a Nurse and Tutrix to so happy a
child, we are not altogether left desolate without hope, but we may probably
find her forth for the honor of this Kingdom her Country. And except the
Roman Historians can find unto us a Christian Father to St. Pudens, and
dwelling with his wife in the same House, as I have found unto them a Father
unto St. Claudia, and Father in law to Pudens, an holy Christian dwelling in
that house before Pudens his time, by Nation of this Kingdom, which by that is
said before they cannot do, seeing that Noble Matron, which is acknowledged by
the Roman Writers, even Baronius, to have dwelt in that House, and Grandmother
to St. Claudia her children, Priscilla foundresse of a Churchyard in Rome of
her Name, Mother of St. Claudia, very probable. Baronius in Annot. in
Martyrolog. Romans July the 8. St. Pastor Sen. Hermes in Act. St. Pudens. Baron.
Tom. 1. Annal. Anno 159. and an. 166.
must needs be her Mother, her Fathers wife and Mother in law to Pudens. I am
bold to assign that glorious and renowned St. Priscilla, Foundresse of that
wonderful and religious Churchyard to be the same British Christian Lady.
Baronius (though staggering sometimes in his opinion herein) says plainly,
There was a most Noble Matron in Rome called Priscilla, Grandmother of the
Virgins, Pudentia and Praxedes, of whom there is mention in the Acts of
Pudentia written by St. Pastor. The like he writes in other places, whereas
she is there by him called the Mother of Pudens: he must needs be understood to
speak in their phrase, which ordinarily all Mothers in law use, by the absolute
name of Mothers as the common custom is. Sometimes in other places Baronius
says, St. Priscilla was wife to Pudens, and Mother to St. Novatus, Pudentiana
and Praxedes; so likewise does Zepherinus Binius, when it is evident, that St.
Claudia our British Lady was the only wife of St. Pudens, and Mother to those
Saints. Therefore to excuse the one from Error, and the other from
Contradiction, they must hold that both the Mother of St. Claudia, and her self
also was sometime called Priscilla, as she was in Vmbria called Sabinella, of
her Husbands house at Sabinum there; and this may sufficiently be gathered from
those Antiquities Baronius cites, in which one St. Priscilla is called
Priscilla senior the Elder, or old Priscilla, to make which justifiable, Mr.
Bro. f. 60. 8.
we must also have Priscilla Junior, the younger or young Priscilla; and this
is usual for distinction sake, where the Mother and Daughter, Father and Son be
of one and the same name, to call the Father and Mother by their names, with
the addition of Old, or elder; then the Son and Daughter with the distinction
of young and younger added to them: and there be other distinctions between
these two; The eldest (Grandmother to these holy Children) as the Roman
Martyrology with others testifyeth, who died at Rome, having employed her self,
and her goods to the service of Martyrs; where we see her Festivity kept upon
the 16. day of February, Martyr. Romans 16. Feb.
and that she dyed at Rome; Of the other the younger, if by any called
Priscilla, we find no such observation, nor that she dyed at Rome, but quite
otherwise, that after her husband St. Pudens death, she lived so long at his
house at Sabinum, in Vmbria, that she thereupon took her name Sabellina, and by
all writers died there, far from Rome. Secondly, St. Pastor who lived in the
Apostles time, and familiarly in that our British house, in witness (even
Baronius acknowledging it) that the elder St. Priscilla the Grandmother to St.
Novatus, Timotheus, St. Pastor in actis St. Praxedis and apud Baron. in Anno.
Mart. Romans die 16. Jan.
Pudentia and Praxedes, which were St. Claudia her Children, was foundresse of
that renowned Churchyard in via Salaria at Rome which bare her name, and was
founded before St. Claudia was of years to be foundresse thereof; And it must
needs be this, and no other, which prepared that most charitable, Christian,
costly work: for we find no other Saints of that name, especially in that time,
but only her, and St. Priscilla wife to St. Aquila, diverse times mentioned by
St. Paul being a Jew, who could not be Author of that foundation at Rome, being
at Corinth, and there saluted by St. Paul, in his first Epistle to the
Corinthians, and was with her Husband Coadjutrice to St. Paul in those parts,
as the same Apostle testifyeth; 1 Cor. c. 16.
Neither did she with her Husband stay so long at Rome to effect such a
business; for as St. Luke proves, they came from Rome upon the banishment of
the Jews, from thence by Claudius, Romans 16.
which was soon after their coming thither; Acts 18.
and they were at or near Ephesus a little before St. Paul's death, as he
proves, writing in his 2d Epistle then to St. Timothy, 2 Timothy 4.
Salute Priscilla and Aquila; and the old Roman Martyrology with others give
evidence, they ended their lives in Asia the less upon the 8th. day of July,
when the other St. Priscilla died (as before, Mart. Romans 8. July.
at Rome) far from thence the 16. of Jan.

And Baronius who was an eyewitness of the chargeable work of that foundation
found in his time, shall prove all the wealth both of this St. Priscilla, and
her Husband St. Aquila (being but Tent-makers, as the scripture testifyeth) was
not able to effect such a work; Baronius who had seen and often visited it,
Baronius Annal. Tom. 2. An. 130. The costly and admirable building of a
British Lady in Rome. Marty. Romans 21 Jul. Act. St. Prax. in Breviario die 2
Jul. and St. Pudentianae die 19 May. St. Peter's first Church and Seat at Rome,
in the house of a British Lady.
compares it to a City for largeness, and streets under the Earth, relating
that the whole City of Rome was amazed to see it; so wonderful and chargeable a
work, with such streets, turnings, Churches, places for divine service, and
Conventions, Images of Saints, and other things of great price: as they argue
the rich and noble decree of the blessed Foundresse; so for a Lady of Britain,
a stranger, there to be at such excessive charge and expenses, to provide such
a sanctuary for the honor of Christ, safety, relief, and comfort both
temporal and spiritual, of his servants in a Foreign Country must be a
perpetual Glory to this Nation; and too give further testimony, that this our
renowned Countrywoman was Foundresse thereof, we find expressly that diverse of
her family, and posterity, namely, St. Pudens her son in Law, her
Grandchildren, his Daughters, St. Pudentia and St. Praxedes, as likely St.
Timotheus and Novatus were honorably interred there. And yet besides this
memorable foundation, for the public good of the Church of Christ, these
Romans themselves do tell us, and the late continued buildings do testify,
that there was another such secret Churchyard at her own house, to hide,
protect, and bury holy Martyrs in; And thus we have found out now at the last,
the house of our noble Christian Britains at Rome, to have been the first
lodging of the great Apostle St. Peter, there his first Church and seat, the
harbor of St. Paul, and many of their Disciples and successors, Popes of Rome
after them; the first Seminary College, or Mother of Christian Learning there,
or in the Western world, the common and ordinary place of holy Christian
Assemblies and Exercises: from whence as from the Original Well and Fountain,
the water of life did take course and current to diffuse it self unto all parts
and Nations of the Occidental world; we may make some estimate and apprehension
of the wonderful charitable help and assistance this most happy house of our
Noble British Christian parents of St. Claudia, yielded to the holy work, of
converting this and all other Western Countries: if besides their extraordinary
love to their own Nation, we do reflect upon that, the old Roman Martyrology
has told us of this Priscilla, employing her self and her substance to serve
the Saints and servants of Christ; That she and her husband were two of the
chiefest of the Nobility of the Britains, kept Hostages at Rome for this
Kingdom: and yet after so many years spent, and their Honorable Revenues much
exhausted in these pious works, in maintaining and relieving distressed
Christians, by themselves, substance, and great number of Attendants and
servants attending also to those holy ends, they left so much to posterity,
that in the Family of their Grandchild St. Pudentia in the same House, there
were Ninety six Christian men, ordinary Attendants, and St. Praxedes her sister
being there, nineteen holy Christians were Martyred in that House at one time.

Theat. of great Brit. l. 9. c. 9. Sect. 5.
As concerning St. Peter's preaching himself in Britain, the Theater of Great
Britain says, If Peter were here at all it was before he went to Rome, and
that the Gospel was preached here before it was in Rome, if Peter were the
first as some hold who preached there; both which may be more probable, if we
consider the huge multitudes of Christians; 1500 says Baronius, which
dispersed themselves into all parts of the world, upon the Martyring of St.
Stephen at Jerusalem. Baron. Annal. Tom. 1. an. Chr. 58. p. 597. Metaphr. die
29 Jul.
And Baronius himself speaks in this manner, When we knew that the rest of
the Apoples were not sent into the West, as into the Eastern parts of the
world, except only Barnabas who a short time taught the Ligurians, or James, if
we shall consent to them who deliver that quickly to return from thence, he
went into Spain; it manifestly appears that none of the others were sent into
the West part of the world. Therefore it was the Office of Peter, who having
traveled very many provinces of the East in preaching the Gospel now which was
left to do, he should compass the Western world; and as Metaphrastes and
others witness, penetrate to the Britains, preaching the Faith of Christ;
Where he makes it a certain known truth, and manifestly apparent in Histories,
That none of the twelve Apostles but only St. Peter preached the Word of God in
Britain. And among others he cites Metaphrastes for that manifest Truth; and
when he had alleged diverse and approved Authors for Christ's appearing unto St.
Peter, and sending him into the West part of the World, he adds, Metaphrastes
consenting unto these, writes thus: Our Lord appeared unto St. Peter in a
Vision, Baron. Anueal. Tom. 1. and in Indice v. Petrus Theater of great Brit.
l. 6.
saying, O Peter, arise and go to the West; for it has need to be lighted by
thy links, and I will be with thee. And he says plainly for his own opinion,
Peter admonished by our Lord so to do, came into the West, and sets down the
time of his coming hither into Britain in the time of Claudius the Emperor.

But to come to things certain and undoubted, in this History of St. Peter's
living and teaching in this I Will, it is an Historical Verity out of Question,
that he was here both in the time of Claudius and Nero also: his being here in
the time of Claudius, what time soever it was of his Empire, must needs be long
before St. Paul, St. Joseph of Arimathea, or any other that is thought to have
preached here or came into these parts; to which I add the Testimony of Gildas
our most ancient and renowned Historian, who in his Book De excidio
Brittanniae, of the Destruction of Britain, Gildas Epist. de excid. Brit.
thus writes: So that this Island might rather be deemed Romania then
Brittania; and whatsoever coin it had, either brass, silver or gold, it was
stamped with the Image of the Roman Emperor: in the mean time, while these
things were doing, Christ who is the true Sun, not only from the temporal
Firmament, but from the high Tower of Heaven, exceeding all times, showing his
exceeding brightness to the whole world, does first afford his beams, to wit,
his precepts to this Island, stiff with frozen cold, by a long distance of Land
removed from the visible Sun.

Therefore seeing this Nation did first receive the Faith of Christ, it must
needs be in the time of Claudius, when first and never before this Island was in
that state. Mr. Bron. fol 86. 3.
And this is that very time which so many Antiquaries, Sameon Metaph. Surius,
Luppomannus, Cambden, Audrie, Chesne, and others agree upon, that St. Peter
preached in this Kingdom. To which St. Paul himself, by his Epistle written to
the Romans at that time, and amongst so many Christians in Rome then, which he
remembers, and never once saluting either St. Paul, St. Aristobulus, (who some
Authors say died here, and by Martyrdom, at Glastenbury, Arnoldus, Mermannus
says in the time of Domitian;) St. Clement, Soph. Hier. li. de laboribus St.
Petri and Pauli. Metap. die 29. Junii. Mr. Brough. fol. 88. 4.
or any one that is supposed to have been in these parts with St. Peter, gives
no small allowance. And St. Paul saluting the Family of Aristobulus in Rome,
and omitting him, does sufficiently insinuate, that St. Peter had acquainted
him with this his Western Voyage, and taking St. Aristobulus with him or
sending him hither before him; for except Identity of Name, both Sophronius and
Metaphrastes deceive us: St. Aristobulus brother to St. Barnabas was Father in
law to St. Peter and so following him did likely at the coming of St. Peter to
Rome, remove his Family thither, and left it there, and he himself employed by
St. Peter, Probable that St. Peter was in Britain, or sent Disciples about the
coming of Claudius hither. Baron. Tom. 1. ann. in S. Petro. Auth. of the 3
conversions. Math. West. ann. 49. Mich. Singel. in Martyrio. Dion. Ariopac.
Clem. Romans ep. 1. Hist. antiq. Mos Eccles. Cant. ad ci^c. ann. 49. Guliel.
Eiseng. cent. 1 did. 3. Math. West. an. 46. Eiseng. sup. in St. Mansuet. and
Epist. Gall. Arnold. Mir. Thereat. Conc. gent. and Cent. 1. Francis. Bell.
Cosmagr. Tem. 1. in Tou^. Mr. Brou. f. 89. Anton. Doniocharuz. l. 2. de miss.
Cont. Call. c. 30. Eiseng. cent. 1. fol. 56. Bed. Mart. pride. Call. Jan. Pet. de
Natale, l. 2. c. 25. Anton. part. 1. tit. 6. c. 25. Sect. 3. Mart. in Chr.
Vicol. in Hagiol. Vn^r. Carth. in fascul. temp. Eiseng. Cent. 1. Fran. Bell.
Tom. 1. p. 202. l. 2. Godwyn. Con. of Britain, c. 1. p. 6. and p. 5.
and by him ordained Bishop of this our Britain, must needs be here or in his
journey hither at that time.

Whether St. Peter was here, in or about the beginning of the Empire of
Claudius, and his Invasion of this Nation, in the Fourth year of his Reign, as
the common opinion of Antiquaries is, I dear not absolutely determine, though
diverse together with Baronius incline to that opinion, and reasons be not
wanting to give probability to it. For if Pomponia Graecina, the wife of Aulus
Plautius, the Emperors Lieut. in Britain, was converted here to the Faith of
Christ, this being before the persecution, which they say Claudius raised
against the Christians the 49. year of Christ, Aulus Plantius then being
returned to Rome, together with his Wife and Company to triumph there,
therefore she could not be converted here by any which they say fled hither
from Rome in the beginning of that persecution; and they can find no other
Christians here, except St. Peter or some other sent by him, which they do not
express (our late Writers) to perform that holy Office. Secondly, whereas it
is manifest, that St. Peter after his coming to Rome, changed the darkness of
the West into most bright splendor, and was commanded to illuminate the West,
the more dark or obscure part of the World, it carries great probability that
he began this work before his coming from the East to Rome the second time,
after the Assumption of the B. Virgin Mary, and had enterprized it here in
Britain before those days: for we read in our own ancient Authors (especially
the Manuscript-Antiquity of Canterbury) that about the 49. year of Christ,
Peter did take the Roman Chair again, which must needs be to make it true after
his return to Rome out of some of these West parts. Thirdly, We find in the
French Annals, cited by Gulielmus Eisengrenius, diverse Bishops consecrated by
St. Peter in this time for our neighboring Country of France; as namely, St.
Maximinus or Maximus at Aquens or Aix, and St. Lazarus at Marsiles, in the year
of Christ 46. St. Martial at Limoges, and St. Julian at Maus in the same year,
St. Paulus Sergius at Narbon in the year 48. when St. Paul the Apostle was not
come into these parts to place him there.

And to make this more credible, If we follow that Author with his Antiquities,
St. Clement at Mentz and our Countryman St. Mansuetus at Toul in Loraine, who
in this opinion may be thought to be left there by St. Peter in his first
return from Britain to Rome, being in his way from hence thither; and this the
rather because many Historians testify, he was ordained there by St. Peter:
and yet not any one remembers any place from whence he was directed thither,
but only affirm, as he expoundth them, that he was consecrated Bishop of that
place by St. Peter in the 49. year of Christ. And this more probable, because
after this 49. year of Christ the French Historians, which take pains to set
down exactly the very year, wherein their first Apostles and Bishops were
ordained unto them, by St. Peter, which are many, do not set down the year
wherein any one after this time was Consecrated, until the 54 of the Nativity
of Christ, by and before such time S. Peter was come unto Jerusalem, and the
Eastern parts, the second time into these Western Nations of the world, when he
both was, and stayed long time in this our Britain.

And this gives light unto us, that about this year of Christ 54. S. Peter
came hither to stay long time in Britain; for in this year, as the French
Antiquaries write, S. Peter Consecrated many Bishops in France, in his way from
Rome to Britain; in this year, as they write he ordained S. Sabinianus, or
Sabinus one of the 72 Disciples primate of all France, Archbishop of Sens; in
which year also he Consecrated (as these Authors say) many other Bishops in
France, as St. Nathaniell spoken of in the Gospel: and by some named Vrsianus,
S. Amator, S. Potentianus, S. Fronto and others; among which the rather to
induce us to think that S. Peter was then in France, this S. Fronto then
Consecrated Bishop by S. Peter, was a Frenchman born, as many Authorities prove
unto us: and so most likely to be Consecrated in his own Country; and the
Authority of S. Simeon Metaphrastes (who was as Godwyn calls him, An Author
without exception) who of all others does most particularly set down the
travailes of S. Peter, will bring him into Britain about this time, the second
time as it seems of his being here; for bringing him to Rome as others do, in
the beginning of the Reign of Claudius, he adds of him; when he had stayed
not long with the Romans, and baptized many one, founded the Church, Probably
St. Peter came into Britain the second time about the 54. year of Christ. Ant.
Demochar. lib. 2. Eisengre. f. 56. Pet. de Natal. l. 2. c. 25. Anton. part. 1.
tit. 6. c. 25. Fran. Bellef. To. 1. p. 202. l. 2. Pet. de Natal. apud Eisergr.
in St. Fronto in Gall. Mr. Br. f. 89. 5.
and ordained Linus a Bishop: he went into Spain, then into Egypt, and so into
Jerusalem by revelation for the transmigration of the Mother of God; then
returned into Egypt, and through Africa returned to Rome, whence he came to
Millan and Photice, and so into Britain; which time being truly calculated,
will teach us that he came hither in or about the 54 year of Christ, when in
the way hither he made so many Bishops in France, long before S. Paul came,
although as a prisoner, first to Rome, or any other Apostle thither, or any
other Western Nation; For as it is proved before, S. Peter going up to
Jerusalem by revelation, at the death of the blessed Virgin, did stay but a
short time there, and in the Eastern parts in that Journey; but the charge of
the Western world being more particularly committed unto him before, he
returned unto it, to discharge his duty here, and although Metaphrastes
brings him back again to Rome, yet he speaks of no stay, he made there at
his time; but presently brings him into Britain.

And Mr. Broughton to confirm this Verity of St. Peter's being in Britain, has
these words; When St. Peter miraculously testified concerning the Church of
Westminster in London, I have quoth St. Peter, a place in the West part of
London, chosen to my self and dear unto me, which sometimes I did dedicate with
my own hands, renowned with my presence, and illustrate with divine miracles,
the name whereof is Thorney; which cannot literally and truly be understood of
any spiritual Vision wherein St. Peter in his only glorified soul should
appear, as in the time of King Ethelbert we read he did, but of his personal
presence there before his death, when and never after until the day of
Judgment and general Resurrection St. Peter had or at any time shall have
proprias manus, his own Hands, or any part of his Body united unto his soul;
and yet he speaks plainly here, that he consecrated the place with his own
Hands, which is not true either in a spiritual Vision, or where an assumpted
Body is used: for an assumpted Body cannot be called the own body of any person.

Having thus passed over and related unto you the admirable sanctity, the
constant faith, ardent charity, and pure and unfeigned zeal of our never to be
forgotten pious Britains; I will return again to the Roman Transactions in
this our Isle. In those terms as you have heard before stood the state of
Britain, when Plautius the Lieutenant was revoked, and the persecution of the
War committed to P. Ostorius Scapula, who at his landing found all in an
uproar; the Britains (that were yet unconquered) ranging the confederate
Country, aad using the greater violence; for that they supposed the new Captain
as unacquainted with his Army (the Winter also being then begun) would not come
forth to encounter them: but he knowing well that in such Cases the first
success breeds either fear or confidence, drew together with speed his
readiest Cohorts, and made toward them, slaying such as resisted, and pursuing
the residue (whom he found straggling abroad) least they should make head again;
and that a Faithless or a cloaked peace might not give either the Captain or
Soldier any time of idle repose, he Disarmed all those whom he suspected, and
Hemmed them in with Garrisons, between The River on which Northampton is seated
(as it is conjectured)
Antona and the River of Severn.
Pabrina.

The first that began to stir, were the The ancient Inhabitants of Norfolk,
Canbridgeshire and Huntingtonshire.
Icenians, a strong people, and unshaken with Wars, as having of their own
accord in former times, sought the Roman Alliance and Amity; The Countries also
adjoining near unto them, following their example, prepared themselves to
Fight, choosing a place that was compassed about with a rude trench, which had
a narrow entrance to impeach the coming in of the Horsemen; That Fence the
Roman Captain (not having the strength of the Legions) went about to force,
with the aid of the Confederates alone, and having placed his Cohorts in
rancks, he set his Troops of Horsemen also in like readiness; then giving the
sign of battle, he assailed the Rampire, and brake it, disordering the
Britains, who being touched with a kind of remorse, for their rebellious
attempts: and seeing the passages stopped up on all sides, showed very great
courage and valor in defending themselves (as it falls out often times, where
extremity of danger it self takes away all fear of danger) In this fight M.
Ostorius his son was Crowned with an Oaken Garland, as an Honorable reward for
saving a Roman Citizen; Now by the slaughter of the Icenians, the rest of the
Britains (who stood upon doubtful terms, as wavering between War and peace)
were well quieted, and Ostorius led his Army against the The Inhabitants of
Cheshire as is conjectured.
Caugi, whose Country he spoiled, and wasted, whilst the inhabitants does not
come into the Field, but privately, surprised such as they found straggling
behind the Roman Army, which was now come near to the Sea Coast that looks
toward Ireland; when as certain tumults stirred among the Britains, brought
back the General, who thought it best not to enter into any new action before
he had made all sure in those parts; howbeit upon his coming thither some few
of the Britains (that first began to take Arms) being taken in and put to
death, the residue were pardoned and the Country quieted. For the General
wisely considering that in such cases Lenity sometimes prevails, where Force
and Rigor cannot, did seek to win favor of the Britains by courteous usage
of such as either fled unto him for protection or else by the fortune of War
fell into his Hands; sometimes pardoning them, sometimes rewarding them, and
sometimes using them in service against their own Nation, as he did Cogidunus a
British Prince, The ancient Inhabitants of Southwales.
upon whom he had bestowed certain Cities in free gift, according to an ancient
custom amongst the Britains, who used even Kings themselves for instruments
of bondage. But the Silures could neither by cruelty, nor fair means be held
in, so as the General saw there was no way to keep them under but with a
Garrison of Legionary Souldeirs; and to that end, the Colony of Camalodunum
(consisting of a strong Company of old Soldiers) was brought into the subdued
Country to defend it against such as should rebel, and to make the
Confederates more willing to live in obedience.

This done, the Army marched against the Silures, who besides their natural
boldness, relied much upon the strength of Caracticus their Leader; a man that
had waded through great dangers, and had been fortunate in many adventures,
having gotten thereby such reputation, as he was preferred before all the
British Captains. But as in policy and knowledge of the Country, he had an
advantage of the Romans; so perceiving himself to be unequally matched in
strength, he removed the War to the The ancient Inhabitants of Northwales.
Ordovices, who entering into the action with him (as fearing alone the Roman
power) resolved jointly to hazard the chance of War; and hereupon they prepared
for battle, having chosen a place very commodious for themselves, and
disadvantageable to their Enemies; then they went to the top of an Hill, and
where they found an easy passage up, they stopped the way with heaps of stones
in manner of a Rampire; not far off ran a River with an uncertain ford, where
upon the bank, a company of the best Soldiers were placed, for a defense in
the foreward; the Leaders went about exhorting and encouraging the common
Soldiers, using such persuasions as may best fit their humors and the present
occasion; and Caracticus himself posting up and down, protested that that day,
and that battle, should be either the beginning of the recovery of their
Liberty, or of perpetual Servitude. Then he called upon the names of his
Ancestors, that had chased Caesar the Dictator out of the Island, and had
delivered them from Hatches and Tributes, and had protected their Wives and
Children from shame and violence; while he uttered these or the like speeches,
the people round about him made a noise, and every man swear, according to the
Religion of his Country, that neither the Enemies Weapons, nor their own Wounds
should make them give over; that cheerful cry terrified and astonished the
Roman General; and the rather, when he considered how he was couped in, having
the river beneath him, the Fort before him, the high Hills hanging over it, and
all things on every side threatening danger and destruction to the Assailers:
howbeit his fellow Soldiers demanded the battle, crying, That there was no
thing which Valor could not overcome, using the like speeches, added courage
to the rest.

Then Ostorius having viewed the places of difficulty led his Soldiers (being
hot or eager of the Fight) unto the further side of the river, and from thence
to the Rampire, where while they fought with their Darts, they had the first,
but having broken down the rude compacted heap of stones with a Testudo, and
both Armies coming to handy strokes upon equal advantage, the Britains turned
their backs, and ran to the Hill top, the Romans pursuing them, both with their
light and heavy armed Soldiers, the one assailing with Darts, the other (as
they marched thick together) breaking the ranks, and beating down the Natives,
who had neither Head piece, nor Armor to defend themselves; so that being
hedged in between the Legionary Soldiers, and the Auxiliaries the greatest
part of them was slain in the place.

At this assault Caracticus his Wife and Daughter were taken prisoners, and his
Brethren yielded to the Enemies, but himself driven to extremity, escaped by
Flight into the Country of the Brigants, hoping to receive some aid of
Cartismandua the Sovereign Lady there; But as it falls out commonly with men
in adversity, to be forsaken and left succourlesse, so instead of finding the
relief which he expected, he fell into the danger which he little doubted: for
Cartismandua either fearing her own estate; or thinking to win favor of the
Conqueror (as Princes oftentimes make use of one another mis fortunes, to
serve their own turns) detained him in prison a while, and afterward delivered
him to Odorius, who was exceeding glad he had gotten him, and forthwith sent
him to Rome, as a prize of great worth, and the happy fruit of nine years
service in the Wars.

The report of Caracticus misfortune was soon spread throughout the Isles and
Provinces adjoining; for his name was renowned in most parts of Italy, and each
man desired to see him, who had so long time withstood, and continued that
power, which held all the world in awe and obedience; The City of Rome for many
days together was filled only with the talk of him, and expectation of his
coming: and the Emperor himself as a Conqueror, by extolling his own
worthiness, covertly added more glory to the Conquered; the people assemble
together, as it were to see some notable and rare spectacle; the Emperors
guard in Arms were orderly placed in the Field, before the Camp; after this
preparation made, the Prisoners and Trophies were presented in this manner.
First, The Vassals of Caracticus going foremost, bowed their bodies to the
people as they passed, and seemed by their Ruefull Countenances to discover
their fear; the Caparasons, Chains, and other spoils, taken in the War, were
carried after them; then Caracticus, his Brethren, Wife and Daughters followed.
And last of all came Caracticus himself; his body was naked for the most part,
and painted with the figures of diverse Beasts; he wore a Chain of Iron about
his Neck, and another about his Middle, the Hair of his head hanging down in
long Locks (curled by nature) covered his back and shoulders, and the Hair of
his upper lip, being parted on both sides, lay upon his breast, the rest of his
body was shaven all over; neither was his behavior less noted then the
strangeness of his habit; for he neither hung down his head, nor craved mercy
(as did the rest) but went on boldly with a settled and stern Countenance, till
he came before the Emperors Tribunal Seat, and there standing still a while,
he after spoke these, or the like words.

CARACTICVS his Speech.
IF either my virtues in prosperity had been answerable to the greatness of my
estate, or the success of my late attempts to the resolution of my mind, I
might have come to this City, to have been entertained rather as a Friend, then
as a Captive to be gazed upon; For it would have been no disgrace for the
Romans to have admitted me into society with them, a man Royally Descended, and
a Commander of many Warlike Nations. But what cloud soever fortune has cast
over my estate she is not able to take from me those things which the Heavens
and nature have given me (that is) the dignity of my Birth, and the courage of
my mind which never failed me: I know it is a custom among you, to make your
Triumphs the spectacles of other men's miseries; and in this my calamity, as in
a mirror you do behold your own glory; yet know, that I was sometimes a Prince
furnished with strength of Men, and ability of War; and what marvel is it that
I have now lost them, since your own experience has taught you, that the
events of War are variable and uncertain? I thought that the deep waters which
like a wall enclose us (whom the Heavens seem to have placed far off in another
world by it self) might have been a sufficient defense for us against Foreign
Invasion; but I see now that your desire of Soveraignity admits no limitation,
since neither the danger of an unknown Sea, nor the distance of place, can any
longer warrant our safety and liberty: if you will needs command the whole
world, then must all men become your Vassals, and live under a forced
obedience; For mine own part, so long as I was able, I made resistance, being
unwilling to submit my Neck to a Foreign Yoke. The Law of natural reason
allows every man to defend himself being assailed, and to withstand force, to
which force had I yielded at the first, thy Glory and my Mishap had not been so
renowned, but both of them would soon have been forgotten; Fortune has done
her worst, and we have now nothing left us but our lives, which if thou spare
(having power to spill) thou shall do that which best beseems a great Mind,
and a Noble Nature.

The Emperor hearing his Speech, and wondering to see such boldness and
constancy of a mind in dejected estate, pardoned both him and the rest of his
company, commanding them to be unbound, and so dismissed them.

For many daves together Caracticus his fortune ministered matter of discourse
to the Lords of the Senate who affirmed the spectacle of his Captivity to be no
less honorable then that of Syphax the Numidian King, over whom P. Scipio
triumphed, or that of Perses, whom P. Aemilius vanquished, or of any other
Kings that had in former times been taken in War, and showed to the people the
public honors of triumph were decreed for Ostorius, whose fortunes being now
at the highest, began afterward to decline by reason that either Caracticus,
the object of his valor being removed, he supposed he had made a full
conquest, and therefore followed the service more carelessly, or else for that
the residue of the Britains having compassion of the misfortune of so mighty
a Prince, and being eager of revenge, renewed the War; for they assailed the
Legionary Cohorts, which were left behind to build Fortresses in the Silures
Country, killed the Camp Master, and eight Centurions, besides some of the
forewardest Soldiers, and they had put all the rest to the sword, if speedy
rescue had not come from the Villages and Forts adjoining; diverse other sallies
they made as time and place gave them advantage, prevailing sometimes by
strength, sometimes by policy, and sometimes by chance; the principal motive
that induced the rest to take Arms, was the example of the Silures, who were
most resolutely bent, as being exasperated by reason of a speech that the Roman
Emperor had used, which was, that he would root out the name of the Silures,
as the Sicambrians had been in former time; this made them bold and desperate
to adventure as men knowing their destiny before hand; many skirmishes they had
in surprising the scattered Troops of the Roman Soldiers, and oftentimes with
good success, in taking rich Booties and Prisoners, and distributing the
spoils among their Neighbors, by which means they drew them also to revolt;
In the mean time Ostorius wearied with care and travel, ended his Life.

Claudius the Emperor being advertised of the death of Ostorius, sent Aulus
Didius to take charge of the Army in Britain, where notwithstanding all the
haste he made, he found all out of Frame; Manlius Valens with his Legion having
encountered the Britains with ill success, which by report of the Ilanders,
was made greater then indeed it was, to terrify the new Governor, who also
made use of the same policy to serve his own turn; for by increasing the Fame
of that which he heard reported, he supposed either to win greater praise if he
prevailed, or to purchase a more favorable Censure of his actions if he
miscarriede. The Silures had made many roads into the subdued Country, wasting
and spoiling round about, when Didius the Lieutenant upon his first arrival
entering into the Field, restrained their outrage, and for a while kept them in
some awe.

After Caracticus was taken, Venutius a Prince faithful to the Romans, and
protected by them (so long as Cartismandua his wife and he agreed together,)
upon private coffeehouse began a new rebellion; For Cartismandua whom the
Romans specially favored for the Delivery of Cataracticus) abounding now in
peace, wealth and plenty, (which are commonly the Nurses of licentious living)
fell in love with Velocatus one of her husbands servants, and forgetting in the
end her own honor, preferred him before Venutius, who being deeply touched
with such an open injury and disgrace, raised a power to expel her and her
Paramour out of the Kingdom. The War seemed at the first to have been
maintained between themselves and their private followers only till
Cartismandua by policy, had taken Venutius his brother and certain of his
kinsmen, and then the Inhabitants round about fearing the event, and disdaining
to be brought under the servile yoke of a Woman, declared themselves for
Venutius, and with a choice number of youthful and well experienced Soldiers
invaded the Country: whereof Didius having timely intelligence, sent certain
Cohorts to encounter them. Hereupon issued a sharp Conflict; the Success
whereof was much doubted in the beginning, but in the end the Romans prevailed.
The like Fortune also had Caesius Nasica with his Legion; for Didius himself as
a man stricken in years and fitter to direct then execute, used for the most
part the Ministry of other men, keeping that which his Predecessors had
gotten, and building only some few Castles and Places of Defense within the
Land, to win thereby a Fame of augmenting the Office.

The year following, Claudius the Emperor by the treachery of Agrippina his
wife, who practiced to prevent Brittanicus, and to prefer her own Son Nero to
the Empire, died of poison, leaving to posterity no greater Fame of any thing
by him attempted during his Government, then of his fortunate Expedition into
Brittany.

Finis Libri Secundi.
To the Right Honorable and Illustrious EDWARD Marquess and Earl of
Worcester, Earl of Glamorgan, Lord Herbert, etc. HENRY Marquess Dorchester,
Earl of Kingston, Viscount Newark, etc.

The Marquess of WORCESTER.
Bernard Newmarsh, Lord of Brecon. Nest D. of Griffith ap Llewellyn Prince of
Southwales. Milo Earl of Hereford. Sibill D. and H. of Bernard Newmarsh. Henry
Fitz Herbert, Lord o^ the Forest of Deane. Lucy Daughter and Coheir of Milo
Fitz Walter, Earl of Hereford. Peter Fitz Herbert. Alice D. and H. of Blethin
Broad-Spear, Lord of Lhanthloell in Monmothshire, a Welsh Prince. Reinold Fitz
Peter Lord of Llanthloell, jure matris. Margaret Daughter of Sir John Welsh.
Adam ap Reinold Lord of Llanthloell. Christian D. and H. of Gwaren ddy of
Gwaren ddy, the arms belonging to this Family, are the same which Inyr King of
Gwent did bear, Viz. party per pale S. and B. 3. de liz. Or. Jenkin ap Adam.
Gwenllian Daughter to Sir Aron ap Bledry Lord of Kilsant. Guillim Jenkin
Esquire. Gwenllian D. to Howell Vichan, ap Howel, ap Jorworth. Thomas ap
Guillim Jenkin Esquire. Maud Daughter to Sir John Morley Knight. Sir William
Thomas Knight. Gladis D to Sir David Gam Knight; this was that valiant Knight
who when the French so over numbered the English, as to be ten for one, boldly
told his King, there were sufficient to kill, sufficient to take prisoners, and
a jolly company left to run away. William Herbert Earl of Pembroke. Anne D. to
Sir Walter Devereux. William Herbert Earl of Huntingdon. Mary D. to Richard
Woodvile, Earl Rivers. Charles Somerset Earl of Worcester. Elizabeth sole
daughter and heir of William Herbert Earl of Huntingdon. Henry Somerset Earl of
Worcester. Eliz. D. to Sir Anthony Brown. William Somerset Earl of Worcester.
Christian D. to Edward Lord North. Edward Earl of Worcester. Eliz. D. of
Francis Hastings Earl of Huntingdon. Henry Earl and Marquess of Worcester. Anne
Daughter and sole Heir of John Lord Russel, Son and Heir apparent to the Earl
of Bedford, by which means also this family descends from the Welsh blood.
Edward Earl and Marquess of Worcester, and Earl of Glamorgan. Elizabeth D. to
William Lord Dormer. Henry Lord Herbert. -- D. to the Lord C^pel, Widow to the
Lord Beauchamp, and Mother to the Duke of Somerset.

The Marquess of DORCHESTER.
John Lord Talbot Earl of Shrewsbury, descended from Gilbert Talbot, Mr. Brock
fol. 291.
temp. Hen. 3. who married Gwenllian, D. to Rees ap Gruffith Prince of
Southwales, and assumed for his arms G. a Lion rampant d' Or ala bordure
endente de mesne, which arms were Rees ap Gruffith's, Prince of Southwales.
Maud Daugher and only Heir of Thomas Nevil Lord ^urnival. John Talbot Earl of
Shrewsbury, Lord Verdon, by which family also comes in the Welshblood; for
Theobald, Lord Verdon, married Maud daughter of Edm. Mortimer, L. of Wigmore,
son of Ralph, who married Gladis d. and h. to Llewellyn ap Jorworth P. of
Northwales. Eliz. D. of James Butler, E. of Ormond. John L. Talbot E. of
Shrewsbury. Iatherine D. to Humphrey D. of Buckingham. George Talbot Earl of
Shrewsbury. Anne D. to William Lord Hastings. Francis Lord Talbot Earl of
Shrewsbury. Mary D. to Thomas L. Dacres of Gilsland. George Lord Talbot Earl
of Shrewsbury. Gertrude D. to Thomas Lord Manors, by which match this
Honorable Family again descends from a Welsh line, as in the descent of the
Earls of Rutland. Henry Talbot fourth son of Earl George. Eliz. D. to Sir
William Reyner. Robert Pierpoint Earl of Kingston, etc. Gertrude D. and coh.
of Henry Talbot, Son to the Earl of Shrewsbury. Henry Pierpoint Earl of
Kingston, and Marquess of Dorchester. Cecely D. of Paul Viscount Banning.

THE ANCIENT AND MODERN BRITISH and WELSH HISTORY, Beginning with BRVTE, and
continued until KING CHARLES the First. The Third Book.
The Succession of the Roman Emperors from Nero unto Domitian.
6 Nero 14 years 7 Galba 7 Months. 8 Otho 4 Months. 9 Vitellius 8 Months. 10
Vespasian 9 years 11 Months. 11 Titus 2 years. 12 Domitian 15 years.
LIeutenants under Nero.
Veranius. Suetonius Paulinus. Petronius Turpilianus. Trebellius Maximus.
Lieutenants under Vespasian.
Petilius Cerealis. Jul^us Frontinus. Julius Agricola.
Lieutenant under Galba.
Trebellius Maxmius.
Lieutenant under Titus.
Julius Agricola.
Lieutenant under Otho.
Trebellius Maximus.
Lieutenants under Domitian.
Julius Agricola. Salustius Lucullus.
Lieutenant under Vitellius.
Vectius Bolanus.


The Princes and Men of Note among the Britains,
In the time of Suetonius Paulinus Government under Nero the Emperor.
Prasutagus Prince of the Icenians. Voadica (the Valiant) his Wife.

In the time of Julius Agricola's Government under Domitian the Emperor.
Galgacus Prince of the Caledonians.

In the time of Sulustius Lucullus Government under Domitian the Emperor.
Arviragus.

This was the state of the Affairs in Britain when Claudius the Emperor died,
leaving the Roman Monarchy to Nero his adopted Son who (after his first five
years spent) being given over to all kind of Vice, neglected the Government
both at home and abroad, not daring to enter into any military Action. And it
was thought that he would have revoked the Army out of Britain, if very shame
in detracting from his Fathers glory, and losing that which he had won, had not
withheld him.

About that time Veranius was Governor in Britain, where the shortness of
his continuance suffered him not to effect any great matter; for he died in the
first year of his Government, and then was the Province assigned to Suetonius
Paulinus, one of the most famous Men of that Age for military Affairs. His good
Success at his first entrance, in subduing Nations and establishing Garrisons
(where need required) made him bold to assail the Isle of Anglicey.
Mona (lying in the West part of Britain) as having been a common receptacle
for Fugitives during the War: in his passage thither he left the Country behind
him as he marched unfurnished in diverse places, laying it thereby open to all
opportunites of Annoyance. At his arrival, the Natives meanly armed, standing
upon the shore, made show of their purpose to Resist. The Women in mourning
Attire, their hair about their ears, shaking burning firebrarnds like Furies of
Hell, ran up and down, and the Druids lifting up their hands toward the
Heavens, filled the Air with cries and cursings. These Druids (of whom mention
is formerly made) were certain Priests had in great Reverence by the Britains;
they keep their residence for the most part in shady and dark Groves (as
fittest places for devotion.) Amongst all Trees they most esteemed the Oak, as
hallowed, and without the which they could not perform their superstitious
Rites. Their Sacrifices were both private and public; they instructed the
youth of Britain, and decided Controversies Civil and Criminal: if any man
refused to stand to their award, he was forbidden to be present at their
Sacrifices, which was accounted the greatest punishment that might be; for
thereby he was reputed a notorious Offender, exempt from the ordinary
protection of the Laws, incapable of any preferment, and all men would fly his
company.

The strange behavior of these religious or rather irrelegious Priests, and
the outcries of the people of Mona, so amazed the Roman Soldiers, that like
men enchanted, they stood still without motion, till the Captain spoke unto
them and encouraged them to adventure, not fearing a flock of silly women or
frantic people, and then boldly giving the Charge, he soon disordered and
dispersed them, making himself Master of the Field; which done, the Roman
Soldiers entered the Towns and placed Garrisons there, felling the Woods which
the Inhabitants superstitiously reputed holy by reason of the Altars whereupon
they sacrificed the blood of Captives, and prophesied of the Success of their
own Affairs by viewing the entrails of men whom they had killed.

Marcellus the Disciple of St. Peter, a Britain
This Emperor Nero was the Tyrant who put Saint Peter to death, and after most
miserably murdered himself. The Body of this blessed Apostle, and to whose
preaching the Inhabitants of this Isle owe their first Conversion, was buried
by Marcellus his Disciple, by Birth a Noble Britain: 'Marcellus quidam
Discipulus Sancti Petri accepit corpus Apostoli and 'lavit illud tali unguento
quod nunquam posset putrescere, and postea misit illud in monumento. True,
there was another Marcellus in this time, a Roman born, 'Marci Vrbis Romae
praefecti 'filius, that sometimes followed Simon Magus, and was converted to
the Faith of Christ by St. Peter, and wrote among other Works the Acts of St.
Peter and St. Paul: but this man being thought to be Martyred by Nero, cannot
so well be adjudged to have been the Burier of St. Peter, seeing St. Peter's
Martyrdom was one of Nero's Actions. And we may not doubt, but our Britains
that first received St. Peter in their house at Rome, and were ever afterward
most faithful and true unto him, both at liberty and in prison, as we are
taught by their love unto St. Paul in like case testified by himself, St.
Praxedes a Noble Britain Eminent in the Primitive Church.
and brought up their children in such sort, that among other Acts of Christian
piety, we find as in St. Praxedes that they buried the Bodies of the holy
Martyrs: Imperatore Christianos persequente, eos facultatibus, opera,
consolatione, and omni charitatis officio prosequebatur; nam alios domi
occultabat, alios ad fidei constantiam hortabatur, aliorum corpora sepeliebat:
iis qui in carcere inclusi erant, qui in ergastulis exercebantur, nulla re
deerat. The wicked Emperor persecuting the Christians, she relieved them with
her worldly Substance, with her own travels and labor, with sweet
consolations, and assisted them with all charitable Offices: some she concealed
and hid under her own roof, others she animated and exhorted to prove constant
in their faith: she interred the Bodies of those which died or were Martyred,
and to such as were imprisoned and kept in Dungeons, she was never wanting in
any thing.

In the mean time Prasutagus Prince of the Icenians, a Man renowned for his
Riches, did by his last Will make the Roman Emperor his Heir (jointly with two
of his Daughters,) supposing that thereby his Principality and Family should
have been maintained in good Estate, and protected from Violence after his
death: all which fell out contrary to his hopes; for his Kingdom was made a
prey to the Soldiers: Voadica his Wife whipped, his Daughters defloured, such
as were of the Family made slaves, and the wealthiest Men of his Country,
either by open force or surmised pretenses, deprived of their goods and
dispossessed of their inheritance; besides that Seneca one of Nero his
Counselors, having forced diverse of the better sort of the Britains to take
great Sums of Money of him upon Usury, did then for his private gain, exact the
payment of the Principal upon a sudden, to the utter undoing of his Debtors;
and Decianus Catus the Procurator in Brittany, renewed the Confiscation of
their Goods, which Claudius the Emperor had pardoned. The Soldiers placed in
the Colony at Camalodunum, had thrust the owners and ancient Inhabitants out of
their Houses, terming them slaves and drudges, and abusing them in all shameful
manner. The Temple erected in honor of Claudius was an eyesore and a
continual burning unto them, while the Priests Augustales that attended there,
wasted the Wealth of the Inhabitants, under the pretext of Religion. To these
common grievances of the afflicted people, the present occasion seemed to offer
means of redress while the Roman General was making War in Mona: whereupon
they resolved to take Arms, inciting the Trinobants and other Nations (that
were wholly brought under subjection) to do the like. Then they began to
discourse of their miseries of bondage, to lay their injuries together,
aggravating them by their own constructions, and complaining that their
patience had profited them nothing, but to draw heavy burdens upon them as men
that would gently bear. That whereas in former times they had only one
Commander, now there was two thrust upon them; the Lieutenant to suck their
blood, the Procurator their substance; whose disagreement was the vexation of
the subject, and agreement utter undoing; while the one burdened them with
Soldiers and Captains, the other with wrongs and indignities. That the lust
and covetousness of these their Enemies laid hold upon all persons without
exception; that though in the field he that spoileth be commonly the stronger,
yet themselves were by Cowards and Weaklings (for the most part) dispossessed
of their Houses, bereft of their Children, enjoined to yield Soldiers for
other men's behoof, as though they were such a kind of people as knew how to do
any thing else save only to die for their Country. For otherwise there was but
a handful of Soldiers come over, if they did but reckon their own number,
considering withal that Germany had already shaken off the yoke, having no
Ocean-Sea, but a River to defend it. That the causes then moving them to take
Arms were just and honorable; namely, to recover their liberty, and to defend
their Parents, Wives, Children and Country; whereas the Romans had nothing to
provoke them to war but their own covetousness and wanton lust, and were
likely enough to depart (as Julius Caesar had done) if themselves would imitate
the virtues of their Progenitors, and not be dismayed with the doubtful event of
one skirmish or two, seeing that men in misery have commonly more courage (then
at other times) and more constancy to continue: and now the Heavens themselves
seemed to pity their poor estate, by sending the Roman Governor out of the
way, and confining the Army (as it were) into another Island, by which means
opportunity of revenge and hope of liberty was offered: and finally, that being
Assembled to advise and deliberate together, they had obtained the hardest
point in an action of that nature; wherein it were more dangerous to be taken
consulting then doing; with these and the like Speeches they stirred up one
another, each man laying his own particular grievances, and adding them to the
common cause.

About this time diverse prodigious Signs were noted to portend the subversion
of the Roman Colony; as namely, an Image of victory falling down, reversed at
Camalodunum, strange noyses sounding in the Air, strange apparitions seen in
the Sea, the Ocean bloody in show, and the prints of men's bodies on the Sands;
diverse constructions were made of these things as ominous, whether that they
proceeded of some natural causes (though not always observed) or else that
they do necessarily forgo the ruin and change of great states: howbeit
commonly in such cases men's minds do misgive them, while they frame the future
event of things answerable to their own fearful imaginations, and great
alterations falling out sometimes after like accidents, they superstitiously
suppose them to be always the certain forerunners of destruction; the
apprehension of these things at the first struck the Romans with great fear, by
reason of the absence of their General, and thereupon they required the aid of
Catus Decianus the Receiver of the revenues of the Province.
Procurator, who sent a small company badly armed, to re-enforce the Garrison.
The old Soldiers that had been left within the Town (although few in number)
yet trusting to the Frenchise of the Temple, and not doubting the secret
conspiracies of their confederates, were in a manner careless, as in times of
peace, following their pleasures, and making no provision for defense; The
Britains having in the mean time taken Arms under the conduct of Voadica, a
Lady of the blood of their Kings (for in matter of Government they made no
difference of Sex) and being informed of the state of the Colony, determined,
first to assail the Towns and Forts in their passage thither, which they
attempted accordingly, and with no great difficulty surprised the greatest
number of them.

The good success the Britains had in taking in some places of defense as
they marched forward, made them desirous and adventerous to invade the Colony
it self; and Voadica as their Leader, being a Woman of great Spirit, and comely
Personage (apparaled in a loose Gown of diverse colors, with a Golden Chain
about her Neck, and a light Spear in her hand standing upon a heap of Turfes,
the better to be seen (her Daughters on each side of her) with a shrill voice,
uttered these or the like words.

The Oration of the gallant Lady Voadica, to the Britains.
IT is no new custom for the Britains to make War under the leading of a
Woman, Enobled by their Birth and Descent; the examples of former times can
well witness the experience thereof; howbeit at this present, I will disclaim
all Titles of Dignity, and Prerogatives of blood: and what difference soever
there is in our Estates, yet shall our Fortune in this action be indifferent,
and common to us both; it shall not need to repeat that, which you all know but
too well, namely, what miseries we have endured under the Tyranny of this proud
Nation; you have had the trial both of Liberty and Bondage, and I doubt not
but you find now how much the one is to be preferred before the other, and
howsoever some of you heretofore for private respects have inclined to the
Roman Governors, as Favorers of their usurped Sovereignty; yet I suppose you
will now confess with me, that freedom in a poor Estate, is better then
Golden Fetters: for what abuse can there be named so vile, or indignity so
disgraceful, that has not been offered us, without respect of Degree, Age or
Sex; we Till our ground and sweat for other Men that reap the sweat of our
Travels; the wealth that we gather together to maintain our selves, and our
Families, is by other men wastfully and riotously misspent; we have nothing our
own, but what they leave us; and nothing left us, but labor and vexation: our
bodies and estates being consumed to satisfy their ambition and covetousness;
we have not so much as our heads toll-free so narrowly we are sifted, from the
highest to the lowest; Other subdued Nations are yet by death free from
Bondage, but we even after death seem to live still in Thraldom, while we are
enforced to pay Tribute, as well for the dead as the living; what? are we a
Nation so contemptible, that we can serve to no other use then to be slaves, or
so unhappy that death it self cannot acquit us from being miserable? How long
shall we give way to our own wrongs? shall we hope for reformation of these
abuses? nay we have hoped too long, and by patient bearing of one injury, we
have drawn on another; why should we not rather seek to redress them? for if
we enter into due consideration of our selves, what are the Romans more then
we? our bodies are as strong as theirs, our numbers greater; we have agility of
body (our women no less then our men) to run, to leap, to swim, and to perform
all warlike exercises; for which indeed we are naturally more fit, then for the
spade, plough, or handy-crafts; and howsoever the Romans may seem fortunate by
the folly or weakness of other Nations, yet are they not comparable to us,
whom nature has framed to endure, Hunger, Cold, and Labor, and to be content
with things necessary only; for to us every herb and root is meat; each river
and spring yields us drink, while we seek no further then to appease hunger
and quench thirst; each tree serves for shelter against storms in winter, and
for shadow against the parching heat of Summer; we need no other beds then
Earth, nor coverings then the Heavens, whereas they must have their joints
suppled with hot Baths, sweet Ointments, and soft Couches, and their bodies
pampered with Wine, dainty fair, and all kind of effeminate niceness and
delicacy; these be the properties wherein they imitate their Master Nero, who
has only the shape of a man, being indeed a woman, or rather neither man nor
woman, but a monster of nature, a Singer, a Fiddler, a Stage Player, a Murderer,
and one that excels other men as far in Vice, as he does in pre-eminence of
degree. Besides all this, the cause of our War is just, and the Divine powers
(that favor justice) have made our first attempt prosperous; and me thinks
that the necessity of our Case were able even to make Cowards valiant: your
Ancestors could make Head against Julius Caesar, and the Emperors Caligula and
Claudius. The Germans have lately freed themselves by that memorable overthrow
of the Roman Legions under the Conduct of Quintilius Varus; And shall not we
(who scorn to be reputed Inferior to the Germans in Valor) be confident in
our own strength and boldly adventure? considering that if we prevail, we
recover our lost liberty; if we be forced to retire, we have Woods, Hills and
Marshes for our Refuge; and if we die, we do but sell those lives with Honor,
which we cannot possess with Safety. For mine own part, you shall find me no
less ready to execute (when time serves) then I am now to Advise and Exhort
you; my self having determined either to Vanquish or die: if any of you be
otherwise minded, then live and be slaves still.

With these and the like Speeches she inflamed the hearts that were already
kindled, and persuading the Britains to pursue their Enemies as Dogs and
Wolves do fearful Hares and Foxes, she let slip out of her lap a quick Hare,
at whose running through the Camp, the Britains shouted, apprehending it as a
matter ominous and fore-signifying the Romans flight. And thereupon they cried,
that they might be speedily led to the Colony it self (as the seat of their
slavery) which at the coming they surprised, killing, spoiling, and consuming
all with Sword and Fire, except the Temple only, into which the Soldiers fled
as a Sanctuary, though it could not protect them from the Violence of the
furious multitude. Petilius Cerealis the Lieutenant of the Ninth Legion, coming
to succor the Garrison, had all his Footmen slain, and himself with a few Horse
hardly escaped. Catus the Procurator knowing himself to be odious to the
Britains (by reason of the extortions he had committed in his Office) fled
secretly into Gallia.

Suetonius upon Intelligence of the Revolt, returned out of Mona, and led his
Army with some difficulty toward London (a place not known at that time by the
Name of a Colony,) but Famous only for concourse of Merchants and Traffic:
there he stayed a while, as doubting what course to take, the small number and
ill success of Cerealis making him more wary, and he supposed it would be a
work well worth his labor, if with the loss of one Town he could preserve the
rest that were likely to Revolt. Whereupon furnishing his defective Companies
with such able men as were then in the Town, although the Londoners with tears
implored his Aid, and desired his abode there for their own Defense, yet he
marched forward, leaving behind him all such as either by reason of their age,
sex, The Inhabitants of London put to the sword by the Britains themselves.
or other infirmities could not follow, or else for love of the place (as being
bred and born there) would not abandon it. The Town being thus weakly guarded,
was taken by the Britains, and the people therein put all to the Sword. The
like calamity befell the free Town of An ancient City, with whose ruins St.
Albans was built. A great slaughter by the Britain, of such as sided with the
Romans.
Verulamium, by reason that diverse of the Britains finding their own strength,
forsook their Forts, and assailed the most notable and wealthy places,
enriching themselves with the spoil of their Enemies, whom they hanged, burned,
and crucified, exercising all kinds of Cruelty that a mind enraged with desire
of revenge could devise. They took no prisoners either to preserve for ransom
or to exchange, according to the Laws of War, but slew both Citizens and
Confederates to the number of above Seventy thousand. Suetonius with the
Fourteenth Legion seconded by the Standard-bearers of the twentieth, and some
Auxiliaries, made haste to encounter the Britains, and resolved without
further delay to try the chance of a set Battle. Then he pitched in a place
that had a narrow entrance with a thick Wood for a Defense behind him, and a
fair wide plain before his Camp. The Legionary Soldiers were marshalled
together in thick ranks, the light Harnessed enclosing them about, and the
Horsemen making wings on both sides; Poenius Posthumus the Camp-Master of the
second Legion, was appointed to lead the fore-ward, but he contemptuously
refused the charge. In the mean time the Britains ranged abroad in great
Troops, triumphing for their late good Success, and being encouraged by the
Example of Voadica their General, were fiercely bent to assail the Roman Camp,
supposing now that no Force was able to resist them. And they brought their
Wives with them in Wagons about the utmost parts of the plains, who were not
dismayed to be the Beholders of their valiant Acts, and Witnesses of their
expected Victory.

Suetonius being now ready to join battle, though he perceived that his
Soldiers, with the sight of so great Numbers scattered upon the plain were not
dismayed, yet he supposed it not unnecessary to use some Speech unto them by way
of Exhortation, And therefore began in this manner.

SVETONIVS his Exhortation to his Soldiers.
I Cannot use many words to exhort you, the time permits it not, and the
present occasion requires rather deeds then words; yet let not our small number
discourage you, considering that your Ancestors with a smaller number have
undertaken greater matters; and that where many Legions have been in the Field,
a few Soldiers carried away the Victory; what a glory shall it be for you
then, if with so small a power you can purchase the praise of a whole Army;
there is no fear of Ambush, the Woods guard you behind, and on the Plain before
you lies your Enemies Camp, wherein you may behold more Women then Men, and
the Men themselves for the most part unarmed, and not likely to endure the
points and strokes of your weapons, which they have so often felt to their
smart, it stands you upon now, to approve your selves the same men you are
reputed to be; This is the time either to recover that is lost, or to loose
that which ye shall never recover, you fight not for honor only, but for honor
and life: Remember that you are Romans, whose glory is to do, and suffer great
things. The fortune of this battle will either give us peaceable possession of
that our forefathers have won, or for ever deprive us of it; what shall become
of you if you be taken? the woeful experience of our Countrymen most miserable
Massacred before your eyes may sufficiently testify; revenge therefore both
their wrongs and your own, and no doubt but the gods themselves (who never
leave cruelty unpunished) will assist you; It is better for us to dye in this
action, then by yielding or flying to outlive the p^a se of our own
worthiness; but whether we live or dye Britain shall be ours; for if we live
and recover it, our posterity ever after shall be able to defend it; and though
they should not, yet shall our bones keep continual possession of it; take
courage therefore and fear not the loud and vain shouts of a disordered
multitude, but boldly give the assault, and keeping your selves close together,
pursue the fight without thinking of the spoil till you have made a full end;
for the victory once gotten, all things else will of themselves fall to your
share.

With these or the like words, the old Soldiers were pricked forward, and
Suetonius perceiving it, gave the signal to battle, the Legions kept the
strait, a place of defense till the Britains had spent their Darts, and then
they sallied out into the plain (the Auxiliares and the Horsemen making the
way) and pressed into the thickest Troops of the Natives, who being unable to
endure the fierceness of the assault, turned their backs thinking to save
themselves by flight; but by reason of the Wagons placed about the plain, had
hedged in the passages on all sides, British Hist. fol. 64.
few of them escaped, the residue as well Women as Men were put to the sword,
and their dead bodies (mingled with the carcases of their horses and chariots)
were heaped one upon another. The number of the Britains slain in that battle
was reported to be about fourscore thousand, and of the Romans about four
hundred only, and not many more wounded in the conflict; this days service was
renowned among the Romans as comparable to those of ancient times in the free
commonwealth. Voadica disdaining to fall in her enemies hands, ended her life
by poison; and Paenius Posthumus seeing the good success of the fourteenth and
twentieth Legion, for that by disobeying the General contrary to the discipline
of War, he had defrauded his own Legion of their part of the glory in that
action, for very grief slew himself.

That Voadica poisoned her self, is the opinion of Stowland, Howes, and
Holinshed, who yet introduces Dio Cassius, to affirm that she dyed a natural
death, and called her Voadica or Bonnica; The count Palatine says Bunduica,
vero vitam veneno finivit; but Ponticus Virunnis relates far other ways of this
heroic British Amazon Lady; for says he, facto congressu exercitum Romanorum
delevit and Paulinum crudeliter poena eadem affecit, venit in Galliam, cuncta
superans, Italiam properabat delere, sed prope Alps labor bellorum defessu
aegrotavit, and periit mulierum gloria. Tunc tantus terror Romam innaserat
Italiam quantus nunquam antea, neque in adventu Brenni, neque Hannibalis, neque
alterius ducis, erat mulier procera, flava and coma alba usque at crura, etc.
In the first onset she destroyed the Roman Army, and most cruelly sent Paulinus
the same way after his Soldiers; after which she came into Gallia, destroying
all as she passed, making all possible speed to bring Italy also to ruin and
destruction, but not far from the Alps being fatigated with the toil and
labor of War, she fell sick and so dyed; the honor and glory of women; she
struck such fear and terror, not only unto Rome, but even unto all Italy, that
neither Brennis, Hannibal or any commander whatsoever had ever done the like.

Then Suetonius having gathered together his scattered Troops, certain
Legionary Soldiers, and Cohorts of Auxiliares were sent him out of Germany to
re-enforce the Garrisons and to make an end of the War, so of the Britains that
either openly resisted, or else stood doubtfully affected were put to the
sword; and some that escaped the sword, died of Famine for lack of Corn (a
calamity incident to them, as to people given rather to War then to Husbandry)
the rest found means to relieve themselves by the Romans provisions; and though
some overtures were now and then made for a Treaty of peace, yet the Britains
could not very readily hearken thereunto by reason they much doubted their
safety, as imagining that their guiltiness of rebellion had excluded them from
all hope of pardon, and they feared also the private displeasure of the
Lieutenant, who (though otherwise a singular man) yet seemed to show too much
haughty and hard dealing toward them that yielded themselves, and in some sort
under the pretext of the public service to revenge his own injuries.

Besides Julius Classianus (which was sent to succeed Catus) being at variance
with Suetonius, had given out that a Lieutenant was coming, and that he was
such a one as being void of malice or the pride of a Conqueror, would be ready
to receive into favor all such as would yield themselves. He wrote Letters
also to Rome, signifying to the Senate that they should look for no end of the
War in Britain, so long as Suetonius continued the government there; and that
the ill success which he had in the service, was to be attributed to his own
ill carriage of himself, and the good to the fortune of the Commonwealth.
Hereupon Nero sent Policletus a Libertine into Brittany to examine and report
the state of the Affairs there, and to enterpose his Authority, as a mean to
reconcile the Lieutenant and the Procurator; and to win the Britains to
embrace peace. At his landing in the I Will the Roman Soldiers there seemed to
fear and reverence him, and the causes of his coming were diversely reported at
the first. But the Britains derided him; for as men being born free they knew
not till that time the power of the Libertines (men made free) but rather
marvelled that a Captain and an Army which had achieved so great an
enterprise, could be brought to obey and yield an account of their actions to a
base bond-slave (as they termed him.)

These things howsoever they were censured by others, yet they were reported to
Nero in such manner as the reporters thought might best content him; And
Suetonius after the loss of some of his shipping, was commanded, the War being
not yet finished, to deliver up his Army to Petronius Turpilianus, who had but
even a little before given up his Counselship.

Turpilianus was a man of a soft spirit, and being a stranger to the Britains
faults; was more tractable and ready to remit them, by which means having
composed his former troubles, he delivered up his charge to Tribellius Maximus,
whose unfitness for action, and want of experience in military matters, gave
the more boldness to the Britains that began now to discover the defects of
the Governors, having learned both to flatter and dissemble; in confirming
themselves to the present time and occasion for their advantage, and for the
most part yielding themselves to those pleasures which security uses to
endanger even in minds well-disposed by Nature. For Trebellius, besides his
insufficiency, abused the authority of his place to enrich himself by polling
the common Soldiers, and Roscuis Caelius Lieutenant to the twentieth Legion,
whetted them on against him, as against an ancient Enemy; so that in the end
they brake out into heinous terms, the one objecting matter of crime against
the other. Trebellius charged Caelius with factious behavior, Caelius again
Trebellius with beggering the Legions, and the discord between them grew so
far, that Trebellius being despised as well by the Hides as the Legions (both
of them sorting themselves to Caelius his side) was in great fear of his life,
the danger whereof he sought to prevent, rather by flying away, then by
executing any exemplary justice upon offenders; in the mean time the Soldiers
neglecting the ancient discipline of War fell to Mutiny and all kind of Riot,
as men that had rather be doing ill, then doing nothing. Afterward Trebellius
taking again his former place as it were by capitulation, seemed to govern
only at the discretion of the Soldiers, who finding his weakness and want of
judgment to use his Authority, took upon them to do what they listed; and
herewith also the Lieutenant himself seemed contented, as being now given over
altogether to a sloathful kind of life (terming it peace and quietness) for
which the death of Nero the Emperor, and the civil discord at that time
between Otho and Vitellius contending for the Sovereignty ministered some color
of excuse.

Not long before this time the fourteenth Legion (famous for many great
attempts, and growing now more insolent then the rest) was revoked out of the
Isle to have been sent to the streights about the Caspian Sea, though
afterward upon intelligence of the revolt in Gallia, Spain, (when Julius
Vindex took Arms against Nero) it was retained about the City of Rome for a
safeguard to those parts; in the turbulent times that ensued Nero's death; it
took part with Otho against Vitellius at the battle near Bebriacum, where Otho
was overthrown, and Vitellius after the victory suspecting the Soldiers of
that Legion (as knowing their great stomachs and ill affection toward him)
thought it expedient to join to them the Bands of Hollanders.
Battanian Cohorts, that by reason of the inveterate hatred between them they
might one oppose the other, and himself in the mean time remain more secure.

Vectius Bolanus a man not much unlike Trebellius in some respects, was sent
over by Vitellius, during the time of whose Government the like disorders still
continued in the Camp: ( Vitellius was third after Nero,) for Galba succeeded
him, and continued Emperor for six months and a little more; him Otho slew,
whose Empire continued a less time, for being in the fourth battle which he
fought with Vitellius, Mr. Br. f. 763.
conquered by him having had victory in the three former, impatient of his
dishonor killed himself, bearing the name of Emperor but three months, and
Vitellius which triumphed over him enjoyed as short and imperial a life; only
eight months or thereabouts, and his death for his cruel wickedness was
dishonorable, stabbed to death, cast into the River Tiber, and wanting burial,
Cum Vitellius multa crudeliter, ac nequiter Romae ageret minutissimorum ictuum
punctionibus, est excarnificatus and ad ultimum in Tiberim mersus communi
caruit sepultura, saying that Bolanus by the mildness of his nature (being not
touched otherwise in his reputation,) had purchased love and good will instead
of fear and disobedience; in this time diverse choice men of War, taken out of
the Legions in Britain, were conducted to Rome by Hordonius Flaccus in aid of
Vitellius; but when Vespasian made War for the Empire, Bolanus refused to send
Vitellius any sucour, by reason that the Britains finding the Romans state
encumbred with civil dissension, began to revolt in diverse places of the Isle;
and some of them also showed openly in favor for Vespasian, who had carried
himself honorably in Brittany when Claudius was there, and seemed now by many
ominous predictions to be a man specially marked for the Empire.

The death of Vitellius quenching the flame of civil broils among the Romans,
confirmed the possession of the Empire to Vespasian, who showed the care and
respect he had to the Isle of Britain by employing great Captains and good
Soldiers there; of this Vespasian, says that grave Author Mr. Broughton, Mr.
Brough. fol. 166.
we find in ancient Histories, Manuscripts, and others, written diverse hundred
years since, that this Vespasian being miraculously cured of a natural
incurable disease by the power of Christ, did plainly acknowledge him to be the
Son of God, Fuist le filz de Dieu, and promised thereupon to revenge his
death upon the Jews, which he performed when he sacked Jerusalem, and slaved
that people; for executing which justice of God, and desolation of the Jewish
Nation, from this Kingdom of Britain (though so far distant thence) were
present there, Joseph Bengor. apud Rich. Hakluit praef. l. Naviga. Ang.
as both Hebrew and English Writers witness, 20000 soldiers; I read says a
learned Author, in Joseph Bengorion a very Authentical Hebrew Author, a
testimony of passing of twenty thousand Britains valiant Soldiers to the
siege and fearful sacking of Jerusalem, under the conduct of Vespasian and
Titus the Roman Emperors; Therefore so many thousands going so great a journey
to fight under so Christianly minded a General, and for the quarrel of Christ,
we cannot think but many of these were in judgment, also act, or both,
Christian.

And so we may worthily Register Britain for one of the first believing
Nations, though so far distant from the place of the life, death, and first
preaching of Christ; and boldly say it was the first, chiefest, principal and
only Kingdom that sent so great Forces, and so far off, through so great
difficulties, to execute the just revenge of God upon his enemies. And the
Christian either public profession, or known disposition of many British
Soldiers there mixed with the Roman, under Vespasian, must needs be a motive
to justify his words for true, to force Josephus to these forcible complaints
to the Jews at that time, That they could not expect any help from God; for as
they had forsaken him, so he also had forsaken them; and he that was wont to
defend them, Ora. Josephi ad Judaeos Egesip. l. 5. excid. Hierosol. c. 15.
was gone to the Romans their enemies, who then worshipped the true God, whom
the Jews had offended, and the true God was with the Romans. Au praesidium
speratur divinum atque auxilium de penetralibus? sed qui nos defendebat, ad
hostem migravit, quoniam quem nos colebamus, Romani venerantur, nos offendimus;
Quis autem ignorant cum illis esse Deum? So that whithersoever we go where
Britains were in that time, either in Jury about Jerusalem, or at Rome in
Italy, or in Britain, then termed by Josephus and Egesippus another world,
Quid asseram Brittannias interfuso Mari a toto orb divisas, and a Romany in
orbem terrarum reductas? We find there were many Christians among them, and
their chief Rulers even in temporal Affairs not unchristianly minded, as
Vespasian in Jury, King Marius in Britain, at Rome Coillus, a great Friend to
Christians both there and in Britain when he came to Rule.

The Lieutenantship which was assigned to Petilius Cerealis, a man that had
given good proof of his sufficiency in former services, upon his first entrance
into office, he invaded the Country of the Brigants, (the most populous state
of the whole Province) the greatest part whereof (after many bloody Battles)
was either conquered or wasted, and the hope of the Britains greatly abated,
when as Julius Frontinus (whose reputation was nothing impared by the Fame of
his Predecessor,) took upon him the charge, which he afterward executed with
great commendation in subduing the strong and warlike Nation of the Silures,
The praise of the South Wales men.
among whom he seemed to fight not only with men (whose strength and valor
was able to make opposition against his Attempts) but also with mountains,
straits and places of very great and difficult access.

In this Estate Julius Agricola (having been trained up for the most part in
the British war) did find the Province at his first coming thither. He crossed
the narrow seas about the midst of Summer; at which time as though the season
of the year had been past to begin a new War, the Roman soldiers attended an
end of their travel, and the Britains a beginning of an annoyance to their
enemies. The North Wales men.
Ordovices a little before he had landed, had almost cut in pieces a Troop of
Horsemen that lay in their borders: upon which Attempt the Country being awaked
as desirous of war, allowed the example, and some then staid to see how the new
Lieutenant would take it. Agricola in the mean time, although the Summer was
spent and the Bands lay dispersed in the Province, his Soldiers presumed of
rest for that year, and diverse Officers of the Army being of opinion, that it
were better to assure and keep the places suspected then to make any new
attempt; yet all this notwithstanding, he resolved directly to encounter the
danger, and gathering together the Ensigns of the Legions and some few
Auxiliaries (because the Ordovices durst not descend into indifferent ground)
himself first of all (to give others like courage) marched up to begin the
assault. And having in that Conflict destroyed almost all the whole Nation of
the Ordovices, and knowing right well, that Fame must with instance be
followed; (for as the rest should fall out, so the rest would succeed) he
deliberated to conquer the Isle of Mona from the possession whereof Paulinus
had been formerly revoked by the general Rebellion of Brittany: But Ships being
then wanting (as in an enterprise not intended before) the policy and
resolutenesse of the Captain, devised a speedy passage: for he commanded the
most chief of the Aids (to whom all the shallows were known, and who (after the
use of their Country) were able to swim in their armor if need were, to lay
aside their carriage, and putting over at once suddenly to invade it, which
thing so amazed the Inhabitants (who supposed that the Romans would have a
certain time for Ships and such like provision by sea) that now believing
nothing could be hard or invincible to men, which came so minded to make war,
they humbly entreated for peace, and yielded the Island. This Agricola at his
first entrance into office (which time others used to consume in vain
ostentation and ambitious seeking of Ceremonies) entering withal into labors
and dangers, became famous indeed and of great reputation. Howbeit he abused
not the prosperous proceedings of his Affairs to vanity or braving in speeches;
for he esteemed it an action not worthy the name of a Conquest, to keep in
order only persons subdued by force, neither decked he with laurel his Letters
of Advertisement, but stopping and suppressing the same of his doings, he
greatly augumented it, when men began to discourse upon what great presumptions
of future success he should make so light an account of so great actions
lately performed.

As touching the civil Government, Agricola knowing how the Province stood
affected, and being taught of others that Armies avail little to settle a new
conquered State (if violence and wrongs be permitted,) determined at the first
to cut off all causes of War and Rebellion: and beginning at home, he first of
all reformed his own house (a point of more hardness to some men then to
govern a Province.) He committed no manner of public Affairs to Bondmen or
Libertines, he received no Soldier near his person upon private affection of
partial Suitors, nor upon commendation or entreaty of Centurions, but elected
the best and most serviceable. He would look narrowly into all things, yet not
exact all things to the very most; light faults he would pardon and the great
severely correct, not always punishing Offenders, but ofttimes satisfied with
repentance, choosing rather not to prefer to office such as were likely to
offend, then after the offense to condemn them.

The augmentation of Tribute and Corn, he tempered with equal dividing of
burdens, cutting away those petty extortions which grieved the Britains more
then the Tribute it self; for the poor people in former times were constrained
in a mockery to wait at the barn-doors which were locked againg them, first to
lay Corn, and after to sell at a low price: Several ways also and far distant
places had been assigned them by the purveyors appointmment, for carrying
provisions from the nearest standing Camps to those which were far off and out
of the way (petty Officers in the mean time making a gain thereof, by sparing
some, and charging others at their pleasures) so as that which lay open to all
at hand, was turned only to the private profit of a few. By repressing these
abuses in his first year, a good opinion was conceived of the peace, which
either by negligence or partiality of former Lieutenants had been no less
feared then War. In times of service he was very painful, and ofttimes more
adventurous in his own person then was fit for a General: for himself would
always appoint his ground for pi^ching the Camp, as also be the first man in
pruning the Thickets, Bogs, or any other places of danger, nor suffering any
corners or secret harbors unsearched, but wasting and spoiling everywhere with
sudden incursions and assaults. Howbeit when by these means he had terrified
the Britains, then would he again spare and forbear, as hoping thereby to
allure them to peace; whereupon many Cities (which before that time stood upon
terms of equality ^^ave hostages and meekly submitted themselves, receiving
Garrisons, and permitting the Romans to fortify a work, performed with such
foresight and judgment, as nothing was ever attempted against them while he
continued in office, whereas before that time no fortified place in all
Britain escaped unsailed. Thus far had Agricola proceeded, when News came
that Vespasian was dead, and Titus his Son invested in the Empire.

The Winter ensuing was spent in a most profitable and politic device; For
whereas the Britains were rude and dispersed, and therefore prone upon every
occasion to War, Agricola that he might induce by pleasures to quietness and
rest, exhorted them in private, and commanded his Soldiers to help them to
build Temples, Houses and places of public resort, commending such as were
forward therein, and checking the slow and idle persons, seeming thereby to
impose a kind of necessity upon them, while every man contended to gain the
Lieutenants good will. Moreover the Noblemens Sons he took and caused to be
instructed in the liberal Sciences, preferring the wits of the Britains before
those of the Students in Gallia: The Britains also themselves being now
curious to attain to the Eloquence of the Roman Language, whereas they lately
rejected the Speech; after that the Roman Attire grew to be in account, and the
Gown much used among them, and so by little and little they proceeded to those
provocations of Vices, namely sumptuous Galleries, hot Baths, and exquisite
banquettings, which things the ignorant people termed common civility, though
it were indeed a badge of their bondage.

In the third year of his Government, he discovered new Countries, wasting all
before him till he came to the Firth of The River of Tweed.
Taus; which thing so terrified the Northern Britains, that although the Roman
Army had been toyled and wearied with many sharp conflicts, yet they durst not
assail it, whereby the Romans had the more leisure to encamp themselves and to
fortify: wherein Agricola was either so skilful or so fortunate, that no
Castle planted by him was either forced by strength or by conditions
surrendered or as not defensible forsaken. In all these Actions Agricola never
sought to draw to himself the glory of any Exploit done by another, but were he
Centurion, or of other Degree that had achieved it, he would faithfully
witness the Fact and yield him always his due commendation.

The fourth year of his Office was spent in viewing and ordering that which he
had overrun; and if the valiant minds of his Soldiers and the glory of the
Roman Name could have so permitted it, there should have been no need to have
sought other limits of Brittany then were at that time discovered. For The
Firth of Dunbretton in Scotland.
Glota and The Firth of Edenborough.
Bodotria, two arms of the two contrary Seas, shooting mightily into the Land,
are only divided asunder by a narrow partition of ground, which passage was
guarded and fortified with Garrisons and Castles, so that the Romans were now
absolute Lords of all on this side, having cast their Enemies as it were into
another Island.

The Fifth year of the War Agricola subdued with many and prosperous conflicts,
strange Nations before that time unknown, and furnished with Forces that part
of Brittany which lies against Ireland; And this he did more for hope of
advantage, then for fear of danger; for if Ireland might have been won lying as
it does betwixt Brittany and Spain, and commodious also for Gallia, it would
aptly have united to the use and profit one of another, those strongest members
of the Empire; The nature and fashion of the Irish did not then much differ
from the British, but the Ports and Haven Towns in Ireland were more known
and frequented, by reason of greater resort thither of Merchants, Agricola
having received a Prince of that Country (driven thence by civil dissensions)
under color of courtesy and friendship did retain him till occasion should
serve to make use of him; It was afterward reported that with one Legion and
some few Aides, Ireland might then have been won, and possessed, and that it
would have been also a means to have kept Brittany in obedience, if the Roman
Forces had been planted each where, and liberty as it were even banished out of
sight.

Now in the summer following, because a General rising in Arms of the further
Nations beyond Bodotria was feared (the passages being all beset with the power
of those people) he manned a Fleet to search the Creeks, and harbors of the
ample Regions beyond it; backing them first of all with a Navy and a goodly
show, bringing War both by Sea and Land, and oftentimes it chanced that the
Horsemen, Footmen, and the Sea Soldiers met and made merry in the same Camp,
each man extolling his own prowess and adventures, and making vaunts and
comparisons, Soldier like; some of the Woods and high Mountains that they had
passed, others of dangers of Rocks and Tempests that they had endured; the one
of the Land, and the enemy defeated; the other of the Ocean, assaied and
subdued; The Britains (as by the prisoners it was understood) were much amazed
at the fight of the Navy, supposing that (the secrets of their Sea being now
disclosed) there remained no refuge for them, if they were overcome; whereupon
the Caledonians arming with great preparation and great fame (as the manner is
of matters unknown) began to assail their Enemies Castles, and some of the
Roman Captains which would seem to be wise, being indeed but Cowards,
counseled the General to retire on this side Bodotria, and rather to depart
of his own accord, then to be driven back with shame; In the mean time Agricola
had knowledge, that the Britains meant to divide themselves and give the onset
in several Companies, whereupon least he should be enclosed about, and
entrapped either by their multitude, or by their skill in the passages; he
marched also with his Army divided in three patts; which when it was known unto
the Calidonians, they changed advice on the sudden, and uniting their Forces
together, jointly assaulted by night the ninth Legion, as being of weakest
resistance; and having slain the watch (partly asleep and partly amazed with
fear) they broke into the Camp, and were fighting within the trenches; when
Agricola having understood by spies what the Britains had taken, and following
their footsteps, commanded the lightest Horsemen and Footmen to play upon their
backs, and to maintain the skirmish: when the day drew near, the glittering of
the Ensigns dazzled the eyes of the Britains, who being daunted with fear of
danger on each side, began to draw back, and the Romans like men that were now
out of peril of their lives, did fight more cheerfully for their honor,
freshly assailing the Britains and driving them to their own Gates, where in
the very streets the conflict was sharp and cruel; till in the end the
Britains were forced to fly, whilst the Roman Forces severally pursued them,
contending with a kind of emulation, the one to have helped the other, and the
other to seem to have needed no help; upon the success of this battle, the
Roman Soldiers presuming, that to their power all things were easy, and
openly cried to the General to lead them into Caledonia, that with a course of
continual conquest they might find out the utmost limits of Britain; Now such
as before the battle were so weary and wise in adventuring, waxed forward
enough after the event; and grew to speak gloriously of themselves (such is the
hard condition of war, if ought fall out well all challenge a part, misfortunes
commonly are imputed to one) contrariwise the Britains (presupposing that no
true valor but the coming of the General by using the occasion had carried
away the victory) abated not much their wonted courage, but armed their youths,
transported their children and Wives into places of safety, and sought by
Assemblies and Religious rights to establish an association of the Cities
together, and so for that year both parties as Enemies departed incensed away.

In the beginning of the next summer, Agricola sending his Navy before (which
by spoiling in sundry places, should induce a greater and more uncertain
terror) followed himself with his Army by land, having drawn to his party some
of the valiantest Britains (whom by long experience in peace he had found most
faithful) and so armed at the Mount Grants lane in Scotland.
Grampius, where the Britains had lodged themselves before; For they were not
altogether dejected with the unfortunate event of the former battle, but now as
men prepared for all chances, they attended nothing else but revenge, death or
servitude: and being taught at length, that common danger must be repelled with
mutual concord (by leagues and embassages) they had assembled the power of all
the Cities together, in number above thirty thousand Armed men (the view being
taken) besides a great company of youths (which daily flocked unto them;) and
lastly old men renowned in War, and bearing the badges due to their honor, at
what time Galgacus for virtue and birth the principal man of all the Leaders,
seeing the multitude hotly demand the battle, is said to have used this or the
like Speech.

The Speech or Oration of Galgacus to his Soldiers.
WHen I consider the cause of this War, and our present necessity, I have
reason (me seems) to presume that this day, and this our general agreement will
give a happy beginning to the freedom of the whole Island; for we have all
hitherto lived in liberty, and now no Land remains beyond us, no Sea for our
safety. The Roman Navy as you see surveying and environing our Coasts, so that
combat and Arms, which men of virtue desire for honor, the dastard must also
use for his security; The former battles which have with diverse events been
fought with the Romans, had their refuge and hope resting in our hands; for we
the flower of the British Nobility, and seated in the furthest part of the
Isle, did never yet see the borders of those Countries which were brought under
servile subjection, (our eyes being still kept unpolluted and free from all
contagion of Tyranny) beyond us is no land, besides us none are free, us only
hither to this corner and secret harbor has defended; you see the uttermost
part of the line is laid open, and things the less they be, which in knowledge
the greater is the glory to atchieve them; but what Nation is there now beyond
us? what else but water and Rocks, and the Romans Lords of all within the Land,
whose intolerable pride in vain shall you seek to avoid by services and humble
behavior. They are the Robbers of the world, that having now left no Land to
be spoiled, search also the Sea: if the enemy be Rich, they seek to win wealth;
if poor, they are content to gain the glory to themselves; whom neither the
East or West can satisfy, as being the only men of all Memory, that seek out
all places, be they wealthy or poor, with like greedy affection; to take away
by main force, to kill and spoil, they term Empire and Government, when all is
wast as wilderness, that they call peace; his Children and blood each man
holds most dear, and yet even they are pressed for Soldiers and carried away
to be slaves we know not where; our Sisters and Wives, though they be not
violently forced as in open Hostility, yet are they under the color and title
of friends and guests shamefully abused, our goods and substance they daily
draw from us, rewarding us only with stripes and indignities, slaves which are
born to bondage, and sold but once, and after are fed at their owners expenses;
but Britain daily burieth, and daily feeds, and is at charge with her own
bondage, and as in a private retinue the fresh man and last comer is scoffed at
by his fellow servants; so in this old servitude of the whole world, they seek
only the destruction of us, as being the latest attempted, and of all others in
their opinion the most vile, we have no Fields to Mannure, no Mines to be
dug, no Ports to trade in, and to what purpose then should they keep us
alive: considering that the manhood and fierce courage of the Subject does not
much please the jealous Sovereign. And this corner (being so secret and out of
the way) the more security it yields to us, the greater suspicion it works
in them; seeing therefore all hope of pardon is past, it behooves you at length
to show courage in defending and maintaining both your safety and honor. The
Igenians led by a Woman Fired the Roman Colony, Forced the Castles, and had the
prosecution of the War, being answerable to so lucky a beginning; the Southern
Britains might have then with ease shaken off the yoke, and prevented our
peril; we as yet never touched, never subdued, but born to be free, not slaves
to the Romans; we I say are now to make proof of our Valor, and to show in
this encounter what manner of men Calidonia has reserved in store for her
self. Do you think that the Romans be Valiant in War as they are wanton in
peace; no, you are deceived; for they are grown famous not by their own virtue,
but by our jars and discord, while they make use of their enemies faults, to
the glory of their own Army, composed of most diverse Nations; and therefore as
by present prosperity it is holden together, so doubtless (if fortune frown on
that side) it will soon be dissolved, unless you suppose the Gauls and the
Germans, and (to our shame be it spoken) many of our own Nation (which now lend
their lives to establish a Foreign Usurper) to be led with any true-hearted and
faithful affection. No it is rather with terror and distrust (weak-workers of
love) which if you remove, then those which have made an end to fear, will soon
begin to hate. All things that may encourage and give hope of Victory, are now
for us. The Romans have no Wives to hearten them on if they faint, nor Parents
to upbraid them if they fly: most of them have no Country at all, or if they
have, it is some other men's. They stand like a sort of fearful persons
trembling and gazing at the strangeness of Heaven it self, at the sea and the
Woods. And now the Heavens (favoring our cause) have delivered them (mewed up,
as it were and fettered) into our hands; be not terrified or dismayed with the
vain-shew and glittering of their gold and silver, which of themselves do
neither offend nor defend. And think that even amongst our enemies we shall
find some of our side, when the Britains shall acknowledge their own cause,
the Gauls remember their old Freedom, and the rest of the Germans forsake them,
as of late the Vsipians did; what then should we fear? The Castles are empty,
the Colonies peopled with aged and impotent persons, the free Cities
discontented, and distracted with factions, whilst they which are under, obey
with ill will, and they do govern and rule without right. Here is the Roman
General and the Army, their Tributes and Mines, with other miseries,
inseparably following such as live under subjection of others, which whether we
are to endure for ever, or speedily to revenge, it lies this day in this Field
to determine; wherefore being now to join Battle, bear in mind I beseech you,
both your Ancestors (which lived in the happy estate of Liberty) and your
Successors, who (if you fail in this enterprise) shall live hereafter in
perpetual servitude. This Speech delivered (with great vehemence of voice and
action) was cheerfully received by the Britains, with a Song (after their
fashion) accompanied with confused cries and acclamations.

As the Roman Cohorts drew together and discovered themselves, whilst some of
the boldest pressed forward, the rest put themselves in array; and Agricola
albeit his Soldiers were glad of that day, and could scarce with words have
been withholden, yet supposing it fit to say somewhat, He encouraged them in
this wise.

AGRICOLA his Speech to his Soldiers.
Fellow Soldiers and Companions in Arms, your faithful diligence and service
these eight years so painfully performed, by the Virtue and Fortune of the
Roman Empire, has at length conquered Brittany. In so many Journeys, so many
Battles we were of necessity to show our selves either valiant against the
Enemy, or patient and laborious above and against nature it self; in all which
Exploits, we have both of us carried our selves, as neither I desired better
Soldiers, nor you other Captains. We have exceeded the limits, I of my
Predecessors, and you likewise of yours. The end of Brittany is now found, not
by Fame and Report, but we are with our Arms and Pavillions really invested
thereof. Brittany is found and subdued.

In your marching heretofore, when the passage of Bogs, Mountains and Rivers
troubled and tired you, how often have I heard the valiant Soldiers say, When
will the Enemy present himself? Lo now they are put out of their holes, and
here they are come; lo now your wish; lo here the place for trial of your
Virtue, and all things likely to follow in a good and easy course if you win;
contrariwise all against you if you lose. For as to have gone so much ground,
escaped the Woods and Bogs, and passed over so many arms of the sea, are
honorable testimonies of your forwardness; so if we fly, the advantage we
have had, will become our greatest disadvantage. For we are not so skilful in
the Country, we have not the like store of provision; we have only hands and
weapons, wherein our Hopes, our Fortune, and all things else are included. For
mine own part, I have been long since resolved that to show our backs is
dishonorable, both for Soldier and General; and therefore a commendable death
is better then life with reproach, (surety and honor commonly dwelling
together.) Howbeit, if ought should mishappen in this Enterprise, yet this will
be a glory for us to have died even in the utmost end of the world and of
nature: if new Nations and Soldiers unknown were in the field, I would by the
example of other Armies encourage you. But now I require you only to recount
your own victorious Exploits, and to ask counsel of your own eyes; these are
the same men which the last year assailed one Legion by stealth in the night,
and were suddenly and in a manner by the blasts of your mouths overthrown.
These of all the Britains have been most nimble in running away, and by that
means have escaped the longest alive. For as in Forests and Woods the
strongest Beasts are chased away by main force, and the cowardly and fearful
scarce only by the noise of the Hunters; so the most valiant of the British
Nation, we have already dispatched; the raskal herd of dastardly cowards only
remains; and lo, we have now at length found them, not as intending to stay
and making Head against us, but as last overtaken, and by extreme passion of
fear, standing like stocks, and presenting to us occasion in this place of a
worthy and memorable Victory. Now therefore make a short work of a long
warfare, and to almost fifty years travel let this day impose a glorious end.
Let each of you show his Valor, and approve to your Country, that this Army of
ours could never justly be charged, either with protracting the War for fear or
upon false pretenses, for not accomplishing the Conquest.

As Agricola was speaking the Soldiers gave great tokens of their fervent
desire to fight, and when he had ended his Speech, they joyfully applauded it,
running straight ways to their weapons and rushing furiously forward, which
the Roman General perceiving forthwith ordered his Army in this manner: with
the Auxiliary Footmen he fortified the middle Battle, The Horsemen he placed in
the wings on both sides, The Legions he commanded to stand behind, Before the
Trench of the Camp, to the greater glory of the Victory, if it were obtained,
without Roman blood, or otherwise for assistance, if the forward should be
distressed, The Britains were marshalled on the higher ground fitly to show
and to terrify their enemies: The first Troop standing on the plain, the rest
on the ascent of the hill, rising up as it were by degrees one over another.
The middle of the Field was filled with Chariots and Horsemen, clattering and
running round about. Then Agricola finding them to exceed him in number, and
fearing least he should be assailed, on the Front and Flanks both at one
instant, thought it best to display his Army in length, and although by that
means the Battle would become disproportionably long, and many advised him to
take the Legions: yet he confidently rejected the counsel, and leaving his
Horse, advanced himself before the Ensigns on Foot. In the first Encounter
before they joined both sides, discharged and threw their darts. The Britains
employing both Art and Valor, with great Swords and little Targets defended
themselves and wounded their Enemies, till Agricola espying his advantage,
appointed three Companies of Hollanders.
Battanian Cohorts, and two of the The ancient Inhabitants of the Territory of
Liege in the Low Countries.
Tungrians to press forward, and to bring the matter to Handy-stroaks and dint
of sword, which they by reason of their long service were able readily to
perform to the prejudice of the other side, in regard of their little Bucklers
and huge Swords. For the Swords of the Britains being weighty and
blunt-pointed, were neither fit either for the close or open fight. Now as the
Battanians began to strike them on the faces with the pikes of their Bucklers,
and (having overborn such as resisted) to march up to the Mountains, the rest
of the Cohorts (gathering Courage upon emulation) violently beat down all about
them, and running forward left some of the Britains half dead, some wholly
untouched for haste, as desirous to have part of the glory in winning the
Field. In the mean time, both the Chariots of the Britains mingled themselves
with their enemies Battle of Footmen, and also their Troops of Horsemen;
(albeit they had lately terrified others) yet now themselves beginning to fly
were distressed by the unevenness of the ground and the thick ranks of their
enemies, who continued the Fight till the Britains by main weight of their own
Horses and Chariots were born down one upon another; the masterless Horses
afrighted, running up and down with the Chariots, and many times overbearing
their Friends which either met them or thwarted their way.

Now the Britains who stood aloof from the Battle, upon the top of the Hills,
and did at the first in a manner, disdain the small number of their enemies,
began to come down by little and little, and sought to fetch a compass about
the backs of the Romans, which were then in train of winning the Field. But
Agricola suspecting, as much opposed them with certain wings of horsemen,
purposely retained about him for sudden dispatches upon all chances, and
repulsed them as fiercely as they ran to assail; So the council of the
Britains turning to their own hurt, the Roman wings were commanded to forsake
the battle and follow the Flight; then were there pitiful spectacles to be
seen, pursuing, wounding, taking prisoners and then killing such as were taking
as soon as others came in the way. Then the whole Regiments of the Britains
(though armed and more in number) turned their backs to the fewer, others
unarmed fought their own death, offering themselves voluntarily to the
slaughter; The fields every where were imbrued with blood; every where weapons
lay scattered, wounded bodies, mangled limbs, some slain out right, some half
dead, some yielding up the Ghost, and yet even at the last gasp seeming by
their countenances to discover both anger and valor; such of the Britains as
in flying recovered the Woods, joined themselves together again and intrapped
unawares some of the Roman Soldiers that unadvisedly followed, not knowing the
Country; and if Agricola had not, by his presence and direction assisted at
need, setting about them his most expert Footmen (as it were in form of a
Tail) and commanded some of his Horsemen to leave them Horses (where the
passage was narrow) and others to enter single on horseback where the wood was
thin, doubtless the Romans had taken a blow by their own over much boldness;
but after that the Britains saw them again in good array, and orderly
following the chase, they fled (not in Troops as before, when they attended
each other, but utterly disbanded, shunning ill company) toward the desert and
far distant places; the darkness of the night and satiety of the blood, made
an end of the chase; of the Britains were then stain about ten thousand, of
the Romans 300 and 40. amongst whom the chief man of note was Aulus Atticus,
the Captain of a Cohort, who upon a youthful heat, and through the fierceness
of his Horse, was carried into the midst of his Enemies; that night the
winners refreshed themselves, taking pleasure in talking of the victory, and
dividing the spoil; but the Britains uttterly discouraged, crying and howling
(both men and women together) took and drew with them their wounded persons,
calling the not wounded, forsaking their own Houses, and in despair setting
them on fire; then seeking holes abroad to lurk in, and having found them,
straight awayes again forsaking them, sometimes communicating Councels
together, conceiving some little hope, and then by and by dejected and
desperate, sometimes moved with pity at the sight of their Kinsfolks and
Friends, and sometimes stirred with rage and envy in thinking and speaking of
their Enemies (which was most lamentable) some of them by way of compassion and
mercy killing their own Children and Wives.

The day following did more plainly discover the greatness of the victory, by
the calamity of the vanquished desolation and silence every where, the smoke of
the houses fired appeared a far off: no sallies out of the woods, no stirring
in the Mountains, no man to make resistance, or to meet with the Roman spies,
who being sent abroad into all quarters, found by the print of the Britains
footsteps that their flight was uncertain, and that they were no where in
companies together, but scattered in diverse places, and altogether unable to
make any new attempt upon the sudden; wherefore Agricola the summer being now
spent in this journey, and the time past for any other employment, brought his
Army into the borders of the The Ancient Inhabitants of Eskdale in Scotland,
(as it is construed.)
Horestians Country, where having received Hostages of the Inhabitants, he
commanded the Admiral of his Navy (being furnished with Soldiers and
sufficient strength for that purpose) to sail about Britain, whether the Fame
and Terror of the Roman Name was already gone before. Then he planted Garrisons
upon the borders between Blota and Bodotria, and disposed of his Footmen and
Horsemen in the wintering places within the Province. Thus after many Conflicts
about the space of one hundred thirty six years from Julius Caesar's first
entrance, the utmost limits of Brittany and the Isles of the Orcades, lying on
the North side of it, were by the Valor and Industry of Julius Agricola first
discovered and made known to the Romans, and the South part of the Isle in the
fourth year of the Reign of Domitian, being in the year of our Redemption 86,
reduced into a full Province, the Government whereof was particular to the
Roman Emperors themselves, and not at the disposition of the Senate.

This state of affairs here Agricola signified by letters (without any
amplifying terms to Domitian, the Successor of Titus his brother in the
Empire) who after his manner with a cheerful countenance and grieved heart,
received the news, being inwardly pricked with anger and disdain, to think that
his late counterfeit triumph of Germany (wherein a show was made of slaves
bought for money, attired like Captives of that Country) was had in derision and
justly scorned; whereas now a true and great victory (so many thousand of
Enemies being slain) was current in every man's mouth: besides he esteemed it a
most perilous point in a state, that a private man's name should be exalted
above the name of a Prince; and he supposed that he had in vain suppressed the
study of Oratory, and all other public Arts, if he should in military Glory be
excelled by another; for matters of other kinds, as he supposed might more
easily be passed over, but to be a good Commander of an Army, was to be above a
private estate, that being a private estate peculiar to a Prince; Domitian
being tormented with these and the like conceits, and musing much in his closet
above (which was commonly noted as a sign of some mischief in working) thought
it best for the present to cloak and dissemble his malice, till the heat of
Agricola's glory, and the love of his Soldiers were somewhat abated (for as
yet Agricola remained in office: wherefore he commanded that all the houours of
Triumphal Ornaments, the image Triumphal, and what else was usually bestowed in
lieu of triumph, should in most ample and honorable terms be awarded him in
the Senate: and then sending a Successor, he caused a brute to spread, that
the Province of Syria (which was then void, and specially reserved for men of
great quality) should be assigned to Agricola; the common opinion was that
Domitian sending one of his most secret and trusty servants unto him sent with
all the Commission for the Lieutenancie of Syria, with private instructions,
that if Agoicola at the time of his coming, should be still in Britain, then
it should be delivered; if otherwise it should be kept back; and that the same
man meeting Agricola as he crossed the Seas, without speaking to him or
delivering the message, returned again unto Domitian; whether this were true or
fained upon a probable surmise, as agreeable to the Princes disposition, it
could not be directly affirmed; But in the mean season, Agricola had yielded up
the Province in good and peaceable estate unto ( Neus Trebellius, or rather as
some Authors report) to Salustius Lucullus.

Agricola least his coming to Rome should have bin noted by reason of the
multitude of people, which would have gone out to see and meet him, did warily
cut off the occasion of that courtesy, entering the City by night (and by night
as he was commanded) came to the Palace, where being admitted to the Princes
presence, and received with a short salutation, and no further speech, he
sorted himself with other Gentlemen of his rank, carrying himself ever after
very temperately and warily in all his actions, as knowing the present state of
those times, and the dangerous inclination of the Emperor himself, who being
(as all other Princes are commonly) more fearful and jealous of the good then
the bad, envyed in him those virtues and that honorable reputation, whereof
himself was not capable; yet, as good deserts cannot be hide (true worthiness
shining even in darkness it self) so the retired life which Agricola led, did
nothing diminish his glory, but rather like water sprinkled on a burning fire,
increased and continued the heat thereof. Diverse times was he accused in his
absence (which ministered to his ill-willers opportunity of working his
disgrace) and as often in absence was he acquitted the opinion only of his good
deserts, and no matter of crime giving occasion, while such as highly commended
him to the Emperor (seeming his friends but indeed being the most pestilent
kind of Enemies,) procured underhand his peril and ruin in the end. Howbeit
the ill success of the Roman Armies in diverse Provinces at that time, serving
as a foil to set out his Honorable Actions, drew him perforce into glory; and
Domitian made pretenses of his purpose to employ him thinking thereby to
satisfy the people who then complained of the want of good Leaders. But virtue
that never continues long time in prosperous Estate (as being the common
object of envy) hastened the death of Agricola, who (as the constant fame went)
was made away by poison; and that not without the Emperors knowledge and
consent. These things concerning Agricola's Government in Britain, I have set
down particularly as they are reported by Cornelius Tacitus, who writ the Story
of his life, which remains to the World as a perpetual Monument of the Doings
of the one, and the Writings of the other.

Salustius Lucullus succeeding Agricola, left little Memory of himself, by
doing any thing here, either for that no occasion was then offered to show
himself in action, or else for that the Fame of so worthy a Predecessor
blemished his Reputation; for having held the Office but a short time, he was
by commandment of Domitian put to death for suffering certain Spears of a new
fashion to be called by his own name.

About this time, Arviragus a Britain by birth and education, did Govern as
King part of the Isle of Britain: the Romans accounting it a point of policy
to permit the Britains sometimes to be ruled by Princes of their own Nation,
whose Aid and Counsel they might use (upon occasions) to the pacifying of
Rebellion, and the establishing of their own greatness. For the common people
(whose affection does oftentimes sway the Fortunes of Princes) are much more
easily brought under the Obedience of their own Countrymen then of Strangers.

The Succession of the Roman Emperors from Nerva Cocceius unto Honorius, in
whose time the Romans gave over the Government of the Isle of Britain.
13 NErva Cocceius, reigned one year and four Months. 14 Vlpius Trajanus (a
Spaniard) 19 years and 6 months. 15 AElius Adrianus, 20 years. 16 Antoninus
Pius, 23 years. 17 M. Aurel. Antoninus Philosophus, 19 years: L. Verus his
Colleague in the Empire. 18 Aurel Comodus (the son of Anton. Philos.) 13 years.
19 AElius Pertinax, 6 months. 20 Didius Julianus, 7 months. 21 Septimius
Severus Britt. 18 years. Pessenius Niger Usurpers. Clodius Albinus Usurpers.
22 Anton. Bassianus, Caracalla Britt. (the eldest son of Severus) six years.
Geta Caesar Britt. the younger son of Sept. Severus.
23 Opilius Macrinus, 1 year 2 months. 24 Varius Heliogabulus (the base son of
Caracalla) 4 years. 25 Alexander Severus (a kinsman of Heliogab.) 13 years. 26
Julius Maximinus, 3 years. Balbinus Caesar's Elect. Pupienus Caesar's Elect.
27 Gordianus the father with his two sons and his Nephew, 6 years. C. Valens
Hostilianus Caesar. 28 Philippus the Arabian, 5 years. 29 Decius Trajanus, 2
years. 30 Vibius Pallus Hostilian. (with his son Volusianus) 2 years. 31
AEmilius of Mauritania, 3 months. 32 Licinius Velerianus, 15 years. 33
Gallienus the son of Valerianus, 9 years. Valerianus Brother of Gallienus
Caesar. Cassius Labienus Posthumus Caesar.
34 Flavius Claudius, 2 years. 35 Aurelius Quintillus, the brother of Claudius,
17 days. 36 Valerius Aurelianus, 5 years and 6 months, 37 Tacitus, 6 months.
38 Annius Florianus (brother to Tacitus) 60 years. 39 Valerius Probus, 6 years
4 months. 40 Carus Narbonensis, 2 years. Numerianus Caesar's. Carinus Caesar's.
Dioclesianus, 20 years. Maximianus Herculeius Caesar. Constantius Chlorus, 4
years. Galerius Maximus, 11 years. Severus Caesar's. Maximianus Caesar.
Maxentius son of Maximian, 6 years. Licinius, 14 years. Constantinus Magnus, 30
years. Magnentius, Usurper. Constantinus the 3 sons of Constantine the Great.
Constans the 3 sons of Constantine the Great.
47 Constantius the 3 sons of Constantine the Great. 48 Julianus Apostata, 1
year 6 months. 49 Jovinianus, 8 months. 50 Valentinianus, 12 years. Valens his
Brother Caesar.
51 Gratianus, 6 years. Valentinians Caesar. Theodosius Caesar
52 Theodosius, 3 years. 53 Arcadius, 13 years. 54 Honorius, 28 years.
Lieutenants in Britain from Nerva Cocceius, his Entrance into the Government
of the Empire, until the Reign of Honorius the Emperor.
Lieutenants under Nerva and Trajanus.
There is no mention of any Lieutenants in Britain during the time of their
Government.
Lieutenants under Adrian Britt.
Julius Severus. Priscus Licinius.
Lieutenants under Antoninus Pius.
Lollius Vrbicus Britt.
Lieutenants under Antonin. Philos.
Calphulnius Agricola.
Lieutenants under Commodus.
Vlpius Marcellus. Helvius Pertinax. Clodius Albinus. Junius Severus.
Lieutenants under Pertinax.
Clodius Albinus.
Lieutenants under Did. Julianus.
Clodius Albinus.
Lieutenants under Sept. Severus Britt.
Heraclianus. Virius Lupus.
For the time of Basianus Caracalla the Successor of Severus unto Constantine
the Great, there is no mention in approved Histories of any Lieutenants in
Britain.

Deputies under Constantine the Great.
Pacatianus.
Deputies under Constantius the youngest son of Constantine the Great.
Martinus. Alipius.
Deputies under Honorius.
Chrysanthus. Victorinus.
Princes and secular Men of special Note among the Britains.
In the time of Calphurnius Agricola's Government under Mar. Aurel. Antonin.
Philos. Lucius surnamed Lever-Maur, the first Christian Prince in Brittany. In
the Reign of Aurelianus. Bonosus an Usurper of the Empire in Britain. In the
Reign of Constantius the youngest son of Constantine the Great. Magnentius
Toporus, Usurper of the Empire of Brittany.
Archbishops of London from the time of King Lucius until the coming of the
Saxons.
1 Thean. 2 Clavus 3 Cador. 4 Obinus. 5 Conanus. 6 Paladius. 7 Stephanus. 8
Jetut. 9 Dedwinus. 10 Thedredus. 11 Hilarious 12 Guidilinus 13 Vodinus, who
lived when the Saxons first entered the Land.
HItherto has been declared the success of times and affairs in Britain,
under the first twelve Emperors of Rome, the same being recorded by such
Writers as had best means to understand the truth thereof, and were principal
Registers of things done by the Romans in those times; as for the occurrents
ensuing the death of Domitian, until the Reign of Honorius (in whose time the
Roman Government ceased) they are imperfectly reported, or a great part of them
merely omitted, so that I am forced of many things only to make a bare and
brief relation; as unwilling by adding or diminishing, to after in substance
what Antiquity has left us, or fill up blancks with conjectures, or projects
of mine invention (says the Author of the Lib. 3. f 104.
British History) and therefore howsoever this book following (which
comprehends the Acts of many more years then the former) may seem to carry
with it a kind of disproportion from the other two; and likewise in respect of
the style and composition to be somewhat different from them, yet the cause
thereof ought to be imputed to the very matters themselves, being for the most
part Fragments and naked memorials (the loose ends of time) without observation
of circumstance or congruity in substance, which will hardly admit any method
befitting a continued History; and I owe so much love and reverence to truth,
as I would rather expose her in the meanest and worst habit that time has left
her, then by disguising her, to abuse the world and make her seem a Counterfeit.

After the death of Titus Domitian, his younger Brother taking the Empire upon
him, as you have heard before, differed so much from his Brother and Vespasian,
his father before him; that he fell into such great pride and impiety, that he
caused and commanded himself to be called and worshipped as a god, and was the
second after Nero; who setting forth his cruel Edicts, to that end persecuted
the Christians; and the Church of Christ; which cruelty of his, although it did
not extend to our Christian Britains in Rome, still by the Roman Laws enjoying
there their privileges and immunities, from compulsion to square themselves in
matter of Religion, to the Emperial Laws and Edicts; at which time many of
those banished, and persecuted Christians, as in the persecution of Nero
before, as good Antiquaries tells us, fled into this our Britain whether that
persecution did not, nor could extend it self) for refuge and succor; Domitian
being now dead, Nerva revoked all his cruel edicts against Christians, and
recalled such as were banished. Nerva primo edicto suo cunctos exules, Mr. B f.
170.
quos Domitianus relegavit revocari precepit.

Nerva was a Prince much honored for his Virtues, but in what estate the
Affairs of Britain then stood, the Histories of those times make no mention;
either for that the Emperor being a man stricken in years, and disposed to
ease and quietness, employed himself rather in reforming abuses at home, then
in maintaining War abroad, or else for that the short continuance of his
Government, did not suffer him to enter into any great actions in places so
remote; for having held the Empire little above a year, The first election of a
stranger to be Emperor.
he left the same by death to Vlpius Trajanus a Spaniard, whom he had adopted
for his valor and wisdom, being then even the first president for electing
strangers.

In his time some of the Britains desirous to free themselves from the Roman
tyranny, entered into Rebellion, but wanting means to effect what they had
begun, they soon gave over the enterprise; howbeit Aelius Adrianus (who
succeeded Trajan in the Empire) having intelligence that the Northern
Britains made incursions into the Province, sent over Julius Severus to
impeach their attempts; but before he could come to make an end of the War, he
was revoked and sent into Syria, to suppress the Jewish Rebellion; and Adrian
the Emperor himself came with an Army into Brittany, where he encountered the
Northern Riders; recoverd such Forts as they had taken, and forced them to
tetire to the Mountains and Woods, whither the Roman Horsemen without danger
could not pursue them; and then fortifying the borders of the Province, by
raising a wall of Turues, about eighty miles in length (between the mouths of
the Rivers The River Eden in Cumberland.
Stuna and The River Tyne in Northumberland.
Tina) to defend the Inhabitants thereof from the sudden assaults of their ill
Neighbors, he returned triumphantly to Rome; This exploit won much reputation
to the Roman Army, and no small honor to the Emperor himself, who was then
called the Restorer of Britain, and had the inscription figured in the stamp
of his coin.

Now the Britains dwelling within the Province, seemed for the most part
patiently to bear the yoke (which custom had made less painful) and they
obeyed the more willingly, as standing in need of the Romans help against their
own Countrymen, whose cruelty was now as much feared, as in former times the
Invasion of strangers; Whereupon they conformed themselves to the Roman Laws,
both in Martial and Civil Affairs, which were then principally directed by
Licinius Priscus, who had been not long before employed by Adrian the Emperor
in the expedition of Jury, and was at that time Lieutenant.
Propretor of Britain.

This Emperor Adrian, began his Empire about the year of Christ 123. Mr.
Brough. f. 196. 2.
in his first years he was a persecutor of Christians, among whom St. Euaristus
the Pope was by his Authority put to death, and he caused to take away the
memory of Christ, the statutes of Devils to be erected in the place of our
Lords passion; and by Severus Sulpitius and others is termed the fourth
persecutor. In loco dominicae passionis daemonum simulachra constituit; yet
soon he corrected his error therein, forbidding Christians to be punished for
their Religion. Quod sub Hadriano persecutio numeratur. Quam tamen postea
exerceri prohibuit injustum esse pronuncians, ut quisquam reus sine crimine
constitueretur; And wrote so expressly, commanding Minutius Fondanus his
Proconsul in Asia, moved thereto perhaps by Apology, and Oration of Serenus.
St. Quadratus unto him for Christians and the letters of Serius Granianus his
legate in behalf of Christians, declareing their innocence, and S. Aristides
presented the like Apology unto him; and he was so much moved by these men,
that one of our own Historians Writes, that he was thereby instructed and
informed in the Christian Religion. Imperator Hadrianus per Quadratum
Apostolorum discipulum, and Aristidem Atheniensem virum fide and sapientia
plenum ac per Serenum Legatum libris de Christiana religione compositis
instructius est and eruditus; And AElius Lampridius confirms as much more,
when he says, that this Emperor Adrian did intend to receive Christ for God;
and caused Temples in all Cities to be erected without Pagan Idols, which
remained so in Lamprideus time, and were called Adrians Churches, which he
intended to the honor of Christ; but was kept back from performing it, by fear
or flattery of the idolaters, told by their Oracles, that if he proceeded so,
all would become Christians, and their Temples would become desolate and
forlorn; Christo templum facere voluit Alexander, eumque inter deos recipere,
quod and Hadrianus cogitasse fertur, qui templa in omnibus civitatibus sine
simulacris jusserat fieri, quae hodie idcirco quia non habent Numina, dicuntur
Hadriain, quae ille ad hoc parasse dicebatur, sed prohibitus est ab iis qui
consulentes sacra, repererunt omnes Christianos si id optato evenisset, and
templa reliqua deserenda. And these were motives in those days to very many to
embrace Christian Religion, both at Rome, where the mind and judgment of the
Emperor himself (a good Prince) was so known to be convinced by the constancy
and innocence of the Christians, and their unanswerable Apologies for the only
truth of their Religion, and evident error and falsehood of the Pagans
superstitious rites now made manifest in all places. I find in the Chronicles
of Burton, under the year of Grace 141. and time of Adrian the Emperor, that
nine Scholars of Granthe or Granta (now Cambridge,) were baptized in Britain,
and became Preachers of the Gospel there; but whether Taurnius Bishop over the
Congregation of York who (as Vincentius says) was executed about this time,
was one or not, as yet, I do not certainly find. Mr. B. f. 205. out of Will.
Harrison, p. 23


Antoninus Pius succeeded Adrian the Emperor, when ( Lollius, Vrbicus being
Lieutenant) the Northern people made a road into the Province, but were beaten
back by the Roman Forces that lay upon the borders; And then was there another
wall of Turve built by the commandment of the Lieutenant, to strengthen those
parts with a double Rampire; in the mean time a new war was kindled among the
The Ancient Inhabitants of the Countries of York, Lancaster, Durham, Westmer
an, and Cumberland.
Brigants, that annoyed some of the Roman Confederates; but by the discretion
of the General, it was quenched before it came to a flame; for Lollius Vrbicus
upon the first rumor of revoult, marched thither with part of the Army,
leaving the rest behind to guard the borders; and Seius Saturninus, Admiral of
the British Fleet, being well appointed by Sea, lay upon the Northside of the
Isle to defend the Coasts; and (upon occasions to further the Land service) by
this means, the Brigants were easily reduced to obedience, even by the presence
only of the Lieutenant, who for his good service done in Brittany, during the
short time of his employment there, obtained the surname of Britannicus.

Mr. B.
Here give me leave to speak of St. Timothy a Britain of this Nation, by his
holy Mother St. Claudia Sabinella, who as diverse Write, preached in this
Kingdom, sent hither by the Roman Sea Apostolic, must needs be sent here
about this time; for Authors testify he was at Rome, and Martyred in the time
of Antoninus; Romae Sanctorum Martyrum Marci and Timothei qui sub Antonino
Imperatore Martirio coronati sunt; which Antoninus began his Empire in or about
the year of Christ 138.

Mr. B. f. 201.
Antonius surnamed Pius, by Baronnis reckoning, was Emperor twenty two years,
seven months, and twenty six days, annis vigenti duobus, mensibus septem, and
diebus viginti sex, which differs not much from Orosuis and Marianus, who
say, triginti and non plenis tribus annis, And both Marius and Wigormensies
say; Eusebius and Bid gave three months more then 23. years, because it was
the custom of Historians to depute unto the Emperor that year wherein he
dyed; and therefore we may say (say they) that Antoninus Pius did not Reign
full twenty three years, because he lived not until the end of the year;
mensibus item tribus secundum Eusebium and Bedam, hoc est usque ad Calendas
Novembris, in anno 134 post passionem Domini, qui autem mos erat Historicorum
and Imperatori disputeretur annas in quo moreretur vel regno deficeret; Idio
dici potest quod non plenis viginti tribus annis Antoninus Pius regnavit, quum
non usque in finem anni vixit.

Antoninus Pius was so friendly to Christians, that as both Ancient and Modern
Writers witness, he wrote unto all places for them to be free from
persecution; Testatur Melito referente Eusebio Antoninum Pium generaliter ad
omnes civitates pro Christianis scripsisse. And in his Epistle to the people of
Asia; recited at large by Eusebius, Nicephorus, and other Writers, he plainly
affirms; That the Christians had been unjustly punished for worshipping the
one true God, 'mortem ab singularis, and very dei cultum appetere, and adds
further; That their persecutors did not observe the worship of God, and
therefore did envy the Christians which worshipped him, and persecuted them to
death; and that diverse Rulers of Provinces had written to his Father before
against the Christians, to whom he writ again, that they should not trouble
such men, except they could be proved to do any thing against the Roman Empire;
and many having written also unto him of such men, to whom he answered,
according to his Fathers sentence, whom he meant to follow: If any man having
an action against a Christian, and accuses him only as such a man, the
Christian accused shall be absolved, although it be manifest he be such an one,
and his accuser shall be punished in Judgment; And that Christians were far
more Dutiful and Faithful to God, then their Persecutors were. And although
diverse years of this Emperors Reign had passed before he established such
public order for the quiet of Christians, and much persecutions was in the
beginning of his time; yet it cannot be thought to have had Warrant or Original
from him. And it was almost in the beginning of his Empire the third year
thereof (as some write) that Saint Justine wrote and delivered unto him, his
Apology for Christians, and made him friendly unto them, 'Anno gratiae 141.
Justinus Philosophus librum de Christiano Religione compositum Ant^nino
Tradidit eumque benignum, erga Christianis Ifecit. And he was surnamed Pius:
Godly by some judgments for his Piety toward Christians, as well as for other
respects. 'Antoninus Pius geuer Adriani erat, erga Christianos Pius. And he
himself is witness, that he proposed his adopting a Father in law Adrian, so
friendly to Christians, to be imitated by him herein.

ANTONIUS PIUS being dead, Marcus Aurelius, surnamed Philosophus, possessed
the Empire; Calphurnius Agricola was made Lieutenant of the Province, who at
his first Entrance into Office, understood of some new Tumults raised during
the vacation; but partly by policy in preventing occasions, and partly by show
of force (his very name striking the terror into the Inhabitants by reviving
the Memory of Julius Agricola,) he in short time appeased them, deserving
thereby great commendation; though the glory of such Exploits was for the most
part attributed to the Emperors themselves (the labor and peril in attempting,
and commonly disgrace and envy after Victory) remaining only as toward their
Ministers.

This Marcus Aurelius, by the command or direction of Adrian, Mr. Bro. f. 220.
2.
who adopted Antoninus Pius, was to succeed, whom from his Infancy he had
trained up in the Gentiles superstition when he was but eight years old he was
put by Adrian into the College of the Salii; most superstitious Priests of
Mars, and was made a Priest, a chief Prelate or Ruler, a Southsayer and Master
among them. Octavo suae aetatis anno ab Adriano in Saliorum Collegium est
relatus; and in Saliatu functus Sacerdotio, and Praesul, and Vates, and
Magister, and nonnullos inauguravit and exauguravit, nemine praeeunte, quod
ipse carmina didicisset; So that there could be little hope, but this Man so
superstitiously brought up, and such a maker and unmaker of theirs Sacrificers
and Enchanters, would still continue in the same, and profess himself an enemy
to all Impugners of such proceedings as all Christians were, which he performed
when he came to be Emperor, raising a general persecution against Christians,
which to omit, but as it concerned this Kingdom, and the Christians thereof,
the holy house of our glorious Countrywoman St. Praxedes in Rome, which until
then both in the time of Saint Novatus her brother, her holy parents St. Pudens
and St. Claudia, Sabinella or Priscilla, and likely as before under her parents
also Christian, Britains had been a safe refuge, and a sanctuary for the
persecuted Christians, was most cruelly ransacked, Act St. Prax. per St.
Pastor. Martyr. Romans die 26 Maii. Beda, Vsuard. and Ado eodem die. Petr. Catal.
li. 5. c. 58. Baron. Tom. 2. Anna. an. 164. St. Marcellus a Britain.
and twenty two holy Martyrs, together with the sacred Priest Simitrius most
barbarously without any trial, question or judgment presently put to death; of
which blessed Company we may not but think diverse of this Kingdom to have
been, and St. Timothy himself returning from hence to Rome, upon the death of
his brother and sister, St. Novatus and St. Pudentiana was Martyred there, and
before the 62 year of Christ: if we will allow of Matthew of Westminster his
computation, who says, that Justus Bishop of Vienna, after long Exile was
Martyred that year. As for our St. Timothy, St. Pius the Pope, in his Epistle
to St. Justus, writes of the Martyrdom of our St. Timothy; and by no account
he lived not above four years longer, but was Martyred in this time. So by some
accounts our glorious Countryman St. Marcellus, so diligent a procurer of the
Conversion of King Lucius, was Martyred in this persecution. And to heap up the
measures of fears for Christian Britains, this Emperor did not only thus
persecute us abroad but sent Calphurnius Agricola hither into Brittany with
armed Troops, to keep the Britains in subjection, as Roman Pagan Writers term
it, but Britains may say in slavery.

These and such were the worldly temptations which allured King Lucius and many
noble Britains, to be more timorous and lingering to profess the Christian
Faith, with such constancy openly as inwardly they firmly believed and
honored, until the Emperor himself, convicted by the written Apologies, and
Miracles wrought by Christians, was enforced to yield the honor to Christ, and
abstain from persecution, and many of his noble Pagans embraced Christian
Religion. 'Imperator victoriam suam gaudenter attribuit. And this I take to be
the chiefest occasion of the mistakings in some Historians or their Scribes
setting down so many and several times, when King Lucius received the Christian
Faith or professed it; many saying it was in the year of Christ 156. Others in
the year 164. and others 185, as William of Malmesbury and others. Henry of
Hartford 169. and others in other and later times.

That such was the state of Brittany for spiritual Affairs in this Idolatry and
superstition daily diminishing and decaying, and Christian Religion in all
places and persons increasing and multiplying, both Authority and the known
certain effect it self, the surest testimony in such cases shall witness. And
this was the condition thereof until about the beginning of the Papacy of St.
Soter, or in the end of the first year thereof, about the year of our
Redemption 175. when as it appears by the Edict of Marcus Aurelius Emperor,
before the strange delivery of him and his Army by the Christians miraculous
prayers, he suffered many Christians to live in quiet, and had a great number
of them about him; Invenique magnam eorum multitudinem; and seeing himself and
his Army in distress, sent for them and entreated them to pray for his
delivery; Eos qui apud nos Christiani dicuntur ac accersivi ac rogavi Which he
would not have done, being a wise and learned Emperor, but that either by the
Apology of Athenagoras, the Virtues and miracles of many Christians, or some
other invincible Argument, his judgment was then wholly or almost convicted,
that their Religion was holy and they also; and therefore likely to be
powerable with God to procure his safety, which his own prayers and sacrifices
to his Pagan gods were not able to do; 'Deos patrios votis 'susceptis rogavi,
sed cum ab eis negligerer, as himself publicly professed; and therefore
preferring the prayers of the Christians appealed unto them. But after God by
the prayers of the Christians which he procured them to make, had so
miraculously delivered him and his Army, consisting but of four Legions, not 27
thousand Men, environed almost with a thousand thousands of Enemies, as the
common reading is, 'Hostium nonagintorum and septuaginta 'septem millia; and
his people distressed with thirst and hunger, not having drunk in five days, by
sending a most cooling and comforting Rain into the Camp of the distressed
Emperor, and Hail like fire and lightning among his Enemies, confounding and
discomfitting them, he presently sent out his Imperial Letters and Edict,
charging the Senate of Rome to confirm them with their Decree, wherein wholly
ascribing this Delivery of his Army and himself, and confusion of his Enemies
to the God of the Christians and their prayers unto him, wherein he gave free
Liberty for any man to be a Christian. Concedamus talibus ut sint Christiani.
And no Man should be molested for being a Christian for Religion: censeo
neminem quod CHRISTIANVS sit, esse in Crimen vel Judicium vocandum. And he that
should accuse any Christian for Religion, should be burned alive; and that he
that shall profess himself to be a Christian, shall be freed from all danger
intended against him for that cause; and no Governor of any Province shall
punish any such for his Religion, or deprive him of Liberty. Volo eum qui
Christianum accusarit, vivum exuri; illum vero qui se Christianum esse
professus fuerit, periculo omni quod ob eam rem intendebatur, liberatum. Is cui
provincia commissa est, nequaquam ad poenitentiam adigat aut libertatem ei
adimat; And he willed these things to be confirmed by the Senates decree, and
this his edict to be proposed in open market place to be read; and that the
prefect of the City then, Vetrasius Pollio should cause it to be sent to all
Provinces, and no man should be forbidden to write it out, Haec autem Senatus
consulto etiam sanciri volo, atque hoc meum edictum in foro Divi Trajani
proponi ut legi possit; curae autem erit Vetrasio Pollioni praefecto urbis ut
ad omnes provincias haec constitutio mittatur, neque quisquam qui eam
exscribere vel ipse uti voluerit, prohibeatur. This was sent to the whole
Senate of Rome, Senatui Populoque Romano, and by the Emperors public charge
and command, as into other Provinces, so likewise sent into Brittany for the
privilege of all Christians there, by the Emperors public Officer in such
Affairs, the Ruler of the Ctiy of Rome, ad omnes Provincias haec constituo
mittatur. Any man that would, might freely be a Christian; and no man under
pain of cruel death to burnt be alive, might call any into question for that
cause; And to give greater testimony of those things in Britain, and see this
Imperial edict for the freedom of Christians here take place and effect;
whereas our English Antiquaries and others tells us, Floren. Wigorn. Chronic.
anno 159. 181.
that Trebellius and Pertinax, the Roman Lieutenants here about this time were
Christians, our Countryman Florentius VVigorniensis plainly affirms, that
Pertinax was a chief Commander in the Emperors Army, when this miraculous
victory was by the Christians prayers, and this edict written and decreed for
their freedom and liberty, and probably was then converted to the faith by
this miracle: and the Emperor himself, who in his public cited edict, does
say of Christians, that in equity he must think them now to be defended by God,
whom before he accounted for wicked men, and alienated from God, must needs be
a Christian in Conscience and Judgment, and he must needs at the least believe
that true God, whom he said the Christians did bear in their conscience; And in
no wise a learned Emperor could or would, in Judgment, Reason, Equity and
Conscience, make a Law to condemn men to so cruel a death as burning alive,
which he afflicted upon the accusers of Christians, except he knew or probably
thought their accusation was unjust, and the cause of the accused, Lawful,
Just, and Holy.

COILLVS.
COILLVS the Son of Marius, was after his Fathers decease made King of
Britain, in the year of our Lord 125. K. Coillus brought up at Rome.
says Holinshed, Fabian says 126. This Coillus or Coill, had his youthful
education amongst the Romans, in the very Imperial City it self; who being of a
Martial spirit, applied his time to warlike exercises, in which he so excelled,
that he was both admired and beloved by the Romans; and to requite their
favors, and to continue toward him their good affections, he paid without
any grudging or seeming discontent their accustomed Tribute, by which means he
spent his days in peace and tranquillity; he so far excelled in bounty and
liberality, that he drew unto himself the hearts and good wills, both of the
Nobles and Commons. The building of Colchester is ascribed to this King, which
is the chiefest City at this day in Essex, wherein Lucius, Helena and
Constantine, the first Christian King, Empress, and Emperor in the world were
born, which made Nechan to sing as he did.

From Colchester there sprung a star,
The rays whereof gave glorious light
Throughout the world in climates far,
Great Constantine, Romes Emperor bright.
This City is walled about, raised upon a high trench of earth, though now much
decayed, having six gates of entrance, and three posterns in the West wall
besides nine watch Towers for defense, and contains in compass 1980 paces,
wherein stand 8 fair Churches, and two other without the walls for Gods divine
Service; St. Tenants and the Black-fryars decayed in the suburbs, St. Mary
Magdelens, the Nunnery St. John's and the Crochiet Friars suppressed: within
toward the East is mounted an old Castle, and elder ruins upon a trench
containing two Acres of Ground, where as yet may be seen the provident care
they had against all ensuing assault.

This City was graced with the honor of a Viscount, by K. James, who Created
Thomas Darcy, Lord Darcy of Chich 1621. Viscount Colchester in Essex, to him
during his life; the remainder, to Sir Thomis Savage, of Roch Savage, in the
County of Chester Knight and Baronet, who had Married one of his Daughters and
Coheirs.

Thomas Lord Darcy. Argent, 3 cinque foils, Gules. John Savage Viscount
Rochester, Colchester. Argent, 6 Lions ramp. 321 sable.
Now was the time come (namely about one hundred and fourscore years after the
Birth of our Savior,) when Christian Religion which many years together had
been for the most part shadowed with dark clouds of Heathenish superstition,
began to discover it self more openly in this Island by the means of Lucius,
surnamed Lever-Maur; who by permission of the Roman Lieutenant, did govern as
King a great part of the Province; For it appears by the testimony of some
ancient Writers, that Britain received the Christian Faith even in the Infancy
of the Church, immediately after the death of our Savior, whose Apostles and
Disciples (according to his Commandment) published and dispersed the same in
diverse Regions, partly by themselves in their own persons, and partly by their
Ministers, among whom were sent into Brittany Simon Chananaeus that after his
peregrination in Mauritania (as it is reported) was slain and buried in this
Island, Aristobulus a Roman, British History, fol. 108. l. 3. c. 3.
of whom St. Paul in his Epistles makes mention, and Joseph of Arimathea, a
noble Man of Jury specially remembered of Posterity for his charitable Act in
burying the Body of our Savior; This Man was appointed by St. Philip the
Apostle then preaching the Christian Faith in Gallia, to instruct the ancient
Britains, among whom he began first, as some write, to institute an Eremitical
life in a place then called Duellonia, and afterward Glastenbury, where
himself and his Companions imitating the austerity and zeal of solitude, which
they had observed in Mary Magdalen, (with whom they traveled out of Jury unto
Marsilia in France) sequestered themselves from all worldly Affairs, that they
might freely attend to the exercise of piety which they professed; yea some
Writers of former Ages have writ, that the Apostles St. Peter and St. Paul, in
their own persons at several times, came into Britain; and that afterward one
Sueton a noble Man's Son of that Country, being converted by such Christians as
first planted the Faith there, and called (after his Baptism) Beatus, was sent
by them to Rome unto St. Peter, to be better instructed and confirmed in
Christianity, and that in his return homewards through Switzerland, he found in
the Inhabitants there such a desire and readiness to receive the Christian
Faith, as he resolved to continue in that place, where he erected an Oratory to
exercise a Monastical life, and departed the world about the year of Grace 110.
but who were the very first Teachers, and at that time the Christian Faith was
first of all received there, it is not certainly known (says this Author.)
Howbeit it is likely that in the Expedition of Claudius the Emperor, which was
about the third year of his Reign, and twelve years after the Ascension of our
Savior, some Christians of Rome and Scholars of the Apostles themselves became
first known unto the Britains; who in process of time were drawn by the
Exhortations and Examples of their Teachers to embrace the Truth. The
unblamable life of those religious Men, moving sometimes even their Princes
(though yet unbelieving) to protect and regard them, (as is shown in Arviragus
and others) as Lucius then began to do; besides that the Roman Lieutenants
also as well in Britain as in other places, did sometimes tolerate the
exercise of Christian Religion, as not altogether disliking it; howsoever for
worldly respects they forbear to show themselves openly in favor of it. But
Lucius declared his inclination thereunto after another manner. For inwardly
disliking the profane superstition then used among the Romans, by the great
constancy, virtue and patience of the Christians at Rome and other places,
suffering Persecution and Martyrdom for the Faith of Christ, the number of
Christians (whom many men esteemed for the Miracles they wrought) as contrary
to common expectation daily increased: That Pertinax and Tretellius, two worthy
Senators of Rome, had been lately converted from Paganism to Christianity,
that Marcus Aurelius the Roman Emperor then reigning; began to conceive a
better opinion of them, then himself and his Predecessors had done; and so much
the rather by reason that not long before he had obtained a famous victory
against his enemies, the prosperous Event whereof he attributed to the prayers
of the Christians at Rome: Upon these considerations Lucius determined to be
instructed in the Religion which they professed; and first of all commanded
Elevanus and Meduinus (two learned Men of the British Nation) to go to Rome
where Elutherius was then Bishop, to require some meet persons to be sent into
Britain to instruct him and his people; for which purpose Fugatius and
Damianus were specially appointed by Elutherius with all speed to repair
thither, where they afterward not without some danger by tempest upon the Seas
arrived, and applied themselves both by doctrine and examples, to perform the
charge committed unto them, the success therein proving answerable to their
endeavors; for the prince and his Family was by them baptized, some of the
Inhabitants that had formerly received the Faith, were confirmed therein, and
others that remained as yet in their infidelity were converted to Christianity.

But Lucius the Prince having received instructions from the Sea of Rome, for
direction of himself and his people, in the profession and exercise of
Christian Religion, not desirous also to order his temporal estate according
the Roman policy; and to that end solicited Elutherius the Bishop, to send
unto him the Laws of the Empire, out of which he might elect and compose some
certain Ordinances, for the Administration of civil justice; whereupon
Elutherius sent Letters to the Prince, commending therein his former zealous
disposition in embraceing the truth; then exhorting him to read with humility,
and reverence the holy Scripture (the divine Law) which he had lately received
in his Dominions, and out of that, by Gods grace and advice of faithful
Counselors, to collect meet observations, for the framing of Laws necessary
for the preservation of his estate; which observations so collected and Laws
so framed, he did affirm to be much better then the Imperial constitutions of
the Romans, or any other whatsoever: that to make Laws and execute Justice,
was the proper office of a Prince, who was upon earth the Vicar of God himself,
and received from him that Title and Authority, to the end he should use the
same to the good of the Catholic Church, and of the people living under his
obedience; hereupon Lucius began first of all to provide for establishment of
that Religion, whereof he was become at the self same time both a professor
and practiser; Then was the worshipping of Idols forbidden; the seats of the
Arch-flamens at London, York, and Caerlegion, or Caerleon upon Vsk, were
changed into Sees of three Archbishops in the same places; and those of the
Flamens into so many Bishoprics, whereby the Temples vowed by Idolatrous
Priests to profane gods, were consecrated to the service of the only true God;
the temporal estate he also adorned with good and profitable Laws, conformable
to the rule of Christian Religion, whereupon ensued the blessings of plenty and
peace in his days.

It is reported that he was Foundet of a Church at Cornhill in London, which he
dedicated to St. Peter, placeing therein one Thean an Archbishop to have the
superintendence over other Bishops within his principality; and the
Metropolitan seat continued there in the succession of thirteen Archbishops
(about the space of 400 years) until the coming of St. Aug. who translated it
to Canterbury.

And now Christianity being thus Generally received amongst the Britains, kept
on her course, untainted and without opposition, till the time of Dioclesian
the Emperor, who kindled the fire of that raging persecution (the last and
longest in the Primitive Church) which consumed the lives of many Christian
Martyrs, as well in Britain, as other places; but returning to the Reign of
Lucius, and considering the state of Britain under his Government, we may
justly admire the Felicity of those times, ascribing to the Britains for their
greatest glory, that among all other Nations they had the happiness to see and
enjoy the first Christian Prince. Thus far compendiously and succinctly the
British History; but let us peruse a while (to the great renown of the
British Nation) the writings of that late, but rare light of Antiquity, the
day star of his Country, Mr. Broughton, and consider what he expresses
concerning the passages and conversion of King Lucius; thus he begins.

They who write of King Lucius, his Nobles, and Countries conversion, do write
also how he wrote for and entreated it by supplyant letters to Pope Elutherius
(not to Evaristus as some have imagined) Gildas says, that King Lucius was
baptized with all his Nobles of Britain, 164 years after the coming of Christ,
and Nennius says it was three year after; so that whither we will take the
account of Gildas or Nennius, for King Lucius his time of conversion, though
others make a greater difference by 20 years and more, we see that King was
converted 44 years after the death of Evaristus, whom some will have the
Instrument of his conversion; and 54 from his first entrance into the Papacy,
seven Popes, St. Alexander, Sextus, Telesphorus, Higinus, Pius, Anicetus, and
Soter, being between him and St. Elutherius, in whose time by all account, St
Lucius was converted, of which two such renowned Writers could not be ignorant;
much less may we judge without great injury and dishonor unto them, and bold
rashness in our selves, that they would or could err in so high a degree; the
one of them Nennius the meanest styled by our Catalogists of such men, both
ancient and modern, The most excellent Doctor of the Britains, Principal or
Arch-abbot of the renowned Monastery of Bangor, famous both for Wisdom and
Religion. The other St. Gildas, by common consent of all Writers, is styled
Gildas the Wise, or surnamed the Wise.

The first and principal means of the Conversion of K. Lucius is ascribed to
certain learned Scholars of Cambridge: Theater of Brit. l. 6. c. 9. Sect. 9.
Hollins. disc. Brit.
The Theater of Great Britain tells us, That there were Christians at these
times, though some exceptions may be taken against the Monk of Burton, the
Reporter thereof, who says in the year 141, and Reign of Hadrian, nine Masters
of Grantcester were baptized themselves, and preached to others the Gospel in
Britain. The ancient Charter which the Antiquities of Cambridge ascribed to K.
Arthur, do give this honor or a great part thereof to the learned Scholars of
Cambridge, K. Lucius persuaded to be a Christian by the Christians of Cambridge.
which being converted to the Faith of Christ, and diverse of them now become
Clergymen and Preachers, moved K. Lucius by their preaching to be a Christian;
which is more confirmed by the ancient Bull of Pope Honorius, the first of that
Name, to confirm the Privileges of the University of Cambridge 1000 years
since; and other Testimonies there are, that say, that both K. Lucius did
confer and confirm by his public Charter, great Privileges and Immunities to
that School, and Pope Elutherius likewise; Chart. Reg. Arturi, 7. Apr. an. 531.
Bulla Honorii. Acad. Cantab. concess. 20. die Seb. an. Dom. 624. Caius Antiq.
Cant. l 1. p. 75. 76.
which he did not so for any thing we find in Histories, to any other School or
University in the World, nor any of his Successors many years after. The
chiefest motive of these exemtions and prerogatives to that place, we cannot
interpret in any better sense, then that King Lucius had received much
spiritual Benefit from thence, which he requited with temporal honor and
dignity; and the holy Pope Elutherius bestowed such singular grace and favor
to that School for the holy labors and fruitful effects it had wrought in the
Church of Christ by their Conversion and Preaching, moving King Lucius and so
many men of sundry degrees in Britain to forsake superstitious Idolatry, and
embrace the Christian Faith and Religion.

We find some Apostolic Men in this very time to have preached the faith in
Britain to King Lucius himself as well as to his Subjects, and these to have
been of this Nation. Pet. Marsaeus Catal. Epis. Tungren. and Archiepis. Treve.
Among those two are chiefly commended unto us in this business, Saint Timothy
and Saint Marcellinus or Marcellus.

And to begin with St. Timothy, We find that he so far prevailed with King
Lucius, that by his Learning our King was induced to the Religion of Christ:
and to make this Opinion clear, Henricus Panta^eon writes, Math. West. an.
159. Mar. Scel. an. 163. Bar. Tom. 2. Annal. an eod.
That King Lucius of Britain was the Disciple of St. Timothy; for which he
cites the Magdeburgians, Stumphius and the Annals of Curre in Germany. And
Naeuclerus with others writes clearly, That one St. Timothy came into
Britain, and Lucius King of Britain and his Kingdom did receive the Faith of
Christ from him. Mr. Broughton affirms, That this our glorious Countryman St.
Timothy was Son unto the Lady Claudia, and Brother to St. Novatus, St.
Pudentiana and Praxedes. Great honor it was for the first Christian King of
this Nation, the first Christian King in the World, to be instructed in the
Faith by so Noble a renowned Apostle of his own Nation! What were the
Impediments in temporal respects which hindered King Lucius from public
profession of Christian Religion, wherein he was thus instructed until or near
the Papacy of St. Elutherius, shall be showed hereafter.

This St. Timothy was assisted by St. Marcellus a Britain also, and preached
here; and the Annals of the Archbishops of Trevers say of this Man, That Lucius
King of Britain, now England, was baptized by his preaching. The History of
Tungers speaks more plainly, That this St Marcellus did by his preaching
convert Lucius Prince of Britain with all his Nation to Christ. And the same
Catalogue of Trevers says, That King Lucius was made a Christian, and Baptized
by this our Renowned Countryman St. Marcellus.

When the estate of Ecclesiastical affairs had taken in Britain so happy
proceeding and effect, that both our King and many principal men were thus
converted to the Faith of Christ, from their former errors and superstitions,
and so great hope and forwardness there was, to have that faith publicly
professed, which they privately embraced, and acknowledged for the only Truth;
many worldly temptations and oppositions did presently arise to hinder these
new and untrained Soldiers of Christ, to make so bold and open profession of
their holy Religion, as many holy Martyrs at that time, and they themselves not
long after did, and the glory of that required; Diverse humane fears and
impediments now chancing and hindering of K. Lucius from open profession of
Christian Religion in Britain.
for as we may probably with many Antiquities affirm, that the favorable
edicts of diverse Emperors, and among them Antoninus surnamed Pius yet
Reigning, had somewhat encouraged them in temporal respects, actually to be
baptized in that Religion, which their internal understanding and judgment was
by many invincible motives and arguments convinced before to be only true; so
now by like contrary worldly events and letts, they were for some time more
slow and dull to profess it openly. They did perfectly understand, that not
withstanding the pretended and expected favor from the present Emperor,
either by his command or permission, two holy Popes (to omit many other places)
St. Telesphorus and St. Higinus, procurers of their conversion, cruelly were
put to Death for that Religion, even in Rome it self, under the Emperors
sight, within the space of four years or little more, by all accounts: and
because present and home dangers do most terrify, they did see and taste that
the present Emperor Antoninus, was at this time incensed against the
Britains, and had already sent Lollius Vrbicus with forces hither, and he had
Fought some battles against the Britains, as both our own and the Roman
Historians testify.

And to maintain and foster these conceived and engendered humane fears and
impressions, to live and continue longer then Antoninus was like to live, now
being old and long time Emperor, when he came first to the Empire by the
Adoption of Adrian, he was commanded or directed by him that Marcus Aurelius
Antoninus, Act. St. Praxed. per St. Pastor. Vsuard. and Ado. Peter. Catal. l.
5. c. 58. Baron. Tom. 2. An. 164.
whom from his Infancy he had trained up in the Gentiles Superstitions, should
succeed him in the Empire; when he was but eight years of Age, he was put by
Adrian into the College of the Salii, most superstitious Priest of Mars, and
was made Priest and chief Ruler of the Southsayers; So that there could be
little hope but this man so superstitiously brought up, and such a maker and
unmaker of their sacrifices, and an enchanter, would still continue the same,
and profess himself an enemy to all Impugners of such proceedings, such as all
Christians were, which he performed when he came to be Emperor, raising a
general persecution against Christians; which to omit, but as it concerned this
Kingdom, and the Christians thereof, the holy house of our glorious
Countreywoman, St. Praxedes in Rome, which until then, both in the time of St.
Novatus her brother, her holy parents St. Pudens and St. Claudia, Baron. Tom.
2. an. 166.
Sabinella or Priscilla, and likely before as under her parents, also Christian
Britains, had been a safe refuge, and as a sanctuary for persecuted
Christians, was now cruelly ransacked, and tweny two holy Martyrs, together
with the sacred Priest St. Simitrius, most barbarously without trial, question,
judgment, presently put to death; of which blessed company we may not but
think diverse of this Country to have been, and St. Timothy himself returning
from hence to Rome, Julius Capil. Marc. Aurel.
was there Martyred, if we may believe Matthew of Westminster his computation.

Ibid. Virgil. in Hist. Angl. l 2. p. 42.
These and such were the worldly temptations which allured King Lucius, and many
Noble Britains to be more timorous and lingering, to profess the Christian
faith with such constancy openly, as inwardly they firmly believed and
honored, until the Emperor himself convicted by the written Apologies and
Miracles wrought by Christians, was enforced to yield the honor to Christ, and
abstain from persecution, and many of his noble Pagans embraced the Christian
Religion; Tertul. Apol. c. 6. Eusebius. Eccle. Hist. l. 5. c. 5. Math. West. an.
174.
and this I take to be the chiefest occasion of mistaking in some Historian or
their Scribes, setting down so many and several times when King Lucius received
the Faith of Christ. or professed it: many saying it was in the year of Christ
156. others in the year 164. others 165. as William of Malmesbury with others.
Henry of Hartford in the year 169. and others in other and later times, All
which be true if we speak of the Religion of Christ which he held and believed
from the very first of these assigned times; but for his and his Nobles public
profession thereof, and the Kingdom generally receiving it, with building of
Churches, placing of Christian Bishops and Priests in them, and abandoning the
superstitious rites of pagan Gentiles, we must expect a later date in the time
of Pope Elutherius. And this holy Pope had, long before he was Pope, the often
occasion of K. Lucius; and others here writing and sending to Rome about this
public work might occasion some error in the Titles of Letters to Elutherius,
when he was not yet Pope, but in high estimation with the Popes there, as a
principal learned and holy Priest of the Church of Rome, as appears in the
first Epistle of St. Pius to Justus Bishop of Vienna, wherein he only sends
him Salutations from St. Soter after Pope, and Elutherius, as the chiefest
Priests then in Rome, and so he recommendeth them; which Epistle was written,
Pius Epist. 1. ad Justum Vien. Epist. Tom. 1. Biblioth. Sanct.
and this honor given to St. Elutherius by that holy Pope almost twenty years
before Elutherius was Pope. And yet he must needs be a renowned Man long before
that time, and so no marvel if diverse Letters were written to him from
Britain, and from him hither before his Papacy; especially if we reflect and
consider how probable a thing it is that he was most resident with our
Christian Britains there, and the Popes of that time committed unto him to
have a peculiar care of this Country, with his great credit and familiarity
with Pope Pius conversing so much with our Britains there, Eusebius. Hist. and
Chronic. Math. West. an. 157. Ethelwerd. Chronic.
and with such principal Men as were sent into these parts, such as St. Justus
of Vienna then was, will induce to think. And our own Annals do sufficiently
witness, that the Fame and Renown of St. Elutherius was great here in Britain
before he was chosen pope. And that this his glory was so great in Britain
before he was Pope, those our both ancient and later Historians prove, which
say, that King Lucius wrote unto him the first year of his Consecration, to
take order for the general conversion of this Kingdom. Mr. B f. 221. Man.
Scot. aetat. 6. in Eluth.
So does the most authentical and approved relation of this History testify,
that it was in the very beginning of his Papacy that King Lucius sent those
Letters and solemn Embassage unto him about this business, which plainly
proves that same and honor of St. Elutherius so well known in Britain, did
not now begin here with his papacy, but was of far more ancient continuance and
antiquity. For the very beginning of any ruler or Governor cannot give him so
singular a commendation so soon, especially where his Regiment is so great and
ample, that in so short a time he can hardly take notice of the state of those
things which belong unto his charge, much less take so good order for them
all, that his Fame and Honor should be for that doing reported in all the
World. And King Lucius sending unto him in the first year of his papacy, and
the very beginning thereof, could not possibly have notice of his so renowned
carriage therein, consult with all his Nobles, Flamens and Arch-flamens so
dispersed in this so large a Kingdom, and have their general consent, for a
general conversion, and send notice of this by solemn Ambassadors so long a
journey to be there in the beginning of his papacy: but that this great honor
and fame of St. Elutherius was here renowned long before, and this public and
general assent to forsake idolatry and embrace Christian Religion had been
formerly concluded and agreed upon in Britain; and very probably as our
Cambridge Antiquities have told us, not only St. Timothy was sent or returned
to Rome about this business but Eluanus and Meduvinus also, as they write,
being but Catechumens to be instructed and consecrated there toward the
performing so great a work in this Kingdom.

Neither can we with equality of judgment think, that among so many Britains
now converted or so disposed here, these two only went from hence thither to
such end and purpose: But although these be the only men remembered in
Histories to have been there employed, as more worthy, or else designed and
sent by King Lucius; yet there went many others about this time from Britain
thither, the better to enable themselves for a general Conversion of this their
Country, and there continued to enable themselves with Learning and Religion,
to be made fit Instruments and Workmen in those holy Labors, and were therein
assisted both by the popes of those times (much conversant with our Country
Britains, and in their Houses at Rome) and others the most Renowned in the
Clergy at that time, among whom St. Elutherius after Pope and happy Converter
of this Nation was a chief Man. (...) Lud in their opinion which held the Title
Cardinal, was given to that holy Priest, Onupheius Panuin. l. de Episc. Titul.
and Diac. Cardinal. Damasus and alii in Cleto Evaristo Higenio.
which was the chief and most eminent commanding Priest in every Church; or
Titulus in Rome, according to the Institution and Ordinance of the Holy Popes,
Saint Cletus, Saint Evaristus, and Saint Higinus, (in whose time we now are) I
cannot but probably think that Saint Elutherius, so high in Dignity and Renown,
both with Saint Higinus and Pius, and his brother Saint Pastor, to whose
disposing and distribution the first Titles or Churches in Rome (founded by our
Christian Britains, and still called by their names, Saint Pudentiana, and
Saint Praxedes, and to this day giving the names of Honor to the Roman
Cardinals so styled) were left, was an eminent Cardinal and chief Priest
presently after this time, S. Pastor. Epist. ad Timoth. Epist ad Pasto. To. 1.
Bib. Sanct. and Tom. 1. Annal. Bar. Pius Epist. ad Justum. Fox Acts and Mon. l.
1. p. 5
in one of those our British Churches in Rome, which among other bonds tied
him so firmly in love to this Nation, and this Nation to him, that he is so
often honored in Titles of Letters and otherwise, by our Antiquaries above all
other Popes; Some add another testimony, which if it be true, it greatly makes
for the especial honor wherewith our Historians adorned him; thinking that
Saint Elutherius came personally into Britain and preached here: and this is
that opinion which Mr. Fox thus remembers, Timotheus in his story thinks
that Elutherius came himself, which wants not probable Arguments if they
speak of his preaching here beforn he was Pope, sent hither by St. Timothy our
Countreyman or some others sent by any of the Popes before him.

Mr. Howes says that King Lucius sent two Ambassadors, Elevanus and Meduvinus
(Britains most probably, though great controversies be amongst Antiquaries
concerning the truth thereof) two learned men in the Scriptures, with his
loving Letters to Elutherius Bishop of Rome, desiring him to send some devout
and Learned men, by whose instruction both he and his people might be taught
the Faith and Religion of Christ; Howes f. 38. in Lucio.
whereof Elutherius being very glad, baptized these two Messengers, making
Eluanus a Bishop, and Meduvinus a Teacher, and sent also with them into
Britain two Famous Clerks, Faganus and Damianus, by whose diligence Lucius and
his people of Britain were baptized and instructed in the Faith of Christ;
There is (says the same Author) and remains till this day in Somersetshire
in the Deanery of Dunster, a Parish Church bearing the name of Saint Dervian,
as a Church either by him Founded, or to him Dedicated; so likewise is there
another in Glamorganshire called Saint Fagans, where every year is a very great
Fair continuing many days, where also my honored Patron, the Right Noble
William Jews of the Van Esquire; Son to Sir Edward Jews, and the Right Honorable
Lady Beauchamp, Daughter of the Earl of Dorset, has a stately Habitation, and
if I mistake not, is Lord of the Manor.

Betwixt this Elutherius and King Lucius many Letters passed, and the said
Bishop granted many privileges to Universities and places of learning in
Britain; as to Cambridge, Stanford, Cricklade or Greeklade, and in
Glamorganshire (I suppose this place was either Caerwent or Caerleon, for all
which is now called Monmouthshire, was then called Glamorgan) where they say
learning flourished, as well as at Cambridge, before the coming of Julius
Caesar; Mr. Bro. f. 270.
and the School of Glamorgan being so near Caerleon upon Vsk in that Country,
where one of the three great Idolatrous Temples of Britain, and seat of the
Archflamen of those Western provinces was, and thereby a Nursery of Paganism,
which those holy men labored by all means to root out; and for that cause,
where Archflamens were, Archbishops were placed; and where Flamens, Bishops.

The British Histories, Ponticus Virunnius and others, say of these Prelates,
that they delivered the Britains from Idolatry, and converted them to Christ;
Radulphus de Diceto in his manuscript History proves as much, that they
converted all the Cities of Britain, as well as their Flamens and Archflamens,
by whom they were directed in their Idolatrous worship as others; And the
principal states and members of this Kingdom, King Lucius, his Nobles,
Universities, Philosophers, Flamens and chief Priests and Teachers of the
Pagan Subjects, and their chief places of commorancy and command, being thus
converted, the conquest over the Vulgar sort was easy and soon effected. The
Author of the British History testifyeth, Mr. Br. f. 271.
that so soon as the people of Britain knew that their King was a Christian,
they gathered themselves together to be Catechized, and received Baptism; and
that those holy Legates did blot out Paganism almost through all the Island;
and Ponticus Virunnius says, that they baptized all the people of Brittany;
all this may easily be confirmed by diverse Authors; but I will conclude with
Harding.

Eluthery the first at supplication
Of Lucius, sent him two holy Men,
That called were Fagan and Dungen,
That Baptized him and all his Realm throughout,
With hearts glad and labor devout.
There were then twenty eight Flamens and three Arch-flamens to whose power
other Judges were subject; and these by the command of the Pope his Legates
delivered from Idolatry; and where there were Flamens, they placed Bishops;
where Arch-flamens, Archbishops. The Seats of the Arch-flamens were in the
three most noble Cities, London, York and the City of Legions, which the old
Walls and Buildings do witness to have been upon the River of Vsk in Glamorgan.

King Lucius sent to Elutherius not only for his assistance in spiritual
matters, but also in his temporal, Mr. Br. f. 301. 6. Bridges defense l. 16. p.
1355. Galf. Mon. l. 2. c. 17. Bro. Virunnius, Stow Hollinshed.
as the governing his people and making wholesome Laws. The Laws which were
established here, were the old Britains Laws, ascribed for their greatest
part to Mulmutius Dunwallo, corrected and made conformable to holy Christian
Religion. We have all kind of Antiquities, British, Saxon, French, Italians,
Ancient and Modern for Witnesses. These Laws were translated out of British
into Latin long before this time by the ancient Gildas, that lived about the
time of the Birth of CHRIST, as many both ancient and late Writers agree, and
continued here till late time, and in diverse respects at this present.

King Lucius being thus informed and secured in conscience by Saint Elutherius
his Letters and by his Declaration, that the whole Kingdom of Britain with
the Islands belonged to his temporal charge and government; and that so much as
he could, he was to win his Subjects to the Faith and Law of Christ and his
holy Church, and provide for the peace and quiet of the same and the Members
thereof: he did first in receiving and admitting these new corrected Laws by
the advice of the Clergy and Nobles of his Kingdom see them so qualified, that
they were for the defense and propagation of Christian Religion; and further,
Founded many godly, costly and memorable Monuments, as Churches, Universities,
or Schools, Monasteries, and other such comforts, helps and furtherances of
that holy end. So that as he was the first King that publicly with his
Kingdom professed Christ, so he won the honor to be the first Nursing Father
among Kings of his holy Church, as the Prophet had foretold, Kings shall be thy
Nursing Fathers.

He was also first among Kings called properly the Vicegerent of God, being the
first King which so religiously performed his will. And that Title which the
Pope gave to King Henry the 8. when he was better then he proved after,
Defender of the Faith, was among Kings the first due and right of King Lucius,
for his so heroical and Religious fortitude and magnanimity in defending the
Faith and Church of Christ.

Being now come to celebrate the day of the death of our glorious King Lucius,
for the joy that he enjoyed thereby, Mr. Br. f. 346. 1.
and bewail it for the unspeakable loss this Nation received thereby, we are
to fall into some difficulties both of the time and place thereof.

William of Malmesbury in his Manuscript-History of Glasten. and other old
Antiquities do prove, that St. Damianus and Faganus after they had converted
this Kingdom, continued nine years at Glastenbury at the least; King Lucius
still living and reigning here. Polidor, Lilly, Hollinshed, Stow and others,
cleave to this Opinion.

A great Controversy arises where this King died; many Foreign Authors say,
That he forsook his Crown and Kingdom, and became a Clergyman, went into
Germany to convert that Nation, was Bishop of Curre and there was Martyred: the
day of his death is agreed upon by all, to have been on the third day of
December; but if those Authors who transport this our blessed King into
Germany, look but upon what has been said before, they shall find that it was
not Lucius who was actually King of Britain, and converted by the means of St.
Elutherius, but another Lucius who was indeed Son of a King of Britain, and
might have been King himself, had he not been banished for the reason before
related: and this was that St. Lucius who with his sister St. Emerita were both
Crowned with the glorious Crown of Martyrdom in Germany.

That our first Christian K. Lucius could not be Bishop of Curre is evident;
for having been so long King here, he was so disabled for Age, that he was nor
capable of such a journey. Further, they which hold he was Bishop of Curre in
Germany, and Martyred there, say his Martyrdom was about the year of Christ
182. whereas this our King was living nine years after; besides, they say that
St. Emerita was his sister.

But it is evident by our Histories, that our first Christian King Lucius had
neither brother, sister, nor child begotten by King Coillus in his old Age,
having no other Child; whereby it is evident, that this King Lucius had neither
brother nor sister; and with what probability can it be affirmed, that a King
so holy and loving of his Countries good and quiet, having no Christian Heir to
suceeed him, would or in conscience could forsake his Native Country and
Subjects in such a case, that were in justice belonging to his chiefest charge,
which no other could execute, to preach unto Foreigners, which many of his
Subjects and others could, and at his request most willingly would have
performed.

We read in Histories that many descended of Regal race, have in such cases
been taken forth of their Monasteries and Religious Conversation to govern
Kingdoms destitute of Heirs; but that a King so virtuous, wise, loving, and
beloved of his Country, having no such Heir to succeed him, but by such course
to expose and leave his Kingdom to so many certain miseries and calamities, as
fell upon Britain by the death of King Lucius, and probably were foreseen of
all wisemen, did, might, would, or could take such a course, Antiquities have
no example, Justice denies it, Charity cannot allow it. Seb. Munster. Cosmog.
l. 3. c. 344. Mr Bro. f 349. Coxion Hist. part. f in K. Lucius. Manu. Hist.
Antiq. in Luco.
Sebastian Manster says plainly, that whereas there is a Vulgar report (he
makes no more of any Lucius preaching there) that one Lucius preached there,
if it were so, it could not possibly be our first Christian King Lucius; for he
never went out of Britain, but very Godly lived and dyed here. Gaspar Bruchius
does also plainly reject all that History, as it is applied by some to our
Lucius, and among other reasons adds, that the great difference of years,
will not permit it to be true. An old French Manuscript joyneth in the same,
leaves him living, dying, buried in Britain. And if we come home to our own
Historians and Antiquities, most likely to make the most true and certain
relation of this their so renowned King, they set down the year, the day,
Antiq. Eccles. St. Petri Cornhil. Harding Cron. c. 51. f. 44.
and particular place of his death, and the very Church, one of his own
foundation, where his body was interred: the day and year they say was the 201.
year of Christ, the third day of October. For the place our old British
History says, he dyed at Gloucester, and was with honor buried there in the
Cathedral Church; so likewise writes Ponticus Virunnius. Matthew of
Westminster setting down the time, as before, says, he dyed at Gloucester, and
was honorably buried there in the Cathedral. The old Manuscript of St. Peter's
Church in Cornhil, at London, avoucheth from diverse Antiquities, that he was
buried at Gloucester, where the Church of St. Francis was after builded, being
at the time of his death, the Cathedral and Episcopal Church of the City. John
Harding also witnesses of this Kings death and burial at Gloucester.

At Caerglove buried after his dignity.

And not to exclude the testimony of our later writers in this relation, in
their Theater of Great Britain, written and composed by diverse able
Historians, Theater of great Britain l. 6. c. 9. sect. 18.
and published with common applause, they make this History of King Lucius his
death in Britain, a matter without question true, and thus scoffingly condemn
those writers, which would carry him to end his days in Germany: That this
Lucius be the Apostle of the Banarians, or that his sister Emerita was crowned
with the flames of Martyrdom, Harrison disc. of Britain. Stow and Howes Hist.
fifteen years after his death, I leave to the credit of Aegidius Schudus, and
Hermanus Schedelius the Reporters: Others of them plainly say: Lucius was
buried at Gloucester: yet this general consent of Antiquaries, for his first
burial at Gloucester does nothing hinder, but as the known devotion, both of the
Britains, as Saxons after them, toward holy Relics did often and with great
devotion and solemnity remove the bodies of holy Saints, or parts of them for
their greater honor. So it might, or did after fall out with the whole body of
this renowned King, or some part thereof. And the Tradition of Winchester is,
that the whole body of King Lucius, or a great part thereof being, once removed
before, (probably to Caerleon, for some say he was buried there) was the second
time translated thither, and there lies in the body of the great Church under
a marble stone, elevated about two foot from the pavement, the same stone being
now broaken in two places, having upon it, and those holy Relics, a cross of
seven great brass buttons, whereof 5. are set down in length the other two
making the perfect figure, and form of the cross, one on each side of the
others making the length. And this Reverend Translation of St. Lucius his body
to diverse places in Britain, is sufficiently insinuated by the old Author of
the French Manuscript History, who although he confidently affirms that King
Lucius dyed at Gloucester, yet he adds that he was afterward buried in the
chief See at Caerleon, and this he says was in the year of Christ's
incarnation, 196. four or five years sooner then others before have set down
his death, except the Manuscript Compilation, which has the same computation
of his death, saying, Sepultus est anno Incarnationis Domini 196. herede
carens, he was buried in the 196. year after the incarnation of our Lord,
wanting Issue or heir.

And both to assure us further of the undoubted truth of those Histories, which
testify the death and burial of St. Lucius to have been in Britain, and not
in any foreign Region, as also to give us better notion and trial, what
honor, peace, and quiet, spiritual and temporal, with other happiness, this
Kingdom enjoyed by King Lucius life, and lost them by the loss of him: it is
the constant agreement of Antiquities, that Britain now made by his death
destitute not only of so worthy a King, but also of any certain heir or
successor of that Regal race, fell to intestine discord and variance, by which
it was miserably afflicted long time upon that occasion: a late Author tells
us, King Lucius dyed without issue, by reason whereof after his decease, the
Britains fell at variance, which continued about the space of fifteen years,
as Fabian thinks, howbeit the old English Cronicle affirms, that the
contention among them remained fifty years, though Harding affirms but four;
which his words of Hardings opinion, that this variance among them continued
but 4. years, are to be amended; for Harding sets down the dissensions of
the Britains, as other Historians do, and makes them of as long continuance
only, he says that Severus the Emperor came hither four years after the death
of King Lucius to seek to appease things, so does Matthew of Westminster,
Florentius and others as far as Harding does.

This holy King, granted, made and signed, many writings, Charters and
Donations, for the defense, maintenance and preservation of Religion, and the
chief teachers, and professors thereof, as to the University of Cambridge, the
School of Bangor, Monastery of Salisbury and such others, and to every
Archiepiscopal or Episcopal See in Britain, both for the assuring the old
revenues and privileges of the Archflamens and Flamens as others new and more
ample, which he conferred unto them, and such as should sit and succeed them
for ever.

And we find in Antiquities, that in the very time of King Lucius, besides the
Cathedral Churches in Great Cities, there were others also builded in them, as
namely Gloucester, Worcester, Caerleon, and others; for we read of diverse kinds
of Churches in them all, both Cathedral and others: King Lucius was buried at
Gloucester in the Church of the Chief or first Order. The same distinction is
given for Winchester, which necessarily infers other Churches, or a Church
in either of them of inferior Order; for the word first proves a second; for
the Inferior Churches, besides the Cathedral in Caerleon they are remembered in
Histories, ( Viz. of St. Julius, and St. Aaron) so of other Cities not
inferior unto these, Gloucester being then but a new, and no great City: we
find others, as at Abington in Oxfordshire, Amsbury in Wiltshire, Cambridge,
Stanford and other places, where to have been Christian Churches in that time,
there is still sufficient testimony left us. Mr. Bro. 307. 5. Gal Mon Hist. l.
5 c. 1. Math. West. an. 201. Bulla Honorii an. 624. Chart. Regis Cadw an 685.
Chart. Reg. Art. An. 531. die. 7. apud Caium l. 1. de Antiq. Cont. John Harding
Chron c. 25. fol. 22. John Ross Hist. Manus. Jo Caius Apol. A ca. Cantib and de
Antiq l. 1. Will. Harri. Dis: B^i^ c. 3. T^. of Universitie. p. 146. (...) H
st. Bladud Bal. pref. in l de scrip. Twin. l. de Antiq. Ox. Ha ^is sup a Ha ^s
manu. G aston Chron. Bal l. de ser. Brit cent 1. in Congello. Barnachoren. Gal
Mor Hist. Brit l 1. c. 12. Math. West. an. 603. Harding. Chron. c. 50. f. 42 p.
2. Ma. h. West an. 124. Harding Chron. c. 51. f. 43. H^llershed H st. of Brit.
fol. 57.
And to provide as well for the continual maintenance and repair of the house
of God, at the first founding and building thereof, these ancient Schools or
Universities of this Kingdom, which all now had received the faith and Religion
of Christ, and so were to be as Seminaries and Mothers of Christian Divinity
and holy learning, for preservation and upholding of Gods Church, King Lucius
endowed with great privileges and Immunities, that they might more quietly and
diligently employ themselves to their so profitable and holy studies.

This his Charter of privileges to the University of Cambridge, the
Antiquaries thereof prove by diverse Ancient Testimonies. The Bull of Pope
Honorius 1000. years ago: the Charter of King Cadwalladrus, and King Arthur
long before, wherein is contained that he granted to the University of
Cambridge, as King Lucius with other Kings had done before, to be free from all
public Vectigalls, and burdens, that they might the more freely and quietly
attend their studies. The like I may affirm of Stanford, which from the time of
King Bladud, until it was interdicted by St. Gregory for the Pelagian heresy,
continued an University, so of Glamorgan claiming but a little later original,
Greeklade and Liechlade of such Antiquity, Bellisilum now Oxford as it
pleads. Therefore whereas a late writer confidently says, there were 600.
Students, in ancient times, and others not so well remembered; to all which now
converted to the faith of Christ, and training up spiritual Soldiers for the
defense, profession and maintenance thereof, we have sufficiently grounds to
affirm, King Lucius gave the like privileges as unto Cambridge, one and the
same reason being for all, and yet besides these, which he found founded
before, he himself was founder of others, namely Bangor in Wales, which long
continued in that State, until it was after changed into so great a Monastery,
that above 2000. Moncks, as our Histories testify abode there. A late Author
tells us of another University, for so he calls it by the name of Accademia
Legionensis, the University of Caerlegion, which he would to have to be
Westchester, others rather take it to be Caerlegion upon Vsk in Glamorgan,
making it a fourth distinct place from the Metropolitan Church, and the several
Churches of St. Julius, wherein were sacred Nuns, and St. Aaron of Canon
Regulars.

In the time of Sixtus Bishop of Rome, reigned here in Britain, either Coillus
or Lucius his son, according to the diversity of opinions of several Authors;
but seeing all Antiquities and Antiquaries confess so many great and renowned
things, and of such labor and difficulty to have been performed, for receiving
generally Christian Religion and abandoning the Pagan superstitions in this
Kingdom in the time of K. Lucius, we must not keep the crown of Britain from
him, long after the death of Pope Sixtus. Harding who says his Father Coillus
reigned but 13. years, will make him King, all this Popes time, which Matthew
of Westminster does confirm, with four years addition at least to the time of
his reign, in the time of Pope Alexander before: And yet he makes the years of
his whole age, but 87 from which, if we deduct the whole term between the year
124. when the Monck of Westminster, says Lucius began his reign, until the
year 142. or 143. when St. Sixtus was Martyred, to prove by all accounts, King
Lucius reigned in some part of the Papacy of Pope Sixtus, we make the time of
his reign, being very young at the death of his Father, not so many years as
some ascribe; John Harding says, Lucius King of Britain reigned 54 years,
others allow but 53 years.

Hollenshed in his History of England tells us, that Lucius having brought his
people to perfect light and understanding of the true God, that they needed not
to be deceived any longer with the crafty temptations and feigned miracles of
wicked spirits, he abolished all profane worshippings of false Gods, and
converted such Temples as had been dedicated to their service unto the use of
the Christian Religion, and thus studying only how to advance the glory of
almighty God, and the knowledge of his word, without seeking the vain glory of
worldly triumph, which is gotten with slaughter of many a guiltless person, he
left his Kingdom, though not enlarged with broader Dominion then he found it,
yet greatly augmented and enriched, with quiet rest, good ordinances and (that
which is more to be esteemed then all the rest) adorned with Christian
Religion, and perfectly instructed with his holy word and doctrine. He reigned
as some write 21 years, though others affirm but twelve. Again some testify
that he reigned 77. others say 54. and Harrison 43. King Lucius dyed without
issue by reason whereof ensued much trouble as is said before.

Concerning the first inclination of K. Lucius to christian Religion in the
time of Pope Higinius, Mr. Broughton thus discourses, Although I do not find
it expressly affirmed by any Antiquary but Harding, that St. Higinius in that
time Bishop of Rome did so particularly give assistance and direction in this
business of our Britains conversion, yet many and very renowned Writers give
such testimony therein that we must needs grant that to be most true which
Harding affirms, and that after-coming Scribes and Copiers of their Histories
have done the Authors wrong by their negligence or ignorance in writing one man
for another, Elutherius for Higinius: for among others Saint Bede as he is
extant, says, that King Lucius of Britain did write to the Pope of Rome in
the year of the Incarnation of our Lord 156. that by his order and command he
might be a Christian. The M. S. Antiquities of the Church of Landaff more
ancient in probable judgment then Saint Bede, and written by a Britain, which
should not be ignorant in that the greatest business of his Country, gives
the same testimony of the same year 156. The ancient author of the British
History also a Britain makes K. Lucius a christian in and before this year
156 in direct terms. So Testifyeth the old History called Brutus, ancient
Records belonging to Guild Hall in London, the Antiquities of St. Edwards
laws, Goceline in the life of St. Aug. so writes Naucl. and diverse ancient
manuscript writers, which I have seen, says the learned Mr. Br.

This was the state of the Church in Britain, when new troubles began to the
disturbance of the Province. For the Northern Britains making a breach in the
wall, Mr. Br. fol. 210.
which Adrian the Emperor had built, and finding the borders but weakly
guarded entered the province, and surprised the Roman General and killed many
of his Soldiers, then ranging the Countries they wasted and spoiled everywhere
without resistance, till Vlpius Marcellus, being sent over by Commodus the
Emperor, stayed the fury, and with great difficulty forced them to retire
within the wall, by which means the Province being quieted, he applied himself
to reform abuses in his Camp, reviving the ancient discipline of war, which
had been for a time discontinued among the Roman Soldiers, whom long service
and many victories had made bold to say and to do oftentimes more then became
them. For Marcellus indeed was a man something austere in reproving and
punishing, otherwise very temperate, diligent in time of war, not idle in
peace, his diet was the same which the common Soldier used, in quantity more
sparing; for he would eat no bread, but such as was brought from Rome, which he
did to the end he might avoid excess, and take no more then sufficed nature,
the staleness of his bread having taken away all taste that might either please
the sense or provoke the appetite. The day time for the most part he spent in
viewing his camp, and training young Soldiers, and giving direction to
Officers. In the night he wrote letters and made dispatches into diverse parts
of the Province (as occasion required.) He slept very little by reason of his
thin diet, and much business, wherewith he was continually occupied; for he
thought that man who slept a whole night together, was no meet man to be either
a Counselor to a Prince or a Commander of an army. Every evening he used to
write instructions upon twelve Tables made of Linden tree, which tables he
delivered to one of his servants appointing him to carry them at sundry hours
of the night, to certain of his Souldies, who thereby supposing that their
General was still waking and not gone to bed, were the more careful in keeping
the watch, and preventing sudden attempts in the night season: he was severe
in execution of Justice, not to be led by favor, nor to be corrupted with
bribe; he levied moneys, only as necessary for the war, not to enrich himself
or his friends, as other Governors in former times had done; for he never
preferred his own private before the public, nor a wealthy estate before an
honorable reputation. The fame of those virtues as they made him much
respected, both of his own Soldiers and the Britains, so they procured Envy
which always follows virtue inseparably as a shadow does the body. For
Commodus the Emperor understanding how Marcellus had carried himself in
Britain was much displeased therewith, and thought it best to cut him off: but
some accidents happening in the mean time to make him change that purpose, he
only sent letters of discharge and so dismissed him of the Office.

After departure of Marcellus the army having been kept in by hard hand, and
finding now the reine let loose, upon a sudden began to be mutinous, and
refused to acknowledge Commodus for their Emperor; these disorders Perennius
one of his favorites took upon him to redress, by displacing such persons as
he suspected, and committing their Offices to Men of meaner quality, wherewith
the Legions were much discontented? disdaining that instead of Senators, and
Men of consular degree, they should now be governed by upstarts and base
companions. In the heat of those broils, about fifteen soldiers forsook the
Army and went to Rome, where they exhibited to the Emperor, a bill of complaint
against Perennius whom they charged as the chief Author of the dissension in
the Army, by bringing in new customs, by exceeding his commission, and doing
things derogatory to the Majesty of the Roman Empire. These and other things
(as well false as true) were objected against him by the multitude, who for the
most part dislike such as exercise authority over them, and keep no measure in
their affections, either in love or hatred. But that which touched to the
quick, was an accusation of treason, put up against him for conspiracy against
the life of the Emperor, and in seeking to advance his Son to the Empire: this
point was quickly apprehended by Commodus who thought that the suspicion of the
fact, or the report only to have intended, it was a sufficient cause of
condemnation, howsoever the party accused was either indeed guilty or innocent.
Hereupon Perennius was declared Traitor, and delivered to the Soldiers, who
stripped him of his apparel, whipped him with rods, and in the end cruelly
murdered him.

Then Helvius Pertinax (a Man of mean fortune by Birth, as having risen from
the State of a common Soldier to the dignity of a Commander) was sent into
Britain to appease the tumults there. He was one of them that Perennius had
before discharged from bearing office, and sent into Liguria where he was born.
At his first entrance he attempted by force to suppress the rebellion of the
army, adventuring so far in a skirmish, that though he escaped with life, yet
was he left among the dead, and supposed to be slain. Afterward proceeding
with better advice and success, he composed the troubles, severely punishing
the principal offenders, and using some rigor in revenging his own injuries,
by which means growing odious to the Soldiers, and distrusting his own safety,
he made suit to be discharged of the Lieutenantship.

Then was the government of the Province assigned to Clodius Albinus, a Man of
Noble birth, very forward, and for the most part fortunate in his attempts, for
which the Emperor Commodus, either upon fear or favor did honor him with the
title of Caesar, though Albinus seemed unwilling to accept it, and afterward
discovered his disposition more openly in affecting the ancient free State. For
upon a false report of the death of Commodus, he made an Oration to the Legions
in Britain, in favor of the Senate, whose Government he had commended, and
preferred the same before that of Emperors. But Commodus being advertised
thereof, sent Junius Severus with all speed to take charge of the army. This
Emperor Commodus though he were a most wicked man, exceeding all that went
before him in impiety, Mr Bro. 247. 1.
as Marcus Maximus, Lampridius, and in them the whole Senate of Rome with
others are witnesses, yet as a scourge of God to the persecutors of Christians,
he oppressed them, and was favorable to Christians, never molesting them,
whether it was at the mediation of Marcia a Woman whom he exceedingly affected,
and was as Dio says, most friendly to Christians, Christianorum studiosissima,
or otherwise, I do not examine; he remained Emperor all Pope Elutherius his
time.

In the mean time Albinus retired himself from affairs till Commodus was dead,
and Pertinax elected Emperor, then he continued himself with Didius Julianus
whom the Soldiers (that then made open sale of the Empire) had elected after
the death of Pertinax. But Julianus being infamous for his Vices, and failing
to perform his prom^se made to the Soldiers, was in a short time forsaken of
them, and afterward was murdered: upon report of Julianus his death, Septinius
Severus (a Man adorned with excellent gifts of nature) was declared Emperor,
and for that he feared Clodius Albinus (who then recovered the Government of
Britain) he made him his a^^ociate in the Empire, and sent Hereclianus to be
Quietant of the Province, which Hereclianus soon after resigned to Virius
Lupes. But desire of Sovereignty (that cannot long endure equal in decree) made
the one jealeous of the other, and the fire of ambition (that had been
smothered for a time) burst out at length into a flame, for Severus having
pacified some tumults in the West part of the World, and after many conflict,
subdued Pescenius Niger (who usurped the Empire in the East) pretended the
breach of association, as a color to make war upon Albinus, who understanding
thereof, transported over the Seas a mighty army, furnished with abundance of
victual, out of the Isle it self, which then (through the industry of the
Inhabitants, applying themselves to tillage and husbandry, yielded plenty of
grain, and served the Romans, as a Garner of the West Empire out of which they
carried yearly great quantities of corn to maintain their armies in Gallia and
Germany. Lions in Franco.
Near Lugdunum in Gallia Severus encountered with Albinus, whose forces were
there defeated, and him self slain.

Then Severus made preparation for his voyage into Britain, which by reason of
the often change of Governors was grown much out of order, and although the
Britains upon intelligence of his purpose did send over Ambassadors to offer
their voluntary submission yet the Emperor in whom neither age nor sickness
had abated the heat of ambition, would not directly accept thereof, but
entertained them with delays, till all things were in readiness for his
expedition (so earnest a desire he had to pass into the furthest part of
Britain, and to purchase the surname of Britannicus, as an honorable addition
to his other titles) his two sons Bassianus, commonly called Caracalla, and
Getta, he took with him; as doubting their agreement in his abscence. To Getta
his younger son, after his arrival in Brittany he committed the government of
the Province there for civil causes, wherein Aemilius Paulus Papinianus the
famous Lawyer (who as chief minister of Justice under him had his Tribunal at
Eboracum) was commanded to assist and direct Him. York.


Severus himself and Bassianus with the army marched Northward against the
Meatae, The ancient Inhabitants of the hither part of Scotland.
a people bordering upon the Calidonians, and in league with them, Virius Lupus
but a little before had assailed to enter the Country by force, when the
Meatae, (standing upon their own strength) withstood him, and forced him in the
end to purchase his peace with money. Then Severus hasted into Calidonia, where
finding the passages uncertain, and dangerous by reason of the Fens, Woods, and
deep Waters he caused Trees to be felled, and Bridges and Cawsies to be made
for his Soldiers to march over. The Calidonians in the mean time sallied out
of the woods, and charged the Romans, who were much encumbred for want of firm
ground, and were often times forced to trace the Country, and to disperse
themselves into several companies, seeking places of advantage: by which means
a great number of them perished, while the inhabitants (lying in ambush and
sometimes leaving their cattle abroad a train to draw them within danger)
suddenly surprised and killed them, before they could recover their camp. This
was an unfortunate journey to the Romans; who besides the loss which they
sustained by their enemies, were afflicted with diseases, by reason partly of
the unwholesome waters which they drank, and partly of the contagious air that
infected their spirits, yea many times they killed one another; for such as for
feebleness could not keep rank in marching, were slain by their own fellows,
50000. Romans lost at one time.
that they might not be left a prey to their persecuting enemies There died in
this enterprise above fifty thousand Romans, yet would not Severus withdraw his
forces thence; till the Calidonians made offer to treat of peace, whereto he
then hearkened the more willingly, for that he saw the difficulty and (in a
manner) impossibility to bring the Northern part of the Isle wholly under
subjection, by Reason of the Rocks, Mountains, and Marshes, as also for that
the county being (for the most part) Baron and unfruitful, the benefit thereof
was not deemed likely to countervail the charge in getting and keeping of it.
The conditions were, that the Calidonians should first disarme themselves, and
deliver part of the country (lying next the Province) into the Romans
possession, and that from that time forward, they should attempt nothing
against the public peace; which articles agreed upon, and assurance taken for
the performance, Severus retired himself into the province, leaving his son
Bassianus to take charge of the army, which after the Emperors departure grew
careless and dissolute; wherewith the General seemed nothing displeased,
either for that he was by his own nature inclined to the worst; or else for
that he hoped thereby to win the Soldiers favor as a mean for his advancement
to the Empire after his fathers death, which he had oftentimes attempted by
indirect practices most unnaturally to procure.

In the mean while the Calidonians (notwithstanding the late contract)
understanding what disorders were in that Roman camp, suddenly invaded it,
killing and taking booty, which they shared with their Neighbors (borderers of
the province) that had assisted them in in the enterprise. Severus being
greatly incensed therewith, sent part of his army to pursue the Calidonians,
expressly commanding, that they should be all put to the sword, without respect
of age or fex. This sharp manner of proceeding, did somewhat quail the hope of
the Northren Britains, who fled into remote parts of Calidonia; and Severus
having rather stayed, then ended the troubles (as intending to prosecute the
war with more advantage, spent some time in repairing and enlarging Adrians
wall, which he carried thwart the Island from sea to sea, entrenching and
fortifiing it, with Bulwarks and square Towers, in places most convenient (to
give warning one to another upon any sudden assault) for defense of the
borders. Then being wearied with age, sickness and travail, York.
having his mind also much grieved with the disloyal and unnatural practices of
his son Bassianus, he withdrew himself to Eboracum, a Colonie of the Romans,
being then the station of the sixth Legion called Victrix, and afterward
growing to be one of the chief places of account among the Brigantes, for these
stations of the Roman Legions were commonly the seed plots of towns and cities,
both in this Isle and diverse other parts of the Empire.

It was reported that in his passage thither, a Moor with a Cypress Garland on
his head, did meat and salute him by the name of a God, and at his entrance
into the City, he was by error of the Southsayer (that guided him) brought into
the Temple of Bellona, and that black beasts being appointed for Sacrifice, did
of themselves follow him to his palace. These things howsoever thew fell out
accidentally, yet they were interpreted as ominous in respect of the event, and
now Severus perceiving his death to approach called before him some of his
Counselors and chief Captains, unto whom he is said to have spoaken in this
manner.

It is now above eighteen years, since I was first declared Emperor by the army
in Pannonia, during which time, with what care, pain, and travail I have
weilded this vast body of the Empire, my continual employment in wars, both at
home and abroad, may witness sufficiently. For at my first entrance I found the
State encumbered every where; and now I shall leave it peaceable even to the
Britains. The future prosperity whereof must depend upon the mutual agreement
of my two Sons. For neither multitude of men, nor abundance of treasure, are so
available to defend and maintain Commonwealths, as amity and unity between
Governors. For by concord we see that small things grow to greatness, whereas
by discord the greatest fall to ruin. I must now leave to them (my Successors)
the imperial Diadem, that which Bassianus has so long thirsted after, though
he know not yet, whether it be a thing to be wished or feared, as having not
proved the difference betwixt a Prince and a private person. But ambition
minds are carried blindfold, they know not whether, in desiring that which
having once obtained, they can neither keep without great care, nor leave
without extreme peril: such a thing is Sovereignty, whose greatness is not
contained in it self, but consists for the most part in the opinion, and
depends on the dispositions of other men, it is virtue only not glorious
titles, which makes men truly great. My self at this present may serve for an
example to show upon what a weak foundation, humane greatness is built. I have
seen all things though now it avail me nothing, seeing I must pay my debt to
nature, and after all my exploytes in the East and West parts of the World, I
must dye, as I may say, out of the World in a strange Country, if any Country
may be termed strange to the Romans, who have now by conquest made all
Countries their own; I exhort you therefore as you tender the welfare of the
Roman Empire, of your own selves, of your posterity, be true and faithful to
my sons, as you have been to me, assisting them with your Council, and
persuading them to mutual concord, as the main pillar to support, both their
Estates and your own.

When he had uttered these or the like speeches he turned a side and shortly
after yielded up the Ghost.

Baron. Tom. 2. Annal. an. D. 105 Manusc. Gal. lic. c. 100. Ma. West. an. 206.
Galf. Mon. Hist. 4 Reg. B^it l 5. c 2. R. vit. Hist. l. 4. Seldom Anale^. c. 7.
Gal. Mont sup. l. c. 3. Pro. Cata Reg. Brit. in Severa. Magdebur. Cent. 3 c.
16. Flo Wigorn. 198 220. Mat West an. 205 206.
Baronius with others confess, that Severus was descended of most noble
Parents; Constat Severum fuisse majorum Claritudine nobilissimum, and yet not
able to describe his Auncestry, does sufficiently prove him a stranger to those
Countries and their Historians, and to make further manifestation herein,
although he was born in Africa about Tropolis, so far from Britain, yet he
married a British Lady, as diverse of the same Authors and others testify, and
had by her Basianus his Son, after King of Britain, and Emperor; also some say
her name was Martia, and the first wife of Severus, and sister of Fulgentius
the Britain, that warred against and slew Severus at York. Fulgentius Matris
Basiani Frater. And this British Lady could not be married to Severus, after
his coming into Britain, but long before, where he then lived in the East
parts of the World. For in Britain he lived, but a short time by our Modern
calculation in their Catalogue of the Kings of Britain, four years; The
Magdeburgians have the like account following Eusebius. Florentius Wigorniensis
makes his abode here but three years. The Monck of Westminster scarcely
allows him two years continuance here. The like have others, all agreeing, he
was old and feeble at his coming hither, yet Bassianus his Son by our British
Lady was so old at his death, that he succeeded him both in this Kingdom and
the Empire, who being Emperor but six or seven years was, as Dio and others
witness, at his death going on his 29^h. year of age; Almost twenty years old
when his Father first landed in Britain.

Divin Caracalla.
The Britains continuing in variance and contention about a Successor to Lucius
King of this Kingdom, Severus the Emperor came hither, some say to quiet the
Debates, others affirm, to win honor to himself, he being accounted very
greedy and ambitious thereof, and to reduce the Kingdom wholly to the Roman
subjection; not willing that any Britain here born should reign, and therefore
as some write they made a decree and law among them, Hector Boethius Scot. Hist.
l. 5. f. 86.
against such Government. Eo fere tempore post Lucium Regem Brittorum extinctum
Romani gnari Brittannos Reges multarum in populo seditionum and rebellionum in
se fuisse autores, ut res Romana in Brittannia soret quietior, publico vetuere
decreto, ne quispiam Brittanici sanguinis deinceps regia insignaretur
dignitate. If there was any such decree of the Romans, it could neither be upon
this surmised motive, that the British Kings had been the occasion of any
rebellions or seditions against the Romans; for it is evident that in the time
of the three last Kings, Merius, Coillus, and Lucius, peace was duly kept with
the Romans, and their tribute paid unto them, and these Kings descended of
Genuista a Roman Lady of the Emperors kindred, so as well as from King
Arviragus the Britain, did participate both of the British and Roman blood.
And these were the only Kings which were here, after the composition between
the Romans and Britains, in the time of Claudius and Arviragus, when Arviragus
marrying the daughter of the Emperor, joining the British and Roman Regal and
Imperial lines together, thereby ended all debates between them.

Neither did any such Decree probably pass the Roman Senate, that none born of
British blood should afterward be King of Britain, if we will be guided
either by reason or authority herein; for how could the Romans, then neither
having such power or possession, take upon them such a definitive sentence. Mr.
B. 362:
This had been the next way to have made a general defection from them here of
all the Britains. And the Britains, Will. Harrison Disc. Brit. c. 22. Harding
Chr. c. 52. f. 45. and alii apud Harrison. Hollenshed Hist. of Eng. l. 4. c. 21.
except in some municipal places, were governed by their own, and not by the
Roman Laws. And for authority, we want not those that write how both our next
Kings here, who came from Rome after this imagined Decree, Severus and Basianus
his son and successor here, were Brittanici sanguinis born of British blood,
and yet both of them our Kings in Britain, and Emperors also, and by some
Antiquaries, the next heirs to the Crown of Britain. Harding in his Chronicle
thus testifies from antiquity of Severus.

Severus thus the worthy Senator,
Descended downright heir to Androgeos,
The eldest son of Lud that was the Emperor,
Out of Britain went with Julius;
Which Senator aforesaid Severus,
To Britain came and was inthronisate,
And with a Crown of Gold was Coronate.
Therefore if Severus the Emperor was descended down right heir to Andro geos
the eldest son of King Lud, the words of the Authors so obsolutely and
consequently, not without good warrant affirming it, he must needs be both
descended of the Regal British race, and be also the undoubted next true heir
to the Crown of this Kingdom at that time; all other lines which might by any
probability make claim before him, being now extinct: and this of it self is
more then any (Author of like credit to him I have alleged) does bring to
prove, that Severus was not descended by lineal and lawful birth, Flor. Wigorn.
Chro. an. 181, and 182. Matthew. West. an. 192. Mar. Scot. Aetat. 6. Mart. Polon.
an 213. Hen. Hunt. l. 1. Hist. in Severo.
from our British Regal race; but some other, in which I find a silence in
Antiquity: only diverse write, (and nothing hindering his Regal British
Genealogy) that he was born at Leptis, in the Province of Tripolis in Africa,
and was the only African that ever was Emperor; yet none of them denies
thereby his descent from British Parentage; but some of them yield to that
which confirms it; and his ancestors being strangers, so long out of Britain
as from Julius Caesar's time, no wonder if he was born in that place of Africa,
for I have showed before in the time of Vespasian, we had many thousands of
Britains went into those parts, and without question diverse of them married,
and continued there in their posterity. So did diverse Britains at other times,
even with wives and children go to Rome, and from thence were disposed into
diverse parts, never returning hither.

Now to speak somewhat of Severus his alienation or affection from or to
Christian Religion, it is the common opinion, and our own Antiquaries be of the
same, Mar. Sco. l. 2. Aetat. 6. an. 153. Matthew. West. an. 195. Flor. Wigorn. in
Chro. an. 189. and 211. Judas Scriptor, Eccl. temp. Severi apud Eusebius.
that in diverse places of the Empire, he was an enemy so far unto it, that many
term him the fifth Persecutor among the Emperors after Nero, and many
Christians in diverse Provinces were martyred in his Empire, Post Neronem
Severus quintam persecutionem in Christianos excitavit, Plurimique Sanctorum
per diversas provincias martyrio Coronantur. And it is so certain by all
foreign antiquities, that there was such persecution in his time, that it was
almost a common opinion, that the coming of Antichrist was at hand, as an
Ecclesiastical Writer of that time has left to posterity, Propterea quod
persequutionis tumultus contra nos excitatus multorum mentes tam graviter per
turbaret, Antichristi adventum omnium ore atque sermon jactatum, jam tum
appropinquare arbitratus est: Yet we do not find any express Edict or
Prohibition of him, until about the tenth year of his Empire, when as Spartanus
writes in his journey from Syria to Alexandria, he made many Laws, forbidding
under great penalty any man to be either a Jew or Christian: and as Dio, and
others witness, Mr. B. 365.
he consented men by his Imperial Letters, both to the depriving of St. Philip
of the Augustal Prefectship of Egypt, being become a professed Christian, and
giving authority to Terentius his successor, secretly to Martyr him. But for
Severus excuse we find, the greatest and almost only persecution of his time,
either to have been in or about Jury, occasioned by the Tumults of the Jews, or
in Africa, where Severus was born, and principally in Egypt, then full of
Christians; the Prefect himself St. Philip a Christian, and so potent as the
Letters of Severus unto him say, he lived more like an absolute King than
Prefect; that Praefecture of Egypt being of so great authority and dignity.

Therefore Africa being the Country of Severus birth, and so formidable an
enemy in former times to the Romans, as all Historians report, and now so
abounding with Christians, slanderously accused by their Pagan enemies, to be
enemies to the Roman Empire; Niceph l. 4. Hist. Eccle. I^e apud eui^dem and
adversus H^ro. l. 1. c. 24.
Severus may seem by such acclamations, against his own Inclination, to have
given way to persecution. And the rather, because the Gnostick Heretics, given
then over to all filthiness, that as Irenaeus, Nicephorus, and others write,
they did publicly profess, and so practice, that all which would come to
perfection of their Sect, which they only allowed, must commit all wickedness.

These Heretics, being accounted Christians, with the Pagans might sooner
provoke the Emperor by such men's informations, against the most holy
Professors of Christian Religion, which were so free from being such, as they
were falsely reputed with those their enemies to be, Athenagoras Orat. pro
Christian.
that as Athenagoras in his Oration for them, in the name of the Christians,
desired no mercy or favor, but to be utterly rooted out, if those impious
slanders could be proved true against them. Nicephorus says, Christianity
flourished in his time; and Tertullian, then living, affirms, That Severus
also himself, father to Antoninus, was kind to Christians; for he sought for
Proculus a Christian, who had some time before cured him with Oil, and kept him
in his Palace with him so long as he lived; Tertul. li. ad Scap. c. 4.
he was exceedingly well known to Antoninus that was nursed by a Christian
woman; and Severus knowing both renowned women, as also most honorable men to
be of this profession, was so far from doing them any hurt, that he commended
them, and openly resisted even to their faces the raging people. Therefore, if
Severus the Emperor was of his own disposition so great a Lover of Christians
in general, if he honored Proculus in his Palace so long as he lived, gave
allowance that his son and heir Antoninus Bassianus King of Britain, and
Emperor after his father, should both be nursed by a Christian woman, and be
so familiar with such known professed Christians as Proculus was, and was the
Overseer of Evodus, the Tutor or Bringer up of Bassianus his son, as may be
gathered both by Tertullian, Dio, and others; and both Severus himself, so
great an honourer both of renowned Christian men and women, and his Lady and
Empress Martia of Britain so far affected and disposed to Christian Religion,
that if she did not profess it in act, yet in affection and desire did so
honor it, that she would not permit her son and heir to be nursed by any but a
Christian woman, and the Overseer of so great a charge to be a Christian so
famous and renowned for Faith, as Proculus was known of all men to be: These
considered, I dare not boldly say, that Severus did in any time or place, of
his own inclination, wittingly or willingly, without great incitation,
condescend to such persecutions, as are remembered in Histories, to have been in
his Empire.

And after his coming into Britain, we do not find the least suspicion in our
Antiquities, that he did of himself, or suffer any other to persecute any for
Christian Religion; but rather both of himself, and at the instance of his
British Empress, at the least a Christian in affection and both powerable with
him, and their son Bassianus his heir and successor, and for that love and
trust he found in the British Christians of all that part of Britain. South
to the Wall and Trench which Adrian and he made, joining with him against his
enemies, to possess him of the Crown of Britain, he was a grateful friend to
them, and their holy profession. And all our Histories are clear, that Religion
was here in quiet, without molestation and affliction, until the Empire of
Dioclesian, that great persecutor; yet we cannot deny, but all places in
Britain, being now full of warlike miseries, and the Christians here, both in
Albania, Loegria, and Cambria, mixed and joined both with Roman and Scythian
Infidels, many of them fell both to wickedness and Paganism also; which
occasioned holy Gildas to write, that Christianity was received but coldly of
the Inhabitants of Britain, and with some continued perfect, but not so with
others, before Dioclesian his persecution. And not only in the time of
Dioclesian his persecution, following in this age, we find even whole Cities
and Towns, as Verulamium and others, wholly destitute of Christians; but long
before or about this time we are assured, that there were very many Britains,
and not of mean estate, but such as were publicly employed about the affairs
of the Kingdom, and sent from hence to Rome about it, that either were fallen
from Christianity, or never forsook their Pagan Religion; for we read both in
ancient Manuscripts and other Authors, in the life of St. Mello, after
Archbishop of Rhoan in Normandy, sent thither by St. Stephen, Pope, not only
that he and his British Companions, which were then sent to Rome to pay the
tribute of Britains there, were Pagans, and Sacrificed in the temple of Mars;
but it was then the custom of the Britains coming thither about that Office so
to do, which to be a custom, could not be younger than these days; time short
enough between this and that time to make a custom: And it seems this custom
had been from the first submission of the Britains to the Romans; for both
late Writers and others affirm, that in Octavius Augustus time Ambassadors came
from Britain to Rome, swearing sealty in the temple of Mars, offering gifts in
the Capitol to the gods of the Romans; and we have testimony in our Histories,
that after the death of King Lucius, and this very time which we have now in
hand, it was the use and custom of our Britains here, when any of their
Nobility (...) were to obtain the dignity of Knighthood, to send them to Rome
to receive that honor there, and after such Pagan rights and ceremonies, that
Christians could not in Conscience so accept thereof. And yet such multitudes
even in this time flocked thither from hence so to be created.

Severus of himself was not addicted to a wicked life, but much renowned not
only for warlike affairs, but also for learning and knowledge in philosophy;
and so great an enemy to incontinency, that he punished adultery by law with
death, with such severity, that Dio writes, that when he was Consul, he found
by record that 3000 had been put to death for that offense. He was after his
death made a God among the Pagans: and Herodianus says, he died rather of
grief for his childrens wickedness then of sickness, which grief for the sins
of his sons, as also of his own in permitting the Christians in many places be
to most grievously persecuted, I would not deny; but that he dyed in any such
grief is untrue, being most certain, that he after so many conquests in other
Countries, when he came to fight against this Country Christians, was enforced
dishonourably to make a wall and trench above 130 miles in length to keep his
enemies back from invading him, and slain in battle by Fulgenius, or as others
call him Fulgentius, brother to his first lawful true wife, the Empress Martia
a Britain. And by the Roman writers themselves, he was at this time when he
was slain at York 65 years old. And although he left thirty two Legions as Dio
writes, to defend that his temporal Empire, which had so persecuted the Church
of Christ, yet that temporal Empire, with all those props began to stagger,
Tertul. adver. Judaeos c. 7.
and notwithstanding so great persecution in the Kingdom of Christ as
Tertullian then living witnesses, was adored and ruled in all places, and
particularly here in Britain.

And it is generally agreed upon by our, both British and Saxon Historians and
Antiquaries, that after his discomfiture by Severus, he went over into Scythia,
interpreted to be that Country which we now call Denmark, Geff. Mon. sup. c. 3.
Fab. Hist. Polycr. Harris discrip. of Brit. c. 22. Hollensh. Hist. of Eng. l.
4. c. 23. Bid Eccl. Hist. l. 1. Capg. in St. Ninian. Hect. Boet. Scoto. Hist.
l. 7. Bal. l. de scrip. cent. 1. in Ninia.
and brought with him a great army of the people of that Nation, which our
Antiquities call Picts, before he fought with Severus, and they both were there
slain, or died at York. These were none of the Christian Picts, or Scots which
lived in our Islands, who had joined with Fulgenius before, and many of them
were slain, as the same Authors testify; but they were Pagan Picts of whom many
remained here after the death of these two Generals, and had a place given
them to inhabit in the Country of Albania. Thus write our British Historians
and our modern Antiquaries agree, when they say that Carausius gave unto the
Scots, Picts and Scythians the Country of Cathnesse in Scotland, which they
afterward inhabited, so these were those Pagan Picts and people which St.
Ninian, and others sent from Rome, did long after convert to the faith of
Christ, as Saint Bede and others testify, for the Islanders which were Picts and
Scots were converted in Pope Victor his time, which is another argument against
the Scottish writers, which would have themselves seated in the Country now
called Scotland, so long a duration of years as they claim.

Bassianus being advertised of his fathers death, practiced with the Soldiers,
by bribes and fair promises, that he might be declared sole Emperor, whereto
when he could not persuade them, for the reverence they bare to his father
Severus, he made a league with the Northern Britains that then assailed the
Borders, and returned to York to meet with Julia the Empress his mother in
law, and Geta his brother. There he caused the Physicians to be put to death,
for not ridding his father sooner out of the way, as he had commanded them,
then he appointed secretly to the slaughter, all those that for their virtue
and wisdom had been esteemed and advanced by his father; and all such as having
been Tutors to him and his brother, and advised them to mutual concord. This
done he entered into consultation about his fathers funerals, which were
solemnized by the Army with all due rights, according to the ancient custom in
time of war. The ashes of the dead body being put into a golden Urne, were
afterward by Julia the Empress, accompanied with the two Caesar's, carried to
Rome, where Severus after the usual ceremony was consecrated a God.

Severus left as is related two sons Bassianus and Geta, and if Fulgenius, who
is by diverse called King (though indeed he was only Dux populi) had any right
by descent to the Crown of Britain, seeing we read of no child or brother he
left behind him, that the title which he claimed must needs descend to the
eldest son of Severus, which was Bassianus, son also to the sister of
Fulgenius, as some before have written; now having by the death of his Father
Severus and Uncle Fulgenius both their titles, with the allowance of the
Empress Martia his mother, lawfully invested in him.

Therefore to decide and end all controversies in this business, the Britains
with common assent did choose and accept Bassianus both for their King (being
the next and undoubted heir, whether we shall stand either upon his father or
Uncles title) as also for Emperor, Mr. Bro. 370. 1 and 2.
as the Eldest son and heir of Severus undoubted Emperor, and for his leaving
sons behind (as the chiefest cause) made a God among the Romans. So writes
Herodian with others, Herodian l. 4. Stow. Hist. Roman. in Severo.
Mos est Romany consecrare Imperatores qui superstitibus filiis vel
successoribus moriuntur. And an English Antiquary, though not citing authority,
delivers the same in these words. The Romans accustomed to consecrate with
immortality such Emperors as at their death leave either Children or successors
in the Empire behind them, Harrison disc. of Brit. c. 22. French manusc. antiq.
c. 109. Galf. Mon. l. 5 c. 2. Pont. Virun. l. 5. c. 2. Mat. West. an. 206.
Harding Chro in Sever. and Bass. Hollensh. Hist. of Eng. l. 4. c. 22. Harris.
disc. Brit. c. 22. Tertul. ad scapu. c. 4. Spartian in Caracalla.
and those which are endued with that honor they Canonize among the Gods.
Therefore to use the speech of an other late Author, Severus by birth a Roman,
but in blood a Britain, and the lineal heir of the body of Androgeas son of
Lud, and Nephew to Cassibelan, was Emperor and King of Britain. Geta, born of
a Roman woman Julia, was chosen Emperor by diverse Romans; but soon after slain
by his half brother Bassianus the Britain. This Bassianus reigned alone both
Emperor and King of Britain till his death; besides his hereditary title to
this Kingdom, it seems that the Christian Britains here were not a little
moved to choose and receive him for their King, for the hope they had he would
either become a Christan, or at least a friend and no enemy to that profession,
of which in his youth and tender years he had given no vulgar argument; for
besides many other hopeful graces and gifts he was then endued with, he was
brought up by a Christian Nurse, and with Christian Children: when he did see
any Christian Martyrs, brought to wild beasts to be killed and devoured, he
would weep and turn his face away, as Spartianus is an ample witness. And
being but seven years old, hearing that one of his Christian Play-fellowes was
grievously beaten for that his Religion, as the common interpretation is, he
could not long after endure the Procures of his beating. And in this hope of
the Britains, now Christians, that Bassianus would rather be a friend then
persecutor of such, they were not deceived. For although contrary to his first
education when he was with Christians, being separated from them he fell to so
many kinds of impieties, as writers do report, and put innumerable of the Pagan
Roman Nobles to death, and many of them which had been greatest enemies to
Christians; yet he died innocent from Christian blood and persecution, Mr. Br.
371.
and by his severe punishment toward their adversaries was justly interpreted
to be a revenger of their wrongs and former calamities. The common opinion is,
that he reigned between six and seven years; although I find in an old
Manuscript French History, entreating much of the affairs of this Kingdom,
written above 400 years since, that he was King of Britain 29. years, Bassian
tenoit le Roilme d Brittanie 29. ans.

Jacob. Senuon Epis. in Caral. Sanctor. in S. Amphibalo. Author of the English
martyrologie. Joan Lydgate Monac. Buriensis in ejus vita. Gerard Leigh in his
Accidence of Armory. Verumne. apud Hect. Boerius. Scot. Hist l. 6. f. 102.
Hollins. of Scotland in Cyathlint. Jacob. Genuen. in vita St. Amph. Harris
Manusc. Hist. Brit. l 3. c 35 Girald. Camb. Item Camb. l. 1. c. 5. David Powell
Annot. 16. and in c. 4. disc. Cambriae. Dio in Macrino. Dio in Caracalla.
Spartian in Caracalla. Manusc. Gall. Antiq. c. 14. Compilatio M. S. de gest. in
Carausio. Fab. in Bass. fol. 47. b.
In this Emperors time St. Zepherine was Pope, who converted our renowned
countriman St. Amphibalus, who won by his preaching, life, and death, after so
many thousands of this Nation to Christ, of whom a late Author citing diverse
antiquities, thus writes, St. Amphibalus being a noble young man of Britain,
and going to Rome with Bassianus son to Severus, was there by Pope Zepherinus
instructed secretly in the Christian faith, baptized, made Priest, and sent
back into Britain, there to preach unto others. Neither may we with prudence
judge, that so great a concourse of our British Nation and Nobility being then
at Rome, and St. Amphibalus thus converted (a great Noble Man, and termed in
antiquities the son of a Prince, and so not without attendance) that he alone
was thus converted, and employed by that holy Pope at this time, and not
unprobable but some of those holy Apostolic men which are yet remembered in
Histories, to have assisted St. Amphibalus afterward in preaching Christ in
these parts or received their Ordination and instruction from the same at Rome
now about this time; such as were Modicus, Priscus, Calanus, Ferranus,
Ambianus, and Carnocus: there is no repugnancy in the time, for these were old
men when the persecution of Dioclesian raged here, and St. Alban was martyred.

Jacobus Bishop of Genua, and so to be termed of that City in Italy, a Roman
writer, writing fourscore years, or thereabouts, before Matthew West, (who
calls this Saint Clericus only, not expressing his name) testifies that his
name was Amphibalus, a Britain of this Kingdom, and son to a Prince thereof,
relating his History and life at large. But our Monck might without blame be
ignorant of that Author. And this foreign bishop adds, that he went from
hence to Rome with Bassianus, in the time of Severus, and was there Knighted
amongst that noble company, most part of this Nation, recounted in number 1540.
of which St. Alban was also one; and that St. Amphibalus was there made priest
by the Pope of Rome, and sent home into his Country. Giraldus Cambrensis says,
he was borne as Caerlegeon, the renowned City and School in Wales. So have
diverse others: the old manuscript History of the Church of Winchester, says,
he was an holy Monck, and Doctor in the Church of Caermardyn in Wales. And
this is the last certain place of his Residency, which that Antiquity gives
him, before his persecution, and going to the Scots; and so it seems not
unprobable, but he was also Bishop of that city Caermardin, or without
question, of some other City there; for otherwise how could he be consecrated
Bishop among the Scots, by whose Annals he is accounted the first Bishop they
had resident among them, but more of him hereafter.

About the year of our Lord 220. or a little before, Bassianus Emperor and
King of Britain, was murdered between Edissa and Carras, by Mardianus a
Centurion: he marrying with the sister of the holy christian Lady Mammea, left
their son Heliogabalus behind him, who soon after was Emperor. An old French
Manuscript History says, that Bassianus was slain by Carausius, who after
reigned 38 years. The same has the manuscript compilation in these words, Et
tandem faventibus Britonnibus Carausius demicavit cum Bassiano, and interfecit
eum, and sic gubernaculum regni in sese suscepit; of this opinion also is
Fabian.

Howes says, Bassianus was cruelly given to sensuality and lust, insomuch that
he espoused his mother-in-law Juba, others call her Julia, as Hollenshed;
Fabian Juliana; who says, that Bassianus on a certain time breaking in to his
brother Geta's chamber, slew him even in his mothers lap, and that himself was
after slain at Edissa by one of his soldiers (but names him not) as he was
about to untruss his points.

Now the affairs of Britain, for the space of almost fifty years together were
passed over in silence, as being either omitted through negligence of Writers
in that age, or perishing through the calamity of the times that ensued under
the Emperors following, namely, Popilius Macrinus (the successor of Bassianus)
Varus Heliogobalus, Alexander Severus, Maximinus Gordianus the first, second
and third, Philippus Arats, Decius Valerianus: These are the words of the
Author of the British History; but we will leave him a while, to try what
other Authors say; Fabian tells, that Carausius, etc.

Finis Libri Tertii.
To the Right Honorable HENRY Earl of Oxford, Lord Bulbeck, Samford,
Badlesmere, Scales, Knight of the Garter, etc. ALGERNON Earl of
Northumberland, and Lord Percy, Lucy, Poynings, Fitz Pain, Bryan and Latimer,
Knight of the Garter, etc. JOHN Earl of Shrewsbury, Lord Talbot, Furnival,
Verdon, and Lord Strange, of Blackmore.

The Earl of OXFORD.
Henry Very the Eighteenth Earl of Oxford of that name, Lord Bulbeck, Samford,
etc. Descended, as Mr. Brook, York Herald, fol. 162. and others say, from
Aubrey de Vere, who married Mabel Daughter of Robert Consul Earl of Gloucester,
and natural Son to Henry the first, by Nest daughter to Rees Prince of
Southwales, which Rees married Gladis, D. and sole heir of Rees ap Kenvin
Prince of Powis, whose successor Robert de Vere, third of that name, and sixth
Earl of Oxford, of that family, married Margaret daughter of Roger Lord
Mortimer, son of Edmund Lord Mortimer, descended from Roger Lord Mortimer, who
married Gladis sister and heir of the whole blood to David, son to Llewellyn
Prince of Northwales, and Joane daughter to K. John, which Llewellyn was son to
Jorworth, the son of Owen Gwineth, the son of Gruffith, the son of Conan, the
son of Jago, the son of Edwal, the son of Meiric, the son of Edwal Voel, the
son of Anarawd, the son of Rodery Maur, the son of Esylht, daughter and sole
heir of Conan Tyndaythwy, the son of Roderike Molwynoc, the son of Edwal Ywrch,
the son of Cadwallader last King of the Britains. Mr. Powel fol. 224

NORTHUMBERLAND.
Llewellin ap Jorworth Prince of Northwales married Joane, natural daughter to
K. John, Mr. Brook in K. John.
begotten on Agatha daughter of William Earl Ferrers and Derby 1204. with whom
her father gave in marriage the Castle and Lordship of Ellinsmere or Ellesmere
in the Marches of Southwales, which deed bears date at Dover, 17. April 6.
Johannis, this Llewellin and Agatha had issue

David Prince of Northwales, sans issue. Roger Lord Mortimer. Gladis sister of
the whole blood to David Prince of Northwales, and his heir. Powel. fol. 314
Roger L. Mortimer and by right of inheritance Prince of Northwales. Maud
daughter to William de Bruise L. of Brecon. Edmund Lord Mortimer. Margaret
Fendlesse. Roger L. Mortimer created Earl of March, by K. Edw. III. Joane
daughter and heir to Sir Peter Genivill or Jenevill. Edmund Mortimer Earl of
March. -- Daughter and coheir of Bartholomew Badelsmere L. of Leeds in Kent.
Roger Mortimer restored in blood Earl of March. an. 29. Edw. III. Philippa
daughter of William Montague Earl of Sarum. Edmund Mortimer Earl of March.
Philippa sole daughter and heir of Lyonel D. of Clarence. Sir H. Percy Knight,
son and heir to Henry Percy Earl of Northumberland. Eliz. daughter to Edm.
Mort. E. of March, and Philippa heir to Lyonel D. of Clarence. Henry Percy Earl
of North. Elinor daughter to Ralph Nevil, first Earl of Westmerland of that
name. Henry Percy Earl of North. Elinor D. and h. of Richard Lord Poynings.
Henry Percy Earl of North. Maud daughter of Will. Herbert E. of Pembroke, by
which match this honorable family descends from diverse Welsh branches, as
shall appear in the pedigree of the Earl of Pembroke. Henry Lord Percy Earl of
North. Mary D. to George Lord Talbot E. of Salop. Tho. Lord Percy E. of North.
nephew to E. Henry. Anne d. to H. Somerset E. of Worcester, where again this
family descends from the Welsh, as in the genealogy of Worcester. Sir Henry
Percy brother to Earl Thomas, Earl of North. Katherine one of the daughters
and co-h. of J. Nevil L. Latimer, which family of the Nevils, streams from the
Welsh as in the pedigree of Abergavenny. Henry Lord Percy Earl of
Northumberland. Dorothy daughter to Walter Devereux Earl of Essex. Algernon
Percy Earl of Northumberland. Anne d. of Will. Cecil E. of Salisbury, by which
this right honorable Family (to whom God grant a long and prosperous
posterity) descends from many British progenies, as in the pedegrees of
Salisbury and Exceter.

The Earl of SHREVVSBURY.
John L. Talbot E. of Sbrewsb. descended from Gilbert L. Talbot, temp. H. 3.
who married Gwenllian d. to Rees ap Gruffith P. of Southw. Maud d. and sole
heir to Thomas Nevil L. Furnival, which family of Nevil descends from the
Welsh, as in Abergavenny. John L. Talbot, E. of Shrewsbury, L. Furnival and
Verdon. Eliz. daughter of James Butler Earl of Ormond. By this match of
Verdon, by which the title of Lord Verdon came, appears an other stream of
Welsh blood; for Theobald Lord Verdon married Maud daughter of Edmund Mortimer,
descended from Llewellyn Prince of Southwales, ut ante in Oxford. John Lord
Talbot Earl of Salop. Katherine d. to Humphrey D. of Buckingham. George Lord
Talbot Earl of Shrewsbury. Anne d. of William Lord Hastings descended from the
Prince of Wales. Francis Earl of Shrewsbury. Mary d. to Thomas L. Dacres of
Gilesland. George Earl of Shrewsb. Gertrude daughter to Thomas E. of Rutland,
descended from the Welsh line Gilbert Earl of Shrewsbury. Mary daughter of Sir.
William Cavendish. Edward Earl of Shrewsbury. Joan daughter and co-h. of
Cuthbert L. Ogle George Talbot son and heir to -- Talbot of Grafton Esquire; heir
male of Sir Gilbert Talbot of Grafton Knight Banneret, and Knight of the
Garter, second son to John Lord Talbot, second Earl of Shrewsbury of that
name, was by King James admitted to the Earledom of Shrewsbury; but he dying
without issue, the Earldom fell to the issue of John Talbot Esquire his
brother. John Talbot Earl of Shrewsbury. Mary daughter to Sir Francis
Fortescue Knight. George Lord Talbot. -- daughter of Sir Percy Herbert, L. Powis,
by which match many Welsh branches devolve unto this honorable family.

THE ANCIENT and MODERN BRITISH AND WELSH HISTORY, Beginning with BRUTE, and
continued until King CHARLES the first. The Fourth Book.
CARAVSIVS, a Britain of unknown birth, Matthew. West, an. 286.
was of the Britains made Ruler Anno Dominicae Incarnationis 218. Hollenshed
also places Carausius next to Bassianus, though others name him not. Galf.
Mon. Hist. l. 5. c. 4. Pont. Virun. l. 5. Matthew. West. an. 292, 293. 294.
Harding Chron. c. 56, 57. Galf. Mon. lib. 15. Pont. Virun. l. 5. Hard. Chron. c
59. Matthew. West. 302. Cat. Reg. Britt. and alii. Matthew. West. an 286. Harrison.
Discr. of Brit. Hollenshed Hist. of Eng. l 4. c. 23.
The learned Mr. Broughton searches this business to the quick; and therefore
to give more life to this History, you shall hear what he says. Bassianus
being as before murdered, Macrinus, a Mauritanian or Moriscan by Nation, with
his son Diadumenus, or by some Diadumenianus, obtained the Empire; but they
were both slain by their own Soldiers, rebelling against them when they had
been Emperors but one year and two months; after whom Marcus Aurelius
Antoninus Heliogabalus or Elagabalus, son of Bassianus Caracalla before spoken
of, was chosen Emperor by the Army, his mother was named Soemiades or
Semiamira, the daughter of Mesa, sister of Julia the Empress, the second wife
of Severus; and this Soemiades, or Semiamira, or Semiamides, was sister to that
renowned Christian Lady Mamea, mother to Alexander the Emperor; Henry of
Huntington, and Florigerus ascribe four complete years to the Emperor
Heliogabalus; Martinus allows him not fully so long a reign; yet Martinus
says with Roman Writers, that he was Emperor four years and eight months.
Florentius Wigorniensis has the like words, both for that continuance of his
Empire, and authority of the Roman History, affirming it, that he was true and
immediate next King of Britain, not only during the time of his Empire, but
in that space also when Macrinus and his son Diadumenus were Emperors, even
from the death of Antoninus Bassianus Caracalla his father, the undoubted King
of Britain, both by his fathers and mothers title. For although Martinus
says, that Severinus son of Bassianus was Emperor with his father, yet seeing
this Author who so writes, consents with all others, that Macrinus
immediately succeeded to Bassianus Caracalla, and Heliogabalus to Macrinus; he
must needs too justify that his Testimony of Severinus being Emperor with his
father, Matthew. West. an 213. Otto Frising. Chron. l. 3. c. 29. Floren. Wigorn
an. 204. and 226. Marian Aetat. 6 an 218. in Cara alla. Galf. Mon. Hist. Reg. l
5. c. 3. Pont. Vir. l. 5.
that this Severinus died with his father or before, or was the same son of
Bassianus, which others do call Heliogabalus, Marcus, Antoninus, and other
names which Heliogabalus is styled by in Histories.

While these things were acted with the Romans, the State of Brittainy was
unquiet; and although Heliogabalus and his brother Severinus also, if Bassianus
had any such son, was next true King of Britain, yet neither of them enjoyed
it; for by all Writers, one named Carausius was King of Britain, not only
after Bassianus, but by diverse Authors, sometime also while he lived, giving
an overthrow to Bassianus the Emperor, or rather some Lieutenant or General of
his, of the same or the like name here in Brittainy, and so made himself King
of Britain; after whom by our British History, and Ponticus Virunnius,
Asclepiodotus Duke of Cornwall was made King, deposing Alectus, sent hither
against Carausius with three Legions, and Matthew of Westminster and Harding
write, was King three years, until Asclepiodotus deposed him; next to
Asclepiodotus was King Coelus, Father to the most renowned Empress St. Helena,
married to Constantius Emperor, and Mother to great Constantine their son, our
most glorious King and Emperor, after which time our History will not be so
obscure and confused as now it is; for as in the succession of these I have now
remembered there is question, so concerning the time of their Government, and
their conversation also, whether it were Christian or otherwise, it is not free
from difficulty. Antiquaries say that Carausius was next King to Bassianus.
Therefore when Matthew West. and some others would not have Carausius to be
King till about the 286. year of Christ, it must needs be an error either in
them, their Scribes or Printers; for it is evident, and all the Roman writers
prove, that Bassianus was dead many years, and diverse Emperors had succeeded
long before this time, and Math. Westminster. himself says, that Bassianus making
war against the Parthians, was circumvented and slain of his Enemies, between
Edissa and Carras, in the year of Christ 213. which was above 70. years before
he brings Carausius to attempt any thing for the crown of Britain:
Florentius Wigorne follows the same account, and sets down the very place
of his death there to be Osdroena, and Mercinus affirms the same, with the
Roman Histories, saying, it was in the year of Christ 218. And both our old
British History, and Ponticus Virunnius, Hect. Boeti. Scot. Hist. l. 6. ol. 88
89.
who gave the greatest light in this matter, say plainly, that Carausius lived
in the time of Bassianus. And add further that Carausius joining with the
Picts, which Fulgenius had got together against Severus Father to Bassianus,
sought with his army, and overthrowing it, Galf. and virun.
was made King of Britain. And these Picts and Scots must needs be those of
which the Scottish Historians write, when they say Bassianus made peace with
them, and the Britains which followed Fulgenius, Hect. Boe. ut supra. fol.
100. Holenshed in Grathlint.
and so went from hence to Rome. And whereas the British History and Virunnius
say that Carausius did kill Bassianus, this was not Bassianus our King and
Emperor, son of Severus and Martia, but one Quintus Bassianus a Legate of the
Romans. Now being the common Opinion, received both of the Roman and other
writers, Catal. Reg. Britainie Hist. Galf. Mon.
that Severus dyed in the year of Christ 213. The Author of the Catalogue of
our British Kings, thus sets down their successions and Regiments, with
their continuance, Bassianus Ceracel six years, Carausius seven years, Alectus
six years, Asclepiodotus thirty years, Coelus twenty seven years. After whom
Constantius his son in law by marrying his Daughter, St. Helena succeeded in
the crown, by which account we have between the death of Severus and
Constantius his reigning here 76. years, and from Carausius his death, and the
beginning of Constantius his reign 65. years, Harding makes the distance
shorter, ascribing to Bassianus seven years, to Carausius 4. to Alectus 3.
Asclepiodotus 10. to Coel 11. years, yet by this account also Carausius was
dead many years before that time, wherein Hector Boethius and some others make
him to have first advanced any title to the Crown of Britain.

Yet we may make some part of atonement between these opinions, if we shall
say with the British and other Histories, Math. West. an. 286.
that Carausius was but a young man in the time of Bassianus or Heliogabalus
the true Kings of Britain. And he went to Rome to procure his Commission there
of the Senate to be Admiral to keep the British Seas. How. Hist. Titul. The
Romans, an. 285.
And after he was thus admitted Admiral, long time and diverse years must needs
be spent before he could come to that power by Sea and Land with Britains
Picts and Scots, to be King of Britain, although he was as diverse hold of the
Kingly race, Ex regio Stemate, and Uncle to that renowned Christian King of
Scots Grathnitus, Carausius of Kingly race.
though some style him to have been of base lineage unprobable in a man
obtaining such honor of the Roman Senate, Hect. Boet. Scot. Hist. l. 6.
and renown among Princes, Kings, and Emperors, and diverse of them Christians.
But to go no further out of my way, whether Bassianus or his Son Heliogabalus
both Emperors and Britains by parentage, or Carausius was in Britain at this
time, we are by this which is said assured, H^lenshed. in Scot. in Grathlint.
that the Christians here were in quiet and peace; for if Bassianus still
continued King, he had made peace with all Christians here, whether Britains,
Picts or Scots, before his departure hence to Rome. And although Heliogabalus,
Hoel. Boet and alii. sup. Harding c. 53.
was otherwise a Man of such wicked conversation, that I had rather refer any
man desirous to know the manner, both of his own and his Fathers life, to
foreign writers, then fill my pen with the dishonor of their race in them, yet
no History makes mention that he any way was a persecuter of Christians, if
Carausius was King, it is not unprobable but he was a Christian, advanced,
chosen, and honored with that Kingly dignity by the Christians, confederate
with, and assisted by the Christian Scots and Picts, their Kings or Rulers and
against the Pagan Romans, a professed Patron and Propugnator of the Right and
Privileges, and Revenger of the wrongs and Injuries of the Christians here,
contending by all means he could even with the adventure of his life loosing in
that quarrel, to restore the Christians of this Kingdom to that quiet and
honorable Estate, to be free from the Thraldom of foreign Pagans, which they
happily enjoyed in the Government of King Lucian, and the Roman Senate began
now to infringe and violate; This was the pretended end, and scope of his
designs, although by some writers, not with a little design of his own
greatness and exaltation, no strange disease amongst great Princes in any age.

Hollenshed says, that Alectus was sent from Rome with three Legions,
Hollenshed Hist. of Engl.
and slew him in the field.

Fabian tells us, that in a Book which in French is called Merc de Histories,
or the Mother of Histories in our Tongue, that this Carausius, or as he calls
him Carassius, was first a Treasurer, or such a high Officer among the Romans;
by reason whereof, he engrossed great abundance of Riches, and by that means
became gracious with the Senators, and in time was elected Senator, and became
a man of such authority, that Basianus made him Protector of the City and
Country of Alexandria; from this his advancement and greatness, issued pride,
and that pride begat Tyranny, insomuch that the Country grew weary of their
heavy and servile bondage and impositions, insomuch that his death was
conspired and decreed, which he perceiving, first revenged himself upon the
conspirators, and then left the Country and Province. At his coming to Rome
the Senate finding him to be of an austere and ridged disposition, assigned
unto him the rule of Britain with three Legions. This is Fabians relation, but
what is formerly set down from Mr. Broughton carries with it more authority.

Alectus.
Alectus sent from Rome by the Emperor and Senate, began the time of his
government, Fabian fol. 49 c. 64.
in the year of our Lord 227. We do not find that Alectus after he had slain
Carausius in battle, and taken upon him the Kingdom, which he held for the
space of three years, did persecute the Christian Britains, under pretense of
Religion, but for following Carausius, and not yielding subjection to the
Romans as they required, where we see the reason of that affliction of the
Britains by the Romans; because they had forsaken the Commonwealth, and
Government thereof, and followed Carausius an Usurper, as the Romans esteemed
him. And other Historians make it plain, that only the followers of Carausius,
and no others were thus persecuted by Alectus; and Matthew of Westminster. also says,
that Alectus did afflict only those Britains, who forsaking their Country had
committed themselves to the command of Carausius; which Harding more plainly
confesses, when he says of Alectus, Pont. Virum. l. 5. Galf. Mon. l. 5. c. 4.
Mat. West an. 294. Harding c 56. Hollersh. Hist. of Eng. l 4. c. 23. Stow and
Stowes in Ascepiod. Hard. c. 56. Galf. Mon. 5. c. 5. Virum. l. 5. Mat. West an
294.
Allecto then crowned and made King of all Britain, reigning fully years
three, and well he ruled in all manner of working; or if Alectus or his Pagan
Soldiers and under-Rulers did unjustly persecute any Britains for Religion,
neither he nor they did escape the just vengeance of God executed upon them, by
the Christian Britains in the like kind, for when Alectus and his Infidel
consorts were at London gathered together to make solemn sacrifice to their
Idols, they were by the Christians driven from their sacrifice, Alectus
shamefully put to flight and slain, his army scattered, and though by Livius
Gallus his Colleague in some part renewed again, yet both the General Gallus and
all his Romans were slain by the Christian Britains in one day, and their
Leader Gallus contemptuously thrown into a brook taking name, thereof as our
modern Antiquaries with antiquity thus deliver, Asclepiodotus recocovered
Britain and slew the Romans Captain named Livius Gallus near unto a brook there
at that time running, into which brook he threw him, by reason whereof it is
called in British Nant Gallon, since in the Saxon tongue Gallus or Wallus
brook and to this day the street where sometime the brook ran is called
Walbrook: And proves the History of this brook both by public Records and
Inquisitions. This Alectus reigned according to Fabian six years.

Asclepiodotus.
Asclepiodotus Duke of Cornewal as says Gaufride (but after the saying of
Eutropius and Beda he was President of the Pretory of Rome) began his dominion
over the Britains in the year of our Lord 232, who upon his victory was
crowned King of Britain by Parliament, says Harding, and by common consent of
the people, (as both the British History Pont. Virun. and Matthew of Westminster.)
being Duke of Cornwall before. All these last writers except Matt. West, say
Dioclesian his persecution began here in his time, of which I shall speak
hereafter. And it seems that diverse Historians not observing that Constantius
was here twice, marrying St. Helena the first time, and the second time
receiving her again, when Maximian the persecuting Emperor, had forced him to
put her away, do thereupon vary and differ much about the years of our Kings in
those times: an old manuscript Chronicle does say Bassianus reigned 27 years,
Carausius whom it calls Carencius 39 years, Alectus 15 years, Asclepiodotus
10 years, Coel 4 years, and after him his son in law and daughter Constantius
and Helena 11 years. The modern Catalogue of our Kings, has told us that
Asclepiodotus did reign 30 years, the same has Hellenshed, calling it the
common account of our Chroniclers; and by the same Authors and diverse others,
King Coel in the latter end of whose reign the Romans by Constantius came in
again, etc.

Authors excuse Asclepiodotus from being any mover of that persecution which
then was in Britain, but suffering the Tyrant Maximian to prosecute it, and
not resisting him therein, which is rather imputed to want of power, than will
and desire in him, when he says, I mean Harding, Who for great fear suffered
all this pain,
(Of Christians)
And durst nothing against this Tyrant steer,
But him withdrew, to hide him, was full fain.


Where he does insinuate, that Asclepiodotus was in judgment a friend rather
than persecutor of Christians; and himself in some sort persecuted by the Roman
Pagans, in that respect which seems expressed, in that this Author says of
him, That he was enforced to hide himself from the Pagan Roman persecutors: And
we find diverse Antiquities testifying, that before there was not any
persecution here against Christians, but their Religion was in peace and quiet
publicly professed; and this Asclepiodotus, to redeem and preserve such
Britains liberty, in that and all other privileges, warred against Alectus
the Pagan Roman Governor, and in sign of his detestation of their Idolatry,
beset and assaulted him and his Confederates, when they were doing their
greatest and most solemn sacrifices to their gods.

Now to calm these Tempests of Troubles, I suppose (by our best Histories) that
this persecution of Dioclesian and Maximinian here raged about the space of
nine or ten years, in the time of Asclepiodotus principally, and that now at
the Martyrdom of St. Amphibalus, so great miseries and afflictions had been
laid upon our holy Christians here long time, as their flying from hence unto
other Nations; their abode there, return hither again, and continuing no short
space, before they were put to death, as is manifest in the case of St.
Amphibalus, not martyred till almost a year after St. Alban, who was kept in
prison six months before his Martyrdom, that now thousands were converted to
Christ, and the chief municipal Cities themselves, where Idolatry so reigned,
that a Christian was rare to be then found in them, as in Verulam, were now
only inhabited by Christians, and not a Pagan to be seen; and this by the
Omnipotent working of God, and the Idolatrous Judge and Prince himself, that
ruled here under the Pagan Romans, and persecuted by their power, even to the
utmost bounds of Brittany, was made that he was unable to Rule and Govern any
longer, but needed be Ruled and Governed himself by others. This Judge, King
and Roman Lieutenant, as the Scottish Historians with others call him, was King
Asclepiodotus, thus grievously either of malice or for fear of the Romans then
persecuting, and for so doing hated of God and Man.

Coel.
King Coel (who began his reign in the year of our Lord 262.) having now both
Warrant and Way to advance the Title to the Crown of this Kingdom, and help to
free the afflicted Christians thereof, from the miseries of their so long and
grievous persecution (as it seems most probable) at this time and upon these
occasions, he took Arms against Asclepiodotus, reputed King in this
persecution, slew him and was crowned King, as our Historians deliver unto us:
Harding also plainly says, that Coel took Arms against Asclepiodotus, by
reason of this great persecution.

For which Duke Coel against him rose in Arms; Asclepiodotus for the first ten
years of his reign was just, and ruled with the general applause of all, but
after fell into wickedness and cruelty, so that King Coel might justly pursue
his right to Britain, in hope thereby in better manner to redeem the
afflictions of his Country Christians, being more potent and able, and likely
more willing than Asclepiodotus was, not so forward in any Judgments as he
should have been in defending innocence, if he had not been an actual
persecutor; which Harding himself thus in these plain terms expresses: Harding
Chron. cap. 58 fol. 57.
This persecution as some Chronicles fain,
The ten years war of Asclepiodote,
For which Duke Coel again him rose full hot,
The Duke Caer Colun, that hight Coilus
Which City now this day Colchester hight,
Then crowned was that slew Asclepiodotus,
For cause he came not forth with all his might,
The Tyramite fell to a canstand, as he hight,
Wherefore Britains were all full glad and fain,
Of King Coilus that succored all their pain.


And howsoever Asclepiodotus concurred with the Roman persecutors, and pleased
them in vexing and tormenting Christians here in Britany; yet otherwise he was
very unpleasing unto them: He troubled the Roman power in all things, and
therefore they were glad of his death. Ponticus Virunnius himself, a Roman,
says, they did esteem him their great enemy, and as for such an one rejoiced
at his death, and this joy was not only of particular Romans, but of the whole
Senate which ruled chiefly in matters of Estate. Therefore when our Antiquities
assure us that Coel obtained the Kingdom, and was crowned, and as an old French
manuscript speaks, regna sur Britaniae, rules over Britain, and was thus
enabled and made powerful to redress what he found offensive and wicked, being
absolute King, and joyfully so received of the Britains, as our Historian said
before.

Wherefore Britains were all full glad and feign,
Of King Coelus that succored all their pain.
And he himself taking acception to Asclepiodotus, next to his charging him
with usurping the Crown, for being to backward in resisting the Roman
persecutors, would not fall into the like error with him, but as is proved
already succored all their pain, and utterly ceased the persecution against
Christians of Britain which were thus joyful of his coronation and thereby
relieved and redeemed them from their afflictions all his time, which both by
our own and foreign Historians, continued to the end of the third hundred of
years. Mr. Broughton.
The Romans having no power here either to persecute Christians, or to any
other purpose. But as our British and other Historians testify, wholly lost
their government here, until after the death of King Coel, or the coming of
Constantius his son in law hither, the second time, very little before King
Coel his death. Our Scottish Historians say that King Coel utterly destroyed
both Romans and all the Britains also, which were their favorers, and set
forth a severe edict, to search forth all Romans and Britains which had
followed them here, and caused them to be punished and put to death, and so
with most joyful and general applause of the people, Nobles and others, that
the crown of Britain was thus restored to the true heir of their regal blood,
was crowned King, and he established the Kingdom in the British government. So
that now so severe a law being made and executed both against the prosecuting
Romans, and all such Britains as had joined with them against the Christian
inhabitants of this nation, and all this done by the authority of our King, and
with the consent both of the nobility and people; we must needs end the
persecution here with the beginning of King Coels reign.

And it would not be singular in this point if we should hold, that King Coel
was actually a christian, and not only a friend to such; for first, all they
which affirm him to have been Kinsman or Heir to our first christian King St.
Lucius, easily prove him a christian, for such a man would not leave either
child or kinsman, which by him had that title, to have any other education.
Secondly by the time of his age, whether he was to King Lucius, so near or no
we must needs confess, he lived most part of his life, when christianity
flourished in this Kingdom, being an aged man before Dioclesian his persecution
began. Thirdly our Historians say that his daughter St. Helen, which had her
education by his direction, was instructed and taught in the christian faith. A
late Author thus speaks, of this, Helena she was first instructed in the
faith of Christ by Coel her father, as Petrus de Natalibus says; and yet if we
incline to this opinion, we may easily answer them that will object the public
and universal restitution of christian religion, as building Churches,
Monasteries, and such holy foundations was not in his time. For by the common
opinion his reign was short, little, and not above four years, a great part
whereof was spent, in extirpating the persecutors, and the rest in preparation
to resist a new invasion of the Romans, not reigning in quiet and security from
these troubles and fears the space of two months, by any writers: and so after
so great and terrible a tempest of persecution, it was a wonderful comfort and
happiness for the British christians, to enter into such a calm and quiet, to
live in security and rest, freed from their former miseries under so renowned a
King which was all he could do, or they expect in such times and circumstances.

The Roman Emperors after the death of Heliogabolus, until Constantius married
first, or after received again Helena daughter of Coel, had little command in
this Kingdom, therefore it will suffice to set down briefly their names and
continuance of their Emperors, which our late Antiquaries do thus propose unto
us. After Senerius Bassianus surnamed Antonius Caracalla succeeded in the
Empire, but was murdered by Martialis when he had governed six years, Macrinus
one year, Antonius Heliogabalus three years, Alexander Severus 13 years, Julius
Maximus three years, M. Antonius Gordanus one year, Julius Philipus (they omit
the second his son) the first christian Emperor five years, Decius two years,
Trebonianus, Gallas and Vibius Hostilianus two years, Julius Aemilianus four
months, Lecinius Valerianus six, Lacivius Gallicinus fifteen. At this time
there arose in diverse countries thirty usurpers, which are called the thirty
Tyrants, of which Lollianus Posthumus, Victorianus Tetricius, as it is supposed
kept Britain from Gallimus: Flavius Claudius two, Aurelianus five, Tacitus 6
months, Florianus six months. This year 276. Aurelian the Dane was chosen
Emperor, he hated christians, and in the 4 year of his reign he stirred up the
9th persecution upon the church of God, he reigned 5 years and 6 days. And
after that, Tacitus succeeded in the Empire being a very fit and worthy
governor, and after Tac. Probus Equirius (...) Son to Delinacius a Clown, and
Gardener by profession; this Probus Equirius was a most valiant Man at arms,
and as good a Justitiar, as any that had the public Government, he began his
reign in the year of Christ, 282. and reigned six years and four months, A
British History.
Aurelius Probus five years. In which time Bonosus, (famous for excess in
drinking) a Britain born, usurped the Empire with Proculus at Cullen, and
would have exempted from the Romans, Britain, Spain, and part of France, but
being vanquished by Probus, he strangled himself (that was the way to spoil
his drinking:) This Probus after he had reigned five years, was slain of the
Soldiers, Carus was created Augustus, he made Carinus and Numerianus his Sons
Caesar's, to Carinus he assigned Britain, Gaul, Illiricum, Italy, and Spain,
but Carinus was slain by lightning, and the other two within three years space
lost their lives. Dioclesian was then chosen Emperor, who adjoined Maximianus
unto him; in like Government these two Emperors elected two Caesar's, Valerius
Maximus and Constantius Chlorus, to which Constantius he committed the recovery
of Brittany.

When Dioclesian and Maximian the most offensive Enemies of the faithful
Servants, and Church of Christ, intended their merciless and matchless
persecution against them, the ease to make it was as universal and general, as
it was bloody and Tyrannical, and perceiving that neither Nero nor any other
their predecessors in that profane impiety had or could before them transport
their rage in that kind, over our Ocean into this Kingdom, protected and
rampired both by situation and sea, and Christian Kings are Rulers, or
favorers of Christianity and Immunities from the Roman severities in such
nature, their study and practice was, first to surprise and overthrow these
firm Bulwarks and Forts against them, and therefore assuredly knowing that by
the Regal claim and title of Britain, Queen Helena was the lawful an
undoubted heir and Owner thereof, that she was a Christian, and descended of
such parents, and absolute Queen of such a Country, the rare virtues and
wisdom, she was endued with, her potency thereby, with her victorious and
triumphant husband Constantius that they had children to succeed them in the
Kingdom, and Government of Britain, and such as by credible Antiquities before
were Christians, and thereby more likely to enlarge and dilate, then to
restrain or hinder the profession of Christianity, they knew these Impediments
to their wicked disignements must be taken away before they could take effect,
whereupon beginning with the chiefest and principal propugnacle, the title of
Queen Helen, her marriage with Constantius, and love between them, they first
assaulted this by pretended disability in that title and marriage. Her lawful
Title by Regal Lineal descent they frustrated in their Judgment, which then had
no Judge on Earth, by their pretended and not to be examined Imperial claim and
pre-eminence, taking and reckoning for their own whatsoever they could get and
keep by force and sword; and their more then Panege^ical Orator Mamertinus
says plainly in his oration to Maximian the Emperor, that the Britains were
not only subject unto him, and that he landing in Britain, The Britains
received him with great Triumph, offered themselves unto his presence with
their Wives and children, reverencing not only himself, but even the sails and
tacklings of that ship which had brought his divine presence unto their coasts,
and when he should set foot on Land, they were ready to lie down at his feet
that he might as it were march over them, so desirous they were of him, that
both the Britains and Nations adjoining to the bounds of that Isle were
obedient to his commandment: And gives nothing to Constantius, but as in the
right and title of that Emperor.

Like to this have some other flatterers of the Romans written, by which we see
they went about utterly to disable the Queen to have any title to the Kingdom.
This they so urged to Constantius, and so disgraced his marriage with that
renowned Lady, that in the end they compelled him, to put her away, and take
Theodora a Pagan, Daughter of the persecuting Emperor Maximian in her place,
then they banished St. Lucius and St. Emerita their holy children. Some by
reason of the Identity of the name think this Lucius here spoken of to have
been Lucius the King, but Harrison in his description of Britain clears that
doubt, who thus relates the occasion of Prince Lucius his forsaking Britain
his native country. It happened (says he) that Lucius by reason of a quarrel
grown between him and his Elder brother, either by a fray or by some other
means, did kill his said brother, whereupon his Father exiled him, out of
Britain, and appointed him from thenceforth to remain in Aquitain in France.
He became a Bishop in the Church of Christ. He erected a place of prayer,
wherein to serve the living God, and is still called even to this our time,
after Lucian or Lucius the first Founder thereof, and the original beginner of
any such house in those parts; in this also he and diverse others of his friends
continued their times in great contemplation and prayer, and from thence were
translated as occasion served unto sundery Ecclesiastical promotions, in the
time of Constantine his brother, so that by his short narration it is easy to
see that Lucius the King, and Lucius son of Chlorus were two distinct persons,
and the same Author says further and more at large in his relation hereof;
Constantius Chlorus being at the first matched with Helena, and before she was
put from him by the Royal power of Dioclesian, he had by her three sons,
besides one Daughter called Emerita, of which the name of the first is
perished, the second was called Lucius, and the third Constantine, that after
was Emperor. And he after adds thereunto, Hermanius Sehedelius adds also,
how he went into Rhetia with Emerita his Sister, and near unto the City
Augusta, converted the Curienses unto the Faith of Christ, and there likewise
being put to death in Castro Martis, lies buried in the same Town, where his
feast is held upon the third day of December. The Curienses converted to the
faith by a Britain.
That Schedelius erreth not herein, also the ancient monuments of the said
Abbey, whereof he was the original beginner, do yield sufficient testimony,
beside an Hymn made in the commendation, entitled Gaude Lucionum, etc. The
said Schedelius sets down likewise, that his sister Emerita was martyred in
Trine castle near unto the place where the said Lucius dwelled; and the same
Author says further, that he converted all Bavaria and Rhetia between the
Alps; and this narration is confirmed by Gaspar Bruchius thus, Bavaria and
Rhetia converted to Christianity by a Britain.
St. Lucius which preached to the Germans, was born of the regal race among the
Britains, and propogating the faith of Christ, came out of Brittainy into
Germany, and preached first at Salisbury, then at Austburg, from whence he was
cast out by the Infidels there, and then went with his sister St. Emerita to
the City of Chur, where preaching again, both he and his sister Emerita were
martyred by the Pagans, St. Lucius at Chur in the castle of Mars, and St.
Emerita at Trine Castle.

Lucius and Emerita being thus by means of the Roman Emperors Dioclesian and
Maximian both banished and martyred, to make all sure in their proceedings they
detained Constantine the other child, as Hostage at their command, and placed
here in Britain, none to bear office, but such as were Pagans, ready to
execute the cruel and savage resolutions of that bloody persecuting Tyrant,
against the holy christians here. These things thus completed, the state of
Britain by such means was now brought into the same condition for persecution
with other nations, or rather worse, the number of christians being here then
far greater, both in respect it was a christian Kingdom, and so had both more
christian inhabitants then other nations, and by the immunities and privileges
it should have enjoyed, many christians of other regions fled and resorted
hither in hope of quiet and security from persecution.

This violent storm of persecution raging through the whole Roman Empire,
acted many tragical Scaenes in this Isle. Harding in his Chronicle says, Hard.
c. 57. f. 41
The Emperor Dioclesian
Into Brittaon sent Maximian;
This Maximian to surname Hercelius,
A Tyrant false that Christenty annoyd,
Through all Britain, a work malicious,
The Christen folk, felly and sore destroyed.
And thus the people with him foul accloyed,
Religious men, the Priests and Clerks all,
Women with child, and bedrid folk all,
Children sucking upon their their Mothers pappis,
The mothers also without any pity,
And children all in their mothers lappis,
The Creples eke and all the Christentee
He killed and slew with full great cruelty,
The Churches brent, all books and ornaments,
Bells, Relics, that to the Church appends.


Dioclesian came to the Empire in the year of Christ 282, and did within two
years after begin his most cruel persecution; the first that felt the heavy,
but yet most blessed stroke here in Britain, was St. Allan. Dicetus Dean of
St. Paul's, London, does set down this persecution in Britain in the year of
Christ 287. The old manuscript Annals of Winchester say that S. Allan in the
eight year of Dioclesian and Maximian was put to death; and the same
antiquities tell us that the Monks of Winchester were martyred by the Officers
of Dioclesian in the second year of his reign, and their Church, then
destroyed; Godwin.
a late Bishop as he cites from some Antiquities of that Church says, this
happened in the year of Christ, 289. and adds that at this time, Dioclesian
endeavoring to root out Christian Religion in Britain, not only killed the
professors of the same, Mr Br. f. 415. Hollen. Hist. of Engl. l. 4.
but also pulled down all churches anywhere consecrated to the exercise
thereof. The instruments of Dioclesian herein were Quintus Bassianus Hircius,
Alectus Gallus, as the most principal with others of inferior degrees; and
Mamertinus the Panegyrist has avouched to Maximian the persecutor, before that
he was here in Britain in his own person, which is confirmed by our own
Antiquaries: Adding further that he persecuted in the Occidental parts, by
commission from Dioclesian; John Lydgat l. 8.
so testifies John Lydgate the Monck of Bury with others.

Ant. Brit. Antiq. in tit. S. Alb. Cadgrave in eodem.
St. Alban our first Martyr was rather descended of Noble Roman then British
blood, but probably both of Roman and British blood, his abode and dwelling
was at Caermunip, or Verulam, where all professed Roman Paganism, and there he
entertained, either for old acquaintance (for they were both Knighted at the
same time in Rome, or hospitality sake, as being a man eminent, and by some
styled High Steward of the Britains) St. Amphibalus; but when he began to
speak of Jesus Christ the son of God, and incarnate for man's redemption, he was
so far off from being a christian, that he had scarce heard of Christ before,
but said, this testimony of Christ was strange unto him; and St. Amphibalus
more particularly declaring the mysteries of Christ's Nativity, Passion,
Resurrection, and Ascension, Alban was yet so far from believing, that he told
St. Amphibalus he was mad to preach such things, that understanding did not
apprehend, nor reason allow, and if the Citizens of that place did know what he
spoke concerning Christ, they would most cruelly put him to death, and feared
much that he would fall into trouble before he could go forth of his house. But
what the preaching of St. Amphibalus prevailed not in, his earnest prayer and
watching obtained of God for Alban. For as the old British writer of his life,
living in that, time relates this History. St. Amphibalus watching in prayers
all the night following, a strange and admirable vision appeared to Alban,
wherewith he being exceedingly terrified and perplexed, presently rose and went
to St. Amphibalus, thus declaring his vision, and desiring the exposition
thereof in this order, and these words. O my friend if these things which thou
preachest of Christ are true. I beseech thee be not afraid to tell unto me the
true meaning of my dream or vision. I did attend and behold a Man came from
Heaven, whom a great and innumerable multitude of Men apprehended, and laid
diverse kinds of Torments upon him, his hands were bound with cords, his body
worn with whips, and grievously torn, his body hanged upon a cross, and his
hands stretched cross upon it. The Man which was thus tortured, was naked and
had no shoes upon his feet. His hands and feet were pierced with nails, his
side thrust through with a spear, and as it seemed to me blood and water did
flow out of the wound of his side; they set a reed in his right hand, and put a
crown of thorn upon his head, and having done all things which man's cruelty
could work against him, they began to work him with words, saying unto him,
Hail King of the Jews: If thou art the son of God, now come down from thy
cross and we believe thee, and then they used many revilings against him: that
young man answered not one word unto them. At last when they had said what
they could against him, crying out with a great voice he said. O Father into
thy hands I commend my spirit, and having so said gave up the Ghost. His dead
body was taken down from the cross, the blood still largely issuing out of his
wounds, they shut it in a tomb of stone, and covered it with a stone sealed,
appointing watchmen to keep it. And a wonder to see, his body thus being dead
came to life again, and receiving strength, did go forth of the Sepulcher, it
still remaining shut. How he did arose from death, I did behold with my own
eyes. Men clothed with garments as white as snow did come from Heaven, and
taking that Man with them, returned from whence they came, and an infinite army
of Men clothed all in white does follow him, which ceased not in all that
journey, to sing praises, and continually blessed a Father and his only
begotten son, great and unspeakable joy was among them, so that none might
worthily be compared unto it. These and many other things which I neither will,
nor is lawful for any mortal Man to tell have been showed to me in vision this
night, what they do signify, I beseech thee not to conceal from me; be not
afraid. St. Amphibalus, hearing these things, perceiving that his heart was
visited by God, exceedingly rejoiced in our Lord, and forthwith pulling out a
cross of our Lord which he had about him, said behold, in this sign thou may
manifestly see what this vision this night means, what it signifies. For
this Man coming from Heaven is my Lord Jesus Christ, who did not refuse to
undergo the punishment of the Cross, that he might deliver us by his blood from
the guilt, wherewith we were held bound by the prevarication of our first
parent Adam. And so prosecuting to the mystery of the holy Trinity, which I
need not particularly to relate, writing to Christian Readers, to speak in this
old British Authors words again; Alban greatly marvailing upon the speeches of
St. Amphibalus, brake out into these words. The things which thou relatest of
Christ are true, and cannot in any respect be reproved as false, for I this
night have evidently known, how Christ overcame the Devil, and thrust him down
to the bottom of Hell. I have seen with my eyes how that horrible one, lies
enwrapped, in the knots of chains, hereby knowing that all thou have spoken is
true. I believe and from this time this is my faith, that there is no God but
my Lord Jesus Christ, who for the salutation of Men, vouchsaving to take
humanity upon him sustained the passion of the cross, the which the Father and
the Holy Ghost is one God, and there is no other, and having thus said, he
falls down prostrate before the cross, as if he had seen our Lord Jesus
hanging thereon, the blessed penitent craveth pardon for his sin. Tears mingled
with blood, run down about his face, and in great quantity fell down upon the
venerable wood of the cross. I says he, renounce the Devil, and detest all the
Enemies of Christ, believing in him, and commending my self to him, who as thou
affirms rose the third day from death. Amphibalus says unto him be of
courage, our Lord is with thee, and his grace will never be wanting to th^^.
That faith which other mortal men have deserved to receive by the Tradition of
Men, thou have not learned it either of Man or by Man, but by the Revelation of
Jesus Christ. Therefore being now secure of thee, I determine to go further to
preach unto the Gentiles: but Alban entreating him to stay at the East one week
longer, that he might in that time be more perfectly instructed in the Faith of
Christ, he did so.

Thus writes this old British Author of St. Alban his conversion, Gil lib. de
Excid. Brit. cap. 8 Bid Martyr. 22. Julii. Bid l. 1. Hist. Eccle. c. 7.
Matthew. West. an. 303.
which both St. Gildas and Saint Bede, and others do in effect and substance also
deliver, although not in so ample a manner: during the time of their abode
together afterward, they spent their time, as St. Amphibalus by Bedes relation
did before St. Albans Conversion, in continual watchings and prayers day and
night, a great motive to St. Alban to receive the Faith of Christ; for every
day toward evening they withdrew themselves from the City and Company of men,
going to an house which St. Alban had without the City, where they spent the
whole night in serving God; and although they observed this camelous diligence,
to keep themselves secret from the persecutors, yet it was by a wicked Pagan
there revealed, and told to the persecuting Judge; which coming to the
knowledge of St. Alban (before the Pagan Prince and persecutor could execute
his designment, Gild. lib. 3. ^e exc. l. 8. Bid l. 1. Hist. c. 7. Galf. Mon.
Hist. Reg. Brit. l. 5. c. 3. Mat. West an. 303.
as at his first receiving o St. Amphibalus, when he was as yet a Pagan, as our
ancient Histories say) he hid him in his house, being pursued by his
persecutors, and presently, had not St. Alban so prevented it, to be
apprehended; so now being a Christian, exposed himself unto danger of death for
him, imitating Christ, that gave his own life for his sheep; for when those
enemies of Christ had raised their Troops, even an Army, as our Antiquaries
name them, to apprehend St. Amphibalus and St. Alban in the night, he before
conducteth him forth of his house and past danger, and shifting garments with
him, to save him from all peril, caused St. Amphibalus to wear his garment of
dignity and privilege, in that time free from all trouble and molestation; and
the garment of St. Amphibalus, where the danger was (being a Caracalla, a
Priests vesture, as they say) having been discryed, he put it it upon himself,
together with the danger; and so returned to his own house alone, having thus
freed his holy Master and Tutor in Christ from that peril.

St. Amphibalus being thus at this time delivered by St. Alban, the King, Bed.
Hist. li. c: 7. Matthew. West. an. 303. Jacob. Germen. in vita St. Alba. Capgrave
in vita St. Al.
Prince or Judge (for Saint Bede, Matthew. Westminster. and other, give all these Titles
to that persecuting Magistrate) sent his soldiers to come at these two holy
Saints; the old British Writer of St. Albans life says, there were horsemen,
with an Army, great multitude, or power of footmen, which were thus sent about
this business: And St. Alban being so renowned a man in this Kingdom then, and
St. Amphibalus so famous a Prelate, and so known to the persecutors that they
pursued him to the furthest parts of the Roman jurisdiction, in the parts now
called Wales, and from thence forcibly brought him by authority to Verulamium
again, there to be Judged and Martyred, which none but the highest Roman power
here could do, Mr. Bro. fol. 438. 1. The rage of the Judge against St. Alban.
Manusc. Antiq. in vita St. Amphibali. Capg. in eodem Matthew. West. an 303. and
alii.
make it an opinion sufficiently warrantable, both that such forces were levied
for this exploit, and the prime Magistrate himself supplied the place of Judge
and Sentencer in this cause of so noble personages, the one spiritual, the
other temporal, the greatest that are remembered in our Histories, to have
suffered Martyrdom in Britain in that raging persecution: the Troops of
soldiers of the wicked Prince, rushing into the house of St. Alban like mad
men; and searching every place and corner, at last found him in his
Countrey-house, where he used to watch and pray with St. Amphibalus,
barefooted praying before the Cross of our Lord, which his Master had left
with him, wearing his Caracalla or Coat upon him, and so representing St.
Amphibalus who before was conveyed from them by St. Alban; which they
understanding, They lay violent hands upon St. Alban, setter him with locks and
chains, some of them haling him by his Coat, others by the Hair of his Head:
And being thus contumeliously used, The great devotion of St. Alban, and his
reverence to the Crucifix. Bed. l. 1. c. 7. Matthew West. an. 303. Serp. vita St.
Albani.
he continually carried in his hands the Cross which St. Amphibalus gave him,
openly to pronounce and profess himself a Christian. And being thus
despightfully brought before the Judge, who labored by all means he could to
persuade and induce St. Alban to forsake his Chistian Religion, and sacrifice
to their Pagan gods; but this was all in vain; for to speak in an old British
Authors words. St. Alban answered the Judge, that his words were vain and
superfluous, he did not repent him for receiving the Faith of Christ, for the
Miracles wrought in it, restoring the weak and sick to health, do teach it by
their testimony, to be the way of Salvation, he would not sacrifice to their
gods; and being supported by the help of God, feared not their threats and
torments: Upon which words the company gathering together, whipped him
grievously; who being thus beaten, said with a cheerful countenance, O Lord
Jesus Christ, I beseech thee keep my mind from wavering from the state which
thou have given me, O Lord I desire to offer my life an Holocaust, and with
effusion of my blood to be thy witness; and when the Tormentors hands were
weary, the H. man was thrust into the bottom of the prison, and there kept six
months: whereupon the Elements themselves did testify the injury done unto
the Martyr; for from the time of his apprehension unto his death, neither rain
nor dew did fall upon the earth, the winds did not blow, but every day
continually the land was parched up with most fervent heat of the Sun, and in
the night also was exceeding and intolerable heat; neither Fields nor Trees
bore any fruit, the whole world did fight for the just one against the wicked.
The Citizens not able to endure this affliction, said it was Christ whom Alban
worshippeth works this, that no Corn nor Grass does grow unto us, and taking
pity upon the injuries done to this holy man, by the judgment of them all he
is delivered from the bonds of the chains; for which St. Alban was very sorry;
and greatly fearing, least his Martyrdom might thereby be hindered, looking
upwards to Heaven, groaning said, O Lord Jesus Christ, suffer not the malice of
the Devil so much to prevail, that by his crafty devices, and assent of this
people, he may hinder my Passion; and turning himself to the people, said unto
them, Why do you stay? If you know not to give sentence, take Council of your
Laws, examine the Statutes of your City, they will insinuate unto you what you
ought to do; Why do ye make delay? Be it known to you all, that I am a great
enemy to your gods; For how can they be worthy any honor, which are known to
have no divine thing in them, being the works of men's hands, and you your
selves are their witnesses, that they see nothing, hear nothing, understand
nothing? Oh greatly to be detested vanity! to hope for life of them that never
lived, to pray unto them that never heard, to seek health of things that never
were well themselves; whereupon I absolutely pronounce, That he which
worshippeth such, is most mad; I demand of you, what can be more unhappy than
that man, over whom his own works have dominion? Therefore woe unto Idols, and
woe unto the Worshippers thereof. When they heard these things, with a general
consent they gave sentence of death against the holy man, Holinhirst.
and bring him to a place called Holinhirst. Thus far this old British Writer,
Matthew. Westminster. Capgrave, and others consenting.

Matthew of Westminster expressly further adds, which others do also
sufficiently testify, That as before his Judgment, so now after it, St. Alban
often kissing the Cross which he held in his hand, commended his cause to God;
and continually kept and reverenced his Crucifix, until his head was stricken
off, when also besprinkled with his holy blood, Matthew. Westminster. an. 3^3. in St.
Albans.
it fell upon the grass, and was secretly taken up and preserved by a Christian
there present. This Author, as he adds this which the British Writer
wants, so wants he something before related from him; for whereas the
British Antiquary said, that the Citizens of Verulamium, upon strange
punishments wherewith God afflicted them in the time of the imprisonment of St.
Alban, did set him free and at liberty.

But to return to the British Author, where I left him; thus he, with others
proceeds in the Narration of the Martyrdom of this holy Saint, so great a
company of people resorted to the place of his Martyrdom, that although it was
large in it self, yet in respect of the great multitude coming thither at that
time, it seemed strait and little; and yet the heat of the Sun was so ardent,
Script. Britt. supr. manuscrip. Antiq. vita St. Albani. Bid l. 1. c. 7. Matthew.
Westminster. an. 303. Capg. in St. Albans. Hen. Hunting. l. 1. Hist. in Dioclesian.
that the ground burned under their feet: In their passage to the place, there
was a most swift River to pass over, and the multitude so great, that they
could scarce before night pass over, and thronging one another, many fell into
the water and were drowned; which, when St. Alban perceived, falling down upon
his knees, thus he prayed for their delivery, O Lord Jesus Christ, from whose
most holy side I have seen both blood and water to flow, grant I beseech thee,
that the waters decrease, and the River may go away, that all this people may
safe and sound be present at my Passion. A wonderful thing to behold, whilst
St. Alban thus kneeled and prayed, the stream was dried up, and the tears of
St. Alban left no waters in the Channel; the power of his Prayer consumed the
River, and made a way for the people between the waters; and they whom the
violence of the water had taken away, enclosed and destroyed, were found in the
bottom of the River without any hurt, having no sign of death in them; the
Soldier which drew St. Alban to these torments, seeing this strange Miracle,
was as strangely thereby converted to the Faith of Christ, threw away his
Sword, and prostrating himself at the feet of the Saint, craved pardon; but the
other Pagans drew St. Alban up and down among the Briars and rough places, so
that the thorns and roots of trees did pull pieces of flesh from his feet; and
yet this merciful and miraculous Saint, seeing the people to be afflicted with
thirst in the Mountain, thus prayed for their relief, O God who did create
man of the slime of the earth, I beseech thee, suffer no creature to sustain
any hurt for my cause; and presently a Well of water sprung up before his feet,
by which they were refreshed.

The Executioner cut off St. Albans head, but his eyes fell out of his own head
therewith, Hiericus Gallus in vita St. Gor.
many so witnessing; among whom Hiericus Gallus in St. Germans life: Millia
poenarum, Christi pro nomine passus
Quem tandem rapuit capitis sententia caesi
Sed non Lictori cessit res tuta superbo.
Vtque caput Sancto reciderunt lumina saevo.


So has the British Writer of St. Albans life, then living, a Pagan, as
himself confesses, and, as may be gathered by his own Narration, present at
his Martyrdom, least they which shall come hereafter, may be doubtful of my
name, they shall call me a wretched and the greatest sinner. And I go to Rome,
that casting off the error of Paganism I may be baptized, and deserve to
obtain pardon of my sins, and this my short treatise I will offer to the
Examination of the Romans. That if any thing shall be uttered in it, otherwise
then it ought, Our Lord Jesus Christ, who Lives and Reigns God, World
without end, may vouchsafe by them to amend it: wherefore see the great Honor
and Reverence which the Christians and Christianly men of that age, even here
in Britain, did acknowledge as due to that holy See, that they referred the
examen and censure of their writings, even of Historical and practical things,
acted so far from thence, to the judgment thereof.

But to finish this funeral honor of this our glorious Martyr, although we do
not find any man then, which for fear of the persecutors presented himself to
bury his holy body, but the valiant Soldier, (now the Soldier of Christ,
converted unto him) which had boldly before them all reverenced the Relics of
St. Alban; who there dug a grave, and laid the Martyrs body therein, which
was all he could do then, Mat. West an 303.
yet God willing (in whose sight the death of his Saints is precious,) as he
had now glorified his Martyrs soul in heaven, so yielded he from thence
extraordinary honor to his body, so meanly buried, making his poor grave more
glorious then the sumptuous Tomb of any Roman Emperor, his persecutor, or
other; for in the next night now following a pillar of light was seen of all
the Pagans themselves, to stretch up from the grave of the holy Martyr unto
heaven, by which Angels descending and ascending spent all the night in
praising God, and among other things which they did sing, these words were
often repeated and heard, The renowned man Alban the Martyr. Mr Br. f: 441. 5.
Autho ^o Britt. vitae S. Albani. Manus. Antiq. in vita eius Capg. in eodem
Manus. Antiq: in vita S. Amp Capg. in eodem Bed. l. 1. Hist. c 7. Hen. Hunt. l
1. Hist. M W. an. 303. Manus. Antiq. in S Amp. Cap. in eodem. Bid l 1. Hist. c
18. Tho. Walsing. Hist. Angl. in Edw. 2. Tho. Walsing. ut supra.
And a thousand of Pagans were hereby converted to Christ; Saint Bede witnesses
that from the martyrdom of St. Alban to his time, cures and often miracles were
wrought in the place of his martyrdom, so has Henry Huntington long after, for
his days also.

The Cross which he had in his hand when he suffered Martyrdom, and was
thereby sprinkled with his holy blood, was reverently preserved by the
Christians then, and presented to St. Amphibalus with great honor: the very
ground whereon St. Alban suffered retained drops of his blood when St. Germain
was sent thither by Pope Caelestine, and he carried part thereof with him, as a
great Relict. His coat Caracalla, which he had of St. Amphibalus, and wherein
he suffered Martyrdom, was kept as a great Relict, and in the time of K. Edward
the II. (the King himself, with many Nobles present, witnesses) was so freshly
bespotted with this Martyrs blood, as if it had been done but the day before,
so miraculously preserved, as the blood in the place of his passion.

Great is the honor which our own both British and English Histories, and
also foreign yield to the Soldier (until then Pagan) who being one that led
St. Alban to his martyrdom and converted by his miracles by the way, was then
and there also most cruelly martyred. St. Gildas says, this martyr being
converted by the miracles St. Alban showed, when by his prayers the deep river
gave place to him, and a thousand with him, to pass over, not wetting their
feet, the waters on both sides standing like walls, as they did to the people
of Israel, to give them passage, was of a wolf made a lamb, and did both
vehemently desire, and valiantly endure martyrdom with him. Saint Bede relates
this History in like manner, yet with more Emphasis of his glory, for having
spoken of the same strange miracle, by which this Soldier was converted
calling him Carnifex, the designed executioner to put St. Alban to death, as S.
Gildas and others do, to show how wonderfully the grace of Christ wrought in
him, he adds, that by divine Inspiration he made all speed he could to come
to St. Alban, and casting away his sword that was drawn to behead St. Alban,
prostrated himself before his feet, the whole assembly beholding it, greatly
desiring that he himself might be worthy to be put to death with the martyr
which he was commanded to strike, and so of a persecutor he became a companion
in Truth and faith.

This St. Heraclius (for so was this happy soldier called) having resolutely
denied his Paganism, craved pardon for his error, and confessed Christ openly
before so many persecutors, and in the highest of their malice and rage against
St. Alban, fell thereby into the same degree of hatred with them, for presently
thereupon to speak in an old Authors words, The Enemies of truth apprehended
him, beat out his teeth, rent his holy mouth, and brake all his bones, and
although nothing remained in his body without hurt, Gild. l. 2. de excid. Brit.
c. 8.
yet his fervent faith remained without harm; and being thus left so maimed,
lame, and baptized in his own blood, and also half dead, with all the power and
strength he could, with his hands crept up to the hill, where St. Alban was
martyred, whom when the judge espied, he said unto him, pray to thy Alban to
set thy bones in order, and lay his head, here stricken off, to thy body, and
thou shall receive perfect health from him: bury thou him, and let him cure
thee. Heraclius answered, I most firmly believe that St. Alban by his merits is
able to heal me, and easily perform that you mock us with; Then reverently
taking the head of St. Alban, and devoutly laying it to his body, he began to
recover the former strength of the same, despaired before, and being thus
miraculously recovered and made whole, ceased not in the hearing of all the
people to preach unto them the merit of St. Alban, and power of Christ, and
digging the earth buried the body of the martyred Saint before them there:
which the Pagans seeing, said among themselves, what shall we do? this man
cannot be put to death with sword, we have already broken his body, and he has
already received his former strength again. And apprehending him with horrible
torment, they tare his holy body in pieces, and lastly cut off his head. And so
this happy Soldier, persevering in the faith of Christ, together with St.
Alban, deserved to be honored with the crown of martydom.

The Judge himself was hereby so moved and convinced, Mr. Br. 443. 2.
that he presently commanded the persecution to cease. Jacobus Genuensis,
Bishop of Genoa, and his old English translation say, this Soldier, called by
some before Herculius, was a Knight. And they yield a reason besides their
assertion, which was the noble renown of St. Alban, who as they say was Lord of
the City of Verulam, and Prince of the Knights, and Steward of the land; Bid
l. 1. c. 7.
and the Judge dread for to slay him, because of the great love that the
Emperor had to him, and for reverence of his dignity, and power of his
kindred, unto the time that he had informed Dioclesian. Jacob. Gone. in vit. St.
Alb. and S. Amp. Anglica translat. ibid. Mr. Br. f. 455.
And therefore when judgment was pronounced against him, the which was deferred
six weeks until Miximian his coming into Britain, to see such wicked
executions, thus they deliver, then Maximian and Asclepiodotus gave final
sentence on him, saying, In the time of the Emperor Dioclesian, Alban Lord of
Verulam, Prince of Knights, and Steward of Britain, during his life has
despised Jubiter and Apollin, Gods, and to them has done derogation and
disworship, wherefore he ought by the law to be dead by the hand of some
Knight, and the body to be buried in the same place, where his head shall be
smitten of, and his Sepulcher to be made worshipfully, for the honor of
Knighthood, whereof he was Prince. And also the cross that he bare, and
Sklavin that he ware should be buried with him, and his body to be closed in a
chest of lead and so laid in his Sepulcher. This sentence has law ordained
because he has renied our principal Gods. These Authors say, Maximian and
King Asclepiodotus gave this sentence; we have spoken elsewhere of those
Martyrs which suffered at Litchfield. Let us therefore return to St. Amphibalus
whom Almighty God had made the instrument to the conversion of so many souls.
These bloody persecutors having thus barbarously and without all commpassion,
of lineage, kindred, friendship, country, or whatsoever relation of love or
mercy, put these holy Saints to death, they now pour out the bottom of their
malice upon St. Amphibalus, neither regarding his noble descent before
remembered, venerable and old years, Mat. West. an 303. Manus. Antiq. in vita S.
Amp Capg. in eodem Mr. Br f. 447. 1
learning, or whatsoever, but bind his arms with thongs, and drive him
barefooted before their horses, so long a journey, from the borders of Britain
where they apprehended him, unto the City of Verulam, where the Prefect and
Lieutenant then was resident. And as they thus contemptibly carried him
barefooted and bound, a sick man lying in the way, in the sight and hearing of
them all cried out unto him, O thou servant of God Almighty help me, that I
which lie oppressed by my own infirmity, may be relieved by thy intercession,
for I do believe that by the calling upon the name of Christ thou art able
presently to restore my health unto me. And forthwith the man, which lay thus
sick before the eyes of them all, arose up joyfully and perfectly well.

When these wicked Pagan persecutors had thus barbarously brought him within
the sight of the walls of the City, as though this holy Saint had been unworthy
to enter into it, and their Troops so great, by that is said before, that they
could not be conveniently received therein, they stay themselves, as it were
pitching their tents, in a place then desert, now called Redburne, three miles
from St. Albans, throwing down their shields, and striking their speers into
the ground. And thus resting themselves, only St. Amphibalus rested not, but
preached continually the doctrine of salvation to his enemies, who in the mean
time gave notice to the Prince, and those of the City of their return and
bringing with them the instructor of St. Alban, and that they had put all those
Christians before spoken of to death, in the uttermost parts of the Kingdom,
after their long journey thither; which when the Governor heard, he called the
people together, and exhorted them: Let us all go forth, and meet our enemy,
that he that has offended may receive revenge of us all. And so hasting forth,
striving as it were who should go first, went by the way leading to the North,
as our antiquities say, the better to set down the old place and situation of
that ancient City, which they then left almost vacant. And coming in this
raging madness and multitude to torment and Martyr this holy Saint, they find
him all wrapped in chains and bonds, and presently stripped him naked, slit his
belly, and pulled out his entrails, tying them to a stake, which they had
fastened in the ground, enforcing him to be led round about it. And the holy
Saint of God, showing no sign of grief at all, among such and so many
afflictions, the wicked persecutors thereby the more enraged, sent him for a
mark as it were, and with their knives and spears, pierced and brake the rest
of his body. Many converted at St. Amphibalus his martyrdom. Jacob. Gonnen. in
vita S. Amp Manus. Antiq. Capg. in eodem.
After all which this holy Martyr stood with as cheerful a countenance as if he
had suffered no hurt at all, and more constant, though he now bore the signs
of his Martyrdom in all his body; Giving a miraculous spectacle of himself,
that he could still live after so great torments, and so many kinds of death,
whereupon very many beholding, and more and more wondering at the constancy of
the blessed Martyr, renouncing their Idols submitted themselves to the
Christian faith, and prayed with a loud voice to God, that by the merits and
intercession of the blessed Martyr they might be worthy to be partakers of
everlasting life, 1000 converted and presently put to death, at the martyrdom
of St. Amphibalus.
which when the Prince perceived and knew he presently called for the
Tormentors, and commanded all that had rejected and forsaken the worship of
their Gods, and embraced the doctrine of Amphibalus, to be put to death.

Which savage Edict the Pagan Soldiers effected, and killed a thousand; which
St. Amphibalus beholding, and commending their souls to God, persuaded his
persecutors to renounce their errors, and be converted to Christ, without whom
no salvation can be had, nothing but hell and eternal damnation to be expected.
But the persecutors did still persevere in their impiety, not ceasing so to
torment this holy Saint with cruel stoning him, besides so many tortures before
remembered, that when his body was afterward miraculously found, there was not
one whole bone in it. Although it seems by the History of his life, that many
of his bones were broken with stones by those so enraged persecutors, that
after his blessed Soul was separated from his body, thus lying still bound and
tied, they ceased not to break it more with their casting great stones upon it.
But so long as he lived in so great extremity of torments, although the stones
were cast at him as thick as hail (as some write) he still persevered in
prayer, never moving himself on the one side or other. And being now come to
the period of his punishments, and to yield his Soul to God: looking toward
Heaven as another St. Stephen, he saw Jesus standing at the right hand of his
Father, and heard a consort of Angels in Heaven, and among them knew St. Alban,
whom he invocated to assist him, saying, O holy Alban, pray unto our God that
he will send a good Angel to meet me, that the dreadful Robber lead me not, nor
the wicked part hinder me in my journey. And a voice spoke to him from Heaven
in the hearing of all, in this manner, Verily, I say unto thee, this day thou
shall be with thy Disciple Alban in Paradise. And two Angels shining with an
heavenly brightness came down unto him, and taking with them the Soul of the
blessed, resplendent with a wonderful whiteness, with Hymns and Praises
carried it to Heaven; which done, to make him both glorious there and
honorable on earth, a Christian secretly conveying his body, reverently buried
it.

And God himself began now to honor him here, and be revenged upon his Enemies
and Persecutors. Those lips of theirs which had been opened before to blaspheme
toward God, and revilings toward his holy Saints, are now miraculously drawn
away, that their speech is hindered. The tongues which had so abused him, now
burn; and the faces of them which had so deformed him, were made deformed; all
their members are so stiff, that the stoners and tormentors of this holy man,
could not now lift one stone from the ground; and the Judge or Prince himself
losing his understanding of reason, became mad; and how many soever had lifted
up their hands against our Lord, did of him receive due revenge for their
demerits. Hereupon the whole City received the Faith of Christ, and desired to
be Baptized; and many by the inspiration of God forsaking their goods, go to
Rome to bewail their sins, and confess their errors. With St. Amphibalus nine
other Christians were martyred, as Matthew of Paris writes; neither is it
probable, Matthew Paris, Hist. page 179, 180, 181. 182, 183.
that so renowned a Bishop as St. Amphibalus, was apprehended alone, being take
as he was preaching to the people, or such rage as then reigned in the
persecutors, would yield them much more favor than they did to St. Amphibalus;
but their malice being most unto him, and he so famous, all our Histories
remember him, almost forgetting the rest.

It is no great marvel, though so few names of so great numbers and thousands
are left unto us, when by some Writers the persecution was so great in
Britainy, that except those which hid themselves, and could not be Witnesses of
things publicly done, all the Christians of Britain were then martyred;
Harpsfield, Hist: Eccle. Ang. in 6. primis soeculis c. 10. p. 17.
and St. Gildas himself does seem to declare no less, when he says, they which
were then left alive, had hidden themselves in Woods, Deserts and Dens; yet he
tempereth this hard assertion, where he says, this persecution was so rigorous
only in some, not all places of this Country. And those parts which were then
absolutely under the Romans command, were by their merciless cruelty in this
estate. So many mutations of times, changes of the names of Places, the rages
of Infidels, Romans, Saxons, and others, have deprived us both of the names and
holy relicts of those Martyrs.

But after the death of so many renowned and glorious Martyrs, Maria Sco. l. 2.
Aetat. 6. Col. 304. in Constant. Flor. Wigorn. Chron. an. 321. and 299. Capg.
Catal. prefat. in vita St. Helenae. Marianas Sco. l. 2. Aetat. 6. in Aurel. Bar
tomo 2. Annal. an. 306 Jac. Gordon an. 273. in Aurel. Harris Hist. Eccl. Britt.
Tom. 4. c. 2. Zosim. l. 2. Suid. in Constan. Matthew. West. an. 273. Mar. Sco. l.
2. Aetat. 6 in Aurel.
whose blood beautified and increased the Church of God (Sanguis Martyrum semen
Ecclesiae) let us return to Constantius Clarus, and his most admired consort
and chaste Spouse St. Helena: Some there be (whether to detract so great a
glory from his Nation, and give it to another, or of Ignorance in History) do
say, that one Theodora was the first lawful wife of Constantius, and the
blessed Helena mother of that happy Emperor the great Constantine, was not
only a stranger to this Nation, but of a mean estate (and which is unworthy to
be written) not the wife, but concubine of Constantius, with name and attribute
Concubina; this, the most noble Empress St. Helena is styled by, not only
among diverse foreign Writers, but of this Nation also, as Marianus Scotus, and
Florentinus Nigorniensis (as they are now published) many of which do not, to
the dishonor of that most holy Lady and this her Country, abstain from the
same phrase of speech. This error being overthrown, overthrows the other,
that she was a stranger and basely born, for excepting those that wander in
that Tract, all agree, she was the sole daughter and heir of the Noble British
King Coel, far from being either an Alien, or of base parentage and descent;
and the more easily to overthrow them, it first fights with, and so
overthrows it self. Some which incline to this error, say, that she did
secretly fly out of her Country, and went to Rome, and there was so familiar
with Constantius the Emperor; but it is evident by all Histories, that
Constantius at the first acquaintance with Helena, was not Emperor, nor long
after; neither was he at Rome, but in Britain, in this time sent hither by
Aurelianus the Emperor, in the year of Christ 273; and (as both Zosimus and
Suidas say) lived most here; and being sent hither by Aurelianus the Emperor
(as so many agree) to have long employment, and great cause to stay here; he
must needs come hither about that time, Marti. Polo. Coxton fol. 38. Hollinshed
Hist. of Eng. l 4. Capg. in St. Helen. Nicep. l. 7. c. 18. Andre. Chesne l. 4.
Hist. Marie. l. 2 aetat. 6. in Constable. Flor. Wigorn. Chronico. Regi. in an. 243.
Mar. Polo. In supputa. an. 307. Otto. Frigen. l. 3. c. 45. Bid l. Hist. c. 8.
Martin. Polo. sup. an. 309. col. 66. Papinian. l. prefect. F. de ritu
Nuptiarum. Joan. Capg. in Catal in praefat. in vita S. Helenae. M. Aurelius
Cassidorus in Chron. Zosimus Comes in Constantine l. 2. Mari. an. 292. c. 301.
Maria. l. 2 aetat. 6. an. 305. col. 303. Bid. Hist. l. c. 8. Floren. Wig.
Chron. an. 328. and 306. Galli. Orat. Panyg. ad. constable. apud. Baron. Tom. 2.
an. 306. Hen. Spond. ibid. Harris Hist. eccl. Tom. 4. Nichol. Vignier.
Billiosh. Histor. ad. an. 306. Pompo Laelus. in camp. Hist. Romans in Constable. Max.
Eutropius. l. 10. Hist. Romans Constan. Manasses. l. Annal. Hanibald. apud.
Frithem. l. de orig. Franc. Eusebius. Cron. an. 294 Eutrop. l. 9. Hist. Romans
Victor. in Diocle. and Maximi.
for by all Antiquities Aurelianus died soon after, and was Emperor but a short
time, so that neither Constantius nor Queen Helena could be either at Rome, or
in any place but, in Britain at this time.

Nicephorus and some later after him would have her to be born in Bithinia at
Drepanum, and the Daughter of an Inkeeper there, with whom Constantius passing
that way to the Persians, fell in done, but this is made unpossible, by that is
said before, of the being of both Constantius and Helena in Britain, so remote
from any part of Bithinia at that time, and neither of them coming to or near
Drepanum or any part of Bithinia, at or after this time, but when she an holy
Widow, many years after Constantius death, passed by Greece in her pilgrimage
to Jerusalem, as is evident in all kind of Antiquaries, and will most
manifestly appear in its due place. Others there be which do term this renowned
Empress by the name of Concubina, as Marianus, and Florentius Wigorniensis, as
they have been lately published, and Regino, without speaking any thing of her
parentage or country; and Martinus Polonus, who confesses she was Daughter to
the King of Britain; but it is evident that either Martinus or his publisher,
has with gross Ignorarance abused the Readers; for he says, that Constantine
(not Constantius) begot Constantine the great in the year of Christ 307. when
by common opinion Constantius was dead before. And not content with this, they
bring in Constantine the great to be Emperor in the year 309. when by their
account he could not be two years old. The other three if their Publishers have
not abused them speak in the phrase of the Pagan Romans, who in those times
called all the Wives of their Lieutenants taken for strangers, though never so
lawfully joined in true marriage by the rude term of Concubine, as their old
Pagan Decree is still witness against them, when I shall make it as clear as
the Sun, that St. Helen was from the beginning the only true lawful wife to
Constantius. This I have written here to answer these frivolous Cavils against
that blessed woman, and with John Capgrave, call their Allegations no better
then dreams, and to speak still in his words, That opinion does not only
blemish the fame of so holy a Woman, but makes that most Noble Constantine to
be a Bastard begot out of marriage, and so disableth him to have been the Heir
of Constantius either King or Emperor, when all Men know he came to the
imperial Dignity by right of Inheritance. And thus he taxes the Authors of
Ignorance, these things pleased them, because they knew not the truth. Ipsos.
forsan qui ista scripserunt talia placuerunt, quia potiara and veriora invenire
minime potuerunt. Diverse foreign Historians, as Baronius, Spondanus, and
others, write as plainly in this matter, and may with great warrant; for as
Cassiodonus is an able witness, it is but a Pagan report, and raised first by
Zosimus that most malicious Ethnic, and Rayler against Constantine, for
professing and advancing of Christian Religion, and renouncing Idolatry: and
this is evident by the best learned Authors themselves which in any sense
called St. Helena by that name, for they do plainly confess, as namely
Marianus, that St. Helen was the true wife of Constantius, and he forced by
Maximian the Emperor to put her away and take Theodora his wifes Daughter. And
further says, Constantine was the true Son and heir of Constantius, and by
that title succeeded him in the Kingdom and Empire, which could not be truly
said, if Helen had not been his lawful wife; neither could Constantius by this
learned and holy Author be named a Religious Father, if he had not begot his
Son lawfully in true marriage. And Saint Bede confesses from Eutropius, that
Constantine succeeded his Father in the Kingdom of Britain, and so by him also
must needs be his lawful son, Florentius Wigorn writes in the same manner,
and confesses St. Helen to have been here in Britain long after her son
Constantine was Emperor, yet these be the chiefest Authors that in any sense
have termed St. Helen by that name.

It is evident by all histories, not only of Christians, that St. Helen was a
most chaste and holy Woman, and that Constantius also lived in conjugal
chastity, marrying when he was but young, but also even by the Pagan writers
themselves, as witnesses Gallicanus the Orator that lived in this time, in his
public oration to his son Constantine, and others; therefore St. Helen being
the first woman, that was thus wedded unto him in marriage, she must needs be
his true lawful wife by their own testimonies. And the same Author witnesses
before Constantine at the public solemnity of his marriage with Fausta, in
most plain and express words that Constantine was born in Britain, so testify
diverse Authors even of the Roman History, among whom one plainly says, that
Constantine was the lawful son of Constantius and Helen, and born in Britain,
and that his Father Constantius was compelled by Herculius the Emperor to be
divorced from Helen his true wife, to take Theodora Daughter in Law of that
Emperor. Eutropius plainly says, that Constantine was son of Constantius in
true marriage: Constantinus Manasses says, St. Helen was the wife of
Constantius; and a most blessed Woman. Hunibaldus above 1000. years since,
relates the History of the composition between Constantius and our British
King Coel, as our writers do. As soon as Coel heard that Constantius was
arrived, he sent Ambassadors desiring peace, and promised to pay the tribute,
so that he might enjoy his Kingdom, to which Constantius agrees, this thus
composed, Coel within 40. days dyed, whose Daughter Helen ( to whom for
beauty, and loveliness, knowledge in the liberal sciences, and rare skill in
music, Theoph. Ceram in Chron. Egbert Albas Ser. 3. de mere and manif. Catho.
fidei Berengosus Abbas l. de in vent and laud. S. Crucis. c. 1
Britain never bred the like) Constantius took to wife, by whom he begat
Constantine, who not only succeeded his Father in the Kingdom of Britain, but
also (prevailing against Maxentius) in the Empire. Victor, Eutropius, Eusebius,
and other ancient Authors, are witnesses, that when Dioclesian made Constantius
and Galerius Cesars, he compelled then to put away both their lawful wives;
Constantius to put away St. Helen, and to take Theodore his daughter in law;
and Galerius, Veleria his own daughter, which account of theirs, that St. Helen
was thus put away in the year 294. invincibly proves, how according to
Eusebius and many others, before setting down the age of Constantine to have
been about 60 years, that St. Helen had been the wife of Constantius 20. years.
Severus Sulpitius does not only call St. Helen the true wife of Constantius,
but says she was Empress both in her husbands and sons time, which proves
her daughter and heir to Coel our British King, by which title only she
reigned with Constantine. Theophilus Cepameus, an old Greek writer, says,
there were Arrian Heretics and Pagans which denied Constantine to be
legitimate, and that the lied therein, mentiuntur. Egbertus says, she was
Queen and mother of Constantine. Beringosus an eyewitness of the most things,
writing of her, says, first, she was a Queen and so the lawful wife of
Constantius, for a Concubine of the greatest Emperor, that ever was, is not
thereby a queen, as the Authors name her, Queen to Rule, to Govern: nor can
the lawful true wives of Kings, be termed Queens by such worth Authors, except
they were Queens by title of Inheritance, or such like, as our Antiquaries
write of Queen Helen, that she was daughter and heir to her father King Coel,
this worthy author does also (though a stranger to us) confirm, when he
proves she was of most noble parentage: and by experimental arguments; because
he had seen the old buildings of her stately palace, continuing to in his
time, the pavement whereof was marble and Touchstone, the most Regal Palace in
all those parts, the walls were gilded with old, her chamber was so sumptuous,
that the like was not in the World, Stately building of St. Helen Q. of
Britain.
and to free her from all slanders, the chamber of her heart and soul was far
more pure; in all things she was obedient to the will of God, and yet
externally pleasing to her husband Constantius, although more pleasing to God
then to her husband.

Thus we see how far this most blessed and noble Queen and Empress, Bernigosus
ibid.
was in all times from being base, either by birth or conversation, such
sanctify of life could never agree with that foul name, by which some have so
wrongfully termed her; such parentage, Palaces and Revenues, able to entertain
the greatest Princes according to their state and dignity, must denominate
their noble owners with better terms and attributes. The Hostess, Inkeeper,
Stabularia, except we will expound them in so large a sense, that we shall so
style Abraham and Lot that lodged the Angels, those that entertained Christ,
all receivers of Kings, Princes and Emperors, and all Harbourers or Exercisers
of Hospitality; for so both St. Helen and King Coel, entertained Constantius,
the one a husband, the other a son in law, as Princes use. It seems this
Palace and lands in and about Trevers to have descended to St. Helen by her
mother, or some Ancestour of that Country, for both Beringosus says, St. Helen
was brought up at Trevers; and Otho Frigensis says, she was by some of her
Ancestors come from thence. And Trevers being at that time, the most renowned
place of those countries for Nobility, Learning and Christianity, and she the
only child of her father King Coel, and to succed him in the Kingdom of
Britain, he sent her thither to have the most noble education, and there it
was probably where she first came to be acquainted with Constantius, then
living in those parts. And this made the Atonement between the Romans and K.
Coel to be so soon and peacebly effected, without any effusion of blood, as our
Antiquities tell us.

The marriage of Constantius and Helena is by what is said so clear, that it is
needless to speak any more of that subject. I will only add this for the
present; The old Inscription of the Church of St. Gereon at Cullen, founded by
her, proves her to be a Queen, and an example to Kings.

Regibus exemplum, sacroque chrismate plena,
Condidit hoc Templum Sancti Gereonis Helena.
A pattern unto Kings, this heavenly light;
St. Helen shining with all virtue bright.
In honor of St. Gereon here did raise
This stately Church to her eternal praise.
At the agreement betwixt Constantius and Coel besides paying the Tribute,
Galf. Mon. H. Reg. Brit. l. 5. c. 6. Pont. Virun.
and Coel to enjoy the Kingdom during his natural Life, it was further agreed
that Constantius should take again his wife St. Helen, daughter and her to King
Coel, and by her right be King after the death of her father. By which covenant
and article agreed upon and truly executed as it was, the first marriage
between Constantius and Helen was even by Roman Pagan laws themselves proved
and declared to be true and lawful, and the children therein begotten
legitimate, and the taking of Theodora, living with her, and children by her to
be adulterate, and utterly unallowable in any sense, even by their own Pagan
constitutions; for although those Pagan wicked decrees, did allow to the
Presidents of Provinces which were unmarried without penalty to keep
Concubines, profanely thinking (as some new seeming Christians have done) that
men unmarried could not live chaste, yet they never permitted it to married
Praefects, and Presidents, such as Constantius was, Elius Lamprid. in Alex.
Sever.
as their own Historians witness. By which Heathenish Roman Law Helena was not
only the Concubine, and no wife of Constantius, but a Concubine, prohibited in
their own proceedings, and her children in like case of reproach with her.

Math. West. and alii supra. Manusc. Hist. Eccles. Winton. Caius Hist. Cantabr.
Ac^ademiae p. 19.
Therefore Constantius being against his will by power of Maximian separated
from St. Helen his true wife, and a Christian from that time ever in affection,
could not but be ever most ready and joyful to be so quietly and honorably
reconciled unto her again, which is sufficiently insinuated by our Authors
testifying that Constantius in all things granted to King Coel his commands,
requiring nothing of him for the Romans but their old Tribute, which as our
Antiquaries say was 1006. pounds, only in money: one of our Historians says of
this matter in this manner.

Harding c. 60.
Of which Constance was glad of his intent,
And here abode at prayer of the King.
Whereby he did sufficiently declare the great content and joy he had, of this
reconciliation to his wife St. Helen, and her Father, his Father in Law, King
Coel, rather choosing and preferring, during his life, to make his abode here as
a Subject, then now being chosen and designed Emperor to continue in any other
Nation with that greatest temporal glory and command.

He retook Helen Daughter of the King to conjugal society.
Thus he signified this so long and much desired atonement. Helenam Coeli Regis
filiam in societatem Thori recepit, which word RECEPIT, that Constantius did at
that time receive Helen again, if we had no other argument or authority used by
diverse our ancient Antiquaries, proves that this was the reconciliation, and
not the first marriage of those noble persons. And impossible it is that any of
these Authors which speak of this union, should take it for the first union in
marriage, for all of them acknowledge that Constantius died soon after this
Reconciliation, (the Monck of Westminster says within three years) by
Merianus within two years, Math. West. an. 302. 305. Mari. Sc. anno. 305. 306.
by Martinus Polonus the same year. The like have others, by which account and
confession Constantine should be either unborn, or not above two years old at
the most, when he was King of Britain, and Emperor also after his Fathers
death. Shortly after this coming of Constantius, and this atonement between
him and King Coel thus made, King Coel dyed within five weeks, says Harding, a
month and eight days, says Galfridus, Viruunius says within one month,
Hard. Chron. c. 6. Galf. Mon. Hist. Reg. Brit. l. 5. c. 6. Pont. Virun. Hist.
l. 5. Harding c. 61. Howes fol. 44.
so likewise does the Monck of Westminster, Harding writes that Constantius
was Emperor before he was King of Britain.

But King Constance of Rome was high Christain,
By the Senate first made the Emperor,
After King of Britain and Governor.
Howes in his Chronicle brings in Peter de Jeham to was tell us, that Coel
Duke of Caric Glow of Gloucester, Holinshed says, he was Earl of Golchester,
but where he died, or where buried, no mention is made. Fabian says he ruled
after the accord of most writers 27. years.

Constantius.
Constantius began his Empire with Galerius, the Empire was divided between
them, so that Constantius should possess Africa, Italy, France and Britain,
Galerius should have Ilyrica, Asia and the East parts, which done, they
substituted under them two Caesar's; Constantius, holding himself content with
the dignity of Augustus, refused to sustain the trouble, which he should have
endured through the administration of the affairs of Italy and Africa. He
sought by all means how he might enrich the people of the Empire. He abolished
the superstition of the Gentiles in his Dominions, so that afterward Britain
felt no persecutions. The year following he prepared war against the Picts, at
which time his Son Constantine, who then served under Galerius, perceiving his
destruction to be contrived, posted to his Father in all have, houghing and
killing all the Post horses which way so ever he passed, Holinshed Hist. of
Eng. 45. Fab. Sozom. Hist. Eccle l. 1. c. 6. Eusebius. l. 2. de vita Constable. Mr,
Bro. fol. 460.
and came safely to his Father in Britain. Holinshed says, Constantius was
the Daughters Son of one Crispus, that was brother to the Emperor Claudius, and
that he began his reign over the Britains, 289. and so also says Fabian.

Constantius was not against the law, for Christians in Britain to profess the
Christian Religion in his time; but preferred the most constant Christians to
highest preferments, and greatest trust. And so consecrated his whole family to
God, that his Court was as a Church, wherein were both Clergy men, and Godly
Christians, truly serving God. This blessing and benefit he brought to our
Christians here in Britain, and publicly maintained it even in those times,
when the name of Christian in other places was so odious, that without danger
it could not be spoken of; which he further, Viz. Eusebius, confirms in
another place, Eusebius. Hist. Eccle. l. 8. c. 14.
where speaking in the name of Christians, he says, that among the Emperors of
that time, only Constantius did neither in any sort persecute Christians, nor
in any sort participate with them that did, but kept all them that were under
him without hurt, and secure from all trouble; neither pulled down Churches,
Idem. apud Baron. and Spon. an. 304.
or did any thing against them and elsewhere he teaches again, that the parts
of the West Empire did generally receive quietness from persecution when
Constantius reigned; which although Baronius and Spondanus do not so well allow
upon Eusebius his words, in all places of the West; because as they allege
Constantius, neither presently could, nor would he be against the Edicts of the
Emperors still living, when he himself remained in Britain, in the end of the
World, and Italy was then full of wars. But Eusebius writteth not this
singularly, but Sozomen and others testify as much, that when the Churches of
God were persecuted in all other parts of the World, Sozomen l. 1. c. 6.
only Constantius granted liberty of conscience to the Christians under him:
and again generally, of all Christian Churches in the part of his Empire; and
were not only quiet under him, but thus lived in great joy, and did increase,
being honored and rewarded by him.

And, relating his experiment to prove constant Christians, before remembered,
and how he admitted such for his nearest friends and Counselors, he gathers
from hence, that the Gauls, Britains, and others under him, were by him
exempted from all penal laws of the persecutors, he taking away and making
them frustrate in his Dominions. And the objections which Baronius makes, do
rather prove then disprove the quietness of Christians in this Nation, when
Constantius was here. For first the inquietness of Italy rather helped then
hindered our peace, our persecution proceeding from thence, now not able to
persecute us, nor take revenge of Constantius for protecting us. And his being
in Britain, his being so friendly always to Christians, as Baronius often
confesses, must needs much more procure ease and freedom to our Christians,
where there was no man of power to contradict or resist it; Constantius being
both King and Emperor here, and the Kingdom of Britain a Christian Kingdom.
Bid. l. Hist. c. 8. Galf. Mon. Hist. Reg. Brit. l. 5. c. 5. Manusc. Gali.
Antiq. c. 28. 29. Virun. l. 5. Hist. 1. Harding Chron. c. 57, 58, 59, 60. Hen.
Hunt. Hist. l. 1. Socrates Eccl. Hist. 1. c. 1. Eusebius. l. 1. vit. Constable. c.
9. Theodoret Hist. Eccle. l. 1. c. 24.
Therefore howsoever his reasons make doubt of some other places, whose Estate
and condition was not like unto ours of Britain, they do not move any question
of the quiet thereof in case of Religion, but establish and confirm it. And
therefore our best allowed and ancient Authors Saint Bede, Galfrid, Hen. Hunting
and old French Manuscript, Virunnius, Harding, and others settle Constantius
here in Britain after all our persecution ended, and nothing but all favor
here to Christians in his time, and not only a tolleration, granted but public
profession of Christianity generally allowed, and by Regal and Imperial warrant
of Constantius used and exercised, as shall appear.

And if we had rather hearken to foreign Writers in or near that time, we have
sufficient warrant, not only that he recalled himself from the worship of the
Pagan Gods, as diverse are witnesses, but as Eusebius and others testify of
him, he gave free power and license to all under him to exercise Christian
Religion without any molestation. And this, as he writes, when the greatest
persecution was in other places; and had care to instruct his son Constantine
the great, whom he left his heir, in the same Faith, as we may easily conclude
from the words of Constantine himself, Registered by Theodoret, that even from
the ends of the Ocean, meaning Britain, he was assisted by God: and Sozomen
says, it is evidently known unto all men, Sozom. Eccles. Hist. l. 1. c. 5.
Chron. Mon. Abington apud Ncieph. Harsp. Hist. Eccle. saecul. p. 203. c. 9.
that great Constantine was first instructed in the Christian faith among the
Britains. And the Chronicle of Abington near Oxford, testifies, he was
brought up in that old Abbey, which we must needs ascribe to his Parents
Constantius and Helen; and we find not any other but Constantius, except we
will apply it to King Coel, and then it was received and approved by him, who
here in Britain caused the persecutors to be put to death, and the persecution
thereupon ceased, as Gildas writes: For this must needs be applied to
persecution in Britain, and not to the Tyrants Dioclesian and Maximian: Gild.
l. de con. Brit. c. 8.
the persecution here ended long before their death, and neither of them, nor
any other Emperor, but Constantius, having power and command here at this time,
and hereupon our late authors themselves thus testify of him; Stow and Howes
Hist. tit. Romans in Constant. and Constantin.
Constantius abolished the Superstition of the Gentiles in his Dominions, so
that afterward Britain felt no persecutions. Constantius renounced the
Idolatry of the Gentiles.

I have showed formerly that Dioclesians persecution continued in this Kingdom
not ten Years, for Gildas in one place says; The nine years persecution of
Dioclesian the Tyrant, and in the next Chapter, not wholly ten years long; as
also that it wholly ended, in the time of King Coel. Those persecutors then
having no power or authority here, and so together with their other overruling
and commanding Decrees, the bloody Edicts of persecuting Christians here, were
utterly extinct, and made void, and never renewed, but altogether omitted by
Constantius, this great friend of Christians; such of this Nation were fully
and undoubtedly restored to their ancient Liberties, Privileges, and
immunities, in matter of Religion; it Constantius and Helen our Emperor and
Empress, King and Queen had then given no further and express approbation
unto them; which we may not reasonably call in question, when we remember their
absolute and independing Regal right and possession without contradiction they
had in this Kingdom, the natural love and affection they bore unto it, and that
to them; with their religious care and desire they had to defend and advance
Christian Religion, even in times and places, when, and where they were not so
enabled nor drawn thereto, with so many and strong bands of duty and affection:
we have heard that the other Churches under his Empire were endowed by his
benefits and munificence, whereby they lived in great joy and increased. The
choycest Christians were his dearest friends, and made his Councillors.

Mr. Bro. fol. 463. 1.
And diverse even of this Nation have delivered, that this our new King and
Emperor particularly place St. Taurinus Archbishop in York, wherein (although
they be mistaken if they understand Taurinus Bishop of Eureux, neither the time
or place allowing) yet we cannot safely say, but he might or did place some
other of that name there, and if both these should fail, yet so many more
authorities concur that Constantius gave consent and assistance to the public
restitution of Religion here in his time. For this we have the warrant of the
most and approved Antiquaries, St. Gildas and Saint Bede, after them Matthew of
Westminster and others: St. Gildas writes, That before the persecution had
been here ten years, the wicked decrees against Christians were annulled and
frustrate, and all the Servants of Christ after a long winter night with joyful
eyes receive the clear light of the heavenly air, Bid. Hist. Ec. l 1. c. 8.
they renew their Churches which were thrown down to the ground, they found,
Matthew West. an. 313. S. Albans Church built. Manusc. Antiq. Eccl. Winton.
Marian. Sco. an 306. Martin Polo 307. Antiq. Gal. an 306. St. Julians and
Lantarnam. Church built in Constantius time, about 309. after Christ. Matthew.
West. an. 305. 307. Baron and Spond. an 306 Gordon. an 306 Jacob Grinaeus an.
in c. 15. l. 1 Eusebius. de vita Constantini an. 308. Hen. Hunt. l. 1. Hist.
Diocl. and Constantin. Regit. o Chro. l. 1. in Constable an. 253.
build, and perfect others in honor of their holy Martyrs, and as it were, set
forth every where their victorious Ensigns, celebrate festival days, offer
sacrifice with a pure heart and mouth, all of them rejoice as children
cherished in the lap of their mother the Church. Saint Bede says that so soon as
the persecution ceased, the Christians which had hid themselves in Woods and
Deserts, and secret Dens presently came forth, and showed themselves in
public, doing those public works of Christian Religion, which St. Gildas
before remembered. And writes plainly, that this was done in the time of
Constantius, and that he dyed here whilst these things were thus in acting. The
Monck of Westminster has the same words with Saint Bede, of this public
profession of Christian Religion here presently, upon the ending of the
persecution during ten years, and adds, that then the church of St. Alban was
built to his honor within ten years of his martyrdom, in the quiet of
Christian times here, which by that is said before must needs be in the time of
Constantius.

Likewise we find in the antiquity of the old Church of Winchester; that being
destroyed with the rest in this late persecution, it was perfectly re-edified
in the year of Christ 309. and so either was in building or warranted to be
built in the days of Constantius, then so, or lately before, by all accounts
living and reigning here, that it could not be done without his warrant or
allowance. The like we say of the Churches of St. Julius, and St. Aaron, and
other Martyrs of that time, and all both Cathedral churches and others,
destroyed here by Maximian the most horrible fact-man, as Henry of Huntington
calls him, after whose leaving the Empire, Christians were quiet here, as he
says, and restored to their former liberties; and as Regino writteth, not only
in Britain, but generally where he ruled, both Bishops were restored to their
private Sees, and many other things granted for the profit of Christian
Religion; and particularly says, that the Monastery of Trevers was begun in
his time; then much more in Britain, where he was both absolute Emperor and
King to command, and no man daring to resist him: to this our late Antiquaries
have given sufficient allowance, when they grant, that Constantius abolished
the superstition of the Gentiles in this Dominions, especially in Britain,
where he now lived King and Emperor, as also in abolishing the Pagan rights,
and observances; for dislike of them and love to Christian Religion, must needs
for his short time be an extraordinary advancer thereof. Stow and Howes in
Constant.
But when he had happily begun this holy work in repairing the ruins of the
Church of Christ in this Kingdom, and before he could bring it to due, and his
desired, perfection, he fell sick at the City of York, where soon after he
deceased. Yet in this short time of his sickness his greatest care was to
leave and commit this his charge both concerning his Empire, and this Kingdom
to his Eldest son Constantine, Son of St. Helen; who, as he hoped for many
reasons, would be most ready and willing to maintain and defend true Religion
and with Justice govern his Subjects.

And to this happy choice, as both Zonoras and Pompeius Laetus do plainly
testify, Zonoras Annal Tom. 2. in Constant. Pomp. Laetus Romans Hist. Camp. in
Constable. max. Eseb. l. 1. de vita Constable. mag. c. 18. Grin. amart. in cum locum.
and Eusebius and others sufficiently insinuate, he was admonished and
instructed by Gods direction, and an Angel; which is confimed by the effect,
and event it self, not only of the general establishing of Christian religion
in the world by Constantine in the time of his Empire, but his extraordinary
and miraculous preservation before he came to it; and at this very time of his
fathers sickness, strangely escaping the Tyrants hands in Italy, and coming
safely unto his sick Father Constantius at York, in our Britain, by the great
providence of God, as Eusebius notes; who had often preserved him to bring him
thither, so long and dangerous a journey, at that very time to succeed his
Father. And this Author immediately adds; For presently when Constantine had
escaped the stratagems of the deceits, he came with all speed to his Father,
Eusebius. in vita Constable l. 1. c. 14.
and after a long space of time which he had been absent from him, presented
him to his sight: at that moment, Constantius was ready to die; but when
(contrary to all hope) he saw his son, leaping out of bed, he embraced him,
saying, that he had now cast that out of his mind; Cap. 15.
which only troubled him at the point of death, which was the absence of his
Son, and therefore did earnestly pray and give thanks for it to God, affirming
that now he rather desired to die then live; and setting himself in the midst
of his Children, and in his place lying upon his Kingly bed, giving over the
inheritance of his Kingdom to his Eldest Son, he departed this Life. Thus has
Eusebius then living in that time. Our Modern Writers citing other ancient
Authors, not differing from Eusebius, Hollenshed Hist of England l. 4 c. 28.
27. cit. Eusebius: Sext Aurel. vict. Nicep. Tripart. Hist.
thus Translate and Epitomate this History from them. Whilst Constantine
remained at Rome, in manner as he had been a pledge with Gallerius, in his
Fathers time, fled from hence and with all post have returned to his Father in
Britain, killing and hewing by the way all such horses as were appointed to
stand at Inns, ready for such as would ride in Post, least being pursued he
should have been overtaken, and brought back again by such as might be sent on
purpose after him. Constantius whilst he lay on his death bed, somewhat before
he departed this life, hearing that his son Constantine was come and escaped
from the Emperors Dioclesian and Maximian, with whom he remained as a pledge,
he received him with all joy, and raising himself up in his bed, in presence of
his other sons and Councillors; with a great number of other people and
strangers that were come to visit him, He set the Crown upon his sons head, and
adorned him with other Imperi-Robes and garments; executing as it were himself
the Office of an Herald, and with all spoke these words unto his said son, and
to his Councillors there about him: Now is my death come unto me more welcome,
and my departure hence more pleasant; I have here a large Epitaph and Monument
of burial, to wit mine own son, and one whom in earth, I leave to be Emperor
in my place, which by Gods good help shall wipe away the tears of the
Christians, and revenge the cruelty exexercised by Tyrants; This I reckon to
chance unto me instead of most felecity. Thus careful was this holy Emperor
even at his death to advance the honor of Christ. This he did prophesying how
his son after him should advance Christian Religion, now by his father declared
Emperor, but as Esebius writes long before designed to that dignity by God,
the King of all.

This renowned Emperor Constantius died, by diverse in the year 306. by others
307 and by some 308. and by all at such time as it is already proved: it must
needs be he which among the Roman Emperors first gave order and warrant for
the restoring and re-establishing Christian Religion here in Britain, after
the desolation thereof by Dioclesian and Maximian, and died happily and most
blessedly. And was so renowned that even by the Pagans he was accounted a God;
and had after his death all honor given unto him, which belonged to an
Emperor; he was most honorably and Christian like buried in the City of York.
Constantine his son the new Emperor present at his funeral, going before his
corpse, with an infinite number of people and Soldiers attending with all
honor and pomp; some going before, others following with most sweet harmony
of singing. This was the End which God showed of this Emperors Godly and
Religious manners and life evidently to all people then living, as Eusebius
witnesses, who also then lived and called him most holy, Eusebius. l. 1. de vita
Constan. c. 16.
which he a learned christian Bishop could not give to any but an holy
professed Christian in his knowledge or judgment, and therefore attributes so
much to Constantius in this kind, that he calls Constantine the great himself
(whom he so much extolleth for his Christian Religion and advancement thereof)
a follower of his fathers piety in such affairs.

Constantine the Great.
Constantius having thus honorably ended his days, and declared Constantine
his eldest son successor in his Empire, his whole Army does presently with
mutual consent and joy, proclaim him King and Emperor; and all Nations subject
to his fathers Empire, were filled with incredible joy and unspeakable
gladness, that they had without intermission so worthy and renowned an
Emperor. Of the coming of this most noble Britain to the Empire, escaping and
preserved from so many dangers and difficulties before; Eusebius. c. 18.
so generally and joyfully chosen and accepted, and proving after so happy a
Ruler, Eusebius says, that he was chosen by God himself, and that no mortal
man could glory of this only Emperor his advancement; for although he was
generally and ordinarily chosen and accepted by men; yet as the same Author
writes, he was miraculously preserved by God, and by his extraordinary
protection, brought safely from all danger to his father here in Britain, old
and ready to die, to be invested in the Empire after him: And so soon as he was
Emperor, as the same Author then living, and well known unto, and knowing
Constantine, Eusebius. l. 1. vit. Constable. c. 12.
testifies, and so declared by the Armies, as the custom was, being chosen of
God long before to that end, insisted in his fathers steps, in favoring and
advancing Christian Religion. Eusebius. Hist. l. 8. c. 14.
So that in this part of the world, as Britain and France, where Constantine
succeeded his father, and now reigned there, was no persecution used against
Christians, but all favor and indulgence toward them; and that assertion of
diverse Historians, both of this and other Nations, which affirms, that the
persecution begun by Dioclesian and Maximian, did continue after their
forsaking the Empire, Eusebius. in Chron. Flo. Wigorn. in Chron. Mar. Sco. Aetat.
6. l. 2. in Constable.
and until the seventh year of the reign of Constantine, is to be understood of
those parts, which until about that time were not under the Rule of
Constantine; but of Galerius Severus, and Maxentius persecutors: and so
Florentius Marianus, and others expounded it; and it can have no other
construction to be true; for evident it is in Histories, that not only from
the beginning of the reign of Constantine; but in his fathers time, all
Christians under their Government, were free from persecution. And so soon as
Constantine had conquered Maxentius, and was sole and absolute Emperor; all
Christians in the world under him were delivered from persecution, and set at
liberty, even publicly to profess their Religion. And from his first entrance
into the Empire, and to be King of Britain, the Christians here in this Nation
did not only enjoy Religion, but as in the time of his father, made and freely
had public exercise and profession thereof; as our old Churches re-edified,
new builded and erected, Bishops, Priests and all Clergy, and religious men,
restored to their former Quiet, Revenues, Honors and Dignities, witness.

Of this we have diverse Testimonies and Examples in particular, yet left unto
us; as out of the old Annals of Winchester, where we find of that old Church,
builded in the time of King Lucius, and destroyed in the late persecution: The
Church of Winchester builded in the time of King Lucius, and hallowed, and
dedicated October the twenty and ninth, Annals Eccle. Winton.
one hundred eighty nine, by Faganus and Damianus Bishops; amongst the rest, at
this time of Dioclesian, went to wrack, the building thereof being ruined,
Godwin Catal. of Bish. Winch. In initio.
and made even with the ground; and the Moncks and all the Officers belonging
unto it, either slain or enforced to fly for the present time; In the year
three hundred and nine, the Church aforesaid was again re-edified, and that
with such wonderful forwardness and zeal, as within one year and thirty days,
both it and all the edifices belonging unto it, as chambers and other buildings
for Moncks and Officers, were quite finished in very seemly and convenient
manner. The fifteenth day of March following, it was again hallowed and
Dedicated unto the honor and memory of St. Amphibalus that had suffered death
for Christ in the late persecution, by Constans Bishop of Winchester, at the
request of Diodatus Abbot of this New erected Monastery. It is evident by this
relation, that this holy work so public, with freedom and zeal was quite
finished in the time of Constantine; his being here, before he went hence
against Maxentius. And yet we see both Bishop, Priest, and Abbot, and religious
men publicly and honorably restored to their former condition. The Church
with unspeakable devotion builded, and dedicated to the holy Saint and Martyr,
who in the late persecution was most hated by the enemies of Christ. So I say
of the Church of St. Alban, a Church of wonderful workmanship, Bid Eccl.
Hist. l. 1. c. 7. Math. West. Anno. 313.
and worthy of his Martyrdoni, was builded so soon as the Christians were here
at quiet. Matthew of Westminster has the same words, and explaineth this time
of the quiet of Christians here, when this Church was so sumptuously builded,
to have been ten years after his Martyrdom, the perfect finishing whereof he
sets down to have been the same year, in which Constantine went from hence
toward Rome against Maxentius, which was by him in the sixth year of
Constantine, and before the general occasion of persecution in other places.
Constantine not being absolute and sole Emperor until his victory against
Maxentius, nor the general quiet then ensuing. Both Saint Bede and the Monck of
Westminster write, that in their several times, often curing of Infirmities and
other miracles were wrought there The old Churches of St. Julius and Aaron, The
foundation of Lhanturnanus, and St. Julians Church in Caerleon.
Martyred in the late persecution, in the City of Caerlegion, derive their
ancient foundation from this time, so do many others founded in honor of
several Martyrs, then cruelly put to death for the name of Christ, so I affirm
of all the Cathedral Churches, Archiepiscopal and Episcopal, with their
particular Sees and Cities, founded in the time of King Lucius, and destroyed
in the time of the Tyrants, Dioclesian and Maximian; as also those that were
not Episcopal, but subordinate and inferior, Mr. Bro. fol. 469.
overthrown with that tempest of persecution; for holy Gildas and Saint Bede, and
others testify without exception, that all they which were then pulled down
even to the ground, were now re-edified. Matthew of Westminster plainly
writes, that besides the new Churches builded in honor of their late Martyrs,
Gild. de. excid. and conq. Brit. c. 8. Bid Eccles. Hist. l. 1. c. 8. Math.
West. an. 313.
of which Saint Bede and St. Gildas make this memory, the Christians here at this
time received and builded again all the Churches dedicated to former Saints,
which had been so destroyed and thrown down to the ground.

And when we are waranted both by late and ancient antiquities also, that from
the beginning of Christianity here, we had many Abbots, Moncks and Monasteries
in every age, and that these Monasteries were all destroyed in Dioclesian his
persecution, we must needs assign their restoration to this time. To this I
join the Monastery of Abingdon, where this our great King and Emperor
Constantine, as the old Annalls thereof do plead, had his education when he was
young, Math. Parker Antiq. Brit. p. 8. Jo. Goscel Eccles. Hist. Manusc. de
Archiepis. Cant. prope initium.
wherein there were (as it testifies further) above 500 Moncks living by the
labor of their hands, in the woods and deserts adjoining, upon Sundays, and
festival days coming to that Monastery; beside 60. which did continually abide
in the same, serving God there. Therefore we cannot doubt, if we will accept
this ancient Record for witness, but of all other Monasteries, this great
Emperor had an especial care of restoring and endowing this his nursing place
of education.

To this we may assign the re-edifying of the noble Monastery, Manusc. Gall.
Antiq. cap 28.
first builded by the Founder Ambrius or Ambrey, after called Amsbury in
Wiltshire, where, at the coming of the Saxons hither, there were 300 Religious
Men, whose Foundation being long before the time of the Saxons, argues it was
builded before the time of Dioclesian and Maxentius, by them destroyed, and now
restored. So we may conclude of the Religious houses, both of Men and Women in
Kent and other places, Chron. Monast. Abington apud Nich. Harpsfield Eccle.
Hist. saecul. 10. c. 9.
renowned here at the Saxons first entrance, even by our modern writers, thus
delivering from Antiquity. Hengist slew the good Archbishop Vodine, and many
other Priests and Religious persons, all the Churches in Kent were polluted
with blood, the Nuns and other Religious persons, were by force put from
their Houses and goods. Thus we must conceive of all other religious houses,
whether of Men or Women, being very many in number, all of them being now
happily repaired, and again employed to their first institution and holy use,
whether the old religious house of Glastenbury is to be accounted in the number
of those that were destroyed by Maximian, and now builded again by Constantius
and Constantine, I dare not make so ready a resolution: likely it it is the
poverty of the house, builded with writhen wands, the penitential and
Eremitical life, those Religious their led there place, of abode being separate
in private Cells and in a Wilderness, in which kind of places other Christians
hid themselves in that persecution, might both preserve them in that raging
storm, and their manner of life considered now, not require reparation, which
both William of Malmesbury in his written History of the antiquity of that holy
place, and the old Manuscript Antiquities of Glastenbury seem to consent unto,
when they absolutely deliver that from the time of King Lucius, until the
coming of St. Patrick thither, not speaking of the least intermission or
discontinuance, there continually remained a succession of 12 Eremits in that
Island.

When Constantine had reigned but a short time in Britain and France, and such
Western parts as his Father before him possessed, Eusebius. l. 1 de. vita. Constable.
c. 20, 21. Socrat. Hist. Eccles. l. 1. c. 1.
Maxentius being proclaimed Emperor in Rome, Italy and other places, and
falling to Tyranny and Usurpation, putmany Innocents to death, and exiling
many, both Christians and others; diverse even of the Nobility fled into
Britain to Constantine for succor and relief, complaining of the cruelty and
usupation of Maxentius, Otto Frig. Chron. l. 4. c. 1. Galf. Mon. Hist. Brit. l.
5. c. 7. Pont. Virun: l. 5. Math. West. l. 1. Hist. Holinshed l. 4. c. 28..
Stowe and Howes in Constable. Hard. Chron. c. 62. p. 49.
humbly inciting and entreating Constantine as undoubted true heir to the
Empire, even of that part which Maxentius had intruded himself into, to take
arms against him, and solely to enjoy the Empire. And he was not only thus
solicited by the Christians and others persecuted, resorting hither, but by
the Romans, which still continued at Rome, enduring the Tyranny of Maxentius,
as some write in this manner.

The Senators of Rome by Letters well endite,
Prayed him to come to Rome as Emperor.
For to destroy Maxence, and disinherit,
Of Christen folk the cruel Tormentour.
Of Christen faith the cursed Counfounder,
For of his birth they said, it set him so,
Maxence to destroy, that was his Fathers foe.
Mr. Bro. fol. 471.
Zonoras, Cedrenus, and other foreign Historians write the like, in this
manner.

Hereupon Constantine to revenge the Injuries done to the holy Christians, and
unspeakable wrongs to diverse others, even the most noble of the Romans, and the
enormous sins of this Tyrant, for number not to be recounted, and for the
horrible and loathsome grieviousness, to be surpressed with silence, assembled a
great army both of Christian Britains, and other Nations subject unto him (by
Eutropius) and others with him, Eusch. in vita Constable. c. 21, 22. Otto Frigen.
Chron. l. 4. c. 1. Eusebius. Hist. Eccle. l. 9. c. 9.
in the fifth, but by the more common opinion, the sixth year of his Empire.
Having entered into these affairs, the better to procure the help and
assistance of Heaven, as Eusebius and other Strangers confess, before he had
his miraculous vision, presently to be remembered, he resolved to have that true
God, whom his Father had devoutly adored to be only adored and reverenced,
wherefore; by his prayers he entreated his help, him he prayed, him he
beseeched to declare himself unto him and assist him in this enterprise. Otto
Frigensis and other strangers also say, that Constantine at this time was a
Religious Emperor, favourer of Christian Religion, when he prepared himself for
this war. Eusebius. ut sup. c. 22.
Eusebius has so witnessed, and plainly says. He only received, worshipped
and prayed unto the God of his Father, the Lord of Heaven, and Jesus Christ the
Savior of all men, which none but a Christian would or could do: and Eusebius
receiving what he wrote from Constantine, and swearing that it was true, thus
proceeds in his History. Cap. 23.
Therefore whilst the Emperor prayed, and earnestly beseeched those things, a
divine exceeding admirable vision appeared unto him, which if any other had
reported, he would not have been so easily credited, but being the Emperor
himself and Conqueror, both long time after, (when he did vouchsafe me
acquaintance and familiar speech with him) both tell me and by oath confirm
what he said, Cap. 24.
this very history which we now commit to writing, no man can be doubtful, but
the narration is certainly to be believed, especially when we see the effect to
have given testimony thereunto: when the Sun had ascended in the midst of the
Heaven, and the day a little enclining to the afternoon, he said he did see the
sign of a cross, made of the brightness of the light manifestly appearing to
this eyes in the Heaven over the Sun, Sozo. Hist. l. 1. c. 3. Convocatis
Christi Sacerdotibus.
with an evident Inscription which contained these words (...), In this thou
shall overcome: a great admiration fell upon him, and his whole army, all of
them beholding this wonder. Constantine earnestly meditating upon this vision,
in the night following Christ appeared unto him in his sleep, with the sign of
the cross which he had seen in Heaven, and commanded him to make another sign
of the cross like unto it, and to use it as a safeguard in his wars with his
enemies; he so soon as he arose imparted the vision unto his friends, Eusebius. c.
25.
and sent for Artisans, skillfull ingravers in gold and precious stones, and
describing the shape of the sign, which he had seen unto them, commands them
to make the like of gold and precious stone, which Image I my self have seen.
Thus far Eusebius, in the next chapter largely setting down the proportion,
manner and glory of this ensign so honorably preserved in that time. Socr.
Hist. Gal. l. 1. c. 3. Sozo l. 1. c. 3. Otto Chron. l. 4. c. 1. Stowe and
Howesin Constantin.


To this relation, if it needed more testimony, Socrates Sozomen, Otto and
other old foreign writers are witnesses, and if any man desires Modern
consent herein, those of our Nation do thus relate this matter. About noon, the
Sun something declining, Constantine saw in the sky a lightsome pillar in form
of a cross, wherein these words were engraven, In this oveercome: the which
vision so amazed the Emperor, that he mistrusting his own sight, demanded of
them that were present, whether they perceived the vision, which when all with
one assent had confirmed, the wavering mind of the Emperor was settled, with
this divine and wonderful sight. The night following in his sleep, he sees
Christ, which says thus unto him. Frame unto thy self the form of a cross,
after the example of the sign which appeared unto thee, and bear the same
against thy Enemies as a fit banner or token of victory. He being fully
persuaded of this Oracle, commands the victorious Sign of the Cross, which as
yet is reserved in the Palace of the Emperor, to be made, and therewith
proceeds forward with great courage. Eusebeus and others say, that presently
upon this Vision, Constantine concluded with his Christian Priests, Eusebius. l.
1. de vita. Constable.
to have only their God which appeared unto him, and no other to be worshipped.

And thus preparing himself with all his Army to suppress the Tyrant, having
God the Governor of all things for his Patron before his eyes, and calling
upon Christ our Savior and Helper, Cap. 31.
placing the Image of the Cross as a Sign of Victory before his armed Soldiers
and Guards, marched forward with his whole Army. And thus trusting in the help
of God, his Army not being more than half the number of Maxentius, Zozom. l. 2.
this consisting of 170 thousand foot, and 18 thousand horse, and yet (as an
old Panagerick has) Constantine not fighting with more than the fourth part of
his Army against 100000 of Maxentius men, Panegerick 1. Constable. Baron. and Spond
an. 312. Zozom. Baron. Spond. an 312
he set upon the Armies of Maxentius three of them, and presently overthrew
them; and so passing through Italy hard by Rome, where Maxentius was, he so
prosecuted him, that in his flight he was with his greatest forces drowned in
the River of Tyber there miraculously, (as Eusebius and others testify) like
to Pharaoh and his Egyptians in the red Sea, swallowed up by the waters, by his
own Engine of a new devised Bridge, of which he had made Boats to entrap
Constantine withal, strangely failing, to his own miserable destruction.

So soon as Constantine had thus obtained Victory (as Eusebius, Socrates, and
others are able witnesses) he gave thanks to God, who had so extraordinarily
assisted him, and delivered the Christians from persecution; those which were
banished, he recalled home; the goods of those which were confiscated, he
restored; those which were put in prison, he delivered; the Churches which were
destroyed, he caused to be re-edified; all which he effected with great care
and speed; his care was only fixed in things belonging to the glory of Christ;
he began to execute all the duties of a Christian man, to build Churches, and
to adorn them with magnificent and renowned Monuments, to shut up the Pagon
temples, pull them down, and abandon the Statuas erected in them.

Eusebius proceeds further, and says, that presently upon this victory,
Constantine making his Prayer with Thanksgiving to God, Author of his
Victory, published unto all in famous Inscriptions and Pillars, publicly
erected, the power of the Cross of Christ: and even in the midst of the City,
in the most principal place thereof, erected a great Trophy against his
enemies, and caused this Sign of Salvation to be engraven in it, with
Characters that could not be blotted out, did demonstrate it was the
Propugnacle of the Romans and all subjects to the Empire, and did openly
propose it to be seen of all men; and his own Image being erected in a famous
place of the City, and much frequented, holding in his hand a Spear, shaped
much like a Cross, Eusebius. c. 34.
commanded this Inscription to be graven on it in Latin letters, With this
saving Sign, a token of fortitude, I have delivered your City from the yoke of
Tyranny; and setting the Senate and People at liberty, Eusebius. c. 35.
I have restored them to their ancient Honor and Renown. And it immediately
follows in Eusebius, that Constantine hereupon with great boldness did openly
profess and publish Christ the Son of God unto the Romans. He also published in
all places his Edict, for restoring all men to their good, which had been
unjustly deprived of them, recalling Exiles, and delivering Prisone^s; all
these, and more of such things of Religious Christian nature, Man. Sco. an.
205. and an. 312.
this our noble King and Emperor performed presently upon his Victory against
Maxeatius, commonly taken to have been in the 7th. year of his Empire, begun
first in the Country of Britain.

And so their opinion, which before have told us, that the persecution
continued in some western parts ten years from the last most cruel Edict of
Dioclesian, Man. Sco. Aetat. 6. an. 312. Flor. Wigorn. in Chron. an. 292 and
300. 321. and 328.
and until the 7th year of Constantine, is expounded by themselves, affirming,
that this general peace to all Christians in the western world, was procured
and granted unto them by Constantine, in the 7th year of his Empire; and after
the ten years of Dioclesians Edict, after prosecuted by Maxentius, was ended.
Floren. Wigorn. writes, that in this year St. Helen, mother of Constantine,
then being here in Britain, wrote to her son to persecute the Jews which
denied Christ; Matthew. of Westminster. says, this general peace of Christians was
effected by Constantine, in the 313 year of Christ; Marianus will have it in
the year 312. so has Beronius Spondanus, and others; Harding relates it done
in the year of Christ 310. Mart. Polonus says, Mar. Sco an. Baron. and Spond
an 312. Harding c. 62. fol. 49. Flor. Wigorn. an. 306. Jo. Bal. lib. de S. rip.
Britt. Centu. 1. in Flavio Constable.
Constantine became a Christian in the year 309. and then both gave liberty to
Christians, and caused Churches to be builded in honor of Christ. Our
Countryman Flor. Wigorn. by Dionisus his Computation, sets it down three
years sooner, in the year 306; to which our English late Writers assent, a
principal man, and named a Bishop, saying, that Constantine learned his
Christian Faith in Britain, of his most Christian mother St. Helen; and at his
going from hence against Maxentius, behaved himself like a Christian in the
midst of the Pagan superstitions, and honored them which were professed
Christians.

4 Reg. 5
Having thus cleared our most glorious Countriman, Emperor Constantine, from
imputation of his so long delaying his holy baptism, as some have pretended,
and so near as I can and dare, proposed the most probable time thereof, I must
now speak though more briefly of the solemnity it self, and his most charitable
Religious Christian acts, and conversion which ensued thereupon. The common
opinion concerning Constantine before his baptism is, the same which the
Scripture witnesses of Naeaman the Syrian Prince, though he was great,
honored, valiant and rich, yet he also was a Leper, before he was by direction
of the prophet washed and healed in Jordane; yet great difference there was
between these two Lepers of Syria and Britain; the Leper of Syria was great,
but with his own Lord the King of Syria, Commander of his armies, and he
procured the quiet and safety of Syria; he was only cleansed of his corporal
Leprosy: But our British Leper was cured both in body and soul, he was not
only great with a particular King, but a great, and the greatest King and
Emperor, so styled, that ever was in the world, he did not only bring temporal
safety and quietness to one Kingdom and Nation, but both Temporal and
Spiritual happiness and salvation to the whole Empire, and to all Nations and
Kingdoms.

Aug. Quest. Evang. l 1. c 40 Edictum Constable Tom. 1. Con Act Sylvest. Papa
Plini. l. 26. c. 1. Adrio. 1. Epist ad Constable Simon Metap in vira S. Sylv.
Zonoras in vita Constable. Greg. Turen
Constantine being troubled with this infirmity, if I may call that so, which
St. Augustine says, is a defect of color, and not of health or integrity of
senses and members, and seeking remedy, yet finding none among his bodily
physicians the Pagan Flemmings advised him to make a Bath in the Capitol and
therein wash his body with the warm blood of Infants; Pliny and others writing
that this grief has been so healed: which to effect these Idolatrous Gentiles
prepared a great number of such children, intending to kill them, and to fill
the Bath with their blood, which when Constantine considered, and beheld the
tears and lamentations of the Mothers for their Children, he abhorred so great
cruelty and wickedness, causing the children to be restored to their mothers
with rewards and means to carry them to their dwelling places. In the night
following the holy Apostles St. Peter and St. Paul do appear, and say thus unto
him; O Emperor because thou have detested to shed the blood of innocents, we
are sent unto thee by Christ, to teach thee means to recover thy health; send
for Bishop Sylvester, and he will provide an holy Bath in which he will baptize
thee, and thou shall be cured of thy Leprosy, and all diseases; which
Constantine presently performed, sending for St. Sylvester, who showed there
unto him the pictures of St. Peter and St. Paul, which when the Emperor
diligently beheld, he openly before his nobility confessed, that these were
they which appeared unto him; and being perfectly instructed by St. Sylvester,
was baptized by him and miraculously cleansed from his Leprosy, an hand from
heaven, as himself did see and testify, touching him; and when he was thus
wonderfully cured and christened, St. Sylvester ministered the holy Sacrament of
Confirmation unto him, anointing and signing his forehead with sacred Crisme.
Simeon Metaphraster, a Greek writer, says, that at the time of Constantine his
baptism by St. Sylvester, Metaphr. in vita St. Sylv. Mr Br. f. 476
a light more bright then the Sun did suddenly shine about all the house, and
the Emperor being baptized, his flesh was pure and sound without any hurt or
scar, and the water wherewith he was baptized was full of such filth as came
from his soars, like scales of fishes. Diverse both Greek and Latin Authors
say, that his son Crispus was then baptized with him.

These things being of so great note and consequence in so great a Prince and
Commander, Theophan Cerameus Chron Plantina in Mar.
and so concerning all people, were not, nor could not be done in secret. The
infirmity of Constantine's Leprosy was generally known, Physicians had been
often times consulted, and done their best practice about it. The place of the
Capitol where the Children should by the Pagans have been murdered about it was
famous, the gathering them from many places and Provinces was known to all, the
open outcries and lamentations of their mothers could not be concealed, the
sending and seeking St. Sylvester were with honor and solemnity performed, so
was his entertainment and conference with the Emperor in presence of his
Nobility. The present conversion of Constantine thereupon, his preparation in
Penance seven days before his baptism. This Solemnized in the public
imperial palace, and in an holy Font so curiously provided, as all Histories
agree, and so miraculously curing his corporal disease, which no art of man
could heal, made this conversion of Constantine renownedly known and manifest
to all. To the Christians for their unspeakable joy, to the Jews and Pagans to
the shame and confusion of their obstinacy, and salvation of many of them
converted by this means.

Eusebius. l. 2. de vita. Constable. c. 27 ut supra. Baron an. 321 Acta. Sylvest
Niceph. l. 7. c 34 Egbertus Ab. Flor. Sem. 3 de Increm. and manifest cath.
fidei.
And Constantine himself did not only send his Imperial Edicts into all
Countries both East and West for embracing Christian Religion, but made his
public persuading Orations to that purpose; as namely in the Church openly, to
the Senate and People of Rome; whereupon as Nicephorus a Grecian writes, in
the only City of Rome there was converted and baptized above twelve thousand
men, besides women and young people in the same year. Egbertus from old
antiquities seems to deliver that all the Senators were then converted to
Christ, for he plainly says, that Constantine gave the honor of the Senate of
Rome to the Christian Clergy thereof, and he with all the Senators departed
thence to Bisantium.

Therefore a wonder it is how some Greek Writers should, or could plead
Ignorance of so concerning and memorable a thing, so publicly acted with so
many circumstances, which could not be concealed in the great commanding City
of the World, by the sole Emperor thereof, Jodoc. Cocc. in the saur. Cath. Tom.
1. lib. 7. art. 9.
and S. Sylvester the highest Ruler in the Church of Christ, and testified by
almost all Ecclesiastical Historians, too many to be remembered, being accounted
to be above 40 Classical Christian Authors and Writers of this matter, omitting
many of great name, antiquity, and authority. The Pagans themselves, even of
the same age, as Amianus, Marcellinus, Zosimus, Amia. Marcel. l. 27. c. 2.
and others give plain testimony unto it; the first expressly speaks of
Constantines Font in Rome. The other sets down the whole History at large,
after his Ethick manner. Zosimus also testifies, that this History was common
among the Pagan Writers in his time. Mr. Br. f. 4^7 5. Zosom. l. 2. de Constan.
Zosom. Hist. Eccle. l. 1. c. 5. R. Abraham Levit. in Chr. Judaic. R. Abra. Ezra
in c. 11. Dan. Glycas Pal. 4. Annal. Meno. Graecor. Calend. Janu. Nich. Pap.
Epist. ad Michael. Imper.
And the Jews also even then most malicious against Christians, as R. Abraham
Levita, and R. Abraham Aben Ezra do confess and prove the same. So do the best
Greek Historians, Theophanes, Metaphrastes, Zonarus, Cedrenus, Glycas,
Nicephorus, and others. Some of these, as Michael Glycas, calling them Arian
Heretics, who say he was baptized at Nicomedia by the Arian Bishop thereof,
and says, it is out of doubt, that he was baptized at Rome; his Baptistery
there continuing to confirm and prove it invincibly true; so have the rest: and
Theophanes plainly says, this was one of the Arian Heretics fictions and lies
against Constantine, to stain his glory untruly with. And their authentical and
publicly received Menologion of the Greek Church does not only say, that
Sylvester baptized Constantine at Rome, clensing him from his Leprosy both of
Soul and Body, but also it receives and enrolleth this glorious Emperor in the
Catalogue of holy Saints, and so he is generally honored among them; and in the
Latin Church his name was ever Enrolled in the Ecclesiastical Tables called
Dyptica, and publicly recited at Mass, which was not allowed to any but
Orthodox and holy Christians.

Therefore he must needs be free from all such suspicion, wherewith those
suspected Grecians have charged him, the chiefest of them making Constantine a
professed Christian, receiving Sacraments many years before the pretended
Baptism at his death. Therefore I may worthily say of this renowned Emperor
with our learned and ancient Historian, That he was the flower of Britain, a
Britain by Country, before whom, Henr. Hunt. hist. l. 1. in Cistit. Harding
Chro. c. 63. f. 50.
and after whom never any the like went out of Britain. And another in his old
Poem of the same our glorious King and Emperor, first testifying that he was
Christened at Rome by Pope Sylvester, and there cured of his Leprosy, adds,
He dyed after that at Nichomeide
In Catalogue among the Saints numbered;
Of May the twentieth and one day indeed,
Under Shrine buried and subumbred,
Whose day and feast the Greeks have each year
Solemnly, as for a Saint full clear.


Our old English Chronicle also testifies of this Emperor: Old English Hist.
part 4. f. 38. S. Adelm lib. de Laud. Virg. c. 12. Nicep. l. Hist. 7. c. 35.
and l. 8. c. 5.
This Constantine was a glorious man, and victorious in battle, In governing
of the Commyn people he was very wise, and in necessity of byleve he was
without comparison devote, his piety and his holiness be so written in the
books of holy Doctors, that without doubt he is to be numbered among Saints: And
the Greeks say, that in the end of his life he was a Monk. S. Adelm says,
Great Constantine was corporally and spiritually cured in Baptism at Rome by
St. Sylvester: and as Nicephorus a Grecian writes this in the consent of the
whole Church.

This our triumphant Emperor and glory of Britain, having thus victoriously
conquered his spiritual as well as corporal Enemies, and by Baptism thus
happily made so glorious and profitable a Member of the Church of Christ, the
joyful news and tidings thereof was soon diffused and known to the holy
Christians, though far distant from Rome, as that thing they most desired to be
effected, and as much rejoiced to hear it was so religiously performed. And
among the rest his blessed Mother St. Helen then living here in Britain her
native Country, after the death of her Husband Constantius, who had in the
best manner she could, instructed her Son Constantine in the true Christian
Religion, and desired nothing more than to understand, he publicly, and with
so great zeal, now openly professed that which she had so often and earnestly
exhorted him unto, was not a little joyed with the certain notice hereof. And
with all haste she could prepared herself for so long a journey, by her
corporal presence to be both more effectual partaker and encreaser of such
Christian comforts; and to give arguments of her joys by messengers, in the
mean time writing unto him from Britain, as our Antiquaries do affirm; and
among other things, to express her great zeal in Christian Religion, and to
exhort her Son to the like understanding of the great malice of the Jews
against Christians, especially at that time, the Emperor being so solemnly and
so miraculously baptized, Floren. Wigo. Chron. an 306 and 328. Marian. Scot.
lib. 2. aetat. 6. anno 321.
persuaded him to persecute those Jews which denied Christ. Marianus Scotus
writes also, that St. Helen did write out of Britain when she heard he was
baptized by St. Sylvester. But his Publisher (as he is charged with many other
things by Harkesfield to have done) either has mistaken him in that which
follows, or published some Copy not so to be approved; for he brings in St.
Helen, in the next words, to request her Son to deny Christ, and follow the
Jews, which cannot be the words either of Marianus, or any Learned Antiquaty,
such as he was, confessing S. Helen to have been at this time in Britain, as
he does; for, neither at this time, nor diverse of hundreds of years after St.
Helen her death, there is mention in Histories of any Jews at all to have been
in this Kingdom; then much more it must needs be Historically a thing
impossible, and altogether untrue, that there should be one hundred forty and
one of the most Learned of the Jews here, and St. Helen should bring them with
her to Rome, from hence, as seems by some to be set down in the Relation of
the Dispute between St. Sylvester and the Jews, before Constantine and St.
Helen: But quite otherwise it is proved, that St. Helen was wholly Christian
when she was in this Nation, before her going to Rome, and at the time of her
writing to her Son Constantine there, after his baptism, when in the other
sense that St. Helen wrote to her Son to Congratulate his Baptism, encouraged
him constantly and religiously to profess Christian Religion, to be a Friend to
the Servants and Friends of Christ, and a Suppressor of Jews, and whosoever
their Enemies, we have her own Religious Education, and all the Christian
Clergy and Nobility of Btitrain, a Christian Kingdom and her native Country so
calling upon her, and neither Jew nor Pagan of note, learning, or power, for
any thing we read, continuing here either to hinder her in this, or advise her
to the contrary, to the favor either of Jews or Gentiles in their proceedings.

The like I may answer to then, which although they with the truth acknowledge
S. Helen to have been the Daughter of King Coel of Britain, and born in this
Nation; yet they say she went hence with Constantine toward Rome, at what time
he went against Maxentius the Tyrant, and with the Children of Constantine
traveled to Byzantium, and dwelling there, was perverted by the Jews; and so
leaving off the Baptism of Constantine in that City of Bithynia, did write to
him from thence, commending him for renouncing Idolatry, but reproving him for
reproving the Jewish Religion, and being a Christian: but this is evidently
confuted before, when by so worthy Authorities and many Arguments it was proved
that St. Helen was in Britain, Mr. Brought. fol. 481.
so far distant from Bizantium at this time.

Math. West. an. 321. Baro. and Spon. Annal. an. 314 Severin. Binnius Annot. in
Conc. Arlesat. Tom. 1. Com. Epist. Constable. ad Chrest. supr. Conc. Roman. Can. 1.
Hist. Tripart. l. 3. c. 2. l. 2. c. 3. Mr. Br. f. 855.
And what man of judgment can think this Empress, having been so fully
instructed in the Mysteries of Christian Faith, to have fallen into Judaism?
nothing but envy it self could invent such a Fiction. In the time of this our
great Constantine was held the first great Council of Arles in France,
consisting of, as Nicephorus, Ado, and others say, 600 Bishops, as Baronius,
Spondanus, and others from Antiquity do gather, in the year of Christ 314, and
the 9. of this Emperor Constantine; in this Council was present and subscribed
Restitutus Archbishop of London, and in probable judgment diverse others of
this our Britain, and in this time of the meeting of the Bishops at the two
Councels of Arles, especial care being taken by our renowned Emperor, that they
should, at his charge and cost, be safely conveyed, with their due attendance,
to that place, where these Councels were to be assembled, and there also to be
provided for during the time of the Councels, at his cost.

Nor did this Heroic Emperor confine his love and favors toward Christian
Religion unto the Christians of his own, the West Empire, but unto all; as God
by an holy Angel before revealed, (both ancient and modern Authors so
acknowledging) the Christians in the whole world should be at peace, and
Idolatry was to be generally overthrown by this noble Emperor.

Bap. Mont. l 2. de vita S. Blasii Joan. Bell. l. 2. de actis Pont. Roman. in
Sylvest. 1.
Nunc bonus expulsis Romana in Regna Tyrannis,
Adveniet Princeps sub quo placabitur Orbis,
Et finem accipiet veterum cultura Deorum.
A Prince shall rule, whose power shall quite expel
Those Tyrants who against Rome did rebel;
The World by him shall quiet peace enjoy,
And he the Pagan gods shall all destroy.
As concerning Christian Churches, they which were large enough, and had been
ruinated in the time of persecution, were repaired, others were builded higher,
and with honor made greater; where there were none before, new were erected,
even from the Foundation; and the Emperor out of his Treasury afforded money
thereto, and wrote both to the Bishops and Presidents of every Province; to the
Bishops, that whatsoever they would they should command; and to the Presidents,
that they should diligently do what they commanded: And so, with the prosperous
estate of his Empire, Religion greatly increased. Out of the Lands of his own
Tribute in every City, he took a certain pension that was accustomed to be paid
into the Treasury and distributed it to the Churches and Clergy, and by Law
decreed that his Gift to be perpetual.

He caused the sign of the Cross to be made upon the Armor of his Soldiers to
accustom them thereby to serve God. He builded a Church in his Palace, Mr. Br.
f. 488
and used to have carried with him when he went to war, a Pavilion after the
manner of a Church, that both he and his Army being in the field, might have a
Church wherein to pray unto God and receive the sacred mysteries; Priests and
Deacons, which, according to the Institution of the Church, should execute
those Duties, continually followed that Tent. He took away by Law the old
Punishment of the Cross used by the Romans; he caused that sign to be made on
his own Image, whether impressed on money, or painted on a Table.

The British History says, that Constantine residing at York, British Hist.
fol. 138.
although he seemed at first unwilling to accept the Imperial Title, and
protested openly against it, yet when the Senate had confirmed the Election, he
took upon him the Government of those Provinces which his Father had held in
the West parts, and with an Army of Britains and other Nations, he first
settled France and Germany, being then in Arms against him, and afterward
subdued Maxentius, Maximianus Son, that usurped the Empire in Italy. Then with
like success he made war upon Licinius, his Associate, who persecuted the
Professors of Christianity in the East parts of the World, by which means
Constantine alone enjoyed the Empire, and for his many and glorious Conquests
was worthily surnamed The Great. In this time the form of the Government in
Britain, both for Civil and Martial Causes, was altered, and new Laws
established. The Civil Government of the Province he committed to Pacatianus,
who ordered the same as Deputy to the Praefectus Praetorio of Gallia (an
Officer entitled by him) with a limitation of place, and restriction of that
power which the ancient Praefectus Praetorio had under the first Emperors.

Then Constantine intending to make war in Persia, either to defend or enlarge
the limits of the East Empire, removed the Emperial Seat from Rome to the City
of Bizantium, (which he re-edified, and caused the same to be called of his own
Name Constantinople) drawing thither the Legions in Germany, that guarded the
Fronteers of the Western Empire, which was thereby laid open to the Incursions
of those barbarous People that afterward assayed it, and in the end possessed
the greatest part thereof. The borders also of the Province in Britain were
weakened by removing the Garrisons there into other Cities and Towns, which
being pestered with Soldiers, (for the most part unruly Guests) were abandoned
by the ancient Inhabitants.

There be Authors that write, Hollin. Hist. of Engl. f. 92.
that Constantine conveyed over Sea with him a great Army of Britains, by
whose Industry obtaining Victory as he wished, he placed a great number of such
as were discharged out of pay, and licensed to give over the War, in a part of
Gallia, toward the West Sea coast, where their posterity remain unto this day,
and marvellously increased afterward, somewhat now differing from our
Britains, the Welshmen, in manners and language.

Among those Noblemen which he took with him when he departed out of this Land,
as our Writers do testify, were the three Uncles of his Mother Helen, Hoelus,
Trabernus and Marius, whom he made Senators in Rome.

After the wars betwixt Constantine and the Persians, Mr. Br. fol. 532.
the King of Persia sent Ambassadors unto Constantine to procure peace, and he
writ back unto King Sapores, that the Christians in his Dominions, which were
there in great numbers, might live at liberty and freedom for their Religion:
And if we may believe Eusebius, then living, Eusebius. lib. 4. Sozom. lib. 2.
Hist. cap. 14.
and best knowing the affairs and proceedings of this most noble Emperor, after
all these things were compassed and brought to an end, he began that glorious
and renowned work and Foundation of the most sumptuous Church of the twelve
Apostles in Constantinople, where it is evident by this then living Author and
witness, that he did not begin to build this Church till long after his
triennial Feast. And yet the glory and stateliness of that work, as it is
described by the same Writer, was such that it could not be effected and
finished under many years, and yet that it was finished before his death it is
certain; for, he there erected a Tomb for his own body to be buried in, and
there was interred. There he erected (says Eusebius) twelve Monuments, to the
honor and memory of the twelve Apostles, and in the midst between them he
placed his own Tomb, with six Apostles encompassed on either side; surely, as I
have said before, considering with discreet Council, Eusebius. ut sup.
that the Tabernacle of his dead body should worthily and decently rest there,
when he had considered these things long time before, he dedicated the Church
to the Apostles, thinking that their memory would bring much profit to his soul.

And both Baronius and Spondanus confess that Constantine did not begin this
great and wonderful work until the 336. Baronius and Spond. Annal. in ann. 336.
year of Christ, and after his concluding peace with the Persians, had not
before so much as resolved it. Therefore this Church being so costly and
magnificent, as these men confess, and Eusebius at large proves, and yet
Constantius lived to see it roofed and quite finished; he must needs live a
longer time than until the next year, the 337. of Christ, which they limit unto
him to live, and much more longer than Socrates their Author continues his
life; for, by his reckoning, setting down his death the same year wherein the
Persian Ambassadors came to him for peace, we must be forced to say, this
admirable Church was quite finished in the space of seven weeks; or if we
should adventure, as Baronius does, to make Socrates our Author, and yet add
unto his account a whole year, as he does, it must needs be yielded unto by
such calculation, that it was not begun, or any materials prepared for it, and
yet quite finished within the space of one year and seven weeks; for, as before
it was not begun at the Feast of Easter, and yet ended the same year (by
Socrates) before the Feast of Pentecost, when by Eusebius, Constantine died,
and by Socrates about the eleventh of the Calends of June the 22. day of May,
and by Baronius, before the Feast of Pentecost and the 22. day of May the year
following, which is morally impossibly to be true; for, besides the amplitude
thereof, and Ornaments therein, Eusebius. lib. 4. de Vit. Constable. c. 64. Socr. l.
1. c. ult.
Eusebius, who had seen it, and knew the building of it, says, that
Constantine erected it to an infinite altitude, and made it from the ground
with all variety of Stones, even to the top; the Roof was curiously wrought,
and within covered with Gold throughout, and covered above with Brass and much
Gold.

And therefore Nicephorus also, a Greek Author, who had diligently examined
Socrates, and cites his very words of this matter before related, affirms
plainly and constantly, notwithstanding that opinion that Constantine did not
die until the 342. year of Christ in the Feast of Pentecost, Eusebius. lib. 4. de
vit. Constable. c. 64. Cap. 66. sup.
toward the end of it about noon time of the day, to speak in Eusebius his
words, this Emperor was received to his God, leaving his mortal part like to
other mortal men to the earth, but joining his Intelligence and Divine part of
his Soul unto God: He dying in Bethinia, his Soldiers enclosing his Body in a
Golden Coffin, covered it all over with Purple, and conveyed it to
Constantinople, and placed it in the Emperial Palace, adorned with Emperial
Robes, Purple and a Diadem; Lights set upon Golden Candlesticks round about it,
which gave such an admirable show unto the Beholders as was never seen: All the
Nobles of his Army which worshipped him whilst he lived, kept their old manner
and custom, at certain times entering in and prostrating themselves on the
ground, saluted the Emperor after his death, lying in his Coffin as if he had
been still living. The Senate and all other Magistrates worshipped his Body
with like reverence. All sorts of people, even Women and Children in infinite
number came to see the solemnity; and these things were performed many days.
This blessed Emperor was he alone which reigned when he was dead; Eusebius. Ca. 66.
and to him alone, God himself being Author thereof, all honors which were wont
to be given when he lived, were given after his death. For he being the only
Emperor which in all the actions of his life piously and religiously worshipped
God the King of all, and his Son Jesus Christ, he alone by right obtained this
honor by the will of God to have that which was buried in death to reign among
men.

Howes of the Romans f. 45.
In the 20. year of this Constantine was held (as says Mr. Howes) the Council
of Nice with great Solemnity, wherein were condemned and suppressed the
damnable Heresies of Arius Bigot, the vainglorious and dissembling Minister,
whereof the Arian Heresy took the Name, and for a long space after much
troubled Christendom. And at this time the Nicene Creed was commanded to be
sung and said in all Churches. And the forenamed Arius pretending to make a
Retract of all his Heresies, took his leave of the Emperor, The fearful end of
an arch Heretic.
as if he had great necessity to take Physic to purge his Body, which
Purgation never ceased working, till it had purged him of all his blood and
bowels, and so he died most miserably and shamefully.

How es ibid.
About this time (says the same Author) Octavius, whom Constantine left
Governor in Britain, rebelled, against whom Constantine sent Traherne his
Uncle with a Legion of Romans, who after diverse Conflicts was slain.

Old English Chronic. f. 34 p. 4.
The old English Chronicle says: When Constantine went from this Land to Rome,
he took all his land to keep to the Earl of Cornwall, that was called Octavian.
And anon as this Octavian wist that his Lord dwelt at Rome, incontinent be
ceased all the land into his hands, and therewith did all his will among hy and
low, and they held him for King. But other Historians, both British and
English, Domestical and Foreign, affirm, that Constantine at his going from
Britain to Rome, committed the Government of this Country to the Roman
Proconsuls, and the named Octavian, or Octavius, took arms against them, slew
them, and so obtained to be King here. The Monk of Westminster says this
Octavius was a King before, a Regulus, or Prince of the People in and about
Worcestershire. Harding says, he was Duke of West Sex, (he must mean where the
West Saxons after ruled, for they came not into Britain till a long time after
this.

But after his day came one Octavius
Duke of West sex that crowned was for King,
That slewgh the Werdins of Constantinus
Which that he set for Britain governing,
In his abscence to keep it in all thing.
Besides this there be other difficulties among the Historians about this
Octavius, and such as will discredit him, for having had many great and chief
and long Commands as a King in this Nation, Math: Westminster: sets down his
conquering the Roman Proconsul here in the year of Christ 314, when diverse more
ancient and received Historians say, that S. Helen, our Queen and Empress,
continued here long after that time. Br. fol. 543. 4.
And her Son Constantine Emperor now at the highest of his Glory, Power and
Victories, and having so many British Soldiers without employment in France so
near unto us, cannot be immagined to have suffered any Enemy in his own native
Country so to have prevailed; or how could such a man as Octavius is supposed
to be, assemble such an Army in Britain, where that victorious Emperor was
undoubted King, and whence he had so great an Army of Britains so lately
before, that by them, as our Historians write, he vanquished all most
innumerable Companies of his most potent Enemies: And as these Relators of
Octavius his proceedings themselves are Witnesses, the power with Constantine
was so great that the Romans which came hither unto him, seeing his power,
said, No Prince in the world was comparable to him for strength: Where then in
Britain could Octavius gather an Army so soon to encounter and overthrow three
Legions of Roman Soldiers, besides their Adherents, as these men say? And
Eusebius says, that Constantine himself came hither again, and was here longer
after this pretended Revolt, and at his death gave Britain the ancient
Patrimony to his Eldest Son. Again, these men say, Octavius was King here until
Maximus his time, and married his only Daughter and Heir unto him, when it is a
common consent in Antiquities, that this Maximus, or Maximinianus, was not King
in Britain, till after the 380. year of Christ. Therefore he must needs be
granted to be very young, of too few years at the going of Constantine hence,
for him to commit the Government of Britain unto him, or for himself to have
so soon Usurped against it so rightful, and potent King and Emperor.

Our most ancient and best Historians, S. Gildas, S. Bid, Marianus,
Florentius, Wigorniensis, Ethelwardus, Henry of Huntington, and William of
Malmsbury, although as diligently as they could recounting our Kings of
Britain, never mention any such Octavius, or Octavian, but the chiefest and
most ancient among them, S. Gildas plainly says, that this Island was at this
time, and until Maximus, or Maximinian, a Britain took upon him the Empire, a
Roman Island Insula nomen Romanum tenens. And diverse Historians, both late and
ancient do particularly set down our Kings after Constantine the Great, and
Roman Leivtenants here until these days, as Constantine, Constantius, Julian,
Valentinian, Gratian, Emperors, or Kings, Martinus, Lupicinus, Nectaridius,
Theodosius, Fraomarius, and other Roman Lievtenants and Governors here. And
when the Council of Ariminum was kept about the year of Christ 360, and the 23.
year of Constantius son of Constantine the Great, it is certain, that this
Constantius was our King in Britain, and bore the charge of the poorest
Bishops of this Kingdom as then under his Government which were present there,
and he was so far from losing Britain, or any other Country of his Empire
then, as Sozomen and others testify that Council thus wrote unto him; Epist.
Arimin. Conc. ad Constant. Imp. apud Sozoni. Hist. l. 4. c. 47.
at this time this Empire so increased, that all the World was under his
Government: this was above twenty years after the death of the great
Constantine, in whose time this Revolt of Britain from him is thus supposed,
and above twice so long time of the imagined usurpation here by Octavius. And
Zonaras writes, that this Constantius in the fourteenth year of his Empire,
banished, or rather carried with him Athanasius into Britain at his coming
hither.

Therefore I dare not assent, that in this time of the greatest flourishing
Estate of the Roman Empire, and the power thereof in Britain, Harding Cron. c.
63. f. 51. Galf. Mon. Hist. Reg. Bri. l. 5. cap. 9. Pont. Virun. Hist. l. 5.
Math. West. an. 379.
especially from whence the glory of it grew to that greatness, either
Octavius, or any other so much prevailed here to bar the Emperors of that
honor. But he might toward the time of Maximus, or Maximianus, when the
Empire had more Enemies and less power, prevail in some such sort, as these
Historians have written of him, although they differ also in Maximian as well
as in Octavius; one says, he was the Son of Traherne the Uncle of St. Helen,
Maximian King Trahern his Son next Heir to Constantine; others say he was Son
of Leolinus another Uncle of St. Helen, Great Uncle to Constantine; and one of
them, Gal. Mon. l. 5. c. 12.15. Pont. Virun. lib. 5. Math. West. an. 390, 392.
Manus. Anti. in vit. S. Nin. Capg. in eod. Bal. li. de Scrip. Cent. 1. in Nin.
says Octavius, was King but 14 years, ending with the beginning of Maximian
his Reign; And so we may well allow such an Octavius to have the name of a
King in Britain in those troublesome days of the Romans ruling here, diverse
petty Kings, being probably at that time, in this Nation, as well by the
Testimony of these Authors which then make Octavian King, as others: So they
term Conanus a King, and that Maximian took his kingdom from him; So was
Dionotus King in Cornwall, So was his brother Carodocus before him, and yet
under one chief King and Emperor Maximian at that time; And St. Nimen who lived
Bishop here, in the end of this age, had Kings for his Ancestors, and yet the
great distance of the place of his birth from King Coel, argues he was not of
their line: And all these Kings or Regents here, were most certainly by our
Antiquaries Chatholick Christians.

Constantinus.
After the death of Constantine, the great Constantinus his eldest Son enjoyed
Britain as a portion of his Dominion, till making some attempts upon his
brother Constans for the enlarging of it, British Hist. fol. 239.
he was by him slain. Then was the Empire divided between Constans and
Constantius the two younger brethren; Constans seized upon the Provinces which
Constantinus his brother had held, and made a voyage into Britain, where
Gratianus a Hungarian by birth had then charge of the Army; This Gratianus was
surnamed Funarius, for that he being a young man was able (as it is written of
him) to hold a Rope in his hand against the force of five Soldiers assaying to
pull it from him, But Constans afterward following ill counsel (the ready way
to Princes ruins) and giving himself over to all kind of vice, was slain by
Magnentius Taporus (the Son of a Britain) who then invaded the Empire,
usurping the Government of Gallia and Britain till (after three years war
with Constantius the successor of Constans his brother) finding himself unable
any longer to uphold his greatness, Mr. Br. fol. 548. 1.
he murdered himself.

This Constantius in process of time was infected with the Arian heresy, but
neither so as to endanger Britain, or any other Nation under his command: He
consented to the recalling of St. Athanasius out of exile, and sometime to his
continuing his dignity at Alexandrea; And whether it was for the love of St.
Athanasius, or fear of his brother Constans writing expressly unto him in favor
of St. Athanasius, is uncertain; he also consented to the calling of the great
general Council of Sardyce 10 or 11 years after the death of his Father, as
Socrates and Sozomen affirm, wherein St. Athanasius was proved innocent, and as
he (then present with many others) proves, the Nicon faith was confirmed and
utterly forbidden to be questioned.

Mr. Bro. fol. 548. Socr. l. 2. c. 16. Soz. l. 3. c. 11, 12. Athan. Apol. 2
cont. Arianos. Diverse Bishops of Britain, 5 at the least present at the
Council of Sardyce Baro. and Spon. an. 347. Sex. Ruff. Brem. Rev. gest. po. To.
ad Valent.
And at the calling of this Council, the same renowned Doctor called this said
Constantins, as also his brother, a known Cacholick Emperor, and a Religious
Prince; and we are sure that at this time our Kingdom of Baittain detained the
former glorious estate, and glory of Religion it had before in the days of
Constantine, and was still free from Arianisme; For the same glorious
Athanasius, present in that Council, faith, that amongst more than 300 Bishops
assembled there, which freed him, and professed the Nicen faith, the Bishops
from the Provinces of Baittain were there: And as the Roman writers testify,
there were from the division of the Empire by Constantine, and as many suppose,
before, five provinces here in Britain, Maxima Caesariensis, Valentia,
Baittannia prima, Brittania secunda, Flavia Caesariensis. So that if we should
allow but one Bishop out of every of those provinces to have been at the
Sardyce Council, and there to have subscribed for the rest of Britain their
Provinces or Dioceses, we must grant five British Bishops to have been there,
and supplied this duty and Office for the rest of Britain.

That this our Country of Britain flourished after this with great numbers of
worthy Bishops, no City then vacant here of such a Pastor and Rider, we may
gather from diverse Antiquities, Epist. Concilii Arimini ad Constable. apud Socr. l.
2. Hist. c. 29. Soz Hist. Eccl. l. 4. c. 16. Sever sulp. sacra Hist. l. 2. c.
21. Lib. Notitia Epis. orb. Chr. sive Cod. Provin. Romans
as from the Epistle of the great Council of Ariminum in Italy, not long after
this time, written to Constantius the Emperor, where our Bishops were present,
testifying unto him, that they were assembled there forth of all Cities toward
the West, most properly and significantly to be applied to this Kingdom, most
West from thence, And the words, All Bishops out of the Western Cities, cannot
carry any other true construction; but our Episcopal Cities in Baittain were
then so furnished, and many or most of them present at that Council. This is
confirmed by the number of Western Bishops above 400, as Sozomen and others
write, assembled at Ariminum, besides 160 from the East at the same time,
gathered together at Seleucia in Isauria, when it is manifest in the old
Manuscript Catalogue of Bishops, that Britain and all the Western Nations
present in the Council of Ariminum had not at that time many more than 400
Bishops. Therefore we must needs grant, that the Bishops of all Cities as well
of Britain as other Countries of the West, which had not excuseable lets and
impediments, were there present in such sense as the Epistle of that Council is
cited, and Severus Sulpitius is sufficient witness, that this our Britain in
particular, that it had many Bishops there, for relating the number to have
been above 400 out of the West: And the Emperor the better to incline them to
the Arian heresy as it seems, commands that provision should be made for
them at his cost; But the Bishops of France, Aquitaine and Britain refused it,
and rather made choice to live at their own charges than to be maintained by
the Emperor; and this refusal was general to all the Bishops of Britain,
Aquitaine and France, except three only of Britain, which received allowance
from the Emperor, and refused maintenance by the other Bishops, themselves
being poor.

And the same Authors prove, that our Bishops were drawn or forced to come to
that Council by the Officers of Constantius, now after his brothers death, a
professed friend to the Arian heresy; or rather a professed Arian then
reigning in Britain makes it evident, that our British Bishops, which could
not plead sufficient cause of excuse and absence, were generally present there.
And it those few poor Bishops of Britain, which were not able to bear their
own charges, were drawn thither, to be maintained by the Emperor, how much
rather must we judge the same of so many potent and rich in this Country, which
could pretend no such excuse? So that we see no excuse, but infirmity either by
age or sickness to have caused any British Bishops absence thence. A late
writer thinks Iltutus then, as he conjectureth, Archbishop of London, the
Archbishops of York and Gaerleon, the Bishops of Winchester, Harris Eccles.
Hist. Tom. 4. c. 24.
Chichester and Gloucester with others were there. I see no particular warrant
he brings more for those than any other, of so many Episcopal British Cities
of that time, which I have before remembered, all of them being in the same
condition, for presence or absence, but where just excuses and lets were
singular to any in particular above the rest: For good Authors have Testified
that all in general were urged to be there, without any exception, or to be
exempted: And almost all Bishops in the world were then caused to be either at
Ariminum in Italy where those of the West were, Sulpi. Sever. Sacr. histor. l.
2. Epist. Conc. Arim. ad Con. apud Theod. l. 2. Hist. c. 19. Mr. Bro. fol. 552.
Epist. Arimin. Conc. ad Constan: Imp. apud Theod. l. 2. c. 20. and alios.
or at Seleucia appointed for the Eastern Bishops; and the command was for all
Bishops generally to be there; this was the Emperors command to the Presidents
of the Provinces to compel all to be present. And the Council of Ariminum, it
self in the Epistle to Constantius the Arian Emperor, testifies plainly, that
all the Bishops of the West were there assembled. The far greater part of these
were Catholic Bishops, and of the whole number about 400. There was not by
Severus Sulpilius his relation above 80. Arians. St. Athanasius says, there
were 50 and more, and St. Ambrose witnesses, that the greatest part of the
Bishops there confirmed the faith of the Nicene Council, and condemned the
Arian errors. This is testified by the same Council in two several Epistles to
the Emperor, that they neither could nor would swerve from the doctrine of the
Nicene Council.

And although the Emperor both by his Epistle to that Council, and otherwise
by fraud and terrors, endeavored for to remove them from that holy mind, and
communicate with the Arians, they plainly wrote answer again, constantly
averring they would change nothing they had decreed, and gave their Legates
charge to tell him as much in words: And to make it manifest, that although by
many Writers diverse of the Bishops being convented and overcome, both with the
deceit of the Arians, and persecution of the Emperor, did afterward subscribe
to a material error, our Bishops of Britain were free, both from imputation
and suspicion thereof. Socrates, Sozomen, Nicephorus and others prove that the
Emperor neglecting to return answer to the second absolute resolution and
Epistle, the Council staying some time for answer, and having none, they all
departed to their countries, and Sees, Hill. li. contra Arian. and Argent.
Socrat. Hist. Ecoles. l. 2. c. 29, 41. Sozom. Hist. l. 4. c. 18.
and wholely dissolved the Council. St. Hillary says plainly this Council
ends Religiously by all: So our Bishops must remove from Ariminum, none being
returned home, or so far from recalling by any new edict or stratagen of the
Emperor then of Constantinople very far from Ariminum, and further from our
Bishops travel into Britain, they could be none of that number which were
circumvented or verified to subscribe to the wicked Emperor and his Arian
favorites designs.

This persecution of Vrsatius by the command of Constantius the Emperor,
stretched not so far as Britain, his malice and indignation being against
Liberius Pope of Rome, and the Bishops of Italy: And our Historians have made
it doubtful, whether Constantius had so much power in Britain after this time
to execute such cruelty.

This Constantius was at the time of his death by Sozomen about 45 years old,
full 45, says Socrates, besides the time he reigned with his Father; after his
death, Sozom. Hist. Eccle. l. 5. c. 1. Socrat. l. 2. c. 37
say Socrates, Sozomen and Nicephorus, he was Emperor 25 years; he died on
the third day of the Nones of November by Nicephorus his account in the 367.
year of Christ; some set down his death; somewhat sooner, Baron. and Spo. Annal.
Tom. 4.
as they have done his Fathers before above 25 years sooner than this account
of Nicephorus of the year of Christ 367. for Constantius his death yet grant he
was Emperor 25. years after his Father died.

About this time Martinus (an aged man) was made Deputy of Britain, when
Paulus a Spaniard surnamed Catena (a name well sorting with his nature) was
sent thither as a Commissioner to enquire of such as had conspired with
Magnentius. British. Hist. l. 3. fol. 140.
But under color of his authority, he called in question such as were not
faulty, either upon false information or private displeasure, and sometimes to
make a gain of those that were accused, which course Martinus the Deputy
mislikeing entreated him, that such as had been no actors in Rebellion, might
be no partners in punshment with offenders: Whereupon Paulus discharging the
Deputy himself as a favourer of Traitors and privy to the conspiracy, did so
far forth incense Martinus, that (being either impatient of reproaches, or
perhaps not altogether guiltless) he struck at Paulus with his Sword,
intending to have killed him, but failing in the execution, he presently thrust
the Sword into his own body. Gratianus Funarius, though he were not specially
bound by oath to the Emperor, as some others had been, yet for that he had
received Magnentius into his house, was adjudged to forfeit all his goods, the
rest of the accused persons being fettered and presented to the Emperor, he
condemned some to death, and some to exile.

Julianus.
Now was the Government of Gallia and Britain assigned to Julianus (afterward
called the Apostata) whom Constantius had made Caesar: British. Hist. l. 3
fol. 141.
Lupicinus Master of the Armor to the Emperor, (a good Soldier, but notorious
for his pride, covetousness and cruelty) and after him Alipius, were sent into
Britain to repress the Inhabitants that had invaded the Province there,
whilst Julianus himself remained in Gallia, not daring to pass into the Isle,
both for that he feared the Gauls, who were ready (upon the least occasion) to
revolt, and also doubted the Almanes, who were then up in Arms.

Mr. Bro. fol. 562.
Constantius the last over-living Son of Constantine being dead, Julianus
brother to Gallus and Son to Constantius Chlorus by Theodora, a man by no title
of descent heir, or King of Britain, was acknowledged for Emperor; for
although this Constantius last Emperor, by the instigation and persuasion of
Eusebia the Empress made him a Caesar in the Empire, (he himself not able to
discharge the whole burden of so manifold troubles and invasions of the
Barbarous (for so the Romans called strangers) in diverse places of the Empire,
especially in Gallia, now France, whereas Zosimus says, they took 40 Cities
near the River of Rhene) and gave unto him in marriage his Sister Helena, and
sent him to Govern the part of the Empire on this side the Alps: Zosim. Hist.
l. 3. Socr. Hist. Eccl. l. 3. c. 1. Cassiod. Tripart. Hist. l. 6. c. 1. Nicep.
l. 10. c. 1. Bar. and Spond. Annal. anno 360. Soc. l. 3. c. 1. Cassiod. Tri.
Hist. l. 6. c. 1. Amianus l. 21.
Socrates Cassiodorus and others testify it was thought that when Constantius
sent him into the dangerous wars of Gallia (his Wife Helena being then dead) he
did it to have him slain by the cruel and potent Enemies; And Constantius
limiting his power to do nothing without consent of others. And not only this,
but he secretly incited Vadomarus, King of the Franks, to take Arms against
Julian, and incited others by his letters which they sent to Julian, for their
excuse to invade the Romans, where Julian Ruled; which when Julian perceived,
and remembering the old hatred he had born him from his Childhood, he required
him with the like measure, showing much love and favor to those under his
command, whom Constantius hated or dis-favoured, which among Christians were
the Catholic Bishops, and others whom he had persecuted.

And this his favor and kindness toward Catholics had continued with him,
even from his first being Caesar in these parts, as evidently appears in the
case of St. Hillary that renowned glory of Gods Church, who at the same time he
was exiled by the procurement of the wicked Arians and consent of Constantius
unjustly, was by Julianus, whom he called his Lord and Religious Caesar,
adjudged Innocent; and for his love and defense of St. Hillary did suffer more
reproach of the Arian persecutors, than St. Hillary endured injury by that
exilement: Thus we see Julian whilst he continued in these Western parts, was a
favourer of the Catholic Religion; but Julian quite leaving these Western
Nations, before either he persecuted Christians, or left the profession of
their Religion, living so short a time Emperor, (not two years by two Months
and three days, Baron. an. 363
as Baronius thinks he does demonstrate) and never returning Westward again,
Britain could not be afflicted with his Apostasy.

After the death of Constantius (who is said to have repented three things at
his last gasp; first, that he caused the death of his Son-in-Law; The second,
that he made Julian who proved an Apostate Emperor; Mr. Bro. fol. 56.
And the third, that he professed and favored the Arian Heresy; for which
offenses craving pardon and repenting, he died a holy death, Gregor. Nazian. in
Orat. in Julianum. Nicep. l. 9. Hist. c. 50. British. Hist. 141.
and was buried with such solemnities as the Catholics use in the funerals of
them that make a holy end. And to confirm the opinion of men with the authority
and Testimony of Heaven and Angels, he says it was commonly related, that his
body was with such solemnity carried to Constantinople to be buried, there an
Angelical Harmony was heard by many, as reward of his piety) Julianus
possessing the Empire (which he had usurped in the life time (says the
British History) of Constantius) banished Palladius an honorable person into
Britain, and sent Alipius to repair the walls of Jerusalem, in which attempt
God discovering his wrath by terrifying the Builders with thunder and
lightning, and killing many thousand Jews, gave an apparent testimony how vain
a thing it is for man to oppose himself against the uncontrollable Decree of
Almighty God; and who so shall consider the strange and miraculous death of
this Julian, as being slain from Heaven, and his desperate crying out, Thou
have vanquished me, O Galilean, when he yielded up his damnable Soul, I suppose
will be terrified both from falling into Apostasy, or taking any Oath of
abjuration concerning his Faith and Religion.

Jovian.
Jovian succeeded Julianus in the Empire, which he held but few months; when he
was chosen Emperor, as Ruffinus, Theodoret, Socrates and others testify, he
refused it, Ruffinus Hist. l. 2. c. 1. Theodoret l. 4. c. 1. Socr. Hist. l. 3.
c. 19. Matthew. West. ann. 366.
and being thereto taken by the Soldiers against his will, openly professed,
that he being a Christian, would not be Emperor over Infidels; but all of them
confessing themselves to be Christians, he accepted the Empire. This Christian
magnanimity appeared evidently in this new elected Emperor before in the time
of Julian: for Julian apostating and making a Decree, that Soldiers should
either sacrifice to Idols, or leave the wars; he being then a Tribune, rather
made choice to forsake all hope of temporal preferment than obey that wicked
Edict. Whereupon Julian then standing in need of such Assistants, retained him
still in the number of his Commanders, notwithstanding he so courageously
professed himself a Christian. This renowned Man was at one and the same time,
as Ruffinus calls him, a Confessor, Emperor, and Extinguisher of Error; Jovian
commended.
and God wonderfully honored his constancy, even in his life, not only in the
conferring the Imperial honor upon him, but in the manner thereof, Ruff. sup:
Theodoret l. 4: c. 1.
that being so professed a Catholic Christian, the whole Army did with one
voice choose him Emperor, which joined with that is said of them before, upon
Jovianus refusing to be Emperor over Pagans, how with one voice they all
confessed themselves to be Christians, sufficiently proves, that either the
Edict of Julian to force his Soldiers to sacrifice to Idols was never received
or generally observed, or they sinned only in external act of Idolatry by that
compulsion, still persevering in judgment and affection Christians. Socr. l.
3. c. 5. Ruff. l. 2. c. 1.
Socrates says he reigned but 7 months; Ruffinus eight.

Valentinian.
Now therefore although Jovianus was a worthy Catholic Christian Emperor, ever
following that Religion and Doctrine against the Arians, as Socrates and others
prove; Socr. l. 3. c. 20.
and shutting up the Pagan Temples, and forbidding their Sacrifices; yet being
Emperor so short a time, and chosen, living and dying in the East Countries far
remote from Britain, it did not receive so great benefits by so good an
Emperor, as nearer Nations did; but during his short Regiment continued much
after the same manner it did before, until Valentinian was chosen Emperor; who
being a Catholic, and reigning diverse years over Britain, and his Son Gratian
after him, this Kingdom in their times was free from Heresy which they
persecuted; Socr. l. 3. c. 11.
for Valens himself being Brother to Valentinian, and by him chosen Assistant
in the Empire, was then a Catholic, and so continued in the time of Julian,
that he forsook all preferment under him rather than his Religion. Thodoret.
Hist. l. 4. c. 12.
And although by the persuasion of his Arian Wife and others, he after fell
into Heresy, he being Emperor of the Eastern remote Nations from hence, this
Kingdom was free from his afflictions, being under the command of the Catholic
Emperors Valentinian and Gratian his Son, until Maximus, descended of a
British race, was both King of Britain and Emperor also, who also being a
Catholic, Britain could not then be endamaged in spiritual affairs by the
temporal Rulers thereof, Maximus Emperor, a Britain excused and defended:
Ruff. l. 2. c. 14. Socr. l. 3. c. 11.
although in civil respects it was much infested by the Scots and Picts, from
which Maximus freed it in his time, by his climbing and aspiring mind to be
Emperor, and to compass that ambition, spoiling Britain of the armed force and
power thereof, transporting it into foreign Nations, gave occasion of greater
miseries here afterward, both by the Scotch, Picts and Saxon Pagans.

About this time (says the British History) the Picts, Scots, Brit. Hist. l.
3. fol. 142.
and Atticots invaded the Roman Province here in Brittian.

These Picts and Scots (as some Writers report) came first out of Scythia;
Picts who, and from whence
though it be not probable that the Picts were any other than such Britains as
being either born in the Northern Promontory of this Isle, or fleeing thither
out of the South parts, entered into confederacy with the Scotchmen, and
retained for a time their ancient name of Picts, as being so called by the
Romans (in respect of the old custom of painting their bodies) to distinguish
them from the Britains then dwelling within the Province. Neither is there any
mention made of their name before the time of Dioclesian and Maximian. These
Picts increasing in number, did afterward inhabit the Isles of the Orcades,
and being for the most part rude and Savage (as the Scottish men also then
were) did often times harrow the borders, and grievously annoy their civil
Countrymen (there being commonly no greater hatred, than that which is bred and
nourished among the people of one Nation) when they are severed each from other
by difference of manners and customs. The name of Picts in process, of time
being changed into that of Scottish men (as of the more popular Nation) was in a
manner clean forgotten when by society and alliance they became one people.

The Scots from whence at first.
That the Scottish men had their original from the Scythes, their very name may
seem in some sort to discover; howbeit diverse histories affirm, that they
traveled first into Cantabria in Spain where (perhaps dislikeing that barren
Soil) they continued not long, but sailed into Ireland, and from thence a
great number of them came over into Britain, British Hist. l. 3. fol. 142.
landing in the North part of the Isle, where afterward they seated themselves:
They were for the most part addicted to war, using peace only but as a means to
repair their losses: (they were people of great courage and boldness, of
stature tall: strong of body, their complexions some what Ruddy and high
Colored; their apparel was either very slender, or none at all, save only to
cover their shame:) Neither was their peace altogether Idle; for even then they
accustomed their bodies to labor no less painful than war it self, and
ofttimes no less dangerous: To ride with swift pace up a steep hill, to swim
over Lakes, and standing Meeres, to pass over Bogs and Fenny grounds, were
things in ordinary use with them, as being accounted exercises of recreation
only: But above all others, the Nobility and better sort were delighted with
hunting, and that in such measure, that they could more patiently endure the
want of meat, drink and sleep, than restraint from that pastime, which they
esteemed manly and generous. In their consultations they were very secret, and
sudden in the execution thereof; by which means they ofttimes struck terror
and amazement to the hearts of their Enemies, and so much annoyed the Roman
Princes in Britain. They were better contented with the necessities of nature,
and more able to endure all extremities of fortune than the Britains in those
times, as being less acquainted with the vain superfluities and delicacies of
the Romans. In behavior the Britains were noted to be more civil, but the
Scottish men (as a people unconquered, and admitting no customs but their own)
refused to imitate them who were brought under the subjection of a stranger, or
to be reputed like to any other then to themselves: Wrongs and Indignities
offered as well to others as themselves, they sharply revenged; the slaughter,
wounding or disgrace of any of their kindred, allies or companions, being
commonly the occasion of rooting out the whole family of him that first gave
the offense; violent persuits, seizing by strong hand the goods and possessions
of their neighbors: burning the houses and killing (upon cold blood) such as
they had taken in War, (which others termed cruelty) they accounted manhood
and policy: supposing the assurance of their estates to consist rather in
diminishing the number of their enemies by open acts of hostility, than by
pretended reconciliations, and leagues of amity, which are either kept or
broken at the will of him that has the greater power: Their names first
mentioned in histories, about the reign of Constantine the Great: Though the
Scottish Writers affirm, that they were governed by Kings of their own Nation
many hundred years before this time: But of things so ancient, to have the
certain knowledge, it is no easy matter, neither is antiquity in it self very
much to be regarded, where true Nobility and Virtue is wanting: For all nations
at the first were of barbarous and uncivil behavior, till time taugh them
other customs, and emulation kindled the hearts of the better sort to seek
fame by their own valor, rather then the Genealogies of their Ancesters. Those
Scottish men and Picts, being now assisted with foreign power, presumed more
boldly to assail the Britains both by Sea and Land, killing Nectaradius the
Admiral of the British Fleet, and surprising Bulchebandes one of their chief
Captains (the mutiny at that time in the Roman Camp giving them opportunity
and boldness to do in a manner what they listed) For the Legionarie Soldiers
refused to obey their Leaders, and even the Deputies themselves complaining of
the partiality of their Generals, who punished the least offense of a Common
Soldier, and winked at the great abuses of Commanders and Officers: hereupon a
warlike troop of Almans were sent over under the Conduct of Fraomarius their
King, who exercised there the authority of a Tribune: Severus the Emperors
steward of his household, and Jovinius were appointed to second him with certain
Auxiliarie forces out of Gallia. By this means the fury of those warlike
Nations was somewhat restrained, until the coming of Theodosius, who first
appeased the mutiny among the Soldiers in Britain, and afterward prosecuted
the service there with such good success, as he restored the decayed Towns,
strengthening the borders, appointing night-watches to be kept there, and in the
end recovered the Province, which was then contented to admit of Governors (as
in former times) and as a new conquered State, have a new name given it: For in
the honor of the Emperor Valentinian the Province was for a time called
Valentia; not long after one Valentinian a Pannonian entered into a new
conspiracy there, which being discovered before it was ripe, the peril like to
have ensued thereby, was easily avoided.

Gratian.
Gratian, the brother of Valentinian, was then created Emperor; He, Howes fo.
46.
to the intent he might the better repair the decayed state of the Empire, made
Theodosius a Copartner with him in it.

The year 369 being the second year of Valentinian the Emperor, A universal
earthquake, strange rain and Hail.
was St. Jerome made Cardinal, and the next year after was St. Ambrose made
Archbishop of Millain, and in the year aforesaid the vnerable Beda in his
little book records, that there was a great universal Earthquake throughout
the whole World: And the next year, as other historians write, it reigned Wool,
and there withal it hailed, which hailstones were of wondrous greatness,
and flew great numbers of the men and beasts at Constantinople, Nice destroyed
by an Earthquake.
and the next year after the City of Nice was utterly thrown down and ruinated
by an Earthquake, and this year died S. Hillary Bishop of Poytiers so
oft-spoken of before.

This Gratian succeeding Valentinian, elected Valentinian the second his
brother, and Theodosius the Son of another Theodosius, to be his associates in
Government.

Maximus.
Maximus then ruling the Army in Britain, Baron Annal. Tom. 4. an. 383.
Sigebert. Chr. an. 383. Virun. Brit. Hist. l. 5. Galf. Hist. Brit. l. 5. c. 11.
Virun. l. 5. Theat. of G. Brit. l. 6. p. 272. Socrat. Hi. l. 5. c. 11. Ruffi.
l. 2. c. 15, and 16. Beda l. 1. c. 9. Malms. l. 1. Stow, Howes in Maxi.
upon emulation and envy of Theodosius his glory, usurped the Empire there.
This Maximus was a Britain by birth, as Socrates and other foreign, Authors,
as well as our own Writers testify; and although he seems to think, that he
did untruly derive his descent from St. Hellen, yet he gives some way to that
opinion when he confesses he claimed descent from great Constantine her Son.
And Sigeberius Gemblacensis plainly confesses, that he both was of the
Emperial Race, and was kinsman of Constantine the Great, claiming part of the
Empire by that title. The like has Ponticus Virunnius in his British history,
he being an Italian, and adds, that he was the Son of Leoninus uncle to St.
Hellen, and great uncle to Constable. the Great; in which, as in many other things,
he differs from the printed British history translated by Galfridus (by
common opinion) which calling Maximianus and not Maximus, makes him both true
heir of Britain, and Grandchild descended from King Coel, Father to St.
Hellen, born both of the Regal Race of the Britains and Romans, bringing in
Caradocus Duke of Cornwall, for persuading Octavius to marry his daughter and
heir unto him, making his title to Britain better than that Octavius had. Our
Writers of the Theater of great Britain, alleging Camden also, for their
opinion, affirm of this Maximus. Clemens Maximus descended linealy from
Constantine the Great. And Ponticus himself does after confess as much,
howsoever he can be accorded to himself before, saying that Leotin^ was his
Father; And Socrates, with others, does free him from the name of Usurper of
the Empire, when he confesses that Valentinian did admit him in for Emperor.
And St. Beda writes of him, that he was a valiant and worthy man, and so far
from intruding himself into the Empire, that he was by the Army created
Emperor almost against his will, which Will. of Malm. also with others
confirms, which is sufficiently confirmed not only by the triumphant enemy of
our Catholic Britains and other such Nations assisting him: But our British
history, Virunnius and others prove, that he was first incited, invited and
sent for into Britain; both to be King here, and afterward to take upon him
the Empire, as his Right; yet, as some say plainly, Maximus a valiant man and
worthy, was forced in Britain to take the Empire upon him. Mr. Broug. f. 572.
Hect. Boe. George Buch. Hist. Scot. Holishn. Hist. Scot.
And if any man says he was infamed by Writers for persecuting Christians, I
dare not assent unto him; for ever from his first power and greatness, he
honored and favored Religion here in Britain, making it all subject unto him;
when he expelled the Scots, he gave or allowed, by their own historians, the
Isle of Jonas to their Bishops, Priests and other Clergy and religious men; and
it is evident that the British Christians, and Catholics, (and as sincere as
any in the World) were they whom he most loved and favored, and by whom, with
other Chatholick Countries as France, Spain and others, he was assisted in his
wars, and by their aid and assistance became so potent; Sozom. ut sup.
and he was far from being a Persecutor of Christians, especially of
Catholics, that even by the ancient Writers of Roman histories themselves,
that excepting his title to the Empire, he made it a chief motive of taking
arms against Valentinian the younger, seduced by his Arrian Mother Justina,
because they went about to set up heresy and persecute Catholics. And
Theodore relates the heretical proceedings of this Valentinian and his mother
especially against St. Ambrose that holy Doctor, and Catholic Bishop of
Millain, and testifies that Maximus understanding thereof, wrote unto
Valentinian, Theodoret. Hi. Eccle. l. 5. c. 13. Paul. Oros. l. 5. c. 34. Paulus
Diaco. l. 1. c. 3.
persuading him to desist from such persecuting and heretical proceedings,
otherwise he would war against him in dafence of the Catholic religion, which
he performed, and Valentinian forced to fly, dearly tasted what his Mothers
heretical Counsels had brought him unto: Paulus Orosius also and Paulus
Diaconus call this our Maximus a valiant and good man and worthy to be Emperor.
A worthy Emperor; St. Senerus Sulpitius is a sufficient witness also how
renowned a man this our British Emperor was in many respects, for concerning
that great blemish which some cast upon him for usurping the Empire, and for
deposing one Emperor, and killing another, which were the great exceptions,
which that great and Apostolic Bishop St. Martine took unto him, and therefore
though often envited, to his Table refused to come unto it, He thus declares
himself, that the Empire was not sought by him, but rather against his will
imposed upon him by the Soldiers and pleasure of God, S. Severinus de vita S.
Martini. Cap. 23.
for defense and necessity of the Empire, God himself sufficiently giving
testimony thereto, by the incredible event and victory following, and that he
slew none of his adversaries but in the field; upon which satisfaction St.
Martin came to the feast, and was far more honored of this Emperor there, than
any Prince (the Emperors uncle, brothers, and such others there present)
sitting next unto the Emperor himself, and his own Priest and Chaplain sat
among those Princes.

Mr. Broug. fo. 573.
And such was the honor and reverence our Emperor, did yield publicly to that
holy Bishop, that in that solemn feast he refused to drink until S. Martin had
drunk out of the same bole before; he condemned Priscillianus the heretic and
his Sectaries to death, and banishment, Justantius and Tiberianus into our
British Island, named Silley; his judgment against those Heretics, was for
things by them committed against his temporal estate.

H^rris Hist. Tom. 4. c. 34. Magdeb. cent. 4. c. 16. Sylvius bonus. C. Max.
Caes. Lauds. Io. Leland and Io. ^its. in Silvio Bon^. Harris sup. Zosim. l. 4.
Baro. and Spondan. 382 in An^al. Annal. Scot. apud Hect. Boet. l. 7. Scot.
Hist. initio.
Yet do I not so contend (says Mr. Broughton) to free Maximus, that I would
wash him clean from all spots and aspersions, wherewith he is stained by some
Writers. I rather excuse him in profession of Religion, then conversation of
life; yet both Symmachus Consul of Rome, and our British Writer Sylvius
(styled the good Sylvius) living in his time, wrote Books in his praise; and
the very Scottish Antiquaries the greatest enemies he had, for conquering and
expelling them out of Britain, are forced to confess that his carriage was
such, that it drew even his enemies to love, honor and follow him, and give
him that honor here in Britain, which never any Emperor, King or Ruler in it
since the first inhabiting thereof enjoyed before him: Which is, that Ruling
here 17 years, he possessed and ruled over all Albion or Britain. And in this
his general command here, was a friend and favourer to good Christians, that
Hiergustus being then King of the Picts, both he and all his subjects
Christians, he freely for a small Tribute to testify the whole Island belonged
to the Roman Empire in his time, suffered, though a stranger, quietly to reign
as King among the Picts; And plainly confessed that in Britain diverse years he
behaved himself, and in all men's judgment governed virtuously, courageously,
and as a good Emperor ought to do. And that both the Christian Britains and
Picts, the only then inhabitants here did marvelously well love him; his
British Wife, Queen and Empress, daughter of Octavius, is commended in the
Histories to have been a very virtuous Lady.

The British History says that Maximus being overthrown by Theodosius, fled
into Aquileia, when by the treason of his own Soldiers (whilst he was paying
them their wages) he was delivered to Theodostus, disrobed of his Imperial
ornaments, and speedily put to an ignominious Death.

Theodosius.
Maximus being dead, Theodosius the elder, as he was Emperor, so was he King
and Ruler in Brittany; this man is most renowned in Histories for the honoring
the Church, and hate of heresies; his praises be exceeding many among ancient
Writers; therefore I will only and briefly use the testimonies of modern
Historians in his behalf, in their own words; Stow and Howes hist. Tit. Romans in
Thedosio. Magdeburg. Cent. 4. c. 7. Col. 568. Mag. Cent. c. 10. Theod. Hist. l.
6. c. 8.
Theodosius the elder a most Christian Emperor; Theodosius did open penance in
Millaine, and fasted and prayed eight Months together, according as St. Ambrose
had enjoined him, because in the first part of his Empire, he had commanded
5000 Citizens of Thessalonica to be slain, and for the executing the innocent
with the wicked in form of civil justice; therefore the Archbishop would not
permit him to rule in the Church, nor to receive the Sacrament until he had
performed his pennace. The Magdeburgians of Germany say this Sacrament was.
Sacratissimum Domini Corpus, preciosus Domini Sanguis.

Howes says that St. Vrsula with 11000 Virgins, which were sent into little
Britain to be married, were martyred in this Theodosius his reign; but others
say it was in the time of Maximus; Surius in St. Vrsula.
one give this relation, Maximus entered into France and possessed it all, but
especially one Province which was then called Formorica, which is now called
Little-Brittain, because the Britains did conquer and raze it, and with great
rage and fury put to Sword all the Natives thereof, left it uninhabited as a
wilderness; Maximus thought it necessary to people that Province again,
because it lay fit for him, therein to conserve and transport his British
Soldiers, Surius and Ri. badeneira october. 21.
and for that purpose he divided the fertile feilds and lands of the
Lesser-Brittain amongst his Soldiers, which came to him out of Brit. to the
end they might Till and Husband it, and reap the fruit thereof: But because his
Soldiers might marry and have succession, and settle themselves in that
Province, where there was no women, for that they were also put to the Sword,
he determined to send unto the Island of Britain, Scotland and Ireland for a
great number of Virgins, which being brought into the new and less Britain,
might marry with those Soldiers who were for the most part naturals of their
own Country. The chief Commander of all that Army was called Conanus, a man of
great birth and of greatest estimation of all the Britains, The Hist. of St.
Vrsula.
whom Maximus has made his Leiuetenant General and Warden of all the Ports of
that Coast. Conanus desired to marry with the daughter of Dionecius King of
Cornwall called Vrs. a most Noble and virtuous Lady, in whom did shine all the
gifts of chastity, beauty and grace which might be desired in a woman;
throughout the Province of there were called forth 11000 Virgins as well for
the intent above mentioned, as also that they might accompany Vrsula who was to
be their leader and Lady; some of these Virgins went of their own accord,
others by constraint; But seeing that the command of Maximus then Emperor was
so peremptory that no excuse could be admitted, they embarked themselves in
those ships, which were prepared for their passage unto the new Province of
Britain.

It pleased our Lord that these ships lancing out of the Haven met with a quite
contrary wind, which instead of carrying that blessed company toward
Britain, it furiously carried them quite contrary, and passing by Zeland and
Holland drove them into the mouth of the River of Rhene, a River of great
capacity and depth, and carried them so high as the water did ebb and flow. At
that time when this happened, Gratian the Emperor understanding what Maximus
had done in Britain and France, and that he carried himself as Emperor and
Lord, and not as Captain and Officer, for to repress and chastize him, he
entertained into his service the Picts and Hunnes a feirce cruel and Barbarous
people, who had conquered the Goths, and done wondrous things by their force
of arms: These being gathered together under the command of Melga Captain of
the Picts, and Gaunus General of the Hunnes, began to molest the Seas and to
lie coasting about after the manner of Pirates, robbing and spoiling all that
fell into their hands, with intent to pass over into Britain and expulse
Maximus, and to serve Gratian the Emperor, who for that purpose had
entertained them; these Barbarous people were at that present where these
blessed Virgins arrived, and perceiving that the ships belonged to their
enemies, and to Maximus in particular, against whom they had undertaken that
voyage, they encountered with them, and seeing that they were laden with
Virgins (being as dishonest and lascivious as they were cruel and furious) they
intended to ravish them. But these holy Virgins ( Vrsula being leader and
encouraging them) determined rather to loose their lives than their chastity,
and hereupon as well in deeds as in words, showing their valor and constancy,
and that they were prepared rather to suffer what torments soever, than to
offend God, the Barbarous people converting their love into fury and
detestation of Christian faith, fell upon them like Wolves upon a flock of
Lambs, and put them all to the Sword, 11000 British Virgins at one time
martyred.
because they would remain there no longer, but pass over speedily into
Britain, which they thought had been uninhabited, because Maximus had drawn so
many Soldiers from thence. Of all that holy and Virgin company, only one
called Cordula remained alive, who through fear did hide herself at the time of
that slaughter, but seeing what had passed, and that all the rest of her
companions were martyred, being encouraged by the motion of our Lord who had
chosen them all for himself, the next day following she discovered her self,
and obtained also the Crown of Martyrdom.

Some are of opinion, A strange wonder.
that the place in which the holy bodies of these Virgins now remain is the
very same in which they were martyred, because the earth on which that Church
is built, will not retain any dead body, although it be a child newly baptized,
Lindanus Bishop of Ruremund.,
but by might it casts it forth, as Lindanus Bishop of Ruremund recounteth,
giving this as a token, that God will not have any other body to be buried
where the bodies of those so many Virgins and Martyrs lie; who shed their blood
for confession of his Faith, and defense of their Chastity.

Now the Roman Monarchy was drawing on to her fatal period, when Honorius
succeeding Theodosius his Father in the Western Empire, Brit. Hist. l. 3. fol.
148.
sent Stilico into Britain to defend the Britains against the Picts and
Scottish men, who assailed them in most parts of the Isle, working upon the
weakness of the Province, in which (the most choice and able men, having been
from time to time transported and wasted in the Roman Wars with other Nations)
there remained not then sufficient to defend it self. The common Soldiers
there seeing the state in combustion, took upon them to elect and depose
Emperors, first proclaiming Gratian a free Citizen of Rome; but not long
contented with his government, they murdered him, and elected one Constantine
(for the namesake only) supposing the same to be auspicious: Constantine
transporting the flower and strength of all Britain into Gallia, made many
dishonorable leagues (to the prejudice of the Empire) with the Barbarous
Nations, that then envaded it, and sent his Son Constans (whom of a Monk he had
made a Caesar) into Spain, where Constans (having put to death some principal
men whom he suspected to favor Honorius) committed the Government of the
Country to Gerontius his chief Captain, by whom he was afterward slain at
Vienna in Gallia: And Constantine his Father having run through many fortunes,
was in the end beseiged at Arles, where he was taken and slain by the Soldiers
of Honorius the Emperor, which then recovered Britain. Chrysanthus a man of
consular dignity, was then Deputy of Britain, where he won so great
reputation, for virtue and integrity in the Government both of the Church
(which was then tainted with the graceless heresy of Pelagius the Britain)
and also of the Weal public of the Province, as he was afterward (though
against his will) preferred to the Bishopric of Constantinople.

This Pelagius the British Heretic was (as the traditions of those parts say)
born at Vsk, a Market Town in Monmoth-shire. Virun. Hist. Scot. Hector. Boet.
Hist. l. 9. fol. 179. p. 1. Geor. Bucan. Rerum. Scot. l. 5. Reg. 52. p. 160.
Hollinshed Hi. of Scot. in frequa hand. Aug. Epist. 106. Bid Hist. l. 1. Hen.
Hunt. Hist. l. 1. Math. West. Chron. an. 404. Floren. Wig. Chron. an. 413 alii
435. Mr. Bro. fol. 605. Aug l. de Here Is. Cler. 88. l. 2. de Pecc. origin. c.
11. Epist. 106. l. 2. de pec. orig. c. 8, 9. 14. l. 2. Retr. c. 47. Hier. Ep.
79. and ad Alip. Dial. cont. Pelag. Prosper. de Ingrat. Isidor. Pelus. Epist.
314. Mr. Broughton fo. 606. Bed. l. 1. hist. c. 17. Math. West. Chron. an. 442.
Pits. aetat. 4. p. 85. Bal. l. de scrip. cent. 1. in Pelag.
The Heresies of this Pelagius, and he the first Author and name-giver unto
them, have given the greatest stain and blemish in that kind to this Nation and
in this time. For as his heresies were most pestilent, dangerous and
infections, so they took first root, and afterward fixed themselves so deeply
in this Britain, that they were not rooted out, until after the coming of St.
Augustine hither about two hundred years after: Notwithstanding we had so many
and worthy men here, both of our own Nation and others, diverse of them sent
hither by the Sea Apostolic to oppose and suppress it, as both our Scottish
and English Writers do testify: It is the common consent of Historians both of
this and foreign Countries, that this Pelagius (as is said before) was a
Britain of this Kingdom; diverse of our Antiquaries hold that he was a Monk and
Abbot after in our old received Monastery of Bangor, which is made more
probable, both in respect that Leporius Agricola his Scholar and follower in
his errors a long time, though after recanting them, was a Priest and Monk of
the same Monastery, and of all places in Britain, the places thereabout were
most infected with the heresy rageing there long after the time of St.
Germanus and Lupus, sent thither by Pope Celestine to suppress it, and was in
a Synod of all the Bishops, Abbots and chief Clergy men of Cambria there
confuted and confounded by St. David. All authors agree that this Pelagius was
very learned, and the title Arch-Heretick, which is commonly given unto him,
does so testify: So did the great number of Councels gathered to condemn him;
so did also the particular best learned men in those days; St. Aug. Jerome,
Innocentius, Orosius, Genadius and others which wrote against him; all the
Errors wherewith he was charged, he at length renounced, though dissembled for
fear, as appears by him after: I think it not convenient to set down his
errors, the world being so apt to broach new doctrines, lest any giddy
brainsick new molded Saint make use of them, both to the destruction of his own
Soul, and of many other, the ordinary sort of people being so prone to follow
after new Preachers.

Yet to free our Kingdom of Britain and Wales also of giving life to such a
man, St. Hier. says he was by nation a Scot, as Isidore Pelusiota notes, and
also a voluptuous Monk, both which may be reconciled, if we say he was born
among the Scots, and bred in our great Monastery of Bangor and there long time
a holy Monk, but after falling both into heresy and lewdness of life, he was
often condemned in diverse Councels in Asia, Africa and Europe, whether he had
spread his heresies, but not perfectly until the time of Pope Zosimus about
the year of Christ 418 being by him finally condemned, both he and his
followers were driven into exile by Honorius the Emperor, and that heresy
condemned in all the World; This Pelagius, though he had many followers, yet
were they all strangers, for the great honor to this Nation, that it had such
learned men, that even one of them falling into error did so much prevail and
dilate it both in Europe, Africa and Asia, and yet in his own Country could
nothing prevail, but was at the first convinced, rejected and exiled, and did
only endeavor to infect Britain his native Country, but could not effect his
desire therein.

Now the Romans about four hundred and seventy years after their first
entrance into this Isle waxed weary of the Government of Britain and
Britains, that had been many times assailed by their uncivil neighbors
(consorted with strangers of diverse Nations) perceived themselves unable to
make resistance, as in the former times; whereupon they sent Ambassadors to
Rome, requiring aid, and promising fealty, if the Romans would rescue them from
the oppression of their enemies. Then was there a Legion sent over into the
Island to expulse the barbarous people out of the province, which being with
good success effected, the Romans counseled the Britains for their better
defense to make a stone wall betwixt The firth of Dunbretton in Scotland.
Glota and Edenbur. Firth.
Bedatria (the two arms of the Sea that ran into the Island) and so departed
thence, but this Wall was only afterward made of Turves, and not of stone as
they were directed, (the Baittains then not having any skill in such kind of
buildings) by which means it served to little purpose; for the Scotshmen and
Picts understanding that the Romans were gone, passed over the water in boats
at both ends of the Wall, invaded the borders of the province, and with main
force bare down all before them, whereupon the Ambassadors were sent again out
of Britain, to declare the miserable state of the Province, which without
speedy succor was likely to be lost.

Upon the complaint and earnest solicitation of the Britains, there was
another Legion sent over by Aetius the President of Gallia, under the Conduct
of Gallio of Ravenna to aid the distressed Britains, and the Romans having
reduced the Povince into her former state, did tell the Britains, that it was
not for their ease to take any more such long Journies, being costly and
paineful, considering that the Empire it self was assailed, and in a manner
overrunne by Strangers; and therefore that from thenceforth they should provide
for their own safety, that they should learn to use Armor and Weapons, and
trust to their own valor. Howbeit the Romans (in regard of the good service
done by the British Nation in former times) began to build a Wall of Stone
from East to West, in the self same place where Severi^s the Emperor had cast
his Trench, the labor and charges of the work being born partly by the Romans,
and partly by the Britains themselves. This Wall contained eight foot in
breadth, and twelve in hight (some Relics thereof, says the British History,
remain to this day;) upon the Seacoast toward the South, they raised
Bulwarks (one somewhat distant from another) to empeach the Enemies landing in
those parts; and this done, they took their last farewell, transporting their
Legions into Gallia, as men resolved to return hither no more. As soon as they
were gone, the barbarous people having intelligence thereof, presumed
confidently, that without any great assistance they might now enter the
Province: and thereupon accounting as their own whatsoever was without the
Wall, they gave an assault to the Wall it self, and with Graples, and such like
Engines, pulled down to the ground a great part thereof, while the Britains
inhabiting the borders being awaked with the suddenness of the Enterprise, gave
warning to the rest of their Countrymen within the Land to arm themselves with
speed, and to make resistance.

About this time also, which was about the year of our Redemption 430, the
state of the Church in Britain was much encumbered by the Heresy of Pelagius,
(of which a little before, yet I here again repeat it in another Authors
Language, for fuller satisfaction of my Reader) which being by birth a
Britain, by profession a Monk, and as some think, trained up in the Monastery
of Bangor, traveled first into Italy, British Hist: fol. 152. l. 3.
then into Sicilia, Egypt, and other East parts of the World, to learn and
study as he professed, whereby he wound himself into the good opinion of many
men of great fame in those days for learning and piety; as namely, of Paulinus
Bishop of Nola, and by his means, of S. Augustine, till the Heretical
assertions, which himself and his Disciple Celestinus a Scotch-man, secretly
taught, being by St. Hierom discovered, were afterward condemned by the Bishop
of Rome Innocentius the first: whereupon they returned again into Britain,
being obstinately bent to maintain their former Heresy; which Agricola the Son
of Severianus, a Bishop of that Sect, had not long before brought thither,
whereby the same in short time was received and approved among the Christians
in diverse parts of the Isle; so that betwixt Heresy among the Britains
themselves, and Paganism professed by their Enemies, the light of Christian
Religion seemed for a time to be eclipsed. Howbeit, some of the Britains,
disliking those heretical Opinions, which as yet they were unable by knowledge
in the Scriptures to confute; and perceiving withal what dangerous
inconveniences to the State arose often times by reason of their disagreement one
from another in matters of Religion, earnestly required the Bishops of France
to send over some godly, wise, and learned men, that might defend the truth of
Christianity, which seemed to be born down by the subtle allegations of humane
Reason. Hereupon the Bishops called a Synod, wherein Germanus the Bishop of
Auxerre, and Lupus Bishop of Troyes in Champaigne were appointed to go into
Britain, and to undertake the Cause; which they afterward prosecuted with so
good success, as many Heretics among the Britains were openly convinced, and
Christians confirmed in faith. About the same time Ninianus Bernitius (of the
Race of the British Princes) was sent into Pictland to convert the Inhabitants
there to Christianity: British Hist. l. 3. f. 153.
Palladius a Grecian was likewise appointed by Celestine Bishop of Rome to
Preach the Gospel in Scotland unto such there as yet remained in Infidelity,
and to suppress the Pelagian Heresy new sprung up in that Kingdom, to be the
first and chief Bishop of the Church there; for which purpose also Patricius,
surnamed Magonius, (born in Britain) was sent to the Irish and Scotch men that
then dwelt in the Isles of the Orcades and Hebrides: these three Religious
Fathers were much honored in those days, for the reverend opinion which most
men had of their Learning and Integrity of life, and they are accounted the
Apostles and Patrons of the Scottish, Irish, and Pictish Nations, as being the
several Instruments of the general Conversion of each of them.

Within few years after the Britains were again hotly pursued by the Scotchmen
and Picts, who swarmed over a great part of the Land, taking from the Britains
for a time all opportunities of convening and assembling themselves together,
as in former dangers they had been accustomed; whereby no small number of the
Inhabitants of the Province (dispairing of better success) retired themselves,
giving way unto the present necessity, while each man (as in common calamities
often times it falls out) laying aside the care of the public, made provision
for his own safety, leaving the Enemy in the mean time to take and kill such as
resisted.

Some of the Britains being driven out of their own houses and possessions,
fell to robbing one another, increasing their outward troubles with inward
tumult and civil dissension, by which means a great number of them had nothing
left to sustain them but what they got by hunting and killing of wild beasts.
Others burying their Treasures under ground (whereof great store has been
found in this Age; Brit. Hist. l. 3. fol. 158.
) did flee themselves either into the Country of the Southwales.
Silures and Northwales.
Ord^nices, and into the West part of the Isle, (where the Cornwall and
Devonshire.
Damonians then inhabited) or else into Amorica in France; the rest being
hemmed in with the Sea on the one side, and their Enemies on the other, sent to
the Emperor for aid; which they could not obtain, for that the Goths and Hunns
invading Gallia and Italy, the greatest part of the Forces of the Empire was
drawn thither for defense of those places: by reason whereof the State of
Britain now declining with the Empire, and shrinking under the burden of
barbarous Oppression, the Britains sent Ambassadors again to Aetius the
President in Gallia, desiring him to relieve their necessities, declaring
withal, that themselves were the small remnant which survived after the
slaughter of so many thousands whom either the Sword or the Sea had consumed;
for the barbarous Enemy drove them upon the Sea, the Sea again upon the
Enemies; between both which they suffered two kinds of death, as being either
killed or drowned, that it imported the Majesty of the Roman Empire to protect
them, who had so many hundred years lived under their obedience, and were now
plunged into the depth of intolerable miseries; for besides the calamities of
War both civil and foreign, at one instant they were afflicted with dearth and
famine which forced them sometimes to yield themselves to the merciless Enemy.
But their complaints availed nothing; for the Romans plainly denied to send
them any more succor; whereof the Scotishmen and Picts being certainly
advertised, and knowing how small a number of able men remained in the Province
to withstand their attempts, assailed first such places of strength as guarded
the borders, and afterward entered the Province it self, where, by continual
course of Conquests, they found a passage into the heart of the Isle, spoiled
the People of their wealth, burnt their Cities, and brought the Inhabitants
thereof under a miserable Servitude.

Thus about five hundred years after the Romans first Entrance, and four
hundred forty six after our Saviors birth, the Isle of Britain, which had
been not only the principal Member of the Empire, but also the seat of the
Empire it self, and the Seminary of Soldiers sent out into most parts of the
World, was now in the time of Honorius bereaved of the greatest part of her
ancient Inhabitants, and left a prey to barbarous Nations.

SHREWSBURY.
SHREWSBURY is the principal Town in Sh^opshire, and stands neatly upon a Hill,
and i^ almost encompassed round by the River Severus that part thereof which is
not fenced by the River, being fortified by a very strong Castle; built by
Roger de Montgomery, the first Earl thereof. A fair and goodly Town it is, well
traded, and frequented by all sorts of people, both Welsh and English, by
reason of the Trade of Gloath and other Merchandise, this being the commont
Mart and Empory between England and Wales: it stands in the very midst or
center, as it were, of the whole Country, which generally is inferior to none
about it for delight and plenty; for the number of Towns and Castles standing
exceeding thick on every side (as having formerly been a frontier Country)
very far above them. It belonged anciently to the Cornavii, and at the Norman
Conquest was bestowed on Roger de Montgomery, who first made it ^eminent, and
with his Successors, and sin^e them the honorable Family of the Talbots enjoyed
the Style and Title of Earls of Shrewsbury.

1. Roger de Montgomery. 2. Hugh de Montgomery. 3. Robert de Montgomery. 4.
John Talbot Marshal of France, created Earl of Shrewsbury by K. H. 6. 5. John
Talbot, L. Tree. 6. John Talbot. 7. Geo. Talbot. 8. Francis Talbot. 9. Geo.
Talbot. 10. Gilbert Talbot. 11. Edward Talbot. 12. Geo. Talbot. 13. John Talbot
now living, and Earl of Shrewsbury 1661.
The Earl of DERBY.
Thomas Stanley Earl of Derby, Knight of the Garter, etc. Elinor Daughter to
Richard Nevil Earl of Salisbury. Tho. Earl of Derby, etc. Anne Daughter to Ed.
L. Hastings, which Family descends from the British line, as shall appear in
its proper place. Edward Earl of Derby, etc. Dorothea Daughter to Thomas
Howward Duke of Norfolk, by which March this honorable Family descends from the
British line, as in the Pedigree of the Duke of Norfolk. Henry Earl of Derby,
etc. Margaret Daughter to Henry Clifford Earl of Cumberland and Elinor his Wife
Daughter and Coheir to Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolk and Mary Queen of
France, Daughter to Hen. 7. and Grandchild to Owen Tudor, lineally descended
from the Prince of South Wales. Ferdinando, Sans Issue male. William Earl of
Derby. Elizabeth Daughter to Edward Vere Earl of Oxon and Anne Cecil his Wife,
by which March, as in the Polog^^^ of Oxford, Salisbury, and Ex c^^^^ appears,
this Family descends from the British Princely St^^^. James Earl of Derby lost
his head as a most faithful and loyal Subject for his liege Lord King Charles
of blessed memory. Charl^t Daughter to the Duke of Tremulia. Charles Earl of
Derby, Lord Stanley of Latham, Lord Strange of Knocking, and of the Isle of
Man, a faithful Subject to his King, a Patron to his Country, and Terror to
his Enemies.

DErby is a part of the Coritain, and took that name from Derby the chief City,
a Town coveniently seated on the River of Derwent, beautified with five Parish
Churches, a goodly stone Bridge, and a large Market place; and no less famous
for good Ale, than Banbury for good Cakes and Cheese: finally the Town is well
traded, and of good resort, and is the usual place of holding Sessions and
Assizes for all the County. The Country of the East and South parts well
manured and fruitful, yielding a very spacious and pleasing prospect, both out
of Cutbury Castle and that of Boulsover. The West part, which they call the
Peak, is not so pleasing to the eye, though possibly as profitable to the
Purse, being rich in Iron, Lead, and Coals, which it yields abundantly, and
grazing multitudes of Sheep on the Mountain tops. It contains in it 106
Parishes, of the which eight be Market Towns, the chief thereof being Derby, as
before is said; the Catalogue of whose Earls here follows.

1. William de Ferrars. 2. William de Ferrars. 3. William de Ferrars. 4. Robert
de Ferrars. 5. Edm: of Lancaster second Son to K. Hen. 3. after which this
Title was continued in the House of Lancaster. 6. Henry of Lancaster Son of
Henry Earl of Lancaster, created Earl of Derby in his Fathers life time, 11.
Edw. 3. 7. Henry of Bullingbrook son of John of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster,
created Earl of Derby in his Fathers life, 9 Ri. 2. 8. Thomas Stanley created
Earl of Derby by K. Hen. 7. Lord Constable. 9. Thomas Stanley. 10. Edward
Stanley. 11. Henry Stanley. 12. Ferdinando Stanley. 13. William Stanley. 14.
James Stanley. 15. Charles Stanley now Earl 1661.
The End of the first Part, or Tome.
CAMBRIA TRIVMPHANS, OR BRITAIN IN ITS PERFECT LUSTER, SHEVVING THE Origin and
Antiquity OF THAT ILLUSTRIOUS NATION.

THE Succession of their Kings and Princes, from the First, to KING CHARLES Of
Happy Memory.

The Description of the Country: The History of the Ancient and Modern Estate.

The manner of the Investure of the Princes, with the Coats of Arms Of the
Nobility.

The Second Tome.

By PERCY ENDERBIE, Gent.

LONDON, Printed for Andrew Crook, and are to be sold at the Green Dragon in
St. Paul's Churchyard. 1661.

TO HIS ROYAL GRACE THE DUKE, BROTHER TO His Sacred Majesty, MONARCH of Great
BRITAIN, King of France and Ireland, etc.
SIR,
GOld the sinue and nerve of war (without which the greatest Princes and
Politicians fall short of their desired ends) and History the faithful
mirror, in which the most accomplished of Commanders may dress and modifie
themselves even to the very height of virtue and perfection, in this walk hand
in hand, and keep an equal sympathy: that whether they flow from the hands of
Peers or Peasants, they still retain the same vigor, force, and virtue; why
did great Alexander set so great an estimate, upon grave Homers works, but that
he found in them examples worthy imitation, and also inglorious deeds, to be
avoided like Rocks in raging Tempests? This work great Prince, (which most
humbly begs your Protection, as the safest Azylum) proceeds from a pen
altogether Rural, yet does it contain matter fit for imitation, selected from
Authors of faithful integrity. Behold a Constantius, memorable for an Act
recorded by many Ancient Historians, who to make trial of true Christians, and
accordingly advance them, first exiled from his Court, all who would not
perpetrate themselves and adore the Pagan Gods; and after trial made, the
Complyers he abhorred, and revoked the constant refusers; preferring them to
places of greatest trust and honor; affirming that they would never be true to
a mortal Emperor, that would be false to an immortal Diety. Quomodo inquit
fidem erga Imperatorem servare poterunt inviolatam, qui adversus Deum optimum
maximum perfidi esse manifesto convincuntur: and therefore says the same
Author, Decrevit secum hos qui se fideles erga D. O. M. declarassent in
amicorum atque adeo consiliorum munero habere: And for this and such like his
pious and virtuous transactions: Fertur Constantio Angelus astistisse; which
Pomponius Laetus in these words confirms, Cum Pater Caesarem fecerat, celesti
nuntio admonitus, Constantinum, etc. The body of this glorious Caesar, was
first withal Princely solemnity interred at York, and after translated to
Carnarvon in the time of King Edward I. and by him commanded to be enshrined in
that Church. Apud Carnarvon maximi principis patris nobilis Imperatoris
Constantini erat inventum and rege jubente honorifice collocatum. Thus we
clearly see virtue and Noble actions not only crowned here upon Earth with
glorious Sepultures and inscriptions, but even approved by Heaven it self, by
Divine and Celestial Revelation.

Let us march a little further into the Court of Honor, and great Theater,
where mighty Emperors and Monarchs act their parts, and there we shall find a
great British Constantine the first Christian Emperor, doing what? taking in
hand a doubtful yet cruel war, what did he then? Deum quem pater sancte
adoravisset solum observandum, colendumque statuit, Quo circa hujus opem
precibus imploravit, hunc oravit, hunc obtestatus est ut tum quinam esset ipsi
vellet significare, tum rebus quas apud animum proposuisset dexteram velut
adjutricem porrigere; he resolved to have the true God; whom his Father adored
devoutly to be only adored and worshipped, wherefore by his prayers he implored
his help, he prayed and entreated his aid, him he besought to declare himself
unto him, and assist him in his enterprise: and what followed these divine and
Heavenly ejaculations and inspirations? About noon, (the day somewhat
declining) Constantine saw in the Sky, a lightsome pillar in form of a cross,
wherein were these words engraven. In this sign overcome: and the night
following in his sleep he beheld Christ, who said thus unto him. Frame unto thy
self the form of a Cross, after the example of the sign which appeared unto
thee, and bear the same against thy Enemies as a fit banner or token of
victory. And that the effects were answerable to the divine promises, hear what
Eusebius relates, as spoken by Constantine himself. Hoc salutari figno vero
fortitudinis judicio vestram Tiranidis jugo liberavi civitatem and S. P. Q. R.
libertatem vindicans pristinae amplitudini and splendori restitui: You have
here viewed Illustrious Prince, our first Christian Emperor, and his Father;
fit patterns for imitation: Cast your Gracious eyes upon our first Catholic
King, Lucius, and you shall find him, (Christianity being now established) thus
Charactered. Interea gloriosus ille Britonum Rex Lucius, cum intra regnum suum
cultum vere fidei magnificatum esse vidisset, maximo gaudio fluctuans,
possessiones and territoria quae prius templa Idolorum possidebant in meliorem
usum vertens Ecclesiis fidelium permancre concessit, and quia majorem honorem
ipsis impendere debuerat, augmentavit; illas amplioribus agris and mansis,
omnique liberate sublimavit. And a little after Lucius the first Christian
King of this Land then called Britain, founded the first Church in London,
that is to say, St. Peter's Church upon Cornhill, where he settled an Archbishops
See, making that Church the Metropolis of his Kingdom: neither was his zeal and
piety confined to that City, for you shall find him erecting a goodly Cathedral
at Caerlegion, in that part of England, (abusively called Wales) which now is
known by the name of Monmothshire, as also the famous University of Bangor in
the remotest parts thereof. This holy King, (says my Author) granted, made,
and signed many writings, Charters and donations for defense, maintenance, and
preservation of Religion; as to the University of Cambridge, the School of
Shaftsbury, with others: and when he had done all this, Anno 201. Inclitus
Britannorum Rex Lucius in bonis actibus assumptus ab hac vita Claudiocesbriae
migravit ad Christum, and in Ecclesia primae sedis sepultus honorifice. King
Arthur sealed many grants for the advancement of Religion and Learning, and by
reason of his great victories thrice changed his armorial ensigns, at last
advancing the cross; for my Author says, King Arthur, that mighty conqueror
and worthy, had so great affection and love to this sign, that he left his
arms which he used before; wherein were figured three Dragons, another of
three crowns (or as some say of thirteen) and depicted in his shield a cross
silver in a field vert, and on the first quarter thereof he figured an Image of
our B. Lady with her Son in her arms, and with this sign he did wonders in
Arms. And to this hour we see the Knights of the Noble order of the Garter, of
which number your Grace (the flower of chevaldry) is one, to bear Argent a
plain cross Gules; the field signifying pureness of life; the cross, the blood
that Christ shed for this our people, whom Trevisa calls the people of God,
and the Realm of Gods Land; the same ensign did Joseph of Aramathia give unto
Arviragus King of Britain, not many years after our Saviors passion;
Cadwalader the last British Monarch for his arms bore Azure a cross for my
fitched Or: whole volumes may be compiled of this Subject, and the worthy and
most Christian acts of your sanctly progenitors. But least I should convert an
Epistle Dedicatory into History or Chronology, I will proceed no further,
humbly offering up these my weak endeavors before the shrine of your goodness,
with all integrity, beseeching Almighty God that you may if not excel, at least
equal the most valiant and virtuous of your Royal Progenitors, which shall be
the daily prayers of

Your Royal Highness Most faithful and humble servant, PERCY ENDERBY.

The Duke of York.
Anarawd King of Northwales. Eidwal King of the same. Meurick or Meirick.
Eidwal II. Jago. Conan. Griffith King of Northwales. Owen King of Northwales.
Jorwerth Son and Heir to Owen, married Marret D. to Madoc Prince of Powis.

Lhewelyn Prince of Northwales.
Gladis sole Daughter and Heir, married to Ralph Lord Mortimer, who in her
right should have been Prince of Northwales.

Roger Lord Mortimer. Edmund Lord Mortimer. Roger Lord Mortimer, Earl of March.
Edmund Lord Mortimer, etc. Roger Lord Mortimer.
Edmund Earl of March married Philip D. and H. to Lyonel D. of Clarence.

Roger Mortimer Earl of March, left one only Daughter and Heir, married to
Richard Earl of Cambridge.

Richard Duke of York. King Edward the Fourth.
Elizabeth sole daughter and heir, married to King Henry the seventh descended
from Owen Tudor. Margaret eldest daughter to Henry the seventh, and in her
Issue his Inheretrix, was Grandmother to Mary Queen of Scotland, France, and
England, Mother to King James, King of great Britain, France, and Ireland,
etc. Grandfather to James Duke of York, who married Anne, daughter to Sir
Edward Hyde Baron of Henden, and Lord Chancellor of England, and has Issue
Charles Duke of Cambridge.

YORK.
The City of York anciently called Eboracum, is seated upon the river Ure,
which we call Ouse, in the VVest-riding of this County, and is the second City
of England, both for fame and greatness; a pleasant large and Stately place,
all well fortified, and beautifully adorned, as well with private as public
edifices, and rich and populous with all; seated on the river Ouse, which
cutteth it as it were in twain, both parts being joined together with a fair
stone bridge, consisting of high and mighty arches: a City of great fame in the
Roman times, and of as eminent reputation in all ages since, and in the several
turns and changes which have befallen this Kingdom under the Saxons, Danes,
and Normans, has still preserved its ancient luster; adorned it was with an
Archiepiscopal See, in the time of the Britains, nor stooped it lower, when
the Saxons received the Faith, Richard the second, laying unto it a little
Territory on the West side thereof, made it a county of it self; in which the
Archbishops of York enjoyed the rights of Palatines: and for a further luster
to it, Henry the eighth appointed here a council for the Government of the
Northern parts, consisting of a Lord President, certain Counselors, a
Secretary and other Officers, and yet in none of these has York been more
fortunate then that it adorned so many Princes of the Imperial line of Germany,
and blood Royal of England, with style and attribute of

Dukes and Earls of YORK.
1. Otho of Bavaria Earl of York. 2. Edmund of Langley, fifth Son to Edward the
third, Duke of York. 3. Edward Plantagenet Son of Edward of Langley, Duke of
York. 4. Rich. Plantagenet, Nephew of Ed. of Langley, Duke of York. 5. Rich. of
Shrewsbury Son of King Edw. Duke of York. 6. Henry, second Son to King Henry
seventh, Duke of York, after King of England. 7. Charles second Son of James
King of England. 8. James second Son to King CHARLES now Duke of York.
The Duke of CUMBERLAND.
It is needless to set down at large the British line of this Heroic and
Warlike Prince Rupertus, being sufficient to tell you that he is Son to that
Peerless and unparalled Princess Elizabeth Queen of Bohemia, daughter to
James King of great Britain; sister to Charles King of great Britain of
immortal fame and memory, and Aunt to Charles now King of great Britain, whom
we may justly call the miraculous; God of his infinite goodness having so
miraculously preserved and restored, and doubtless will still protect him.

CUMBERLAND.
Cumberland is the farthest County of England on the North-VVest side,
anciently part of the Brigants. It is called Cumbria as being inhabited by the
true and natural Britains, who in our language are called Kymry, when as the
residue of those Northern parts had yielded to the conquering Saxon: a country
for the Situation of it, neither unpleasant nor unprofitabe, the valleys
yielding corn sufficiently, the Mountains breeding great flocks of sheep, the
Meeres replenished with all kind of wild foul, and the adjoining Sea affording
variety of fish. It contains in it not above 58. parish Churches, but very
many Chapels of ease as big and large as are the Churches; of these, there are
nine market Towns, whereof the chief (next Carlisle) for dispatch of business
is that of Parith, wherein they hold their Sessions and Assizes. Late was it
ere this County became an Earldom, being now become a Dukedom, when Henry the
eighth bestowed the style and dignity of Earl of Cumberland, upon Henry Lord
Clifford, and Charles the first, the dignity of Dukedom upon his Nephew Prince
Rupert.

Earls and Dukes of CUMBERLAND.
Henry Lord Clifford created Earl of Cumberland by K. Henry the 8.

Henry Clifford, Earl. George Clifford, Earl. Francis Clifford, Earl. Henry
Clifford, Earl. Prince Rupert Duke of Cumberland.
Tomus Secundus. THE ANCIENT and MODERN BRITISH and WELSH HISTORY.
AFter the Romans had given over the Government and protection of the
Britains, the inhabitants of the South part of the Isle, being altogether,
Brit. Hist part. 2. l. 1. fol. 176
by their own strength, unable any longer to withstand the furious assaults of
the Scottish men and Picts (who were already come with their power as far as
Stanford upon the River of Welland) assembled themselves together in several
companies, A Town in Lincolnshire.
and the most ancient and best respected among them entered into consultation,
what means might then be used for defense in a case of such necessity. But
first of all for that they had found by their late experience what dangerous
effects proceed from civil jars, they resolved with common consent to run all
jointly one and the same course: and for the better strengthening of this their
purpose they elected a King whose name was Vortiger, a man much esteemed both
for the Nobility of his birth (as being extract from the line of the British
Princes) and also for the General good opinion conceived of his sufficiency to
undergo so weighty a charge, though the eminency of his degree did soon after
lay open those vices and infirmities which his private life had concealed. To
him did all the petty Princes in the Isle submit themselves.

They then entered into Consultation together, and called to mind the
Conditions of such Nations as were most known unto them, considering well with
themselves, that from the Romans there was no more relief to be expected (
Italy it self, the seat of the Empire, being invaded by strangers) and France
was assailed as well as Britain. That Germany (though a mighty and ample
Region) was not altogether free from encumbrance. For this Country had
formerly been the common ^eceptacle of those Northren people, that dwelling
beyond the Rhene and Panon, and being very fruitful in generation, came usually
thither to disburden themselves, and to seek new habitations: by reason whereof
the Germains themselves were much distressed, and now and then forced to
abandon their Native Soil, being sometimes also by consent among themselves
chosen out by lots for that purpose; howbeit those strangers which had there
planted themselves, were for the most part better able to annoy other
Countries, then to maintain in peace what by intrusion and violence they had
gotten. Saxons renowned both by sea and land.
Among all the Germains there was at that time no one Nation which for great
adventures both by Sea and Land was more renowned then the Saxons. For touching
qualities of the mind, they were bold, hardy, and vain glorious, patiently
enduring labor, hunger and cold, whereunto by the constitution of their
bodies, and temperance of the Climate they seemed to be framed, as being very
strong, and yet not unwieldy, tall of stature, but not uncomely or out of due
proportion. For the North Region by reason of the coldness of the air, which
drives the natural heat inward, brings forth men commonly of greater courage
and ability of body, then those countries that lie nearer the sun. Their diet
was simple and homely, neither knew they any other a long time, till by
attaching some of the Roman ships, straggling about the coasts of France and the
Lower Germany, they became first acquainted with their manner of Victualling.
Their habit was neither costly nor cumbersome, but serving indeed rather for
decency and ornament then for defense against the sharpness of the air, or
such like annoyances. For their garments were commonly of linen or yarne,
woven with diverse colors, and hanging loose about them, the locks of their
hair (which in former time they had been accustomed to shave) being then curled
and spread abroad in compass, so that they covered their shoulders and upper
parts of their cassocks. The weapons which they ordinarily used in fights, were
long spears, round targets, and betle axes, having also (trussed up at their
backs) certain short swords, which they did wear continually for readiness
upon all occasions. In the art of Navigation they were very expert, and lived
at the first by pilfery, and afterward by open robbery, being trained up
therein, even from their childhood, under a kind of discipline: storms at sea,
unseasonable weather, perils of Rocks and Sands loss of goods and shipwracks
(which terrify other men) they carelessely contemned, while they seemed to
have not only a certain knowledge of them, The customs and manners of the
Saxons.
but also a certain familiarity with them. The Offices of Soldiers and
Mariners they executed with like skill, and often times with equal advantage.
There was no kind of Cruelty, in a manner new or strange unto them. Neither
were they altogether void of policy, in watching opportunity of time and
place, to further their designs, albeit they were for the most part more
sudden in attempting and procuring other men's harms, then wary or well
advised in avoiding their own. Superiority in degrees they hardly admitted, but
each man commanded and obeyed as the cause required, being as ready to learn of
his fellows what he knew not, as to instruct others in those things wherein he
happened to be skillfuller then the rest. Of their blood they were nothing at
all sparing, but they exercised cruelty, sometimes even upon themselves, as
making no account to cast away their own lives, rather then to endure any
public shame, scorn or disgrace.

The wicked Sacrifices of the Saxons.
When they did set forth to Sea upon any Voyage, their custom was to choose out
of the number of their Captives every tenth man to be murdered, and offered up
as a purging sacrifice to their profane Gods; esteeming it a work of Religion,
and much more behooveful for them, then to receive any ransom for redemption
of such prisoners as they had taken.

The Saxons from whence.
The Ancestors of the Saxons (as approved Authors report) did fetch their
Original from the Sacae, a people of Asia, that came first out of Scythia to
Europe with the Goths, Suevians and Dacians, and being either by nature
inclined to War, or by necessity constrained thereto for supplying their own
wants, ranged often times from place to place, as men always ready upon hope of
spoil to be drawn into any action, or to encounter any peril whatsoever. In
process of time they seated themselves in Cimbria Chersonesus (now called)
Denmark, and in the Reign of Dioclesian the Emperor, became famous for their
Piracies committed upon the Coasts of Britain and the Lower Germany, when
Carausius being sent forth with a Navy to repress them, under color of that
service attempted, and with some difficulty attained the Empire. Afterward
passing over the River of Elbe, they intruded themselves by little and little
into the ancient seat of the Suevians, encroaching also upon Friseland and
Holland, The Britains send for the Saxons.
then called Batavia; the greatest number of them planting themselves in that
part of Germany which is now called Saxony. These were the men whom the
Britains supposed best able, and most likely to assist them, and thereupon
Messengers were sent to declare unto them, that the fame of their valor and
experience in warlick actions had moved the Britains to require their aid
against the barbarous and bloody people, which assayed by force to subdue the
whole Island: that next the Romans who had now abandoned them, Brit. Hist. part
2. l. 1.
they knew no Nation more worthy then theirs, that the very terror of the
Saxon name (if they should but once set foot in the Isle) was able to daunt
their enemies, who were for the most part men unarmed, unskilful in military
affairs, and many times confounded by their own multitude. Fir^^ly that if they
would undertake this War they should want neither provision of Victual or any
thing else for their maintenance; the Isle being very large and fruitful,
yielding abundance of all things that might serve either for profit or delight.

The Saxons being very glad of this occasion of employment (which themselves
would have sought if it had not been thus offered) promise to satisfy the
Britains request by sending over with speed such able men as they had then in
readiness till further provision could be made, and so the messengers were
dismissed.

Hengist and Horsa arrive in Britain.
The messengers had scarcely made report of their negotiation at their return
into Britain, when the news came, that certain Saxons under the conduct of
Hengist and Horsa (two brethren) were landed upon the Coasts of Kent, whereupon
the Britains from most parts thereabout ran to meet them, receiving them with
salutations, songs and feastings, after their country guife. The time of the
Saxons first arrival here by the testimony of their own Writers, was in the
year of our Redemption 450.

But Vortiger the King and the chief of the British Nobility entertained them
in other manner, giving them thanks for the great care and diligence, which
they had showed by their speedy repair into the Isle: and acquainting them
further with the present estate of their affairs. Agreement between the
Britains and Saxons against the Picts.
Then was there a contract made between both Nations, namely that the Saxons
should undertake the war against the Picts and Scottishmen, and that the
Britains should provide for them all things Necessary thereto, as Victuals,
Armor and Soldiers wages; the charge whereof should be borne by the Britains
only, who were to leavy the same by the way of tax, to be imposed upon every
Inhabitant within the Province according to his ability, which contract with
other Articles depending thereupon being ratifyed on both parts ( Hengist
considering wisely the nature of the People with whom he was to encounter, and
the likely advantage of sudden attempts) thought it best to take the first
opportunity by leading the Saxons (who were very desirous to fight) and such of
the Britains also as he supposed fit for service, into those parts where the
barbarous enemy was lodged: And to that end provision of Victual, and other
necessaries were made in such measure as the shortness of the time would
permit.

The Scottishmen and Picts although they did not greatly fear the Britains
(whose courage was much abated by the ill success that accompanied their late
conflicts) yet hearing that new supplies of strangers were arrived to assist
them, Brit. Hist part 2. l. 1. fol. 182.
they waxed more wary keeping themselves for the most part in their strength:
and now upon certain intelligence of the approach of a well ordered Army, they
resolved to try with them, the fortune of a set battle; wherein they found
themselves more hardly matched then in former times, by reason that the Saxons
(nimbly avoiding the darts and spears wherewith they were assailed) did
fiercely rush upon the Picts, and with their keen swords and weighty axes, The
first victory of the Saxons against the Picts.
made way through the thickest Troops: So that having borne down the most
valliant before them, they enforced the rest to forsake the field and save
themselves by flight. After this victory they returned to the Isle of Thenet
(which at their first arrival was assigned to them for a place of Residence)
and Hengist their Captain fortified there diverse places for defense; hoping by
that means both to keep his own Territory in surety, as also (as occasion might
serve) to enlarge it; for he apprehended it as a matter of no great difficulty
to make a conquest of the East part of the Isle, considering that the natural
Inhabitants were already brought upon their knees, the King himself given over
to ease and pleasure, and in his own conceit the more secure, the less he
entermedled with public affairs, that the state of the war now in hand rested
merely in his own direction, and the more freely he was trusted the more safely
might he deceive: that (though he was sent for to help the Britains) yet (this
fair occasion being offered, which Fortune seemed to have cast into his lap) he
had no reason to neglect it, by seeking other men's advantage rather then his
own. And for the Contract made with them he was no further bound to it then the
Britains themselves, who had already failed in performance of some Covenants,
that the breach of one diss^^veth all the rest, and finally that in him who
has power (to prevail where he attemp^^^ nothing can be judged unlawful. With
those and other like cogitations, he nourished his ambitious humor: howbeit
knowing well that the forces which were already brought into the Isle, would
not be sufficient to accomplish the enterprise, he persuaded Vortiger, it was
very necessary that more aid should be sent for out of Germany, and to that end
he named his Brother Octha and his Son Ebusa, men of approved valor, who might
be directed to land with a power in the Picts own Country, and to assail the
Inhabitants there, while himself in the South parts pursued the rest of them
(with whom he had already encountered) whose Forces being by that means
diverted, from the heart of the Isle to succor their Country men at home, or
wanting their wanted supplies, which should then of force be employed elsewhere
for defense, there might be some hope of a speedy and full end of the war. The
event whereof otherwise was now more to be feared then in former times, if the
North Britains, whetted with the desire of revenge, and having space of
breathing given them, should make head and assail them again. This counsel
seeming profitable (howsoever it proved pernicious in the end) was allowed by
the King, either for that he foresaw not the peril likely to ensue thereupon,
or else for that such things as God himself has determined are doubtless
(though sometimes foreseen) yet never prevented.

In the mean while the Germains inflamed with continual reports of the wealth
and fruitfulness of the Isle (and solicited by Hengist who discovered unto
them the weak estate of the Britains, and the facility of supplanting them)
hired certain small vessels, wherein themselves, Wives, Children, and Families
were transported into diverse parts of the land: At which time Rowen the
Daughter of Hengist (a woman of excellent beauty, and not of the worst
behavior) having been specially sent for by her Father, arrived in Kent and
was forthwith conveyed to the Palace where Vortiger and Hengist made their
abode.

Of those Germains that then came over there were three several kinds of
people, namely Saxons, Juites and Angles, though the Saxons seemed to bear the
most sway, by reason both of the general respect of that Nation, for their many
and great exployts, A God of the Saxons from whence we call the third day in
the week Wedesnday.
and also for the authority of their Captains Hengist and Horsa, who where of
the lineage of Woden, from whom the Saxon Princes that afterward reigned in
this Isle, used always for honors sake to derive their descent. From these
Saxons the East, West and South Saxons had their Original: The Juites as some
Authors report, and as the affinity of the names may seem in some sort to
infer, were descended from the Jetes and Bothes, and dwelt in the upper part
of Denmark, which is at this day called Juiteland, from them the Kentish men,
The Kentish men from whence.
with the Inhabitants of the Isle of Wight, and of that part of the Land which
lies over against it, had their beginning. The name of the Juites was of no
long continuance in Britain, notwithstanding their posterity was incorporated
into the Saxons and Angels, who were accounted but one Nation, the name of
either of them being indifferently used as common to both, till in the end, the
Angles possessing the greatest part of the land, they were all known and called
by that name alone.

The Angles in those days were a people well esteemed among the Germains, and
in number exceeded both Saxons and Juites. Lin olnsh. Yorlsh. Northum. Noting.
Derby, etc. from whence.
Touching their ancient seat, the opinions of writers are differing, though it
be most probable that they did sometimes inhabit that part of Denmark yet
retaining the name of Angle, which lies between Juitland and Holsutia. From
them came the East Angles, Mercians, and Northumbers.

But Hengist knowing well that fraud and cunning practices often times prevail
where force it self cannot, resolved as occasion might serve to make use of
both: and to that end observing well the Kings humor, he applied himself in
all things to follow it, specially by soothing and nourishing him in those
vices, to which by nature he was most addicted, supposing thereby to strengthen
his own estate, and with more security to accomplish his desire, while the King
intended nothing more then the satisfaction of his own immoderate appetites in
sensual pleasures, British Hist. par. 2. fol. 188
which had already brought him in contempt and hatred with his people, and
would by all likelihood open the way to his speedy destruction. Whereupon, one
day inviting Vortiger to a feast, he appointed Rowen his daughter to attend
upon him as his Cup Bearer, at which time by her fathers instruction she
behaved her self in such manner, as the King fell in love with her, and
although he had a wife then living, yet was he not ashamed to tell Hengist in
plain terms that he earnestly desired to become his Son in Law, if he might
attain his consent for the marriage of his daughter. Hengist (who had cast out
this bait on purpose to catch him) pretended respect of Vortigers own
reputation, which as he said should be too much impaired by matching with a
poor maid, a stranger by birth, far inferior to him in degree, and no way
worthy of so great Fortune: howbeit in the end he seemed by entreaty to yield
to that, which himself would voluntarily have offered, and so making use of the
occasion he was content to take the thanks, which he of right should have
given. Hereupon Vortiger having cast behind him, all regard both of Divine and
Humane Laws, did put away his lawful wife (by whom he had three children) and
contrary to the advice of his faithful Councillors, Vortiger marries Hengist^
daughter, having a wife of his own.
married Hengist the Sa^^^s daughter. Upon the conclusion of this marriage a
great part of the Country of Kent, which had been many years together governed
by Guorongus as the Kings Deputy there, was assigned to Hengist, who like a
wily serpent, having now gotten in his head found means in short time to wind
in his whole body.

It is reported by some writers that Vodin then Archbishop of London reproving
the King for his incontinency and other vices (which drew him down with his
Realm to ruin) was by the commandment of Hengist put to death, The Archbishop
of London put to death by Hengists command.
with many other Priests and religious Votaries as persons too well affected to
their Country, and odious to the Saxons, for profession of Christianity.

This inconsiderate match and immeasurable bounty of the King, was much
disliked by the Britains, for that the Saxons presuming of the Kings favor by
reason of his new affinity with them, came over daily in great numbers,
pestering the East parts of the Isle, and many times offering abuse to the
natural Inhabitants; whereupon the British Nobility, complained to the King,
Vortiger neglects to hear his British Nobles counsel.
that their estate was now much worse then before the Saxons arrival, that
strangers (under the color of friendship) robbed them of their goods, and
bereaved them of their lands: that the secret practices of such as they trusted
were no less to be feared then open Hostility; and that if speedy order were
not taken to expel them, they would in short time root out the ancient
Britains, and make themselves Lords of the whole Island. But Vorteger whose
affection to his wife and her Kindred weighed down all other respects
whatsoever, neglected their complaints, till by his own experience he was
taught what dangerous inconveniences proceed from wilful rashness and
mis-government: For the Britains disdaining to be any longer commanded by such
a Prince, Vortiger despised by his own Subjects.
as had neither power to command his own affections, nor care to provide for
the safety of his Subjects, declared him incapable, and by a general consent
deprived him of all Regal Authority.

Vortimer.
Vortimer the Son of Vortiger (a Man in disposition of mind, much like his
Father) was declared King, and renewed the war with the Saxons, whom he
encountered in a pitched field near Alisford in Kent. In that conflict, Catigern
his Brother, and Horsa the Brother of Hengist, fighting hand to hand were both
slain, whereby though the Saxons perished in greater number then the Britains,
yet by the loss of the Generals on both sides, the fortune of the Battle
seemed in a manner to be equal. On the part of the Britains there died no man
of name, save only Catigern, in remembrance of whose death there was afterward
a Sepulcher of stone erected where the battle was fought, the like monument
was also built by the Saxons for Horsa their Captain, though time has now
defaced it: howbeit the memory of the place it self, (if credit may be given to
the inhabitants there) iscontinued amongst them even to this day, by a small
village in East Kent, yet bearing his name. After this the Britains made
diverse attempts upon their Enemies, sometimes winning, sometimes loosing, and
then recovering again that which they had lost, when Vortimer the King ended
his days, either by a natural death, or by the treachery of Rowen his
Stepmother. He was a Prince of great courage, adorned with many moral virtues
(and as some writers have reported) a favourer and professor of Christian
religion.

Vortiger restored.
Now was Vortiger (either by an hope that adversity had wrought upon him a
reformation of mind, British Hist. part second fol. 191.
or else for fear least any civil discord should arise by the election of an
other) revoked with common consent of the Britains, and restored to his former
Estate. During his Sons reign, as Histories report, he lived a private life
near Radnor in Wales, where he bestowed much cost in building a Castle for
defense, as he vainly imagined, against any sudden assault.

In the mean time the strength of the Saxons increased by new supplies, which
came daily out of Germany, and the Britains doubted their own Estates so much
the more, by reason that the Picts and Scottish Men, (their ancient Enemies)
were dispersed in most parts of the Isle. The Saxons also for their own
advantage, entering often times into secret conferences and mutual leagues with
them.

But Hengist supposing that he could not with safety enjoy the possession of
that Territory which Vortiger had assigned unto him, so long as the chief and
most valiant of the British Nation remained alive, The treachery of the Saxons.
devised by a cunning practice (under pretense of hospitality and friendship)
to draw them together into one place, and on the sudden to supprise them. To
this end he prepared a solemn banquet, at which the King with diverse noble
personages (as bidden guests) were present, suspecting nothing less then what
was intended against them. For the Britains being warm with good cheer and
wine, (whereof they had drunk immeasurably) were scoft at by the Saxons,
Drunkenness the ruin of the Britains.
the one provoking the other so far, with reproachful terms, that in the end
they fell from words to blows, in such furious manner as the Britains (being
about 300 in number all un armed and surcharged with wine) were slain in the
place, and Vortiger their King taken prisoner, who soon after delivering for
his ransom the whole Country of Kent, with other Provinces thereto belonging
and adjoining, into the Saxons hands, fled to his Castle in Wales, where
supposing himself free from danger, he continued his vicious and profane
manner of living, till in the end both himself and his Castle (as some writers
affirm) was by lighting from Heaven consumed to ashes.

Thus Vortiger the last King of the British blood, a Prince in manners
dissolute, and weak in actions, was by strangers dispossessed of his Kingdom,
living to see the ruin of his Country, whereof himself was the principal
cause, and dying, in the end, a strange and unnatural death, which is commonly
the issue of a disordered and infamous life.

The report goes that this fatal meeting was held upon Salisbury-plains, where
not many years after Aurelius Ambrosius caused that strange building of stone
(now called Stone-hedge) to be erected as a perpetual monument of so many
worthy Britains slain and buried there, concerning which sundry conjectures
have been made, as being either framed according to men's particular conceits,
or grounded upon common reports, received by tradition. But by what means so
ever they came thither, they are accounted at this day one of the miracles of
England, in regard both of the stones themselves, which are of a huge bigness,
as also of their position and order, whereby they seem in a manner to be
supported with their own weight, in hanging one by an other; considering
withal that there are no stones for building to be found within many miles of
that place.

Now were the Britains driven from place to place, some flying to the
mountains, others hiding themselves in Caves under ground, where they either
perished for want of food, or (coming abroad to seek for relief) were cruelly
murdered, their Enemies in the mean time ranging up and down without
resistance, rafing their houses, The woeful condition of the Britains.
polluting the Altars in their Temples with the blood of their Priests, burning
the Temples themselves, and committing all manner of sacrilege, and outrage
without regard of place or person. For the Saxons as by little and little they
planted themselves in the most wealthy and fruitful parts of the Isle; so they
endeavored to supplant the true Christian religion, whereof they professed
themselves open Enemies: as men merely addicted to heathenish superstition, in
worshipping diverse Gods and Goddesses, among whom the Images of Thor, Woden,
Frea, and Eoster, were placed in their Temples, as their chief Patrons: they
painted Thor with a Scepter in his hand, after the same manner that the Poets
used to describe the Image of Jupiter, and him they reverenced as the commander
and disposer of thunder and lightning, with all those Meteors which are
engendered in the middle Region of the Air, From whence the name Thursday first
derived.
consecrating to him the fifth day of the week, which was afterward called
Thursday. The name of Woden they attributed to Mercury, or as some write to
Mars, whom they reverenced as a Protector in war, and a giver of strength and
courage against their Enemies. To him they usually sacrificed with man's blood,
and dedicated the fourth day of the week, naming it Wodensday, as yet retaining
the first denomination with very little difference. Wednesday from whence:
Under the name of Fre^ they sacrificed to Venus (as the giver of peace and
pleasure, whom they adored sometimes under the figure of Priapus, committing to
her the Patronage of the sixth day called Frea-day. Of these three, Thor was
placed upon a three footed stool in the midst, Friday from whence.
and Woden, and Frea on each side. To the Goddess Eoster they always offered
Sacrifice in the month of April, which thereupon was called Eoster-moneth. In
their consultations of any weighty matter they observed south-saying and
casting of lots. Their custom of casting of lots was, first to cut a branch
from a fruit-bearing tree into many pieces, which being distinguished with
several marks, they did cast upon a white garment at a venture, then (if the
matter concerned the Commonwealth in general) the Priest; The manner of
casting lots among the Saxons.
if a private person, only the Master of the house (having prayed the Gods and
looked toward heaven) did take up every one of the said pieces three times,
and interpreted the future success according to the form and similitude of the
marks; if the lots fell out contrary to their minds they consulted no more that
day, if otherwise, yet they would make further trial by observing the flying
and singing of birds.

They had another practice also to search out the event of great and weighty
battails with their Enemies. For they would get some one of that Nation, with
which the war should be made, and then take another choice man of their own,
arming them both after their Country guise, Horses much honored by the Saxons.
and so make trial of their valor, conjecturing by the success of that fight,
on whose side the victory should afterward fall: but of all other passages the
neying of horses was of greatest credit, both with the Priests and People, who
fondly supposed that those beasts understood and were privy to their secrets.
Why a horse for the Saxons Arms.
And hereupon (as some suppose) the Dukes of Saxony in times past, gave a horse
for their Ensign. The names also of Hengist and Horsa (the first men of note of
the Saxon Nation that arrived in Britain) do signify in their own language a
horse, Brit. Hist. part. 2. fol. 195. Mr. Bro. fol. 199. Jo. Gosc. Hist. Eccle.
Mat. Parker. Antiq. Brit. p. 8. Antiq. Glast. Capgrave in vita St. Patricii.
Gul. Malm. l. de Antiq. Caenob. Glast.
which denominations, whether they were given in respect of their strength and
courage (qualities by nature proper to that beast) or whether they received
them upon any other occasion or accident, I cannot certainly affirm, says my
Author.

In this age we had here in Britain many Monasteries and Religious houses,
both of Men and Women. Our old Religious house in Glastenbury, continued in
this age, as in the former, having twelve religious Eremites belonging unto it,
dwelling in the places and Cells of the first twelve in the time of St. Joseph
of Aramathea. This is testified by the old Manuscripts of that place, and Will.
of Malms, in his book of the antiquity thereof witnesses, that those holy men
in the number of twelve, thus successively lived and served God until St.
Patricks coming. The names of the twelve then living were Brunbam, Dyregaan,
The great sanctity of the British Nobility.
Viwall, Wentreth, Bantonnewing, Adeloobre, Loyor, Wellyas, Breden, Swellwis,
Hinloirmus, and Alius, all of them descended of noble families, rather
preferred this poor penitential eremitical life then worldly honor.

The antiquities of Glestenbury further witness, that about this time, there
was new founded or renewed an other little Religious house in honor of St.
Michael the Archangel, and particularly to honor and pray to him. And that
Arnulphus and Ogmar, two religious holy men, were the first that supplied that
office and duty there.

Math. West. an. 543.
That there were diverse Monasteries in Britain, as well in London, Winchester,
Kent, and other places, appears evidently by diverse Authors. For say they,
Hengist the Pagan Saxon at his coming into Kent, Stow. and Howes Brit. and Sax.
in Constable. and Vortiger.
found many religious houses both of Men and Women, and many of them were
glorious Martyrs by the Saxon persecutors. Hengist slew the good Archbishop
Vodine, and many other Priests and Religious Men. All the Churches in Kent were
polluted with blood, the Nunns with other Religious persons were by force put
from their houses and goods.

These religious houses must needs be builded, and so furnished with goods, and
consecrated persons before the Saxons entered, and so in, or before this age;
these men being then Pagans were no founders but destroyers of such monuments,
Bed. 1. c. 6.
not only in Kent, but all places where they prevailed by all histories. Among
these these sumptuous and stately Church, Math. West. an. 313. and 586.
and Monastery of St. Alban, builded within ten years after his Martyrdom, was
one; for the Monastery there, was not as Math. West. proves, founded first by
King Offa, Kaer Carodoc Salisbury. Manuscript. Gallic. Antiq. c. 24. Galf. Mon.
Hist. Brit. l. 8. c. 9:
but being destroyed by the Saxons was re-edified by him.

There was also a noble monastery at Amsbury in Wiltshire, near Salisbury, in
which, (as an old French Manuscript, and others say) there were at this time
three hundred. This was founded long before the Saxons came, by one Ambrius
near Kaer Carodoc Salisbury. Our old English Chronicle treating of the
desolation which the Pagan Saxons wrought in this Kingdom, in destroying
religious Houses and Churches, and how Aurelius Ambrosius restored and builded
them again, thus delivers, that in general and particularly of this
Monastery, King Aurelambros went throughout the Land, Mr. Breugron fol. 610.
and put away the name of Hengist- Land, that Hengist after his name had called
it before. Then he let call it again great Britain, and let make again
Churches, and Houses of Religion, Castles, and Cities, and Boroughs, Old
English Chronicle, part. 5. fol. 43.
and Towns, that the Saxons had destroyed. The Britains led him to the Mount
of Ambrian, where sometime was an house of Religion, which then was destroyed
through the Paynims, whereof a Knight that was called Ambross, that sometime
was founder of that house, and therefore the hill was called the holy Mount of
Ambrian, and after it was called Ambesbury. The King Aurclambros let amend and
redress the house of Ambesbury, and put therein Monks, but now there be Nuns.

There was a Monastery of great renown at Abington in Berkshire, before the
coming of the Saxons into Britain, the old Chronicle of that house is witness,
testifying that then there were five hundred Monks and more belonging to that
Monastery, living in woods and deserts, getting their living by their labor,
King Cissa a Saxon, a cruel persecuter of the Monks at Abington, and all
Christian Britains.
and upon the holy days and Sundays coming together in their Abbey, all
excepting threescore which continually abode in the Abbey, serving God there.
And that before King Cissa was a Christian, he put those Monks either to death,
or forced them from their Monastery, and cruelly persecuted all Christians.

In the mean time the Britains coming together from the places of their
retreat, and combining their dispersed forces the better to defend themselves
against the power of the Enemies, were freshly assailed by the Scottishmen and
Picts, Brit. Hist. part 2. fol. 196.
a great number of the Saxons also being newly entered into association with
them, whereupon Germanus the Bishop who came over into Britain, a little
before the Saxons arrival, Picts, Scots, and Saxons enter into association
against the Britains.
and had remained there with Lupus, to the end they might instruct and confirm
the Britains in the true faith against the Pelagians confident of the goodness
of this cause, and to give encouragement to his new converts, offered himself
to be the leader of the British Army, which consisted for the most part of
such Christians as himself had lately baptized, the place wherein they pitched
was a fair valley enclosed on both sides with high Mountains, over which their
Enemies were to march: the Bishop himself and certain Priests that attended
him, standing in the midst of the Army, exhorted the Britains to fight
courageously as the Soldiers of Christ, under the banner of the Cross (which
badge they had received in their baptism) and commanded them all upon the
enemies approach to answer him aloud with one consent in such manner as himself
began. Thereupon the Saxons and Scottishmen ascending the further side of the
hill, supposed to have charged the Britains on a sudden, which when Germanus
and his Priests who were about him perceived, they cried out three several
times Alleluja, all the Britains seconding the cry, and the Echo rebounding
from the hills, redoubled the sound, A miraculous victory obtained by the
Britains against the Picts and Scots and Saxons; the word being Alleluja.
by reason whereof the Pagans (imagining the number of the Christians much
greater then it was indeed) cast away their weapons and fled, the Britains
killing many of them in pursuit: and such as escaped the sword, being drowned
in the River which impeached them in their flying. After this, memorable
victory Germanus persuading the Britains to unity and constancy in profession
of Christian Religion, as a means to make their attempts against their enemies
prosperous, departed out of Britain whether (as some writers report) he soon
after returned, and by the assistance of Severus the Bishop of Trevers
suppressed the Palagian heresy: Which after his departure sprung up again, and
increased among the Britains. In remembrance of whose zeal, Brit. Hist. part
2. fol. 197.
and travail in that behalf sustained, the Christians of Britain afterward
dedicated unto him (as a protecting Saint) certain Churches and Houses of
Religion in diverse paces of the Land.

Aurelianus or Aurelius Ambrosius.
The Saxons presently after perceiving that the Britains were scattered in
several troops, disarmed and unfurnished of all things necessary for support of
the War, prepared themselves to follow them, and to empeach them from joining
their forces together any more, to which end they divided themselves into
several companies, with a full resolution either utterly to destroy and expel
them out of the Isle, which they had almost brought to pass, when Aurelianus
Ambrosius coming out of France into Britain, brought hither some of the
Britains that had seated themselves there, who pitying their distressed
Country men in the Island, determined either to relieve them, or to perish in
the enterprise. This Ambrosius was a Roman by birth, honorably descended, and
as has been conjectured, Brit. Hist. and sup.
of the race of that Constantine, who for the hope of his name only (which was
reputed ominous) had been elected Emperor by the Roman Army in Britain. And
being now the chief leader of the Britains, he often times encountered the
Saxons, and by the assistance of Arthur a valiant Captain gave them many
overthrowes. Howes Brit. and Saxons fol. 52.


Aurelius Ambrose (says Howes) was ordained King of Britain, in whose time
the Britains by little and little, began to take courage to them, and coming
out of their caves in which they lurked before, and with one consent calling
for heavenly help, thet they might not for ever be utterly destroyed. They
having for their Captain and leader, the foresaid Aurelius, assemble themselves
together, and provoked the Victors to fight, and through Gods assistance
achieved the victory, and from that day forward were the men of the country.
The enemy had the victory till that year in which Bath was besieged, where they
gave their Enemies a great overthrow, which was about the forty fourth year of
their coming into the Land.

Of this Aurelius, William of Malms. writes thus, Surely even then (says he)
the Britains had gone to wrack, if Ambrosius who only, and alone of all the
Romans, remained in Britain, and was Monarch of the Realm after Vortiger, had
not kept under the proud Barbarians, Stone-hedge built by Aureius Ambrosius.
with the notable travel of the warrior Arthur. Geffry of Mon. tells us that
this Ambrosius caused Churches to be repaired, which had been spoiled by the
Saxons. He caused also the great stones to be set on the plain of Salisbury,
which is called Stone-hedge, in remembrance of the Britains that were slain
and buried there in the reign of Vortiger. This ancient monument is yet to be
seen, and is a number of stones rough and of a gray color, twenty five foot in
length, and about ten foot in breadth, they are conjoined by two and two
together, Howes Vt. sulp^a.
and every couple sustained a third stone lying overthwart gatewise, which is
fastened by the means of tenons that enter into mortases of those stones not
closed by any cement. It appears that there has been three rancks going
round as circles, one within another, whereof the utmost and largest contains
in compass 300 foot, but the other rancks are decayed, and therefore hard to
reckon how many stones there be.

G^ffr. Mon. Garal. Came. Gerva. Doro.
The Chronicles of the Britains do testify, that whereas the Saxons about the
year of our Lord 450. had slain 48. of the Britains Nobility by treason, and
under color of treaty, Aurelius Ambrosius now King of the Britains, desirous
to continue their memory with some worthy monument, caused these stones to be
set up in the place of their murder and burial, the which stones had been
first brought from Afric into Ireland, and had been placed on Mount Killare,
and from thence by the industrious means of Merlin were conveyed to this place,
to the foresaid end. There are about this place certain little hills or banks,
under which are found sometimes bones of big men, and pieces of armor, also
not far from thence remain old ruins of the manner of a fortress, which the
Romans most likely did build there in times past.

Such was the devotion of this time, as we may gather by old Writers,
testifying that after the Pagan Saxons had destroyed the Churches and Abbeys in
Britain, yet many still remained, Will. Lamb. Peram. of Kent p. 330. Mr.
Broug. fol. 601. Mat. West. an. 490. Idem an. 498. Galf. Mon. hist Brit. l. 7.
c. 16
and their Abbats were honored (and Will. Lamb. perambulation in Kent tells
us; In ancient time even the greatest personages held Monks, and Nuns in such
veneration and liking, that they thought no City in case to flourish, no house
to have long continuance, no castles sufficiently defenced, where was not an
Abbey, Priory or Nunnery, either placed within the walls, or planted at hand or
near adjoining) and numbered among our Nobles, spiritual Lords before the
temporal. So it was in that great solemnity, when Aurelius Ambrosius kept the
feast of Penticost at Amesbury; he had there many Bishops, Abbots, and many
other Noble persons. And after Britain was more decayed by those Pagans, yet
there were still both Bishops and Abbats here, and they buried the body of
their King Aurelius Ambrosius in regal manner: thus it was in all places and
Provinces in this Kingdom, where these Pagans reigned most, London, Winchester,
Lincoln, York, and other parts, where they destroyed Churches and all holy
monuments, Mat. West. an. 462.
martyred the Priests at the Altars, burnt holy Scriptures, defaced and
obscured Martyrs tombs. They found every where Religious persons, who flying
their persecution hid themselves, in caves, woody places, and desert crags of
hills and mountains.

Alla and his three sons, Kymon, Plineing, and Cissa came into Britain with
three ships, and landed with them in a place called Kimon shore, Howes Brit.
and Saxon. fol. 53.
and there slew many of the Britains, forcing the rest to take their flight
into a wood called Andredsleage. This Alla fighting with the Britains in a
place near unto Macreds Boorn, or Micreds Rilear, slew many of them, and put
the rest to flight.

Alla and Cissa his sons, after long seige, brake into the City of
Andredcester, and slew the inhabitants, Andredcester.
from the greatest to the smallest.

Port and his two sons Byda and Moegla arrived in Britain with two ships, in a
place called Portesmouth, Portsmouth.
and there slew a young Gentleman, one of the Nobility of the Britains, and
diverse others,

The same year two Dukes, to wit Cerdic, and Kenric his son, came into Britain
with five ships, and arrived in a place called Cerdic shore, the same day they
fought with the Britains and put them to flight: Howes ut sup.
Cerdic and his son Kenrie slew Natanland, King of the Britains, and 5000 men,
of whose name that country, as far as Cerdicsford, was called by the name of
Natanleend. I beseech Mr. Howes to give me leave to tell him, that Port could
not land at Portsmorth, nor Cerdic at Cerdicshore, being names at their
arrival utterly unknown, and questionless had other British names; these
nomenclations seemed to be taken from Port and Cerdic, and therefore the
Author should better have given their first appellations.

Ambrosius Aurelianus or Aurelius, being poisoned, dyed, when he had reigned
thirty five years and was buried at Stone-hedge then called Chorsa Gigantum.

It is strange to me, that a Prince so much a Christian, and a restaurator and
repairer of Churches, Monasteries, and sacred places consecrated for the
Sepulture of devout Christians, and that both Bishops and Abbots should be
present at the funerals and obsequies of so deserving a King, and not afford
him a Sepulcher in a Church, he having repaired and re-edified so many.

Vter Pendragan.
After that Aurelius Ambrosius was dead, his brother Vter Pendragon, whom
Harrison calls Aurelius Vterius Ambrosianus, was made King in the year of our
Lord 500. The cause why he was surnamed Pendragon, was, for that Merlin the
great Prophet likened him to a Dragons head, that at the time of his nativity
marveilously appeared in the Firmament, Hollenshed. Hist. of Engl. fol. 127.
Howes and Stow Britains and Saxons fol. 53
at the corner of a blazing star, as is reported. Others suppose that he was so
called of his wisdom and serpentine subtilty, or for that he gave the Dragons
head for his arms.

This Vter, hearing that the Saxons with their Captains Octa or Occa the Son of
Hengist and his brother Osca had besieged the City of York, hasted thither,
and giving them battle put them to flight, and took Osca and Occa prisoners.
Hector Boethius in his Chronicle is of an other opinion, for he says, Vter
Pendragon, at the death of his brother Aurelius was in Wales, as not yet fully
recovered of a dangerous sickness, wherewith lately he had been extreemly
molested; yet the Lords of Britain, after the funeral of their last King,
came unto him, and set the Diadem upon his head, and though he was not able to
go against the Saxons (who by reason of Aurelius his death, were very busy and
more earnest in pursuing the war then before) and army was yet prepared and
sent forth with all convenient speed, under the leading of one Nathaliod, a man
neither of ancient extraction, nor skill in military affairs. The Noble men
were nothing pleased herewith, and misliking altogether the lack of discretion
in their new King, they doubted much least in time to come he would have more
delight to advance men of base lineage and degree, then such as were descended
of noble parentage: yet because they would not put the state of the Land in
danger, through any mutiny they agreed to go forth with him in that journey.
Occa had advertisement given him by secreet letters sent to him by some close
friends among the Britains of the whole matter, and therefore in hope of the
better success, he made all possible speed to encounter the Britains: and
thus the one army coming in fight of the other, they prepare to the battle,
and shortly after the first onset the Britains retreated and turned their
backs, by reason that one of their chiefest Commanders called Gothlois
disdaining to be under Nathaliod, got him up to the top of the next hill; with
such as were under his power and charge, leaving the other Britains in eminent
danger, which they perceiving began also to save themselves by flight. There
dyed no great number of the natives; for Occa mistrusting what Gothlois meant
by his retreat, would not suffer the Saxons to follow the pursuit, but in the
night following Gothlois departed secretly, and rested not till he was out of
danger: Occa then perceiving himself to have the upper hand, sent an Herald
unto King Vter, with a certain message threatening destruction to him and his
people if he refused to do that which he should appoint.

Vter perceiving what disloyalty rested in the hearts of his own Subjects,
agreed that the matter might be committed to eight grave and wise Councillors,
four Britains and as many Saxons, which might have full power to make an end
of all controversies and variances depending between the two Nations Occa was
likewise contented therewith, whereupon by the award, agreement, and sentence
of these so nominated eight persons, sufficiently authorized thereto, a league
was concluded upon, certain articles concluded and approved, among the which
the chiefest was, that the Saxons from thenceforth should quietly enjoy all
that part of Britain which lies before the Almain and Germain Ocean, the same
to be called ever after England; and all the residue should remain to the
Britains as their own rightful inheritance. Thus Hector Boethius a true Scot,
Thus far Hect Boethius but all he writes is not absolutely truth. Fabian calls
this Castle Tintagel ut supra, and the Lady Igwarne or Igorne.
but we shall find the name of England imposed upon this Kingdom otherwise;
both in respect of time and circumstance. But let us return, says Hollenshed,
to Vter Pendragon, according to that which we find in the British Histories.
To proceed therefore after our own writers; when he had vanquished the Saxons
and taken their two chief Commanders prisoners, in process of time, he fell in
love with a most beautyful Lady called Igwarne or Igerna, wife to one Garolus
or Garlois Duke of Cornwall, the which Duke he slew at length near his own
Castle, called Dinulioc or Dunilioc, to the end he might enjoy the said * Lady,
whom afterward he married, and begat on her that noble Knight Arthur, and a
daughter named Agnis or Anna. Occa and Osca escaping also out of prison,
assembled fresh powers, and again began to vex the Britains, whereof Vter
having advertisement, prepared to resists them, and finally went himself in
person against them, and at St. Albans, as some write, gave them battle, and
slew them both in the field.

Polidor Virgil will have that battle fought in this Kings reign, wherein St.
German caused the Alleluja to be used, but questionless he mistaketh, as is
before specified.

But now to the incidents which happened in the reign of Vter; we find that one
Porth a Saxon, with his two Sons Megla and Beda, landed at Portsmouth, about
the beginning of the said Vters reign, Hollenshed. ut sup. fol. 130.
and slew a noble young man of the Britains, and many others of the meaner
sort with him. Of this Porth the town and haven of Portsmouth took the name, as
some have thought. Moreover about sixty years after the coming of the Saxons
into this land with their leader Hengist, one Nazaleod a mighty King among the
Britains, assembled all the power he could make to fight with Certicus the
King of the West Saxons, who, understanding the great power of his enemies,
required aid of Oska King of Kent, also of Elle King of Sussex, and of Porth
and his Sons which were lately arrived: Certicus being then furnished with a
competent army, divided the same into two battails reserving the one to himself
and the other he appointed to his son Kenrick.

King Nazaleod perceiving that the wing which Certicus led was of more strength
then the other which Kenrick governed, he set first upon Certicus, thinking
that if he might distress that part of the Enemies army he should easily
overcome the other.

Hereupon he gave such a fierce charge, that by pure force he opened the same,
and so overthrew the Saxons on that side making great slaughter of them as they
were scattered. The British King Nazaleod slain.

The Britains overthrown. Mat. West. Hen. Hunt. Stuff and Whitgar arrived, 514
An other overthrow of the Britains by the Saxons


The which manner of dealing when Kenrick saw, he made forward with all speed
to succor his Father, and rushing in among the Britains, he brake their army
in pieces, slew their King and put his people to flight.

There died of the Britains that Day five thousand, the residue escaping by
flight.

In the fixed year after this battle, Stufft and Wightgar, who were Nephews to
Certicus came with three ships and landed at Certicestshore, and overthrew a
number of Britains, who came against them in order of battle, and so by the
coming of those his Nephews, being right valiant and hardy men, the part of
Certicus became much stronger.

About the year of our Lord 519. the Britains fought with Certicus and his son
Kenrick at This place was formerly called Nazalcoy from Nazaleod King of the
Britains. The Isle of Wight conquered by the Saxons, with loss of the
Britains. Howes ut sup.
Certicestford, where the Britains valiantly behaved themselves, yet in the
end (for who can resist what the he highest has decreed) were put to flight,
not without great slaughter, when greater would have been had not night
befriended them, which impeached the bloody and barbarous enemy from further
execution.

In the thirteenth year of the reign of Cerdicus, he with his son Kenrick, and
other of the Saxon Captains fought with the Britains in the Isle of Wight at
Witgaresbridge, where they slew a great number of the Britains, and so
conquered the Isle, which about four years after was given by Cerdicus or
Cerdicius to his two Nephews, Stuff and Wightgar.

This King Vter reigned eight years and was buried at Stone-hedge, Fabian
says, he dyed not without suspicion of poison, after he had reigned sixteen
years, and was buried at Corsa Gigantum.

The Fable of Pendragons, taking upon him the shape of Igernies Lord and
Husband, and so enjoying the pleasures of her bed, by the enchantments of
Merlin, I imagine to be a fantasy taken out of Plautus, the comical poet,
where Jove took the shape of Amphitrio, and so leave it.

King Arthur.
Before I enter too far into the description of this King, I shall desire my
Reader to believe, that as I would not willingly add or insert any thing which
may be fabulous, or without Historical grounds, so would I not leave out any
thing which may redound to the true honor of so glorious a King, so heroic a
soldier, and so good a Christian.

Whereas he is commonly branded with the note of bastardy, if Hollenshed and
others relate his history truly, that can not be; for if Vter first slew the
husband, and then married the wife, and after wedlock begot this so much, as
Gordon calls him (decantatum illum Arthurum) admired and famed Arthur. Though
the act was equally cupable with that of David's yet were the children
questionless legitimate.

Mr. Brou. fol. 124. Jo. Pitseus l. de viris Illust. aetat. 8. an. 720 in
cremit Brit. Ananimus in li. de. St. Graal Jo. Capg. in Catal. in S. Joseph of
Ar.
As concerning his descent (to leave the Trojon line) it is no hard matter to
derive him from St. Joseph of Aramathea; for a learned Antiquary speaking of
that blessed Saint and his associates, says. Although our universal histories
of St. Joseph of Aramathea, chiefly speak of the coming of him and his
religious companions not above fourteen, by any account, yet we have
Antiquities testifying that great number of other Christians came with him
hither, or to our Islands adjoining at that time Among these a British Eremite
living when Glastenbury Abbey was builded by King Inas, where the Antiquities
thereof were diligently sought and examined, and he so conversant in them, that
he wrote a book of that subject, does plainly testify in his history here of
named, The holy Graal, that there came hither in the company of St. Joseph and
his religious associates, which continued with him at Glastenbury in Eremitical
conversation, above 600 Men and Women that were Christians, Fits and supra.
and had vowed chastity or continency until they should arrive in this Land,
miraculously assigned (as it seems) unto them to continue in, Ant. Glast. in
Tab. Antiq.
and because some take exception to this Author the most warranted and allowed
Manuscript Antiquities of Glastenbury written in old letters in parchment, upon
broad tables anciently belonging to the Monastery, affirm the same, and how
diverse of them were noble personages, and such as in those times in small
Islands were styled Kings, and some of our British Kings descended from them:
among these was first Helaius, Nephew of St. Joseph, K. Arthurs pedigree from
the family of St. Jo. of Arem. by his mother.
of whom this old Manuscript-Antiquity thus relates: Helaius Nephew to St.
Joseph begat Josue, Josue begat Aminadab, Aminadab begat Castellors, Castellors
begat Manaclaniel, Manaclaniel begat Lambrord, Lambrord begat a Son which begat
Igerna, of whom Uter Pendracon begat the noble and renowned Arthur, by which it
appears, that King Arthur did descend of the race of Joseph. And these
antiquities do thus further relate unto us, Peter Kinsman of Joseph of
Aramathea King of Orcany begat Erlan, Erlan begat Melianus, Melianus begat
Arguth, Antiq. Glasten. Cap. in St. Joseph.
Arguth begat Edor, Edor begat Loath, who took to wife the Sister of King
Arthur, of whom he begat four Sons to wit, Walwan, Agranayans, Gwerches and
Gaheries.

Again the same Antiquities speak of St. Joseph's Imprisonment presently after
his coming into this Island, which was in Venedocia, now Northwales near the
Isle of Mona, Harris M. S. Hist. l. 1. c. 25. Hist. Boet. Hist. Sco. in
Crathlinit. Bald. de. Script. cent. lib. in Amp. Theater of great Britain l.
6. c. 9.. 4. St. Joseph's Sister married to a Britain. ^i h. Vignier Biblior.
Hist. an. 63. Theater of great Britain l. 6. c. 9. S. 9.
who was set at liberty by a noble Man, whom he had converted to the faith,
named Mordraius whom the antiquity calls a King: A late writer thinks this
Mordraius to be the then King, or Ruler of the Island Mona, and that the place
where he was converted, named the City Saract, was Soder in the Isle of Man,
which was the first Bishops See we read of in those parts, in the time and
persecution of Dioclesian. And the writers of the Theater of Great Britain,
tell us of some others of this company of St. Joseph that lived in the World
and were not of the Religious number that settled at Glastenbury, and among them
they name a Sister of St. Joseph's, called Eurgaine, who (to speak in their
words) afterward married to a Britain, named Siarklos, and they cite George,
Owen Harry for the same opinion. And Nicholas Vignier a French Writer in his
Bibliotheke Historial in the year of Christ, 63 plainly affirms: Joseph of
Aramathea arrived this year in great Britain with a troop, or great number of
his companions. To these I may add the testimony of Tertullian, of the timely
receiving of the faith of Christ by our Northern Britains, commonly confounded
in Histories with the Scottish Nation, by reason of their dwelling long
together, and how Petrus Cluniacensis writing to St. Bernard, cited by the
Theater, which follows him therein, supposes the Scottishmen the more
ancient Christians, as not being in the like subjection to the Romans as the
other then were, which cannot more probably be affirmed of any then those that
came, by those Antiquities, with St. Joseph into those outward Islands, where
the Scots then inhabited, and with whom they united themselves, as also with
our Northern Britains: neither can we think but among so many, even hundreds
which came hither at that time, some of them left a posterity of Children, as
is exemplified in two before, one the Nephew, the other the Kinsman of St.
Joseph, and we may take notice from the names themselves of some of those that
be recited, as Josue, Aminadab, and Loath that they were Christians, no others
in those parts, in that time taking names from Scripture but they only: and for
Loath one of them that is named, certain it is by our British and other
Histories that he was a Christian, so of Igerna and King Arthur, which likewise
by these antiquities did descend from those of the company of Joseph of
Aramathea, and although these three last were late in respect of that first age
of Christ, and lived when Britain generally professed Christian Religion, yet
Helaius Nephew or Grandsonne of Joseph, placed in the first of that Genealogy
in this Land, at the time of St. Joseph's coming hither, and his Son Josue being
by his name a Christian did probably live until the days of King Lucius and
Donaldus, to be of those which continued a succession of Christianity here.

Mr. Broughton proving that nine Scholars of Cambridge were converted to the
faith, Cambridge the School of the British Kingdoms.

K. Arthur a Benefactor to Scholars, learning and Religion.

Apud Caium li. 1. de. Antiq. Cant. and in arce, London. Howes. fol. 53.


and became fervent laborers in the Vineyard of our blessed Savior, says,
which is further confirmed by the public Charter of privileges and immunities
of King Arthur to that renowned ancient Town, School and University of
Cambridge, where among other memorable things he declares that his christian
predecessors, Kings of Britain, had been instructed there in learning and
Religion, and in particular speaking there of King Lucius, what immunities he
granted to that University, testifies further, that this our first Christian
King did receive the faith of Christ, by the preaching of the learned Christian
Scholars of Cambridge. This Charter was dated at London, in the year of Christ
531 the 7th. day of April.

Arthur therefore the Son of Vter born in Cornwall at the age of fifteen years
was crowned King of Britain as some say at Caerleon (and most likely, for that
he received the crown at the hands of Dubritius who was Archbishop there) of
whose Archbishops we have formerly spoken, others will have it that he was
crowned at Winchester, and one old nameless pamphlet says at Silicester, which
in the British Tongue was called Caersegent, and was situate near Reading.

Hollensheed ^ist. of Eng. fol. 131.
Of this Arthur, (says Holenshed) many things are written beyond belief, for
that there is no Ancient Author of authority that confirms the same: but
surely as may be thought he was a most worthy man, and by all likelihood, a
great Enemy to the Saxons, by reason whereof the Welshmen, which are the very
Britains indeed, much honor his memory. He fought, as common report goes,
twelve remarkable battails against the Saxons, and in every one of them carried
away the victory. Yet could he not utterly expel them out of the Realm, but
that maugre all his force they kept Kent, Surrey, Norfolk, and other places by
strong hand and undaunted courage; howbeit some writers hold that they held
these Countries as Tributaries unto King Arthur: But Authors of Credit avouch,
that he held continual war against them and the Picts, which were allied with
the Saxons.

The British writers affirm that Arthur, presently after he had received the
Crown of Dubright Archbishop of Caerleon (in Monmoth-shire not West-Chester, as
both, Harpsfield, Porter, and others have mistaken) went with his power of
Britains against the Saxons of Northumberland, which had to their Captain, one
Colgrime or Colgerne, whom Arthur vanquished, and chased into the City of York,
in which place Arthur besieged him, till at length the said Colgrime escaped
out of the City, and leaving it in charge with his Brother called Bladulff,
passed over into Germany unto Childrick King of that Country, of whom he
obtained succors, so that the said Childrick made provision of men and ships,
and came himself over into Scotland, having in his company fifteen hundred
Sails, one and other.

When Arthur was advertised hereof, he raised his siege, and withdrew to
London, sending Letters with all speed unto Howell King of little Britain in
France, who was his Kinsman, requesting him earnestly to send him aid. Howell
incontinently assembled his people to the number of fifteen thousand men, and
taking Sea landed with them at South-Hampton, where Arthur was ready to receive
him with great joy and congratulation, from thence they drew Northwards, where
both the hosts of Arthur and Howell being assembled together, marched to
Lincoln, which City Childrick did as then besiege.

Here Arthur and Howell assailed the Saxons with great force and manhood, and
at length, after great slaughter made of the Eenemie, they obtained the
Victory, and chased Childrick with the residue of the Saxons that were left
alive unto a wood, where they compassed them about within the same, in such
wise, that in the end they were constrained to yield themselves, upon condition
that they might be suffered to depart on foot to their ships, and so avoid the
Land, leaving their horse, armor, and other furniture unto the Brittans. A
noble battle got by the Britains against the Saxons.


Hereupon the Britains, taking good Hostages for assurance, permitted the
Saxons to go their ways, and so Childrick and his people got them to their
ships, with purpose to return to their Country: but being on the Sea they were
forced by wind to change their course, and coming on the coasts of the West
parts of Britain, they arrived at Totness, and contrary to the articles agreed
upon with Arthur, again invaded the Country, and taking such armor as they
could find, marched into the Country, plundering and wasting where they went,
till they came to Bath, which Town the Britains held, and defended against
them, not suffering them by any means to enter, whereupon the Saxons begirt it
with a strong siege.

Bath besieged by the Saxons.
Arthur, informed hereof, with all speed hasted thither, and giving battle to
his Enemies, slew most part of Childricks men.

Child i k slain by Cador D. of Cornwall, a Britain.
There were slain both Colgrime and Bladulffe, howbeit Childrick himself fled
out of the field toward his ships, but being pursued by Cador, Earl of
Cornwall (that had with him ten thousand men) by Arthurs appointment, he was
overtaken, and in the fight slain with all his people.

Howell besieged by the Scots.
Arthur himself returned from this battle at or near Bath with all speed
toward the Marches of Scotland for that he had received intelligence; that the
Scots had besieged Howell King of little Britain, as he lay sick there.

After that Cador had accomplished his enterprise, and slain Childrick, he
returned with as much speed as was possible toward Arthur, and found him in
Scotland, where he rescued Howell, and afterward pursued the Scots, which fled
before him.

K. Arthurs victory against Guillomer K. of Ireland.
About the same time one Guillomer King of Ireland, arrived in Scotland with a
mighty Army of Irishmen (near to the place where Arthur then lodged or hell his
quarters) to help the Scots against the Britains: Whereupon the prudent and
victorious King Arthur, turning his forces toward Guillom^r, vanvished him,
and chased him into Ireland.

K. Arthurs marriage with Guenheza.

The Kingdom of Ireland held from the K. of Britain by conquest.


This done he continued in pursuit of the Scots, till he caused them to s^e for
pardon, and to submit themselves wholly to him, and so receiving them to mercy,
and taking homage of them, he returned to York, and shortly after took to wife
Guenhera a right beautiful Lady, near Kinswoman to Cador Duke of Cornwall.

In the year following (which Harrison notes to be 525.) he went into Ireland,
and there overcame Guillomer in the open field in a pitched battle,
constraining him to yield, and to acknowledge, by doing to him fealty, to hold
the realm of Ireland of him.

It is further remembered in those British histories, that he subdued Gothland.
Gutland and Island, with all the Isles in and about those seas.

Also that he overcame the Romans in the Country about Paris, with their
Captain Lucius, and wasted the most part of all France, and slew in single
combat certain Giants. (What the Author Holenshed here means by Giants I
know not, neither would I have any thing fabulous fastened upon so noble a King
and Christian as Arthur was: true it is that we read, Genesis Chap. 6 And
Giants were upon the earth in those days. Some have thought that those Giants
were not men, nor begotten by men, but that either devils which fell at the
first from heaven, Erroneous opinions concerning Giants. Philo Judeus.
Josephus. Tertullian.
or other Angels allured by concupiscence begat them of the daughters of Cain.
Philo Judeus in his book De Gigantibus, that those whom Moses then called
Angels, the Philosophers called Genios, which are living creatures with airy
bodies. Josephus (l. 1. antiq.) says, that Angels begat those Giants.
Tertullian also, lib. de hab itu muiebri, holds the same error, and diverse
more (otherwise good Authors.) But St. Cylril of Alexandria l. 1. c 9. adv.
Juli. St. Chrisost. hom. 22. in Genesis St. Ambrose de Noe and a rca c. 4. St.
Aug. l. 15. c. 23: de civit. St. Hierome Tradit. Hebraic. and other most
principal Doctors teach it to be untrue, yea impossible that those Giants
should have been begotten by any other creatures then men: For that Angels and
Devils are mere spirits without all Natural bodies. And if they had airy bodies
(as they have not, yet) they could not have such generation, for the power or
force to engender belongs to the vegitative soul, whose proper operations are
to turn nutriment into substance of the subject wherein it is, and to engender
new issue or offspring from the same, as Aristotle shows l. 2. de anima,
textu 24. And in what body soever there is a vegitative soul, it must needs be
that the same was engendered, and must sometime decay and die, and so the
devils should be mortal. Moreover if they could have generation together with
mankind, then such issue should be a distinct species both from man and Devil,
as a mule differs both from Horse and Ass, and again if spirits had abused
women in assumpted bodies and shapes of men, yet they did not take them to
wives, as the Scripture says they did who begat these giants. Finally the holy
Scripture expressly calls the giants, men, These be the mighty ones, famous
men. The modesty of Scripture terming them famous, whom our common phrase would
call infamous, being more monstrous in wickedness of mind, then in hugeness of
body. For they were most insolent, lascivious, covetous, cruel, and in all kind
of vices most impious.

And if Arthur had not been revoked home to resist his Cozen Mordred, that was
son to Loath King of Pictland, that rebelled in his Country, he had passed to
Rome, intending to make himself Emperor, and afterward to vanquish the other
Emperor, that then ruled the Empire: but for so much as there is not any
approved Author does speak of any such thing, we will let it alone.

At his return into Britain, he found that Mordred had caused himself to be
made King, and having allied himself with Childrick a Saxon, (not him whom
Gaufride as ye have heard supposes to have been slain before) was ready to
have resisted his landing, so that before he could come to shore he lost many
of his men; but yet at length he repulsed his enemies, but not without great
loss of his own men; and at length landed at Sandwich, and then joined in
battle with his enemies: in this conflict was slain Gawin a noble Chieftain,
whose death he much lamented, who was brother to Mordred, who like a faithful
Gentleman regarding more his honor and loyal truth then neernesse of blood,
chose rather to fight in the quarrel of his lawful King and loving master, then
to take part with his natural brother in an unjust cause, and so there in that
battle was slain, together also with Auguisal, to whom Arthur formerly had
committed the government of Scotland. Mordred fled from this battle, and
getting ships sailed Westward and finally landed in Cornwall.

King Arthur caused the corpse of Gawin to be interred at Dover (as some hold
opinion) but William of Malmsbury supposes that he was buried in Wales, as
after shall be showed.

The dead body of Anguisall was conveyed into Scotland, and there buried.

After that Arthur had put his enemies to flight, he had intelligence into what
part Mordred was withdrawn, with all speed he reenforced his army, with new
recruits called out of several places, and with his whole puissance hasted
forward, not resting till he came near to the place were Mordred was encamped,
with such an Army as he could assemble together from his friends and adherents.

Here, as apeareth by John Leyland in his book entitled The assertion of
Arthur; it may be doubted in what place Mordred was encamped, but Jeffry of
Monmoth shows, that after Arthur had discomfited Mordred in Kent at the first
landing, it chanced so that Mordred escaped and fled to Winchester whether
Arthur followed, and there giving him battle the second time, did also put him
to flight, and following him from thence, fought him after at a place called
Camblan or Kemelene in Cornwall, or as some Authors have it, near
Glastenborough.

This battle was fought with such prowess and eagerness on both sides, that
in conclusion Mordred was their slain, with the most part of his whole army.
And Arthur receiving diverse mortal wounds died of the same shortly after, when
he had reigned over the Britains by the term of twenty six years. His Corpse
was buried at Glastenbury in the Church yard, betwixt two Pillars, where it was
found in the days of K. Henry the Second, about the year of our Lord 1191.
which was in the last year of the reign of the same K. Henry, more then six of
hundred years after the burial thereof. He was laid sixteen foot deep under
ground, for doubt that his enemies the Saxons should have found him. But those
that dug into the ground there, to find his body, after they had entered
about seven foot deep into the earth, found a mighty broad stone with a leaden
Cross fastened to that part which lay downwards toward the Corpse, containing
this inscription, Hic jacet sepultus Inclitus Rex Arthurius, in Insula Avelonia.

This inscription was graven on that side of the Cross which was next to the
stone, so that till the Cross was taken off it was not seen. His body was
found, not enclosed within a Tomb of Marble, or other stone curiously wrought,
but within a great tree made hallow like a trunk, the which being found and
dug up was opened, and therein were found the Kings bones, of such
marveilous bigness, that the shin bone of his leg, being set on the ground,
reached up to the middle thigh of a right tall man; as a Monk of that Abbey
has written, Hapsfield ex^b Alisto. Aug. fol. 39.
and Nic. Hapsfield says the same in manner, viz. Os tibiae procerissimam tum
hominis tibiam, adtrium digitorum longitudinem superaret, the length of the
shin bone exceeded in length the shin bone of the tallest man then living three
fingers in length, which lived in those days and saw it: but Giraldus
Cambressis which also lived in those days, and spoke with the Abbot of the
place, by whom the bones of Arthur were then found, affirms, that by the
report of the same Abbot, he learned, that the shin bone of the said Arthur
being set up by the leg of a very tall man (the which the Abbat, showed to the
said Giraldus) came above the knee of the same man, the length of three fingers
breadth, which is much more likely then the other.

The skull of his head was also of a wonderful largeness, so that the space of
his forehead between his two eyes was a span broad, there appeared in his head
the signs and prints of ten wounds or more, all the which were grown into one
wemm, except only that whereof it should seem he dyed, which being greater
then the residue, appeared very plain.

Also in opening the Tomb of his wife Queen Guenhera that was buried by him
(this Queen had taken upon her a Monastical habit, Mr. Broug. fol. 603.
either after the death of her Husband, or else to do penance for some crime
committed (for some there are who affirm, that she was too familiar with
Mordred, her husbands, both kinsman and capital enemy) the Monastery unto which
she went to receive the habit of Religion, was one of the two which were in
Gaerleon, dedicated to St. Julius our Martyr, and is yet called St. Julians,
and is at present the Mansion House of the Right Honorable Edward Lord Herbert
of Cherbery)

When the tomb of this Queen was opened, they found the tresses of her hair
whole and perfect, and finely platted, of color like to the burnisht gold, the
which being touched immediately fell to dust. The Abbot, which then was
governor of that house, was called Stephan or Henry de Bloys, otherwise de
Sullie, Nephew to King Henry the second (by whose commandment he had searched
for the grave of Arthur) translated the bones as well of him as of his Queen,
into the great Church, and there buried them in a fair marble Tomb, laying the
bones of the King at the head of the Tomb, and the body of the Queen at his
feet toward the west part.

In Commendation of this Warlick Prince certain verses are made in Latin, but
because they are turned into English, I set not down the Latin, but give them
unto my Reader as they are in Holinshed.

Who vanquished Saxon troops, with battails bloody broils;
And purchased to himself a name, with warlick wealthy spoils.
Who has with shivering shining sword, the Picts so often dismayed;
And eke unweildy servile yoke, on neck of Scots has laid.
Who Frenchmen Pufft with pride, and who the Germains fierce in fight
Discomfitted, and daunted Danes, with main and martial might.
Who of that murdering Mordred did the vital breath expel,
The Monster grisley, loathsome, huge, that diresome Tyrant fell.
Here livelesse Arthur lies entombed, within this stately hearse
Of Chievaldry the bright renown, and virtues nursling fierce.
Whose glory great now over all the world does compass fly.
And of the airy thunder shales, the lofty buildings high.
Therefore you Noble Progeny of Britains line and race
Arise unto the Emperor great of thrice renowned grace.
And cast upon his sacred Tomb the roseal garland gay.
That fragrant smell may witness well your duties you display.
The occasion that moved King Henry the second to cause his Nephew the Abbot to
search for the grave of King Arthur, was for that he understood by a Welsh
These Bards were as Heralds observing the true genealogies of the Country.
Bard, that could sing many histories in the Welsh language of the Ancient
Britains, that in the foresaid Churchyard of Glastenbury, betwixt two pillars
the body of Arthur was to be found buried six foot deep under the ground,
Giraldus Cambrensis affirms that the tree, in which Arthurs body was found
enclosed, was an Oak, but others suppose, that it was an Alder tree, because
that in the same place a great number of those kind of trees do grow, and also
for that it is known, that an Alder lying under the ground where moisture is,
will long continue without rotting.

But the finding thus of the body of Arthur thus buried, such as believe that
he was not d^^d but conveyed away by Fairies, (deluded it may be by this
fantastic verse) Hic jacet Arthurus ReX quondam Rexque futurus. into ^ome
pleasant place where he should remain till a time, and then to return again,
and reign in as great Authority as he did before, might well perceive
themselves deceived in crediting so vain a fable; on the other side as quite
contrary, some seem to doubt whether any such man was ever, In rerum Natura.

William of Malmsbury, a writer of good credit and authority among the learned,
has these words, in his first book entitled De Regibus anglorum, saying, But
he being dead, meaning Vortimer, the face of the Britains waxed feeble, their
decayed hope went backward apace and even then suddenly had they gone to
destruction, if Ambrosius (which alone of the Romans remained yet alive and was
King after Vortigerne) had not kept under and stayed the lofty barbarous
people, that is to say the Saxons, by the notable aid and assistance of the
valiant Arthur.

This is the same Arthur of whom the trifeling tales of the Britains even to
this day do fantastically descant and report wonders: but worthy doubtless was
he of whom feigned fables should not have so dreamed, but rather that true
Histories might have set forth his worthy praises, as he that did for a long
time sustain and hold up his Country, that was ready to go to utter ruin and
decay encouraging the bold hearts of the Britains in the war, and finally in
the siege of Badon hill, he set upon 900 of the Enemies, and with incredible
slaughter did put them all to flight.

On the contrary part, the English Saxons, although they were tossed with
several chances of Fortune, yet still they recruited their forces with new
supplies of their Country men that came out of Germany, and so with bolder
courage assailed their Enemies, and by little and little causing them to give
place, spread themselves over the whole Island, for although there were many
battails, in the which, sometimes the Saxons, sometimes the Britains got the
better, yet the greater number of the Saxons that were slain, the greater
number still came over to the succor of their Countrymen, being called in,
and sent for over out of every quart^^ of their Territory.

Here is also to be noted that where the British History declares, that Gawen
or Gallowyn being slain in the battle fought betwixt Arthur and Mrodred in
Kent, was buried at Dover, so that his bones remained there to be showed long
after. This Gawain as says a French Author did bear for his arms; De Purpre a
vu aigle d' Or; a Deux testes members d' Or: Purpure an Eagle displayed with
two heads Or: yet by that which Will. Malm. in the third book of his volume
entitled De Regibus Anglorum, the contrary may seem true: The arms of Gawain.
his words are these, When in the Province of Wales, which is called Ross, the
Sepulcher of Walwain was found who was Nephew to Arthur by his Sister, not
going out of kind from so worthy an Uncle, he reigned in that part of Britain,
which unto this day called Walwithia, a Knight for his high prowess, most
highly renowned, but expulsed out of his Kingdom by the Brother and Nephew of
Hengist, Will. of Malms. de Reg. Angliae.
first requiting his banishment with great detriment and loss to those his
Enemies, wherein he was partaker by his just desert of his Uncles worthy
praise, for that he stayed for a great many years the destruction of his
country, which was now running headlong into utter ruin and decay. Hollenshed
Hist. of Engl. fol. 156.
But Arthurs grave no were appears, but the others tomb was in the days of
William the Conqueror upon the Sea side, and contained in length fourteen
foot, where he was (as some say) wounded by his Enemies, and cast up by
shipwreck, but other write that he was slain at a public feast or banquet by
his own Countrymen.

But here you must consider, that Malmesbury departed this life about the
beginning of the reign of King Henry 2. certain years before the bones of King
Arthur were found.

But now to speak some things of the Queen, King Arthur his consort, some are
of opinion that she took that name from her excellent beauty, because Cuynne,
(if truly written) in the Welsh tongue signifies fair, so that she was named
Guenuere, or Guenllean, even as you would say the fair and butifull Heonere or
Helen; she was brought up in the house of Cador D. or E. of Cornwall before
Arthur married her, and as it appears by writers, she was evil reported of,
as noted of Incontinency and breech of faith to her husband; but excellent
beauties seldom escape the venomous blasts of detracting and envious tongues,
and never want the amorous courtings of lascivious wantons. The British
history affirms that she did not only abuse her self by unlawful company
with Mordred, but that also in Arthurs absence, she consented to take him to
husband.

It is likewise found recorded by an old writer, that Arthur besieged the
Marches near Glastenbury, for displeasure that he bore unto a certain Lord
called Melva, who had ravished Guuennere, and led her into those Marches and
there did keep her.

Arthur had two wives as Girald. Came. affirms, of which, the later says he
was buried with him, and her bones found in his own Sepulcher so divided, yet
that two parts of the Tomb toward the head were appointed to receive the
bones of the man, and the third part toward the feet contained the woman's
bones a part by themselves.

Hector Boethius writes, that Queen Guennere being taken by the Picts, was
conveyed into Scotland, were finally she died, and was there buried in Angus.
And this may be true, if Arthur had three several wives, each of them bearing
the name of Guenhere, as Sir John Price avoucheth.

But by reason of the disagreeing of writers touching the great acts achieved
by this Arthur, and also for that some difference there is amongst them, about
the time in which he should reign, many have doubted of the truth of the whole
history, which is written of him.

The British histories, as also the Scotch do agree that he reigned in the
days of the Emperor Justinian, about the fifteenth year of whose reign he
died, which was in the year of our Lord five hundred forty one, as Harrison
also confirms: some write otherwise.

The writer of the book called Aurea Historia affirms, that in the tenth year
of Cerdicus King of West Saxons, Leyland.
Arthur the warrior arose amongst the Britains. Also Divionensis writes,
that Cerdicus fighting oftimes with Arthur, if he were overcame in one month,
he rose in another more strong and fierce then before.

At length King Arthur, over toyled with hard labor and warfair, after the
twelfth year of the coming of Cerdicus, gave unto him, upon his homage done and
fealty received, the Shires of South-Hampton and Somerset the which Country
Cerdicus named West Saxon. West Saxon.


In the while that this Kingdom was thus troubled with war and destruction,
between the Britains and Saxons, the Christian Religion was not only abolished
in places where the Saxons seated themselves, but also among the Britains the
right faith was brought into danger, by the reviving of the Pelagian Heresy,
which began to be broached (says Hollenshed) by diverse naughty persons, and
questionless they were so, and all such as follow them. And although in the
first part of this History speaking of this most pestiferous Arch-heretick and
his damnable doctrine, I then expressed not his Theses, yet upon better
consideration, that all virtuous Christians may avoid them, I think it not
altogether amiss to lay them open to the World, and I must heartily wish that
none may follow them.

The Heresies of Pelagius.
1. First he was charged, that Adam was made motral, and should have died
whether he had sinned or no.

2. That his sin did only hurt himself, and not humane kind.

3. That infants new born are in the same State, wherein Adam was before his
fall.

4. That by the death and prevarication of Adam, all Mankind does not die, nor
all mankind rise again by the Resurrection of Christ.

5. Children may have eternal life, though they be not baptized.

6. Rich men that be baptized, except they renounce all their goods, if they
are taught to do any good, thing it shall not be reputed to them, neither can
they have the Kingdom of God.

7. That the grace and help of God is not given to every act, but is from the
will, or in the Law or Doctrine.

8. That the grace of God is given according to our own demerits.

9. That Men cannot be called the Children of God except, they be altogether
without sin.

10. And that it is not free will if it wants the help of God, because every
one has in his own will to do any thing or not to do it.

11. That our victory is not from the help of God, but from freewill.

12 That to them that seek pardon, pardon is not given according to the Grace
and mercy of God, but according to the labor and merits of them, which by
penance are worthy of mercy.

St. Augustine in diverse places speaks of this Arch-heritique, and of the
Articles whereof he was charged, and recanted by Pelagius, though
dissemblingly, for fear, as appeared by him afterward; so did diverse others;
and add more errors, which he held, as that

1. Before Christ man was without sin.

2. Prayer is not necessary.

3. Man is able by the power of Freewill, not only not to sin, but not to be
tempted.

4. That Women ought to sing in the Church.

5. That all men ought to be clothed like Monks.

St. Augustine adds that

1. Man might not ^ear at all.

2. The life of just men in this life to be altogether without sin, and that
the Church of Christ in this world consists of such.

3. He denied that the Church should offer prayers either for Infidels, and
such as resisted, the doctrine of God, that they might be converted unto him:
or for the faithful, that their faith might be increased and they persevere in
it.

For these heresies as is said before, he was condemned by a general Council
or Councels; but harder it is to reclaim an Heretic, then to convert an
Infidel yet Almighty God out of his infinite goodness, never suffers any
heresy to arise but presently he sends a remedy by providing both Learned and
Pious men to withstand, oppose and suppress it.

Dubritius therefore that was Bishop of Landaff, and after Archbishop of
Caerleon, Arnaske and his successor David with other learned men, earnestly
both by preaching and writing defended the contrary cause to the confuting of
those errors and re-establishing the truth.

This holy Bishop St. Dubritius was of such sanctity of life, that after St.
German and his Associates departure hence, Capg. in St. Dubritius. Antiq. Eccl.
Hard. Harpsfield Hist. Eccl. Angliae fol. 38.
he together with St. David were the Popes Legates or greatest commanders here
by the highest spiritual power; St. Dubritius was a famous Master to many
learned Scholars.

Harpsfield speaking of the remarkable, holy and learned men of that time,
says, Amongst whom Dubritius Gainius Vagensis, of or near the River Wye, a
South Wales man (of Monmoth shire) first comes in order to be spoken of, who
first set up a school near the River Wye, where Thelianus, Samson, and Aidan
were his scholars: he himself having formerly been a Disciple of St. German
(under whose conduct the Britains obtained a miraculous victory against the
Saxons) who was an earnest opposer of the Pelagian heresy: whose example St.
Dubritius followed, both by preaching and writing; John Capg. John Leyland.
he was first Bishop of Landaff, and afterward Atchbishop of Caerleon
(Harpsfield here mistaketh, and places his See at Westchester, which never had
either Arch flamen or Archbishop, but both these Cities being called
indifferently Caerleon, breeds that error; Mr. Porter in in his Lives of
Saints is in the same mistake) This blessed man growing full in years, left his
honors and dignities, Pitseus Conc. Polid.
and with other associates betook himself to the Wilderness or solitary and
unfrequented mountains, where they lived by the labor of their hands, and then
at last rendered up his pure soul in all peace and tranquillity to his creator,
the eightenth of the Kalends of December. Whilst this blessed man held the Sea
of Landaff, Nod a Son of King Arthur, gave certain lands lying by the River of
Taff or Teiny unto that Church, which were called Benalin and Landeiliaw Vanur,
Hen. Hunt. l. 2. Cap. 13.
as is recorded in the monuments of that Church. This Bishop set the British
Crown upon the heads both of Aurelius Ambrosius, as also Arthur, and in the
famous and renowned battle fought against the Saxons at the City of Badan now
called Bath, besieging that place, this Dubritius was personally present, with
sweet and divine exhortations, encouraging the soldiers to fight manfully
against the Pagans and enemies of Christian faith; laying before their eyes the
lamentable destruction of their Country occasioned by those miscreants; and how
glorious that death would be, where life was spent in so good a cause, and
likewise what reward they might expect at the hands of Almighty God for so
Christian-like; service, that day proved most glorious unto the Britains, who
purchased a most absolute victory, obtained, as all imagined, by the prayers of
St. Dubritius. He dyed in the year of our Lord 555. in the wilderness or
solitude before spoken of, called Enli. But in the year eleven hundred and
twenty his body was translated to the Cathedral Church of Landaff, by Urban
Bishop of that See.

I esteem (says Harpsfield) King Arthur (though many things are ridiculously
foysted upon him) a Prince so worthy to have his glory eternized, that even in
Ecclesiastical History he deserves to have his name registered. For what can be
more renowned and becoming a true Christian Prince, then to expose his life,
estate and all for Gods sake, with Arthur, who most valiantly opposed and
overthrew the Saxons, who not only had trodden the Brittans, but even Religion
it self under foot? Twelve times he joined battle with them, and twelve times
came out of the field victorious, amongst all which, the greatest trophy and
triumph which he purchased was that at Bath, in which, says this Author,
praecipue post Deum in beatae Mariae open spem posuit, after Almighty God he put
his chiefest confidence in the help of the B. Virgin, and therefore advanced
her effigies and picture in his shield. King Arthurs arms. Mr. Boswel in his
armory fol. 22.


King Arthur, that mighty Conqueror and Worthy, had so great affection and
love to the sign of the cross, that he left his arms which he bare before,
wherein were figured three Dragons, and another of three crowns, or thirteen,
as the French say, 33331. Viz. Azure 13. crowns Or, and assumed and took to
his arms, as proper to his desire, a cross silver in a field Verd. on the
first quarter whereof was figured an image of our Lady with her Son in her
arms, and bearing that sign, he did many marvails in arms, as in his book of
acts and valiant conquests are remembered.

And what can be spoken (says the former writer) more honorably of any
conqueror then may be said of this our Arthur? For that scum or dregs of
miscreants, the Saxons, being in a manner quite swept out of Britain, he soly
applied his thoughts to the repairing of Temples and Churches, Hen. Hunt. li.
9. p. 167. K. 168.
which those Pagans had demolished and ruined, especially at York, where the
storm of that persecution did most rage, besides many others, as at Glastenbury
where he spared no cost nor charge.

In the time of this most heroic King, this Island was adorned with diverse
learned and eminent Men, as Iltutus, Canigellus, David Machutus and sundry
others. Iltutus, born in the county of Glamorgan, and therefore called
Morganensis (whom some also call Eclhutus) contemning the greatness of his
birth, and all the vanities and follies of the World, as impediments to
devotion and heavenly contemplation, withdrew himself from all company of
Worldlings, and went unto St. Dubritius to lead an austere and solitary life,
where he arived unto so great perfection, that he himself became a spiritual
Master, and had many Disciples, as Sampson, David, Paulinus, and Gildas
Badonicus, and others. Iltutus died in the Ides of November; the Welsh even to
these our days celebrate an Annual Festival day in honor of this Saint, as is
manifest by the Church dedicated unto him, and in that language called Llan
Iltutus: Congellus was Abbot of the famous monastery of Bangor, the nursery
from whence so many learned men as filled the whole Christian World with
admiration of their learning and sanctity, did spring. Disciples to this
Saintly Abbot, were St. Columbanus and St. Brandon. Columbanus took the habit
of Religion at Bangor, and filled Scotland, Ireland, Italy, Gallia, and
Germany, with admiration of his sanctity and learning.

King Arthur, in the beginning of his reign had Enemies Lotho and Conradus his
allies, who envying his prosperity, made war against him; but he valiantly
vanquished them with their Picts and Scots, and at his pleasure appointed them
a Governor named Anguisel, whom the French Author of the book of the Knights
of the round table, printed at Lions 1590. Le Roy Aquisant d' Escosse, and sail
H. portoit d' argent a un lion de guenles, The arms of Anguisel.
arm de sable un cordelire a l' entour, he fought 12. battails against the
Saxons, and always bare away the victory. These battails says Nennius, were
fought in these places following.

The first battle was fought in the mouth of the Well Gleyne or Gledy.

The Second, Third, Fourth, and Fifth, nigh unto the River Douglasie, in the
county of Lineux.

The sixth on the River Bassus.

The seventh in the wood Calidon, or Coile Calidon.

The eighth beside the castle called Guinien.

The ninth at Caerleon in Wales.

The tenth by the Seaside in a place called Trachenrith or Rithorwood.

The elventh upon a hill named Agule Cathegonien.

The twelfth at the hill or tower of Bath then named Bathenhill, where many
were slain by the force of Arthur; for he alone (says Will. Malmes.) having
the Image of our Lady sowed upon his armor, set upon 900. of his Enemies, and
with an incredible slaughter put them to flight. But now concerning this Bath
before mentioned, it is to be noted that Bath in Somersetshire, stands low,
compassed about with hills, whereby it is evident, that either it is removed
from that place where it stood in Nennius his time, or else the place which he
called Mons Badonicus was not the town it self, as Reyland and others
conjecture, but some other high place near, which is not unlikely; for at this
day within a mile of it is a town called Bannardowne, which is so called either
corruptly for Bathendowne, or else in memory of the banners displayed there,
Bannardowne as seems to me, both upon the sight of the place, and report of
such as have gathered caps full of men's teeth in following the plough there, to
be the same that Nennius, or Bid means, though Polydore mistakes it for
Blanchmere. Thus much of Badon Hill now.

King Arthur having abated the rage of the Saxons, Howes fol. 55. Arthurs round
table.
he constituted the Order of the round table, into which order he only
entertained such of his Nobility as were most renowned for virtue and chevalry.
This round table he kept in several places, especially at Caerleon in
Monmoth-Shire, Winchester and Camilet in Somersetshire. Camilet Castle one of
the places of the round table.
This Camilet sometimes a famous Town or Castle, stands at the South end of
the Church of South Gadburie. The same is situate on a very high hill,
wonderfully strengthened by nature, to the which be two enterings up by very
steep ways, by North one, and the other by South-VVest. The very root of the
hill whereon this fortress stood, is more then a mile in compass. In the upper
part of the top of the hill above all the trenches, The description of Camilet
as now.
is Magna Arca, or Campus, of twenty acres or more, where in diverse places men
may see foundations or Rudera of walls; there was much duskie blue stone, that
people of the village there by have carried away. This Camilet within the upper
wall being more then twenty Acres, has often been ploughed and born very good
corn; much gold, silver, and Copper of Roman coin has been found there in
ploughing, and likewise in the fields about the roots of the hill, with many
other Antic things, especially by East: Such another place is at Caerleon
triple-trenched, now called the lodge in the Park.

There was found in memory of Men, a horse-shoe of silver at Camilet; The coat
of Lord of Earl, Hungerford.
the people can tell nothing there, but that they have heard say that Arthur
much resorted to Camilet. The old Lord Hungerford was owner of this Camilet,
who bore for his Coat of arms G. and V. indented per pale a cheveron Or, since
the right honorable the Lord Hastings, Earl of Huntington, from which family
my wife is descended by her Grandmother, Daughter to the Earl of Huntington,
and wife to the Earl of Worcester; Elizabeth married to Edward Somerset,
Father and Mother to Henry Earl of Wigorne, whose fourth Daughter Frances was
married to William Morgan of Lantarna Esquire, who left issue Sir Edward Morgan
Baronet, Henry Morgan, and Winefred wife to Percy Enderby Gentleman, Author of
this book.

There is to be seen in Denbighshire, in the parish of Lansanan in the side of
a stone hill, a place encompassed, wherein be twenty four seats for men to sit
in, some less, and some larger, cut out of the main Rock by man's hands, where
children and young men coming to seek their cattle, use to fit and play. They
commonly call it Arthurs round table.

The Order and Institution of the round table.
About the year of Christ 490. there reigned in England then called Britain,
Sir William Segar King at arms.
a King named Arthur, whose valor was so great and admirable, that many men
now living do hold the same rather fabulous then credible; yet who so shall
consider enterprises of later times achieved by private persons, may be easily
induced to think that a great part of the praise written of that mighty
Monarch, may seasonably receive belief; but omitting to speak of his prowess
(perhaps by others already over largely discoursed) I say that this most famous
King having expulsed out of England the Saxons, conquered Norwey, King Arthur
crowned in Paris.
Scotland, and the most part of France, and was crowned in the City of Paris,
from whence returned, he erected a certain association, a brotherhood of Knights
who vowed to observe these articles following.

The Articles of the round table.
1. First that every Knight should be well armed, and furnished to undertake
any enterprise, wherein he was employed by Sea or Land, on horseback or a foot.

2. That he should be ever pressed to assail all tyrants or oppressors of the
people.

3. That he should protect widows and maids, restore Children to their right,
repossess such persons as were without just cause exiled, and with all his
force maintain the Christian faith.

4. That he should be a Champion for the weal public, and as a Lion, repulse
the Enemies of his Country.

5. That he should advance the reputation of honor, and suppress all vice,
relieve people afflicted by adverse fortune, give aid to the holy Church, and
protect Pilgrims.

6. That he should bury Soldiers that wanted Sepulture, deliver prisoners,
ransom Captives, and cure men hurt in service of their Country.

7. That he should in all honorable actions adventure his person, yet with
respect to justice and truth, and in all enterprises proceed sincerely, never
failing to use his uttermost force of body and labor of mind.

8. That after the attaining of any enterprise he should cause it to be
recorded, to the end the same of that fact might ever live to his eternal
honor and renown of the noble order.

9. That if any complaint were made at the Court of this mighty King, of
perjury or oppression, then some Knight of the order whom the King should
appoint, ought to revenge the same.

10. That if any Knight of foreign Nation, did come unto the Court, with desire
to challenge or make show of his prowess (were he single or accompanied) those
Knights ought to be ready in arms to make answer.

11. That if any Lady, Gentlewoman, or VVidow, or Maid, or other oppressed
person did present a petition, declaring that they were or had been in this or
that Nation injured, or offered dishonor, they should be graciously heard, and
without delay, one or more Knights should be sent to take revenge.

12. That every Knight should be willing to inform young Princes, Lords and
Gentlemen in the orders and exercises of arms, thereby not only to avoid
Idleness, but also to increase the honor of Knighthood and Chevalrie.

Diverse other Articles inciting to magnanimous actions of honor in arms,
those Knights were sworn to observe, Sir William Segar. ib.
which for brevity I omit; nevertheless being used to lose my labor, I will
adventure to say this little, and the rather because this order of Knighthood
is ancient.

I do not read of any Robe or habit prescribed unto these Knights, nor with
what ceremony they were made.

The place of meeting and Convocation was the City of Winchester, where King
Arthur caused a great round table to be made, and at the same the Knights at
Pentecost or VVhitsunday did sit and eat; the proportion thereof was such as no
room could be thought of more dignity then the rest, yet (as some writers say)
one seat thereof was called the Sea Perilous, reserved for that Knight that did
excel the rest in virtue. That place by thet consent of all the rest of the
Knights was allotted to King Arthur, who for his valor surpassed all other
Knights and professors of arms.

Of Officers and Ministers belonging unto this order I do not read, but of a
Register whose duty was to enter and keep records of all and every action
enterprised, attempted, or performed by any of all those Knights which records
were read and sung publicly to the eternizing of their honor and fame.

Whether the number of these Knights, was many, or few, I do not find, but it
seems imparted to a great many, all persons of high dignity and much
prowess; for unto King Arthur at Caerleon in Monmoth-Shire resorted at one time
ten Kings, Caerleon more honored then any City of Britain.
and thirteen Earls, besides many Barons and other Knights of meaner quality.

As the conquests of the King were many, so was his bounty notable; for it is
written that unto his chief Scheneshal or Steward called Kay, he gave the
province of Avion, on his Butler Bedwere he bestowed Normandy, and to his Cozen
Berel, he granted the Duchy of Buriundy, and unto many other Lords and valiant
Knights he allotted other magnificent gifts according to their virtue.

Sir John Hayward, fol. 4. in Will. Conq.
Some are of opinion (the truth whereof I will not dispute) that this most
victorious King was not born in lawful wedlock; some make the like quere of
Alexander, others of Julius Caesar; many such have been brought into the World
to the great admiration and astonishment of Posterity; and that bastards should
inherit Kingdoms, Principalities and other Seigniories, it was no unusual
thing. Sir John Hayward writing the life of William the Conqueror, who is
commonly called William the bastard, tells us it was a general custom at that
time in France, that bastards did succeed even in dignities of highest degree
and condition, no otherwise then children lawful begotten. Thierry bastard of
Clovis had for his partage with the dutiful Children of the said Clovis, the
Kingdom of Austrasie now called Lowain; Sigisbert bastard to King Dagobert the
first had his part in the Kingdom of France with Clovis the twelfth, lawful
Son to Dagobert; Loys and Carloman bastards to King Loyis le Begue succeeded
after the death of their Father; so likewise in England, Alfride bastard Son to
Oswine, succeeded his Brother Egfride. So Adelstane the bastard Son of Edward
the Elder, succeeded his Father before Edmund and Eldred his younger Brothers,
notwithstanding they were lawfully begotten. So St. Edmund the Martyr bastard
Son to King Edgar, succeeded him in the state before Ethelbred his lawful
issue. Afterward Harold, surnamed Harefoot, bastard to Canutus, succeeded him
in the Kingdom before Hardi Canutus his lawful son. The like custom has been
observed in Spain, in Portugal, and in diverse other Countries. And it is
probable that this use was grounded upon often experience that bastards
(begotten in the highest heat and strength of affection) have many times been
men of excellent proof, both in courage and understanding; this was verified in
Hercules, Alexander the great, Romulus, Timotheus, Brutus, Themistocles,
Arthur; in Homer, Demosthenes, Bion, Bartholus, Gracian, Peter Lumbard, Peter
Comestor, John Andreas, and diverse of most flourishing name; but this custom
now concerning succession of bastards in Kingdoms, Royalties, and other
inheritances, is obsolete and quite abolished.

Concerning the Coronation of King Arthur, some Authors have written thus; the
appointed time of the solemnity approaching, The Coronation of King Arthur.
and all being ready assembled in the City of Caerleon, the Archbishops of
London and York, and in the City of Caerleon the Archbishop Dubrick, were
conveyed to the place with royal solemnity to Crown King Arthur. Dubritius
therefore because the Court lay within his Diocese, He was crowned at
Lanturnam an ancient Abbey, but now the house of St. Edward Morgan Baronet.
furnished him accordingly to perform and solemnize this charge in his own
person: The King being crowned was with all pomp brought to the Cathedral
Church of that Metropolitan See; on either hand of him, both right and left,
did the Archbishops support him, and four Kings, to wit, Angusell King of
Albania, Cadvall King of Venedotia, Cador Kings of Cornwall and Sater King of
Demetia, went before him, carrying four golden swords. The Companies also, and
concourse of sundry sorts of Officers played before him most melodious and
heavenly harmony.

On the other part the Queen was brought to the Church of professed St.
Julians, now the house of the Lord of Cherbery.
Nuns, being conducted and accompanied by Archbishops and Bishops, with her
arms and titles royally garnished; and the Queens consorts to the four Kings
aforesaid, carried before her, as the order and custom was, four white Doves
or Pigeons.

At a solemnity held by this renowned King upon the feast of Pentecost, which
was the usual day for the Knights of the Round-table to convene, a challenge
was brought to King Arthur from a King of Northwales, the Copy whereof was
given me by the right honorable Richard Lord Herbert of Cherbery and Castle
Island, unto whom it was presented by Dr. Johnson a grave and learned Physician
in Worcester, who had it from a Manuscript in the Library of the right
honorable Thomas Lord Windesore, which here I will insert for my Readers
recreation.

As it fell out upon a Pentecost day,
King Arthur at Camelot kept his Court Royal
With his fair Queen Gwinever the gay,
And many princes sitting in hall,
Hold Barons, Knights and Squires that day,
Ladies attired in purple and pall,
With Herehaughts in hewkes howling full high,
Cried Larges Larges, Chaveliers treshardie.
A doughty Dwarf to the uppermost Desk,
Boldly began prick kneeling on knee,
Said, King Arthur, God thee save; and see,
Sr. Reimes of North Gales greeteth well thee,
And bids thee anon thy Beard thou him send,
Else from thy jaws he will it off rend.
For his robe of State is a rich scarlet mantle,
With eleven Knights beards bordred about;
And there is room left yet in a Kantle
For thine to stand, to make the twelfth out;
This must be done, be thou never so stout.
This must be done, I tell thee no fable,
Maugre the teeth of all the round table.
When this mortal message from his mouth past,
The Kings fumed, the Queens scrich't, Ladies were aghast,
Princes pufft, Barons blusterd, Lords began to lower,
Knights stormed, Squires startled, like steeds in a Stower,
Pages and Yeomen yield out in the hall,
With that came in Sr. Kay the Seneschal.
Silence my Sovereign, quoth the courteous Knight,
And therewith all the stur began to still,
The Dwarfs dinner full deerly was dight
Of Wine, and wisely he had his fill,
An hundred pieces of fine coined Gold
Were given the Dwarf for his message bold.
But say to Sr. Rayns thou Dwarf quoth the King,
that for his bold message I him defy;
^or shortly I mean with Basins him to ring
^^t of North Gales where he and I
^ith swords and not rasors will quickly try
Whether he or K. Arthur will prove the best Barbor;
And therewith he struck his good sword Esculabor.
Concerning the mantle trimd with beards of Kings or Knights, Fol. 62.
Mr. Draiton in his Polialbion gives a hint, but something differing from the
preceding Relation; his lines are these; Then told how himself great Arthur did
advance,
To meet (with his Allies) the puissant force of France,
By Lucius thither led those Armies that while ere
Affrighted all the World, by him struck dead with fear.
The report of his great acts, that over Europe ran,
Is that most famous field which he with Emperor wan; This is but a Poetical
fancy; for Helena was never ravished.

As how great Rithout self be slew in his repair,
Who ravished Howels Niece, young Helena the fair;
And for a Trophie brought the Giants coat away,
Made of the beards of Kings; then bravely chaunted they
The several twelve picht fields he with the Saxons fought,
The certain day and place to memory they brought.
Then by false Mordreds hand how last he chanced to fall,
The hour of his decease, the place of burial.


These I have intermingled as Poets do interludes in the plays, setting Horace
his rules before me, Omne tulit punctum qui miscuit utile dulci.

Constantine.
Howes ut sup.
Constantine Kinsman to Arthur, and son to Cador Duke of Cornewal, was ordained
King of Britain, and reigned three years.

This man was by the two sons of Mordred grievously vexed, for they claimed the
land by the right of their father; But after many battails, they fled, the one
to London, the other to Winchester, which Cities they obtained, and took them.
But Constantine followed and subdued them, and gained the Cities. And one of
these young Lords he found in an Abbey at London, here he slew him near the
Altar, cruelly, and then buried him near Vter Pendragon at Stone-hedge: The
other brother was found at Winchester, where he was also slain, flying into the
Church of St. Amphibalus.

Aurelius Conanus a Britain raised mortal War against Constantine the King,
and afer sore fight, slew him in the field; after three years reign he was
buried at Stone-hedge.

Of this Constantine that seems to be meant, which holy Gildas writes in his
Book entitled De excidio Brittaniae, where, inveighing against the Rulers of
the Britains in his time, he writes thus;

Britain has Kings, but they be Tyrants: Judges it has, but they be wicked,
oft-times killing and harming the innocent people; revenging and defending; but
whom? such as be guilty persons and robbers; having many wives, but yet
breaking wedlock; oft-times swearing and yet forswearing themselves, vowing,
and for the more part lying warring; but maintaing civil and unjust war,
pursuing rude thieves that are abroad in the Country, and yet not only
cherishing those that sit even at table with them, but also highly rewarding
them; giving alms largely, but on the other part heaping up a mighty mount of
sins; sitting in the seat of sentence, but seldom seeking the rule of
righteous judgment, despising the humble and innocent persons, and exalting, so
far as in them lies, even up to the heavens, the bloody and proud murderers,
thieves and adulterers, yea the very express enemies of God, if he would so
permit, keeping many in prison, whom they oppress in loading them with Irons,
through craft, rather to serve their own purpose, then for any guilt of the
persons imprisoned; taking solemn oaths before the Altars, and shortly after
despising the same Altars as vile and filthy stones, of which heinous and
wicked offense Constantine the tyrannical whelp of the Lioness of Devonshire,
is not ignorant, who this year after the receiving of his dreadful oath,
whereby he bound himself, that in no wise he would hurt his subjects, (God
first, and then his oath, with the company of Saints and his mother being there
present) did notwithstanding in the reverent laps of the two mothers, as the
Church and their carnal mother, under the Coul of the holy Abbot, devour with
sword and spear instead of teeth, the tender sides yea and the entrails of two
Children of noble and Kingly race, and likewise of their two Governors, yea
and that (as said) among the sacred Altars: the arms of which persons so slain,
not stretched forth to defend themselves with weapons) (the which few in those
days handled more valiantly then they) but stretched forth I say to God, and
to his altar in the day of judgment, shall set up the ensigns of their
patience and faith at the gates of the City of Christ, which so have covered
the seat of the celestial sacrifice as it were with the red mantle of their
clottered blood.

And those things he did, not after any good deeds done by him, deserving
praise. For many years before overcome with the often and changeable filths of
adultery, forsaking his lawful Wife, contrary to the Laws of God, etc. he now
brought forth this Crime of killing his own Kinsman, and violating the Church;
but neither being loosed, or unbound from his former evils, he increases the
new with the old. Harpsfield cap. 22. fol. 36.


Thus in effect has Gildas written; it is to be noted that there were two
writers of eminency of that name; the one styled Albanius, the other Badonicus,
of whom Harpsfield thus relates his opinion, complaining first of the scarcity
of Scholars and learned men in Britain by reason of the Saxons cruelty and
persecution: Notwithstanding says he, there flourished eminent and worthy men
both in Scotland, Ireland, and that part of Britain, Gildas a B^ittain of
princely parentage.
which is now called Wales; whose acts as much as they concern the Welshmen,
living in foreign Countries or abiding here at home, we shall deliver unto you
as we have gathered them out of authentic and approved authors; it is
therefore most certainly written that this age brought forth among other
excellent and eminent men, two; both called Gildas; the one surnamed Albanius,
which was the Disciple of the great St. Patrick, and he born of princely or
regal parentage of the Britains; the other Badonious surnamed Sapiens the
wife. The first is much extolled for the nobleness of his birth, the great
pilgrimages which he undertook even to Rome it self, the better to enable his
soul in learning and virtue to oppose and beat down the Pelagian heresy, for
singular devotion and solitary life, for the severe and strict course of his
living and rare abstinence and fasting, thereby to bring under the wanton and
rebellious flesh, and make it obedient and subject to the spirit: in so much
that through his extreme fasting his face looked as though he had been in a
continual fever or ague; He fled and avoided all terrestial and earthly
negotiations, thereby to have his mind more free and ready to contemplate
celestial mysteries, to which frame and example of life he exhorted his
disciples with sweet and eloquent language: He is reported to have written the
Lives and acts of Germanus and Lupus (the which I wish to God were extant) he
lived and was an Inhabitant in a certain Island seated near the river Severne,
where also he died about the fourth of the Kalends of February DXV. His body
was carried to Glastenbury and there buried.

Gildas Badonicus, as he himself confesses, was born that year when the great
slaughter of the Saxons was at Badon, or Mons Badonicus, of which you have
heard before; he was of Bangor Monastery, Learned, Religious, and as much as
could be in those turbulent times eloquent, and a most free-spoken man,
inveighing without dread or fear (as may appear by his books) against the vices
both of the Clergy, Kings and Princes of his time; reproving them with evident
and convincing Text both out of sacred scripture and holy prophets; He
flourished, Anno. 580. About 300. or rather more years after, anther Guildas
appeared, who cloaked many ridiculous things in the name of this our Badonicus,
and as it were casting a mist before his readers eyes, vended centons of lies,
which he had forged upon the Anvile of Gaufride the Fable teller.

Aurelius Conanus.
After that Aurelius Conanus had slain Constantine, as in the British history
is mentioned, the same Conanus was made King of Britain, in the year of our
Lord 546. Holl^nshed ut supra.


This Aurelius Conanus as is recorded by some writers, was of a noble heart,
free and liberal, but addicted much to softer and boulster up strife and
contention among his Subjects, light of credit, and naturally had an open ear
to receive and hear the reports of such a accused others.

Moreover he was noted of cruelty, as one who took his Uncle, who in all right
and justice should have been King before him, and kept him in prison, securing
his person, and not so satisfied, slew in Tyrannical manner his two Sons. But
God would not suffer him long to enjoy a Crown purchased with so much blood;
for he died after he had ruled two years, leaving a son called Vortiporus which
accordig to the agreement of Authors succeeded him in the Kingdom.

Of this Aurelius Conanus, Gildas writes, calling unto him after he had made
an end with his Predecessor Constantine, in this wise saying, And thou Lions
whelp, as says the Prophet, Aurelius Conanus, what do thou? Art thou not
swallowed up in the filthy mire of murdering thy Kinsmen, of committing
fornications and adulteries, like to the other before mentioned, if not more
deadly, as it were with the waves and surges of the drenching sea, overwhelming
thee with her merciless rage? Do thou not in hating the peace of thy
Country, as a deadly serpent, and thirsting after civil wars and spoils
(oftentimes unjustly gotten) shut up against thy soul the gates of Celestial
peace and refreshment? thou being left alone as a withering tree in the midst
of the field; call to remembrance I pray thee, the vain youthful fantasy and
over-timely death of thy father and thy brethren; shall thou being set apart,
and chosen forth of all thy lineage, for thy Godly deserts be reserved to live
an hundred years, or remain on earth till thou be as old as Methusalem? No, No.

And after these Reprehensions with further Threatening of Gods Vengeance, he
exhorts him to amendment of Life.

Howes says, that this King reigned thirty three years, for which he cites
Flores Historiarum: But Fabian agrees with Hollenshed, allowing only two
years, and cites Gaufrid.

The Kingdom of Northumberland, began first in Britain, under a Saxon named
Ida, about this time.

Vorliporus.
Vorliporus, the Son of Aurelius Conanus, succeeded his Father, and began to
Reign over the Britains, in the Year of our Lord 576.

This Vorliporus vanquished the Saxons in Battle, as the British Histories
record, and valiantly defended his Land and Subjects the Britains, from the
Danger of them and their Alleyes: In the time of this King's Reign, Ella began
to Reign in the South part of the Kingdom of Northumberland, called Peira,
according to the Account of some Writers, who also take this Vorliporus to
begin his Reign in the Year 548. Finally, after that Vorliporus had ruled the
Britains the space of four years, he departed this Life, leaving no Issue
behind him to succeed him in the Kindome. Against whom also Gildas turning his
Pen, begins with him thus. And, why stand thou as one quite amazed? Thou,
I say Vortiporus, the Tyrant of South Wales, like to the Panther in Manners,
and Wickedness, diversely spotted as it were with many Colors, with thy hoar
head in thy Throne, full of Deceits, Crafts, and Wiles, and defiled even from
the lowest part of thy Body to the Crown of the Head, with diverse and sundry
Murders committed in thine own Kind, and filthy Adulteries: Thus proving a
naughty Son of a good King, as Manusses was of Ezekias, How chances it that
the violent streams of sins, which thou swallowllest up like pleasant Wine, or
rather art devoured of them (the end of thy Life, by little, and little, now
drawing near) cannot yet satisfy thee.

What meanest thou, that with Fornication of all Evils as it were the full
Heap, thine own Wife being put away, and by her honest Death, thou do oppress
thy Soul with a certain Burden that cannot be avoided, of thy own un-shamefac'd
Daughter! consume not I pray thee the Residue of thy Days to the Offense of
God, Hollenshed in Vorliporus,
etc.

Thus Hollenshed out of Gildas.

Fabian in Vorliporus.
Fabian writing of this King, says, Of which is little left in any Chronicle,
except that Guido testifying him to be a victorious Knight; showing briefly,
that in sundry Battles, he discomfited the Saxons, and defended the Land and
Britains from the Danger of them, and other their Allies.

Howes in eodem.
Howes calls him a vicious King, and a Tyrant, who put from him his Wife, and
kept her Daughter for his Concubine.

Harpesfield having spoken of several Saintly men, and great Scholars in the
Reign of former Kings, continuing his History, says, After whom, other famous
and learned Britains are not to be forgotten; I mean Thelianus, Daniel,
Petrocius, Kentegernus, Sampson, Cadocus, with others: Thelianus born of an
Illustrious and Princely Offspring, yet more illustrated his Family by his own
most resplendent Virtues; he was first Disciple to Dubritius, Bishop of
Landaff, and afterward, together with Saint David to Paulinus. So strict was
the Amity betwixt him and David, that they were esteemed the most admirable
Pair of Friends of that time; For the wonderful Luster of his Virtue, and
Sanctity he was commonly called (...) (i. e.) The Sun; from whence by
Corruption, instead of Elios, he is usually called Elive. He succeeded
Dubritius in the Episcopal Dignity of Landaff, where after the leading of a
most holy Life, he rendered his blessed Soul into the hands of his Creator, in
the Ides of February, in the Reign of Vorliporus, Anno 540.

Daniel, famous both for Learning and Virtue, associated himself with Dubritius
and David, for Extirpation of the cursed Poison of the Pelagian Heresy, and
founded that Renowned College of Acaon, in the province of North Wales, which
is now the Bishopprick of Bangor, where he was the first Bishop, and flourished
until the year 560. under Vortiporus. There is a certain Island in Wales,
which the Cambrians or Welshm^n, Scots, and English, call Bardsey, in which
they say, not only the Body of this Daniel, but of diverse other Saints
likewise are interred; neither want Authors, who affirm, that for the sakes of
those Saints there buried, the Inhabitants of that Isle live extremely long,
even to the most decrepid Age that can be imagined. Who so desires to have
further Satisfaction concerning the Renowned Britains, in this Kings Reign,
let him read Harpsfield in the first six Ages, c. 27.

Malgo Conanus.
Malgo Pulcher Conanus of North Wales, began his Reign over the Britains, and
continued his Reign five years.

This Malgo was in proportion of body, Hour fol. 56.
greater then any of the Kings or Dukes of Britain, but he delighted in the
foul sin of Sodomy, he slew his first Wife, and then took to Wife his own
Brothers Daughter.

This Malgo (says Hollenshed) is reported to have been the comeliest Gentleman
in beauty and shape of Personage, Hollenshed 147. in Malgo.
that was to be found in those days among all the Britains, and therewith of
a bold and hardy courage; he manfully defended the Country which he had in
Government from the malice of the Saxons, and subdued the out Isles, as Orkney,
and others; but notwithstanding the Noble Qualities with which his person was
adorned, yet he spotted them all with the foul sin of Sodomy, so that he fell
into hatred with Almighty God, and being pursued of the Saxons, received many
Overthrows at their hands, as by the Report of the English Writers is gathered
more at large: Finally, when he had reigned five years and odd Months, he
departed this Life.

It seems that this Malgo is named by Gildas Maglocunus, which Gildas, before
he speaks of him, inveigheth against one Cuneglasus, whom he reproves, for
that he warred both against God and Man; against God with grievous sins, as
namely. Adultery in forsaking the Company of his lawful Wife, and keeping to
Concubine a Sister of hers, that had professed chastity: and against man with
material Armor and Weapons, which he used to the Destruction of his own
countrymen, with whom he kept Wars, and not against the Enemies of the
Commonwealth.

From Cuneglasus he comes to the foresaid Maglocune, whom he names The Dragon
of the Isles, and the Expeller of many Tyrants, not only out of their
Kindomes, but also out of Life, the last of whom he entreats as himself
says, but the first in all Mischief, and Evil, greater then many in Power,
and likewise in Malice; right liberal in giving, and more plentiful in sin,
strong and valiant in Arms, but stronger in Destruction of his own Soul; and so
proceeding, charge him with the sin of the Sodomites, and sore blames him
for that whereas it had pleased God to make him higher then all other
Chieftains of his Kindome, he did not show himself better, but contrarily worse
then they by far, in manners and conditions. He declares also a little after,
that this Maglocune in his younger years, slew in Battle his Uncle being King,
with the most valiant Soldiers in a manner that he had.

Also, that whereas the said Maglocune took upon him the profession of a Monk,
he after renounced the same, and became a worse Liver then ever he was before,
abandoning his Wife, and keeping his Brothers Sons Wife, whilst her Husband was
yet living.

Thus, by that which Gildas writes of the Kings and Rulers of Britain, which
lived in his days, ye may perceive that they were given to all manner of
Wickedness, and namely to civil Dissension, Rapine, Adultery, and Fornication;
so that it may be thought, that God stirred up the Saxons to be a scourge to
them, and to work his just Vengeance upon them for their wicked and abominable
Offenses daily committed against his Divine Majesty; so that we find recorded
by Writers, how that the Saxons in diverse conflicts against the Britains, had
the better, and also took from them diverse Towns, as has been partly already,
and shall hereafter be made manifest.

Fabian tells us, Fab. fol. 99.
that Malgo in his later days being oppressed and pursued by his Enemies,
lastly dyed, when he had reigned thirty five years, whereas other Authors
allow only five.

Careticus.
Careticus took upon him the rule and Government of the Britains; this man
loved civil War, and was odible both to God and his Subjects; They moved the
Saxons (being accompanied with Gurmundus King of Ireland) to make war upon
Careticus in such wise that he was feign to take the Town of Cicester, where
they assaulted him, and fired the Town by tying fire to the wings of Sparrows,
that he with his men fled from thence into Wales, by which means he left a
great part of his Dominion, and ended his life when he had reigned three years.

In the month of August there happened great Earthquakes, and presently followed
a most grievous pestilence, with extreme great scabs and botches upon the
People, Earthquakes and Pestilence.

The three Archbishops of Britain at once in Wales.


so as it was hard to discern one man from another.

Gurmumd the Irish King burned up the Land of the Britains, from Sea to Sea;
and the more part of that Isle called Leogrea, he gave to the Saxons: The
Britains gave place, and came into Wales, and the West parts of Cornwall;
Theanus Archbishop of London, and Theodocus Archbishop of York, when their
Churches were all destroyed to the Ground, they with their Clergy fled into
Wales, and many of them into little Britain; This Plague fell upon the
Britains for their Covetousness, Rapine, and Lechery. Gurmund builded
Gurmund-Chester.

Harpsfield speaking of these Evils committed by the Britains, in his seventh
Age, says, Incurrebant itaque primo in patriam barbari, etc. This barbarous
destruction fell first upon this Country 449. an evil so great and terrible,
that it is beyond Expression; yet was it courted and invited hither, I say, by
the grievous and enormous sins, and wickedness of the Princes, Priests, and
People, justly provoking the Divine Justice, to take a speedy and sharp Revenge
of their Iniquities: and to lay more load upon their own shoulders,
overburdened already with sin, they send for the Saxons, a Nation, not only
void of, but even hating the very Name, and Faith of Christian Religion; a
crime so odious, as the like in former times was never heard of; a Nation
Christian, yea and renowned for their Faith, and Christianity, not to seek and
implore the help and protection of that infinitely good and omnipotent God; but
to invoke the assistance of Pagans, Miscreants, and Idolaters: Humiliations,
Prayers, and Repentance, had they wisely considered, had been far better means
to withstand their Enemies: He that reads Antiquities, shall find many
Desolations to have happened unto Christians, by seeking aid and joining with
Infidels. In this very seventh Age was Spain upon like pretenses, overrun by
the Saracons, and in our great great Grandfathers time, Constantionople; and
since that, a great part of Hungary by the Turks.

Had Vortiger either read, or well considered the Scriptures, who was the
principal Author of sending for the Saxons, he might have seen an Example
sufficient to have deterred him, in Ezekias, a Prince otherways even by Divine
approbation to be commended who (indiscreetly showing his Treasures to the
Ambassadors of the profane King of Babylon) heard that heavy sentence from
the Prophet, that not only himself, but also those Treasures and all his people
should be transported, Osee 5.13. and sequ.
and led captive thither. He might likewise have reduced unto his Memory that
of the Prophet Osee, And Ephraim saw his Sickness, and Judah his Band, and
Ephraim went to Ashur, and sent to the King a Messenger: and he shall not be
able to heal you, neither shall he be able to loose the Band from you. And
again, They invocated Egypt, they went to the Assyrians, and when they shall
go forth, I will spread my Net upon them; as a fo^l of the Heaven I will pluck
them down, Osee 7.11. sequ.
I will beat them according to the hearing of their Assemblies: Woe be to them
because they have revolted from me, they shall be wasted because they have
prevaricated against me, and I redeemed them, and they have spoken lies against
me, and they have not cried to me in their heart, but they howled in their
Chambers, upon Wheat and Wine they chewed their Cud, they are revolted from
me. And presently the Prophet adds, Their Princes shall fall by the Sword for
the fury of their Tongue. And what befell to the Israelites from the Egyptians
and Assyrians, upon whose help they relied and depended; the same befell to
miserable Vortiger and his posterity, by the Saxons, who in a short time became
most eager and spiteful Enemies, turning the Edges of their Swords against the
Throats of the most deplorable Britains, which had hired them to protect them
against the Picts and Scots.

Things being brought into this miserable state and condition, had no other
remedy but a hearty contrition and cordial Repentance, and an humble
application of our selves to the mercies of Almighty God; but Vortiger was so
far from such celestial and divine meditation, that he did not only deprave
the whole Commonwealth with sloth, Idleness, and corrupt living, but wallowed
himself in the filth and mire of all voluptuousness, and carnality, insomuch
that had not he himself invited in the Saxons, the just anger and indignation
of the most holy One, would have sent either them or some other more cruel and
barbarous people to chastise the enormous, hideous, and crying sins of that
Nation. Shame and modesty to offend chaste and Christian Ears, forbids to speak
the crimes of that Age; nothing will serve his turn but the lascivious
embraces, and incenstuous bed of his own Daughter; neither was this wicked
Adulterer content herewith, but becomes a Traitor even to sacred and Christian
Wedlock, taking Roxana a Pagan Miscreant into his Bed, palliating the villainy
with the Title of Wife, his former Lady being yet living.

These things though they may seem incredible, yet are left unto us recorded by
Authors without exception, and are made evidently clear unto us, by the wicked
lives of the Princes and people which followed in succeeding ages; who even
when the Barbarians had engrossed the greatest part of the Island, yet sought
out a remote corner, whereas they imagined they might freely and securely sin;
where no ear was lent to Truth and Verity, while Lying, Adulation, Detraction
and Flattery were esteemed Virtues; where Fornication found such Entertainment
as was never heard of, even among the Gentiles: The Princes, Prelates, and
People, neglected their Duties toward God, the Princes polluting all places
with filthy fornication, Bigamy, and unlawful Marriages, Eyes Perju^^es,
pilling, plundering the Religious, placing the wicked and impious in the
chiefest seats of honor, wresting the Law to their own sense, and will
profaning sacred vows, and religious Temples and Altars. Among these
irreligious Princes, one was Constantine the Successor of that renowned
Arthur, who before the holy Altars against all Religion and piety vilanously
murdered the two princely brothers, and then to heap sin upon sin, putting away
his lawful wife, he made himself infamous, by his wicked adultery. Aurelius
Conanus, and Vortipor came not much short of him in wickedness. Magoclunus an
homicide of his own Uncle, turns away his lawful wife, and takes her Niece
into his bed, who had consecrated and vowed her widdowhood to perpetual
chastity. These foul crimes he might perchance have expiated, had he not cast
aside perfidiously that monastic calling and habit, which, pricked by the sting
of a branded conscience, he had taken upon him to do penance and make
satisfaction for his former lewd living: but casting that aside, he seemed with
his coule, or hood and habit, to cast away also all shame and feeling of piety
and religion, and humanity it self; much more Gildas sets down, which drew
upon the British Nation the just vengeance which almighty God poured down upon
them.

Cadwane
Cadwane Duke of Northwales was made Sovereign of the Britains, Howes fol. 56.
who gave strong battle to Ethelfred King of Northumberland, and forced him to
entreat for peace: After which concord being made, they continued all their
life time loving friends; he reigned twenty two years.

The Kingdom of the East Saxons began under Ercheminus about the year of Christ
614.

The Kingdom of Mercia or middle England, began under Penda 626.

Hollenshed also says that he reigned 22 years (though, says he, some allow
but 13) and was slain by the Northumbers.

Cadwallin.
Cadwallin the son of Cadwane ruled over the Britains; How. fol. 56. b. St.
Martins in London by the Britains.
he warred strongly upon the Saxons, and made Penda King of Mercia tributary to
him. He reigned 48 years, and was buried in London, in the Church of St.
Martine near unto Ludgate, which Church was then new-founded and builded by the
Britains, in anno 677.

An other Author makes a longer relation of this Kings reign, Holl. fol. 166.
Edwin was not son to Ethelfred, but to Alla or Ella.
and tells us that Cadwallo (for so he calls him) and Edwin the son of
Ethelfred were brought up in France, being sent thither unto Solomon King of
Britain by Cadwane, when they were very young; (for this he cites Gaufred) and
that after their return into this land, when they were made Kings, Cadwall of
the Britains, and Edwin of the Northumbers, there continued for the space of
two years great friendship betwixt them, till at lenghth Edwin required of
Cadwall that he might wear a Crown, and celebrate appointed solemnities within
his dominion of Northumberland, as well as Cadwall did in his Country. Cadwall
taking advice in this matter, at length by the persuasion of his Nephew Brian,
he denied to grant unto Edwin his request; wherewith Edwin took such
displeasure, that he sent word unto Cadwall that he would be crowned without
his license, since he would not willingly give it; whereunto Cadwall answered,
that if he did so, he would cut off his head under his Diadem, if he presumed
to wear any within the confines of Britany. Hereupon discord arising betwixt
these two princes, they began to make fierce and cruel war, each of them
against the other, and at length joining in battle with their main armies,
Cadwall lost the field, with many thousands of his men, and being chased, fled
into Scotland, and from thence got over into Ireland, and finally passed over
the seas into Britain the less, called Armorica, where of his cofin King
Solomon he was courteously received, and at length obtained of him ten thousand
men to go with him back into his Country, to assist him in recovering his lands
and dominions, the which in the mean time were cruelly spoiled, wasted and
plundered by K. Edwin.

The same time Brian the Nephew of Cadwall, whom he had sent into Brittanie a
little before, to kill a certain Wisard or Southsayer, whom K. Edwin had gotten
out of Spain, named Pelitus, who by disclosing the purpose of Cadwall unto
Edwin, greatly impeached Cadwals designs, he fortified the City of Exceter,
meaning to defend it till the coming of Cadwall: whereupon Penda King of Mercia
besieged that City with a mighty army purposing to take it and Brian within it.
Cadwall advertised hereof, immediately after his arrival hasted toward
Exceter, and dividing his people into four parts set upon his enemies, and took
Penda, and overthrew his whole army. Penda having no other shifs to escape,
submitted himself wholly unto Cadwall, promising to become his liegeman, and to
fight against the Saxons in his quarrel. And this Penda being subdued, Cadwall
called his Nobles together, which had been dispersed abroad a long time, and
with all speed went against Edwin King of Northumberland, and slew him in
battle at Hatfield with his son Osfride, and Godbold King of the Isles of
Ockney, who was come thither to his aid.

By this it should appear that Fabian has gathered amiss in the account of the
reigns of the British Kings; for it appears by Beda and others, that Edwin
was slain in the year of our Lord 634.

And whereas Fabian attributes that act and diverse others unto Cadwan father
of Cadwall, yet both Galmon and Beda. with the most part of all other writers,
say that it was done by Cadwall.

Hollenshed ut sup.
Harding assigns but 13 years to the reign of Cadwall, and declares that he
died in the year of our Lord 606. in the which year, as he says, Cadwall began
his reign, which opinion seems best to agree with that which is set down by
others.

But to return to Cadwall and his acts, as we find them recorded by the
British writers; After he had got this victory against the Northumbers, he
cruelly pursued the Saxons, as though he meant, so far as in him lay, to
destroy the whole race of them out of the land of Britain; and sending Penda
against King Oswald, who succeeded Edwin, though at the first Penda received
the overthrow at Havenfield, yet afterward Cadwall himself, highly displeased
with that chance, King Oswald slain.
pursued Oswald, and fought with him at a place called Bourne, where Penda slew
the said Oswald.

After that Oswald was slain, his brother Osunus succeeded him in the
government of the Northumbers, and sought the favor of Cadwall now ruling as
King over all Brittanie, and at length by great gifts of gold and silver, and
upon his humble submission, he obtained peace, till at length upon disgust,
Penda obtained leave of Cadwall to make wars against the said Osunus, in with
Penda himself was slain.

Then Cadwal granted, after the space of two years, Vlfridus the son of Penda
should succeed in the Kingdom of Mertia: Cadwall absolute Prince of all
Britain.
and thus Cadwall ruled things after his own will and pleasure; and finally
when he had reigned, as before is said, as years, he departed this life the
22d. of November.

His body being embalmed and dressed with sweet confections, was put in a
brazen Image, by mervalous art melted and cast, the which being set on a brazen
horse of excellent beauty, the Britains erected aloft upon the West gate of
London called Ludgate, in sign of his victorious conquests, and for a terror to
the Saxons.

Cadwallader
Cadwallader, the last King of the Britains, descending from the Noble race of
the Trojans, by extreme plagues of death and famine was driven to forsake this
his native Country and Kingdom, and to sojourne with a great number of his
Nobles and Subjects, with his Cousin Alan King of Little Britain, which is
called in the British tongue Lhydaw. Of the first inhabiting of this place by
the Britains, we have already spoken.

Conon of Meriadoc, now Denbighland, in the year of Grace 384. was the first
Prince of the British blood in Armorica or Little Britain: the second was 2.
Graldonus. 3. Solomon I. The names of the Kings of little Britain
4. Auldranus. 5. Budicus I. 6. Howellus Magnus. This Howel was with King Arthur
in his wars. 7. Howellus II. 8. Alanus I. 9. Howellus III. 10. Gilquellus. 11.
Solomon II. 12. Alanus II. Of whom mentions is made in this place, who
descended of a daughter of Rune the son of Mailgon Gwyneth King of Great
Britain, who was married to the forenamed Howel II King of Little Britain.
13. Conobertus. 14. Budicus II. 15. Theodoricus. 16. Rualhonus. 17. Daniel
Dremrost, (i. e.) with the red face. 18. Aregstanus. 19. Maconus. 20.
Neomenius. 21. Haruspagius. 22. Solomon III, Who was slain by his own men, and
then was that Kingdom turned into an Earldom, whereof Alen was the first Earl,
who valiantly resisted the Normans, and vanquished them often: at last it was a
Dukedom.


Cadwallader bein in Britain, was certified that a great number of strangers,
as Saxons, Angles, and Juthes had arrived in great Britain, and finding it
desolate, and without inhabitants, saving a few Saxons, who had called them in,
and certain poor Britains, who lived by roots in Rocks and Woods, had overrun
a great part thereof, and dividing it into Territories and Kingdoms, inhabited
that part which was then, and yet at this day by the Welsh, who are the ancient
Britains, called Lhoyger and in English England, with all the Cities, Towns,
Castles and Villages, which the Britains had builded, ruled, and inhabited by
the space of 1827. years under diverse Kings and Princes of great renown;
whereupon he purposed to return, and by strength of British Knights to recover
his own Land again.

After he had prepared and made ready his Navy for the transporting of his own
men, with such succors as he had found at Alan's hand, an Angel appeared to
him in a Vision, and declared that it was the will of God that he should not
take his voyage toward Britain, but to Rome to Pope Sergius, where he should
end his life, and be afterward numbered among the blessed. Which vision after
that Cadwallader had declared to his friend Alan, he sent for all his books of
prophesies, as the works of both Merdhines or Merlins, to wit, Ambrose, and
Sylvester surnamed Merdhin Wylht, and the words which the Eagle spoke at the
building of Caer Septon, to be now come, whereof they had prophesied. To this
very day the Welsh, the very real offspring of the Britains, are much addicted
unto prophesies, and so confident, that out of their old books (I know some my
self, and those of good quality) they doubt not to tell you things to come; but
those prophesies are never discerned to have come to pass till it be too late,
as in Ragland Castle in Monmothshire, and others, which it concerns me not to
speak of.

Alan upon the relation of Cadwallader his vision or dream, counseled him to
fulfill the will of God, who did so, and taking his journey to Rome, lived
there eight years in the service of God, and dyed in the year of Christ 688. So
that the Britains ruled this Isle, with the out-Isles of Wight, Mon in English
called Anglesey, Manaw, in English Man, Orkney and Ewyst, 1137. years before
Christ, until the year of his Incarnation 688. and thus ended the rule of the
Britains over the whole Isle.

This glorious King bore for his arms, Azure a cross firmie fitched, Or. He
slew Lothayre King of Kent, and Aethelwald King of the South Saxons.

Ivor the son of Alan.
After Cadwallader had taken his journey toward Rome, Gerard Leigh in his
accidence of armory. fol. 33.
leaving his son named Edwal the Roo and his people with his Cousin Alan, which
Alan taking courage to him and not despairing of the conquest of Britain,
manned his ships as well with a great number of his own people, as with those
which Cadwallader had brought with him, and appointed Ivor his son and Inyr his
Nephew to be leaders and chieftains of the same, who sailing over the narrow
seas, landed in the West parts of Britain; of whose arrival when the Saxons
were certified, they gathered a great Army, and gave Ivor battle, where they
were put to flight, and lost a great number of their people, and Ivor wan the
Countries of Cornwall, Devonshire and Somersetshire, and peopled them with
Britains.

Whereupon Kentwinus King of West-Sex gathered a great number of Saxons and
Angles together, and came against the Britains, which were ready to abide the
battle; and as the armies were both in sight, they were not very desirous to
fight, but fell to a composition, and agreement, that Ivor should take
Ethelburga to wife who was Cofin to Kentwin, and quietly enjoy all that he had
during the reign of Ivor.

This Ivor is he whom our English Chronicles call Ive or Jew, King of West
Saxons, H. Lhoyd.
that reigned after Cedwel, and they say that he was a Saxon; for Kentwin
reigned full five years after Ivors coming into England, and after him his
Nephew Cedwel, who after he had reigned over the west Saxons two years, went to
Rome, and left his Kingdom to Ive his Cousin. This Ive or Ivor whom the
Britains call the son of Alan, and the Saxons the son of Kenred, being King of
the Saxons and Britains which inhabited the West parts of Britain, after many
victories atchived against the Kings of Kent, Southsex and Mercia, left his
Kingdom to Adelred, or as some call him, Adelerdus his Cousin, and took his
journey to Rome, where he made a godly end, about the year of our Lord seven
hundred and twenty.

Roderike or Rodri, the Son of Edwal Yworch.
Roderike over the Britains began his reign Anno. 720. against whom Adelred
King of the West Saxons, raised a great Army, and destroying the Country of
Devonshire, The Britains victorious against the Saxons in three battails
entered Cornwall, where Roderike with the Britains, gave him battle, in with
the Britains had the victory over the Saxons; the year after the Britains
obtained two other victories over the Saxons; one in Northwales at a place
called Garth Maelawc, and an other in Southwales at Pencoed. At this time Belin
the Son of Elphin a noble Man among the Britains died.

Ethelbaldus King of Mercia desirous to annex the fertile soil of the Country
lying between Severn and Wye, to his own Kingdom, gathered an Army, and entered
into Wales; A battle near Abergevenny.
and destroying all before him, he came to the Mountain Carno, not far from
Abergevenny, where a sore battle was fought between him and the Britains,
Anno seven hundred twenty eight.

This Mercian King called to his aid Adelard King of the West Saxons, and gave
battle to the Britains, where after a long and terrible conflict he obtained
a bloody victory.

And the next year after he gave the Britains an other overthrow, and then
departed this life.

About this time died Theodor the Son of Belin, a Man of great estimation among
the Britains. Not long after, there was a great battle fought betwixt the
Britains and the Picts, at a place called Magedawc, where the King of the
Picts was slain.

About this time Rodri or Roderike Molwynoc, was driven by the Saxons to
forsake the West Country, and to come to seek his own inheritance in
Northwales, where ruled at that time the Children of Bletius or Bledericus
Prince of Cornwall and Devonshire (who was one of them that gave Adelred and
Ethelbert the overthrow at Bangor upon the River De) and enjoyed the Government
of Northwales, ever since Cadvan was chosen King of Britain until this time.

Powels Chronic. fol. 16.
By this history it should seem (says my Author) that the Britains continued
their Government in the West part of Lhoegria until this time. But surely the
consent in a manner of all writers is, that the British Kingdom ended in
Cadwalader, after whom the Britains had nothing to do beyond Severne, being
constrained to keep themselves within the Countries of Cambria and Cornubia. It
is also written by diverse, that Ivor and Inir at their first arriving in
Britain were expelled by the Saxons, and driven into Wales, where Ivor ruled
as Prince many years, whom this Rodri, the Son of Edwal, the Son of Cadwalader
succeeded.

When Rodri or Roderike the King of the Britains, had reigned above 30.
years, he died, leaving two Sons after him, Conan Tindaythwy, and Howel.

Conan Tindaythwy the Son of Roderike.
Conan Tindaythwy began his reign over the Britains, Anno Domini 755. About
two years after there was a great battle fought at Hereford between the
Britains and the Saxons, where Dyfnwal the Son of Theodor was slain.

Jo. Castorius
In the year 776 the men of Southwales destroyed a great part of Mercia with
fire and sword, and the summer following, all the Welshmen gathered together
and entered the Kingdom of Mercia and did much harm.

The Saxons which bordered upon the Country of Cambria, or Wales, did daily
encroach upon the Lands of the Welshmen beyond Severn, especially toward the
South part of the Country. Wherefore the natives put themselves in armor, and
set upon the Saxons, and chased them over Severn again, and then returned home
with great prey and booty; and thus they did oftentimes, killing and destroying
all before them, and always bringing home with them much Cattle, which thing
caused Offa to conclude a peace with other Saxon Kings, and to bend his whole
force against the Welshmen.

Whereupon Offa King of Mercia, caused a great ditch to be made, large and
deep, from Sea to Sea, Powel. John Castor Math. West.
betwixt his Kingdom and Wales, whereby he might the better defend his Country
from the incursions of the Welshmen. And this ditch is to be seen in many
places as yet, and is called Clawdh Offa, Viz. Offa's ditch at this day.

Offa's ditch. Shrewsbury the ancient Court of the Welsh Princes of Powys.
After Offa had made this deep ditch, and chased the Welshmen from the plain
Countries unto the Woods and Mountains, the seat of the Kings of Powys was
translated from Pengweru, now called Salop or Shrewsbury, to Marthrual where it
continued long after.

About the year 795 there was a battle fought at Ruthlan, between the Saxons
and the Welshmen, where Caradoc King of Northwales was slain. This Carodoc was
the son of Gwin the son of Golhoyn the son of Ednowen the son of Blethin the
son of Bletius or Cledericus Prince of Cornwall and Devonshire.

Nole.
In the year 800. died Arthen the son of Sitsylth the son of Clydawc King of
Cardigan, and Run King of Dinet, and Kadelch King of Powis died in the year 808.

This was a troublesome time, and as yet no staid government in Wales, and
therefore such as were chief Lords in any country, were called Kings.

In the year 810. the Moon was Ecclipsed on Christmas day, and the same year
St. David's was burnt by the Saxons. There was also a general murrain and death
of Cattle throughout all Wales; the next year ensuing Owen the son of Meredith
the son o^ Terudos died, and the Castle of Degaunwy was destroyed with thunder.
Conan Prince of Wales and his brother Howel fell at variance, in so much that
they tried the matter by battle, wherein Howel had the victory.

This Howel the brother of Conan King or Prince of Northwales, did claim the
Isle of Mon or Anglesey for part of his fathers inheritance, which Conan
refused to give him, and thereupon they fell at variance, and consequently to
make war the one against the other.

The next year there was much hurt done by thunder in diverse places, many
houses burnt to the earth. The same year dyed Gruffith the son of Run, and
Griffri the son of Kyngen was slain by the treason of Elico his brother.

Howel gave his brother Conan another battle, and slew a great number of his
people, whereupon Conan levied an army in the year 817, and chased his brother
Howel out of Anglesey, compelling him to fly into Man. And a little after died
Conan, chief King of the Britains or Welshmen, leaving behind him a daughter
called Esylht, who was married to a Noble man called Mervin Vrich the son of
Gwyriad or Vriet the son of Elidur, and so forth in the right line to Belinus
the brother of Brennus King of the Britains, and his mother was Nest the
daughter of Cadelth King of Powis, the son of Brochwel Yscithroc, that fought
with the Saxons at Bangor, who was Prince of Powis.

This Brochwel is called by the Latin writers Brecinellus and Brochmaelus, of
whom, Galfride J. Cast. Math. West. Mr. Powel fol. 22.
says Mr Powel, I find thus written in Historia Divae Monacellae.

Fuit olim in Powisia quidam princeps illustrissimus nomine Brochwel Yscithroc,
Consul Legecestriae, qui in Vrbe tunc temporis Pengwern Powis, nunc vero
Salopia dicta est, habitabat, cujus domicilium seu habitaculum ibi steterat,
ubi Collegium Divi Ceddae nunc situm est.

That is,

There was sometimes in Powis a Noble Prince named Brochwel Yscithroc, Consul
or Earl of Chester, who dwelt in a town then called Pengwern Powis, and now
Salop, whose dwelling house was in the very same place where the College of
St. Chad now stands: This man with Cadvan King of Britain, Morgan King of
Demetia, and Bledericus King of Cornwall, gave an overthrow to Ethelfred King
of Northumberland, upon the river Dee, an. 617. of whom the Ancestors of
diverse in Wales living at this day, are known (by ancient books and records) to
have descended.

Mervin Vrich and Esylht the Daughter of Conan.
The first year of the reign of Mervin Vrich and Esylht his wife Egbert King of
the Saxons entered into Wales with a great and puissant army, and destroyed
the whole Country unto Snowden hills, and seized into his hands the Country of
Rhyvonioc in Denbighshire.

About this time there was a great battle fought in Anglesey, called the
battle of Lhanvaes.

In this year being the 819. ab incarnatione, 819.
Kenulph King of Mercia destroyed West Wales, and the Summer following he
overcame Powis land, and did much hurt, and after died, and Kenelme reigned in
his place.

About the same year also Howel King of Man died; much about this time, 828.
a great battle was fought at a place called Gavelford betwixt the Britains
and the West Saxons of Devonshire, and many thousands cruelly slain upon
either side, the victory being uncertain.

In or about the year 836. the Danes landed in West Wales, and so passing
through Wales into England with many of the Britains which joined with them,
against Egbert, but they were all overthrown by Egbert at Hengistdown, who died
the year following.

In the year 841. died Edwalhan a noble man of Wales. And two years after was
the battle of Kettel betwixt Burchard King of Mercia and the Brittans, where
in as some do write, 841.
Mervin Vrich King of the Britains was slain, leaving behind him a son called
Rodri Maur, that is to say Roderick the great, from Rodri, by his son Anarawd,
who bore for his arms Or, three Lions passant Gules; Mervin, whose coat was
Or, a Lion rampant Gules, and Cadel who took for his arms Gules, a Lion Ramp.
within a border engraled Or; the worshipful and flourishing families of the
Morgans in Monmothshire, who to this day quarter the two last coats, by matches
and coheirs are rightly descended; of which line William Morgan of Lantarnam
Esquire who married Lady Frances daughter to the Earl of Worcester, derived his
pedigree, leaving issue Sr Edward Morgan first Baronet of that lineage (father
to Sr. Edward Morgan Baronet, now living) Henry Morgan, and Winefred Wife to
Percy Enderbid, Compiler of this book.

Roderike the Great.
Roderike the great began his reign over Wales the year after Christ his
incarnation 843. This Prince divided all Wales into the three territories of
Aberstraw, Dinivour, The description of Wales by Sr. John Price Knight and Hump.
Lhoyd Gent.
and Mathraval. But before we proceed any further, be pleased to read over the
description of Cambria now called Wales, drawn first by Sir John Price Knight,
and afterward augmented and made perfect by Humphrey Lhoyd, Gent.

Forasmuch as it is necessary for the understanding of the Welsh history, to
know the perfect description of the Country of Wales, to the end the acts
achieved and done, may the better be known, I thought good somewhat to travail
therein, and so to lay down the same as it was in those days, and as it is
now, that the Reader may by conference of both times, the better understand,
both what has passed from the time of Cadwalader, and what hereafter is to
ensue.

Therefore after the three Sons of Brutus had divided the whole Isle of
Britain into three parts, that part contained within the French Seas, with the
Rivers of Severn (called in British Hafern) Dee and Humber fell to the eldest
Son Locrinus, which was after his name called Lhoyger, which name it has in
the British Tongue to this day, but in English called England, and is
augmented Northward to the River Tweed. The second Son, (or as some say the
third) Albanactus, had all the Land Northward from Humber to the Sea Orkney,
called in the British Tongue Norweryth, and in Latin Mare Calidonium. The
third Son Camber, (or rather the second) had for his part that remained
undivided, lying within the Spanish and Irish Seas, and separated from England
by the Rivers Severn and Dee, part was after his name called Cambria, and the
Inhabitants thereof Cambri, and their Language Camberaec, and so are at this
day, so that they have kept the same Country and Language this 2690. years and
above (says this Author, when that Chronicle was printed which bears no date)
without commixtion with any other Nation, especially in North Wales.

And because the name of the Country is changed, or rather mistaken by the
inhabitants of England, and not by them called Cambry but Wales, I think it
necessary to declare the occasion thereof, which is, That whereas the Saxons, a
people of Germany, were the first that after the Britains inhabited and ruled
the greatest part of this Island, and drove the Britains into that corner, a
which according to the manner of their country they called Wales, Wales why
so called.
and the countrymen Welshman, and the Tongue Welsh, that is to say, strange,
or not of them understood; for at this day, the Inhabitants of the
Low Countries call all their next Neighbors Language, Henegaw, or others that
speak French, VValsh, as a Language to them unknown. Likewise the Inhabitants
of Tyroll, and other the higher countries of Germany, do name the Italian their
next Neighbor a VValshman, and his language VValsh. And this is an evident
proof, that they which harped upon a Queen Gwallaes, Not from Queen Gwalaes,
Nor from Prince Wala.
and of a Prince VValla, (of whom neither British, Latin or English History
makes mention) were foully deceived: and so likewise was a great Historiographer
of late days, who says that it was called VValia quasi Italia, because the
rest of the Romans which remained in the Isle were driven thither. Neither is
this any new invention; although Polidore Virgil with an Italian brag does
glory his self to be the first that found it out; Polidore Virgil his brag.
for diverse ancient Writers do allege the same cause of the name of Wales, of
whom Sylvester Giraldus is one who writ in the time of Henry the Second, after
the Conquest before 380 passed, which is an evident token that the said
Polidore Virgil did either never see it, or at least not read the ancient
Histories of this Kingdom, or else dissembleth the same to the advancement and
praise of himself and his country: which to the learned and indifferent
Reader, shall appear to be the only occasion he took that work in hand;
Polidores juggling in his History.
for all his book redoundeth only to the praise and honor of the Romans, as
well Spiritual as Temporal, and to blaze forth their Acts and Deeds within this
Realm, and upon the other part he does either openly slander, or else privately
extenuate, or shamefully deny the Martial prowess and Noble Acts as well of
Saxons, Danes, and Normans, as of the Britains, all inhabiters of this Isle,
which thing he that lists to prove, let him read and confer Caesar's
Commentaries, Cornelius Tacitus, Herodianus, and other ancient Writers as well
in Latin as in Greek, with his works. As for the Ancient Writers of the
British History, as the British Chronicle, the History of Gildas, Ponticus
Virunnius, yea the golden work of Matthew Paris, Monk of Saint Alban, who writ
from William the Conqueror; to the last year of Henry the Third, I dare say he
never saw them, they be in diverse places to be had, so that the Truth may be
eastly proved. To make an end, I say, that he being a stranger born, as also
ignorant in our Histories, and in the Tongues and Languages wherein they were
written, Polidores ignorance, the cause of many men's errors in History.
could never set forth a true and perfect Chronicle of the same, but he having
a good Grace, and fluent Phrase in the Latin Tongue, and finding himself in a
country where every man either lacked Knowledge, or a Spirit to set forth the
History of their own country, took this enterprise in hand to their great
shame, and no less dispraise, because he a blind leader should draw a great
number of undiscreet and rash followers, as well Geographers and Cosmographers,
as Chroniclers and Historiographers to the dark pit of Ignorance, where I leave
them at this time, remitting the Reader to the Apology of Sir John Price Knight.
and his British History, written by him on purpose against the envious
Reports, and slandrous taunts of the said Polidore, where he shall see a great
number of his Errors confuted at large. And to return to my former matter
concerning the name of Wales, which name to be given of late by a stranger
Nation may be otherwise proved, That which is now abusively called Welsh, was
the ancient Language of the first Britains.
for the Welshmen themselves do not understand what these words Wales and Welsh
do signify, nor know any other Name of their country or themselves, but
Cambry, nor of their Language but Cambrae, which is as much as to say as
Cambers Language or Speec; so likewise they know not what England or English
means, but commonly they call the Country Lhogier the Englishmen, Sayson,
and the English Tongue Saysonaec, which is an evident token that this is the
same Language which the Britains spoke at the beginning; for the works of
Merdhin, and of Taliessin who wrote above 1000. years since, are almost the
same words which they use at this day, or at the least easy to be understood
by every one which knows perfectly the Welsh Tongue, especially in
North Wales.

Besides this, whereas at this day there do remain three Remnants of the
Britains divided every one from the other with the seas, which are in Wales,
Cornwall, (called in British Cerniw,) and little Britain, yet almost all the
particular words of these three people are all one, although in pronunciation
and writing of the sentences they differ somewhat; which is no marvel, seeing
that the pronunciation in one realm is often so different that the one can
scant understand the other. But it is rather a wonder, that the Welshmen being
separated from the Cornish, well nigh these 900 years, and the Britains from
either of them, In this Authors time.
290, before that, and having small traffic or concourse together since that
time, have still kept their own British tongue. They are not therefore to be
credited which deny the Welsh to be the old British tongue. And here I cannot
pass over what one of the five Chroniclers writ of late, of the name of
Britain, affirming that it should be so called of Britain in France, as the
elder of that name; but sure he had either never seen Ptolomy, nor Caesar, nor
any other ancient writer, or read them with small judgment and memory; for
there he might have learned that when this land was called Britain, the other
was called Armorica, and how in Maximus time Conan Meriadoc was the first that
gave it that name, and inhabited it with Britains out of this Isle; other
derivations of these words, out of Greek and Latin, I am ashamed to relate,
(of which I have spoken formerly) I will therefore return to the description
of Wales, which was almost in old time compassed about with the Irish seas, and
the Rivers Dee and Severne, although afterward the Saxons wan by force from
the Britains, all the plain (as is already said) and champion Countries over
the rivers; and specially Offa King of Mercia who made a ditch of great breadth
and depth to be a Meare betwixt his Kingdom and Wales; which ditch began at the
river Dee by Basingwerk between Chester and Ruthlan, and ran along the hills
sides to the South sea a little from Britstol, reaching above an hundred miles
in length, and is in many places to be seen at this day; bearing the name of
Clawdh Offa, viz. Offa's ditch; and the Country between it and England is
commonly called in Welsh Y Mars, although the greatest part of it be now
inhabited by Welshmen, namely in Northwales, which yet keeps the ancient
limits to the River Dee, and in some places over it. Other (as Sylvester
Giraldus) make the river Wy called in Welsh Guy to be a mear between England
and Wales, on the South part called South Wales, who measures the breadth of
Wales from Sallowe or VVillowford called Rhydyrhelig upon VVy, to St. David's
in Menevia a 100 miles; and the length from Caertheon upon Vsk in Gwentland, to
Holy head called Caergibi in Anglesey, in Welsh called Mon above a 100 miles.
And these be the common mears at this day, although the Welsh tongue is
commonly used and spoken England-ward beyond these old mears a great way, as in
Herefordshire, Glocestershire, and a great part of Shropshire; and thus for the
general description of Wales, which afterward about the year of Christ 870.
Rodericus Magnus King of Wales divided it into three territories, which he
called Kingdoms, which remained till of late days.

These three were Gwyneth, Northwales Dehenbarth Southwales, and Powis land, in
every of which he ordained a princely seat or Court for a Prince to remain at
most commonly: as in Gwyneth (which some old writers call Venedocia, Abersfraw.
for Gwinethia) Abersfraw in the Isle of Mon, or Anglesey. In Deheuberth,
called in Latin Demetia 'Caermardhyn, from whence it was afterward removed to
Dinevowr eight miles thence. Dinevowr.
In Powis Penguerne called Y Mwythic, and in English Shrewsbury, Methraval.
from whence it was removed to Mtheraval in Powis land. And because this
history does as well entreat of wars betwixt these three Provinces, as betwixt
them and the Saxons, Normans and Flemmings, I think good to set forth the
particular description of every part by it self; and first of Northwales as the
chiefest part which he gave his Eldest Son, Northwales.
ordering that either of the other two should pay him yearly 200. pound of
tribute, as it appears in the laws of Howel Dha, which are to be had in
Welsh and also in Latin. Therefore Gwyneth called Northwales, had upon the
Northside the Sea from the River Dee at Basingwerck to Aberdyni; and upon the
West and Southwest the river Dini, which divides it from Southwales, and in
some place from Powis land. And on the South and East it is divided from Powis
land, sometimes by the mountains, and sometimes with rivers till it come to the
River Dee again. This land was of old time divided into four parts, of which
the chifest was Mon, in English Anglesey, Mon.
where the Princes chief house was at Abersfraw, which is an Island separated
from the mainland, with an arm of the sea called Maenai, and had in it self
three Cantreds or hundreds, which were subdivided into six Comots, as Cantreff
Abersfraw to comot Lhion, and comot Malhtraeth, Cantreff Cemais to the comots
Talebolion and Tur Celyn, An other absurd error in Polidore.
Cantref Rossir to the comots Tindaethwy and Menai. And at this day there is a
trim town in that Island called Buemarish, and a common passage to Ireland at
Caergibi, called in English Holy-head; but here I cannot wink at that notable
error of Polidore, which after his accustomed fashion, deemeth this Isle to be
called not Mona, but Anglesia or Anglorum Insula, because it is called in
English Anglesey, and gives this name Mona to Man, and so has lost the names
of both Isles: which ignorance and forgetfulness might be forgiven him, if he
had not drawn a great number to this error with him; which in their Charters
do daily wrong-name these Isles, which may be easily proved. First because the
Inhabitants of the Isle do know no other name but Mon, and it is called through
all Wales, Tir Mon, that is to say, the land of Mon, unto this day, so that
neither by memory of Man, neither by any Monument in writing in the British
tongue, can it appear that ever it had any other name but Mon, yet there be
manifest monuments for these 1000. years. It is also grown to a proverb through
Wales for the fertility of the ground, Mon mam Gymry, that is to say, Mon
mother of Wales.

The ancient history of Cornelius Tacitus (which it seems, age had beaten out
of Polidors head) says, that the Soldiers of Paulinus Suetonius, and after of
Julius Agricola, after they had passed through Northwales, then came over
against Mona, where they did swim over an arm of the sea 200. paces, and so by
force wan the Isle. Now whether is it more reasonable thus to swim over 200
paces, or 20 miles? I know there are many believe Polidor in this point; let
all men therefore by this judge the rest. As for that which he says of the
great woods, Mon the seat of the superstitious Druids
it is nothing; for both the Romans, and after when the Christian faith took
place in the Realm, the Christians, did fall and root them out of the
abominable Idolatry and superstition practiced by the Druids in them, as is
touched before, that the King of Man sent for timber to Mon: Great trees found
in the Earth.
read the life of Hugh E. of Chester; which also is evident by the great
beeches, and other trees found in the earth in those days. His other reason
is, because it is called Anglesey in the English tongue. So is Lhoyger called
England, and Cambry Wales; are those therefore the old names? no surely; and
what if the inhabitants called it so? (as they did not) had it not a name
before the Angles wan it? yes I warrant you; but he had forgotten that. Now the
name of Man was ever, or at the least these 1000 years, named in British
Manaw, of which comes the English name Man. The Inhabitants there call it so,
and no nation about it did ever call it Mon, nor any writer but Polidor, which
was too young a Godfather to name so old a child. For Gildas writ above 900.
years since, whose writings Polidor never saw, but untruly fathers upon his own
device. Geraldus in his description of Ireland to Henry II, and Henry
Huntington, do plainly call Man in Latin Eubonia, adding thereto either Manaw
or Man for the better understanding of the name; will you believe them or
Polydor? other arguments there are which I pass over till I have more leisure
and occasion to write of this matter.

Arvon.
The seccond part of Northwales was called Arvon, which is as much as to say
over against Mon, and had in it four ^cantrefs and ten comots.

Cantref Abeer had in it three comots, Y Lhechwedh Vchaf, Y Lechwedhisat and
Nanconwy.

Cantref Arvon had two comots, Ywch Owyrnai, and Isgwyrnai.

Cantref Dunodic had two comots, Ardudwy and Enionyth.

Cantref Lhyyn contains three comots Cymitmain, Tinlhain, and Canclogion.
This is now called Carnarvonshire, the chief Town whereof is Carnarvon:
heretofore it was strongly walled, and had a very fair Castle. Edward the II.
King of England was here borne; and hence according to the custom of those
times, entitled Edward of Carnarvon; The Princes of Wales had in this place
their Chancery and Exchequer for all Northwales, which was no small improvement
to it. Earl it had never any till this present age in which the late K. Charles
conferred that title 1628. on, Robert Lord Dormer of Wing created Earl of
Carnarvon 4o. Carol. Aug. 2. and lost his life in the said Kings service. Lord
Dormer his son Earl of Carnarvon now living. Azure 10 billets 4, 3, 2, and 1.
Or, in a chief of the second a Lion Issuant sable, incensed Gules.


And as Carnarvon has given title to an Earl, so has Anglesey also, though
not by her ancient name Mon; for anno 1624.

Christopher Villiers brother to the D. of Buckingham, was created E. of
Anglesey, September 24. Charles Villiers second Earl. Argent on a cross Gules
five escolops Or, a mullet for difference.
This Mon is also called Anglesey shire, and has both it and Carnarvonshire,
the same divisions at this day. In this shire are Snowden hills called Eryri,
neither in height, fertility of ground, wood, cattle, fish, and foul, giving
place to the famous Alps, and without controversy the strongest country in
Britain.

Here is the Town of Carnarvon called in old time Caersegonce; and there is
also Conwey called Caer Giffin, and See of Bangor, with diverse other ancient
Castles and places of memory, and was the last part of Wales that came under
the Dominions of the Kings of England. It has on the North the Sea, and
Maenai; upon the East and South East the River Conwey, which divides it from
Denbighshire, whose principal Town is Denbigh which has had Lords good
store and of several families; but none of them Parliamentary Peers (in
reverence to it) till these latter times. Of late it has given title both of
Lord and Earl to two several families, viz. to these;

1 Robert Lord Dudley created Baron of Denbigh and Earl of Leicester, Eliz. 6.
Sep. 29 Or a Lion Rampant his tail double forked vert.

2 William Viscount Fielding created Earl of Dinbigh, 20. Jac. Sept. 14. Master
of the Ward robe, etc.

Argent on fess. Azure 3. fusils, Or.

This Shire is parted on the South West and West from Mirioneth with high
mountains and Rivers and other Mears. Merionith.


The third part of Gwineth was Merioneth, containing three Cantrefs and every
Cantref three comots.

The Cantref Mereon, has three camots, Talibont, Pennal and Ysttumaner: the
Cantef of Arustly has these, Vwchcoed, Iscoed, and Guarthrenion. Guarthrenion.


Cantref Perilhum has these Vwchmeloch, Ismeloh, and Micnaint; and this
keeps the said name till this day, but not within the same Mears; it is full
of hills and rocks, and has upon the Northside the sea, notable at this day
for the great resort and number of people that repair thither to take herings:
it has upon the East Arnon and Denbighland; upon the south Powis, and upon the
West Dini and Cardiganshire.

In this Country stands the Town of Harlech and a great lake called Lhin
Tigid, through which the river Dee runs and medleth not within the water of
the Lake, Note a wonder.
which is three miles long; and also the Salmons, which are commonly taken in
the river hard by the Lake, are never seen to enter the Lake; likewise a kind
of fish called Guymaid, which are like to Whitings, and are full in the Lake,
and are never taken in the River; not far from this Lake, is a place called
Garergay, which was the house of Gay Arthurs, foster brother. This shire as
well as Arvon is full of Cattle, Fowl and Fish, with great number of Deer and
Roes, but there is great scarcity of corn.

The fourth part of Gwenith was called Y Berusdhwlad, which may be Englished,
the Inland or middle Country, which contains 5. Cantrefs and had thirteen
comots, as cantref Rivomoc had in it these comots, Vwbhalet and Isalet.

Cantref Ystrat had Hiraethoc and Cynmeirch.

Cantref Roff these, Vwchdulas, Isdulas and Crenthin, which all are in the
Lordship of Denbeigh, saving the Crenthin, which is in Carnarvonshire, wherein
the Castles of Dygandwy did stand, which was the Earl of Chester, and is
commonly called in Latin and English Chronicles Gannoc.

The 4th. Cantref was Difrin Clwid, which may be Englished the valley of Clwid,
and now is called the Lordship of Ruthin, and has those comots, Coleigion,
Lhannerth, and Dogvelin.

The fifth Cantref is Tengle, and is now a part of Flintshire having these
comots, Counsylht, Prestatyn, and Ruthlan, and in this part is one of the
fairest valleys within this Isle containing 18. miles in length, and 4, 5, 6,
or 7. in breadth, as the hills either draw inward together or backward asunder,
which high hills do enclose it on the East, West and South parts, and Northward
the sea, it is plentiful of Cattle, fish, and foul, corn, hay, grass and wood;
and divided along in the middle with the river Clwy to whom runs Clywedoc,
Ystrad, Whilar, Elwy, and a great number of other rivers from the hills. In
this valley two miles from the sea, is the town and Castle of Ruthlan, where
sometime a Parliament has been kept; and two miles above it is the Sea of
Asaph, between the rivers Cly and Elwy, called in the old time the Bishops See
of Lhan Elup. Four miles thence and two miles from the river is situate upon a
rock the town and Castle of Denbigh, where is one of the gratest Markets of the
Marshes of Wales, and one of the fairest and strongest Castles within this
Realm, which being the house of David brother of Lhewelin the last Prince of
the Welsh blood, was enlarged and strengthened by Henry Lacy Earl of Lincoln,
to whom K. Edward gave the same Lordship. It is also the Shire Town of that
Shire; Anno 12. Ed. 1.
five miles above this is the Town of Ruthin, with a fair Castle, which
sometimes belonged to the Lords Gray Earls of Kent. This part of Northwales
has upon the North the river Dee and the sea, upon the West Arnon and the
river Conwey, South and east Merionith, and the country he called Powys, and
these be the mears and bounds of Gwyneth or Venedotia; for the name of
Northwales contains beside this all Powis in these days: so there was under
the territory of Terffraw 15. Cantrefs and in them 38 comots.

The second Kingdom was Mathranal, which in right order was the third, as that
which came to third brother; yet for the better understanding of the History
following I have placed it here. To this Kingdom belonged the Country of Powis,
and the land betwixt Wy and Severne, which part had upon the South and West,
Southwales with the river Wy and Twyl and other meers, upon the North Gwineth,
and upon the East the Marshes of England, from Chester to Wy a little above
Hereford; and therefore it was most troubled with wars as well of the Saxons,
as afterward of the Normans Lords Marchers who afterward daily wan some part
thereof, and by that means it was the first part that served the Kings of
England, and therefore less esteemed of all the rest. This part called Powis
was divided again into Powis Vadoc, and Powis Wenwin win. Powis Vadoc contained
in it self five Cantreds and 15 comots

Cantref Y Barwn which has three comots Dynmael, Edeyrneon and Glindourdwy,
which be now in Merionithshire saving Dinmael which is in Denbighshire.

Cantref Y Rhiw, whose comots are these Yal now in Denbigshire, Staytalin and
Hop now in Flintshire.

Cantref Treferd contains these comots, Creosuam, Tref Y wayn, in English
Chirk; and in Denbighshire Toesoswallt, English Oswestred and in Shropshire.

Cantref Vwchnant has these comots, Merforth in Flintshire, Maelor Gymraeg, in
English Bromfield, now in Denbighshire, and Meoler Saesneg in Flintshire.

Cantref Rayder with his comots, Morchnant, Israider Clynhaeth and Nanhendwy
all in Chirkland and in Denbighshire. Also the Lordship of Whittington now in
Shropshire, was in this part of Powis, which part at this day has lost the
name of Powis, and is situate in diverse Shires, as it appears by the
discourse before passed. In this part is the Castle of Holt in Bromfield, and
the Castle of Chirk in Chirkland, likewise the Lordship and Castle of
Whittington, which came by marriage to Goulh Fitzwarren. There is besides these
the Lordship of Oswestre, of the which the Fitz Allans have been Lords these
300 years and odd, and of diverse other Lordships in those Marches, as Shrarden,
the eleven towns, Clun and many others which are now in Shropshire.

The second part called Powis Wenwinwin had. likewise five cantreds and
twelve comots.

Cantref Y Vyrnwy had these comots, Mechnant, Vwch, Rayader, Mechain, Iscoed
and Lhanerch Hudol.

Cantref Ystile has these, Deuthwr, Gorthwr, Isaf and Strat Marchelch.

Cantref Lhyswinaf had these, Caerneneon and Mechain Vwchcoed.

Cantref Cydowen had comot Conan and comot Hauren.

Cantref Conan had Cyveilioc and Mouthwy which is now in Merionithshire: of all
these the three first Cantreds do only at this day bear the name of Powis,
which are upon the Northside of Severne, and are all five saving the comot of
Mothwy in the County of Montgomery.

This is a Country full of Wods, Hills, and Rivers; and has in it these towns;
the Pool, Newtown, Machinlheth. Arustly was in old time in this part, but
afterward it came to the Princes of Gwineth. These Lordships came by just
delcent from the Princes thereof to a Woman named Hawys the daughter of Owen ap
Gruffith, as appears in the history following. Arustly and Cyneloc came to
the Baron of Dudley, and afterward was sold to the King.

The third part belonging to Mathrual, was the land between Wye and Severn,
containing four Cantreds and 13. comots.

Cantref Melienith has these Comots, Cery, Swithygre, Lewalalht, and Glin
Seithon.

Cantref Elnel has these, Vwch, Minydh and Lhochdhiffnog.

Cantref Yclawdh these, Dyffryn, Teyveydat, Swydhygnogen and Pennwelht.

Cantref Bulcht has these, Swidhi, Vam, Drenlies and Isyrwon. Of this part
there is at this day some in Montgomery shire, some in Radnorshire, and some in
Brechnockshire, in this part and in the Lordship marching to it; which although
at the time of the division, which was in the time of the last prince, were not
in his subjection, yet to this day speak Welsh, and are called Wales, and in
those comots are these Towns and Castles; Montgomery in these late wars utterly
destroyed and levelled with the ground, though the Lord thereof Edward Lord
Herbert took arms with the Parliament, called in Welsh Trevaldwin, a small
Town, but a most beautiful Castle, a little before its desolation, much and
magnificently enlarged and adorned by the said Lord, and for situation almost
impregnable. The Castle of Clun called Colunwy which is the Earls of Arundel,
who amongst his other honorable titles is Baron of Clun and Oswestrie. The
Town of Knighton, in Welsh Trefilcawd. The Castle of Cymaron, Presthyn, in
Welsh Lhanandras The Town and Castle of Radnor, in Welsh Maesynet, at this day
the Shire-Town. The Town of Knighton and the Castle of Huntington called in
Welsh Y Castelh Mayn, which were the Bohunes Earls of Hereford, and after the
D. of Buckingham; Castle Hay, Pain, Lhanvair in Buecht. These Lordships with
Brechvoc and Aberganeny, were belonging to the Bruses Lords of Brechnoch, and
after came diverse times and by sundry means to the Bohunes, Nevils, and;
Mortimers and so in this Kingdom or Territory were found 14 Cantreds and 40
comots. Two of these parts which are Powis and Gwineth, are at this day called
Northwales, and divided into six shires. Mon called Anglesey, Carnarvon,
Merioneth, Denbigh, Flint, and Montgomeryshire, are of all on the Northside
Severn, saving a piece of Montgomeryshire.

And here I think it good to let the Reader understand what the British.
Chronicle says of Northwales, which affirms that three times by inheritance
it came to Women; first to Stradwen, Daughter to Cadvan ap Conan ap Endaf, and
wife to Coel Godeboc, Mother to Genaw, Dyvor and Gwawl. The second time to the
same Gwawl wife to Edeyrn ap Padern, and mother to Cunetha Wledic; which
Cunetha inhabiting in the North parts of England, about the year 540. after the
incarnation of Christ, and hearing how the mingled Nations of the Irish, Scots
and Picts had overrun the sea shore of Cardigan, which was part of his
inheritance, sent his sons thither to enjoy their inheritance; of the which
Tibiaon his eldest son died in Man, which land the said Irish Scots had wan;
for Gildas says that of the Children of Clam Hector, which peopled a great
part of Ireland, Yscroeth with his people inhabited Dalrienda, which is a part
of Scotland. Builke with his people came to Man; but I think it good to put in
Gildas words, which says, Builke cum filiis suis inhabitavit Euboniam Insulam
vulgo Manaw quae est in meditullio maris inter Hiberniam and Brittanniam; that
is to say, Builke with his Children inhabited the Isle Eubonia, commonly called
Manaw (for so it is and was named in British) which lies in the middle of the
sea, between Ireland and Britain. This was not called Mona, as Polidore says:
The children of Bethoun inhabited Demetia, which is Southwales, with Gwyr and
Cydweli till they were chased thence by the children of Cunetha; thus far
Gildas. Therefore the Sons of Cunetha being arived in Northwales (as well I
think being driven by the Saxons, as for their inheritance) divided the Country
betwixt them. And first Micreaon the son of Tibiaon the son of Cunetha had
Cantref Meireaon to his part. Arustel ap Gwenetha had cantref Arust: Caradoc ap
Cunetha had Caerdegion now Cardiganshire; Dunod had cantref Dunodic, Edeyrn had
Edeyhnion, Mael had Dynmmael, Coel had Coleyon, Dogvael had Dogvelyn, Ryvaon
had Rivomoc now Denbighland, Eneore Yrch had Caerneon in Powis, Vssa had
Maesuswlht now Oswestre. For surely that which they say commonly of Oswald King
of Northumherland, to be slain there, and of the Well which sprung where his
arm was carried, is nothing so. For Beda and all writers testify that Penda
slew Oswald at Maserfelt in the Kingdom of Northumberland, and his body was
buried in the Abbey of Bardney in the province of Lindsey on the third part of
Lincolnshire, which Province gave title of Earl to Robert Bertu, Lord
Willoughbie of Eresbie, who was created, being Lord great Chamberlain of
England by inheritance, Earl of Lindsey 2. Car. November. 29 and was General for
the King at Edgehill, where he valiantly lost his life, in his Masters right
and quarrel, bearing for his arms, Argent 3 battering rams barwise proper
headed and hooped Azure. The ruins of Bardney Abbey are yet to be seen. But to
my former matter, these names given by the sons of Cunetha remain to this day.
After this the Irish-Picts and Scots, which the Britains called Y Gwidhyl
Phichiaid, which is to say, the Irish Picts, did overrun the Isle of Mon, and
were driven thence by Caswalhon Lhawhir, that is Caswalhon with the long hand,
the Son of Eneon Yrch ap Cunedha, who slew Seoigi their King with his own hands
at Lhany Gwydhyl which is the Irish church at Holyhead. This Caswalhon was
father to Maelgon Gwyneth whom the Latins call Maglocunus Prince and King of
Britain.

In this time was the famous Clerk and great wise man Talissyn Ben Beirdh, that
is to say the chiefest of the Beirdh or wise men, for this word Bardh in
Caesar's time signified (as Lucan bears witness) such as had knowledge of
things to come, and so it signifies at this day. This Maelgon had a son called
Run, in whose time the Saxons united Gurmund unto Britain, from Ireland who
had come hither from Afric, who with the Saxons was the utter destruction of
the Britains, and slew all that professed Christ, Gurmund an Affrican King of
Ireland was the first that drove the Brittans over Severne.
and was the first that drove them over Severne. This Run was father to Beli,
who was father to Jago (for so the Britains call James) who was father to
Cadvan, and not Brochwell called Brecyval (as the English Chronicle says) for
this Brochwell Ysgithroc that is long-toothed, was chosen leader of such as met
with Adelred, alias Ethelbertus Rex Cantiae, and other Angles and Saxons, who
put Brochel twice to flight not far from Chester, and cruelly slew 1000 Priests
and Monks of Bangor with a great number of Lay brethren of that house which
lived by the labor of their hands.

This Brochwel retired over Dee hard by Bangor, and defended the Saxons
passage, till Cadvan King of Northwales, Meredith King of Southwales, 1066.
Saxons slain by the Britains.
and Bledrus or Bletius Prince of Cornwall came to succor him, and gave the
Saxons a sore battle, and slew of them the number of 1066. and put the rest to
flight. After which battle Cadvan was chosen King of Britain, and was chief
ruler within the Isle, after whom his son Cadwallon, who was father to
Cadwallador the last of the British blood that bare the name of King of
Britain, This was writ by a Northwales man, but Southwales far exceeds it
for beauty, profit and pleasure.
was King.

The third time that Northwales came to a Woman was to Esylht daughter to Conan
Tindaythwy the son of Edwal Ywrch the son of Cadwalador. She was wife to Mervin
Vrich, and Mother to Roderike the great, as hereafter shall be declared. By
this you may understand that Northwales has been a great while the chiefest
seat of the last Kings of Britain; it was and is the strongest country within
this Isle, full of high mountains, craggy rocks, great Woods and deep,
valleys, straight and dangerous places, deep and swift Rivers, as Dev which
springs in the hills of Merioneth, and runs Northwest through Mouthwy, and
by Machinlaeth, and so to the sea at Aberdini, dividing North, and Southwales
asunder. Dee called in Welsh Dourdwy, springs also in an other side of the
said hills, runs East through Penlhin, and the lake Tisgyd down to Corwen,
and Lhangolhen, between Chirkland and Bromfield where it boweth Northward
toward Bangor to Holt, and to Chester, and thence Northwest to Flint Castle,
and so to the sea.

There is also Conwel rising likewise in Merionithshire, and dividing
Caernarvon from Denbighshire runs under Suowdon, North-east by the Town of
Aberconwey to the sea.

Also Clwyd which rising in Denbighland runs down to Kuthin, and plain
North, not far from Denbigh, to St. Asaph, and so by Kuthlan and to the sea;
there be many other fair Rivers, of which some run to the sea, as Mawr at
Traethmawr, and Avon Y Saint at Caernarvon, and others that run to Severn, as
Murnwy in Powis, and to Murny Tanat, some other to Dee, as Ceirioc betwixt the
Lordships of Chirk and Wittington, Alin through Yal and Moldes dale, and
Hopedale, and so to Dee, a little above Chester. And this shall suffice for the
perfect description of that which in old time was called Gwineth and Powis, and
at these days the six Shires of Northwales.

Now remains the last Kingdom of Wales called Dinevowr, which although it was
the greatest, Dinevour.
yet was it not the best, as Giraldus writes, chiefly because it was most
molested by Flemmings, and Normans, and also that in diverse parts thereof the
Lords would not obey their Prince, as in Gwent and in Morganwc, which wrought
their own confusion, as shall hereafter appear. This was divided into six
parts, of which Caredigion was the first, and contained four Cantrefs and ten
comots, Caerdigion.
as Cantref Penwedic had in it these comots, Geneurglin, Perueth and Crenthin.

Cantref Canawl had these Mevenith, Anhunoc, and Pennarch.

Cantref Castelh had these comots, Mabwinion, and Caerwedros.

Cantref Sirwen had these, Gwenionith and Iscoed, and this part is at this day
called in English Caerdiganshire and in Welsh Swidh Aberleini. This is a
champion country, without much wood, and has been diverse times overcome by
Flemmings and Normans, who builded many Castles in it, and at last were beaten
out of them all. It has on the East Northwales, with the River Dini, and part
of Powis; upon the South Caermarthenshire, upon the West Pembrockshire with the
river Teini, and upon the North the Irish sea. In this part is the Town of
Cardigan upon Teini not far from the sea. The Town of Aberystwyth upon the
river Ystwith by the sea, and Lhanbadern Vawr which was a great Sanctuary, and
a place of religious and learned men in times past, and in this Shire was a
great number of Castles, as the Castle of Strat Meyric, of Walter, of
Lhanristed, of Dynerth of the sons of Mineaon, of Aber Reidol, and many more,
with the Towns of Tregaron, Lhandhewibreni, as you shall understand hereafter.

The second part was call Dinot, and at this day Pembrockshire and had in it
eight cantrefs, and 23. comots, which where these; cantref Emlin, that had
these comots, Vwchluch, Iscutch and Lenethir.

Cantref Arberth had these, Penrhin, or Elays, Esterolet, and Talacaarn.

Cantref Dangeld had these, Amgoed, Pennant, and Eudfre.

Cantref Ycoed had these, Lhanhayaden, and Castelh Gwis.

Cantref Penvro had these, Coedychaf, Maenorbyir and Penvro.

Cantref Ros had these, Hulfforth, Castelh, Gwalhmai and Ygarne.

Cantref Pubidioc had these, Miniw, Pencaer, and Pebidioc.

Cantref Cemas has these, Vwchnener, Isnener, and Trefdracth.

In these parts are diverse towns and havens at this day, as Pembroch Tenby, in
Welsh Denbigh, Y Pis. Heref. in welsh Hulforth, with the fair haven of Milford,
called in Welsh Aberdangeldhen; S. David's or Menevia, called in Welsh Miniw,
the chiefest see in all Wales, Then Friscare called Abergwain, and Newport
named Trefdraeth, these be along the sea coast, and not very far of besides
these there be diverse Castles as Cilgarran, Arberth, Gwys, Lanhayaden, Walwin,
and diverse others. This part was wan first by the Montgomeries, Earls of
Shrewsbery, and after given to the Marshalls, and so to Valence, and from
thence to the Princes of Wales, most troubled with the Normans and Flemmings,
who do remain and inhabit about Pembrock, Tenbie and in Ros to this day, which
can neither speak Welsh nor good English as yet: Dinet (for so I will call it
hereafter) has on the West and the North the Irish sea, upon the South the
Spanish sea, and upon the East Caermarthenshire, and on the North-East
Caerdiganshire. The third part of Caermardhinshire having 4 cantrefs and 15.
comots, as cantref Finioc with the comots of Harfryn, Dervedh and Isgeneny.

Cantref Eginoc with these, Gwir, now in Glamorganshire, Cidwel, and
Carnwillheon

Cantref Baehan with these, Melhaen, Caeo, and Maenor Deilo.

Cantref Mawr with these, Cethineoc, comot Mab Elvyw, comot Mab Vchdrid and
Widigada. In this Shire are the Towns and Castles of Caermadhin, Dinevowr,
which was the Princes seat of that Country, Newton, Lhandeilo, Lhauymdhyfry,
Elmin, Swansey, now in Glamorganshire, called in welsh Abertawy upon the sea,
the Castle of the sons of Vchtryd of Lhanstephan and others. It has upon the
West Dinet or Pembrockshire, on th North Caerdig^^shire, upon the Southwest the
sea, and upon the Southeast Glamorgan, and upon the East Brechnockshire. This
is counted the strongest part of all Southwales, as that which is full of high
mountains, great Woods and fair rivers, specially Tywy. In this and in the
other two parts of Southwales, were the notablest acts that their History
treats of, atchived and done.

The fourth called Morganwc, now Glamorganshire, contains 4 cantrefs with 15
comots, as cantref Croveth with these comots, Rwngueth ac Won, Tir Yr Hwndrwd,
and Maenor Clynogwr.

Cantref Pennythen with these, Meyskin, Glynrhodny, Maenor, Talavan, and Maenor
Ruthyn.

Cantref Brenbinol with these, Gibowr, Senghennyth, Vwcheaeth and Iscaeth.

Cantref Gwenthwy which is now in Monmothshire with these comots, Yrhardh
Ganol, and Eithafdylygion. In this part are these towns and castles; Lhandaf
the Bishops See, Caerdiffe called Caerdhyeth, Cowbridge, called in Welsh Y bont
Vaen, which is as much as to say Stonebridge, Lantwid, Caerftyli, and others;
and has diverse rivers, which run to the South sea, as Lay, Taf, Tawy, Neth,
Avan, Ogwr and Lhychwr; it has on the South the sea of Severne, which divides
it from Devonshire and Cornwall; upon the West and Northwest Caermardhynshire;
upon the Northeast Brechnocshire, and upon the East Monmothshire; of this you
shall read very little; for one Jestyn being chief of the Country, and having
war with his Neighbors, called on Robert Fitz Hamon with a great number of
strangers to his aid, who after they had atchived his desires, liked so well
the Country, that they found occasion to fall out with Jestyn, and inhabited
the country themselves and their heirs, at least some of them to this day.

The fifth pat was called Gwent, and now is in Monmothshire, which has three
cant. and ten comots, as cant. Gwent which had these comots, Ymynyth, Iscoed,
Lhefnydh and Tref Y Grug.

Cant. Iscoed these, Brinbuga, Vwchcoed, Y Teirtref and Ergnig ac Ewyas, now in
Hereford-shire.

Cant. Cough was the 7th. cant. of Morgamoc, which is now in Gloucestershire,
and is called the Forest of Dean.

In this part is the ancient City of Caerlheon upon Vsk, where was the
Archbishops See of Wales; here are also diverse Towns and Castles, as Chepstow,
Glyn, Strigol, Ros, Tinterne upon the River Wy. There is also Newport called
Ycastelh Newyth, Visc called Brynbuga, Grosmond, Raglan, White Castle,
Abergaveny, and many others (as I shall show, God willing, in my description of
Monmothshire) this is a fair and fertile Country, of which likewise the
Gentlemen were never obedient to their Prince, which was the cause of their own
destruction. It has on the West Glamorgan and Brechnock-shire, on the North
Hereford-shire, Gloucestershire and the River VVy, and upon the South and
South-East Severne.

Last of all comes Brecheinoc, now Brechnoch shire, which has three cant. and
8. comots, as cant. Selef, which has these comots, Selef and Trahayern.

Cantref Canol these, Talgarth, Ystradyw and Brwynlhys or Eglwys yail.

Cant. Mawr has these, Tir, Raulfe, Lhywel and Cerrig Howel. In this part is
the town of Brechnock upon the meeting of Vsk and Hodui, and is called
Aberhodni: and Hay called Y Celhy which Talgarth, Buelt, Lhangors; it has West
Carmardhin-shire, with the river of Tawy, upon the North Radnor-shire with Wy,
upon the East Hereford-shire and Monmoth, upon the South Glamorgan. This for
the most part is full of Mountains, Woods, and Rivers, especially Buelt. And
the Lords of that Country called Bruses with the Mortimers most of all other
Lords Marches, sometimes by might, Omne regnum in se divisum, no^ postest stare.
but oftener by treason have molested and grieved the Princes of Wales, as you
shall understand by the History following. This Land came after the Bruses to
the Bohunes, Earls of Hereford, and so to the Straffords, D. of Buckingham.
Proditionem amo, Proditorem odi.


These six Shires being subject to the Territory of Dynevour with Radnorshire,
which was belonging to Mathraval, are now commonly called Southwales, which
Country is both great and large, with many fair plains and valleys for corn,
high mountains and rocks full of pasture for cattle: great and thick woods with
forests and parks for red and fallow dear, clear and deep rivers full of fish,
of which Severne is the chiefest, which with Wy and Reidol, springs out of a
high mountain called Pymlhyman in the edge of Cardigan-shire, and are commonly
called the Three Sisters. Severne runs full East through Cydwin and under
the Castle of Shraden to Shrewsberie, from whence it turns Southward, and
turns to Bridgenorth, Beaudley, Worcester, Gloucester, and so to the sea.

The second Sister is Gwy, in English VVy, which took her journey South-East by
Rayader Gwy to Buelt, where Irwon meets her, thence to Glacebury, and so to
Hereford, and Monmoth, and to the sea of Severne at Chepstow; for so they call
Mor Hafren, the sea which severeth Wales from Somersetshire, Devon-shire and
Conwall. The third Sister named Reidol, ran Northward to the sea being not far
of at Aberystwyth. There be other fair rivers as Vsk, which rises in a high
mountain called Y Mynydh duy in the Southwest part of Brechnochshire; it
runs to Brechnoch, and so to Monmothshire to the town of Vsk, Caerleon and
Newport, and so to the said south sea. Tywy also rising not far from Wy,
runs South to Lhanymdhyfri, and then South West by Lhandeilo and Dinevour to
Abingwily and Gaermardhen, so by Lhansteshen to the sea.

(...) Greek, Fiber, Latin, Beaver English, Avane. Brit.
Teini likewise, which rises in the edge of Caermardhenshire, and runs
North West by Embly Cilgerren, Caerdegion, and so to the North sea. In Teini
above all the rivers in Wales, were in Giraldus time a great number of Castors,
which may be Englished Beavers, and are called in Welsh Avane, which name only
remains in Wales at this day; but what it is very few can tell. It is a beast
not much unlike the Otter, but that it is bigger, all hairy, saving the tail,
which is like a fish tail, as broad as a man's head; this beast uses as well
the water as the land, and has very sharp teeth, and biteth cruelly till he
perceive the bones crack; his stones be of great efficacy in physic. He that
will learn what strong nests they make, And believe him if ye please; this
species here spoken of, is now I think quite lost if it ever were.
which Giraldus calls Castles, which they build upon the face of the water with
great boughs, which they cut with their teeth, and how some lie upon their
backs holding the wood with his fore feet, which the other draws with a
cross stick, the which he holds in his mouth, to the water side, with all
other particularities of their nature, let him read Giraldus in his Topographia
of Wales. There be besides these a great number of Rivers, of which some run to
the South and some to the West, and North sea, as Tywy in Glamorganshire, Taf
also in Caermardhenshire, which runs to Cledhen, two rivers, either called
Cledhen, which do give Milford the name of Abergavgledhw in Pembrockshire,
Arth, Aeron, and Ystwyth in Caerdigan. There be also diverse Lordships, which be
added to other shires, and were taken heretofore for parts of Wales, and in
most part of them at this day, the Welsh language is spoken, as Oswestre,
Knocking, VVhittington, Esmer, Masbrook, Chitbury, Caurs, Clonn, which are now
in Shropshire; Ewyas Lacy, Ewyas Harold, Clifford, VVinsorton, Yardley
Huntington, VVhitney, Loghardneis in Herefordshire. Also this country of
Southwales as all the rest of Britain, was first inhabited by the Britains,
which remain there to this day; saving that in diverse places, specially along
the sea shore, they have been mingled with Saxons, Normans, (which the Welsh
history calls Frenchmen) and Flemings: For that the Princes of Wales, since
the conquest of the Normans, could never keep quiet possession thereof, but
what for strangers, and what for disloyalty of their own people, vexation and
war, were for the most part compelled to keep themselves in Caermardhenshire.

This shall suffice for the description of the Country
After this great King had (as it is said before) disposed of his affairs, had
had war with Burchved King of Mercia, which by the aid of Ethelwaph entered
Northwales with a great power, and destroyed Anglesey, and fought with the
Welshman diverse times, and slew Meric a great Prince amongst them;

846. Math. West. Kongen P. of Pendieth at Rome. 871.
The year 846. was Ithel King of Gwent or Wetland slain in fight by the men of
Brechnoch, and in the year 854 Kongen King of Powis died at Rome, being slain
or choked (as some say) by his own men.

Much about this time dyed Gwyan King of Cardigan. This was that noble Gwyan ap
Mevric ap Dunwal ap Arthen ap Sitsylt, King or Prince of Cardigan, who as some
British books have, was at this time drowned by misfortune.

The Danes having entered the land, and being with shame and ignominy beaten and
repulsed, and compelled to abjure the Isle, they bent (whether equivocally or
perfidiously) their force against Wales, and entered the Isle of Mon with a
great army in the year of Christ eight hundred seventy three, where Roderick
gave them two battails, one at a place called Menegd in Anglesey.

Dav. Powel. fol. 34. 879.
I find also (says my Author) that about this time Halden and Hungare, two
Captains of the Danes arrived in Southwales, and overrun the whole Country,
destroying all before them, with fire and sword, neither sparing Churches nor
Religious houses; but within a while after, they received their deserved reward
at the hands of the West Saxons who awaiting for them on the coasts of
Devonshire slew both Halden and Hungare with 1200 of their people.

At this time Endon Bishop of Menevia or St. David's, died; and Hubert was
installed in his place. And within two years after Dungarth King of Cornwall was
drowned by a mischance. In the year 876 the Englishmen entered into Anglesey,
and fought with the Welshmen a sore battle, who in the year following slew
Roderike King or Prince of Wales, and Gwyriad his brother, or as some say his
son.

This Roderike had by his wife Enharad the daughter of Meyric, the son of
Difnwal or Dunwal the son of Arthen ap Sytsylt, diverse sons, as Anarawd his
Eldest son, to whom he gave Aberfraw, with Northwales, Cadelh the second son
who had Dinevour with Southvvales, and also took Mathraval and Powis land by
force from his brethren after the death of Mervin the third son, to whom the
father had given the same. A Welsh manuscript which I have, says Rodri the
great, did bear G. a cheveron between three Roses arg.


Quarterly Gules and Or, four Lions passant gardant Counterchange.


The Author who sets down this coat as belonging to this King or Prince, Mr.
Mills catologue of honor. fol. 209.
compendiously gives us this relation

Roderike the great, in Welsh called Rodero Mawr, Prince of all Wales, a man of
much strength and courage, the son Essilt, begotten by Mervin King of the
Isles, whose Grandfather (by the Mothers side) was Conan the son of Roderike,
the son of Idwall the son of Cadwallader, the last King of the Britains. This
Idwall conveyed the miserable Britains (that were oppressed and afflicted with
the invasions and inroads of the Saxons) into Cambria (now called Wales) and
worthily governed them, under the name and title of Prince of Wales. Some are
of of opinion that the Cambres were called Welshmen by this Idwallo, as in old
time the Britains took their name from Brute. But this is of no more truth,
then theirs is that would have them of one Wallo their Duke and governor, or
of Wendola a Queen of whom there is no mention made among them.

This Roderike of all the Princes of Wales, The Author also put Camber before
Albanact preferring Wales before Scotland.
was the first that caused the histories of the Britains to be written: He
renewed good Laws, he caused strong Castles to be built, and procured that
Churches or Temples should be kept and maintained for Divine Service; at his
decease he left the Principality of all Wales to be divided unto his three
sons, following the example of Brute, who made Locrine, Camber and Albanact
Kings. This matter of division was the very true and first Original of the
Welsh men's ruin, as being divided into three Kingdoms; which they called
Principalities. For allbeit whilst they lived, one man held and maintained his
own with much stoutness and magnanimity, yet their posterity being distracted
and falling to war among themselves, were enforced every each to defend his
part as well from their general enemies the English, as from their Neighbors
and Countrymen the Welsh, by which the whole Kingdom of Wales was wrackt and
overthrown.

Roderike ended his life in the eighty ninth year of his Age, Mr. Wills ut ante.
and in the year of Christ eight hundreed seventy seven, Alured the son of the
godly King Ethelwolph being then King of the English Saxons. He was buried at
Keyby Castle in Anglesey.

Engharad Princess of Wales, Wife of Roderike the great, was daughter and
heir to Meirich the son of Dyfnwal the son of Arthen ap Sytsilt King of
Cardigan,

Their Issue.
Sab. a Lion ramp. Arg. If I mistake not.


Mervin Prince of Ven^dosia (or North Wales) of whom more hereafter.

Anarandus was second Son, to whom his Father gave the 105. Cantreds, or
hundreds of Powis Land; and for that of all his Brethren he was the most
valiant, and approved Warrior, he seated him in the Marches or Borders of
Wales; his principal Seat and Manor was at Mathraval.

The patrimony of this Anarandus, namely the Principality of Powis, in process
of time, devolved and came into the hands of a Woman (named Hawis) as her Right
and Inheritance. She being married to one John Chorlton (an Englishman)
enfeoffed him with her Right, and made him Lord of Powis. From this Family it
descended at last to the Greys of the North, and thereby utterly lost that Name
and Title of Principality: For Andornus or Owen, the Father of Hawis, (or Avis)
being called and sent for to a Parliament, which King Edward the First held at
Shrewsbury, by the Decree and Judgment of the King and Barons, took his Lands
to be held in Capite under the Title and Tenure of Free Baronage of England,
and resigned to the King, his Heirs, and to the Crown of England the name and
Title of Principality.

Cadel the youngest son, and Prince of Demetia, or South Wales, which the
Welshman called Dehenbarsh, that is, the Right Side, or South part; this
Country, although it be very fruitful and far greater then North Wales, yet
was it always esteemed the worser part; and the reason was, for that the
Nobles thereof refused to obey their Princes, and the seacoast was evermore
infested and troubled with the invasion of the English men, Normans, and
Flemings, by which the Prince was enforced to leave his royal Seat at Marydune,
and place the same at Dynefar in Cantremaur.

And although these Princes had great Authority in Wales, yet after Rhese, the
Son of Theodore the great, was by Treason of his own people slain (in the time
of William Rufus, Anno Domini 1093) they were no more called by the names of
Dukes or Princes, but only Lords, until at last by civil Wars amongst
themselves, and the Lands divided among strangers and many others, the English
seeking to possess all, the Principality was so weakened, and brought so low,
that after the death of Rhese the Son of Griffith (a most worthy man) they lost
both Name, and Authority of Principality and Lordship. And all this while the
Lines of the Princes of Venedosia or North-VVales, did prosperously continue,
and held on their course, as shall hereafter be specified by that which
follows.

THE SECOND BOOK.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE
ANTHONY GRAY Earl of Kent, Lord Gray of Ruthen, Hastings and Valence. John
Manors Earl of Rutland, Lord Ross of Hamlake, Trusbut, and Belvoir. Philip
Earl of Pembroke and Montgomery, Lord Herbert of Cardiff, Ross, of Kendal, Par,
Marnnon, and Saint Quintin. Edward Sackvil Earl of Dorset, Lord Bu^khurst.
William Earl of Salisbury, Viscount Crambourn, Lord Cecil of Essenden. David
Earl of Exeter, Lord Burley.
THE EARLS OF KENT.
GRiffith ap Meredith ap Blethin. Owen Cynelioc Gwenwynwyn. Griffith of
Gwenwynwyn. Owen ap Griffith Lord Powis.
John Charleton Lord of Powis, by the gift of King Edward the first, to whom he
was Valectus Regis, jure uxoris, Lord of Powis. Hawis Gardan (i. e.) the Hardy,
Son and Heir to Owen ap Griffith, Lord of Powis. John Charleton second Lord of
Powis of that name. John Charleton third Lord of Powis of that Name. One of
these John's married a daughter to Roger Lord Mortimer, by which means this
Family descended from the British blood. Edward Charleton fourth Lord of Powis
of that Name. Alianor daughter, and one of the heirs of Thomas Holland Earl of
Kent. Edward Charleton, the last, John dying without Issue, fifth Lord of
Powis, and last of that Family, who left only two daughters his heirs. Sir
John Gray Knight. Jane daughter and coheir to Edward Charleton Lord of Powis.
Henry Gray Lord Powis, created Earl of Tankervile. Antigone natural daughter to
umphery Duke of Gloucester. Edward Or Edmund.
Gray Lord of Ruthine, descended from the Lord Gray, Lord of Powis, created
Earl of Kent. Katherine daughter to Henry Percy second Earl of Northumberland,
by which match the British blood descended. George Gray Earl of Kent. Anne
Daughter to Richard Woodvile Earl Rivers. Richard Gray Earl of Kent, sans
Issue. Elizabeth Daughter to Sir William Hussy Knight, Lord chief Justice.
Reiginold Gray, grandchild to George by his second Wife daughter of William
Herbert Earl of Pembroke, by which match comes in the British blood sans
Issue. Henry Gray, Brother and Heir to Reginold Earl of Kent, Sans Issue. Mary
daughter to Sir George Cotton of Cheshire Knight. Charles Gray Brother to the
two former Earls, and their Heir. Susan daughter to Richard Cotton of Hantshire
squire. Henry Gray Earl of Kent, sans Issue. Elizabeth, daughter and coheir to
Gilbert Earl of Shrewsbury. Anthony Gray of Burbage, Com. Leic. son of George,
son of Anthony Gray of Branspath, son of George Hrey, Lord Gray of Ruthin,
second Earl of Kent by his wife, Daughter to William Herbert Earl of Pembroke,
continues the British line. Henry Lord Gray.

KENT.
Kent is a very rich and pleasant Country, lying between the Thames and the
narrow Seas. A country very good for Corn, and fit for pastorage, according to
the several Plots and parts thereof, and wondrous full of fruitful and well
ordered Orchards, from whence the City of London is supplied with most sort of
Fruit; the Villages and Towns stand exceeding thick, being in all three hundred
ninety eight parishes, besides lesser Hamlets, which make up the two Diocesses
of Canterbury and Rochester. It has also diverse safe Roads and sure Harbors
for Ships, and those exceeding well defended with Forts and Castles: Caesar
when he arrived in Kent, found here four Kings, (for so they called the chief
of the principal Families) and gives this Testimony of the People, that they
were the most courteous and civil of all the Britains; in the declining of
whose Empire, Vortiger gave this County unto the Saxons, who being Heathens
when the rest of the Isle were Christians, gave an occasion to the Proverb,
Kent and Christendom; at that time it was made a Kingdom, as in the entrance
of the Normans it was made an Earldome, and so it has continued in the persons
of these

Earls of KENT
Odo Bishop of Baieux, half Brother to the Conqueror, Lord chief Justice, and
Lord Treasurer.

William of Ypres. Hugh de Burg Lord chief Justice. Edmund of Woodstock, Son to
King Edward the First. Edmund Plantagenet. John Plantagenet. Thomas Holland.
Thomas Holland. Thomas Holland Duke of Surrey Edmund Holland Lord Admiral.
Edmund Gray Lord Ruthin Earl of Kent. George Gray Richard Gray Reginald Gray
Henry Gray Charles Gray Henry Gray Anthony Gray now living 1661 Henry Lord Gray
heir apparent.
The Earl of Rutland.
Owen ap Griffith Lord of Powis, who left one only daughter and heir, who
married as follows; John Charleton born in Appley near Wellington, was
Valectus Regis. Hawis Guardan (i. e.) the hardy, sole daughter and heir to
Griffith L. of Powis formerly a Prinpality. John Charleton L. of Powis. John
Charleton L. of Powis. John Charleton L. of Powis. Edward Charleton his
brother, dying without issue, Lord of Powis, who left two daughters his heirs.
Elinor one of the daughters and coheirs of T. Holland E. of Kent. John Lord
Typtoft of Worcester. Joyce D. and Co-h. to Ed. L. Powis. John L. Typtoft, E.
of Wocester, sans issue, left his four sisters his coheirs. Thomas L. Ross of
Hamlack, which line devolved into the family of Mannours E. of Rutland, by the
marriage of Elianor sister and heir of Ed. L. Ross of Hamlack, Belvoir and
Trusbut to Sr Roger Mannours Grandfather to Thomas first E. of Rutland of that
name. Philip the eldest daughter and coheir to John L. Tiptoft E. of Worcester.
Thom. Mannours first E. of Rutland. Elinor daughter to Sr. Will. Paston of
Norfolk. Sir John Mannours second son, Knight. Elizabeth daughter and coheir of
George Vernon of Haddon in the Peak in Darbyshire Esquire Note that John Vernon son
of Sir Henry Vernon, married Anne daughter to John Ludlow Esquire son to Sir
Richard Ludlow and Elizabeth his wife daughter of Richard Gray L. of Powis, and
Margaret daughter of James Audley, both which families are derived from Welsh
progenitors. George Manors of Haddon Esquire Grace daughter to Sir Henry Peirpoint
descended from British line, as in the Marquess of Dorchesters pedigree. John
Manors L. Ross Belvior and Trushat. E. of Rutland 1661. Francis daughter to
Edward Lord Montague.

RUTLAND.
Rutland for quantity is the least County of England; for quality not inferior
to the best, as being a pleasant and fruitful Country, especially about the
vale Catmoss. The earth thereof is generally very red of color, so red that
even the Fleeces of the sheep are colored with it, in which regard it had the
name of Rudland, the Saxons calling it Rud which we now call red. Heretofore it
was reckoned for a part of North-hamptonshire, not made a County till of late;
it contains in it 48. Parishes in the whole; the chief of which are Uppingham
and Oakham, two small Market Towns; of which the last is the Shire town for the
Assizes, Sessions and all public business; yet small and little though it be,
it can show the seats and titles of four Parliamentary Barons, and besides
that, it has honored many a noble person with the name and title of

Earls of RUTLAND.
1. Edward Plant. son of Edmund of Langley Duke of York. 2. Edmund Plant.
second son of R. D. of York. 3. Thomas Manors descended by his mother from the
Duke of York Earl of Rutland. 4. Henry Manors. 5. Edward Manors. 6. John
Manors. 7 Roger Manors. 8. Francis Manors. 9. John Manors. John Manors now
Earl of Rutland, 1661.
The Earl of Pembrock.
Bernard Newmarsh or Newmark L. of Brecon. Nest daughter of Grissith ap
Lhewellin Prince of Southwales. Milo Earl of Hereford. Sibil daughter and heir
of Bernard Newmarsh. Herbert Lord of the Forest of Dean. Lucy one of the
daughters and coheirs of Milo Earl of Hereford. Peter ap Herbert Esquire Alice
daughter and heir of Blethin Broadspear Lord of Llanthloell and Beachley.
Reginald ap Peter Esquire Margaret daughter to Sir John Welsh Knight. Adam ap Reginald
Esquire Crisley daughter and h. to Gwaindy Lord of Gwarendy Esquire Ienkin ap Adam of
Gwarendy Esquire Gwenllian d. to Aron ap Bledri Knight. Gwinllin Ienkin of Gwarendy Esquire
Gwenllian daughter to Howel ap Ioroth or Yorrath of Tylegles Esquire Thom. Gwillin
Ienkin of Gwarendy Esquire Maud daughter and heir of Sir John Borley Knight. Sir
William Thomas Knight. Gladys d. to Sr. David Game Knight. William Herbert created E.
of Pembrook, temp. Hen. 4 Anne daughter to Sir Walter Devereux K. William
Herbert of Ewyas. of Sir Matthew C^adoc Knight. William Herbert created Earl of
Pembrock 1468. Anne daughter of Thomas Par Baron of Kendal, and sister and
coheir of William Par Marquess of Northampton and Earl of Essex. Henry Herbert
Earl of Pembrock, Mary daughter to Sir Henry Sidney. Knight. L. Deputy of Ireland.
William Herbert Earl of Pembrock sans issue. Mary eldest daughter and coheir
to Gilbert Talbot E. of Shrewsbury. Philip Herbert E of Pembrock and
Montgomery. Susan daughter and at length coheir of Edward Vere Earl of Oxford,
by which match this honorable family again descends from the British line.
Philip Herbert E. of Pembrock and Montgomery 1661.

PEMBROCK.
Pembrockshire is a County plentiful of Corn and Cattle, and not distitute of
Pitcoale, and which is far above all the rest (as Giraldus tells us)
considering that it is so near to Ireland, of a temperate and wholesome air. It
contains in it 140. Parish Churches, and five Markets, that which is most of
note being Milford, renowned for its safe and capacious haven; but that from
which it takes denomination, is the Town of Pembrock, seated upon a forked arm
of Milford haven, and in the best part of all the Country, a Town consisting
principally of one long street on a long narrow point of the Rock, and has
within the walls thereof two Churches. The Earls hereof in former times were
County Palatines, and passed all things that concerned that Country under the
Seal of the Earldom, and it continued so until the reign of K. Henry VIII.
when as Wales was reduced to England, and the authority of the great Lords
there dissolved by Parliament, since when the Earls of Pembrock have been
merely titular, as of other places; and of each sort were those in their
several ages, the

Marquesses and Earls OF PEMBROCK.
Gilbert de Clare. Richard de Clare surnamed Strongbow. William Marshall
married Isabel daughter and heir of Richard Strongbow. William Marshal L.
chief Justice. Richard Marshall. Gilbert Marshall. Walter Marshall. Anselme
Marshall. William de Valence half brother to K. Henry III. whose wife was
daughter of a sister of Anselme Marshall. Agmer de Valence. Laurence Hastings
who married the Lady Isabel de Valence. John Hastings. John Hastings. Humphrey
D. of Gloucester. William de la Pole D. of Suffolk. Jasper of Hatfield D. of
Bedford. William Herbert. William Herbert. Edw P. of Wales son to K. Ed 4. Anne
Colen Marchioness of Pembrock, wife to K. Henry 8. William Herbert Lord
Stewar^ ^reated Earl of Pembrock by K. Edw. 6. Henry Herbert. William Herbert
Lord Stuard, and Chamberlain of Oxford. Philip Herbert E. of Pembrock and
Montgomery. Philip Herbert E. of Pembrock and Montgomery. 1661.
Earls of Dorset.
THomas Sackvile Earl of Dorset. Cecily daughter to Sir John Baker Knight. Robert
Sackvile E. of Dorset. Margaret sole daughter of Thomas Duke of Norfolk, by
which match this right honorable family is diversely descended from the
British blood, as at large appears in the pedigree of the Dukes of Norfolk.
Richard Sackvill E. of Dorset. Anne d. and sole h. of George E. of Cumberland,
descended by a daughter and coheir from Char. Brandon Duke of Suffolk, and
Mary Queen of France, daughter to King Henry VII. and Elizabeth his wife heir
general to the house of York, and consequently to the Mortimers E. of March, of
which family Raph L. Mortimer of Wigmore married Gladis sister and heir to
David, and daughter to Lhewellin Prince of Northwales as likewise Henry the
7th. descended from Owen Tweder lineally sprung from the Princes of Southwales.
Edward Sackvil E. of Dorset. Mary sole daughter of Sir George Curson Knight. Edward
Sackvile now E. of Dorset 1661.

DORSET.
The County of Dorset abutteth upon that of Devon, having the Sea upon the
South, and Somersetshire upon the North. The air good and of an healthful
constitution, the soil fat and rich in many places; and wherein that is
defective, it yields good store of Woods and Pasture. The Country generally
very pleasant in her situation, as being no less beholden to the Inner-land
Rivers, then the bordering Ocean; the one yielding Merchandise from far, the
other the commodity of conveyance to the most parts thereof, and both of them
good store of Fish. It contains in it 248. Parishes, and in them 18. Market
Towns, the chief whereof is Dorchester, as that which does denominate the whole
County. A Town not much famous for much else then that it has long been and
does still continue the honorary title of those noble Personages which have
been severally

Marquesses and Earls OF DORSET.
1 Osmond de Sees. E. 2 John Beaufort Marquess L. Adm. 3 Thomas Beaufort Earl,
Duke of Exceter, Lord Chancellor and Lord Admiral. 4 Edmund Beaufort E. and
Marque 5 Henry Beaufort Marq. 6 Edmund Beaufort Marq. 7 Thomas Gray Marq. 8
Thomas Gray Marq. 9 Henry Gray Marq. D. of Suffolk. 10 Thomas Sackvile Lord
Buckhurst, created Earl of Dorset, 10 Jacobi, Lord Treasurer and Chancellor of
Oxford. 11 Robert Sackvile E. 12 Richard Sackvile E. 13 Edward Sackvile E. Lord
Chamberlain to the Queen. 14 Edward Sackvile now Earl of Dorset 1661.
The Earls of Salisbury and Exceter.
RObert Sitsylt came into Wales with Robert Fitz Hamon who conquered Jestin
Prince of Glamorganshire. an inheretrix, by whom he had Halterennis and other
lands in Herefordshire and Glocestershire. James Sitsylt Esquire; John Sitsylt Esquire
The Lady Maud de Frenes. Eustace Sitsylt Esquire Elianor daughter to Sir Will.
Pembridge Knight. Sir Baldwin Sitsylt Knight, temp. Hen. secundi. -- daughter
to Maurice de Brampton Esquire Gerald Sitsylt Esquire Mavil daughter to Sir Moygne
Knight. Robert Sitsylt Esquire Alice daughter to Sir Rob. Trogois Knight. James
Sitsylt Esquire Isabell daughter to Sir John Knell Knight. Gerald Sitsylt Esquire
Margaret Daughter to Stephan de Ber. John Sitsylt Esquire Sibil daughter to Robert
of Ewyas Esquire. Sir John Sitsylt Knight. Alicia sister to Sir Richard
Baskervile Knight. John Sitsylt Esquire Jone daughter to sir Richard Monington
Knight. Thomas Sitsylt Esquire Margaret daughter and heir to Gilbert de Winston Esquire
Philip Sitsylt Esquire Margaret daughter to John Philips Esquire Richard Sitsylt
Knight, Cecil Esquire Margaret daughter to Philip Vaughan Esquire David Cecil Esquire Sir
William Cecil Baron Burley Knight of the Garter, etc. Mary sister to Sir John
Cheek Knight. Rob. Cecil E. of Salisbury Elizab. d. to W. Brook L. of Cob. Will.
Cecil E. of Salisbury 1661 Katherine d. to Tho. Howard E. of Suffolk. Charles
Lord Cranbourne. Jane daughter to Maxwell Esquire groom of the Bedchamber to K.
Charles of glorious memory. Tho. Cecil E. of Exceter. Dorothy d. and co-h. to
I. Nevil L Latimer. Will Cecil E. of ^xceter. Eliz. d and h. of Ed. Manors E.
of Rutland. D. Cecil now E of Exceter 1661 descended from a younger son of
William L. Burley. Eliz. d. to John Egerton Earl of Bridgwater.

SALISBURY.
Salisbury is the chief City of Wilts; it was at first seated high upon an
hill, as being a place designed for strength and war, yet honored for a while
with a Bishops See, and a fair Cathedral. But the Bishops and the Clergy
finding no good quarter amongst the Soldiers which were there in Garrison, and
being destitute of water upon so high an hill, about the time of Rich. I. began
to leave it, and plant themselves down lower by the waterside; being once
settled there and raising a new Cathedral for Gods public service, the people
also followed after, and left old Sarum to it self which in short time became
so totally deserted that now the ruins of it are hardly visible: but for new
Salisbury that grew up presently to a great renown, pleasantly seated on the
river with water in every street thereof; and for the populousness of the
place, plenty of provision, and spacious market place and a fair Town hall, is
esteemed to be the second City of all that Tract, and which adds no small
luster to it, a place that has been very fortunate in those eminent persons on
whom the Kings of England have bestowed the title of Earls of Salisbury.

Earls of Salisbury.
Patrick d' Eureux. Will. d' Eureux. Will Longespee base son to K. Henry 2.
who married Ella daughter of Will. d' Eureux. William Longespee. Will. de
Montacute Will. de Mont. John de Mont. Tho. de Mont. Richard Nevil who married
Elianor daughter of Thomas Mont. Lord Chapter Richard Nevil Earl of Warwick.
George Duke of Clarence, who married Isabel daughter of Richard Earl of
Warwick. Edward eldest son of King Richard 3. and Anne the second daughter of
Richard Nevil. Margaret daughter of George Duke of Clarence created Countess of
Salisbury by King Henry 8. Robert Cecil Viscount Crambourne, created Earl of
Salisbury 3. Jacob. William Cecil now Earl of Salisbury. 1661.
EXCETER.
Exceter is now the chief City of Devonshire, a fair and goodly seat; it is
placed upon the Eastern bank of the River Ex from whence it had the name of
Exceter. In circuit it contains within the walls about a mile and a half,
besides the suburbs which every way stretch out to a great length, and in the
circuit there are numbered fifteen Parish Churches, besides the Cathedral, the
whole environed with deep ditches and very strong walls, having many Towers
therein, very well disposed; and yet the animosity of the Inhabitants is a
greater strength unto it then the walls or ditches, whereof they have given
notable proof in these later times, to their great honor; here follows a
Catologue of the

Dukes, Marquesses, and Earls.
John Holland E. of Huntington, made Duke of Exceter by Richard 2. Thomas
Beaufort E. of Dorset, Lord Chapter and Adm. made Duke of Exceter by King Henry 5.
John Holland Duke Lord Adm. Henry Holland Duke Lord Adm. Henry Courtney E. of
Devon, created Marquess of Exceter by K. Henry 8. Thomas Cecil Lord Burley
created Earl of Exceter 3. Jaco. William Cecil. David Cecil now Earl 1661.
THE SECOND BOOK.
Arma Paterna.


ANARAWD the Son of Roderick began his Reign over Wales in the year of Christ
877.

Fedan the son of Melht, a noble man of Wales, and the second year following
there was a great Battle fought by the Danes, and the Englishmen of Mercia
against the Welshmen upon the River Conway, where the Welshman had the
Victory, and this was called the Revenge of the Death of Roderick.

Eveneth the Son of Bledrid, a Baron of Wales died, Foreign and always
pernicious.
and Anarawd King or Prince of North Wales came with a great Army of
Englishmen, and made War against his Brother Cadeth, and spoiled the country
of Caerdigan, and Ystradgwy.

The Danes being put hard to their shifts by Alfred, left their Wives and
children in Essex, and passed spoiling the Land to Forsan Cowbridge.
Quadbridge upon Severn, and so passed the River, and spoiled the countries of
Brechnock, Gwentland, and Gwenthwg.

About the year 900. Igmond with a great number of Soldiers, came to Anglesey,
and the Welshmen gave him a Battle at Molerein.

There be some British Copies of this History, which affirm that this battle
between Igmond Captain of the black Nations and the Britains, (wherein Mervin
was slain) was fought at a place called Meilon, of the which it was called Maes
Rhos Meilon.

Cadeth King or Prince of South Wales, third Son to Roderick the Great, leaving
behind him three Sons; Howel Dha (that is to say Howel the Good) who succeeded
his Father in the Kingdom of South Wales, Meyric, and Clydawc.

Shortly after there came a great Navy from Tydwick, with Other and Rahald, and
past the Western Sea to Wales, and destroyed Saint David's, and there fought the
Battle Dinerth, where Mayloc (the Son of Peredur Gam) was slain.

Anaawd chief King of Wales dyed and left behind him two Sons, Edwal Voel who
reigned after him, and Elise.



Mr. Mills fol. 292. Anno 877.
Mr. Mills differs here from Mr. Powel, the one setting Voel, the other Mervin
to succeed: I will therefore set down both Writings; the former of these two
says, Mervin the first begotten son of Rhoderick the Great, Prince of all
Wales, by the Gift and Grant of his Father was made Lord or Prince of that
Country of Wales, which the Inhabitants call Gwyneth, the Englishmen
North-VVales, and the Latins Venedotia. This province was divided into four
countries or quarters, which contained fifteen Cantreds: This word Cantred
being compounded of the British and Irish Language, is said to be such a
portion of Land as may contain an hundred Villages. The chief and principal
place of this Country was the Isle of Anglesey, or Mon, and in Aberfraw a city
thereof was the Royal palace of the Kings of North-VVales: now the reason why
the Kings of Gwyneth were called Kings of Aberfraw, was for that in the Laws of
the good Howel (Prince and Lawgiver) it was decreed, That as the Kings of
Aberfraw ought of Right to pay threescore and three pounds in way of Tribute to
the King of London, so the King of Dynefur and Mathraval should also be hound
in like manner to pay the like money unto the King of Aberfraw, as it were also
by way of Tribute; by which it appears, that this Lord was the chief Prince
of Wales.

The Wife of Mervin, the Son of Roderick, Prince of Venedotia or North-VVales
thus says Mr. Mills, but names her not.

Their Issue.


Idwallo, surnamed Voel Prince of Venedotia.

Edwal Voel.

Ut ante.



After that Edwal Voel began his Dominion over North Wales, Mr. Powel fol. 46.
Howel Dha being King or Prince of South Wales and Powis land, a terrible
Comet appeared in the Firmament, at which time the year following, Leicester
was new built.

Denelm, did destroy the Isle of Mon or Anglesey; and the year 917. Clydawc the
Son of Cadeth, was slain by the hands of his brother Meyric; and about the
same time the Englishmen did overthrow the Danes.

Much about this time, Elfled Duchess of Mercia sent her whole Army into
Wales, Ren. Cest. Math. West Hell. pa. 222.
and fought with the Welshman, and won Brecknock, and took the Queen and
three and thirty men. This was it which is called in Welsh, Gweythy Dinas
Newydh, that is to say, The battle of the new City; also she vvon the Town of
Derby.

John Castoreus reports this story in this manner; Huganus Lord of West
Wales, Jo. Cast.
perceiving King Edward to be occupied in the Danish War, far enough from him,
gathered an Army of Britains, and entered the Kings Land, whereupon Elfled Lady
of Mercia, and Sister to King Edward, came to Wales with a strong Army, and
fought with the Welshmen at Brecknock, and putting Huganus to flight, took his
Wife and thirty four Captives, and led them with her to Mercia; Huganus thus
discomfited, fled to Derby, and there being peaceably entertained of the
Countrymen with fifteen men of War, and two hundred Soldiers well appointed,
joined himself with the Kings adversaries the Danes, of which thing when Elfled
was certified by the men of Derby, she followed him with a great Army, and
entered the Gates of that Town, where Huganus resisted her, and slew four of her
chief Officers. But Gwyane Lord of the Isle of Ely her Steward, set the Gates
on fire, and furiously running upon the Britains, entered the Town; then
Huganus being overmatched, A stout resolution of a valiant Welshman.
and choosing rather to dye by the Sword, then to yield himself to a Woman, was
there slain.

The same Author also reports, that about this time Leofred a Dane, and
Gruffith of Madoc, Brother in Law to the Prince of West Wales, came to Ireland
with a great Army, to Snowdon, and minding to bring all Wales and the Marches
thereof to their subjection, overran and subdued all the Country to Chester,
before King Edward could be certified of their Arrival, whereat he was much
discontented, and being loath to trouble his subjctes in that behalf, made a vow
that he and his Sons with their own people, would he revenged on Leofred and
Gruffith, and thereupon came to Chester, and wan the City from them, after
which he divided his army into two Battails, whereof he and his Son Athelstane
led the first, and Edmund and Eldred the second, and so followed them with as
much celerity as he could, and overtook them at the Forest of Walewood now
Sherwood, where Leofred and Cruffith set upon him fiercely, so that the King in
the beginning, was in some Distress, until Athelstane stepped in between his
Father and Leofred, and wounded the Dane in the arm, in such sort, that he
being not able to hold his spear, was soon taken and committed to the custody
of Athelstane. In the mean time, Edmund and Edred encountering with Gruffith,
slew him, and brought his head to their Father: Then Athelstane caused Leofred
to be beheaded, and so both their heads were set up together on the top of the
Tower of Chester.

The year 933. Owen the Son of Gruffith was slain by the men of Cardigan. 933.
Will. Malmsh. Hol. p. 225. Jo. Cast. Mat. West. Ren. Cest. P^w^l fol. ^50. The
B^^tains removed into Cornwall. Math West. Hol. page 226.
Then Athelstane did enter Wales with a great Army, and brought the Kings of
the Country to subjection, and received yearly of Tribute twenty pounds in
gold, and three hundred paid in silver, and two hundred head of Cattle; yet the
Laws of Howel appointed to the King of Aberfraw, to pay yearly to the King of
London, no more but sixty six pounds for a Tribute, and that the Prince of
Dinevowre, and the Prince of Powis, should pay a like sum of sixty six pounds
yearly to the King of Aberfraw.

In the year 936. dyed Euneth the son of Clydawc and Meiric, the son of Cadeth,
at this time also Athelstane did remove the Britains that dwelt in Exeter, and
thereabouts to Cornwall, and appointed the River Cambria, to be the utter Mere
toward England as he had before appointed the River Wy, to be the Mere of
England and Wales. About the year 940. Cadeth the son of Arthvael a noble
Britain, was imprisoned; and Edwal Voel, the Son of Anarawd, and Elise his
Brother, were slain in a battle which they fought against the Danes and
Englishmen. This Edwal had six sons, Meiric, Janaf, or Jenan, Jago, which is
James, Conan, Edwal, Vachan, and Roderick; after whose death Howel Dha his
Cousin German ruled all Wales during his life. Elise also had Issue Conan, and
a Daughter named Trawst, which was Mother to Conan ap Sitsylht, Gruffith ap
Sitsylht, and Blethin ap Covyn, which two last were afterward Princes of
Wales.



Howel Dha.
This Howel Dha King or Prince of Southwales, and of Powis, long before this
time, after the death of Edwal Voel, his cousin, took upon him the rule and
government of all Wales, about the year of Christ 940. who, notwithstanding
the sons of Edwal did something murmur against him, was for his godly
behavior, discreet and just rule, beloved of men. This Howel constituted and
made Laws to be kept through his Dominions, which were used in Wales till such
time as the Inhabitants received the laws of England, in the time of King
Edward the First, and in some places thereof long after; These laws are to be
seen at this day both in Welsh and Latin.

Howel Dha perceiving the laws and customs of his country to have grown unto
great abuse, sent for the Archbishop of Menenia, and all the other Bishops,
and chief of the Clergy, A pious example for all Princes.
to the number of one hundred and forty Prelates, and all the Barons and Nobles
of Wales, and caused six men of the wisest and best esteemed in every Comote
to be called before him, whom he commanded to meet altogether at his house
called Y Tuy Gwyn Taf, that is, The white house upon the River Taf. Thither he
came himself, and there remained with those his Nobles, Prelates, and Subjects
all the Lent in prayer and fasting, craving the Assistance and direction of
Gods holy Spirit, that he might reform the Laws and Customs of the Country of
Wales, to the honor of God, and quiet government of the people.

About the end of Lent he chose out of that company twelve men of the wisest,
gravest, and of the greatest experience, to whom he added one Clerk or Doctor
of the laws, named Blegored, a singular learned and perfect wise man. These
had in charge to examine the old laws and customs of Wales, and to gather of
such as were meet for the government of the Country; which they did, retaining
those that were wholesome and profitable, expounding those that were doubtful
and ambiguous, and abrogating those that were superfluous and hurtful, and so
ordained three sorts of Laws. The first for ordering of the King or Princes
Household and his Court. The second of the affairs of the Country and
Commonwealth. The third of the special customs belonging to particular places
and persons. Of all the which (being read, allowed and proclaimed) he caused
three several books to be written; one for his daily use to follow his Court,
an other to lie in his Palace at Abersfrew, and the third at Dinevour, that all
the three Provinces of Wales might have the use of the same when need required.
The King and Princes of Britain, much observant of the Sea Apostolic.
And for the better observation of these laws, he procured of the Archbishop
of St. David's, to denounce sentence of excommunication against such of his
Subjects as refused to obey the same: whithin a while after Howel (because he
would omit nothing that could bring countenance and authority to his said laws)
went to Rome, taking with him the Archbishop of St. David's, the Bishop of
Bangor and Asaph, and thirteen other of the learned and wisest men in Wales,
where the said laws being recited before the Pope, were by his authority
confirmed; then having finished his devoted pilgrimage, he returned home again
with his company.

1. By these laws they might not morgage their lands but to one of the same
family or kindred which were de eadem Parentela.

2. Every tenant holding of any other then his Prince or Lord of the Fee, paid
a fine pro defensione Regia which was called Arian Ardhel, in Latin Advocarii.

3. No Legacy of goods by Will, was good, otherwise then those which were given
to the Church, to the Lord of the Fee, or for payment of debts.

4. Every man might destrain as well for debts as for rent of Lands, any goods
or Cattle saving horses which were counted to serve for a man's necessary
defense, and were not destrainable without the Princes license.

5. Causes of Inheritance were not heard or determined but from the ninth of
November till the ninth of February, or from the ninth of May until the ninth
of August; the rest of the year was counted a time of vacation for sowing in
the spring, and reaping in the harvest.

This also is to be observed, that all matters of inheritance of Land were
determined and adjudged by the King or Prince in person, or his special Deputy
(if he were sick or impotent) and that upon the view of the said Land, calling
unto him the Freeholders of the same place, two Elders of his Council, the
Chief Justice attending always in the Court, the ordinary Judge of the Country
where the Land lay and the Priest. The manner of their proceeding was thus; the
King or Prince sat in his Judicial seat higher then the rest, with an Elder on
his right hand and an other on his left, and the Freeholders on both sides next
unto them, which for this cause as (I think) were called Vchelwyr. Before him
directly a certain distance off and a little lower sat the Chief Justice,
having the Priest on his right hand, and the ordinary Judge of that Country on
the left; The court being set, the Plaintiff came in with his Advocate,
Champion and Rhyngyth, and stood on the right side, and last of all the
Witnesses on both parties came, which stood directly before the Chief Justice,
at the lower end of the Hall, until they were called up to testify the truth
of their knowledge in the matter in varitance.

The figure of which I thought good here to lay down as ye see Underneath.

Uchelwyr. An Elder. The King. An Elder. Uchelwyr. The Priest. THE Chief
Justice. The Judge. The Defendant. The Plaintiff. Rhyngyth. Rhyngyth. Advocate.
Advocate. Champion. The VVitnesses. Champion.

After the hearing of this book read, the depositions of the witnesses, and
full pleading of the cause in open Court, upon warning given by the Rhyngyth,
the chief Justice, the Priest, and the Ordinary Judge withdrew themselves for a
while to consult of the matter, and then secundum Allegata and probata, brought
their verdict, the Court sitting. Whereupon the King or Prince after
consultation had with the Elders or Seniors which sat by him, gave definitive
sentence except the matter was so obscure and intricate that right and truth
appeared not; in the which case it was tried by the two Champions, and so the
cause ended. This shall be sufficient for this time.

Some Authors write that Lhewelin ap Sitsylht who was after Prince of Wales,
assisted Edmund a Saxon King, and entered Cumberland, taking the two sons of
Dummaille King of the Province, put out their eyes, and then gave that Country
to Malcolme to be holden of him, with condition to keep the North part of the
Realm from incursion of enemies, the which condition was afterward but
slenderly peformed. This Malcome was the son of Donald King of Scotland, and
was the next King, after Constantine the third, being in number the 76.

In the year 942. died Hubert Bishop of St. David's, and the year following,
Marclois Bishop of Bangor, and Vssa the son of Lhavyr died; the year 944. the
Englishmen entered Wales with a strong army, and spoiled Strad, Clwid, and
returned home: At which time Conan the son of Elise was put in danger of death
by poison, and Everus Bishop of St. David's died.

In the year 948 died Howel Dha, the noble and worthy King or Prince of Wales,
whose death was much lamented by all men; for he was a Prince that loved peace
and good order, and that feared God; he left behind him four sons, Owen, Run,
Roderike, and Edwin, betwixt whom and the sons of Edwal, there ensued great
wars, for the chief rule of Wales, as shall appear in the history following.



After the death of Howel Dha, his sons did divide Southwales and Powis betwixt
them. And Janaf and Jago the second and third sons of Edwal Voel ruled North
Wales (because their elder brother Meyric was not a man worthy to rule) who
coming of the elder house, would have had the chief rule of all Wales, which
the sons of Howel Dha denied them. And thereupon Jago or James and Janaf entered
Southwales with a great power, against whom came Owen the son of Howel and his
brethren, and fought together at the hills of Carno, where Jago and Janaf had
the victory. And the year following the said brethren did twice enter into
Southwales and spoiled Dinet, and slew Dwnwalhon Lord thereof. And within a
while after dyed Roderike one of the sons of Howel Dha. Howel gathered their
strength together against Janaf and Jago, and entered their land at the river of
Conwy, where they fought a cruel battle at a place called Gurgustu, or
Lhanrwst as some think, where a great number were slain upon either side, as
Anarawd the son of Gwyriad or Vriel, the son of Roderike the great, and Edwin
the son of Howel Dha, in the which battle were overthrown the sons of Howel,
whom Janaf and Jago pursued to Caerdigan, and destroyed their Country with
fire and svvord. About this time Yarthyr the son of Mervyn was drowned.

In the year 958 was a wonderful hot summer, when Gwyan the son of Gwiriad the
son of Roderike dyed: After the which heat there followed a great plague in
March ensuing. In those days Jago and Janaf by force and strength ruled all
Wales as they thought good. And yet for all their power Abloic King of Ireland
landed in Mon, and having burnt Holyhead, spoiled the country of Lhyyn. Edwin
the son of Colhoyn were slain after they had destroyed all the country to
Towyn. About this time Meyric the son of Cadvan, Rytherch Bishop of St. David's,
and Cadwalhon ap Owen departed out of this transitory life. Not long after the
country of Northwales was exceedingly spoiled by the army of Edgar King of
England.

The cause of this was the not payment of the tribute that the King of
Abersfraw, by the laws of Howel Dha was to pay to the Kings of London: in the
end there was a peace concluded; Jo. Cast. Holl. page 232. Wolves destroyed by
the Prince of W.
for King Edgar understanding what hurt the Countries of England and Wales
received daily, by reason of the great multitude of Wolves, that then abounded,
especially in Wales, which destroyed much sheep, and otherwise did great
harm, released the tribute of money, appointed by the said laws of Howel Dha,
and bound the Princes of Northwales to pay him yearly certain Wolves for his
tribute, and so to be released of the other tribute in money, which the said
Prince performed, until he had left never a Wolf in all Wales or England.

Roderike the son of Edwal Voel was slain by the Irishmen, by whom Abersfraw
was destroyed.

The next year after fell a great debate betwixt the two sons of Edwal, Jago
and Janaf, which had ruled jointly together from the death of Howel Dha till
that time: and shortly after Jago having taken his brother Janaf by force, very
cruelly kept him in prison a long time, about the which time Eneon the son of
Owen Prince of Southwales wan and seized to himself the land of Gwyr. And in
the year ^69. Machis the son of Haroald with an army of Danes did enter into
Anglesey and ^poyled (...). ^^^nes were suffered by Edgar to inhabit quietly
through all England till they ^^re as strong as the Englishmen, and then they
fell to such ryotousness and drinking that ^^ch mischief ensued thereof, A law
against immoderate drinking.
whereupon Edgar made a law, that every man should drink by measure, and caused
a certain mark to be set in every pot, how deep they should drink, and so by
these means he somewhat stayed the immoderate ingurgation. Not long after that
Godfryd the son of Haroald did subdue to himself the whole Isle of Anglesey,
which he en^oyed not long* Edgar likewise in the year 972 did send a great army
to Ga^^^^on upon Vsk which shortly turned back without doing any notable act.
Caerleon upon Vsk.
The next year following Howel the son of Janaf raised a great power against
his Uncle Jago, for the deliverance of his father out of prison, and overcame
his Uncle in fight, whom he chased out of the land, and took his eldest Uncle
Meyric the son of Edwal, and put out both his eyes, and kept him in prison
where he dyed shortly after, leaving behind him two sons, Edwal and Jonaval, of
the which Edwal came afterward the most worthy Princes of Wales. Howel
notwithstanding he had set his father at liberty, yet took upon himself the
whole rule of the land for his lifetime. He had three brethren, all men of
great estimation Meyrich, Janaf and Cadwallon, whose lines shall ensue
hereafter.



Howel Son of Janaf.
After that Howel the son of Janaf had expelled his Uncle from the land,
Dunwalhon goes to Rome.
he took the rule to himself. And at that time Dwnwalhon Prince of Strad Cwlyd
took his journey to Rome. Then dyed Edwalhon the son of Owen.

Eneon the son of Owen King of Southwales destroyed the land of Gwyr the second
time; the year ensuing Howel the son of Janaf, with a great army both of
Welshmen and Englishmen made war against such as succored and defended his
Uncle Jago, and spoiled the Countries of Lhyyn and Kelynnoc Vawr, whereby
shortly after Jago was taken by Howels men, who enjoyed his part of the land
peaceably. Edwal Vachan the son of Edwal Voel, was slain by his Nephew Howel.
At this time Custenym Dhu, that is Constantine the black son to Jago (which
then was prisoner) hired Godfryd the son of Haroald with his Danes against his
Cousin, and they both together destroyed Anglesey and Lhyyn, whereupon Howel
gathered his army together, and setting upon them at a place called Gwath
Hirbarth, overthrew them, where Constantine was slain.

Godfryd the son of Haroald gathered a great army and entered West Wales, where
spoiling all the Land of Dynet, with the Church of St. David's, he fought the
battle of Lhanwanoc. Likewise in the year next ensuing Duke Alfred with an
army of Englishmen spoiled and destroyed Brechnock and great part of the lands
of Owen Prince of Southwales, against whom Eneon the son of the said Owen and
Howel King of Northwales did raise all their power, and overthrow them in
battle, where the greatest part of Alfreds army was slain, and the rest put to
flight. The year following the Gentlemen of Gwentland rebelled against their
Prince, and cruelly slew Eneon the so^ of Owen which came thither to appease
them. This Eneon was a worthy and noble Gentleman, who did many notable acts in
his fathers time, and left behind two sons, Edwin and Theodor or Tewdor Mawr,
of whom came afterward the Kings and Princes of Southwales. In the year 984.
Howel the son of Janaf King of Wales, entered England with an army, where he
was fought and slain valiantly fighting. This Howel had no son, but his
brethren reigned in his place.



Cadwallon the Son of Janaf.
After the death of Howel, his Brother Cadwallon the second Son of Janaf, took
in hand the government of Northwales, and first made War with Jonaval his Cofin
the Son of Meyric, and right heir to the Land, and slew him; but Edwal the
youngest Brother escaped away secretly.

The year following, Meredyth the Son of Owen, King or Prince of Southwales,
with all his People entered into Northwales, and in fight slew Cadwallon, the
son of Janaf and Meyric his Brother, and conquered the land to himself, wherein
a man may see how God punished the wrong which Jago and Janaf the Sons of Edwal
Voel did to their eldest brother Meyrick, who was first disinherited, and
afterward his eyes put out, and one of his Sons slain; for first Janaf was
imprisoned by Jago, then Jago with his Son Constantine by Howel the Son of
Ianaf, and afterward the said Howel with his brethren Cadwallon and Meyric were
slain, and spoiled of their Lands.



Meredyth the Son of ap Howel Dha.
Meredyth ap Owen, havingslain Cadwallon, obtained the Rule and government of
Northwales, in the year 986. Godfrid the Son of Haroald the third time entering
the isle of Anglesey, where having taken Lywarck the Son of Owen, with two
thousand prisoners besides, he cruelly put out his eyes, whereupon Meredyth the
Prince with the rest escaped and fled to Cardigan, and the same year there was
a great murrain of cattle throughout all Wales.

Ianaf the Son of Edwal, who had lived many years a private life. The same year
also dyed Owen the son of Howel Dha, prince of Southwales. This Owen had three
Sons, Eneon which dyed in his Fathers life time, Lhywarck which lost both his
eyes, and Meredyth, which (as ^^fore is declared) had won Northwales, and after
his Fathers death took also into his possession all Southwales, having no
respect to his Brother Eneon his Sons Edwin and Theodor or Tewdor. About the
same time, the Danes sailed from Hampton along the Sea coast, The Tribute of
the black Army.
spoiled Devonshire and Cornwall, and so at last landed in Southwales, and
destroyed Saint David's, Lanbadarn, Lhanrystid, and Lhandydock (which were all
places of Religion) and did so much hurt in the country besides, that to be rid
of them, Meredyth was fain to agree with them, and to give them a penny for
every man within his land which was called the Tribute of the black Army.

Owen the son of Dyfnwal was slain; within a year after, Meredith King of
Wales, destroyed the Town of Radnor, at which time his Nephew Edwin, the son of
Encon, having to his aid Duke Adelf, and a great army of Englishmen and Danes,
spoiled all the land of Meredith in Southwales, as Caerdigan, Dynet, Gwyr,
Kydwch, and Saint David's, where Edwin took pledges of the chief men of those
Countries.

In the mean time this Meredith with his people did spoil Glamorgan, so that no
place was free from Sword and fire; but at the last Meredith and Edwin fell to
an agreement, and were made Friends. Soon after Cadwalhon the son of Meredith
dyed.

Meredith being thus employed, had so much to do in Southwales, that Northwales
lay open for the enemy; which thing when the Danes perceived they arrived in
Anglisey, and destroyed the whole Isle, Matthew. West. page 383. J^a. Castor. 992.
whereupon the Inhabitants of that country received Edwal the son of Meyric,
the right heir of Northwales for their Prince, in the year 992. After these
great troubles there followed within a year after, such famine and scarcity in
Southwales, that many perished for want of food.



Edwal ap Meyric the son of Meredith:
This Edwal being in possession of the principality of Northwales, studied to
keep and defend his people from injuries and wrongs. But Meredith gathered
together all his power, intending to recover again Northwales, with whom Edwal
met at Lhagwm, and overthrew him in plain battle, where Theodor or Tewdor
Manor, Meredith his Nephew was slain, who left behind him two Sons, Rees and
Rytherck, and a Daughter called Elen. A little after this, Swain the son of
Haroald destroyed the Isle of Man, and entering into Northwales, slew Edwal the
prince thereof, who left behind him a son called Jago.

In the year of Christ 998. the Danes came again to Saint David's, destroying
all before them, and there they slew Morgency, or rather Vrgency, Bishop of
that See; the same year also dyed Meredith the son of Owen, King or Prince of
Wales, leaving behind him one only Daughter called Angharad, which was married
to Lewellin ap Sitsylht, and after his death to Convyn Hirdref, or as other do
think, to Convyn ap Gwerystan, who had children by either of them, which was
the cause of much war and mischief in Wales, as shall appear hereafter.



Aedan the Son of Blegored.
The death of both these Princes, (for so much as Meredith had no Issue male, and
Edwal left behind him a child within years, not able to take the charge of a
Commonwealth) did cause much trouble to ensue; for in Northwales diverse did
aspire to the Government, and sought the rule of the Land, as Conan the son of
Howel, and Aedan the son of Blegored, who tried the matter in open field, where
Conan was slain in the year, 1003.

I do not know (says my Author) neither could I ever find what color or
pretense of Title this Aedan ap Blegored had to the principality of Northwales,
nor yet of whom he de cended, or who descended from him, whereas all the other
Princes are notoriosly known of what families they did descend, and who from
them; neither yet do I read of any Blegored,, whose son he was, except it be
that Doctor of Law, of whom mention is made in the Laws of Howel Dha, whose
estate was too mean to challenge a principality: he is reported to have
governed about twelve years.

Of his Acts by him achieved, there is very little written, saving of those
two, battails, the one wherein he overcame Conan ap Howel, and the other,
wherein he was overcome himself, and slain with his four sons by Lhewellin ap
Sitsylht.

In the year 1015. Lhewelin the Son of Sitsylht, raised a great power against
Aedan, who by force had taken upon him the rule of Northwales, and slew him
with his four sons in battle, and having no respect to Jago or James the son of
Edwal, the right heir, took upon him the name and authority of King of Wales.

This Lhewellin was descended from the Kings of Wales by his mothers side,
whose name was Trawst, daughter to Elise, second son to Anarawd, which was
eldest son to Roderik the great, who also had to wife Angharac, the only
daughter of Meredith Prince of Southwales, and so by these means he claimed and
enjoyed the right of either country, as hereafter shall be showed.



Lhewellin the son of Sitsylht and Angharat the Daughter of Meredith.
After that Lhewellin son of Sitsylht had taken into his hands the government
of Wales, all things did prosper in the Land; for the earth brought forth
double to the time before passed, the people prospered in all their affairs,
and multiplied wonderfully; the cattle increased in great number, so that there
was neither beggar nor poor man from the South to the North sea, but every man
had plenty, every house a dweller, and every Town inhabitants.

In the year 1019. Meyric the son of Arthpoel, did raise a great army against
Lhewelin, King or Prince of Wales, which met with him in the field, and
manfully slew him, and discomfited his people.

In the year 1020. a certain Son of low birth, came to Southwales, and named
himself Run, the son of Meredith their late King, whom the Nobility which loved
not Lhewelin, exalted to the regal Throne, and took him for their King, which
thing when Lhewelin heard, he gathered his power in Northwales, and came
toward the supposed Run, who had gotten all the strength of Southwales
together at Abergwili, where with great pride he abode the coming of Lhewelin;
but when both the armies met, and were ready to join, Run full of brags and
cracks, encouraged his people to fight, promising them the Victory: yet he
himself (following the Proverb, which bids a man to set on his dog, and not
to run after him) set on his people to fight it to the uttermost, and withdrew
himself privately out of the way; whereas upon the contrary part, Lhewelin like
a bold and courageous Prince, came before his people, calling for the vile Scot
Run, that durst so belly a Princes Blood, and so both the Armies joined together
with much malice and hatred; for the one party was so courageous to defend the
quarrel of so worthy a Prince of their own blood, as the other was obstinate in
the cause of a stranger; in the end, after great slaughter upon either part,
the Northwales men remembering their old Victories, and encouraged by the
prowess of their Prince, put their enemies to flight, and pursued Run so
narrowly, that all his Scottish shifts could not save his life, and returned
home with great spoil and prey. Then Lhewelin ruled all the land quietly, till
the year following, he was slain by Howel and Meredith, the Sons of Edwin,
leaving behind him a son named Griffith ap Lhewelin.



After the death of Lhewelin, Jago or James the son of Edwal, took upon him the
rule of Northwales, as right heir thereof; and Rytherick the son of Jestin
governed Southwales by strong hand.

Irish Scots entered Southwales by the means of Howel and Meredith the sons of
Edwin ap Eneon ap Owen ap Howel Dha, who hired them against Rytherick ap
Jestin, whom they discomfited and slew, and by that means attained unto the
government of Southwales, which they two ruled jointly, but yet with small
quietness; for the sons of Rytherick, gathered a number of such as were their
fathers friends, to avenge his death, with whom Howel and Meredith met at
Hyarthwy, and after long fight, put them to flight. But in the year following,
Meredith was slain by the sons of Conan the Son of Sitsylt, brother to the
worthy Prince Lhewelin, to revenge their fathers death, whom Meredith and his
Brother had slain.

The year next ensuing, certain Englishmen entered the Land of Gwent, with whom
Rytherick ap Jestin fought, and was by them slain.

In the year 1037. Gruffith the son of Lhewelin ap Sitsylt, sometime King of
Wales, raised a great number of people against Jago, then enjoying the
Principality or Kingdom of Northwales, whom Jago likewise provided for as well
as he could: but the more part and better soldiers were of Gruffiths side, for
the love they bare to his Father, which afterward well appeared; for the Armies
meeting, Jago was soon overthrown and slain. This Jago left behind him a son
called Conan, by his wife Avandred, daughter to Gweir the son of Pilh.



Gruffith ap Lhewlyn ap Sitsylt and Angharat.
Gruffith ap Lhewlin after he had slain Jago, governed Northwales worthily, in
all things following his fathers steps, who overcame both the Danes and the
Englishmen diverse times, and defended his Country and people manfully all his
reign. In the first year of his government he fought with the Englishmen and
Danes at Crosford upon Severn, and put them to flight, and from thence he led
his army to Lhanpadarn Vawr in Caerdiganshire and destroyed it utterly and from
thence passed all Southwales throughout, and received the people to his
subjection; for Howel ap Edwin their King fled before his face, and forsook the
land.

This Howel procured Edwin, the brother of Leofrike Earl of Chester or Mercia,
to come with an army of Englishmen and Danes to his aid against Prince
Gruffith; who met his enemies in the field and overcame them, and slew the said
Edwin, but Howel escaped by flight: after the which victory Gruffith made
sundry invasions upon the Marshes toward Hereford, and always returned with
great spoils.

Gruffith had brought all Wale: under his dominion, he returned to Northwales
again. The year ensuing 1038. Hernon Archbishop of Menevia or St. David's died,
a man both learned and godly; the next year following Howel King of Southwales
gathered a great power of his friends and strangers, and entered the land,
intending to overcome it again; wherefore Gruffith like a worthy Prince came
with all speed to succor his people, and meeting with Howel at Pencadair,
after he had encouraged his Soldiers, gave him battle, and overthrew him and
pursued him, so narrowly that he took Howels wife, whom he had brought to the
field to see the overthrow of Gruffith (which chanced otherwise) whom Gruffith
liked so well that he kept her for his Concubine.

Howel came again to Southwales, and remained there a while, and shortly after
a number of strangers landed in Westwales, and spoiled the Country; against
whom Howel gathered his forces and fought with them, and drove them to their
ships with much loss.

At this time Conan the son of Jago (who had fled to Ireland to save his life)
with the power of Alfred King of Develin whose daughter Ranulph he had married,
entered Northwales and by treason had taken Gruffith the King, and carried him
toward the ships; but when it was known, the Country upon a sudden followed
the Irishmen; and overtaking them rescued their Prince, requiting their foes
with much slaughter, forcing them to their ships who returned with Conan to
Ireland. The year following Howel the son of Owen Lord of Glamorgan dyed, being
a man full of years. Then Howel ap Edwin called to his succor Danes and
Englishmen with all the power he could make in Southwales, whereof Gruffith
being certified, gathered his power together in Northwales, and came
courageously to meet his enemies (whom he had twice before discomfited) and
overcame them and chased them as far as the spring of the River Towy, where
after a long and dangerous battle Howel was slain, and his army routed, and so
narrowly pursued that few escaped alive. After whose death Ritherck and Rees
the sons of Ritherck ap Iestyn aspiring again to the rule and government of
Southwales, which their father had once obtained, gathered a great army as well
of Strangers as out of Gwentland and Glamorgan, and met with Gruffith King of
Wales, who after his accustomed manner detracting no time, but courageously
animating his men with the remembrance of their former fortune and diverse
victories under his standard joined battle with his enemies, whom he found
disposed to abide and to win again the honor they had lost: wherefore when
they met, the fight was cruel and bloody, and continued till night, which
easily departed, both armies being weary with fighting, and either fearing
other, returned to their Countries to gather more strength. This year Joseph
Bishop of Teilo or Lhandaf died at Rome. The Bishop of Landaff dies at Rome.
The land being thus quieted, Gruffith ruled all Wales without any trouble;
till about two years after the Gentlemen of Ystrad Towy did by treason kill 140
of the Prince his best Soldiers; to revenge whose death the King Gruffith
destroyed all Dinet and Ystrad Towy. Here is also to be noted that such snow
fell this year, that it lay upon the earth from the Kalends of January to the
fourteenth of March.

In the year 1050 Conan the son of Iago did gather an army of his friends in
Ireland minding to recover his inheritance again; as he sailed toward Wales,
there arose such a tempest that it scattered his navy abroad, and drowned the
most part of his ships so that he was disappointed of his purpose and lost his
labor.

This Earl Godwin that wicked Earl of Kent, whose lands were swallowed up by
the Sea, and as this day called Godwins sands pernicious and terrible to
Navigators, as late experience has taught us.
About this time Godwin being summoned to appear and answer before King Edward
Conf. at Gloucester, the guilty Earl Godwin fearing the Kings displeasure (who
could never brook him since the death of his brother Alfred) gathered an army
out of Kent and other Countries where his sons ruled or had power, and so came
toward Gloucester, reporting abroad that all his preparation was made to
resist Gruffith Prince of Wales, who as they affirmed, was ready with an army
to invade the Marches: but King Edward being certified by the Welshmen that
there was no such thing in hand, commanded Godwin to send back his army.

Matthew. West writes that about this time, to wit, anno 1053. Rees the brother
of Gruffith King of Wales was slain in a place called Balendane, which place
since was called Pen Rees, and lately belonged to Sir Ed. Morgan Baronet; but
sold from the house, as he did much more to the ruin of his family, though the
fault be laid upon upon his son (I say no more but God knows how (...) whose
head was presented to the King at Gloucester, the day before the Epiphany.

According to the computation of Authors, near these times Machbeth King of
Scotland caused a noble man named Bancho to be cruelly murdered; whereupon
Fleance the son of the sad Bancho escaping the hands of Macebeth fled to
Gruffith ap Lhewelyn Prince of Wales where being joyfully received and
entertained courteously, he grew into such favor with the said Prince that he
thought nothing too good for him. But in process of time Fleance forgetting
the courtesy to him showed, fell in love with the Princes daughter, and got her
with child, which thing the Prince took in ill part that he in rage caused
Fleance to be killed, holding his daughter in most vile estate of servitude for
so suffering her self to be de flowered by a stranger. At length she was
delivered of a son, which was named Walter, who in few years proved a man of
great courage and valor, in whom from his childhod appeared a certain
nobleness of mind, and ready to attempt any great enterprise. This Walter on a
time fell out with one of his companions who in that great heat of contention
objected unto him, that he was but a bastard begotten in an unlawful bed, which
reproach so grieved Walter that he fell upon the other, and slew him; whereupon
fearing the punishment of the law, he fled into Scotland, and there fell into
the company of those Englishmen which were come thither with Queen Margaret the
sister of Edgar Edeling; amongst whom he showed himself so discreet and sober
in all his demeanor, that he was highly esteemed of all men, and so attaining
to higher reputation and credit, was afterward employed in the affairs of the
Commonwealth, at length made Lord Steward of Scotland receiving the King
revenues of the whole realm. Of the which Office he and his posterity retained
that Surname of Steward ever after, from whom descended the most noble Kings of
Scotland, besides many other Dukes, Marquesses, Earls and Barons of great fame
and honor.

Whosoever desires to be more fully satisfied in this matter, let him read and
peruse E. Holenshed, and he shall find James King of England to have descended
from the Welsh blood.

Gruffith the son of Rythrick ap Iestyn, did gather a great army, as well of
strangers as of others, against Gruffith ap Lhewelyn, King or Prince of Wales,
but commonly called King of Northwales, who detracting no time, meeting him,
fought with him and slew him.

Shortly after; Algar Earl of Chester, being convicted of Treason against the
King, fled to Gruffith into Wales, who gathered his power to revenge the
Wrongs which he had received at the Englishmens hands, who ever succored his
enemies against him. Therefore he together with Algar entered Herefordshire,
and spoiled all the way with fire and svvord to the City, whether all the
people had fled, and they boldly issued forth (Earl Randulf being their leader)
and gave him battle, which Gruffith wished for above any other things, as he
that had won five set battles, and courageously receiving his Enemies, fought
with them, which fight was long and doubtful, till such time as Gruffith
encouraged his people with the remembrance of the prowess and worthy Acts of
the ancient Britains their forefathers, saying, that they were the same
enemies, whose backs they had so often seen formerly, which doubled their
strength and force, and so they pressed forwards, that their foes were
compelled to forsake the field, and trust to their feet, and thought to have
taken the Town for their defense; but Gruffith and his men pursued them so
hard, that they entered with them, and after a great slaughter, returned home
with many worthy prisoners, great triumph and rich spoils, leaving nothing in
the Town but blood and ashes, and the Walls razed to the ground.

There be some that think that King Edward by evil counsel (as it is thought)
banished Algar the son of Earl Leofrike, whereupon he got him into Ireland, and
there providing eighteen ships of Rovers, returned and joined himself with
Gruffith, King or Prince of Wales, who both together invaded the Country of
Mercia, about Hereford, where Earl Ranulph Earl of that Country, who was Son to
King Edwards Sister, named Ioda, by her first husband Walter de Maunt, came
against them with a great army, and met them above two miles from Hereford,
where after a sore fight for the space of three hours, Ranulph and his army
were overcome, and five hundred of them slain, the rest being totally routed,
whom Gruffith and Algar pursued to Hereford, and entering the Town, set the
Cathedral Church on fire, and slew the Bishop named Leoger, A barbarous act
amongst Christians.
(an Act fitter for Pagans then Christians) with seven of the Canons, spoiled
and burnt the Town miserably; whereupon King Edward being advertised hereof,
gathered an Army and sent Haroald, the Son of Earl Godwin against them, who
pursuing the enemies to Northwales, passed through Stradelwyd to Snowdon; but
Gruffith and Algor being afraid to meet Har^ald, got them again into
Southwales, whereof Haroald having notice, left one part of his army in
Northwales, to resist the enemies there, and returning with the residue to
Hereford, caused a great Trench to be cast round about the Town, with a high
Rampire, strongly fortifying the Gates of the same. After this, by means of a
Parley had with Gruffith and Algar, at a place called Beligelhag, a peace was
concluded, whereupon Algar being pardoned by the King, and restored again to
his Earldome, returned home to Chester.

About two years after, Algar was accused again of Treason, so that he was the
second time exiled the land, and repaired to his old friend Gruffith, Prince of
Northwales, by whom he was joyfully received, and restored again to his
Earldome by the aid of certain strangers, which came by chance from Norway,
whereupon King Edward being highly offended with Gruffith, sent Haroald again
with an army into Northwales, to do revenge upon him, who coming to Ruthlen,
burned the Palace of Gruffith and his Ships, and then returned to the King at
Gloucester.

Not long after these Transactions, Roderick Son to Haroald King of Denmark,
came with a great army to Wales, and there being friendly received by Gruffith,
joining his power to King Gruffiths, entered England, and cruelly spoiled and
burned great part of the Land, but shortly after, Roderick was compelled to
return to his Ships, and to sail to Denmark, and Gruffith came to Wales laden
with spoils.

Mr. Powel. fol. 101.
This year (says Mr. Powel) died Owen the son of Gruffith ap Rytherick. Also
Haroald and his Brother Tosty, by the procurement of Caradoc ap Gruffith, ap
Rytherick and others, gathered a great Power and entered Southwales, and subdued
a great part thereof, and wrought so with those that were about Gruffith the
King, that as soon as he had gathered his people in Northwales, and began his
journey to meet with Haroald, he was cruelly and traterously slain by his own
men, and his head brought to Haroald, who appointed and placed Meredith, the
son of Owen ap Edwin, Prince and Ruler of Southwales, and he with his brother
Tosty returned home.

Some do report that Haroald about Rogation week, by the Kings commandment,
went against the Welshmen, and taking the sea, sailed by Bristol, round about
the Coast, compassing in a manner all Wales. His brother Tosty that was Earl of
Northumberland, met him by appointment with an host of horsemen, and so joining
together, they destroyed the Country of Southwales in such sort, that the
Welshmen were compelled to submit themselves, to deliver hostages, and
conditioned to pay the ancient Tribute, which before time they had paid.

Southwales submits to the English.
The people of that Country, because Gruffith their Prince fled at the coming
of Haroald, and left them to be a prey to the enemies, hated him so, that as
soon as he returned again unto them, they slew him, and sent his head to
Haroald, which he sent to the King. After whose death King Edward granted the
Principality of Northwales to Blethyn and Rywalhon the sons of Convyn brethren
to Gruffith by the Mothers side, who did homage unto him for the same.

This Gruffiuh ap Lhewelyn governed Wales thirty four years valiantly and
worthily; he never fough: but that he departed out of the field victorious; he
was gentle and affable to his Subjects, and cruel to his foes; beloved of the
one, and feared of the other; liberal to strangers, costly in apparel, and
princely in all his doings, and unworthy of that cruel death, that the
ambitious desire of Rule did provoke his unkind Subjects, and unnatural ^osins
to prepare for so noble a Prince, and so gentle a Master as he was.



Blethin and Riwalhon the Sons of Convyn.
After the decease of King or Prince Gruffith, Meredith the son of Owen ap
Edwin (which Edwin was son, as some Writers say, to Howel Dha) did take upon
him the government of Southwales; and Blethin and Riwalbon the sons of Convyn
and half Brothers to King Gruffith ap Lhewelyn (as they which were born of
Angharat, daughter to Meredith King of Wales) did govern Northwales; Conan the
son of Jago being all this time with his Father in law in Ireland.

Caradock ap Gruffith ap Rytheryc, was the first that procured Haroald to come
into Wales against Gruffith ap Lhewelyn, hoping by him to attain unto the
Government of Southwales; but it fell ontotherwise; for when Haroald understood
that he should not get that which he looked for at the hands of Caradock, which
was a certain Lordship within Wales nigh unto Hereford, and knowing also
Caradoc to be a subtle and deceitful man, compounding with Meredith ap Owen
for that Lordship, he made him King or Prince of Southwales, and banished
Caradoc out of the Country. Afterward Haroald having obtained that Lordship,
builded there a stately and princely house, at a place called Portashlyth, and
diverse times earnestly invited the King to come and see the same, and at length
the King being then at Gloucester not far of, granted him his request, whereupon
Haroald made such preparation as was most wonderful, and as much abused: Soon
after this, the said Caradoc ap Gruffith came to the same house, and to be
revenged upon Haroald, killed all the workmen and laborers that were at
work, and all the servants and people of Haroald that he could find, and
defacing the work, carried away those things that with great labor and
expenses had been brought thither, and set out and beautified the building.

William commonly called the Conqueror, was now King of England; and Edrik
Sylvaticus the son of Alfrike, Earl of Mercia, refusing to submit himself as
ohers had done, when he saw that the King was departed to Normandy, rose
against such as were left in his absence to keep the Land in obedience;
whereupon those that lay in the Castle of Hereford, Richard Fitz Scroop and
others, oftentimes invaded his Lands, and wasted the goods of his Tenants; but
as often as they came against him, they always lost some of their own men; at
length he calling to his aid the Kings of Wales, Blethyn and Rywalhon, wasted
the Country of Hereford even to Wye bridge, and then returned with great booty.

This year also 1068. Meredith and Ithel the sons of Gruffith ap Lhewelyn,
raised a strong army against Blethyn and Rywalhon Kings of Northwales, and met
with them at a place called Mechain, where after a long fight there were slain
upon the one part Ithel, and upon the other Rywalhon, and Meredith put to
flight, whom Blethyn pursued so straightly, that he starved for cold and hunger
upon the mountains, and so Blethyn son of Convyn remained the only King of
Powis and Northwales.

Carodoc the son of Gruffith ap Rytherck ap Jestyn, caused a great number of
Frenchmen (for so the British book calls the Normans) to enter Southwales,
to whom he joined his power of Gwentland, and gave Meredith the King of that
country an overthrow, and slew him upon the River Rympyn.

About this time the Normans brought great forces into Westwales by sea, and
destroyed Dynet, and the Country of Caerdigan, and carried away much spoil, and
did so likewise the year following. Bleythyd Bishop of Menevia or Saint David's,
died about this time, and Sulien was Bishop in his place.

Radulf Earl of East Angles, his Mother came out of Wales, which was the cause
of the Welshmens assisting him against William the Conqueror; Matthew. West.
lib. 2. fol. 6 Math. Parker p. 11.
for Ranulf sent for many of his Mothers friends and kinsmen to come unto him,
meaning through their aid and procurement to get the Princes and people of
Wales to join with him in his enterprise; but William having notice of this
plot, and coming before he was sent for, he hanged some of the Welshman among
others, put our the eyes of many, and banished the rest.

In the year 1073. Blethyn ap Convin King of Wales, was traitorously and
cowardly murdered by Rees ap Owen, and the Gentlemen of Ystrad Tywy, after he
had governed Wales thirteen years. This man was very liberal and merciful,
doing Justice and Equity all his Reign; he had diverse weomen and many children;
First Meredith by Haer, daughter to Gythyn, Lywarck and Cadogan by another
woman, Mad^e and Ryrid by the third, Jorwerth by the fourth.



Trahern the Son of Caradoc.
After the death of Blethyn, Trahern ap Caradoc his cousin German, took upon him
the rule of Northwales, and Rees ap Owen with Rytherck ap Caradoc, did jontly
rule Southwales; Then Gruffith son to Conan, son to Jago or James, right
Inheritour of Northwales, came from Ireland with succor with his brethren,
Encumalhon King of Vltonia, and Ranalht and Mathawn had delivered him, and
landed in the Isle of Mon, or Anglesey, and brought it to his Subjection. At
this time Kynwric ap Rynalbon, a noble man of Maelor or Bromfield, was slain in
Northwales.

This year also, Gronow and Lhewelin the sons of Cadogan ap Blethyn, did join
their powers with Caradoc ap Gruffith ap Rytherck, to revenge their
Grandfathers death, and then fought at a place called Camdhwc, where the Sons
of Cadogan obtained the Victory; shortly after, Gruffith ap Conan passed over
the water, from Mon to the main land, and Trabern ap Caradoc met with him at
Bronyrew, where Gruffith was put to flight, and retired back to the Isle,

Rytherc ap Caradoc was slain by Treason of his own cousin German Meyrchaon ap
Rees ap Rytherc, and Rees ap Owen ruled Southwales alone. Nevertheless, the
sons of Cadogan gathered their powers, and came against him and fought with him
the second time at Gwaynyttyd, where he was put to flight; but yet he gathered
new forces, and kept the land still. Then Trahern ap Caradoc King of Northwales
moves his forces against Rees, who boldly met him with all the power of
Southwales, at a place called Pwlhgwttic where after long fighting, Rees was
put to slight, and after great slaughter of his men, he fled from place to
place, fearing all things, like a stagg that had been lately chased, which
mistrusteth every noise; but at the last, he with his Brother Howel fell into
the hands of Caradoc a^ Gruffith, who slew them both in revenge of the wise and
noble Prince Blethyn ap Convyn. At this time Sulien Archbishop of Saint
David's, did forsake his Bishopric, and Abraham was chosen Bishop in his place.

Rees the son of Theodore the son of Eneon, the son of Owen, the son of Howel
Dha, as right Inheritor to the Kingdom of Southwales, claimed the same, and
the people received him with much joy, and made him their Prince.

The next year Menevia was all spoiled and destroyed by strangers, and Abraham
the Bishop died, after whose death, Sulien was compelled to take the Bishopric
again.

In the year following, Gruffith the son of Conan did bring a great Army of
Irishmen and Scots into Wales, and joined with Rees ap Theodore, as two right
heirs of the whole Country: Gruffith of Northwales, and Rees of Southwales,
descending both lineally from Roderic the Great, against whom came Trahern ap
Caradoc, and Caradoc Gruffith and Mailer the sons of Rywalhon ap Gwyn, his
cousin Germans (for Gwyn ap Blethin was their Grandfather) who in those days
were the chief Rulers of all Wales: and after they had met at the Mountains of
Carno, they fought a cruel battle, and were the more eager, because upon that
days work lay the lives and honor of either party; but at length the victory
fell to Gruffith and Rees, and Trahern with his cosins were all slain, and most
part of their people; then the Kingdoms of Wales came under the rule of the
right heirs again.

At this time also, a noble man in Wales called Vrgency ap Sitsylht, was slain
by the sons of Rees Sais (i. e.) Rees the Englishman; for so they used to name
all such as had served in England, or could speak English.

Gules three Lions pass. Gardant; or other say, only passant, which I rather
approve of.


Gruffith the Son of Conan.
The Welsh Princes do homage to William the Conqueror.
After the death of Trahern, Gruffith ap Conan did quietly rule Northwales, and
Rees ap Theodore Southwales.

In the year 1079. William commonly called the Conqueror, entered Wales with a
great Army, and passed as far as Saint David's, where he offered, and took
homage of the Kings of the Land.

And not long after, the Sepulcher of VValwey, King Arthurs Sisters Son, was
found upon the sea shore in the Country of Ros; the body by estimation upon
viewing of the bones was thought to be fourteen foot in length: VValwey in his
life time was a right noble and valiant Warrior, of very good reputation, who
ruled that Country, which to this day from him is called VValwethay.

Caerdiff built.
And this year Sulion forsook his Bishopric the second time, and Wilfrid was
enstalled in his place; and in this time also, the Town of Caerdyff was built.

Blethyn ap Convyn, sometime King of Wales, gathered their strengths together
against Rees of Tewdor, who not being able to meet them, fled to Ireland, and
there he purchased to himself great friends, and got an Army of Irishmen and
Scots, to whom he promised great Rewards, when he should obtain his Kingdom,
and so landed in Southwales with those strangers, which when his friends heard
of, they drew to him; and the other came in all haste, thinking to fight with
him before his power should increase, and at Lhechryd they gave him battle,
where they were overthrown, and two of the Brethren slain, to wit Madoc and
Riryd, and the other fled and forsook the Country. As soon as Rees was in
quiet possession of his Kingdom, he sent home his strangers with great
rewards. About this time the Shrine of Saint David was stolen out of the
Church, and when all the Jewels and Treasures were taken away, the Shrine was
left where it might be found again. About this time, the Earls of Hereford and
Shrewsbury, with the Welshman, burned all Worcestershire and Glocestershire,
to the very gates of Worcester.

And in the year 1088. there was a terrible Earthquake through all the land;
and the year following dyed Sulien the godliest and wisest man, and the
greatest Clerk in all Wales, being 89. years old. About this time certain
strangers, which were Rovers upon the seas landed at St. David, and robbed it
and burned the Town; at which time also Cadinor the the son of Colhoyn Lord of
Dinet dyed, whose sons Lhewelyn and Eneon moved Gruffith the son of Meredyth to
make war against their Lord and Prince Rees ap Tewdor, and so joining all their
strength together came against him to Lhandydoc where Rees was, who gave them
battle, and putting them to flight, pursued them so sore that he took Gruffith
ap Meredith and put him death, but Eneon son to Cadinor ap Colhoyn fled to
Jestin Lord of Morganwc (who likewise rebelled against Rees ap Theodor) and
promised upon condition to have Jestins daughter in marriage and certain other
covenants then agreed upon between them, to bring to their succors an army of
Normans (for he had served in England before, and was well known and acquainted
with all the English Nobility) which things being thus concluded, they were
fully determined to be revenged upon Rees. And so Eneon went to England and
wrought such means that he procured Robert Fitzhamon (in the reign of William
Rufus) which twelve other Knights, to gather a great army of Frenchmen and
Normans to come to their aid, who shortly after landed in Glamorganshire, where
Jestin ap Gurgent Lord of the Land received them with much honor, and joining
his power to theirs burned and spoiled Prince Rees; it grieved him exceedingly,
whereupon he suddenly gathered his people and met him not far from Brecknock,
where after a terrible fight he was slain, with whom fell and decayed the
Kingdom of Southwales. This Rees had by his wife the daughter of Rywalhon ap
Convin a son called Gruffith, who at his fathers death was but a very child,
and one Grovo that was in the Kings prison. These Normans after they had
received their promised Salary and great rewards of Jestin, returned to their
ships. When Eneon burdened Jestin with the promise of his daughter in
marriage, Jestin laughed him to scorn, and told him that he would bestow his
daughter otherwise: whereupon Eneon full of anger and despite followed the
Normans, and when he came to the shore they were all a shipboard. Then he
shouted to them and made a sign with his cloak to call them back, and they
returned again to know his meaning. Then he went to the chiefest of them and
showed his abuse at Jestins hands, declaring withal how easy it was for them
to win that fair and pleasant Country from Jestin, whom for his treason to Rees
none other Prince of Wales would succor, whereunto they (easily persuaded)
turned all their power against him, for whose defense they had come thither,
and at whose hands they had been well entertained, and recompensed with rich
gifts and rewards. And first they spoiled him of his country who mistrusted
them not, and took all the fertile and valley land, to themselves and left the
barren and rough mountains for Eneon his part; the names of Robert and the
twelve Knights and parcels which fell to each ones share were these,

Robert Fitz Hamon had Cardiff who bore for his arms Azure a Lion rampant
gardant Or encensed gules.


Those men, whose Coats are mentioned, and their Heirs, have enjoyed the
Country to this day, who were the first strangers that ever Inhabited Wales
since the time o^ Camber.

Of this King or Prince Master Mills says, Griffin Prince of Northwales, son
and successor of Conan, the Prince; between this Griffin, (or rather Gruffith)
and Blethyn Prince of Powis and Rees, the son of Theodore, Prince of Demetia,
there was a great search and enquiry made concerning their Arms, and military
Ensigns; as also of the Royal Blood of the ancient Kings of Britain, which
being made known by the judgment and industry of wise men of Wales, it was
found that there were three principal Lines or Badges, and fifteen progenial
Lines of the ancient noble blood of the Britains.

These three principal Badges or Coats, which Master Mills speaks of, I
suppose are these; for in this Tract of the Princes of Wales he imparteth no
more, ( viz. fig. 13, 14, 15.)

But another Author, or rather the parcel of an Author, which was bestowed
upon me, says, there be five Kingly Races in Cambria or Wales, (whose Arms
are reduced to fig. 16. 17. 18. 19. 20.) deducing from them by Sir Owen Tudyr,
and King James.

As for the fifteen progenial Lines, I dare not undertake to determine which
they be, only I will offer unto my Reader the Noble VVelshman, such Coats as I
have collected, not desiring to give offense to any in matter of precedence,
which here I intend not, but will set them as I found them in an ancient
Manuscript.

Southwales.
That Cadisor or Ridivour ap Gwaith Voeth (whose Arms are mentioned with fig.
22.) had eight sons. viz.

1. Kedvour ap Gwaith Voeth Lord of Caerdigan. 2. Gworestan Lord of Powis. 3.
Rydrych Lord of the Gwyway. 4. Aythan Lord of Grismont. 5. Gwin Lord of
Lenflgwyn. 6. Back Lord of Skinfreth. 7. Kynan Lord of Degaingle. 8. Ednowen
Bishop of Lhanbadern Vawn.
Aythan the fourth Brother and his sons, built three Chapels in Monmothshire,
Aythens Chapel in Clytha, Bettus Chapel, alias Botus Aythan, and by old
writings, it is called Bettus F^vour, Aythan and Brungunei Chapel, Vt fertur.

1 Willy de Londas had for his share Domer and bare B a fess Argent

2 Robert de S Oumim had Lhan Blethian and bare (...) cheuerons Gulis on a
Chief Arg: a fess or bar vnd^ B
3 Richard de Grana Villa or Grene pille had Neth and bare Gules 3 rests or
4 Richard de Sward had Talavan and hare Argent a Cross story fitchs Sable
5 Pagan de Turber vile h^ Coity and bare Checky arg and Gules a fess Ermine
11 Peter de Sore had Peterto^ and bare quarterly or and Gules in ye first q^ a
lio^ past Azure
12 Willyam de Elterling had S Donals and bare paly of 6 ar and azure, one a
bend Gules (...) 5 soiles or
13 1 quarterly Gules and or 4 lions pass guard: Counterchandged
14 2 Gules 3 lions passi gar: arg: intensed Azure
15 3 bert 3. Egles dis played in fess or
21 Tudor or Theodore: Ga lyo^ ramp^t with in a border Engral^d^ or Incen^ed
Azure
22 Cady for Gwayth voed or a lion ramp^t ^^g^rd: Sable
23 LLawdden Gules a Griffon Saergreant o^
24 Kadyvor ap Dynawal Sable a spears head inter 3 scaling ladders a^ on a
Chief Ga Tower tri ble tower del 2 de
25 Tarynn Ga cheueron intet 3 de liz or in chief a lion ramp^t del 2 do
31 meinch Cough Azure a wolf Salia^ Argent
32 Memok of Diuet a cheueron between 3 Cocks memb: or
33 Kadiver Vawr Arg a lion passt: guard Sable nicensed Gules
34 Lwch Hawen vawr Sable a boar by a tree arg: head G in closed or
35 Morda vrygh Ermin a cheuero^ or in a Chief arg: a lion passt G
41 Sr James Willyams K or on a fess inter 3 Ravens H as many Cressants del
primo aspears head del 2 do
42 Ido wyllt Arg: a lion ramp^t Sable hedd paws and half y queue Ash Color:
43 Pemb: Pwyll pen Devig Azure a lion ramp^^ inter 7 roses or
44 Sr Trustan Gulas a cheueron inter 3 true love knotts ^ arg
45 Cradock of Newton Argent on a chauerons Azure 3 garbes or
51 Cradoc Azure 3 bores head arg 1 semy croscroslets or
52 Sr Raph Maylor Or a lion ramp^t besante
53 Rhiwr Percy Azure a lion ramp^t or
54 Ivoi Pety Sable a lion ramp^t regardant arg
55 Sr John Brigon Arg: a stagg Gules attired or
6 Gilbert de Humfrevil^ ^ad Penmarke and bare Gules a synque foil with (...) an
pr^e of ciosscroslets
7 Roger de Beckrolles had East Orchard and bare B^ cheueron between 3
Cressants or
8 John de ffleming had 8 George and bare Gules a frett of 8 pieces or a Thieft
B
9 Reynold de Sully had Sully and bare Gules 6 wastalls or roundell 321
Conterchanged
10 Oliver de Sr John had Fonmon and bare Argent of a Chief Gules two mnllevs
or.
16 Griffith Cenan: Pr^ ^f North w^: Gules 3 lions paff guard: ar Incensed Azu^e
17 Iestyen ap Curgant Gules 3 Cheuerons Argent
18 Rees ap Tewdor Gules a lion ramp^t with m a border endented or Incensed Azure
19 Blethij Prine of Davis or lion ramp^t Gules sum say sable ye lion arg
other, arg, ye lion Sable.
20 Elistan Prince of fferlix Gules a lion ramp^ regardant or Incensed Azure
26 Karedig Sable a lion ramp^t Arg: meensed G
27 Elffm or a Griffan Sergreant vert: incensed G
28 Tudwall K of Diuet Azure a molfe Saliant Argent
29 Philip ap Ivor Vert 5 Eagle^t in cross or membred
30 Vrien Reged Arg: a cheueron between 3 ravens sable
36 Glon Benarw Sable a Cheueron or 3 greyhounds Cursant ar colored del 2 do
37 St Griffeth ap Elydr Arg: on a Cross Sable 5 cressants or m y first ^
quarter a spears head Gules
38 Grono Goch Azure 3 bucks heads Cabosed or
39 Bledery Arg 3 bules heads Sable
40 Kydri^h Sable a lion ramp^t regard: or
46 Ryod of Han stepha^ Gules in a bend arga lion pass Sable inter 3 trifoyles
slipped or
47
48 Testyn ap Guryant Gules 3 cheuerons Arg
49 Inion ap Gollwyn Sable a cheueron inter 3 de liz ar: ye coat is quarted by
ye ^ Prot:
50 Jews Pri^hard K (...) Sable a lion Ramp^ arg:
56 Griffith Gwyr arg: a stagg lodged Gules a^^red o^ holding an oak branch
(...) per
57 Philiphir Arg: a dragons head ertased vert hold a a hand Couped at the
wrest (...)
58 Km Haer arg 3 Cooks Gules membred and J closed or
59
60 Inork of Gwent party per pale Azure und Sable 3 de liz: or
Howell of Caerleon Gules 3 Towers triple Towered arg:
Morgan ap Meredith Arg: a lion ramp^t Gules
Blethin Broad spear quarterly arg and Gules on a cross Sable 5 mullets or
Tygar ap Tegan Or a griffon sergreant Sable incensed Gules
St John Morgan Knight of the sepulcher Sable a cross angraled inter 4 spears
heads pctm i nails arg:
Mereiddig Sable 3 Childrens heads Couped a ye shoulders wrapped about with
suakes proper perukes or
Inon L^ of Kymwyd or 3 verspertileas Azare
Teleglas Gules on a garb or 3 Rauons proper
Owen Getien Azure a Stagg Saliant Arg: attired or
Elystan Gules a lion ramp^t Regardant or
Pr of Powis Or a lion Ramp^t Gules
Brochwell Sable 3 naggs heads Errased arg:
Elistan and Cadogan Quarterly ye two coats as in Radnor
Madog Dannowth Ermin a lion ramp^t sable with in a border Gules besante
Allho or 3 lions heads errased G incensed B with in a bord^ engraled ^ 3^
Brichan Sable a fessor inter 2 swords points in chief and bast arg: hilts del
2 do
vrien Reged Arg: a cheueron between 3 rauons Sable
Cradoc vrach vras Sable a cheuero^ inter 3 spears head arg: go^^nd
Rodery ye great Gules a cheuervn inter 3 roses Arg:
Brochwell yssgithro^ K of Po^^is Sable a che^ron ^nter naggs heads ^rrased Arg:
K. Kadwalader Azure a Cross pate fitche Or
Rees ap Tewdor Gules a lion ramp^t with in a border endented or
Gruffith ap Kynan Gules 3 lions passant Argan
Blethm ap Kynan Or a lion ramp^t Gules
Iestyn ap Gurgan Gules 3 cheuerons Arg^
Gollwyn ap Tangno Sable a cheron inter 3 de liz Arg:
Myaylag Kcwn Arg: on a cheueron Sable 3 cheribimes or
Nefydd hardd Arg: 3 spears heads Sable
Briant Her Azure a crss flory Ermin
Hedd Molwyn^^ Sable a stagg trippin^ Arg:
Knymyllon ap Pris gogh argent a dragons head ^t ante
Aython Arg: a Salloir azure
Brochan Sable a fess Or inter 2 swords points in chief and bast arg: hilts del
2 do
Blethin Sable a cheueron between 3 spears heads arg: goa^ed ^ppor
Kadogan ap Elystan Arg 3. boars heads Sable incensed or
^m Cre gerith Sable an Eagle di^plaed Arg: mem: and beaked Gules
Madoc ap Iorworth Azure on a fess arg: inter 3 lions ramp^t ^ras many crosses
pate fitohe sable
Trystan arg: a cheueron Sable in 3 spears heads Azure goared pp
Euyon Glyd Gules a lion ramp^t arg: with in a border of ye 2d ogresse
Brute Or a lion ramp^t guard Gules on his neck and sholder 3 crvwnes in pale
Locrme Arma paterna
Camber Arg 2 lions passt guard Gules
Albanact Gules a lion ramp^t or
Kadrod Katsh vynydd B a lion ramp^t arg incensed G
Karedig K of Cardiga^ Sable a lion ramp^t arg
Yrien for ye round table Vert 3 lions passt guard or
Elssm ap Gwyddno or a Griffon Sergreant vert incensed G.
Lord Rees Gregg Arg: a lion ramp^t Sable Corone or
Elist^n P of fferlix Gules a lion ramp^t regardant Or
Lemarch ap Bran Argent a chcuervn inter 3 rauons carrying each an ^ in his
beak sable
Hufa ap Kynddeliv Gules a cheueron between 3 lions ramp^t O^
G^eiridd ap Rees Gogh Arg: on a bend Sable 3 leopards heads or
Kilm m Troytyn Argent a leg Couped at ye calfe sable
Edwin ffreum Ar: a cross engraled florie inter 4 rauons Sable
Ayarch Hiron wei B a lion ramp^t arg:
Edwayn Benn dew Arg a cheueron inter 3 boars heads Sable
En^ydd ap Gwergoun Azure a lion ramp^t or
Owain ap Bradrwen Gules 3 snakes braced Arg:


Gwayth voed Or a lion ramp^t regardant Sable


Owyn Gwynedd Vert 3 Eagles in fess or membred and beared Gules


Pr: Llhewel^r quarterly Or and Gules 4 lions passt guard con^erly


Edeuynet byohan Gules a cheueron inter 3 helmetts closed Arg:


Madoc ap Meredith Argent a lion ramp^t Sable


Ym aur Dorchog Azure a lion passt guard queen between his legs reflaxed uer
his back of ^arg


Ithel Velm Gules a cheueron arg. inter 3 goats heads errased or


Sionas ap Growy Azure 3 boares passt arg; biosled armed and buguled o^


Llm ap b^yt Paly of Six or and Gules


Cradoc ap Gwell than quarterly Gules and arg 4 lions passt guard Counterly


Blaidd Rhydd or Gest Azure a wolf passt Argent


Reynalt Ld of man Gules 3 legs conioned in y thigh slexed in triangle


Ilhel Ld of Brinn Argent 3 greyhounds Cursant Sable collered Or


Marchan Azure a fess or inter 3 woules heads errased Arg:


Thahem^ descended from Ld Rees Azure a cheueron inter 3 dolphins hauriant
Argent


Madoc die of Egeiangh barry of 8 arg: and Sable


Hona ap Ierworth ap yena ap Runry K Sable 3 lions passt arg


Tlhell Lloyd Azure a lion passt arg


Enion ap Iesun ap Madoc Arg 3 bears paws Erected Sable incensed Gules


Kadrod Hardd Arg: 2 wolves in com^ Gules incensed or


Kynfrig Efell Gules on a bend arg a lion passt Sable


Sr Griffith Lloyd K. Gules a cheueron or chife Ermme


Tegwared ap Rhobert Sable 3 de liz arg: a border plale


Morgan ap Traherne Arg: a cheuero^ inter 3 boares heads Gules


ap Kynreg Ermine a lion passt guard queue between^ ^his legs Gules


Madoc Kloddaith Gules a che^ron Arg: between 3 plates


LLyddoccu ap Kradoc braych vras Azure a lion ramp^t party perfess or and Arg:
aborde del lertic:


Gryffeth Maylor paly of 6 Ar: and Ga lion Ramp^t Sable


M Ayerchydd Gules a Saracens head proper




Tydor Treuor party per bend Sinister ^rmm and Ermines a lyo^ ramp^t or


Matha farne Argent a lion pass Sable inter 3 de liz Gules


Hona ap Kynnerig ap Rywalhon Ennine a lion ramp^t Sable


Einiin ap Ryhylyn Sable at ye root of a tree^^ a child in Swathing clothes
thereon a goat argent browsing at the tree


Elivr ap Rh Say Ermine a lion ramp^t Azure


Rydid Vlaidd Vert a cheue^ron inter 3 wolves heads errased Argent


Blaidd ap Elnarch (...) a cheueron inter (...) wolves heads errased or


Cadogan ap Blethin Or a lion ramp^t Azure incensed Gules


Madog or Hendor Arg: on a cheueron Gules 3 de liz Or


Eimon ap Cradoc Arg: 3 sadles with stirrops Sable


Ilhel Vanchan Arg: a boares heads Sable


Griffith ap Howell ap Griffith ap Torwerth Gules alyon passt guard Argent.


Howell barfe beinog Arg^in a crosshumeta couped quarterly Gules and Sable a
cressant or


Iarlldyr of LLcehweldd Gules a cheueron inter 3 bucks heads Arg


Llaherne of Rros Gules a cheueron inter 3 bucks heads Or


St Owen ye good Knight Azure a lion ramp^t or


Howel Coed mor Azure a cheveron between 3 spears heads. Arg:


Eimon Evil pty per fess Sable and Arg: a lion ramp^t Counterly


Kadwalladr ap Gronwy Ld of Mou^hnant Arg: a che^ron inter 3 pheons there
points turned to ye center of ye Shield Sable


Madoc ap yrien of Mayngwynedd Arg: a cross^ngrald Sable inter 4 Changhs on a
chief Azure a boares of ye first


Madoc ap Iarthyr Vert a Stagg Saliant arg: attired or


LLyowarch Holberth Vert a Stagg tripping


Owam Brogyntyn Argent a lion ramp^t Sable batune Gules


Ld off fflint Or a lion ramp^t Sable borderan graled Ermine


Santhe hardd Arg: a lion ramp^t Or Semy broom flippe proper




Herbert party perpale B a G 3 lions ramp^t Arg: incensed conterly


Cliftord Chechy or and B a fess G


Milburne Gacheueron between^ 3 escolops arg:




Basset Arg: a cheuero^ Azure inter 3 bugles Sable


Rumsey Arg: a fess Galabell of M ^ B


Sitsyltats Cseill barry of to Arg: and Azure on Six escouchcons 3 2 1 Sable as
many lions ramp^t Arg:


Herbert party per pale Azure and Gules 3 lions ramp^t


Aubery verl^ a cheueron between 3 Eagles heads Errased Or


Kemeys vert on a cheueron Arg: 3 pheons Sable


Gunter Sable a cheueron inter 3 gantlels clutchc Or


Havert Arg: a bulls head cabosed inter 3 mulets Gules


Walbeise Arg: 3 bulle pale ways Gules armed and vnguled Or


Gamage Arg: a bend losengy Gules on a chief Azure 3 escallops Or


Wiston Gules a cher^on Ermine


Maunsell Arg: a cher^on between 3 Maunches Sable


About this time, or shortly after, Bernard Newmarsh a noble man, also of
Normandy, obtained by conquest the Lordship of Brecknock containing three
cantreds, and married Nest the daughter of Nest, daughter to Gruffith ap
Lhewelin Prince of Wale^, by whom he had issue Mahael and a daughter. This
Mahael being a worthy Knight, was dis-inherited by the malice of his own
mother, who contrary to the matrimonial duty kept unlawful company with a
Knight whom she set more by then her husband; whereupon Mahael being offended
with the dissolute life of his mother, warned her to avoid infamy; and on a
time meeting with the said Knight coming from her, fought with him and hurt
him; wherefore Nest to be revenged of her son for that fact, went to K. Henry
the first, and solemnly, Gerald Itin. Camb.
rather of malice and revengement, (as Giraldus notes) then of any Truth,
swear upon the Evangelists, that the said Mahael her son was not begotten by
Bernard Newmarsh her Husband, but by another Lover of hers; by reason of which
Oath (or perjury rather, as Giraldus thinks) Mahael was disinherited, and his
Sister (whom the Mother affirmed to be the very Daughter of Bernard) was by the
said King with the whole Inheritance, King Henry the First confesses the
Welshman to be the lawful inheritours of the Country.
bestowed upon Milo the son of Walter the Constable, who was after created Earl
of Hereford, Lord of Gloucester, Brecknock, and the Forest of Dean. This Milo
Earl of Hereford, told King Henry the First, of the singing and triumphing of
Birds, by the pool called Lhyn Sanathan at the passing of Gruffith ap Rees ap
Theodor, the said Milo a Pini-Fitz-John, Lord of Ewyas Land being present;
whereunto the King answered, that it was not a thing to be wondered at so much;
for in truth (said he) we by our great force and strength, do offer injury and
violence to that Nation, yet are they well known to be the lawful inheritours
of hat Country.

The sons of this Milo dyed all without issue, yet he left three daughters.

First, Margaret married to Humphery de Bohune, in her right Earl of Hereford,
Many if not most of the English Nobility by this match desce^d^d of the Welsh
blood Henry the 4th. descended from Lhewelin Prince of Wales.
and Constable of England, from which match, and so consequently from Bernard
Newmarsh his Wife, daughter of Nest, who was daughter of another Nest, daughter
from Gruffith ap Lhewelyn, Prince of all Wales, most of the ancient Nobility
descend from Lhewelyn the great Prince; for the last Humphry de Bohune Earl of
Hereford, Essex and Northampton, and Constable of England, had issue two
daughters and heirs. Elianor the elder, was married unto Thomas Plantagenet,
alias Thomas of Woodstock, the sixth son of Edward the Third, who was by King
Richard the Second, created Earl of Buckingham, and after Duke of Gloucester,
and in her right Earl of Essex, Northampton, and Constable of England. Mary the
second Daughter, was married to Henry Plantagenet, alias Bullingbrook, Earl of
Derby, after King of England, by the name of Henry the Fourth.

Plantag^nets, Staffords, and Bouochier from Lhewelin Prince of Wales.
The said Thomas Plantagenet Duke of Gloucester, etc. had Humphry Lord of
Brecknock, who dyed without Issue, and four daughters, heirs after their
Brother. Ann the elde stmarried to Edmund Stafford, Earl of Stafford, who by
her had Issue Humphry Earl of Stafford, Hereford and Northampton, Lord of
Brecknock, etc. and afterward the said Ann was married to William. Viscount
Bourchier, created Earl of Ewe in France, by King Henry the Fifth, Father of
Henry created Earl of Essex, by King Edward the Fourth. This Humphry Earl of
Stafford was created Duke of Buckingham by King Henry the Sixth, and so the
Lordship of Brecknock came to the Dukes of Buckingham, and by the Attainder of
Edward the last Duke of that family, came to the Crown.

But let us return again to the daughters of Milo; you see what gallant Issue
proceeded from the first.

Secondly, Bersa the second Daughter was married unto Philip Bruise, created by
King Stephan Lord Bruise of Gower, Bold, and Brimber, and in his Wives Right
Lord of Brecknock.

Thirdy, Lucia the third daughter was married to Herbert the son of Herbert, a
base son to King Henry the First, who was in her Right, Lord of all the Forest
of Dean, of whom descended the Fitz-Herberts of Derbyshire.

Awbery, Walbeif, Gunter, and Hanara no Welshmen properly.
With Bernard Newmarsh before spoken of, there came many Gentlemen at that time
to Brecknock, upon whom he bestowed diverse Manors, as to the Awberies the
Manor of Abercynrick, and Slowch, to the Walbeifes the Manor of Lhanhamlack
and Taly Lhyn, and to the Gunters the Manor of Gilston, to the Hanards the
Manor of Pont Willym; an easy matter to cut large thongs out of another man's
Hide.

About this time Cadogan ap Blethyn ap Convyn, destroyed all Dynet in the end
of April; and shortly after, the same summer, the Normans in great companies,
landed in Dynet or Westwales and Caerdigan, and builded Castles there, and so
began to inhabit the Country upon the Seashore.

The Normans having gotten into their hands all the lands and livings of the
Nobility of England, began to pry and peep into the commodities of Wales; and
seeing that Robert Fitz-Hamon and other Knights, that went with him had sped so
well, they made suit to the King to grant them the lands of the Welshmen,
whereupon the King thinking that to be the best way for him, as well to
encourage them to be more willing to serve him, as also to provide for them at
other men's cost, granted to diverse of his Nobles sundry Countries in Wales, to
hold of him by Knights Service, for the which they did Homage, and swear fealty
unto him as follows.

First, Roger Montgomery Earl of Arundel and Salop, did his homage for the
Lordship of Powis and Caerdigan. Secondly, Hugh Lupus Earl of Chester, did
homage for Tegengel and Rynonioc with all the Land by the Seashore unto the
River of Conwey. Thirdly, Arnulph a younger son of Roger Montgomery for Dinet.
Fourthly, Bernard Newmarch for Brecknock. Fifthly, Ralph Mortimer for Eluel.
Sixthly, Hugh de Lacie for the land of Ewyes. Seventhly, Eustace Cruer for
Molde and Hopedale; and many others for other Lands.
Montgomery why so called.
Then Roger de Montgomery, to whom the Conqueror had given Powis, entered the
land, and wan the Town and Castle of Baldwyn, which he fortified, and called it
Montgomery after his own name.

About this time also, Gruffith ap Conon, King of Northwales, with Cadogan ap
Blethyn who then ruled Southwales, entered the Land of Caerdigan, and killed a
great number of Normans, being not able any longer to suffer their great Pride
and Cruelty; but after their Return, the English Captains sent to England for
more men, and thought privately to make a Road into Northwales, which journey
was discovered unto Cadogan, who gathered his Power, and met with them in the
Wood or Forest of Yspys, and set upon them with great Hue and Cry, and they
defended themselves manfully, but in the end they were put to flight with great
loss, and Cadogan followed them hard and spoiled the Country of Cadogan and
Dinet, and destroyed all the Castles saving two, which were Pembroke and
Rydeors which he could not get, and so returned to Powis with much Joy.

King Rufus not able to prevail against the Welsh, to his dishonor returns
home.
Normans that inhabited the Country of Glamorgan, spoiled the Territories of
Kydwely, and Y^rad Tywy, and left them without any Inhabitants. When William
Rufus had been informed of the great slaughter of his Subjects, as well in
Cheshire, Shropshire, Worcestershire and Herefordshire, as in Wales, which
Gruffith ap Conan, and the sons of Blethyn Convyn had done, he gathered his
power together, and entered Wales at Mountgomery, which Castle being lately
overthrown by the Welshman, he re-edified again: but the Welshman kept so the
straits of the mountains with the Woods and Rivers, that the King did no good,
but lost his labor and his men; therefore he returned back to his great
Dishonor.

William the son of Baldwyn, who at the Kings commandment, had built the
Castle of Rydcors, after whose death the Castle was forsaken by his men, and
the Inhabitants of Gwyr, Brecknock, Gwent, and Gwent Ihwc, Welshmen hardly
overcome unless by Treason among themselves.
cast from their Necks the burden of the Normans that had won their Countries,
and held them in subjection, and chased them out of their Territories; but
shortly after they returned again with greater Power. Then the countrymen
detesting their insolency, met with them at a place called Celly Tarvawc, and
courageously encountered them, so that they put them to flight, with great
Slaughter, and chased them back again out of the Land: nevertheless, the greedy
Normans would not give over, but recruiting, returned again to Brecknockshire,
making a vow to leave no living thing within that Country (it is not good to
reckon before mine Host, nor count our Chickins before they be hatched) for the
country people flying before them, stayed at a strait passage, and killed many
of them.

About this time, Roger Montgomery Earl of Salop and Arundel, Powel fol. 153.
and William Fitz Eustace, Earl of Gloucester, (though I read of no such man,
for Master Mills fol. 358. as also other Authors, set Robert, base Son to King
Henry the First, the first Earl of that place) Arnold de Harecourt, and Neale
le Vicount were slain between Cardiff and Brecknock, by the Welshman; and
Walter Evereux, Earl of Sarum, who dyed in Normandy, and Hugh Earl Gurney were
there hurt.

Patrick de Evereux was first Earl of Sarum or Salisbury, created so by King
Stephen, and therefore could not be in this time; but it is he that was son to
Walter Evereux, Mr. Mills fol. 1034.
who built the Abbey of Bradenstock, 1139. the fifth of King Stephen, and being
an old man, did take upon him the habit of a Monk there; others say, this
Walter was Earl of Rosemer.

When the Normans saw that they had all the loss, they manned and victualed the
Castles which formerly they had builded, and returned home; but in their
retreat, Gruffith and Ivor the sons of Edverth ap Cadogan met them
unexpectedly, at Aberlhech, and encountering them slew most part of them, the
rest escaping into England. Notwithstanding, the Norman Captains defended the
Castles valiantly, and kept them till they were driven by force for safeguard
of their lives to forsake them: then the ancient Inhabitants possessed their
own quietly. Moreover certain Lords of Northwales, namely Vokthed the son of
Edwin ap Grono, and Howel ap Grono, with the Children of Cadogan ap Blethyn of
Powis land, Pembroke Castle built by a Norman.
gathered a competent Army, and passed through Caerdiganshire to Dynet, (which
Country a little before, the King had given to Arnulph son to Roger Montgomery,
who had builded the Castle of Pembroke, and appointed Keeper and Governor
thereof one Giraldo de Windsore) and there burned, spoiled and destroyed all
the country except Pembroke Castle, which they could not win, and so returned
home with great booty. After the return of these Lords, Girald issued out of
the Castle, and spoiled the lands of Saint David's, and took many Prisoners.

The year following, William Rufus returning from Normandy to England, Fasting
and Prayer used by the Welsh in their greatest danger.
and hearing of the great slaughter of his men committed by the Welshmen,
gathered all his forces, and with great pomp and pride entered Wales. But the
Britains fearing the great strength of the King, put all their hope only in
Almighty God, returning to him in Fasting, Prayer, and Repentance of their
sins; and he that never forsakes the penitent and contrite heart, heard their
prayers, so that the Normans and Englishmen durst not enter the land; but such
as presumed were slain, and the King returned with small Honor, after he had
built certain Castles in the Marches.

In the year following, viz. 1096. The Arms of Hugh Montgomery.
Hugh de Montgomery (who as his Father before him had for his Arms, Azure a
Lion rampant Or, within a border) his Father before spoken of, builded the
Abbey of Shrewsbury, wherein he was buried; the Earl of Arundel and Salop, whom
the Welshmen call Hugh Goch, that is, Hugh with the red head, and Hugh Vral,
that is Hugh the fat Earl of Chester, who bore for his Arms Azure six Garbs, 3
2. and 1. Or. and many Nobles more did gather a strong and powerful army, and
entered into Northwales, The Welsh ever their own destroyers.
being thereto moved by certain Lords of the Country. But Gruffith ap Conan the
Prince, and Cadogan ap Blethyn fled to the Hills and Mountains for their
defense, as not being of force sufficient to fight the Earls, neither durst
they well trust their own men; and so the Earls approached the Isle of Mon or
Anglesey, where they built the Castle of Aberthiennawc. Then Gruffith and
Cadogan went to Anglesey, thinking to defend the Isle, Aberthiennawe Castle
built by the Normans.
and sent for succor to Ireland, but found there little comfort; and now the
Treason began to break forth; for Owen ap Edwin (who was the Princes chief
Counselor, and his Father in Law, whose Daughter Gruffith had married, having
himself also married Everyth the Daughter of Convyn Aunt to Cadogan) was the
chief Caller of those Strangers into Wales, who openly went with his power to
them, and did lead them to the Isle of Anglesey, which thing when Gruffith and
Cadogan perceived, they sailed to Ireland, mistrusting the Treason of their own
people. Then the Earls spoiled the land, and slew all that they found in the
Isle; and at the very same time Magnus the son of Haroald, came with a great
Navy of Ships toward England, minding to lay faster hold upon that Kingdom
then his Father had done; and being driven by chance to Anglesey, would have
landed there, but the Earl impeached his landing there, and there Magnus with
an arrow stroke Hugh Earl of Salop in the face, that he dyed thereof, and
suddenly either part forsook the Isle, and the Englishmen returned home, and
left Owen ap Edwyn Prince thereof, who had allured them thither.

Gruffith ap Conan and Cadogan ap Blethyn from Ireland, and made peace with the
Normans, and gave them part of their Inheritance; for Gruffith remained in Mon,
and Cadogan had Caerdigan, and a parcel of Powis Land.

About this time the men of Brercnock slew Lhewelyn the son of Cadogan; then
Howel ap Ithel of Tegengel went to Ireland: Also Rythmarck the Archbishop of
Saint David's dyed, the godliest, wisest, and greatest Clerk, Sulien except,
that had been in Wales many years before.

About this time also dyed Crono ap Cadogan, and Gwyn ap Gruffith.

Robert de Blesmo, son to Roger de Montgomery, Earl of Salop, and Anulph his
Brother Earl of Pembroke, did rebel against the King, which when the King
heard, he sent for them to come unto him; but they made blind excuses, and
gathered their strength, and fortified their Castles, and then gave great
gifts, and made large promises to the sons of Blethyn ap Cadogan, and Jorwerth,
Cadogan, and Meredyth, and enticed them to join their powers with them. Robert
fortified four Castles, Arundel, Tekinhill, Shrewsbury, and Brugg, which Castle
was the cause of the War. For Robert had erected it without the Kings leave,
and Arnulph fortified his Castle of Pembroke: Then they entered the Kings Land,
and burned and spoiled it, carrying away rich booties. And Arnulph to have more
strength, sent Gerald his Steward to Murchard King of Ireland to desire his
Daughter in marriage, which he obtained with promises of great succors, which
did encourage him the more against the King; but Henry the First gathered a
great Army, and first besieged the Castle of Arundel and took it, as also he
did Tekinhil, and then led his power before Brugg, which for the situation and
depth of the ditches, being also well manned and victualed, the King doubted
the speedy winning thereof. There he was counseled to send privately to
Jorwerth ap Blethyn, promising him great gifts if he would forsake the Earl,
and serve him, recounting what wrongs the Earls Father, Roger, and his Brother
Hugh had done to the Welshman. Also the King to make him more willing to stick
unto him, gave him all such Lands as the Earl and his brother had in Wales,
without Tribute or Oath, which was a Moity of Powis, Caerdigan and Dynet, and
the other half had the son of Baldwyn, with Stradtywy and Gwyr; Jorwerth being
glad of these offers, received them willingly, and then coming himself to the
King, he sent his powers to the Earls Land, which doing their Masters command,
destroyed and spoiled all the Country; for the Earl had caused his people to
convey all their cattle and goods to Wales, little remembering the mischiefs
that the Welshman had received at his and his Brothers hands. When these
tidings came to the Earl, to Cadogan and Meredyth, Jorwerths Brethren, they
were all amazed, and despaired to be able to withstand the King, for Jorwerth
was the greatest man of power in Wales: And at this time Arnulph was gone to
Ireland for his wife and succor; also a little before, Magnus again had landed
in Anglesey, and received of Gruffith ap Conan and hewed down as much Timber
trees as was needful for him, and so returning to the Isle of Mon, which he
had won, he builded three Castles there, and sent to Ireland to have the
Daughter of Murchard in marriage for his son, which he obtained and made his
son King of Mon. The Earl Robert hearing this, sent to him for aid, but
obtained none: therefore seeing no remedy, he sent to the King, desiring him
that he might forsake the realm, which the King granted, and he sailed to
Normandy. And likewise the King sent word to his brother Arnulph, that either
follow his brother and depart the land, or yield himself to the Kings mercy and
pleasure, but he chose the former proposition he should, and so went away.

Things thus transacted, the King returned home, and Jorwerth took his brother
Meredyth, and sent him to the Kings prison: for his brother Cadogan agreed with
him, to whom Jorwerth gave Caerdhyth and a piece of Powis.

Then Jorwerth himself went to the Kings Court to put the King in remembrance
of his promise; but Henry when he saw all quiet, forgot the service of Jorwerth
and his own promise, and contrary to the same took Dynet from Jorwerth, and
gave it to a Knight called Saer, and Stradtiwy and Gwyr he gave to Howel ap
Grono, and Jorwerth was sent home empty.

At this time K. Henry gave diverse Castles and Lordships in Wales to Normans
and Englishmen, of whom there is mention oftentimes in this history.

This year died Grono the son of Rees ap Theodore in prison.

And in the end of this year the King sent diverse of his Council to Shrewsbury,
and willed Jorwerth ap Blethin to come to meet them there to consult about the
Kings business and affairs; but when he came thither, all the consultation was
against him, whom contrary to all right and equity they condemned of treason,
because the King feared his strength, and that he would revenge the wrongs
which he had received at the Kings hands, and so he was committed to prison.

About this time (as Bale notes) the Church of St. David's began to be subject
to the Sea of Canterbury, being always before the Metropolitan Church of
Wales, since the Pall was carried from Caerleon upon Vsk.

Owen ap Edwyn died after great Misery and long sickness. Then also Richard the
son of Caldwin did fortify the Castle of Ridcors and chased Howel ap Grono out
of that Country, to whom the King had given the custody of that Castle; who
nevertheless returned shortly after, and burned all the country houses, corn
and hay, and slew a great number of the Normans as they returned homeward, and
kept all the Country in his subjection, except the Castles and Garrisons. At
this time the King took the rule of Dynet from Saer to whom he committed the
same, and gave it to Gerald who had been sometimes Steward there under Arnulph.

Then the Normans who were in the Castle of Ridcors and other castles
thereabouts, seeing they could not have the upperhand of Howel ap Grono in open
fight, fell to their accustomed practice of treason, and so obtained their
purpose in this manner; There was one Gwgan ap Meyric who had nursed a son to
Howel ap Grono, and therefore very well trusted and beloved of him, as the
Custom of Wales is: An odious and detestable treason.
This Traitor being corrupted by the Normans, procured his Masters death,
inviting him one night to his house to make merry, whether he came willingly:
Then Gwgan gave notice to the Garrisous of the Castles, who in the dawning of
the day entered the Town, and coming about the house, gave a great shout, which
awaked Howel, who courageously leaped out of his bed and sought his weapons,
but the Traitor Gwgan had conveyed them away, when he was asleep. Then he
called for his men, but they were all fled to save their lives; and as he would
have gotten away, The Welshmen still overthrown by their own nation.
he was taken by Gwgan and his company and strangled, which cut off his head,
and brought it to the Castle of Ridcors: and this traitorous murder of the
Kings Lieutenant was left unpunished; for whatsoever fault the Normans
committed, was always winked at; and if the Welshman did never so little
offend the Laws of the King, it was thought a most heinous and unpardonable
Crime, which was the cause that afterward they rebelled against the King, who
sought nothing but their utter destruction.

About this time Meirick and Gruffith, the sons of Trabern ap Caradoc, Easy
for an Enemy to overcome where the natives destroy one another.
were both slain by Owen ap Cadogan ap Blethyn, and Meredith ap Blethyn brake
the prison, where he had been a long time, and recovered again his own
Inheritance, which he enjoyed in peace and Tranquillity.

The year 1108. the Rage of the Sea did overflow, and drown a great part of the
Low Countries of Flanders, in such sort, that the inhabitants were forced to
seek new dwellings and places of abode, who came to King Henry, and desired him
to give them some void place to remain in, who being very liberal of that which
was none of his own, gave them the land of Ros, in Dynet or VVestwales, where
Pembroke, Tenby, and Hanerford are now built, and there they remain to this
day, as well may be perceived by their speech and conditions, far differing
from that of the Country.

At that time Gerald the Steward dyed, who built again the Castle of Pembroke,
in a place called Congarth Vechan, and brought thither all his householdstuff
and other goods with his wife and children. Then also Cadogan ap Blethyn, made
a great feast in Christmas, Christmas observed in those days.
and invited all the Lords of his Country to his house in Dynet, among whom
came Owem his son, who being at his Fathers house, and hearing Nest the Wife of
Gerald Steward of Pembroke praised above all the Weomen in the land, he was
inflamed with a desire to behold her. And forasmuch as Gladis daughter of Rees
ap Theodore or Tewdor, and Mother to Nest, was daughter to Rywalhon ap Convin,
and cozen Germane to Cadogan his Father, he with a few under the color of
Friendship or cosenage, went to see her; and finding the truth to surmount the
fame, he came home wounded with Love, and in that doting humor, the same night
returned thither again with a crew of wild companions or Hectors, entered the
castle privately, and compassed the chamber about, and set the house on fire,
which awaked Gerald and his wife, who would have issued out to know the cause
of the Noise; but his wife fearing some Treason, impeached him, and advised him
to go to the Prince, where drawing up the board, she helped him out that way,
which done, she came to the Chamber door, and said that there was no body but
she and her children; yet they forced in and sought round about, but not
finding him, they seized on her and her two sons, and a son and a daughter born
by a Concubine to Gerald, and carried them away to Powis; and burning the
Castle they spoiled all the Country. When Cadogan understood this rumor, he
was much displeased, fearing the Kings heavy displeasure; and forthwith went to
Powis, and commanded his son to send to Gerald his Wife and Children with his
goods; but Owen by no means would depart with the Lady, yet at her request he
sent unto Gerald his Children again. And when Richard Bishop of London, The
Welsh still made authors of their own ruin.
whom the King had appointed Warden of the Marshes, being at Shrewsbury heard
of this, he was highly offended, and sent for Ithel and Madoc the sons of Kyrid
ap Blethyn, to whom he promised rich gifts and great rewards besides the rule
of the Country, if they could take or kill Owen, to revenge the dishonor that
he had done to the King; and to them he added Lhywarch the son of Traburne ap
Caradoc (whose two brethern Owen had slain) and Vchtrid the son of Edwyn: which
four promised the Bishop to bring him Owen and his father either alive or dead;
and thereupon forthwith gathered their power to destroy the whole Country; but
Vchtryd sent word privately before, that all such of the People as would have
their lives saved should come to him. And when the Country heard this, some
fled to Arustly, some t^ Melienith, and some to Stradtywy, and some to Dynet,
where Gerald was destroying the Country.

And at that time Walter Bishop of Hereford, gathered an army to defend
Caermarthyn, and met with such as fled to Arustly and Mehenyth, and destroyed a
great number of them. Those that went to Stradtywy were gently received by
Meredyth ap Rytherck; and Vchtryd saved all such as came unto him; and thus
these four came with their powers to the Castle of Rydcors, and thought best to
have entered the Country by night for fear of Ambuscado, and to take Cadogan
and Owen unawares, but Vchtryd dissuaded them from that stratagem, counselling
them to enter by day with their men in good order.

In the mean time Cadogan and Owen got a ship at Aberystwyth which was lately
come from Ireland, and escaped away so; that the day after when they entered
the Land, they found none of those whom they sought for, laying all the fault
upon Vchtryd; therefore they burned and plundered all the Country, except the
Sanctuaries of Padam and Lhandhewi Breni; yet they took diverse men out of those
places, and carried them away Prisoners, and thus returned to their Castles
again.

Owen with such as had been with him at the rape of the Lady and firing the
Castle, fled for Ireland to King Murcard who received him with great
expressions of joy; for he had been there before in time of the war of the two
Earls in Anglesey or Mon, and had brought the King rich gifts from Wales; but
Cadogan kept himself privately in Powis, and sent to the King to declare and
manifest his innocence. The King allowed of his submission and allegations, and
granted that he should remain in the Country, and enjoy the town and lands
which he had by his Wife (for she was daughter to a Lord of Normandy) called
Pigot de Say.

Then Madoc and Ithel his two Nephews divided such Lands as he and his son Owen
had in Powis betwixt them, and ruled it very evil, for they could never agree
amongst themselves. Within a while after Cadogan made such friends to the King
that paying 100 pound fine he should enjoy his lands again in Caerdigan; and
that the inhabitants should return to their houses, and manure and till their
ground; for the King had given commandment that no Welshmen nor Norman should
dwell within Caerdigan; when they that were in Ireland understood this, they
returned privately, and hid themselves in the houses of their kindred and
friends, after whom Owen followed, but not to Cadogan; for his father had
received that Land upon such condition, that he should not suffer Owen to come
therein, nor aid him either by counsel, money, or men. Howbeit Owen came to
Powis, and would gladly have sent Messengers unto the King, but he could get no
man that would venture to speak to him.

Much about this time there happened ^ome variance between Madoc ap Riryd and
the Bishop of London, Lieutenant of the Marshes, about certain fellows of
England that had fled to him for succor, whom the Bishop sent for, but could
not get; wherefore he was highly displeased with him; Riryd understanding
hereof, sent to Owen, and desired his friendship, whose greatest enemy he was
before; and by this means they were made friends, and swore each to other, that
neither of them should betray the other, nor agree by himself with the King or
his Officers without the other, and thereupon they burned and spoiled the lands
of such as they loved not, and destroyed all things that they met withal.

This year appeared a terrible Comet; and the King took into consideration
Jorwerth ap Blethyn whom he had kept long in prison, and sent to know of him
what fine he would pay to have his liberty, and he promised the King 300
pounds, or the worth thereof in cattle or horses; then the King set him at
liberty, and gave him his land again; and gave ten pounds of that money to Henry
the son of Cadogan by the daughter of Pigot.

All this while Owen and Madoc were burning and plundering the Englishmen and
Normans, and ever withdrew themselves to the land of Jorwerth, which thing
grieved him greatly; whereupon he sent word of his danger, desiring them to
spare his land and Cadogans, For if it were known that they came in any of
theirs, the Land was forfeited to the King; when Owen and Ryrid heard this,
they frequented his territories the more often then formerly, which Jorwerth
perceiving chased them quite away. Then he went to the country of Vchtryd in
Merionethshire, and the sons of Vchtrid sent word to their people to withstand
them, and so they did; for meeting them by the way, they set upon them, and
Owen and Madoc defended themselves manfully, but at the last they and their men
were driven back, so that they were forced to fly; Owen to Caerdigan to his
Fathers Country, and Madoc to Powis.

Then Owen with his companions made diverse roads to Dynet, and spoiled it,
carrying away both men and cattle to the ships that came from Ireland, and
after ransomed them, and then gathering fresh recrutes, he set upon a town of
the Flemmings and fired it, returning from thence to Gaerdigan, nothing valuing
his Fathers danger or the Kings displeasure.

At this time it chanced that Owens men among other mischiefs, Owen guilty
first of a Rape, and now murder and sacrilege.
laid wait for a Bishop belonging to the King, whose name was William de
Brabant, and slew him and all his Men: Whilst these things were in agitation,
Jorwerth and Cadogan were at the Court to treat with the King concerning
certain business of their own; and as the King talked with them, behold, there
came in a Flemming brother to the murdered Bishop, who made an exclamation how
Owen ap Cadogans men had slain his brother, and many more, and how they were
succored in Cadogans land. The King hereupon highly displeased, asked Cadogan
what he could say to the matter; and he laying all the fault upon his Son,
excused himself as well as he could. Then said the King to Cadogan; Seeing thou
can not keep thine own, but that thy Son and his adherents shall be succored
there, in their disorder, I will give it to one that shall keep them out; here
I will maintain thee all thy life at my proper charges, charging thee upon thy
Allegiance that thou enter not into Wales, until such time as I have taken
further order. And so the King gave him twenty days, and set him at liberty to
go whether he would, ( Wales excepted;) when Owen and Madoc heard this, they
departed to Ireland. The King forthwith sent for Gilbert surnamed Strongbow;
this Gilbert was youngest Son of Gilbert de Clare Lord of the honors of Clare
in Suffolk, and Grandchild of Robert Fitz-Gilbert, and Rohesia his wife
daughter to Walter Gilford Earl of Longeville in Normandy; Chepflow and Strigul
once belonged to the Clares. Tyntern Abbey founded by Walter Clare, Lord of
Caerwent, and Uncle to Gilbert Strongbow Earl of Strigul. 1131.
this Gilbert was Lord of Chepstow and Strigul Castle in Monmothshire, (part of
whose ruins yet remain) who for his much keeping of that Castle was commonly
called Earl of Strigul; he gave Doglesdon to the Church of Worcester, and in a
certain deed where he gave Lands to an Abbey, Gilbert de Gurney, Richard Son of
the Earl, and Henry Maltravers being witnesses, he is entitled Earl of
Pembrock, and Lord of the Rape of Penensel; his Uncle Walter de Clare was Lord
of Caerwent in Monthmoshire, and the Marsh of Leigh by Tunbridge; And founded
Tyntern Abbey in Wales not far from Strigul, 1131.

This Gilbert the fourtenth of King Stephen, 1149. had been Earl of Pembrock
and Strigul ten years, whose arms were Or three Cheverens, Gules a labell of
five B. But to return to our History, the King therefore sent for Gilbert Earl
of Strigul, who was a Valiant and worthy Knight; to whom he said thus; Thou
have been diverse times a suitor to me to have some Lands in Wales, and now I
give thee all the Lands and Inheritance of Cadogan ap Blethyn; win it and take
it; Gilbert received it joyfully and thanked the King, and gathered forces, and
landed in Caerdiganshire, and brought the Country to his subjection without any
opposall: where he builded two fair Castles, one toward Northwales upon the
River Ystwyth at the Sea shore a mile from Lhanbadarn; an other toward Dynet
upon the River Teini, at a place called Dyngerant, where Roger Montgomery had
begun a Castle before.

And shortly after Madoc ap Riryd returned from Ireland, because he could not
well brook the Manners and conditions of the Irishmen, and being arrived came
to the Country of his Uncle Jorwerth, who hearing that, and fearing the loss of
his Lands (as his Brother Cadogan had done) made a Proclamation that no Man
should aid him, but take him as an Enemy; which when Madoc understood, he
enticed many unthrifts and outlaws, and kept himself in the Rocks and Woods,
contriving how he might be revenged on Jorwerth for so great a discourtesie as
he imagined, and thereupon concluded a friendship privately with Lhywarch ap
Trahearn who hated Jorwerth to death; and having intelligence that Jorwerth lay
one night at Caerneon, they two gathered all their strength, and environed the
house about midnight, which Jorwerth and his Men perceiving, armed themselves
and defended the place, till their foes set it on fire, which when Jorwerth's
Men perceived, every one shifted for himself, so that some were slain, others
burnt, few escaping. Jorwerth having the true heart of a noble Prince, chose
rather to adventure and manfully to dye with sword in hand then to be burnt,
without a glorious action; came out; but his merciless Enemies received him
with the point of their spears, and violently cast him into the flames of the
raging fire, where that gallant man paid what was due to nature, death, yet by
which his name is eternized.

As soon as the King understood this, he called Cadogan before him, and gave
him his brothers Land, which was Powis, and promised Owen his pardon, willing
his Father to send him to Ireland.

When Madoc saw his other Uncle Cadogan rule the Country, he hid himself in
rough and desert places, and adding one mischief upon an other determined also
to murder him by one way or an other. Therefore after Cadogan had brought the
Country to some stay of quietness, and administered Justice therein, having ever
an eye and respect to the King, he came to Trallwug (now called Pool) and the
elders of the Country with him, and determining to dwell there, began to build
a Castle. But Madoc hatching nothing but mischief, hearing this, came suddenly
upon him, and Cadogan thinking no hurt was slain before he could either fight
or fly.

After this Madoc sent incontinently to the Bishop of London the Kings
Lieutenant at Shrewsbury, and entreated him to remember what he had promised,
when he chased Owen out of his Land; for the Bishop hated Owen and Cadogan, and
gave Madoc all such Lands as his brother Ithel was possessed of. Meredyth the
Son of Blethyn hearing of the death of both his brethren, posted to the King,
desiring of him the Lands of Jorwerth, which Cadogan had lately obtained, and
the King gave him the rule thereof, till such time as Owen Son to Cadogan,
should come from Ireland, who came shortly after and went to the King, who
received him to his peace and gave him his Lands, whereupon Owen promised to
the King a great Fine and gave pledges for payment of the same; likewise Madoc
did fine to the King for his peace and lands; nevertheless the King wished him
to take heed of the Kinsfolks of such as he had murdered upon his own peril

Meredyth ap Blethyn sent a party to make an Inroad into the Country of
Lhywarch ap Trahearn ap Gwyn who was Meredyths and Owens Enemy, as he that
succored Madoc to kill his Unkles Jorwerth and Cadogan, Meredyths brethren.
These Men as they passed through the Country of Madoc in the night, met with a
Man which belonged to Madoc, The welsh despairing one of another, make way for
their enemy to subvert them all.
whom they took, and examined where his Master was: he at first said that he
could not tell; but being threatened with death, he confessed that he was not
far from thence. Therefore they lay quietly all that night, and in twy-light
next morning they came suddenly upon Madoc and his men, where they slew many
of them, and taking Madoc prisoner, they brought him to their Lord, who was
right glad thereof, and secured his person till he had sent word to his Nephew
Owen, who immediately upon the news repaired thither; A great courtesy no
question to put out a man's eyes and save his life.
then Meredyth delivered Madoc unto him; And albeit he had slain Owens Father,
his own Uncle, yet Owen remembering the friendship and Oath that had been
betwixt them in times past, would not put him to death, but putting out his
eyes let him go. Then Meredyth and Owen divided the Lands betwixt them, which
was Caerneon, Aberhiw and the third part of Devthwr.

Henry prepared an Army against Wales, being thereunto provoked by such as
would have the Welshmens Lands, to wit Gilbert Strongbow, Earl of Strigyl, to
whom the King had given Caerdigan, who made grievous complaints against Owen ap
Cadogan, declaring that he received and maintained such as robbed and plundered
the Country; Also Hugh Earl of Chester said no less by Gruffith ap Conan Prince
of Northwales, A rash and unchristian oath.
how that his men, and the Men of Grono ap Owen, ap Edwyn Lord of Tegengl
wasted the Country of Cheshire, adding to aggravate the matter, that Gruffith
did neither acknowledge to owe service, nor pay tribute to the King; whereupon
the King swore that he would not leave one living Creature in Northwales and
Powis Land, but new colonize them. Then dividing his army into three parts, the
leading of the first he committed to Gilbert Earl of Strygull, Two great Kings
against two petty princes, a great conquest no doubt.
wherein was the whole power of all the fourth part of England and Cornwall
against Southwales; Alexander King of Scotland had the leading of the second
division with Hugh Earl of Chester, wherein the power of Scotland and the North
was, which went against Northwales; and the King led the third himself, wherein
was the strength of middle England; Then Meredith ap Blethyn fearing this came
and yielded himself to the King.

But Owen fearing to commit himself to them who were so greedy of his Lands,
fled to Gruffith ap Conan to Northwales, whereupon the King turning all his
strength that way, came himself as far as Murcastelh, and the King of Scots as
far as Pennant Bachwy: but the people fled to the mountains and woods, and
carried all their victuals and cattle with them, so that the King could not
follow them; and such of his Men as entered the Land, were either slain, or
galled in the Straits; Then the Scottish King sent to the Prince to come and
yield himself to the King, and promised him the Kings peace, but he was
acquainted with such promises, and would not. The King therefore because he
would not return without doing something, sent to Owen to come to him, and to
forsake the Prince who was not able to defend himself, but was ready to make
peace with the Scottish King and the Earl of Chester; but for all this Owen
would not trust the King, until such time as his Uncle Meredyth came from the
King to him, and counseled him not to forsake the King of Englands offer, but
rather to trust to his promise, and to make haste before the Prince agreed with
the King, who offered him all his Lands without tribute. Owen hearing this,
came to the King who received him graciously, and told him because he had
trusted the Kings word and promise, he would not only perform that, but also
exalt him above all his ^kin, and give him his lands without tribute. The
Prince also hearing of this, sent to the King to have his peace, which (because
the King could not come by him) he obtained for a great sum of money.

Some British copies write that the submission both of Gruffith ap Conan and
also of Owen ap Cadogan was procured by subtle policy of Meredyth ap Blethyn
and the Earl of Chester, the one working with Gruffith, and bearing him in hand
that Owen had submitted himself to the King, and made his peace with him,
before it was so indeed: so that the Prince something yiedling to the Earls
request, if Owen had so done, contrary to his oath (for they were sworn each to
other, the one not to agree without the assent of the other) seemed to incline
to peace. On the otherside Meredyth going himself in person to his Nephew Owen,
This Nation still brought to ruin by the nobles thereof.
affirmed for a truth that the Prince and the Earl of Chester were thoroughly
agreed concerning peace, and that the Prince was on his journey toward the
King to make his submission: and in the mean time all messengers between Owen
and the Prince were (by the procurement of Meredyth) intercepted; where upon
Owen willingly yielded himself to the King.

The King having finished his business in Wales, called Owen to him, and told
him that if he would go with him into Normandy and be faithful unto him, he
would perform all his promises with him; whereupon Owen went with the King into
Normandy, where he was made Knight, and had all promises performed by the King
at his return, the Year following.

At which time dyed Griffith Bishop of Menevia; and the King made one Bernard a
Norman Bishop in his place, contrary to the minds of all the Clergy of Wales,
who were always accustomed to choose their Bishop.

At this time there was a rumor through all Southwales of Gruffith the son of
Rees ap Theodore, who for fear of the King had been of a child brought up in
Ireland, and had come over two years since, which time he had spent privately
with his friends and Kinsfolk and Allies, as with Girald Steward of Pembrock
his brother in law and others, but at last he was accused to the King, that he
intended the Kingdom of Southwales as his father had enjoyed it, which was now
in the Kings hands, and that all the Country hoped for Liberty by his means;
therefore the King sent to secure him; but Griffith ap Rees hearing of this,
sent to Griffith ap Conan Prince of Northwales, desiring his and and that he
might remain safely with him in his country, which he granted and received him
joyfully for his fathers sake.

Howel the brother of this Griffith being committed to prison, Arnulph Earl of
Chester, in the Castle of Montgomery where he remained prisoner a long time,
made an escape and being sore hurt and bruised, fled to Gruffith ap Conan where
his brother was.

Which thing when the King heard, he sent gentle letters to the Prince,
desiring him to come and speak with him, which Griffith ap Conan did, whom the
King received honorably, and gave him rich gifts and precious Jewels after the
usage of the Normans who make much of men to serve their turns; afterward he
talked with him of Gruffith ap Rees, promising him mountains of gold to send
the said Griffith or his head unto him, the which thing the Prince (being
deceived with the fair words of the King) promised to do, and so returned home
joyfully. But Gruffith ap Rees and Howel his brother had counsel given them to
withdraw themselves out of the way awhile, until they understood what the
Prince would do, for their friends suspected the Kings message. The Prince as
soon as ever he came to his palace at Aberfraw, inquired for Griffith ap Rees,
and learning where he was, sent certain horsemen for him to come to his Court;
and as they came toward his house where he was, he had warning of their
coming, and with much ado escaped to the Church of Aberdaron and took Sanctuary
there.

Then the Messengers returned again, and declared to the Prince how all things
fell out, and the Prince being highly offended commanded him to be taken out by
force: but the Clergy of the whole Country with stood that, and defended the
liberties of their Church. That night some who took compassion to see the young
man innocent to be sought as a Lamb to the slaughter, conveyed him away out of
Northwales to Stratywy in Southwales, where he was compelled for safeguard of
his own life to rebel against the King, and so gathering all the power he
could to him, made war against the Flemmings, and Normans.

Gruffith ap Rees did gather his forces and laid seidg to a Castle that was
over against Arberth, and wan the same, and utterly dismantled it, laying it
level with the ground; which done, he approached the Castle of Richard de Pwns
at Lhanymdhyfry, to whom the King had given the Cantref Bychan and would have
burnt it; but Meredyth ap Rytherck ap Caradoc Lieutenant of the same, and the
Garrison, defended it courageously; yet Gruffith fired the outworks, and slew
many of the Soldiers, but not without loss on his own part, and then returned
without any advantage. From thence he went to Abertawy, and beleagur'd a Castle
which Henry Beaumont Earl of Warwick had built, burning the outguards and
destroying the Country of Stratywy: Upon these transactions several
haire-brain'd young men in great numbers from all parts adjoined themselves to
Gruffith; So that his power began to be considerable; which so elevated his
thoughts that he made attempts and inroads into Ros and Dynet, spoiling and
plundering the Country.

The Normans and Flemmings seeing this mischief, entered into consultation how
to remedy so grand a tempest, calling unto their aid and assistance all such as
were the Kings friends, amongst which were Owen ap Ritherck and Rytherck ap
Theodore and his sons Meredyth and Owen whose mother was Heynyth the daughther
of Blethin ap Convin, and Owen ap Caradoo whose mother was Genlhian an other
daughter of Blethin ap Convin, and Meredyth ap Rytherck, and asked whether they
were true and faithful to the King of England; who answered affirmatively. If
you be, said they, you must keep and defend the Castle of Carmarthin, and that
after this manner; first Owen ap Caradoc shall keep it a fortnight, and
Rytherck ap Theodor and his sons an other fortnight, and so by course; which
they were content to do. Then Owen took upon him the keeping of the Castle; and
the Castle of Robert Courtmain in Abercomin or Abercorran, was committed to
Blethyn ap Cadovor.

Shortly after Gruffith ap Rees sent his scouts to discover the condition of
Caermarthyn, and the Castle, who surveying it returned with welcome news;
whereupon he came unexpected and beleaguered the Town, ecchoing great shouts
and outcries, which caused Owen ap Caradoc to repair speedily to the place
where the noise was, thinking that his men would have followed him, but the
most part of them fled, and so Owen dyed in the bed of honor, making his
valor sufficiently appear, in which conflict the Town was won and the Castle
defaced. This done, Gruffith returned to his place of Residence and strength,
full fraught with spoil and plunder.

This fortunate attempt allured fresh supplies of young and gallant spirits,
who came Volunteers to serve under his banner, thinking all to be their own;
puffed up with this good success, Gruffith attempteth Gwyr, and surpriseth a
strong fort, committing it to the merciless Element of fire; which William de
Londres perceiving, forsakes his own Castle, and with his men betakes himself
to his heels; which gave an easy entrance to Gruffith, who sets fire to the
Castle, and carries away all the cattle and spoil of the Country. Fortune
seems now a propitious deity to Gruffith; which animates the men of Cardigan
to invite him to be their Protector and defender, as being both their kinsman
and Countryman; the hitherto fortunate Gruffith embraces their election and
proffer, friendly visits them, and is joyfully received by Cadavor ap Grono,
and Howel ap Diverth, and Traberne ap Ithel who had forsaken Dynet, leaving it
full of Normans, Flemings and Englishmen.

There were also many strangers in Caerdigan which ruled that Country, whom the
people hated, not forgeting the wrongs which they had formerly received from
them. Notwithstanding Henry King of England had brought all that Country into
subjection, partly banishing the Natives, partly by force, but especially by
gifts, fair promises and rewards, but all this could not dismay or impeach
heroic Gruffith from coming to Caerdigan Iscoed, where he fiercely begin a
strong fortress, which Earl Gilbert and the Flemings had erected at Blaen
Porth Gwithan, were after long fight and diverse assaults, with great
destruction of the besieged, and the only loss of one of his men, the place
was committed to fire and flames, and the Country brought into subjection.

This so affrighted the strangers that they fled confusedly relinquishing the
houses and habitations to the mercy of the Natives who burnt all before them to
Penwedic. The next enterprise taken in hand was the assailing of a fort in
Stradpythilk, which belonged to Ralph Earl Gilberts Stewart, which was won,
and the soldiers therein put to the sword.

From thence they encamped at Glasgryg a mile from Lhanbadarn, where they
offered violence to the Church, took away cattle (to Victual themselves) which
were within compass of Sanctuary, purposing the day following to besiege the
Castle of Aberystwith, which being declared to Ralph the Steward, he sent
secretly to the Castle of Stratmeyric, which Gilbert had built for succor,
which from thence came to him by night.

The day following Gruffith came to the Castle out of order and discipline, as
fearing nothing nor knowing what strength was within, and so stood upon a hill
(the river being betwixt him and the Castle with a bridge to pass over) where
he and his Chieftains called a Counsel of War concerning the fabricating of
Engines to give the assault; this consultation continued till night, at which
time the Normans seeing their disorder, sent archers to the Riverside to
skirmish with them, hoping thereby to allure and draw the Welshmen to the
Bridge, that the armed horsemen might suddenly issue out and fall upon them.
The Welshmen ignorant of this design and stratagem, approach the bridge with
manful resolution, fight (...) enemy, when suddenly issued forth one single
horseman, who would have passed the bridge, but his horse was wounded by a pike
and began to fail; and as he endeavored to retreat, he fell from his horse, and
the Natives pursued him over the bridge. When the Englishmen saw that, they
fled toward the Castle, and the Welshmen followed to the hill top, when
suddenly the Ambuscado of horsemen that lay under the hill interposed betwixt
them and their fellow soldiers, and those who seemed to fly returned with
haughty spirits, having fresh recruits, so that the Welshmen were surrounded,
and the bridge so maintained that no rescue could come to them, where they were
for the most part slain as being naked and unprovided for such an
entertainment. The rest seeing the great number of men armed, which they looked
not for, turned faces about and departed the Country.

But when the King of England heard all these transactions and passages, he
sent for Owen ap Cadogan; to whom when he came, the King said; Owen, I have
found thee true and faithful unto me; Therefore I desire thee to take or kill
that murderer Gruffith ap Rees who does so molest my loving Subjects; I assure
thee my chief trust is in the, and in Lhywarch ap Traberne who shall go with
thee, and you two shall wait upon my son Robert whom I will send shortly
against that Traitor with an army; and look how thou servest me at this time,
so will I recompense thee without fail. Owen herewith being overjoyed that the
King put such confidence in him, encouraged his men to do their endeavor, at
this time, to work the Kings ends, as they had done heretofore to offend him:
and so joining with Lywarck, they went toward Stratywy to meet with the Kings
son. And when they came to the confines of the Country, they made a vow, that
neither man, woman or child should escape their hands alive. A cruel vow.
When the people understood of this cruel and bloodthirsty army, they fled out
of the Country, some to woods, other to rocks and caves, and some to the Kings
Castles to save their lives: thus they divided their forces to enter the Woods
and Straits, which were very many in that Country; and Owen himself took with
him about 100 men and entered the wood, and perceived that men and cattle had
passed that way, whom he followed and overtook, and slaying some of them, put
the rest to flight, then taking their cattle returned back toward his company.
But at the instant behold Girald the Steward of Pembroke with all his power of
Flemings was coming to meet the Kings son, and met with them that fled, who
cried out to him for help, and declared to him that Owen ap Cadogan had spoiled
them of all their goods; now when Girald and the Flemmings understood that Owen
was there with so little company, they thought the opportunity very seasonable
to be revenged for their old vvorngs, and so pursued them to the Woods.

Owen having intelligence by his men that a great number pursued him, advised
him to make haste away, who utterly refused it, Drinking no new vice among the
Dutch.
because he conceived them that followed him to be the Kings friends and
nothing doubting of them. But when they approached nigh, they began to shout at
his men, who would have had Owen to fly, but he turned manfully to his Enemies,
and encouraged his men to fight, A just punishment for one that assisteth a
foreign enemy against his own kin and Country.
affirming that although their enemies were seven to one, yet they were but
Flemmings and such as feared their names, and were good for nothing but to
empty cups, and with that set upon them courageously. And it chanced that at
the first meeting Owen was stricken with an arrow to the heart and slain; which
when his men perceived, they fled and brought word to Lywarck ap Traherne and
their followers, who suspecting the Kings army, seeing they could not trust
them in the Kings service, returned to their Country.

After the death of Owen, his brethren divided his Lands between them, The
Children of Cadogan ap Blethyn.
saving that which he had taken by force from his Uncle Meredyth, being the
Lands of Madoc ap Riryd, ap Blethyn; the names of his brethren were these,
Madoc whose mother was Gwenlhan the Daughter of Gruffith ap Conan, Eneon whose
mother was Sanna the Daughter of Dyfnwall: This Family of Picot, if I mistake
not, were Lords of Ragland Castle in Monmothshire, one of which married the d.
and h. of Sir Rich. Enderby, brother to Sir Will. Enderby, from whom descended
Percy Ence by the collector of this history.
Morgan whose Mother was Evelbivv or Elhiw the Daughter of Cadivor ap Colhoyn
Lord of Dynet: Henry and Gruffith whose mother was the Daughter of the Lord
Pigot, Cadogans wedded wife. Meredyth by Eururon Hoedliw, Owen was Son of
Inerth the daughter of Edwyn.

After this Eneon ap Cadogan and Gruffith ap Meredyth ap Blethyn did lead their
forces against a Castle that Vchtryd ap Edwyn had built at Cymmer in Merionyth;
for Cadogan had given to his cousin Germain Vchtryd, Merionyth and Cevilioc,
upon condition that he and his should be friends to his friends, and Enemies to
his Enemies in all causes: but contrary to that condition, he and his Sons were
ever against Cadogans children, in every enterprise that they went about.
Therefore after they had set upon the Castle, and slain diverse of the Garrison,
the rest yielded unto them; and thus when they had won all the Country, they
divided it betwixt them, whereupon Gruffith ap Meridith had Mowthwy, Cyneliock
and half Penlhyn, and the other half of Penlhyn and Merioneth came to Eneon.

In the year 1116. dyed William Strongbow of a Consumption, and the next year
following fell a great variance betwixt Howel ap Ithel Lord of Ros and Rivonioc
(now Denbighland) and Riryd and Lhywarch the Sons of Owen ap Edwyn. Ingratum
dixeris, omnia dixeris.
Then Howel sent to Meredyth ap Blethyn and to Eneon and Madoc, Cadogans Sons
for succor, who came down from Merioneth with 400. Men well appointed, and met
with the Sons of Owen in the vale of Clwyd their own Land, which Sons of Owen
sent for their cosins the Sons of Vchtryd to come with their aid to relieve and
succor them: All these met together with enraged hearts, and fought manfully,
but in the end after great slaughter, Lhywarch the Son of Owen ap Edwyn was
slain, and with him Jorwerth the Son of Nudh, who was a Noble man, and a worthy
Soldier, and Riryd fled. So that Howel ap Ithel had the victory, but he was so
sore wounded, that he dyed within 40 days after. Meredyth ap Blethyn and the
Sons of Cadogan hasted home for fear of the Frenchmen, who lay in garrison
about Chester.

About the year 1121. King Henry the first prepared a great army against Wales,
and came to Powis Land, which when the Lords of the Land, Meredyth ap Blethyn,
and the three Sons of Cadogan, Eneon, Madoc, and Morgan, saw they sent to
Gruffith ap Conan Prince of Northwales to desire succors from him; but he
answered that they should not have any from him, nor enter within his lands,
for that he had made peace with the King.

Thus having no hope of aid from him, they purposed to defend themselves within
their own Land, after the best manner they could, and set men to keep and
defend the Straits whereby the Enemies must needs pass. And as it chanced, the
King himself with a small number came unto one of those defended places for
this whole Army had gone a further way about by reason of their carriages, at
whose coming the Men who kept the straits, skirmished with the Kings Men, and
with their arrows having the advantage of the ground, slew some and hurt many.
Among those one drew his bow, and shooting toward his foes, by fortune struck
the King a great blow upon his breast, but by means of his coat of Male, the
arrow hurt him not; nevertheless he was wonderfully dismayed, and considering
how rashly by misfortune he might lose in that wild Country the honor and fame
which he had won before, did send to parle with them that kept the passage, and
to will them under assurance to come and speak with him; which they did; then
he asked them whose men they were, and how they durst be so bold as to put the
King in such dangers; and they said that they were Meredyth ap Blethyns men,
and did nothing but their masters command in keeping the passage; vvhereupon
the King willed them to go for their master, and counsel him to enbrace the
Kings peace, and he should receive no hurt, which he and his cozens did, and
fined to the King for their offenses 1000. England, leaving the Lord
Fitz-VVaren Warden, Jo. Cast.
or Lieutenant of the marches.

The year ensuing, Gruffith ap Rees, ap Theodor, did kill Gruffith ap Sulbaern,
and Eneon the Son of Cadogan dyed and gave his part of Powis, and Merioneth
which he had vvon, to his brother Meredyth; but his Uncle Meredyth ap
Blethyn, put him back by force and took it to himself.

At this time the King did set at liberty Ithel ap Riryd ap Blethyn whom he
had kept prisoner many years, who came home thinking to enjoy his Lands: When
Gruffith ap Conan Prince of Northwales heard that Meredyth ap Blethyn had taken
by force the Lands of his Nephew Meredyth ap Cadogan, he sent his Sons
Cadwalhon and Owen with a power to Merioneth, who brought all the Country
under their subjection, and carried the chiefmen and the cattle to Lhyn. And
after the Sons of Cadogan destroyed the Lands of Lhyarch ap Trahern, Murder
upon Murder.
because he joined with the Sons of the Prince.

The year 1125. Meredith ap Blethyn slew his brothers son Ithel ap Ririd.

And shortly after Gadwalhon ap Gruffith ap Conan slew his three Unckles,
Crono, Riryd and Meiler, the sons of Owen ap Edwin.

And also Morgan ap Cadogan slew his be brother Meridith with his own hands.

About the year 1127 Gruffith ap Rees was put besides his lands, which the King
had suffered him quietly to possess, by the false accusations of the Normans
which dwelt in the Country with him

And then also Daniel Archdeacon of Powis died, a man both learned and pious,
who traveled all His life time to set Peace and Concord betwixt His
Countrymen.

Anno 1128. died Gruffith ap Meredyth ap Blethyn, and the same year Lhewelin
the son of Owen ap Cadogan took Meredyth ap Lhywarck and delivered him to Pain
Fitz John to be kept safe in the Castle of Bridgnorth; this Meredyth had slain
Meyric his cosen german, An easy matter for the Normans to conquer when the
Welsh murder and betray their own kindred and countrymen.
and had put out the eyes his two cozen germans the sons of Griffith.

The year ensuing Jevaf the son of Owen, put out the eyes of two of his
brethren and banished them the country.

Also Lhewelin ap Owen slew Jorwerth ap Lhywarck.

And Meredyth ap Blethyn took the same Lhewelyn ap Owen his Nephew, and putting
out his eyes gelded him, to the end he should beget no children, that he might
have his lands, and slew Jevaf ap Owen his brother.

Putting out of eyes a common revenge in those times.
Also Meyrick slew Lhywark and Madoc his son, his own cozens, who himself was so
served a while after.

Then Morgan the son of Cadogan repented exceedingly for the murder of his
brother Meredyth; wherefore he took his journey to Jerusalem, and died in his
return at Cyprus.

About the year 1133. Cadwalhon the son of Gruffith ap Conan was slain at
Nanhawdwy, by Eneon the son of Owen ap Edwin his Uncle (whose three brethren he
had slain) with Cadogan ap Grono ap Edwin.

That year also dyed Meridyth ap Blethin and Convin the greatest Lord and
chiefest man in Powis, as he that had gotten his brethren and nephews lands by
hook and crook into his own hands.

An excellent character of Cadwalader and Owen Gwyneth the sons of Gruffith ap
Conan.
About the year 1135. Richard before spoken of and Gilbert his son were slain by
Morgan and Owen.

And shortly after Cadwalader and Owen Gwineth the sons of Gruffith ap Conan
(in whom remained the hope of all Wales, for they were gentle and liberal to
all men, terrible and cruel to their enemies, meek and humble to their friends,
the succor and defense of widow and fatherless and all that were in
necessity, and they transcended all other in good and laudable exercises and
virtues, so they were paragons of strength, beauty and well proportioned
bodies) gathered a great power against the Normans and Flemmings, Walter Especs
and Aberystwyth Castles taken.
who entered Caerdigan, subdued, destroyed and fired the whole Country with the
Castle of Walter Espec, the Castle of Aberystwith which was very strong and
well manned. And thither came Howel ap Meredyth and Rhees ap Madoc ap Ednerth
who went forward and razed the Castle of Richard de la Mare, and the Castle of
Dynerth and Caerwedros, The Castle of Rich de la Mers Dynerth and Caerwedros
taken from the strangers.
and returned home with much honor.

Afterward toward the end of the same year they returned again with 6000
footmen and 2000 horsemen well armed, and to them came Gruffith ap Rees and
Howel ap Meredyth ap Breckaock and his son, and Madoc ap Ednerth who subdued
the whole Country to Aberteini placing again the old inhabitants and chasing
away the strangers. Against this army came Steph. Constable of Aberteini, R
Fitz Martin, the sons of Girald and Will Fitz John, with all the power of
Normans and Flemmings and Englishmen that were in Wales or the Marshes. And
after a most fierce and cruel battle the strangers according to their manner
put all their hope in their forts and forsook the field, and the Welshmen
followed so close that besides 3000 that were slain, The Natives obtained a
glorious victory over the strangers.
a great number were drowned, taken and carried away Captives.

This victory atchived, Owen and Cadwaladen ^^rran the whole Country, and
returned home with rich spoils in armor and horses as well as in other things
with much triumph.

The year 1137. dyed Gruffith ap Rees ap Theodore, the light, The praise of
Rees ap Theodore.
honor and stay of Southwales, who had by his wife Gwenlhian the daughter of
Gruffith ap Conan Rees commonly called the Lord Rhees.

Floren Wigorn. says, that this Gruffith ap Rees Prince of Southwales, died by
the deceitful practice of his wife.

Toward the end of the same year died Griffith ap Conan King or Prince of
Northwales, Flor. in r. Sc ot. Ma
the only defense and shield of all Wales, after he had escaped many great
dangers by sea and land, in Ireland and Wales, and after many worthy victories,
when he had brought Northwales, which he found full of strangers, to peace and
quietness, having ruled the same worthily 50 years.

1. This Prince had many children by diverse women; first by Angharat the
daughter of Conan ap Edwin he had sons Owen, Cadwalador and Caddalhon who was
slain before his father died, and daughters Marret, Susanna, Ranulht, Agnes and
Gwenleban.

2. And by his second wife he had Jago, Iscani, Edwal Abbot of Penmon Dolhing,
who was also a Priest and well learned; and Elen the wife of Hova ap Ithel
Velyn of Yal; he reformed the disordered behavior of Welsh Minstrels by a very
good sttatute which is extant to this day.

There are three sorts of Minstrels in Wales.
The first sort named Beirdh which are makers of songs and odes of sundry
measures, wherein not only great skill and cunning is required, but also a
certain natural inclination and gift which in Latin is called furor poeticus;
these do also keep records of Gentlemen's arms and pedegrees, till of late the
Welsh are so mingled with the English that these kind of Heralds are to seek,
and of no such estem as formerly, using yearly visitations, and are the best
esteemed and accounted of amongst them.

The second sort of them are players upon Instruments, chiefly the Harp and the
Croutch, whose music for the most part came into Wales with the said Gruffith
ap Conan, who being on the one side an Irish man by the mother and grandmother,
and also borne in Ireland, brought over with him out of that Country diverse
cunning Musicians into Wales, who devised in manner all the instrumental Music
that is now there used, as appears as well by the books written of the same,
as also by the names of the tunes and measures used amongst them at this day.

The third sort called Atteneaid, as those who do sing to the Instrument whilst
an other does play, and those as yet be in use in Wales.

This statute or decree here mentioned, does not only prescribe and appoint
what reward every of the said Minstrils ought to have, and at whose hands, but
also of what behavior and conversation they ought to be; to wit to make no
debates, no vagabonds nor Alehouse hunters, no drunkards, nor brawlers nor
Whoremongers, no thieves nor companions of such; In which things if they
offend, every man by the said statute is made, and officers are authorized to
arrest and punish them, yea and take from them all that they have then about
them; and they are also in the same statute forbidden to enter into any man's
house or to make any song of any man without special license of the party
himself. And this statute or decree has been oftentimes allowed by public
authority of the chief Magistrates of that Country, as appears by sundry
commissions directed to diverse Gentlemen in that behalf.

Vert three Eagles in fess. displaid Or.


Owen Gwyneth so^ of Gruffith ap Conan.
The name of King cease in Wales.
After the death of Gruffith ap Conan, his sons divided his lands betwixt them,
after the manner of Wales. And Owen surnamed Gwineth the eldest son was made
Prince of Northwales, (for the name of King is no further used in the British
book) who in the beginning of his reign, Caermarthyn and three castles
destroyed.
together with his brethren made their expedition into Southwales and overthrew
the Castle of Strad Meyric, and Castle Stephan, and Humphreys Castle, and
burned the town of Caermarthyn, and returned home with much honor.

At this time dyed John Archbishop of Lhanbadarn who for his godly life is
canonized amongst the Saints.

In the year 1140. Cynwric the son of Owen was slain by the men of Madoc ap
Meredyth ap Blethyn ap Convyo.

About the year 1141 Madoc ap Ednerth a man of great estimation in Wales died,
and the sons of Blethyn ap Gwyn slew Meredyth ap Howel.

Two noble Welshment slain by the treason of the Flemmings.
In the year 1142. Howel-ap Meredyth ap Rytherc of Cantref Bychan, and Rees ap
Howel were slain by treason of the Flemmings; likewise Howel-ap Meredyth ap
Beethyn was slain by the treachery of his own men.

Then also Howel and Cadogan the sons of Madoc ap Enerth did kill each other.

And shortly after there fell a variance betwixt Anarawd son to Gruffith ap
Rees Prince of Southwales, and his father in law Cadwalader the son of Gruffith
ap Conan and brother to Prince Owen Gwineth, By homebred quarrels the Welsh
destroy one another, and make way for the Norman.
who from words grew to blows, where Anarawd was slain, the hope and prop of
Southwales; for the which thing Prince Owen took such displeasure at his
brother, that he and his son Howel gathered an army against him, and destroyed
all his country, and burnt his Castle of Aberistwith; for Cadwalader himself
had fled to Ireland, and had hired Octer (son to Octer) and the son of Turkel
and the son of Cherulfe with a great number of Irishmen and Scots for 2000
marks to his succor: and landed at Abermenay in Caernarvonshire, against whom
the Prince came with great forces; but before the armies met, there was a peace
concluded betwixt the brethren; which when the Irishmen understood, they
detained Cadwalader as prisoner for their wages, and he delivered unto them
2000 heads of cattle, Wales plentiful of Cattle.
besides many prisoners and spoils that were taken in the Country. But as soon
as the Prince had notice that his brother was set at liberty, he fell upon the
Irishmen, and slew a great number of them, and recovered all the cattle with
the prisoners and other spoils: as many as escaped alive, returned home with
great loss and shame.

Flemmings and Normans defeated by the Welsh.
About the year 1143 Howel and Gadogan the sons of Prince Owen gathered an army
against the Flemmings and Normans, and gave them an overthrow at Aberteini, and
keeping the town returned home with great honor; also this year dyed Sulien ap
Rythmarck a man of great knowledge, one of the College of Lhanpardarn.

Carmarthen Castle built.
Near this time Gilbert Earl of Clare came with a great power to Dynet, and
built the castle of Carmarthen and the castle of the sons of Vtchtryd.

Then also Hugh Mortimer slew Meiryc ap Madoc ap Ryrid, and Meredyth ap Madoc
ap Edwerth. Cadelth the son of Gruffith ap Rees Prince of South Wales won the
castle of Dynevowr, which Earl Gilbert had built, and after he and his brethern
Meredyth and Rees gathered their powers and laid seige to the castle of
Carmarthen, which was yielded unto them, reserving only the lives to them of
the Garrison: Carmarthen Castle yielded to the Welsh.
And from thence they conducted their army before the castle of Lhan Stephan,
where the Normans and Flemmings meeting with them had a great overthrow, and so
the castle was reduced: Whereupon the Normans and Flemmings inhabiting that
country all about, The Normans and Flemmings overthrown by the Welsh.
gathered their power; their captains and leaders were the sons of Girald and
William de Hay, who laid seige to the same castle without discovery. But
Meredyth ap Gruffith to whose custody the castle was committed, encouraged his
men to fight and defend the place; and that which was wanting in him in
strength (for he was very aged) he supplied in courage and discretion: he
suffered his enemies to scale the Walls, and when the Ladders were full, he
gave the Watch word and signal, A politic stratagem of the Welsh.
and his Soldiers did both manfully and with great dextery over-turn the
Ladders with certain Engines contrived for such purposes, and maimed many both
armed men and expert Soldiers, putting the rest to flight.

Shortly after died Run the son of Prince Owen of North Wales, a fair and
goodly young man, whose death when it came to his fathers ears, did so trouble
him, that no kind of pleasure could comfort his heavy heart, so that he spent
the night in tears, and the day in sadness, till God who took compassion upon
the poor remnants of the Britains, Mould Castle a curb to the Welsh.
even as he had discomforted the Prince with the death of his son, so he did
glad his sorrowful heart with the overthrow of his enemies; for there was a
Castle at the Mould very strong and well manned which did trouble the whole
Country, and had been oftentimes assaulted, but never won; Prince Owen levied
an Army and beleaguered it, yet the Garrison defended it and endured many
assaults: Mould Castle utterly dismantled, by the Britains.
at last maugre all their endeavors the presence of the Prince did so
encourage his men, that they entered perforce, and put many to the Sword, and
taking the rest, razed the Castle to the ground; which Victory did so please
the Prince, that he forgot his doleful accents and solitary retirement, and
fell to his accustomed pastimes.

About this time Cadelh, Meredyth, and Rees the sons of Gruffith ap Rees ap
Theodore did conduct their forces against the Castle of Gwys, which after they
perceived they could not win, they sent for Howel the son of Owen Prince of
North-VVales to their aid, who for his prowess and valor in the field, and his
discretion in consultation, was esteemed the flower of Chivalry; whose presence
was thought also only sufficient to overcome any Fortress: He being desirous
to purchase honor, gathered his men and came to these Lords before the Castle
of Gwys, Granados not yet in request.
whom they received with general acclamations and great expressions of joy.
When he had viewed the place, he caused Engines to be made to batter the Walls
with force of men, and others to cast great stones to their enemies, The strong
Castle of Gwyl taken by the Britains.
thereby to disquiet the Garrison, which preparations when they within beheld,
their hearts failed, and forthwith they yielded the Fort, which done, Howell
returned home with great honor.

Shortly after there fell a great dissension betwixt Howell and Conan Prince
Owens sons and Cadwalader their Uncle, whereupon they rallied their Forces and
entered the Country of Merloneth, which caused the people to fly to Sanctuary
for security of their lives.

These two young Lords made Proclamation, that no man should hurt such as would
submit themselves, whereupon the people which had fled returned to their houses
without any damage or hurt; Thus they brought by fair means all the Country
under their wished subjection, and led their Army unto the Castle of Cynvael
which Cadwalader had built and fortified; wherein was the Abbot of Tuygwyn or
Whitehouse, to whom the Lord had committed the defense of the Castle. A Crosier
fitter for an Abbot than a Corslet.
Howell and Conan summoned the Fort with great threatenings, but they within
defied them; whereupon Howell and Conan promised the Abbot Meruni great rewards
to let them have the house. But he like a faithful servant, whom neither
terrible menaces nor gilded promises could move to betray a trust, continued
faithful, and denied them entrance, choosing rather to dye with honor than to
live with shame; with which answer the young Lords were greatly offended, that
a Priest should stay their prosperous proceedings, and thereupon gave an
assault to the Castle so terrible that after they had beaten down the Walls,
they entered by force and slew and wounded all in the Garrison, saving the
Abbot, who escaped privately by means of friends which he had in Howells Army.

In the year 1147. died Bohthred Bishop of Landaff; Mr. Godwyn called him
Vthryd, and says he had a daughter, (before he was Bishop) married to Jorwerth
ap Owen ap Caradoc Lord of Carleon upon Vsk, a great and mighty man in those
parts, Godwin in Landaff fol. 426.
but he affirms that he died 1141. Powell says, whom Nicholas ap Gurgant
succeeded, but Godwyn tells us that H. Jorwerth was his successor, who died
Anno 1153.

In the year 1148. died Barnard Bishop of David's or Menevia; of this Barnard
thus writes Godwyn; Barnard a Norman, Chaplain unto K. Hen. I. and
Chancellor unto his Queen, was consecrated by the Archbishop of Canterbury
July the 12. 1115. Godwin Cat. Episco. in Landaff fol. 418.
not chosen by the Clergy of Wales (as hitherto has been accustomed) but
forced upon them by the King, who had then newly conquered Wales; This man
being in great favor with the King, and presuming upon the goodness of his
cause; began to take upon him the title of Archbishop, and caused his Cross
sometime in Wales to be carried before him; After long suit and much money
spent in this cause betwixt him and the Archbishop of Canterbury, Barnard had
prevailed at the last (as Giraldus Camb. seems to persuade) had not two
suborned Witnesses deposed a flat untruth in the presence of the Pope. Giraldus
doubts not confidently to pronounce that the power and wealth of the Archb.
of Cant. has out-born the poor Bishop of St. David in this matter without all
right; This Bishop (says Giraldus) was a man in some other respect
praiseworthy, but unreasonable proud and ambitious, as most of the Englishmen
were in those times, who were thrust into Bishoprics; again, he was a very ill
husband to his Church, alienating diverse lands and letting others for the tenth
penny of that his predecessors had made of them, so thinking to make a way by
gratifying of Courtiers unto some better Bishoprics in England, he was
deceived of his expectation: having been Bishop of St. David's about 33 years,
he died 1148.

Of this old Menevia in succeeding times called St. David, you may read before
in this History; but I think it not amiss to set down the Succession of that
See, having now fit opportunity according to Godwin. Godwin fol. 413. in St.
David.


The British Histories do all report that in this Island at the first planting
of Christian Religion here, there were established 28. Episcopal Sees. Of these
28. three were Archbishopricks, London, York, and Carlegion or Caerleon upon
Vsh in Monmothshire. At Caerleon (which was then a great and populous City) in
the time of King Arthur sat Dubritius the son of Eurdila a Gentlewoman of
great birth; but who was her father it was never known. He was a man of
excellent learning and singular integrity, in regard whereof when first he had
taken great pains many years, as well in teaching and reading unto his
Scholars (whereof he had a great number) as in preaching unto the people, he
was appointed first Bishop of Landaff, and having stayed there no long time,
was made Archbishop of all Wales, by Germanus and Lupus two Bishops of France,
that were entreated by Aurelius Ambrosius King of Britain to come over and
yield their best help for the extinguishing of the Palagian heresy that had
taken great root in this Country: Aurelius Ambrosius being dead, he crowned
Other Pendragon, and afterward that great Arthur King of this Island, and
waxing old he resigned his Bishopric unto David a Disciple of his; he died and
was buried in the I Will of Enlhi now called Bardsey (where he led a solitary life
many years) October 14. Ann. 612. his bones were after removed to Landaff by
Vrbanus Bishop there, May 7. 1120.

1. St. David.
David before named, was Uncle unto K. Arthur and son of Xanthus a Prince of
Wales begotten upon one Melearta; a man very learned, eloquent and of
incredible austerity of life and conversation: he was also very tall of
stature, and of a comely personage; by his diligence Palagianisme was quite
rooted out, and many earnest professors of the same converted unto the Truth;
with the consent of K. Arthur he removed his See from Caerlegion to Menevia,
which ever since of him is called St. David's, a place neither pleasant, fertile
or safe; for (as Girald. Came. reports of it) it is neither furnished with
Wood, watered with Rivers, beautified with Meadows, nor enriched with any kind
of fruitful soil, affording plentifully nothing but Rocks and barren Hills,
vehement Winds and Tempests, and lastly dangers and injuries, whereunto
solitary places near unto the Sea are subject by Pirates and otherwise: It
seems he misliked the frequency of people at Caerlegion, as a means to
withdraw him from contemplation whereunto that he might be the more free, he
made choice of this place for his See rather than for any fitness otherwise.
St. David lived 146 years, built 12 Monasteries.
He sat long, viz. 65. years, and died at the last Anno 642. (having first
built 12. Monasteries in the Country thereabout) being now 146 year of age, as
Bale out of the British Histories reports; he was buried in his own
Cathedral Church, and many hundred years after Canonized a Saint by Pope
Calixtus the second; many things are reported of him which I leave unspoken of,
referring those that are desirous of further satisfaction to Mr. Porter, who
writes his life at large, and Laurentius Surius; although I doubt not but God
afforded many Miracles in the infancy of his Church (yea and daily yet does)
neither therefore would I be so peremptory in derogating too much from such
reports as we see no reason why they may not be true. Of him they say that his
Birth was foretold 30 years before hand; That he was always attended by an
Angel that kept him company; That he bestowed upon the waters at Bath that
extraordinary heat they have, and (to report no more) That upon a time
preaching to a great multitude of people at Brevy, the plain ground grew up so
high in their sight and increased under feet to a pretty hillock.

After St. David sat successively these, as Giraldus sets them down.
2 Cenauc 3 Eliud or Teilau 4 Ceven 5 Morwal 6 Haerunen or Haernurier 7 Edward
8 Gurnuen 9 Leudiuord 10 Gorwyst 11 Gorgan 12 Cledauc 13 Anian 14 Elvoed 15
Ethelmen 16 Elanc 17 Malsced 18 Sadermen 19 Catellus 20 Sulhiathnay 21 Noais 22
Etwoll 23 Asser 24 Arthuael.
A certain antiquity belonging to the Church of St. David, reports a
Catalogue somewhat differing from this of Giraldus; to wit, this that follows.
1. St. David 2 Eliud 3 Kenea 4 Mornael 5 Haenurier 6 Elnaeth 7 Gurnel 8
Leudywyth 9 Gorwist 10 Gorgan 11 Cledaucke 12 Eynaen 13 Eludgeth 14 Eldunen 15
Elnaeth 16 Maelsdhwyth 17 Madenew 18 Catulus 19 Sylnay 20 Namys 21 Sathveney 22
Doythwall 23 Asser 24 Alhuael 25 Sampson.


Of these forenamed Bishops until Sampson there remains no memorial but their
names only; 7 Suffragans under St. David's.
In this time the Sea of St. David had 7 Bishops Suffragans subject unto it (as
the before Antiquity declares) viz. Exceter, Bathe, Hereford, Landaff, Banger,
St. Asaph, and Fernes in Ireland; while he was Bishop, it happened the people
of all that Country were wonderfully vexed with the Jaundice, so that great
numbers of them died daily of that disease; By the importtnity of his Clergy
and Disciples he was induced to fly the Country, and sailed into Britain,
where the Bishopric of Dola being void, he was straight way elected unto the
same. He brought thither with him the Archiepiscopal Pall of St. David, and
used it during his life, as did also his Successors for many years, until they
were compelled by the Pope at the suit of the Archbishop of Turon to leave it,
and make profession of obedience unto him as in former times. By this occasion
it fell out that the Successors of Sampson in St. David's, what for want of
their Pall, or for poverty, or negligence, or some other occasion, lost their
title of Archbishop, and to this day never recovered the same. Howbeit they
used all Authority belonging to an Archbishop, by consecrating of other
Bishops, etc. neither ever did they make profession of subjection unto
Canterbury, until the time of K. Hen. I. of England: whereof formerly, and more
hereafter.

After Sampson succeeded these,
26 Rucline 27 Rodherch 28 Elguni 29 Lunuerd or Lywarch 30 Nergu or Vergu 31
Sulhidir or Sulhidu 32 Eneuris. 33 Morgeneu.


This man (says Giraldus) of all the Bishops of St. David's presumed first to
eat flesh, which none of them had ever done before; for punishment of which
heinous offense he supposes it fell out, that afterward he was murdered by
Pirates; reporting withal how that after his death he appeared to a Bishop in
Ireland, using these words, Quia carnes comedi, caro factus sum, For eating of
flesh I am become nothing but flesh.

34 Nathan. 35 Jevan, he continued Bishop but only one night. 36 Argustel. 37
Morgenueth. 38 Ervyn or Hernnu, a godly and learned man, died anno 1038. 39
Tramerin or Carmerin. 40 Joseph. 41 Bleithud, he died the year 1070. 42
Sulghein, he forsook his Bishopric the year 1070. 43 Abraham; the year 1078.
or thereabouts St. David's was spoiled and destroyed by strangers, and Abraham
the Bishop what through grief or sickness died; whereupon Sulghein was
constrained to reassume his Bishopric, which notwithstanding he resigned
again about the year 1085 and 1088 died, being 80 years of age, the godliest
and wisest man, and the greatest Clerk in all Wales: so says the Chronicle of
him. 44 After him a son of his called Rythmarch succeeded (as the Chronicle
delivers) and died about the year 1100. 45 Wylfrid, he died 1115, this is he
whom the Chronicle styles Griffri. 46 Bernard a Norman, of whom before. 47
David Fitz Girald, Archdeacon of Cardigan succeeded, he died the year 1176. 48
Peter or Peirs, a Benedictine Monk, Prior of Wenloch, was consecrated the same
year; this Cathedral Church dedicated to St. Andrew and St. David, had been
oftentimes formerly destroyed by Danes and other Pirates, and in his time was
almost quite ruinated; he bestowed much in re-edifying the same, and may in
some sort be said to have built the church which now stands. 48. Geffry Prior
of Lanthony (a Religious house in Monmothshire very ancient, of which I will
take occasion in the end of this work to speak, when I shall, God willing, give
an account by way of supplement, of all the Monasteries throughout Wales) a
Regular Canon was prefered to this See by the means of Hubert Archbishop of
Canterbury. 49. Silvester Giraldus was born in Pembrockshire near Tinby, of
very noble parentage, being near of kin to the Princes of Wales, a very comely
and personable man of body, and for his mind witty, discreet, studious,
virtuous and well given. In his youth he traveled over most part of
Christendom. At Paris he read publicly in the English College with great
commendation; returning home he grew in great esteem with K. Henry the II. and
became Secretary unto his son John, with whom he went into Ireland, and being
there, writ a description of the Country, as he did also of England and Wales.
Some affirm he was Archdeacon of Landaff. Of Brecknock and St. David's he was
for certain; being elect unto this See An. 1199, he made challenge unto the
title of an Archbishop at Rome, which controversy how it was debated and ended,
ye may read at large in R. Hoveden his report of the year aforesaid. He was
once accused of treason, but happily acquitted, lived till he was 70. years of
age and upward, and dying was buried in his own Church. He writ many books, the
Catalogue whereof ye may find in Bale. 50. Jorwerth or Edward was consecrated
1215. 51. Alselmus or Anselmus. 52. Thomas Archdeacon of Lincoln a Welshman,
and a great Clerk, forsaking other great preferments, accepted of this
Bishopric, (being a miserable poor thing at that time) the year 1247. 53.
Richard Carren. 54. Thomas Beck, he founded two Colleges, one at Abergwily,
and another at Lhan-dewybreny. 55. David Martin. 56. Henry Gower, he built the
Bishops Palace at Saint David's, and dyed in the year 1347. 57. John Teresbie
or Thorsby, Translated to Worcester 1349, and thence to York, 1352. 58.
Riginald Brian translated to Worcester, 1352. 59. Thomas Fastock, died the
year, 1361. 60. Adam Houghton founded a college near to the Cathedral Church of
St. David; he was Chancellor of England for a time, about the year 1376. 61.
John Gilbert Bishop of Bangor was translated to Hereford 1376. and thence
hither 1389. 62. Guido de Mona died in the year 1407, who while he lived (says
Walsingham) was a cause of much mischief. 63. Henry Chichley was consecrated at
Sienna by the Popes own hand, June the 12. 1409. sat five years, and was
translated to Canterbury. 64. John Keterich or Catarich, sometime Archdeacon of
Surry, was translated hence to Coventry and Lichfield the year 1415. and after
to Exceter. 65. Stephen Patrington a Jacobine Friar, as one says, or rather a
Carmelite, as another says, being at the Council of Constance, was by the Pope
translated to Chichester, in December 1417. (as the records of St. David's do
affirm) others say (and I take it to be true) that he refused to accept of the
Popes gift. 66. Benit Nicols Bishop of Bangor suceeded him. 67. Thomas Rodborn,
a man of great learning, was brought up in Oxford, and became first Archdeacon
of Sudbury, then Bishop of St. David's; he writ diverse works, amongst, the rest
a History or Chronicle. The year 1434, the King endeavored to translate him to
Ely, but could not. 68. William Lynwood Doctor of Law, first Chancellor to
the Archbishop of Canterbury, then keeper of the privy seal, having first been
employed in Embassages to the Kings of Spain, Portugal, and other Princes, He
writ much; amongst other his works, he is famous for putting in order such
provincial constitutions as had been made by the Archbishops of Canterbury,
from the time of Stephen Langton unto Henry Chichley; he flourished about the
year 1440 but just what time he became Bishop, or when he died, I cannot tell.
He lies buried at St. Stephens in Westminster. 69. John Langton dyed within
15. days after his consecration. 70. John de le Beer. 71. Robert Tully a Monk
of Gloucester. This man I take to be him that by the name of Robert Sherborne,
is said to have been translated to Chichester the year 1508. 72. Richard
Martin. 73. Thomas Langton. 74. Hugh Pany, he impropried to the Vicars Choral
of St. David's the Church of Lan-saint-Fred. 75. John Morgan dyed in the Priory
of Caermarthyn, and was buried in his own Church. 76. Edward Vaughan built a
new chapel in his church of St. David. 77. Richard Rawlin. 78. William Barlow
translated to Wells (having sat here 10 years) about the year 1548, and after
to Chichester. 79. Robert Ferrar, of whom read Fox if ye please. 80. Henry
Morgan died December. 23. 1559. 81. Thomas Young, staying here but a very short
time, was translated to York, February 25. 1561. 82. Richard Davis Bishop of
Asaph. 83. Marmaduke Midleton Bishop of Waterford in Ireland. 84. Anthony Rud
Doctor of Divinity, born in Yorkshire, brought up in Cambridge, after he had
been the space of nine years Dean of Gloucester, was consecrated June the 9.
1594. 85. Richard Milbourne translated to Carlisle. 86. William Laud 1621.
translated to Wells 1626. from thence to London, being Chancellor of Oxford,
lastly translated to Canterbury 1633. and lastly beheaded on Towerhill. 87.
Theoph. Field 1627. translated to Hereford 1635. 88. Roger Mainwaring Bishop of
St. David's, 1641. at the beginning of that Parliament so fatal to Bishops.


The Bishopric of St. David's was valued in the Exchequer at 426l -- 22d ob,
and in the Popes books at 1500 Ducates.

Let us now return to our former matter in hand.

About the year 1149. Owen Prince of Northwales did build a castle at Yale,
Yale Castle and Lhanrystyd castle built.
and his brother Cadwalader built another at Lhanrystyd, and gave Cadogan his
son part of Caerdigan.

Toward the end of this year Madoc the son of Meredyth ap Blethyn did build the
castle of Oswestrie (which now gives the title of a Barony to the honorable
family of the Howards) and gave his Nephews Owen and Meiric the sons of
Gruffith ap Meredyth his part of Cynelioc. Oswestrie Castle built.


The year after Prince Owen did imprison Conan his son, for certain faults
committed against his father: Also Prince Owens son took his Uncle Cadwalader
prisoner, and brought his country and castle to his subjection.

At this time also Cadelh the son of Gruffith ap Rees fortified the castle of
Caermarthyn, and from thence conducted his army to Cydwely, where he destroyed
and spoiled all the country, and after his return he joined his forces with
Meredyth and Rees his brothers, and entering Caerdigan wan that part called
Is-Aeron.

Not long after there fell a variance betwixt Randol Earl of Chester and Owen
Prince of Northwales, The Welsh still join with their enemies to cut their own
throats.
which caused Randal to gather supplies and Auxilaries from all his friends in
England, to whom Madoc ap Meredyth Prince of Powis (disdaining to hold his
lands of Owen) joined all his power, and they both together entered Prince Owens
land; who like a worthy Prince not suffering the spoil of his Subjects, met
them at Counsylht, and boldly bade them battle, which they refused not, but
being more in number, The Welsh obtained an admirable victory against the
Normans.
and better armed and weaponed, were glad of the occasion; yet before the end
they threw away both weapons and armor, and trusted to their feet, whom the
Northwales men did so pursue, that few escaped, but were either slain or taken,
the chief Chieftains excepted whose nimble horses carried them swiftly away.

In the year 1150. Cadelh, Meredyth and Rees, the sons of Gruffith ap Rees
Prince of Southwales, conquered all Caerdigan from Howel the son of Prince
Owen, except the Castle of Lhanvihengel in Pengwern; and at the Castle of
Lhanrystyd they lost many of their men, for which reason they slew all within
the garrison when they took it, and thence they marched to the Castle of
Stratmyrick, which they fortified and manned, and then returned home.

This Cadelh took great pleasure in hunting, and spent much time in that
recreation; which when the Inhabitants of Tenby or Denbigh Y Pyscot in Pembrock
shire understood, they laid in Ambuscado for him, and when his hounds were
uncoupled, and he pursued a stag, with few in his company, they fiercely set
upon him, and finding him weakly accompanied, and attended, and also unarmed,
they easily put them to flight, and wounded Cadelh very much; yet he escaped
their hands, and came to his house, where he lay long in danger of death: Upon
this affront Meredyth and Rees his brothers entered Gwyr, where burning and
destroying all the country, Aherthychwr Castle razed.
they surprised the castle of Aberthychwr and razed it to the ground, and then
returning home with great booty re-edified the castle of Dinevowr. The same
year also Howel the son of Owen Prince of Northwales fortified Humphreys castle
in the valley of Caletur.

An act more fit for a Turk than a Christian.
In the year 1151 Owen Guyneth took Cunetha his brother, Cadwalhon his son, and
put out his eyes, and gelded him, least he should have children to inherit part
of the land. Lhewelyn also the son of Madoc ap Meredyth slew Stephen the son of
Baldwyn. About the same time Cadwalader the brother of Prince Owen escaped out
of his nephew Howells prison, and subdued part of the Isle Mon or Anglesey to
himself; but his brother Owen sent an Army against him, and chased him thence,
who fled into England for succor to his wives friends, for she was the
daughter of Gilbert Earl of Clare. And the same year Galfride Arthur was made
Bishop of Lhanelwy, called in English Asaph.

Godwin fol. 430.
Mr. Godwin in his Catalogue of Bishops says, For want of instructions I cannot
as yet set down a perfect Catalogue of the Bishops of Banger and St. Asaph, and
therefore passes them over; but be pleased to hear what a later Writer
exposes to open view.

A help to English History; Anonymus, printed for Abel Roper over against St.
Dunstans Church, MDCLII.
The Bishopric of St. Asaph (says he) is exceeding ancient, first founded by
one Kentigern a Scot, and there Bishop of Glasco about the year 560. The
Cathedral there first bulit by him upon the banks of the River Elwy, whence it
is called by the Welsh Lhen-Elwy, the Bishop in the ancient Latin Elwensis or
Elguensis, by us St. Asaph; from St. Asaph a holy man, whom Kentigern returning
into Scotland, left here his successor. It seems it stood not long in credit,
there being a great hiatus in the succession of the Bishops, none to be found
between St. Asaph and Geofry of Monmoth, who was here Bishop in the latter end
of K. Stephens reign; and which is more, Henry of Huntington in his Recital of
the Welsh Bishoprics, reckons only three, St. David's, Banger and Lhandaff;
which may be probably imputed to the frequent Wars in this bordering Country
(for it is seated in the County of Flint not far from Chester) which made it an
unquiet seat for religious persons. The Bishopric being at the best not very
rich, Bishop Parfew was a good member to begin a Reformation in the Church.
was made much poorer in the time of Bishop Parfew, who lived in the days of
King Edward the sixth; for where the Bishop had before five Episcopal houses,
there is none now left but St. Asaphs only, the rest together with the lands
to them belonging by him made all away, and aliened from the Church for ever,
that keeping a house above his means, he was fain to let the residue of his
lands into tedious leases not yet expired. This Diocese contains in it no one
whole County, but part of Denbigh, Questionless, he had another wife besides
his Church, and provided better for her children than those of the Church.
Flint, Montgomery, Merioneth, and some Towns in Shropshire, wherein are to be
numbered 121 Parishes, most of the which are in the immediate patronage of the
Bishop; It has but one Archdeaconry, called of St. Asaph, which is united to
the Bishopric for the better sustentation of it; the Tenth of the Clergy
comes to 186 li. 19. s. 7 d. ob. q. and for the Bishopric it self, it was
valued in the Kings Books at the sum of 187 l. 11 s. 6 d.

Bishops of St. Asaphs. An. Chr. 560 1 Kentigern. 2 St. Asaph. 1151 3 Geofry of
Monmoth. 4 Adam. 1186 5 Reinerus. 1220 6 Abraham. 1235 7 Howell ap Ednever.
1248 8 Anian. 1268 9 Anian 2d. 1293 10 Lhewelyn de Bromfeild. 1319 11 David ap
Blethyn. 12 Ephraim. 13 Henricus. 14 John Trevaur. 1357 15 Lhewelyn ap Madoc.
1373 16 Willgam de Stridlington. 1382 17 Laurence Child. 1390 18 Alexander
Bach. 1395 19 John Trevaur 2d. 1411 20 Robertus. 1423 21 John Low, translated
to Rochester. 1444 22 Reginald Peacock, translated to Chichester. 1450 23
Thomas. 1484 24 Richard Redman, translated to Exceter. 1503 25 David ap Owen.
1513 26 Edward Birkhead. 1519 27 Henry Standish. 1535 28 William Barlow,
translated to St. David's. 29 Robert Perfew, translated to Hereford. 1555 30
Thomas Goldwell. 1559 31 Richard Davis, translated to St. David's. 1561 32
Thomas Davis. 1573 33 Thomas Hughs. 1595 34 William Morgan. 1604 35 Richard
Parry. 1622 36 John Hanmer. 1629 37 John Owen, Bishop of St. Asaph, 1641.

Thus much of St. Asaphs; Again to our History.

Also Simon Archdeacon of Cynelioc, a man of great worthiness and same, died
about the same time; and the year ensuing Meredyth and Rees, the sons of
Gruffith ap Rees, conducted their forces against Penwedic before the Castle,
which did belong to Howell the son of Prince Owen, and with great pains got it;
Penwedic Castle taken.
shortly after privily by night they came to the Castle of Tenbie, which was in
the keeping of Fitz Girald, and scaling up, suddenly surprised it, and by that
means revenged their brothers hurt. And returning thence, Tenbie Castle
surprised.
they divided their Army, and Rees went to Stratcongen, which he destroyed and
spoiled; and went thence to Cyvelioc, which he destroyed in like manner; but
Meredyth laid siege to the Castle of Aberaven, and wan it, returning home with
rich spoils. Aberaven Castle subdued.


In the year 1153 died Meredyth ap Gruffith ap Rees, Lord of Caerdigan and
Stretewy, in the 25 year of his age, a worthy Knight, and fortunate in battle,
Anonymus ut suprain St. Asaph.
just and liberal to all men; also the same year died Jeffrey Bishop of Landaff.

Lhandaff is one of the most ancient Bishops Sees, either in England or Wales,
and claims direct succession from the Archbishops of Caerleon upon Vsk, as
unto the Bishopric, though for the Metropolitan dignity it be content to let
St. David's have what is left thereof. The first Bishop here, of whom is any
good record, is St. Dubritius, consecrate by Saint Lupus and Germanus; that
time they came hither out of France, for the extirpation of the Pelagian
heresy. The Church he dedicated to St. Thelianus, the next successor to St.
Dubritius, founded on the River Taff, and thence called Landaff, then in the
Welsh tongue signifying a Church or Holy Place, a Church very well endowed by
the munificence and piety of great persons in those times, so well that it is
affirmed by Mr. Godwin, that were it possessed now of the tenth part only of
what once it had, it might be reckoned one of the richest Churches in all
Christendom. The ruin of it came in the time of Bish. Dunstan, alias Kitehin,
who thereupon is called Fundi nostri calamitas, by Bish. Godwin. The Diocese
contains only part of Glamorganshire, and part of Monmothshire, though the
most of each; and in those parts 177 Parishes, whereof 98 Impropriations, and
for them one Archdeacon, which is called of Lhandaff; the Bishopric was valued
in the Kings book 154 l. 14 s. 1 d. the Clergy paying for their Tenth somewhat
near the same, viz. 155 l. 5 s. 4 d. It is to be observed, or may be observed
if it please the Reader, that neither here nor at St. David's there is any Dean,
Godwin in Landaff fol. 423.
nor ever was in any of the times before us; the Bishop being the head of the
several Chapters, and in his absence the Archdeacon here, as is the Chaunter at
St. David's.

The Cathedral Church of Landaff is reported to have been first built in the
time of King Lucius, about the year of our Lord Christ 180. But I perceive not
that any Bishop sat there before Dubritius, who by Germanus Bishop of
Altisiodore, The antiquity of the Church of Landaff.
and Lupus of Trecasia (two Bishops of France) was removed to the
Archbishopric of Caerleon. Of the occasion of their double journey into these
parts (for they were twice here) and of Dubritius we have spoken already. So we
must account St. Dubritius the first Bishop of Lhandaff; not that I deny any
other to have sat there before him, but because he is the first whose name is
remembered; and it is probable he had no predecessors, because the memory of all
his successors is so carefully preserved.

St. Tebian, alias Eliud, the second Bishop, was very nobly born and brought up
under Dubritius his predecessor, and Saulinus together with St. David. I find
delivered than soon after his coming to the Bishopric, he was constrained by a
strange disease reigning in those parts to fly into France; whence after a
season he returned again, bringing home with him in three Ships his
Contrymen that had fled with him upon the same occasion; he was afterward
slain in the Church of Lan-Delia-Hechan, by a certain noble man called
Guraeddan; his Cathedral Church, where it seems he was buried, has ever
since born his name unto it; in the time of this man and his successors, many
Kings of England and Princes of Wales have given much land, and granted many
notable privileges; amongst which, these are accounted the chiefest
benefactors.

King Iddon, the same of Juyr Grevent, Benefactors to Landaff Church.
gave Lanerth with all the lands there that belonged heretofore to St.
Dubritius; he gave also Lhanteilian porth halawg, with the Territory unto the
same belonging.

Maredud the son of Reni K. of West-wales, gave 3 Churches. Aireol Lawhir the
son of Fryfan K. of West-wales, gave diverse lands. Cadwgawn a King, was also a
great benefactor; as were all these that follow. Maurice, King of Morganwy.
Tendric or Theoderick, a King. Morgant, King of Morganwy. Augustus, King of
Brecheiniawc. Iddug the son of Nudd, a King. Morgant, King of Glewissig.
Ithael, a King. Gurwodius Kings of Ergnig. Cuiuni Gurgant Clodri Noble Men of
Wales, called in Evidences by the name of Kings. Lluddgwallawn Clydiawc Nagwy
Hywell Gruffith ap Owen. Rys King of Glewissig. Arthmael Kings of Gwent.
Rhodri. Rhiderck Kings of Morganwc. Jestin ap Gurgant Caradock. Gruffith ap
Lhewelyn, King of all Wales.

3 Oudoceus or Odoceus succeeded St. Telian; he was also very nobly born, and
after his death reputed a Saint, as was also his predecessor; he died July the
2d. the year I find not.

4 Vbelwinus alias Vbelwin.

5 Aidenus.

6 Elgistill.

7 Lunapeius.

8 Gomergwinus, alias Gomergius.

9 Argwistil.

10 Gervanus or Gurven.

11 Gwydlonius, alias Gwod loiw.

12 Edilbinus, alias Edilbin.

13 Grecielus.

14 Berthywynus.

15 Tricanus l Trican.

16 Eluogus.

17 Cadgwaret.

18 Cerenhir.

19 Nobis.

20 Pater.

21 Gulfredus, alias Gulfrit.

22 Nuth, alias Nudd.

23 Cymeiliawc, alias Cymbelinus, he died 917

24 Libianth, or Libianch, he died 929.

25 Gogwenus was consecrated by St. Dunstan Archbishop of Canterbury 982. so it
seems this See was long void.

26 Marchluid, l Marchlwyth.

27 Bledry or Bletheri, chosen by the Kings, Clergy and People of the Country,
was Consecrated by Alaricius Archbishop of Canterbury 993. he died 1022.

28 Joseph was consecrated by Alnothus Archbishop of Canterbury, October. 1.
1022. he died at Rome in the year 1046.

29 Herewald was consecrated at London, by Stigand Archbishop of Canterbury, in
Whitsun week 1056. he died March 6, 1103. being 100 years of age, and having
continued in his Bishopriek 48 years.

30 Vrbanus Archdeacon of Landaff, was consecrated together with diverse Bishops
August the 10, 1108. being then but 32 years of age; at the first coming he
found his Bishopric in a very poor and miserable estate; the Church ruinated
almost even to the very ground in the time of the late Wars under William the
Conqueror, the revenues of themselves small, and yet so ill husbanded by the
negligence of his predecessors, as they could now scarcely maintain two Canons
besides the Bishop, whereas there were wont to be 24; complaining hereof to the
Pope Calixtus the second, at what time he was at the Council at Rhemes; viz.
the year 1119. he afforded him his Letters to the King, as also to the
Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Clergy and Gentlemen of his own Diocese,
earnestly praying them to yield him their best assistance for the Reformation
of his Church so disordered; The Archbishop the rather to draw on the
liberality of men, in contributing toward the new building of the Church, took
upon him to release the fourth part of penance inflicted upon such as should
bestow any thing toward the same. By this means having massed great sums of
Money, The now Church of Landaff built 1120.
began the building of that Church which now stands, April the 14, 1120. and
having, finished it, built anew also all housing belonging to it. Then next
endeavoring to recover the lands lost or alienated from his See, he challenged
diverse parcels which were held by Barnard Bishop of St. David's, and Richard
Bishop of Hereford; and moreover, complained that they had usurped on the
jurisdiction of these places, Gwhyr, Cedwely, Cantref, Bychan, Ystrad, Yw, and
Ergeng, upon deposition of 6 witnesses, that all these were of the Diocese of
Landaff; they were so adjudged by the Popes definitive sentence, who also writ
unto the King and Archbishop to restore that right unto the Bishop of Landaff,
and to the Inhabitants to yield obedience to him and his successors, as their
Diocesan. Howbeit (how it comes to pass I know not) those places are now and
long have been esteemed part of the Diocese of St. David's, and part of
Hereford, and none of them of Landaff: This Bishop died beyond Sea, traveling
betwixt this and Rome, anno 1133.

Vacat seeds annos 6.

31 Vchtred that succeeded, had a daugter married (before he had orders) to
Jorworth ap Owen ap Caradoc Lord of Caerlbeon upon Vsk, a great and mighty man
in those parts; he died an 1141.

32 Geffry died 1153.

33 Nicolas ap Gurgant died 1183.

34 William de Salso Marisco.

35 Henry Prior of Burgavenni, was Founder of 12 Prebends in the Church of
Landaff; he died 1218.

36 William Prior of Goldeliff in Monmothshire, died January 28, an 1229.

37 Elis de Radnor died May the 6, 1240.

38 William de Burgo, Chaplain to King Henry the 3d. was consecrated the year
1244. and died June 11, 1253. having lived blind 7 years before his death.

39 John de la Ware, Abbot of Margan, died about the end of June 1253.

40 William de Radnor died January the 9, 1265.

41 William de Brews died in the end of March 1287. he lies buried under a
Marble engraven, in the East end of the Church of Landaff, toward the North
wall.

Vacat seeds annos 9.

42 John de Monmoth Doctor of Divinity, was consecrated Feb. 10. 1296. at
Canterbury, and died April 8, 1323. he lies in the midst of the East end of
the Church Celceuliere, commonly called our Ladies Chapel, under a flat
Marble, having a French inscription, now somewhat defaced.

43 John de Egliscliff, a Friar Preacher, was consecrated at Rome, and came to
his Diocese of Landaff upon the eve of Trinity sunday 1223. he died at
Lankadwaladar Jan. 2. 1346. and was buried at Caediff.

44 John Paschall Doctor of Divinity, a Carmelite of Ipswich, was a Gentleman
born in Suffolk, of a Family yet remaining there, and brought up in the
University of Cambridge; by William Bateman Bishop of Norwich, was made a
titulary Bishop, and his Suffragan by the name of Episcopus Scutariensis, from
that Imaginary See; he was translated by the Pope to Landaff, an. 1347. died
1361. and was buried at Landaff; he was a man of great learning, and left
diverse Monuments thereof in writing behind him.

45 Roger Cradoc, a Friar Minor.

46 Thomas Rushook, a Friar Preacher, and Doctor of Divinity, was translated to
Chichester.

47 William de Betlesham, made Bishop of Bethelem by the Pope, was translated
first to Landaff, and after to Rochester.

48 Edmund de Bromfield, was a Dr. of Divinity, and Monk at Bury; where being
known for a a man of a very pragmatical and stirring humor, that he might not
trouble them at home, the Covent thought good to maintain him at Rome, for the
dispatch of their ordinary business there, taking first a corporal Oath of him,
never to seek any office or preferment of their house without their privity and
direction. This Oath notwithstanding, when shortly after it fell out that the
Abbot died, he found means that the Pope should entitle him to the Abbotship,
whereunto the Covent with the Kings good liking, had now already elected
another man far more meet, called John Tymworth. For this bad kind of dealing,
as also because as those provisory Bulls had been forbidden by Parliament, he
was committed to the Tower, and there lay prisoner a long time; but in the end
the Bishop of Landaff ut ante, being translated to Rochester, he was preferred
to that See.

49 Tydemannus, Abbot of Beaulieu succeeded Bromfield, and (if I mistake not)
was that Tydemannus de Winchcomb, that anno 1395 became Bishop of Worcester.

50 Andrew Barret, Doctor of Law.

51 John Burghyll, a Friar Preacher, being Bishop of Landaff, and Confessor
unto the King, was translated to Liechfield in Sept. 1398.

52 Thomas Peverel, a Carmelite, and Doctor of Divinity, was first Bishop of
Ossery in Ireland, translated thence to Landaff 1399, and thence to Worcester
1407.

53 John la Zouche, a Friar Minor, and Doctor of Divinity. It should seem that
this man built either a great part, or else happily all of the house at Mathern
near Chepstow, The Bishops house of Matherne built.
the only house that is now left the Bishop (if there be any such) to put his
head in; his arms fixed in diverse places of the walls and windows, to my
judgment import, so much; viz. Gules ten besants 432. and 1 a Canton Ermine,
encircled with a girdle of St. Francis to show his Order.

54 John Wellys was likewise a Minorite, and Doctor of Divinity.

55 Nicholas Ashbie, Prior of Westminster.

56 John Hunden, a Minorite, Doctor of Divinity, and Prior of Kings Langley.

57 John Marshall, Doctor of Divinity, sometime Fellow of Merton College in
Oxford, was consecrated 1479, and was (I take it) translated to London the year
1489.

58 John Ingleby, sometime Prior of Sheen, a Carthusian.

59 John Smith, Doctor of Divinity, died October 16, 1511. and was buried at
Christ-Church in London in the Chapel of All Saints on the North side of the
Altar.

60 Miles Salley, sometimes Almoner to the Abbey of Abington, and afterward
Abbot of Eynsham.

61 George de Attigna, a Spaniard, a Friar, Preacher and Doctor of Divinity,
was consecrated March the 8, 1516.

62 Robert Holgate, Doctor of Divinity, was consecrated March the 25, 1537. and
1544 was translated to York.

63 Anthony Kitchen, alias Dunstan, Doctor of Divinity, and sometimes Abbot of
Eynsham, was consecrated May 3, 1545. and enduring all the tempestuous changes
that happened in the mean time, continued till the fifth year of Queen Elizabeth,
and then died (and high time) having first so impoverished the Bishopric by
unreasonable demises of whatsoever was demiseable, that there was no great
cause he should live any longer: He is called Kitchen, though he might have
rather been called Schullian; yet indeed he made his Church a Kitchen, and like
a Schullian swept all away, leaving poor Daff without Lan or land.

Seeds vacabat annos 3.

64 Hugh Jones, Batchelour of Law, was made Bishop May the 5, 1556.

65 William Blethyn, Batchelour of Law, was appointed Bishop April the 17,
1575. I observe few Families sprung from Bishops, to prosper or continue long;
yet such as do, in my judgment should not be so averse as to eradicate all
spiritual function.

66 Gervage Babington, Doctor of Divinity, was placed in that See Aug. 29,
1591. from thence translated to Exceter, and after to Worcester.

67 William Morgan, Doctor in Divinity, was appointed to this See July the 20,
1595. and translated to St. Asaph, September the 16, 1601.

1601. 68 Francis Godwin, translated to Hereford; this Francis Godwin being
then Subdean of Exceter, was he who compiled the Catalogue of Bishops here
cited.

George Carleton, translated to Chichester.

Theophilus Field, translated to St. David's.

John Murrey, Bishop first in Ireland, a Scot by Nation; had his Majesty had
Bishoprics sufficient to have stoptd all their mouths, Episcopacy had not so
been bandied against.

1639. 72 Morgan Owen, Bishop 1641.

This Bishopric was valued in the Exchequer at 154 l. 14 s. 1 d. and paid for
first fruits 700 Ducats.

Henry the 2d. his reign, and in the year of our Lord God 1155 Rees ap Gruffith
ap Rees, whom the Welsh book surnameth Lord Rees, and all the Latin and
English Writers of that times name King of South Wales, did leavy all his
Forces to defend his Country from Owen Gwineth, whom he understood to be
raising of men to conquer South Wales. So that Rees came as far as Aberdyni
over against North Wales, and perceiving the rumor to be false, built a Castle
there, and so returned back.

Caerneon Castle built.
At the same time Madoc ap Meredyth Prince of Powis, did build a Castle at
Caerneon, besides Pymer; at that time Meyric his nephew escaped out of prison,
where he had been long kept; Eglwys Vair built.
then also Eglwys Vair in Myvot was built.

At this time King Henry banished the Flemmings, whom King Stephen had brought
in, and sent some of them to their cozens into West Wales.

About this time Caradocus Lhanoarvan, who is reputed and taken of all learned
men to be the Author of the Welsh History, ended his Collections of the
British Transactions from Cadwalader to this present time; of whom some
studious Antiquary composed this following Distichon: Historiam Britonum doctus
scripsit Caradocus,
Post Cadwalladrum Regia scripta notans.


In these two Abbeys the Princes of Wales were usually buried
The Successions and Acts of the Princes of Wales after this time, until the
year 1270, were kept and recorded from time to time in the Abbeys of Conwey in
North Wales, and Stratflur in South Wales; as witnesses Gutryn Owen, who
living in the days of Edward the 4th. wrote the best and most perfect copy of
the same.

England, intending to subdue North Wales, being thereunto procured and moved
by Cadwalader, whom the Prince his brother had banished out of the land, and
bereaved of his living, and by Madoc ap Meredyth Prince of Powis, who envied at
the liberty of North Wales, which knew no Lord but one; and hereupon the King
conducted his Army to VVestchester, and encamped on the march called Saltney:
So also Owen like a valiant Prince, listed all his people fit for service, and
came to the utter Mears of his land, purposing to give the King battle, and
encamped himself at Basingwerk; which thing when the King understood, he
selected out of his Army diverse of the chiefest bands, and sent certains Earls
and Lords with them toward the Princes Camp; and as they passed the Wood
called Coed Zulo, David and Conan the Princes sons met with them, and fiercely
assaulted them; and what by reason of the advantage of the ground, and
suddenness of the action, the Englishmen were put to flight, and many slain,
the rest being pursued to the Kings Camp. They being exceedingly vexed with
this disaster, removed along the Sea coast, thinking to get betwixt Owen and
his Country; but Owen foreseeing the intent, retreated back to a place which
is called to this day, Cil Owen (that is, Owens retreat) and the King came to
Ruthlan.

In the first voyage of King Henry against the Welsh, he was put in great
danger of his life in a strait at Counsylth not far from Flint, where Henry of
Essex, whose office was by inheritance to bear the Standard of England, cast
down the same, and fled; which thing so encouraged the Welsh, that the King
being sore distressed, had much ado to save himself, and (as the French
Chronicle says) was glad to fly; on whose part Eustare Fitz John, and Robert
Curcie two worthy Knights, with diverse other Noblemen and Gentlemen were slain.

After this Owen encamped and entrenched himself at Brynypin, and daily
skermished with the Kings men; whilst in the mean time the King fortified the
Castle of Ruthlan; his Navy which guided by Madoc ap Meredyth Prince of Powis,
anchored at Mon or Anglesey, and landed the Soldiers, who spoiled two
Churches, and some of the country thereabout; but as they returned unto their
ships, all the strength of the Isle set upon them, Sacrilege punished.
and slew them all; so that none of those who plundered the Churches brought
tidings of their fortune. The Mariners beholding this, liked not the harbor,
but weighed up anchors and made for Chester; in the mean time, there was a
peace concluded between the King and the Prince, K. Hen. builds a house for
the Templers in Wales.
upon condition that Cadwalader should have his lands again, and his brother
should be friendly unto him. Then the King having the Castles of Ruthlan and
Basywerk well fortified and manned, after he had built a house thereby, for the
Templers returned into England.

At that time also Jorwerth Goch ap Meredyth got the Castle of Yale, and burnt
it; Yale Castle burnt.
The year following Morgan ap Owen was traitorously slain by the men of
Jorwerth ap Meyrick, with whom died the best Poet in the British Tongue of his
time, called Gurgan ap Rees; and his brother Jorwerth got the Town or City of
Caerleon upon Vsk, Caerlheon upon Vsk City taken.
and the lands of Owen. Now it was that the King made peace with all the Lords
and Princes of Wales, except Rees ap Gruffith ap Rees Prince of South Wales;
which Rees fearing the Kings power, caused his people to remove their cattle
and goods to the Wilderness of Tywy, he still making War against the King.
Therefore the King sent for him to come to his Court to conclude a peace before
the Forces both of England and Wales, should be sent for him: Rees after
consultation came to the King, and an order was taken that Rees should enjoy
the Cantref Mawr as it should please the King, so that his land should be whole
together, and not in diverse Places and Shires; but the King did contrary to his
promise, appointing Rees diverse lands in several Places and Lordships
intermingled with other men's lands; which deceit, although he perceived well
enough, yet he received it piecemeal as it was, and lived quietly until Roger
Earl of Clare hearing this, came to the King and desired his Highness to give
him such lands in Wales as he could win; which the King granted. Then he came
with a great Army to Caerdigan, and first he fortified the Castle of
Stratmeryc, and afterward the Castle of Humphrey of Dyny; of Dynerth and
Lhanristyd; when these Castles were well manned and fortified, Walter
Clifford, who had the Castle of Lhanyndhyfir, made a road to the roads of Rees,
and returned with a booty after the slaughter of some of Rees his men.

Upon this Rees sent to the King to complain, and to have a Redress; who had
only fair words and nothing else; for the King winked at the faults of the
Englishmen and Normans, and punished the Welshmen cruelly. Rees seeing this,
begirt the Castle of Lhanyndhyfri, and in short space wan it. And Enedon the
son of Anarawd, Rees brothers son, being a lusty Gentleman, and desirous to
make his Country free from servitude, and perceiving his Uncle to be
discharged of his Oath to the King, laid siege to the Castle of Humphrey, and
by force wan it, putting the whole Garrison to the sword, wherein he found
Horses and Armor to furnish a great number of men. Likewise Rees seeing he
could enjoy no part of his inheritance, but what he obtained by the sword,
gathered his power and entered Cardigan, left not a Castle standing in the whole
Country, of those which his enemies had fortified, and so brought all under
his subjection: Wherewith the King being highly offended, returned to South
Wales; and when he saw he could do no good, he suffered Rees to enjoy all that
he had gotten, and took pledges of him to keep the peace in his absence: and
then returning into England, he sailed into Normandy, and made Peace with the
French King. But the next year Rees Prince of South Wales, did lead his power
to Dynet, and destroyed all the Castles that the Normans had fortified there;
and afterward laid siege to Caermarthyn, which when Reignold the Earl of
Bristoll the Kings base son heard, he called to him the Earl of Clare, and his
brother in law Cadwalader, the brother of Prince Owen, with Howell and Conan
Prince Owens sons, and two other Earls, and came to raise the siege with a
great Army; whose coming Rees stayed not, but betook him to the Mountains
called Kefu Rester, and there kept himself, and they camped at Dynwyl hic and
built a Castle there, who after they could not heard of Rees, returned home
without doing any notable act.

Madoc ap Meredith ap Blethyn Prince of Powis at Winchester. This man was ever
the King of Englands friend, and was one that feared God and relieved the poor;
his body was conveyed honorably to Powis, and buried in Mynot. He had by his
wife Susanna the daughter of Gruffith ap Conan Prince of Northwales three sons,
Gruffith, Maylor, Owen, Elise, and a daughter also called Marred; he had base
sons Owen; Brogynton, Kynric Evelh, and Endon Evelh, which base sons were not
basely esteemed, for with the other they had part of their Fathers inheritance,
and so had others through Wales, if they were stout and of noble courage.

And here I think it convenient to declare how Powis land came to be divided
into so many parcels, and thereby weakened and brought under the Normans, before
the rest of Wales: Meredyth son to Blethyn ap Convyn Prince of Powis, had two
sons, Madoc of whom we spoke, and Gruffith, between whom Powis was divided;
Madoc had that part which was called Powis Vadoc; which part again was
subdivided into three parts, betwixt his three sons; Gruffith and Maylor had
Bromfield, Yale, Hope, Dale, Manhewdwy, Mochnant, u Rhayard, Chirk, Glynlhayth,
and Glyndoverdwy. Owen Vachan had Mechain Iscoyd. And Owen Brogynton had
Dynmael, and Edeyrneon. The other part of Powis, called after Powis Wenwynwyn,
was the part of Gruffith ap Meredyth, after whose death his son called Owen
Civilioc enjoyed it.

The Lordship of Powis before King Offa's time reached Eastward to the Rivers
Dee and Severn, from a right line from the end of Broxen hills to Salop, with
all the Country between Wy and Severne, whereof Brochwel, Yscithroc was
possessed; but after the making of Offa's ditch, the plain Country toward Salop
being inhabited by Saxons and Normans, Powis was in length from Pulford bridge
Northeast to the confines of Caerdiganshire in the parish of Lhanguric in the
Southwest; and in breadth from the furthest part of Cyvilioc Westwards, to
Elsmere on the Eastside. This Country or principality of Powis was appointed by
Roderike the great for the portion of his third sons Anarawd, and so continued
entirely until the death of Blethyn ap Convyn; After whom although the
Dominion was diminished by limiting parts in severality amongst his sons
Meredyth and Cadogan, yet at length it came wholly to the possession of Meredyth
ap Blethyn, who had issue two sons, Madoc and Gruffith, between whom the said
Dominion was divided. Madoc married Susan the daughter of Gruffith ap Conan
Prince of Northwales, and had that part which was after called from his name
Powis Vadoc; which dominion and signiory was divided, and so forth; see Mr.
Powel fol. 216.

The same year Cadwalhon ap Madoc ap Ednerth was taken by his brother Eneon
Clyd, and delivered to Owen Prince of Northwales, A help to English History,
printed by Abel Roper. MDCIL.
who sent him to the Kings Officers to be imprisoned at Winchester, from
whence he escaped presently after, and came to his country. The year next
following dyed Meiric Bishop of Bangor.

Bangor another of the Bishoprics of Wales, is of ancient standing, but by
whom founded (says this Author) not yet known; the Cathedral there is
dedicated by the name of St Daniel who was Bishop there about the year 516,
Bangor.
which being cruelly defaced by the wretched Rebel Owen Glendour, was afterward
repaired by Henry Dean who was once there Bishop. The ruin of this bishopric
came in the time of bishop Bulkhey (a blessed Reformer questionless) who not
content to alienate and let out lands, Sacrilege by miracle punished.
made a sale also of the bells, and going to the Seashore to see them shipped, in
his return was stricken with a sudden blindness. This Diocese contains in
it the entire Country of Carnarvon, wherein Bangor stands, and the whole Isle
of Anglesey, together with parts of Denbigh, Merioneth and Mongomery, and in
them to the number of 107 Parishes, whereof 36 impropriated. It has moreover
in it three Archdeaconries, viz. of Bangor, Anglesey and Merioneth, one of
which is added to the bishopric for support thereof.

This Bishopric was valued in the Kings books 131 l. 16 s. 4d. and answers
for the Clergies tenth 151 l. 14s. 3d. q.

Bishops of Bangor. An. Chapter 516 1 St. Daniel. 2 Hernaeus translated to Ely.
1120 3 David. 1139 4 Maurituis. 5 Gulielmus. 6 Guido, alias Gwianus. 1195 7
Albanus 1197 8 Robertus de Salopia. 1215 9 Caducan, alias Cadogan. 1236 10
Howel. 1267 11 Richardus. 1306 12 Anianus. 13 Cadogan II. 1306 14 Griffith.
1320 15 Lodovicus. 1334 16 Matthaeus. 1358 17 Thomas de Ringsted. 1367 18
Gervasius de Castro. 1370 19 Howel II. 1374 20 John Gilbert, translated to
Saint David's. 1376 21 John Clovensis. 22 John Swaffan. 1400 23 Richard Young
translated to Rochester. 24 Lodovicus the II. 1408 25 Benedict, Nicols
translated to St. David's. 1418 26 William Barrow translated to Carlisle. 27
Nicolaus. 1436 28 Thomas Cheriton. 1448 29 John Stanbery, translated to
Hereford. 30 Jacobus. 1464 31 Thomas Edwane. 1196 32 Henry Dean translated to
Salisbury. 1500 33 Thomas Picot. 1504 34 John Penvy translated to Carlisle. 1505
35 Thomas Skenington. 1534 36 John Capon translated to Salisbury. 1539 37 John
Bird translated to Chester. 1541 38 Arthur Bulkeley or Bulkeby the bellseller.
1555 39 William Glynn. 1559 40 Rowland Meyric. 1566 41 Nicholas Robinson. 1585
42 Hugh Bellot translated to Chester. 1595 43 Rich. Vaughan translated to
Chester. 1596 44 Henry Rowland. 1616 45 Jews Bayley. 1632 46. David Dolvin.
1633 47 Edward Gruffith. 1637 48 William Roberts Sub-Almoner., Bishop of
Bangor 1641.

About the year 1162. Howel the son of Jenaf ap Cadogan, ap Athelstan Glodrydh
got the Castle of VValwern in Cyvelioc, and razed it, which thing when it was
told Owen Prince of Northwales, it displeased him wonderfully, at the which he
was so grieved that nothing could make him merry until such time as he had
gathered his power, and came to Lhanthinan in Arustly, and thence sent away
great spoils, which caused the People of the Country to come unto their Lord
Howel ap Jenaf, who followed the spoil to the Severn side, where the Princes
camp was; the Prince apprehending now an occasion of revenge offered him, was
right glad and set upon his Enemies, and slew the most part of them; the rest
with their Lord escaped to the woods and rocks. The Prince being well pleased
with this revenge, built up his Castle again and fortified it strongly. Castelh
Catrec Hova.
The year following Owen the son of Gruffith ap Meredyth, named Owen Cyvelioc,
and Owen ap Madoc ap Meredyth, got the Castle of Carrechona by Oswestrie and
wasted it.

Henry the second gathered a strong army against Southwales, and came himself
as far as Pencadyr beside Brecknock, where Rees came to him and did homage,
and gave him pledges, which done, the King went out of Wales. About this time
Eneon the Son of Anarawd ap Gruffith, Nephew to Prince Rees, was murdered in
his bed by a Man of his own, named Lhywarch. Also Cadogan ap Meredyth was slain
in the like manner by one Walter ap Ricard. The Lord Rees, as he is called in
Welsh, or King Rees, as Latin Authors call him, took the Cantreff Maur (which
is a great Country) and the Land of Dynevowr and enjoyed it. And this year died
Cadivor ap Daniel Archdeacon of Caerdigan, and Henry ap Arthen who was the
worthiest Clerk that had been in Wales many years. The year ensuing, the Lord
Rees seeing he was not able to maintain his Estate with such Lands as the King
had appointed him, entered into the Territory of Roger de Clare, Earl of
Gloucester (for by that Earls means his Nephew was murdered) and wan the Castles
of Aberheidol, and of the sons of Wywyaon, and raised them. And thus in short
time he brought all Caerdigan under his subjection; from thence he made many
inroads against the Flemmings, and brought away great spoils. This happy
fortune caused all Wales to conspire the shaking off of the Norman yoke (whose
treason and cruelty they could not abide) and to elect Princes of their own
Nation.

In the year 1165. David the son of Owen Prince of Northwales did destroy all
Flintshire, which was the Kings, K. Henry's third voyage in vain against the
Welsh.
and carried all the people and cattle with him to the Dyffryn Cloyd now called
Ruthin Land, which when the King had notice of, he levied an army in haste, and
came to relieve his Castles and people as far as Ruthlan, and after he had
rested there three days, and could do no good, he returned into England, where
he gathered another Army of selected Soldiers, and chosen through all his
Dominions, sending for Auxiliaries from Flanders and Britain; and then
returned to Northwales, with resolution to destroy all that had life in the
Land; and coming to Croes Oswalt called Oswaldstree, encamped there; on the
contrary side, Prince Owen and his Brother Cadwalader with all the power of
Northwales, and the Lord Rees withal the forces of Southwales, and Owen
Cyvelioc and the Sons of Madoc ap Meredyth with the strength of Powis, and the
two sons of Madoc ap Edwerth with all the people betwixt Wye and Severne,
gathered themselves together and came to Cawen in Edierneon, with purpose to
defend their Country. But the King understanding that they were so nigh, being
wondrous desirous of battle, came to the river Ceireoc, and caused the wood
to be felled, whereupon a number of the Welsh understanding the passage,
unknown to their Captains, met with the Kings Ward, where were placed the
choice men of all the Army, where began a hot skirmish, and diverse worthy Men
were slain on each side, but in the end the King obtained the passage, and came
to the Mountain of Berwyn, where he lay in camp certain days, and so both the
Armies stood in awe each of other: the King kept the plains, as being doubtful
to be entrapped in straits; but the Welsh watched for the opportunity and
advantage of the ground, and kept the King so straightly, that neither forage
nor victual might come to his camp, The Welsh united invincible against the
English.
neither durst any Soldier stir abroad; and to augment these miseries there
fell such store of rain, that the Kings Men could scarce stand upon their feet
upon those slippery places; in the end the King was compelled to return home
without his purpose, and that with great loss of Men and Ammunition, besides
his charges; therefore in a great choler he charged the Pledges eyes, A cruel
act of K. Henry 2.
(whom he received long before that) to be put out, which were Rees and
Cadwalhon, sons to Owen, and Cynwric, and Meredyth the sons of Rees, Roger Hove.
and other.

I find also says Mr. Powel, written by diverse, that in the assailing of a
bridge the King was in no small danger of his life; for one of the Welshmen
shooting directly at him, had pierced him through the body, if Hubert de St.
Clare, Constable of Colchester (perceiving the Arrow coming) had not thrust
himself betwixt the King and it; Hol. page 408.
whereby he saved his Master, and lost his own life.

Then after long consultation the King came again to North Wales, intending to
have his Army conveyed by Sea, and to Land in some convenient place of the
Country, and with his design he came to Chester, and there reposed a certain
time, till all his Navy was gathered together, as well hired ships of Ireland
as his own; and upon the sudden he brake up his Camp, and gave both ships and
men leave to depart. The same year Rees Prince of South Wales laid siege to the
Castle of Aberteini, Aberteini Castle won by the Welsh.
and wan it, and laid it flat with the ground; and likewise wan Pilgeran, and
razed it. At which time he took prisoner Robert the son of Stephen (his cozen
German, son to Nost his aunt, who after the death of Girald had married Stephen
Constable) and so returned home with great honor, and rich spoil. About the
same time died Lhewelin, son to Pr Owen, a worthy Gentleman, and of great
towardness. In the year ensuing, the Flemmings and Normans came to West Wales;
with a great power against the Castle of Cilgerran (which Rees had fortified)
and laid siege unto it, assaulting it diverse times; but it was so manfully
defended, that they returned home as they came; and shortly after they came
before it again, where they lost many of their best men, and so departed. The
same year Owen Pr. of North Wales, laid siege to the Castle of Basygwerke,
which the King had fortified, and in short time wan it, and dismantled it.
About the same time Jorwerth Goch was spoiled of his lands in Powis, by Owen
Cyvelioc the son of Gruffith ap Meredyth Lord of Powis, by Owen Bachen second
son to Madock ap Meredyth: which lands they divided betwixt them, so that Owen
Cyvelioc had Mochant above Rayader, and Owen Vachan Mochnant beneath Rayader.

In the year 1167 Owen Prince of North Wales, Cadwalader his brother, and Rees
Prince of South Wales, brought an Army into Powis against Owen Cyvelioc, and
wan all his lands, and chased him out of the Country, and gave Caereneon to
Owen Vachan the son of Madoc ap Meredyth to hold of Prince Owen; and the Lord
Rees had Walwern, because it stood within his Country; but within a while
after, Owen Cyvelioc returned with a strength of Normans and Engleshmen to
recover his Estate, and laid siege to the Castle of Caereneon; and winning the
same, burnt it to the ground. Also the same year the aforesaid Princes, Ruthlan
Castle taken by the Welsh, which King Henry had built.
Owen, Rees and Cadwalader, laid siege to the Castle of Ruthlan, which the King
had lately built and fortified, where the Garrison defended it most valiantly;
yet the Princes would not depart, until they had won it; which they did at two
months end, and razed it. After that they gat the Castle of Prostatyn, and
destroyed it; and then brought all Tegeugl to Owens subjection, and returned
home with much honor. In the year following Conon the son of Prince Owen, slew
Vrgeney Abbot of Lhwythlawr, and Lhawthen his nephew.

In this year also Robert the son of Stephen the Constable, was released out of
his cozens the Lord Rees his prison, and was sent to Ireland with great Forces
to Dermot the son to Murchart, who landed at Lochgarmon, and won it, and so
went forward.

In the year 1169 Meyric ap Adam of Bueltht, was murdered in his bed by
Meredyth Bengoch his cozen german. A Giants body 50 foot found.
Also this year there were found the bones of a Giant cast up by the Sea, of
such length, that his body seemed to contain after fifty foot in height.

This year Owen Gwyneth, the son of Gruffith ap Conan, Prince of North Wales,
passed out of this life; he had Governed his Country well and worthily 32
years.

This Prince was fortunate and victorious in all his affairs; he never took any
enterprise in his hand, but he atchived it; he left behind him many children,
begotten by diverse women, which were not esteemed by their mothers and birth,
but by their prowess and valiantness; first, he had by Gladus the daughter of
Lhywarch ap Trahevern ap Caradoc, Jorwerth Drwyndwn (that is, Edward with the
broken nose) Conan, Maelgon, and Gwenlhian, by Christian the daughter of Grono
ap Owen ap Edwin; he had David, Roderik Cadwalhon Abbot of Bardsey, and
Augharat wife to Griffith Maylor; he had besides these, Conan, Lhewelin,
Meredyth, Edwal, Run Howell, Cadelh, Madoc, En^on, Cynrwric, Philip and Riryd
Lord of Clocharn in Ireland by diverse women; of whom, Run, Lhewelyn and Cynwric
died before their father; the rest you shall hear of hereafter.

THE Third Book OF THE ANCIENT and MODERN BRITISH AND WELSH History.

TO THE Right Honorable JOHN Earl of Bridgwater, Baron of Elsmere, Viscount
Brackley. Earl of Carnarvon, Lord Dormer. RICHARD Earl of Carburie, Baron of
Emlyn. ANTHONY Viscount Montague, etc. JOHN Lord Abergavenny. WILLIAM Lord
Sturton, etc. HENRY Lord Arundel, Count of the sacred Roman Empire, and Baron
of Wardor.


The Earls of BRIDGWATER.
Edward Earl of Derbie. Dorothea Daughter of Tho. Howard, Duke of Norfolk, by
which Match this Honorable Family of the Egertons, by Frances Daughter and
Coheir to Ferdinando Earl of Derbie, descends from the British line, as
appears at large in the Pedigree of the D. of Norfolk. Henry Earl of Derbie.
Margaret Daughter to Henry Clifford, Earl of Cumberland, and Elinor his wife,
Daughter and Coheir of Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolk, and his wife Mary Queen
of France, Daughter to K. Henry VII. and Elizabeth Heir general to the house of
York, and Lord Mortimer; whose Ancestour, Ralph Lord Mortimer, married to
Gladis, sister and Coheir to David, and Daughter to Llewelin Prince of
Northwales; and K. Henry VII. was Grandchilde to Owen Tudor, lineally descended
from the Princes of South Wales. Ferdinando Earl of Derbie. Alice Daughter to
Sir John Spencer, Knight. Sir John Egerton Knight of the Bath, Lord President
of Wales, Earl of Bridgwater, Baron of Elsmere. Frances Daughter and Coheir of
Ferdinando Earl of Derbie. John Egerton Baron of Elsmere, Viscount Brackley,
Earl of Bridgwater, now living, 1661.

BRIDGWATER (but more properly in old Records Burghwalter, that is VValters
Burgh, so called of Walter de Duaco, who came in with the Normans, and had
fair Lands given him in those parts by the Conqueror) is a Town in
Sommersetshire: A great and populous Town, descending by the Chawworths to the
Duchy of Lancaster, and was by King Henry VIII. Heir of the Lancastrian line,
adorned with the Title of an Earldom, which he bestowed on Sir Henry Daubeney,
son of that Giles Daubeney, who came in with King Henry the Seventh from
Britain in France, and was by him made Lord Chamberlain, and Knight of the
Garter, which Henry dying without issue, this Title lying long asleep, was
afterward awakened in another Family, ordained to be a Seminary for the Earls
of Bridgwater.

Henry Lord Daubeney created Earl of Bridgwater 30. Hen.

John Egerton Viscount Brackley, created Earl of Bridgwater May 15. Lord
President of Wales, etc.

John Viscount Brackley, created Earl of Bridgwater, now living, 1661.

The Earl of CARNARVON.
THis Right honorable Earl now living, is the worthy Heir of that most worthy
and Heroic Robert Lord Dormer, and Earl of Carnarvon; whose loyal Fidelity to
his King, hate to Tyranny, love of his Countries Liberty, and contempt of
Rebellion, made him appear in in the field like a true Son of Mars, where he
did wonders beyond expression; and for justice, religion and loyalty,
sacrificed his life upon the Altar of never-dying Fame. He married the Daughter
of Philip Earl of Pembrock, and Montgomery etc. by which means this now Earl
of Carnarvon is many ways descended from the British Princely line, as does
most amply appear in the Genealogy of the Earl of Pembrock, which for brevity
I forbear to express.

CARNARVON.
CARNARVON is a Shire of Northwales, butting upon the Irish Seas, and parted
from the Isle of Anglesey by a straight, or fretum; a Mountainous and Rockie
Country: but the defects thereof are supplied plentifully by the Isle
adjoining. It took name from Carnarvon, the chief Town thereof, heretofore
strongly walled, and fortified with a very fair Castle. Edward II. King of
England was born there, and hence according to the custom of those times
entitled Edward of Carnarvon; for the occasion of it I referr you to the
common Chronicles. The Princes of Wales had in this place their Chancery and
Exchequer for all Northwales, which was no small improvement to it; Earl it
never had any till this present Age, in which King Charles of ever blessed
memory, conferred the Title on

Robert Lord Dormer, created Earl of Carnarvon, 4 Caroli, Aug. 2.

Lord Dormer, Earl of Carnarvon 1661.

The Earls of CARBURIE.
Gwaith Voed Lord of Cardigan. Gweriston Prince of Powis, Second Son of Gwaith
Voed. Kynvyn. Blethyn. Meredith. Madoc, Lord of Powis Vadoc. Griffith Mailor,
Einon Edvel, alias Elvel. Rhyn. Jevan, Esquire; Madoc Cough, Esquire. Madoc Kyffin,
Esquire. David Vaughan, Esquire. Griffith, Esquire. Hugh Vychan, Esquire. John
Vychan, Esquire. Walter Vychan, Esquire. Sir John Vaughan of the Golden Grove,
Knight. Richard Vaughan, Earl of Carburie, Lord Vaughan, Baron of Emlyn, now
living, 1661. Alice, Daughter of John, Earl of Bridgwater.
FRANCIS Viscount MONTAGUE.
Sir George Brown, Knight of the Garter, temp. Hen. 8. Lucy Daughter to John
Nevil, Marquess Montague, and Coheir to her Brother George Duke of Bedford.
This John, Marquess Montague, married Isabel Daughter and Heir to Sir Edward
Englethorp, or (as Mr Powel fol. 217. calls him) Edmund, who married Joan,
third Daughter to John Lord Typtoft Earl of Worcester, and Coheir to Edward
her Brother, which Earl John married Joyce, Daughter and Coheir of Edward
Charleton, Lord Powis, descended lineally from John Charlton Lord Powis, in
right of his wife Hawis the hardy, sole Daughter and Heir to Owen ap Griffith,
Lord Powis, whose Forefathers were Princes of Powis. Anthony Brown Knight of
the Garter, created Viscount Montague, tem. Phil. and Mariae, at Hampton Court.
Jane Daughter to Robert Ratcliff, Earl of Sussex. Anthony Brown Esquire, obiit
ante patrem. Mary, Daughter to Sir William Dormer. Anthony Viscount Montague.
Joan or Jane Daughter to Thomas Earl of Dorset. Francis Brown, now Viscount
Montague, 1661. Elizabeth Daughter of Henry Marquess of Worcester, by which
Match the Heir apparent, with the rest of that honorable issue, are descended
from the British line, as is manifest in the Genealogy of the Marquess of
Worcester. Brown, Heir apparent.

LORD ABERGAVENY.
John, Lord Nevil, Baron of Abergavenny, descended from Sir Edward Nevil,
Knight. Elizabeth Daughter and Coheir of John Chamberlain, alias Tankervile of
Sherburn Castle, Com. Oxfor. Sir Edward Nevil Knight, third Son of Ralph Nevil,
Earl of Westmerland. Elizabeth, Daughter and Heir of Richard Beauchamp, Earl
of Worcester, and Lord of Abergavenny, in whose right the said Edward was Lord
of Abergavenay. This Elizabeth descended from William Beauchamp, Baron of
Burgavenny, who was fourth Son of Thomas Beauchamp, Earl of Warwick, Marshall
of England under King Edward III. and one of the Founders of the Noble Order of
the Garter: who married Katherine, Daughter of Roger Mortimer, Lord of Wigmore,
son of Edmund son of another Roger, by right of inheritance I have seen a Deed
of the Advowson of St. Bride in Monmothshire, granted to the Forefather of
William Jones of Lansanfride, (i. e.) St. Bride, the very place where this
Advowson is, thus, Edwardus Nevill Miles, and Elizabetha de Beauchamp, (as Mr.
Powel says fol. 316.) Prince of Wales, as being son to Sir Roger Mortimer, who
married Gladys, Heir to her brother David, and Daughter to Llewelin ap
Iorwerth, Prince of Northwales, and Joan Daughter to King John. Domina de
Burgavenny, omnibus ad quos praesentes literae pervenerint, salutem: Noveritis
nos pro bono consilio and laudabili servitio, Philippo Thomas dedisse
concessisse and hoc praesenti scripto confirmasse Philippo, heredibus and
assignatis suis dominationem Ecclesiae beatae Frigittae in nostro Dominio de
Burgavenny, habendum and tenendum, etc. Sigilla nostra apposuimus in Castro
nostro de Burgavenny vicessimo secundo die Julii, anno regni Regis Henrici
sexti, post Conquestum vicessimo septimo.

The Arms upon the Seal.

Quarterly Beauchamp and Warren in the First: and in the Second Nevill: the
Third as the Second: the Fourth as the First.

THE LORD STURTON.
William, Lord Sturton, descended from John Sturton, created Baron Sturton,
tempore Henrici Sexti, one of whose Successors, Charles Lord Sturton, married
the eldest Daughter to Edward Earl of Derbie, and Dorothea, Daughter of Thomas
Duke of Norfolk, by which Match this Honorable Family descends from British
Princes, as plainly appears in the Genealogies of the Duke of Norfolk and Earl
of Derbie.

The Heir apparent of this Right Honorable Lord married a Grandchilde of
William Lord Petre of VVrittil in Essex, and Katharine his Wife, Second
Daughter to Henry Earl of Worcester, by which Match this right Honorable
Family again descends from British Progenitors; as in the Pedigree of the
Marquess of Worcester.

William Sturton Esquire, Second Son to William Lord Sturton, married
Margaret, Daughter to George Morgan of Lansore in the County Monmoth Esquire,
descended from Kydivor Vawr Lord of Kilsant, who was one of the Peers of Wales,
of the Blood Royal of Britain, paternally descended from Belly the Great, King
of all the Britains, who died in the year 1084. and was buried at Caermarthyn.
This Family of the Morgans (whose ancient seat is Maughan in Monmothshire, from
whence have sprang many flourishing Families) descended also from Rees ap Tuder
King of Southwales: from Ivor king of Gwent, from Rhiallon ap Kinvin Prince of
Powis, Gwillim ap Ayddan Lord of Grismond: all which Coats this Noble Family
quarters.

HENRY LORD ARUNDEL OF WARDOR, COUNT of the SACRED ROMAN EMPIRE.
Sir Thomas Arundel Knight. Margaret Daughter and Coheir to Edmund Lord Howard,
third Son to Thomas Duke of Norfolk, by which Coheir the British Blood
descends upon this Honorable Family, as appears in the Genealogy of the Dukes
of Norfolk. Thomas Arundel Count of the Empire, and Baron of Wardor,
Grandchilde to Sir Thomas Arundel. Mary Daughter of Henry Writchsley Earl of
South-Hampton. Thomas Arundel Count of the Empire, and Baron of VVardor. Blanch
Daughter of Edward Earl of Worcester, by which Match this Honorable Family
several ways descends from the British blood Royol. Henry Arundel Count of
the Empire, and Baron of VVardor, now living, 1661. Cicely Daughter to Sir
Henry Compton Knight of the Bath. Thomas Arundel, Heir Apparent.

THE THIRD BOOK OF THE Ancient and Modern British and Welsh HISTORY.
THis Owyn with five of the chiefest of Wales, did homage to Henry the second;
and likewise to his eldest son Henry at Woodstock, in the eighth year of Henry
the father, Anno Dom. 1165.

Quarterly Gules and Or 4 Lions pass. guard. Counter-change.


David the son of Owen Gwyneth.
AFter the death of Owen, his sons fell in debate who should inherit after him,
for the eldest son born in Matrimony, Edward or Jorwerth Drwndwn, was counted
unmeet to Govern, because of the maim upon his face; Howell base son of Owen
slain.
and Howell who took upon him all the Rule, was a base son begotten upon an
Irish woman: Therefore David gathered all the power he could, and came against
Howell, and fighting with him, slew him, and afterward enjoyed quietly the
whole land of North Wales, until his brother Jorwerths son came to age, as
shall hereafter appear: Madoc, another of Owen Gwyneths sons, Mahoc betakes
himself to Navigation
left the land in contention betwixt his brethren, and prepared certain ships
with men and ammunition, and sought Adventures by Sea, sailing West and leaving
the cost of Ireland so far North, that he came to a land unknown, where he saw
many strange things. This land must needs be some part of that which the
Spaniards affirm themselves to be the first Finders of, H. Lhoyd.
since Hanno's time; for by reason and order of Cosmography, this land to which
Madoc came, must needs be some part of Nova Hispania or Florida; whereupon it
is manifest, that the Country was long before by Britains discovered, India,
first discovered by the Britains.
before either Columbus or Americus Vespasius conveyed any Spaniards or
Portugues thither. Of this Voyage and return of this Madoc there be many
fictions, as the common people do use in distance of place and length of time,
rather to augment than diminish; but sure it is that there he was. And after he
had returned home, and declared the pleasant and fruitful Countries that he had
seen without inhabitants; and upon the contrary part, for what barren and wild
ground his brethren and nephews did murder one another; he prepared a number
of ships, and got with him such men and women as were desirous to live in
quietness, and taking leave of his friends, Madocs second voyage to the Indies.
took his journey thitherward again: Therefore it is to be supposed, that he
and his people Colonized part of those Countries; for it appears by Francis
Lones, that in Ancusanus and other places the people honored the Cross;
whereby it may be gathered, that Christians had been there before the
Spaniards; but because this people were not many, they followed the manners of
the land unto which they arrived, and used the Language they found there.

This Madoc arriving into that Western Country, unto which he came in the year
1170. Mr. Powel.
left most of his people there, and returning back for more of his own Nation,
Acquaintance and Friends to inhabit that fair and large Country, went thither
again with ten Sails, as I find noted by Gutyn Owen. I am of opinion, that the
land whereunto he came, was some part of Mexico; the causes which makes me
think so, are these:

1. First, The common report of the Inhabitants of that Country, who affirmed,
that their Rulers descended from a strange Nation that came thither from a far
Country; which thing is confessed by Mutezuma King of that Province, in an
Oration made for quietting of his people at his submission to the King of
Castile, Hernando or Fernando Curt^^^ being then present, which is declared in
the Spanish Chronicles of the conquest of these Indies.

Evident proofs that the Welsh first discovered the West Indies.
2. Secondly, The British words and names of places used there even unto this
day, do argue the same; as when they talk together, they use this word Gwrando,
which is hearken or listen: Also they have a certain Bird which they call
Pengwin, that is, Whitehead; but the Island of Corroeso, the Cape of Bryton,
the River of Gwyndor, and the white Rock of Pengwyn, which be all British or
Welsh words, do manifestly show that it was that Country which Madoc and his
people inhabited.

About this time Rees Prince of South Wales came with great power into Powis,
and subdued Owen Cyvelioc the Lord thereof, and took Pledges of him, and then
returned home with honor.

K. Henry and P. Rees attoned.

Rees supplyeth the King in his journey toward Ireland.


When King Henry prepared for the Conquest of Ireland, Prince Rees came and met
him, who received him courteously, and confirmed all what formerly had been
accorded; insomuch that Rees promised the King toward his expedition into
Ireland 300 Horses, and 400 Oxen, and gave him 14 Pledges.

Thus done, the King came to South Wales, and entering Caerlheon upon Vsk, took
the (formerly sumptuous) City from the Lord thereof, Jorwerth ap Owen ap
Caradoc keeping the same to his own use; The Arms of of this Lord were Gules 3
Towers Arg. now quartered by the Morgans.
wherefore Jorwerth departed from the King, and calling to him his two sons
Owen and Howell (who was called Howell of Caerlheon, and bare for his Arms
Gules 3 Towers Argent; which Coat is now quarted by the Morgans of Mahan and
Lantarnam, etc.) and his sisters son Morgan ap Sylsit ap Dyfnwal, gathered
forces, and upon the Kings departure entered the Country, spoiling and burning
as they went, and took the Town of Caerlheon, and destroyed it, saving the
Castle (now ruined by time) which they could not get: The destruction of the
once famous Caerlheon.
The King kept on his journey to Pembrock, and there he gave Rees all
Caerdigan, Stratywy, Aberustly and Eluel: Rees coming to Aberteini, which he
had won from the Earl of Gloucester, and lately fortified, removed from thence
to Pembrock in the Kalends of October, and spoke with the King, returning the
day after, and then culled out of his Horses the promised number, or at least
86, and sent them to the King, who chose out 36, and sent the rest back with
many thanks. K. Hen. 2. offers at St. David's.
The same day the King went to St. David's, and offering there, dined with the
Bishop the son of Girald, cousin german to Rees. Whether Rich. Strongbow Earl
of Strigull (an ancient Castle formerly in Monmothshire, part of whose ruins
yet remain) came from Ireland to confer with the King, and after dinner the
King returned to Pembrock; within a while after, the King being at the white
house, rendered to Rees, Howell his son, who had for a long time been pledge
with him; and then also he gave him day for the other Pledges, and for his
tribute, till his return from Ireland. The next day being the morrow after St.
Lukes day, the King took shipping there, and had fair passage into Ireland,
where he landed at Dublin, and there lay quiet that winter.

In the year 1172 there fell a great Plague among the Kings soldiers in
Ireland, by reason of the change of the air and victuals; K. comes to
Pembrock, and the solemnizeth the feast of the Resurction of our B. Savior.
which caused the Kings return, who landed in Wales in Passion week (if such a
week be now remembered) and remained at Pembrock on Easter day (which, did it
not constantly fall upon Sunday, would be as well forgot, or at least
disesteemed, as the Birthday of our most Holy and Blessed Savior and
Reedeemer; (For he who honors not that blessed Nativity, can we think that he
reverenceth his glorious Resurrection?) and the day following and on Tuesday
took his journey toward England; the Lord Rees careful to comply with the
King, waits his coming at Talacharn, and there presents his duty. Caerlheon
Castle anew repaired, not built by King Hen. 2.
The King as he passed from Caerdiff by the new Castle upon Vsk, sent for
Jorwerth ap Owen ap Cadogan, to come and speak with him under safe conduct for
him, his sons and friends, meaning to conclude a peace with him, and so to
quiet all Wales; upon these summons or message Jorwerth took his journey
toward the King, and sent word to Owen his son, being a lusty young Gentleman,
to meet him by the way; but as he came at his fathers command, the Earl of
Bristolls men (by this Earl of Bristoll I know not whom Mr. Powell means)
Reynold Earl of Cornwall and Bristoll, as Mr. Mills calls him, base son of Hen.
1. (for in our usual accounts of Earls, Mr. Mills, fol. 69.
John Lord Digby of Sherborne is accounted the first of that place, being
created Earl of Bristoll Sept. 15. Jac. 20. but in those days many were styled
Earls of places, as Strongbow Earl of Strigull, which are not numbered in the
Catalogue of Earls) hearing of it, came out of the now Castle of Caerlheon upon
Vsk, and laid wait for him by the way, being under the Kings safe conduct, and
trusting to his promise, and suddenly set upon, and murdered him traitorously
and cowardly, A most unworthy act.
being unarmed and having but a few in his Company: Which hard and
unchristianly act when his father understood by some of his followers that
escaped, he was much perplexed, and returned home with all his friends, and his
son Howell, A just revenge.
and would never afterward trust neither the Kings promise, nor any Normans;
but forthwith gathered all his power and friends that he could make, and
without mercy destroyed all the Country with fire and sword to the Gates of
Hereford and Gloucester, to avenge the death of his son: Howsoever, K. Henry
made Lord Rees chief Justice of all South Wales by Commission, Usual then as
now for the Welsh to have By-blows, and look upon them as sons.

Abergavenny Castle suprised.


and took his journey into Normandy.

In the same year died Cadwalader ap Gruffith ap Conan Prince of North Wales,
who had by his wife Alice daughter of Richard Clare Earl of Gloucester, Cunetha,
Radulph and Richard; and by other women he had Cadvan, Cadwalader, Eneon,
Meredyth, Goch and Cadwalhon. Toward the end of this year Sytsilt ap Dyfnwall,
and Jevan ap Syrsilt ap Riryd got the Castle of Abergavenny by surprise, and
took the Kings Garrison prisoners: and the year ensuing was the fairest winter
that ever was seen.

About this time Rees Prince of South Wales sent unto King Henry his son Howell
with a goodly Company of men to serve him; which much pleased the King; Hol.
page 437.
who returned cordial thanks to Prince Rees: If I mistake not, this Prince
Rees, as also other Princes of South Wales, bore for his Ensigns of honor,
Mars, The Arms of P. Rees.
a Lion rampant and border endented Sol, incensed Jupiter. In the mean time
Jorwerth ap Owen brought his Forces against Caerlheon, and they of the Town
fought with him, whom he overthrew, and took many prisoners of them, and wan
the Town, and laid siege to the Castle, Caerlheons Town and Castle taken.
which was yielded him forthwith in exchange for prisoners. Then also Howell
his son brought all Gwent it Coed (the Castle only excepted, the Castle here
meant by Mr. Powell I conceive, was Strigull which belonged to Earl Strongbow)
under his obedience, and took Pledges of the Inhabitants. Also at that time
David ap Owen Gwyneth Prince of North Wales, made war against his brother
Maelgon, who kept the Isle of Mon or Anglesey, and brought his people over
Menai (for so that arm of the Sea is called) which separateth that Isle from
the main land; and chasing his brother out of the Isle to Ireland, brought all
the Isle under subjection; also he expelled all his brothers and cousins out of
North Wales, A Turkish policy.
and took all their lands to himself; and taking his brother Maelgon as he came
from Ireland, detained him close prisoner. Then Conan his brother died.

In the year 1175. The Welsh much addicted to geld their kindred.
Howell the son of Jorwerth ap Owen of Caerlheon took his uncle Owen Pen Carne
prisoner, and putting out his eyes, gelded him, least he should beget children
to inherit Caerlheon and Gwent; but God provided a punishment for him; for upon
the Saturday following there came a great Army of Englishmen and Normans before
the Town, Caerlheon taken by the English.
and wan it with the Castle, Maugre Howell, and his father who was not privy to
his sons lewd deed.

This year also David Prince of North Wales (being bold of the King affinity)
did imprison his own brother Roderike in bolts, because he desired part of his
fathers lands.

This year also Rees Prince of South Wales, came to the Kings Court at
Gloucester, and brought with him such Lords of South Wales as had offended the
King, to do him homage; which pleased his Majesty exceedingly; whose names were
these, Cadwalhon ap Madoc of Melyenyth, Reeses cousin german, Eneon Clyt of
Eluel, Eneon ap Rees of VVerthrynion; which two had married two of his
daughters, Morgan ap Caradoc ap Jestin of Glamorgan, Gruffith ap Ivor ap Meyric
of Senghennyth, Silsyt of higher Gwent, Caerlheon restored to Jorwerth by the
K. of Engl.
which three had married his sisters, and Jorwerth ap Owen of Caerlheon, whom
the King received under his protection, restoring to him Caerlheon again; and
so they returned home well satisfied: But shortly after William de Bruise Lord
of Brecknock, desired Silsyt ap Dyfnwall, Geffry his son, and a great number of
the Gentry and best men of Gwentland to a feast at his Castle of Abergavenny
(which he had received of them by composition) and they mistrusting no harm,
came thither; but like a Traitor and a Murderer he had a great number of armed
men within the Castle, which fell upon this Lord and the rest, Hol. page 439.
Marthi West, lib. 2.
and without any mercy or remorse put them to the sword, and forthwith went to
Silsyts house (being not far from thence) and took his wife, and slew
Cadwalader his son before his mothers face, and destroyed the house; and this
was a lamentable day to all Gwent, and a lesson to all men to take heed of a
reconciled enemy.

This William Lord Bruise having the Welshmen within his Castle of Abergavenny,
to seek a quarrel, propounded unto them certain Articles to be by them kept and
performed; and among other things, that none of them should at any time carry
about them in their journey, either Bow or Sword; for the observing of the
which, he would have had them to be sworn; which they refused to do: Whereupon
he falling out with them, called his men, which were ready for that purpose,
and caused them all to be murdered; and when that deed was done (to cloak this
Treason with some reasonable excuse) he caused it to be reported abroad, that
this he did in the revenge of the death of his uncle Henry de Hereford, whom
they on an Easter even before had slain.

In North Wales Roderike brake his brothers prison, and escaping came to
Anglesey, where all the Country received him for their Lord, because they
abhorred the ingratitude of the Prince, who unnaturally had disinherited all
his brethren in boldness of his brother in Law the King. This Roderike also was
received as Lord and Prince in all the Country about the River of Conwey. Then
Prince David fled over Conwey, and there remained for a time. This year died
Cadelh, the son of Gruffith ap Rees, and brother to the Lord Rees, after long
sickness, and was honorably enterred at Stratflur. The next year died David
Fitz Girald, Bishop of Menevia, and Peirs was installed in his place.

This year the Lord Rees, Prince of South Wales, made a great feast at
Christ-mass (a time now almost forgot, if not denied) in the Castle of
Aberteini, which feast he caused to be proclaimed through all Britain long
before, A sumptuous Invitation of P. Rees.
and thither came many strangers, which were honorably entertained, so that no
man departed discontended: and among deeds of Arms and other Courtly pastimes,
Rees caused all the Poets of Wales (which are makers of Songs, and Recorders of
Gentlemen's Pedegrees and Arms, of whom every one is entitled Bardh, in Latin
Bardus) to come thither, and provided chairs for them to sit in the Hall, where
they should dispute together, and try their cunning and gift in their
faculties, where great rewards and gifts were appointed for the Victors;
amongst whom, they of North Wales wan the prize; and among the Musicians,
Reeses own houshold-servants were accounted best. Shortly after Eneon Clyt and
Morgan ap Meredyth were both slain by Treason of the Normans who inhabited the
Marches.

At this time the Lord Rees built the Castle of Rayder Gwy, that is to say, The
Fall of Wye, Rayder Gwy Castle built.
for the River of Wye falls there over a high Rock. About this time the sons
of Conan ap Owen Gwyneth made war against him: then also Cadwalhon, the brother
of Owen Gwyneth, and uncle to David and Roderike, who had fled to the King for
succor, as he was conveyed home by the Kings men, to enjoy his patrimony, was
cruelly murdered by the way, and found those whom he imagined to be his
assistants and friends, to be indeed Traitors and Butchers. This year the bones
of K. Arthur and Queen Gwenhonar his wife were found in the Isle of Avilon,
without the Abbey of Glastenbury 15 foot within the earth, in a hollow
Elder-tree; but of this formerly.

And now Ranulph de Poer with a great number of Gentlemen was slain by certain
young men of Gwentland. Giral. Came.
This Ranulph was Sheriff of Herefordshire, as says Girald, whose death the
same Author seems to impute unto himself, for his cruel and unreasonable
dealing with the Welsh: but the King construed it otherwise, who being sore
incensed against them, assembled a mighty Army, and came with the same to
Worcester, meaning to invade Wales; The Prince South Wales becomes liege man to
the K. of Engl.
but the Lord Rees ap Gruffith fearing the Kings puissance thus bent against
him and his Country men, came by safe conduct unto Worcester, where submitting
himself, he swear fealty to the King, and became his liege-man, promising to
bring his son and nephews to him for Pledges: But when according to his promise
he would have brought them (they remembering how the other Pledges were before
used) refused to go with him, and so the matter rested for that time.

About this time Cadwalader, the son of Lord Rees, was slain privily in West
Wales, and buried in Twy Gw in. The next year Owen Vachan, the son of Madoc ap
Meredyth, was slain in the Castle of Carregona, hard by Oswestred, in the night
time, by Gwenwynwyn, and Cadwalhon the son of Owen Cyvelioc. And shortly after,
Lhewelin son to Cadwalhon ap Gruffith ap Conan was taken, and had his eyes put
out.

The Visitation made by the Archb. of Canterbury into Wales. Many noble
Welshmen list themselves for the Holy land. 1188. Tenbie destroyed.
About the year 1187. Baldwine Archbishop of Canterbury having in his company
Giraldus Cambrensis Arch-Archdeacon of Brecon, visited that Country; whom the
Clergy of Wales began to resist, alleging the liberties and privileges of
their Metropolitan Church of St. David, but they prevailed not. In this
visitation he persuaded (which Giraldus describes, calling his Book
Itinerarium Cambriae) and exhorted as many as ever he could to take the Cross,
and to vow the voyage against the Saracens, whereunto he persuaded many of the
Nobles of Wales, as appears by the same Giraldus.

In the year 1188. Maelgon son to Lord Rees, brought his Army against Tenbie,
and by plain force wan the Town, and spoiling the same, burned it to ashes.
This Lord was fair and comely of person, honest and just, beloved of his
friends, and feared of his foes, against whom (especially the Flemmings) he
achieved diverse victories.

This year also the Lord Rees gathered all his strength, and wan the Castles of
Seynclere, Abercorran, and Lhanstephen, and brought all the whole Country
under his subjection, taking Maelgon his son, The father imprisoneth his son.
in whom remained all the hope of South Wales, whom he kept in prison.

In the year following Rees did build the Castle of Chewely; and Gwenlhian his
daughter, the fairest and goodliest woman of all Wales died. At this time also
Gruffith Mailor Lord of Bromfield a noble man and wise, and one that in
liberality passed all the Lords and noblemen of his time died, and was buried
at Mynot; Mynot.
he had by his wife Angharat the daughter of Owen Gwyneth Prince of Northwales,
a son called Madoc, who succeeded his father in that part of Powis called Powis
Vadoc. And prince Rees wone the Castle of Dinevowr, and Owen his son died a
Stratta florida or Stratflar, and shortly after Maelgon his other son escaped
out of prison, where his Father had kept him long time. Lhanhayaden castle won.
But the Lord Rees got the Castle of Lhanhayaden, and the Country about. At
which time Gruffith ap Cadogan died.

In this year Roderike the son of Owen Gwyneth, by the help of Gothrick King of
Man, entered the Isle of Mon, and reduced it under his subjection; b^^ before
the End of the Year, the sons of his brother Conan chased him out of the Isle,
and got it to themselves. And at this time Maelgon laid sieg to the Castle of
Strat-Meiric and wan it. Stratmei^c castle taken.
Also Howell (surnamed Saer, that is to say, the Saxon or English, because he
had served in England) son to the said Prince Rees, got the Castle of Gwys by
surprise, and took Philip de Gwys, his wife, and his two sons Prisoners
therein, Gwys castle surprised.
but because he had more Castles then he could well defend, he determined to
dismantle the Castle of Lhanhayaden: whereof the Flemmings having notice,
gathered all their power and came thither the day appointed to raise the
Castle, and fiercely assaulted the men of Howel and Maelgon, and put many of
them to the sword, the rest escaping by flight; nevertheless shortly after
they gathered new forces and came thither again, and demolished the Castle
without any impeachment. Lhanhayaden castle destroyed.
Upon this Anarawd another son of Prince Rees (moved with filthy ambition and
covetousness of lands) took his two brethren Howel and Madoc prisoners, under
pretext of friendship, and put out both their eyes.

Maelgon the son of Prince Rees, gave his brother Anarawd the Castle of
Stratmeiric for his prisoners, whom he set at liberty; then Rees himself did
re-edifie the Castle of Rayader Gwy, and his own sons laid wait for him, and
took their father prisoner, fearing least he would revenge their cruel and
unnatural deeds, The sons imprison the father.
but by means of Howel who was blind, he escaped out of prison, and took the
Castle of Dynevowr, which Maelgon kept, and destroyed it; also the sons of
Cadwalhon wan the castle of Rayader Gwy, and fortified it for themselves.

At this time Lhewelin the son of Jorwerth Drwyndwn, who was the eldest son of
Owen Gwineth prince of Northwales, remembering his right and title to his
inheritance in Northwales (although his father had been dis-inherited by his
brother David) called together his friends by his mother (which was Marred,
daughter of Madoc ap Meredyth P. of Powis) and also drew to his side his
cosens, the sons of Conan ap Owen Gwineth, and then challenged the rule of
Northwales, and entered the country, to whom the people willingly yielded, and
took him for their Lord, and so without bloodshed he received all Northwales
into his protection and tuition, except three castles, which his Uncle David
kept by force of Englishmen, in whom was all his trust; having married Emma
daughter of Jeffrie Plantagenet Earl of Ancow and Cevoman or Maine, and Maud
the Empress, and sister to King Henry the second: and thus David lost his
land, and Lewelin got his birthright 1194.



Quarterly G. and Or 4. Lions pass^guar. counterchang
Lhewelin or Leoline magnus.
After that Lhewelin or Leoline the great (as Mr. Mills call him) the son of
Jorwerth, Mr. Mill f. 306
had gotten the principality of Northwales, Roger Mortimer came against him
with great forces to Melyenith, and built the castle of Cimaron, and so brought
that country under his command, Cimaron castle built.
and chased away the two sons of Cadwalhon ap Madoc Lords of that place. About
the same time Rees and Meredith the sons of Prince Rees (being two valiant
Gentlemen) gathered together a company of Madcaps or Hectors, as we now call
such hair-baind fellows, and came to Dinevowr, and got the Castle from their
Fathers Garrison; and after that exployt they went to Cantred Bachan, where the
whole Country received them gently, and delivered the castle to their hands,
which much displeased their father, who laid privy wait for them; and by
treason of their own men (who were afraid any further to incense their Lord and
Prince) they were taken and brought to their father, who presently secured them.

Caermarthyn destroyed.
The year ensuing Prince Rees listed a gallant army, and laid seige to the town
and castle of Caermarthyn, and in short time wan them both spoiling and
destroying the same, and then returned with great plunder. Clun Castle fired by
P. Rees.
After which conquest he conducted the same forces to the Marshes before the
Castle of Clun, which after a long siege, and many a fierc assault, he got and
burned it; and from thence he marched to the Castle, of Radnor, and likewise
wan it; to the defense whereof ca^^ Roger Mortimer and Hugh de Says with a
strong army of Normans and English; but Re^^ who had won the Castle, determined
not immure his men within the walls, but boldly like a worthy Prince came into
the plain besides before the town, and gave them battle; where his men
(although for the most part unarmed, and not accustomed to field discipline)
declared that they descended of British blood, A brave resolution of the
Welsh, and a famous victory against the English.
(whose title the Noble Roman Emperors did so much desire, as a token of
manhood and worthiness) chosing rather to dye with honor, in the defense of
their Country, then to live with shame, and did so worthily behave themselves,
that their enemies forsook the field, with great loss of their men, whom Rees
pursued, till the benefit of the night shadowed them with her darkness, and
forthwith he laid siege to the Castle of Pain in Elvel and got it. Thither
came William de Bruise the owner thereof, Pain Castle taken. The Archb. of
Cant. led an army against the Welsh. Matthew. Park. page 138.
and made peace with Rees, from whom he received the same Castle again. Not
long after the Archbishop of Canterbury (whom Richard who was then King of
England, had substituted his Lieutenant in England) came with a huge power
toward Wales, and laid siege to the Castle of Gwenwinwin at the pool; but the
garrison defended the hold so manfully, that he lost many of his men, but could
do no good; for the Welshmen made him know that it was better and more secure
to be in a pulpit, then a pavilion, and that the miter and helmet fitted not
the same head; yet the Martial Prelate would not so be bafled, but sent for
Miners, and set them on work to undermine the walls; which when the garrison
discovered, and knowing that their enemies were three to one, they were content
to yield up the Castle upon condition that they might depart with their arms
freely: whichafter the Archbishop took, suffering them to pass quietly,
fortifying the Castle strongly to the Kings use, and placing therein a garrison
for defense thereof, departed into England. But immediately VVenwinwin or
Gwenwinwin begirt it again, and in short space reduced it upon the same
conditions that his men had surrendered it, and kept the same to his own use.

P. Rees dies Hol. p. 534.
The next year after, the fourth of May, Rees the son of Gruffith ap Rees ap
Theodore P. of Southwales died, the only hope and stay of all that part of
Wales, as he that brought them out of the thraldom and bondage of strangers,
and set them at liberty, and had defended them diverse times in the field
manfully, Mr. Powel Fol. 249.
daunting the pride and courage of their cruel enemies, whom he did either
chase out of the land, or compelled by force to live quietly at home; The
Encomiums of prince Rees.
woe to that cruel destiny that spoiled the miserable land of her defense and
shield, who as he descended of noble and princely blood, so he passed all other
in commendable qualities and laudable virtues of the mind; He was the
overthower of the mighty, the setter up of the weak, the overturner of the
holds, the separater of troops, the scatterer of his foes, among whom he
appeared as a wild bore among the whelps, or a Lion that for anger beats his
tail to the ground: See more of him in Polychronicon and Grafton.

The Kings of England descend from this P. Rees.
This Prince had many sons and daughters, as Gruffith, who succeeded his father,
Cadwalhon, Maelgon, Meredyth Rees; and of his daughters one called Gwenlhian
was married co Ednivet Vachan, who was ancestor of Owen Theodore or Tudor, that
married Queen Katharine the widow of K. Henry the fifth, and the rest were
married to other Lords in the country. After the death of Rees, Gruffith his
son subdueth all the country to himself, and enjoyed it in peace, until
Maelgon his brother (whom his father had dis-inherited) made league with
Gwinwynwyn the son of Owen Civelioc Lord of Powis, who both together, levied
forces and came suddenly upon Gruffith, and slaying many of his people, took
him prisoner, and so recovered all the Country of Caerdigan with the Castle.
Thus Maelgon having taken his brother, sent him to be imprisoned with
Gwinwynwyn, who in despite delivered him to the English. Then Gwenwynwyn
gathered his power and entered Arustlie and subdued the same to himself.

About this time there was a great war in Northwales; for the late Prince David
ap Owen came with a great army, as well English as Welsh, purposing to recover
the land again; but Lhewelin his Nephew who was the lawful heir, and then in
possession thereof, came boldly and met him, Powis Wenwynwyn why so called.
add gave him battle, and putting his people to flight, took him prisoner and
secured him, by which means he enjoyed his country in quiet tranquillity.
Toward the end of this year Owen Cyvelioc prince of higher Powis died, and
left his territories to Gwenwinwin his son, after whom that part of Powis was
called Powis Gwenwinwin, for a difference from the other called Powis Vadoc,
which was in the possession of the Lords of Bromfield. At this time also dyed
Owen the son of Gruffith Maylor, Lord of Bromfield and Brichtyr, the son of
Howel ap Jevaf, likewise Maelgon the son of Cadwalhon ap Madoc, Lord of
Melienyth.

Not long after Traherne Vachan (a man of great power in the Country of
Brecknock) as he came to Lancors to speak with William Bruise Lord thereof, was
suddenly taken, A cruel murder.
and by the Lords command, tied to a horse tail, and drawn through the town of
Aberhodny or Brecknock, to the gallows, and there beheaded, and his body hanged
up by the feet three days. This cruelty showed upon no just cause, caused his
brother, wife and Children to avoid the Country. The year ensuing Maelgon the
son of Prince Rees, after he had imprisoned his elder brother, got his Castles
of Aberteini and Stratmeiric; also the youngest son of P. Rees wan the Castle
of Dinevowr from the Normans.

The Summer following Gwenwinwin intending to extend the limits of Wales to
the old Meers, gathered a great army, and laid siege first to the Castle of
Pain in Eluel, which was of the possessions of William de Bruise, making a
Proclamation, that as soon as he had won the Castle, he would burn all the
whole Country to Severne, without mercy, in revenge of the murder of Traherne
Vachan his Cosen, but because he had not Engines and Miners, he lay three weeks
at the Castle, whilst the murderer sent to England for aid; whereupon Jeffrie
Fitz Peter Lord Chief Justice of England raised forces, and joining with him
all the Lords Marchers, came to raise the seige. And because Fortunes in
battails are various and uncertain, he sent first Gwenwinwin to have a treaty
of peace concluded, but he and his adherents would by no means condescend
thereunto, but answered that they would that journey revenge their old wrongs.
The Welsh still made instruments to one another ruin.
Whereupon the English Lords did first enlarge Gruffith the son of Prince Rees
of Southwales, whom they knew to be an enemy to Gwenwynwyn, which Gruffith
gathered a great power, and joined with the English Lords, and so they came
toward the Castle, against whom Gwenwinwin advanced very stoutly, and there
began a cruel fight, with much slaughter on either side, but at the last the
English carried the victory, and Gwenwynwyn lost most of his men, among whom
were Anarawd son of Eneon, Owen ap Cadwalhon, Richard ap Jestin, and Robert ap
Howel; also Meredith ap Conan was then taken prisoner, with diverse others.
Matthew Paris says, that this battle was fought before Mauds Castle, and that
of the Welshmen were then slain 3700. 3700 Welshmen slain. A. Lhoyd. Mat. Paris
page 259.
and after this victory the English Lords returned with great honor. And
forthwith Gruffith son to P. Rees recovered by force and favor of the people
all his land, except the two Castles Aberteini and Stratmeiric, which his
brother Maelgon by the aid of Gwenwinwin, had wrongfully taken from him. This
his brother Maelgon, fearing his displeasure, took a solemn Oath before both
noble and religious men, which endeavored to make peace betwixt them; that if
his brother Gruffith would give him pledges for assurance of his own person, he
would deliver him by a Day the Castle of Aberteini: whereupon Gruffith did so;
Perjury never prospers.
but as soon as Maelgon got the pledges, he fortified the Castle and manned it
to his own use; and sent the pledges to Gwenwinvvin, who hated Gruffith to
death, there to be kept in prison; but shortly after by Gods help, they broke
the prison, and escaped home.

In the year 1199. Maelgon son to prince Rees laid seige to the Castle of
Dinerth, and getting it, slew all the Garrison which his brother Gruffith had
left to defend it, But at the same time Gruffith won the Castle of Cilgarran,
and fortified it.

This year as King Richard did view the Castle of Chalens in France, The end of
K. Rich. and beginning of K. John's reign.
he was stricken with a quarrel, and sore wounded, whereof he dyed the ninth of
April, and left by his Testament John his brother, Inheritor of all his lands,
having no respect to Arthur, who being son of an elder brother was right heir.

The year after Gruffith son of Conan ap Owen Gwineth a noble man died,
Noblemen buried in Monks habits.
and was buried in a Monks Cowle at the Abbey of Conwey, and so were all the
Nobles (for the most part) of that time buried.

This year Maelgon ap Rees, seeing he could not well keep Aberteini, The Key of
Wales sold treacherously.
of very spite to his brother, and hatred to his Country, sold it to the
Englishmen for a small sum of money, being the very key of Wales. The same
year Madoc the son of Gruffith Maylor, Lord of Bromfield, did build the Abbey
of Lhannegwest, called in English commonly Vale Crucis.

The year 1201 Lhewelyn ap Jorwerth Prince of North Wales, being a proper young
Chivalier, banished out of the land his cozen Meredyth, the son of Conan ap
Owin Gwyneth, suspected of Treason, and seized the Cantref of Lhyyn and
Evvyonyth to his own hands, which were Conans lands. Then shortly after
Meredyth the son of P. Rees was slain at Carnwelhion by Treason; Gruffith
seized upon his Castle in Lhanymdhfri, and all his lands; this Gruffith was a
wise and discreet Gentleman, and one who was like to bring all South Wales to
good order and obedience, who in all things followed his Fathers steps, whom as
he succeeded in Government, so did he in all Martial prowess, and nobility of
mind, but cruel fortune which frowned upon that Country, suffered him not long
to enjoy his land; this Prince died on St. James day ensuing, and was buried at
Stratflur with great solemnity; he left behind him a son called Rees as right
Inheritor of South Wales, whose mother was Maud the daughter of William de
Bruise.

Gwerthryneon Castle destroyed.
The next year after certain Lords of Wales got the Castle of Gwerthryneon,
which was Roger Mortimers, and laid it plain with the ground.

Then Lhewelyn ap Jorwerth P. of North Wales, calling to memory his Estate and
Title, and how all the other Princes by the Ordinance of Roderike the great,
and by the laws of Howell Dha, ought of right to acknowledge the King or P. of
North Wales as their liege Lord, and hold their lands of him, and of none
other, notwithstanding that of late years, by negligence of his predecessors,
they had not used their accustomed duty; but some held of the King of England,
A Parliament called by the P. of Wales.
others ruled as Supreme power within their own Countries; wherefore he called
a Parliament of all the Lords in Wales, which for the most part appeared before
him, and swore to be his liege men; but Gwenwynwyn Lord of Powis would not come
thither, nor take the Oath of Allegiance; which disobedience the Prince
declared to all his Lords, and they all thought that it was requisite that
Gwenwynwyn should be constrained by force to do his duty, or else to lose his
lands; yet one of his Lords named Elise ap Madoc would not condescend to hurt
Gwenwynwyn in any case, but departed away suddenly. Then Lhewelyn came with an
Army to Powis; but by the means of certain learned men, Gwenwynwyn and the
Prince were made friends; and Gwenwynwyn became the P. his liege man, and
confirmed that both by Oath and Writing. Then Lhewelyn remembering how Elise ap
Madoc had served him, seized upon all his lands, and Elise fled the Country;
but afterward yielded himself to the Princes mercy, who gave him the Castle of
Crogen, and 7 townships withal.

Concerning the by-name Crogen.
And here I think it not amiss to declare the cause why the English call the
Welsh Crogens, as a word of reproach and despite; but if they knew the
beginning, they should find the contrary; for in the voyage which K. Henry the
2d. made against the Welshmen to the Mountains of Berwin, as he lay at
Oswalstred, certain of his men that were sent to try the passages, as they
would have passed Offas ditch at the Castle of Crogen, at which place there was
and is at this day a narrow way through the same ditch; these men, I say, as
they would have passed the strait, Adwy'r bedhev.
were met withal, and a great number slain, as does appear by their graves
there yet to be seen, whereof the strait bears the name. Therefore the
Englishmen after, not forgetting the slaughter, used to cast the Welshmen in
the teeth in all their troubles, with the name of Crogen, as if they would
signify unto them thereby, that they should look for no favor, but rather
revenge at their hands: which word in process of time, grew to be taken in
another signification.

Balani Castle fortified. Lhanymdhyfri Castle taken.
Now when Lhewelyn had all those parties in good order, he returned to North
Wales, and by the way fortified the Castle of Balani Penlhyn; about the same
time Rees son of Gruffith ap Rees (by right P. of South Wales) got the Castle
of Lhanymdhyfri upon Michael-Mass day.

The Prince of Wales marries the King of Englands Daughter.
About this time Lhewelyn Prince of Wales, took to wife Jone daughter of K.
John, with whom the said King gave the Lordship of Elsmere in the Marches of
Wales.

The year next ensuing, the aforesaid Rees ap Gruffith ap Rees got the Castle
of Lhangadoc, and fortified it to his own use; but shortly after Maelgon his
Uncle with his friend Gwenwynwyn came with a strong power before the Castle of
Lhanymdhyfri, and wan it; and from thence they removed to Lhangadoc, Gwenwynwyn.
From thence Maelgon went to Dinerth, and finished the Castle which he had
begun there. About this time David son of Owen Gwyneth, after that Prince
Lhewelyn his nephew had set him at liberty, fled to England, and got an Army to
restore him to his ancient estate in North Wales; but all in vain; for his
nephew met him, and overthrew him in the way; whereupon he returned into
England, and there shortly after died for very grief and sorrow.

The next year to this, Howell the son to Prince Rees, being blind, was slain
at Cemaes by his brother Maelgons men, and buried by his brother Gruffith at
Stratflur. Although this Maelgon in those days bare all the rule in South
Wales; yet his brother Gruffiths sons, Rees and his brethren wan from him the
chief defense of all his country; to wit, the Castle of Dyncvowr and
Lhanymdhyfri. Then William Marshall Earl of Pembrock laid siege to the Castle
of Cilgarran, and wan it; not long after Maelgon ap Rees hired an Irishman to
kill Gadiver ap Griffri, whose 4 sons Maelgon took and put to death. These were
hopeful Gentlemen, and nobly descended; for their mother Susanna was daughter
to the said Howel ap Rees, by a daughter of Madoc ap Meredyth Prince of Powis.

The Castle of Abereneon built.
The year 1205 Maelgon did build a Castle at Abereneon; at which there came such
abundance of fish to Aberystwyth, as the like was never seen before.

The same year Gwenwynwyn came to Shrewsbury, to speak with the Kings Council,
and was there detained prisoner; whereupon P. Lhewelyn conquered all his
country, with all the Towns and Castles therein, and kept the same to his own
use; which, when Maelgon ap Rees understood that, and Lhewelyn would visit also
South Wales, he overthrew his Castles of Aberystwyth, Sratmeyric and Dynerth,
which he before had fortified, dispairing to be able to withstand the Prince;
but the Prince held on his journey to Aberystwyth, and reedified the Castle,
and fortified it, and seized to his own hands the Cantref of Penwedic, and the
land betwixt Dyni and Aeron, which he gave to Maelgons nephews the sons of
Gruffith ap Rees, and so returned home with great joy. Within a little after,
Rees Vachan son to Prince Rees, besieged the Castle of Lhangadoc, and wan^t;
not regarding his promise and league with the sons of his brother Gruffith ap
Rees, forgetting how worthily they had served him in his necessity. Therefore
as soon as they heard of this, both Rees and Owen came before the said Castle,
and wan it by assault, and slew and took prisoners all the garrisons; and then
demolished quite the Castle.

Chester re-edified the Castle of Dyganwy, which stood upon the Seashore, East
of the River Conwey, which Prince Lhewelyn had formerly ruined; also he
fortified the Castle Treffynnon or St. Winfride. Then Prince Lhewelyn entered
the Earls land, and destroyed a great part thereof, and returned home with the
plunder.

Also Rees Vachan fearing Prince Lhewelyn, who defended his nephews the sons of
Gruffith in their right, went to the King for succor, which he received with
good will, and by their aid he laid siege to the Castle of Lanymdhyfri; now
when the garrison perceived no hope of relief, they desired that they might
depart with bag and baggage, horses and all; and so they did. Likewise
Gwenwynwyn, whom the King detained in prison, was set at liberty; and the King
fearing the Prince his power, sent an Army with him, by whose means he received
all his country again in short space. Maelhon violating his Oath.
Maelgon also when he heard the same came to the Kings Court, and became his
man, who returning home with a great company of Normans and Englishmen, joined
to them all the power he could make in Wales, and contrary to the Oath that he
had made to his nephews Rees and Owen, began to spoil their country, and
coming to Cantref Cenwedic, encamped at Cilkennyn, and lay there all night
consulting upon his voyage. In the mean time his nephews hearing this, having
but a small power, not above 300 of chosen men, came and lodged hard by,
undiscovered by their enemies: and having notice by their Scouts that all was
quiet in Maelgons camp, and how that his men mistrusting nothing, behaved
themselves carelessly; these two Lords prosecuted boldly the enterprise which
they had taken in hand, and peaceably entering the camp, came where they thought
Maelgon lay, and before they were discovered, they gave an Alarm, and slew a
great number before they could awake, and the rest hearing the noise half
amazed, by reason of the darkness escaped away, A valiant exploit of the Welsh.
thinking some great power had been there; but Maelgons men defended themselves
manfully, until such time as their Lord had gotten upon his feet, and escaped
away by the benefit of the night. Then his nephew Conan ap Howell, and his
chief Counselor Gruffith ap Cadogan were both taken, and Eneon ap Caradoc
with a great number more slain.

About this time Gilbert Earl of Gloucester fortified Bueltht, Cruelty against
the Welsh revenged by God.
where a little before he had lost many men. This year also Maud de Bruise wife
to Gruffith ap Rees died, and was buried in a religious habit at Stratflur. You
have heard before of the great and treacherous usage which William de Bruise
used toward the Welsh at Abergavenni and Breconi; but King John (Gods just
judgment so ordaining) banished him and his wife into Ireland, and seized all
his lands; yet his wife and son were taken, and William himself forced to fly
into France.

The next year ensuing, King John had many complaints made unto him by the
Marchers against Lhewelyn, how he entering their country, burned and spoiled
all as he went, and slew their men; Wherefore the King gathered a great Army
through all England, and called to him such Lords and Princes of Wales as held
of him, as Howell ap Gruffith ap Conan ap Owen Gwyneth, whom Lhewelyn had
banished; Madoc ap Gruffith Maylor, Lord of Bromfield, Chirk, and Yale;
Meredyth ap Rolpert Lord of Cydewen; Gwenwynwyn Lord of Powis; Maelgon and Rees
Vachan the sons of P. Rees, Rulers of South Wales; The Welsh still enemies to
themselves.
with this great Army he entered into North Wales by Chester, resolving to
destroy all that had life in that country: The Prince hearing of all this
preparation against him, as well of his own country as others, commanded all
such as inhabited the inland or middle country (which is now part of Denbigh
and Flint Shires) to remove all their goods and cattle to Snowdon Hills for a
time; and so the King came along the Sea coast to Ruthlan, The English
distressed by the Welsh.
and there passed over the River Clwyd, and came to the Castle of Teganwy, and
there remained a while: but Lhewelyn cut off his victuals behind him, so that
he could have none from England, and there could no man scatter from the
Skirmishes unfought withal, where the North-Walesmen always both for the
advantage of the straits, King John with dishonor forced to return home.
and knowledge of the places had the upper hand; at the last the English
Soldiers were glad to taste horseflesh for pure need. When the King saw no
remedy, he returned home in great rage, leaving the country full of dead
bodies.

In August next ensuing, he returned again with a great Army, and the Lords
before named with him, and entered into Wales at Blanchmonasterie, now
Oswastred, King John an enemy to Clergy men.
whereof John the son of William Fitz Allen was Lord; at this time the King
passing the river of Conwey, encamped there by the river side, and sent part of
his Army with guides of the country, to burn Bangor, who did so, taking
Rotpert the Bishop prisoner, A strange ransom for a Bishop.
who was afterward ransomed for 200 Hawks. The distressed, yet courageous
Prince, seeing all England and Wales against him, and a great part of his land
won from him, thought it best to capitulate with the King; and thereupon he
sent Joan his wife, the Kings daughter, to her father, The Inland of NorthWales
granted to K. John for ever
to make a peace, who (being a discreet woman) found the means, that upon
pledges given for safe conduct, the prince came to the King and made peace with
him, and did him homage. And giving pledges, promised toward his charges 20000
heads of Cattle, and forty Horses. Moreover he granted to the King the Inland
for ever, whereupon the King returned to England with great triumph, after he
had brought all Wales under his subjection, saving Rees and Owen the sons of
Gruffith ap Rees. Therefore at his departure he gave strict command to Fulk
Visconnt of Caerd^ff (called Warden of the Marshes, a cruel Tyrant, Caerdif
honored with a Viscount.
yet well beloved by the King) to take an army with him, that he joining with
Maelgon and Rees Vachan, might compel the aforesaid sons of Gruffith to obey
him.

This Foulk calling to him Maelgon and Rees came to the Cantref of Penwedic,
when the young Lords seeing no remedy, sent to him for peace and safe conduct
to pass to the Court, upon their submission to the King, with the gift of all
their Lands betwixt Aeron and Dyn^; All Wales in homage to K. John.
they were received by him very gently, and courteously entertained; and after
they had done him homage they returned home again. Fulk before his departure
out of the Country fortified the Castle of Aberystwith, and manned it to the
Kings use.

But within a while after Maelgon (as he was very unconstant) and Rees Vachan
repented them of the peace they had made with the King, and thereupon sat down
before Aberistwyth, and getting the same, destroyed it. When the Nephews Rees
and Owen perceived that their Uncle had broken the Kings peace, they made a
road into Maelgons country, and slew a great number of his men, and returned
home with great booty.

The next year prince Lhewelin, being not able to endure the displeasures which
the garrisons (left in his Nephews castles in Northwales) did to his people,
called to him Gwenwinwyn from Powis, Maelgon ap Rees from Southwales, Madoc ap
Gruffith Maylor from Bromfield, Meredyth ap Rotpert from Cydewen, and opened to
them this miserable case, how they which were wont to have a prince of their
own Nation, now (by their own willfulness) were brought under subjection to a
stranger; and declared also unto them, how, that if they would agree among
themselves, they might defend their ancient Estate still, which they all
promised to do, and swore fealty to prince Lhewelyn, and forthwith gathered an
army and wan all the Castles except Ruthlan and Dyganwy; then coming to Powis
they laid siege to the Castle which Robert Vepont had made at Mathraval.
Mathraval Castle razed by K. John's command.
The King no sooner had notice of these transactions, but he leavied an army
and came thither to raise the siege, and after caused the Castle to be razed,
and then returned home having greater matters in hand between him and his
Nobles, and being at Notingham, he caused all the pledges out of Wales to be
hanged, A tyrannous execution.
as Howel the son of Cadwalhon, Madoc the son of Maelgon and others, to the
number of 28. striplings; also Robert Vepont did hang at Shrewsbury Rees the
son of Maelgon not being yet 7 years of age, and so cruelly murdered the
innocent to revenge the the offenses of others.

Rees the son of Gruffith ap Rees, who was heir to prince Rees, seeing he could
have no part of his Fathers Lands, but that his Uncles did keep all from him by
force, made his complaint to the King; and the King pitying his Estate, sent
to Foulk Viscount of Caerdyf, and to the Steward of Hereford commanding them to
take all Stratywy from Rees Vachan, (whom others call Rees Gryc) unless he
would let his nephews enjoy the castle of Lanymdhfry, with the territory
belonging thereunto, and they sent to Rees to know his resolution, who answered
them stoutly, that they should not have one foot of Land of him. Therefore
Foulk gathered a great army together, and met with young Rees at Talhwynelgain,
where he looked for him with a number of men that he had gotten in Brecon, and
thence they marched in three battails toward Dynevowr, of which young Rees had
the leading of the first, Foulk the second, and Owen, brother to Rees, the
third; Rees Vachan notwithstanding came boldly to give them battle, where in
the end he was put to flight, with great loss of his men; whereupon he went
immediately and manned the castle of Dynevowr and set fire to the town of
Lhandeilo vawr, keeping himself in the wild and rough places; his enemies
seeing this, besieged the castle of Dynevour, and at the first assault they wan
the first ward, so that they of the garrison were compelled to take the Koxe
for their defense, which they manfully defended, but the assailiants made
engines to cast stones of great bigness, and began to undermine the walls in
such sort, that the Captain fell to that composition, that if he were not
succored by the next day at noon, he would deliver up the castle upon
condition, that all his men might depart with their armor and weapons, and so
they did, for they had no relief. Afterward they brought the Cantref Maur under
subjection, which caused Rees Vachan to remove his wife and children to his
brothers country, and left the castle of Lhanymdhfry well fortified and manned.
After the departure of Fulke, young Rees came with an army of Welshmen and
Normans to Lhanymdhfri, but before they were encamped the Captain delivered up
the castle, and the garrison departed, their lives granted. And shortly after
Rees Vachan was taken at Caermarthyn and committed to the Kings prison.

At this time prince Lhewelyn laid siege to the castle of Dyganwy and Ruthlan,
and won them both, so that he left the King neither hold nor castle within his
land.

After this fortunate success and happy attempts, Lhewelyn in the head of a
gallant Army marched to Shrewsbury; which Town and Castle were delivered unto
him without any resistance; and there he remained a while. In the mean time
Giles de Bruise, the son of William de Bruise, a man of great power and nobility,
was consecrated Bishop of Hereford, Godwin in Hereford.
Sept. the 24, 1200. In the Barons Wars he took part with them against the
King, and at last was fain to fly the land; afterward being suffered to
return, and received into the Kings, favor, he traveled homeward, and died at
Gloucester, November. 17, 1215. he left great possessions, descended unto him by
his ancestors, which he left to Reginald Bruise his brother, that married the
daughter of Lhewelyn ap Jorwerth Prince of North Wales. This man lies buried
upon the North side of the Presbytery; the Image that lies upon his Tomb,
holds the likeness of a Steeple in his hand, whereby it should seem he built
one of the Towers or Steeples: thus far B. Godwyn. This Giles as chief of the
conspiracy, sent his brother Reynold to Brecnock, and all the people received
him as their Lord, The large possessions of that Bruise in Monmothshire.
and so he got all his Castles without gainsaying of any man; to wit,
Abergwenny, Penkelhy, Gastelth Gwyn, or White Castle, Grismond and the Isle of
Cynuric. But when the Bishop came thither himself, they delivered him the
Castles of Abechodny, Hay, Bueltht, and Blaynthyfery; and he to strengthen
himself in that Country, promised Castle Pain, Clune, withal Eluel to Walter
Vachan the son of Eneon Clyd: In the mean time young Rees, son to Griffith ap
Rees, and Maelgon his Uncle were made friends, and went both to Dines, where
they recovered all the land to themselves, saving Cemai, and overthrew the
Castle of Aberth, and Maynclochoc. Then Maelgon and Owen, brothers to Rees,
went to North Wales to P. Lhewelyn, and did to him homage; and young Rees
gathered an Army, and came to Cydwely, and brought withal Caruwylheon to his
subjection, and razed the Castle there, Lhychwr Castle razed.
and likewise the Castle Lhychwr.

From thence he conducted his army to the Castle of Hugh de Miles at Talybont,
and having taken the same by force, slew many of the garrison; the day after he
took his journey to Senghennyth, where the garrison which lay there, burnt the
Town and departed. Therefore Rees laying siege to the Castle of Ystymlhwynarth,
Senghennyth burnt by its own garrison.
got the same the next day following, and set both it and the Town on fire; and
he got the Castles of Gurland within three days after, and then returned home
with Victory and Triumph. At this time Rees Vachan, uncle to young Rees, and
son to the Lord Rees, was set at liberty by the King, Young Rees prosperous in
Glamorgan.
leaving his son and two other Pledges for him. This year two Abbots were made
Bishops, Jorwerth of St. David's, and Cadogan, of whom formerly.

Shortly after Lhewelyn Prince of North Wales, came with a great Army to
Caermarthyn, and laid siege to the Castle, which was yielded unto him the 5th
day after, which he razed to the ground, as he did also the Castles of
Lhanstephan, St. Clare, and Talachern; P. Lhewelyns fortune.
from thence he went to Caerdigan, and winning the new Castle in Emlyn, he
subdued Cemaes, and got the Castle of Trefdracth (called in English Newport)
and razed the same to the ground. Then the garrison which kept the Castle of
Aberteini, delivered the same unto him upon St. Stephens day, and the day after
he had the Castle of Cilgerran; from whence he returned to North Wales with
great Honor and Triumph. In the which voyage these Lords accompanied him; viz.
Howell ap Gruffith ap Conan, Lhewelyn ap Meredyth, Gwenwynwyn Lord of Powis,
Meredyth ap Rotpert, Maelgon and Rees Vachan the sons of P. Rees, Rees and Owen
the sons of Gruffith ap Rees, and the power of Madoc ap Gruffith Maylor Lord of
Bromfield.

The year following the Prince went to Aberteini, to make an agreement betwixt
Maelgon and Rees Vachan, sons to Prince Rees on the one side, and their nephews
young Rees and Owen on the other part, where he divided South Wales betwixt
them after this manner; to Maelgon he gave three Cantrefs in Dines Gwarthaf;
Penlhwynoc, Cemaes, and Emlyn, with the Castle of Cylgerran; two in Stratywy,
Hiruryn and Malhaen, and Maenor Bydvey with the Castle Lanymdhifri; and two in
Caerdigan, Gwynionyth and Mabwyneon to young Rees; and to Owen his brother he
gave the Castle of Aberteini, and the Castle of Nant yr arian (or silver dale)
and three Cantress in Caerdigan withal; and to Rees Vachan the Castle of
Dynevowr, the Cantref Mewr, and the Cantref Bachan (except Hyruryn and Mydhuey,
and the Comots of Cydwely and Carnwylhion.) This division being accomplished,
the Prince returned homeward; to whom by the way it was signified, that
Gwenwynwyn (contrary to his Oath and bonds in Writing) had forsaken him, A
fickle Lord.
and became the Kings subject; which grieved the Prince very much, and
therefore he sent unto him Bishops and Abbots to move him to remember his Oath,
and Promise and Pledges given to the Prince, and to show him his owr hand, and
thereby to see if he would come again, and to promise him the Princes favor;
but he would in no case hear of reconciliation, wherefore the Prince entered
into Powis with fire and sword, and subdued the Country to himself; which
caused Gwenwynwyn to fly unto the Earl of Chester for relief, where he stayed
a while.

In the mean time Reynalt de Bruise (who had received many favors from the
Welsh) did agree with the King without the knowledge or consent of P. Lhewelyn,
and contrary to his promise; whereupon young Rees and Owen his sisters sons
(seeing that he in whom they trusted most, deceived them) rose against him, and
won all Buelht from him, saving the castle; but when the prince heard of this
agreement, he was much offended therewith, and coming with an army to
Brecknock, he laid siege to the town of Aberhadny, where the Burgesses of the
town came to him, and by means of young Rees the prince taking 100. marks and
five pledges of them, raised the siege, and took his journey over the black
mountains toward Gwyr, where he lost much of his carriages. And as he encamped
at Lhangruc, Reynalt Bruise came to him with six Knights in his company, and
desired of his father in Law pardon for his defense, who receiving him lovingly
did not only forgive him, but gave him also the castle of Sengbennyth, and
Reynalt committed the same to the custody of Rees Vachar. Lhewelin after he had
set all things in good order in that country, marched to Dynet, and being at
Cefu Cinwarchan, the Flemmings sent to him to desire peace, but the prince
would not grant them their request. Then young Rees was the first that passed
the River Cledhen to fight with them of the town; whereupon Jorwerth Bishop of
St. David's with all his clergy came to the prince to desire peace to the
Flemmings, which after long debating was thus concluded.

First that all the Inhabitants of Ros and the Land of Pembrock should become
the Prince his Subjects, Articles of peace between Lhewelin and the Flemmings.
and ever from thenceforth take him for their Liege Lord.

Secondly that they should pay him a 1000 marks toward his charges before
Michaelmas next coming.

Thirdly that for performance of these they should deliver forthwith to the
Prince twenty pledges of the best in all the country, which things they did;
Then the Prince returned into Northwales with much honor. Caerleon taken by
the E. of Pembrock.
Shortly after William Marshal Earl of Pembrock got the town of Caerlheon, and
made war against the Welshmen, whom contrary to their promise, the Barons left
out of the conclusion of peace. The Barons were very glad of the friendship and
aid of the P. of Wales to serve their own turn; The Barons pacifying France
and England, conspire, against Wales.
but now in a general conclusion of peace, contrary to their oath and promise,
they reserve out Wales to keep them play withal, hoping to get some more land
thereby; therefore let us take heed how we trust to self serving friendship.

Hereupon Rees Vachan razed the Castle of Senghennyth and all the Castles he
had in his custody in that Country, and banished all the English there
inhabiting, with their wives and Children for ever, Strangers banished out of
Wales.
and divided the Country amongst the Welsh, who have kept it ever since.

The year ensuing, Prince Lhewelyn put Garrisons into the Castles of
Caermarthyn and Aberteini. Then young Rees, by the Prince his consent, went to
the King, and did homage for his lands.

In the year following Rees Gryc married the daughter of the Earl of Clare,
and John de Bruise married the daughter of P. Lewelin.

The Flemmings violate the Oath.
Lhewelyn Prince of Wales conducted an army to Pembroke against the Flemmings,
who contrary to their Oath and League had taken the Castle of Aberteini, which
Castle the Prince won and destroyed, putting the Garrison to the sword, razed
the Castle, and went thence to Gwys, where he razed that Castle, and burned the
town. Also he caused all Hanerford to be burned to the Castle gates, and
destroyed all Ros and Dongledhan; and they who kept the Castle, sent to him for
truce till the first of May, which was concluded upon conditions, and so he
returned home. Wales besieged the Castle of Buelht, which belonged to Reynalt
de Bruise, therefore the King came with an army to the Marches, and raised the
siege, and came as far as Montgomery, and built a Castle there. Montgomery
castle built by K. John.


The year following, there fell a great difference betwixt Prince Lhewelin and
Gruffith his son; for this Gruffith enjoyed the Cantref of Merioneth without
his fathers consent, and therefore his father sent for him to come unto him,
which he denied to do: Therefore the Prince swear that he would be revenged
upon him and his confederates for that dishonor, and then came with a great
army to Merioneth; but the son not fearing his father, got his people into the
field ready to abide the battle; but as they were in fight, there was a peace
concluded, and Gruffith yielded to his father, and cried him mercy. Then
Lhewelin, although he forgave his son the offense, yet he took Merioneth and
Ardydwy from him, and building a Castle there, returned home again. At this
time young Rees forsook Prince Lhewelyn because Aberteini was not delivered him
as the promise was at the division of South- Wales, and went to William Marshal
Earl of Pembroke, which caused Prince Lhewelyn to come to Aberystwyth, and
seize the castle and all the Territories to his own use. Young Rees hearing
this, went to the King to complain upon Prince Lhewelin, and the King sent for
the prince to Shrewsbury, and made him and Rees friends; the prince promising
to deal with Rees for Aberteini, as he had done with Maelgon for Caermarthyn.
This Winter John Bruise by the consent of prince Lhewelyn fortified the Castle
of Senghennyth.

Young Rees dies and is buried at Strat^lur.
The year after young Rees departed out of this life, being a lusty Gentleman,
and endued with many notable virtues, and was buried at Stratflur, whose
inheritance Lhewelin divided between his brother Gwen and his Uncle Maelgon.

William Marshal came from Ireland, and landed at St. David's with a great army;
and shortly after laid seige to Aberteini and got it, and from thence marched
to Caermarthyn, and likewise got the same.

Lhewelin prince of Wales, at what time William Marshal Earl of Pembrock
prosecuted the wars in Ireland, took the two castles in Wales belonging to the
Earl. And now speaking of this Earof Pembrock as formerly I have done, I will
set down a Catalogue of the Earls of that place with their arms.

Pembrockshire was inhabited of old by the Dimetae; a Country quite surrounded
by the sea, save where it joyneth unto Caerdegan and Caermarthynshires, a
country plentiful in corn, and cattle, and fish, not destitute of pitcoale,
and which is far above the rest (as Giraldus tells) considering that is so near
to Ireland, of a wholesome and temperate air; it contains in it 140. parish
churches, and 5. Markets; that which is most of note being Milford, renowned
for its safe and capacious haven; but that from which it takes its
denomination, is, the Town of Pembrock, seated upon a forked arm of Milford
haven, and in the best part of the country, the Town consisting principally of
one long street, on a long narrow point of a rock; and has in the walls
thereof two churches. The Earls hereof in former times were County Palatines,
and passed all things that concerned that County, under the seal of the
Earldom, and it continued so until the reign of K. H. VIII. when as Wales was
reduced to England, and the authority of the great Lords there dissolved by
Parliament, since which the Earls of Pembrock have been merely titulan, as of
other places; and of each sort were these in their several ages; the Marquesses
and Earls of Pembrock.
1 Gilbert de Clare. 2 Richard de Clare surnamed Srongbow. Or 3 Cheverons G. a
Cressant for difference. 3 William Marshal married Isabel daughter and heir of
Rich. Strongbow. 4 William Marshal Lord Chief Justice. 5 Richard Marshal. 6
Gilbert Marshal. 7 Walter Marshal. 8 Anselme Marshal. Party per pale Or, and
vert a Lion Rampant Gules incensed Azure. 9 William de Valence half brother to
Henry III. whose wife was daughter of a Sister of Anselme Marshal. 10 Aymer de
Valence. Ten Clossets Argent and B, as many Martlets in Vrle Gules, Mr.
Brochcals larnly of 10. pieces. 11 Laurence Hastings who married the Lady
Isabella Valence. 12 John Hastings. 13 John Hastings,; this John bore quarterly
Brotherton, Hastings Or a Manch Gules. Valence and Brotherton 14 Humphrey Duke
of Gloucester. Quarterly France and England a border Arg. 15 William de la Pole
Duke of Suffolk. B. a fess. between three Leopards heads Or. 16 Jasper of
Hatfield, brother to King Henry the Sixth, after Duke of Bedford. Quarterly
France and England in a border B. 8 martlets Or, Mr. Brock calls them Semy. 17
William Herbert. 18 William Herbert. Party per pale B. and G. 3 Lions Ramp.
Arg. 19. Edward Prince of Wales, son of K. Edw. IV. Quarterly France and
England a Label Arg. 20 Anne Bullen Marchioness of Pemb. wife to Hen. 8. Arg. a
Cheveren G. between 3 Bulls heads coupe, Sable. 21 William Herber created
Earl by Edw. 6. 22 Henry Herbert. 23 William Herbert Lord Steward and
Chancellor of Oxford. 24 Philip Herbert Earl of Pembroke and Montgomery. 25
Philip Herbert now living. Quarterly Band G 3 Lions Ramp. Arg. a border Gotone
of the second and Or besants; this border is now laid aside.


Lex Talionis.
This Earl hearing that Lhewelin had taken his Castles, and put his men to the
sword, returned from Ireland with all speed, and recovering his forts, used the
same courtesy toward Lhewelins men as he had showed to his; and then entering
further into the Princes Country; destroyed all before him as he went.

Mat. Pa^is 423 who says that the Earl had the victory, and that there were
slain ^000. persons.
These tidings coming to Lhewelins ear, did much vex him, whereupon he sent
Gruffith his son with a power of men to impeach the Earl from passing further.
Griffith went to Cyeweli, and understanding that the Burgesses of the town
meant to betray him, burned the town, churches and all to the ground. Then
William Marshal passed the River Tywy at Caermardhyn, where Gruffith met with
him, and gave him battle, which was long time doubtful, and endured until
night, and then either party withdrew themselves, and the River betwixt: and
after they had abode so for certain days, Gruffith for lack of victuals (for
his men were about 9000 persons) returned back, Cilgerran Castle built.
and the Earl went to Cilgerran and began to build there a very strong castle;
but receiving letters from the King to come and speak with him, he went to the
Court by sea, and left his army to continue the work which he had begun. The
King and the Archbishop being at Ludlow sent for the Prince, and would gladly
have composed matters between him and the Earl, but it would not be, and so
they departed. And when the Earl would have passed to Pembrock by land, with
the strength of the Earl of Derby and Henry Pigot Lord of Ewyas, the prince
sent his son to keep the passage at Carnwylhion, and he himself came as far as
Mabedryd; which when the Earl understood, He retreated back to England, and
the prince bent his course for North- Wales.

Rees Vachan son of Rees Gryc, took his father prisoner, and would not set him
at liberty, till he had delivered him the Castle of Lhanymdhfry. At this time
Meredyth Archdeacon of Caerdigan son to prince Rees, was interred by his father
at St. David's. The year following K. Henry the III. now King of England, came
with a great army into Wales as far as Ceri and encamped there; K. Henry 3. of
England. Mat. Paris. p. 463.
and on the other side Lhewelyn called to him all the power of Wales, encamped
not far off, and there passed diverse great skirmishes, and chiefly upon one
day, the most part of both armies was in the field, and many of the Kings men,
at which time William de Bruise son to Reynalt was taken prisoner, who offered
for his ransom the Country of Buelht, P. Lhewelin a worthy prince
and a great sum of money beside. Then was a peace concluded between the King
and the prince, whereupon the Prince came and did honor unto the King, but not
as his King and Lord, and every party returned home.

Mr Powel. fol. 282.
This History says Mr. Powel, is somewhat otherways set down by Matt. Paris,
which I have thus translated out of the same Author.

About the same time those Souldies which lay in Garrison in the Castle of
Montgomery, went out with some of their Neighbors to amend a certain passage
in the highway, leading through a great wood thereby, where the Welshmen were
wont to rob and slay such as traveled that way, and coming to the place, with
their axes and other weapons, began to fell trees and to cut down the bushes,
whereby the way might be enlarged, which thing when the Welshmen understood,
they came with a great power, and setting upon their enemies, compelled them to
take the Castle for their defense (certain being slain on both sides) and then
casting a trench about the same laid siege to it. The Castle and honor of
M^ntg^mery given to Hubert de B^^g.
This being speedily carried to Hubert de Burge Chief Justice of England, to
whom a little before the same castle and honor was given: The King himself
with convenient speed coming, raised the siege, and when his whole army came
unto him (for few Soldiers came with him thither) he went to the said wood,
which was very large, being five miles in length, and by reason of the thick
growth of the same, very hard to be mooted, howbeit the King caused the same
with great diligence and travail to be asserted and consumed with fire. King
Henry causes ^^^d a Abbey to be burnt.
Then leading his army further into the Country, he came to an Abbey of white
Monks, called Cridia, being a refuge for the Welsh to fly unto, which he caused
to be burnt to Ashes: where Hubert de Burg, (to whom the place seemed very fit
for fortification) having the assent of the King, caused a castle to be built;
but e^e the work could be finished many were slain on both sides; and Will de
Bruise a valiant Soldier and Chieftain, who went out to make provision for the
army, was taken by the Welshmen and secured; and diverse others went out for the
like purpose, whereof one being Knighted a few days before, seeing some of his
fellows in danger and like to be distressed, rushed boldly into the midst of
his enemies, killing many about him; yet in the end with many others of the
Kings men was slain: several also of the Kings men being confederates with P.
Lhewelyn did very remisly defend themselves and his cause, with whom they came
thither; whereupon the King wanting necessary provision, and perceiving the
double dealing of some of his own men, was constrained to conclude a
dishonorable peace with the Welshmen, giving his assent that the Castle which
with so great expenses of men and money was almost finished, should be razed at
his own charges, An ignoble peace to the English.
taking of P. Lhewelin 3000 pound toward the same; the peace being thus
confirmed, both parties went homewards. Thus the King of England, after he had
bestowed three months in the building of the said Castle, and disbursed an
incredible some of money in vain, leaving William de Bruise one of his nobles in
the Prince his prison, returned home with great stain of honor. The name also
which Hubert the Chief Justice had given to the Castle viz. Huberts folly,
Stulitia Huberti.
did now move many to laugh at those things, who seeing that costly and
sumptuous building to be laid even with the earth, said that Hubert was a
prophet, and much more then a prophet; so much out of Paris.

About the year 1230 Lhewelyn the son of Maelgon deceased, and was entombed at
Conwey. Adultery punished by death. Abergaveny business revenged.
Prince Lhewelin caused William Bruise to be hanged, being as it is reported,
taken in adultery with his wife, who was the Sister of K. Henry. About this
time Maelgon was buried at Stratflur whose patrimony young Maelgen his son,
inherited after his father.

This year the King led a great army to Wales, and after he had remained in the
Marshes a while, he returned into England, and left Hubert de Burge Earl of
Kent with his army to defend the Marshes, and hereby his spies understood where
certain Welshmen had entered the Marshes to plunder, and set upon them by
Montgomery, killing many of them. The Prince herewith being much troubled
gathered his forces, and to revenge his men, A gallant revenge.
entering the Marshes he destroyed all with fire and sword who withstood him,
and burnt the Castles and Garrisons without mercy; Montgomery, for the Earl
withdrew himself for fear; then the castle of Radnor, Aberhodny, Rayader, Gwy,
and so he went to Caerlheon, and after long fight, and loss of many of his men
got the Town, and left nothing therein but Ashes; the like he did with the
Castles of Neth and Cydwely. The utter destruction of Caerlheon.
Therefore the King came to Hereford with a mighty army, and sent a great
number of his nobles with the most part of his army to Wales, who using the
direction of a Friar of Cymer, met with a company of Welshman which at the
first encounter sled, whom the Englishmen followed to the Straits, where the
ambushments lay, which fell upon them, A Friar ventureth his life in behalf of
his country. Maud Castle built by K. Henry the III. The Welsh well enough
required for de^erring their own Countrymen.
and slew a great number of the best Soldiers; the rest escaped by flight.
Therefore the King would have burnt the house of Cymer; yet the Prior redeemed
it by paying 300 marks, and so the King returned into England, after he had
built the Castle of Maud; whilst these things were in agitation, Maelgon the
son of Maelgon ap Rees laidsiege to Aberteini, and got the Town and destroyed
it to the Castle gates, putting all the inhabitants to the sword. And shortly
after he returned with his cozen Owen son to Gruffith ap Rees, with certain of
the Princes Captains, and brake down the bridge upon the River Teini, and laid
siege to the Castle, and with engines and mines threw down the same, and so
with much honor returned home.

The next year this gallant and heroic Britain Lhewelyn entered England, and
brought back a rich spoil both of goods, cattle and men; which forced the King
to impose a subsidy to subdue the Britains.

About this time John Earl of Chester, surnamed Le Scot, from the place of his
birth, Mr Brook York Herald fol. ^5. The murder at Abergaveny punished in the
Family of de Bruise.
Earl of Huntington and Cambridge, etc. son of David brother to the King of
Scots, who bore for his arms Or three garbs Gules, married Helin daughter to
Lhewelin P. of Northwales: also Ephraim Bishop of Lhanelwy died; and John de
Bruise falling off his horse, his foot sticking fast in the stirrup, was dragged
till he dyed most miserably. The year following Richard E. of Cornwall fortified
the Castle of Radnor, which the Prince had lately destroyed.

Shortly after Prince Lhewelin came with an army to Brecknock, and destroyed
all the towns and castles of the Country, and lay a month at the siege of the
Castle of Brecknock, P. Lhewelin a scourge to the English adherents.
but yet went without it, and burning the town retreated home with great
plunder. In his journey by the way, he burned the Town of Clun, and recovered
all the Country called Diffrin Teneidiat, which was the possession of John Fitz
Allen, but he could not get the Castle. After that he overthrew the Red Castle
in Powis (now the house of the Right Honorable Sir Percy Herbert Lord Powis a
right worthy Gentleman, Red castle in Montgomery shire.
) a Garrison formerly for the Parliament, and at this present: and burned the
town of Oswestre and so came home. And about this time Richard Marshal fell at
variance with the King, who with Huber de Burge, that escaped out of the castle
of Devises (where the Bishop of Winchester intended to have starved him) came
to Wales, and joined with the prince against the King.

Then the Earl with Owen ap Gruffith ap Rees came to Menevia or St. David's,
The English with the Welsh against their King. Abergavenny with other Castles
taken. K. Henry by Grismont lost 500. Horse.
and killed and spoiled all the Kings Friends within the Town. Also Maelgon and
Rees Gryc with the power of the prince joined with them who in that voyage wan
all these Castles, Caerdiff, Abergaveny, Pencelhy, Blaynlhefyini and Bwlchy
Dynet, which they razed all, except Caerdif. This so incensed the King, that he
raised a mighty army, as well Flemmings, Normans, and Gascoines and Englishmen,
and entered Wales, thinking to destroy the whole Country, and encamped at
Grismont, where the Earl with the power of Wales encamped hard by him; and as
the Kings men would have entered further, they were met withal and lost 500
horse; and so upon better consideration returned home, after whose departure
the Earl with the power aforesaid lay before Caermarthyn three months; but it
was so manfully defended that they went without it, and at last there came in
the Kings ships, and manned and victualed the town; which caused the besiegers
to raise their siege and depart. About this time Rees Gryc Son to the Lord or
prince Rees, dyed at Lhandeilo vawr, and was buried honorably by his Father at
St. David's, and then also Maelgon the son of Maelgon finished the Castle of
Tresilan which his father had begun.

John of Mermeth forced to ^y.
In the year 1234. John Lord Monumetensis, a noble warrior, Captain or General
of the Kings Army, being made Ward of the marches of Wales, levied a power, and
came against Earl Marshall and the Welshmen, but when he had once entered Wales,
he came back in post leaving his Men for the most part slain and taken behind.

Man. Paris p. 520.
This History is reported by Matthew Paris after this manner; About the feast of
St. John Baptist, John of Monmoth a noble and expert warrior, who was with the
King in his wars in Wales, gathered a great army, meaning to invade the Earl
Marshal at unawares; but he being certifi'd thereof, hid himself in a certain
wood, by the which lay the way of his Enemies, intending to deceive them who
went about to do the like by him; when the Enemies therefore came to the place
where the Ambuscado was, Ha^m watch, ha^m catch.
the Earl Marshals army gave a great shout, and so set upon their Enemies being
unprovided, and suddenly put them all to flight, putting to the sword an
infinite number of them, as well Poictavians as others: John of Monmoth himself
escaped by flight, whose Country with the villages, buildings and all that he
had therein, the Earl Marshall did spoil and plunder, leaving nothing but what
fire and sword could not destroy, and so full fraught with spoil returned home.

Salop taken by P. Lhewelyn.
Afterward, in the week of Epiphanie, Lhewelyn P. of Wales, together with the
Earl Marshall joining their forces, and entering the Kings land, destroyed all
with fire and sword from the confines of Wales unto the town of Salop which
they also took, and burnt a great part thereof, enriching themselves with the
plunder of the Country: The King of England being all this while with the
Bishop of Winchester ^t Gloucester, The K. careless of his honor.
little regarding war, who for want of sufficient strength, durst not meet his
enemies in the field, but being ashamed of the matter, departed toward
Winchester, leaving the marches to be destroyed by the Enemies, as any man
might imagine.

The same year Richard Marshall Earl of Pembrock, by council of Geffrey de
Marisco, went with an army to Ireland, where he was slain in fight by treason
of his own Men, after whom his brother Gilbert succeeded in the Inheritance:
Mr. Brook reports the story thus, that whilst he with Lhewelyn was thus
busied against the King, word was brought him that Morice Fitz Girald, and
other Irish had sacked his Countries and Lands in Ireland; Mr. Brook, Alias
York, fol. 270.
upon the hearing whereof he hasted thither with fifteen Knights to encounter
with his Enemies, and joined battle with them upon Saturday the first of
April. 1234. and fought eleven hours, until his horse was slain under him. And
then he falling to the ground, one of the Irish perceiving his back part
ill-armed, lifted up his Habergeon, and thrust a knife into his back up to the
halft, giving him his deadly wound, and then brought him to a Castle of his own
named Kilkenny (which the said Morice had taken a little before from him) where
he died fifteen days after without issue. What K. Hen. cannot do by the sword,
he thinks to do by the word.


In that year the King sent the Archbishop of Canterbury with the Bishops of
Rochester and Chester, to entreat with Lhewelyn to make peace with the King,
but they returned without doing any good.

Matthew Paris says that the King going at this time to meet Edmond Archbishop
of Canterbury, and other Bishops which he had sent to conclude a peace with
Lhewelyn, Prince of Wales, came to Woodstock, where being certifi'd of the
death of the E. Marshall (by certain messengers which came from Ireland) he
fell into great weeping and sorrow, for the death of so valiant a Knight,
affirming withal that he had not left his Peer behind him in the Realm. From
thence he went to Gloucester, where the said Archbishop and Bishops coming unto
him, declared the treatice and form of peace, taken between him and the said
Lhewelyn; The Welsh constant to their confederates, in concluding of peace.
yet nevertheless upon this condition that the Noblemen of England which were
confederates with the said Lhewelyn, and by evil council were exiled, should
first be reconciled to the King, whereby the said peace might be more firm and
stable. Moreover the Archbishop said that with much ado they had brought the
matter to that pass, adding sometimes threatenings on the Kings behalf, with
his Clergy: To the which threatenings the said Lhewelyn is reported to have
answered that he more regarded the Kings almsdeeds, and his holy behavior,
then he did fear the war of all his Clergy. Then the King who wished peace with
all his heart, caused by his letters all the Nobles that were outlawes, to be
called again unto him to Gloucester, and Sunday before Ascension day next
following, to have their pardons, and to receive their Inheritance, Osculum
pa^^^.
which the King had seized into his own hands; then Hubert de Burgh Earl of
Kent came to the King, and obtained his favor, whom the King reverently
embraced and kissed.

Prince Lhewelyn also this year set Gruffith his Son at liberty, whom he had
kept in prison six years for his disobedience; and this year Cadwalhon ap
Maelgon dyed, and the next year Owen the Son of Gruffith ap Rees being a Noble
Gentleman, and very well beloved, was buried by his brother Rees at Stratflur.

The year after Madoc the son of Gruffith Maylor, Lord of the lower Powis or
Bromfield, Chirk, and Pale, a Man very just and merciful, dyed, and was buried
very honorably at the Abbey Lhan Egwest or Vale Crucis, which he had built,
and left behind him a son named Gruffith, to inherit his Lands; also Owen ap
Meredyth, ap Rotpert, ap Cydewen departed out of this World. Marchan Castle.
The same year Gilbert Earl of Pembrock by treason got the Castle of Morgan ap
Howel, called Marchan, and fortified it very strong for fear of the Prince. The
next spring Joan the daughter of King John, Princess of Wales, was buried upon
the Seashore, within the Isle of Anglesey at Lhanvaes, as her pleasure was,
Lhewelyn builds a Fryery at Lhanvaes over his Wives Sepulcher.
where the Prince did build a house of barefooted Friars over her grave.

In the year 1237. Lhewelyn Prince of Wales called all the Lords and Barons of
Wales, (if any such title as Baron was amongst them, it being altogether
Norman, as I conceive) before him to Stratflur, and there every one of them
swore to be faithful subjects, and did homage to David P. Lhewelyns son. An
Act of a discreet Prince.


At this time Lhewelyn being impotent (by reason of a palsy which had taken
him) and sore urged and disquieted by his son Gruffith, sent Ambassadors to
the King to signify unto him, that forasmuch as his years were now well near
spent, The Prince of Wales whom power could not compel, voluntarily submits
himself.
he was desirous to lead the rest of his days in peace and quietness; and
therefore purposed now to submit himself to the government and protection of
the King of England, and that he would hold his lands of him, promising withal,
that whenever the King should stand in need of his aid, he would be ready to
help him with men and money to the utmost of his power. There were sent as
Mediators in this behalf the Bishops of Hereford and Chester, who traveled
about the same with the good liking of many of the Nobles of Wales, although
some openly opposed it, and in no case would except of any such peace.

Then the said David took from his brother Gruffith Arustly, Ceri, Cyvelioc,
Wowthwy, Mochant and Caerneon, and let him only enjoy the Cantref of Lhynn.
This Gruffith was the elder brother, and a lusty Gentleman, but base born.

This David son to Lhewelyn, did contrary to his Oath, take his brother
Gruffith (being in in safe conduct with the Bishop of Bangor) upon whose
promise he was content to speak with his brother, and imprisoned him in the
Castle of Crickieth.

The year 1240 Lhewelyn ap Jorwerth, the most valiant and noble Prince, who
brought all Wales to his subjection, and had so often put his enemies to
flight, and defended his country, enlarging the Meers thereof further than they
had been many years before, passed out of this transitory life, and was
honorably buried at the Abbey of Conwey, after he had governed Wales well and
worthily 56 years; this Prince left behind him one son called David, begot upon
his wife Joane, daughter of King John; by whom also he had a daughter called
Gladys, married to Sr. Ralph Mortimer; Mr. Mills fol. 307.
Mr. Powell calls his other son Gruffith base; but Mr. Mills says, he was
lawfully begotten, and that Lhewelyn ap Jorwerth married Tanglosta daughter of
Lhoirth ap Brooi of Anglessa to his first wife, by whom he had this Gruffith.

S. John Dodridge Knight, late one of his Majesty's Judges of the Kings Bench,
says, That the Dominion of Wales ever was holden in chief and in fee of the
Crown of England; and the Prince thereof being then of their own Nation
compellable upon Summons to come and appear in the Parliaments of England, and
upon their rebellions and disorders the Kings of England devised their
Scutagium or Escuage, Les ancient Tenures fol. 116. Com. Plow.
as it is called in the Laws of England; that is, to levy aid and assistance
of their Tenants in England which held of them per ser vitium militare, to
suppress the disordered Welsh tanquam rebels, and non hosts, as rebels, and
not as foreign enemies.

And hence it is that King Henry the 3d. upon those often revolts of the Welsh
endeavored to resume the Territory of Wales as forfeit unto himself, Edw. 1.
took upon him the name of P. of Wales. Record. Turris Land. 29. Hen. 3.
and conferred the same upon Edw. Longeshanks his heir apparent; yet
nevertheless, rather in title than possession, or upon any profit obtained
thereby; for the former Prince of Wales continued his Government
notwithstanding this, between whom and the said Edward wars were continued;
whereof when the said Edward complained, the said King made this answer, as
records Matthew Paris, a Cosmographer living in that time; Quid ad me terra
tua? Est ex dono meo; Matthew. Paris anno 1257.
exere vires primitivas, famam excita Juvenilem, and de caetero timeant inimici.

But the Charter of this gift is not now readily to be found among the records;
for after this time it appears by the records of the Tower of London, that by
the mediation of Othalon Deacon Cardinal of St. Andrews, Patent. 51. Hen. 3.
pars prima.
a peace was then concluded between the then Prince of that Welsh blood, and the
said King Henry the 3d. which nevertheless, as it seems, continued not long;
for sundry battles were a fought between them; viz. Edw. of England, and
Lhewelyn last Prince of Wales.



David the son of Lhewelyn.
David, to whom all the Barons in Wales had made an Oath of Fidelity, took the
Government of Wales after his father, who within a month after came to the King
to Gloucester, and did him homage for the principality of Wales; and also all
the Barons of Wales did to the King homage for their lands. But forthwith the
Englishmen began to trouble the Welsh after their accustomed use; for Gilbert
Marshall came with an Army, and fortified the Castle of Aberteini. The year
ensuing, the King came with a great Army into Wales, and many noble men yielded
to him, because they hated David betrayer of his brother, and accursed by the
Pope; or as Paris says, excommunicated by the Bishop of Bangor: Thus he
writes,

When Richard Bishop of Bangor saw that David dealt so hardly with his brother
Gruffith, contrary to his faithful promise made unto the said Bishop, he
excommunicated him; and then withdrawing himself out of Wales, made a grievous
complaint to the King against David, most instantly requesting the King to
deliver Gruffith out of prison, least the rumor of that fact being notified in
the Court of Rome and other Countries out of the realm, should be some stain of
the Kings honor, if he should not withstand such outrageous and unlawful
dealings. The King therefore greatly blaming David his nephew for abusing his
brother in such sort as he did, requested him with most pithy persuasions to
set his brother at liberty, as well for the preserving of his own credit and
fame, as also for the avoiding of the excommunication, and other eminent
dangers which might ensue of that matter. To the which request of the King,
David answered plainly, that he would not deliver his brother out of prison;
affirming constantly, that if his brother were enlarged, the Country of Wales
would be in great disquietness. Whereof when Gruffith was certified, he sends
privately to the King, promising that if he would forcibly deliver him out of
his brothers prison, he would hold his lands of him, and pay him 200 marks
yearly; offering not only to be sworn upon this, and deliver Pledges for
performance thereof, but also to aid the King to bring the rest of the Welshmen
under his subjection. Further Gruffith Lord of Bromfield did assure the King of
aid, if he would come to Wales with an Army, to chastize David for his falsehood
and injury used toward his brother. Moreover the Bishop of Banger procured the
land of David to be interdicted. Hen. 3. being allured by these promises on
Gruffiths behalf, levied a puisant Army to go into Wales; straightly commanding
by his Writs all such as ought him service in time of War, to give attendance
upon him, ready with Sword and Armor at Gloucester the first day of August
following, to set forward against his enemies, whether the King came at the day
appointed; and from thence went to Salop, and remained there 15 days.

During the Kings abode at Salop, diverse noble men were great suitors unto him
in the behalf of Gruffith, as Ralph Lord Mortimer of Wigmore, Walter Clifford,
Roger de Monte alto Steward of Chester, Maelgon the son of Maelgon, Meredyth ap
Rotpert Lord of Cydewen, Gruffith ap Madoc Lord of Bromfield, Howell and
Meredyth the sons of Conan ap Owen Gwyneth, and Gruffith the son of Gwenwynwyn
Lord of Powis; these wrought so with the King, that there was a league
concluded between him and Senena the wife of the said Gruffith in the behalf of
her husband, lying then in his brothers prison, according to the Articles
comprised in this Charter following:

Convenit inter Dominum Hen. 3. regem Anglorum illustrem ex una part, and
Senenam uxorem Griffini filii Leolini quondam Principis North-walliae, quem
David frater ejus tenet carceri mancipation cum Owino silio sao, nomine ejusdem
Gruffini ex altera, etc.

Articles of Agreement between Hen. 3. King of Eng. on the one party, and
Senena the wife of Gruffith the son of Lhewelyn, sometimes Prince of
North Wales, whom David his brother detaineth in Prison with Owen his son, in
the name of the said Gruffith on the other party.

I. Inprimis, The said Senena undertaketh that the said Gruffith her hu^band
will give unto the King six hundred Marks, upon condition that the King do
cause the said Griffith and Owen his son to be delivered from prison wherein
they are kept, and will stand at the Judgment of the Kings Court, whether by
Law he ought to be imprisoned or no.

II. Item, The said Gruffith and his heirs will stand to the Judgment of the
Kings Court, for and concerning that portion of the Inheritance of the said
Lhewelyn his father, which of right ought to pertain unto him.

III. Item, The said Senena undertaketh for the said Gruffith and his heirs,
that the said Gruffith and his heirs shall yield and pay yearly to the King for
the same lands the sum of 300 hundred Marks, whereof the first third part to be
paid in money, the second in kine, and the third in horses, by the estimation
of indifferent men, and the same to be paid yearly at Michael-Mass and Easter
by even portions, by the hands of the Sheriff of the County of Salop, for the
time being.

IV. Item, The said Senena undertaketh further for the said Gruffith and his
heirs, that they and every of them shall observe the peace against the said
David, and suffer him quietly to enjoy such portion of his fathers inheritance,
as to him shall be found to be due.

V. Item, The said Senena does further undertake for the said Gruffith her
husband his heirs, that in case any Welshmen hereafter shall happen to rebel
against the King, that they at their own costs and charges shall compel the
said Offender to make satisfaction to the King for his disobedience.

VI. Item, For the performance of the Premises, the said Senena will deliver
unto the Lord the King, David and Roderike her sons for Pledges, who promise
that if the said Gruffith and Owen, or either of them shall happen to dye
before their delivery out of prison, it shall be lawful for the said Senena to
have one of her sons released, the other remaining with the King for Pledge.

VII. Item, The said Senena has sworn upon the holy Evangelists, that the said
Gruffith her husband and his heirs, and every of them shall accomplish and
perform all the Premises on their behalf; and further undertaketh, that the
said Gruffith her husband, upon his delivery out of prison, shall take the same
Oath.

VIII. Item, The said Senena in the name of the said Gruffith her husband,
submits her self concerning the observation of the Premises, unto the
jurisdiction of the reverend fathers, the Bishops of Hereford and Liechfield;
so that the said Bishops, or either of them at the Kings request, shall compel
the said Gruffith and his heirs to observe all and singular the Premises on
their behalf by sentence of excommunication upon their persons, and
interdiction upon their lands.

IX and lastly, The said Senena does undertake and promise (bona fide) to see
and procure the full performance of all the Premises, and that the said
Gruffith her husband and his heirs shall allow and perform the same, and
thereof shall deliver his instrument in writing to the King in form aforesaid;
to this Charter both parties put their Seal, Gruffith and Senena to that part
which remained with the King, and the King to that part which remained with
Senena.

Moreover, for the sure performance of these Arricles, the said Senena for and
in the name of her husband, put in for Pledges the aforesaid noble men; to wit,
Ralph Mortimer, Walter Clifford, Roger de Monte Alto, etc. who bound themselves
by their several writings obligatory to the King, in manner and form as
follows,

Omnibus hoc scriptum visaris Rogerus de Monte Alto Senescallus Cestriae
salutem, etc.

To all and singular to whom this writing shall come, Roger de Monte Alto
Steward of Chester sends greeting; Know ye that I have constituted myself
pledge for Senena the wife of Gruffith the son of Lhewelin sometimes Prince of
Northwales, and have undertaken for her to our Sovereign Lord King Henry of
England, that the said Senena shall accomplish and perform all and singular
those Covenants and Articles agreed upon, between our said Sovereign Lord, and
the said Senena, for and concerning the Deliverance of the said Gruffith her
hu^band and Owen his son out of the prison of David his brother, and the
portion of Inheritance due unto the said Gruffith, which the said David keeps
from him by force. In Witness whereof to this present writing I have put to my
seal. Dated at Salop the Monday before the feast of the Assumption of the
Blessed Virgin Mary, in the 25 year of the Reign of the said King.

The like Charters were made by every one of the other Noble men Pledges, who
bound themselves with the like words; further such of the said Lords as
favored Gruffiths cause, were out among themselves, and were now made Friends,
as Morgan ap Howel Lord of Kery and Sr. Ralph Mortimer, who before were at
variance, whereupon David being driven to extremities, having most of the
Nobility against him; especially Gruffith ap Madoc Lord of Bromfield, favored
him not, who being a man of great wisdom and power, was entirely beloved of the
King; again the sentence of excommunication and the interdiction of his Land
did not a little vex him. But the Kings presence with so puissant an army, did
so move his spirits that he could not be quiet, till he had sent to the King to
desire peace, with this submission following.

The Charter of the Articles of David's submission to the King.
Omnibus Christi fidelibus ad quos praesentes literae pervenerint, David filius
Leolini salutem, etc.
To all Christian People to whom these present Letters shall come, David the
Son of Lhewelin
sends greeting;
Know ye that I have granted and promised to deliver unto Lord Henry the Noble
King of England, Gruffith my Brother with his Son and Heir, whom I keep in in
prison, and all other Prisoners, who by occasion of the said Gruffith lie in
durance.

Item, I shall stand to the judgment of the Kings Court, as well in that case,
whether the said Gruffith ought to be detained prisoner, or No; as also for and
concerning the part of the Inheritance of the said Lhewelin my father, claimed
by the said Gruffith, according to the custom of Wales, so that the peace be
maintained between me and the said Gruffith.

Item, I and the said Gruffith, and either of us, shall hold our portions of
Land of our said Sovereign Lord the King in Capite; acknowleging him Chief Lord
thereof.

Item, I shall restore unto Roger de Monte Alto Steward of Chester his land of
Montalt or Mould with the appurtenances.

Item, I shall also restore to all other Barons, all such Lands, Lordships and
Castles as were taken from them, since the beginning of the wars between the
Lord John King of England and the said Lhewelin Prince of Wales my father,
saving the right of all covenants and Grants by writing to be reserved unto the
judgment and determination of the Kings Court.

Item, I shall give and restore unto our Sovereign Lord the King, all his
charges in this present voyage laid out.

Item, I shall make satisfaction for all damages and injuries done by me, or
any of my Subjects unto the King or his, according to the consideration of the
Kings Court, and shall deliver such as shall be malefactors in that behalf.

Item, I shall restore unto the said Lord the King all the said homages which
the late King John his father had, and which the said Lord the King of right
ought to have, especially of all the noblemen of Wales, and if the King shall
set at liberty any of his captives, the possessions of that man shall remain to
the King.

Item, the Land of Elsmere with the appurtenances shall remain to the Lord the
King and his heirs for ever.

Item, I shall not receive, or suffer to be received, within any Country of
Wales, any of the Subjects of England outlawed or banished by the said Lord the
King or his Barons of Mercia.

Item, For confirmation and performance of all and singular the premises on my
behalf, I shall provide by bonds and pledges, and all other ways and means as
the said Lord the King shall award, and will accomplish the commandment of the
said King, and will obey his laws.

In witness whereof to this present writing I have put to my Seal; Dated at
Alnet by the River of Elwey in the feast of the dedication of St. John Baptist
in the 25 year of the reign of the said King. Mr. Powel fol. 306.


For the Observation of these Articles, the said Prince David, and Ednivet
Vachan were sworn.

Upon these atonements David sent privately unto the King, Justice done, not
for Justice sake, but for self ends.
to desire him that he would suffer him, being his Nephew and the lawful heir
of Lhewelin his father, to enjoy the principality of Wales, rather then
Gruffith who was but a Bastard (though some account him legitimate) and nothing
of kin unto the King; giving him withal to understand, that in case he did set
Gruffith at liberty, he should be sure to have the war renewed: whereupon the
King knowing those things to be true, and understanding also that Gruffith was
a valiant stout man, and had many friends and favorers of his cause, inclined
rather to assent unto David's request, then otherwise to be in danger of further
troubles, and therefore willingly granted the same.

Shortly after David sent his brother Gruffith unto the King, and other pledges
for himself for the performance of the said Articles, M. Paris p. 765 From
prison to prison, like a fish out of the frying pan into the fire.
which the King sent forthwith to the Tower of London, there to be safely kept,
allowing to Gruffith a Noble daily for his maintenance. And within few days
after Michaelmas P. David came to the K. Court, and did him homage, and swore
fealty, who for so doing, and because he was the Kings Nephew, was sent home
again in peace. When Gruffith saw how all things went, and that he was not like
to be set at liberty, he began to devise means how to escape out of prison.

Wherefore deceiving the Watch one night, he made a long line of hangings, An
unfortunate end of a desperate attempt.
coverings and sheets, and having got out of a window, let down himself by the
same from the top of the Tower; but by reason that he was a mighty personage
and full of flesh, the line brake with the weight of his body, and so falling
down headlong from a great height, his neck and head was driven into his body
with the fall, whose miserable Carcass being found the morrow after, was a
pitiful spectacle to the beholders. The King being certified hereof, commanded
his son to be better looked unto, and punished the Officers for their
negligence.

About this time the King fortified the Castle of Dyserth in Flintshire, and
gave to Gruffith son to Gwenwynwyn, Lord of Powis, his inheritance, and to the
sons of Conan ap Owen Gwyneth their Lands in Merionith.

The Bishop of Bangor (a constant friend to that party) came to the Court to
sue for the deliverance of Gruffith son to Lhewelin the Prince; but the King
knowing him to be a man of great courage, would in no wise grant his liberty.

About this time Maelgon Vachan fortified the Castle of Garthgrugin; John de
Mynoc also fortified the Castle of Buelht, and Roger Mortimer the Castle of
Melienyth. The summer following the King began to vex the Welsh extremely, and
take their Lands by force, without just title or rightful cause; and now died
Rees Mechylh son to Rees Gryc of South- Wales.

During these transactions, Varium and mutabile semper.
David gathered all his strength to be revenged of all the wrongs which the
Earls of Clare and Hereford, which John d^ Monurch and Roger de Alto Monte and
other Merebers did to his people, whom all the Lords of Wales obeyed, and took
for their Sovereign, saving Gruffith son to Gwenwynwyn and Morgan ap Howel,
which two also were shortly compelled to obey, and then the Prince entered the
March Lands spoiling and destroying a great part thereof, with whom the said
Earls fought diverse battails, and sometimes the one, and sometimes the other
had the victory. 300 Welshmen slain near Montgomery. M. Par. p. 884. English
put to flight. K. Hen. 3. nothing fortunate against the Welsh.
The year ensuing the Marchers and the Welshman met not far from Montgomery,
where was a cruel fight, and 300 of the Welshman slain, and a great number of
the English; among whom was a noble Knight called Hubert Fitz Matthew,
whereupon the King being weary of his domestical troubles, gathered a vast army
of English and Gascoynes and entered Northwales, intending to destroy the
Country: but the prince met with his people in a straight, and fought with
them, and put them to flight. There the King lost a great number of his most
worthy Soldiers and Nobility, and most part of the Gascoines; and now seeing he
could do no good, he sent for the Irishmen who landed in the Isle of Mon or
Anglesey, and spoiled a great part thereof, till the Inhabitants of the Isle
gathered themselves together and met with them, being laden with plunder, whom
they chased to their ships; and thus the King being not able to do any more,
Mat Paris p. 917.
manned and victualled his Castles, and so returned home.

Of this Voyage a certain Nobleman being then in the Kings Camp, wrote thus to
his friend, about the end of September. 1245.
Gannock, fortifying of that Strong Castle, and we lie in our Tents thereby,
Gannoc castle.
watching, fasting, praying and freezing with cold; we watch for fear of the
Welshmen, who are wont to invade and come upon us in the night time; we fast
for want of meat; for the half penny loaf is worth five pence; The Welshmen
teach the Englishmen three excellent virtues of watching, fasting, and praying.
we pray to God to send us home again speedily; we starve for cold wanting our
winter Garments, and having no more but a thin linen cloth betwixt us and the
wind; there is an arm of the sea under the Castle, whereunto the tide comes,
and many ships come up the haven thither, and bring victuals to the Camp from
Ireland and Chester; this arm of the sea lies betwixt us and Snowdon, where
the Welshmen abide now, and is about a flight shot over when the tide is in.
There came to the mouth of that haven a certain ship from Ireland with victuals
to be sold, upon Monday before Michaelmas day, which being negligently looked
unto, Man. Par. p. 924.
was set on dry ground, at the low ebb, at the further side of the water, over
against the Castle: which thing when the Welshmen saw, they came down from the
hills and assaulted the vessel being now upon dry ground; whereupon we on the
otherside beholding the same, sent over by boats 300 Welshmen of the borders of
Cheshire and Shropshire with certain Archers and armed men, to the rescue of
the said ship, whereupon the Natives withdrew to their accustomed places in the
rocks and woods, whom our men followed as far as two miles being on foot, by
reason they could transport no horses, and slew many of them. Our men being
over geeedy and covetous, spoiled the Abbey of Aberconwey, and burned all the
houses of Office belonging to the same. Which doing caused the Welshmen to run
thither, Aber^onwey Abbey plundered by the English.
who like desperate men set upon our Soldiers, being laden with spoils, and
slew a great number of them, following the rest to the water side, of whom some
got to the boats, and so escaped, and some cast themselves into the water and
were drowned, and such as they took they hanged and beheaded every one. In this
conflict we lost many of our men, The Welsh revenge the sacrilege.
especially of those that were under the conduct of Richard Earl of Cornwall,
and Sr. Alen Buscel, and Sr. Adam de Maio, Sr. Geffry Estuemy, and one Raymond
a Gascoyne, whom the King highly fancied, and diverse others, besides 100. of
common Soldiers. In the mean time Sr. Walter Bisset worthily defended the said
ship, until the tide came, and then came away with the same manfully, wherein
there were 60 Tuns of wine besides other provision, etc. Many other things are
contained in the said writing of the hard shifts that we made in the Kings
camp, for victuals, and the dearth of all things that were to be eaten.

In the beginning of the year 1246. David Prince of Wales, after he had gotten
the love of his subjects, and atchived many notable victories, dyed, and was
buried at Conwey by his father, after he had ruled Wales five years, leaving no
issue of his body, to the great discomfort of the Land.

Mr. Mills speaking of this David, says, he was disquieted with a number of
cares in his life time; he wasted and destroyed his Country, he did many
slaughters, and after perjury and killing of his brother, was overwearied with
sundry tribulations. He left Wales most miserably desolate and disquiet, so as
they found this saying true, Every Kingdom divided in it self shall be made
desolate; he caused the Nobles to swear fealty unto him, and so continued
Prince 6. years, and died Anno 1246.

Quarterly ut ante.


Lhewelyn and Owen the sons of Gruffith ap Lhewelyn.
When all the Lords and Barons of Wales understood of the death of their
prince, they came together, and called for Lhewelin and Owen Goch, the sons of
Gruffith son to Prince Lhewelyn brother to David as next Inheritors (for they
esteemed not Roger Mortimer son to Gladis, R^g. Mortimer right heir, put by his
right.
sister to David and right inheritor by order of Law) and did them homage who
divided the principality betwixt them two. The King hearing of the death of
prince David, sent one Nicholas de Miles as Justice of Southwals to
Caermarthin, and with him in commission Meredyth ap Rees Gryc, K. H. 3. makes
another attempt against Wales, but in vain.
and Meredyth ap Owen ap Gruffith to dis-inherit Maelgon ap Vachan of all his
lands; wherefore the said Maelgon fled to the princes into Northwales for
succor, with Howel ap Meredith (whom the Earl of Clare had by force spoiled
of all his lands in Glamorgan) against whom the King came with a great army,
who after he had remained a while in the Country and could do no good, returned
home again.

The Prince of Northwales was a superior prince of all Wales, to whom the
other princes of Southwales and Powis did pay a certain tribute yearly, as
appears by laws of Howel Dha, and in diverse places of this history; and was
the right heir of Cadwalader, as is evident by all writers, whose line of the
heir male from Roden Mawr ends in this, David the son of Lhewelin, the son of
Jorwerth, the son of Owen Gwineth, the son of Gruffith, the son of Conan, the
son of Jago, the son of Edwal, the son of Meiric, the son of Edwal Voel, the
son of Anarawd, the son of Roderi Mawr, the son of Eselht, the daughter and
sole heir of Conan Tindathwy, the son of Roderike Molwynoc, the son of Edwal
Ywrich, the son of Cadwalader, the last King of the Britains.

Lhewelin ap Jorwerth prince of Northwales, father to David, married two wives;
the first Jone Daughter of K. John, by whom he had David, who dyed without
issue, and Gladis married to Mortimer, from which match the Kings of England
are descended by the mothers side from Cadwalader.

About this time Harold King of Man came to the Court and did homage to K.
Henry, M. Paris p. 938 The K. of Man does homage to the K. of England.
and he dubbed him Knight; the Summer following Rees Vachan son to Rees Mechyl
got the Castle of Carvec Cynnen; which his mother of mere hatred conceived
against him, had delivered to the Englishmen. The Abbots of Conwey and
Stratflur made suit to the King for the body of Gruffith ap Lhewelyn; which he
granted unto them, and they conveyed it unto Conwey, where he was honorably
buried.

In the year 1254. there arose a great debate between the princes of Wales; for
Owen could not be content with half the principality, but got his young
brother David unto him, All cover, all lose; or Harm watch, harm catch.
and they two levied an army to dis-inherit Lhewelin, who with his men met with
them in the field, and after a long fight gave them an overthrow, where he took
them both prisoners, and then seized all their lands into his own hands
enjoying alone the whole principality of Wales.

The year ensuing all the Lords came to prince Lhewelin, and made their
complaints to him with weeping eyes, how cruelly they were handled by prince
Edward, and others of the Nobility of England; their lands being taken from
them by force; and if at any time they did offend, they were punished with
extremity; but where they were wronged, they found no remedy. Therefore they
protested before God, and him, A gallant resold on of the Welsh.
that they would rather die in the field in defense of their right, then to be
made slaves by strangers: whereupon the prince pitying both his own estate and
theirs, determined together utterly with them to refuse the rule of the
Englishmen, rather to dye in liberty then to live in thraldom, shame and
opprobry. And gathering all his power, first recovered again all the Inland
Country of Northwales, and afterward all Merionith, and such lands as Edward
had usurped in Caerdigan, which he gave to Meredith the son of Owen ap
Gruffith, An heroic Prince.
and Buelht he gave to Meredyth ap Rees, chasing away Rees Vachan out or the
same, and so honorably divided all that he wan among his Barons, that he kept
nothing to himself but a perpetual fame of his liberality. Then also he
recovered Gwerthryneon from Sr. Roger Mortimer. The Summer following prince
Lhewelin made war against Gruffith ap Gwenwinwin (who served the King) and wan
all Powis from him, saving the Castle of Pole, and a little of Caerneon and
landed by Severne side.

Rees Vachan ap Rees Mechylh meaning to recover his lands again, A bloody
battle.
obtained of the King a great army, whereof one Stephen Bacon was Captain, and
came to Caermarthin by sea, and marching from thence toward Dynevowr laid
siege to the Castle; The English overthrown.
but the princes power came with his cosens to raise the siege, where there was
fought a bloody battle as ever had been in Wales, of so many men, and in the
end the Englishmen were put to flight, and lost of their men above 2000
Soldiers; from thence the Princes army went to Dynet and burned all the
Country, and destroyed the the castles of Abercorran, Lhanstephan, Maenclochoc,
The Welsh victorious.
and Aberth, and then returned home with much spoil, and forthwith not being
able to abide the wrongs which Greffry Lanley (Lieutenant to the Earl of
Chester) did to them, M. Par. p 1251 Tho. Walsh Hypodigma p. 61. Brave-spirited
men.
the Prince entered the Earls lands, and destroyed all to the gates of Chester
on either side the water. Whereupon Edward the Earl fled to his Uncle (who was
then chosen King of the Romans) for succor, and returning back with an army
durst not fight with the prince, who had 10000 armed men every one sworn to dye
in the field (if need requred) in the defense of their country; A Judas amongst
his countrymen. M. Par. p. 1253
yet Griffith ap Madoc Maelor commonly surnamed Lord of Dynas Bran (which is a
castle standing upon a very high Mountain, of situation impregnable in the
Lordship of Chirk) forsook the Prince and served the Earl with all his power,
which Earl was counted a cruel and unjust man, having no regard to right
promise or oath.

Mat. West p. 277.
The next year Prince Lhewelyn seizing into his hands Cymeys, and making peace
between Rees G^yc, and Rees Vachan his brothers son, got the Castle of
Trefdraeth, or Newport with all Ros, A ^ust punishment for a traitor o his
Country. O^ thirds not caught with chief.
saving Hanerford. Then destroying the Country in his way toward Glamorgan, he
raised the Castle of Lhangymwch, and returning to Northwales, met with Edward
Earl of Chester by the way, whom he caused to retire back, and then destroyed
the Lands of the said Gruffith Lord of Bromfield. Therefore the Kings of
England and Almain wrote to him gently to depart home, which he refused to do,
but deviding his army into two battails, in every of which as Matthew Paris
said, there were 1500. Mat. Par. fol. 12^8. The Welsh beat the Irish at Sea.
Mat. Par. fol. 1271. A prudent and politic Prince. King Hen. unfortunate in
his undertakings against Wales. Mat. Paris fol. 12^5. English. Almains,
Gasco^nes and Irish against Wales. Mat. Paris fol. 1274 and 1279.
footmen, and 500. horsemen well appointed: Whereupon Edward sent to the
Irishmen to come to him to his succor; whereof the Prince being certified,
made ready his Bishops, and sending them to Sea, with sufficient power to
resist the coming of his Enemies that way, prevented him, so that the Irish
were overcome and sent home with great loss; wherefore the King with his Son
(being in a great rage) gathered all the strength of England from St. Michaels
mount to Twede, and came to Northwales as far as Tegenwy; but the Prince caused
all the victuals to be removed over the River Conwey, and kept all the Straits
and passages so narrowly, that the King was compelled to tetire to England with
great loss.

Then Prince Lhewelyn calling unto him all the power of Southwales, came to the
marches where Gruffith Lord of Bromfield yielded himself unto him (because the
King could not defend his lands,) and seizing into his own hands all the lands
in Powis, he banished the Lord Gruffith ap Gwenwynwyn, and wan the Castle of
Gilbert de Clare Earl of Gloucester, where also he gave the English men an
overthrow, and slew a great number of the worthiest Soldiers and such as the
King loved well, which caused the King to call his strength unto him, and sent
to Gascoyne and Ireland for succo^^s, and then coming into Wales in harvest
time, destroyed all the corn that was in his way; yet he went not far beyond
Chester, but returned back without doing any notable act; for God, as Matthew
Paris says, defended the poor people that put their whole confidence in him.
The Lord James Audly (whose daughter Gruffith Lord of Bromfield had married)
brought a great number of horsemen from Almain to serve against the Welshmen,
God the Protector of the Welsh.
who with their great horses, and unaccustomed kind of fight overthrew the
Welshmen at the encounter; wherefore the Welshmen minding shortly after to
revenge the displeasure, made roads into the said Lord Audleyes Lands, where
the Almains set upon them, pursuing hard such as fled to the Straits, who
(using that flight for a policy) returned again so suddenly, and so fi rcely
upon the Almains, that they being not able to retreat, Great scarcity in
England for want of commerce with Wales.
upon the sudden were almost all slain. At this time there was great scarcity
of Beeves and horses in England, whereof they were wont to have many thousands
yearly out of Wales, and all the marches were made as a desolate and desert
place.

The next spring all the Nobles of Wales came together and swear to defend
their Country to death, and never to forsake one another, and that upon pain of
cursing; but shortly after Meredyth ap Rees of Southwales, A subsidy demanded
to conquer Wales.
not regarding his oath, served the King. Then the King called a Parliament for
a subsidy to Wales, when he had so many losses, and of late all the Country of
Pembrock burnt and spoiled, where the Welshmen had found salt plentifully,
which they lacked, in the which Parliament no Subsidy was granted. Mat. Pa^is
fol. 1807.


Shortly after the same Parliament by propagation was called at Oxford, where
the Lords of Wales offered to be tried by the law for any offense they had
committed against the King i^iustly; To this patrick the Lordship of Cydwely
was given if he could win it. Easy to give l ^ge thongs out of another man's
hide.

Trea hery revenged by the Welsh.


but Edward would not hear of it, but sent one Patrick de Canton as Lieutenant
for the King to Caermarthyn, and with him Meredyth ap Rees; and this Patrick
desired to speak (upon peace) with the Princes Council, whereupon the Prince
meaning good faith, sent his brother whom he had set at liberty with Meredyeh
ap Owen and Rees ap Rees to Emlyn, to treat with them of peace; but Patrick
meaning to entrap them, laid an ambushment of Men armed by the way; and as they
should have met, these miscreants fell upon the Welsh, and slew a great number
of them; but the Lords which escaped, raised the Country forthwith, and
followed Patrick and slew him, and the most part of all his men. And after this
the Prince desirous of peace and quietness to redeem the same, and to end all
troubles, and to purchase the Kings good will, offered the King 4000 marks, and
to his son 300. and to the Queen 200. to have peace; but the King answered,
What is this to our losses? and refused it.

It appears by the records in the Tower, that about this time, to wit An. 43.
Hen. 3. there was a commission to William Bishop of Worcester, John Mansel
Treasurer of York, the Kings Chaplain, and Peter de Montfort, to conclude a
peace with the Welshmen; but it is like there was nothing done to any effect in
that behalf; for the war continued still. Notwithstanding I find by Matthew
Westminster that there was a certain truce agreed upon between the King and the
Welshmen for a year. I read also in the same Author that the Bishop of Bangor
was this year about Michaelmas sent from Lhewelyn the Prince, and all the
Barons of Wales to the King, to desire peace at his hands, and to offer unto
him the sum of 16000. pound for the same, so that he would grant the Welsh to
have all their matters heard and determined at Chester, as they were wont to
have, and to suffer them to enjoy the laws and customs of their own Country;
but what answer the Bishop brought again, the said Author makes no mention.

The year 1260. Prince Lhewelyn destroyed the lands of Sr. Roger Mortimer,
because he contrary to his oath, maintained the Kings quarrel and took from him
all Buelht, saving the Castle, which the Princes men got by night without
bloodshed, Aber. P. Lhewelyns Court, or Palace.
and therein much ammunition; and so after the Prince had passed through all
Southwales, he returned to his house at Aber, betwixt Conwey and Bangor. The
year following died Owen ap Meredyth Lord of Cydewen, and this summer certain
of the Princes men surprised the Castle of Sr. Roger Mortimer in Melienyth, and
slew the garrison, taking Howel ap Meyric the Captain thereof, with his wife
and children, and the Princes Lieutenant came and destroyed it. Then Sr. Roger
Mortimer hearing this, came with a great strength of Lords and Knights to
Melienyth, whether the Prince came also, and Sr. Roger kept himself within the
walls of the broken Castle, and sent to the Prince for license to depart
without hurt the Prince having his Enemy within his power, A most Christian
and heroic act of Lhewelyn.
took compassion upon him, because he was his cozen; and suffered him to depart
with his people without hurt; from thence the Prince went to Brecknock at the
request of the people of that Country which swore fidelity unto him, and so
returned to Northwales.

Prince Lhewelyn being confederate with the Barons against the King, destroyed
the Earldom of Chester, and raised two of Edwards Castles, Tygannwy and
Deserth, and thither came Edward, but did nothing to speak of. This year John
Strange the younger being Constable of Montgomery, came with a great number of
Merchers by night, through Ceril to Cydewen; which when the Countrymen
understood, they gathered themselves together, and slew 200. of his Men, but he
escaped with his men back again. Shortly after the Merchers and the Welshmen
met near Clun, Rara est concordia franum.
where the English had the victory, and slew many of the Welsh. At this time
David the Princes brother (whom he had set at liberty) forsook him, and
succored his foes with all his power. Then Gruffith ap Gwenwynwyn got the
Castle of Molde and raised it. At this time died Meredyth ap Owen the defender
of Southwales.

The Year ensuing King Henry led a great army toward Wales, and by the means
of Olobonus the Popes Legate, there was a peace concluded betwixt the King and
the Prince at Montgomery Castle, for the which the Prince gave unto the King
30000. marks, and the King granted the Prince a Charter to receive from
thenceforth, homage and fealty of all the Nobility and Barons of Wales saving
one, so that all the aforesaid Barons should ever after hold of the Prince as
their Liege Lord, and he to be called and written from thenceforth Prince of
Wales; and in witness of this the King put his seal and hand to the said
Charter, which was likewise confirmed by the authority of the Pope.

The year after this dyed Grono ap Ednyvet Vachan, a Noble man, and chief of
the Princes Council. In the year 1270. dyed Gruffith Lord of Bromfield, and was
buried at Vale Crucis; and here ends the British copy.

At this place leaves the British Copy, Mr. Lhoyd.
and writes no further of the end of this Prince, but leaves him at the
highest and most honorable stay that any Prince of Wales was in, of many years
before. The writer (peradventure) being ashamed to declare the utter fall and
ruin of his Countrymen, whereunto their own pride and discord did bring them,
as it does evidently appear to him that searches out their Histories; but I
intending to finish the History, during the Government of the Britains, have
sought out in other Chronicles written in the Latin tongue, especially in the
Chronicle of Nicholas Trivet, King Hen 3. dies.
(who wrote from the beginning of the reign of King Stephen to the Coronation of
Edward the second) and such other, as much as I could find concerning this
matter.

In the year 1272. dyed King Henry the third, and Edward his Son coming from
the holy Land two years after, was crowned at Westminster King of England, to
which Coronation the Prince of Wales refused to come, although he was sent for,
alleging for his excuse that he had offended many Noblemen of England, and
therefore would not come in danger, without he had for pledges the Kings
brother, with the Earl of Gloucester, and Robert Burnell Chief Justice of
England; wherewith the King was highly displeased.

Edward could never brook P. Lhewelyn since the time that he was compelled to
flight by him at their meeting in the Marches as before; Thom. Walsh;
on the other side Lhewelyn liked no better of the King then the King did of
him; again those Noblemen, who for their disobedience were dis-inherited by
Lhewelyn, were received and entertained by King Edward, which things caused the
Prince to fear some evil practice by those and other such as hated him, if he
should have been at the Kings Coronation to do his homage and fealty according
to the writ directed unto him in that behalf, as appears by an instrument
sent by the said Prince to Robert Kilwarby Archbishop of Canterbury, the
Archbishop of York, and other Bishops, sitting then at their Convocation in
the new Temple at London, Anno. 1275. wherein the causes of this war are
contained: which instrument it self (as it was then sent) is extant to this
day, written in parchment, with the Princes great seal thereunto appendant,
which I have seen (says this Author) and copied out of the Original verbatim,
Mr. Lhoyd.
being then in the custody of Thomas Yale Doctor of Law, of late Dean of the
Arches (a great searcher and preserver of the antiquities of Wales) which I
thought convenient here to lay down for the fuller understanding of this
History.

Reverendissimis in Christo Patribus and Dominis, Roberto Dei gratia
Archiepiscopo Cant. totius Angliae Primati, and Archiepis. Eborum, ac eorum
suffraganis, etc.
To the most Reverend Fathers in Christ and Lords, Robert Archbishop of
Canterbury, Primate of England, and the Archbishop of York, and their
Suffragans being now together at London in Council. Their devote Son Lhewelyn
Prince of Wales, and Lord of Snowdon,
greeting;
with due Obedience, Reverence and Honor in all things. Be it known unto your
reverend Father-hoods, that where heretofore contention and discord, (whereof
war followed, and long continued) arose betwixt the King of Noble memory, Henry
King of England of the one party, and us of the other party; the same
contentions and strife were at the last appeased by authority of the Sea
Apostolic, and means of the reverend Father Lord Otobanus, Deacon and Cardinal
of St. Adrian, Legate into England, as it appears in the form of Treaty and
Peace betwixt the said King and Edward his first begotten Son, Lord Edward now
King of England, and their Successors on the one party, and us and our
Successors on the other party, by the corporal Oath of both parties assured;
Which form of peace was committed to writing with the said Legate, with the
seal of the said King, and the seal of the said Lord Edward now King, and with
our seal also, in the which peace it is contained amongst other things (as you
do well know, as we believe) that we and our Successors should hold of the King
and his Successors the Principality of Wales. So that all Welsh Barons should
hold their Baronies and Lands of us and our Successors in Capite, and should do
homage and fealty to us, and to our heirs, (one Baron excepted) for the which
we and our Successors should do homage and fealty to the Lord the King and his
Successors. It is further contained in the same peace, that neither the said
King nor his Successors should receive any of our Enemies, or any running from
us or our Successors, nor should help or maintain any such against us or our
Successors. The which all are contained in the form of peace, the Tenor whereof
the Reverend Fathers of Strata Florida and Aberconwey bearers hereof, can show
you.

But see Reverend Fathers, the Lord Edward now King of England, after the said
peace takes into his hands certain Barons Lands in Wales, of which they and
their Ancestors have been long possessed, and keeps a Barony in his hands,
which should be ours by the form of peace; other Barons of our Land being from
us fugitives, running to him, he keeps, helps; and maintains, David ap
Gruffith, and Gruffith ap Gwenwynwyn who purposed our death and destruction.
Notwithstanding that since their departure they have robbed within our Land,
committed slaughter, and burning of houses, do daily the like against the peace
aforesaid; and although we have often sent our griefs and complaints by solemn
messengers to the said Noble Lord Edward, as well before he was King as since,
yet unto this day he never did any redress therein; also that which is more
perilous, he called us unto a place (not to us safe) amongst our deadly
Enemies, our fugitives and fellons, and their spies, and murderers, to do him
homage and fealty, to which place we can no ways come without danger of our
body, especially seeing our Enemies above said to be in that place at the Kings
table, and sometimes in Council, and openly brag themselves. And though lawful
and reasonable excuses were alleged by our messengres before the King and his
Council, why the place was not safe nor indifferent, yet he refused to allow or
appoint any other place indifferent for us, to do homage and fealty, which we
were and are ready to do unto him in any safe place by him to be appointed, if
he will appoint any, and to perform the other articles of the peace concluded
and sworn. And for that it pleases him not to come to any place where we could
with safety do him homage, we were suitors to him to send any from him to
receive our oath and homage, until it pleased him to appoint a place where we
shall do our homage to him personally, the which thing he utterly denied to do.

We therefore beseech your Father-hoods earnestly that it may please you to
consider what danger should happen to the people both of England and of Wales,
by reason of the breach of Covenants of peace abovesaid, if now wars and
discord should follow, which God forbid, attending and calling to remembrance
the prohibition of the Holy Father, the Pope lately in the Council at Lions,
that no war should be moved amongst Christians, least thereby the affairs of
the holy Land should be neglected; that it would please you also to help with
your Council with the Lord and King, that he would use us, and order us
according to the peace agreed upon, the which we will no way infringe. And if
he will not hearken to your Counsel therein, (which God forbid) that you will
hold us excused; for we will no ways as much as lies in us, procure the
trouble and disquietness of the Realm. And if it may please you to give credit
to our messengers which we do send to the King, at the day by him to us
appointed) to allege our lawful excuses in those things which they by mouth
shall on our part show unto You, resting to do Your will and pleasure, if it
please You to write again.

Dated at Talybont the eight Day of October Anno 1275.



Chester, Thom. Walsh. fol. 6. Mar. West p. 364.
willing the Prince to come thither and do him homage, which when the prince
detracted to do, the King gathered an army to compel him thereto.

The year following the Countess of Leicester, wife to Simon Montfort (which
remained at a Nunnery in France) sent her daughter to Wales to marry the
prince, as it was 'agreed betwixt them in her Fathers time, and with her came
her brother Admerike and a courtly company, who fearing the coast of England,
bent their voyage to the Isle of Sylly, whereby chance they met with four ships
of Bristol, which set upon and took them, and brought them to the King, who
entertains the Lady houourably, sending her brother to be kept prisoner in the
castle of Corff, from whence he was removed to the castle of Sherburne. Then
the King prepared two armies, A prodigious Omen to Wales.
whereof the one he conducted himself to Northwales as far as Ruthlan, and
fortified the castle, and the other he sent with Paganis de Camurtiis a worthy
Soldier to Westwales; they burned and destroyed a great part of the Country,
and this year itrained blood in diverse places of Wales.

The year ensuing the Lords of Southwales came to the Kings peace, The jangling
of the Welsh among themselves their utter overthrow.
and did him homage, and delivered the Castle of Stratywy unto the K.
Lieutenant Paganus de Camurtli, (if his surname be not mistaken for de
Cadurcis, it is the family of Chaworth in Notinghamshire.) This Prince
understanding this, and seeing that his own people had forsaken him, sent to
the King for peace, which was agreed upon these conditions.

1. First that all such as the Prince kept prisoners of the Kings, and for his
cause, should be set at liberty.

2. Item, That the Prince should pay to the King for his favor and good will
50000 marks to be paid at the Kings pleasure.

3 Item, That four Cantreds should reman to the King and his heirs for ever;
which Cantreds I think were these; cantref Ros, where the Kings Castle of
Teganny stood; cantref Rynivioc where Denbigh; cantref Tegengl where Ruthlan
stands; and cantref Dyffryn Clwd where Ruthin is.

4 Item, That the Lords Merchers should quietly enjoy all the Lands that they
had conquered within Wales.

5. Item, That the Prince should pay yearly for the Isle of Mon or Anglesey
1000 marks, which payment should begin at Michaelmas then next ensuing; and
that also he should pay 5000 marks out of hand; and if the prince dyed without
issue, the Isle should remain to the King and his heirs.

6 Item, That the Prince should come to England every Christmas to do the King
homage for his lands.

7. Item, That all the Barons in Wales should hold their lands of the King,
except 5. in Snowden, who should ackowledg the Prince to be their Lord.

8. Items, that he should for his lifetime enjoy the name of Prime, and none of
his heirs after him, so that after his death, the foresaid five Barons should
hold of the King, and none other.

9. Item, that for the performance of the Articles, the prince should deliver
for hostages ten of the best in Wales, without imprisonining, disinheriting, or
time of deliverance determined, and also the King to choose twenty within
Northwales, that should take their oaths with the prince for performance of
these Articles; and if the Prince should swerve from any of them, and being
thereof admonished, would not amend and redress the same, Th. Walsh. p. 7
they should forsake him and become his enemies. The prince was also bound to
let his brethren enjoy their lands in Wales, of whom David had long served the
King, whom the King had made Knight, contrary to the manner of Wales, and had
given him in marriage the daughter of the Earl of Derby, whose first husband
was lately deceased; to whom the King gave Denbigh in Northwales and 1000l.
lands therewith. And his other brother Roderike was lately fled to England out
of prison, and Owen the third was delivered at this composition.

This peace was concluded in the Kings absence, who appointed one his
Commissioners, Mr. Trinet Sol p. 787.
to wit the Lord Ripiost to take an oath of him, and authorized the said
Robert, Antonio Beck and William de Southampton Prior Provincial of the Friars
predicant, Commissioners appointed on his behalf to receive the like oath of
the said Lhewelyn, for whose part Theodor or Tudor ap Ednivet and Grono ap
Heilin were Commissioners.

At this time the King builded a Castle at Aberystwyth, and returned into Eng.
with much honor; unto whom the people granted a subsidy of the twentieth part
of their goods toward his charges in this war. The year following the marriage
was celebrated at Worcester betwixt Elianor daughter to Simon Montfort and
prince Lhewelin, where the King and Queen and the most part of the Nobility of
England were present. Also the year after Roger Mortimer set up at Killingworth
a round table for a hundred Knights to be exercised in the feats of arms, The
Kof Scots suc^ou^eth against the Welsh.
and thither resorted many Knights from diverse Countries. At this time the King
of Scots did homage to K. Edward, and obtained the Kings letters that his
succors in the last wars of Wales were not done by the name of service but
good will.

The peace concluded betwixt the prince of Wales and the King of England, did
not long continue, by reason of the severe and strict dealing of such Officers
as the King appointed rulers in the Marshes and the Inland country of Wales,
who hunting after their own gains, oppressed the Inhabitants, burdening them
with new exactions, contrary to the custom of the country; and also showing
themselves too much affectionate and partial in matters of controversy betwixt
party and party, especially when any Englishman had to do in the matter, which
poling and partiality did altogether alienate the hearts of the people from the
King of England, so that they had rather die, then live in such thraldom;
whereupon assembling themselves together, they so moved David the Lord of
Denbigh to be at unity with prince Lhewelin, and to take pity upon their
affliction and misery, that he being agreed with his brother, became their
Captain.

David should never after serve the King of England as he had done before, but
become his utter enemy, who laid siege to the castle of Hawarden and took Roger
Clifford (a noble Knight) slaying all that resisted, The Welsh impatient of
servitude.
and after spoiling all the country, he with his brother the prince laid siege
to the Castle of Ruthlan; the King hearing of this, hasted thither with a great
army to raise the siege, whereupon the prince retreated with his army.

Seek to recover their liberty. Aberystwyth castle built by the King, taken.
Godwin in Canterbury, fol. 77.
Also the same time Rees the son of Maelgon and Gruffith ap Meredith ap Owen,
which other noble men of Southwales too^ the castle of Aberystwyth and diverse
other castles in the Country, spoiling and plundering all the Kings people that
inhabited thereabouts. Therefore the King sent the Archbishop of Canterbury to
confer with the prince and his brethren; but he returned without doing any
good, so that he denounced an excommunication; this Archbishops name was Jehn
Beckham, who (as B. Godwin says) took great pains in laboring a peace between
K. Edw. l. and prince Lhewelin of Wales, unto whom he went in person and
travailed long with him, but all in vain.

Articles sent from the Archbishop of Canterbury, to be intimated to Lhewelin
Prince of Wales, and to the People of the same Country.
1 Because we came to those parts for the spiritual and temporal health of
them, whom we have ever loved well, as diverse of them have known.

2. That we came contrary to the will of the Lord our King, whom our said
coming, as is said, does much offend.

3 That we desire and beseech them for the blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, that
they would come to an unity with the English people, and to the peace of our
Lord the King, which we intend to procure them as well as we can.

4. We will them to understand, that we cannot long tarry in those quarters.

5. We would that they considered that after our parting out of the Country,
they shall not perhaps find any that will so tender the preferring of their
cause, as we would do, if it pleased God (with our mortal life) we might
procure them an honest, stable and firm peace.

6. That if they do contemn our petition and labor, we do intend forthwith to
signify their stubbournesse to the high Bishop and the Court of Rome, for the
enormity that many ways happens by occasion of this discord this day.

7. Let them know that unless they do quickly agree to a peace, that war shall
be aggravated against them, which they shall not be able to sustain; for the
Kings power increases daily.

8. Let them understand that the realm of England is under the special
protection of the Sea Apostolic, and the Sea of Rome loves it better then any
other kingdom.

9. That the said See of Rome will not in any wise see the state of the Realm
of England quail, being under a special protection.

10. That we much lament to hear that the Welshmen be more cruel then Saracens;
for the Saracens when they take christians, they keep them to be redeemed for
money, but (they say) that the Welshmen by and by do kill all they take, and
are only delighted with blood, and some time cause to be killed them whose
ransom they have received.

11. That whereas they were ever wont to be esteemed, and to reverence God and
Ecclesiastical persons, they seem much to revolt from that devotion, moving
sedition, and war, and committing slaughter, and burning in the holy time,
which is a great injury to God, wherein no man can excuse them.

12. We desire, That as true Christians they would repent, for they cannot long
continue their begun discord, if they had sworn it.

13. We will, That they signify unto us, how they will or can amend the
trouble of the Kings peace, and the hurt of the Commonwealth.

14. That they signify unto us, How peace and concord may be established; for
in vain were it to form peace to be daily violated.

15. If they say, That their Laws or Covenants be not observed, that they do
signify unto us what those be.

16. That granting it, That they were injured (as they say) which we in no
ways do know; they which were Judges in the cause, might so have signified to
the Kings Majesty.

17. That unless they will now come to peace, they shall be resisted by decree
and censure of the Church.

The Answer of Prince Lhewelyn, to the above-written Articles.
To the most Reverend Father in Christ, the Lord John, by Gods grace Archbishop
of Canterbury, Primate of all England, his humble and devote son Lhewelyn
Prince of Wales, and Lord of Snowdon
sends Greeting.
With all Reverend Submission and Honor, we yield our most humble and hearty
thanks unto your Fatherhood, for the great and grievous pains, which at this
present for the love of us and our Nation you have sustained; and so much the
more we are beholden unto you, for that besides the Kings pleasure you would
venture to come to us. In that you request us to come to the Kings peace, we
would have your Holiness to know, That we are most ready and willing to the
same, so that our Lord the King will duly and truly observe and keep toward
us and ours. Moreover, although we would be glad of your continuance in Wales,
yet we hope there shall not be any delay in us, but that peace (which of all
things we most desire and wish for) may be forthwith established, and rather by
your travel and procurement than by any other men's, so that it shall not be
needful to complain unto the Pope of our wilfulness; neither do we despise your
Fatherhoods requests and painful travel, but with all hearty reverence,
according to our duty do accept the the same: neither yet shall it be needful
for the Lord the King, to use any force against us, seeing we are ready to obey
him in all things, our Rights and Laws (as aforesaid) reserved. And although
the Kingdom of England be under the special protection of the Sea of Rome, and
with special love regarded by the same; yet when the Lord the Pope with the
Court of Rome shall understand of the great damages which are done unto us by
the Englishmen; to wit, The Articles of the peace concluded and sworn unto,
violated and broken, the robbing and burning of Churches, the murdering of
Ecclesiastical persons, as well religious as secular, the slaughter of women
great with child, the children sucking at their mothers breasts, the destroying
of Hospitals and Houses of Religion, killing the men and women professed in the
Holy Places, and even before the Altars: We hope that your Fatherhood, and the
said Court of Rome, will rather with pity lament our case, than with rigor of
punishment augment our sorrow. Neither shall the Kingdom of England be in any
wise disquieted or troubled by our means (as is affirmed) so that we may have
the peace duly kept and observed toward us and our people: Who they be that
are delighted with bloodshed and war, is manifestly apparent by their deeds
and behavior; for we would live quietly upon our own, if we might be suffered,
but the Englishmen coming to our Country, did put all to the sword, neither
sparing sex, age or sickness, or any thing regarding Churches or sacred Places;
the like whereof the Welshmen never committed. That one having paid his ransom,
was afterward slain; we are right sorry to hear of it, neither do we maintain
the offender, who escaping our hands, keeps himself as an Outlaw in the
Woods, and unknown places. That some began the war in a time not meet or
convenient, that understood not we of till now; and yet they who did the same,
do affirm, that in case they had not done as they did at that time, they had
been slain or taken prisoners, being not in safety in their own houses, and
forced continually for safeguard of their lives, to keep themselves in Armor;
and therefore to deliver themselves from that fear, they took that enterprise
in hand. Concerning those things which we commit against God, with the
assistance of his grace, A true Christian resolution in Lhewelyn.
we will (as it becomes Christians) repent and turn unto him; neither shall
the war on our part be continued, so that we be saved harmless, and may live as
we ought: but before we be disinherited or slain, we must defend our selves as
well as we may. Of all injuries and wrongs done by us, we are most willing and
ready (upon the due examination and trial of the trespasses and wrong committed
on both sides) to make satisfaction to the utmost of our power, so that the
like on the Kings side be performed in like manner toward us, and our people:
and to conclude and establish a peace, we are most ready. But what peace can be
established, when as the Kings Charter so solemnly confirmed, is not kept and
performed? Our people are daily oppressed with new exactions. We send unto you
also a note in writing of the wrongs and injuries which are done unto us,
contrary to that Form of the peace before made, we have put our selves in
Armor, being driven thereunto by necessity; for we and our people were so
oppressed, trodden under foot, spoiled and brought to slavery by the Kings
Officers, contrary to the Form of peace concluded against justice, none
otherwise then if we were Saracens or Jews; whereof we have oftentimes
complained unto the King, and never could get any Redress, but always those
Officers were afterward more fierce and cruel against us; and when those
Officers through their ravine and extortion were enriched, other more hungry
than they, were sent afresh to flea those whom the other had shorn before; so
that the people wished rather to dye than to live in such oppression: And now
it shall not be needful to leavy any Army to war upon us, or move the Prelates
of the Church against us, so that the peace may be observed duly and truly, as
before is expressed. Neither ought your holy fatherhood to give credit to all
that our adversaries do allege against us; for even as in their deeds they
have and do oppress us, so in their words they will not stick to slander us,
laying to our charge what likes them best. Therefore forasmuch as they are
always present with you, and we absent from you, they oppressing, we
oppressed, we are to desire you, even for his sake from whom nothing is hid,
not to credit men's words, but to examine their deeds.

Thus we bid your Holiness farewell, Dated at Garth Celyn, in the Feast of
Saint Martin.
Certain Griefs sent from Lhewelyn to the Archbishop, translated word by word
out of the Records of the said Archbishop.
Where that it is contained in the Form of Peace concluded as follows:

1. If the said Lhewelyn will claim any right in any lands occupied by any
other then by the Lord the King without the said 4 Cantress, the said Lord the
King shall do him full justice, according to the Laws and Customs of those
quarters or parts where the said lands do lie. Which Article was not observed
in the lands of Frustly, and betwixt the waters of Dyni and Dulas; for that
when the said Lhewelyn claimed the said lands before the Lord the King at
Ruthlan, and the King granted him the cause to be examined according to the
Laws and Customs of Wales, and the Advocates of the parties were brought in,
and the Judges, which vulgarly they called Ynnayd, before the King to judge of
the said lands, according to the Laws of Wales; and the Defendant appeared and
answered, so that the same day the cause ought to have been fully determined,
according to the appointment of our Lord the King; who at his being at
Gloucester, had assigned the parties the said day; and though the same cause was
in diverse places often heard and examined before the Justice, and the lands
were in North Wales, and never judged but by the Laws of Wales, neither was it
lawful for the King, but according to the Laws of Wales to prorogue the cause:
All that notwithstanding, he prorogued the day (of his own motion) contrary to
the said Laws; and at the last the said Lhewelyn was called to diverse places,
whither he ought not to have been called; neither could he obtain justice nor
any judgment, unless it were according to the Laws of England, contrary to the
said Article of peace; and the same was done at Montgomery, when the parties
were present in judgment, and a day appointed to hear the Sentence, they
prorogued the said day, contrary to the aforesaid Laws, and at the last the
King himself at London denied him justice, unless he would be judged according
to the English Laws in the said matter.

2. All Injuries, Trespasses and Faults on either part done, be clearly
remitted unto this present day. This Article was not kept, for that as soon as
the Lord Reginald Gray was made Justice, he moved diverse and innumerable
accusations against the men of Tegengl and Ros, for trespasses done in the time
of King Henry, when they bare rule in those parts; whereby the said men dare
not for fear keep their own houses.

3. Whereas it was agreed, That Rees Vachan ap Rees ap Maelgon shall enjoy his
possessions, with all the land which he now holds, etc. After the peace
concluded, he was spoiled of his lands in Geneurglyn, which he then held, with
the men and cattle of the same.

4. Also our Lord the King grants, That all Tenants holding lands in the 4
Cantrefs or in other places, which the King holds in his own hands, shall
hold and enjoy the same, as freely as they did before the time of the wars, and
shall use the same liberties and customs which they used before; contrary to
this Article, the Lord Reginald Gray has brought many new customs against the
Form of peace aforesaid.

5. All Controversies moved or to be moved betwixt the Prince and any other,
shall be decided after the Law of the Marches (if they have their beginning in
the Marches) and after the Laws of Wales, such as in Wales have their
beginning; contrary to this Article, the King does, and sends Justices to
Anglesey, who presume to judge there the men and subjects of the Prince,
setting fines upon them contrary to the Laws of Wales, seeing neither this,
nor any like, was ever heard of in times past, imprisoning some, out-lawing
others, when the Prince is at all times ready to do justice to all men that
complain upon any of his men.

6. Where it is in the peace, That Gruffith Vachan should do homage for the
land in Yale, and to the Prince for the land in Ederneon, The Kings Justices
brought the Lady of Maylor into the said land of Ederneon; The knowledge of
which cause only pertained to the Prince, and not to the said Justices; and
yet for peace sake, the said Prince tolerated all this; being at all times
ready to minister justice to the said Lady.

7. And though the said Prince submitted himself unto us and our will, yet we
nevertheless will and grant, that our will in no case go further than is
contained in those Articles. Contrary to this Article Gold was exacted for the
Queens works, at every payment made to the King; which Gold was never demanded
in the time of King Henry, or any other King of England; which Gold yet for
quietness sake the Prince paid, though it were not spoken of, or mentioned in
the peace. And now further it is exacted, for the old Queen, the Kings mother
that now is (for the peace concluded with King Henry) 2000 Marks and a half;
and unless it be paid, the King threatens to occupy the goods and lands of
Lhewelyn and his people, which he could find in his Realm, and sell men and
beasts till the sum were paid.

8. When the King invited the Prince at his Feast at Worcester, promising with
very fair words, that he would give his kinswoman to him for wife, and enrich
him with much honor; nevertheless, when he came thither the self same day they
should be married, before Mass the King required a Bill to be sealed by the
Prince, containing amongst other things, That he would never keep man against
the Kings will, nor never maintain any, whereby it might come to pass, That all
the Princes forces should be called from him; the which Letter sealed, he
delivered the King by just fear, which might move any constant man: yet was not
this contained in the peace, whereas the conclusion of peace was, That the King
should require nothing that was not contained in the same.

9. Where in the peace all Customs be confirmed to the said Prince, as his
ancestors of long and daily observed Custom have received to their own use all
Wrecks happening upon his own lands; The Justice of Chester took a distress of
the Prince for goods of Shipwreck, received by him before the wars, contrary to
the Form of the said peace, by the which all trespasses on either side were
remitted, and contrary to the Customs aforesaid; and if in case it were
forfeited, yet he took such a distress, 15 pounds of honey, and many horses,
and imprisoned his men; and this he took of the Princes own proper goods: And
further, took booties of Bagiers which came to Lyrpool with Merchandise, and
never delivered the same, until he had taken so much money for the same as it
pleased him.

10. When certain men of Geneurglyn had taken certain goods of some of their
Neighbors of Geneurglyn, when they were in the Dominion of the Prince in
Meyreon, the Kings men of Lhanbadarn did take away the said goods out of the
said Dominion of the Prince; and when the Princes men came thither, and asked
the cause why they took the said prey, the Kings men killed one of them, and
wounded others, and the rest they did imprison; neither could the Prince get
any justice for the said goods to this day.

11. And where it is contained in the peace, That all things committed in the
Marches, shall be redressed in the Marches; yet the Kings men would no where
hear the Princes men, but put them in the Castle of Lhanbadarn; which is
against the peace aforesaid. In these Articles and diverse others the King
stands sworn to the Prince, and his people. And although the Prince as well
by himself as by his people have often requested the King to cause the said
peace to be kept, yet was it in no point kept, but daily the Kings Justices did
more and more heap injuries and griefs upon the people of those parts: So that
it cannot be blamed, if the Prince did assent to them that first began the
wars, seeing the Oath which the Lord Robert Typtoft swear unto the King, was
kept in no point; and chiefly seeing the Prince was forewarned, that he should
be taken as soon as the King came to Ruthlan, as he had been indeed, if the
King had come thither after Christmas, as he purposed.

These Griefs following were done by the King and his Officers, to the Lord
David ap Gruffith.
1. When the said David came to the Lord Edward then Earl of Chester, and did
him homage; the said Lord Edw. did give by his Letters Patents to the said
David two Cantrefs, Dyffryn Cluyd and Crinmeyrch with all the appurtenances:
afterward when he was made King, he confirmed the said gift to the said David,
and gave him possession of them; After, when Gwenlhian Lacy died, who held some
Towns in the said Cantrefs for term of life, which after her decease
appertained to David by force of the aforesaid grant; which Towns yet the King
took from him, contrary to his Letters Patents.

2. Item, When the said David did hold of the Lord the King the Villages of
Hope and Eston in Wales, of the which he ought to answer no man, but according
to the Laws of Wales; yet the Justice of Chester caused the said David to be
called to Chester, at the suite of one William Venable an Englishman, to answer
for the Title of the said Villages; and although the said David did often and
instantly desire him the said justice, not to proceed against him injuriously
in the County of Chester, where he was not bound to answer by the form of the
peace; yet he plainly denied him to be judged, either in Wales, or after the
Laws of Wales.

3. Item, The said Justice of Chester, to the injury of the said David, did cut
down his Wood of Lhyweny, and his Woods at Hope, as well by the Dwellers of
Ruthlan, as others; and yet the said Justice had no jurisdiction in those
patts; and not being contented to get Timber there for building, as well of
Ruthlan as of other places, but also destroyed the same Woods, sold it and
carried it into Ireland.

4. Item, Where the said David took certain Out-lawes and Rovers in the Woods,
and caused them to be hanged; yet the said Justice accused David to the King,
for succouring and maintaining the Thieves aforesaid; which was not like to be
true, seeing he caused them to be hanged.

5. Item, It is provided in the peace, that all the Welshmen and their causes
should be judged after the Laws of Wales. This was in no point observed with
the said David and his people.

Of these aforesaid griefs the said David required often amends, either
according to the Laws and Customs of Wales, or of special favor; but he could
never obtain any of them both at his hands. Further, the said David was warned
in the Kings Court, that as soon as Reginald Gray should come from the Court,
Good service ill requited.
the said David should be taken and spoiled of his Castle of Hope, his Wood
should be cut down, and his Children taken for Pledges: who seeing he had taken
great pains and peril for the King in all his wars, as well himself as his
people, both in England and Wales, and had lost thereby the most part of the
Nobility of his Country; and yet nevertheless could obtain neither Justice,
Amends, nor favor at his hands, having such great wrongs offered unto him, and
fearing his own life and his Childrens, or else perpetual prison, being
enforced as it were against his will, began to defend himself and his people.

Griefs and Injuries offered by the King and his Officers, to the men of Ros.
1. This is the Form of peace which the King of England did promise the men of
Ros before they did him homage, which he promised them to observe inviolably.
That is to say, That the King should grant to every of them their Right and
Jurisdiction, as they had in time of King Henry, according as the said men do
report that they had in the time of King Henry.

2. Item, The Lord the King did promise the same men, that they should have
Justice in their Suites; after granting of the which Articles the said men did
homage unto the King. And then the King promised them with his own mouth,
faithfully to observe the said Articles. This notwithstanding, a certain
Nobleman passing by the Kings high way with his wife in the Kings peace, met
certain English Laborers and Masons going to Ruthlan, where they did then
work, A notorious ouragious murder and injustice committed against the Welsh.
who attempted by force to take away his wife from him, and while he defended
her as well as he could, one of them killed his wife, and he who killed her
with his followers were taken, and when the kindred of her who was slain
required Law at the Justice of Chesters hands (for their kinswoman) they were
put in prison, and the murderers delivered.

3. Item, A certain man killed a Gentleman, who had killed the son of Grono ap
Heilyn, and was taken; but when certain of the kindred required justice before
the Justice of Chester, certain of them were imprisoned, and the Offender set
at liberty, and justice denied to the kindred.

A profitable Judge to himself, but unjust to the oppressed.
4. Item, Certain Gentlemen claimed some lands, and offered the King a great sum
of money to have justice, by the Verdict of good and lawful men of the Country
(then the lands being adjudged to the Claimers) Reginald Gray took the same
lands, corn, goods and all upon the ground; so that they lost their lands,
money, corn and cattle.

5. Item, It is our right, That no stranger should cut our Woods without our
leave; yet this notwithstanding, A hard case.
there was a Proclamation at Ruthlan, That it should be lawful for all other
men to cut down our Woods, but to us it was forbidden.

6. Item, Where diverse honest men had lands of the gift of the said David, the
Justice takes the said men's lands away.

A slavery worse than Jewish.
7. Item, When any comes to Ruthlan with Merchandise, if he refuse whatsoever
any Englishman offers, he is forthwith sent to the Castle to prison, and the
Buyer has the things, and the King has the price; then the Soldiers of the
Castle first spoil and beat the party, and then cause him to pay the Porter,
and let him go.

8. Item, If any Welshman buy any thing in Ruthland, and any Englishman do meet
him, he will take it from him, and give him less than he paid for it.

9. Item, The King contrary to his promise made to the men of Ros, has given
the Territory of Maynan, Penmayn and Lhysuayn.

10. Item, Certain Gentlemen of the Cantref of Ros bought certain Offices, and
paid their money for the same; yet the Justice of Chester took the said Offices
from them without cause.

11. Item, Grono ap Heilyn took to Farm of Godfrey Marliney the Territory of
Maynan and Lhysuayn, for the term of four years; yet Robert de Cruquer with
Horses and Arms, and 24 Horsemen, came to vex the said Grono so, that he had
no safe going neither to Ruthlan nor Chester, without a great guard of his
kindred and friends.

12. Item, Certain Gentlemen were arrested for trespasses done before the wars,
and imprisoned, and could not be delivered until they had paid 16 Mark; which
was contrary to the peace concluded.

13. Item, Our causes ought to be decided after the custom of our Laws; but
our men be compelled to swear against their Consciences, else they be not
suffered to swear. Furthermore, we spent 300 Marks in going to the King for
justice in the aforesaid Articles. Sr. Reginald G^ey a cruel Tyrant over the
Welsh.
And when we believed to recover full justice, the King sent to our parties the
Lord Reginald Gray, to whom the King has set all the land, to farm, to handle
the men of the said Cantref as it pleases him; who compelled us to To swear by
his hand, whereas we should swear by the hand of the King.
swear in his name, whereas we should swear in the Kings name; and where the
Kings Cross ought to be erected, he caused his Cross to be erected, in token
that he is the very true Lord: and the said Reginald at his first coming to
those parts of Wales, sold to certain servants of the King Offices for 60
Marks, which the said servants bought before of the King for 24 Mark, which
Offices ought not to be sold at the choice of the Lord.

14. Item, The King gave Meredyth ap Madoc a Captainship for his service;
Reginald Gray took it from him, neither could he get any remedy at the Kings
hand for the same.

15. Item, One of the Council of the said Reginald, Cynwric Vachan told us by
mouth, that as soon as the said Reginald Gray returned into Wales, he would
take 24 men of every Cantref, and either behead them or imprison them
perpetually.

16. Item, Whereas we paid our Taxes and Rents in old money, half year before
the coming of new money, they enforced us to pay new money for the old.

These griefs and the like the said Reginald offered us, and threatened, that if
we would send any to the King to complain, he would behead them: and when we
sent any to the King, they could never speak with the King, but spent us much
money in vain; for which griefs, we believe our selves free before God, from
the Oath we have made to the King.

These Griefs following the King and his Justices offered to Rees Vachan of
Stratywy.
1. After that the said Rees gave the King his Castle of Dynevowr, since the
last peace the said Rees then being in the Tent of the Lord Pain de Gadersey,
at the same time there were slain six Gentlemen of the said Rees his men; for
whom they never had amends, which was to him great grief and loss.

2. Item, John Gifford claimed the said Rees his Inheritance at Hiruryn, and
the said Rees requested the Law of his Country of the King, or the Law of the
Country of Caermarthen; in the which Country the Ancestors of the said Rees
were wont to have Law, when they were of the peace of the Englishmen, and under
their regiment; but the said Rees could have no Law, but lost all his lands.
They would have had him to answer in the County of Hereford, where none of his
Ancestors ever answered. Further, in the lands of the said Rees were such
enormities committed, which do most appertain to the State Ecclesiastical; that
is to say, in the Church of St David, which they call Lhangadoc, Grievous
sacrilege committed by the English.
they made Stables, and played the Harlots, and took away all the goods of the
said Church, and burning all the houses, wounded the Priest of the said Church
before the high Altar, and left him there as dead.

3. Item, In the said Country they spoiled and burnt the Churches of Dyngad,
Lhantredaff, and other Churches in other parts, they spoiled their Chalices,
Books, and all other Ornaments.

These be the Griefs which the King and his Justice gave to Lhewelyn ap Rees,
and Howell ap Rees.
After that a Form of peace was concluded betwixt Henry then King of England,
and the Prince of Wales, the said King granted and confirmed by his Charter to
the said Prince, the homage of the said Noblemen, so long as they stood friends
with the Prince, according to the said gift and confirmation: But Edward now
King disinherited the said Gentlemen of their lands; so that they could not
have their own lands, neither by law nor by favor.

These be the Griefs done by the Englishmen, to the sons of Meredyth ap Owen.
1. After that the King had granted the Gentlemen their own inheritance of
Geneurglyn and Creuthyn, he contrary to the peace disinherited the said
Gentlemen, denying them all laws and customs of Wales, and of the County of
Caermarthyn.

2. The said King in his County of Caerdigan, by his Justices compelled the
said Gentlemen to give judgment upon themselves, where their predecessors
never suffered the like of Englishmen.

3. The said Justices of the King having taken away the Courts of the Noblemen
in Wales, and compelled the people to satisfy before them for trespasses, when
as they ought to have satisfied by the said Nobles.

4. When a Wrack happens upon any of the grounds of the Noblemen, whose
ancestors had the Wrack, they should have the same, yet the King forbids
them; and the said King by color of that Shipwreck, contrary to their custom
and law, did condemn them in eight Marks, and took away all the goods of the
Shipwreck.

The Complaints of the Noblemen of Strattalyn, of the Wrongs and Griefs done to
them, by Roger Clifford, and Roger Scrochill, Deputy to the said Roger
Clifford, contrary to the Privilege, Justice and Custom of the said Noblemen,
as they say and prove.
1. When the said Roger compelled the said men of Strattalyn, to give them (to
have their customs and privileges) 20 Marks starling, and after the payment of
the money, they brake by and by, after this sort to put upon 12 men according
to the laws of England, which was never the manner or custom of the said
Country.

2. Item, Madoc ap Blethyn was condemned in 4 Marks unjustly, contrary to the
laws and use of the Country.

3. Item, Grono Goch was likewise condemned 5 Marks and 12 Beasts, contrary to
the customs of his Country.

Dear Venison.
4. Item, The said Roger took the lands of the men of the Country as forfeit;
and for one foot of a Stagg found in a Dogs mouth, three men were spoiled of
all they had.

5. Item, Itlhel ap Gwysty was condemned in a great sum of money, for the fact
of his father done 40 years before.

6. Item, The said Rogers laid upon us the finding of all the English
Soldiers, where as before there was but one half.

7. Item, We were given to Mr. Maurice de Cruny, and were sold to Roger
Clifford, which was never seen in our parents time.

8. Item, The widow of Robert of the Mowld asked of the King the third part of
the land in the Mowld in Ward, whereas it was judged before the King, that the
said lands were never given in Ward.

These be the Articles of Grief done to the men of Penlhyn, by the Constable of
Henry Chambers of the White Abbey, and his men.
1. Cynwric ap Madoc was spoiled by them in the time of peace, of 8 pound, 4
Oxen, Corn, the work of one plough for two years, and to the value of 3 pound,
of 3 of his men, and they had the worth of 16 pound for the said 8 pound, and
did beat him besides, which was more wrong, for then he was the Princes
Constable at Penlhyn; and all the cause that they pretended to make this spoil,
was only, that they said they had found 24 sheafes of Tithe in the house of a
servant of the said Cynwric.

2. Item, Adam Criwr was condemned in 8 s. 8 d. and a Mare, price 20 s. and was
taken and beaten, for that he had taken the Stealer of that Mare, and brought
him bound with him; the which Thief was forthwith delivered.

3. Item, Jorwerth ap Gurgenen was condemned in 4 l. for that he had escaped out
of their prison in time of the wars, and was found in the same Town in time of
peace; and this is directly against the peace concluded betwixt the King and
the Prince.

4. Item, Cadua Dhu, servant to the Constable of Penlhyn, was condemned because
he would not receive the old money for new.

5. Item, Gruffith ap Grono, the Princes man, was spoiled of an Ox, price 11
s. 8 d. and after that the Constable had ploughed with the said Ox 7 months,
he paid to the said Gruffith for the said Ox 3 s. 4 d.

6. Item, Two servants of one named YBongan, were spoiled of 2 l. for that they
took a Thief that robbed them by night; and yet the Thief was delivered.

7. Item, Eneon ap Ithel was taken, beaten, and spoiled of two Oxen, price 24
s. and 2 d. for this cause only, That the said Oxen went from one street to
another in the Town.

8. Item, Guyan Maystran was spoiled of his money, because a certain Merchant
of Ardudwy owed them certain things, and yet the said Merchant was not of their
Baliwicke.

The Griefs of Grono ap Heilyn
1. A Tenant of Grono ap Heilyn was called to the Kings Court without any
cause. Then Grono came at the day appointed to defend his Tenant, and demanded
justice for him, or the Law which the men of his Country did use: All this
being denied, the said Tenant was condemned in 27 l. 1 d. ob. which caused the
said Grono to go to London for justice; which was promised him, but he could
never have any, where he spent in his journey 15 marks.

2. A certain Gentleman was slain, who had fostered the son of Grono ap Heilyn;
and he that killed him was taken, and brought to Ruthlan Castle; then the said
Grono, and the kindred of him that was slain asked justice, but some of them
were imprisoned, and the Killer discharged: Then Grono went again to London for
justice, which the King did promise him, but he never had any, but spent 20
Marks.

3. The third time Grono was fain to go to London for justice, in the premises,
where he spent 18 Marks 6 s. 6 d. And then likewise the King promised him that
he should have justice; but when he certainly believed to have justice,
Reginald Gray came into the Country, and said openly, that he had all doings
in that Country by the Kings Charters, and took away all the Baliwikes which
the King had given to the said Grono, and sold them at his pleasure: Then the
said Grono asked justice of the said Reginald, but he could not be heard.

4. The said Grono took to Farm for 4 years of Godfrey, Marliney, Maynan and
Lhyffayn; then Robert Cruquer came with his Horses and Arms, to get the said
land by force; and for that, Grono would not suffer him to have the said lands
before his years were out, he was called to the Law, and then the said Reginald
Gray came with 24 Horses to take the said Grono: And for that, that day they
could not have their purpose, they called Grono the next day to Ruthlan; and
then Grono had council not to go to Ruthlan: Then they called him again, to
answer at Caerwys; but the said Grono durst not go thither, but by the conduct
of the Bishop of St. Asaph, for that Reginald Gray was there, and his men in
Harness.

5. For these griefs, for the which he could get no justice, but labor and
expenses of 54 Marks, and more; and for that he durst not in his own person go
to the Court, he sent Letters, one to the King, another to his brother
Lhewelyn, to signify to the King that he should lose all the favor of the
Country, if he kept no promise with them; and so it came to pass, because the
men of Ros and Englefield could get no justice, the King neglecting the
correction of these things, lost the whole Country.

Humbly shows to your Holiness Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate of
England, the Noblemen of Tegengl. That when the said Noblemen did their Homage
to the Lord Edward King of England, the said King promised them to defend them
and their Goods, and that they should use all kind of Right, Privilege and
Jurisdiction, which they did use in the time of King Henry, by the Grant of the
said King, whereof they were after spoiled.
First they were spoiled of their Right, and Privileges, and Customs of the
Country, and were compelled to be judged by the Laws of England, whereas the
Tenure of that their privilege was to be judged according to the Laws of Wales
at Tref Edwyn, at Ruthlan and at Caerwys, and the best men of the Country were
taken, because they desired to be judged at Tref Edwyn, according to the Tenure
of their privileges, by the Laws of Wales.

2. Whatsoever one Justice does, his successor does reverse the same; for in
David's case, Reginald Gray revoked that which his predecessor confirmed and
allowed.

3. If he do take any Gentleman of that Country, he will not let him go upon
security, which he ought to do.

4. If any Gentleman be brought to the Castle of Flint, upon a small
accusation, and his cattle withal, they can neither be delivered or have delay,
until they give the Constable an Ox, and until they pay 3 l. fees to Cynwrick,
for having of the delay.

5. Reginald Gray gave the lands of the men of Merton to the Abbot and Covent
of Basingwerk, against the Laws of Wales and Custom of the Country, and
contrary to the Form of peace betwixt Lhewelyn and the King; that is to say, 16
Caratatas terrae.

6. The Noble and Best of the Country be injured, for that the King builded
the Castle of Flint upon their ground, and the King commanded the Justices to
give the men as much good ground, or the price; but they are spoiled of their
lands, and have neither other lands nor their money.

7. Reginald Gray will not suffer men to cut their own Wood, until he have both
money and reward, and until they pay for it also; but permits others to cut
it down freely, which they ought not to do by the Laws and Customs of Wales.

8. When the men of Cyrchynan Covenant with the King, to give the King half a
Meadow, upon condition the King should not suffer the Woods to be cut down,
Howel ap Gruffith being present; yet Reginald Gray has broken the same,
permitting every man to cut their Woods, and spoil them also of their Meadow.

9. The same Cynwric ap Grono was taken at Ruthlan, and put in prison without
any cause at all, neither would the Kings Officers deliver him, unless he would
redeem the gage of a certain woman; for the which he was constrained to pay
much more than the pawn lay for.

10. When the Bailiff of Ruthlan was at a Feast, Hicken Lemaile wounded a
Gentleman cruelly in the presence of the said Bailiff; by occasion of which
wound, Hicken was condemned in 8 l. and when he which was hurt would have
demanded the 8 l. he was put in prison by Hicken.

11. The messengers of Reginald Gray attempted an absurdity not heard of, and
requiring the people of the Country to plough his ground, and sow the same;
and the messengers were Cynwric Says, and Hicken Lemayl; and the said Cynwric
swore openly before the whole company, that unless all men should plough
Reginald Greys ground, they should shortly repent it; then the people feared
much, as in that case any constant man would fear.

12. The heirs of Tegengl bought their Offices for 30 Marks of the King; but
afterward Reginald Gray spoiled them of their Offices and money, contrary to
the Laws and Customs of England.

13. Seven Gentlemen were wrongfully killed by the Englishmen, but as yet the
Parents of the Gentlemen can have no amends, and though the offenders were
taken, yet the said Constable let them go without punishment.

14. The Constable of Ruthlan kept two of the Kings soldiers in prison, for
that they took an Englishman who had wounded a man.

All these things contained in these Articles are contrary to the privilege,
liberty and right of the said men, and contrary to the Laws and Customs of
Wales; neither dare the Inhabitants send their Complaints to the King, for fear
of Reginald Gray (which fear any constant man might have) because the said
Reginald said openly, that if he could come by any such their messengers, he
would cut off their heads, as it is certainly told us by one of his Council;
further, neither tongue can tell, nor pen write, how cruelly the men of Tegengl
have been ordered.

Humbly complains to your Lordship my Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate
of all England, Lhewelyn ap Gruffith ap Madoc, of the Constable of Oswalds
Cross, the King and of the men of that Town, who have spoiled the said Lhewelyn
of the third part of a Town called Lhedrot, and his fathers house, without any
Law, or Right, or Custom of the Country. Further, the said Constable and his
Accomplices have against the Laws and Customs of the Country, spoiled the said
Lhewelyn of his Common and Pasture, which he and his predecessors have used
time out of mind, and further condemned the said Lhewelyn for the said Pasture
in 70 Marks: And further the King of England granted certain Letters to a
Bastard called Gruffith Vachan of Cynlhaeth, to law with the said Lhewelyn for
his whole Lordship and possessions; by the occasion of the which Letters, the
said Lhewelyn has spent 200 l. of good money.

Also the said Constable compelled the said Lhewelyn to send two Gentlemen to
him; whom when they came to him, he caused to be hanged; which Gentlemen ought
not by right to have been hanged, whose parents had rather have given him 300l.

Afterward the said Constable imprisoned 60. of the Men of the said Lhewelyn
(no cause alleged) but that a certain Page spoke a word, who could not be
delivered out of prison until every one of them paid 10 s.

When the Men of the said Lhewelyn came to the said Town to sell their Oxen,
the said Constable would cause the beast to be driven to the Castle; neither
would he restore the beasts, nor money for them. Further the said Constable and
his men took away the Cattle of the said Lhewelyn from his own ground, and did
their will with them.

Further the Kings Justices compelled the said Lhewelyn contrary to the law and
custom of Wales, to deliver to the Sons of Eneon ap Gruffith, a certain Town
which both he and his Ancestors ever had held. The said Constable took the
horse of Lhewelyns Baliffe, when the said Baliffe owed him nothing, who could
never get his horse again, nor any satisfaction for it.

Furthermore when the said Lhewelyn should have gone to a Town called Caerlheon
to appear there, as he was appointed, the Sons of Gruffith ap Gwenwynwyn and
the Soldiers of Robert Strange by the Council of the said Roger, took the said
Lhewelyn and his Men, and imprisoned them, to their great damage, which the
said Lhewelyn would not for 300 l. starling, who could by no means be delivered
until they had found sufficient sureties.

The Archbishop receiving these and other Articles, came to the King, and
requested him to consider these wrongs, and to cause amends to be made, or at
the least excuse the Welshmen, having so just cause of grief; who answered that
the Welshmen were to be excused, yet he said he was ever ready to do Justice to
all them that complained. Whereupon the Archbishop besought the King again,
that the Welshmen might have free access to his Grace, to declare their griefs,
and to seek remedy; the King answered they should freely come and depart, if it
should seem that by Justice they deserved to depart.

The Archbishop hearing this, went and came to the Prince of Wales in Snowdon,
that he might move him and his Brother David, and the other company to submit
themselves, whereby he might incline the King to admit them; to which after
much talk and conference with the Archbishop, the Prince answered, that he was
ready to submit to the King; reserving two things, that is to say his
conscience, which he ought to have for the rule and safeguard of his people,
and also the decency of his State and calling; which answer the Archbishop
brought and reported to the King. At the which the King said, that he would not
any other treaty of peace then that the Prince and his people should simply
submit themselves. But the Archbishop (knowing well that the Welshmen would not
submit themselves but in form aforesaid, or in other form to them tolerable,
and of them liked, requested the King that he might have conference in this
matter with all the Noble Englishmen then present, who after much conference
agreed to all these Articles following. The which Articles the Archbishop did
send in writing to the Prince by John Wallensis.

These are to be said to the Prince before his Council.
1. First that the four Cantreds and the Lands, by the King given to his
Nobles, and the Isle of Anglesey, we will have no treaty of.

2 Item, Of the Tenants of the four Cantreds, if they will submit themselves,
he purposes to do as becomes a Kings Majesty, and we verily believe he will
deal with them mercifully, and to that end we will labor and trust to obtain.

3. As touching the Lord Lhewelyn, we can have none other answer, but that he
shall submit himself simply to the King; and we believe certainly, he will deal
mercifully with him; and to that end we travail all we can, and verily believe
to be heard.

The following are to be said to the Prince in secret.
1. First, that the Nobility of England have conceived this form of a
favorable peace, That the Lord Lhewelyn should submit himself to the King, and
the King should honorably provide for him 1000l. starling, and some honorable
County in England, so that the said Lhewelyn would put the King in quiet
possession of Snowdon, Durum telum necessitas.
and the King will provide honorably for the daughter of Lhewelyn according to
the State and condition of his own blood; and to these they hope to persuade
the King.

2. Item. if it happen that Lhewelyn marry a wife, and so have by her any heir
Male, they trust to entreat the King, that the same heir Male, and his heirs
for ever shall have the same 1000l. and County.

3. Item, to the people, subject to the said Lhewelyn, the King will provide as
becomes their Estates and condition, and to that the King is well inclined.

These are to be said to David Brother to Lhewelyn in secret.
A specious banishment.
First, That if for the honor of God (Juxta debitum crucis assumptae) he will
go to the holy land, he shall be provided for according to his degree, so that
he do not return, unless he be called by the King, and we trust to entreat the
King to provide for his child.

2. And these things we tell our selves to the Welshmen, that a great deal
greater peril do hang over them, then we told them by mouth, when we were with
them. These things which we write seem grievous, but it is a great deal more
grievous to be oppressed with arms, and finally to be rooted out, because
every day more and more, their danger does increase.

One of Jobs comforters.
3. Item, It is more hard to be always in war, in anguish of mind, and danger
of body, always sought and beseiged, and so to dye in deadly sin, and
continual rancor and malice.

4. Item, We fear (whereof we be sorry) unless you do agree to peace, we must
certainly aggravate the sentence Ecclesiastical against you for your faults, of
the which you cannot excuse your selves, whereas you shall find both grace and
mercy if you will come to peace.

And send us your answer of these in writings.

To the most Reverend Father in Christ, the Lord John, by Gods grace,
Archbishop of Canterbury, and Primate of all England, his Obedient Son Lhewelyn
Prince of Wales, and Lord of Snowdon
sends greeting.
Most heartily with all Reverence and Honor we are content and ready holy
Father, as you have committed us, to submit our selves unto the Kings grace, so
it be in that form that shall be safe and honest for us: But because the form
of submission contained in the Articles which were sent unto us, is neither
safe nor honest, as we and our Council do think (at the which Articles all men
do marvail) tending rather to the destruction of us, and our people then any
security, or honest dealing, we may in no wise yield our assent unto it, and if
we should so do our Nobles and People would not agree to the same, knowing the
mischiefs and inconvenience that is like to ensue thereof. Nevertheless we
beseech your holy Father-hood, that for the reformation of a decent, honest and
firm peace (for the which you have taken so great pains) you do circumspectly
provide, having respect unto the Articles which we send unto you in writing. It
is more honorable for the King, more agreeable to reason that we should hold
our Lands in the County, where we do dwell then, that we should be
dis-inherited and our Land given to other Men.

Dated at Carth Celyn.
The Answer of the Welshmen.
First, though the Lord, the King will have no treaty of the four Cantreds, the
Lands that he gave to his Nobles, The right of lands derived from Camber.
nor the Isle of Anglesey, yet the Princes Council will no peace be made unless
treaty be had of them, For that the four Cantreds be of the mere Tenure of the
Prince, whereas the Princes of Wales, had more right, since the time of Camber
Son of Brute, so that they be of the principality of Wales. The confirmation
of the which the Prince obtained by Otobanus, the Popes Legate in England, by
the consent of the King and his Father. As it does appear by the Letters
Patentes. And more just and equal it is that our heirs do hold the said
Cantreds of the King for money, The P. of Wales justly taxes the K. of England.
and used service, then the same to be given to strangers, which abuse the
people by force and power.

2. All the Tenants of all the Cantreds of Wales altogether do say, that they
dare not submit themselves to the King, to do his pleasure, first for that the
King kept neither covenant nor oath, nor grant by charter from the beginning,
to the Prince or his people. Secondly that the Kings men do cruelly exercise
Tyranny toward the Church and Churchmen. Thirdly that they be not bound to any
such matter, seeing they be the Princes Tenants, who is ready to do, used and
accustomed service, and to obey the King with and by the said service,

3. To that which is said that the Prince should simply commit himself to the
Kings will it is answered, that none of us will dare come to the King for the
cause aforesaid; we altogether will not suffer our Prince to come in that
manner.

4. Item, where the great Men of England would procure a provision of a 1000l.
per annum in England; let it be answered, that such provision is not to be
accepted, for it that is procured by them, who go about to disinherit the
Prince to have his Lands in Wales.

5. Item, The Prince ought not to dismiss his inheritance, which his
predecessors held in Wales since the time of Brutus, and confirmed by the Sea
Apostolic, and to take lands in England, where he knows neither tongue,
manners, laws nor customs, wherein he shall be soon entrapped, by his
neighbors the Englishmen, his old malicious enemies, whereby he should lose
land also.

6. Item, Seeing the King goes about to deprive him of his ancient
inheritance, it is not like that he would suffer him to possess Lands in
England, where he claims no right; seeing that the Princes Lands in Wales,
of his own inheritance, is but barren and untilled, it is less like the King
would suffer him to enjoy good fertile land in England.

7. Item, The Prince should give the King possession of Snowdon for ever. Let
it be answered, that seeing that Snowdon is of the appurtenances of the
principality of Wales, which the Prince and his predecessors, hold since the
time of Brute; His Council will not suffer him to renounce that place, and to
take a place in England less due unto him.

8. Item, The people of Snowdon do say, that although the prince would give the
King possession of it, yet they would never do homage to strangers, of whose
tongue, Manners, Laws, they should be ignorant; for so they should be for ever
Captives, and as cruelly handled as the Cantreds have been by the Kings
Bailiffs, and other the Kings men, handled more cruelly then Saracens, as it
does well appear by the notes of their griefs which the men of the Cantreds
sent to you holy Father.

These are to be Answered; For David the Kings Brother.
When he is disposed to see the Holy Land, will do it for Gods sake
voluntarily, not by such inforcement against his will; for he intends not to
go on pilgrimage in that sort, because he knows enforced service not to
please God; and if he hereafter shall for devotion see the holy land, that it
is no cause for ever to disinherit his Offspring, but rather to reward them.

And for that neither the Prince nor his people, for County nor for gains do
move war, invading no man's lands, but defending their own Lands, Laws and
Liberties; and that the King and his people of inveterated hatred, and for
covetuousnesse to get our Lands, invading the same moved war: We therefore see
our defense is just and lawful; and herein we trust God will help us, and will
turn his revenge upon destroyers of Churches, who have rooted up, and burned
Churches, and taken out, both all sacraments and sacred things from them,
killing Priests, Clerks, Religious, Lame, Dumb, Deaf, Younglings, Sucklings at
their mothers paps, Weak and Impotent, both man and woman, and committing all
other enormities, as partly it appears to your Holiness. Wherefore God
forbid that your Holiness should fulminate sentence against any, but such as
have done such things; we who have suffered all those things at the Kings
Officers hands, do hope at your hands remedy and comfort, and that you, will
punish such Church Robbers and killers, who can defend themselves no ways,
least their impunity be cause and example for others to do the like. Very many
in our Country do much marvel, that you councelled us to leave our own land,
and to go to another man's Lands, to live among our Enemies; for seeing we
cannot have peace in our own Land, which is our own right, much less should we
be quiet in an other man's amongst our enemies; and though it be hard to live in
war and peril, harder it is to be utterly destroyed and brought to nothing,
especially for Christians seeking nothing else but to defend our own, being by
necessity driven thereunto and the greedy ambition of our enemies.

And your Holiness told us that you had fulminated sentence against all that
for hatred or gains do hinder the peace; and it appears evidently who do war
for those causes, the fear of death, the fear of imprisonment, the fear of
perpetual prison, the fear of disinheriting, no keeping of promise, Covenant,
Grant or Charter, tyrannical Dominion, and many more like, compel us to be in
war; and this we show to God, and to your Lordship, desiring your godly and
charitable help.

Furthermore if any in England have offended the King (as many do offend him)
yet none of them be dis-inherited; so if any of us have offended the King, let
him be punished and make satisfaction as he may, without exhereditating. As we
trust in you, we pray you holy father to labor to this end; if they lay to us
that we break the peace, it appears evidently, that they (and not we) brake
the same, who never kept promise nor Covenant, nor Order, made any amends for
Trespasses nor Remedy for our Complaints.

When the Archbishop could not conclude a peace, he denounced the Prince and
his Accomplices accursed; then the King sent his army by sea, to the Isle of Mon
or Anglesey, which they wan, and slew such as resisted them; for the chiefest
men served the King, as their oath was; so they came over against Bangor, where
the arm of the sea called Menath, Spaniards, Scots, and Gescoynes, Germans,
Normans and English, all concur against the Welsh. Quantae molis erat
Britannam perdere gentem. Gramercy horse. The Welsh rout their enemies.
which divides the Isle from the main land is narrowest, and the place called
Moely Donn, and there made a bridge of boats and planks over the water, where
before Julius Agricola did the like, when he subdued the Isle to the Romans;
and not betwixt Man and Britain, as Polidore Virgil ignorantly affirms. This
bridge was accomplished so that threescore men might well pass over in a
front. William Latimer with a great number of the best Souldies, and Lucas
Thany Steward of Gascoine with his Gascoynes and Spaniards (whereof a great
number were come to serve the King) passed over the bridge, and there saw no
appearance of enemies; but as soon as the sea began to flow, down came the
Welshman from the hills, and set upon them fiercely, and either slew or chased
them to the sea, to drown themselves; for the water was so high, that they
could not attain the bridge, saving William Latimer alone whose horse carried
him to the bridge, and so he escaped.

There were slain and drowned at this time many worthy Soldiers, and amongst
others that famous Knight Sr. Lucas Thany, Robert Clifford, Sr. William
Lindsey, and two Gentlemen of good account, that were brethren to Robert Burnel
then Bishop of Bath. There perished in all thirteen Knights, Hol p. 791. Tho.
Walsh. p. 11. Chro. Dunst. The K. of Eng. hard put to it by the valiant Welsh.
17. young Gentlemen, and to the number of 200 footmen, which happened upon St.
Leonards day. Thomas Walsingham writes, that the King lost in this voyage, a
little before this, 14 ensigns, at which time the Lord William de Audley and
the Lord Roger Clifford the younger and many other were slain, and the King
himself was driven to take the castle of Hope for his safeguard.

In the mean time was the E. of Gloucester and Sr. Edmund Mortimer with an army
in Southwales, where were many that served the King, and there sought with the
Princes friends at Lhandeilo Vawr, and gave them an overthrow, wherein on the
Kings side young William de Valence his cosen germane, and four Knights more
were slain. All this while the Prince destroyed the country of Caerdigan and
all the lands of Rees ap Meredyth, who served the King in all those wars. But
afterward the Prince separated himself from his army with a few, and came to
Buelht, thinking to remain their quietly for a while; and by chance, as he came
by the water Wy, there were Edmund Mortimer and John Gifford with a great
number of Soldiers, and either party were abashed of other, Edmund Mortimers
men were of that Country, for his father was Lord thereof. Then the Prince
departed from his men, and went to the valley with his Esquire alone, to talk
with certain Lords of the Country who had promised to meet him there.

Then some of his men seeing the enemy come down from the hill, kept the bridge
called Pont Orewyn, and defended the passage manfully, till one declared to the
Englishmen where a ford was a little below, through the which they sent a
number of their men with Helias VValwyn, who suddenly fell upon them that
defended the bridge, in their backs, and put them to flight. The Princes
Esquire told the Prince (as he stood secretly expecting the coming of such as
promised to meet him in a little grove) that he heard a great noise and cry at
the bridge. P. Lhewelyn slain, and with him the glory of Wales.
And the prince asked whether his men had taken the bridge, and he said, Yes;
then said the prince, I pass not, if all the power of England were upon the
other side. But suddenly behold the horsemen about the Grove; and as he would
have escaped unto his men, they pursued him so hard, that one Adam Francton ran
him through with a staff being unarmed, and knew him not; and his men being but
a few, stood and fought boldly, ever looking for their prince, till the
Englishmen by force of Archers mixed with the horsemen wan the hill, and put
them to flight, and as they returned, Francton went to spoil him whom he had
slain, and when he saw his face he knew him very well, and struck off his head,
and sent it to the King at the Abbey of Conwey, who received it with great joy,
caused it to be set upon one of the highest Turrets of the Tower of London.

This was the end of Lhewelyn, betrayed by the men of Buelht, who was the last
prince of the Britains blood, who bare dominion and rule in Wales, so that
the rule and government of the Britains over continued in some place of
Brittany from the first coming of Brutus, Mr. Powel fol 374.
which was (as Mr. Powel says) in the year before Christ's incarnation 1136. to
the year after Christ 1282 by the space of 2418. years.

Varium and mutabile semper vulgus.
Shortly after that the King had brought all the Country under his subjection,
the country men themselves brought to him David the princes brother, whom he
kept in Ruthlan Castle, and after put him to death at Shrewsbury. Then the King
built two strong castles in Northwales, Conwey and Carnarvon castle built by K.
Edw I.
the one at Conwey, and the other at Caernarvon; when Rees Vachan heard how all
things went, he yielded himself to the Earl of Hereford, who at the Kings
commandment sent him to the Tower of London to be imprisoned there, and so the
King passed through all Wales and subjected the whole Country to the Kingdom
of England.

Mr. Mills fol. 310.
Two religious men, the one a VVelshman, the other an Englishman, have written
late in Verses in praise and dispraise of this Lhewelyn, not unworthy to be
remembered, the substance whereof is this;

The VVelshman thus, The Englishman thus, Here lies he that terrifieth the
English men, and Wales he did as valiantly defend, Lhewelyn the Prince of
Northwales, the bulwark, the jewel of his time, a flower of Kings past, a
pattern of future ages; the Captain, the light, the beauty and law of the
People. Here lies the Prince of error, the spoil of men, traitor to England,
bright firebrand of the guilty, the VVelshmens God, a traitor Captain, and
death of the godly, the scum of Trojans, a lying stock, and cause of much
mischief.

His Issue.
Katherine Lackland, or without land, married to Malcome Earl of Fyke in
Scotland.

Madoc was his bastard son, who in the latter time of K. Edward I. raised war
in Northwales, but where the King came; he builded the Castles of Beaumarish,
and cut down there woods which yielded them succor and refuge in time of war;
he fortified the Castles about the sea coast. Shortly after he was taken, and
from that time the Welshmen ceased to make war, and the King gave to his eldest
son the Principality of Wales, and with it the Earldom of Chester.

THE Fourth Book OF THE ANCIENT and MODERN BRITISH AND WELSH History.

TO THE Right Honorable
Sir PIERCY HERBERT, Lord Powis. EDWARD HERBERT Baron of Cherbery in England,
and Castle-Iland in Ireland. Sir CHARLES SOMERSET, Knight of the Bath, and Son
to the Right Honorable Edward Earl of Worcester. Sir EDWARD STRADLING, alias
ESTERLING of St. Donats, Baronet. Sir EDWARD MORGAN of Lantarnam, Baronet. Sir
TREVOR WILLIAMS of Langibbie, Com: Mon: Baronet. WILLIAM JEWS of the Van, Esquire
RICHARD JEWS of Edigton Esquire THOMAS MORGAN of Maughan, Esquire
The Lord POWIS.
Sir EDWARD HERBERT of Red-Castle, Montgomeryshire, descended lineally from
British Progenitors, as in the Geneology of the E. of Pembrock largely appears.

Sir William Herbert created Lord Powis. Elianor Daughter to Henry Earl of
Northumberland, by which match this honorable Family descends from the British
line, as appears in the Genealogy of the Earl of Northumberland. Sir Piercy
Herbert Lord Powis. -- sister to the Lord Craven. William Herbert Esquire Heir
apparent. Elizabeth Daughter to Edward Marquess of Worcester, by which the
British blood is again renewed and conjoined, as appears in the Pedigree of
the Marquess of Worcester.

The Lord HERBERT Baron of Cherbery and Castle-Iland.
Edward Lord Herbert of Cherbery. Anne Daughter of Sir Thomas Middleton of
Cherck Castle descended anciently from British noble Progenitors. Richard Lord
Herbert, etc. Mary Daughter to John Egerton, Earl of Bridgewater, by which
match the honorable Family is linked into the British blood, as appears in
the Genealogy of the Earl of Bridgewater. Edward Lord Herbert, etc. Mary
Daughter and Heir to Sir William Herbert of St. Julians Com: Monmoth.

Here take natice, that these two honorable Families, both Male and Female by a
long continued Series and Genealogy descend from Noble and Princely British
Progenitors: The first whereof Herbert Lord of the Forest of Dean married
Lucy, Daughter and Coheir of Milo Earl of Hereford, who married Sibil Daughter
and Heir of Bernard Newmarsh Lord of Brecon, and his Wife Nest, Daughter and
Heir of Griffith ap Llewellin Prince of Southwales; the first of this Family
who settled in Wales was Peter ap Herbert, who married Alice Daughter and Heir
of Blethin Broadspear, he was Lord of Llanthloell in Monmouthshire and Beachley
in Glocestershire; and from this branch are sprung, The Earl of Pembrock and
Huntington, the Marquess of Worcester, The Earl of Pembrock and Montgomery, the
Lord Powis, and several Noble ancient and mighty Families, who do, and have
born several honorable Offices in this Kingdom.

Sir CHARLES SOMERSET of Troy in the County of Monmouth, Knight of the Bath.
SIR Charles Somerset Knight of the Bath at the creation of Henry Prince of
Wales third Son to Edward Lord Herbert of Chepstow Ragland and Gower Earl of
Worcester, and Elizabeth Daughter of Francis Hastings Earl of Huntington, and
Katherine his Wife Daughter and Heir of Henry Poole Lord Mountague descended
from the British line, married the sole d: and h: of Sir William Powel of Troy
Knight, extracted from an ancient and long continued series of British
Progenitors; and has three Daughters and Coheirs, the eldest married to Squire
Anderton of Lostock, Com: Lan: Esquire and has Issue Male; the other two as yet
unmarried. I shall need to say no more concerning the extraction of this
honorable and most virtuous Knight from the British line, the Genealogy of the
Marquess of Worcester will make it appear: only I shall daily pray that
Almighty God will prolong his life for the good of the poor; and at his
departure crown him with a crown of glory, and bless his posterity.

Sir EDWARD STRADLING Baronet.
SIR Edward Esterling was one of the twelve Knights who came into Wales for the
subduing of Glamorganshire, and for his good service had St. Donats Castle and
Manor given him, where this Knightly and Noble Family has hitherto continued.

Sir John Esterling, Knight. Sir Morris Esterling, Knight. Sir Robert
Esterling, commonly called Stradling Knight. Sir Gilbert Stradling, Knight. Sir
William Stradling, Knight. Sir John Stradling, Knight. Sir Peter Stradling
Knight. Julian sole Daughter and Heir to Tho. Hawey, Esquire Sir Edward Stradling
Knight. Elianor Daughter to Gilb. Stradling of a younger Family Esquire Sir Edward
Stradling Knight. Wenlian Sister and Heir to Sir Lawrence Beccols one of the
twelve Knights. Sir William Stradling Knight. Isabell Daughter and Heir to Joht
St. Barbe Com. Somer Esquire Sir Edward Stradling Knight. Jane Daughter to Henry
Beaufort, after Cardinal. Sir Henry Stradling Knight. Eliz. Sister by the whole
blood to William Earl of Pembrock. Thomas Stradling, Esquire Jenet Daughter to Tho.
Matthew of Kayder Esquire Sir Edward Stradling Knight. Eliz. daugh. to Sir Tho.
Arundel of Llanheyron Com. Devon, Knight. Sir Thomas Stradling Knight. Katherin d.
to Sir Tho. Gamage Knight. Sir Edward Stradling, Knight. Agnes d. of Sir Edward
Gage Knight. Sir John Stradling Knight, created Baronet by K. James, being the 6th.
Baronet so created. Sir Edward Stradling Baronet. -- d. to Sir Tho. Maunsel
Baronet. Sir Edward Stradling. Bar: A Lady from London. Sir Edward Stradling
Baronet, now living, 1661.

Sir EDWARD MORGAN of Lantarnam Com. Mon. Baronet.
Kidivor Vawr Lord of Kylsant, one of the Peers of Wales, of the Royal blood of
the Britains paternally descended from Belly King of Britain.

Kydivor Vawr Lord of Kilsant. Elen d. and h. to Llewelen Vawr one of the Peers
of Wales. Bledry Lord Kilsant. Clydwen d. and h. to Griffith ap Kydrych Lord of
Gwenvay. Ivor ap Bledery de eodem. Tauglust d. and h. to Howel Sais Lord of S.
Clear. Llewelin ap Ivor Lord of St. Clear. Augharand d. and h. to Sir Morgan
Meredith L. of Tredegar, Knight. Morgan Llewellin Lord of S. Clear and Tredegar.
Mallt daugh. to Rhyn ap Gronwey Lord of Kybor. Philip Morgan of Langston Com.
Mon: Esquire a second brother. -- daughter and heir of Sir John Norris of Langston
Knight. Jenkin Philip of Langston Esquire Cicely d. to Sir John Welsh Knight. Morgan
Jenkin of Langston Esquire Eliz. d: to Roger Vaughan Esquire Sir Thomas Morgan of
Penloyd Knight. Com: Mon: Joan d: and h: to John Gwillym Herbert of Itton Esquire John
Morgan of Caerleon a second Son, Esquire Eliz. d: to Jews ap Richard Wyn of the
Van Com. Glamor: Esquire Will: Morgan of Lantarnam, Esquire Eliz: d: to Sir Rees
Maunsel, Knight. Edward Morgan of Lantarnam, Esquire Eliz: d: and h: to Hugh Smith of
Long Ashton Com: Some: Esquire William Morgan of Lantarnam, Esquire The Lady Frances
daughter to the Earl of Worcester. Sir Edward Morgan of Lantarnam Baronet.
Mary, daughter to Sir Francis Englefeild Baronet. Sir Edward Morgan of
Lantarnam Baronet, now living 1661. Frances daughter to Tho: Morgan of Maughon,
Esquire Edward Morgan Esquire, Heir apparent.

Sir TREVOR WILLIAMS of Langibbie, Com. Mon. Baronet.
Cradoc Vraych Vras E: of Ferlix. Tegayr d: and h: to K. Pallinor. Maynarck
Lord of Brecon. Elinor d: to Synon L. of Cwnwe. Rees ap Maynarck Lord of
Istradyw. Joan d: to Kydwayn ap Elistan P. of Ferlix. Ruylhyn ap Rees Goch Lord
of Istradywe. Jonet Daughter and Coheir to Howell of Caerleon. Kynvyn ap
Kuylhyn, Esquire Gladys d: to Sitsilt ap Difnwall of Upper Gwent Esquire Arthur ap
Kynvyn Esquire Elinor daughter to Meirick ap Cradoc Esquire Howel ap Arthur Esquire Joan d:
to Gronwey Vychan Esquire Griffith ap Howell Esquire -- d: and h: to Gronwey Vychan ap
Gronwey ap Ririd of Penllin. David ap Griffith Esquire Maud d: and heir to
Llewellin ap Kynvrige Vychan Esquire Howell Gam David Esquire Joyce d: to Sir Scudamore
Knight. Evan ap Howell Esquire Alice d: to Morgan Vawr Esquire Philip ap Evan Esquire Jonet
daughter to Meirick Hanard Esquire Howell ap Philip Esquire Jonet d: to Rog: David ap
Meirick Gwillym ap Howell Esquire Gwellian d: to Jenken David ap Rees ap Gronwey
Esquire Tho: Guillym Howell Esquire Gwellia d: to Meirick ap Evan ap Gronwey Esquire John
Thomas Esquire Anne d: to David Goch ap Jenkin Grant Esquire William Jones Esquire Margaret
d: to Edward Jenkin ap Roger of Martholy Esquire Roger Williams Esquire Dorothy d: to
Sir Baynam Knight. Rowland Williams Esquire Cicely daughter to Sir Edward Maunsel
Knight and Baronet. Sir Charles Williams Knight. Anne daugh: to Sir John
Trevor. Sir Trevor Williams Baronet, now living, 1661. Eliz: daughter to Tho:
Morgan of Maughan Esquire and Coheir by her Mother to that never sufficiently
admired Ralph Lord Hopton her Uncle. -- Williams Esquire Heir apparent.

WILLIAM JEWS of the Van, and RICHARD JEWS of Edington Esquires, and Brothers.
Cloddien ap Gurgan Prince of Dryswyn. Morvid d: and sole h: to Odwin ap Teith
Lord of Cardigan. Gwaith Voed Lord of Gardigan in right of his Mother. Morvid
one of the daughters and Coheirs of Iuyr K. of Gwent. Kydrych ap Gwaith Voed
Lord of Gwyn Vai Nest daugh: to Tango ap Cadvael Pr. of Ardydwy. Cadivor ap
Kydrych Lord of Twch Cayack. Mevamwy daughter to Gurgan King of Morganog.
Moirick ap Cadivor Lord of Ywch Cayack. Gladys daughter to Eiddyn King of
Gwent. Ivor ap Meirick, alias Ivor Petty Lord Royal of St. Sein henidd. Nest
daugh: and heir to Madoc ap Cradoc Lord Royal etc. Griffith ap Ivor, etc. Elen
daughter to Griffith ap Rees Tudor Prince of Wales. Howell ap Griffith, or
Howell Velin Esquire Sarah d: and coheir to Sir Mayo Sore Lord of St. Fagans. Madoc
ap Howell of Marthyr Esquire Efnydd d: and one of the Heirs of Jews descended from
Minarch Lord of Brecon. Llewellin ap Madoc of Marthyr Esquire Llewellin Vychan of
Marthyr Esquire Rees ap Llewellin Vychan of Marthyr Esquire Llewellin ap Rees of
Marthyr Esquire Joan d: of Howel Gam Lord of Penrose Com: Mon: Esquire Richard Gwyn of
Marthyr Esquire Jonet Lady of Marthyr sole d: and Heir to Jeuan Esquire Lewis ap
Richard Gwin Esquire Gladys d: and sole h: to Jenan ap John descended lineally from
Brecon Lord of Brecknoc. Edward Lewis of the Van Esquire Anne d: of Sir William
Morgan of Pencoed Knight. John Morgan of Caerleon 2. son of this Sir William
married Eliz. sister of this Edw: Lewis, from which cross match the Lewisses of
the Van and Morgans of Lantarnam are desscended. Tho: Lewis of the Van Esquire
Margaret d: to Robert Gamage, Lord of Coyty Esquire Sir Edward Lewis of the Van
Knight. Blanch d: to Thomas Morgan of Tredegar Esquire Sir Edward Lewis of the Van
Knight. The Lady Anne d: to Robert Earl of Dorset, and widow to the Lord
Beauchamp.

William Lewis of the Van Esquire now living. 1661. -- sole d: and h: to --
Banister Esquire Rich: Lewis of Edington Esquire now living. 1661. -- d: and h: to --
James Esquire Lewis Esquire Heir apparent. Lewis Heir apparent.

THOMAS MORGAN of Maughan Esquire
Kydivor Vawr Lord of Blain Cych paternally descended from Belly the Great King
of Btittain, married Elen Daughter and Heir to Llewellen Vawr.

Bledry ap Kydivor Vawr Lord of Kylsant. Clidwen d: and h: to Griffith Cederch
Lord of Gwnfay. Ivor ap Bledry Lord of Kylsant Esquire Tanglust d: and h: to Howell
Sais Lord of St. Clear y much Esquire Llewellin ap Ivor Lord of S. Clear Esquire
Lleykye d: to Griffith ap Eli Lord of Gilfeild in Powis. Ivor ap Llewellin Lord
of S. Clear Esquire Nest daughter to Cadwgan, and Great Grandchilde to Elistan Pr:
of Ferlix. Llewellin ap Ivor Lord of S. Clear and Tredegar Esquire Augharand
daughter and heir to Sir Morgan Meredith Knight, Lord of Tredegar. Morgan ap
Llewellin Lord of Tredegar Esquire Maud daughter to Rhun ap Grono ap Llwarch Lord
of Kybor, Esquire Llewellin Morgan of Tredegar Esquire Jonet daughter to Dd. Ychan of
Rydodyn Esquire Evan Morgan of Tredegar Esquire Denis daughter to Tho: ap Howell Ychan
Esquire Sir John Morgan of Tredegar Knight. Jonet daughter and heir of John Matthewes
of Landaff Esquire Thomas Morgan of Machen Esquire his Brother Sir John dying Sans
Issue. Rowland Morgan of Manghan Esquire Thomas Morgan of Maughan and Tredegar Esquire
Sir William Morgan of Tredegar Knight. -- Daughter to Wintour Knight. Com. Glonc.
Thomas Morgan of Maughan and Tredegar Esquire now living, 1661. -- Daughter and
Heir to -- Windham. Com: Somer: William Morgan Esquire Heir apparent.

I Have seen a Pedigree of this noble Family deduced even from Brute; but
because I affect brevity, I have only selected what serves for my purpose,
giving you to understand, that all Morgans, or of what Name else soever, who
either bear for their Arms Argent, a Lion Rampant, gardant, sable, or else Or,
a Griffon Sergreant sable for their Paternal Coat, must acknowledge themselves
to descend from this ancient Family

THE FOURTH BOOK OF THE Ancient and Modern British and Welsh HISTORY.
The Princes of Wales of the blood Royal of England, collected for the most
part, out of the Records of the Tower.
Edward of Caernarvon.
KIng Edward albeit he had brought all Wales under his subjection, and by a
statute made at Ruthland, An. 12. Edw. I. incorporated and united the same to
England; in the which Statute there be many good laws concerning the division
of Wales into Counties, and concerning diverse Offices and Officers, and
concerning Trial, and the divisions of actions, and the the forms of many
writs, and the proceeding therein much like to the laws of England; yet he
could never win the good will of the common people of the Country to accept him
for their prince, except he were of their own nation, for the Welshmen having
experience of the government of the English Officers, and knowing that the King
would rule the Country by his Deputies, could not abide to have any English man
to be their Rulers, who often times upon the Kings motion, answered that they
were content to take for their prince any man whom his Majesty would name, so
that he were a Welshman, and no other answer could he ever get from them by any
means; whereupon the King sent for Q. Elianor out of England in the deep of
Winter, being then great with child, to the Castle of Caernarvon, and when she
was nigh to be brought to bed, the King went to Ruthlan and sent for all the
Barons, and best men in Wales to come unto him, to consult concerning the Weal
public of the Country. And when they were come, he deferred the consultation
till he was certified that the Queen was delivered of a son, then sending
certain Lords to the Christening of his child and informing them how he would
have him named, he called the Welshmen together, declaring unto them, that
whereas they were oftentimes suitors unto him to appoint them a Prince, he now
having occasion to depart out of the Country, would name them a prince if they
would allow and obey him, whom he should name. To the which motion they
answered that they would so do, if he would appoint one of their own Nation to
be their prince, whereunto the King replied, that he would name one that was
born in Wales, and could speak never a word of English, whose life and
conversation no man was able to stain, and when they all had granted that such
an one they would obey, he named his own son Edward born at Caernarvon Castle a
few days before.

Then the King having the whole country at his will, gave whole Towns and
Lordships in the midst of Wales unto English Lords, as the Lordship of Denbigh
to Henry Lacy Earl of Lincoln, the Lordship of Ruthin to the Lord Reginald
Gray, second son to J. Gray of Wilton, and other lands to many of his Nobility.

This Hen. Lacy Lord of Denbigh was the son of Edmund Lacy, the son of John
Lacy Lord of Halton, Pomfret, and Constable of Chester; who married Margaret
the Eldest Daughter, and one of the heirs of Robert Guincy Earl of Lincoln,
the said Henry married Margaret the daughter and sole heir of William
Longesped, Earl of Sarum, and had Issue Edmund and John, which both dyed young,
of whom the one perished by a fall into a very deep well, within the castle of
Denbigh; and a daughter named Alicia married unto Thomas Plantagenet Earl of
Lancaster, who was in the right of his said wise, Earl of Lincoln and Sarum,
Earl of Denbigh, Halton, Pomfret, and constable of Chester, After the death of
the said Thomas, King Edward the second gave the Lordship of Denbigh to Hugh
Lord Spencer Earl of Winchester. After whose death the said Lordship was given
by King Edward the third, Anno regni sui primo, as it appears on record, to
Roger Mortimer Earl of March, with diverse other Lordships in the Marches, in
performance of the Kings promise while he remained in France with his mother,
for the provision of 1000 l. lands of a reasonable extent for the said Roger,
as soon as by Gods grace he should come to the possession of the crown and
Kingdom of England, which in few years after, the Earl of March being
attainted, the said Lordship of Denbigh was given by the said King to the Lord
Mortague Earl of Sarum, but shortly after Anno 29. Edward 3. it was restored
again with the Earldom of March to the Mortimers, in the which family the same
remained until the whole inheritance of the Mortimers came with a Daughter to
the house of York, and so to the crown: A help to English History fol. 263.
and it was given by Queen Elizabeth, Anno regni 610. to Robert Dudley Earl of
Leicester, who was created Baron of Denbigh; it is accounted one of the
greatest and best Lordships of England. This Town is well seated on the banks
of the River Istrad, which from thence runs into the Cluyd, the fairest
River of this Country; a Town well peopled, and inhabited, especially since it
became the head of the Country, which was not till the 27. of Hen. 8. what time
the 5. new shires were added to the rest of Wales, of which this was one: but
before that it was the head Town of the Barony of Denbigh, being conceived to
be one of the goodliest Territories of all England, as having more Gentlemen
holding thereof in Fee and by service then any other Lords, it has had good
store, and of several families, but none of them a Parliamentary Peer, (in
reverence hereunto) till these later times; of late it has given title both to
Lord and Earl of two several families. Viz. to these.

Robert Dudley created Baron of Denbigh, and Earl of Leicester. Eliz. 6. Sept.
29. 1622. Or, a lion rampant queen fourche vert, incensed Cules a cressent for
difference. William Viscount Fielding created Earl of Denbigh 20. Jac. Sept.
14. Master of the Wardrobe, etc. Arg. Or a Fess. B. 3. Fusils or Lozenges Or.
The Lordship of Ruthin continued in the possession of the Greyes, until the
Reign of Hen. 7. George Gray Earl of Kent, and Lord of Ruthin passed the same
upon some bargain to the King.

There came at the same time with King Edward diverse Gentlemen, who grew
afterward to be men of great possessions in the County, many of whose
posterity continue to this day.

Rees ap Meredyth served the King in all these wars, who did most hurt of all
men, and was in good hope of great preferment at the Kings hand, whom after the
overthrow of the Prince, the King made Knight, and fed with many fair and good
words. After that he and all other his Countrymen and Neighbors had submitted
themselves to the Government of the King of England, it happened that the Lord
Pain Tiptoft, Warden of the Kings castles nigh unto Rees his Country, and the
Lord Allen Plucknet the Kings Steward in Wales called the said Rees, as they
did all other of the Country to the Kings Court, whether he refused to come,
alleging his ancient privileges and liberties: with the Kings promises; but
the said Officers proceeded according to the law against him, whereupon a great
variance arose between the said Pain Tiptoft and the said Sir Rees ap Meredyth,
so that sundry Skermishes were fought betwixt them, and men slain on both
sides, to the great disturbance of the Country. The King hearing of these
things, being then beyond Sea, wrote unto Rees Meredyth, requiring him to keep
the peace till his return. At what time he promised to reform all things in due
and reasonable order, but Rees would not give over the enterprise which he had
begun: Whereupon the King sent to the Earl of Cornwall, whom he had left his
Lieutenant in the Realm during his absence, to send an army of Men into Wales
to withstand the disordered attempts of the said Rees, who went into Wales
himself, and overthrew Rees his Castle at Drofolan; but by undermining the
walls of that Castle, with the fall thereof the Baron Stafford, and the Lord
William de Monchency, with many other Knights and Esquires, were oppressed and
bruised to death. Afterward Robert Typtoft Lord Deputy of Wales gathered an
army, and meeting the said Rees after the slaughter of 4000. of his people
discomfited and took him, who about Michaelmas following, at the Kings going
into Scotland, was had to York, and there condemned and executed.

Not long after the King wanting money, there was a great subsidy granted
toward the maintenance of the war in France, about levying of which there was
much a do in several places; but especially the Welshmen, who were never wont
to be acquainted with such contribution, stormed against it, so that they took
one of their own Captains named Roger de Puelesdon, who at the Kings command
gathered the said subsidy, and hanged him with diverse others; and afterward
beheaded the said Roger. Whereupon the King being sore offended for the death
of the said Roger, whom he greatly favored, and hearing that the Welshman
began to stir against him in diverse places; for the VVestwales Men had chosen
Maelgon Vachan for their Captain, and destroyed all Caerdigan and Pembrock, and
returned with spoils. They of Glamorgan and the Southparts took one named
Morgan for their leader, and driving the Earl of Gloucester out of the Country,
they restored to the said Morgan again the possessions which the Ancestors of
the said Earl by force and great wrong had taken from the said Morgans
Predecessors. The Northwales men had set upon Madoc, being of the kindred of
the last Lhewelyn, who gathering a great power, came to Caernarvon, and slew a
great number of Englishmen, which were come thither to the Fair, and spoiled
the whole Town; then I say the King called back his brother Edmund Earl of
Lancaster, and Henry Lacy Earl of Lincoln, and John Lord Denbigh, who had an
army ready to pass into Gascoyne. The remnant of the Welsh, foil the English.
These Earls came toward Northwales, and as they approached near unto the
castle of Denbigh upon St. Martins day, the Welshman with great force
encountered them, and giving them battle, drove them back and discomfited
their people.

Upon this ungrateful news the King himself came into Wales and there kept
his Christmas at Aberconwey, where Robert VVinchesey Archbishop of Canterbury
came unto him and did him homage, and then returned home; the King as he passed
further into the country, lost much of his carriages, which the Welshmen took,
being laden with victuals and provision for the army, so that the King and
his people endured great penury, and were constrained to drink water mixed with
honey, and eat very gross and course meat, where he was very like to have been
distressed, had not the other part of his army come to him in time.

While the King remained in Snowdon, the Earl of Warwick hearing that a great
number of Welshmen were assembled together, and lodged in a valley betwixt two
woods, chose out a company of horsemen with certain cross-bowes and archers,
and coming upon the Welshmen in the night, compassed them round about, who
pitching the ends of their spears, and turning the points against their
Enemies, stood at defense so to keep off the horsemen. But the Earl having
placed his battle so that betwixt every two horsemen there stood a crossbow, a
great part of the Welshmen, who stood at defense in manner aforesaid with their
spears were overthrown and broken with the shot of the quarrels, and then the
Earl charged the residue with a troop of horsemen, and bare them down with such
slaughter, as they had not sustained the like loss of people (as was thought)
at any time before.

After this the King builded a strong Castle within the Isle of Anglesey, and
called the same Beaumarish, and so setting all in quietness, and punishing such
as had put to death Roger de Puelesdon, he returned home with his army; Madoc
victorious against the Lord Strange of Knooking and the Marchers.
but Madoc within a while after levying an army, came to Oswestred where the
people yielded unto him, and meeting with the Lord Strange with a company of
Marchers not far from Knooking, overthrew him, and spoiled his Country
miserably, and shortly after he gave the Marchers another overthrow. But for
all that the Lords Marchers nothing dismayed, at this mischance, gathered new
forces, and met Madoc as he was coming toward Shrewsbury upon the hills of
Cefn Digolh, not far from Caurus Castle, where after a long fight Madoc was
taken, and his men discomfited and put to flight. Then he was sent to the Tower
of London, there to remain in perpetual prison. Some there be who affirm that
Madoc was not taken but rather after many adventures and sundry conflicts, when
the Welshman were brought into great extremity, the said Madoc came in and
submitted himself to the Kings peace, and was received upon condition that he
should pursue Morgan till he had taken him and brought him to the Kings prison,
which was done, and so all things were quieted, and many hostages of the
chiefest Nobility of Wales were delivered to the King, who sent them to diverse
Castles of England, where they were safely kept almost to the end of the wars
which followed in Scotland.

In the 29th. year of K. Edw. 1. Edw. Prince of Wales came to Chester where he
received the homage of the Freeholders of Wales; as Henry Earl of Lancaster
did homage and fealty for Monmoth. Regynald Gray for Ruthyn. Fulk Fitz Waren
for his lands in Wales. The Lord William Martin for his lands in Cemais. Roger
Mortimer, for his lands in Wales. Henry Lacy Earl of Lincoln, for the land of
Ros and Ryveneoc in Wales. Robert Lord Montalt, for his land in Wales. Gruffith
Lord of Poole, for the Lordship of Powis. Sr. Gruffith Lhoyd Knight. Tuder ap
Grono of Anglesey. Madoc ap Tuder Archdeacon of Angelsey. Eneon ap Howel of
Caernarvon. Tuder ap Gruffith. Lhewelyn ap Edninet. Gruffith Vachan, the Son of
Gruffith ap Jorwerth, Madoc Vachan d'Englefield. Lhewelyn Bishop of St. Asaph.
Mr. Richard de Pnelesdon, this man (as appears by the Records in the Tower)
was made Sheriff of Caernarvonshire, during his life, with the stipend of 40 l.
staring, yearly Anno. 12. Ed. 1. Gruffith ap Tuder. Ithel Vachan. Ithel ah
Blethyn etc. The Lord Richard Sutton Baron of Malpas, did homage and fealty to
Edward Prince of Wales and Earl of Chester for the said Barony of Malpas apud
Ruthlan. 27. die Aprilis Anno supradicto. Aniamis or Eneon Bishop of Bangor,
and David Abbot of Maynan did homage and fealty to the said Edward Prince of
Wales apud Conwey 28. April. An. sup. dict. Lewis de Felton the son of Richard
de Felton did homage and fealty to Prince Edward for the Lands which the said
Richard held of the Prince in Maelor Saesneg. John Earl Warren did homage and
fealty to Edward Prince of Wales in the Chapel of the Lord John de Kerby,
sometime Bishop of Ely at London. 25. die Julii. Anno. 30. Ed. 1. for the
Lordships of Bromfield and Yale. The same John Earl Warren swore fealty unto
the said Ed. P. of Wales for the lands in Hopedale. The Lord Edmund Mortimer,
the 6th. day of November an. 30. Ed. 1. in the house of the Bishop of Ely at
London, did homage and fealty to Edward P. of Wales before his Council for his
lands in Cery and Cydewen.


About the year 1322. one Sr. Gruffith Lhoyd Knight, gathered a great number of
Welshmen, and took diverse Castles in Wales which were kept by the people of the
Lord Mortimer the Elder, he took also the Castles of Mould, Chirk, etc. The
keepers whereof coming to P. Edward at Shrewsbury who then was King of England,
submitted themselves to him, and were shortly after sent to the Tower of London.

Edward of Carnarvon, was known by the name of Edward the second King of
England, living in a turbulent time between him and his Barons, was after
deposed for his ill Government,and came to a violent death in the Castle of
Berkeley; nevertheless in his life time he created his son P. of Wales. Hol. p.
863.


Edward of Windsor.
The same year being the 15. of K. Ed. the second Edward de Windesore the Kings
Eldest Son, was in a Parliament holden at York, created Prince of Wales, and
Duke of Aquitane.

Edward of Woodstock surnamed the Black Prince.
Mr. Mills ut ante.
Edward born at Woodstock, Son and Heir to King Edward, was created Prince of
Wales 12. of May, anno. 17. Ed. patris, when he was fourteen years of age, who
in time grew to be the flower of Chivalry of all Europe; he took John the
French King prisoner at the battle of Poyteirs, and dyed, his Father yet
living, the eighth of July in the 46. year of his age, and the 50. of his
Fathers Reign, a Prince of such excellent demeanor, so valiant wise and
politic in his actions, that the very and perfect representation of Knighthood
appeared most lively in his person; for such was his towardness, or rather
perfection in Princely Government, that if he had lived and attained the crown,
every man Judged that he would surely have exceeded all his predecessors. Sr.
John Dodridge fol. 6.


Edward the third (says Judge Dodrige) at a Parliament holden at Westminster
15. regni. created Edward his eldest Son, Ex. harta creationis in Parliamento.
a. 15. Ed. 3.
(surnamed the black Prince) Prince of Wales, being then of tender years, and
invested him in the said principality with these ensigns of honor, as in the
Charter is contained, Per sertum in Capite, and anulum in digito aureum and
virgam argenteam juxta morem, by a Chaplet of gold made in manner of a garland,
for so the word sertum imports, by a gold ring set on his finger, and by a
Verge, rod and Scepter of silver, howbeit in the investure of succeeding
Princes, this Rod or Scepter, (as appears by the Charters of their several
Creations) was changed into a Verge of gold.

The said King for the better maintenance of the said Prince his Son in
honorable support according to such his State and dignity, gave unto him by
his Charter, Dated 12. of May in the 17. year of his Reign of England, and in
the 4. year of his reign of France, and enrolled in the Exchequer in the Term
of St. Hillary, in the 18. year. of the said King Edward the Third, the said
principality and the manors, Lordships Castles and land ensuing to appertain
to the said principality. Viz.

All his lands and Lordships, in Northwales, Westwales, and Southwales.

1. The Lordship, Castle, Town and County of Caernarvon. 2. The Lordship,
Castle and Town of Convey. 3. The Lordship, Castle and Town of Crucketh. 4. The
Lordship, Castle and Town of Beaumarish. 5. The Lordship, Castle and Town of
Hardlagh. 6. The Lordship, Castle, and Towns, and Counties, of Anglesey and
Merioneth. 7. The Lordship, Castle, and Town and County of Caermaden. 8. The
Lordship, Castle and Town of Lampader vawr. 9. The Lordship, and Stewardship of
Canter mawr. 10. The Lordship, Castle, Town and County of Cardigan. 11. The
Lordship, Castle and Town of Emelyn. 12. The Lordship, Castle and Town of
Buelht. 13. The Lordship, Castle and Town of H^verford. 14. The Lordship,
Castle and Town of Montgomery,.
And all the lands that were of Rees ap Meredyth, The large liberties and
privileges of the Prince of Wales.
which came to the hands of King Edward the First, together with all the
Lordships, Cities, Castles, Burrowes, Towns Manours, Members, Hamlets, and
Tenements, Knights fees, Voydances of Bishoprics, Advowsons of Churches and of
Abbeys, Priories, and of Hospitals, with customs and prisages of wines. The
exercise and Execution of Justice, and a Chancery; Forests, Chases, Parks,
Woods, Warrens, Hundreds, Como^s, etc. And all other Hereditaments, as well
unto the said principality, as unto the said King, in those parts then
belonging, To have and to hold the same unto the sad Prince and his heirs Kings
of England.

This limitation of Estate of this principality unto the prince and his heirs
Kings of England, may seem strange to our Modern Lawyers. For how is it
possible that the Kings of England can inherit the principality, since the
principality being the lesser dignity is extinguished in the Kingly Estate,
being the greater; for in presentia majoris cessat id quod minus est, for as
much as the Heir apparent of the crown (being Prince) is presently upon the
death of his Ancestor eo instante King himself, and the principality as the
lesser not compatible with the Kingdom, being the greater.

But when I consider that this age where in this Charter was penned, was a
learned age of Judges and Lawyers (by whose advice no doubt in a matter of this
importance this Charter was penned) and this age much commended for exquisite
knowledge of the laws, by those learned Men that lived in the succeeding times,
I cannot but think reverently of antiquity, although I cannot yield sufficient
reason of their doings therein. Nevertheless for as much as all the Charters in
the ages following made to the Prince, do hold the same manner of limitation of
Estate, Sr. John Dodridge his opinion concerning a difficulty.
I am persuaded some mystery of good policy lies hid therein, which as I
conceive may be this, or such like. The Kings of England thought to confer upon
the Prince and heir apparent, an Estate in Fee simple in the lands that they
bestowed upon him; for a lesser than an Inheritance had not been answerable to
so great a dignity. And yet they were not willing to give him any larger Estate
then such as should extinguish again in the Crown when he came to be King or
died, for that he being King should also have the like power to create the
Prince or his heir apparent, and to invest him into that dignity, as he, being
the Father, was invested by his Progenitor. For the wisdom of the Kings of
England was such, as that they would not deprive themselves of that honor, but
that every of them might make new Creations and Investitures of the
principality to there Eldest Son, and next succeeding heir apparent, and that
those lands so given unto the Prince, might when he was King be annexed, knit
and united again to the crown, and out of the crown to be anew conferred, which
could not so have been if those lands had been given to the Prince and his
heirs general, for then the lands so given would have rested in the natural
person of the Princes after they came to the Kingdom distinct from the Crown,
Lands; and might as the case should happen, descend to others then those which
were his heirs apparent to the Crown. And herein I do observe a difference
between the principality of Wales given to the Prince, and the Duchy of
Cornwall given unto him. For every Prince needs, and so has had a new
creation and investiture. But he is Duke of Cornewal as soon as he is born, if
his Ancestor be then King of England; and if not, he is Duke of Cornwall eo
instante that his father is King of England.

The said King also by an another charter, dated the 20 of September in the
said 17. year of his reign, granted unto the said prince all arrerages of
rents, duties, accounts; Stocks, stores, goods and chattels remaining in all
and every the said parts due, or by right belonging unto the King, and
thereupon the prince accordingly was possessed by virtue of these charters of
all these aforesaid.

It rests that here we set down the Total Annual value of the said
Principality of Wales by it self, as it appears upon a diligent Survey
thereof taken in the 5. year of the reign of the said King Edw. the III. of
England, and in the 37. of his reign over France.

The survey of the principality of Wales is drawn out of a long Record, and to
avoid tediousness, the value of the revenues of every County or Shire, is here
set down, and then the total of the whole, omitting the particulars of every
Manor, Lordship, Town or other profit in every of the said Counties: The
setting down whereof at large would have been exceeding combersome and
intricate.

It is therefore in this manner.

The Province of Northwales.
The sum total of all the Princes Revenues in the County or Shire of
Caernarvon. 1134l 16 s 2 d ob. q.

The sum total of the Revenues of the province in the County of Anglesey. 832
l 14 s 6 d ob. q.

The sum total of the revenues in the county of Meryoneth amounts unto 748 l
11 s 3 d. ob. q

The perquisites and profits of the Sessions of the Justices of Northwales.

The sum Total of all the former Revenues in Northwales, amounts to 3041 l
7 s 6 d. q.

Whereof deducted the yearly Fee of the Justice of Northwales, and there
remains the sum of 3001 l 7 s 6 d. q.

The Province of Southwales.
The sum total of the yearly Revenue of the prince in the county of
Caerdigan. 374 l 11 s 3 d. q.

The sum total of the yearly Revenue of the prince arising in the County of
Caermardhyn. 406 l 1 s 7 d.

The Fee Farm of Buelht. 113 l 6 s 8 d.

Montgomery. 56 l 13 s 4 d.

Perquisites and profits of the Sessions of the Justice of Southwales. 738 l 6
s 9 d. ob.

Perquisites of the Courts of Haverford. 41 l. 5 s. 3 d. ob.

The sum total of the Revenues in Southwales. 1730 l 4 s 11 d q.

Out of which deducted for the Fee of the Justice of Southwales 50 l. there
then remains 1681 l 4s 11 d q.

The total of all which Revenues of the Principality of Wales, cast up in one
entire sum together, is 4681 l 12 s 5 d q.

This survey was made upon this occasion as it seems; after the death of the
prince called the black Prince, the Princess his wife was to have her dowry to
be allotted unto her, out of those Revenues; which could not be without an
extent or survey thereof first had by Commissioners thereunto appointed. And
because the yearly value of the said revenues, by reason of the casual profits
thereof, were more or less yearly, and not of one certain value, the
Commissioners observed this course; they did make choice of three several
years, viz. 47, and 48, and 49. of Edw. III. and did take out of the several
profits of those years, and did cast them all into one sum, which they again
divided into three several parts equally esteeming one of the said three parts
to be the just yearly value of the said Revenues Communibus annis, that is, one
year, with an other. And in this account, we find no other charges allowed then
the Justics Fees only.

This survay and account made about 200 years past, is here inserted, to the
end it might appear, what the Revenues of this Principality alone was.

The said prince of Wales, surnamed the Black prince; Mr. Mills fol. 315.
after many fortunate victories achieved by him, having subdued a great part
of France, and having taken John the French King prisoner at Poyteers in
France; and after that also having vanquished Henry at Naveroit in Spain, and
restored Peter King of Aragon, dyed, in June; Sr. John Dodridge fol. 15.
leaving behind him Richard his Son and Heir, born at Burdeux, and thereof
surnamed Richard of Burdeux.

Richard of Burdeux.
Richard son of Edward Prince of Wales, was after the death of his father
created prince of Wales at Havering at Bower the 20. day of November, in the
50. year of King Edw. III. his Grandfather, he was after the death of his said
Grandfather K. of England, by the name of K. Rich. II.

This Richard (says Judge Dodridge) surnamed of Burdeux, son and heir of
Edward the black prince, was created prince of Wales (ut supra) being about
the age of XI. years, and upon Christmas day next following the said King
Edward the third caused the said prince (being his Nephew or Grandchild) to sit
at the table in high estate, above all his Uncles being the Kings sons, as
representing the personage of the heir apparent to the Crown, and gave to him
the two parts of all the said principality, Counties, Lordships, Castles, and
the most of the said Lands, which belonged to the said black prince, and the
reversion of the third part thereof; the possession of the third part there of
then being to the mother of the said Rich. to her dowry with an 113 l. 6 s. 8
d. yearly rent, payable by the Earl of March, as a Fee Farm for the Lordship
and Lands of Buelht; and 85. marks for the fee farm of the Castle, Lordship and
Land of Montgomery, with the vacations of Bishoprics, excepting the Fees of
the Baron Marchers of Wales, who do always hold of the Crown in Capite; and
excepting the avoydance of the Bishopric of St. David's in Wales, which
anciently also belonged to the Crown, with the like limitation to the estate
viz. To the said Richard and his heirs Kings of England.

It seems that these Lordships of Buelht and Montgomery, being formerly
granted to Edw. the black prince, were before this time given away in Fee Farm.
After the death of the said K. Edw. III. which was in the 51 year of his reign,
the Kingdom of England descended to the said Richard being his grandchild, and
he was crowned King thereof, by the name of Richard the second, and in the 23
year of his reign he resigned his Kingdom, or to speak more truly, was deposed
against his will, and after by a violent death, departed this life without
issue.

Henry of Monmoth.
Henry of Bullingbrock, a Town or Castle in Lincolneshire, and heretofore
belonging to the Lacies Earls of Lincoln; and by the marriage with Alice
daughter and heir of Henry Lacy Earl of Lincoln to Thomas Earl of Lancaster,
this with the residue of the lands of Lincoln, became united and incorporated
with those of Lancaster. It has been almost ever since this time one of the
honors (as we call them) of the Crown of England, but never made any honorary
title unto any family until King James conferred it on Sr. Oliver Saint John,
who possibly might affect to be thence denominated, as fetching his descent
from the Lady Margaret Beauchamp, Grandmother to King Henry the seventh, the
heirs of the Lancastrian family, by which descent likewise, as well as
otherwise he is descended of the Welsh blood and bears for his arms, Argent
on a chief gules, two mullets Or: but to our former matter; this Henry of
Bullingbrock, by the name of Henry IV. who was formerly Duke of Lancaster and
Hereford, Earl of Derbie, Leicester, and Lincoln, son and heir of John of
Gaunt the fourth son to K. Edward the third, by his Charter dated at
Westminster 15. October. in the first year of his reign, created Henry his eldest
son prince of Wales, and invested him in the said princely Ornaments, viz. the
chaplet, gold ring, verge or rod of gold, To have and to hold unto him and his
heirs Kings of England. And by another Charter of the same date gave to him and
his heirs Kings of England the said principality, with the Lordships, Sr. John
Dodridge fol. 17.
Castles and Lands before mentioned in the Charter made to the black prince,
together with four Comots in the county of Caernarvon, viz. the comots of
Ifaph, Vghaph, Nantconwey and Crewthin, not named before, and the reversion of
the Lordship of Haverford, with the prices of Wines there, and of the Lordships
of Newin and Pughby in Northwales; which Thomas Percy then Earl of Worcester
held for term of life of the demise of King Richard the Second, together also
with the reversion of the county and lordship of Anglesey in Northwales, and
the castle of Beaumarish, and the comots, lands, tenements and hereditaments
belonging thereunto, which Henry Percy son of the Earl of Northumberland then
held for term of his life, of the demise of the said K. Hen. IV. and by an act
of Parliament made in the first year of K. H. IV. whereby the Duchy of
Lancaster is severed from the Crown of Engl. the style of the said P. is
declared to be this, P. of Wales, D. of Aquitane, of Lancaster and of Cornwall,
and E. of Chester, for the said K. H. IV. having been himself D. of Lancaster
before his assumption to the Crown, and knowing that the name of Duke, being an
inferior dignity, would extinguish and be surrounded in the crown as in the
superior, desired (as by that Act of Parliament appears) not only to separate
the said Duchy of Lancaster, and the lands thereof from the Crown, to the
intent he might still hold the said Duchy as his ancient patrimony, if he were
put from the Crown, it being but his new acquired dignity, but also to preserve
the said style, Mr. Lhoyd fol. 385.
title, and name of Duke of Lancaster in his posterity, which as the said act
affirms his ancestors had so worthily borne and sustained.

In the time of K. Rich. II. there was one Owen ap Gruffith Vachan, descended
of a younger son of Gruffith ap Madoc Lord of Bromfield. This Owen was first a
Student at the Laws of the Realm, and became an utter Barrister, or an
apprentise of the law (as they term it) and served King Richard in great credit
and favor; between whom and the Lord Gray of Ruthin happen some discord about
a piece of Commons lying between the Lordship of Ruthin and the Lordship of
Glyndourdwy, whereof Owen was owner, and thereof took the surname of Glindour;
during the reign of K. Richard, Owen was too hard for the Lord Gray, being then
a servitour in court with K. Rich. (with whom he was at the time of his taking
in the castle of Flint by the Duke of Lancaster) but after that K. Richard was
put down, the Lord Gray being now better friended then Owen, entered upon the
said Commons, whereupon Owen having many friends and followers in his country,
(as those that be great with princes commonly have) put himself in armor
against the Lord Gray, whom he meeting in the field overcame and took prisoner.
The Welsh ever addicted to believe prophesies.
This was the very beginning and cause Owens rising, and attempts: upon the
taking of the Lord Gray, and spoiling of his Lordship of Ruthin, many resorted
to Owen from all parts of Wales, some thinking that he was now as well in
favor as in K. Richards time, some other putting in his head, that now the
time was come wherein the Britains through his means might recover again the
honor and liberty of their ancestors. A caveat for Mr. Pugh, and such as are
over credulous in prophesies.
These things being laid before Owen, by such as were very cunning in Merlins
prophesies; and the interpretations of the same (for there were in those days,
as I fear there be now, some singular men which are deeply overseen in those
mysteries, and hope one day to mete velvet upon London bridge with their bows)
brought him into such a fools paradise, that he never considering what title he
might pretend, or what right he had, proceeded and made war upon the Earl of
March, who was the the right Inheritor, as well to the principality of Wales,
as appears formerly, as to the Crown of England after the death of K. Rich.
being descended from the elder brother, next to Edw. Prince of Wales father of
K. Rich. of which insurrection and rebellion, there ensued much mischief unto
the Welshmen, for the King conceiving great hatred against them, showed himself
a manifest opressour of all that nation, making rigorous laws against them,
whereby he took in a manner all the liberties of subjects from them; Cruel
Laws against the Welsh.
probibiting all Welshmen from purchasing lands, or to be chosen, or received
Citizens or Burgesses in any City, Borough, or market towns, or to be receied
or accepted to any office of Mayor, Bailiffe, Chamberlain, Constable, or Keeper
of the gates, or of the goal, or to be of the Council of any City, Borough or
Town, or to bear any manner of armor within any City, etc. And if any suit
happened between a Welshman and an Englishman, it was by law ordained that the
Englishman should not be convict, unless it were by the judgment of English
Judges, and by the verdict of the whole English Burgesses, or by Inquests of
English Buroughs, and Towns of the signiories, where the suit lay; also that
all Englishmen that married Welshwomen should be disfranchized of their
liberty, no congregation or meetings in council was permitted to Welshmen, but
by license of the chief Officers of the said signiory, and in the presence of
the same Officers. That no victuals nor armor should be brought into Wales
without the special license of the King or his Council. That no Welshman should
have any Castle, Fortress or house defensive of his own or of any other man's
to keep; no Welshman to be made Justice, Chamberlain, Chancellor, Treasurer
Sheriff, Steward, Constable of Castle, Receiver, Eschetor, Coronor, nor chief
Forrester, nor other Officer, nor Keeper of Records, nor Lieutenant in any of
the said Offices, in no part of Wales, nor of the council of any English Lord,
notwithstanding any patent or license made to the contrary. That no Englishman
which in the time to come shall marry any Welshwoman, be put in any Office in
Wales, or in the Marches of the same.

These with other laws, both unreasonable and unconcionable (such as no prince
among the Heathen ever offered to his subjects) were ordained and severely
executed against them. Neither was it any reason that for the offense of one
man and his accomplices, all the whole nation should be so persecuted, whereby
not only they that lived in that time, but also their children and posterity
should be brought to perpetual thraldom and misery; A law more cruel then that
Julian the Apostate.
for these laws were not ordained for their Reformation, but of mere purpose
to work their utter ruin and destruction, which does evidently appear in that
they were forbidden to keep their children at learning, or to put them to be
apprentises to any occupation, in any Town or Borough in this realm. Let any
indifferent man therefore judge and consider, whether this extremity of law,
where Justice it self is mere injury and cruelty, be not a cause and matter
sufficient to withdraw any people from civility to barbarism.

This Hen. dyed in the 10th. year of his reign leaving a son behind him, being
an infant of ten months, who by reason of his tender age, was not (as by any
word extent can be proved) ever created prince, but was proclaimed King
immediately, after the death of his father, by the name of Henry the Sixth.

Edward of Westminster.
Henry the sixth by the advice of his Lords Spiritual and Temporal, given to him
in his Parliament holden in the 31 year of his reign, did afterward by his
charter bearing date 15 day of March 32. Regni, created Edward his son, born at
Westminster by one and the self same patent to be both prince of Wales and
Earl of Chester, and invested him therein, His Creation.
with the usual Ensigns of that dignity, as had been in former time
accustomed, TO HAVE AND TO HOLD the said dignities to him and his heirs Kings
of England; Sr. J. Dodridge
which Charter is recited in the Act of Parliament, holden at Westminster. 9.
Julii anno 33. regni.

In the which Act of Parliament is also recited another Charter, likewise
confirmed by the said Parliament; whereby the said King, did give unto the said
Prince, the said principality of Wales together with all the Lordships and
lands, Castles, and Tenements, by special names above mentioned, and all in
the former Charters granted and conveied to the former Princes, and the said
Fee Farms and Rents of 113 l. 13 s. ob. out of the Lordship and Town of Buelht,
and the said 56l. 13s. 4d. out of the Lordship, Castle and Town of Montgomery
likewise mentioned in the Charters of the former Prince To have and to hold to
him and his heirs Kings of England.

By the same Act of Parliament also, it was enacted (because the said prince
was then of tender years) and there was assigned unto him a certain number of
Servants, to attend him according to his estate and dignity, which should be at
diet in the Kings house, until the said prince should accomplish the age of 14
years, and that the King should have all such sums of money as should clearly
remain unto the prince due of all manner of Issues and Revenues, which the
Prince then had in respect of his said Principality, Duchy, and Earledom,
until the said age of 14. years, The said Revenues to be accounted for to the
King in his exchequer, reserving unto the said Prince, until he should come to
be of the age of eight years, 1000 l. yearly, and from that age till he came at
fourteen, The K. to have the revenues till the P. accomplish the age of 14:
2000 marks yearly for his Wardrobes, Wages of Servants, and other necessary
expenses. But saving always unto the King the Advousons of Bishoprics and
spiritual livings, and the gifts of all Offices, Wards, Reliefs and Escheats
belonging to the said Prince, until he should accomplish the said age of
fourteen years, saving such estate in certain of the said lands as the Queen
had to her before the said time assured, until the Prince should be of the
said age of fourteen years; and saving certain particular sums of money in
the said Act of Parliament mentioned, as were formerly appointed out of the
said lands, as well for expense of the Kings of England for their household as
otherwise, during such particular times as are therein declared; provided that
all Offices formerly granted by the King, and needing actual exercise, and the
Fees to the same should not be prejudiced by the same Act.

Afterward by another Charter, Ex Charta Regia dat. In Scaccaria penes Rememor
Thesaur. remo^te.
the said King does release unto the said Prince all the said Grant, of the
said yearly sums of money, issuing out of the revenues aforesaid, and all
things by the said Act granted and appointed unto the said King yearly 527
marks 4 s. 7 d. ob. and out of the said Duchy, until the said prince should
be of eight years of age, then reserving out of the said Principality and
Earldom yearly unto the King 277 marks 4 s. 7 d. ob. and out of the said Duchy
yearly 517 marks 11 s. 7. ob. until the said age of 14. years of the Prince
for the said Duchy, and to be employed toward the charges of the Kings
household, and not otherwise.

And the said King by his letters Patents, dated 18 of January anno regni 35.
during the minority of the said Prince, ordained the then Archbishop of York,
In Chartes l. 35. H. 6 part 2. a Privy Counselors appointed to the Prince.
the bishops of Winchester, Hereford, Lichfield and Coventry, and the Lord
Keeper of the privy Seal, the Earls of Shrewsbury, Stafford and Wilts, the
then Viscount Beamont, and also John Sutton, and Thomas Stanley Knights, to be
of the privy Counsel to the said Prince, enjoining all Officers and Ministers
of the Prince, that they and every of them should be obedient to the execution
of all commandments and warrants of the said Councillors, or at least four of
them together, with the assent and consent of the Queen, in all causes and
matters concerning the titles rights, possessions and Interests of the said
Prince: and that the said commandments and warrants should be as available, in
that behalf, as if the said had been made or done by the said Prince himself,
being of full age, which commandment in all leases of the said Princes
inheritance was pursued accordingly.

In the 39. year of the said K. Henry VI. reign he being of the house of
Lancaster (such is the mutability, and so unstable are all humane things) that
the said King being a man (devout and religious) the founder of Schools and
Colleges, virtuous, and a lover of peace, was by the violence of the heirs of
the house of York, put from his Kingdom and secured in prison, and Edward Earl
of March, son and heir to Richard Duke of York reigned in his stead by the name
of Edw. IV.

But yet behold the hand of God, for in the tenth year of the said King Edward
IV. upon a coffeehouse conceived against him by Richard Earl of Warwick, a
man more popular and potent then was fit for a Subject; the said Richard with a
collected power so pressed the King, that he was driven to fly the realm, and
to seek foreign aid, seeing his homebred subjects proved so unfaithful.

In Chartes pat. 35. H. 6. pars 2.
Then King Henry VI. after 10 years imprisonment, readepted the Kingdom, and in
the said tenth year of King Edward IV. wrote the 49 year of his reign, having
endured 10 years intermission in the computation of his time, as appears in
the books of law of that age, but being thus seated he was unsettled, and after
much effusion of blood (for in a civil war there is no true victory, in as much
as he that prevails is a loser) K. H. 6, was compelled again to give place to
his adversary, and after to make that part sure was deprived of life, having
lost also Edw. his son P. before spoken of, the hope of all his posterity, in
the battle at Tukesbury.

Edward of Westminster.
Edward IV. having gotten the Crown which had been thus shaken from his head,
did by his Charter dated the 26 of June, 11 regni, created Edward of
Westminster his son and heir apparent P. of Wales and E. of Chester, 11 Ed. 4
pars 1. memb. 1.
and by another like Charter of the same year gave unto him the lands and
revenues of the said principality, to have and to hold to him and his heirs
Kings of Engl. This Ed. the P. being of tender years was born in the Sanctuary,
whether the Queen his mother was fled for security, and during the time that
the King her husband had avoided the realm.

Afterward the said King by his letters patents dated the 8. of July in the
said 11 year of his reign, ordained his Queen, the then Archbishop of
Canterbury, George Duke of Clarence, Richard Duke of Gloucester, brothers to the
said King, the then Bishop of Bath and Wells and Durham, Sr. J. Dodridge fol.
25.
Anthony Earl Rivers, the then Abbot of Westmonastery Chancelour to the Prince
Will. Hastings Knight, Lord Chamberlain to the King, Rich. Fines, Lord Dacres
Steward of the said Prince, John Fogg, John Scot Knight, Thomas Vaughan
Chamberlain to the Prince, J. Alcock and Rich. Farler to be of Council to the
said Prince, giving unto them and every 4 of them thereby, with the advice and
express consent of the Queen, large power to advise and council the said
Prince, and to order and dispose the lands, revenues and possessions of the
said Prince and the nomination of officers to him belonging, when they should
happen to become void, or that the parties were insufficient. The said
authority thus given unto the said councelours to continue until the said
Prince should accomplish the age of 14. years, which was performed by them
accordingly in all leases, dispositions and grants of the revenues of the said
prince.

The said K. Edw. by another Charter composed in English, and bearing date 10
of Novem. 13o. regni, appointed the said E. Rivers (being brother unto the
Queen) to be governor of the person of the said prince, and to have the
education and institution of him in all virtues worthy his birth, and to have
the government and direction of his servants.

King Edward the fourth having reigned full 22. years, left this mortal life
24. regni at Westminster, and was enterred at Windsor, Edward his Son and
Heir then being at Ludlow near the Marches of Wales, for the better ordering of
the Welsh under the Government of the Lord Rivers his Uncle, on the Mothers
side, and upon the death of his Father drawing toward London to prepare for
his Coronation fell into the hands of his Uncle by the Fathers side, Richard D.
of Gloucester, and the said Lord Rivers being upon his way to London, Dulce
vennum regnum.
was intercepted and lost his head at Pomfret; for what cause I know not other
then this, that he was thought to be too great an obstacle between a thirsty
Tyrannous desire, and the thing that was so thirstily and Tyrannously desired.

Edward the 5. King of England, for so he was, although he enjoyed it not long,
being thus surprised under the power of his natural, or rather most unnatural
Uncle and mortal enemy, was brought to London with great solemnity and pomp,
and with great applause of the People flocking about to behold his person, as
the manner of the English Nation is to do, whose new joys cannot endure to be
fettered with any bonds. His said Uncle calling himself Protector of the King
and his realm, but indeed was a wolf to whom the lamb was committed, for
having thus surprised the Kings person, he labored by all means to get into
his possession also the younger brother, being D. of York, knowing that they
both being sundered, Vindex nocentes sequitur a tergo Deus.
the safety of the younger would be a means to preserve the elder, and
therefore by all sinister persuasions and fair pretenses having obtained the
younger D. from his mother, the King and the D. both for a time remained in the
Tower of London, Ed. v. upon his return to England.
and there shortly after, both in one bed, were in the night smothered to
death, and buried in an obscure and secret place, unknown how or where, until
one of the Executioners thereof, after many years being condemned to dye for
many other his manifold crimes, confessed also his guilty fact in this tragical
business, and the circumstance thereof, of which by reason of the secrecy and
incertainty, diverse had before diversely conjectured. And by this means all for
the Coronation of Innocent Edward, served the turn to set the Crown upon the
head of Tyrannous Richard. Out of which by the way I cannot but observe how
hateful a bloody hand is to Almighty God the King of Kings, who revenged the
bloodshed of those civil broils, whereof Edward the Father had been the
occasion, and the breach of his oath upon these his two Innocent Infants

Edward Son of Richard III.
This Tyrant, and stain of the English story, Inter war. ad magnum sigillum in
Cancellaria. Henricus rosas
Richard D. of Gloucester usurped the Kingdom by the name of Richard the third,
and became King, yet as our Records of Law witness de facto non de jure, and in
the first year of his reign created Edward his son, being a child of ten years
of age, Prince of Wales, Lieutenant of the Realm of Ireland.

But for that the prosperity of the wicked is but as the flourishing of a green
tree, which whiles man passes by is blasted, dead at the roots, and his place
knows it no more, so shortly afterward God raised up Hen. Earl of Richmond
the next heir of the house of Lancaster to execute justice upon that unnatural
and bloody Usurper, and cast him that had been the rod of Gods Judgment upon
others, into the fire also; for in the third year of his reign at the battle
of Bosworth, whereunto the said Richard entered in the morning crowned with all
Kingly pomp, he was slain, and his naked carcass with as much despite as could
be devised, was carried out thereof at night, and the said Henry Earl of
Richmond, the Solomon of England, Reigned in his stead, by the name of King
Henry the Seventh.

Arthur Son of K. Henry VII.
Henry the VII. took to wife Elizabeth the eldest daughter, and after the death
of her brothers, the Relict heir of King Edward IV. by which marriage, all
occasions of contention between those two noble Families of York and Lancaster
were taken away and utterly quenched and the red Rose joined with the white.

The said K. Henry the seventh by his letters patents dated the first day of
December 5. regni created Arthur his Eldest son and heir apparent, being then
about the age of three years, Prince of Wales. But before we proceed any
further, treating of the Princes of Wales, let us consider from whence this
Arthur descended, and admire the goodness and providence of the highest and
great God toward the Welsh nation, to bring the honor and principality to
one descended of the Ancient Welsh or British blood; I will bring the pedigree
ascendent, the noble Prince Arthur was son to Henry the VII.

Arthur. The King of England from the Welsh blood first thus.
Henry VII. Elizabeth Eldest Daughter to K. Edward IV. Edmund Earl of
Richmond. Margaret Daughter and Heir to John Duke of Somerset. Sr. Owen Tudor.
Katherine, Queen Dowager to K. Henry the V. Meredyth son to Tudor. Tudor son to
Grono. Grono son to Tudyr. Tudyr son to Grono. Grono son to Ednivet. Ednivet
Vachan married Gwenlhian, daughter to Rees Prince of Southwales. Gruffith King
of Southwales Rees ap Tudyr King of Southwales Whose Arms were, Gules a Lion
Ramp. within a border indented Or.


I could deduce this family from several English matches, as Holland, Tuckets,
Norris, but I should be too prolix and seem to exspaciate beyond my bounds, and
therefore I will return to our Prince of whom we now speak.

Dodridge fol. 28.
Also there was a Charter of the Grant of the Lands of the said principality,
Earledom of Chester and Flint, dated the 20 of February in the said fifth year
of the said King, made unto the said Prince.

The said King Henry the VII. by his Charter bearing date the 20. day of March
in the eight year of his reign did constitute and appoint the said Prince
Arthur, to be his Justice in the County of Salop, Inter war. ad magnum sigillvm
in Cancellaria.
Hereford, Gloucester, and the Marches of Wales adjoining to the said Shires, to
enquire of all liberties, privileges and franchises, being possessed or
claimed by any person or persons, and which were to be seized into the Kings
hands, and of all escapes and Fellons and those inquisitions, so from time to
time to be taken, to certify into the Chancery. And by the same Charter gave
him power to substitute and appoint others under him for the better execution
of the same, which afterward by Commission was executed accordingly.

And the said King also by his Charter bearing date 14 Junii, 8o regni, made
and constituted the said Arthur Prince of Wales, and Governor and Warden of
the Marches toward Scotland; and substituted as his Lieutenant and Vice-Warden
under him Thomas Earl of Surrey for the due execution thereof.

Likewise the said King by his letters Patents, dated 5. November. 9. regni, in
augmention of the Revenue of the Prince, did grant unto the said Prince the
Honor, Castle and Lordship of Wigmore, and diverse other Castles, Mannours, and
Lands, which some time had been belonging to the Earldom of March, which came
to the Crown by King Edward the IV. who was himself Earl of March, before he
assumed the regal estate, To have and to hold, during the pleasure of the King,
yielding yearly the Rent of 200 l.

A Council assigned the P.
The Prince was sent unto the Marches of Wales, for government of that Country,
and in the 17 regni Henry VII. had a Counsel of wise and very worthy men
assigned unto him as namely Sr. Richard Pool, chief Chamberlain of the said
Prince, Sir Henry Vernon, Sir Richard Crofts, Sir David Philips, Sir William
Vdal, Sir Thomas Inglefield and Sir Peter Newton Knights, John Wilson, Henry
Marian, Doctor William Smith (after Bishop of Lincoln, where he was buried)
President of the Council, and Doctor Charles; where not long afterward the
said Prince died in the Castle of Ludlow without issue.

I may not let pass what Mr. Lhoyd writes concerning Sir Owen Tuder, he
says, that Sir William Stanley then Lord of Cromfield, Mr. Lhoyd fol. 391.
Yale and Chirkland, aided Henry VII. being followed by the Welshmen, and that
the said Henry, knowing and pitying the thraldom and injuries of that Nation,
from whom he descended, took order to reform the same, and granted unto them a
Charter of liberties, The bondage of Hen. IV. taken from the Welsh by Hen. VII.
whereby they were released of that oppression wherewith they were afflicted,
by laws I have set down before, more heathenish then christian: and here I
cannot omit, but some thing answer the reproachful and slanderous assertions of
Joannes Bernardus, Pontus, Henlerus and others (I my self have seen a
manuscript, where he is called a Shereman, but rather ignorantly I hope then
maliciously) who go about to abase the noble parentage of Owen Tuder the Kings
Grandfather, following more their own affections, then any good proof or
authority; for if they would read that noble work of Matthew Paris, they shall
find in page 843. of the printed book, that Ednivet Vachan one of his
Ancestors, was the chiefest of Council to Lhewelin ap Jorwerth, otherwise
called Leolenus Magnus, and to David ap Lhewelin Princes of Wales, as formerly.

They may also find in the Records of the Tower of London, in an. 29. Edward I.
in the general homage done to Prince Edward of Caernavon, first prince of Wales
of the English blood, that Tuder ap Grono, another of the Ancestors of Owen,
did his homage among the Nobles of Wales, Owen Tuder descended from the K. of
England.
as appears in the said Records. Further the said Owens Grandmother the wife
of Tuder ap Grono, was Margaret the daughter of Thomas the son of Elianor,
which was the daughter of the County of Bar, by Elianor his wife, daughter to
Edward I. King of England.

Besides all this there was a Commission at this time directed by King Edward
VII. to the Abbot of Lhan Egwest, Doctor Owen Pool Canon of Hereford, and John
King Herald, to make inquisition concerning the parentage of the said Owen, who
coming to Wales traveled in that matter, and used the helps of Sir John
Levof, Guttin, Owen Bardh, Gruffith ap Lhewelin ap Evan Vachan, and others, in
the search of the British or Welsh books of Pedigrees, out of the which they
drew his perfect Genealogy from the Ancient Kings of Britain, and the Princes
of Wales, and so returned their Commission, which return is extant to be seen
at this day. And I God willing will set forth what I have, in a compendium
which I intend to annex to this present treatise, of many things which cannot
be well digested in method of History, yet much conduce to the Glory of the
Welsh, the several princely stems from whence Owen Tuder, and consequently the
succeeding Kings of England descended.

Henry Duke of York.
After the death of Prince Arthur King Henry VII. Charta creationis P. Wall.
by his letters patents dated the 18 of February 19 regni, in a parliament,
created Henry, then his only son, who after was King Henry VIII. and whom
before that in the 11. he had made Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, by an other
Charter of the same year, Constable of the Castle of Dover, to be Prince of
Wales, Earl of Chester, being then about the age of twelve years. To have and
to hold to him and his heirs Kings of England for ever, being the like
limitation of Estate, and with the like investure as in former times had been
acustomed.

But whether the King did grant the lands and revenues belonging to the said
principality unto the said Henry or no, as he had done unto Prince Arthur his
brother does not appear by any Charter thereof that as yet can be found.

After the death of King Henry VII. the said Prince Henry was King of England
by the name of King Henry VIII. he had a issue son called Henry who dyed very
young, he likewise had issue the Lady Mary afterward Queen, and the Lady
Elizabeth, and lastly prince Edward the youngest in years, who first reigned
after the death of his said father by the name of Edward the Sixth.

Mary
The Lady Mary daughter to the same King Henry the VIII, Mr. Lhoyd fol. 393.
by the Queen Catherine his first wife, was Princess of Wales, and in the 17.
year of King Henry's reign, he sent John Voiseie Bishop of Exeter to be Lord
President of the Council of the said Princess in the Marches of Wales.

Elizabeth.
Elizabeth daughter to King Henry the VIII. Mr. Lhoyd fol. 394.
was in a Parliament begun the 15 day of January in the 25 regni, declared
Princess and Inheritrix of the Crown of England, with all the Dominions to the
same belonging, in default of issue male of the body of the said King Henry.

Sr. John Dodridge, does not approve of King Edward VI. Queen Mary, or Queen
Elizabeth, to have been Prince or Princess formally, for he says there cannot
be found any Charter among the records, whereby it may appear that any of them
were created Princes of Wales, or whereby any of the Revenues of the said
principality were given or conferred unto any of them; so that it seems they
were princes generally by their birth, and not princes of Wales by any creation
or investure; for in a record of an account of the Duke of Cornwall, in the time
of the said Edward, he is called by the name of prince of England, and not by
the name of prince of Wales.

And thus much touching the succession or ranks of the princes of Wales, which
I have drawn in an Historical, though in a plain and homely manner, thereby the
better to take the harshnesse of the particularities of records intermingled
therewith, which of themselves although they offer profitable knowledge, yet
they do carry with them small delight; but also for that the variety of things
in those succeeding ages, in the sundry occurrences and accidents thereof, do
yield good matter of observance and worthy memory, representing as it were the
English state for the time of more then 200 years.

Now therefore do rest nevertheless three things concerning the said
principality to be further considered of.

Wales were governed and directed under the said prince.





The manner of Government of the Principality of Wales.
The said principality being under the government of the princes of the Welsh
blood (whose ancient patrimony yet remained until the conquest thereof by K.
Ed. I. as has already been showed) was guided, governed and directed by their
own municipal laws, and the customs of the country, most of which had their
commencement from the constitutions of one of their ancient Princes, called
Howel Dha, as their Historians report: but being reduced under the yoke of the
said King Edward, he divided certain parts of that Territory into Shires, he
caused the Welsh Laws to be perused, some whereof he did allow and approve
some others he did abbrogate and disanul, and in their place appointed new,
altogether according to the English manner of executing Justice. He caused to
be devised certain briefs, writs, or formula juris, and he instituted their
manner of process, pleadings, and course of their judicial proceedings. All
which things do manifestly appear by the Act of Parliament made at Ruthlan in
Wales, called therefore Statutum Walliae, and when they want a writ of form to
serve the present case, then use they the writ of Quod ei deforciat which
supplieth that defect, and although the Principality of Wales as has appeared
by some of the Records were divided into 3 Provinces, Northwales, Southwales
and VVestwales, for so in some of the former patents they are mentioned, yet
for the Jurisdiction thereof it was divided into two parts Northwales and
Southwales; for a great part of VVestwales was comprehended within the Shire of
Pembrock, which is a very ancient Shire of Wales, and the territory thereof
conquered by the English in the time of William Rufus, long time before the
general conquest of Wales by Richard Strongbow, being English, and the Earl
thereof, and called also by some Earl of Strigulia or Chepstow (or rather
Strigul Castle) was the first that attempted the conquest of Ireland in the
days of Hen. II.

The Province of Northwales and Southwales were governed by law in this manner.
The Prince had and used to hold a Chancery and a Court of Exchequer in the
Castle of Gaernarvon for Northwales, and had a Judge or Justice which ministered
Justice there to all the inhabitants of Northwales, and therefore was called
the Justice of Northwales. The like Courts of Chancery and Exchequer he held in
the Castle of Caermardhyn for Southwales, where he had a Justice likewise
called the Justice of Southwales; 3. Ed. 3. ^9. and in le novel prin. 63. a 7.
Hen. 35, 6.
and the Courts of the Justices or Judges so held within the several Provinces,
were called the great Sessions of those Provinces, and sometimes those Justices
were Itenerant, and sat in every of the several Counties of his province. In
those great Sessions the causes of greatest moment, real, personal and mixed,
and pleas of the Crown, concerning life and members were heard and determined.
Ministers accounts 18. H 7.
In these great Courts also upon creation of every new Prince, there were
granted by the people of that Province unto the Prince, nomine recognitionis ad
primum adventum principis, certain sums of money as it were in
acknowledgement or relief of the new Prince, which sums of money are called
by them Mises; these mises or sums of money were granted by the people unto
the prince for his allowance of their laws and ancient customs, and a general
pardon of their offenses, sinable or punishable by the prince, and that sum
of those mises, for the Shire of Caermardhyn only, amounted unto 800. marks,
and for the Shire of Cardigan, the total sum of the mises amounted unto 600
marks, as by sundry Records does appear; these sums of money were paid at
certain days by several portions, such as were appointed, and in the said
Sessions agreed upon. Also in every Shire of every the said provinces, there
were holden certain Inferior Courts, called therefore County Courts and Shire
Courts and Tourns, after the manner of England and which by some were also
called the petty Sessions, and there were also Courts inferior in sundry
Counties, for ending of causes of less moment and importance, and if any wrong
Judgment were given in any of those leferiour Courts, 19. H 6. 12. b. 21. H. 7.
33. a.
the same was redressed by a writ of false Judgment in the Court Superior.
And if any erroneous judgment were given in the great Sessions which was the
supreme Court of Justice that error was either redressed by the judgment of
penal Justices Itenerant, or else in Parliament, and not otherwise in any the
Courts of Justice now at Westminster.

A noble policy of William Conq. good for himself, but destructive to the Welsh.
As touching the government of the Marches of Wales, it appears by diverse
ancient monuments that the Counquerour after he had conquered the English,
placed diverse of his Norman Nobility upon the Confines and Borders toward
Wales, and erected the Earldom of Chester being upon the borders of Northwales,
to a Palatinate, and gave power unto the the said persons thus placed upon
those borders, to make such conquest upon the Welsh, as they by their strengh
could accomplish, holding it a very good policy, thereby not only to encourage
them to be more willing to serve him, but also to provide for them at other
men's costs. And hereupon further ordained, that the lands so conquered should
be holden of the Crown of England in Capite; and upon this and such like
occasions diverse of the nobility of England having lands upon the said borders
of Wales, made roads and incursions upon the Welsh, whereby diverse parts of
that Country near or toward the said borders, were won by the sword from the
Welshmen, and were planted partly with English Collonies: and the said lands so
conquered were holden per Baroniam, Another policy.
and were called therefore Baronies, Marchers; In such manner did Robert Fitz
Hamon acquire unto himself and such others as assisted him, the whole Lordship
of Glamorgan, using in some resemblance the Roman Policy, to enlarge
Territories by stepping in between two Competitors, and by helping the one, he
subdued the other, and afterward turning his sword against him whom he had
assisted, and making this the pretense of his quarrel, alleged, that he whom
he had assisted, had denied to make unto him sufficient recompense for his
sustained travels, and so made himsel absolute owner of all. Likewise Bernard
Newmarsh conquered the Lordship of Brecknock, containing three cantreds, and
established his conquest by a marriage in the Welsh blood; The Original of the
Baronies Marchers
(but she proved a blemish to her country) Hugh Lacy conquered the lands of
Ewyas called after his name Ewyas Lacy, and others did the like in other places
of the borders, all which were Baronies, Marchers, and were holden by such the
conquerours thereof in capite of the Crown of England: and because they and
their posterity might the better keep the said lands so acquired, Sr. J. Dod.
fol. 38. 13 Fitzh. Jur. 23 47 Ed. 1. 5, 6, 7 6 H. 5. Fitzh. Juris 34 7 H. 6.
35. 36. 30. b 6. 6. b
and that they might not be withdrawn by suits of law from the defense of that
which they had thus subdued, the said Lordships and Lands so conquered were
ordained Baronies Marchers, and had a kind of palatine Jurisdiction erected in
every of them, and power to administer Justice unto their Tennants in every of
their territories, having therein courts with diverse privileges, franchises
and immunities, so that the writs of Ordinary Justice out of the Kings Court
were for the most part not current amongst them. Nevertheless if the whole
Barony had come in question, or that the strife had been between two Baron
Marchers touching their Territories or Confines thereof, for want of a
superior they had recourse unto the King their supreme Lord; and in these and
such like cases, where their own jurisdiction failed, justice was administered
unto them in the superior Courts of this Realm. And this was the state of the
Government of the Marches of Wales, both before and after the general conquest
thereof made by K. Edw. I. until the 27 year of K. Henry VIII.

And as touching the first council established in the Marches of Wales, it is
conceived by the best and most probable opinions amongst Antiquaries, that the
same began in or about 17o. Edw. IV. when as prince Edward his son was sent
into the Marches of Wales, under the tuition of the L. Rivers his Uncle by the
mothers side, at what time also John Bishop of Worcester was appointed L.
president of Wales.

Prince Arthur the son of K. Henry VII. in the 17. of his reign, went into
Wales, at what time Dr. Will. Smith (after Bishop of Lincoln, and there
buried) was then president of the Council of the Marches, he founded
Brasonnose College in Oxford, and bore for his arms arg a fess. dancette inter
gules. This man was also president in the time of King Henry VIII, until the
fourth year of the reign of the said King. At what time Geffry Blyth Bishop of
Coventry and Lichfield, succeeded in the Office of president in the said
Council.

There succeeded him in the office of president of the council of the Marches
of Wales, Rowland Lee Bishop of Coventry and Lichfield, and this was the state
and government of the principality of Wales, 27o. H. 8.

The said King by a Statute made 27o. regni, Wales annexed to England and the
English laws brought into Wales.
united and annexed the principality and Dominion of Wales unto the Realm of
England, altering in many parts, the former Jurisdiction and Government
thereof, bringing the same to the like administration of Justice as was, and
yet is usual in England, apponting that the laws of England should take place
there, and that all Welsh law, Welsh laws abrogated.
sinister customs and tenures not agreeable to the Laws of England, should be
thenceforth abrogated and abolished. Of which union and Annexion;

Wales.

Peradventure the annexion of Scotland was meant.


England, I have presumed with convenient brevity upon this good occasion here
in this place to express the same. Therefore whereas in former time there had
been in Wales anciently 8 several Shires or Counties, Judge Dod. fol 40.
Statutum de 24. b. 8. cap. 26
besides the county of Monmoth which was the ninth, and that some other
Territories in Wales were then no Shire Grounds, by reason whereof the Laws of
England could have no current passage therein. For all the ordinary Ministers
and Executioners of the process of the Laws of England, or which have
Viscountile Jurisdiction are the Officers of particular Shires, as the
Sheriffs, the Coroners, the Escheaters, and such like. Therefore by the said
Act of Parliament there were erected in Wales 4 other new ordained shires of
the lands not formerly so divided, namely the several shires of Radnor,
Brecknock, Montgomery, and Denbigh, so that now the shires are 13. viz.

1 Radnor shire. 2 Brecknock shire. 3 Monmoth shire. 4 Glamorgan shire. 5
Carmarthyn shire. 6 Pembrock shire. 7 Cardigan shire. 8 Montgomery shire. 9
Merionith shire. 10 Caernarvon shire. 11 Denbigh shire. 12 Flint shire. 13
Anglesey shire.
And these four last also with the former ancient Shires together, are by that
Act of Parliament, and by Statute of 38. H. 8. subdivided into Cantreds, The
Marches divided betwixt the Welsh and English Shires.
and all the March ground being then neither any part of Wales, although
formerly conquered out of Wales, neither any part of the Shires of Engl. The
said King by the said Act of Parliament did annex and unite partly unto the
said Shires of Engl. and partly unto the Shires of Wales next adjoining, as was
thought then (by reason of vicinity of place and other correspondency) most
convenient as by the said Act of Parliament appears: which the said King was
the rather occasioned to do for most of the said Baronies Merchers, were then
in his own hands. And for that also diverse murders, rapes, roberies and
enormities, and odious offenses had been there committed, and by reason of the
flight of the offenders, Monmoth made an English Shire.
from one Barony (as is usual upon the borders) they had escaped due and
condign punishment, for their such enormities and crimes, he ordained also
that the county of Monmoth, formerly being a shire of Wales, should be governed
from thenceforth in like manner, Stat. 27. H. 8. cap. 26.
and by the same Judges as other Shires of England, and for the other 12 Shires
he ordered a special jurisdiction and Officers, but yet in substance agreeable,
and after the laws of England, although for the circumstance of time and place
and persons in some few things discordant.

He ordained that out of every of the said Shires of Wales, there should be one
Knight and out of every of the Shire Towns of Wales named in the said Act of
Parliament, Stat. 276. cap 26.
there should be one Burgess, elected after the English manner, which Knights
and Burgesses so elected, and duly upon the summons of every parliament in
England, returned, should have place and voice in the parliament of England, as
other the Knights and Burgesses of England used to have.

Circuits 34. H 8. cap. 26. Stat
As for the administration of justice in the said 12 Shires of Wales, there was
by an Act of parliament of 34. H. 8. ordained 4. several circuits, precints, or
Conventus Juridicus allotting to every of them three of these Shires, so that
the Chief Justice of Chester has under his jurisdiction the three several
Shires of Denbigh, Flint and Montgomery, his Fee is yearly 100 l.

Justice.
The Shires of Carnarvon, Merioneth and Anglesey, are under the Justice of
Northwales, whose Fee is, 50 l.

The counties of Carmardhin, Pembrock and Cardigan have also their Justice,
whose Fee is 50 l.

The counties of Radnor, Brecknock and Glamorgan have also their Justice whose
Fee is 50 l.

After by an Act of parliament made 18. Eliz. cap. 8. one other Justice
assistant was ordained to the former Justices, Stat. 18. Eliz. cap. 8.
so that now every of the said four circuits, have two Justices, viz. one chief
Justice, and a second Justice assistant.

Their Jurisdiction.
These Justices in every of their circuits have almost the same Jurisdiction
that the ancient Justices in Air, or Justices Itenerants had. First they had
power to hear and determine all criminal causes which are called in the laws
of England, the pleas of the Crown, and herein they have the same absolute
jurisdiction that the Judges have of the K. bench, commonly so called.

They have also Jurisdiction to hear and determine all civil causes, which are
called in the laws of England, common pleas, and to take the acknowledgment of
Fines levied of lands or hereditaments without suing any dedimus potestatem;
and herein they have the same jurisdiction that the Justices of the Common
pleas do execute in the hall at Westminster, also they may hear and determine
all Assizes upon disseisons of lands or hereditaments, wherein they equal the
jurisdiction of the Justices of Assize.

They may hear and determine all notable violences and outrages, perpetrated or
done within their several precints, and therein they have the power, authority
and jurisdiction of the Justices of Oyer and Terminer.

Their Chancery, Seal and Writs.
For as much as no suite can commence between party and party, nor orderly
Justice can be done without complaint of the pursevant, and summons and
admonition given unto the defendant; which summons the policy of England from
the beginning of the first foundation of this Commonwealth has appointed to
be performed by that kind of formulae juris which the common law calls a Writ
or Brief so called as Bracton says, Breve quia rem quae est and intentionem
petentis breviter enarrat, and which writ is always conceived in form quondam
of the Kings name, in manner of a preecept Royal, and sealed with the Kings or
Potestates great seal. Writ either Judicial or Original.
Therefore in the appointing of this Jurisdiction, there is ordained to every
Circuit or precint, a several Seal for the sealing of such writs and
commissions as the case shall require within that Circuit. And for as much as
all Writts are either Original, such as begin the suite, or else judicial, such
as command and warrant the execution thereof. It is by the said Statute made in
the 34 Hen. 8. ordained, that the Seal serving for Original process in several
shires of Denbigh and Montgomery, should be in the custody of the Chamberlain
of Denbigh, and what the original Seal of Chester shall be and stand for the
Original Seal of Flint, and shall be in the custody of the Chamberlain of
Chester; the like seal serving for the several shires of Carnarvon, Merioneth
and Anglesey, to be in the custody of the Chamberlain of Northwales.

The like seal concerning the several Shires of Radnor, Brecknock, and
Glamorgan, is committed to the custody of the Steward of Brecknoc.

And finally, the like Seal serving for the several Shires of Caermardhyn,
Pembrock^ and Cardigan, is in the usage of the Chamberlain of Southwales.

These Chamberlains are as Chancellours in this behalf, and have the sealing of
all Original writs and commissions within the several precints, and these
Chamberlains may also award out several writs to all Under-Receivers of the
Revenues, and ministers to make their accounts.

The Seal for sealing judicial writs, is appointed by the said Statute 34 H. 8.
to be and remain by the Justices of every the said circuits for the more
expedite execution of their Judgment. The great sessions.


Their Sessions and manner of Sitting.
Every of these Justices in their several circuits shall be Itenerant, twice
every year, and sit in every of the Shires with their authority by the space of
six days together, at a place certain by them so appointed, and upon
proclamation of summons to be made 15 days before the said sittings,
Adjournments.
where all persons requiring Justice may purchase their writs and proceed in
their suits. And where Adjournments of the causes there depending shall be De
die in diem, and if the cause can have no end during the sitting, then from
Sessions to Sessions, as the nature of the business shall require, and
according to the discretion of the said Justices, and these sittings are called
the great Sessions. 34. H 8 cap. 26. ^ 33 Pet^y Sessions.


And if their shall be such multitudes of pleas personal, as that they cannot
be tried at the same great Sessions, then the issues there in trial shall and
may be tried at some Sessions before the Deputy Justice, which is therefore
called the petty sessions.

And if any erroneous judgment be given by the said Justices in any real
Action, the same shall be reversed by writ of error, before the Justices of the
Kings bench. And if the said erroneous judgment shall be in any Action
personal, the same shall be reversed by bill before the Lord president of the
Marches, and council there.

Officers, Ministers, Clerks, and Writers, for the expediting of the said great
Sessions.
First, there are the Chamberlains of every the said circuits, as has been
said, who are properly and Originally the Treasurers of the Revenue within
their charge, and by the said Statutes are also Keepers of the seals as
aforesaid, therein they do undertake in part the Office of a Chancellor.

And in every of the said circuits there is the Attorney or Regius Advocatia,
and Solicitor.

There is a Protonotary or chief Register who draws all the pleadings,
Protonotary Cl^rk of the Crown.
enters and engrosseth the Records and Judgments in civil causes, and
engrossing Fines. And there is also a Clerk of the Crown, which draws and
ingrosseth all inditements and proceedings, arraignments and judgments in
criminal causes; and these two Officers are at the King or States appointment.

There is a Marshal to attend the persons of the Judges at their common sitting
and going from the Sessions or Court. There is a Marshal.


There is a Crier, Tanquam publicus preco, to call forth such persons, whose
apparences are necessary, and to impose silence to the people. And these two
Officers last remembered are deposed by the Justices. And thus much touching the
Justices of the great Sessions.

There are also other ordinary Officers appointed for every Shire in Wales, by
the said Statute 34. Henry 8. such and in like manner as in other the Shires in
England.

There is a commission under the great Seal of England, to certain Gentlemen,
What a Justice of peace.
giving them power to preserve the peace, and resist and punish all turbulent
persons, whose misdemeanour may tend to the disquiet of the people, and these
are called, Justices of peace, and every of them may well be termed Eirnarcha,
the chief of them is called Custos Rotulorum, in whose custody all the Records
of their proceedings are resident: Others there are of that number called
Justices of the peace, and Quorum, because of their Commissions, whereby they
have power to sit and determine causes, concerning breach of peace and
misbehaviour: the words of the Commission are conceived thus, Quorum such and
such Vnum vel duos, etc. Esse volumus, and without some one or more of them of
the Quorum, no Sessions can be holden; and for the avoiding of the superfluous
number of such Justices, 8. Justices only allowed in every County of Wales.
for through the ambition of many, it is accounted a credit to be burdened
with that Authority. The Satute of 34 Hen. 8. has expressly prohibited that
there shall be above eight Justices of Peace, within every of the Counties and
Shires of Wales; which, if the number were not indefinite for the Shires in
England, it were the better: These Justices do hold their Sessions quarterly.

And it is further ordained by the Statute of 34 Hen 8. that two Justices of
peace, whereof one to be of the Quorum, may hold their Sessions without any
greater number.

In every of the said Shires, where the said Commission of peace is
established: There is also a Clerk of the peace, for the entering and engrossing
of all proceedings before the said Justices, and this Officer is appointed by
the Custos Rotulorum.

Sr. John Dod, fol. 49.
Every of the said Shires has a Sheriff; which word being of the Saxon English,
is as much as to say a Shire-Reeve, or Minister, or Bailiff of the County; his
Function or Office is twofold, Ministerial and Judicial: As touching his
Ministerial Office, he is the Minister and Executioner of all the Process and
Precepts of the Courts of Law, and thereof ought to make return and
certificate; Why the Turn Court so called.
and as touching the Judicial Office, he has Authority to hold two several
Courts of distinct natures, the one called the Turn; because he keeps a
Turn or Circuit about the Shire, holding the same in several places, wherein
he does enquire of all offenses perpetrated against the common Law, and not
forbidden by any Statute or Act of Parliament. The County Court derived from
Justice Communicative.
And the Jurisdiction of this Court is derived from justice distributive, and
is for criminal offenses; The other is called the County Court, where he does
determine all petty and small causes civil, under the value of 40 s. arising
within the said County, and thereof it is called the County Court. And the
Jurisdiction of this Court is drawn from Justice Communicative, and is held
every Month. The Office of the Sheriff is annual by the Statute of 34 Hen. 8.
it is ordained that the Lord President, Council and Justices of Wales, or three
of them at the least, whereof the President to be one, shall yearly nominate
three fit persons for that Office, of whom the King or State may elect one, who
thereupon shall have his Patent, and be Sheriff of the said Shire.

Escheator, why so called
Every of the said Shires has an Officer called an Escheator, which is an
Officer to attend the Kings Revenue, and to seize into his hands all lands
either Escheated, goods or lands forfeited, and therefore he is called
Escheator; and he is to enquire by good enquest of the death of the Kings
Tenants, and to whom the lands are descended; and to seize the bodies and lands
for Ward, if they be within age, and is accountable for the same. And this
Officer in Wales is nominated, Escheator, 34 Hen. 8. cap. 16.
by the Lord Treasurer of England, by the advice of the Lord President, Council
and Justices, or three of them at least, whereof the Lord President to be one.
There are also in every of the said Shires two Officers called Coroners; they
are to enquire by enquest, in what manner and by whom every person dying a
violent death, came to his death, and to enter the same of Record, which is
matter criminal, and a plea of the Crown, Coroners, why so called
and thereof they are called Coroners or Crowners, as one has written, because
their enquiries ought to be public, Et in Corona Populi: These Officers are
are chosen by the Freeholders of the Shire, by virtue of a Writ out of the
Chancery, De Coronatore Eligendo. And of them I need not speak more, because
these Officers are elsewhere.

The Goal.
Forasmuch as every Shire has one Goal or Prison, appointed for the restraint
of liberty of such persons as for their offenses are thereunto committed, until
they shall be delivered by course of Law.

Finally in every hundred of every of the said Shires, the Sheriffs thereof
shall nominate sufficient persons to be Bailiffs of that hundred, and under
Ministers of the Sheriff, and they are to attend upon the Justices in every of
their Courts and Sessions.

The Government of the Marches of Wales, after the Statute of An. 27. and 34.
H. 8.
By the said Statute of 34. Hen. 8. cap. 26. It is furthered ordained, that the
President and the Council in the said Dominion and Principality of Wales, and
the Marches of the same, with all Officers, Clerks and Incidents thereunto,
should continue and remain in manner and form as was then formerly used and
accustomed.

And therefore Rowland Lee, being Lord President of the Council of the Marches
of Wales, at the time of making of the said Statute, so continued after the
making thereof until his death, being in the 34 year of the said King Hen. 8.
after whom succeeded in the Office of the said President, Richard Samson Bishop
of Chichester, and after removed to Coventry and Liechfield, who continued Lord
President until the second year of K. Edw. 6. At what time John Dudley, then
Earl of Warwick, and after Duke of Northumberland, was President of the said
Council, who so continued until the 4th year of the said King; and after him
succeeded Sr. William Herbert, Knight of the Noble Order of the Garter, and
after Earl of Pembrock, who continued president until the first year of Queen
Mary; next succeeded Nicholas Heath, Bishop then of Worcester, and after
Archbishop of York, and Lord Chancellor of England; and upon removing of the
said Archbishop, the said William Herbert succeeded again as President of the
said Council, until the 6th year of the said Queen Mary; at what time followed
him Gilbert Brown, Bishop of Bath and Wells, who continued until the death of
the same Queen: In the beginning of the late Queen Elizabeth, Sr. John
Williams, Lord Williams of Tame, of whom the Lord Norris was descended, was
appointed President of the said Council, and died the same year; and after him
succeeded Sr. Henry Sydney, Knight of the Noble Order of the Garter, whose love
to learning; and favor to learned men, need not here to be spoken, he
continued Lord President of Wales about 24 years and 6 Months, he served in
Ireland 8 years and 6 months, being there 3 several times Lord Deputy General
in that Country; During some part of the time of tho abode in Ireland of the
said Sr. Hen. Sydney, there served as President or Vice President John Bish of
Worcester, after Archbishop of Canterbury; after this succeeded H^n. Earl of
Pembrock, son in law to Sr. Henry Sydney, and father to the honorable Earl of
Pembrock; and after him Edward Lord Zouch. Quare who succeeded.


The President and Council of the Marches of Wales, The Jurisdiction of the
Council of the Marches of Wales, Statutum 34. H. 8. cap. 26.
had power and authority to hear and determine by their wisdom and discretions,
such causes and matters as be, or shall be assigned to them by the Kings
Majesty, and in such manner as shall be so prescribed unto them by Instruction,
signed by his hand.

The Council assisting the Lord Prince consisted of these, the chief Justice of
Chester, together with the three other of the said Justices of Wales, who
after their Sessions ended, are for the most part resident at the Council; and
these are ordinary; there are diverse extraordinaries, both Lords and Knights,
and such others, as are learned in the Laws, and are to be called to Council,
when the Lord President shall think requisite; and every such of the Council
extraordinary learned in the Laws, when they are called and do serve there,
they are allowed their diet for them and their men, and 6 s. and 8 d. per diem,
during the time of their attendance.

The Officers there serving to the administration of Justice (as I am informed)
are these; Sr. John Dodridge, fol. 54.
The Clerks of the Council; The Clerk of the Signet; The Register; All which
were granted to one man by the late Queen Elizabeth: And are Executed by his
Deputy; The Examiner; The Remembrancer; The Receiver of the Fines; The
Attorney, The Solicitor; The Porter: To whose custody such Delinquents as
deserve to suffer restraint of liberty, are committed, etc. Two Messengers, and
a Sergeant at Arms.

And thus much briefly touching the Ancient and Modern Estate and Government of
the Principality of Wales, and of the Marches of the same.

Next follows to be considered (according to the former Order proposed) the
Ancient and Modern Officers of the said Principality serving the Lord Prince,
and what Fees Sallary were allowed unto them:

The Ancient Officers their Names and Fees, Collected out of diverse Ancient
Accounts, were these following in North Wales.
The Justice of North Wales, whose ancient fee was uncertain, but yet for the
most part yearly his fee was 50 l. Howbeit, I find that Sr. William Standley
Knight, to whom K. Hen. 7th. gave the Office of Justice of North Wales, for
his life had the yearly fee of 133 l 8 s. 8 d. d. a. 1. Hen. 7. But this
seems to have been of favor.

Chamberlain. Auditor.
The Chamberlain of North Wales, whose ancient fee was yearly 20 l.

The Auditor of North Wales; viz. Chester and Flint, the ancient fee was 10 l.
yearly, with allowance of 10 s. per diem, while he was in executing this
Office, and finishing the account 10 l.

Countrouller. Attorney.
The Countrouller of all Pleas, Fines, Amercements and Redemptions, or Ransoms,
his yearly fee was 12 l. 3 s. 4 d. b.

The Attorney of North Wales; viz. of the Counties of Carnarvon, Merioneth and
Anglesey, his yearly fee was 56 s. 8 d.

Surveyor.
The Supervisor or Surveyor of the Castles, Manors, Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments of the Prince of North Wales, his yearly fee was 10 l.

Constable.
The Constable of the Castle of Carnarvon, his fee was uncertain, sometimes 60
l. and sometimes but 40 l.

Captain.
The Captain of the Town of Carnarvon, his fee was yearly 12 l. 3 s. 4 d. d. and
sometimes one man had both the Offices of Constable of the Castle, and Captain
of the Town, having 60 l. yearly, for both the Offices 12 l. 3 s. 4 d.

Soldiers.
There were allowed sometime unto the said Constable and Captain 24 Soldiers,
for the safe custody of the Castle and Town, and every of them was allowed 4 d.
per diem, amounting in the whole unto 146 l. by the year 146 l.

Porter. Constable.
The Porter of the Gates of the said Town of Carnarvon, whose fee was yearly 3
l. 10 s.

The Constable of the Castle of Conwey, his fee was yearly sometimes 40 l. and
sometimes 50 l.

Captain.
The Captain of the Town of Conwey, had for his yearly fee 12 l. 3 s. 4 d. and
most commonly he that was Constable of the Castle, was also Captain of the Town
12 l. 3 s. 4 d

Soldiers.
There were also allowed to the said Constable and Captain 24 Soldiers, for the
safe custody of the said Town and Castle, and every of them was allowed 4 d.
per diem, amounting yearly to 146 l.

Porter. Constable.
The Keeper and Porter of the Gate of Conwey, his fee was 4 d. per diem.

The Constable of the Castle of Hardlaigh in the County of Merioneth, his fee
yearly was 26 l. 13 s. 4 d. in some accounts he was allowed 50 l. which I think
was of both Offices of Constable and Captain 26 l. 13 s. 4 d.

Soldiers.
There were also allowed 24 Soldiers for the Guard of the said Town and Castle
of Hardlaigh, their wages amounting yearly to 146 l.

Constable. Captain.
The Constable of the Castle of Beumarish, his yearly fee was 40 l.

The Captain of the Town of Beumarish, his yearly fee was 12 l. 13 s. 4 d.

There were also 24 Soldiers allowed for the Guard of the said Town and Castle
of Beumarish, every of which were allowed 4 d. per diem, amounting to 146 l.

Porter. Forrester.
The Porter or Keeper of the Gate of Beumarish, had for his fee 9 l. 2 s. 6 d.

The chief Forrester of the Forest of Snowdon, his fee 11 l. 8 s.

The Office of the Steward of the Towns of Newborough and Roffaire, his fee was
yearly 10 l.

The Marshal and Keeper of the Justice house in the Town of Carnarvon, his
yearly fee was 26 s. 8 d.

The Clerk of the great Sessions I find not.
Exchequer.
There was a Court of Exchequer of the Princes Revenues for North Wales holden
in the Castle of Carnarvon, in which Court there were certain fees allowed, for
the expenses of Parchment, Paper, Bags for Money, and for Portrage of Money,
and such other small charges, which were variable according to the occasions
and times.

South Wales.
Justice.
The Justice of South Wales, whose ancient fee was yearly 20 l. at sometimes 46
l.

The Auditor of South Wales, Auditor.
his ancient fee was yearly 40 l. but sometimes his fee was but 20 l. 5 s. per
diem, whiles he exercised his Office.

The Attorney of South Wales, who had yearly for his fee 8 l. 13 s. 4 d.
Attorney. Constable. Sheriff. Steward.


The Constable and Usher of the Castle of Caermarthen, whose yearly fee was 20
l.

The Sheriff of the County of Caermarthen, whose fee was yearly 50 s.

The Steward general of the Comotts of the County of Caermarthens fee 6 l. 13
s. 4 d.

The Clerk of the County, Courts, and small Sessions in the County of
Caermarthen, his yearly fee 40 s.

The Crier of the County Courts, and small Sessions in the said County, whose
fee is yearly 6 s. 8 d.

The Steward of the Welsh Courts in the County of Caermarthen, his fee 6 l. 13
s. 4 d. Steward. Penkeys. Steward. Clerk. Bailiff. Bailiff. Constable. Sheriff.
Clerk.


The Office of the Penkeyes in the Comots Widegada and Elvet, his fee 4 s.

The Steward of the Welsh Courts of Widegada and Elvet, his yearly fee 3 l. 6
s. 8 d.

The Clerk of the Welsh Courts of Widegada and Elvet, whose yearly fee 6 s. 8 d.

The Bailiff Itenerant for Caermarthen, whose yearly fee was 5 l.

The Bailiff Itenerant for Cantred, whose yearly fee was 6 l. 13 s. 4 d.

The Constable of the Castle of Cardigan, whose ancient fee was yearly 40 l.

The Sheriff of the County of Cardigan, whose yearly fee was 5 l.

The Clerk of the County Courts, Tornes, and small Sessions of the County of
Cardigan, his yearly fee was 40 s.

The Crier of the County Courts and small Sessions in the said County, Crier.
his fee 6 s. 8 d.

The Clerk of the Hundreds in Cardigan, his yearly fee was 6 s. 8 d. Clerk.
Steward. Clerk.


The Steward of the Welsh Courts in the County of Cardigan, his fee was 10 l.

The Clerk for writing the Rolls in the Welsh Courts, his yearly fee was in the
County of Cardigan 6 s. 8 d.

The Bailiff Itenerant of Cardigan, his ancient fee was yearly 5 l. Bailiff.
Bailiff. Captain.


The Bailiff Itenerant of Lampaderne, his yearly fee was 6 l. 13 s. 4 d.

The Captain of the Town of Aberystwyth, his yearly fee was 18 l. 5 s. he was
allowed 12 Archers for the custody of the said Town and Castle.

The Escheator for the two Shires of Caermarthen and Cardigan, Escheator.
his fee was yearly 10 l.

The Clerk of the great Sessions for both the Counties of Caermarthen and
Cardigan, Clerk.
his yearly fee was 5 l.

There was a Court of Exchequer likewise, Exchequer.
for the Revenues of the Prince of South Wales, kept in the Castle of
Caermarthen, and yearly allowance for the expenses thereof, as in the Province
of North Wales.

By this it appears, that the Province of South Wales, chargeable to the
Prince, extended for the most part into the two Counties of Caermarthen and
Cardigan; the rest of South Wales, as Munmothshire and Glamorgan, etc. were in
the hands of others.

The reason of the difference of the Officers that were in South Wales, from
those that were in North Wales, was, North Wales was divided in Counties, and
framed into Shires, and ordered according to the English Laws, by the Statute
made at Ruthlan, called Statutum Wallioe, often before mentioned, made in the
time of King Edw. 1. whereas South Wales nevertheless remained governed in
some things according to the Welsh Laws and Customs, even until the said
Statute made in an. 27. H. 8.

Thus much concerning the Offices of both Princes of North Wales and South
Wales.
The Prince of Wales had also diverse and sundry Officers about his person, and
of his household, which were these that follow out of Records, where mention is
made of them:

The Council of the Prince, consisting of diverse honorable, The Council.
Governor.
worshipful and learned persons, to Council for the leasing and good disposing
of his Revenues.

The Governor of the Prince his person, to whom the Education and Institution
of the young Prince was committed; such was the Lord Rivers unto Prince Edw.
son to King Edw. 4. wherein also the Queen, Mother to the Prince, had a special
interest; for few things were done concerning the Prince without her privacy
and advice.

The Chamberlain to the Prince; Chamberlain. 21 Edw. 1. pat. part 2.
it appears that Richard de la Beer was Chamberlain to the Black-Prince, son
and heir of King Edw. 3. and Sr. Thomas Poole was chief Chamberlain to Prince
Arthur; so was Thomas Vaughan to Prince Edw. son to King Edw. 4.

The Attorney General to the Prince: William Rudhall, The Attorney. 11 Edw. 4.
pat. part 1. Clerk.
was sometimes Attorney to the Prince.

The Clerk of the Prince his Council, or Secretary, and Keeper of his Books,
Writings and Records, his fee was 10 l. per annum, and his diet; one Thomas
Tamworth had this Office.

The Usher of the Councel-chamber of the Prince, his fee was 10 l. per annum,
and his wages for attendance of the Council there: one Thomas Ferris sometimes
had this Office.

The Gentleman Usher of the Princes private chamber: Sr. Thomas wroth had this
Office to P. Edw. in the life of K. Hen. 8. and yet was that Prince never
created Prince of Wales.

The Keeper of the Princes Wardrobe, who sometimes was one Giles Davies, and
had a patent thereof, with a fee of 5 l. 10 s. yearly.

The Officers that follow are principally necessary, besides many other
Officers inferior left out, and no doubt did serve the Princes of this Realm,
although no mention of them of Record.
The Treasurer or Receiver general of the P. of all his Revenues; which
appears in this, That he had his general Exchequer at Westminster.

The Princes chief Secretary.

The Master of the Princes horses, and those that teach him to ride.

The Schoolmasters of the Prince, as namely those that teach him

The Arts and Philosophy.

The tongues of French, Italian and Spanish, etc.

The Principles of the Laws of the Realm, and of the Civil and Ecclesiastical.

A Note of the Officers, both modern and present, of the local Principality of
Wales; which Officers are allowed Fees, and other Charges going out of the
Principality, as does appear by diverse accounts before the Auditors the last
year, viz. the 44 year of Eliz.
Carnarvon Shire.
The Chamberlain of North Wales, in the Counties of Carnarvon, Anglesey, and
Merioneth, his fee is 20 l.

The Constable of the Castle of Carnarvon, his yearly fee is 60 l. 10 s.

The Porter of the Town of Carnarvon 3 l. 10 s.

The Porter of the Town of Conwey 6 l. 1 s. 8.

The Constable of the Town of Conwey 13 l. 6 s. 8 d.

The said two Justices are allowed yearly, while they are in circuit in the
time of the great Sessions 6 l.

The two Justices for the Counties of Carnarvon, Anglesey and Merioneth, each
of them having for his yearly fee 50 l. amounting in the whole to the sum of
100 l.

The Attorney in the three Counties aforesaid, is allowed for his fee yearly 6
l. 6. 8 d.

The chief Forrester of Snowdon, his fee 11 l. 8 s. 1 d.

The Controuller of the pleas, fines and redemptions before the Justices of
North Wales, his yearly fee was 12 l. 3 s. 4 d.

The fee of the Marshal and Keeper of the Shire-house, in the Counties of
Carnarvon, Anglesey and Merioneth 2 l. 6 s. 8 d.

The Protonotary and Clerk of the great Sessions is allowed for a reward for
his labor, in engrossing of the estreets of the Sessions holden in the the
said three Counties 3 l. 6 s. 8 d.

The Barons of the Exchequer of Carnarvon 13 l. 6 s. 8 d.

For their attendance at Carnarvon yearly 40 s.

Toward the expenses allowed the Clerk of the Exchequer, attending the great
Sessions in the said Counties of Anglesey and Merioneth, for writing of the
Original Writs of every Sessions 10 s.

For the expenses of parchment, paper, ink, and other necessaries, spent in the
Office of the Clerk of the Crown 1 l. 6. s. 8 d.

The Crier, whose yearly fee is 13 s. 48.

For expenses of paper, parchment, ink, and other necessaries, in the Exchequer
at Carnarvon, and for baggs to put money in 1 l. 10 s.

For expense of Bailiffs Itenerant, bringing the Writs for colecting of the
money by the Receivers 11 s.

Summa totalis Carnarvon 303 l. 1 s. 7 d.

The Constable of the Castle of Beumarish, and Captain of the Town, whose
yearly fee was 26 l. 13 s. 4 d.

The Steward of Meney, whose fee was yearly 5 l.

The Steward of Rossaire, whose fee was 20 s.

Summa totalis Anglesey 32 l. 13 s. 4 d.

The Constable of the Castle of Hardleigh, whose fee was yearly 50 l.

The Auditors, whose yearly fees are 61 l. 18 s. 4 d.

And for their charges they are allowed 90 l.

The Receiver, whose yearly fee and allowance for portage of money 30 l. 18 s.
6 d.

The Surveyor, whose yearly fee was 20 l.

The Woodward, whose fee was yealy 10 l.

Summa totalis Merioneth 262 l. 16 s. 10 d.

The total sum of North Wales 599 l. 8 s. 5 d.

South Wales.
The Protonotary and Clerk of the Crown in the Counties of Cardigan,
Caermarthen, Pembrock, and the Town of Haverford West, whose fee is 40 s.

The Attorney in the Counties Caermarthen, Pembrock, Cardigan, Brecknoc and
Radnor, whose yearly fee is 8 l. 13 s. 4 d.

The Stewards of the Welsh Courts, whose yearly fee is 6 l.

The Sheriff of Cardigan, whose fee is 5 l.

Summa totalis Cardigan 21 l. 13 s. 4 d.

The Chamberlain and Chancellor of Caermarthen, Caermarthen Shire.
whose yearly fee is 35 l. 11 s. 8 d.

The Crier of the great Sessions holden in the Counties of Caermarthen,
Cardigan and Pembrock, whose fee is 6 ^. 8 d.

The Constable of the Castle of Caermarthen, whose yearly fee is 20 l.

The Steward of the Welsh Courts of the County of Caermarthen, whose yearly fee
is 10 l.

The Justices of the Counties of Caermarthen and Cardigan, their yearly fee is
to each of them 50 l. and they are allowed for their diet in the times of their
great Sessions 5 l.

Summa totalis Caermarthen 215 l. 19 s. 8 d.

The present revenue of the Principality of Wales, as the same was in charge
before the Auditors this last year past; viz. 44. Elizabeth.
The Farm and yearly Rents certain of the Manners, Lands and Tenements in the
County of Carnarvon amounts unto 423 l. 3 s. 4 d. ob.

The casual profits thereof 76 l. 19 s. 9 d. ob.

Summa totalis 500 l. 3 s. q.

The Farm and yearly Rents certain of the Lands, The County of Anglesey.
Manners and Tenements in the County of Anglesey 398 l. 19 s. 11 d. q.

The casual profits thereof 26 l. 10 s. 10 d.

Summa totalis 425 l. 10 s. 9 d. q.

The Farm and yearly Rent, certain of the Manners, Merioneth.
Lands and Tenements in the County of Merioneth 202 l. 9 s. ob. q.

The casual profits 60 l. 16 s. 10 d.

Summa totalis 263 l. 5 s. 10 d. ob. q.

Summa totalis of North Wales 1138 l. 19 s. 8 d. q.

South Wales.
The Farm and Rents, certain of the County of Cardigan amounted to 213 l 2 s. 2
d.

The casual profits thereof 86 l. 9 s. 2 d.

Summa totalis 299 l. 11 s. 4 d.

The Farm and Rents certain of the County of Caermarthen amounts to 185 l. 6
s. 3 d. ob.

The casual profits 180 l. 11 s. 7 d.

Summa totalis 376 l. 17 s. 10 d. ob.

The yearly sum total, being cast up together, amounts to 1865 l. 8 s. 10 d.
ob. q.

The charges above specified, and other, issuing all manner of ways out of the
same revenues, amount to 530 l. 6 s. 7 d.

Which being deducted out of the former total sum of 1865 l. 8 s. 10 d. ob. q.
there does rest clear the yearly sum of 1335 l. 2 s. 3 d. ob q.

Whereby may be observed, that the Revenues of the principality of Wales, which
in the time of Prince Edw. called the Black Prince, about 300 years ago,
without deductions amounted to 4681 l. 12 s. 5 d. q. is now worn and wasted to
the sum of 1865 l. 8 s. 10 d. ob q. and with the ordinary deductions and
reprizes taken out of it at this present in charges, fees to Officers, and
other Reprizes, is brought to the sum of 1335 l. 2 s. 3 d. ob q.

Which small sum also (as the Revenue was to Queen Eliz.) was much lessened,
for that a greater sum in the whole amounting yearly to 1789 l. 13 s. 2 d.
which did partly arise by reason of the allowance of the diet of the council of
the Marches, being yearly 1106 l. 13 s. 4. the fees of the Barons of the
Exchequer in Wales, the Auditors fees, Woodwarps fees, Receivers fees,
Surveyers fees, and for the portage of money, was charged as well upon this
Revenue of the Prince, as upon other Lands or Revenues belonging to the Crown
within the several Counties of Wales.

Prince Henry.
Mr. Holl. page 247.
James King of Scotland (only son and heir of Henry Stewart King of Scotland)
the name of Stewart here first presenting it self as concerning the right of
succession to the Crown of England, I think is convenient to show unto my
Readers out of Mr. Hollenshed the descent of that Noble, Ancient and Regal
Family, which has much of the Welsh blood in it: Mackbelih, after he had
obtained the Crown of Scotland by indirect means, fearing the posterity of
Banquho, a Nobleman, whose children and offspring the three women told should
enjoy the Crown and sway the Regal Scepter, invited the father Banquho with his
son Fleance to his Palace to supper, but caused certain of his wicked adherents
and Ministers, treacherously to murder them before they entered his Court;
which assascination fell too heavy upon the father, for there he lost his life;
the son by the (Divine assistance) escaped the massacre; and having
intelligence by some private friends in the Palace, that his life was sought
after, to avoid the further peril, he fled into Wales; where by reason of his
carriage, proportion and Court-like behavior, he found such courteous
entainment, that better he could not desire from the Prince, the Courtiers
admire his gallantry, the Ladies his person, his pleasing and charming
behavior, the Princes daughter is so ensnared with Cupids bewitching
allurements, that she admits him privately into her most secret closet, where
what hearts content they enjoyed, unseen by any but themselves, appeared openly
to the world in a short time, by the increase and exuberance of Her belly; in
revenge whereof Fleance is slain, and the poor Lady kept in miserable
condition, for having thus suffered her self to be deflowred by a stranger; at
the last she was delivered of a son named Walter, who within a few years proved
a man greater in courage and fortitude, than any commonly was found, although
he had no better bringing up (by his Grandfathers command) than amongst the
baser sort of people; howbeit, he showed ever from his infancy, that there
reigned in him a certain stoutness of stomach, ready to attempt high
enterprises.

It chancing that falling out with one of his companions, after many taunting
words which passed between them, the other to his reproach objected that he was
a Bastard, and begotten out of lawful Wedlock; which so incensed him, that he
slew him forthwith.

This sad accident forced him to leave Wales, and betake himself to Scotland,
to seek some rising fortune there; where he happened into the company of
certain Englishmen, which came thither with Queen Margaret, and behaved himself
so soberly in all his actions, that within a while he grew into high esteem
amongst them.

Not long after, by such means raising high esteem, he was sent with a great
power of men into the Western Isles, and other places of the Realm, to free the
same from the Tyranous and Injurious oppressions there, Walter made Steward of
Scotland.
exercised by diverse misgoverned persons; which enterprise, according to his
Commission, he achieved with such prudent policy and manhood, that immediately
upon his return to the Court, he was made Lord Steward of Scotland; with
assignment, to receive the Kings Rents and Duties out of all parts of the Realm.

This Walter Steward had a son named Allan Steward, who went after with Godfrey
of Bulloin Duke of Loraine, and Robert Duke of Normandy, Alan Steward.
son to King William Conqueror into the Holy Land, at what time they with
other Western Princes advanced thither, An. 1099.

Allan had issue Alexander Steward, that founded the Abbey of Pasley of St.
Benedicts Order, who had issue Walter Steward, Alex. Steward. Walter Steward.
whose valor was notable in the battle of Largis.

This same Walter had issue two sons, the one named Alexander, who fought right
valiantly at the foresaid battle in defense of his father, Alexander and
Robert brothers, from whence the Earls of Ienox and Dernly.

John and James Walter inhetor of Bonkil. The Crown of Scotland, comes to the
family of the Stewards.

John Steward alias Robert Rex.

Duke of Albanie.


and the other named Robert Steward got the lands of Terbowtoun, and married
the heir of Cruckeistoun, from whom descended the Earls of Lenox and Dernly.
Moreover the abovenamed Alexander that founded Pasley, had diverse other sons,
as John and James, etc. howbeit they took new sirnames by the names of those
lands unto the which they succeeded. The abovenamed John Steward, after the
death of his brother James, married the heir of Bonkil, a virgin of great
beauty, and had by her Walter Steward, that inherited the lands of Bonkil,
Runfrew, Rothsay, Bute and Stewardrown, after that his father John was slain at
Fulkyrk.

He married Margery Bruce, daughter to K. Robert Bruise, by whom he had issue K.
Robert the second of that name.

This Robert the second took to wife one Isabel Mure, a Damosel of excellent
beauty, she was daughter to Sr. Adam Mure Knight, and brought forth issue three
sons and three daughters, the eldest son called John Steward, and by some
Robert, who succeeded immediately after his fafathers death in the Kingdom.

The second called Robert was made Earl of Fyfe and Mentrith, also he was
created Duke of Albanie, and ruled the realm of Scotland under the name of
Governor by the space of XV. years.

The third son named Alexander, was Earl of Buchquane and Lord of Bondzenot.
The Earl of Buckquane a Steward.


The eldest daughter was married to James the son and heir of William Earl of
Douglas, the second daughter was married to John Dunbar brother to George Dunbar
Earl of March, and was made to his more honor Earl of Murray.

He got on her one only daughter that was married to the Douglas, and so
Douglas came to be Earl of Murray. The third daughter was married to John
Lyoun, that was made afterward Lord of Glammis.

Moreover the foresaid Robert, that was the first of the Stewards, The Earl of
Athol and Stratherne Stewards.
which ware the crown of Scotland, married Eufamia daughter to the Earl of
Ross, and had by her two sons, Walter E. of Athol, and David E. of Stratherne.

This Walter solicited Robert D. of Albanie to slay David Steward D. of Rothsay.

After that James the first was returned out of England, Nec lex est justior
ulla. Quam necis artifices art perire sua.
he did what he could to move him to put to death all the lineage of the said
Duke, still being in hope after the dispatch of his Kinsmen to come to the
crown himself, which hope moved him to procure his Nephew Robert Steward and
Robert Graham his daughters son to murder K. James the I. also for the which
crime the said Walter was convicted and destroyed with all his sons.

His brother David Earl of Buchquane died without issue, and so the lands of
both those brethren returned again to the crown, without any memory of their
blood.

Sir Robert Steward Duke of Albanie married the E. of Lenox daughter, and had
by her 3 sons Walter, Alexander, and James.

Duke Murdo himself with his first two sons were slain at Striveling, by K.
James I. and the third brother James in revenge thereof, burnt Durbertane, and
was after chased into Ireland, where he deceased without issue. Robert the
third of that name, married Annabel Drommound, daughter of Sir John Drommound
of Stobhal Knight, and had by her David and James, the first dyed in Faulkland,
and the other attained the Crown, and was called James the first, and married
the Lady Jane, daughter to John Beauford Earl of Somerset in England, he had
by her two sons born at one birth, Alexander and James, the first died young,
the second reigned, by the name James the second.

James the first had also 6 daughters, James the 1. his issue.
the eldest whereof was given in marriage to the Dolphin in France, the second
to the Duke of Britain, the third to the Lord Feir, the fourth to the Lord of
Dalkeith; the fifth to the Earl of Hantley, and the sixth had no succession.

James the II. married Margaret daughter to the Duke of Gelderland, and begot
on her three sons and two daughters.

The first succeeded him in the Kingdom and was called James the III. the
second named Alexander was Duke of Albanie, and married the Earl of Orkneys
daughter, and had by her Alexander that was after Bishop of Murray, and then
parting with her went into France, where he married the Countess of Bullogne,
and begot on her John Steward D. of Albany, who was Governor of Scotland many
years in the minority of James V.

The 3 son John Steward was E. of Mar, whose chance was to be slain in the
Cannogat in a Bath-fat.

The first daughter of James the second, was married to the Lord Boyd, who had
by her a son that was slain by the Lord Montgomery, and a daughter that was
married to the Earl of Cassels.

After the death of the Lord Boyd she was married to the Lord Hamilton, and by
that means was the house of Hamilton decorate with the Kings blood, which they
have well requited in the late transactions.

The other sister was married to the Lord Creichton.

James III. married Margaret daughter to the K. of Denmark, of which marriage
was born James IV, Alexander, Bishop of St. Andrews and D. of Albanie, and John
Steward E. of Mar, which two died without issue.

James the IV. married Margaret daughter to K. Henry VII of England, and by her
had James the fifth, who marrying first the Lady Magdaline, daughter of Frances
the French King had no issue by her; for that she dyed in the year next after
her coming into Scotland: and then shortly after the said James the fifth
married the Lady Mary de Lorayne, Duchess of Longuile, a widow, and by her
had he issue Mary Queen of Scotland, that took to husband Henry Darnely alias
Steward, by whom she had issue Charles James, after King of England, only son
as I said before, of Henry King of Scotland, and of Queen Mary his wife,
Dowager of France and heir of Scotland, who married Anne daughter of Frederike
the second King of Denmark, by whom he had Issue Henry Frederike, created
Prince of Wales, at whose creation Charles Duke of York. Sir Rab. Bartu Lord
Willoughby of Earesby, after Earl of Lindsey, and General for K. Charles at
Edgehil, and there slain. Sir William Compton, Lord Compton, after Earl of
Northampton. Sir Gray Bridges, Lord Shandos. Sir Francis Norris, Lord Norris of
Ricot, after E. of Berks. Sir Will. Cecil after Earl of Salisbury. Sir Allan
Percy brother to Henry Earl of Northumberland. Sir Francis Manors after Earl
of Rutland. Sir Thomas Somerset brother to the Earl of Worcester, and Viscount
Cassel after in Ireland. Sir Thom. Howard second son to the E. of Suffolk,
after E. of Berks. Sir John Harrington, son to John Lord Harrington of Exton.


Prince Charles.
Charles Duke of Albanie, Marquess of Ormond, Earl of Roth, and Lord of
Ardmanoch the third son of James King of great Britain, was created Duke of
York at Whitehal on Tueseday the sixth of January 1604. and after on the 4 of
November 1616. he was likewise at Whitehal created Prince of Wales, Earl of
Chester, etc. at whose Creation these Knights of the Bath were made.

James Lord Matravers, eldest son to Thomas Earl of Arundel. Algernon Lord
Percy, after Earl of Northumberland. James Lord Writchesly, eldest son to the
Earl of Southampton, Knight. Theophilus Lord Clinton, after Earl of Lincoln.
Edward Seymore L. Beauchamp, grandchild to the Earl of Hertford. George Lord
Berckley, after Lord Berckley. Henry Lord Mordant, after Earl of Peterborough.
The Earl of Mar his eldest son, after Lord Fenton. Sir Henry Howard, after
Lord Matravers, etc. Sir Robert Howard, fifth son to the Earl of Suffolk. Sir
Edward Sackvile, after Earl of Dorset. Sir William Howard, sixth son to the
Earl of Suffolk. Sir Edward Howard, seventh son to the said Earl, after Lord
Escricke in Yorkshire. Sir William Seymor second son to the Lord Beauchampe,
after Earl of Hertford. Sir Montague Bartu, son to Robert Earl of Lindsey,
and after Lord Willoughby and Earl, etc. Sir William Sturton, son to the
Lord Sturton. Sir William Parker, after Lord Morley and Monteagle. Sir Dudley
North, after Lord Morth. Sir Spencer Compton, after Earl of Northampton. Sir
William Spencer, after Lord Spencer. Sir Rowland St. John, brother to Oliver
Earl of Bullingbrook. Sir John Cavendish, second son to William Earl of
Devon. Sir Thomas Nevel son to Henry Lord of Abergavenny. Sir John Roper, after
Lord Tenham. Sir John North brother to the Lord North. Sir Henry Carry Viscount
Faulkland.
Prince Charles.
This Prince had the title of Prince of Wales, but not the Investure and
Creation as had his father and Uncle; a thing formerly practiced, as before is
showed, and is also of the Welsh blood, though born in England, by the line of
King James, from the Stewards whose original came out of Wales, from Henry VII.
who descended from Owen Tewdor, ut ante, who descended from Blethin King of
Powis, Gruffith ap Conan King of Northwales, Jestin Lord of Glamorgan, Meyric
King of Gwent, Cadeth King of Southwales, Anarawd King of Northwales, and from
Cadwalader last King of the Britains thus, Henry the seventh married Elizabeth
eldest daughter to King Edward the IV. who was son of Richard Plantagenes, Duke
of York, descended from Richard Plantagenet of Conesbourgh Earl of Cambridge,
by Anne his wife, sister and coheir of Edmund Mortimer the fifth Earl of
March, who was son and heir of Rog. Mortimer fourth E. of March, who succeeded
Edmund Montimer the third Earl of March, who was heir unto Roger Mortimer
Grandchild to Roger Mortimer first Earl of March, and son to Edmund Mortimer
Lord of Wigmore, who died in the Castle of Ludlow, and was buried in the Abbey
of Wigmore, whose Father was

Roger Mortimer Lord of Wigmore, who was created the first Earl of the Marches
of Wales, in the second year of King Edward III. at a Parliament held at
Salisbury, etc. he was son to

Edmund Mortimer Lord of Wigmore, who was son to

Roger Mortimer Lord of Wigmore (and by right of inheritance Prince of Wales)
for he was son to

Ralph Lord Mortimer of Wigmore and Gladys, his wife, who was daughter and heir
(her brother David being dead) to Lhewelin ap Iorwerth, Prince of Northwales,
from this Gladys, her brother being dead sans Issue, as I said, thus descends
from Cadwalader Gladys daughter and heir to Lhewelyn, who was the son of
Iorwerth, the son of Owen Gwineth, the son to Gruffith, the son to Conan, the
son to Iago, the son to Edwal, the son to Meyric, the son of Edwal Voel, the
son of Anarawd, the son of Rodery Mawr, the son of Esylht, the daughter and
sole heir of Conan Tindaythwy, the son of Roderick Molwynoc, the son of Edwal
Ywrich, the son of Cadwalader the last King of the Britains; what transactions
have happened while this prince had the style of that Principality. I will
forbear to speak or relate in this place and only give you a copy of the
Charter used at the Creation of the Princes of Wales.

Here should have been the Picture

The Kings Charter for the Creating of the Princes of Wales.
HENRY by the grace of God King of England and of France, Lord of Ireland, etc.
To all Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Dukes, Earls, Barons, Justices,
Viscounts, Governors, Ministers, and to all our Bailiffs and Faithful subjects
Greeting, out of the excellency of Royal pre-eminence, like as beams from the
Sun, so do inferior honors proceed, neither does the integrity of Royal
luster and brightness by the natural disposition of light affording light from
light, feel any loss or detriment by such borrowed light, yea the royal
scepter is also much the more extolled and regal throne exalted, by how much
the more Nobles Preheminencies and Honors are under the power and command
thereof.

And this worthy consideration allureth and induces us which desire the
increase of the name and honor of our first begotten and best beloved son
Edward, in whom we behold and see our selves to be honored, and our royal
house also, and our people subject to us, hoping by the grace of God (by
conjecture taken of his gracious future proceedings) to be the more honorably
strengthened, that we may with honor prevent and with abundant grace prosecute
him, who in reputation of us is deemed the same person with us, wherefore by
Council and consent of the Prelates, Dukes, Earls, Viscounts, and Barons of
our Kingdom, being in our present Parliament, we have made and created, and by
these presents make and create him the said Edward, Prince of Wales and Earl
of Chester, and unto the said Edward we give and grant, and by this
Charter-have confirmed the Name, Style, Title, State, Dignity and honor of the
said Principality and County. And him of the said Principality and County, that
be may therein, in governing, rule, and in ruling direct and defend, we by a
Garland upon his head, by a ring of gold upon his finger, and a verge of Gold,
have according unto the manner invested him, To have and to hold the same unto
him and his heirs, the Kings of England for ever, wherefore we will and
straightly command for us and our heirs that Edward our son aforesaid, shall have
the name, style, title, state, dignity and honor of the principality of Wales
and county of Chester aforesaid, unto him and his heirs the Kings of England
aforesaid for ever, these being witnesses, the reverend Fathers John Cardinal
and Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate of all England, our Chancellor, and
William Archbishop of York Primate of England, Thomas Bishop of London, John
Bishop of Lincoln, William Bishop of Norwich; our most well beloved Cosens
Richard Duke of York, Humphry Duke of Buckingham, our well beloved Cosens,
Richard Earl of Warwick, Richard Earl of Salisbury, John Earl of Wiltshire;
and our beloved and faithful Ralph Cromwell Chamberlain of our house, William
Faulconbridge and John Stourton Knights. Dated at our Palace at Westminster
the 15 day of March, in the year of our reign 32.

By the King himself, and his Council.

Things required unto the Creation of the Prince of Wales.
First, an honorable habit, viz. a Robe of purple Velvet, having in it about
18 else, more or less, garnished about with a fringe of gold, and lined with
Ermines.

A Surcote or Inner garment having in it about 14 else of Velvet of like
color, fringe and fur.

Laces, Buttons and Tassells (as they call them) ornaments made of purple silk
and gold.

A girdle of silk also to gird his inner gown.

A sword with a scabbord made of purple silk and gold, garnished with the like
girdle he is girt withal, thereby showing himself to be Duke of Cornwall by
birth and not by Creation.

A cap of the same Velvet that his robe is of, furred with Ermines, with laces
and a button the tassels on the crown thereof made of Venice gold.

A garland or a little coronet of gold to be put on his head together with his
cap.

A long golden verge or rod, betokening his government, a ring of gold also to
be put on the third finger of his left hand, whereby he declares his marriage
made with Equity and Justice.

All these things were almost with royal sumptuousness prepared for Edward son
to King Henry VIII. to have been created Prince of Wales, but prevented by his
fathers death, he was crowned King, sixth of that name, yet the form with the
rights and ceremonies belonging to the investing of the Prince into the
Principality of Wales you may perceive by what is above set down.

FINIS

