Truth Prevailing, And Detecting ERROR: OR, An ANSWER to a Book, mis-called, A
Friendly Conference between a Minister and a Parishioner of his, inclining to
Quakerism, etc.

By Thomas Ellwood.

Isa, 54.17. No Weapon that is formed against thee, shall prosper; and every
Tongue that shall rise against thee in Judgment, thou shall condemn. This is
the Heritage of the Servants of the Lord, and their Righteousness is of me,
says the Lord.

Printed in the Year 1676.

THE PREFACE.
Reader,
THere came lately to my Hand a little Book, bearing the Title of, A Friendly
Conference, etc. which having turned over, I found the Drift and Design of it
was to infame the People called Quakers, by representing their Principles
absurd and heterodox, misstating some, and with sophistical Arguments
perverting and opposing others. This, when I had observed, I held my self
concerned to vindicate those Truths which we believe and make Profession of,
from the Absurdities and Errors which the Author of that Book partly through
Ignorance, but principally through Envy, has endeavored to fasten on them.
This is the Occasion and Subject of the following Discourse, which I recommend
to thy serious and impartial Perusal.

Who the Author of the Conference was I did not know, when I wr^^ the Answer to
it, he not having so much Ingenuity (...) to say (...) as to (...) his Name to
his Book. But after the Answer had a good part passed the Press, I received
Information concerning the concealed Author, both Who and What he is, his Name,
Place. etc. which I forbear at pre^ent to publish, in Expectation that he
himself should do it in his next. If he persist a lurking Adversary, let him
not think much, if (after so fair a Warning) I give the World his Name with
such an (...) as his unmanly Dealing with us deserves. He writes himself, A
Lover of the Truth. But seeing Truth seeks no Corners, what should induce him
to conceal his Name! If he indeed believed that to be Truth, which he undertook
to maintain, he needed not to have been either afraid or ashamed to have openly
avouched it. Although I do not think men strictly tied, in all Cases, to affix
their Names to whatsoever they write: yet in Matters of Controversy,
especially wherein one man shall accuse or charge another Man or People, I
conceive the Opponent, in point of Honesty, obliged to give h^^ Name, as a
Caution or Security for making good h^^ Charge, or giving Satisfaction to the
Party injured, in case he fail in his Proof. Certainly this way of striking in
the dark, th^s skulking way of writing Controvers^es is very disingenuo^^,
unfair and unmanly; fitter for F^ux with h^s Dark-Lanthorn, then for one that
pretends to be a Minister of the Gospel. But leaving the Author for this time,
to hug himself in the dark, and delight in his own Obscurity, I shall offer two
or three short hints, relating to the Book it self.

1. Some of the more minute and less material Passages in the Conference, I
have purposely omitted, that I might have more scope (without swelling this
Book into too great a Bulk) more largely to insist on, and freely handle those
things which are indeed of greater Weight and Moment.

2. In those Cases wherein I have had occasion to use the Testimonies of
Ancient Authors, I have been necessitated, for want of some of the Books
themselves (which in the Country I knew not how to procure) to take some few
Quotations upon trust from others; yet not without great Caution in the Choice
of those Quotations: for I assure thee, Reader, I would rather choose to lay
them all wholely aside, then knowingly to obtrude one wrong one upon thee.

3. The first Chapter may peradventure seem not so much defensive as offensive,
relating more particularly to that Ministry, whereof my Opponent professes
himself a Member. But let it be considered, that the Su^ject was not of my
choosing, but his proposing, whose Method and Matter I am in some sort obliged,
as a Respondent, to observe.

THE CONTENTS.
Chap. I. OF the present Ministry: The Cause of the Peoples not profiting
inquired: Some Reasons of it given, page 1. Chap. II. Of using the Word Thou to
a Single Person, p. 27. Chap. III. Of Titles and Civil Respects, as they are
called, p. 31. Chap. IV. Of Confession, p. 50. Chap. V. Of Perfection, p. 54.
Chap. VI. Of Swearing, p. 100. Chap. VII. Of Taking Texts, Studying Sermons and
Selling them to the People, p. 196. Chap. VIII. Of Humane Learning, Divine
Inspiration and Revelation, p. 205. Chap. IX. Of Tithes, p. 277.
ERRATA.
THe Reader is desired, before he reads the Book, to correct with his Pen the
following Mistakes of the Press. Others of less moment, as Mis-pointings,
Mis-placing of Letters, and the like, a friendly Eye (it is hoped) will
overlook or excuse.

Page 20. line 16. for ever read even. p. 24 l. 7. f. more r. move. p. 28 l. 3.
f spoken to r. spoke unto. lin. 12. f. answered r. as we read p. 33 l. 24. f
mistake r. mis-state. p 40. l. 10 f. same now r. same. Now. p. 65. l. 3. f that
e did r. that he did. p 72 l. 20 f. (...). page 77. l. 1. afte^ this add sense.
p. 86 l. 13. f woe r. who. p. 111. l. 2 f. that r shot. p. 114. l. 25 f to r.
so. p 115. l 25. f Ambassador r. Ambassadors p. 116. l. 22. f. I for cannot
r. for I cannot. p. 130. l. 8. f. lib. 72 r lib 7. l. 13. f. take r. takes
it. p. 131. l. 4. f. degenerate r derogate. p. 132. l. 26. after says r. my.
p. ^37. l 5. f. commanded r commended. page 149. l. 26 f. Quakeos r. Quakers p.
154. l. 25. f margent r. margin. p 158. l. 21. f. against r. upon. p 164 l. 29.
f aid r. said. p. 179. l. 23. r. prohibition. page 202 l. 7. de^e and. p. 205.
l. 2. r. inspiration p. 209. l. 7. f. pricipal r principal. p. 218 l. 11. f. we
are far r we are so far. page 237. l 3. f. discover r. discovered. p. 240. l. 14
f. concerned r. concerning. page 257. l. 10 f having r. have. lin. 21. f. for r
from. p. 259. l. 26. dele his. p. 260. l. 8, 9. f. ye speak r. yet spoke.

CHAPTER I. Of the present Ministry: The Cause of the Peoples not profiting
inquired: Some Reasons of it given.
THE Nameless Author of the ill-named Friendly Conference, to lay a Foundation
for his Discourse, causes his Parishioner to report, that At a Quakers Meeting,
a notable Speaker propounded this to the Consciences of the Hea^ers, Whether
any among them could affirm, that he had received any Spiritual Advantage by
his long frequenting of the Steeple Houses?

Whether this Question was ever really thus proposed in any of the Quakers
Meetings, is not my present Business to inquire. But seeing it is now
propounded after such a manner, and that by one who terms himself a Minister, I
cannot but desire every one, who shall read it either in his Book or this, to
consider very seriously of it; and if they be such as st^ll frequent those
Places, to propose it most solemnly to their own Consciences; for it is indeed
of great Concernment to them.

And if (says he) after Inquiry, he found he had received no Pr^fit by it, he
bad him further propound this Query to himself, Why am I thus? For if God had
any regard to the Priests, or their Worship, he would not be wanting to give a
Blessing to their Ways, etc. Thus far the Parishioner, to which the Minister
replies, That the Goodness or Badness of the Ministry is not to be measured by
the Want ^f a sensible Effect upon the Hearts of indisposed and careless
Hearers, etc.

Answer, The Question is not concerning indisposed and careless Hearers, but in
general Terms, Whether any among them, impartially consulting his own
Conscience, could affi^m, that he had received any Spiritual Advantage by his
long frequenting of the Steeple houses; so that, in drawing it from any, to
indisposed and careless Hearers only, he rather avoids then answers the
Question; which is so much the greater Fault in him, inasmuch as both Question
and Answer were of his own framing.

This however is observable, that we have here an implicit Acknowledgment of
the Peoples not profiting under the present Ministry, which in page 6. is more
freely confessed in these words, Alas! its our Hearts Grief, that our People
should come into the Church, as the Beasts into Noah 's Ark, go out Beasts,
(...) they came in Beasts; or like (...) Pharaoh 's lean Kine, no ^atter for
all their feeding. Hence the People may take notice, what their so long and
chargeable Attendance upon this Ministry has produced them, namely, to be by
their Ministers themselves reputed Beasts, and Lean Beasts too, no fatter for
all their feeding. Surely it concerns them to consider well, what manner of
Feeding they have had, which yields so little Nourishment. But however the
Priests have fed the People, it is evident the People have fed the Priests
well; for they are grown ^at and wanton; whence may be well inferred, That the
P^iests are better fed then the People taught; being such as the Prophet
pronounced woe against of old, Ezekiel. 34.2, 3.
who fed themselves, and eat the Fat, but fed not the Flock.

But the Minister not liking (as it seems) the former Question, tells his
Parishioner, (page 6.) that The Question, if rightly stated, will be this, Not
Whether you have profited by our Ministry? but Whether you might not have
pr^fi^ed, had not the Fault been in your s^lves?

Answ. The Cause being thus far yielded by the Minister, as to matter of fact,
namely, that People are not really profited by their Ministry, this other
Question of his leads both me and them to consider where the Fault of their Non
proficiency lies. We read of some in former times, who (though they did
probably take as much pains as any of these men now adays do, yet) did not
profit the People at all; and the Reason thereof is also given. Now, inasmuch
as similar (or like) ^ffects are commonly produced from similar Causes, let us
inquire the Cause of that Defect, which may probably give some Light to this.
In the 23d of Jeremiah verse. 30. the Lord by the P^op^et says, Therefore
behold, I am against the Prophets that st^al my Word every one from his
Neighbor: Behold I am against the Prophets, says the Lord, that use their
Tongues, and say, He says: Beh^ld I am against them that prophecy False
Dreams, says the Lord, and do tell them, and cause my People to Err by their
Lies and by their Lightness, yet I sent them not, nor commanded them; therefore
they shall not pr^fit this People at all, says the Lord, verse. 32. Here the
very Ground and Reason why that Ministry did not profit, nay, why it was
rendered incapable of profiting the People at all, is most plainly given by God
himself, viz. He sent them not, nor commanded them: They used their Tongues,
and said he says, when the Lord had not spoken to them: They stole his Word
every one from his Neighbor: They ministered not from that Word which Moses
long before, and Paul long since declared to be in the Mouth and in the Heart;
Deuteronomy. 30.14. Romans 10.8
which Word the Lord by his Prophet sets forth to be like as a Fire, Ier.
23.29.
and like a Hammer, that breaks the Rock in pieces; Verse. 28.
Therefore said the Lord by the same Prophet, He that has my Word, let him
speak my Word faithfully; what is the Chaff to the Wh^a^? As if he had said, My
Word only, my pure heart^cleansing Word, that like a Fire does burn up all
Corruption, and like a Hammer breaks the Rocky Heart in pieces, this only is
comparable to Wheat (the Staff of Bread) All the Divinations of Man's Brain,
his highest Notions and Conceptions, his studied Di^courses and most learned
Exercitations, they are all but Chaff in comparison of this Word. And because
those Prophets did not attend to this Word in the Heart, but stole the Word
from their Neighbors, and preached what they had stole, because they said, The
Lord says, when the Lord had not spoken to them (though he had spoken to
others) because they ran, and he never sent them, nor gave them any such
Command, this was the very Reason why they neither did nor could profit the
People at all.

Now let us see how the Case stands with the Ministers of England; Has God
sent them, or do they send one another? Do they attend unto the Word in their
Hearts, or do they steal the Words from their Neighbors? Do they use their
Tongues, and say, He says, when the Lord has not spoken to them? If so, how
then can any Benefit be expected from them, the Lord having said expressly of
such, They shall not pr^fit the People at all? Now, that they do send one
another, that they are Ministers of Man's mak^ng, com^mon Experience shows, If
they were sent of God, 2 Pet. 4.11.
they would speak as the Oracles of God If they ministered by Command from him,
they would do it as of the Ability which God gives, that God in all things
might be glorifi^d, through Jesus Christ. But this divine Ability they rely
not on, nor indeed expect. But School-Learning and Humane Abilities, acquired
by Study and much Reading, these they trust to, these they depend on, these
they glory not a little in; yea, these they Extol to so high a pitch, as if our
Savior were not a little beholding thereto, and that the Gospel could not be
preached without them, as this Minister does broadly enough insinuate, when he
says, that Men wholely illiterate are not fit to preach the Gospel; page 98.
and in diverse places of his prolix Discourse on that Subject, urges the
Necessity of Humane Learning, which I intend to consider in its proper place.
Now, if God has not sent them, if our Savior Christ has not committed his
blessed Gospel to these men to preach; but they have run unsent, and have
spoken uncommanded, no Wonder that the People are not profited by their
Ministry; and the Non-proficiency of the People under that Ministry, must needs
be chargable on such Ministers.

But he says, The Goodness or Badness of the Ministry is to be measured from
its agreeableness to the divine Institution, and real Tendency to its proper
End, the Salvation of Souls, page 4.

Answ. Let us compare their Ministry with the Divine Institution, and see how
they agree. What he means by Divine Institution, he has not expressed; but that
which is generally urged as the Divine Institution, is the Words of Christ to
his Apostles, Mat. 28.19.
Go ye therefore and teach all Nations, etc. He told them, in the Verse
immediately foregoing, that All Power was given unto him in Heaven and in
Earth, and thereupon he grounds the Institution, Go ye therefore, etc. But
before they were thus to go forth to teach, they were to receive the Promise of
the Father, as Luke testifies, And behold (said Christ to his Disciples, Chap.
24.49.
just before he parted from them) I send the Promise of my Father upon you, but
tarry ye in the City of Jerusalem, until ye be endued with Power from on high.
And accordingly his Disciples did wait for and receive the Promise of the
Father, and were endued with Power from on high, before they went forth to
preach, as appears in Acts. 1, and 2. Now that Ministry that does not wait to
receive the Promise of the Father, nor is endued with Power from on high, is
not agreeable to this Divine Institution, and consequently not the Good
Ministry. The Apostle Paul also, unto whom was committed a Dispensation of the
Gospel, according to divine Institution, 1 Cor. 9.17. Ephesians. 4.8, 12.
says expressly, that When Christ ascended up on high, he gave Gifts unto men,
for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the
edifying of the Body, etc. Now that Ministry that has not received Gifts from
Christ, is not agreeable to the Divine Institution, therefore not the good
Ministry. And that the English Ministry (in general) has not received the
Promise of the Father, is not endued with Power from on high has not received
those Gifts from Christ, their denying the immediate Teaching of the Spirit in
this Age, and their constant Recourse to, and Dependence upon Humane Learning
and Study, does sufficiently evince. This Di^agreeableness of the present
Ministry to divine Institution, is another great Reason why the people are not
profited by it.

Again, page 5.
This Minist^r says, that Real Profit is Obedience and Holiness of Life; and
that the strong grown Christian measures the Goodness of the Ministry from its
Tendency to Conscientious Obedience, that is, (says he) the Performance of all
Duty in its Latitude, both to God, to Man, and to our selves. Now if the
Performance of all Duty in its Latitude, to God, to Man and to our selves, be
the Tendency of a good Ministry, how can that Ministry be good which deny,
that all Duty, in us Latitude, both to God, to Man, and to our selves can be
performed in this Life? Yet that the English Ministry does deny this, is not
only notoriously known, but is also evident from this very Conference, a great
part of which is spent to prove the Impossibility of being freed from the Act
of Sin in this Life; whereas the least Sin is a Breach of Duty, in some Degree
or other, either to God, to Man, or to our selves. Hence I infer, that if the
proper Tendency of a true Ministry be (as this Man in words acknowledges) to
bring People to such an Uniform, Through, Conscientious Obedience, as amounts
to the Performance of all Duty, in its Latit^de, both to God, to Man, and to
themselves; then cannot this Man's Ministry be true, because it does not tend
to the Performance of all Duty, etc. but on the contrary, by pleading a
Necessity of Continuing in Sin, makes such a Performance of all Duty to be
altogether impossible: And this is another grand Reason, why the People are not
profited by their Ministry, the Fault whereof is in the Ministers.

Besides, they do not minister to the right Part in People, they aim rather at
the Head then the Heart. Thus did not the Ministers of Christ; they commended
themselves to every man's Conscience in the Sight of God, 2 Cor. 4.2 C^ap 5.11.
as Paul testifies; and again, We are made manifest (says he) unto God, and I
trust also are made manifest in your Consciences. So Peter's Sermon at
Jerusalem reached the Hearts of the Auditors, Acts 2.37. Verse. 41.
so that it is said, They were pricked in their Heart: This was Home preaching;
for that day were added to the Church about Three Thousand Souls. But these men
now aday^s, as they preach from the Strength of Natural Reason, and from such
Abilities as they can acquire from Study and School-Learning, so they suit
their Matter to reach and catch the same Part in their Hearers, whose
Affections if they can so far gain upon, as to win them to a Subscription to
certain plausible and pleasing Notions, the Work is well nigh done, they are
thenceforward Believers, but have not that Faith which overcomes the World, and
quenches all the fiery Darts of the Wicked. 1 John 5.4. Ephesians. 6.16.
Now, that this is the Mark they aim at, hear what this Minister, speaking of
the Ministry, says, page 5.
We must not esteem that most powerful and profitable, which produces only
sensible Consolations, working upon the Tender, and (as he words it) inferior
Faculties of the Soul; whereas the strong-grown Christian ( such (adds he) as
the English Ministry designs to make men) has his Religion seated in the
Rational Powers. Hence the People may plainly see the Reason of their not
profiting under this Ministry, namely, because this Ministry designs to seat
the Religion even of the grown Christian in the Rational Powers; whereas the
People of God in Ages past had their Religion seated in their hearts. The good
Ground (in the Parable of the Sower) is by our Savior Christ declared to be
them, which (not in a wise and knowing Head, not in the rational Powers, as
this man speaks, but) in an Honest and Good Heart, Luke 8.15.
having heard the Word, keep it, and bring forth Fruit with Patience. The
Prophet David (speaking of the Righteous) says, The Law of his God is in his
Heart, Psalm 37.^1. Psalm. 119.11.
none of his Steps shall slide. And of himself he says, Thy Word have I hid in
my Heart, that I might not sin against thee. The Heart was the spiritual
Treasury of Good Men of old, Mat. 12.35.
as he well knew who said, A Good Man out of the Good Treasure of his Heart
brings forth Good things. Now these men not being sent of God, not having
received the Promise of the Father, not being endued with Power from on high,
not ministering as of the Ability which God gives, but professedly designing to
seat the Religion even of the strong-grown Christian in the Rational Powers,
they cannot reach the heart, they cannot strike the Conscience; Their Teaching
is but like that of the Scribes, not having (divine) Authority; whereas the
Preaching of the true Ministers was in Demonstration of the Spirit and of
Power, 1 Cor. 2.4, 5.
that the Faith of the Hearers might not stand in the Wisdom of Men, but in the
Power of God.

But there is yet another Cause, why the People are not profited by their
Ministry, namely, the Evil Lives of the Ministers, which this Priest gives his
Parishioner leave to express, perhaps more plainly then ^e shall have Thanks
for, at least from some of his Brethren; for says the Parishioner, Now that
you have put me upon it, page 11.
I shall give you the true C^^se of men's Non-proficiency, and indeed
Separation, which is occasioned by the Scandalous Lives of some Ministers,
whose Behavior is such, that they have caused both themselves and Doctrines to
sti^k in the Nostrils of the People. This indeed is something to the Purpose,
and to this the Priest thus replies, That there are Scandalous Ministers in the
World, is too sad a Truth, and which indeed ought to be lam^nted in the m^st
Brinish Tears. Let none think the Priest has herein over shot himself, either
in the Objection or Answer: For, like a wary man, he probably considered, that
it was in vain for him either to conceal or deny that which every Body knows:
His Art therefore and Interest it is, by a free Confession, a little to
paliate, and what in him l^es to extenuate the Crime, and therein to be sure he
will not be wanting: For says he, It ought to be considered, that in a settled
National Ministry (such as ours is) consisting of great Numbers in holy Orders,
it cannot be expected to be otherwise, but that some men for a Corrupt
Interest, will intrude themselves into these sacred Offices, which is not to be
charged upon our Function, since there was a Judas amongst the chosen Twelve.

Answ. Here then as to matter of Fact, Habemus confitentem reum; we need not
seek for Evidence, the Priest himself pleads guilty, acknowledging the
scandalous Lives of Ministers; but when in his endeavoring to mitigate the
Fault, he from their Number argues the unavoidableness of it, and says, it
cannot be ^^pected to be otherwise, but that some men for a corrupt-interest
will intrude, etc. He is so far from mending the Matter, that to my
Understanding, he makes it much worse then it was before; for by this he
renders them arrant Hyppocrites, Cheats, Imposters, if not something worse by
the Similitude of Judas, whom our Savior Christ called a Devil, John 6.70, 71.

Besides, it is much he should say, these scandalous Ministers intrude
themselves, seeing all men that know any thing of them, know that according to
the Constitution of their Government, none can intrude themselves into their
Ministry, but they must be admitted, and have Letters of Induction (as I think
they term them) from the Bishop, now then the Question naturally rises, Why
would the Bishop admit such Hypocrites into such sacred Offices (as they call
them) and the Answer as naturally follows, why, he did not know them to be
such: But then alas! may the People well say we are now in worse case then
before; for how shall either we or he be assured that they are not most of them
such? here they are all at a loss: If the People would judge them by their
Fruits (by which Christ said they should be known, Mat 7.16.20.
the Priest foreseeing the Danger that would ensue, tells them, by Fruits is
not meant outward ^onversation, though from what immediately follows, viz. not
every one that says Lord Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, ver.
21, 22, 23.
but he that does the Will of my Father, etc. and again, Many will say unto me
in that day, Lord, Lord* have we not prophecy! in thy Name, etc? and then will
I profess ^^^o them, I never knew you; depart from me ye that work I^^qu^ty
nothing can be more evident then that Life and outward Conversation are the
Fruits intended there b^ Christ. But says the Priest, By Fruits are meant the
ill ^onsequences of their Doctrines, so that he would be sure to put the people
upon that Way of Trial, by which they should be l^ast able to discern; for if
those wise and great learned men, who admit these scandalous Pr^achers, cannot
by the ill Consequences of their Doctrines discover those corrupt Inte^ests for
which they intrude themselves, how alas should the ignorant vulgar do it.

But how scandalous soever these Ministers are, how corrupt soever the
Interests for which they intrude, the People, it seems however m^st hear them,
must maintain them that is the Drift of his Discourse; and because the ^uakers
think otherwise, page 14.
he reputes them worse then the very Papists the Reason's obvious, the Papists
and he jump togeth^r, and as with one Voice, endeavor to subject the People to
the Clergy, how corrupt, how scandalous soever: Alas poor People! miserably
enthralled to their own Servants, whom good or bad they must keep, Minister a
Servant.
how much harder is their Lot (in this Case) now, then was that of the
primitive Christians! They were not permitted only, but exhorted, nay,
commanded to withdraw themselves from every Brother that walked disorderly, 2 Thessalonians* 3.6. And to the Corinthians the Apostle is more particular, I have
written unto you (says he) if any man that is called a Brother, 1 Cor. 5.11.
be a Fornicator, or Covetous, or an Id^later, or a Railer, or a Drunkard, or
an Extortioner, not to keep Company with such an One, no not to eat: Had the
Christians then so stri^t a charge given them to separate from such disord^rly
Walkers, such corrupt and s^andalous Persons (though they had but the Name of
Brethren) and to see their Converse, their Company, their Society, as men not
fit to be eaten with, and must People now be tied up, and fettered to such, and
constrained not only to seed with them, but even to be fed by them? Were such
then thought not worthy to be converst with as Brethren, and must they now be
received and admired as Fathers, as Teachers! Unhappy change: though I have
great ground to suspect a man to be a Fornicator, though I know him to be
Covetous, though I fear he is an Idolater, though I hear him r^^l, though I see
him drunk ever and anon, and feel ^^s Extortion upon all Occasions, must I
notwithstanding acknowledge this man to be a Minister of Christ, and have
recourse to him for Teaching, and Instruction in the divine Mysteries of the
Heavenly Kingdom? God forbid. yet take notice how this Priest argues for it.

Page 15. The Scribes (says he) and Pharis^^s were got into Moses 's Chair,
our Savior bids not the People pull them down, but gives them an eternal [mark
the Epithet, an eternal] Document, how to behave themselves when such Teachers
fall to their Share, viz. Whatsoever they bid them to observe, that to observe
and do, etc. Man. 23.3.

Answ. Here first, it may be worth our noting that the Scribes and Pharisees
were got into Moses's Chair, not into Aaron's: Now Moses was the Civil
Magistrate, the Judge, or Ruler, but Aaron was more p^operly the Priest; but
take it in his Sense, the Chair for the Pulpit, and see his Inference. Our
Savior (he says) gives the People an Eternal Document, how to behave
themselves when such Teachers fall to their Share. An Eternal Document! What Is
that? To do, [sayes he] whatsoever they bid them; nay, hold there, we have had
too much of that already; England has not yet forgot, since the Scribes and
Pharisees of Rome sat in the Chair here, and were forward enough to bid, but
were the good Men of that Age as ready to observe and do? No, no; Our godly
Martyrs (by his leave) held not that Document to be eternal, as Smithfield can
amply witness: And within our own Memory, that Chair (as he understands it) was
possessed by another Sort of Pharis^es, who I am apt to think were readier to
bid, then ever thi^ man himself was to observe, for all his Eternal Document:
But Reader, consider well, if God for a Scourge to this provoking Nation,
should once more suffer the Pope to repossess that Chair, how fit an Instrument
would this man be to lead the People into Popery, by t^^ling them Christ has
given them this eternal Document, that whenever such Teachers fall to their
share, they must observe and do whatsoever those Teachers shall bid them to
observe* then they must receive the Sacrament of ^he Altar, then worship the
Host, then pray to Saints, then pray for the dead, then adore Images, burn
Tapers, and what not: nay if the Emaums, which are the Turkish Priests, could
get into this Chair, I see no Remedy upon this man's Principle, but Mahomet
must be worshipped, but to go on.

He tells us, he is to look at the Water, not at the Conduit through which it
is conveyed, page 15.

Answ. But if a man see the Conduit be smeered with Mire and Dirt, will he
choose (or is it reasonable he should be tied) to drink the Water that issues
therefrom, when he may as well have it from a cleaner?

Again, he brings the Apostles's Words, we have this Treasure in earthen
Vessels, that the Excellency of the Power may be of God, and not of us.

Answ. B^t ^ad they this Treasure in filthy Vessels? no doubtless; for no
Excellency could thence have redounded to God: Earthen Vessels denote Meaness,
but are capable of being clean as well as Silver.

But what, says he, do you think of Judas, and Nicholas the Deacon.

Answ. I think Judas was bad enough, he was one that sold his Master for Money
yet as bad as he was, and as well as he loved the Bag he did not intrude
himself (as it seems some Pri^sts for corrupt Interests, now adays do but he
was cho^en and had obtained part of the Ministry, from which by ^ransgression
he fell: Now will this Priest say, that Judas after he had this transgr^ssed
and fallen, should (if he had lived) have continued in the Mininistry? if he
says yes, then may all People see what manner of Ministry this Priest is
pleading for. If he sa^^s No I thence infer, that if the Ministers be Corrupt
and Wicked, the People are so far from being bound to hear them, that they
ought to turn from them and deny them.

As for Nicholas the Deacon, his Office was b^^ to serve Tables, to take Care
of the Widows, etc. He was chosen to be Overseer of the Poor; and is no where
(that I remember) in holy Scripture, taxed with any scandalous Deportment.
Ens^^bius indeed reports him to have been the Head of that Sect which in the
Revelations is called Nichola^^^s; L 3. c. 26.
but neither one nor the other ^ayes, that he continued his Deaconsh^^ after his
Defection. However it app^ar not that he was a public Preacher.

But the Priest adds, Solomon you know fill into the grievous Sin of Idolatry,
ye^ for all that, we burn not his Books of Proverbs, Ecclesiastes and Canticles.

Answ. But did Solomon fall into this grie^vous Idolatry after he writ the^e
Books, or before? If it was before, then how knows he but Solomon repented, and
turned from his Idolatry, before he writ those Books? Charity uses to think
the best.

But says he to his Parishioner, You cannot but acknowledge, that you have
heard many excellent Discourses from the Pulpit, pressing your Respective
Duties both to God and Man.

Answ. Ay but, might his Par^shioner well have replied, those Discourses made
little Impression upon me, when I considered from whom they came. He told me
indeed, that I must not be Covetous; yet of all my Acquaintance I knew none
more covetous then he. He told me, I must not be drunk, yet I have seen him so
too often. He told me, I must live chastely, yet he himself was incontinent. He
told me, I must not be Angry, yet none more furious then he. He told me, I must
not Swear, yet himself would Swear and Curse too. He told me, I must not Rail,
when a great part of h^s Sermon was made up of Railing. I confess I have heard
him say, The Wick^d shall be turned into Hell; but how could I think he
believed it to be true, when he was so wicked himself? For, Examples are far
more powerful t^en Precepts; Prae^^p^a monent Exempla movent viv^tur Exemplis.
therefore its said, Pr^^^p^s Admonish, (...) more; And Me^ are apt to live by
Examples. This the Apostle Paul well knew, and therefore exhort^d his Son
Timothy to be an Example of the Believers, 1 Timothy 4.12.
not only in Word, but in Conversation, in Charity, in Spirit, in Faith, in
Purity. And his Son Titus he exhorted, Titus 2.7. 1 Pet. 5.2, 3.
In all (...) to show himself a Pattern of Good Works. The Apostle Peter also
exhorted the Elders to feed the F^^ck of God, not as bring Lords over God's
(...), but ^^^ng Examples to the Flock. Examples then we see are very
necessary, and Examples indeed are not wanting. The Diffe^ence lies in th^s,
The True Ministers were always Examples of G^od^^ss; but too many of these
Ministers are Examples of Evil: And that is another Reason why the People are
not profited by them.

But when he cannot clear them of his own Profession, he falls upon the
Quakers, whom if he can render as b^d as his own, he thinks he has done
something, therefore he says, If you look narrowly upon the speakers, many of
them make their pretended Holiness a Cloak for Ev^^ Designs.

Ans^. If with all his narrow looking, he could have espied those Evil Designs,
he should have done well to have discovered them. If he could find none, he has
not done well, nor like a Christian, much less like a Minister of Christ, to
insinuate such a foul Sland^r, and offer nothing in Proof of it. If ^e could
have given an Instance, it is not to be doubted but he would; for his whole
(...) shows him big with Envy, in which he g^^e^on thus:

And diverse of them (says he) who have been much admired for a time, have been
by the Quakers themselves rejected for arrant Ch^^ats.

Answ. This wants Proof as well as the former; and as he has stated it, I deny
it: Yet this I grant, that when any who have walked among us, and made
Profession of the same Faith, have swerved from their Integrit, and losing that
Sense of the Power of Godliness, which once they had (although retaining
something of the Form) have gone back again into the spirit of the World, from
such I say we have turned away, 2 Timothy 3.5.
thereby declaring, We have No Fellowship with them: And be this spoken to the
Honor of that most pure Principle, which we have received from God, Ephesians.
5.11.
which admits no Fellowship with the unfruitful Works of Darkness, but rather
reproves them. And I would have my Antagonist know, that even in this our
Religion is highly to be preferred before theirs who admit into and continue in
their sacred Offices (as he calls them) so may ill-living and scandalous
Priests, who for corrupt Interests intrude themselves, as he tells us.

CHAP. II. Of using the Word Thou to a Single Person.
THe next thing the Priest falls upon in his Conference, is our using the word
[Thou] to a Single Person at which he seems offended, page 16.
and asks, Whether Religion suffers by saying Thou to a Single Person?

Answ. We lay not the Stress of our Religion upon Words; yet we know there is a
Form of Sound Words, and we desire to keep to it. He urges Custom against us;
but alas! whence sp^ang that Custom? In the best of Times, and with the best of
Men, Thou and Thee (to a Single Person) was good and inoffensive Language. But
as Times grew bad, and men worse, Pride and Fla^tery first put Inferiors upon
paying a Pl^ral Respect to the Single Person of every Superior, and Superiors
upon receiving and at last requiring it. It was the style of Fr^^ce at first,
as well as any other Countries, to Thou any Person, one spoken to; See Howel 's
Epist. to Cotgrave his Dictionary.
but when the Commonwealth of Rome turned to an Empire, and so much Power came
unto one man's hand, then in regard he was able to confer Honor and Offices,
the Countries began to Magnify him, and to speak to him in the Plural Number
by You, and to Deifie him with Transcending Titles, answered in Symmachus his
Epistles to the Emperor Theodosius, and to Valentinian, wherein his style unto
them is, Vestra Aeternitas, etc. so that You to a single person, with other
Titles and Complements, seems to have its first rice with the Roman-Empire,
which afterward descended by degrees upon particular men. And how much it is
uphold by Pride, and mutually upholds Pride at this day, Experience plainly
shows. How often have many been reviled and s^^ff^, how often abused and beaten for
using this proper and harmless word, the use of which he himself acknowledges
to be indifferent! What spirit is that which thus rages, and smiles with the
Fist of Wickedness? Is it the humble, meek, gentle Spirit of Jesus? or the
haughty, proud, exalted spirit of Lucifer? It is easy to judge from what
spirit that Custom (of saying Thou to one) at first arose, by the spirit that
appears in it at this day, and the Ways he takes to uphold it. How does the
haughty ambitious Mind swell, and disdain to be spoken to in the other Dialect!
What, I pray, does this bespeak, but Pride and Arrogance? And does not then the
upholding that Custom uphold Pride, and the upholding Pride cause Religion to
s^ffer? He magnifies Custom, and builds all upon it; but I impeach that Custom
it self, as nourishing and cherishing that in man which is not of the Heavenly
Father's planting, and therefore must be plucked up Let the Ax therefore be
laid to the Root of this Custom, which is, Pride, Ambition, Haughtiness,
Flattery; and no further Controversy will ever sprout from it.

To the Objection, that God said Thou to Adam, and Adam said Thou to God, he
answers thus; Do you suppose that God and Adam discoursed in English? If the
Translators had used You for Thou, this Shadow of an Objection had disappeared
(perhaps he would have said [ not appeared] for disappeared implies an
appearance first.)

Answ. This is a weak Shift: Though God and Adam did not discourse in English,
yet the Hebrew Tongue (in which it is supposed they did discourse, and in which
the Discourse is penn^d) is not defective of Numbers, but has the Singular and
the Plural as distinct as the English: If therefore the Translators had used
You for Thou, instead of One Objection, there would have been Two; the same
that now is, and another against the Translation as fal^e.

The rest of his Discourse upon this Subject leans wholely upon Custom. Custom
has taught them to say You to a Man that loves to be Flattered: but God regard
not Flattery, and therefore they say Thou to him still. And in all Spiritual
Relations and Religious Offices, he confesse^, Thou's the fi^^^st Word to be
us^d; and if it be high enough for God and Spiritual Affairs, I see not how it
should be too low for Man and Temporal Affai^s.

To conclude therefore (because I would not be long where he is short I shall
leave it to the conscientious Consideration of every unprejudiced Reader,
whether that Dialect which God is pleased to accept, that wherein he has been
pleased to deliver himself, that which all the holy Prophets, our blessed
Savior, his Apostles, and all Good Men, in the best Times, did express
themselves by, is not fitter for a Christian now to use, then that which
depends only upon a Custom, sprung up out of the Putrefaction of Corrupt Times.

But if any desire to be satisfied further concerning this Subject, I refer
them to two Books, the Title of one being, No Cross No Crown (p. 6.) That of
the other, A Serious Apology for the Principles and Practices of the People
called Quakers (p. 143.) in both which they may find it more copiously handled.

CHAP. III. Of Titles and Civil Respects, as they are called.
FRom Propriety of Language he comes next to Civil Respects (as he calls them)
wherein he deals very injuriously with us; for whatever he has a mind to fasten
upon us, that he makes his Parishioner speak, and then himself infers whatever
he thinks will render us ridiculous. For instance, in page 24. After he has
through a Series of Discourse brought his Parishioner to say, Possibly I have
been faulty in suffering my Servants to call me Master, he by and by draws this
inference, So then (says he) the Quakers bring this Tenent to this strange
Res^lt, that a Child must Honor his Father, but not call him Father; that a
Servant must obey ^^ Master, but not call him Master. Which Tenent to be his
own, not ours, our Writings and Practices sufficiently evidence. Again, p. 26.
He asks hi^ Parishioner thus, Do you suppose that Text, Luke 10.4. Salute no
man by the Way, is to be a taken in a (...)? To which he makes the Parishioner
reply* I suppose ^^ is; and thereupon he confidently infer^, Then the Quakers
are (...), and highly to be blamed. Why, what are the Quakers concerned in the
Parishioner? What Is he to them or they to him? Oh, says the Priest, He is
inclin^ning to Quaker^^m; See his Title Page.
and more than than, He approves of some Quakers, p. 19. What then? is that
sufficient to entitle the Quakers to whatsoever (...) Priest has a mind to cast
upon them? Observe, Reader, the Injustice of this man, who from a bare
Supposition of his own suggesting to a Parishioner of his own making,
adventures to charge a Fault and Blame upon all the Quakers in general. What
Man or People after this way of writing, might he not Abuse and Traduce?

But as he has dealt dishonestly with us, so has he also befooled himself; for
he makes the Parishioner for nine or ten pages together, contend with him
against Respecting Persons, forgetting that at their very first congress, he
brought in the very same Parishioner speaking to him thus, Take it not for
Flattery, page 3.
if I tell you, that the Respects which I bear to your Person, are most sincere
and cordial. What think thou, Reader? Did the Priest remember his Decorum
here? Was this a fit Person to represent the whole Body of the Quakers, and
dispute against Respecting Persons? Nay, does it not look like a Design laid to
mistake our Principles, and misrepresent us to the World? But our Confidence is
in the Lord our God, whose Truth we are engaged to defend. Let us therefore go
on, and see what Strength our Adversary has brought forth.

The Parishioner, after his solemn Respect to the Priest's Person, urges
against Respect of Persons, those words of the Apostle James, Iam. 2.1, 2, 3.4.
My Brethren, have not the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Lord of Glory,
with Respect of Persons, etc. This, says the Priest is not meant of Civil
Respect, but such sort of Respect only, as did violate Justice in their public
Consistories, when the gaity and outward splendour of the Rich tempted them to
partiality; and to give such a Sentence as agreed not with the Merit of the
Cause, p. 21.

Answ. That this was not the Apostle's Drift, let it be considered to whom he
writ, namely, to the Twelve Tribes that were ^^attered abroad, which cannot
reasonably be supposed to be the whole People or Political Body of the Jews,
but such of them as had received the Christian Faith, as the^ Text in
Controversy plainly shows, My Brethren, have not the Faith of our Lord Jesus
Christ with Respect of Persons. This also B^za well observes in his Marginal
Notes upon the place, Fidelibus omnibus Iudaeis says he) cujuscunque Tribus
sint, per terrarum Orbem dispersis: i. e. To all the Faithful Jews, of what
Tribe soever they are, dispersed throughout the World. Which dispersion may not
improbably relate to that great Persecution, which, upon Stephen's Death, Acts
8.1.
was raised against the Church at Jerusalem, by means of which the Believers
there were all scattered abroad through the Regions of Judea and Samaria. Now
this being premised, consider, Reader, what Consistories, or Courts of
Judicature, these poor scattered Believers could then have, who being exiled
(as it were) from their own, chap. 11.19.
travailed through other Countries to preach the Word.

But he says, This Supposition (for he makes no more of it) namely, that by
Assemblies the Apostle here means Places of Judgment, will appear to be well
grounded, when we consider that the Jews had a Law, whereby it was provided,
that when a Rich Man and a Poor had a Suit together in their Courts of
Judicature, either both must Sit, or both stand in the same rank, to avoid all
Marks of Partiality: To the Terms of which Law the Apostle here has reference,
p. 22.

Answ. He had done but his part to have quoted his Authority for this Law. If
such a Law the Jews had, whence had they it? If it had been given them of God,
doubts less we should ^ave found it amongst those Laws which they received from
him. If it was not from God, but an Invention and Tradition of their own, it is
altogether impro^able that the Apostle of Jesus Christ would have any reference
thereunto, especially writing to those who were then coming off, not only from
the Traditions of the Jewish Elders, but even from the whole Jewish Polity.

Besides, If this Law was but a Sanction of their own (which, for ought I yet
see, it m^st be, or be nothing) The Jews were so superstitiously Zealous for
the Traditions of their Fore Fathers, that it is no way likely they would so
positively violate a Law of their making He says, The Law was, that the
Parties to the Cause must either both Sit, or both Stand in the sam^ rank;
whereas here, the one is said to sit, and the other to stand, and so not both
sit; or the one to sit in a good Place, and the other under the Footstool, and
so not both in the same rank. This had been directly to thwart their own
Tradition (if this Law he speaks of was a Tradition of theirs) a thing they
were seldom guilty of: for they too often preferred their own Traditions even
to the Law of God.

But says he, The Apostle could not mean by Assemblies Civil Meetings, because
he then had contradicted what his Lord had plainly allowed, Luke 14.8, 9, 10.
When thou art bidden of any man to a Wedding, sit not down in the highest Room,
lest a more honorable man then thou be bidden, etc. Where (he says)
Difference and Degrees of Honor and Place are evidently allowed by our
Savior, etc.

Answ. For the right Understanding of this Scripture, it must be considered in
what time, and to whom these words were spoken. For the time, it was under the
Law, before the One Offering was actually offered up. That was an Outward
State, the People of God was then an Outward National People, their Religion
and Worship was much outward and shadowy, their Wars were outward, their
Ornaments were outward, their Honors and Respects to one another were outward.
And in this State many things were indulged to the Jews, many things permitted
and connived at, Mat. 19.8.
partly because of the Hardness of their Hearts, and partly by reason of their
Weakness. But this State was to last but ^ill the Time of Reformation; Hebr.
9.10.
and when the Time of Reformation was fully come, these things grew out of Use.
Old things were done away, 2 Cor. 5.17.
all things became new. That People were put away (from being the People of God
upon those former Considerations) and He is the True Jew now, Romans 2.28, 29.
which is one inwardly, whose Praise is not of Men (he regards not the Honor
and Respect which men give) but of God. That Outward Worship is laid aside,
John 4.21, 22, 23.
and now the true Worship is (neither in the Mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem,
but) in Spirit and in Truth. The outward Wars were ended, Isa. 2 4. Mic. 4 3.
as to Christians; the Swords were beaten into Plowshares, and Spears into
Pruning Hooks (as was long before prophesied of the Gospel State) And said the
Apostle Paul, 2 Corin* 10.4.
The Weapons of our Warfare are not Carnal, but Spiritual, and Mighty through
God. The Outward Ornaments were put off, the Plating of Hair, the Embroderies
and Gold; and the Ornament used instead thereof, is that which is not
corruptible, 1 Pet. ^* 3, 4.
even the Ornament of a Meek and Q^iet Spirit, which is in the Sight of God of
great price. The Outward Honor also went off with the rest, and they that
received the Faith of Christ Jesus, sought the Honor which comes from God
only. John 5.44.
The Praise of the True Jew was of God, not of Man. Romans 2.29.
Thus much of the Time when those Words of Christ were spoken, and the
Difference between that Time and this.

Now of the Persons to whom they were spoken, if we consult the Place we shall
find they were the Pharisees, and Interpreters of the Law, Luke 14.1, 3.
whom he met with in the House of one of the chief Phaerisees where they were
invited to eat, and the Occasion of his putting forth this Parable to them was,
He marked how they chose out the chiefest Ro^mes or Seats, ver. 7.
this it seems was the Pharisaical Itch then, as appears further in Mat. 23.6.
I wish the Pharisees of this Age were not overrun with the same now amongst
that Sort of men, there were several Ranks or Degrees, there were chief
Pharis^es, and inferior Pharisees, and they took place one of anot^er, some
being accounted more honorable then others; nay there were no less then Seven
Ranks amongst the Pharis^es, Moses and Aaron l. 1. c. 10.
as Goedwin tells us; nor wanted there Ranks among the Lawyers also; now our
Savior seeing how they chose out the best Places for themselves, had a fair
Opportunity giv^n him to ^i^ their Ambition and Folly, by showing them that if
another that were of a Rank above them should come in, the chief Pharisee, who
was Master of the Feast would turn them down with Disgrace, and they m^st with
Shame give place to another that ha^ a broader Philactery then their own; this
was Argumentum ad hominem, very close and home to those perking Pharisees, who
so do^ed upon receiving outward Honor one from another, that it is mentioned
as a Ground of their Unbelief, John 5.44.
but what was this to his own Disciples? did he ever instruct them after this
manner? No such matter; he puts them in mind of their Equallity, by telling
them they were Brethren; Mat. 23.8.
and when a little hankering after Superiority began to steal in upon them, he
stricks it dead at one Blow* by telling them, Though the Gentiles exercise
Authority over one another, yet it shall not be so among you, but he that is
greatest among you, Luke 22.24, 25, 26,
let him be as the younger; and he that is chief, as he that does serve.

From what has been said it appears, that those Words of Christ in Luke 14.
were not spoken with relation to the time, of the Gospel, nor directed to his
Disciples, so that the Words of the Apostle James may still (without any
contradiction to his Master) be reasonably understood, as a general prohibition
of that vain and evil Custom of resp^cting Persons upon any Occasion what
soever; and indeed the Apostle's manner of speech implies no less, being much
like that which Christ spoke to the Jews, John 5.44. How can y^ believe which
receive Honor one of another, and seek not the Honor that comes from God
only? where our Savior seems to make their receiving Honor one of another
an Hind^ance to belie^^ng; and the Apostle tells them that do believe, they
must not think to hold the Faith of Christ Jesus, and respect of Persons
together, as if he had plainly said, they are inconsistent.

The next Scripture he touches upon is, Mat. 23.10. Neither he ye, called
Masters; for one is your Master, even Christ, upon this he abuses us at his
pleasure, and by his absurd and idle reasoning, would fasten this Foppery upon
us, that a Child must honor his Father, but must not call him Father, that a
Servant must obey his Master, but must not call him Master, which ridiculous
conceit of his is so evidently contradicted by our universal Practice that
whosoever has conversed almost with any of us, is able to give a Check
thereto, though I should say nothing of it, yet, lest he should grow wise in
his own Conceit, if no further answer be given, I add this.

Answ. We are not ignorant either of the Intention, or Occasion of those Words
of Christ, as little Learning as this man is willing to allow us: That Christ
did condemn the use of the Word Father, as it implied an implicit Faith in them
to whom it was so given; and also the Word Master, as it denoted the chief or
head of a Sect or Party, we grant; but this was not all, he also condemned the
Use of those Titles [Master and Father in every Sense wherein there is not a
true Relation: Now for a Child ^o call his Parents Father and Mother; for a
Servant to call him Master, whose Servant indeed he is, this is just and
reasonable; for here is betwixt them a Real Relation, which makes these Titles
necessary and true, but for one man to call another man Father, who he knows is
not his Father in any Relation, either by Nature or Law, this is condemned by
Christ, and how indeed can it otherwise be? for it is a direct Untruth, which
is contrary to his Nature: And besides the evil of it (which were it no more
then an idle Word, and idle that must needs be, which has no Signification nor
Service, an Account must be given for it, the Absurdity of it is most gross;
for by the same Reason that I may call any one man, father, who indeed is not
so to me, I may call two, ten, an hundred so, nay every man I meet; from Father
let us turn to Master, and see how the cafe stands there. If it be evil for me
to call another man Father, who is not really my Father, and that because I
should therein speak untrue, doubtless it is as evil for me to call another man
Master, who is not really my Master, because I should therein speak untrue
also, yet this is the common Case: Since Vanity and Flatter have prevailed upon
the World, and Men's Tongues have been un^ridl^d, they frequently, and
fawningly, call them Masters for whom they do no Service, to whom they
acknowledge none to be due from them; and who never expct any of them; this we
say is condemned by Christ, this cons^^^nciously we refuse, and are witnesses
against; in short therefore Titles of true Relation we own, and use, but empty
Titles, Titles without Relation we disown and reject, as being indeed but
Titles of Flattery, which we dare no more make use of, then that good man who
said of old, Job 32.21, 22.
Let me not I pray you a^^^pt ary man's pers^n, neither let me give flattering
Titles unto man; for I know not to give flattering Titles, in so doing my maker
would soon take me away.

I should now have done with this Subject, but that the Priest offers some
Examples from both old and new Testament, I shall take notice of those only
which he brings from the new, as nearer to the purpose, having before showed
the Difference between the States of the old Testament and the new.

He says, St. Luke dedicating his Gospel to Theophilus, salutes him with the
Tu^e of most excellent Theophilus, chap. 1.3. And St. Paul to Festus an
Heathen, addresseth himself with the Title of most noble Festus, Acts 25.26.

Answ. These are not properly Titles, but Epith^^s (as wise, learned, patient,
merciful just and the ^^ke) which might be used without Fla^^ery to the
Persons, if they to whom they were used were t^^ly excellent or noble (for the
greek Word is the same in both) But more particularly to the first, We find the
same Luke did afterward to the same Theophilus, dedicate his Treatise of the
Acts of the Apostles, without any, either Title or Epithet at all, but barely
thus, The former Treatise have I made, O Theophilus, and yet this was written
after the other, Acts 1.1.
in his riper years, and when he had made a further Progress in the Christian
Religion, and none I Hope will think so good a man went from better to worse. 2
dly. As for Paul's Address to Festus (which is the same with Luke's (...) in
both) and might as well have been rendered most excellent, he had Reason to use
it to him; for in Justice and courteous Deportment, he excelled all other
Magistrates, that Paul had been brought before.

But the Priest adds, That Paul did not abridge Agrippa of his Royal Titles,
but called him King.

Answ. Agrippa was a King, and the Title related to his Office, therefore Paul
might well give it; and it is observable, he gave it barely, he did not add
most Sacred Majesty, Dread Sovereign, or the like: But seeing Paul said only
King Agrippa,^ and that Agrippa was the Name, and only King the Title, I see
not how this man will make Titles of one Word, unless by the same Figure
whereby he makes one Man two, that he may say you to him.

Another instance he brings of Barnabas and Paul, crying among the People,
Sirs, why de ye these things? Acts 14.15.

Answ. The place is mis-rendered. The Greek word is (...), Beza's Latin ^viri,
from both which it ought to be read, Men, why d^ ye these things?

But St. John, he says, writes to the Elect Lady.

Answ. Who she was, in what Relation John stood to her, or how far her Temporal
Power might extend, does not appear. But this is certain, that John was a
Plain, Simple, Downright Man, not addicted to flatter or complement any, as
may well appear by the Style of the Epistle, wherein he frequently uses the
honest plain Language of Thee to her. So that this I take for granted, that he
used not the Title of Lady (which yet signifies no more then Mistress or Dame)
as a mere empty, vain or flattering Title, devoid of all Relation; since so to
have done had not been right and sound, as I have showed before. And that it
was not his manner to give Titles, where there was no just Ground or Relation
for them, may appear from his third Epistle, where writing to Gajus, he does
not call him Rabbi or Master Gajus, but simply says, The Elder unto the Well
beloved Gajus If therefore the Priest will have it, that John gave the Title of
Lady in Complement only, let him prove it.

Sarah (he says) was commended by Peter, not only for obeying Abraham, but
also for calling him Lord, 2 Pet. 3.6.

Answ. Abraham had a Lordship or Power over her, as he was her Husband: She
acknowledged it in obeying his Commands. Here was Government and Subjection;
and Lord (or Master, which imports the same) was a relative Title to it.

I have now done with this Head. But before I pass to the next, I must take a
little Notice of a Passage of his, which although it relate not directly to
this Matter, yet may pertinently be applied to another: It is this, You must
know (says he, page 25.) that the Scribes and Pharisees had so far incroacht
upon Christ's Prophetic and Regal Offices, that they had usurped an absolute
Authority and Dominion over the Faith and Consciences of Men; imposing the
Traditions and Invention of their own Brains, as so many abso^ute Laws in the
Church of God. From these words of his may be observed, First, That Authority
and Dominion over men's Faith and Consciences are the Prophetic and Regal
Offic^s of Christ. 2. That the Imposing of the Traditions and Inventions of
men's own Brains, as so many absolute Laws in the Church of God, is an Usurping
Authority and Dominion over the Consciences of men. 3. That they who so Vsarp
Authority and Dominion over the Faith and Consciences of men, do Incroach upon
the Prophetic and Regal Offices of Christ. 4. That they who thus Incroach, are
not Christians, but Scribes and Pharisees.

Another Saying he has somewhat to the same purpose, a little lower, where
speaking of a Father after the Spirit, to whom we are subject in all things
which concern the Spirit, he adds, For of our Souls, Spirits and Consciences,
as we can have no Father, so we can have no Master upon Ear^^, page 26. Whence
I take it to be a fair Consequence, That no man upon Earth has Power to Impose
any thing upon the Conscience of another. But this being beside my present
Business, let it suffice to be only hinted in transcurs^, as it were, and by
the by.

CHAP. IV. Of Confession.
FRom contending for empty and vain Titles, he comes in the next place to
Confession of Sin, and that not without very good Reason: Prove. 10.19.
for if as the Wise Man said) In the Multitude of Words there wa^t^th not Sin;
doubtless in a M^ltitude of (...), Vain, Flattering and Untrue Words, Sin m^st
much abound, But C^ntess^^g, unless he also forsake, will stand him in little
stead.

In the Mannagement of his Discourse on this Head, he makes his Parishioner a
mere Baby, that he may throw him down the more easily. For, the Parishioner
objecting That they Confess themselves miserable ^inners, He asks, Whether
Confession of Sin be the Duty of every humble Penitent? The Parishioner grants
it is a Duty. Then, says the Priest, the sum of your Accusation lies here,
that we live in the practice of a known D^ty, p. 29. Hereupon he makes his
Parish^on^^ ^neak off thus, I confess I took up this Argument too hastily.

Answ. And as hastily he lets it fall. But let us righty sta^e the Ca^^: That
it is the Duty of every humble Penitent to Confess his Sins, is not doubted;
but the Question is, Whether a constant Course of Confessing be a Duty? for
that implies a constant Course of Sinning: Whereas we know, that ba^e
Confessing of Sins without Forsaking them, avails little. But it is He that
Confesses and for sakes them, that shall have Mercy: Prove. 28.13. 1 John 1.9.
for if we thus Confess, God is faithful and just to forgive us our Sins. Now
then the Question is, Whether it be our Duty to Confe^s from day to day, from
year to year, that we are still guilty of those Sins, which, by the Assistance
of God's Grace, we have forsaken, and which God has forgiven to us? But if
this be so far from being a Duty, that it would be a Sin in us so to Confess,
because that Confession would be fal^e; let us then consider further, that If
we truly Confess, and (as I said before) by the Help of Divine Grace, Fo^sake
our Sins, God is Faithful and ^ust, not only to forgive us our Sins, but also
to cleanse us from all Unrighteousness, 1 John 1.9. Now they who are thus
cleansed by God from all Unrighteousness* is it their Duty still to say, They
are Miserable Sinners? That would be to speak Untruth, which I am sure is no
man's Duty. The Ephesians were sometimes Darkness; Ephesians. 5.8.
but now (says the Apostle to them)^ ye are ^^ight in the Lord: Had it been
their Duty to have said, No, we are still Darkness? Some among the Corinthians
(before their Conversion) had been Fornic^to^s, Idolater, A^u^^erers, 1 Cor.
6.9, 10, 11.
Covetous, Drunka^ds etc. Paul says to these Corinthians, Such indeed some of
you were; but ye are Wash^d, but ye are Sanct^fied, but ye are Iustifi^d (from
the^e things) in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God. Had
it been the Duty of these Corinthians, after they were thus washed, sanctified
and justified from those gross Sins, to have said, We are such still; We are
Fornicators still, Idolaters still, Adulterers still, Thieves still, Covetous
still, Drunkards still? This had been the Way to have made themselves Liars too
(which before was not charged upon them) in denying the Work of God.

Let us consider further, If this customary and common Road of Confessing be a
Duty (as the Priest would have it) whom is it a Duty to? Is there but One
Lesson for all Degrees? The Little Children, the Young Men, the Fathers and
Elders (mentioned in John's ^st Epistle) What! are they all in one Form? When
they first come into this School, their Confession is but Miserable Sinners:
and most they be saying the same Lesson so long as they continue in the School?
What! no Proficiency, no Improvement, no going forward! Surely it is not so in
the School of Christ. But in this School he that comes in at Sixteen Years of
Age, does but confess himself a Miserable Sinner, and the same Man, if he live
till Sixty or more, confesses himself a Miserable Sinner still. So that after
he has travailed Forty or Fifty Years upon this Road, after he has spent his
Age in this School, if he be measured by his own Confession, he is not one step
nearer his Journey's end, he is no whit bitter then when he first came in, and
therefore worse.

In short then, let this be the Issue of this Discourse: Though it be every
man's Duty, when he is overtaken with a Sin, humbly and penitently to confess
his sin to Almighty God, yet it is not the Duty of any Man, to propo^e to
himself a constant and common Coarse of Confession, because whosoever does so,
must first propose to himself a constant and common Course of sinning; but no
constant and common Course of sinning being allowed, it cannot reasonably be
supposed, that a constant and common Course of Confession is required.

CHAP. V. Of Perfection.
THat he may never want Occasion to Confess Sin, his next work is, to plead the
Continuation of Sin, which he does in Opposition to the Doctrine of Perfection.

Great indeed has been the Opposition this Doctrine of Perfection has met
withal, from the Hands of most sorts of men, since the time it was first
preached in this latter Age of the World. Some through Ignorance mistaking it:
Others through Interest Revi^in^ and Gainsaying it, as foreseeing it
destructive to their Trade and Profit: And very many rejecting it for the
Straightness of the Way, because they saw their beloved Lusts and they could
never walk together in it; but that they must part with their most pleasing
Vanities, and forever abandon the Company of their dearest Delilahs, if they
would be really and indeed (not in Name only and Profession) Disciples and
Followers of Holy Jesus.

Yet because in all Undertakings Perfection is desirable, and aimed at, my
Opponent is wary how he wholely denies it: We deny not (says he, page 30.) the
Doctrine of Perfection, but such a Notion as tho Quakers have thereof, calling
it, an V^sioning S^ate.

Answ. A Perfection then it seems he is for; but it is to be perfect in a state
of sinning: for in an Unsinning State he denies it. What kind of Notion has he
got of Perfection, who would be perfect, yet a Sinner?

He then goes on to open the Words of Christ, Be ye therefore Perfect, even as
your Father which is in Heaven is Perfect. Mat. 5.48.
In which Words he says, our Lord aims only, from God Almighty's Example, to
p^ess Charity and Mercy to the highest Degree, page 3.

Answ. Charity and Mercy to the highest Degree! Did he consider what he writ?
or how he should be able to maintain it? He is g^t so hi^h at the first step,
that the Quakers had n^ed help him down again. The highest Degree of Charity
and Mercy is applicable only to God Almighty: we don't aspire so high. We
desire our Charity and Mercy may be real, true, sincere, of the same Nature,
Kind, Quality with God's; but we expect it not in the same Degree or Falness^s
that is peculiar to God himself.

The Parishioner adds another Scripture, intimating that we are commanded to be
Holy as God is H^^y; 1 Pet. 1.16.
and if we could not be unsinningly perfect and holy, in vain (says he) is the
Pre^ept propounded to us. To this he replies, Could you rightly distinguish
between Equality and Similitude, your Objecti^^ would disappear in a Moment,
page 33.

Answ. If he had righty distinguished between Equality and S^militude in his
opening the for^^er Text, he had not ^en fallen into the Error he did, in
construing Christ's Words to intend the highest Degree of Charity and Mercy,
which relates to Equality (for he that could attain the Highest Degree of
Charity and Mercy, would in Charity and Mercy be equal with the Highest) nor
had he now incurred the Absurdity of being inconsistent with himself.

But he ran not more to the one hand before, then he runs to the other now; for
having light on the Distinction between Equality and Similitude, he inveighs
most fiercely against an unsinning Perfection, as if to be delivered and
preserved from Sin, were to vi^ Perfections with the Creator. ibid.

Answ. Did Adam vi^ Perfections with his Creator, when he was in an unsinning
State of Perfection? Nothing less: for even in that State of pure Innocence,
unstained with any Spot of Sin, Adam had not an Equality with God, although he
was in his Similitude. He was made in the Likeness of God, not equal to him.
But if no other Instance of this could be given, yet Adam's Capacity of sinning
(which the divine Nature is utterly insusceptible of) was a sufficient Taken of
his Inequality. Hence ^infer, Th^^ to aim at and pr^ss after a State of being,
in this Life, delivered from Sin, and by the Mighty Power of God preserved from
the Act, Commission and Guilt of Sin (which is what we intend by the word
Perfection) is no Presumption, no ^^^y^ng Perfections, no aspiring to an
Equality with the divine Majesty.

And verily Reader, I cann^t but (upon this Occasion) expres^ the Ser^^ of my
own Heart simply and nakedl^: It Is the ^elief of my Heart, that the Lo^d is to
far (...) being offended with any, for sincerely p^^ssi^g after this State of
Holiness (...) he loves his Children so much the more by how much the more they
(...) him herein; and sure I am, then (...) come out of sin and Iniquity and
the more they grow up i^ Righte^u^ness, and true Holiness, the nearer they
approach unto his Likeness, and bear the more of his Image, whi^^, even this
Priest in words will allow, saying, Though we cannot equal (which we aim not
at) yet we may imitate the divine Perfections, and that indeed we press after.

But he attempts to illustrate his meaning by a familiar instance, as he calls
it, A writing Master sits his Scholar a C^py w^^h a Charge to imitate i^; you
must (...) const^ue his meaning to be such, that he must frame his Letters
according to the Form of those Characters, which are set before him, and not
that he expects he should write according to the Perfection of his Copy.

Answ. Let me now show him that his instance, (as familiar as he thinks it
(...) Way apt to his purpose; for the Writing Master, if he be ingenuous and
honest, not only expects, but endeavors also what in him lies, that his
Scholar may arrive to the Perfection of the Copy, and this the Scholar
oftentimes does, yea sometimes outdoes or excels, at least is capable of so
doing: But this is no way predicable of man in his imitation of divine
Perfections; his instance therefore is unapt to the Business; but if he will
grant me, that Sin, Iniquity and Transgression are the Stains, the Blots, the
Blurs of man's Life, and also that it is possible for a Scholar to keep his
Lines strait, and to write fairly without Blots and Blurs, though he should
mise of that lively vigor, and sprightfuln^ss, which appears in the Letters of
his Master's Copy, I shall not think it an uneasy matter even from his own
instance, to infer a possibility of living without Sin.

Before I pass from this Place, there are two or three Scriptures which my
Opponent has quoted (I suppose to corroborate or strengthen his instance)
which seem to me so pertinent to my Purpose, that I am willing to transcribe
them out of his Book into mine, and let the Reader make what use of them he
pleases; they are brought in thus, Therefore says he, Christ tells us, John
13.^5. That he has given us an Example to do as he has done, that is (says
the Priest) to purify our selves as he is pure, 1 John 3.3. to walk as he
walked, and to be holy in all manner of conversa^ion, because he was so. What
is this less then an Vnsinning State? But I proceed,

From the former instance we must now go to instances of another kind; for to
that Pass is the world now come, that although the necessity of this State, of
being preserved out of Sin, be evidently demonstrated, the Advantages accrewing
therefrom, clearly set forth, and the Commands requiring it, plainly produced,
yet so prevalent are the Baits of Lust and sinful Pleasures, on the degenerate
Minds of men, and so long have they been nurs^d up in a Persuasion, that they
can never be freed from Sin on this Side the Grave, that rather then they will
believe a Possibility of Deliverance in this Life, they will not stick to
reflect an Uncertainty on the holy Scriptures as if they meant not what they
express, and call for proofs of another kind, Examples namely, and instances of
some in Ages past, who have attained this State of Freedom; and yet when
instances of this kind are given, such and so great is the incredulity of men
(in this Case especially that they will hardly admit those instances to have
been, what in holy Scripture they are declared to be; thus deals this man with
us. The Instances brought in his Book are, Noah, Job and David, three good men
doubtless: Of Noah the Testimony of the holy Ghost is, That he was just and
perf^ct in his Generation, Genesis 6.9. Job 1.1.
and that he walked with God. Of Job that he was perfect and upright, and that
he feared God and eschewed Evil. Of David, that he was a man after God's own
Heart, Acts 13.22.

Now to blemish Noah's Perfection, the Priest objects that he was drunk and
uncovered in his Tent, Genesis 9.20, 21.

Answ. Noah walked with God before this and I will not stick to say after this
also, this I grant was his Sin, and while he was in his Sin, while he was
drunk, he did not walk with God; what was his State then while he did walk with
God, both before and after this? did he ever fall into Sin again? let the
Accuser of the Brethren charge him with Evil if he can.

To stain the beauty of Job's Perfection, he objects, that Job in one Place
confesses, I have sinned, and in another says, Behold I ^m vil^, Job 7.20.
and 40.4.

Answ. The 1 st. [ I have sinned] speaks of a time past not present. The 2 d. [
I am vile] does not imply that he was sinful; for although the word [ vile] is
often used in English to signify wicked, yet the Latin Word [ vilis] does not
properly signify wicked, or sinful, but Cheap, Mean, Small, of little Account,
etc. therefore we find in Scripture that where the Word vile is used to
signify wicked or sinful, it is not taken from vilis, but from scelestus,
f^^git^sus, foedus, etc. us in Judges 19.24. Do not so vile a thing; Jerome
reads it, Ne Scelus ho^ opere^ini. Tremel. Ne facite quicquam hujus Flagitij.
So Isa. 32.6. A vile Person will speak Villainy, Tremel. has it^ Flagiticsus
dic^tur flagitium eloquens. Again, Romans 1.26. God gave them up unto vile
Affections, B^za reads it, Tradidit cos Deus foe^^s Aff^ctibus, but when vile
is used to denote ^^an, low, of small Account, etc. it is taken from vilis,
humilis, or the like, as in (...) 15 9. Every thing that was vile and ^ fuse,
that they utterly destroyed, Ierom. has i., Q^^quid vero vile fuit et reprobum,
ho^ demol^^^ sun^. So 2 Samuel 6.22. I will be yet more vile then thus, In Jerome
it is, Vilior fiam plusquam factus sum. Lament. 1.11. I am become vile, facta
sum viles, says I^r. M^ vile pendi, Tremel. Again, Phil. 3.21. W^^ shall
change our vile Body. B^za reads it, Q^^tra^sfo^m^^it Corpus ^ostrum humile;
and in this Sense it is that Job said he was vile, that is (...) an, low,
little to be regarded comparatively and in respect of God (as Tremel. expounds
it using the Word vil^s) but Ier. reads it, (...) loo^^^s sum, who have (...)
to the Purpose.

But s^ppo^e nothing of this kind could have been said in Job's defense, but
that the words had been as full to the Defamation of Job, as the Priest himself
could with; yet would it not seem strange, and very hard measure, that from two
such Expressions (spoken much about the same time) a Conclusion should be drawn
against Job, That he was n^v^^ free from Sin all the days of his Life? What if
in his s^re Afflictions (such as we d^ not find did ever b^f^l any man but
himself) he had a Slip, a Falling, is that enough to blemish so remarkably good
a Life as his? or can it thence be fairly in^err'd, that he was not delivered
and kept from Sin in the precedent and subsequent parts of his Life? Let this
be spoken for the Honor of Job (but much more to the Glory of him who
preserved him) That the Devil himself could not pick a Hole in his C^ar, though
this Priest has endeavored to do it. He who is the Author of Sin, and whose
main Business it is to tempt to Sin, none I suppose will imagine him ignorant
who commits sin, and who not. Now when God proposed Job to Satan as a perfect
and upright man, one that feared God and ^schew^d Evil, Chap. 1. Verse. 8.
can we suppose, that if Satan had had any Sin to fling at him, he would not
have readily flung it, especially considering how particular his Enmity was at
Job? But instead of that, what says he? Verse. 10.
Thou have s^t a Hedge about him, I cannot come at him (O blessed and praised
forever be the Lord, he has s^t an Hedge about his People) But put forth thy
Hand now, Verse. 11.
says Satan, and touch all that he has, and he will curse thee to thy Face.
The Devil, we see here, could not charge Job that e did sin, but insinuates
against him, that if he were closely tried, he would sin. Thou shall see that
(said God) Behold (...) that he has is in thy Power, Verse. 12,
only upon himself put not forth thy Hand. Satan forthwith sets his Agents on
work, Verse. 15.
The Sabeans fall upon Job 's Oxen and his Asses, and sweep them all away.
Verse. 17.
The Caldeans in three Bands f^ll upon his Camels, and carried them all away.
Verse. 16.
Fire from Heaven fell upon the Sheep, and burnt them up; and in all these
Calamities his Servants also were slain and d^stroyed, but one in a place
escaping to bring him the doleful Tidings. Then to complete his Misery, in
steps another, and tells him, Verse. 19
His Sons and Daughters were feasting together, and a Wind from the Wilderness
threw the House on their Heads, and they were every one dead. Now was Satan
listening to hear Job curse, but instead of Cursing, Job blessed the Name of
the Lord: Verse. 21. Verse. 22.
And says the Text, In all this Job SINNED NOT.

Well, the next time Satan presented himself before the Lord, God did (if I may
so say) glory in the Perfection of his Servant Job; Chap. 2. Verse. 3.
and again sets him forth a Perfect and Upright Man, one that feared God, and
eschewed Evil, and still he holds fast his Integrity (says the Lord) although
thou movest me against him, to destroy him without Cause. Satan had not yet got
any thing to charge him with, he had not yet found any flaw in Job, yet his
Enmity still remained, and he would not cease suggesting Evil of him; therefore
says he, Verse. 4.
Skin for Skin, yea, all that a man has will he give for his Life; but touch
him to the Quick, Verse. 5.
touch his Bone and hi^ Flesh, and he will yet Curse the^ to thy Face. Verse. 6.
Behold, says the Lord, he is in thy Hand, only spare his Life. Satan hereupon
smote Job with sore Boils, from the Sole of his Foot to his Crown; Verse. 7.
and to heighten his Misery, sets his Wife upon him too; Do thou yet retain
thy Integrity? Verse. 9.
(says she) Curse God, and Dye. This Satan longed for: But how does Job
answer? Verse. 10.
Thou speak as one of the foolish Women speak; What! shall we receive Good
a^ the Hand of God, and shall we not receive Evil? In all this (says the Text)
Job did NOT SIN with his Lips. Observe what Care the Penman of this Story took
to clear Job's innocent Life from any Imputation of Evil.

I have insisted the larger upon this Instance to show the Reader, That Job, in
the precedent part of his Life (before this unparalelled Trial fell upon him)
had indeed attain^d a State of Deliverance and Freedom from Sin; and was
preserved by the Lord to as that he SINNED NOT; Satan himself could not accuse
him, And if thus it was with Job in the former part of his Life, what may be
thought of his latter days, when he had been purged and tried in the Furnace
of Affliction, and had passed through the Refiner's Fire?

Now having proved this State attainable, by showing that it was attained, the
Controversy is determined; for the Question was not, whether it was possible
for a man, having attained this State, to continue always in it, but whether
it is possible for him ever to attain it, grant this, and the other will
follow: If it be possible to attain it, it cannot be impossible to retain it.
The same divine Power that brings man to it, is equally able to preserve him in
it. If it be possible for a man to be preserved in this State an Hour, it is
not impossible to be preserved a Day; if a Day, a Year; if a Year, an Age. But
when I say it is possible to be kept in this State; I do not say it is
impossible to d^p^^t from it. When I say it is possible to stand, I do not say,
it is impossible to fall. Adam was placed in a State of P^rity, free from Sin;
it was possible for him to have stood in that State, yet not impossible for him
to fall from it, as sad Experience shows. Now as that one Sin of Adam's is not
made use of by any to prove that he was not in a perfect sinles-State, so
neither ought ^ single Slip, or Falling of any of the People of God, to be used
as an Argument, that they were never really in a State of Purity and Freedom
from Sin, of whom the holy Ghost bears witness, that they were perfect,
upright, blameless, without Fault, etc.

His next and last Instance is of David, a man after God's own Heart; against
him he objects, that he fell into the heinous Sins of Adultery and Murder, page
36.

Answ. To be a man after God's own Heart is to be just as God would have him to
be; but was David a man after God's own Heart while guilty of Adultery and
Murder? none I hope will so affirm; for Adultery and Murder are Sins, and all
Sin is utterly contrary to the Heart and Nature of God: Now then, if David was
not a man after God's own Heart (i. e. not such an one as God would have him to
be) while he was guilty of Sin, I thence infer that when David was a man aft^r
God's own Heart (i. e. such an one as God would have him to be) he was not
guilty of Sin but was free from it.

Thus have I endeavored to vindicate the Lives of these good and godly men,
from the false Suggestions of their and my Adversary, wherewith he essays to
distain their Glory, by representing them Sinners all their Lives. My next
Business is to vindicate also some Scriptures he has brought, from the wrong
Construction he has put upon them.

The first is, Phil. 3.15. Let us therefore as many as be perfect, be thus
minded. By perfect, here he says is meant no more then sincere and to prove it
brings ver. 12. Not as though I had already attained, or were already perfect.

Answ. If then after his Sense we read the former verse thus, Let us therefore
as many as be SINCERE be thus minded, we must by the same Reason read the
latter thus, Not as though I had already attained, or were already SINCERE;
which were to make the Apostle charge himself with Hypocrisy; but to avoid
this Absurdity, he would have it read perfect in the 12 th. verse, and sincere
in the 15 th, although the Greek Word be the same in both, and to give some
Color to it, he inserts the 11 th. verse. If by any means I might attain to
the Resurrection of the dead, then follows, Not as though I had attained,
either were already perfect; intimating (says the Priest) that he could not be
The Word FULLY] he ought not to thrust in, for it alters both the text and the
case, as relating to the degree of Perfection, not the kind, which is the
Subject we are upon.
fully perfect, till he had attained the Res^urrection of the dead, which
Resurrection this man must necessarily understand of the general Resurrection
of good and bad at the last Day, because he urges it as a bar to Perfection in
this World: Now that this was not the Resurrection which the Apostle meant, I
offer these Reasons to prove. 1 st. If he had intended that Resurrection, he
needed not have used such a conditional and doubtful Expression, implying a
Hazard, or Uncertainty of attaining [ If by any means I might attain unto the
Resurrection of the dead] whenas himself well knew beyond all Haesitation, or
Doubting, that that Resurrection would certainly come, and that every one, both
good and bad, must have a Share in that Resurrection, either to everlasting
Happiness or Misery. 2 dly. It had been an Absurdity (not to be suspected of
him) for him to have told the Philippians, that he had not yet attained the
general Resurrection both of quick and dead, when that (according to the
Priest's own Principles) was not to be expected till the Disolution of the
World, in which he himself was yet alive, whereas a Resurrection implies a
Death foregoing: This therefore cannot be the Resurrection by Paul here
intended, but there is another Resurrection mentioned in Scripture, by the Name
of the first Resurrection ( Blessed and holy is he that has Part in the first
Resurrection, on such the second Death has no Power, etc Rev. 20.6.) This the
Apostle refers to in his Epistle to the Colossians, If ye be risen with Christ,
seek those things which are above, etc.

The Priest being thus out in his Notion of the Resurrection, his
interpretation of the Text (which he grounded upon this Notion) is not to be
admitted; for he has not offered any substantial Reason, why (...) in the 15
th verse should be read sincere, and and yet (...) in the 12 th verse should be
read perfect, especially considering that (...) is rarely (if ever) rendered in
Scripture by sincere, nor do I think he will readily find throughout the whole
New Tes^ament any one place where it is so rendered, but for perfect it is
generally used.

The next Scripture he undertaks to open, is 1 John 5.18. We know that
whosoever is born of God sins not (thus far only he goes omitting the rest
of the verse, which is thus, But he that is begotten of God keeps himself,
and that Wicked one touches him not. This he says, cannot signify that any
in this Life has got an absolute Conquest over all Sin, and that for two
Reasons. 1 st. Because St. John here would contradict other plain Texts, as 1
Kings 8.46. 2 Chronicles. 6.36. Eccles. 7.20. which places say, there is no man that
sins not.

Answ. The Words of the Apostle are not contradictory to these, the one speaks
of man in a na^ural State, the other of man as begot and born of God; neither
does that Phrase [there is no man that sins not] import, that there is no
man but sins all his Life long; but it imports that there is no man but
sins at one time or other of his Life, which suites well with the Apostle's
Words, All have sinned, Romans 3.23.
and come short of the Glory of God, but this man who has sinned coming now to
be born of God, to be a new Creature, to have Christ formed in him, he now by
the Power which he receives from Christ, keeps himself, and that Wicked one
touches him not. Ye are kept by the Power of God, through Faith unto
Salvation, etc. 1 Pet. 1.5.

The next Scripture is, Prove. 20.9. Who can say I have made my Heart clean, I
am pure from my Sin?

Answ. No man can say in Truth, he himself has made his own Heart clean; but
he whose Heart God has cleansed, can say, and that in Truth, God has made his
Heart clean. The latter Part of this verse depends upon the former: No man can
say, I am pure from my Sin, by having my self cleansed my own Heart; but he
whose Heart is purified, whose Iniquity is taken away, and his sin purged by
the Lord, he can say, in an humble acknowledgement, and to the Glory of him who
purged him, The Lord has purged me from my sin.

Another Scripture that he brings is, Ezekiel. 18.24. which has not the least
Tendency to prove that man cannot be set free from sin in this Life, but that,
if the Righteous man turns from his Righteousness, and commits Iniquity
again (which implies there was a time when he did not commit Iniquity) that
then his former Righteousness shall not avail him, but in his sin he shall dye,
etc.

Another is Job 9.20. If I justify my self, my own Mouth shall condemn me; If
I say, I am perfect, it shall also prove me perverse.

Answ. Self-Justification, and whatsoever is grounded thereupon, is indeed
condemnable; but the Justification which comes from God is not so: Who shall
lay any thing to the Charge of God's Elect? It is God that justifies, who is he
that condemns? Job does not here deny Perfection, but shows, that however it
was with him, or how high soever his Seize were, he would not take upon
him to contend with his Maker, or justify himself against the Almighty, but
submit himself unto him, and therefore he says in the 15 th verse, Whom,
though I were Righteous (which all I suppose will grant he was) yet would I not
answer, but I would make supplication to my Judge, yet to show that he did not
this from any Guilt of sin that lay upon him, he appeals to God himself Thou
know (says he) that I am not Wicked, Job 10.7.
and yet for all that, there is none can deliver me out of thy Hand; but though
he thus expresses himself in Submission to the Hand and good Pleasure of the
Lord (whose Power and Soveraignity he acknowledges) yet against the false
Suggestions of his seeming Friends (who, like this Priest, would fain have
fastened some Iniquity upon him) he vindicates his Innocence plainly and
smartly. chap. 27.5, 6
Till I dye (says he) I will not remove my Integrity from me, my Righteousness
I hold fast and will not let it go; my Heart shall not reproach me so long as I
live. And it is observable, that those three men who [ like this Priest] had
charged Sin upon Job, were fain to offer Sacrifice, and entreat Job 's Prayers
on their behalf, to appease the Wrath of the Lord, which they had kindled
against themselves, chap 42.7, 8, 9.

He urges also Gal. 3.22. But that being the same with Romans 3.23. is explained
before.

Another that he brings is, James 3.2. In many things we offend all.

Answ. This does not prove that the Apostle himself was an Offender, any more
then that other saying of his concerning the Tongue, verse. 9. Therewith Bless
we God, and therewith Curse we Men, can prove that the Apostle himself was a
Curser, which I do not helieve this Priest, as forward as he is to sully the
Saints will dare to affirm of the Apostle James.

These are the Scriptures he has quoted, to prove that St John (in those
words, Whosoever is born of God sins not) did not intend, that any in this
Life has gotten an absolute Conquest over all Sin. But, in the respective
Answer thereunto, I have showed, that the Apostle may very well be understood
in this without the least Contradiction to any of these Scriptures, none of
which plead for a Continuation of Sin, or deny a Possibility of being perfectly
freed from Sin.

His 2d Reason, why those words of John cannot be interpreted to signify, that
any in this Life has gotten an absolute Conquest over all Sin is, because he
would then contradict himself also, having plainly said, 1 John 1.8. If we say
we have no Sin, we deceive our selves, and the Truth is not in us, page 39.

Answ. From the last Instance in the words of James, it is evident that the
Apostles, in Condescension to those to whom they writ, did many times include
themselves as in the Condition of others, that so they to whom they writ, might
receive Exhortation the better. And thus did John in this place, He, as well as
Paul, writ of the several States and Conditions Growths and Degrees in the
Church of God, in which no doubt there were some, who could not at that time
truly say, they had no sin. To these he condescends, with these he includes
himself. And as Paul in one place said, I speak after the manner of men,
because of the Infirmity of your Flesh, Romans 6.19. And in another place, To the
Weak became I as weak, that I might gain the Weak, 1 Cor. 9.22. the same may be
said in this place of John, who, for their sakes, including himself with them,
did, in his own Person jointly with theirs, speak of that State which some of
them were then in, and which himself also had once been in, as well as they.
But from this Condescension of his, to infer, that he himself was at that time,
really and actually in that State, is neither fair nor true, for though some
among them might not have attained so far, yet he himself had doubtless felt
the Blood of Jesus Christ cleansing him from all sin, else could he not
experimentally have said, 1 John 1.7.
If we confess our Sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our Sins, and to
cleanse us from all Unrighteousness. Verse. 9.
But if he did really and truly know, that the Blood of Jesus Christ had
cleansed him from all Sin, from all Unrighteousness: Surely then he might at
that time, without deceiving himself, have said he had no sin. He writes to
Little Children, 1 John 2.12, 21.
to Young Men, to Fathers; He tells the little Children, their Sins were
forgiven; yea, and that they knew the Truth, John 8.32.
which our Savior told the Jews should make them free. But he tells the Young
Men, 1 John 2.14.
they are strong, and the Word of God abides in them, and they have overcome
the Wicked one (Is not that a Conquest over Sin? Verse. 28.
) He exhorts the Little Children, to abide in Christ; for whosoever abides in
him, sins not; Chap. 3.6.
and we are in him, says the Apostle himself; and he that abides in him,
Chap. 2.6.
ought also to walk even as he walked. Does he tell them, they ought to do that
which is impossible? or had not Christ an absolute Conquest over all Sin? We
know (says the Apostle) that whosoever is born of God, Chap. 5.18.
sins not; but he that is begotten of God, keeps himself that the Wicked One
touches him not. If he be so kept, that the Wicked One (which is the Devil)
touches him not, how can he sin? Does any sin but whom the Devil touches? So
long as any are kept out of the Devil's Reach, so long I hope he will grant they
may be without Sin, These Young Men then, who had so overcome the Wicked One
(the Devil) that he could not touch them, had not these gotten an absolute
Conquest over all sin? Now if such was the state of the Young Men, what had the
Fathers and Elders arrived to! These things (says John) I write unto you, my
Little Children (not to countenance your continuance in sin, not to beget a
Belief in you, that it is impossible for you to live without Sin; To what End
then?) that ye sin not. And if any man sin, Chap. 2.1.
we have an Advocate, etc. If any man sin! why, is it come to that? (might such
a man as this have then objected) Do thou make an if of that, which is so
certain, so unquestionable, so unavoidable! If any man sin! as if it were
possible for any man to live and not sin! Yes, yes, (says this holy Apostle)
if he abide in Christ; for he that abides in Christ, sins not. Chap. 3.6.
And in this he is not contradictory to himself; for indeed, the whole stream
of his Epistle runs in this Channel.

But it seems strange to the Priest, that our Lord should teach his Disciples
to pray as often for the Forgiveness of their sins, as for their daily Bread,
whilst we must suppose (says he) that when they so prayed, they had no
Trespasses to forgive, page 39.

Answ. This will not seem so strange, if it be considered, that when our Lord
taught his Di^ciples thus to pray, they were but young and weak; their Faith,
which should have given them Victory over Sin, 1 John 5.4.
was weak, and sometimes almost ready to wav^r; and therefore in the very same
Chapter, he blames the Littleness of their Faith, and frequently after, in the
same Book of Matthew calls them, O ye of Little Faith. 2 Thessalonians. 1.11.
They had not yet experienced the Work of Faith with Power, in that Degree
which afterward they did; for the Holy Ghost was not yet poured forth, John
7.39.
because that Jesus was not yet glorified. Now this Form of Prayer was suited
to their present Condition; but it does not appear that it was intended to be a
standing Rule for them to pray by, as long as they lived, but as a Supplement
to their Weakness, until the Comforter, the Spirit of Truth, John 15.26.
was come unto them, which Christ promised to send them immediately after his
Departure, and as it were) in his room. But when the Comforter was come, when
they had received the Spirit of Truth in that more eminent Degree; He was then
to lead them into all Truth; Chap. 16.13.
He was to teach them what they should pray for (and that after an higher
manner then hitherto they had prayed, as our Savior's words imply, John 16.2.)
and he did so, as the Apostle witness^th* Romans 8.26.
Likewise the Spirit helps our I^firmities; for we know not what we should
ask for as we ought (mark that, for all their former Teaching) but the Spirit
it self makes ^nterc^ssion for us, with Groans, which cannot be uttered.

From Scripture-Arguments he comes to Reason; Who, says he, can be so
confident to say, He is free from all the Infi^mities of his Nature?

Answ. Every Infirmity of Nature is not Sin: A man therefore may be free from
Sin, though not from all the Infirmities of his Nature.

Again, He that says he cannot fall by Error, is already fallen by Pride.

Answ. This relates not to a Possibility of not sinnin^, but to an
Impossibility of s^^ning; which is not the Subject of the present Controversy.

He goes on to show, That it is not they that give Encouragement to sin, by
denying a Possibility of being freed from it; but we, who believe such a
Possibility. Pray, says he, who is your Friend, he that says you have no
Enemy, or he that informs you where he lurks? page 41.

Answ. He all along mistates the Case, either through Ignorance or Design: yet
I would not think the worst of him. By Perfection, by a State of Freedom from
Sin, we do not mean a State free from being tempted to sin Our blessed Savior
(in whom was no sin) in that sense was not free; Mat. 4.1.
he was tempted by the Devil But to be tempted is no sin. So that we do not
tell People, they have no Enemy; but we tell them, they have an Enemy; we tell
them where this Enemy lurks, and how he works, We tell them, 1 John 2.13.
this Enemy may be overcome, and also how. Now then, turn the Question the
right Way, and let me ask, Who is thy Friend, O Man, He that tells thee, Thou
can never overcome, thy Enemy will be too hard for thee, it is in vain to
expect a Complete Victory? 1 Timothy 6.12.
or He that incourages thee to fight the good Fight of Faith; and tells thee,
that Satan, James 4.7. Rom 16.20.
if thou resist him, will flee before thee; and not only ^o but that the God of
Peace will ^r^ad Satan under thy Feet, and that shortly too?

Again, He says, It is one Step to Conversion, to see our selves unconverted;
and one Step more to Happiness, to percerve our selves Miserable Sinners.

Answ I grant indeed it is so. But m^st we always stand upon this one Step?
Must we never take another Step? Never step forward? He moves very slow indeed,
that takes but one step all his Life. If we see our elves misererable sinners
at the first step must we see our selves miserable sinners at the last step too
(which they do, from the first step to the last confess themselves such, or
else they sin in so confessing) this is miserable indeed! miserable Comforters
are all they, who tell men, they must be miserable Sinners as long as they
live: Let such take heed that they run not in vain.

Again, He says, I need not guard my House, when I am sure that no Thieves can
enter.

Answ. This is also quite besides the business: The Question is not, whether no
Thieves can enter, although I do not guard my house but whether it is possible
for me to keep the Theives from entering, if I do guard my house? That this is
possible our Savior expressly tells us, If (says he) the good man of the House
had known at what Hour the Thief would come, he would have watched, and not have
suffered his House to be broken through: Luke 12.39.
So that the good man had Power, and was able to have kept out the Thief, if he
had stood upon his Guard; and the intent of this Parable was to excite the
Disciples to Watchfulness, which our Savior did frequent lyinculcate to them
What I say unto you I say unto all watch. Mark 13 27. Mat. 26.41.
And again, Watch and pray that ye enter not unto Temptation; for there is the
Sin. It is not a Sin to be tempted, but it is a Sin to enter into the
Temptation: Now t^en, if the Disciple watches and prays, it is possible for
him to be kept from entering into Temptation, and consequently possible for him
to be kept from sinning, which is directly to the Case.

Again, he says, it is in vain to offer him Physic, woe concludes himself well.

Answ. If any man that is not well concludes htmself well, he is to blame; but
that is nothing to our purpo^e: The Questionis Whether he that does really
receive the Physi^k, and does carefully observe the prescriptions of the
Physician, can be perfectly cured or no? The Disease is Sin, can man be
perfectly cured of this Disease? If he grants he may, he yields the Cause; if
he denies it, her st^cts upon the Abil^ty of he Physician. Mark 5.25.
The poor Woman with the bloody issue, had suffered much from many Physicians,
and spent all she had upon them, but was never a whit the better ( Miserable
Sinners at the first, and miserale Sinners to the last) her bloody Issue ran
twelve Years together, John 7.23.
but when once she came to Christ, he made her whole: He works perfect Cures.

Will the Priest say, that man may and shall be cured of his Disease of
sinning, but not in this Life, not till he dies; this is not Gospel surely; for
that is Glad-tidings, but this is Sad-tidings to the poor patient, that he must
carry his Disease with him to his Grave, and yet always be taking costly
Physic, this (if he believe it) were enough, one would think to send him forth
with thither: If such a cure could have satisfied the poor Woman, she might
have saved both her Pains and Money; for she could not doubt but that she
should be rid of her Disease when she died; but that would not serve her turn,
'twas a Pain and a Burden to her while she lived, and therefore she sought up
and down, far and near for a Physician that co^ld cure her of it in her Life
time, and at length t^ her un^peakable Joy she found him; They therefore that
say, the Disease of Sin can never be perfectly cured in this Life, are all
Physicians ^f ^o Value.

Again he says, But if on the contrary han^, I find my self weak, then I lay
hold on him that is st^ong, from a Sense of my Infirm^t^es I seek after Help;
if I fi^d many Enemies, I prepare against them; if I be thoroughly convinced
that I am beset round with Temptations and such Strategems as are under the
Conduct of such a powerful and politic Enemy, as the Devil is without me; and
to complete my Misery, that I have a false and treacherous Heart within me,
being in those sad Circumstances, I see the Necessity of a Savior, set my
Watch, and flee from the Confidence of Flesh, to the Protection of an Almighty
Arm.

Answ. Well, here is a fair Preparation to the Battle, but what is the issue? He
seek (he says) after Help, he lays hold on him that is strong, he prepares
against his Enemy, he flees from the Confidence of Flesh, to the Protection of
an Almighty Arm; but what is the Event of the Fight? Is he indeed protect^d? Is
he kept that the Wicked one touch him not? Does he overcome his Enemy? 1 John
5.18.
Does he put him to flight? Is he preserved out of the Temptation, and
consequently out of Sin? Surely then he would never plead against the
Possibility of overcoming; but on the other Hand, does the Enemy overcome him?
does he prevail against him? does he fall before the Enemy? Does he enter into
the Temptation, and commit the Sin he is tempted to? O then let him never boast
of this, or propose it for an Encouragement to others; for what can be a
greater Discouragement to y^ung Soldiers, then for one that is reputed an old
experienced Soldier to tell them, I have fought against this Enemy with all
the Strength and Courage that man can have, and have used all the Ways and
Means that are possible to be used, and yet he has been too hard for me? Who
would not blame and despise that General, that having brought his Forces into
the Field, should upon the Brink of engaging tell his Soldiers, that he knew
before hand, they should not have the Victory? But we are not discouraged by
the false Reports of Evil Spi^s who have often told us of the Children of
Anack, of their Strength, and of their Walled Cities, Numb. 13.
and of our inability to overcome them, but Caleb and Joshua (men of a right
spirit) believe and report otherwise.

I observe that among the many sad Circumstances, that just now he reckoned up,
as motives to betake himself to his Defense against the Assaults of his Enemy,
one was his Heart: And says he, To complete my Misery, that I have a false and
treacherous Heart within Me, page 42.

Answ. We have hitherto been speaking of a regenerate State, a sanctified
State, of man's best state in this World, not his worst, but a false and
treacherous Heart belongs to his worst state, not his best: The Lord by his
Prophet has promised to give his People a New Heart; Ez^k. 36.26.
Now if the old Heart was false and treacherous, is this new Heart which God
gives false and Treacherous also? Mat. 5.8.
Christ pronounces them blessed that are pure in Heart, Luke 8.15.
but is that Heart false and treacherous? That Seed which brings forth Fruit is
sown in the honest and good Heart, not in the false and treach^rous Heart. No
wonder that this man is against Perfection, if he be troubled with a false and
a treacherous Heart; but he is out as much in allowing sincerity in men, while
he admits their Hearts to be false and treacherous; for it is impossible for
any man whose Heart is false to be sincere; for to be sincere, is to b
true-Hearted: Thus in his Eagerness to run down Perfection, he has run himself
into this Absurdity, That regenerate and sanct^fied men have false and
treacherous Hearts, but to go on.

The Parishioner offers him two Scriptures ( Ephesians. 5.5. and Rev. 21.27.) from
which he says, we may learn, that no Unclean thing can enter into the Kingdom
of Heaven, which implies a Necessity of an Vnsinning State, even i^ ^t is Life,
and that in o^der to our Happiness in the next. page 42.
To this he replies I shall not need to spend much time in Refutation of your
m^stake in these Scriptures; do but duly consult them, and the best ommentators
on them, and you will fi^d they import no more, then that no Unregenerate and
Vnsanct^fi^d Person shall have any S^are in Bliss or Happiness.

Answ. This is his whole Reply, and in this methinks he treads so light, as if
he were willing to give us the sl^p; however his Parishioner is satisfied with
it, for my Part I am not, and therefore he must not take it amiss if I press
him a little further.

If in t^is Life, Freedom from Sin be not attainable, when, and where is it? As
Death leaves Judgment finds; for i^ the Grave there is no Remembrance; and
nothing that is Unclean can enter Heave Where then is the place of purging?
Will he seek out a middle Region? He had best take heed left he drop into
Purgatory; the Papists indeed have dreamt of such a Place; but I am now
treating with one who professes himself a Protestant: The Christians of old
had no such Devices nor had they need of any, for they had received the Faith
that gave them Victory, by which they overcame the World, John 5.4. James 1.27.
John 5.18. Col. 1.27. Ephesians. 6.11. to 17.
and kept themselves unspotted from it that the Evil one could not touch them;
they were possessed of the purifying H^pe, which was Christ in them; they had put
on the whole Armor of Light, by the only Shield whereof, they were able to
quench all the fiery Darts of the Devil; Righteou^ness was their Breastplate;
their Helmet Salvation, and their Hearts were neither false nor treacherous:
Thus was it with the Saints of old. Let now the Priest, who denies a perfect
Cleansing in this Li^e, show when and where that Cleansing is to be expected.
Our Savior Christ told the Jews, If they would not believe, they should dye in
their Sins, and if they dy^d in their Sins, John 8.21, 24.
whether he went they should never come. A sad Sentence I wist, to them that
believe they shall never be free from Sin while they live.

But says the Parishioner, By denying Perfection, a Fundamental in Divinity is
overthrown (viz.) That the second Adam has gained what the first lost. To this
the Priest thus replies, You cannot think that the first Adam had a State of
such Perfection, as to make it impossible for him to sin; for you know he did
as t^^lly sin; such a Perfection he never lost, nor did Christ gain such a
State for us in this World.

Answ. It Is strange a man should so often beat the Air, and fight with his own
Shadow; here again he wrests the Case from a Possibility of not sinning, to an
Impossibility of sinning* But if Christ did gain such a State for us in this
World as Adam lost (in respect of Righte^^sness and Innocence) then to be sure
Christ has (at least) gained such a State for us in this World, as renders it
possible for a man to live without Sin; for such a State Adam l^st. Hear what
the Priest at length grants, We are indeed (says he) by Christ and the Grace
of God put into such a State, as that we may please God, considering what he
now expects and accepts through Christ; as well as Adam could, considering what
God required then, page 43. Very good, he required Faith and Obedience then of
Adam; he requires Faith and Obedience now of us: He gave Adam Power to believe
and obey; he gives Power now to believe and obey; for he is not an hard Master,
whatever some think of him, he requires no more then he gives Power to perform
and yet he requires to be served without Sin.

Nor is it at all repugnant to Reason, that the strongest should prevail; our
Savior plainly af^^rms it, in his Parable of the st^ong man keepi^g his House,
ti^l a stronger then he come, Luke 11.21.22.
and overcomes him: Now is not Christ stronger then the Devil? Hear what the
^postle says, 1 John 44.
Greater is he that is in you, then he that is in the World: Why then should it
seem so impossible a thing to any, that the Devil and Sin which is of him)
should be overcome in this Life? Christ was the Author of that Faith which
overcomes the World; but who was the Author of that Faith which holds it
impossible to overcome? Be of good. Cheer, says Christ, I (who am your
Captain, 1 John 16.33.
your Example, whom you are to follow, and imitate, I) have overcome the World,
there, by letting you see, that the world may be overcome: What then is the
Reason that it is not? Will any lay the Blame upon God? God forbid; but many
will say man is weak, and full of Frailty, and compassed about with
Infirmities. Man indeed is very weak, 1 Cor. 12.9.
but God is pleased to ^isplay his Strength through man's Weakness; Sa^an
indeed is v^ry strong, but God is stronger then he, Mark 3.27.
and binds the strong man, and d^sposs^ss^s him with all his Goods: 2 Cor.
12.7.9,
The Buffetings of the Enemy are oftimes thick and hard, yet still the Grace is
sufficient: Paul of himself could do nothing, Phil. 2.13.
yet was able to do all things through Christ, who worke^h in his both to will
and to do of his own Pleasure. Thou have wrought all our Works in us, Isaiah
26.12.
said the Ev^ngellical Prophet ( Was there any Sin in those Works? Mat. 1.21.
) Why had Christ the Name Jesus given him, but because he was to save his
People from their Sin? and was ^e to save them from some Sins only and not from
all? John said of him, He will thoroughly purge his Floor, Mat 3.12.
and must we now think he will purge it but in Part? The Author to the Hebrews
says, Heb. 7.25.
He is able to save them to the utte^m^st, that come unto God by him: All
outward Disea^es he cured perfectly, and shall the Ma^adies of the Soul be
cured but by ha^^s? The Apostle Paul tells the Romans, Romans 6.6
That the old man is cr^cifi^d with Christ, that the ^^a^ of Sin might be
destroyed; and that he that is d^ad is free from Sin: ver. 7.
Nay, How shall we (says he) that are dead to Sin live any longer therein?
verse. 2.
And again, Being made free from Sin, verse 18.
ye became the Servants of Righteousness. What mean the Scriptures in so many
places to hold forth a State of Freedom from Sin in this Life, if no such thing
is to be here expected; They that are Christ's have crucifi^d the Flesh, with
the Affections and Lusts, Galat. 5.24. 1 Pet. 4. Romans 8.1.
says Paul. He that has suffered in the Flesh has ceased from Sin, says
Peter. There is no Cond^mnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, (says Paul)
who walk not after the Flesh but after the Spirit. If there be no Condemnation
to them, there is no sin committed by them: for, wheresoever there is Sin,
there is also Condemnation: for, The Lord will not justif^ the Wiced, Ex. 28.7.
1 John 1.7.
If we walk in the Light, as he is in the Light, then have we Fellowship one
with anoth^r, and the Blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all Sin,
says the Apostle John. So Paul to the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 7.1.
Having therefore these Promises, let us cleanse our selves from all Fil^^iness
of the Flesh and Spirit, perfecting (...) in the Fear of the Lord. And with
what Zeal does the same Apostle pray for the Thessalonians, 2 Thessalonians. 5.23.
The very God of Peace sanctify you wholely; and I pray God, your whole
Spirit, and Soul, and Body may be preserved blameless unto the coming of our
Lord Jesus Christ. With what fervor of Spirit did that Good Man pray for that,
which, had he lived in this untoward Age, he might happily have been blamed for
expecting!

But consider; Can it be indeed profitable for any man to live in sin, or
injurious to him to be freed from it? Nay, is not sin, on the contrary the
greatest Hurt and Injury that ever did or can befall Mankind? Why then is this
man so angry with us, for believing it (...) to be preserved from Sin, and in
that Faith desiring to be preserved from it, and endeavoring to live without
i^? Does not himself ^ay, (page 34.) It is good to set the Mark as high as may
be, so that we may be excited to endeavor nobly? And will he notwithstanding
blame us, for not setting the Mark too low? How unfairly are we dealt with?

Thus far in D^fence of this truly Gospel Doctrine, of being perfectly
de^i^ered and preserved from Sin. Now to all you Priests and others, who set
your selves in Opposition thereunto, this in short I have to say; Repent,
Repent, and cease to pervert the Right Way of the Lord, lest in the Day when he
makes Inquisition for Blood, ye be found guilty of destroying the Souls of
many. For verily, as the Evil Spies discouraged the Heart of the Children of
Israel, Numbers 32.9.
that they should not go into the Land which the Lord had given them; Chap.
13.31.
by telling them, they were not able to overcome their Enemies, but that the
People of the Land were stronger then they: Even so do ye discourage the People
at this day, from pressing after a pure and sinless State, by telling them it
is not possible to attain thereto in this Life: Yet ^owing Pillows under their
Armholes, and daubing them up with untempered Mortar, ye persuade them it shall
go well with them although they sin against the Lord. Thus ye strengthen the
Hands of the Wicked, that he returns not from his Wicked Way, by promising
him Life. And thus like the Scribes and Pharisees of old (against whom our Lord
denounced so many and such dreadful Woe. Mar. 23.
) Ye shut up the Kingdom of Heaven against men, neither entering in your
selves, not suffering others to enter.

CHAP. VI. Of Swearing.
FROM the Doctrine of Perfection the Priest passes on to that of Swearing; at
his very entrance into which, he makes a Digression to deliver himself of a
Noti^n (wherewith it seems his Head was pregnant) concerning the two Covenants,
namely, of Works and of Grace. The Covenant of Works, he says, was mad^ with
Adam before he f^ll. Thus, he says, is called by Divines a Covenant of Works,
because an exact Obedience was required of him, and a Reward promis^d him upon
that Obedience, page 48. And this Covenant, he says, none lived under but Ad^m
only, page 50.

Answ. Of this he offers no Proof at all, which he had great Reason to have
done, if he had any to offer, considering that he treads an unbeaten Path.
Where does the Scripture say, that Adam was under a Covenant of Works? or what
were the Works he was under? Adam indeed was commanded not to eat of the Fruit
of the Tree of Knowledge: Will he say that was a Covenant? If of every Command
he will make a Covenant, he may find more Covenants then Chapters in the Bible.
And upon the same Reason, he may call this a Covenant of Works too, under which
Believers now live, because many things are commanded and forbidden them
therein.

But if Adam had fallen from a Covenant of Works to a Covenant of Grace, what
had his Loss been? what had he suffered? He had not then fallen from better to
worse (which he did) but from worse to better: for the Covenant of Grace is
better then the Covenant of Works was or could be, as the Apostle argue, Hebr.
8.6.

But as this Man would make Adam, in his state of Innocence, to be under a
Covenant of Works, without any Scripture Proof: so he would make the Covenant
of the Jews (or the Covenant of the Law, under which the Jews were) to be not a
Covenant of Works, quite contrary to the Scripture, That that Covenant that
Moses and David lived under, was a Covenant of Works, I utterly deny, says he.
Whereas the Scripture, speaking of the Law, and the Works thereof (which was
the Covenant under which Moses and David lived) says expr^sly, Ye shall keep
my Statutes and my Judgments, Lev. 18.5.
which if a man do, he shall live in them: Was not this a Covenant of Works?
Was not here an Obedience required (yea, an exact Obedience too; Galat. 3.10.
for, Cursed is every one that (...) not in all things that are written in the
Book of the Law, to do them) and Life promised as a Reward upon that Obedience?
The same said the Lord by his Prophet, complaining of Rebellious Israel; Ezekiel.
20.21.
They walked no^ in my Statutes, neither kept my Judgments, to do them, which
if a man do, he shall even live in them. Romans 10.5. Gal. 3.12.
To the same purpose also speaks the Apostle Paul. And will this man
notwithstanding adventure to say, that this was not a Covenant of Works? When
Moses had told the People all the Words of the Lord, and all the Judgments,
then all the People answered with one Voice, Ex. 24.3.
and said, All the Words which the Lord has said w^ll we do (the same is
repeated, Deuteronomy. 5.27.) Here are Works commanded to be done: Here Is an
undertaking on the Peoples's Part, who promise to do them. Reward also is
propo^ed upon Obedience: Punishment upon Disobedience. If this be not a
Covenant of works, what is? Divines, he says, do therefore call that a
Covenant of Works, which was made with Adam in his Innocent State, because an
exact Obedience was required, and a Reward thereupon promised. But if an exact
Obedience was required in this Covenant under which Moses and David were, and a
Reward thereupon promised as is most clear from Deuteronomy. 5.32, 33.) How can he,
without con^radicting himself and his Divines, deny this to be a Covenant of
Works? Let the Reader judge.

Again, He would make that Covenant under which they lived, and the Covenant
under which we now live (the Covenant of the Law and the Covenant of the
Gospel) to be one and the same. Whereas the Lord not only calls this latter a
New Covenant, Ier. 31.31, 32.
but also says, It is not according to that which he made with Israel of old.
Which Words, the Author to the Hebrews referring to, argues this latter
Covenant to be not only not the same with the former, Hebr. 8.
but to be a better Covenant, and established also upon better Promises then
the former. And in his Epistle to the Galatians, The Apostle (who knew how to
deliver himself, as well it may be as this Priest does) calls them expressly Two
Covenants (not 2 Forms, or Modes only Administration* of one and the same
Covenant, as the Priest does) and plainly she^s by the Allegory of Abraham's
two Sons* that they were distinct and different Covenants. Galat. 4. Verse. 22
For (says he) it is written, that Abraham had two Sons the one by a Bond
maid, the other by a Freewoman: But he who was of the Bond woman was born
after the Flesh; Verse. 23.
but he of the Frewoman was by Promise: Which things (says he) are an
Allegory; Verse. 24.
for these are Two Covenants, etc. the one gendring to Bondage, the other free.
So that the Priest might as well have said, that Abraham's two Sons ( Ishmael
and Isaac) were not two distinct men, but one and the same man, differing only
in Name, Time or Habit; or that the two Mountains, Sinai and Sion, are not
indeed distinct and several Mountains, but one and the same Mo^ntain,
differenced only by diverse Names; as that these Two Covenants, of which those
things were the Allegory, are not really two distinct Covenants, but one and
the same, differing only in the Forms or Modes of Administration, and various
Dispensations of it*

But not to insist over long on that which himself makes but a Digression from
his Theme, I return with him to the Case of Swearing.

He takes an Offense at R. Hubberthorn, for setting in the Title* page of a
Book, which he writ against Swearing, these Scriptures, Because of Oa^hs the
Land mourns, Hos. 4. And (as said the Prophet) Every one that swears shall be
cut off Zach. 5.3. These he says are his Proofs (though R. H. does not call
them so himself) and hereupon he falls foul not only upon R. H. but all the
Quakers also calling this the horrible Abuse the Quakers put upon the
Scriptures, and the Spirit of God by which they were writ, and that it
discovers a most dishonest Principle in the Quakers, etc. page 53.55. What Is
the Ground of this great Clamor? Why says he, they co^fess Oaths were lawful
in the time of the Law, yes do bring in Hosea and Zachary, w^o lived in the
time of the Law, speaking against that Usage which they confess was then lawful.

Answ. He mistakes the Case, they are not brought in speaking against that
which was then lawful, but against that which was then unlawful, namely the
wrong Use and Abuse of Oaths: who that has at all converst with Books, is
ignorant, that it is usual at the Foot of a Title page, to insert some
Sentences (out of Holy Scripture, if the Subject of the Book be Religion; out
of profane Authors if the Discourse be of another Nature ^ somewhat relating
or) alluding to the matter treated of. The Subject R. H. was treating of was
this, that all manner of swearing being forbidden by Christ, all Oaths are now
unlawful, and therefore the Use of any Oaths must needs provoke the Displeasure
of God against that Nation where they are used. This being the Subject of his
Book, he did very a^tly allude to those Words of the Prophet Hosea, Because of
Oaths the Land mourns. The Land mourned then because of Oaths; Why? because
those Oaths then were Unlawful. The Land mourns now because of Oat^s; why?
because all Oaths are now unlawful. The like is to be said of the Words of
Zachary; and this is further to be noted, that in R. H.'s Book it is thus, And
(as says the Prophet) Every one that swears shall be cut off but this
Parenthesis (as says the Prophet) the Priest leaves out, which was not fairly
done of him; for it shows the Intention of R. H. to be only to allude to the
words of the Prophet, as if he had said, as the Prophet says in another Case,
so say I in this; he said, every one that swears falsely shall be cut off,
because it was unlawful to swear falsely then: I say every one that swears at
all shall be cut off because it is unlawful to swear at all now; it was
therefore ignorantly at least, if not maliciously done of the Priest to
infinuate that R.H. brought these Scriptures to prove that all Oaths were as
unlawful then as now; for himself confesses that R. H. does yield that some
Oaths were lawful then.

Besides, what Reason had he to say of those Scriptures, These are his Proofs?
what does he mean they were Proofs of? He himself in his own Book has set at
the Foot of his Title Page this Scripture, 2 These. 2.11. For this cause God
shall send them strong Delusion, that they should believe a Lie. Did he intend
this for a Proof? of what I would know? Is it to prove his Book a Conference
between a Minister and a Parishioner of his? Is it to prove his Parishioner was
inclining to Quakerism? Is it to prove that the absurd Opinions of that Sect
are detected, and exposed to a just Censure? (This is the sum of his Title) or
is it to prove, that they who credit what he has ^herein written against the
Principles of the People called Quakers, are indeed under strong Delusion, and
do believe a Lie? But letting his pass, let us now hear what the Priest ^an say
in defense of Swearing.

That our Savior Christ, when he said, ^ear not at all etc. Mat 5. did not
forbid ^ll manner of Oaths, he takes upon him to prove, and says he will do it
in this order

First, By proving an Oath an Act of natural Religion toward God.

Secondly, An Act of necessary Justice, and Charity toward men.

Thirdly, That it is therefore a Part of that Moral and Eternal Law, which our
Savior professes he came not to destroy, but to fulfill.

Fourthly, That we find it practiced in the new Testament, page 5.6.

His first Proposition (viz.) That an Oath is an Act of natural Religion
toward God, I deny.

He offers to prove it by Reason, and Consent of Nations.

By Reason thus, That whereby we glorify God, and adore his Attributes, is an
Act of Religion; but by an Oath (rightly taken) we glorify God, and adore his
Attributes, therefore such an Oath is an Act of Religion.

Answ. The first Part of this Argument does not reach the Proposition, he
undertook to prove, namely, That an Oath is an Act of natural Religion; for in
his Argument he drops the Word [ Natural] and makes no mention of it, neither
does he in the Conclusion of his Argument infer that an Oath is an Act of
Natural Religion, but barely thu^ Therefore such an Oath is an Act of Religion
Now a thing may be an Act of Religion, and yet not an Act of Natural Religion
(as he calls it) that i^, The Word natural has diverse Acceptations; for there
is the pure uncorrupte^ Nature, wherein man was, at first made There is the
corrupt and degenerate Nature of man in the ^^ll, in which Sense natural is in
Scripture opposed to spiritual, as where the Apostle says, The natural man
receives not the things of the Spirit of God; for they are foolishness unto
him, 1 C^r. 2.14. And there is the divine Nature, of which the Saints are mad*
Partakers, as Peter witnesses, 2 Pet. 1.4.
it may be an Act of Religion by Precept or Institution, yet not an Act of
Religion barely of it ^elf, or simply from the Nature of the things that may be
an Act of Religion, being commanded, which was not an Act of Religion before it
was command^d, nor will be an Act of Re^igion after that Command which made it
so, is repealed. T^us^ ^s it in the Ca^e of Circumcision it was an Act of
Religion, yet not an Act of Natural Religion. It was no ^ct o^ Religion before
it was commanded* It was an Act of Religion after it was commanded; it is no
Act of Religion since that Command which made it so is repealed. Here then he
has missed his A^m, and that abundantly short of the Mark: And it is a very
material Consideration for for his main Drift, in asserting an Oath to be an
Act of Natural Religion, seems to be, that he might wholely free it from
Dependence upon Precept, and establish it as a Part of the Moral and Eternal
Law, which in his third Proposition, he ushers in with a Therefore, that it
being an Act of Natural Religion, etc. It is therefore a Part of the Moral and
Eternal Law, etc. But his Therefore being built upon a false Foundation, must
needs therefore fall to the Ground.

And as in the first Part of his Argument there is a D^f^ct, so in the second
there is a Redu^da^cy, which makes it stark naught; for therein he Assumes thus
But by an Oath (rightly taken) we glorify God, etc. The Fa^lacy lies in those
Words [ rightly taken] b^ which he would take for granted, that an Oath may be
rightly taken; this is mere begging of the Qu^stion; for that is the main thing
in Controversy: if we c^uld grant that an Oath may be rightly taken, we should
not refu^e to take it our selves; but we ^ay no Oath can be rightly taken,
because all Oaths are by Christ forbidden.

The Premises being both faulty his Conclusion to be sure cannot be good
theref^^e what he builds thereupon deserves the less Regard. He enumerates many
Attributes of God, which he says are acknowledged by an Oath, to which no
other Answer need, be given, then that the divine Attributes are acknowledged
by speaking the Truth without an Oath, and God thereby more glorified, in
having re^eemed a people from ^e^fidiousness, Treachery and Falsehood, and
brought them to that State of integrity, and Uprightness of Heart, Ephesians. 4.25.
that ha^ing put away ^ll Lying (which was the Occasion of Swearing) they can
now sp^^k every man Truth to his N^ighbour without an Oath

From Reason he comes to Consent of Nations the second Medium to p^ove Swearing
an A^t of Religion (Observe Reader he has wholely let go h^s Hold of Natural
Religion, w^ic^ was the thing he prop^sed a first to prove (page 5^.) and which
if he fail of proving, his H^athenish Examples will stand him in no stead; but
however let us hear his In^tances, he begins with Aristo^le, to whom he refers
this Saying, An Oath is the most v^^nerable thing that pertains to Religion: ^o
Aristotle he joins Cicero, who (he says) gives this Account of an Oath, An
Oatha a Religious Affirmation, and what you affirm or promise by taking God to
witness, ought to be kept (so it ought whether God be taken to witness or no)
and elsewhere (he says) he has these Words, Our Fore^ Fathers thought no Tie
more fast to bind men's Faith then an Oath. To these two he adds a third,
Seneca, speaking thus, Religion is the chief Bond of Fidelity in the M^litia:
Where observe, that Seneca does not say an Oath is the chief Bond, but Religion
is the chief Bond, though he would per^wade his Reader, that by Religion is
meant an Oath. These are his Instances: Now let us see what Use he ^akes of
them.

Those T^st^monies (says he (...) do sig^^fie the Vnive^sal Consent of Mankind
in this Point, page 60.

Answ. D^ they so? That methinks is somewhat stringe, they s^^m then to take
too much upon them. What three men (One Greek, and two Rom^^s) to represent all
Nations, and signify the Universal Consent of Mankind! Is he sure these three
Men were deputed by all Nations to be their Rep^esentatives in this Case? That
had been proper for him to have inquired, before he had been so positive; or
does he certainly know there were none amongst Mankind that were of a contrary
Mind, seeing he speaks so comprehensively of the V^iversal Content of
Mankind? To show him the Rashness of his inconsiderate Assertion, I will g^v^
him some Instances to the contrary. The first shall be of Solon (one of the
Sages of Greece) A good man should have that R^pute, Bp. Gaude^ of Oaths, page
42.
as not to need an Oath. It is a Diminution of his Credit to be put to swear.
To him add S^s^ades (another of those seven wise men) whose Saying was,
Stobaeus Ser. 28. Stob. Sermon. 25.
Abstain from an Oath. with him agrees Cher^llus, No Oath ought to be used,
neither a JUST one, n^r an unjust one* Epict^^us says, Refuse an Oath ^f
possible ALTOGETHER, Bp. Gauden of Oa^hs page 42. ^bid. (...).
if not by things obvious Plato is more positi^e, Away, says he, with ^n Oath
ALTOGETHER. M^nander little less, To avoid evil Swearing, as not to swear in
things JUST and TRVE. Plutarch tells us, ^^id.
It was unlawful for Jupiter 's Priests to swear. Neither take an Oath, ibid.
nor require one, said Fimi^us to Lollianus. In the better and simpler Ages of
the World Oaths were s^id^mused in Judicature, idem page. 36.
but after that Perfidy and Lying increased, the Use of Oaths increased says
Polybius.

Judge now, Reader, by these Instances, whether the more virtuous and honest
sort of Heathens did esteem an Oath to be an ^ct of natural Religion (that is)
whether they accounted it of a Religious Nature in it self; or whether being
sensible of the Corruption of Mankind, they only made use of Oaths as a Rem^dy
or Exp^dient against the Perfidy, Treachery and Falsehood of Evil minded men,
and therefore (as Solon said) A Diminution to the Credit of a Good Man. But of
this more hereafter, when I come to speak of his t^ird Proposition.

The former Instances are of particular Persons; Take one Instance of a Nation
in general, namely, the Seythians, whose Ambassador treating with Alexander
the Great, thus deliver themselves: Think not that the Scythians confirm their
Am^ty by Oaths; Q. Curt. l. 7.
They swear by keeping their Word: That is the Security of the Greeks, who seal
Deeds and call upon their Gods. We are bound by our very Promise. They that
fear not Men, w^ll not stick to deceive the Gods.

Thus, Reader, thou may see, that not only many particular Men, but even a
whole Nation in general were against Swearing. What now is become of his
Consent of Nations, his Universal Consent of Mankind! Might be not have come
^ff with less Shame, if he had used more Modesty?

But he says, These Testimonies signify the universal Consent of Mankind in
this Point. What Point is that? that an Oath is an Act of Religion; for that
was it he proposed to prove by them, page 5^.

Answ. If his Instances were never so g^^neral, and his ^estimonies never so
universal, to prove Oaths Acts of Religion amongst the Heathen, yet it would
not do his Business, unless he could also prove, that Oaths were Acts of
Natural Religion, (I for cannot think him so weak ^eaded, as to imagine, that
whatsoever the Heathen did as Religious Acts, were Acts of Natural Religion)
That Oaths were used among the Heathen, and by many of them reputed Religious
too, I deny not; but this does not prove, that Oaths were Acts of Natural
Religion, or that the Heathen used Oaths from a divine Instinct in Nature. Romans
2. Verse. 14.
It is evident, that the Heathen borrowed many Ceremonies from their Neighbors
the Jews* and used them in their own Religion: Will he thence infer, that those
Ceremonies were Acts of a Natural Religion, or that they sprang from a common
Principle of Religion in Nature? That were to err willingly. They had their
Images, their Temples, their Priests, their distinct Habits for their Priests,
their Sacrifices, the Ring in Marriages, wearing Black in token of Mourning for
the Dead, and many other Ceremonies. Had they these from an innate Principle, a
Principle of Religion in their Nature? To acknowledge and adore a Deity, to do
Justice, to love Mercy, to speak Truth, etc. These indeed are the Effects of
Natural Religion; these spring from Seeds of Religion sown in the Nature of
Mankind, and so are indeed Moral and Eternal. See Acts 17.22, 23. Romans 1.21.
But there may be Ways or Modes of performing these which are not the Dictates
of this Natural Religion, but are either received praeceptively from God, or
invented and instituted by Men according to their own Fancy and Humor. For
though it be an Effect of Natural Religion, to acknowledge that there is a
Deity, and that this Deity is to be adored; yet are not all those Ways, by
which this Deity is adored, the Effects of Natural Religion; but some of them
have been commanded and appointed by God, the rest invented and instituted by
Men. The like may be said of Justice, M^rcy and Truth: There is Justice, and
the Manner of doing Justice; there is Mercy, and the Way of showing Mercy;
there is Truth, and the Manner of speak^ng Truth. Now an Oath is but the M^de
or Manner of (...) Truth (He himself calls it, A Form of ^iv^ng Evidence, page
62,) It Is Truth it self that is the main thing. To do justly is a moral and
eternal Precept. To show Mercy is the like. To sp^ak Truth is the like. But the
Manner of Expressing these is not moral, not eternal. but ^utable, vari^bl^,
transient. To speak the Truth is an ind^spensible Command, a Command written in
Man's Heart from the Beginning; b^t the Manner of Performing this has been
various: So^e^imes by a bare single Affirmation; sometimes by an Additional
Ass^veration; sometimes by calling God verbally to witness; sometimes by an
Impreca^ion on the Party himself; sometimes by putting the Hand under the
Thigh; sometimes by lifting it up to Heaven; sometimes by laying it upon the
Breast; sometimes by laying it upon the Altar; sometimes by laying it upon a
Book; sometimes by Kissing the Book, etc. Now all these (out of which an Oath
is made up) are but the various Ways and Manners of Expressing Truth. The Oath
is not the Truth it self, but a Medium, or Way contrived to gain Credit with
the suspicious and incredulous, who are easily persuaded, that the Party giving
Evidence, will from the Apprehension of Danger and Punishment upon Perjury, be
more inclined to speak the Truth after this manner ( viz of an Oath) then if
his Testimony should be taken upon a single Affirmation. An Oath therefore
being the Manner, not the Matter; not the Substance, but a Ceremony, used only
sometimes, and by same Persons, to gain Credit with the Suspicious, and that
variously, according to Circumstanc^s and Occasions. I conclude it cannot be an
Act of Natural Religion, it cannot be a Moral Eternal Precept. And how far John
Gauden, late Bishop of Exeter, was of this Mind also, let the Reader judge by
his own words, It were to be wished (says he in his Discourse concerning
public Oath. page 23.
) that the Evils of Men's Hearts and Manners, the Jealousies and Distrusts, the
Dissimulations and Frauds of many Ch^^sti^ns, their uncharitableness,
Unsatisfactions and Insecurities, were not such, as by their Diseases do make
these Applications of Solemn Oaths and Judicial Swearings necessary, not
ABSOLUTELY and MORALLY, or Precepti^^^y (as the Schoolmen note well) but by
way of Consequence and Remedy; as good new Laws are necessary for the Curb or
Cure of new Evils in Polities and Kingdoms. Observe, Render, the Bishop here
denies that Solemn Oaths and Judicial Swearings are absolutely necessary,
morally necessary, preceptively necessary; and makes them necessary only by way
of Consequence and Remedy, as Applications to the Diseases of Iealousi,
D^strusts, Dissimulations, Frauds, and other Evils of Men's Hearts and Manne^s.
How then are they Acts of Natural Religion? How are they a part of the Moral
and Eternal Law?

Again, the Bishop goes on thus, Possibly as Christians (truly such) we should
need no Swearings in public or private, etc. Consider now, I pray, What Act of
Natural Religion is that, which, the more truly-Christian men become, the less
need they have of it! How is that a Part of the Moral and Eternal Law, which,
as men become truly-Christian, they shall have no Occasion to use! But I need
not have gone further then his own words, to refute his Opinion of the Morality
of an Oath, as an Act of Natural Religion, and a part of the Eternal Law; since
he himself says, (page 61.) If there were that Truth in men, that their bare
Testimony were of sufficient Credit, then there were no need at all of an Oath:
Which plainly shows, that an Oath is nor an Act of Natural Religion (as he
calls it) not a part of the Moral and Eternal Law, which is never to be
abolished. For if it were an Act of Natural Religion, an Increase of Truth in
men would not render it needless; if it were a part of the moral and eternal
Law, an Increase of Truth in men would be so far from making it needless, that
it would rather confirm, strengthen and ^nforce it, as we see in Love, Mercy,
Justice, and the like. I have now done with his first Proposition, which proves
defective in all its parts.

His second Proposition, by which he undertakes to prove Swearing lawful, is,
that An Oath is an Act of N^c^ssary Justice and Charity toward Men. To prove
which he says, ^t at in order to the Ending of Strife, Evid^^ce is necessary.

A^sw. Evidence is indeed necessary. But if he admits nothing for Evidence, but
what is given upon Oath, he errs egregiously: for that is as really Evidence
(and may be also as true and faithful) which is delivered barely by a plain
Affirm^ion, as that which is given in the Form of an Oath. This being granted
(which cannot reasonably be denied) an Oath is then superfluous, Frustra fit
perplura, quod fieri potest per panciora.
and whatsoever is superfluous is not necessary. And indeed, amongst Good Men
an Oath is needless, as the Emperor Antonine well observes in his Description
of a Good Man, The Integrity of a truly Good Man (says he) is such, that there
is no need of an Oath for him. Which single Sentence of a virtuous Heathen were
enough (one would think) to put to Shame and Silence all those nominal
Christians, that from their Hypocrisy, Malice and Interest, infer (as this
Priest d^es) a Necessity of Swearing.

But if he will still have Oaths to be necessary, I will show him (from one of
sufficient Authority, with him at least, I doubt not) whence that Necessity
came; Of Christian simplicity, fol. 228.
I^r Tailor (late Bishop of Down and Conner) in his Course of Sermons lately
printed, speaking of Swearing says thus; But let us consider who it was that
invented and made the Necessity of Oaths, etc, These things (says he) were
indeed found out by Man, but the Necessity of them was from him that is the
Father of all Lies, the Devil. Here th^n the Priest may see, First, Whence that
N^cessi^y at first sprang, which he labors so hard to continue and perpetuate.
2. That Oaths were invented by men, and therefore what he has said, of an Oath
being an Act of Natural Religion, and a part of the moral and eternal Law, is
indeed but a mere Fancy.

But he says, If there were that Truth in Men, that their bare Testimony were
Infall^ble, and of sufficient Credit, then there were no need at all of an
Oath, page 61.

Answ. I say, If Oaths were infallible, that is, that they that took them could
not deceive, could not choose but speak true, then there were more Reason for
^he taking of them. But Oaths are F^ll^ble, as well as bare Testimonies; and
that the too frequent Perjuries, in all Ages, wherein Oaths have been used, are
infallible Evidences of: But is nothing of sufficient r^d^t with him, but what
is infallible? If so, then neither are Oaths of sufficient Credit, because not
infallible. But if he will grant, that an Evidence may be of sufficient Credit,
although not infallible, he must then either deny that there is in any man that
Truth, which may make his bare Testimony of sufficient C^ed^t; or yield that
there are some men from whom there is no Need at all of an Oath.

But he says, All men are Liars.

Answ. I do not believe all men are Liars, whatever he may be; and I would
gladly hear in what sense he will own himself to be a Liar. David indeed, in
his great Affiction, let such an Expression drop; Psa. 116.11.
b^t he quickly re-called himself, and confessed it was spoken in his Haste. This
man has been over hasty too, and has caught up the word at a venture; let us
see whether he ( who is so much for confession) will as fairly confess his
Error.

Again, he says, Mankind is so generally leavened with Hypocrisy, and Fear,
or Favor, Malice or Interest swayes with the far grea or part of men; and
therefore it becomes highly needful, that their Evidence be demanded and given
in such Forms as are most binding to the Conscience, which an Oath by all the
World is ack^owledged to be, page 61, 62.

Answ. Here observe, that from the Hypocrisi^ and Wickedness of men, he infers
a needfulness of their Evidence being demanded and given by an Oath. Their
Evidence! Who^e Evidence? Their Evidence who are leavened with Hypocrisy, and
swayed by (...) Interest, etc. What is this to good men, to (...), to the
Disciples of Christ? If (...) cannot be hold without Fetters, must True men
therefore wear Shackles? Or will he reckon all men Fello^s, as even now he
called all men Lya^s? But if it were true, that the genera^^y of men were so
lea^ened with Hypocrisi^, and swayed with Malice, Interest* etc. as he says
they are, and that therefore they could not believe one another's Evidence
without Swearing, would it be an Act of necessary Justice: and Charity to good
men, out of whom the old Leaven of Hypocrisy is purg^d (and who keep the Feast
(of a Good Conscience) not with that old Leaven, neither with the Leaven of
Malice and Wickedness: 1 Cor. 5.7, 8.
but with the Unleavened Bread of Sincerity and Truth) to demand their Evidence
also by an Oath; or for them to give their Evidence by an Oath, and thereby
implicitly acknowledge themselves to be leav^ned with Hypocrisy, and swayed
with Malice and Interest, as well as the worst? For if Hypocrisy and
Wickedness be Reasons of demanding an Oath, does not he that, in Conformity
thereunto takes an Oath, acknowledge himself to be Hypocritical and Wicked? Is
this an Act of Justice, and a nec^ssary one too? What sort of Justice is that,
I pray, which makes No Distinction between the Virtuous and the Vicious, the
True Man and the False, the Sincere and the Hypocrite, the Good and the Bad;
but injoyns the most Sincere and Upright Man to wear the Badge of Hypo^^isie,
an Oath.

But suppose this just (th^n which what can be more remote from Justice) yet
does it not answer the End proposed, for an Oath does not bind the Conscience
of a man, so leavened with Hypocrisy, and swayed with Malice, Interest, etc.
as he (to the Shame of his own Mi^i^try) represents the far greater Part of men
to be; for it is not to be supposed, that he that is thus leavened with
Hypocrisy, and sway^d with Malice or Interest, will make any more Conscience
of false Swearing, then of false Speaking; ^ut he that will lie in giving in a
Solemn Evidence, will not stick in Point of Conscience, to add an Oath to that
Lie, if it be required of him. This Bishop Gauden was sensible of, when he
said, Nor can i^d^^d much Credit be given any more then to a Liar, Discourse
con. pub. Oaths page 17.
to any man that swears never so solemnly, and in Judicature, who is a Common
Swearer, and has no Reverence of the Majesty of God. And what Reverence of the
Majesty of God shall we suppose those to have, who are leavened with
Hypocrisy, and swayed by Malice or Interest, of which Sort he reputes the far
greater Part of men to be! Yet he faith Multitudes, who fear not a Lie, d^d
read the Solemnity of an Oath, and the Horror of Perjury; but it is much more
probable, that such a Sort of men, as he has described do rather dread the
outward Penalty for Perjury, because the Law intricts severe Punishments on
them that forswear themselves, whereas Liars (the more is the Pity) go Scotfree.

But otherwise, as to a Conscientious Tie, how little they regard Perjury, who
are adicted to Lying, is not only evident from the frequent Perjuries
committed, but also observable from the Testimonies of the Ancients.

Chrysestein says, He that does not stick at LYING, will not fear SWEARING;
for he that tells a Lie, goes beyond the Truth in his Heart; and he that SWEARS
falsely passes over God in his Words: what then is the Difference between
passing over God, Hom. 12. in Mat. 5.
and going beyond the Truth, seeing God is Truth it self? This is the only
Difference, that when we LIE we pass over the Truth in our Heart, and when we
FORSWEAR we pass over God in Words; for to men we give Satisfaction by words,
to God by Conscience. God himself, who forbade Forswearing, even he afterward
commanded NOT TO SWEAR: He therefore that is not afraid to set light by the
Command of God in SWEARING, will not be afraid to do the like in FORSWEARING;
but what would thou have? Does he fear God, or does he not fear him? If he be
one that fears God, he will not LIE, though he be not sworn, but if he be one
that does not fear God, he cannot speak Truth, though he be SWORN. Again, Thou
deceivest thy self O man (says he) A man that has learnt to steal, and to
wrong a man, will oftimes trample also upon an Oath. Hom. 9 in Act. Apost. cap.
3.
With him consents Isidorus Pelusiota (who was Contemporary with Cyril) In one
of his Epistles writing thus, If thou art of our Flock* and art ordered under a
good Shepherd, deny the Nature of wild Beasts, lib. 1. Epist. 155.
and obey his Voice that ^orbiddeth to SWEAR AT ALL. Moreover not to SWEAR, is
not to REQUIRE AN OATH of another. Now if thou will not SWEAR, neither REQUIRE
thou an OATH of another for two Causes; ^ither because he who is asked loves
Truth, or on the contrary to Lie; if the man speaks Truth usually, he will
always speak Truth WITH OUT AN OATH; but i^ he be a LIAR he will LIE, Comment.
in Iac. 5.
though he SWEAR. To this agrees that of Erasmus, Whosoever dare be bold to lie
without Swearing, Qui non r^^^rentur (...) fal^unt D^os, says. (...) ad
Alexand. in Q. Curt. lib. 72. Q^i (...) Virop (...), insarit, Antipho. (...)
Sermon. ^5 Nullum jusjurandum (...) est, sari et imp^st^^i. Sop^oc. in Stob.
(...). 26.
he dares do the same al^o when he swears, if he list.

But he take for granted that an Oath is an Act of very great Justice and
Charity; therefore he says, Seeing the E^ds of Justice and Charity are so much
served by the religious Use of an Oath, would not the abolishing of it derogate
from the Honor of Christianity, page 62.

Answ. First, The Ends of Justice and Charity are not served by the Use of an
Oath, but by the Use of Truth, and Sincerity in gi^ing a true Evidence, whether
it be with or without an Oath: This Truth-speaking is the Substance of the
whole matter; this answers the Ends of Justice exactly; but Oaths are but the
Forms of giving Evidence, as himself confesses, page 62.

Secondly, The abolishing of an Oath would not degenerate. Nay, I add, the
continuing of Oaths does derogate from the Honor of Christianity. The Honor
of Christianity is, that it out-strips and excells all other Professions of
Religion whatsoever: It is no Honor to Christianity to stand but upon equal
terms with any other Religion, whether Heathenish or Jewish; but it mounts far
above them all, and leads them that sincerely embrace it, to a Perfection
beyond whatever was attainable in any of them, yet in them Oaths were
attainable: It is no Derogation to the Honor of Christianity that it has made
its Adherents so Upright, just and true, that they dare not speak a Falsehood,
though others dare swear it. Is it any Derogation from the Honor of Religion,
that the Professors of it are men of Credit, worthy to be believed (and if he
allow them to be such, there is then (he confesses, page 61.) No Need at all
of an Oath) The primitive Christians (says Bp. Gauden) did so keep up the
Sanctity and Credit of their Profession among Unbelievers, Discourse concerning
pub. Oaths page 41.
that it was Security enough in all Cases to say, Christianus sum, I am a
Christian. If any urged them further to any Oath, for matter, or manner, or
Authority unlawful, they repeated this, as the ONLY Satisfaction they could
give: There needed no more then the Veracity of their BARE WORD. But was this a
Derogation from the Honor of Christianity? No, They kept up (says he) the
Sanctity and Credit of their Profession by this. Nay hear what he says further
upon this Subject, Certainly the Affairs of Christians, both PVBLICK and
private would be NO LESS to their Honor and Ease, if there were in NO CASE any
need or use of ANY Oaths or Swearing, page 22
but such an Authentic Veracity, and Just Credulity on all Sides, as might
WELL spare even the MOST TRVE, sincere and lawful Oaths, keeping on all Sides
as great a Distance from Lying, as from false Swearing: The abolishing then of
Oaths would no way derogate from the Honor of Christianity.

But the continuing of Oaths does greatly derogate from the Honor of
Christianity. Why are Oaths continued? Because (says m Opponent) there is not
that Truth in Men that can make their bare Testimony of sufficient Credit (for
if there were, he confesses there would be no need at all of an Oath) What can
more derogate from the Honor of Christianity, then that its Followers should
be so devoid of Truth, as not to deserve Credit? Again, Why are Oaths
continued? Because (says my Opponent) all men are Liars, Mankind is generally
leavened with Hypocrisy and Fear, Favor, Malice or Interest sway with the far
greater Part of Men. If his far greater Part of Men are such, as have no
Relation to Christianity, his Instance then relates not to the matter, but if
they are such, as by profession thereof, have Relation thereunto, How great a
Derogation is this from the Honor of Christianity? Does it not pluck down
Christianity from its Superexcellent Sphere, and debase it to an Equality with
Heathenism: The most Barbarous Heathen could be believed with an Oath; and
can not thou ( a strong grown Christian, having thy Religion seated in the
Rational Powers, page 5.) be believed without an Oath: What then art thou
better (in this respect) then the misbelieving Heathen? or how art thou in this
Case an Honor to thy Religion, more then that Miscreant is to his? Let none
therefore imagine, that the abolishing of oaths does any way derogate from the
Honor of Christianity; but let all endeavor by living virtuous, just and holy
Lives, and by speaking the Truth upon all occasions Plainly and sincerely, to
leave no Cause nor Place for Oaths, and thereby will Christianity be adorned,
and its Honor highly advanced.

But says he, While the Apostle says, An Oath for Confirmation, is the End of
Strife; if you take away an Oath, you take away that which by God is ordained
to be the most effectual means of ending it, page 63.

Answ. He should rather have said was ordained, then is ordained, if he had
intended to deal fairly; for it was to them of old time under the Law (which
was a State of Weakness and Childhood, and so of Contention and Strife) that
Oaths were appointed; but in the New Testament, which is the Gospel of Peace,
there is no such ordination, there Oaths are taken away, not ordained. Now it
was to that State of Weakness the Apostle refers, when he speaks of an Oath,
Heb. 6. for he writes there to the Hebrews, who had been under the Law, which
shows he had Reference to the State of the Jews, but in all his Epistles to the
believing Gentiles, there is no such thing to be found. Besides, he fetches
the occasion of his Discourse in that Place from the Old Time (wherein Swearing
was allowed) showing how God confirmed his Promise by an Oath to Abraham ver.
13.) and then adds (ver. ^6.) For MEN verily swear by the Greater, and an
Oath for Confirmation is to THEM an End of all Strife. He does not say WE swear
by the Greater, and an Oath to US is an End of all Strife; but MEN swear, and
to THEM an Oath is an End, etc. which plainly carries the Intent of his Words
to them that were under that State of the Law. And this will appear yet more
plain, if we observe that when in the following verses, he speaks of the Heirs
of that Promise, and the strong Consolation they have thereby, he does not then
use the words MEN and THEM, but WE and US. Wherein God (says he) w^lling more
abundantly to show unto the Heirs of Promise the Immutability of his Counsel
confirmed it by an Oath, that by two Immutable things in which it was
impossible for God to Lie, WE might have a strong Consolation, who have fled
for Refuge to lay hold upon the Hope is set before US, which Hope WE have, etc
(ver. 17, 18, 19.) So that when he spoke of what wa^ done in in the old time
wherein swearing was lawful) he expresses himself by the words MEN and THEM;
but when he speaks of what relates more immediately to the New Testament time,
he expresses himself by the Words WE and US, inti^ating that as he
distinguished between the times and States of Law and Gospel, Old Testament and
New, so also he put a Difference between Men and Saints; for as in another
Case, he says, Though we walk in the Flesh, 2 Cor. 10.3.
we do not war after the Flesh, so say I in this Case, Though Saints are men,
yet they do not walk as men: The same which the Apostle also intimates in his
Reproof to some among the Corinthians, Whereas (says he) there is among you
Envying, 1 Cor. 3.3.
and Strife, and Divisions; are ye not carnal, and walk as men? Here he plainly
shows, that walking in Strife and Contention* walking as Men is not the Sain^s
State but a Carnal State, whence we may fair^y infer, that when he speaks (in
Heb 6) of Men's Swearing, he does not by Men intend ^aints, true B^lievers, the
New Testament Church* but such as were under the Old Dispensation (to which
Oaths were allowed) the Ordinances whereof were Carnal, Heb. 9.10
besides it charge an Incongruity upon the Apostle himself to suppose he
meant by men's Swearing that the Saints did swear, and that an Oath was to them
an End of Strife (much more, to imagine he commanded or allowed it in them)
when he checked the Corinthians so sharply for living in Strife, and walking as
men, telling them plainly, they were but carnal.

Nor let him or any think to take Advantage (as some without cause or success
have done) from the Apostle's speaking in the present Tense ( Men [do] swear,
etc. and an Oath [is] to them an End, etc.) from thence inferring, that he
spoke this of the Christian-state, because he says, men [ do] not [ did] and
an Oath [ is] not [ was]; but consider that he writes to the Hebrews, who were
of the Jews, amongst whom Oaths had been lawfully used: And therefore he
expresses himself to them in the same Tense upon other Occasions also, which
none can apply to the Gospel state, although spoken in the Gospel-time. So he
says, Every High Priest [is] ordained to offer, Hebr. 8.3.
etc. This must needs be understood of the Jewish Priesthood, which ( de jure)
was at an End, and yet he does not say, Every High Priest [ was] ordained, but
in the present Tense [ is] ordained, etc. So also, speaking of the outward
Tabernacle, Hebr. 9.3.
that was used in the time of the Law, he says, After the second Vail was the
Tabernacle, which [is] called the Holiest of all. He could not intend this of
the Believers in Christ, that they did call this Tabernacle the Holiest of all;
for they knew a Holier then it, and that it was at an end. But he must here be
understood to speak of the Jews, to whom that Tabernacle belonged, and not to
the Christians. in like manner, when he says, men [ do] swear, etc. and an
Oath [ is] to them an End, etc. he must also be understood to speak of the Jews
(to whom Oaths were commanded) not of the Christians (to whom they were not
commanded) For there is no more Reason to apply his words in this Case to the
Christians, then there would be to apply his words in the other Cases (here
mentioned) to the Christians, which to do would be highly absurd and false.

But he says, If you take away an Oath, you make Christ not so much the Prince
of Peace, as Discord, by making him the Abolisher of that which was designed to
compose it.

Answ. No such matter: Christ has a better Way of composing Discord then by
Oaths. John 8.35.
Moses had that Way, who was but a Servant (and the Servant abides not in the
House forever) But Christ, who is the Son, has a more excellent Way, by
establishing Truth and Righteousness in the Earth. The Law (in which the Oaths
were) was given by Moses, John 1.17.
but the Grace and the Truth came by Jesus Christ. And by this Grace and Truth
Christ works out of the Hearts of them that receive it all that Lying,
Hypocrisy, Fear, Favor, Malice, Interest, etc. which this Priest makes to be
the Needful Causes of an Oath (page 62.) And instead of Lying, he brings in
True-speaking; instead of Hypocrisy, he brings in Sincerity; Prove. 29.25.
instead of that insnaring Fear, he brings in the Fear of the Lord, by which
men depart from Evil; Chap. 16.6.
instead of Favor, he brings in Justice; instead of Malice, he brings in Love;
instead of Interest, he brings in Self-denial; instead of Unrighteousness, he
brings in Righteousness, and the Work of Righteousness is (not Discord, but)
Peace: Isaiah 32 17.
Thus he is made both the Lord our Righteousness, and the Prince of Peace. And
thus by setting up Truth and Sincerity in the Heart, he takes away the Ground
of Oaths. For the Priest confesses, If there were that Truth in men, that their
bare Testimony were of sufficient Credit, then there were no need at all of an
Oath, page 61. Now, though I will not invert the Charge upon my Adversary (which
without any Inj^stice to him I might do) yet I will make bold to tell him, that
He shows but little Respect to Christ, while he grounds the Need of an Oath
upon Lying, Hypocrisy and Malice, yet would make CHRIST to continue the Use of
it in his Church.

He is now come to his third Proposition, viz. That an Oath is a Part of that
Moral and Eternal Law, which our Savior professes he came not to destroy, but
to fulfill, p. 56. And this he infers with a Therefore, that is, Because it is
an Act of Natural Religion toward God, and of necessary Justice and Charity
toward men, Therefore it is a part of that Moral and Eternal Law, etc.

Answ. If nothing more should be said to this, yet the two former Propositions,
on which he builds this, being before overturned, this in course must fall to
the Ground: Yet nevertheless, that he may not think himself slighted, I will
take notice what he says here also. He b^stirs himself not a little to prove
that which I never yet heard any deny, namely, that all Oaths are not Evil in
themselves, which he gravely infers from their having been once confessedly
lawful, p. 63. What else is this, but to mis-spend his Time, and bestow many a
doughty Blow upon his own Shadow? His Proposition required him to prove, that
some Oaths are Good in themselves; and he comes so near it as to prove, that
all Oaths are not Evil in themselves. What think thou, Reader? has he not
showed his Ability? Some things are forbidden, because they are Evil; and some
things are Evil, because they are forbidden: An Oath, we say, is therefore
Evil, because forbidden. That which made it lawful to the Jew, was its being
commanded; that which makes it unlawful to the Christian, is its being
forbidden.

He has another far-fetch by which he would prove Oaths moral, and that is,
because they are not Ceremonial. But how does he prove they are not Ceremonial?
Thus: They were used (says he) by the Patriarchs before the Levitical Law was
given, therefore not Ceremonial, page* 63.

Answ. Indeed! Was nothing then Ceremonial, that was used by the Patriarchs
before the Levitical Law was given? Surely he consulted his own Credit more in
concealing his Name, then in thus undertaking to prove Oaths a part of the
moral and eternal Law, because used by the Patriarchs before the Levitical Law
was given. Can any thing be more naturally inferred, then that he accounts
whatsoever was used by the Patriarchs, before the Levitical Law was given, to
be a part of the moral and eternal Law? And could he have found a more direct
medium, to discover his own Ignorance! Was not Circumcision in the Flesh used
by the Patriarchs, before the Levitical Law was given? Will he thence conclude
Circumcision to be a part of the moral and eternal Law? Why then is he not
Circumcised himself? Were not Beasts sacrificed by the Patriarchs long before
the Levitical Law was given? Will he thence conclude, that such Sacrifices are
a part of the moral and eternal Law? Nay, does he not himself call those
Sacrifices, Types and Figures? (page 50.) And are they not then ceremonial,
notwithstanding they were used before the Levitical Law was given? But of this
more anon.

Here he makes a Digression to fall upon some others, who, it seems, have
offended him, in what they have written concerning the Nature and Power of the
divine Will. He names only Szydlovius the Dutchman but hints at some others of
our own Nation, who (he says) by their Writings have not a little contributed
to the Debauching of this present Age. Who these are, he does not say; but it
is most probable they are some of those that for corrupt Interests have
intrud^d themselves into the Priesthood. But be they who they will, seeing he
acknowledges that this Discourse is beside our Subject, I will (at this time
however) step over it, and meet him again at page 66. where resuming his former
Argument, he says thus.

That an Oath is not a part of the Ceremonial Law, is clear from what has been
said concerning the Morality of it, which proved it a part of Natural Religion
and Justice, etc.

Answ. That which has hitherto been said by him, to prove the Morality of an
Oath, is no more then what he might have said, to prove the Morality of
Circumcision and Sacrifices: That was used by the Patriarchs before the
Levitical Law was given, so were these; if then that is therefore moral*
because so used, then are these also therefore moral, because so used. But if
Circumcision and Sacrifices are not therefore moral, although so used; then
neither is an Oath therefore moral, although so used: So that hitherto he has
done in effect nothing toward the proving an Oath a part of the moral and
eternal Law, which he must do, before he can make it an Act of Natural Religion
and Justice.

Besides, he says here (page 66.) that the ceremonial Law is a System of Types
and Shadows: and in page 50. he calls the Sacrifices that were offered by the
Patriarchs, before the Leviticall Law was given, Types and Figures; by which he
plainly allows them to be ceremonial, notwithstanding they were used before
the Levitical Law was given. And yet he would have Oaths to be not Ceremonial,
but Moral, for that very Reason, be^au^e used before the Levitical Law was
given: So little is he consistent to himself.

But he adds, Whatsoever was purely Ceremonial, was purely Typical, and if you
cannot find in the Gospel an Antitype for an O^t, you may then be satisfied
that the Command of Swearing was no part of the Ceremonial Law, page 67.

Answ. He is a great deal forwarder to affirm then to prove. Where will he find
particular Antitypes in the Gospel for all the Ceremonies in the Law? Were not
the Priests Garments Ce^emonial? I would know of him then, what Aaron's
Breeches were a T^pe of? Let him find out an Antitype for them in the Gospel.
And we read Moses was commanded to kill a Ram, Exodus 20.29.
and to take of his Blood and put it upon the T^p of the right Ear of Aaron,
^^d upon the Tip of the right Ear of his Sons, and upon the Thumb of their
right Hand* and upon the great To^ of their right Foot. I demand of ^im what
these Ceremonies were Types of? if he can find Antitypes for them in the
Gospel, he may do well to bring them forth; and if he cannot, yet I would not
have him thence infer, that the Command for these things was no Part of the
Ceremonial Law, but rather consider how over hasty he was in concluding the
Command of swearing to be no Part of the Ceremonial Law, unless an Antitype for
an Oath can be found in the Gospel.

But says he, If you say an Oath was a Type of any thing pertaining to the
times of the Gospel, show what was its Antitype or thing represented by it.

Answ. That I will do by and by, after I have showed the occasion and rise of
Swearing, which is the Type, Man was created righteous, holy, pure, innocent:
There was no Guile, no Fraud, no Deceit in him; nothing but Sincerity,
Vprightness and Truth. In this State there was no Use nor Need of Oaths; for
while he abode in this, his Word was Truth, he spoke a pure Language; but man
falling from this State, set open a Door (as it were) to Fraud, Treachery,
Perfidy, Lying, Falsehood, etc. and thereby to Iealousies, Suspicions,
Distrusts, Incredulities, etc. These being entered wrought men by Degrees to
that pass, that not daring to rely upon one another Words and Promises, they
sought other Expedients to secure themselves by, whereof Oaths was one, so that
Oaths entered through Transgression, for want of Truth and Sincerity; and the
further men went from the Truth into Falsehood, the more frequent did the Use of
Oaths grow: This Bishop Gauden acknowledges, out of Polybius, In the better and
simpler Ages of the World (says he) Oaths were seldom used in Iudicatures,
Discourse of pub. O. p. 36.
but after that Perfidy and Lying increased, the Use of Oaths increased, etc.
But this Perfidy and Lying, as it had a time of Increase, so it was to have a
time of Decrease; it was not to continue always, Men were not to be perfidious
and false always, and consequently Oaths were not always to last. Now when
the Gospel comes to be preached and received (which is the Power of God to
Salvation to all them that believe in it) that purges out the old leaven of
Hypocrisy, Romans 1.16. 1 Cor. 5.7, 8. 1 (...) 2.1.
Malice and Deceit, that cleanses the Heart from Guile, Fraud, Lying,
Falsehood, Perfidy, and all Unrighteousness; and renews man into the Image of
God, bringing him again into that Truth. Sincerity and Uprightness which by
Transgression he had lost. And man thus redeemed speaks Truth again, and bears
true Witness without and Oath (and is believed too without an Oath, Zeph. 3.8.
ver. 13.
by all that are redeemed from Unbelief) for in this Gospel-State the pure
Language is again l^arnt and spoken (which God by his Prophet promised to turn
to the People) And there is not a deceitful Tongue in the Mouth of those that
are thus redeemed, Ephesians. 4.
but having put away Lying, they speak every man Truth with his Neighbor.

Now this Truth-speaking, this True Witness-^earing, this Pure Language under
the Gospel, is the Antitype of an Oath, the very thing that was represented by
an Oath in the time of the Law, and the Antitype (the Truth) being come (which
is more peculiar to the Gospel; for the Law was given by Moses. but the Grace
and Truth came by Jesus Christ: John 1.17.
The Type (which was the Oath) is at an End. Thus what the Prophet in the time
of the Law, Isa. 45.23.
delivered in the Type by the Word Swear: Romans 14.
That the Apostle in the time of the Gospel expresses in the Antitype by the
Word Confess; plainly showing that the Type was ended: As therefore he argues,
that if his Parishioner cannot find an Antitype for an Oath in the Gospel, he
may then be satisfied that the Command of swearing was no Part of the
Ceremonial Law; I by the contrary Reason infer, that having found an Antitype
for an Oath in the Gospel, he and all his Parishioners (and all others) may be
satisfied that the Command of Swearing was a Part of the Ceremonial Law, and so
an Oath not moral.

He goes on thus, The second Argument to confirm you, that Oaths are not evil
in themselves, nor Part of the Ceremonial Law, is taken out ^f the Example of
the holy Patriarchs, with whom an Oath was of authentic Use, and held sacred
before the Delivery of the Levitical Law. page 67.

Answ. Two things by this Argument he undertakes to prove, one whereof is by
none (that I know of) denied, and it was warily done of him to begin with that,
namely, that Oaths are not evil in themselves. What makes him harp so upon this
String! He could not suspect that the Quakeos (whom he writes against) held
Oaths to be evil in themselves; for at his Entrance upon this Subject, he
himself observed out of R. H. that they allow Oaths to have been lawful, page
52. yet no less then six times in his Discourse of Swearing, he inculcates
this, that Oaths are not evil in themselves, which looks as if he designed to
persuade weak Heads they may do any thing that is not evil in it self.

The second thing he undertakes by this Argument to prove is, That Oaths are no
Part of the Ceremonial Law, because they were of authentic Use with the holy
Patriarchs, and by them held Sacred before the Delivery of the Levitical Law.

Answ. If Oaths are therefore no Part of the Ceremonial Law, because they were
of authentic use with the holy Patriarchs, and by them held sacred before the
Delivery of the Levitical Law: Then by the same Reason no other thing is a Part
of the Ceremonial Law which was of authentic use with the holy Patriarchs, and
by them held Sacred before the Delivery of the Levitical Law; that is in short,
nothing that the Patriarchs did religiously observe, before the Delivery of the
Levitical Law, was Ceremonial, but Moral. This I take to be the natural
Consequence of his Argument, and this I deny, let him prove it if he can. He
may find (if he pleases) that Circumcision was of authentic Use with the holy
Patriarchs, and by them held sacred, Genesis 17. chap. 21.
long before the Delivery of the Levitical Law (and somewhat too before his
first Instance of an Oath) and yet I think he will not deny that Circumcision
was a part of the ceremonial Law. Levit. 12.3.
What then will he think of the Sacrificing of Beasts, which was of Authentic
Use with the holy Patriarchs, and by them held sacred, not only before the
Delivery of the Levitical Law, but even before the Flood? will he say that
Sacrificing was therefore no Part of the Ceremonial Law? I hope he will be more
considerate.

Another touch yet he has at this, in page 68. where he says, The Gospel
Dispensation does not repeal any Law that is Moral* etc. and such is this of a
lawful Oath. He assayes to prove it thus, That Law whose Reason and Usefulness
is perpetual, and the same to us under the Gospel, as it was to them under the
Law, is it self perpetual, and therefore not rep^aled by any new Dispensation.

Answ. To be satisfied whether or no the Reason of an Oath is perpetual, we
must again enquire out the Reason of an Oath, and I will go no further at this
time to fetch it, then to my Adversary's own Words (page 61 62.) If there were
that Truth in men, that their ba^e Testimony were infallible, and of sufficient
Credit, then there were no need at all of an O^th; but seeing all men are
Liars, and mankind is so generally leavened with Hypocrisy, and since Fear or
Favor, Malice or Interest sw^ys with the far greater Part of men, it becomes
highly needful, that their Evidence be demanded, and given in such Forms as are
most binding to the Cons^ience, which an Oath by all the World is acknowledged
to be. Observe here the Reason he gives for the Needfulness of an Oath, viz.
^ying, Hypocrisy, Fear, Favor, Malice, Interest (for were it not for these,
he confesses there were no need at all of an Oath) Let ^s now carry this
Reason of his along with us to his Argument, and see how well favouredly it
will look there: His Argument then will run thus, The Gospel does not repeal
any Law, the Reason whereof is perpertual, but the Reason of an Oath (namely
Lying, Hypocrisy, Malice, etc.) is perpetual, therefore the Gospel does not
repeal Oaths. What else is this but to establish Lying, Hypocrisy Malice, etc.
and to perpetuate them for ever, that while the World stands men must never
cease from Oaths, because while the World stands men must never cease from
Lying, Hyp^crisie, Malice, etc. for if these be (as he truly says) the Reason
of Oaths, take away these, and the Reason of Oaths is taken away, and then
there can be no Reason for Swearing; but these (viz. Lying, Hypocrisy, Malice,
etc.) under the Gospel, and from among true Christians are taken away, at least
none will deny that ( de jure, of right) they ought to be so, therefore Oaths
also under the Gospel, and among true Christians are taken away, at least (of
right) ought to be so.

Besides, In making Lying, Hypocrisy, Malice, etc. the Reason, and Strife and
Contention the Usefulness of Oaths, and then asserting the Reason and
Usefulness of Oaths under the Gospel to be the same as it was under the Law, he
greatly undervalues and debases the Gospel, rendering it as defective and
insufficient to take away Lying, Hypocrisy, Malice, Strife, etc. as was the
Law. Whereas the Apostle says expressly, that What the Law could not do, in
that it was weak through the Flesh, Romans 9.3, 4.
God sending his own Son in the Likeness of sinful Flesh, and for Sin condemned
Sin in the Flesh; that the Righteousness of the Law (which is beyond the Letter
of it) might be fulfilled in Us, who walk not after the Flesh, but after the
Spirit. And to the Hebrews he says, Hebr. 7.19.
The Law made nothing perfect; but the bringing in of a better Hope did. But if
there be as much need of Oaths now, under the Gospel, as there was then, under
the Law, and that for this Reason, because there is as much Lying, Hypocrisy,
Malice and Strife now among Christians, as there was then among the Jews (which
his words carry, and his Argument it self implies, else it is nothing to the
purpose) then has not Christ who is Heir of all, and to whom all Power in
Heaven and Earth is given) done more, in this Respect, for his Disciples, then
Moses (who was but a Servant) did for his: Which to suppose, would so highly
derogate from the Honor of Christ, that it were to^ great an Impiety for any
to admit, who bears the Name of a Christian.

In his Margent upon this place, he says, Rations boni and mali sunt
aeternae: i. e. The Reasons of Good and Evil are eternal.

Answ. For what Reason he brought this Sentence, I do not see, unless he would
from thence infer, that an Oath is a part of the Eternal Law, because the
Reasons of an Oath are Eternal. But if this be his Meaning, he had need
consider, that the Reasons of an Oath (in his own account) are, Lying,
Hypocrisy and Malice; and I hope he will not say, these are Eternal. But if he
will have it, that the Reasons of Good and Evil are Eternal, what are the
Effects of Good and Evil? are they Eternal too? For, that an Oath is the Effect
of Evil, he has already too far granted to deny.

I have now followed him to his fourth and last Proposition, by which he
undertook to prove, that all Oaths are not forbidden by Christ, viz. that some
Oaths are used in the New Testament. His Instances are of Paul and the Angel:
Those of Paul are these which follow, Rom: 1.9. For God is my Witness, whom I
serve with my Spirit in the Gospel of his Son, that, etc.

Answ. To say barely and simply God is my Witness, is not an Oath. Read Isa.
43.10. Ye are my Witnesses, says the Lord; so verse. 12. Therefore ye are my
Witnesses, says the Lord, that I am God: Again, Chap. 44.8. Ye are even my
Witnesses, etc. Here God is pleased to call men his Witnesses, as Paul in the
other place calls God his Witness. Now either God in these words did swear, or
he did not swear, if any will say, he did swear in saying of Men, Ye are my
Witnesses, then they will make God to swear by Men, the greater by the lesser;
whereas God, Hebr. 6.13. Genesis 22.16. Ier. 22.5.
whenever he is said to swear is always said to swear by himself, because he
could swear by no Greater. But if God, in saying, Ye are my Witnesses, did not
swear; it follows then, that Paul might say, God is my Witness, and yet not
Swear. How often did Moses call Heaven and Earth to witness! Did he swear (will
the Priest say) by Heaven and Earth? That was never allowed. But if this manner
of Speech be Swearing, what will become of Paul in another Case, Acts 22.5.
where he says, The High Priest does bear me witness, etc. Which is all one as
if he had said, The High Priest is my Witness? Now if my Adversary will make
Paul to swear by God, in saying God is my Witness, how will he avoid making him
swear by the High Priest also, in saying, The High Priest is my Witness? Yet he
will not dare to charge Paul directly with Swearing by the High I ^est
(although indirectly he does) for he knows full well, that so to have sworn had
been unlawful, even when Swearing was lawful. But if Paul did not swear in
saying, The High Priest is my Witness, it is evident that that Form of Speech
is not an Oath. Besides, how extremely absurd is this Construction of Paul's
words! For, if I should have Occasion to say, John is my Witness, or James is
my Witness that I did or said so or so; by the same Reason, by which the Priest
would prove that Paul swore by God, in saying, God is my Witness, he may as
well infer that I swear by John or James, in saying, John or James is my
Witness. But his Weakness in this is too plain to need any further Detection.

His next Instance is Romans 9.1. I say the Truth in Christ, I lie not, my
Conscience also bearing me witness in the Holy Ghost.

Answ. To speak the Truth in Christ, is not an Oath. In the time when Oaths
were lawful, it was not lawful to swear but in Solemn, Weighty and
Extraordinary Occasions: but to speak the Truth in Christ was and is lawful
upon all Occasions. And indeed, if Paul should have sworn as often as he spoke
the Truth in Christ, he would have been a very common Swearer. But if to speak
the Truth in Christ, be not Swearing; how can it be an Oath to say, I speak the
Truth in Christ? But this is not all; he adds, My Conscience also bearing me
Witness in the Holy Ghost. What will he infer from hence? will he make Paul
here to swear by his Conscience also? Doubtless Paul made more Conscience of
Swearing then so. This however tends to overturn his former Instance: for if
Paul did not swear by his Conscience, in saying, My Conscience bears me witness
(or my Conscience is my Witness, which is all one) and which if he had done, he
had done Evil, and his Example had not been imitable) then neither did he swear
by God, when he said, God is my Witness.

His next Instance is, 2 Cor. 1.18. But as God is true. And Verse. 3. Moreover,
I call God for a Record against my Soul, that, etc.

Answ. 1. In the first of these Verses (But as God is true) the Particle [ as]
(by which the Priest would make these words sound an Oath) is not in the Greek
((...), etc.) but put in by the Translator; which they who do not read Greek
may observe in their English Bibles, where they will find the word [ as] in a
different and smaller Print then the rest. Which Beza observing in his Latin
Translation, renders it thus, Imo fidelis Deus novit sermonem nostrum apud vos
non fuesse etiam and non. And Tomson, who turned it out of his Latin into
English, gives it thus, Yea, God is faithful, that our Word to youward was not
yea and nay. From all which it may appear, that the Apostle in these words
intended no more then a solemn Ass^veration (which is not an Oath) as if he had
directly said (as Beza's Latin runs) God who is faithful knows, that, etc. and
as upon another Case, in the same Epistle (though with somewhat more of
Circumloc^tion) he did say, The God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which
is blessed for evermore, knows, that I lie not, 2 Cor. 11.31. (which is
another Instance the Priest gives of Paul's Swearing) which words, though
somewhat more periphrastically expressed, amount to no more in point of an Oath,
then if he had only said, God knows I lie not: For the Oath (if there had been
any) had lain in those two words, God knows (The same is to be observed in the
words abovementioned, viz. I call God for a Record upon my Soul, which though
it sounds a greater Earnestness, is ^et no more in Substance then if he had
barely said, I call God to witness; which barely and simply to do is not an
Oath, as I have showed before upon the first Instance) But how absurd is it
even to think, that the Apostle Paul, upon no greater Occasion neither, then
the recounting to the Corinthians the manner of his Escape out of Damascus
through a Window into a Bask^t, should take a solemn Oath by God, that he did
not lie! which is he had taken, he had do^e Evil, even in the Priest's own
Ac^o^nt^ For he says, It was one of the Erroneous Gl^ssis of the Pharisees,
that it was lawful at any time to swear by God's Name, so that they swore
nothing but Truth, and performed their Oaths unto the Lord, p. 77. and this, he
acknowledges, Christ prohibited, p 78. But the U^e and Lawfulne^s of Swearing,
which he says remains, is, when a man is called by lawful Authority So Bp.
Gauden makes the lawful Call of Authority one of the due Circumstances which are
necessary in a lawful Oath, p. 45.
to declare his Conscience, in order to the ending of any Controversy, wherein
his Evidence may ^e concerned, page 84. Now then, let us consider, If Paul had
sworn (which he did not) who called him to it? who required ^t of him? Nay,
what lawful Authority had the Corinthians over him if they would have done it)
to require an Oath of him? Next; What Ne^d was there of an Oath, can any think
the Corinthians so incredulous (or the Apostle so out of Credit) that they
would not have believed Paul without an Oath especially in a Case of no greater
Moment then this was? The Priest himself (in a Case much more to be doubted)
lays to his Parishioner, I hope you will believe me without an Oath, page 46.
And does he think Paul had not as much Reason to expect the Corinthians would
have believed him without an Oath? Methinks he might at least allow Paul as
much Credit as he takes to himself. He confesses, page 61. If there were that
Truth in men, that their bare Testimony were of sufficient Credit, then there
were No Need at all of an Oath. And it seems he thinks so well of himself, that
his bare Testimony was sufficient, and therefore hopes his Parishioner will
believe him without an Oath But he is not willing to allow this to Paul. No:
Paul must swear at every turn (though none require it of him) So that (if he
will be consistent to himself) either he must say, that Paul had not that Truth
in him, that his bare Testimony (though in a small matter) was of sufficient
Credit; and therefore that it was Ne^dful for him in these Cases to swear (and
so bespatter the Apostle) or he must grant, that Paul had that Truth in him,
that his bare T^stimony was of sufficient Credit, and therefore that he needed
not to have sworn (for, Swear he says he did) and so make the Apostle to have
sworn needlessly, that is, (even in his own Account) unlawfully. Besi^es, that
which he says is the Use of an Oath was also wanting in this Case, namely,
Controversy; for we read of no Controversy among the Corinthians concerning
Paul's Escaping out at a Window into a Basket. So that, from Top to Bottom,
this, if it had been an Oath, had been a false one: And the like is to be said
of his other Instances. Thus he would make the Apostle an Offender, not only in
swearing at all (which I say is Evil) but also in swearing Needlessly, Vselesly
and Unrequired (which he himself says is Evil) What therefore he has said,
concerning Paul's Swearing, is not to be believed, because it is false; nor
were to be imitated (if it had been true) because it had been Evil.

Yet he is earnest to have the Instances of Paul taken for Oaths, because he
says, that in every of them Paul makes a most solemn Appeal to God, etc. page
70.

Answ. If to appeal to God, be to swear by God, then by the some Reason, to
appeal to man or any other thing (in the same Sense) is to swear by that man or
thing, that is so appealed to. What the Consequence of this would be, I will
show him out of his own Book, p. 110. He appeals to his Parishioner's
Conscience. According then to his own Saying, he might be said to have Sworn by
his Parishioner's Conscience; but what would he think of that? He knows full
well that had been unlawful, whenever Oaths were lawful. Again, says he to
his Parishioner, page 65 I appeal to your own Faculties. Here is an Appeal, and
a Solemn one too, for ought appears; for he seems to be in earnest, yet as
eager as he is for Swearing, I can hardly think he would offer to Swear by his
Parishioner's Faculties.

But he says, that those mentioned Forms used by Paul were as positive Oaths
(here again he calls an Oath a Form as he did before, in page 62. though he
will not have it a Ceremony) as any other you find in the Bible. or any of
those that are imposed upon you by the Law of the Land, page 72.

Answ. Ta^e notice that none of those Expressions which he has brought to
prove that Paul swore (and as many more of the like Nature, which with as much
Reason he might have brought) were used by Paul in any public Court of
Judicature, nor was he called th^reto by any Lawful Authority (or indeed called
at all by any Authority) to declare his Conscience, in order to the ending of
any Controvesie, wherein his Evidence was concerned (which is the only lawful
Use that the Priest gives of Swearing now under the Gospel, page 84.) but were
only used by Paul in his Communication with his Brethren in the Letters which
he writ to them for their Instruction and Edification. If therefore in these
Instances Paul had sworn, he had not sworn judicially and legally, but in his
ordinary Communication, which kind of Swearing (viz. in Communication and
unrequired by lawful Authority) is on all Hands acknowledged and) even by this
Priest himse^f, page 76, ^7.) to be forbid^n by Christ, and consequently evil:
So that to say those Forms of Speech, which Paul used, are as positive Oaths as
any in the Bible, or as any now used in this ^and. is no better then if ^e had
positively said that Paul did positively sin in Swearing being neither thereto
called, nor in due Cases.

But that he and all may see, it is not our Judg^^ent only that Paul did not
swear, I here produce two very authentic witnesses, to clear Paul from
swearing. The first is Basil, s^rnamed the great who himself refused to swear
at the Council of Chalcedon, and commended Clinias a Greek, About 300. l.
for suffering a Fine of three Talents (which he might have avoided if he would
have sworn) He upon Psalm 15. says, There are some speeches which have the
Forms of Oaths and yet are NO OATHS at all, but rather Remedies to persuade. He
instances in Joseph, and the Apostle Paul, of which last, he says, The Apostle
willing to show his Love to the Corinthians said, By the glorying of you which
I have in Christ Jesus our Lord; for he did not d^part from the Doctrine of the
Gospel, etc. thus Basil. The other is Gregory Nazianzen, in his Dialogue
against Swearing, thus. B. But Paul also swore, as they say. A. Who said so? O
what a vain ^angler was he that said it! quoth he, God is my Witness, and God
knows; Those Words are not an Oath, but a certain Asseveration, etc. Thus
Nazianzen. So that, if what I have said before were not sufficient, ^o here a
couple of credible Witnesses step in to clear Paul 's Innocence in this
particular, from the Aspersions of all vain-Ianglers whatsoever.

His last Instance is of the Angel swearing, Rev. 10. 5, 6. And this he
introduces with more then ordinary Pomp, saying, We need not fear to imitate
any thing that is done in Heaven, where nothing but the Will of God, nothing
evil and unholy can be done, page 72.

Answ. But by his leave, this was not done in Heaven, but on Earth, for the
Angel which swore stood upon the Sea, and upon the Earth, verse 5. Now the Sea
is the Emblem of the Wicked, as says the Prophet, The Wicked are like the
troubled Sea, Isa. 57.20.
when it cannot rest, whose Waters cast up mire and Dirt. There is the Strife
and Contention, which the Oath was of old to end. The Earth also represents
Wordly-minded men, Rev. 14.3.
who are thence called Earthly-minded; but the Saints are re^de^med from the
Earth, Phil. 3.30.
and have their Conversation in Heaven, where to be sure there is no Swearing,
nor need of it; for the Priest must not forget that he has said (page 61.) If
there were that Truth in men that their bare Testimony were of sufficient
Credit, then there were no need at all of an Oath, and yet would he fetch an
Instance from Heaven of Swearing? We need not fear (says he) to imitate any
thing that is done in Heaven. Does he imagine then, that there is Swearing in
Heaven? What! if there were not Truth enough in men, does he think there is not
Truth enough in Angels neither, to make their bare Testimony of sufficient
Credit! what a strange Notion has he got of Heaven and Angels.

Besides, though he confidently says, that God has proposed the Angels to us
as Patterns for our imitation, I must take the Liberty to tell him plainly he
mistakes, and that in the very Case in Hand, which I thus demonstrate: In the
time of the Mosaic Law, among the Utensils of the Tabernacle (and afterward of
the Temple) there were Censers, Levit. 16.12.
on which the Priests were to burn Incense before the Lord, that this was Part
of the Ceremonial Law, and as such abolished by Christ, the concurrent
Judgment, and Practice of all Parties confirms; which notwithstanding, in the
same Book of Revelation we read, Rev. 8.3.
that an Angel came and stood at the Al^^r, having a Golden Censer, and there
was gi^^n unto him much Incense, that he should offer it with the Prayers of
all Sa^n^s upon (...) Golden Altar, which was before the T^rone. Now then sa^^,
if the Example of the Angels are proposed to us for our imitation, and that it
is lawful (as the Priest argues) for us to swear* because we read that an Angel
swore in the time of the Gospel, then by a parity of Reason* it is lawful for
us to have a Censer as they had under the Law, and to offer Incense thereupon
before the Lord, as they then did, because we read that an Angel so had and did
in the time of the Gospel; but if to use such a Censer now would be Jewish and
unlawful, notwithstanding the Angel used one; then to use an Oath now, would
for the same Reason be Jewish and unlawful also, notwithstanding the Angel used
one. In short, he can no more prove it lawful to swear now, because an Angel
swore, then he can prove it lawful to burn Incense now, because an Angel burnt
Incense.

I have now done with his Instances, and I hope to the Reader's Satisfaction. I
should now go directly to those two Texts in Matthew and James, but for a
passage or two which lie in my way, and I am not willing wholely to pass over

The first is this, he says, That every Oath impl^^s an Execration, i. e. a
Cursing, or betaking oneself to the Devil as Rider expounds the (...)) which
makes an Oath more unsuitable to the Nature of the Gospel, which teaches to
bless, not to curse, but this is not all He adds, Execration is implied and
understood even in those elliptical Forms of swearing used by God himself, page
71. This I cannot brook, that he should thus charge God with using an
Execration (that is, wishing a Curse) upon himself, which how great a Blasphemy
it is against the divine Nature and Majesty of God, will mo^e evidently appear,
if we consider, that it tends to make the most high God acknowledge some other
Being superior to himself; for he who execrates (or wishes a Curse upon)
himself, does thereby own a Power above himself, which is able to bring or
execute that Curse upon him as is plain from 2 Samuel 3.9. and 35. 1 Kings 2.23.
By this Reader thou may see what horrid Absurdities, that Wisdom which
descends not from above (but is earthly and sensual to be sure, James 3.15.
if not worse, runs some of these learned Rabbis into.

The other Passage I take notice of is this, He says, The laying on of the
Hand, and kissing the Book, we hold to be no essential Parts of an Oath, but
only decent and comely Ceremonies, etc. I wish the Magistrates in all Counties
would read this, and reflect upon those many great Fines, and sore
Imprisonments inflicted by some of them upon many of us, even sometimes to the
loss of Life, for not complying with those things, which are by this man
asserted to be no essential Parts of an Oath, but bare Ceremonies; that from
this Consideration they may be induced, for the future to exercise more
Moderation and Gentleness, and not expose their honest Neighbors to so great
Sufferings for mere Ceremonies, when the Sum and Substance is effectually
answered by our speaking the plain and naked Truth in the Presence of God.

I am come at length to those two notable Texts, Matthew 5.34. Swear not at
all. And James 5.12. Above all things my Brethren swear not. These stand like
two immovable Rocks, against which all the Contenders for Swearing have
hitherto been split: These two Bishop Gauden confesses to be No^able Texts,
which seem to stand as the Angel of the Lord against Balaam, Discour. of pub.
Oaths, page 20.
with a Sword in their Hand to st^p the Way of any Swearing Whasoever; The
Priest however (being as bold, and not less blind then he of old) will venture
on, come off again as he can.

First he attempts to prove that those Words of Christ [Swear not at all]
cannot bear a general Interpretation, but must be taken with a limitation. Why
so? You are not to suppose, says he, that it is our Lord's Design to forbid all
manner of Oaths, etc. (Yes say I, I do more then suppose so, and demand of him
why I should not suppose so) because as has been already shown (says he) St.
Paul had not only then been faul^y in making so honorable mention of an Oath,
Heb. 6.16. but much more faulty in taking an Oath himself, and then, both he
and the Angel, had fallen under the Charge of Antichristianism. page 75.

Answ. So then, the proof he offers here (against our general Interpretation of
Christ's Words [ Swear not at all] to forbid all manner of Swearing, and for
his own Limitation of those Words, to forbid some Swearing only, not all) is
neither more nor other, then what he says, he has offered before, namely the
Instances of Paul and the Angel; which Proofs of his, being before in this book
sufficiently (as I conceive) disproved and enervated, his conceited Limitation,
and whatsoever he shall build thereon, must inevitably fall to the Ground,
unless he has any other Prop to shore it up for a while, which I do not find
he has; for he goes on thus, Seeing our Savior in that Gracious Law of his
has forbid nothing that is morally good, nothing that is either indifferent or
expedient, it must needs follow that an Oath is no further forbidden then as it
is evil, etc. So that herein he offers no further proof, but as ^eakly as
willingly takes the matter for granted, and thence infers a Consequence; but he
is not like to carry it so: Three things therefore I offer to his (if he
please) and the Reader's Consideration, from these words of his. 1 st. that he
does herein most meanly beg a Concession, that an Oath is morally good, which
yet I will not grant him, and which he hitherto has not, nor ever will be able
to prove. 2 dly. That as if he already began to despair of being able to
maintain his Assertion of the Morallity of an Oath, he is now making way to
hook it in, under the Notion of Ind^fferency ( Our Savior forbad nothing that
is indifferent says he) Surely he comes down apace, who from calling it an Act
of Natural Religion, a Part of the Moral and Eternal Law, is already come to
talk of its being indifferent; and yet herein he may see himself at a Loss too,
if he observe that in the same Sermon, Mat. 6.
our Savior forbad the use of a Trumpet in giving Alms, which in it self was a
thing indifferent. So that he spoke unadvi^edly when he said our Savior forbid
nothing that is indifferent. 3 dly. That in taking for granted that an Oath is
expedient, he again begs the Question, not only of the Expediency, but
Lawfulness of it also; for though some things may be lawful, which are not
expedient, yet nothing can be expedient, which is not lawful, so that in
calling it expedient he calls it lawful, which is the matter in question: He
therefore concluding upon bare (and withal false) Suppositions, his Conclusion
is of no Validity at all to prove his Limitation of Christ's Words to forbid
some Oaths only, not all.

His next Essay is to set forth the erroneous Glosses of the Scribes, Pharisees
and Jewish Doctors in the Case of Swearing, One (he says) was that it was
lawful to swear by the Creature as often as they pleased and that such Swearing
(though falsely, was no Perjury The other, That i^ was lawful at any time to
swear by God's Name, so that they swore nothing but Truth, and performed their
Oaths unto the Lord. To the consuting these Doctrines (says he, our Savior
accommodated his Answer in the Verses f^llowing. Against the first of them,
viz. Swearing by the Creature, he opposes that Pro^ibition in the 34, 35, 36.
Verses, But I say unto you swear not at all, neither by Heaven, etc. Against
the latter, viz. Swearing by the Name of God in their ordinary Communication,
he gives this Precept, ver. 37. Let your Communication be yea, yea, etc. Thus
far the Priest, page 77 78. and this is all he admits our Savior to have
forbidden: So that (secundum hunc) our Savior did not forbid any thing that
was commanded by Moses, but only condemned and forbad the Erroneous and false
Glosses whereby the ^cribes Pharisees and Jewish Doctors had deviated from the
Law of Moses.

Answ. To refute this fond Conceit, I will first oppose to this, what Bp Gauden
has said in this Case, and let these two Earthen Pitchers dash one against
another. He says, our Savior gives many singular Lessons or Precepts of more
eminent, Diligence, Discourse of public Oaths, p. 27.
Patience, Charity, Mortification, Selfdenial, Sincerity, Conspicuity,
Perseverance and Perfection of Obedience required now under the Gospel, above
what either the Letter of the Mosaical Law seemed to exact, or by the
Pharisaical Interpretations were taught to the Jews. Let us now observe the
Difference between these two Rabbis: The Priest limits Christ's words to the
false Glosses only of the Pharisees, etc. The Bishop says, Christ gave
Precepts of more eminent Sincerity, and Perfection of Obedience required now
under the Gospel, above, not only the Pharisaical Interpretations of the Law,
but even what the Letter of the Mosaic Law seemed to exact. Here then the
Bish^p has laid the Priest slat. Now if Moses commanded to abstain from all
but solemn Swearing upon wrightly Occasions, and yet Christ required more then
he, then it follows that Christ required to abstain from solemn Swearing also.
If Moses forbad all that kind of Swearing, which the Pharisees taught, namely
by Creatures, and in ordinary Communication, and yet Christ forbad some
swearing more then Moses, then it is most plain that Christ forbad some kind of
swearing more then that which the Pharisees taught, namely Solemn Swearing.
That Christ did forbid more then the Law of Moses forbad, besides the Bishop's
Testimony before cited (which perhaps with my Opponent may have some weight) is
clear from the other Instances in Mat. 5. as in the Case of Murder: Moses said,
Thou shall not kill; Christ says, Thou shall not be angry. In the Case of
Adultery, Moses said, Thou shall not commit Adultery; Christ says, Thou shall
not look upon a Woman to lust after her. Moses here forbad the Acts of Adultery
and Murder; Christ forbids the very M^t^^ns tending toward those Acts In the
Case of Divorce, Moses suffered it if a man hated his W^fe, Deuteronomy. 24.3. or for
light Causes, Mat. 19.3.8. but Christ cuts short that Liberty, which Moses for
the hardness of their Hearts had given, and restrains the Cause of Divorce to
Fornication only. So that we see here Christ did not only forbid more then
Moses had forbidden, but also that he forbad something which Moses had all we^;
either of which is of Weight enough to cast the Cause to our S^^e, and make the
Words [ Swear not at all an Universal Prohibition of all Swearing; for it
Christ did forbid more then Moses did forbid, and yet Moses did forbid all but
solemn Swearing by the Name of God in weighty matters, then it is plain, that
Christ did forbid that solemn Swearing also. Again, if Christ did forbid some
Swearing which Moses had allowed, and yet Moses had allowed none but solemn
Swearing by the Name of God, in weighty matters, then it is clear that Christ
did forbid even that Solemn Swearing also.

But to make it yet more evident, that Christ in those Words, Swear not a^ all,
did intentionally forbid all Oaths, even those which Moses had commanded: let
it be considered, that the very Phrase of Speech necessarily implies an
exceeding or out doing of what was done before; an Instance of which, we have
in 1 Kings 12.11. ( My Father, says Rehoboam to his People, chastized you with
Whips, BUT I w^ll chastize you with Scorpions) where the Particle [ But]
imports an hither Degree of Chastizement, a Degree of Severity beyond what his
Father had used, and was so understood by the People, upon which they revolted,
so in this Place, Christ says, it has been said to them of old time, thou
shall not for swear thyself, BUT I say unto you, swear not at all. As if he had
said, Moses said, Do not for swear, but I (who am greater then Moses, and whose
Ministration exceeds in Glory, the Ministration of Moses) say. 2 Cor. 9.3.
Do not swear at all: Moses forbids false and vain Swearing, but I (who go
beyond Moses) forbid all Swearing; Moses allowed of some Swearing, but I (who
am to have the Preeminence in all things) allow no Swearing at all. Col. 1.18.
And indeed if Christ should have forbid no more then Moses before him had
done, but should have allowed the same Swearing to his Followers, that Moses
did to the Jews, wherein would he, who ought to have the Preeminence in all
things have had any Preeminence of Moses, in the Case of Swearing?

Besides, in restraining this general Prohibition of Christ, to the erroneous
Glosses of the Pharisees only, the Priest will render the Words of our Savior
Christ Superfluous and Vain; for all agree, that Moses had forbidden, not only
false Swearing, and vain Swearing, when he said, Lev. 19.12. Deuteronomy. 6.13.
Ye shall not swear by my Name falsely neither shall thou profane the Name of
thy God, but Swearing by Creatures also, when he commanded them to swear by the
Name of God; so that the false and erroneous Glosses of the Pharisees were
before forbidden by Moses, and they are therefore called the erroneous Glosses
of the Pharisees, because the Pharisees did therein err from the Law: He
therefore that shall restrain and limit Christ's words to forbid only the
erroneous Glosses of the Pharisees, will make Christ to speak after this
manner, Ye have heard that Moses said of old, Thou shall not swear falsely, nor
vainly, nor by Creatures, but I say unto you, You shall not swear at all
falsely, nor vainly, nor by Creatures. How idle and impertinent would such a
Speech have been? How much below the Wisdom of a Man, much more the Wisdom of
God! yet this is the plain Consequent of limiting Christ's Words to forbid only
the erroneous Glosses of the Pharisees, or no more then Moses had forbidden
before him and yet this (as absurd as it is) is the interpretation my Adversary
gives, page 79. The Prhi^i^ion (he says) is limited to those things the Jews
were wont to swear by, as Jerusalem, the Temple, the Altar, the Head, etc.
whereas the Opposition (which is implied in the adversative Particle BUT)
standing, not between For swearing and Vain or Creature-swearing, but between
Forswearing and no Swearing, shows plainly that Christ intended to forbid all
Swearing; for it is as if he had said, Moses forbad some Swearing, but I forbid
all Swearing: Moses allowed some Oaths, but I allow none. Moses permitted more
causes of Divorce, then I do; Moses allowed Eye for Eye, Tooth for Tooth, Blow
for Blow, but I allow no such thing; Moses allowed Swearing in some Cases, but
I allow it in none. Thus does the Gospel outshine the Law, thus does the Son
excel the Servant, and bring in a Righteousness beyond, not only that of the
Scribes and Pharisees, but even of the Mosaic Law also.

But as the Priest would restrain the Words of Christ, Swear not at all, to the
abuse of the Tongue in common Talk, and Communication, page 81. So the Words of
the Apostle James, Above all things my Brethren swear not, neither by Heaven,
nor by the Earth, nor by any other Oath, etc. these also will he not let pass
without a Limitation. The Apostle, he says, does mean only all Oaths of that
Kind there mentioned, namely by any created being, page 82. And this he would
infer, from the Apostle's leaving out some of those Instances which our Savior
mentioned (as Jerusalem, the Altar, the Temple, etc.) and breaking off with
this Clause, Nor by any other Oath.

Answ. The contrary may with much better Reason be inferred from hence; for
these Words are exclusive of all Sorts of Oaths. No Ca^h whatsoever, whether
true or false, by God or Creature, Solemn, or Vain, can escape the Reach of
these Words.

But he says, Without Doubt St. James offers at a Repetition of our Savior's
Doctrine, and that he forbad only such Oaths, as our Savior had forbidden.

Answ. It Is true indeed; he did forbid only such Oaths as our Savior had
forbidden, and he could forbid no other, because our Savior had forbidden All,
advancing his Followers into an higher State then ever Oaths were used in (for
Oaths were but as Expedients to supply the Defect and Weakness of a shadowy and
legal State) and this the Apostle well knew. But if we well consider the manner
of his expressing himself, we shall find he speaks so full and home to the
Purpose, as if he had either met with or foreseen the Tricks and Devices which
have since been used to elude Christ's Command. For, after he had first given a
general Prohibition ( Above All Things, my Brethren, Swear No.) and then
particularly forbidden the Erroneous Glosses of the Pharisees, namely, Swearing
by Creatures, etc. (neither by Heaven, neither by the Earth) that he might be
sure to leave No Oath unforbidden, he closes up his Sentence with these
comprehensive words, Neither by any other Oath. Thus does the Disciple explain
and confirm the Doctrine of his Master. And herein does the Wisdom of God shine
forth, in that the Apostle, repeating his Master's Doctrine, which himself in
the Mount was an Ear-Witness of, should be directed by the Holy Ghost so to
express himself, that if any should fancy Christ's Words not so general a
Prohibition, as indeed they were, but should think he allowed of some other
Oath, though he condemned those of the Pharisees, they might here be convinced
of their Mistake, and assured that he allowed neither those Oaths used by the
Pharisees, nor any other Oath whatsoever. And moreover, to take away all
Occasion of Stumbling, and leave nothing whereon such a Mistake might be
grounded, it is observable, that the Word Communication, which is used by our
Savior ( Let your Communication be Yea, yea; nay, nay: for whatsoever is more
then these, comes of Evil, Mat 5.37.) and from which very Word they that
contend for Swearing do wrest Christ's Meaning from a general Prohibition of
all Swearing, to a particular Prohibition of Swearing in Common Talk or
Communication, is not used by the Apostle ( but let your yea be yea, and your
nay, nay; lest ye fall into Condemnation, Jam, 5.12.) as if the Holy Ghost had
designedly omitted it, to secure this Text from the like Violence. But to go on.

The Priest says, Christ told them, that in ordinary Communication, those
plain Ass^verations of Yea and Nay, are enough to give Credit to what we say,
if we would use our selves to speak Truth.

Answ. And if men would use themselves to speak Truth, would not this be enough
to give Credit to what they say in all Cases? For if Truth be spoken, what more
can be desired in any Case? He said himself, but a little before (speaking of
the most solemn Use of Oaths) If there were that Truth in men, that their bare
Testimony were of sufficient Credit, then there were no need at all of an Oath,
page 61. And has he so soon forgot himself? Nay, he says now again, page 83
While St. James says, Let your Yea be Yea, and your Nay, Nay; his Meaning is,
Let your Promise be Performance, and let your Word be the Truth, to the end
that among all with whom you converse, you may be believed without an Oath. If
this be indeed the Apostle's Meaning ( as indeed I believe it is) with what
Face can any say he allowed Swearing in some Cases, who renders it so utterly
N^^dless in all? For, if their Promise was to be Performance (that is, the
g^ing promised was to be as safe and sure, as if it were already performed) if
their word was to be the truth (then which there cannot be more in the most
solemn Oath) and if the End why it should be thus, was this, that among all
with whom they conversed, they might be believed WITHOUT an OATH; what room, I
pray, did the Apostle then leave for any Oath at all? Will not such a Promise
as is Performance, such a Word as is the Truth, reach all Cases, serve all
Occasions. and answer all Ends in Humane Society? Then farewell Swearing.

Thus have I cleared the words of our blessed Savior, and his Holy Apostle,
from the erroneous Glosses of the Pharisees of this Age, who say, that Christ
and his Apostle did forbid no more but the erroneous Glosses of the Pharisees
of that Age: I shall now give the Reader a few Instances, by which he may see,
what was the Judgment of the primitive Christians in this Case, and so draw
this Chapter to a Conclusion.

P^lycarpus (who lived in the time of the Apostles) being required by the
Magistrate to Swear by the Fortune of Caesar, Eusebius, l. 4. c. 15.
refused, giving this only Reason, I am a Christian, and was therefore Burned
to Death.

Basilides (a Roman-Soldier, who led Pontamiena to Execution, L. 6 c. 4.
and by her constant Martyrdom was turned to Christ) being required to swear,
refused it utterly, plainly affirming, that it was not at all lawful for him to
swear, because he was a Christian; for which he lost his Head.

Or^g^n, speaking of those Particulars which Christ forbad to swear by (as
Heaven, the Earth, the Altar, etc.) says, These things Christ speaks to the
Jews, forbidding them to give heed to the Traditions of the Pharisees:
otherwise (says he) before, Christ manifestly forbad to SWEAR AT ALL

Basil, surnamed the Great, on Psalm. 14. This in our English Bibles is the 15.
Psalm.
Lord, who shall abid: in thy Tabernacle? He that Swears, etc. (has these
words) Here (viz. in the Law) he seems to allow an Oath to a Perfect Man,
which in the Gospel is altogether forbidden; But I say unto you, Swear not at
all. In this place, says he, the Prophet is contented with an Oath, if it be
just and true: but our Lord cuts off the very Occasion of Forswearing. For even
he that swears truly, may peradventure be deceived some time or other; but he
that never swears at all, is out of all Danger of Forswearing.

Gregory Nazianzen, in his Dialogue against Swearing, discourses thus, B. What
if I use an Oath unwillingly, but to free me from Danger? B and A denote the
Persons speaking.
A. Let another allow thee that ( as much as to say, Be the Danger what is
will, I cannot allow thee to Swear) B. What if we be drawn by Necessity to give
an Oath? A. Why did thou not rather dye? for surely thou should rather Dye
then do it And that he speaks here of ALL OATHS, even the most solemn,
observe what he says a little before; B. But what will thou say to me of the
Old Covenant? surely it does not prohibit an Oath, but requires a true one. A
No Wonder; at that time only it was prescribed in the Law concerning Murder;
but now it is not lawful, for any Cause, so much as to smite or beat: then the
End of an Evil Deed only came into Judgment, but now that also which moves to
the End. This (says he) is my Judgment. Observe his Way of Reasoning, from the
Instance of Murder to this of Swearing, that as in the Case of Murder there is
more forbidden by Christ then was by Moses (for Moses forbad the End only of
Evil, says he, but Christ forbids that which moves to that End) so also in
the Case of Swearing, there is more for^idden by Christ then was by Moses,
which could not be, unless all Swearing whatsoever were forbidden by Christ.

Epiphanius says, In the Law, as well as the Gospel, it is commanded not to
use another Name in Swearing: but in the Gospel he commanded not to Swear,
neither by Heaven nor Earth, nor other Oath; but let Yea be Yea, Nay, Nay; for
what is more then the^e is of Evil. Therefore I suppose, that the Lord ordained
concerning this, because of some men's Allegations, that would swear by other
Names; and first, That we must not Swear, no, not by the Lord himself, nor by
any other Oath, for it is an Evil Thing to SWEAR AT ALL.

Chrysostom says A Christian must avoid Oaths by all means, hearing the
Sentence of Christ, which says, It was said to them of Old, Thou shall not
Forswear, but I say unto you, Swear not at all. Let none say therefore, I Swear
in a just Matter: It is not lawful to swear, neither in a JUST nor Unjust
Thing. Again, says he, If to swear TRULY be a Crime, and a transgressing of the
Commandment, where shall we place Perjury? Again (speaking to them that tender
Oaths to others) But if thou fear nothing else ( says he) at least fear
that Book which thou take in thy Hand, bidding another swear, and when thou
turnest it over, and mark'st what Christ has there commanded concerning Oaths,
Tremble and forbear. Quest. What does it then say of Oaths there? Answ. But I
say unto you, Swear not at all. Do thou make that Law on Oath which forbids
to swear? Oh injurious! Oh unjust thing! This cannot be understood of vain
Oaths; for it is evident he speaks here of Judicial Oaths, taken upon the
Bible. Again, What then if any require an Oath, and impose a Necessity of
Swearing? Let the Fear of the Lord be more forcible to thee ( says he) then all
Necessity or Compulsion: for if thou will always object such like Occasions,
thou will keep none of those things which are commaded.Again (reproving the
Clergymen for tendering the Bible to be sworn upon) he says, If it were well
done to swear, ye said rightly that we gave them the Gospel to Swear, not to
Forswear: But now ye know, that it is a SIN even to SWEAR WELL, how can ye be
acquitted that give the Occasion of sinning against God?And a little after, Be
these things spoken of them that Swear by God, but -- every one commits
Idolatry, who swears by any thing besides God, if it were AT ALL lawful to
Swear.

To these might many more Testimonies be added, such as that of Iustine Martyr,
Christians ought not to swear AT ALL. Those other of Chrysostom, It is not
lawful to swear AT ALL, nor to bring a NECESSITY of an Oath: And again, He
(viz. Christ) forbids, not Perjury only, but to Swear AT ALL. So that of
Origin, A Man that lives according to the Gospel, should not swear AT ALL. That
of Lactantius, A Good Man will not swear falsely, lest he mock God; nay, he will
not so much as swear at all, lest at one time or other he fall, even by Custom,
into Perjury. That of Hierom, The Truth of the Gospel does not admit an Oath.
See Gauden's Discourse of Oaths, p. 42.

By this time I hope I have satisfied my Reader, that to refuse all manner of
Swearing is no new Doctrine, nor contrary to the Primitive Christian Faith. Let
me add one Testimony of a modern Writer, a Man of no mean Account in the
English Church (and therefore perhaps more cogent to my Adversary) namely, Ier.
Tailor, Bishop of Down and Conner, Of Christian-simplicity, fol. 228.
in his Course of Sermons lately printed. Our blessed Lord (says he) would not
have his Disciples to swear at all (not in public Judicature) if the Necessity
of the World would permit him to be obeyed. If Christians will live according
to the Religion, the Word of a Christian were a sufficient Instrument to give
Testimony, and to make Promises, and to secure a Faith, and upon that
Supposition Oaths were usele^s, and therefore forbidden; because there would be
no necessity to invoke God's Name in Promises or Affirmations, if men were
indeed Christians, and therefore in that Case, it would be a taking in vain.

Here is much Matter in few Lines, which I desire the Reader to observe: 1.
This Bishop says expressly, That Christ would not have his Disciples to SWEAR
AT ALL; no, not in public Judicature, if the Necessity of the World would
permit him to be obeyed. 2. In these last words, he very plainly implies, That
they who swear in public Judicature do therein disobey Christ, whatever
Necessity they may plead for it. And by this Implication he again asserts, that
Christ did forbid all Swearing, though it were in public Judicature. This then
overturns the very Foundation of that feeble Fabric, which my Adversary the
Priest has been all this while raising for an Oath to lodge in. For i^ it be
true, that Christ did (as this Bishop understands) forbid all sorts of Oaths
whatsoever, then that must needs be false which the Priest says, namely, That
Christ did not forbid all Oaths, but only the erroneous Glosses of the Scribes
and Pharisees. Nor is that all; for if it be true (as the Bishop understands)
that Christ did indeed forbid all Oaths, then that is false which the Priest
says, namely, that Oaths are Moral and Eternal. But there is yet more in the
following words of the Bishop's Testimony, If Christians (says he) will live
according to the Religion, the Word of a Christian were a sufficient Instrument
to give Testimony, and to make Promises, and to secure a Faith, and upon that
Supposition (adds he) Oaths were useless, and therefore forbidden. Observe
here, that he does not say, If Christians could live according to the Religion;
but, if Christians will live according to the Religion [which implies, they not
only ought so to live, but also may so live] then the Word of a Christian were
sufficient without an Oath, even in public Judicature; and upon that
Supposition Oaths were useless, and therefore forbidden* This manifests beyond
all Contradiction (of them that allow this Bishop's Testimony) that Christ did
forbid all manner of Swearing, when he said, Swear not at all. For without all
doubt, Christ intended that his Disciples, those that were called by his Name,
should live according to the Religion they protest, should be Christians
indeed; which if they were, he knew their bare word would be sufficient to give
Testimony to make Promises, and to secure a Faith, and consequently that an
Oath would be altogether useless. It would therefore be unreasonable, as well
as unrighteous, to imagine that Christ did allow any Oath at all to his
Disciples, since that were to suppose that he either permitted them to live
contrary to the Christian Religion, or that he allowed them to take Oaths
though useless; which had been to take God's holy Name in vain. Thus, Reader,
thou see, that what the Priest has said to prove Oaths lawful, is denied and
disproved by a Bishop of his own, and Swear not at all proved to be an
universal Prohibition of ALL Oaths whatsoever.

That I may now therefore draw this Chapter to a Period; seeing it is already
proved, that an Oath is not an Act of Natural Religion (but was used of old as
a Remedy only to restrain those Mischiefs, which Perfidy and Lying have brought
amongst men (as the Bishop of Exeter notes out of Polybius) That it is not
needful amongst Good Men, Discourse of public Oaths, p. 36. and 23.
nor binding to Wicked Men. That it is no part of the Moral and Eternal Law.
That it is positively and generally forbidden by Christ, not practiced or
countenan^ed by Paul, or any other of the Apostles, but expressly forbidden by
the Apostle James, denied and witnessed against even to Martyrdom by the
primitive Christians, and rejected by holy Men in the best Times of the
primitive Church. What remains, but to dehort all from the Use of a thing so
greatly derogatory from the Honor of Christianity? For if Solon could say, A
Good Man should have that repu^e, as not to need an Oath; page 41.
and that it is a Diminution to his Credit (though but an Heathen) to be put to
swear (as the said Bishop of Exeter observes) If the Athenians would not suffer
Xenocrates to Swear, Val. Max. l. 2. c. 10.
though in a Case of Evidence, because He was a Man of Eminent Virtue and
Integrity: If the Heathenish Romans did not exact Oaths of their Idolatrous
Priests, accounting it an Unworthy Thing not to believe a Man of so great
Sanctity without an Oath (as the same Bishop also notes) How great a Diminution
of Credit then, page 41.
how foul a Reproach and Blemish must it needs be to them that denominate
themselves Christians (who if they be truly so, are all Priests to the only
true God) that they cannot be believed without an Oath? What greater Dishonor,
what blacker Infamy can be cast upon the Christian Religion, by the most
malicious and crafty Enemies it has, then to say, its Adherents (even the most
Conscientious of them) are not fit to be trusted without an Oath! which yet,
alas! (how shameful soever it be) is the unavoidable Consequence of Imposing
Oaths on the most Just and Virtuous of them.

CHAP. VII. Of Taking Texts, Studying Sermons, and Selling them to the People.
THE next thing the Priest takes in hand to treat of, is their Manner of
Preaching from a Text, which he brings in after this manner; You pretend your
selves (says the Parishioner to him) to be the Apostles Successors and
Imitators; if so, how comes it to pass, that you preach not as they did; but
single out a Text, our of which you compose your Sermons? what Warrant have you
for so doing? To this he replies, The Apostles themselves took Texts out of
Scripture, to expound and apply them: St. Peter did so in his Sermon, Acts 2.
and St. Paul in the Synagogue at Antioch, Acts 16. (I suppose it should be Acts
13 for in the 16th chapter there is no such thing.)

Answ. If he and his Brethren have no better Warrant for singling out a Text,
and composing their Sermons out of it, then these Scriptures afford, their
Practice will appear to be very weakly grounded. For Peter took no Text at all,
but began his Speech thus, Ye Men of Judea, and all ye that are at Jerusalem,
Acts 2.14.
be this known unto you, and hearken to my words; for these Men are not
drunken, as ye suppose, seeing it is but the third Hour of the Day. No man I
think will take these words to be Peter's Text: yet if any should, I desire him
to show me whence Peter took them. But if this be not Peter's Text, then Peter
began without a Text; for this is the Beginning of his Sermon. It Is true, in
the progress of his Discourse, he takes notice of several Passages of
Scripture, though not naming the places; and if from hence the Priest will
infer he took a Text, he may with the same Reason say, he took half a Dozen
Texts together: for I think he referred to not fewer then half a dozen several
Scriptures in that short Sermon of his.

But he says, Both Peter and Paul also preached Christ out of the same Text,
namely, Psalm. 16.10.

Answ. That Peter does mention the words in Psalm. 16.10. I grant; but that he
took them for his Text, or composed his Sermon out of them, I deny: for he was
beyond the middle of his Sermon, before he mentioned those words of the
Psalmist. How then could they be his Text? The like is to be said of his other
Instance of St. Paul. He took no Text neither, as appears plainly Acts 13.16.
where he thus began, Men of Israel, and ye that fear God, give audience; The
God of this People of Israel chose our Fathers, etc. and so he goes on to give
an Historical Account of the Dealings of God with that People, until the time
of Christ, and many Passages of Scripture he refers to in Deuteronomy, Joshua,
Judges, Samuel, Isaiah, and the Psalms; yet did not take any of them as a Text
to compose his Sermon out of. But as for that place, Psalm. 16.10. (which the
Priest would have to be his Text) he mentioned it not at all till he had
well-nigh done his Sermon, so far was he from making that his Text, or
composing his Sermon out of it. These Instances then afford no Warrant for the
Priest to take a Text, and compose his Sermon out of it. And that which he next
offers is as little (or less) to the Purpose.

He says, The whole 4 th Chapter to the Romans is but an enlarged Discourse
upon, Genesis 15.6.

Answ. If he does not mean that Paul took Genesis 15.6. for a Text to compose that
Chapter out of, he speaks nothing to the Business: But if he does mean so, he
discovers the greater Weakness. For what can it be but Weakness in any one to
imagine, That the Apostle, in writing an Epistle, after he had gone so far in
it as the three first Chapters, without a Text, should take a Text to compose
the 4th Chapter only out of, and the^ go on again without a Text; especially
considering, that that Epistle, when he writ it, was one entire piece, not
divided, as it now is, into Chapters and Verses? But if he will needs have it,
that Paul took Genesis 15.6. for a Text, out of which to compose this Chapter,
because in this Chapter that Passage is mentioned; he may not only say the same
of other Sciptures referred to in the same Chapter, but with the like Reason
infer, that the Apostle, in that Epistle, took twice as many Texts as the whole
Epistle is divided into Chapters, since more then so many places of Scripture
are in that Epistle referred to.

But, as suspecting the Authority of his own Instances he adds two more, which,
he says, were produced by Dr. Sherlock, whom he represents as speaking
worthily, and like himself.

Answ. Who Dr. Sherlock is I know as little as I do who my present Adversary
is: But this I know, that my Adversary has gone at least half as far as that
Doctor; for he has spoken like himself, though not worthily. But let us see the
Intances.

One is of Christ, who (he says) took a Text, and preached upon it, Luke 4.17,
22. The other is of Philip, who (he says) took a Text which the Eunuch read,
Acts 8.30.

Answ. To the Instance of Christ, I say, first, That it was in the time of the
Law, and suitable to that Ministration; when Reading and Expounding the Law and
the Prophets was a part of the Jewish Service: But it is not a sufficient
Warrant for the like Practice in the time of the Gospel. 2. That it is no where
recommended by Christ, or any of his Apostles, as an Example or Pattern for
Gospel Ministers. 3. It is a particular Case (for in all the Sermons that our
Savior preached, while he was upon Earth, we do not read the like) and the
Priest himself says, p. 127. When any Text has a Relation to a particular
Case, that Text must not stand for a general Rule: for it is a grand Fallacy
(he says) to draw an Universal Conclusion from Particular Premises.

To the Instance of Philip, I answer, That he did not take a Text to preach on,
but opened that Scripture which the Eunuch was reading, and that too at his
Request. Philip did not single out any Text to compose a Sermon out of; but
hearing the Eunuch read that Scripture, and being desired by the Eunuch to
inform him in the Meaning of it, he thereupon took an Occasion to preach Christ
to the Eunuch. He abuses his Reader therefore, in saying, Philip took a Text:
for it is evident that Scripture in Isaiah was of the Eunach's choosing, not
Philip's. So that if he will needs have it, that a Text, was taken, he should
rather have said, The Eunuch took one; for he was reading it when Philip came
to him. These Instances therefore afford him no more Warrant for his Practice
of singling out a Text. and composing Sermons out of it, then the former; so
that if this be all they have to say, the Doctor and he are still to seek a
Warrant for their Practice.

But he falls fiercely (and foully too) upon Rich. Hubberthorn, for the Reply
he made to Dr. Sherlock, which he says was in these words, O thou Enemy and
Slanderer of Christ and the Apostles! Did they take Texts to g^e Moan with
them, and to lie a Quarter of a Year or Half a Year in a Text? Christ came to
fulfill the ^crip^ure, and the Apostles showed how he fulfilled the Scripture.
And this he calls a Brutish Reply, and says, Did Dr. Sherlock any where lay
such a Slander upon Christ and his Apostles, as to say, they took Texts to get
Money with them, or to lie Half or a Quarter of a Year in them, as this Man so
injuriously infers? Who then, think you, is the Slanderer? and who stood at
this Man's Elbow to dictate unto him that wretched Untruth? p. 88.

Answ. For all his big words I would have him take notice, that he deals very
unfairly with us, in reporting a Reply of R. H.'s, and not quoting the Page,
nor so much as Book out of which he takes it; therein falling short of the
common Honesty of every fair Adversary. Yet will I not therefore (as I justly
might) pass over this place unanswered; but supposing the words to be truly
recited, I say thus: Our Charge against the Priests is not only and barely for
taking Texts, and composing Sermons out of them (though for that having no
divine Warrant, they are condemnable) but also for selling those Texts and
Sermons to the People for Money. Thus making a Trade of the holy Scriptures,
they lie some of them three, some six Months in a Text; and what, by the Helps
of Invention and Study, they gather into their Understandings that by Measure
they sell out to the People, taking some Ten, some Twenty, some Forty Shillings
and more, for an Hour's Discourse. This is Matter of Fact, and too Notorious to
need Proof. Dr. Sherlock (as he calls him) to defend the Practice of the
Priests, urges the Examples of Christ and Philip: Whereupon R. H. replies, Thou
Enemy and Slanderer of Christ and the Apostles, did they take Texts to get
Money with them, and to lie a Quarter of a Year or Ha^^ a Year in a Text. As if
he had said, If thou do bring the Examples of Christ and Philip to justify
the Priests Practice in taking Text^ to get Money with them ( as you Priests
do) and in lying a Quarter or Half a Year in a Text (as some of you do) thou
art a Slanderer and Enemy of Christ and the Apostle: for did they ever do thus?
Now, this being our Charge against the Priests, not only that they take Texts,
but that they make a Trade of the Scriptures, taking Texts to get Money by,
etc. Does not Dr, Sherlock, in bringing the Examples of Christ and Philip to
justify the Priests Practice, plainly intimate he intends, that they took
Texts as the Priests do? What else then is that, but implicitly to infer, that
they took Texts to get Money by? So that if the Case be truly stated and
rightly considered, it will appear that the Doctor did slander Christ and
Philip (in urging their Examples to justify so bad a Practice) not R.H. the
Doctor. But I observe my Opponent does not ^t all deny that the Priests take
Texts to get Money with them: but stepping over that, he insists a little upon
the other part of the Charge, namely, their lying a Quarter or Half a Year in a
Text, which (says he) I think very few do, nor any but when their Text has
such plenty and variety of Matter in it, as requires much Time in the handling
of it. etc. So that, at least, the one part of the Charge he grants, and the
other he does not deny.

CHAP. VIII. Of Humane Learning, Divine Inspira- and Revelation.
HAving briefly dispatched the Business of taking Texts, framing Discourses on
them, and selling those Discourses for Money* that which comes next under
Consideration is Humane Learning, which the Priest asserts the Necessity of in
interpreting the Scriptures, page 90. He takes an Occasion to enter upon this
Subject, from some words of R. H. which (as he sets them down: for he names no
Book) are thus, The Scribes and Pharisees were Learned Men, and they could not
open the Scriptures; Peter an Unlearned Man, he opened the Scriptures, page, 87.
At this he carps, saying, R. H. magnifies the Learning of the Scribes and
Pharisees, and makes a very Ignoramus of St. Peter, etc. p. 88.

Answ. He had no Cause to quarrel at this; for R. H. spoke but the Truth. He
did not magnify the Learning of the Scribes and Pharisees, but barely said,
they were Learned Men, which none that understands what they were, will deny:
Nor does he any whit debase St. Peter (as this Priest does unfairly insinuate)
but barely says, He was Unlearned; and so indeed he was in that sort of
Learning wherein the Pharisees were learned, to which his being unlearned is
opposed.

But says he, Will they prove that St. Peter, who opened the Scriptures, was
an Unlearned Man?

Answ. The Scripture says it expressly, Acts 4.13.

Is there no D^fference, says he, betwixt Peter the Fisherman, and Peter the
Disciple?

Answ. Yes; there was great Difference, but not in point of Humane Learning:
The Difference lay not there. He had no more of that Learning when he was a
Disciple, then he had when he was a Fisherman. But the great Difference lay in
this, that when he was a Fisherman, he was Carnally-minded; but afterward,
being a Disciple, he became spiritually-minded, having received an
Understanding, not from Study and Natural Means, but from God, as another
Apostle said, 1 John 5.20.
We know that the Son of God is come, and has given us an Understanding, that
we may know him that is true, etc. For Luke tells us, that a little before his
Ascension, Luke 24.45.
he opened their Understandings (which was an immediate and inward Operation of
his Spirit and Power upon them) That they might understand the Scriptures.
Coloss. 1.9.
And this it is the Apostle Paul desired for the Colossians, viz. A spiritual
Understanding.

He goes on, Had Peter been so long with him, that spoke as never man spoke,
and is he still unlearned?

Answ. Yes, unlearned still in humane Learning, as much as he was before; for
Christ did not instruct him in that, neither did the Excellency of Christ
himself lie in that; for when he spoke as never man spoke, it was not in
respect of Humane Learning, but of Divine and Heavenly Wisdom.

Did the Holy Ghost, says he, give him the Tongue of the learned, nay a
Portion of the Cloven Tongues, by which he spoke all Languages, to enable him
to expound the Scriptures to all Nations, and is this Peter unlearned still?

Answ. Yes, he was unlearned still in humane and acquired Learning; for that
which was given him by the holy Ghost, was not humane nor acquired.

Does he not say (adds he) that the Unlearned, and Unstable wrest the
Scriptures to their own Destruction, and is he himself Unlearned?

Answ. Yes, he himself, notwithstanding all this, was Unlearned in that
Learning, by which they, who were Unlearned in the Heavenly Learning, did wrest
the Scriptures.

Now that this may not seem strange, I desire the Reader to consider, that
there is a twofold Learning, Knowledge, Wisdom, and Understanding. There is a
Learning that is acquirable by natural Study and Industry, and this is called
Natural, or Humane Learning, and this Learning, Man as Man, though never so
ignorant of God, or never so great an Enemy to God, is capable of; this
Learning Peter was Unlearned in. And there is a Learning which is given by, and
received from God, without the Help or Means of Natural Study and Industry, and
this is called Divine or Heavenly Learning; and this the Natural Man is not
capable of, but he only, that is led by and taught of the Spirit, In this
Learning Peter was well versed. So also there is a Twofold Knowledge. There is
a Knowledge, Ecles. 1.18.
which he that increases, increases Sorrow, but there is also a Knowledge,
Prove. 1.7.
of which the Fear of the Lord is the Beginning (or pricipal Part) In like
manner there is a Twofold Wisdom: There is the Wisdom of the World, 1 Cor. 1.21.
and the Wisdom of God. There is a Wisdom by which the World knew not God, and
there is a Wisdom by which God is known: There is a Wisdom that is not from
above, James 3.^5. ver. 17.
but is Earthly and sensual, and there is a Wisdom that is from above, that is
Pure, Peaceable, etc. There is also a Twofold Understanding: 1 Cor. 2.14.
There is an Understanding by which the things of God cannot be perceived, an
Understanding which God will destroy: 1 Cor. 1.19. Job 32.8.
And there is an Understanding which the Inspiration of the Almighty gives.
Now this Divine, this Heavenly Learning (this Spiritual Knowledge, Wisdom and
Understanding Peter had received of God; in this he was indeed learned, and by
this sufficiently able to understand the Scriptures, but that humane Learning,
that that was acquirable only by Natural Study, and Industry, that he was
unlearned in, notwithstanding he was a Disciple, Acts 4.13.
as appears plainly in the place before quoted. No Ground at all then had the
Priest so scornfully to insult, and vainly triumph over R. H. as he does, nay
it more nearly concerns himself to beware, lest while he is glorying in that
Learning, which the Pharisees of old (whom Christ called blind Guides) did so
greatly dote upon, and wherein he seems to Place his Strength, he fall himself
into that Ditch, which his Envy, and Evil Nature has assigned for others.

He takes upon him in the next Place to open and explain those Words of the
Apostle, 2 Pet. 3.16. In which are some things hard to be understood, which the
unlearned and the unstable wrest, as they do other Scriptures, to their own
Destruction. Upon these words he makes four Observations.

The first is, that some Passages of Scripture a^e so obscure and dark, that
they are hard to be understood, page ^0. from whence he infers the Necessity of
Learning (I for Distinction sake will call it Natural, Humane, or
School-Learning) in the Interpreting of Scriptures, the great Danger of mis
interpreting them without it, and therefore that they that want it, are very
unfit to be Preachers, and Interpreters of the Holy Word of God.

Answ. Thou see here Reader, to what a Pitch he has advanced humane
Learning, as if the Scriptures could not be rightly understood without it. Not
a Word of the Spirit of God, but humane Learning all in ^ll* There is a
Necessity of it, he says, great Danger of mis-interpreting without it, yea
they that want it are very ^^fi^^te preach, etc. What could he have said more
to magnifi^ hmane Learning! but as Children use with one Blast to blow up a
Bubble, and with another to Blow it down again, so this Man, after he has with
one Hand to exalted Learning, as that without which there is no safe
interpreting of Scripture, and consequently no certain Knowledge of the will
and mind of God therein expressed, with the other Hand ^ulls it down again, and
renders it as needless in Relation to man's eternal Happiness, as before he
asserted it not only needful, but even of absolu^e Necessity. Hear what he
says, page 92. The Parishioner asks this Question, Are then the necessary
Points of Religion in the Scriptures hard to be understood? No (says he) they
are not; for whatsoever is necessary to Salvation, either to be believed, or to
be done, are in some Place or other of holy Scripture, fitted to the most
vulgar Capacity, and shallowest Understanding, as (for Example) the History of
Christ's Birth, Death, Resurrection and Ascension is, as necessary to be
believed, so plain to be understood: Then the Duties of the first and second
Table of the Law and the Love of God and our Neighbor; all the Evangelical
Precepts, and the Essentials of Religion, are in the Gospel made such easy
Doctrines, that he that runs may read them, being fitted to the Capacity of the
most unlearned. Where now is this grand Necessity of humane Learning? The
necessary Points of Religion, he says, are not hard to be understood,
whatsoever is necessary to Salvation, either to be believed or to be done, is
in some Place or other of holy Scripture fitted to the most vulgar Capacity,
and shallowest Understanding. The History of Christ's Birth, Death,
Resurrection and Ascension, is plain to be understood; The Duties of the first
and second Table; the Love of God and our Neighbor (on which Christ said, Mat.
22.40.
the whole Law and the Prophets depend) All the Commands of the Gospel, and the
Essentials of Religion: All these he confesses, are in the Gospel made such
easy Doctrines, that he that runs may read them: Nay, he says, they are
fitted to the Capacity of the most unlearned. Are they so! what, and yet a
Necessity of humane learning still! to what End I would fain know? why, to
enable men to preach the Gospel (for says he, They that want this Learning,
are very unfit Persons to be Preachers, and Interpreters of the holy Word of
God, page 90.) This is strange indeed (more strange then true I am sure) If all
things necessary to Salvation, if all things that men are required either to
believe or do, are fitted to the most common Capacity, and to the shallowest
Understanding; if the History of Christ's Birth, Death, Resurrection and
Ascension is so plain to be understood; if the whole Law and the Prophets; if
all the Commands of the Gospel; if all the Essentials of Religion, are in the
Gospel made such easy Doctrines, that he that runs may read them; in a Word,
if all these things are fitted to the Capacity of the most unlearned (as he
affirms they are) then I hope men may preach any or all of these without the
Help of humane Learning. If so, where then is the Necessity of humane Learning,
without which he says, Men are very unfit to preach the wo^d of God? Is there
any Necessity of preaching any thing that is not necessary to Salvation; any
thing that is neither to be believed nor done; any thing that is no Part of the
History of Christ's Birth, Death, Resurrection and Ascension; any thing that is
no Part of the Love of God and our Neighbor (which as I showed before
comprehends the whole Law and the Prophets) any thing that is no Command of the
Gospel; any thing that is not Essential to Religion? No man I think in his
right Wits, will so affirm. If then there be no Necessity of preaching any
thing, that is not comprehended within these particulars* and what^oe^er is
comprehended within these party this may be preached without the Help of ^umane
Learning, what room has he left for that Necessity of Learning, which but even
now he contended for! Thus like Solomon's Foolish Woman, Prove. 14.1.
he has pluck^d down his House with his own Hands.

Nor has he yet done, he goes on thus, page 93. And this reminds us of our
Duty of Thankfulness to our great Lawgiver, in that he has made those
Doctrines most plain, which are most necessary to be believed, and those things
least necessary which are most difficult, as for Example, says he, it is not
necessary to Salvation to be knowing in all the Circumstances of the Levitical
Rites, nor in all the Genealogies of the Scripture, nor in all the
Apocalyptical Prophecies, and therefore the Obscurity of them need not dismay
us.

Answ. It seems then, those Doctrines which are most necessary to be believed,
are plain enough to be understood, and preached without humane Learning; and
that Learning is only necessary to the understanding of those things which are
least necessary, which how little it conduces to prove a Necessity of humane
Learning in a Preacher of the Gospel, I leave to the Reader's Judgment.

He said before (page 86.) Our only work is to explain and apply the written
Word of God. He said but now (p. 92, 93.) All things necessary to Salvation,
all things to be believed or done, all Gospel-Precepts, all Essentials of
Religion (with many more particulars there mentioned) are plain and easy to
the shallowest Understanding, to the most unlearned) and so have no Need of
explanation) he says now, those things which are most difficult (and so have
most Need of explanation) are least necessary. Compare now these three Sayings
one with the other, and see if the direct Consequence of them be not this, That
their (I mean his, and his Brethrens) only Work is to explain, and apply those
things, which are least necessary to be known; nay, which indeed are not at all
necessary to Salvation, are neither to be believed nor done, are no Gospel
precepts, nor essential to Religion O that all People would take Notice of
this! that they might no longer spend their money for that which is not bread,
Isa. 55.2.
nor their Labor for that which satisfies not.

From this I pass on to his second Observation on 2 Pet. 3.16.) not finding any
thing further in this that is remarkable, save that in page 94. he again
acknowledges, that those Passages in Scripture that are of the greatest
Concern, are written in such a plain and familiar Style, that the weakest and
most illiterate, or unlearned (of which number a greatest Part of the Members
of the Church are) shall never be able to excuse the Neglect of them, the
Omniscient Author of the Scriptures (which is God) herein graciously
condescending to the shallowest Capacities, etc. All which makes still more and
more against the Necessity of humane Learning.

His second Observation is, That the Scriptures have been wrested, page 95.
This being matter of Fact, he concludes to be sufficiently known without
further proof, and therefore having spent a Page or two in exclaiming against
the Quakers, and some others (but them especially) for wresting them, he goes
on to his third particular, whither I also follow him, not doubting but by that
time this Subject is discust, I shall prove his second observation for him, by
an undeniable Instance of himself, perverting these Words of Peter.

His third Observation was, the Causes why the Scriptures are wrested, which he
makes twofold, want of Learning, and of Stability. I begin (says he) with the
first, namely, the want of Learning, which is derided by Hubberthorn, page 97.

Answ. It had been but fair for him to have given some Instance of R. H's.
deriding Learning. R. H. was not a man apt or inclinable to deride any, being a
grave, scrious, solid, weighty man, as they who best knew him can bear witness,
nor is it our manner to deride, or any way undervalue Learning, which in its
Place we know to be good and serviceable, but when others do so much over value
it, and lift it up so high above its proper Sphere, as to make it the only Key,
by which divine Mysteries can now a days be opened; that, without which the
Gospel cannot be preached, etc. We are then necessitated to pull it down, and
reduce it to its proper Station and Service, which is to be conversant in
Natural, Civil, or Humane Affairs, where while it is exercised, we are far from
deriding or under valuing it* that we give it that Esteem which is due unto it,
as a Natural thing, and in our outward Occasions, make use of it our selves, so
far as we have Understanding in it, which together with our E^deavours (though
through great Difficulties) to educate our Children therein, may sufficiently
evidence our regard to Literature, and that our Exception lies not against
Learning it self, but against the Abuse of it. This I thought needful here to
be hinted, to rectify the mistakes of any concerning us in this Case.

He goes on thus, You are here to take special Notice (says he) that Learning
is by the holy Ghost declared so necessary for the understanding of difficult
Passages in the Scriptures, that the Cause of the wresting them is attributed
to the want of it. This he says, but does not so much as attempt to prove.

Answ. That Learning is necessary I grant, but the Question is what Learning:
If he does not mean Natural, Humane, or School learning, such as the Scribes
and Pharisees were skilled in, he equivocates; but if he does mean such
Learning, I deny his Proposition. I deny that Natural Learning, School
Learning, such as is acquired by Art, Study and Industry, is the Learning here
by the Holy Ghost declared necessary. If want of Humane Learning were the Cause
why the Scriptures are wrested, how comes it to pass that they are wrested by
those that have Humane Learning? for if we look back into former Ages, we shall
find that the Scriptures for the most part have been wrested by learned men,
great Scholars, acute Wits, men of much Study and Reading, as by the Rabbis,
and Jewish Doctors of old, the Bishops and Clergy men in the Arrian and other
Controversies; the Cardinals, Jesuits and Popish Priests in latter times. How
came it to pass that these men wrested the Scriptures? was it for want of
Humane Learning? that could not be; for that most of these men were profound
Scholars great Linguists, University men, men of much Reading, and great
Learning, is undeniable, and yet these are the men, that of all others have
wrested the Scriptures most frequently, and most perniciously: What was the
Reason of this? surely if Humane Learning had been designed by God, as the
proper and necessary means of understanding the Scriptures aright, they who had
so much of that Learning should have understood them better then they did, then
whom none has ever understood them worse, nor is it a thing to be wondered at
by any, who shall consider the words of Christ, I thank thee O Father, Lord of
Heaven and Earth, Luke 10.21.
that thou have hid these things from the wise and prudent, and have revealed
them unto Babes; even so Father, for so it seemed good in thy sight. Here then
is the true cause why these learned men wrest the Scriptures; They seek to
understand them by that Wisdom from which the true Sense of them is hid; they
trust too much to their Brain Knowledge, and Humane Learning, and with that
undertake to interpret Scripture, not waiting for the Guidance of the Holy
Spirit, whose Office alone it is to lead into all Truth. Experience therefore
shows by the Errors of learned men in all Ages, that Humane Learning (whatever
this Priest says) is not the Key that can open the Scriptures aright, none
having more missed of the true Sense of them, then they that have sought it by
that Learning.

But says he, Though the Apostles were unlearned when Jesus called them, yet
to the Eternal Honor of Learning, he made them learned in all Tongues by a
Miracle, before he sent them abroad to teach all Nations; teaching us thereby,
that men wholely illiterate are not fit to preach the Gospel.

Answ. This at first Sight, makes a show as if it had something in it; but look
well upon it, and it appears to be but a mere empty Flourish. Christ (he says)
by a Miracle made his Apostles learned in all Tongues, before he sent them
abroad to teach all Nations. Well, what does he infer? Teaching us thereby
(says he) that men wholely illiterate are not fit to preach the Gospel. Herein
is a Fallacy, he should have said (if he would have said any thing to the
Purpose) that men wholely illiterate, are not fit to preach the Gospel to all
Nations, which if it were true (as it is not; for illiterate men may speak by
Interpreters, 1 Cor. 14.27.
which also was in use in the Primitive Church) what is it to the Purpose? If
not having all Languages they should not be fit to preach to all Nations,
because all Nations could not understand their Speech, will it therefore follow
they are not fit to preach to their own Nation that does understand their
Speech? But these Words [ All Nations] he was willing in the last Clause to
leave out, that he might beguile the ignorant into a Conceit that none but
Book-learned men can preach the Gospel; but though he may twattle after this
rate to his Parishioner (whose Respects to his Person may perhaps induce him to
swallow any thing that comes from him) yet let him not think to impose such
Sophistry upon us, as ignorant as he takes us to be; we understand Words better
then so. The Gift of Tongues to the Apostles does not imply, that men wholely
illiterate, are unfit to preach the Gospel. What was the End of the Gift of
Tongues? was it to give the Apostles themselves the Knowledge and Understanding
of the Gospel? was it to enable them to preach the Gospel sincerely and truly?
or was it that they might express themselves to the Understandings of those
several Nations to whom they were to preach? They were commanded to preach the
Gospel to all Nations, which that all Nations might understandingly hear, it
was expedient it should be preached unto them in their respective proper
Languages, which that it might be, the Use of Tongues was requisite, and
therefore given unto them, who were designed to that so Universal Embassage:
Observe then, Reader, what was indeed the very Reason, and proper Service of
Tongues, namely, that all Nations might hear and understand what was spoken: So
that the Gift of Tongues was not designed to enable the Apostles to preach the
Gospel, in such a Sense, as if they had not been able to preach it at all
without them, but to enable them, in the preaching of it, so to express
themselves in every Nation's proper Dialect, that they to whom they spoke might
understand what was spoken to them, but as for the Ability which they had to
preach the Gospel simply it self, without Relation to other Nations, that, they
received immediately from the Holy Ghost, which was poured forth upon them, and
dwelt in them, and by Virtue of this indwelling of the Spirit, the most
illiterate amongst them were able to preach the Gospel fully, and effectually
to those of their own Nation (and any other who understood their Language)
without the additionall Gift of Tongues; but the Priest in comparing humane
Learning with the Gift of Tongues, and then inferring that because the use of
Tongues was needful to the Apostles, in order to preach the Gospel to all
Nations, who could not otherwise have understood them, therefore humane
Learning is needful (yea absolutely necessary) in order to preach the Gospel to
them of their own Nation and Language, and who can understand us as well
without it: In this I say, he covertly imposes a Falsehood upon his Reader,
which he ought not to have done. He might rather have inferred thus, That if
the Apostles having received the Promise of the Father, in the pouring forth of
his Spirit upon on them, were thereby enabled and fitted to preach the Gospel,
to their own Countrymen, in their own Mother Tongue, without the help of other
Languages, then such now as have received the same Spirit (whether in the same
measure is not material, it being sufficient if the Measure received be
suitable to the present Service) are thereby made able to preach the Gospel in
their own Mother Tongue, to such as understand that Tongue, without the help of
Humane Learning, and this sets Humane Learning quite aside, as to any Necessity
of it in preaching the Gospel.

But he says, There was great Reason for choosing illiterate men then, in
order to the most succesful Promulgation of the Gospel, and the Glory of God;
for had our Lord chosen the Philosophers and learned Rabbis of the time, his
whole Doctrine might have been opposed with greater Force of Argument, and
would have lost much of its Reputation, by being ascribed to such men's
Invention, as if its Success had been wholly owing to their Skill and Learning,
and not to the mighty Power of God.

Answ. The Reason holds good still; Experience shows that these learned men,
that call themselves Ministers of the Gospel now, do extol and cry up their
humane learning beyond the Power of God; for they make that Learning such an
indespensible Qualification, and of such absolute Necessity, that though a man
be endued with Power from on high, though he has received the Promise of the
Father, though he be full of the Holy Ghost, and of Faith, yet if he be not
sk^lled in humane Learning (or at least supposed to be) they say, he is not fit
to preach the Gospel.

But he says, That was a time extraordinary, the Disciples being to plant the
Gospel in all Nations, and probably understanding no Language but the Syrian,
Christ therefore rains upon them cloven Tongues, whereby they were capacitated
to preach the Gospel to all People, and Nations under Heaven, page 100.

Answ. If that was an extraordinary time and occasion, in and upon which,
Tongues were given, he is the more to blame for inferring from thence a
Necessity of Humane Learning, in ordinary times, and upon ordinary occasions:
He should have remembered what himself says, page 128. That it is a most grand
Fallacy, to draw an universal Conclusion, from particular Premises.

But a time, he says, was coming when these Tongues should cease, the main
Work being done, page 101.

Answ. It Is true, Tongues being given but for a particular Service were to
cease, that Service being answered, but the Teaching of the Spirit was not to
cease, it had no Dependency upon Tongues, and therefore was not to cease with
them; it was before them, and was to continue after them. The Comforter, the
Spirit of Truth (which Christ said, John 14.16 and ver. 26. chap. 16.13.
he would pray the Father to send to his Disciples) was to abide with them
forever, and he was to be their Teacher, and to guide them into all Truth.

Besides the Apostle Paul, writing to the Church at Ephesus, Ephesians. 1.17.
amongst whom (being of one Tongue) there was no need of Tongues, and by whom
we read of no Miracles wrought, tells them, He cease not to pray for them,
that God would give them the Spirit of Wisdom, and Revelation, in the Knowledge
of himself. From whence it is evident, First, That divine Revelation had no
Dependence upon Tongues, or Miracles. Secondly, That although Tongues were for
a particular Service and Season, and therefore were to cease, yet that the
Ministration of the Spirit by divine Revelation, was not to cease, but to
continue in the Church of Christ, therefore also he exhorts the Thessalonians,
not to quench the Spirit, 1 These. 5.19.

But he says, It would be presumption in them, who pretend to be the Apostles
Successors to expect to receive all Gospel Knowledge in the same manner, and in
all those Ways, wherein it was communicated to the Apostles, page 101.

Answ. How far he will strain the Word all (in the last Clause) I know not; but
if by all those Ways he intends no more then an inward Manifestation, and
immediate Revelation of the mind and Will of God to them, by the Spirit of
Truth which dwells in them, I will adventure to tell him it is no Presumption
at all in those who are the Apostles Successors, to expect to receive the
Knowledge of the Gospel in the same manner; for as our Savior prayed not for
them only, but all such also, John 17.20.
as should believe on him through their Word. So what he promised concerning
sending the Comforter, to be in them, to teach them, to take of his and show it
unto them, to guide them into all Truth, and to abide with them forever; he did
not promise with Restriction, and Limitation to them only, but with an
extensive Relation to all that should believe on him. This appears, First from
the Words of Christ, John 7.38.
He that believes on me, as the Scripture has said, out of his Belly shall
flow Rivers of living Water: ver. 39.
But this spoke he of the Spirit, which they that believed on him should
receive. This is spoken indefinitely of all Believers, without any Restraint to
Persons, time, or place; for the Invitation is general, ver. 37.
If any Man thirst, let him come unto me, and drink, etc. Secondly, It does
appear that this inward, immediate and spiritual Teaching was known and
received by the Saints of old in general, of whom we read not that they spoke
with Tongues, or wrought Miracles: The very little Children (Babes in Christ)
to whom John writ, had received the Anointing. Ye have an Unction from the holy
One* 1 John 2.20.
and ye know all things, the Anointing which ye have received of him, abides
in you, ver. 27.
and ye need not that any man teach you; but as the same Anointing teaches you
of all things and i^ Truth, and no Lie; and even as it has taught you, ye
shall abide in him. Hence it is manifest, that in the Primitive Church, the
Saints in general had the Spirit poured on them, had the Anointing in them,
that the End of it was to teach and guide them, and that they were taught and
guided by it. Thirdly, Besides, this inward and immediate Teaching of the
Spirit of God, by which the Knowledge of the Gospel is communicated, being the
very End for which the Conforter was sent, and (as I may say) the natural
Effects of his coming (implied in those Words of Christ, He shall teach you all
things, he shall testify of me he shall receive of mine, and shall show it
unto you; he shall guide you into all Truth. etc.) it must either be granted
that these Effects of his Coming are now received, and known in the true
Church, or denied that the Comforter is now received, and does abide with
Believers at all. The Consequence whereof would be, that Christ has left his
People Comfortless, which he has assured them he will not do; John 14.18. v.
16.17. chap. 15.26. chap. 16.14. chap. 14.26. chap. 16.13.
but if the Comforter, the Spirit of Truth be now to be expected (he is
faithful that promised) if he is to be in the Saints, and to abide with them
forever; if his Office be to testify of Christ, to receive of Christ's, and
show it unto them, to teach them all things, and to guide them into all Truth;
I hope Reader thou will not think it Presumption in them, that are truly the
Apostles Successors in Faith and Doctrine, to expect to receive the Knowledge
of the Gospel, in the same manner as they received it.

Again, he says, it is as ungodly and absurd to depend upon extraordinary
Revelations, and Miracles, while we neglect the ordinary means under which we
live, as it is for an Husbandman to give over his Husbandry in expectation of
being provided for by daily Miracles, page 102. And a little lower, he says,
Though God's Hand be not shortened, but that it is in his Power to give the
Church now the same Gift of Tongues, of Working Miracles, and the rest as he
was pleased to do in the Primitive Age of the Church, etc.

Answ. By this he seems not rightly to understand how the Apostles and
primitive Christians received the Knowledge of the Gospel; for he is still
harping upon the Gift of Tongues and Miracles, as if he apprehended, they had
received the Knowledge of the Gospel by these means, and that therefore it is
Presumption in any now, to expect to receive the Knowledge of the Gospel in the
same manner, as they received it; but in this he greatly errs, not
distinguishing between the Effects and the Cause: Tongues and Miracles were but
the Effects of that divine Power, wherewith they were filled, of that holy
Spirit which rested on them, and dwelled in them. Now the Apostles did not
receive the Knowledge of the Gospel by Tongues and Miracles, these were but
Mediums to convey their Message to others, and persuade a Belief of it, but
that which they received the Knowledge of the Gospel from, was the Divine Power
it self, the Holy Spirit it self, which dwelt in them, from which the Tongues
and Miracles did sometimes flow (I say sometimes; for they were not inseparable
Effects of the Spirit; for if they had been so, then when and wheresoever the
Spirit had appeared, these Effects must unavoidably have followed, but that
they did not; for all the true Believers received the Spirit, yet did not all
work Miracles, Romans 8.9. 1 Corin. 12.29.30. 2 Cor. 4.4.
nor speak with Tongues) Thus Paul having told the Corinthians, that the God of
the World has blinded the Minds of them that believe not, lest the Light of
the glorius Gospel of Christ, who is the Image of God, should shine unto them,
shows them how the Knowledge of the Gospel is to be received* ver. 6.
for God (says he) who commanded the Light to shine out of Darkness, has
shined in our Hearts, to give the Light of the Knowledge of the Glory of God,
in the Face of Jesus Christ. And in his Epistle to the Galatians, he plainly
shows, that he received the Knowledge of the Gospel, Gal. 1.16.
and Ability to preach Christ from the Revelation of Christ in him. Seeing then
that the Apostles, Ephesians. 3.3.7.
and primitive Christians did receive the Knowledge of the Gospel from the
immediate Teachings of the holy Spirit, which dwelt in them, and not from
Tongues or Miracles; and seeing this holy Spirit (as I have before proved) was
promised to abide with the Saints forever, to be their Teacher, and Guide into
all Truth, I thence infer, that the Cessation of Tongues, and Miracles does not
at all render it any Presumption, Ungodliness or Absurdity in those, who are
the Apostles Successors in Faith and Doctrine, to expect to receive the
Knowledge of the Gospel now in the same manner, as it was communicated to them
of old.

Yet that he may not seem wholely to exclude the Spirit, he thus says, That
the Spirit helps us to understand old Truths, already revealed in Scripture,
we confess and pray for his Assistance therein, etc. page 103.

Answ. Either he does not speak sincerely, or else he has forgot himself, but
a little before (page 92, 93, 94.) he said that, All the necessary Points of
Religion, whatsoever is necessary to Salvation; whatsoever is either to be
believed or done, is in some Place or other in the holy Scriptures fitted to
the most vulgar Capacity, and shallowest Understanding, that the History of
Chist's Birth, Death, Resurrection and Ascension is plain to be understood;
that the Duties of the first and second Table of the Law, and the Love of God
and our Neighbor (which I have elsewhere showed) comprehends the whole Law and
the Prophets* all the Evangelical Precepts, and the Essentials of Religion, are
in the Gospel made (...) easy Doctrines, that he that runs may read them,
being fitted to the Capacity of the most unlearned; that those Passages in the
Scriptures, which are of the greatest Concern, are written in such a plain and
familiar Style, that the weakest and most illiterate shall never be able to
excuse the neglect of them: In a Word, The great Lawgiver (he says) has made
those Doctrines most plain, which are most necessary to be believed, and those
least necessary, which are most difficult. Now if he did believe himself when
he said all this, I wonder what he expects his Reader should believe of him,
when (in behalf of himself and all his Brethren) he here says (page 103.) we
confess the Spirit helps us to understand old Truths already revealed in the
Scriptures, and we pray for his Assistance therein. Do they pray for the
Assistance of the Spirit to help them understand those things which he says,
are already fitted to the Capacity of the weakest, most illiterate and
unlearned, which are suited to the shallowest Understanding, nay, which are
made so plain and easy, that he that runs may read them? What else were this,
but to mock the holy Ghost by invocating his Assistance to help them understand
that, which they confess they understand already; and which they affirm to be
so plain and easy, that the weakest, the shallowest, the most unlearned may
understand! And yet of this kind do they reckon all necessary Points in
Religion; all the Duties of the first and second Table of the Law, the Love of
God and our Neighbor, the History of Christ's Birth, Death, Resurrection and
Ascension, all the Commands of the Gospel, all the Essentials of Religion, and
in short, whatsoever is either to be believed or done, necessary to Salvation;
but what then has he left for bimself and his Brethren to pray for the
Assistance of the Spirit to help them to understand? Nothing that is necessary
to Salvation to be sure, no Essential of Religion, no Gospel Precept, no Part
of the History of Christ's Birth, Death, Resurrection and Ascension; none of
the Duties of the first or second Table; nothing of the Love of God or our
Neighbor; what can it be then? Some difficult Passages, which himself
confesses are least necessary to be believed (as the Circumstances of the
Levitical Rites, the Genealogies in Scripture, and Apocalyptical Prophe^ies
(these are his own Instances, page 93.) nay, in order to Salvation, not at all
necessary either to be believed or done. See now what his fair Flourish of
Praying for the Spirit is come to.

Besides, to say they are already (...) in Scripture, and yet say he want the
assistance of the Spirit to help him understand them, is a Contradiction; for
what he does not understand is not already revealed, but veiled to him; if he
already understand it, he in vain implores Assistance to help him to understand
it; if he does not already understand it, then it is not yet revealed to him,
but hid or covered from him, and in praying for the Assistance of the Spirit to
understand it* he acknowledges the Necessity of the Spirit's Teaching, and
confesses that Revelation is to be expected in this Age.

But (says he) to pretend to such Miraculous Inspirations as the Apostles once
had, or to n^w Revelations beyond what was discover^ to them, is an horrible
Cheat, etc.

Answ That the Inspirations which the Apostles had, or the Teaching of the
Spirit, whereby the mind of God was communicated to them, had no Dependency
upon Miracles, I have showed before: As for New Revelations, it is a Phrase of
his own, not used by us, and if by New, he intend New as to Substance, he does
not rightly represent us; for we do not expect a Revelation of any other
Gospel, of any other Way of Salvation, of any other Ess^ntials in the Christian
Religion, then what were revealed to the primitive Christians, and have been in
all Ages revealed to the ^aints in (...) D^gree or other, and which by the
divinely inspired Penmen were committed to writing, and are declared of in the
holy Scriptures, but as no Prophecy of old ^ime came by the will of man, 2 Pet.
1, 21.
but holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost, so neither can
the true Sense and Meaning of those heavenly Doctrines contained in the holy
^criptures, be comprehended or understood by the Wit and Wisdom of man (in his
highest Natural Seize) but only and alone by the Openings and Discoveries
of that holy Spirit, by which they were at first revealed. Those divine
Mysteries are Mysteries indeed, and remain so, as a sealed Book (which neither
the unlearned, nor yet the most learned in the wisdom of this World is able by
that Learning to open) until Christ (the Lamb) does open them: Isa. 29.11. Rev.
5.
And these Heavenly things and divine Mysteries so opened by him, chap. 3.7.
who has the Key of David (wherewith he opens, and no man shuts, and
shuts, and no man with all his humane Learning opens) are not New
Revelations, that is New things revealed, but rather renewed Revelations, that
is, Old things revealed anew: The same Gospel the same Way of Salvation, the
same Essentials of Religion, the same Principles and Doctrine, in a word, the
same Good Old Truths, which were revealed to the Saints of old, and are
recorded in the holy Scriptures, revealed now anew. And this Revelation is
absolutely necessary: for without it there is no true, no certain, no living
Knowledge of God the Father, or of Jesus Christ his Son. This our Savior told
the Jews, No man (says he) knows the Son, Mat. 11.27.
but the Father; neither knows any man the Father, save the Son, and he to
whomsoever the Son will reveal him. Humane Learning cannot do it. Nor can the
Doctrines of the Gospel, or the Mysteries of God's Kingdom, be known to man,
but by the Rev^lation of the Holy Spirit (Humane Learning cannot discover them)
for, The things of God (says Paul) knows no man but the Spirit of God. 1
Cor. 2.11.
Perhaps the Priest will say, They are revealed in the Scriptures. But I shall
then tell him, That Revelation is necessary (yea, of Necessity) even to
understand the Scriptures. For he himself observes (p. 96.) that it is not the
Letter, but the Sense that is the Word of God. If so, it is not enough for any
man to have and read the Letter only (though he spend his Age therein) but if
he expect profit thereby, he must come to the true Sense, which (how learned
soever he be in the Wisdom of this World) he never can attain unto, until the
holy Spirit reveal it to him. And to this purpose must his own words serve (if
they will serve to any purpose at all) namely, We confess that the Spirit
helps us to understand old Truths already reveal^d i^ Scripture, and we pray
for his Assistance therein, page 103. In which words (though he mistakes, in
saying they are revealed already to him, that does not understand them* yet) by
confessing that the Spirit does help to understand, and praying for his
Assistance therein, he acknowledges that the Truths contained in the Scriptures
are to be revealed by the Spirit.

Having promised this, I hold my self the less concerned to take notice of what
he says concerned new Revelations; because he speaks upon a false Ground, and
shoots at random: Yet some things scattered here and there in his Discourse I
may speak briefly to, to make him more sensible of his Mistakes.

1 st. He says, These New Revelations highly disparage the Scriptures.

Answ. He that desires and waits to have the Truth's Record in the Scriptures,
revealed to him by the same Spirit from which they were written, does not at
all disparage the Scriptures, but honors them.

But he says, The Scripture, if it be true and may be believed, declares it
self to be a perfect and sufficient Rule in order to Salvation, 2 Timothy 3.17.

Answ. The Scripture (so far as it has escaped Corruption from
Mis-transcribing, Mis-translating, Mis-printing, and the like) is true, and not
only may but ought to be believed. But I do not find it declares that of it
self, which he has here declared of it, from 2 Timothy 3.17. namely, that it is a
perfect and sufficient Rule in order to Salvation. That place says thus, Verse.
16. (for the 17th Verse depends on that, and is imperfect without it) All
Scripture is given by Inspiration of God, and is profitable for Doctrine, for
Reproof, for Correction, for Instruction in Righteousness: Verse. 17. That the
Man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all Good Works. Now (to let
pass the Translation, which is not altogether so well as it might be) here is
no mention of a Rule at ^ll. The Scripture is here said to be profitable, but I
hope the Priest will not say, every thing that is profitable is a perfect and
sufficient Rule. He says humane Learning is profitable, and not only so, but
nec^ssary, yea of Necessity to the Understanding and Preaching the Gospel; will
he therefore make humane Learning the Rule? But how regardless is this man of
speaking Truth, who so confidently says, the Scripture declares it self to be
a perfect and sufficient Rule in order to Salvation; whena^ that Scripture
which he brings to prove this, has no such words in it.

But he adds, That the Scripture accurses all that shall preach any other
Doctrine, Gal. 1.8, 9.

Answ. If he means any other Doctrine then this, which he has preached,
concerning the Scripture being a perfect and sufficient Rule* he errs and
wrongs the Text. For the Apostle there says, If any man preach any ^^her
G^spel unto you, then that we have preached, and you have received, let him be
acursed. And so say I: He that preaches any other Gospel, then what was then
preached by the Apostle, the Curse and Woe is to him. But let me withal tell my
Adversary, he did unadvisedly to bring these two Scriptures together: For in
that to Timothy, the Apostle says, That the Man of God may be perfect; but
that the Priest denies it is possible for him to be. So that he preaches not
only another, but a directly contrary Doctrine to what the Apostle preached. Let
him look again then, and consider, whether he has not brought the Curse to his
own Door.

Again, he says, page 104. Consider how contrary these new Revelations are to
God's constant Method, in regard they come naked without any Miracles to attest
them; for when did God ever send any new Doctrine, and did not also give the
Preachers thereof a Power of Working Miracles* etc?

Answ. This all depends upon the word New (New Revelations and New Doctrines)
which ^ have before showed to be a Mistake, and that we are not concerned
therein; if by N^w Doctrines he means such Doctrines as are ess^ntial to
Salvation, we do not pretend or expect to have any New Gospel, or such New
Doctrines revealed to us: but we say, the Good Old Gospel and the Doctrines of
it (which were of old revealed to the Apostles and Saints in the first Ages of
Christianity, and which are declared of in the Scriptures of Truth) are now
(after the long Night of thick Darkness, which has covered the Earth, and that
general Apostasy, Rev. 13.^.4. Chap. 17.2. Chap. 18.3.
wherein all the World wondered after and worshipped the Beast, and the
Inhabitants of the Earth were made drunk with the Wine of the Fornication of
the great Whore, of which all Nations had drunk) again revealed by the same
Spirit, which Christ promised to send to his Disciples, to be in them, to teach
them all things, to guide them into all Truth, to take of his and show it unto
them, and to abide with them forever; the Spirit of Christ being still free in
his manifold Discoveries and Revelations beyond Utterance; Ephesians. 3.10. 1 Cor.
2.9, 10. Rev. 10 4.
the highest Degree whereof is in no wise repugnant to those Essential Truths
declared of in Scripture. And it is observable, that although the Gospel was
preached in Demonstration and Power, by the Apostles and Disciples, in the
Beginning, and that too universally, yet John in his Vision of the future State
of the Church, Chap. 14.6.
saw the Gospel preached again by an Angel, flying in the midst of Heaven;
thereby intimating, that the Gospel should be preached in the Demonstration of
the Spirit and Power, after the ^postacy, as well as it had been before. Yet we
read not of any Miracles he wrought, though he was an Angel.

Yet in the next page, he has another fling at New Revelations, which, he
says, do manifestly contradict the Faith of the primitive Christians.

Answ. To this I shall not need to say much: Let them look to it whom it
concerns. That it concerns not us, I have already showed. The Faith which we
have received is the same with that of the primitive Christians, the Author of
it is the same, the Finisher of it the same, and we have received it after the
same manner that they received it of old, namely, by the Gift of God. But other
Gospel then that which they had, we do not expect.

Again, in page 106, 107. Upon his old Text of new Revelations, he runs into an
Extravagant Vein of Rayllery, charging us with Falsehood, Railing, Nonsense and
Blasphemy, that we would bring the World into Egyptian Darkness, and all this
(and much more) for a Dream, a mere Fancy, a Miserable Mistake, etc. that we
follow a False and Fantastic Light, and adore a Lie for divine Revelation, etc.

Answ. In this Case, what fitter Answer can be given, then that which Michael
gave the Devil, Jude 9.
The Lord Rebuke thee. Unhappy Man! whom nothing less would satisfy, then to
dash himself against that Stone, which if it fall upon him, will dash him to
pieces (...) enough, that he has reviled and vilified ^s throughout his whole
Book, but he must also blaspheme the Light of the Son of God, and the Opera^ion
of the Holy Ghost, in calling the one a False and Fantastic Light, and the
other a Lie! Well, let him remember that the Apostle has said, He that
despises, 1 Thessal. 4.8.
despises not Man, but God, who has also given unto us his good Spirit: And
let him beware of persisting in this Course, lest he bring on himself an
irreversible Doom, which he may read, Mat. 12.31, 32.

Yet would not this man for all this, be thought to deny all Revelation
neither. For says he, I own those Revelations which are upon Record in the
holy Bible, which i^ the Word of God, wherein he has revealed his Will to the
Church, etc. page ^07.

Answ. He seems not rightly to understand Revelation but rather to have taken
in some strange Notion concerning it. I would gladly know of him, how he would
be understood when he says, God has revealed his Will to the Church in the
Holy Bible. He says, The Letter is not the Word, but the Sense (page 96.) Does
he mean then, that this Sense is so revealed in the Bible, that he that reads
the Letter (though he has no Assistance therein, but only his own natural
Understanding) shall be sure to find the true Sense, and understand the Will of
God? This his words import. Yet this he cannot reasonably intend (if he will
consist with himself) because he elsewhere, not only urges the Necessity of
Humane Learning, but also confesses, the Spirit does help them to understand
the Scriptures, and that they therefore pray for his Assistance therein (page
103.) But if he means, that the Will of God is so revealed in the Scriptures,
that they can understand it with the Help and Assistance of the Spirit, but not
without (which is the fair import of confessing the Spirit does help, and
praying for its Assistance therein) what else then, I pray, is this, but to
say, They can understand the Will of God in the Scriptures, when the Spirit
reveals it unto them, but not otherwise. For if they could understand the
Will of God without the Help of the Spirit, in vain do they invoke his
Assistance: but if they cannot understand the Will of God in the Scriptures,
without the Help of the Spirit, and therefore implore his Assistance, that
shows the Necessity of the Spirit's Teaching: and if the Spirit vouchsafe his
Help, and do open and make known the Will of God to them, that is, Revelation.
How egregiously absurd then it is, for this man to exclaim (as he does) against
Revelation, who, upon his own Principle, cannot understand the Will of God
without it, let the Reader judge.

But he charges the Quakers with saying, The Bible is a Dead Letter, but the
Word of God is Quick and Powerful, so is not the Bible, p. 107.

Answ. The Word Bible signifies a Book, and the Book or Bible the Priests call
the Word of God. This Man called it so but just now ( I own, said he, those
Revelations which are upon Record in the Holy Bible, which is the W^rd of God,
page 107.) Hereupon, to show them how grossly they mistake; they have been
sometimes asked, How it can be, that the Bible should be the lord of God,
seeing the Word of God is quick and powerful, and the Bible (or Book^ a Dead
Letter? Some of them, being by this a little awakened, to avoid the Absu^dity
tell us, They do not (...) can that the Letter is the Word of God, but the
Sense; so says this man, p. 96. But why then do they mean one thing, and speak
another? But if the Letter be not the Word of God, how can the Bible be the
Word of God, seeing the Bible is only the Book wherein the Letter is written?
Yet does this man so confound and jumble them together, that it is hard to know
what at last he intends to be the Word of God. One while he says, it is not
the Letter, but the Sense, that is the Word of God; by and by he says, The
Bible is the Word of God, as if he took the Bible, in which the Letter is
written, to be the Sense of the Letter: for he makes the Bible and the Sense of
the Letter to be one and the same thing, namely, the Word of God: But the Word
of God which is quick and powerful, he appears to be a Stranger to.

But he asks, Whence we know that the Word of God is Quick and Lively?

Answ. By Experience; For though he, being with the Jews in the Unbelief, has
never peradventure heard the Voice of God at any time; yet, blessed be the
Lord, we have; and when the Lord has spoken in us, we have felt his Word
living and powerful, discerning and discovering the Most Secret Thoughts and
Intents of our Hearts. But this Answer I conclude will not answer his End: He
has fitted an Answer to his own Design, and put it into his Parishioner's
Mouth, to speak as for us, which is, That We learn out of the Bible, that the
Word of God is Quick and Lively. Whereupon, as apprehending some Advantage, he
lays about him with all his Might: What! says he, Out of that Bible which
they call a Dead Letter? and so goes on for three or four pages together, in
such an insulting strain, as if he had gotten some petty Conquest, and were now
riding in Triumph. But a Wise Man would have deferred his Boasting, until he had
put his Armor off.

That the Bible, barely as it is a Book, is a Dead Thing; that the Scriptures,
barely as Writings, are Dead Letters, none I think (that considers what he
says, and dare^ put his Name to it) will deny. But says he, Though the Leaves
and Letters have no Natural Life in them, is therefore the Sense of the
Scriptures dead? No, say I; The true Sense and Meaning of the Scriptures is not
dead. But that Sense which man, by his Natural Understanding and Humane
Learning only, does invent and form to himself, as if he had it from the
Scriptures is dead, for the true Sense and Meaning of the Scripture is received
and understood in and by the Openings and Revelation of the Divine Spirit, and
not otherwise. Now we never call the Scriptures a dead Letter in dis^respect to
or dis-esteem of the Scriptures but to manifest the Mistake and Error of those,
who think it sufficient that they have the Scriptures, although they d^ny the
Revelation of the Spirit, by which alone the true Sense and Meaning of the
Scriptures can be understood. And though the Scriptures without the Spirit be a
Dead Letter; yet being opened, explained, applied, and the true Sense of them
given by the Spirit, they are then truly serviceable, and profi^able for
Doctrine, 2 Timothy 3.16.
for Reproof, for Correction, for Instruction in Righteousness, and may be so
used by them that are led and guided by the Spirit, without any of those
Absurdities, which this man irreligiously would fasten on them. Besides, when
the Bible is called a Dead Letter, it is ( as in his Book) in Opposition to
them that call it the Word of God, as this Man expressly does (in the very same
page 107) though (to his own Contradiction) he had said but a few Leaves before
(page 96.) It is not the Letter, but the Sense, that is the Word of God. So
that, although he will not have the Letter to be the Word of God, but the
Sense, yet, by an incomparable Piece of Ignorance and Self-contradiction, he
will have the Bible (or Book) to be the Word of God, as if the Book wherein the
Letter it written, were the Sense of the Letter. Thus all his great Bluster and
Vapor against others, ends in the Detection of his own Confusion.

He says, page 112. To look for more Revelations, or a Repetition of the
former, would be equally an Act of Impudence and Infidelity. Why of Impudence
and Infidelity? He replies, Would it not be an Act of Infidelity not to believe
God, when he plainly tells us, that the Scriptures themselves are able to make
us wise unto Salvation through Faith, etc. and to furnish us thoroughly to all
good Works?

Answ. He corrupts the Scripture. Where does God plainly tell him, that the
Scriptures themselves are able, etc? This word [ themselves] he puts in of his
own Head, and yet says, God tells us plainly, that the Scriptures themselves
are able, etc. wherein he speaks Untruth of God. If this be not Infidelity, yet
it looks as like Impudence as I have seen. If the Scriptures themselves were
able to make wise unto Salvation through Faith, etc. there were then no Need of
the Help of the Spirit. But I have already showed, that unless the Spirit
reveal and open them, the Scriptures themselves cannot be rightly understood.
And he himself, in saying, The spirit does help them to understand them, and
that they pray for its Assistance therein (page 103.) does implicitly
acknowledge as much. But if there be a Necessity of the spirit's Teaching, in
order to a right understanding of the Scriptures, then it is evident that the
Scriptures themselves are not able to make wise, etc. without the Help and
Assistance (i. e. the Teaching and Revelation) of the Spirit. Whether then it
can be an Act of Infidelity to expect that, which there is so great a Necessity
of, that men cannot be wise unto Salvation without it, I leave to the Reader's
Judgment. Nay, let it be well considered, seeing Christ has plainly and
expressly told us, That he will send the Comforter, the spirit of Truth, to his
Disciples; that this spirit shall be in them, and shall abide with them
forever; that he shall testify of Christ; that he shall take of Christ's, and
show it unto them; that he shall teach them all things, and guide them into all
Truth (as appears in the 14, 15 and 16. Chapters of John; I say, let it be well
considered) whether it is not an Act of Infidelity in any, who profess
themselves to be Christ's Disciples, not to believe and expect the Performance
of this so absolute a Promise. Thus far as to the Infidelity of expecting to
have the Truths formerly revealed to the Saints, revealed now to us by the same
spirit, by which they were then revealed unto them (which I take to be the
Meaning of that Phrase of his, a Repetition of the former Revelations) Now to
the Act of Impudence; for he says, To look for a Repetition of the former
Revelations, would be equally an Act of Impudence and Infidelity. And is it not
an Act of Impudence (says he) when God has plainly told us, that we have
sufficient, not to be contented with them (to wit, the Scriptures) but to
expect and call for more?

Answ. Here again he lets his Pen run too fast, without due Consideration. I
read indeed in the Holy Scriptures, that God has said, My Grace is sufficient;
but I never read that God said, The Scriptures are sufficient. Yet this man
confidently says, God has plainly told us. He should have done well to have
showed us, where God has plainly told this; and indeed, it behooves him yet to
produce the place, if he can; otherwise, it will appear an Act of great
Impudence in him, to say God has plainly told that, which he has not told at
all. That the Scriptures themselves (as he speaks) are sufficient, without the
Teaching and Revelation of the spirit, I have before disproved. That the Help
and Assistance of the Spirit is needful to understand the Scriptures, he has
before granted. The spirit's helping to understand the Scriptures is by its
Teaching the true Sense and Meaning of them, by opening, discovering and making
known the Mind and Will of God therein expressed. This is Revelation: for
whatsoever is discovered or made known is revealed. Now then, if the spirit
does open, discover and make known the Mind and Will of God, then the spirit
does reveal the Mind and Will of God. And if the Mind and Will of God (although
expressed in the Holy Scriptures) cannot be truly understood or known, unless the
Spirit open, discover and make it known, then it follows, that the Mind and
Will of God (although there expressed) cannot be truly understood or known,
unless the spirit reveal it. So that still here is a Necessity of Revelation.
And these very same things having been before revealed unto others, is not this
a Repetition of the former Revelation (that is, a Revealing of the same things
to us now, that were formerly revealed to others?) And will he, upon second
Thoughts, call it an Act of Impudence to expect this? If he shall, I am sure
that will be an Act of most audaciou^ Ignorance.

In the next place, he takes upon him to give the True Sense of Christ's Words
in Mark 13.11. Take no Thought before hand what ye shall speak, neither do ye
premeditate; but whatsoever shall be given you in that Hour, that speak ye; for
it is not ye that speak, but the Holy Ghost. Which words (he says) import no
more then this, that whereas the Disciples were to be brought before the Kings
and Potentates of the Earth, to vindicate the Doctrine of Christianity, that
they might be under no Discouragements, either from the Presence of those
before whom they were to appear, or from a Sense of the Meanness of their own
Education, he promises to supply all their Defects miraculously: and whereas
they had extraordinary Work to perform, they might be assured of an
extraordinary Assistance from him: but this (he says) reaches not to an
Ordinary Case, page 113.

Answ. That the Words do indeed import that the Disciples, when brought before
Kings and Potentates to vindicat^ the Doctrine of Christianity, should without
^r^medi^ation* or taking Thought, having given to them what to speak, is
evident; but with what color of Rea on he will restrain this to that Age only,
so as to make it an Extraordinary Case, I see not. Was any thing more ordinary
in the succeeding Ages, under the Heathenish Roman Emperors, then for the
Disciples of Christ to be brought before Kings and Potentates to vindicate the
Doctrine of Christianity? Were not these (for the most part) under equal
Discouragements (either for the Presence of those before whom they were to
appear, or from a Sense of the Meanness of their own Education) with the
former? and had they not need of equal Supply? Nay, has it not been the
ordi^ary Case of Christ's Disc^ples in all Ages to be brought before Rulers and
Magistrates, to vindicate the Doctrine of Christianity (why then does he call
theirs of old an extraordinary Case?) and have they not (for the general) been
of mean Education, (and from thence under the same Discouragements with the
former) why then would he abridge them of the same Assistance? Besides, observe
the Reason which Christ gives, why his Discipler should not take Thought, nor
premeditate or study what to speak; For (says Christ) it is not ye that speak,
but the holy Ghost. But if the priest will restrain this Promise to them of
that Age only, what will he thereby seem to say to the Disciples of this Age in
the like Cases, but this, When ye are brought before Rulers and Magistrates to
vindicate the Doctrine of Christianity, do not ye have your Eye to God, in
expectation that he should give you any thing to speak, but bethink your selves
before hand, and go provided with your Answer; for it is not now the Holy Ghost
that speaks, but it is ye. But consider Reader, how unsuitable this would be to
that Promise of Christ, of sending the Comforter to be in his Disciples, John
14.16, 17.
and to abide with them forever. Our Savior Christ, when he was ready to
ascend unto his Father, made this solemn Promise to his Apostles, Mat. 2^.20.
Lo, I am with you always, even unto the End of the World. This cannot be
restrained to them only, to whom it was spoken; for then it had extended to
none but the eleven Apostles, by which means the seventy Disciples had been
excluded, besides the Priests use to tell us, that this Promise of Christ did
not relate to the Apostles and Disciples of that Age only, but is extensive to
the Ministers of Christ in all Ages to the World's End. Now that Christ was
with his Apostles and Disciples in that Age by his Spirit, by which he gave
them in the very hour that which they should speak (so that it was not properly
they, but the Holy Ghost in them, that spoke) and by which he revealed the
Gospel, and Heavenly Mysteries of God's Kingdom to them, enabling them thereby
to preach them powerf^lly and effectually to others, in the Demonstration of
the Spirit, this is on all Hands confessed; but what Reason then can there be,
that any should put in for a Share in this Promise of Christ's Presence, and
yet deny, and his refuse to enjoy his Presence in that manner, which themselves
confess, they to whom the Promise was directly and immediately made, did enjoy
it in?

But he takes notice of some Speakers that said, they did not know before they
began what they had to say, but as the Spirit gave them Utterance that only
would they speak, and al though they came without Preparation, ye^ speak
notably. This he rails extremely against^ and calls it the Sac^ifice ^f a Fool.

Answ. Had he forgot that so to speak was the Apostles Practice, or did he
design to call them Fools by Craft (as the Proverb is) for certain it is that
the Apostles spoke as the Spirit gave them Utterance, yet this way of speaking
he profanely calls the Sacrifice of a Fool. Acts 2.4.
If he had disliked it, yet he might, one would think, have spoken less
uncivilly of it* had it been but for their sake, whom he could not but know to
have used it; but at this time it seems his Ill will ^o us got the upper Hand
of his Respect to them. But consider, Reader, does this Practice deserve so
foul a Reflection as he has bestowed upon it? Solomon when he spoke of the
Sacrifice of a Fool, said, Be not rash with thy Mouth, and let not thy Heart he
hasty to utter any thing before God; Ecles. 5.2.
for God is in Heaven, and thou upon Earth, therefore let thy Words be few,
Judge now whether is more like the Fool in his Sacrifice, he that waits upon
the Lord, to receive from him what he shall speak, and speaks only what he
does receive from him, and that according as the Holy Spirit give^ him
Utterance, and no further, nor otherwise; or he who is so rash with his M^uth,
and whose Heart is so hasty to utter, that he is scarce well settled in his
Seat, ere his Tongue begins to run, whose Tongue is unbridled, at his own
Command, and he can begin when he will, and end when he will, say as much as he
will, as little as he will, and what he will, so that all is in his own Power.

Yet from these Words of Solomon, he says we may take notice, that the Spirit
of God is so far from owning these Extemporary Exercises in his Worship, that
they are reproved by him, page 114.

Answ. If he insists on the Word those, thereby meaning Rash, Hasty and Foolish
Exercises, he had as good have said nothing, that being nothing to the Purpose;
but if he intends that all extemporary Exercises are so far from being owned by
the Spirit of God in his Worship, that they are reproved by him, I tell him he
errs, and runs unavoidably upon one of these Absurdities, either that the
Apostles did not speak by the immediate Inspiration of the holy Spirit,
extemporarily and without Premeditation, or that if they did so speak, yet God
d^d not own it in his Worship, but reproved it: Either of which I think he will
be more considerate then in cool Blood to assert

He goes on thus, page 115. It Is not the Nimbleness of the Fancy, Quickness of
Invention, Readiness of Elocution, Fluency of Speech, or a ready Tongue, that
God is delighted with; with these we work upon the Imperfections of Men, and
these are natural Faculties, with which the worst of Men have been endowed,
such as Achitophel and Tertullus, whilst holy Moses was naturally defective in
his Utterance.

Answ. He said right indeed, With these we work upon the Imperfect^ons of Men;
for these are the chi^f Tools he works with, and Men's Imperfections the matter
he works upon; but he might if he pleased have put humane Learning in among his
natural Faculties; for God is no more delighted with that in this Worship, then
with the other, and that is but a Natural Attainment; which the worst of Men
have acquired, as well as the other, even such as Achitophel and Tertullus, all
which notwithstanding renders neither the one nor the other evil, or
unserviceable in their proper Places, but blames the Abuse, and Mis-application
of them.

But he says, We must not overthrow that plain Advice which St. Paul gives to
Timothy, Till I come give Attendance to Reading, Exhortation and Doctrine:
Meditate on these things give thy self wholely unto them, that thy profitting
may appear unto all, 1 Timothy 4.13, 15.

Answ. When he called this plain Advice, methinks the very Word [ Plain] might
have put him in mind to have dealt plainly; He gives us here the 13 th. and 15
th verses, but what made him leap over the 14 th. was he afraid of it? what is
the matter? is there any thing in it that he thought would be too hard for him?
Let us hear what it says, Neglect not the Gift that is in thee, which was
given thee by Prophecy, with the laying on of the Hands of the Presbytery, ver.
14. No wonder that he shunned this Verse; for here is the Gift of God mentioned,
which Timothy had in him, and which was given him by Prophecy, etc. And he was
as plainly advised to meditate on t^is, and give himself as fully to this as to
any of the rest, not to say something more also, in as much as his Profitting
in the rest had no small Dependence on his dilligent Attendance to this. We see
now the Reason why this was stepped over.

He says (page 116) He have great Reason to be truly thankful that the
Scriptures are traenslated into the vulgar Languages, but then we are beholden
to the Learning of the Translators.

Answ. We are indeed very sensible of the Goodness, and Love of the Lord to us,
in that he has been pleased so to order it, that we can read the holy
Scriptures in our own mother Tongue, and we are truly thankful unto him for it.
Nor would I detract a Tittle from the due Praise of the Translators, or in the
least undervalue or disesteem that Learning which they made use of in their
Work, which I always a knowledge to be good and serviceable in its right place,
as an outward Means (as writing also and Prin^ing have been) to bring the
Scriptures into that Language, which I most readily understand, and herein I
ackn^^le^ge I receive a Benefit by Learning, and am thus far beholden thereunto
(and so I am to Printing also, and to Writing much more; for without the first
of these the Scriptures could not have been so common and easy to come by, but
without the latter, they could not have been at all) but this is still but the
outward Part, and as it were the Bark Rind or Shell; the Sap, the Substance,
the Kernel lies within, and is beyond the Reach of humane Learning; that the
divine Spirit is alone able to give, but to set up humane Learning in the Room
(as it were) of the Spirit, and attribute that to humane Learning which
properly belongs to the Spirit, namely to dis^l^se and reveal the Mind of God,
this is not true Honor, but an Abuse to Learning.

But he says, If Learning were at first necessary for the translating of the
Scriptures, it is still as necessary for the Interpreting of them.

Answ. If by interpreting he means (according to the common Acceptance of the
Word) an Opening, and giving the Sense and Meaning of the Scriptures, I deny
his Consequence; for though Learning was at first necessary to turn the Words
out of one Language into another, yet it is not necessary to give the Sense,
and open the meaning of the matter contained in the Words, because it neither
was designed thereto, nor is capable thereof; for as in Natural things, what
man (says the Apostle) knows the things of a Man save the Spirit of Man
which is in him? even so the things of God knows no man, 1 Cor. 2.11, 12.
but the Spirit of God. Now we (says he) have received not the Spirit of the
World, but the Spirit which is of God, that we might know the things that are
freely given to us of God. The Apostle here lays the Capacity of knowing the
things that are given us of God upon our receiving the Spirit of God, and
wholly shuts out the Spirit of the World from having any thing to do in it, and
that not without great Reason; for he that has most of the Spirit of the
World, he who is deepest in the Wisdom and Understanding of the World, and who
has climbed to the highest Pitch of humane Learning, is by all these
Seize but a Natural Man. And the Apostle says expressly (ver. 14.) The
Natural Man receives not the things of the Spirit of God; for they are
Foolishness unto him; neither can be know them, because they are spiritually
discerned. Where then is the Necessity of humane Learning to interpret the
Scriptures.

But he intimates, That there is still a Necessity of understanding these
Tongues for the Translation of Scripture.

Answ. Not if the Scriptures be already rightly translated; but by this he
implies, that the present Translation is not true: And what a Condition does he
leave them in then, to whom he proposes it as a perfect and sufficient Rule;
for if the Scripture ( not the Spirit) is to be their Rule, then to them that
understand it not in other Languages (which not one of an hundred does) the
Translation of the Scripture must be the Rule, and if that Translation be not
true, the Rule is not true (and what will the Consequence of that be) but if
the Translation be true, then there is not a Necessity still of understanding
those Tongues for the Translation of Scripture.

But says he, I pray by what way and means must we attain the Knowledge of it
(speaking of the Scripture just before) but by the ordinary means of Study,
Industry, or University Education?

Answ. The Question implies he knows no other Way, and indeed I doubt he does
not; yet if he thinks there is no other Way, I would ask him why he says (page
103.) He prays for the Assistance of the Spirit to help him understand the
Scriptures? Is not that another Way then by Study, Industry, or University
Education.

He next attempts to show the use of Learning, in unfolding difficult places in
Scripture, namely, for the Understanding the Literal, Moral, Mystical,
Tropical, Metaphorical, Allegorical, Hyperbolical Senses, which he confesses
are hard Words. and hard indeed would the Case of Mankind be, if the Gospel
could not be understood, and preached unto them without understanding these hard
words, but the best on it is, these hard words relate but to the difficult
Places, which (he says, page 93.) are least necessary, nay not at all
necessary to Salvation: All Points whatsoever necessary to Salvation, either to
be believed or done; the History of Christ's Birth, Death, Resurrection and
Ascension; the Duties of the first and second Table; the Love of God and our
Neighbor, all Evangelical Precepts, and the Essentials of Religion, being
fitted to the most vulgar Capacity, and shallowest Understanding, suited to the
Capacity of the weakest and most unlearned, written in such a plain and
familiar Style, and made such easy Doctrines, that he that runs may read them.
So then here is no need of a lea^ned Priest, to puzzle Peoples Heads with hard
Words, and pick their Pockets by Tropes and Hyperbolies; for the Gospel with
all the Doctrines and Precepts of it, the Essentials of Religion, and
whatsoever is necessary to Salvation, being so plain and easy to be
understood, may very well be preached without Study, or humane Learning, by such
as, having freely received, are willing freely to give.

But he charge the Quakers with mis-timing and abusing the Prophecy of Joel,
in applying it to this present Age. The words are, And it shall come to pass
afterward, that I will pour out my Spirit upon all Flesh, etc. chap. 2.28. This
Prophecy he tells us, a learned Commentator tells him, was cited and applied by
St. Peter (Acts 2.) to the times of the Gospel.

Answ. What does he mean by the times of the Gospel? are not these times, which
we live in, the times of the Gospel? what times I wonder does he take these to
be?

But Peter explains the Word [ afterward] by the last days; for whereas the
Prophet had said, It shall come to pass afterward, etc. The Apostle says, It
shall come to pass in the last Days* etc. Upon this the Priest recites these
Words of his learned Commentator, Whatsoever can be collected from this Place
t^ the Benefit of the Pretenders, will receive a short and clear Answer, by
considering the time to which this Prediction (and the Completion of it)
belonged, and that is expressly the last Days, in the Notion wherein the Writers
of the new Testament constantly use that Phrase not for these Days of ours so
far advanced toward the End of the World, but for the time immediately
preceding the Destruction of the Jewish Polity, etc. page 123.

Answ. That this Prophecy then relates to the last Days (whenever they fall
to be) both he and his Commentator grant us, but we do not agree which are the
last Days. He says, these days of ours are not the last Days, but those Days
immediately foregoing the Destruction of Jerusalem. That the last Days did then
begin, I grant, but that they are already ended, I deny. Will he call them the
last Days, and yet say th^se, which are sixteen hundred Years latter then they
are not the last Days? What can he say more repugnant to Reason! Which is more
properly the last, the foremost, or the hindermost, that that is gone before,
or that that follows after? But I observe he says, The last Days are not
these of ours, so far advanced toward the End of the World, etc. as if he
thought the advancement of these Days so far toward the End of the World a fit
Medium to prove them not the last Days, then which I think he could not have
found an unfi^ter since by how much the further they are advanced toward the
End of the World, by so much the more properly they may be called the last Days.

But he would have it, That the Writers of the New Testament do constantly use
that Phrase [the last Days] with relation to that time immediately preceding the
Destruction of Jerusalem.

Answ. No they do not constantly use that Phrase with relation to that time;
the Apostle Paul to Timothy says, In the last days perilous times shall come:
2 Timothy 3.1. 2 Pet. 3.3.
Peter also says, There shall come in the last days Scoffers. This must not be
understood of that time only wherein they lived, because they both speak in the
future Tense (shall of a time hereafter, or then to come; and says the Apostle
James to the rich men, Your Gold and Silver is cankred, Jam. 5.3.
and the Rust of them shall be a Witness against you, and shall eat your Flesh,
as Fire; ye have heaped Treasure together for the last Days. In which Places
the last Days cannot reasonably be understood of the time of Ierusalem's
Destruction.

But to shorten the Work, I will grant him that the Last Days did then begin,
to which that Prophecy had relation: let him prove that the Last Days are at
an end, or that the Spirit was to be poured out in some part only of the Last
Days, and not in all* if he will have the pouring forth of the Spirit to be
now ceased. Our Savior, when he promised to send the Comforter, told his
Disciples, John 14.16. Mat. 28.20.
He should abide with them forever. And at that very time, when he commanded
his Disciples to wait at Jerusalem to receive the pouring forth of the Spirit,
he promised to be with them always, even unto the End of the World.

I have now done with his Discourse upon this Subject, namely, of Humane
Learn^ng and Divine Revelation.

I will add a Testimony or two of other men, of sufficient Note and Credit, to
show we stand not alone in this matter, and leave the whole to the impartial
Reader's Judgment.

The first shall be of W. Tindall, a faithful Martyr, who thus writes; It is
impossible to understand in the Scriptures more then a Turk, See his Works, p.
319, and p. 80.
for whosoever has not the Law of God written in his Heart to fulfill it.
Again, Without the Spirit it is impossible to understand them. And in his
Answer to Mor^'s Dialogue, he says, When thou art asked, why thou believe
thou shall be saved ^y Christ? answer, Thou feel that it is true; and when
he asks, How thou know that it is true? answer, Because it is written in
thy Heart; if he ask, Who wrote it? answer, The Spirit of God; and ^f he ask,
How thou came first by it? tell him, Thou wast inwardly taught by the Spirit
of God; and if he ask, Whether thou believe it not, because it is written in
Bo^ks, or because the Priests so preach? answer, No, not now, but only because
it is writt^n in thy Heart, and because the Spirit of God so preaches, and so
testifies unto thy Soul, etc. Thus far Tindal. To him I will add John Jewel, a
zealous Defence^ of the Protestant Religion: The Spirit of God (says he) is
bound neither to Sha^pness of Wit, nor to abundance of Learning: Oft-times the
UNLEARNED see that thing that the LEARNED cannot see. Therefore says Christ, I
thank th^e, O Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth, because thou have hid these
things from the Wise and Prudent, and have revealed them unto Babes, even so,
Faher, for so it seems good in thy sight, Mat. 11. Therefore (adds he)
Epiphanius says, Only to the Children of the Holy Ghost, See his Reply to
Hardings Answer, p. 393. of his Works and page 394.
all the Scriptures are plain and easy. Again, True it is (says he) Flesh and
Blood is not able to understand the Holy Will of God, without SPECIAL
REVELATION: therefore Christ gave Thanks unto his Father, for that he had
revealed his Secrets unto the Little Ones; and likewise opened the Hearts of
his Disciples, that they might understand the Scriptures. Without this SPECIAL
HELP, and prompting of God's Holy Spirit, the Word of God is unto the Reader,
be he never so wise, or well LEARNED, as the Vision of a sealed Book. But this
Revelation is not special unto One, or Two, but GENERAL unto ALL them, that be
the Members of Christ, and are endued with the Spirit of God. Thus far Jewel.
These men we see, although themselves very well learned, yet a^cribe not their
Knowledge of God, and their understanding of the Scriptures unto their Humane
Learning, ^tudy or Natural Abilities; but to the Inspiration and Revelation of
the Divine Spirit, B^t let us further observe what some others also of that Age
have said on the same Subject: John Bradford, an eminent Martyr, Martyr^log.
vol. 3. page 296.
in his Answer to the ^rch Bishop of Y^rk* says thus, We do believe and know
the ^criptures, as Christ's Sheep, not because the Church says, they are the
Scriptures, but because they be so, being thereof assured by the same Spirit
that spoke them I. Philpot, another Godly and Lea^n^d Martyr, having in the
beginning of his B^ole written this Sentence, Spiritus est Vicarius Christ's in
terris; i. e. The Spirit is Christ's Vicar (or in Christ's stead) on Earth;
Martyrology, vol. 3. page 573
gave this Answer to B. Bonner, inquiring the Reason of his so writing, Christ
since his Ascension works all things in us by his Spirit, and by his Spirit
does dwell in us, etc. I conclude with Bullenger, Decad. 4. Sermon. 8.
Unless the Holy Spirit inspire our Minds and guide our Tongues, we can never
either speak or hear any thing concerning him with any Worth or Profit: For as
none knows the things of God, but only the Spirit of God; so men fetch the
understanding of Divine Things, and Knowledge of the Holy Ghost, from NO WHERE
ELSE then from the same Spirit. By this, Reader, thou may see, that it was
not Humane Learning, Natural Study or University, Education, that these Good
Men trusted to of old, for the right understanding of the Scriptures, but the
Spirit of God, which dwelt in them, from which they received the Understanding
of Heavenly Things.

CHAP. IX. Of Tithes.
I Am now come to the Priests Delilah, the very Darling and Minion of the
Clergy, TITHES; which were wont to be claimed as of Divine Right: but I do not
find this Priest hardy enough to adventure his Cause upon that Title. No;
though he pretends to be a Minister of the Gospel, yet he takes the Law for the
surer holding, and therefore betakes himself chiefly to that. Yet something he
would say for the other too, though not so much from himself as others. Let me
tell you, says he, that those that insist upon the Divine Right of Tithes (as
much as to say, I do not) derive them not from Levi, but Melchizedeck. It is
then inquirable, Whether or no Tithes were ever due to Melchizedeck That which
should make them due, must be a Command. They were not due to the Levitical
Priesthood, until they were commanded to be paid; but after they were commanded
to be paid, they be^^me due: and so long as that Command stood ^n force, it was
an Evil to detain them. But we do not find, througho^t the Scriptures, any
Command from God, that Ty^h^s should be paid unto Melchizedeck. With what
Reason then can any affirm that Tithes were due unto him? That he did once
receive Tithe of Abraham, I grant; but that it was not a proper Debt or just
Due belonging to him, and which Abraham had done Evil in detaining, I offer
these Reasons to prove; First, That Moses says expressly, He gave him Tithes:
Genesis 14.20.
He does not say, He paid him Tithes; but He gave him Tithes: which the Apostle
referring to, Hebr. 7.2.
uses also the same Phrase, To whom also Abraham gave a Tenth Part; and again,
Verse. 4.
Unto whom even the Patriarch Abraham gave the Tenth, etc. To gave, we know,
imports one thing; to a^ another. But if Tithes had been really and properly
d^e from Abraham to Melchizedeck it is not probable that both these holy men
would have said he gave Tithes, but that he paid Tithes. 2. That if Tithes had
bin due from Abraham to Melchizedeck according as they are now demanded, which
must be proved before a Divine Right to them, as they are now demanded, can be
derived from Melchizedeck) then must Abraham have paid Melchizedeck Tithes of
all his Substance, of all that be possessed. But no such thing appears at all.
We do not read that Abraham gave him Tithes of his own Estate: but that which
he gave him the tenth of was the spoils, which he had recovered from the Kings
that had plundered Sodom, Hebr. 7.4. compared with Genesis 14. But 3. The Occasion
of Abraham's thus giving the tenth of the Spoil to Melchizedeck seems to be
altogether Accidental. Abraham returning from the Battle, the King of Sodom
came forth to meet him, to congratulate his Victory; Melchizedeck also came
fo^th, and brought Abraham a Present of Bread and Wine, to refresh him and his
Soldiers after the Fight, and withal blessed him: So that Abraham's giving him
the tenth of the Spoils, may well be taken for a Thankful Acknowledgment, and
Return of Kindness to Melchizedeck, and the rather, seeing he had before
determined* not to keep any of the Booty to his own Use, and therefore when he
had given the tenth to Melchizedeck* he returned all the rest to the King of
Sodom, reserving only to his Confederates their parts, Genesis 14.2^, 24.

But the Priest would insinuate, That this was not a Voluntary Gift of Abraham
's, but that he paid it as a Tithe, page 135.

Answ. If Abraham was not required to pay it, then surely it was a voluntary
Gift of him. If he will say, it was required of Abraham, let him show the
Command by which it was required; otherwise his Affirmation is of no force.
Besides, he cannot plead (I mean rationally) that Tithes were due to
Melchizedeck upon a Right founded in natural Justice and Equity; since there
was not in those days any setl^d public Worship, wherein he could perform any
outward Priestly Office or Service, for which Tithes might have been a
Compe^sation. Nor do I find any one instance (this single Gift of Abraham's
excepted) of giving or receiving, much less of demanding or paying Tithes, in
all that space of Four Hundred Years and more, between this time of Abraham and
the Levit^cal Priesthood. If Tithes were then due, how chance Abraham paid them
not duly? Nay, how shall the Patriarchs be acquitted, of whom we read not that
they paid any at all. ^ut if Tithes were not due to Melchizedeck (which whether
they were or no, I leave to the Reader, from what has been said, to judge)
certainly ^o Right thereto can be derived from him to any other. Nay further,
If Tithes had been due to Melchizedeck, yet could not the Clergy of this Age
derive any Right from him to them, inasmuch as they are not of his Priesthood.
For certain it is, that he was not made a Priest after the Law of a Carnal
Commandment, but after the Power of an Endless Life. But every one knows, that
these men are made Priests after the Law of a Carnal Commandment. These
therefore, not being of Melchizedeck's Priesthood, could have no colorable
Pretense to Tithes from him, if Tithes had ever been due to him. And this the
Priest (being in some things a wary man, as much overseen as he is in others)
might not improbably foresee, which made him at first so shye of adventuring
his Cause upon that Issue.

But if he has no Right from Melchizedeck, to be s^re he has none from Levi:
for he says expressly (page 133.) To affirm that the Clergy now claims their
Tithes by Virtue of the Ceremonial Law, is a most wretched Untruth; for (says
he) we disown all such Titles to them. So that hereby he has saved me the Pains
of proving the Levitical Law for Tithes abrogated, since whether it be or no,
he does (for himself and all his Brethren) disclaim any Title by it.

But then he starts a Question, Whether Tithes are not purely Ceremonial, and
so abolished by Christ? His Answer is, Tithes cannot b^ called purely
Ceremonial, because paid by Abraham to Melchizedeck Four Hundred Years before
the Law, etc.

Answ. That Tithes were not paid by Abraham to Melchizedeck, but given, and
that but once, and that too upon an Accidental Occasion, nor then out of his
own proper Estate (but out of the Pillage of Sodom, which he by the Sword had
recovered from the Plunderers) I think I need not stick to say I have already
proved. But suppose it had been otherwise; imagine Tithes to have been paid by
Abraham to Melchizedeck as due, yet would not his Reason at all hold, That they
are therefore not purely Ceremonial, because paid before the Law. For that were
to suppose, that nothing that was done before the Law was actually given, was
purely ceremonial, wherein how greatly he deceives himself, I have already
showed (by the Instances of Circum^^sion and Sacrifices) in the Chapter of
Swearing, where the Reader may find the Weakness of the Argument more fully
discovered. But observe, what in the next words, he grants concerning it.

That the exact Tenths of the holy Land should be brought in ki^d to Jerusalem,
and paid there, was (^aith he) Ceremonial, and confined to the legal
Dispensation.

Answ. But in what could the Ceremoniality lie, more then in the very Tenth it
self (for as to bringing it in kind to Jerusalem, that they were not strictly
tied to, but had Liberty to turn it into Money, and when they came there to lay
out that Mo^ney in whatsoever their Heart desired) and if its being an exact
Tenth made it Ceremonial, Deuteronomy. 14.25, 26.
then its being an Exact Tenth must needs have made it as much Ceremonial both
before and since.

But not to insist long on the Disproof of that, which he dares not undertake
at all to prove, namely the divine Right of Tithes, I conclude thus, That the
Payment of Tithes having never (that appears) been commanded by God to any
Person, or in any time, save only by the Levitical Law, no man can justl^ plead
a divine Right to Tithes, since that Law was abrogated.

Not finding any sure Footing for Tithes upon a divine Right, he urges that
Maintenance in general to the Ministers of the Gospel, is Just, Reasonable, and
established by a Divine Authority (and this he does in order to prove a humane
and temporal Right) for which he quotes 1 Cor. 9. and Gal. 6.6.

Answ. That a Maintenance in general to the Ministers of the Gospel is Just,
Reasonable, and established by a divine Authority, I grant: But the Intent of
the Apostle in those Scriptures which the Priest has quoted, is not so much to
set forth what the Maintenance is, as who they are from whom it is to be
received, namely, such as receive their Ministry, such as believe them to be
true Ministers, such as are taught by them, such as are fed by them, such as
are planted by them, etc. This appears in the several Instances, The Ox that
trod out the Corn (in the time of the Law) was not to be muzzeled, but was to
be fed by him whose Corn he trod out, but it was not agreeable to the Equity of
that Law that while the Ox trod out Corn for one Man, another should be bound
to keep him, that had been unreasonable. The Apostle argues from a Soldier, a
Planter, an Herdsman: Who (says he) goes a Warfare at anytime at his own
Charge? Who plants a Vineyard, and eats not of the Fruit thereof? or who feeds
a Flock and eats not of the Milk of the Flock? Consider now, at whose Charge
ought the Soldier to go, but at his for whose defense he fights? He that
plants a Vineyard, may eat of the Fruit, but it must be of the Fruit thereof,
that is, of the Fruit of that Vineyard which he has planted: So he that feeds
a Flock may eat of the Milk, but it must be the Milk of the Flock which he
feeds. If (says the Apostle) we have sown unto you spiritual things, is it a
great thing if we shall reap your carnal things? No, because he had first sown
unto them; they had received of him, and therefore he might well expect to
receive of them. This still shows that the Ministers of the Gospel are not to
reap carnal things of any but those to whom they have first sowed spiritual
things. To the same Purpose is that to the Galatians, Let him that is taught in
the word communicate to him that teaches in all good things; hence it is
plain, that he that teaches can expect this Communication of good things from
none, but them that are taught by him: All therefore that can be inferred from
these Instances will amount to no more then this, First, That a Gospel-Minister
may expect and receive a Gospel-Maintenance from such as receive his Ministry.
Secondly, That a Gospel-Minister ought not to expect any Maintenance from those
that do not receive his Ministry. But what this Gospel-Maintenance is, is
expressly set down by Christ himself, Luk 10.6, 7, 8, Mat. 10.10.
when he said to his Disciples, Eat such things as are set before you. Eat and
drink such ^^i^gs as they give; for the Workman is worthy of his Meat, etc. And
this is the very Maintenance which, in the Place fore-quoted by the Priest (1
Cor. 9.) the Apostle asserts he had Power to receive ( Have we not Power to eat
and to drink, etc. ver. 14.) And again, Having Food (says he) and Raiment let
us therewith be content. This was thought enough in that Day. Thus they who
then preached the Gospel lived of the Gospel; and if these men were indeed
Ministers of the Gospel they also would be content with this; but this will not
satisfy my greedy Adversary, nothing less then Tithes will serve his turn.

He says (page 146) The Gospel commands a Maintenance be provided for the
Ministry, and the Civil Powers and Nursing-Fathers of the Church, have set out
Tithes for that Maintenance, so that (says he) if Tithes were not due by a
divine appointment, they are now due by a Voluntary Dedication of them.

Answ. He does not seem to regard how he comes by them, so he may have them. If
the Gospel will not give them to him, he will try what humane Law will do, and
if he can get them that way it is all one to him ( It Is sufficient says he,
that our Tithes are settled by the same Laws that your Lands are, page 138.)
Though Christ deny them, yet if Men will grant them, it will serve his turn as
well, which shows him to be a Minister of Man, not of Christ. If (says he)
Tithes were not due by a Divine Appointment, they are now due by a Voluntary
Dedication of them. But how (says the Parishioner) does any such Voluntary
Dedication appear? O! says he, you need not scruple this Point, would you but
give your self the Pains of consulting Antiquaries, or Church-Histories,
especially that famous Charter of King Ethelwolfe set down at large by Ingulfe,
where you will find the whole History of the thing, etc. I am apt, replies the
Parishioner, to believe what you say, without any (...) Inquisition into the
thing. Here Is a Parishioner now! Oh, if he could but get all his Parishioners
to be of this Mind, what a petty Pope would he be! But, Reader, that we may not
be as fondly Credulous as the Parishioner, let us a little examine this
Voluntary Dedication of Tithes, and see how suitable it will be for a
Gospel-Maintenance to a Christian-Ministry.

He grounds his Claim upon the famous Charter (as he calls it) of King
Ethelwolfe, which is so variously reported by Historians, that few agree in the
Words; or S^bstance of it, some seeming to restrain it to the Tithes of his own
Demeasne Lands only; others to the tenth Part of his Land Aliquam portionem
terrarum haereditariam, ^re the words both in Ingulfe and Malmesbury.
^ome to his Kingdom of West Saxony Aliquam portionem terrae m^a decimam Scil.
partem terrae meae, are the words in M^tthew of We^^minster. Decimam Hydam
terrae totius (...)-Saxiae, are the words in Jornalensis.
only; othere extend it to all England. But not to insist on things so
doubtful, let us enquire who this Ethelwolf was, what his Education and
Religion, whom he granted this Charter ^o* and what were the motiv^s that
induced him thereunto.

Our Countryman Speed tells us, That Ethelwolf was the eldest Son of Egbert the
Saxon that in his Youth he was committed to the Care of Helmestan Bishop of
Winchester, and by him to Swithan a learned Monk of that time, that he took
upon him the Vow and Profession of a Monk, was made a Deacon, and shortly after
Helmestan dying, was consecrated (at least elected) Bishop of Winchester in his
stead, but that after the Death of his Father, by the Entreaty of the Nobles,
and Constraint of the Clergy, he was made King, being absolved of his Vows by
Pope Gregory the fourth, that about the time of this Grant (which wa^ about the
Year eight hundred fifty five) he went himself in great D^votion to Rome, abode
there a whole Year, confirmed his former grant of Peter Pence, covenanted
furt^er to pay yearly Three Hundred Marks (a great Sum in those Days to Rome,
so be thus employed, One Hundred Marks to St Peter 's Church, another hundred
to Saint Paul 's Light, and the third to the Pope, these Two Hundred Marks a
Year that were given to St. Peter's Church, and St. Paul's Light, were to buy
Oil to fill all the Lamps in those Places, and keep them burning. This may be
sufficient to show what the Education and Religion of this Tythe-giver was. The
next Question is, To whom he granted this Charter of Tithes? This must
unavoidably be the Popish Clergy, that being his own Religion, and there being
at that time no other public Ministry, or Priesthood for him to give them to,
and for the Motives inducing him thereunto, the very Words of the Charter are,
Pro remissione Animarum et Peccatorum ^estroru^, i. e. For the good of our
Souls, and the forgiveness of our Sins, which shows it to be an Effect of that
Popish Doctrine, of meriting Salvation by good Works, and that he granted this,
as an Expiation for his Sins.

Here now Reader, thou may see, what he was, whom this Priest calls a
Nursing-Father of the Church, and what Church it was he nursed; He was bred a
Monk, made a Deacon, then a Bishop, absolved from these Vows by the Pope, went
in great Devotion to Rome, gave there an Hundred Marks a Year to buy Oil to
keep the Lights burning in St. Peter 's Church (as they call it) another
Hundred for the same Use to St. Paul 's, and a third to the Pope, and granted
this famous Charter (as the Priest calls it) for Tithes to the Idolatrous
Priests of the Church of Rome, as an Expiation for his Sins, and a means to
merit Heaven, according to the impious Doctrine of that Idolatrous Church, and
yet this is the Basis or Foundation, that my Opponent (a pretended Protestant,
and one that would be taken for a Minister of Christ) has laid whereon to
build his Claim to Tithes, as a Gospel Maintenance, namely, The famous Charter
of King Ethelwolfe, to which he ascribes ^o^ great Virtue and Efficacy, that he
says, If Tithes were not due by a divine Appointment, they are now due by a
voluntary Dedication of them. How suitable this Dedication of them is to be
pleaded and insisted on by a Protestant Minister (not to say a Minister of the
Gospel) in respect both of the Person, dedicating, the Persons to whom, and the
End for which the Dedication was made, let every true Protestant judge.

To manifest yet further the Corruption of that time, and Apostasy of that
Church, I will here add what the Clergy on their Part undertook in
Consideration of the said Charter to perform, according as I find it set down
by Spelman (in his Britti^h Councils) out of Malmsbury and Mat^ Westminster, It
pleas^d also (says Malmsbury) Alhstan and Swithin, the Bishops of the Churches
of Shirburne and Winchester, with their Abbots, and the Servants of God, to
appoint that upon the Wednesday in every Week, all our Brethren and Sisters at
every Church, should sing fifty Psalms, and every Priest say two Masses, one
for King Ethelwolf, and another for his Nobles that consented to this Gift, for
a Reward, and f^r an Abatement of their Offenses (Pro mercede et refrigerio
delictorum suorum, are the Words: Mat Westminster. has Salu^e instead of Mercede)
and that they should say for the King so long as he lived, Oremus D^us qui
justificas; for his Nobles also while they lived, Presende Domine, but after
they were dead, for the Deceased King by himself, and for the deceased Nobles
in common: And be this as firmly appointed during all the Days of Christianity,
as that Liberty is appointed, so long as Faith encreasith in the Nation^, the
English

And these things (says Ingulf speaking of the Charter) were done at
Winchester in the Church of St. Peter, in the Year of our Lord's Incarnation
855. the third Indiction on the Nones of November, before the great Altar, for
the Honor of Mary the glorious Virgin and Mother of God, and of St. Michael
the Arch Angel, and of the Prince of the Apostles St. Peter, as also of our
holy Father Pope Gregory. Malmesbury adds, And of all Saints. And the Charter
(says Ingulf) King Ethelwolf offered upon the Altar of St. Peter the Apostle.

But then* says the Parishioner) they were given in a blind and superstitious
Zeal, which makes all void to us: This, says the Priest, is another mistake,
for Tithes being given to God for the Maitenance of his Ministry, no Blemish in
the Dedication of them can alter their Property, page 146.

Answ. Here he begins to speak plain (perhaps before he was aware) He tells us,
That by this Dedication Tithes were given unto God for the Maintenance of his
Ministry. I have showed before that they were given for the Maintenance of the
Popish Clergy; for there was not at that time any other public Ministry for
them to be given to. Now then, when he shall say they were given to maintain
God's Ministry, can any other Construction be made of his Words, then that he
calls that Idolatrous Priesthood of the Church of Rome, God's Ministers. Next,
though it appears they were given by Papists to Papists, for Popish Service
(that is in plain Protestant English, by Idolaters, to Idolaters, for
Idolatrous Ends) yet he will not allow that they were given in a blind and
superstitious Zeal, no, that is a Mistake, he says here; and again, page 147.
speaking of those Papists that gave Tithes in an ignorant Zeal, he adds in a
Parenthesis, as some suppose, but we do not grant. So th^n it seems the Papists
Zeal in providing this Maintenance for those that were to perform their
Idolatrous Worship, was not a blind, and ignorant, and Idolatrous Zeal. Is this
fit Language for a Protestant-Preacher's Mouth? What Zeal is that I pray, that
upholds Idolatry, by maintainin^ Idolaters? Is not that a superstitious blind
Zeal? And can any hearty P^pres^ar^ ^^ny that to be the End of those Donations.

But he says, That no Elem^sh in the Dedication of them can (...) their
Property.

Answ. I perceive then he is for having all he can get, be it dedicated by whom
it will, or b^^r it will he wants noth^ng but Power, to revive all the old
Donations of the Papists, given in the mid^ight dark^s^ of Popery, to redeem
their Souls ^ut of a supposed Purgatory; nay so g^neral i^ hi^ Asserti^n ( No
Blemish, etc.) that nothing once d^dicated by whomsoever, would seem to come
amiss to him; not the Offer^ngs of the Gentiles to their Heathenish Deities,
not the Endowments of the Turks to their Mahumetan Priests, nor yet the Thirty
Pieces of Silver ( The Price of Innocent Blood) had Judas chanced to have
dedicated it, would upon this Position, have been unwelcome to this man, could
he once but have got them into Possession.

To make good his Assertion, he offers a parallel Case (as he calls it) in
Scripture, That (says he) which comes nearest is the Case of Two Hundred and
Fifty Men, who offered Incense; yet there was a vast Difference between them:
the Two Hundred and Fifty offered in a Stubborn Rebellious Manner, and these in
an Ignorant Zeal (as some suppose, but we do not grant) p. 147.

Answ. Observe, Reader, that this Case of Corah, Dathan and Abiram, with the
Two Hundred and Fifty Men offering Incense, is brought to parallel the
Dedication of Tithes, by which he says they are now due. The two hundred and
fifty offered (he says) in a stubborn rebellious Manner, and he calls it a
Damnable Sin; yet makes that a parallel Case to this of offering Tithes, and
says, it comes most near it. Has he not found out a pretty Parallel) Has he
not matched his Case well?

But that (says he) which will give us most Light into our present Case, are
the Ce^sers which were so offered, which you will find, notwithstanding that
D^mnable Sin committed in the Consecration of them; yet because they were
offered to God, they were not to be al^^nated to common Uses, Numb. ^6.37.

Answ. There was a particular Reason given, why the Censers should be taken up
and kept, na^ely, to be as a Sign and Memorial, and as a Warning unto the
Children of Israel, that no Stranger in time to come, who was not of the Seed
of Aaron, should adventure to offer Incense before the Lord* lest he should
speed as Corah and his Company had done, Verse. 40. Yet thought they were thus
taken up, they were not permitted to be used, or employed in that Service, to
and for which they were dedicated or consecrated; but being wrought out into
broad Plates, the Property of them was altered before they were allowed to be
used.

But he goes on: From hence (says he) you may learn how dangerous a thing it is
to m^dd^ with any thing that has been given to God.

Answ. I need not, I suppose, tell the Impropriators, that this concerns them;
for it is obvious, that if because Tithes have been dedicated (as he says) to
God, it is unlawful to alienate them to Common Uses, then it must needs b^
unlawful for them to hold their Im^ro, nations be^a^se they were offered in
like manner as the rest of the Tithes were But let them look to themselves Were
not all the ^bbey Lands and the Revenues belonging to the Religious Houses (as
in the time of Popery they were called) offered also to God as well as Tithes?
And yet have not all (or most) of these been alienated to Common Vs^^? By whom
was this Alienation made? ^as it not by some or other of his N^^^ing-Fathers?
And will this Priest, like a sau^y and unthankful Son, take upon him to censure
the public Acts of his Nursing-Fathers, to whom he ow^ ^he Maintenance he has?
But ye whose Ancestors did at first buy these Lands from the Crown, and into
whose Possession they are now come, either by Descent or Purchase, what think
ye of this? Are ye satisfied with his Plea, and willing to resign? Ye hear what
he says, That no Blemish in the Dedication of them can alter their Property,
and that (from the Parallel of the Censers) because they were offered to God,
they were not to be alienated to Common Uses. Nay, he tells you, Hence you may
learn how Dangerous a thing it is to meddle with any thing that has been given
to God. And do you think, that if he had Power, you should not hear of this
after another Manner? It Is not to be doubted, but he that now tells you, they
should not have been alienated, will be as ready, if Opportunity serve, to let
you know that what should not have been Alienated, must be Restored. But
leaving this to your Consideration, that which I shall observe is, that Tithes,
and other such like Oblations (notwithstanding what ^e say^ to the contrary)
are alienable, and in this Nation have been legally alienated to Common Uses.

In his Margin he says, Factum valet, quod fieri non debuit, i e. That which
ought not to be done, is notwithstanding of force (or binding) when it is done.

Answ. 1. I must tell him, his Saying will not hold true in all Ca^es: I
instance in that of Herod's Oath (by which John Baptist lost his Head) which as
it should not have been taken, so neither ought it to have been kept when
taken. 2. Though by this he would infer, that Tithes, being offered and
dedicated, ought to be upheld, which his Factum valet imports; yet he thereby
implicitly (and unaware^) acknowledges, that they ough^ not to have been
off^r^d or d^dicated at all, which his fieri non d^bu^t implies.

But after all this, he has the Confidence to say, that Tithes had not (...)
Institution from Popery; for says he, Tithes were settled upon the Church
before Popery had made her Encroachments in it, p. 148.

Answ. If he had any Charter or Settlement of Tithes of old^r date th^n that of
Ethelwolf (which was about the year 855.) he should have produced it, and
probably so he would. However, since he did ^ut, I have no Reason to think he
has any elder. But if he means, that Ethelwolf, who gave this Charter, was not
himself a Papist, that the Times he lived in were not Popish, or that Popery
had not then made her Encroachments upon the Church, I must then remind my
Reader of that Character which our Countryman Spread out of Hov^d^n,
Huntington, Malmsbury, Mat. Westminster, and others) gives us of him: He says
expressly, Ethelwolf was bred up by Swithin the Monk, that he took upon him the
Vow and Profession of a Monkish Life; that he was absolve^ ^^d discharged of
his Vows by the Authority of Pope Gregory the fourth, whose Creature (says
Speed) he was in both Professions; That he went himself in great Devotion to
Rome; that being there he confirmed his grant of Peter- Pence, and further
covenanted to pay yearly Three Hundred Marks to Rome, whereof One Hundred to
St. Peter's Church, One Hundred to St. Paul's Light, and One Hundred to the
Pope. And after all this is not Ethelwolf a Papist? then it may be Gregory the
fourth was not a Pope neither, although (according to Platina) he was the
thirty seventh from Gregory the great.

Or will he say, that in the Time of Ethelwolf Popery had not made her
Encroachments in the Church? What he will call Encroachments I know not, but
this I find, that well near an Hundred Years before that Charter of Ethelwolf
was granted, Pope Zacharias the first took upon him to absolve the French from
their Oath of Allegiance, Fascic. Temp. in Zach. Pap. Burdegal. Chronog. in
eundem.
and deposing Childerick King of France, set up Pipin in his stead.

But seeing he says that Tithes were settled upon the Church before Popery had
made her Encroachments in it (referring to Ethelwolfe's Charter for the
Setlement) and withal tells us what he means by Popery, namely, such Doctrines,
and Superstitious Practices, which by the Corruption of time, have prevailed in
the Church of Rome, contrary to the True, Ancient, Catholic and Apostolic
Church, page 149. Let us a little enquire whether any such Doctrines, or
Practices had indeed prevailed in the Church at the time of this Grant or
before.

The time of the Grant Spelman in his British Councils sets down to be in the
Year Eight Hundred Fifty Five: More then Two Hundred and Fifty Years before
this, came over Austin the Monk with his ^^rain from Rome. That many
Corruptions both in Doctrine and Practice, were before this time crept into the
Church of Rome, is clear from History, and that Austin brought them over hither
with him, is not to be doubted. The Use of Holy Water to drive away Devils, See
Fascic. Temporum. Platina and Burdegalensis.
is said to be insti^uted by Alexander the first. The Consecration of Chrism
once a Year, by Fabianus. That all should stand up at the reading of the Gospel
(as they call it) by Anastasius. That Wax Tapers should be consecrated on the
Holy Sabbath, by Zozimus That Processi^ns should be made on Sundays (as they
speak) by Agapetus; All which were long before Austin the Monk came over. But
whether this Priest be Protestant enough to call these things Popish
Corruptions, and Superstitions, I know not. Let us go on still toward the time
of Ethelwolfe's Charter, on which he grounds his Settlement of Tithes. Platina
in Vita ejus.
Pope Constantine the first (about the Year Seven Hundred) called a Council,
wherein was dec^eed, That the Images of the Fathers should be painted upon the
Wall of St. Peter 's Church Porch. His Successor Pope Gregory the second, when
the Emperor Leo the third, to remove the Cause of Idolatry, set forth an Edict,
Commanding that all Statu^^ and Images of Saints, Platina in vita ejus.
Martyrs and Angels should be wholely taken away out of their Churches, openly
withstood the Emperor's Edict, and says Fasciu^us Temporum, did anathematize
the Emperor to boot. And Pope Gregory the third, who came next after, not only
called a general Co^ncil to establish the worshipping of Images, but also took
upon him to excommunicate the Emperor, Platina in vita ejus.
and which is yet more to depose him. Zacharias the next Pope took upon him not
only to absolve the French from their Oath of Allegiance, Burdegal. Fascicul.
Tempor.
but also to depose Childerick the French King, and set up Pipin in his Stead,
as fitter for his Turn, And had not Popery, will this Priest say, mad^ her
Encroachments yet* Not long after this (and Fourscore Years or more before
Ethelwolfe's Charter) Constantine the Second got the Popedom by evil means, and
by as evil keptit, until at length he was plucked down, and his Eyes put out;
nor was he the first Pope of this Stamp. The Author of Fascie. Temp. confesses
there were four more such infamous Popes before him. Besides all this, B^da the
Saxon (who was dra^ long before Ethelwolf was born (in his Ecclesi^stical
History, a bounds with Stories of strange kind of Miracles, Lib. 3. c. 11. and
13. Lib. 3. c. 2. Lib. 5. cap. 4.
wrought by the Relics of Popish Saints, as Os^wald, Hilda and others, nor
only so, but by the Wood of the Cross also, and by holy Water. But in the 14
th. chap. of his 4 th. Book there is particular mention of an Extraordinary
Miracle wrought by the Intercession of Oswald King of Northumberland, who had
been dead long before. So that that popish Doctrine of the Intercession of
Saints appears by Beda to have been received in the then Church of England, a
great while before Ethelwolf's Charter for Tithes was thought on.

Many more Instances of this kind might be produced, but these I judge
sufficient to satisfy the Reader how greatly that Age wherein Ethelwolf lived
(and several Ages before) were overcast and clouded with the Darkness and
Ignorance of Popery, and by what a blind Zeal and Superst^tious Dev^tion, the
men of those tim^s (...). Whence it may appear that Doctrines and S^perstitious
practices, contrar to the true, ancient, catholic and ap^tolick Church (which
is his Definition of Popery (ad prevailed in the Church of Rome (from which
Austin came, and by which he formed his Church here) before Tithes were given*
and conseq^^ntly that Tithes had their Institution from Popery: Unless the
Priest will say, that the Instances I have here produced are not superstitious
practices, are not Popery, are not contrary to the true, anci^nt, Catholic and
Apostolic Church; which if he will say, he need say no more to let us know
what Religion he is of, nor tell h^s Name till be come to Rome.

That which I desire the Reader to observe from this is, that the Institution
of Tithes (since Christ's time) the Voluntary Dedication of them, so hig^ly
^alked of (and from which they are claimed to be now due) the f^mous Charter of
Ethelwolf (so dearly hugged by this Priest) was but the Grant and Gift of a
P^rish Prince, in an ignorant, blind, superstitious Zeal to the Idolatrius
Priesthood of the Remish Church, and for an Erroneous End.

But that which he thinks will help him off is this, That Cra^m^r, Hooper,
Ridley, Latimer, Tailor and Bradford received Tithes, page 149.

Answ This will not do his Business. That these were Godly Men, and Worthy
Martyrs I grant: Yet will not their receiving Tithes make them either Lawful,
or less popish, in the Institution. The Lot of those good men fell in the very
Spring and Dawning (as it were) of the Day of Reformation, and it was their
Happiness and Honor that they were faithful (even to the Death) to those
Discoveries of Truth which they received. But all Truths were not discovered at
once, nor all Untruths neither. But it being a Day of the Infancy of
Reformation, it pleased God in his infinite Wisdom and Tenderness, to rend the
Vail as it were by little and little, and so discover things gradually unto
them, that they might go cheerfully on in their Testimony, and not come under
those Discouragements, which the gi^t of so many Difficulties at once, might
not improb^bly have brought upon them. Nor will this seem strange to any who
shall seriously consider, that many of the blessed Martyrs, who sealed their
Testimony with their Blood, and entered cheerfully the fiery (...), had not so
full and clear a Sight of all the Superstitions and Abominations, which in the
dark Night of Ignorance, had crept into the Church of Rome, as it has pleased
God since to give. Yet they being faithful to the Lord in what they did see,
we^e accepted by him, and through Death received a Crow of Life.

Neither is it a fair way of reasoning, because some who lived but at the
Daybreak (as it were) of Reformation, did not at that early Hour discover the
whole Mystery of Iniquity (although they did a great part) or bore Testimony
against every particular Evil in the Church of Rome (although they did against
a great many) thence to argue, that the Mystery of Iniquity extended no further
then was discovered unto them, or that there was no other Evil in the Church of
Rome, but what they testified against, especially since we find diverse things
which they took little or no Notice of, plainly condemned, and zealously
witnessed against by others, who are acknowledged to have been in their
respective times, Co^f^sso^s of and true Witnesses for God against the
Corruptions and Superstitions of the Romish Church, as well as they; so that
what my Opponent says in another Case (page ^14) You must not interpret one
Scripture to overthrow oth^^ plain Scr^ptures the same say ^in this he ought
not to instance these men^ receiving Tithes to overthrow, or contradict the
plain Testimonies of other faithful Se^vants of God, who denied them, but
rather as in the Beginning of Christianity the Apostles did not all alike
oppose the Ceremonies of the Law but Cir^cumcision and other Rites, Acts 16.3.
and 18.18. and 21 2^.
were born with, and for some time used by some of them, which in process of
time were utterly rejected and denied by all, which yet neither ought to have
been, nor was made use of by the rest of the Apostles or Churches, as an
Argument for the lawfulness and Continuation of Circumcision, or any other of
the Jewish Rites: So in the Testimonies of those holy Martyrs and Confessors of
Jesus, what was denied by some, and witnessed against as Popish, Superstitious
and wicked, ought not to be received, and defended now as not Popish or
Superstitious (at least by such as pretend to reverence their testimonies)
because the same things were not denied by all; for God is not limitable to
Numbers of Witnesses, but he raised up one to bear Testimony against one
Corruption, another against another Superstition; some stormed one Part of
Babylon, some another, b^^ did not make their Batteries all in one Place: Now
that Tithes were denied by many of those godly men, Fox's Martyrology assures
us in the Instances of Thorp, Swinderby, Bruce, Wickliff, etc. Some of whom
complained of the Abuse of Tithes, in that they were then fixed and settled as a
Payment, whenas but a little before they were a voluntary free Gift,
disposeable at the Will and Pleasure of the Giver: Others utterly denying and
rejecting them, as no way lawful at all; nay Thorp says expressly, That those
Priests that do take Tithes, d^^y Christ to be come in the Flesh, urging it as
the Opinion of one of the Doctors, and as he thinks of Jerome. And Brute says*
not only that no man is bound to pay Tithes in Gospel Times, but that it is
manifest and plain, that neither by the Law of Moses; nor by Christ's Law,
Christian People are bound to pay Tithes, but by the Traditions of Men. Hence
what Opinion these good men had of Tithes, the Reader may judge. but for any
now to urge, in Defense and Justification of Tithes, that Cranmer, Hooper,
Ridley, and other Godly Martyrs received them, what else is this, but to oppose
the Martyrs one to another, and render them, as clashing and warring amongst
themselves; yea and to endeavor, by the Practices of some, to invalidate and
make the Testimony of others utterly void and of no Force, which I am sure does
ill become any Protestant to do; and indeed I think none, that were truly such
would ever have attempted it. But to go on.

From Divine Right (which he only nibbles at, but dares not trust his Cause
upon, as having no Place in holy Writ, from whene he might derive it* and from
Donation, or Voluntary Dedication of Tithes in former Ages (which is here
proved to be at best but Pop^sh) he be takes himself to his last and surest
^e^uge, Humane (...), making Tithe to be b^t a Temporal Right in the same
man^e^, a (...) Tenure that other men's. (...) are (...) may introduce a Pl^^ to
(...) enjoy Tithes by the same Right, and (...) Reason, that any other man
enjoye^ (...). For when in page 135* (...). he is pressed to show (...) a
Precept, where God has commanded Tithes to be paid, or an Example, there the
Apostles did receive them (and this urged also from a Th^s^^ of his own, viz.
That Precept or Example in holy Scripture, must certainly be the Guide of all
our Actions) he to avoid the Force of it, insinuates that he is no more obliged
to (...) Precept, or Example for his taking (...), then any other man (...) for
the enjoying of his Temporal Estate. (...) show you the Mistak^ says he (I
thought he had not counted it a Mistake for men to take precept or Example in
holy Scripture for the Guide of all their Actions) You, says he, chall^nge so
many Acres of Ground, etc. Now to make you a good property in this Estate, you
must show either some positive Scripture for your Right to hold the same, or an
Example from Christ or the Apostles, that they had Free Holds, etc. To this the
Parishioner replies, I shall soon discover your Fallacy, by telling you, that I
enjoy my Estate as a Temporal Right.

Answ. But that is not all, I shall discover his Fallacy further, by telling
him, not only that I enjoy my Estate as a Temporal Right, but also that I claim
it in a Natural and Civil Capacity, without Relation to a Ministerial Function,
or Spiritual Office, as a Man, not as a Minister of Christ. But the Priest does
not claim Tithes in this Capacity. He claims in a Spiritual Capacity although
his Claim be false) his Claim depends upon a Ministerial Function. He claims
not as a Man, but as a Minister of Christ (for such he pretends to be, though
he be not) His claim therefore to Tithes, and my claim to my temporal Estate,
differing in the very Ground and Nature of them, that which will make good my
claim to my Estate, will not make good his claim to Tithes. For my claim to my
Estate being grounded upon a Natural, or Temporal Consideration only, a
Temporal Right is sufficient to make it good. But his Claim to Tithes being
grounded upon a Spiritual Consideration (as he pretends to be a Minister of
Christ) a Temporal Right is no way equal, or suitable to his Claim. So that he
has still need (if he would still take Tithes, and still be reputed a Minister
of Christ) to produce a Precept where God has commanded Tithes to be paid
under the Gospel, or an Example, where Christ or his Apostles did receive them.
Which if he cannot do, he is justly to be reputed no Minister of Christ, since
they that are indeed his Ministers, are able to show both Precept and Example
for the Maintenance which they receive.

But says he, page 137. If the Consideration of a Temporal right be sufficient
to satisfy your Conscience, in a Temporal Enjoyment, by the same Reason I can
hold my Tithes without any Wound to my Conscience.

Answ. How hard his Conscience is (to be wounded) especially in a Case so
profitable to him as Tithes, I will not undertake to lay. Yet thus far I will,
that if his Conscience were not harder then it should be, I am sure he could
not satisfy it in taking Tithes* That which gives Sati^fa^^ion to mine, or any
other man's Conscience, in the Temporal Enjoyment of a Temporal Estate, is the
Consideration that he claims it only in a Natural and Civil Capacity, as a man
(without any respect to a Spiritual Employment (and that in that Capacity he
has a Temporal Right unto it. But i^ the Case thus with the Priest? Does he
claim Tithes purely in a Natural and Civil capacity, as a man (without any
respect to a Spiritual Employment) or does he claim them upon a Religious
Score, as a Minister of Christ (though not one) and in Consideration of a
Ministerial Office, or Spiritual Function, which he pretends to execute? If so,
how dares he then say, that by the same Reason which satisfies other men's
Consciences, in the Enjoyment of their Temporal Estates, he can hold Tithes
without any Wound to his Conscience! Certainly, by confounding these so
different Considerations of Natural and Spiritual, Civil and Religious
Capa^ities, he has argued very fallaciously and craf^ily, endeavoring to
beguil his Reader with mere Sophistry. And after the same manner he goes on*

What have you to show for your Estate, says he to his Parishioner? I have a
good Died, replieth the Parishioner: But what have you to show for your Gle^^
and Tithes? I have a good Terrier and Endowment, cries the Priest. Prove that
Terr^^r and E^dowment to b^ right by the Law of God, says the Parishioner.
(...) I will, quoth the Priest, when your De^d (...) made good by the Law of
God* It i^ sufficient, says the Parishioner, that my Deed way^ ^oved by the
Law of the Land. So it i^ sufficient, replies the Priest, that our Tithes are
settled by the same Laws.

Answ. (...) where, Reader, how willing the Priest is, for his own Interest, to
parallel his Case with the Parishioner's as if there were no Difference a^ all
in the (...) One claims a Temporal Thing, and (...) claims a Temporal Thing.
One cla^m b^ a Temporal Right, and the other claim by a Temporal Right. One
has no Ne^^ of a Precept or Example in holy Scripture for what he claims,
(...) has the other. Thus he takes his Parishioner by the Nose, and endeavors
to c^kes him into a Conceit, that their Cases answer pat to one another, that
their Right is all one, their Claim one and the same, their pretensions just
alike. But then they must not stay there, the priest must also acknowledge, he
is no more a Minister of Christ, then the other, at least, that he does not
claim Tithes as a Minister of Christ, any more then the other does his Temporal
Estate; otherwise the Parallel w^ll not hold. For if he claims Tithes as a
Min^ster of Christ, if he demands them in Consideration of a Spiritual Office,
I am sure th^n their Claims will not agree; and that which will be sufficient
to make good a (...) the one, will not be so to the other, whatever he thinks
on it. A good Deed for a Temporal Estate, sounds some what like; but a Terrier
and Endowment for a Minister of Christ, is new and strange Language, which
Christians are not acquainted with. And for a Temporal Estate, held in a Civil
Capacity, it is sufficient that the Deed be approved by the Laws of the Land,
because the Estate it self is claimed, and held upon no other Considerations,
then such as are Temporal. But it is otherwise in the case of Tithes: A
Temporal Settlement of Tithes is not sufficient, because Tithes are claimed
upon Considerations that are not Temporal, but Spiritual.

But the Parishioner puts the Question, If Tithes are Temporal Rights, how come
you (...) call them spiritual Preferments? The Priest answers, All Tithes are
not so called, because all Impropriations are held in a Laity, etc.

Answ. By this then it appears, that if the Impropriations are held in a Laity,
Tithes are not so Sacred a thing, but that they may be and are alienated to
common Uses, notwithstanding the Dedication of them, and whatever else he says
elsewhere (page 146, 147.) to the contrary.

But other Tithes, the Priest says, are called spiritual Preferments, not in
respect of the Profits, but the Persons who are capable of them, and therefore
are they vulgarly called spiritual Preferments, because enjoyed by spiritual
Persons, page 137.

Answ. So then it seems the Persons enjoying Tithes must be Spiritual, yea so
Spiritual as to communicate to the Tithes themselves the Denomination of
Spiritual Preferments, and yet they must be held by a Temporal Right; and why?
but because they have no Spiritual Right to them. But letting that pass, two
things I desire to be resolved in. First, Why these Priests, who hid such
Defiance to the Inspiration of the Spirit, should affect to call themselves
Spiritual Persons? Secondly, Seeing toward the Beginning of his Book (page
11.) he says, some men for a corrupt Interest will intrude themselves into
these Sacred Offices; and again, near the End of it (page 160.) He tells us, the
Secular Care of some of the Clergy, for the Maintenance of their Families, has
been excessive: I would gladly know whether he reckons these for some of his
Spiritual Persons, seeing these do enjoy the Preferments as well as any.

He tells us (in page 140.) That which Nobody doubts, viz. That Temporal
Authorities have Power to establish Temporal Rights; from whence (in page 141.)
he infers, That in Temporal Affairs, an Argument drawn from Temporal Authority
(where the thing is equitable and Reasonable) is a good and convincing
Argument; and in the next page, taking an Occasion to repeat, he says, I do
not say in every Case a Temporal Authority can create a Right to a Temporal
Interest, but in such Cases only as are Equitable and Reasonable.

Answ. I observe here he reels from establishing a Right to creating a Right: I
hope he does not think that to establish and create is one and the same thing.
Let him stick to which he please^^, so he will be pleased without confou^ding
them. If he will say that Temporal Authority has created a right to Tithes, he
thereby cuts off all Pretensions to any Right antecedent to that Creation. If
he will say that Temporal Authority has only established a Temporal Right to
Tithes, that supposes a Temporal Right to them before. But that will lye^^:
his Door to prove, which hitherto he has not in any Degree done; unless to say
i^, be a Degree of doing it, and then indeed (...) has (...) it in many
Degrees. For he has said it over and over. If Tithes, says he, (...) another
man's Estate and Property, the Ca^^ will be clear against me; but thi^, says
he, is b^gging of the Question: therefore I am ready (...) prove that Tithes
are mine, not his, from whom I receive them. Here he says he is ready to
prove, but I wonder when he will do it. After a Periphrasis of three pages or
more, he brings his Discourse to this Issue, If you will grant, says he, that
Maintenance in general is due by the (...) of the Gospel, you will sufficiently
justify Tithes from all the idle Cavils which are brought against them (page
145.) I^ not this notably argued to prove Tithes his, not theirs from whom he
receives them, especially from one that was in such Readiness too! Well, I^le
grant him that Maintenance in general is due by the Gospel to a Gospel
Minister, and now let us see what he can make on it. Why, says he (page 146.)
The Gospel commands a Maintenace be provided for the Ministry, and the Civil
Powers, and Nursing Fathers of the Church, have set out Tithes for that
Maintenance: To prove this, he urges a Voluntary Dedication of them; and to
prove that, offers Ethelwolfe's Charter. The Dedication and Charter I have
already examined, and showed how little they conduce to this Cause. Therefore
not to repeat the same things, let us now inquire what Power those Nursing*
Fathers had to set (...) Tithes for a Maintenance for the Ministry.

He that appointed a Maintenance in general, described also that Maintenance in
particular. In the same House, says Christ, remain, ea^ing and drinking (...)
things as they give, Luke 10.7. So again, ver. 8. Eat such things as are set
before you. For the Workman is worthy of his Man, Mat. 10.10. Here was the
Maintenance which Christ appointed for his Ministers, which was altogether Free
and Voluntary* But where has Christ given Power to any man to alter this
Maintenance and set up another in the Room of it? Doubtless if any such
Authority were given, it concerns them that claim thereby, to show it. But if
Christ has given no such Power, whence then does man take so much upon him?
Yet suppose Magistrates had such a Power to appoint Maintenance, yet for any
Magistrate to set out Tithes for that Maintenance, is a di^ect Opposition to
Christ. For Tithes having been commanded by God in the Mosaical Law, to be paid
unto the Levitical Priesthood, and Christ having disannulled that Law, and
taken away Priests, Tithes and Law altogether (Heb. 7.) what greater Affront
can be offered to Christ, what greater Contempt showed of him, then to see up
that which he has thrown down, to establish that which he has abolish^d.

But says he (page 154.) ^f the Quakers can prove from the Laws ^f God or
right Reason, that it is not Lawful for every one to do what he will with his
own, and consequently that he may not settle Tithes, Lands or Moneys upon the
Clergy, then they do something to the Purpose.

Answ Well then, that I may be sure to do something, even in his Sense, to the
purpose, I will prove both from the Laws of God and right Reason, that it is
not Lawful for every Man ^o do what he will with his own. The Earth is the
Lord's, and the Fulness thereof: whatsoever Man injoyes of it, he holds but in
Stewardship from God, and must give an Account thereof unto his Lord. His Eye
must be to his Master, in the Use and Disposing of what he has received from
him, and calls his own. He may not employ it ^o an Evil Us. He ought to Honor
God with all his Substance; but he ought not to honor the Devil with one
Farthing. He may not spend his Substance upon his Lusts, nor bestow it among
Harlots. (The Prodigal, that wasted his Portion after that manner, confessed,
He had sinned against Heaven, Luke 15.21. And the Steward, that was accused for
wasting his Master's Goods, was called to an Account therefore, and turned out
of his Office, Chap. 16. see also Eccles. 11.9. and 12.14.) They mistake
greatly, that think man so independent and uncontrolable, that he may do what
he will with the Goods he possesses, and employ them to what Use he pleases. He
may not make an Idol of them, neither may he uphold Idolatry with them. In
these, and very many Cases more it is not lawful for any man (either by the Law
of God or right Reason) to do what he will with his own. Will any Protestant be
so inconsiderate as to say, that it is lawful for a Man to lay out his Money in
Beads, Crosses, Crucifixes, Agnus De^'s, and such like Trumpery? Will he say it
is Lawful to buy Masses, Prayers, Pardons, Indulgences, etc? Will he say it was
lawful, by the Law of God, for Ethelwolf at Rome to give Two Hundred Marks a
Year to buy Oil, to k^ep St. Peter's 's Lamps and St. Paul' s Lamps burning? If
he thinks this justifiable, let him defend it; if not, he may in this very
Instance see, both that it is not Lawful for every man to do what he will with
his own, and also that Ethelwolf, his great Donor and Patron, did that with his
own that was not lawful for him to have done, namely, uphold Superstition and
Idolatry. N^r did he transgress in this In^tance only, of giv^ng that Yearly
Pension to Rome, but in his Donation of Tithes also: for it is evident he gave
them to maintain a Popish Clergy, d^generated from Apostolical Purity, and
f^^lly corrupt both in Doctrine and Practice, in upholding of which he did that
which was Evil, and therefore to be sure Unlawful.

And if it was not lawful for him to do what he would with his own, how much
less lawful then was it for him to do what he would with that which was none of
his own, but other men's! If he did not well in giving that which was his own
for the Maintenance of a False Ministry, surely then he did worse in giving, to
the same Use, that which was not his own, but other men's; which yet he must
needs do, if indeed he gave the Tithes of the whole Nation, as some allege,
and as they are now received. For though he were a King, yet no man I think
will say, that he had thereby Power of disposing or giving away other men's
Properties. If as King he had such a Power, then farewell Property to all
Subjects. If he had not such Power rightfully, yet did it, that Deed's unjust,
and the Chart^r therefore void. But if he neither had nor used such Power, but
only decimated his own Demeasn Lands (as some understand) then cannot any
general Claim to Tithes be derived from his Charter.

But suppose that Ethelwolf had an ample Power of disposing what he pleased, or
that the People had by Consent joined with him in the Donation, every man
according to the Interest he had; yet neither could he single, nor he and they
conjoined, grant any more then belonged to themselves. They were possessed of the
Lands, and enjoyed the Profits. These they might dispose of ( I do not say to
an Evil Use) of these they might have given what part they pleased. If they had
given the Tenth Part of the Land, the tenth Acre (in which Sense some
understand the words of the Charter [ aliquam portionem terrarum haereditariam]
in Ingulf) how unrighteous soever it had been in respect of the Use and End to
and for which it had been given, yet they to whom it had been so given had
thereby had a distinct Property and Possession. If they had had a mind to have
given the tenth part of the yearly Profits (which I know is the t^ing aimed at)
that, I grant, they might have done for th^mselves, and during their Lives such
Gift would have been of force against them, being bound by their own Act. B^t
for them to make a g^ant of the 10th part of the Profits of the Land forever,
is (to my Understanding) utterly repugnant to Reason, Justice and Equity. For
it must be considered, that by the Profits of the Land is not understood the
natural only, ^ut the artificial Product thereof, not what the Earth of her own
accord, without any Help of Man, brings forth (which I think would be little,
and comparatively little worth) but what by the painful Labor, continual Toil,
daily Sweat, thoughtful Care and great Charge of the diligent and industrious
Husbandman, is dug, and as it were torn out of her Bowels. So that in the
Profits of the Land (rightly computed) the Labor, Sweat, Care, Charge, Skill,
Industry, Diligence, etc. of the Husbandman are included, and that inseparably:
for these are indeed the Instrumental Causes of Production. To admit then a
Power in any man, to give the Tithes of the Profits of his Land, beyond his own
Life, were to suppose a Power in that Man to give away the Labor, Care, Skill,
Charge, Diligence, Industry of another. But that Reason gainsayes. For though a
man may give away his own Pains, Charge, etc. may make himself a Bondslave, if
he will, and devote himself wholely to labor for others: yet can he not impose
this Condition upon others. For as till it was voluntarily undertaken by him,
he was under no Obligation to it: so in like manner until it be voluntarily
undertaken by others, they are under no Obligation to it. Now for any one to
plead, that Ethelwolf (or any other man) has given him, the Tithes of the
Profits of that Land that I possess or occupy, is all one as if he should tell
me, that Ethelwolf (or some other) has given him my Labor, Pains, Charges,
Care, Skill, Industry, Diligence, Understanding, etc. seven or eight Hundred
Years, it may be, before either he or I was born; a thing most rid^culous, and
utterly inconsistent with Reason.

Nor is it more agreeable to Justice and Equity. For if Ethelwolf, a Papist,
gave Tithes to the Romish Clergy, he did it upon a Consideration, for the
Health of his Soul and Remission of his Sins, Remissione animarum, and
peccatorum nostrorum, are the Words of the Charter in I^gulf, as Spelman gives
them is his British Councils. Anno Christi, 855.
which he believed he might obtain in that Church, and by the Help of that
Ministry to whom he gave his Tithes, and Mediation of those Saints in Honor of
whom he granted this Charter. And on the other hand, the Clergy undertook, that
all the Holy Brethren and Sister at every Church (as they called it) should
upon every Wednesday in the Year sing Fifty Psalms, and say Two Masses, one for
the King, and t^other for his Dikes or Nobles* Here was a Consideration, and
such an one as in that day was thought valuable too. But all that are true
Protestants know full well, that this Consideration is of no value now (nor
indeed ever was; though, by the ignorance of those Times, it was then so
reputed.) Now if the Consideration (good or bad) be taken away, why should the
Charge be continued? If the End, for which Tithes were given, neither be nor
can be now answered, with what Justice or Equity can Tithes be now demanded?
But how much more unjust and unequal will it then appear, that Tithes should be
now exacted, and extorted by a Protestant Ministry, upon a Donation
fraudulently obtained by a Popish Clergy! If Tithes were ever indeed due to any
by virtue of this Gift, it must be to the Popish Priests, and all the Rabble of
their Religious Men and Women: for to them were they given, and that too upon
such Terms, and to such Ends, as the Protestant Religion disowns and rejects.
How dishonorable therefore is it for a Protestant. Minister to lay hold, as it
were, on the Skirts of a Papist, and endeavor to derive a Right to Tithes from
that Church, which has long since anathematized them for Her^ti^ks, and which
they also were wont formerly to call Antichristian.

Besides, the Reasons urged why Tithes are now due, viz. the voluntary
Dedication, Donation and Charter, will be certainly as strong and cogent (if
not somewhat more) for the Payment of Tithes to the Popish Priests, if ever
they should be suffered to get up again: for to them were they dedicated, to
them were they given, to them was the Charter granted. Nor has this Priest said
any thing in Proof of his Claim to Tithes, which might not as reasonably (and
in this Respect somewhat more colourably) be said by one of the Popish Clergy.
One says, a Maintenance in general is appointed in the Gospel: so says
the other. One says, the Civil Powers, and Nursing-Fathers of the Church have
set out Tithes for that Maintenance: so says the other. One says, there was a
voluntary Dedication of them, a famous Charter given for them. Aye* so there
was indeed says the other, and which is more, that Dedication was made to our
Church ( in Honor of Mary the Glorious Virgin and Mother of God, and in Honor
of St. Michael the Archangel, and of Saint Peter the Prince of the Apostles,
and also in Honor of our Holy Father Pope Gregory, as the words of the Charter
in ^^g^^f are) and that Charter was granted to us. Thus, Reader, thou se^st
that the same Reasons this Man uses to prove Tithes due to him, a Popish Priest
may as well use to prove Tithes due to him But as the Author to the Hebrews,
speaking of the Levitical Priesthood, says (chap. 7.12.) The Priesthood being
changed (which took Tithes) there is made of Necessity a Change also of the Law
(which commanded Tithes) so I say in this Case. The Church of Rome, and her
Priesthood, being cast off, disowned, denied and rejected: There is a Necessity
(if ye will be true Christians, and true Protestants) that all her Ded^cations,
O^lations, Donations, Grants, Charters of Tithes, Glebes, Offerings,
Obventions, Collations, Terriers, Endowments, Benefic^s, and whatsoever else is
of the like Nature, and crept in under the Corruption of her degenerate State,
be utterly renounced, made void and cancell^d to all Intents and Purposes.

Besides, the Injustice, and Unreasonableness of exacting Tithes will yet more
plainly appear, if it be considered, that if Tithes were a suitable Main c^ance
for a Protestant Ministry, yet the Clergy now do nothing for the People (nor
indeed have any thing to do) which can de^erve so great a Compensation. For let
it not be soon forgotten, nay, let the Parishioners in every Parish take
notice, that this Priest, speaking of the present Clergy, has said, Our only
Work is to explain the written Word of God, and apply the same, page 86. Yet a
little after says, (page 92, 93.) Whatsoever is necessary to Salvation, either
to be believed or done (as the History of Christ's Birth, Death, Resurecti^n
and Ascension) the Duties of the first and second Table, the Love of God and
our N^ighbour, ^ll the Evangelical Precepts, and the Essentials of Religion,
are in some place or other in holy Scripture, fitted to the most vulgar
Cap^c^^y, and shallowest Vnd^rstanding, are mad: such pl^in and easy
Doctrines, that he that runs may read them, being sitted to the Capacity of the
most unlearned. So that here nothing needs explaining, all things necessary to
Salvation are so pl^in already. Whatever then they explain and apply, is by his
own Confession not necessary to Salvation, and this he says is their only
Work. But is it not a great Injustice, and extreme Unrighteousness in the
Clergy, to exact and tear from the poor Husbandman the Tenth Part of his Crop
for only explaining, and applying some thing that is no way necessary to the
poor man's Salvation, nor in that respect can do him any good? O great
Oppression! O foul Abuse!

But he says, To put the thing out of all doubt, our Laws have made Tithes a
Freehold, page 137.

Answ. A Freehold does he call them! Such a Freehold, I wis, as h^lds the
greatest part of the Nation in Bondage. But what Laws are they that have made
Tithes a Freehold? Where are they to be found? He is peremptory in another
Case, Show the Text, show the Statute; it is the Opponent's part to prove, page
152. I desire him therefore to show those Laws, produce those Statutes, that
have made Tithes a Freehold to the Clergy, whose Right he insists upon (for if
he will say they are a Freehold to the La^ty, that will be so far from
advan^aging his Cause, that it will yet further prove the Lawfulness of
alienating Tithes to common Uses, notwithstanding the Solemn Ded^cation of them
to God, which he so much brays of That the Charter of Ethelwolf by which Tithes
are claimed) was popish, superstitious, wicked, is sufficiently showed before.
What has been done by succeeding times, in Confirmation of it and them, it
more concerned my Opponent to search, then me: But probably he might designedly
omit it, as well knowing that such an Inquiry would no way conduce to the
Credit of his Claim. For if Tithes were born (as I may say) in bad times, to be
sure they were brought up in worse. If they were granted in the dusk of the
Evening, they were confirmed in the Midnight of popery. And that the Reader may
see I speak not this without Ground, I Will here set down the Preamble of a Grant
made by King Stephen, about the Year One Thousand One Hundred Thirty Nine.

Inasmuch as by the Providence of divine Mercy, we know that it is appointed,
and being published far and near by the Preaching of the Church, it sounds in
all Men's Ears, that by the giving of Alms the Bonds of Sins may be loosed, and
the Rewards of Heavenly Ioys obtained: I Stephen by the Grace of God King of
the English, desiring to have a Part with them, who by an happy kind of
trading, exchange Heavenly things for Earthly, being pricked forward by the
Love of God, and for the Salvation of my Soul, and the Souls of my Father and
Mother, and of all my Par^nis and Predecessors, etc. By this Reader, thou may
see upon what Gro^nds they went, and by what Principles they were acted in
those times; and that the Confirmation was sufficiently su^^able to the
Institution.

Long after this, Henry the Eighth, being more Papist then Protestant (though
he had transferred the Supremacy from the Pope to himself) and believing, as
most of the other Doctrines of the Church of Rome, so that of Tithes being due
to God and Holy Church, in the Twenty Seventh Year of his Reign, made a Law for
the Payment of Tithes, the Preamble whereof is thus, For as much as diverse
Numbers of Evil dispos^d Persons, etc. having no Respect to their Duties to
Almigh^y God, but against Right and ^o^d Conscience, have attempted to
substract and withhold in some places the who^e, and in some places great ^ar^s
of the Tithes and Oblations, as w^ll personal as predial, due unto God and holy
Church* etc. This is the first Parliamentary Law that I find amongst our
Statutes for the Payment of Tithes: and this, take notice, was made by a King
and Parliament that were Papists, upon a Popish Supposition that Tithes were
due to God and holy Church. The same King, in the Thirty Seventh Year of his
Reign, upon the Dissolution of Religious Houses (as they were then called) made
another Law for the Payment of Tithes, supposing them still Duties to Almighty
God. And in Pursuance of these Laws of his, his Son and Successor Edward the
Sixth made another, grounding it upon those which his lather had made before So
that neither of these Kings made any new grant of Tithes; but taking it for
granted that they were due to God and holy Church, they made Provision for the
Payment of them. Yet both the one and the other restrained Suits and Trials for
Tithes to the Ecclesi^stical Courts, which shows they did not und^rstand Tithes
to be a Temporal Right.

The^e are all the Statute Laws I have hitherto met with concerning Tithes. And
the^e being built upon a false Supposition, that Tithes were due to God and
holy Church (a Doctrine purely Popish, hatched at Rome, and here preached up with
thundering Excommunications by the Pope's Emissaries and Agents) why should
they be continued to make that Error minimus in principio, fit major in medio,
maximus, in fine.
Error which was at first but too great, still greater by persisting in it?
However it is too great Weakness in the Clergy to call Tithes a Freehold, and
claim to themselves a Temporal Right in them by these Statutes, when the
Statutes themselves suppose them due by Divine Right: For, for a man to claim
that by a Temporal Right, from a Temporal Law, which the Law he claims by
commands to be paid as due by a Divine Right, is mere Iuggling. Now we see
these Statutes did not set up or appoint the Payment of Tithes upon any civil
Ground, but took it for granted that Tithes are ^oue to God and holy Church.
But if this were a Mistake, and that it does really now appear that Tithes are
not due to God and holy Church, the Foundation and Reason of the Law being
taken away, the Law it self must needs cease to be in Force. C^ssante Ratione
legis c^ssat lex.
For the Law not making them due, but supposing them due by a former Right, if
they were not so due, how then can the Law be of Force!

But what is i^ the Priests claim a Property in? Is it the Profits and Increase
of the Lands? that I have showed does comprehend and include the Labor, Sweat,
Care, Industry, Charge, Skill and Diligence of the Husbandman, without which
the other would not be: And for any man to pretend a Property in these, is
ridiculous. Who would not smile at (and Pity) that Priest that should tell his
Parishioners he has a Property in then Understandings, in their Strength, in
their Care, in their Industry, etc! But if nothing less then a Property will
serve the Turn, yet where is this Property rested? In whom does it lie? Is it
in the Person of the Priest? No such matter: For a man may be a Priest in
Orders, and yet have no Power to demand Tithes. Nor, how long soever he has
been a Priest, has he anything to do with Tithes, until by Presentation,
Institution and Induction he is invest^a with Offic^; and w^enever he parts
with that Offic^, he parts with the Tithes also. So that the Pr^perty (if there
were any) would lie in the Offic^, not in the Pri^st. And what is the Office?
It was to be sure a ^^pash Office when Tithes were first paid to it in this
Nation, an Office set up by the P^p^, and that not as a Secular Prince, but as
a Pope (as a Spiritual Father: For such he pretends to be but if there had been
a Property in the Office, yet seeing the Office it self is laid aside, and the
Pope, who was the Author of it cast off; surely whatsoever property was in the
Office, must needs be gone along with it.

But to manifest yet further the Emptiness of this plea of the Priests Property
in Tithes, let it be considered, that the Pri^st after all his Boasting Talk of
property and Pr^e^hold, ^ath no power to take One Sheaf or (...) of the
Husbandman's Corn from off his Gro^nd, until the Owner has severed it as Tithe
from the Remainder, and thereby first disseized himself of that Part, and by
his own Act given the Priest a Title thereunto. So that the Priest's Title lies
in the Gift of the Owner; nor has he any Propriety there, unti^ the Owner by
setting it out for him has made him one. Only the Law supposing Tithe d^e to
God and holy Church injoyns the Owner to set it out, and that under a penalty,
which if he refuse to do, he incurs the penalty, but the property remains
entire in himself.

But says the Priest, I told you before, that Tithes and other Church-Revenues
have been settled by those that were actually seized of them in Law, page 154.

Answ. I tell you, and I told you, are his two great Proofs; and he speaks it
so confidently, as if he thought it sufficient Demonstration to say, I told
you. The best on it is, we are not bound to believe all he tells us. He might
have done well to have told us who those Doners were, that were so actually
seized, and what it was they were seized of. What he means by other Church
Revenues, neither does he express, nor I intend to inqui^e. Tithe is the
present Subject; to that let us ^^ick. If Tithes be the Tenth of the profit, or
increase of the Land, and they that settled Tithes (as he says) were actually
seized of them in Law, then surely they could settle no more then they were so
seized of, and they could be actually seized of no other profits, or increase,
then what did grow, increase, or renew upon the Land, while they were actually
seized of it. So that such Settlement, how valid soever while they lived, must
needs expire with them. Is any one so void of Reason, as to imagine that they
who were possessed of Land an hundred Years ago, could then settle and dispose of
the profits and increase that shall grow and ari^e upon that Land an hundred
Years hence; which profit cannot arise barely from the Land, but from the
Labor, Industry and Stock of the Occupier? Were ever any actually seized of
the Labor of the Husbandman's Hands, of the Sweat of his Brows, of the
Iud^^ment, Understanding and Sk^ll that God has given him, of the Stock he
imploies, the Cost he bestows, the Care, Pains, Industry and Diligence he
exercises for the obtaining of a Crop? That all these are i^cluded in the Crop*
I have showed, and that without these the Crop comes not. He therefore that
undertakes to dispose of any Part of the Crop, takes upon him so far to dispose
of these also; but with what Right, let the Reader judge. Indeed, if they who
were anciently seiz^d of the Lands had then set out and settled any Part of the
Land it self, it had been something to the purpose. But let not any man imagine
that they had Power to charge their Posterity with that which was no way
theirs, nor which in any true Sense or Construction they could be said to have
any Property in, and which is not paid by Reason of that which is derived from
them. For indeed, if the Case be rightly stated, Tithe is not paid of Land, nor
simply by Reason of the Land, but of the Profits and Increase growing and
arising and by Reason of the Labor and Stock employed to the production of
that Increase. This will more plainly appear, if we observe that by the Statute
of Edward the sixth, Tradesmen and Handycrafts-men (who possess no Land) are
injoined to pay the Tenth of the Profits, Increase or Gain, arising by their
Trades or Labor, as well as the Husbandman the Increase of the Land. Which
shows, that as they are tythed for the Labor, Industry and Stock which they
exercise in their Trades and Callings; so is he also for the ^ains, Care, Skill
and Stock which he imploies in his Calling of Husbandry. If therefore, he that
has Land, and he that has no Land, are both alik^ bound to pay Tithe, how can
it be said, that he that has Land pays Tithe for the Land? If a man has
never so much Land, and yet no Increase, no Tithe can be demanded. If he has
no Land at all* and yet by any other way has Increase, he is (...) by the Law
to pay Tithe. If a man so husband his Land that the Increase of it is not to be
severed from it, as (for Instance) if he convert it to Pasture, and feed Cattle
upon it, he shall not be accountable for the Tithes of the Grass so eaten, but
if any thing at all be demanded, it can be only a rate Tithe for the Cattle
there feeding. But if he feed his Land with Horses, very little, if any thing
at all is recoverable for Tithe. And if he plant Wood, and let it grow for
Timber, he is not liable to any Tithe at all. From these Instances it is
manifest, both that it is in the Power of the Occupant to make the Tithe much,
little or nothing at all: And also that those Tithes that are paid, are paid
not purely in Consideration of the Land it self, but with Relation to the Stock
and Personal Estate employed upon the Land, together with the Labor and
Industry of him that occupies it. But because it cannot be supposed that any
man's Ancestors had a Property in, or were actually seized of that very Stock,
and Personal Estate which he now possesses, much less of the Strength, Health,
Ability to labor, Wisdom, Judgment and Understanding which he has received
from God, out of, through and by Reason of which, Tithes are now paid; it could
not justly be in the Power of any man's Ancestors, so to settle Tithes, or
oblige his Posterity to pay them, according as they are now demanded and
received: for that were to charge an Incumberance upon that, which himself had
never any Property in.

His Supposition of some charitably disposed Persons, giving certain Lands and
Tenements to every Parish for the Maintenance of the poor, is not at all the
same Case with this of Tyth^s, although he says (page 145.) it is the same,
and that it will be evident to every understanding man. But I believe no
understanding man can see the Cases to be the same. For in that of the Poor,
there is a certain Setlement of Lands and Tenements, in which it is to be
supposed the Donor had a Legal Property, or of which he was actually seized, at
the time of the Gift. But in the Case of Tithes, here is no Gift of Lands and
Tenements, but of the Increase growing and arising through, and by Reason of
the Labor, Ca^e, Industry an^ (...) of the Occupier, which he that gav^ (...)
Tithe neither had, nor could have, an^ (...), nor wa^ or could be, actually
(...), and therefore had no Power to (...) at the Cases are no whit alike, (...)
therefore the Destroying of Tithes has (...) Tendency at all to destroy
Hospitals. Nor are the Tenants to such Ho^pital-Lands, thereby discharged from
the Payment of their respective Rents: No; but are under the (...) was before,
both as they were (...) by themselves* and so are a free and voluntary (...) of
their own; and also as the whole Rent they pay is not the f^ll Profit and
Increase of the whole Land they hold; but such a Proportion only, as the Land
it self is val^e or rated at. So that the Increase of t^eir own Labor and
Industry, and the Improvement of their own Stock, is not exacted from them, but
left to them to d^fray Charges, and for their own Subsistence and Maintenance.
But in the Case of Tithes it is fa^ otherwise: For the Tithe is the full and
^mi^e Profi^s, and Increase of the whole tenth Part of the Land, without any
Allowance for Charges, or regard to the Subsistence of the Occupier: Of which
more anon.

He says, All Tenants may as reasonably say, that the Payment of Rent to their
Respective Landlords, is a National Burden and Oppression, as that Tithes are a
great Oppression, etc. page 155.

Answ. No such matter. For, First, The Tenant for his Rent has of his Landlord
the Worth of his Rent. But for his Tithes he receives of the Priest it may be
nothing at all, however that which to him is worth nothing, being by the
Priest's own Confession (page 92, 93.) not necessary to his Salvation, upon
which account it is that he pays his Tithes. Secondly, Rent is a Voluntary
Contract, and the Maxim is, Volenti not fit Injuria, i. e. He that willingly
undertakes a thing is not injured. But Tithe is not Voluntary now, but taken by
Force and Violence. And I doubt not but, if every English Man durst Freely
speak his own Sense, nine Parts of ten of the whole Nation would unanimously
cry, TITHES ARE A GREAT OPPRESSION.

But the main Question he says is, Whether they that purchased Lands and
Tenements did also purchase the Tithe?

Answ. They p^^chased all that was not excepted out of the Purchase, but Tithes
were not excepted out of the Purchase. If they who have purchased have no Right
to the Tenth Part, I seen ^t how they can claim a Right to the Nineth, or
indeed to any of the nine parts; for they purchased them all alike. And
theref^^e in Deed of Bargain and Sale, it is said, ^^at the Seller does grant,
Bargain, Sell, etc ALL tha^, etc. with its Appurtenances, and EVERY PART and
parcel th^reof (the tenth as well as the Nine) and also All the Estate, Right,
Title, Interest, Prope^ty, Claim and Demand whatsoever, etc. An^ if there be
any Rents or Services reserved, they are expressly excepted. But no Exception of
Tithes did I ever yet see (or hear of) in any Deed of Purchase. But says he,
Will you s^ll more then you bought? No, say (...) for I bought all: And
therefore if I sell all, I sell no more then I bought. Besides, he that buys
Land, pays so much Money for the Land only, as Matter for him to work upon: but
when he has this Land, if he will have Profit and Increase from it, he must
purchase that after another manner; he pays for that (and many (...) dear
enough too) by the Labor and Charge he bestows in tilling, dressing and
manuring it. And if in this Sense he may be said to purchase the Nine Parts of
the Crop or Increase, in the same sense he purchases the Tenth Part also: for
he bestows (...) Charge and Pains on all alike* and the T^^th Part stands him
in as much as any one of the Nine.

But he says, Though the Tenant pays Tithes, yet they are no Inconvenience to
him, because he pays less Rent in Consideration thereof.

Answ. There is a Fallacy in this: for if it should be granted, that the Tenant
does pay less Rent in Consideration of Tithes (which yet is questionable) yet
the Abatement, which he is supposed to have in Rent is not proportionable or
answerable to the Value of the Tithes he pays. I demonstrate it thus: Suppose
a Landlord le^s a Farm for Ninety Pound a Year, which if it were Tithe free
would yield an Hundred. The Tenant to pay his Rent, defray all his Charge of
Husbandry, and have a Comfortable Subsistence and Maintenance for himself and
his Family, must (according to the Computation of skilful Husbandmen) by his
Care, Industry and ^abour, together with the Employment of his St^ck, rai^e
upon his Farm three Rents, or three times as much as his Rent comes to, which
will make Two Hundred and Seventy Pound* and the tenth part of Two Hundred and
^eventy Poun^s is Twenty Seven P^unds, so that if the ^enant should have Ten
Pounds a Year abated in his Rent because of Tithes, and he pa^es Seu^n and
Twenty Pounds a Year for Tithes, then does he pay Seventeen Po^nds a Year in
Ninety more then he is supposed to be allowed in his Rent

Besides, observe the Difference between the Landlord's Dealing and the
Priest's: The Landlord does not take or desire the whole Increase and Profit
that is made upon his Farm: he knows it would be unreasonable, because the
whole Year's Labor and Stock of the Tenant is employed in it And therefore,
seeing he finds only Land, and the Tenant finds all manner of Workmanship,
Stock and Charges, he is contented, by a pretty equal kind of Partition, to
divide the Profits between them, so that he takes no more for the Rent of his
Land, then it is supposed the Tenant may make double so much to himself, for
the Improvement of his Stock, for his Charge and Labor. But when the merciless
Priest comes, he does not say, Neighbor, though I claim the Tenth Part, yet
seeing you have been at the Pains and Charge to get it for me, I Will deal no
worse with you then your Landlord d^es; as he takes One Part and leaves you
Two, so divide the Tithe into Three Parts, I Will be contented with One of them,
and do you keep the other Two, for the Pains and Charges you have been at in
procuring it. No, no: Who ever heard a Priest say so? But like the Sabeans and
Calde^ns he falls on, and sweeps all away together. He takes the full Tenth
Part of the Increase of the whole Farm, and leaves the poor Farmer no
Consideration at all for all the Charges and Toil he has bestowed about it. And
yet he will wipe his Mouth, and say, This is no Oppression, no Grievance at
all: whenas indeed there is none greater in the Nation. But if the Landlord
should have as little Justice as the Priest, and should take away all the
Increase of the Nine Parts, as the Priest does all the Increase of the Tenth,
what would become of the poor Farmer! He would have nothing left him. Nay, who
should sow the Land again? for the unreasonable ^riest does not leave him of
the Tithe, where (...) to (...) the tenth part of the Land against another
Year, but keeping him in an Egyptian Bondage, expects he should make Bricks for
him, although he allow^ him ^o Straw.

And yet this must not be thought hard or g^umbled at, to (...) a pass is this
unhappy N^tion brought Nay, he reckons the People have an ^asi^ tim^ on it now,
over they had in the Time of the (...). For when he goes about to clear the
Clergy from the Charge of Iud^^sm in taking Tithes, he says, Should we
chall^nge and receive our Tithes as they were due to the Levites, our (...)
would be much fuller then they are, (...) Imposi^ions much heavier upon the
Peop^^, page 134.

Answ. No^ the Charge is much heavier now upon the People, then it was under
the Levitical Priesthood. For, 1. The Tribe of Levi had no Inheritance with
their Brethren, no Share in the Division of the Land; but had Tithes assigned
them instead of their Proportion of Land, Numb. 18.20. So th^^ the other eleven
Tribes had all the Land (...) them. They had so much the (...) Land, their Lots
were the bigger; and this was some Consideration for their Tithes. But now
adays the Priests have not only the Tithes, but their Share also of Land, so
far as they are able to compass; in which Respect it is harder now with the
People then it was then.

2 If the Levitical Priests had offerings, so have these. What mean all the
Easter-Reckonings, Midsummer-Dues (as they are called) Smoak-Money; Garden
Penny etc. Money for Marrying, Money for Christening, Money for Churching of
Women, Money for giving the Communion, Money for Burying, Money for Breaking
the Ground, Money for Funeral Sermons, Money for Lectures, and what not? All
for Money, and without Money or Money's worth nothing will be done, So that
their Revenues far exceed those of the Levitical Priesthood, and the Charge
falls heavier on the People.

3. Those Tithes and Offerings under the Law maintained all the Officers
belonging to that Tabernacle, so that the People were at no further Charge. But
now the Priests alone run away with all this; and their under Officers, as
Clarks, Sextons, etc. are fain to be maintained by the People beside; the
ringing of the Bell, the reading of the Psalm, saying Amen, and whipping out
the Dogs are charged upon the Peoples Account, and they are made to pay it,
which still lays greater and heavier Loads upon the People.

4. Out of the Tithes under the Law Provision was made for the Fatherless, the
Widow and the Stranger, Deuteronomy. 14.28, 29. But now the Clergy take all the Tithes
to their own use, leaving the Fatherless, the Widow, etc. to shift for
themselves as they can. So that the Fatherless and Widow, etc. might,
notwithstanding the Tithes, perish for want, did not the People relieve and
maintain them at no small Expense besides. Thus it appears, that the Charge is
much greater upon the People now, then it was then; the Little Fi^ger of the
English Clergy being heavier then the Loy^s of the Levitical Priesthood. But to
proceed.

He confesses (page 157.) That the Apostles had not Tithes in their days, and
he gives this as one Reason for it, because they could not have them, if they
would, the Levites being in Possession of them.

Answ. But if Tithes ought to have been paid, what hindered their receiving them
of the Gentiles that were converted? some of whom were so zealously aff^cted,
that they could have pulled out their Eyes, and have given them to the Apostle,
Gal. 4.15. And can it be thought, that if he had demanded Tithes of them, or
they had understood them to be due unto him, they would not readily have paid
them?

Again, he says, We ought to consider that Tithes were an Improper Maintenance
for the Apostles, because of their Vnfixt State of Life.

Answ. Oh! were Tithes indeed an Impr^p^r Maintenance for the Apostles! If he
and his Brethren, who pretend to be the Apostles Successors, did so walk as
they have them f^r an Example, they would find Tithes an improper Maintenance
for them also. But seeing the Apostles State of Life was unfixt, who, I pray*
fixed your State of Life? who divided Provinces into Parishes, and set up
Parish Priests? was it not a Pope? Had you not your fixed State of Life and your
Maintenance by Tithes from one and the same power? But I remember this Priest
says (page, 86.) The Apostles and we (the Clergy) act under Different
Circumstances. And I do not wonder at it; for so did the true Ministers and the
false (...) all Ages. But I wish the Apostles and these differed in
Circumstances only.

He has another Reason yet, why the Apostles had not Tithes, namely, They had
no need of them; for as they had their Gifts, so their Maintenance by a
Mira^ulous Providence.

Answ. This is notoriously false. They had their Maintenance in an Ordinary
Way, without any Miracle at all. Whatsoever was set before them, by such as did
receive them, that they were to eat and drink, Luke 10 7, 8. Where then was the
Miracle? was it in the Believers setting Food before them? or in their eating
it, when it was so set before them?

But says he, page 158. If you conclude that we must be in all things as were
the Apostles, then must you of the Laity do now as the Laity did then, who sold
their Possessions, and laid them down at the Apostles Feet, Acts 4.

Answ. That does not follow. The Apostles (and in them all Ministers of Christ)
were commanded to preach freely ( Freely ye have received, freely give, Mat
10.8.) and for their Maintenance to receive such things only, as by Believers
were freely administered to them, Luke 10.7, 8. But the Believers were not
commanded to sell their Possessions; that was a voluntary Act in them, as is
manifest from the Instance of Ananias, While it remained (says Peter, Acts
5.4.) was it not thine own? and after it was sold, was it not in thine own
Power? So that he might have chosen whether he would have sold his Land or not;
and after it was sold, he might yet have chosen, whether he would have brought
the Money, or any part of it, into that Common Treasury or no. But the Apostles
were not at their own choice, whether they would preach the Gospel or no. But
says Paul, A Dispensation of the Gospel is committed unto me, a Necessity (of
preaching it) is laid upon me, yea, Woe is unto me if I preach not the Gospel, 1
Cor. 9.16, 17. And the same Apostle, when he took his Leave of the Elders of
the Ephesian Church, did not exhort them to covet other men's Possessions; but
told them, I have coveted no man's Silver, or Gold, or Apparel: Yea, you your
selves know (said he) that these Hands have ministered unto my Necessities, and
to them that were with me. And I have showed you all things (adds he) how that
so laboring, ye ought to support the Weak; and to remember the words of the
Lord Jesus, how he said, It is more blessed to give, then to receive, Acts
20.33, 34, 35.

But he tells us We ought to pay them Tithes for Conscience sake, because the
King commands it, p. 158.

Answ. Every Command of a King is not for Conscience sake to be actually
obeyed. Histories, both Ecclesiastical and Civil, inform us, That many things
have been commanded by Kings, which for Conscience sake ought not to have been
performed. Instances of this kind abound in the Histories of the Kings of
Israel and Judah. And if the King should command this man but to throw up his
settled Maintenance, and preach freely; I question how forward he would be in
obeying such a Command. But if an active Obedience must for Conscience sake be
yielded to every Command of a King, it must be either simply as he is a King,
or as he is a Christian King; if simply as a King, then if I lived in Turkey,
and the Grand Signior command me to maintain his Priests, I must do it. If as a
Christian-King, then if I lived in France, and the French King command me to
maintain his Priests, it seems by this Man's Doctrine, I must do it, and that
for Conscience sake too, how contrary soever it be to Good Conscience.

But he says, The First Fruits and Tenths is one of the fairest Flowers
belonging to the Crown.

Answ. He greatly mistakes, being herein somewhat like the Crow, which is said
to think her own Bird White Asinus asino, sus sui pulcher.
though others see it to be Black. No Flower can be fair in an English Crown,
which was taken out of a Pope's Mitre. If nothing else could be said against
it, but that it once stuck in the Tripple Crown, that alone were enough to make
it unworthy to be worn in an English Diadem.

He seems greatly offended that he and his Brethren are counted Hirelings; and
to vindicate himself he makes a Comparison between them and the Judges of the
Land: You know (says he) the King has Twelve Judges, etc. and these have an
Honorable Allowance from the Exchequer. Will you therefore say that they are
Hirelings, and sell Justice? and is not ours the same Case? page 159.

Answ. No: for you pretend to be Ministers of Christ; whereas they pretend no
higher then to be Ministers of State. You call your selves Spiritual Persons:
but you reckon them but Lay Men. You challenge to your selves a Spiritual
Function: they claim but a Civil or Temporal Office. They therefore standing in
a civil Capacity, may reasonably and fairly, without any Imputation of
Injustice, receive what their Master is pleased to bestow upon them. But you,
who pretend to be Ministers of Christ Jesus, are therefore justly condemnable
as Hirelings, because ye will not be content with that Maintenance, which he
(whom ye call, though untruly, your Master) has appointed, but seek for Hire
from others.

Again, He takes it ill, that any should think they would abandon their
Profession, if they should be bereaft of their Preferments. I hope (says he)
many of us can appeal to the Searcher of Hearts, that we embraced the Ministry
upon better Grounds, then Temporal Interests, etc. I pray you therefore ask
your own Conscience, whether it were likely to be Reason, or rather Envy, that
drew up this Charge against us, p. 160.

Answ. I would not think hardly of them all* nor more hardly of any then they
deserve. But yet I must tell him, he need not take it ill, if such a thing be
questioned, considering what Ground has been given for it. I do not know his
standing (because he had not Ingenuity enough to give his Name) and therefore
can say nothing to him particularly. But if he be not a very Young Man, he
cannot be ignorant, that once within these Twenty Years, when their Preferments
were taken away, chose of his Profession were very scarce to be found, insomuch
as at that day the old Proverb began to come in use, No Penny, No Pater Noster.
Certain it is, the Shepherds were fled, and had left their Flocks to the Mercy
of those, whom they accounted no better then Wolves; and many good men thought
the Reason to be, because they were but Hirelings, John 10.13. But to pass that
by,

There remains yet a material Point to be considered, viz. For what Reason the
Quakers should pay Tithes, when by their Separation they have no Benefit of his
Ministry? His Reason is, That the Minister is not to Blame for their
Separation, or lack of that Benefit, but desires they would enjoy it while he
is attending his Office, p. 161.

Answ. If the Minister be one that for corrupt Interest has intruded himself
(as it seems by what he says page 11. some such there be) if the Minister be a
Man of a Vicious and Intemperate Life, of a Disorderly Conversation, such as
the Apostle has exhorted to withdraw from, is not the Minister then to Blame
for the Separation? Admit he be a man of tolerable Sobriety, yet if his
Ministry can do me no good, am I not better without it? That which I am is the
Salvation of my Soul. He tells me (page 92, 93.) That whatsoever is necessary
to my Salvation, is already so plain in the Scriptures, that I may understand
it without his Help. To what End then should I make use of him?

But to come closer to the Point. He pretends to be a Minister of Christ. Where
did Christ ever empower his Ministers to make people hear them, whether they
will or no? or to exact Wages of them although they did not hear them? His
Instruction to his Disciples was, Whosoever shall not receive you, nor hear
your words, shake off the Dust of your Feet, Mat. 10.14. And Paul says to the
Jews, It was nec^ssary that the Word of God should first have been spoken to
you: but seeing ye put (...) from you, and judge your s^lves unworthy of
Everlasting Life, lo, we turn to the Gentiles; for so has the Lord commanded
us, etc. Acts 13.^6. He greatly mistakes, if he thinks it to be the Mind of
Christ to impos^ his Gospel upon any, or, as the Spaniards are said to have
dealt with the Indians, to make men Christians whether they will or no: Nay,
nay; he lovingly invites all; he inwardly strives by his Spirit with all; he
graciously tenders Mercy to all; but he obtrudes it upon none. And if he gave
no Authority to his Apostles to compel any to hear them; to be sure he gave
them no Power to Demand, muchless Enforce a Maintenance from such, as did
neither receive nor own them. It was e^pecially provided in their Commission,
that they should be first received, before they received any thing themselves,
Luke 10.8. And Paul says, He did not eat any man's Bread for naught, 2 These.
3.8. And if these men were indeed Ministers of Christ, they would not be so
eager and forward to receive of those they call Heretics.

But as for that he says, that he desires we should enjoy the Benefit of his
Ministry, what is it more then a Popish Priest may say to him? Would he hold
himself bound in Reason or Equity to maintain that Popish Priest, or think the
other did justly in Forcing a Maintenance from him, because he had Liberty to
hear him if he would? It may be he will say No, because a Popish Priest is not
a Minister of Christ. A very good Reason against them both. But the Popish
Priest no doubt will say He is, and the other does no more. But this man may
say, He has Law on his side: so had the other too lately in this Nation, and
has it still elsewhere. The Intent of my reasoning thus is to show, that by the
same Argument by which he would condemn us, he justifies not only the Practice
of the Papists against the Protestants here of old, but also the Dealings of
other Secretaries against his Brethren and himself of late.

Besides, it is most weakly argued, that we must b^ forced to maintain him,
because we may hear him if we will. In this he is more unjust then the worst
sort of men usually are: for take the most greedy and overreaching Tradesman
that one can find, though he should tell me his Ware is very Good, and that he
has such as will fit my turn, yet he will not thrust it upon me, whether I like
i^ or no; but leaves me to my own Liberty, either to take it or to leave it:
and if I do ^ot take it, to be sure he will never demand any thing of me for
it. But this Priest will either make us take his Ware* though we neither like
it, nor have any need of it; or to be sure will make us pay for it, though we
never take it. What can be (...) unreasonable, what more dishonest then this.

He next undertakes to defend the Priests in sueing for Tithes; If it be (says
he) their Due they sue for, the Recovering of them by Course of ^aw will have
no Injective in it.

Answ. In Civil Cases it is no Injustice for a man to recover his Due by Law.
But neither is this a civil Ca^e, nor Tithe his Due. His supposing it so, is
but begging of the Question. If he will say, it appears to be his Due, because
upon Trial he recovers it at Law; I shall answer, that that Argument will no
more prove Tithes due to him, then it will, that they were due to the Papists
and Presbyterians, both which (the former of old, the latter of late) recovered
them by Law. Will he therefore acquit them of Injusti^e? Will he say, Tithes
were their Due? then he and his Brethren had no Wrong, from whom they were (by
the latter) taken.

But for a Minister of Christ to sue men at Law for his Belly, is without all
Precept, Precedent or Ground in Scripture, Religion or Reason. It is contrary
to the Nature of a Gospel Maintenance, which is altogether free and voluntary,
not at all compulsory. The Ministers of Christ were to take what was given,
what was set before them: not to demand, command, comp^l. This Practice is more
like that of the Sons of Eli (who were Sons of Belial, and knew not the Lord)
who said, We will have this, or We will have that, and if thou will not give
it, we will take it by Force, 1 Samuel 2. Or like the False Prophets mentioned by
Micha, who prepared War against them that put not into their Mouths, Chap. 3.
But when or where did any Minister of Christ ever do thus? Let him search the
Holy Scriptures, let him turn over Ecclesiastical Histories, and produce such
an Instance if he can.

Yet so little Mod^sty has he as to say, The Highway Thief may as w^ll implead
the Justice of an Hue and-Cry, as the Quakers such a lawful Pros^cu^ion. But
this is a Position so utterly devo^d of Truth, Reason and Charity, that without
further Answer I dare commit it to the Censure of every dis interested Reader.

The Conclusion.
I Have now, Reader, gone through the several Heads of his Discourse, and given
a particular Answer to the most material Passages therein. There remains in his
last Leaf an old over-worn Obj^ction, That the primitive Christians were
d^fferent from us; in debating which, he shall hereaf^er (he says) be ready to
bestow his Pains) as Providence shall give Occasion and Assistance. Seeing he
puts it off to hereafter, I will not anticipate his Work, by saying any thing
to it now: But whenever he shall think fit to undertake that Task, I no way
doubt b^t the Lord will enable me, or some other of his Servants to vindicate
his Truth and Heritage from the Sland^rs and Falsehoods of this man's Malevolent
Tongue; and also, to discover and demonstrate how greatly He and his Brethren
d^ffer from the Apostles and primitive Christians in the greatest part of their
Re^igion, having ind^ed neither the Power of Godliness, nor so much as the true
Form thereof. But of this no more at present, until further Occasion be
offered. In the mean time, to give thee, Reader, a little Taste of the Temper
of his Spirit, I here present thee with a short Collection of some of the
Phrases and virulent Expressions, which his Academical Education has bestowed
upon us, viz.

The Spirit of Quakerism, and the D^lusions of it. p. 3. You may find the
Picture of your Speakers drawn by Virgil ( an Heathen Poet) where he brings in
the Sybil possessed with her Demon* page 9. Whetting their Tongues to speak
the most prodigi us Lies, that is in the power of Malice to invert, page 13.
The Lash of their Serpentine Tongues, p. 14. Blind Guides, p. 89. The Whim in
his Pa^^, p. 96. The Dev^l and these, p. 96. Poor delud^d Souls receive
Falsehood and Railing, Nonsense and Blasphemy, etc. p. 106. A Dream, a mere
Fancy, a miserable Mistake, a False and Fantastical Light; they adore a Lie for
Divine Revelation, p. 107. Sottish Ways of Reasoning, p. 1^8. The Quakers a
Company of fine Cheats, p. 108. A Fanatical Jesuit, p. 109. Out of the Mouth of
a Quaker or a Jesuit, p. 110. A Company of Wandering Fellows that have got into
a Road of Babbling, p. 114. The Venom of their Tongues, p. 116. Sottish
Ignorance, p. 152. They are a Company of Cheats and Impostors, page 155.

These I confess I have not answered, not judging any Weight of Argument to lie
in them, or that they tend to prove any thing, unless it be that he, from whom
this corrupt Fruit springs, is likely himself to be one of those who for a
corrupt Interest intrude themselves into sacred Offices (as he says page 11.)
or that that Savage, Waspish, Crusty Humor of his Natural Disposition (which
he speaks of page 119.) is not yet transformed into the Meckness and Innocence
of a Lamb. But letting these things pass, I shall conclude with that Saying in
Cornelius Tacitus, Didicit ill^ maledicere, et ego contemnere: i. e. He has
learned to speak Evil, and I to disregard it.

T. E.

THE END.

