AN EPISTLE TO The Truly Religious and Loyal GENTRY OF THE Church of England.

Writtten by Edmund Ellis, Rector of East Arlington, in the County of Devon.

(...).

(...).

Greg. Nazianz. Orat. 9. LONDON, Printed in the Year MDCLXXXVII.

An EPISTLE to the Truly Religious and Loyal GENTRY of the CHURCH of England,
etc.
My Honored Brethren,
IF I thought the Address, I here make unto you had need of an Apology, it
would be Incapable of any. My Confidence, I confess, is utterly Inexcusable, if
it be not grounded upon Reason. What I Desire therefore is only this, That you
would be Pleased to Condescend to the most Serious Consideration of what is
Said by so Obscure a Person.

I Do not Pretend to any Skill in the Letter of Our Common Law, but that Law
which All Mankind Ought to be, and that Law which All Christians Profess they
are Governed by, has been my Study above thirty Years: And in the prosecution
of Charity, or Divine Love, to which All my Speculations naturally Tend, I find
it my Duty to Endeavor with all my might to Communicate the Knowledge I have
of this Truth: that if the Parliament shall Comply with His Majesty's most
Just, and Equitable Desire of the Abrogation of all such Laws against the
Papists which are more Rigorous than any of those against the other
Nonconformists, it would most certainly conduce to the Glory of God, and the
Good of Men. If any men should say what Impudence is this? Is not such a
Proposal Contrary to the Present Government? I should Confidently Answer, It is
not. And the Reasons of this Confidence I shall here (as well as I can within
the compass of a Letter) in all Humility tender to your Consideration. By those
words of the Blessed Apostle, Do we then make void the Law, yea we establish
the Law. I am prompted to say to our Adversaries in this Case, Do we subvert,
yea we Establish the Present Government. That this may be clearly perceived, I
shall desire that it may be duly considered that whatsoever tends to the
Establishing of the Rights of Our MONARCHY does most certainly tend to the
Establishing of Our Civil Government: And what is it to Establish the Rights
of MONARCHY but to Secure All Due Obedience to Our MONARCH and His Successors
throughout All Generations? Tho it be True indeed that it is the Duty of All
Subjects, Enjoined by the Fifth Commandment, to retain a FILIAL Affection for
their PRINCE the FATHER of their Country, whatsoever he Does, or Designs, yet
alas! since the Generality of men are Led more by the Love of Life and Estate
than a Sense of Duty toward God and the Hopes of Glory in the World to come,
and since so many of those who are Habitually Heavenly-minded often fall from
their Better Temper, and are carried in the stream of Secular Interest, How can
it be supposed, that Subjects should be United in their Affections to their
Prince, and to one another, whilst there are Laws Standing against so great a
Number of Them, that are Persons very Ingenious, very Well bred, and of great
Estates, many of them of Our most Ancient Nobility, and many Exceeding Learned;
Laws I say, which if put in Execution, would deprive them of their Lives, or
Estates? And what do those men Intimate that are so Eager against the
Abrogating of such* Laws but that they Hope for a Time when they shall get the
Blood of some of their Loyal Fellow Subjects to be Shed, or their Estates
taken from them, because they cannot Do what their Consciences, supported by
the Concurring Judgments of Thousands of Sober, and Learned men, Oblidge them
not to Do? if it shall be said what signifies an Oath to a Papist etc.? I shall
most humbly beg that it may be considered whether such an Objection can have
any thing in it of Natural Conscience, or Common Honesty, since Few, or none,
that we know of the Papists, who took the Oath of Allegiance did ever Break it,
but all the world know's it was Broken in the most heinous manner that possibly
could be by Thousands of that sort of People who are, and ever have been most
Bloudily set against the Papists. And as for this sort of People, who Murdered
the Father of Our Gracious Sovereign, Attempted the Murdering of His Brother,
and the Excluding of Himself from His Royal Inheritance and who were (I think,
I may say All of them in their Persons, or in their Hearts and Affections) so
lately in Open Rebellion against Himself, let us Observe His Majesty's most
Merciful and Gracious Dealings with Them: And Admire the Benignity of that
Wisdom which has hitherto Governed Him since the Divine Providence brought Him
to be Our Governor next, and Imemediately Under the Great and Glorious MONARCH
of Heaven, and Earth. And since He is so Kind to them, how Crooked and Perverse
would it seem, if we should endeavor to Obstruct the Current of His Sacred
Clemency, when it Flows toward Persons of His own Persuasion, in a way so
just and Equitable in the sight of all men? How much it would contribute to the
Peace and Tranquillity, the Ease, and Comfort of a Protestant Successor, if the
Papists were freed from the Terror of those Dreadful Laws I could speak
largely. But I shall hasten to my other Point, to show that this Lenity to the
Papists could be no Disadvantage to the Church of England but rather a great
Advantage in as much as we should thereby Declare to all the world the
Sincerity of Our Profession to be Meek, and Lowly in Heart, And that we will
not be Affrighted by the Pharisaicall Multitude from Acknowledging All the
Truth we find Professed, and all the Uirtue we find Practiced by Papists. The
Holy Fathers and the Four First General Councils, next to the Holy Scriptures,
Our Church is Founded upon; And how many Learned men in this Kingdom began to
make light of these Blessed Records of Christian Antiquity? which Growing Evil
the Course, which His Majesty has taken will most undoubtedly Suppress.

If these Dreadful Laws were Repealed certainly it would take off the Edge of
the Animosities, which cannot but be in the Hearts of some Learned Papists
against the Church of England which must needs make them in their Writings more
Pungent than otherwise they would be. For, (poor men) they may justly apprehend
that the Standing of Our Church tends to the Destruction of their Lives if Our
Church cannot stand without those Severe Laws that have been made against them.

I shall give you no further trouble at present, but shall Commend you to the
the Protection and Instruction of the Almighty, and Only Wise God, the God of
Peace, and Love, And shall ever remain

Your Affectionate. Philotheus.


