The LETTER Torn in Pieces: OR, A Full Confutation OF Ludlow's Suggestions,
THAT King Charles I. WAS An Enemy to the STATE: By the Author of Two Papers
formerly Published, Viz.

The Vindication of the Honor of King Charles the First. And the Earnest Call
to the People of England, etc.
In which There is a Clear Vindication of His MAJESTY'S Carriage toward the
CHURCH.

(...), Prove. 10. 7.

Licensed, Sept. 29. 1692. Edmund Bohun.

LONDON, Printed by T. J. and are to be Sold by Nich. Hooper, in Amen Corner
near Stationer's-Hall. 1692.

1.
NO doubt but HELL is more Enraged
Against Saints in HEAVEN, then when they are here:
Hence it is that LVDLOW's Pen's Engaged
To Blot Great CHARLES's His Character.
2.
Such Painted Crimes on Him to Place
Does to His Lasting Glory Add:
True Goodness Shines with greater Grace
By the Enmity of All that is Bad.
3.
A REGICIDE must needs Hate KINGS:
But all his Fury's Spent in Vain:
His Conscience has a Thousand Stings,
His Soul's still full of Rage and Pain.
4.
Go, Fiend Incarnate, do thy worst,
Fill all the Earth with thy Dire Name,
Let All Men see that thou art Cursed,
Thy HELLISH MALICE to Proclaim.
Anno DOM. 1691.

THE LETTER Torn in PIECES, etc.
WHatsoever Errors, or Miscarriages in Government, Our Gracious Sovereign K C.
the First had been Guilty of (either through ill Advice, or the Common Frailty
of all Mankind) most evident it is that he made full satisfaction for them in
Granting the Petition of Right: And as to those Fears, and Jealousies, which
were raised against Him after the Granting of that Petition, as if he Designed
to Act Contrary to the Laws of the Land, so that he could not undertake to
justify His Actions to His own Parliament, and to all the World, as agreeable
to His Just and Honorable Professions, to prevent all Appearance of Reason for
such Fears and Jealousies, he bound himself by a Law not to Dissolve the then
Present Parliament as long as they desired to Continue; upon which Act His
Majesty Reflects thus in His (...)

By this Act of highest Confidence, I hoped for ever to shut out, and lock the
Door, upon all present Jealousies, and Future Mistakes; I confess I did not
thereby intend to shut my self our of Doors, as some Men have now requited me.

True, It was an Act unparalled by any of my Predecessors; yet cannot in
Reason admit any worse Interpretation than this, of an Extreme Confidence I
had, that my Subjects would not make ill use of an Act, by which I declared so
much to trust them as to deny My self in so high a point of My Prerogative.
Sure it had argued a very short sight of things, and Extreme Fatuiry of Mind in
Me, so far to bind My own Hands at their Request, if I had shortly meant to
have used a Sword against them.

To thee, O my God, do I still Appeal whose All-Discerning Justice sees through
all the Disguises of Men's Pretensions, and Deceitful Darknesses of their Hearts.

Let thy Grace Teach me wisely to enjoy as well the frustratings, as the
fulfillings of my best hopes, and most (...) desires.

Thus have they Requited me Evil for Good, and Hatred for my GoodWill toward
them. O Lord, be thou my Pilot in this dark and dangerous Storm, etc.

All Men but such as are Blinded by the Darkness of HELLISH Malice may clearly
Perceive that this Most Christian Prince, by the Excess of His Desires to
satisfy the utmost Doubts, and suppress the Fears of any of His Subjects, did
so Strengthen the Hands of the Traitorous and Sediticus, that they Acted so
Subtly and Vigorously upon a Pretense of the Authority of Parliament, that
within a few Years they got their KING into their Power, and Murdered Him (to
the Regret even of diverse both of the Lords and Commons, who continued Sitting
till they were Excluded by the ARMY:) And so in the sight of all the World,
they Subverted the whole Government both of Church and State. I shall here
Recite the Relation of some of their Unparalled Enormities, and most
Prodigious Outrage which was Published by a Person that had a full View of them,
In the Mystery of the Two Juntoes, Presbyterians, and Independents, P. 3. We
find these words: There has been given away to Members openly (besides
innumerable private cheats mutually connived at) at least 300000 l. in Money,
besides Rich Offices, Employments in Money, Committees, Sequestrations, and
other Advantages. Such as have gone beyond the Authority given by Parliament,
and Sequestered Men unjustly, and so withheld their goods under pretense
thereof; and such as have Levied Taxes Three or Four Times over, are quit from
private Actions, and the Benefit of Law, and Justice taken from the Oppressed
to secure Country Committees and Sequestrators, and others (not Prerogative,
but Legislative) Thieves, contrary to Magna Charta, which says, ( Nulli
negabimus, nulli differemus justitiam, aut rectum) We will deny, nor defer
Justice, and Right to no Man. Oh, Prodigeous Acts, and of greater Tyranny than
any King ever durst Adventure upon! P. 6. How frequently the Country Committees
Act contrary to the Laws of the Land -- How they ordinarily turn well-affected
Men out of their Freeholds, and Goods, Imprison, and beat their Persons,
without any known Charge, Accuser, or Witness against them; nay, Murder them,
as in the Case of Dr. Rawleigh, Killed in Prison at Wells by the Committees
Marshal; and the poor Men Murdered at Bridge-Water, whose Bloods were shed
like the Blood of a Dog, and no real Prosecution thereof. -- How they Excluded
all other Magistracy, Engrossing to themselves the Power of Sheriffs, Justices
of Peace, Churchwardens, etc. in an Arbitrary way; keeping Troops of Horse
upon Pay and Free Quarters, for their Guard, like the Thirty Tyrants of Athens;
and if any but speak of calling them to give an Account, they presently Vote
him a Delinquent, and Sequester him.

The History of Independency, P. 46. Anthony Nichols was Arrested upon the way
into Cornwall by the Army, and dispightfully used, and when the General was
inclined to free him, Cromwell told him he was a Traitor to the Army, You see
now upon whom they meant to fix the Peoples Allegiance, for where no Allegiance
is Due, there can be no Treason. P. 47. The Speaker pulled a Letter out of his
Pocket from the General, and General Council of the Army; it was accompanied
with a Remonstrance of Villainous Language and Threats against those Members
that Sat (while the Two Speakers were with the Army; calling them Pretended
Members, charging them (in General) with Treason, Treachery, a Breach of Trust;
and protested if they shall presume to stir before they have cleared
themselves, that they did not give their Assent to such and such Votes, they
should sit at their peril, and he would take them as Prisoners of War and try
them at a Council of War. What King of England ever offered so great a Violence
to the Fundamental Privileges of Parliament, as to deny them the Liberty of
Voting I and No freely? Certainly, the little Finger of a Jack Cade, or a Watt
Tyler, is far heavier than the Loins of any King. P. 66. In the Third Year of
KING CHARLES, the Lords and Commons in their Petition of Right (when not above
2000, or 3000 Soldiers were Thinly Quartered upon the People but for a Month
or Two, Complained thereof to His Majesty, as a great Grievance, contrary to
the Laws, and Customs of the Realm, and humbly Prayed as their Right and
Liberty, according to the Laws and Statutes of this Kingdom, that he would
remove them, and that his People might not be so burdened in times to come;
which His Majesty Graciously Granted. Yet now we are Ten Thousand times more
oppressed with them, and if these Quarterers offer Violence, or Villainous
usage to any man in his House, or Family; or commit Murder, or Felony, they
are Protected against the Laws, and Justice of the Land, and Triable only by a
Council of War at the Headquarters, where a Man can neither obtain Justice,
nor seek it with safety -- Though the Kings Oversights must be Tragically
published to the World, yet the Heinous Crimes of the Godly must ly hid under
the Mask of Religion: P. 91. You now make all that is or can be near and dear
to the People, liable to the Passions of Three Committee Men to Judge and
Execute, according to their Discretion without Law, or so much as a formality
thereof.

The Second Part of the History of Independency. P. 23. It is not all the (...)
the Thousandth Part of them, but a few Covetous Ambitious Men, that desire to
bring the King to Capital Punishment, and Subvert our Fundamen al Government.
P. 34. One day an Officer of the Army having taken some Members going to the
House, and secured them in the Tobacco Room, under Guard; the Speaker not being
able to muster enough to make a House, was fain to send to the said Officer, to
lend him his said Prisoners to make up a free Parliament, P. 35. They
Garrisoned Black Friars, and St. Paul's, Reforming it from the Church of God to
a Den of Thieves, Stable of Horses, and Brothel of Whores. P. 56 The Commons
Resolved to rid their Hands of a KING and LORDS together.

And now Reader, I shall most earnestly entreat thee to Consider whether
LUDLOW, and His Accomplices, or KING CHARLES the First, offered greater Violence
to the LAWS of this Kingdom; yea whether the Distemper which the Body Politic
Labored under by reason of the Miscarriages of the King in His Government,
were not as Inconsiderable, in Comparison of what it suffered by the Outrages
of the Prevailing Rebels, as a very Tolerable Ague of short continuance would
be in a Man's Body, in Comparison of the PLAGUE. I think it necessary I should
take particular Notice of LUDLOW's Attempt to expose the Memory of this Blessed
Prince to the Odium of the Populace, by telling them that he did lend Eight
Ships to the French King to Fight against the Miserable Protestants of Rochel,
Letter P. 10. I shall not undertake to Explain the Intrigues of that Affair,
the Lending of those Ships, but this. I shall Affirm that most certainly it was
not done out of any Ill Will to the French Protestants; and that the King was
so far from being an Enemy to those Protestants, that he was their Great
Friend, and most Charitable Assistant: Which I shall here prove by the
Testimony of those Protestants themselves, in a Letter to His Majesty, in the
Suppliment to the CABALA; P. 204.

The Protestants of France to CHARLES King of Great Britain.
SIR,
THe Knowledge, and Resentment, which it has pleased your Majesty to take of
the Misery of the afflicted Churches of France, has given us the boldness to
awaken Your Compassion in such measure as our Calamities are Aggravated by the
unmerciful Rigor of our Persecutors; and as the present Storm does Threaten
near at hand the Total Ruin and Lamentable Destruction of that which the Mercy
of God had yet kept entire unto us, since the Desolation of Rochel: And as we
have adored with Humility the Judgment in this bad Success (which we impute
only to his Wrath justly kindled against us for our Sins) so our silence could
be thought no less than Ingratitude, if we had not at the beginning of our
Assembly resolved the most Humble and Affectionate acknowledgment, which we now
render to your Majesty, for the Great Succor which you have sent us,
Interesting your self so far in the grief of our Oppression, and in the means
of our Deliverance.


P. 208. The Duke of Rohan to His Majesty of Great Britain; 12 of March. 1628.

THe greatest Support which God has raised unto them, is the Succor our
Churches have, and do look to receive, from Your Majesty.

In the same Book P. 232 I find a Council Table Order against hearing Mass at
Ambassadors Houses; March 10. 1629.

At this Sitting, the Lord Viscount Dorchester Declared, That His Majesty being
informed of bold and open repair made to several places, and especially to the
Houses of Foraign Ambassadors, for the hearing of Mass, which the Laws and
Statutes of this Kingdom do expressly forbid his Subjects to frequent: And
considering in His Princely Wisdom, both the Public Scandals, and dangerous
Consequence thereof, is resolved to take present Order for the stopping of this
evil before it spread it self any farther: And for this purpose has Commanded
me to acquaint the Board with his Pleasure in that behalf, etc. By this and a
multitude of other Passages in the Reign of this Blessed Prince, it is manifest
how far He was from being a Papist, though to Persons of that Persuasion, He
often showed his Christian Lenity and Royal Compassion. His own words are most
Efficacious to convince the most stubborn of his Enemies of the sincerity of
His RELIGION, which was always accompanied with Joy unspeakable and full of
Glory, so that in all his Conflicts, He was more than Conqueror. His
Expressions are so Genuine and Unaffected, so Lively and Vigorous, that any man
who understands them must needs be sensible, that they are the True and Lively
POURTRAITURE of his Conceptions. I shall therefore recite some more of them
upon the many Jealousies raised, and Scandals cast upon the King, to stir up
the People against Him.

I will not justify beyond humane errors and frailties my Self, or my
Counselors; they might be subject to some miscarriages, yet such as were far
more repairable, than those Enormous extravagancies, wherewith some men have
now, even wildred, and almost quite lost both Church and State.

No men were more willing to complain, than I was to redress what I saw in
reason was either done, or advised amiss; and this I thought I had done, even
beyond the expectation of moderate Men; who were sorry to see Me prone even to
injure Myself, out of a Zeal to relieve My Subjects.

Time will best inform My Subjects, that those are the best preservers of their
true Liberty, who allow themselves the least Licentiousness against, or beyond
the Laws.

They will feel it at last to their cost, that it is impossible those men
should be really tender of their Fellow Subjects Liberties, who have the
hardiness to use their King with so severe restraints; against all Laws, both
Divine, and Humane.

For Mine Honor I am well assured, that as Mine Innocence is clear before God,
in point of any Calamities they object; so My Reputation shall like the Sun
(after Owls and Bats have had their freedom in the Night, and darker times)
rise and recover it self to such a degree of Splendor, as those feral Birds
shall be grieved to behold, and unable to bear. For never were any Princes more
glorious than those whom God has suffered to be tried in the Furnace of
Afflictions, by their Injurious Subjects. Nor shall their black vails be able
to hide the shineing of My Face, while God gives Me a heart frequently and
humbly to converse with him, from whom alone are all the Traditions of true
Glory and Majesty.

Thou, O Lord, know My Reproach and my Dishonor, My Adversaries are all
before thee.

My Soul is among Lions, even them that are set on fire, even the sons of men,
whose teeth are spears and arrows, their tongue a sharp sword.

Mine Enemies Reproach Me all the day long, and those that are mad against Me,
are sworn together.

O my God, how long shall the sons of men turn my glory into shame? how long
shall they love vanity, and seek after lies?

Teach me David's patience, and Hezekiak's devotion, that I may look to thy
mercy through man's malice, and see thy justice in their sin.

Though they curse, do thou bless, and I shall be blessed, and made a blessing
to my People.

To them He shall be a Blessing indeed, in this and in all future Ages, who
shall have the Grace to Imitate the Example of His Virtues, by a sincere and
constant dependence upon the Divine Wisdom, Power and Goodness, Loving in
Sincerity the worst of their Enemies, and rejoicing in the greatest of their
Sufferings.

FINIS.

