A NEW REMONSTRANCE FROM IRELAND: DECLARING The barbarous cruelty and
inhumanity of the Irish Rebels against the Protestants there.

ALSO AN EXACT DISCOVERY of the manners and behavior of the Irish Renegadoes
here in England, with infallible Notes whereby they may be known and
distinguished, together with the places they usually frequent, and many other
things remarkable.

LONDON, Printed for GEORGE TOMLINSON. 1642.

A Remonstrance of the manners and behavior of the Irish Renegadoes, with many
other Passages very remarkable.
THe Irish Renegadoes go not without the company of women, whom they call their
wives, but where they were married, or by whom, or when, God knows: but
instead of a ring, they put a cord about their middles, and so it is concluded
on very ridiculously. Their traveling here is most commonly by their false
passes, which they make good in this manner. When they are in Ireland, they
know that wheresoever they land, they shall be fitted with a Scribe to make them
any writing to fit them for any parts of England, go they where they will, and
commonly most of them are for london, quickly getting acquaintance of Noblemens
Footmen, and such like, and then they are sure to be provided of any bodily
sustenance; and these kind of people do rob the poor and the lame of all such
provision as they should have given them at the gates.

Now when these Renegadoes have been so long in London, that they have gotten
store of money and good clothes, then down they come about S. James tide to
Bristoll in their old clothes, and false Passes made at London, because they
will beg by the way, and send their other clothes by the Carriers, and when
they are at Bristoll, away go the old clothes, and put on their new, and then
have they a false landing brief, from Minhead or some other landing places
near adjoining, and other false writings, as if it came from some great man of
authority in Ireland, which shall certify their great losses there, as if they
were of the Gentry indeed, when as they never lay in a bed of their own in all
their lives. They are exceeding prevailing by reason of the smoothness of
their language, and get great store of money; for the countrey-gentlemen and
gentlewomen are soon won by them, giving them freely of any thing their house
affords, when the distressed people of our own nation shall be sent empty away,
with ill words, and many times stripes most cruelly. These kind of people live
at great expenses: I have heard the Hostess of their Inn in Bodminster Parish
declare to some the last S. James tide, that five of these begging rogues in
six days spent seventeen pound at her house: and for their better sort of
apparel, it is not mean, but of rich skarlet and gold lace: it may be thought,
that they play the parts of Gypsies, or Juglers, and break shops in London for
their costly things, which are of no small price, but as one of them said, his
suit of apparel was not so little worth as 35 pound. In the time of Gondamores
being here in England, he made great use of these, and sent them into all parts
of the Kingdom for spies, giving them money to buy perfumes and other
trinkets; and by this means they as men of trades ranged all the kingdom over,
and were so perfect in the height and strength of all our forts, and also in
knowing the shelves and depth of all ports, that there was not any shipping, of
what burden soever, but they knew well where such and such a ship of any burden
might arrive, and where not.

They are wonderful intelligencers, and give great advantage to the enemy: for
not long since an English soldier being taken prisoner in Spain, and
questioned before the Dons and other great ones appointed for the time and
place, they asked him how high the hoe at Plimmouth was, and he told them it
was very high; nay said one of them, who had a writing in his hand, it is no
higher then a man may well leap over with a staff: now there were behind him
two Irish Friars who had given this Nobleman this writing, with diverse others
the like, who had been any where in our Kings Dominions for the advantage of
the King of Spain their Master, as they affirmed.

M. Scot, a worthy Divine, and the Preacher appointed to the English Companies
in Vtright in Holland, having declared in three Books the damnable plots and
devices of Gundamore whiles he was in England, Gundamore vowed his death, and
gave good store of money to one of these renegadoes, absolved him of all his
sins (as this animal thought) and sent him into Holland to murder this good
man: this villain having been in Holland a whole year and a half to that
purpose, at length came upon him unawares in a place where he meditated nigh
the walls of the City under Pine trees, with his sword thrust him through the
body, supposing he had killed him, and ran away with his sword naked in his hand;
some soldiers being nigh at hand, met him, and held him, whilst others went
to find out the business; and when they found M. Scot grovelling on the
ground, they asked him how it was with him, and who had done this villainous
mischief unto him? he answered, he did not know: then they brought this man to
him, who, when he saw that he was not dead, was much vexed, and said, art thou
yet alive? and he said, yea; and art thou he that have done this unto me? he
said, yea: M. Scot said, wherefore have thou done it? and he said, if I have
slain thee, I am saved; if not, I am damned: so M. Scot prayed God to forgive
this murderer, and to forgive him, and so died: and the other being executed,
repented not at all, but declared privately to some wherefore he did it.

An Englishman coming to Dublin, and being landed, he asked if he might have
any good lodging nigh at hand, an Irish man in a mantle hearing it, told him,
if he would go along with him, he should have good; the party went with him to
a victualling-house, and sitting down in a chair, called for some Tobacco (the
Hostess being a widow, and not within) the Irish man told him he should have
it presently: the English man drew his purse, wherein was good store of coin,
and putting his hand therein to draw out some money, the Irish man standing by,
stabbed him with his skeane in diverse places of the body, snatched his purse
from him, ran away, and threw his skene all bloody over a chamber door where
an English man being drunk lay asleep. The Hostess coming in and seeing a man
sitting in the chair as though he were asleep, went nigh him, and perceiving
the blood run from him in abundance, cried with a loud voice to her neighbors,
and said, see here, the man is wounded, and they coming in, the man presently
died, but none could tell how: the Officers searching the house found an
English man on a bed sleeping, and the skene in his chamber which the man was
killed withal, and they carried him to prison, and this innocent man was executed
for the Irish man's fact, as afterward the villain confessed. This Irish man
traveled toward Waterford, and went into an English man's house on the way side
not four miles from Waterford, and staid there two days: his manner was to
sleep all day, and drink all night: it being market day on the Saturday at
Waterford, it happened that a Tanner rode by which knew the man of the house,
and he called to him, asking him how he did; the Host answered, he thanked God,
very well, and made him drink; so away went the Tanner toward the market,
promising to ca^l there again at his return: all this while the murderous
villain lay listening on his bed, supposing that the Tanner would receive money
at Waterford, and come there with it, thinking if he could get him to drink
with him by any wile, he should pay deerly for it before they parted. Now it
came to pass as he returned that he drank with him, and they were merry, and
the Irish man kept him there till night, so that he was fain to lodge with him:
toward midnight, the Tanner being soundly asleep, this villain cut off his
head, and wrapped straw about his body and it, and having a candle, and every
body asleep in the house, he set the straw on fire, and away he went, and took
the Tanners money, cloak, and horse in the field, and rode to Waterford toward
the morning, and harbored himself in an Irish Alehouse: all this while the
house burnt, the host, his wife and daughter slept, until the straw in the
beds burnt their feet, and did not know how to help themselves, but all the
house being burnt, they thought that the Tanner and their murderous guest had
been likewise burnt: but when they searched, there was nothing to be found but
the Tanners bones, and his head severed from his body: then they suspected this
villain, who took away the Tanners horse, and were confident of the treachery.
Now some Irish neighbors and a Constable came and apprehended the Host and his
daughter, and said, that they had robbed the Tanner of great store of money,
and burnt the house of purpose; and so led them away to Waterford, and put them
in prison, by the command of the Mayor: but by great friendship they got
liberty for their daughter to beg food for them, and to seek for this villain,
and it happened, that as the maid was at the kay, prying to find him out, that
he came (with the Tanners cloak on his back) unto a Master of an English Bark,
to agree for his passage for England, and the maid knowing him by the cloak,
cried out alowd, and said, This is the man that has burnt my Fathers house,
and this is the Tanners cloak: the villain hearing this, ran through a long
street with his sword drawn, and no Irish man would stir to take him: but a
soldier ran on him, and threw him down, and other soldiers did help to aid
him; and being brought before Sir George Flower, he confessed the burning of the
house, and on the gallows, the other murder at Dublin, and he was hanged and
quartered for this petty treason.

The rebels lately took an English Minister, and put him to wonderful
torments. First they did saw his legs off in the middle, and then after about
the middle of the thighs, and then his arms above the wrists, and also above
the elbow, and then cut two slices from his breasts, always charging him to
alter his Religion, which he would not do for all their tortures; then they
took a hot iron and pierced it to his heart, and so he died.

The late Bishop of Limrick, Doctor Web, a Wiltshire man, a great Scholar, and
a worthy housekeeper, being in the Castle of Limrick as long as the Castle
held out, unto four days, for he being buried in linen, as fit as the time
and place required, after the yielding up of the said Castle, when it was in
the Rebels hands, they took him out of his grave, and unstript him out of his
linen, and abused his body very basely, in a most barbarous manner, without
all Christianity or humanity.

My Lord Esmond, who commands the Fort of Dungarvan, and has done worthily in
these late wars in Ireland, having one only son, who before the wars was
thought to be a good Protestant, but is now quite revolted, and sides with the
Rebels, and sent his father word, that if he could at any time come within
reach of him, he would sheath his sword in his bowels: his father receiving
this answer, was much grieved at it, having no more sons. Since this his
message to his father, he being then and always among the Rebels, who know not
well what to judge of him, sent word to his Father, that if he would not yield
up the Fort of Dungarvan unto them, they would hang up his son: well, said my
Lord, and I pray you do it; for if you do it not, if ever I take him, I will.
This is according to the Scripture; for in the latter age shall be the father
against the son, and the son against the father. I pray GOD be merciful to us
all.

There was at S. JAMES tide last an Irish man which came newly from Ireland,
and went into Bristoll, and a Warder that kept the gate, with some others, took
notice of him, and followed him; the Irish man went boldly where the Mayor was
in the Tolsie, and delivered him his landing brief, hoping for a reward; it
happened, that at the instant that there was an English Gentleman in the Tolsie
which came newly from Ireland also, who beholding well this Irish man's
countenance, at length took hold of him, and said, Gentlemen, this is the man
which rifled me in Ireland, and took from me any money and my clothes, and
thereupon I will take my oath, and so he did, and they committed him to prison
till the Sessions.

Many of the Irish that are lately come over into England, and have robbed and
undone many good English men, deny themselves to be Irish, and say they are
Scots: that ye may the better discover them, observe these directions following.

1. Cause them to pronounce any word which has the letter H In it, as Smith,
Faith, etc. which they cannot do, not one among an hundred, but pronounce
Smith, Smit; and Faith, Fait.

2. To know their Religion, cause them to say their prayers, as the Pater
Noster and the Creed, in English, which they cannot well do.

3. Uncover their bosoms, most of them wear Crucifixes, especially the women.

4. Concerning their false passes, separate them asunder, and so examine them.

Captain George Courtney, a man of great descent, son unto Sir William
Courtney, of the house of Pawdra in Devonshire, dwelling at Newcastle in
Munster in Ireland, a man of great authority there, and chief Constable of
Limrick Castle and Askeiton, with many other Castles under his command, being a
man of other great revenues, and a noble housekeeper, and one that delighted
to see his tenants thrive, has lately had a sharp and bitter time of his being
in the Castle of Limrick, for he held out long after the city was in the
enemies hands, and though there was a great want of victuals and ammunition, so
that many were starved, yet had it not been more for their sakes which were
ready to starve then otherwise, he would never have come thence upon any
condition or quarter; he is a man of an undaunted spirit, and nobly minded, and
religiously affected in the true way of a Protestant: the shallowness of my
capacity is not able to give him the least part of his well-deservings, but
being a Warder formerly to the Castle of Limrick; I presumed to write part of
his worth, not forgetting the valiant mind of his eldest son Sir William
Courtney, who lately has adventured himself with a few in battle, against a
multitude, and had a great victory of the Rebels.

Of the barbarous cruelty of the Irish ye hear daily, being people of no
Religion, but as heathens, and cannot yield any account of their faith,
therefore let us think of them as they are; and so I leave them, villainous and
faithless for the most part.

There are two or three towns in Ireland, Waterford, Washford and Dungarvan,
very perilous for the advantage of the Rebels there, for of late the Dunkerks
have brought thither great store of powder and other ammunition, especially at
Dungarvan, and those Dunkerks arrive daily out of those parts, and take Barks
both of the English and Scots, and bring in there, and the poor men of those
Barks are prisoners, and in great misery.

These things here inserted, being of truth, and not false, are the better
worth observing, wherefore, Gentle Reader, afford me your good opinion, and I
shall be beholden unto you.

THOMAS EMITIE.


