AN EXCLAMATION TO All those that Love the LORD JESUS in SINCERITY, Against an
APOLOGY Written by an Ingenious Person. For Mr. COWLEY'S Lascivious and
Profane VERSES.

By a Dutiful Son of the CHURCH of ENGLAND.

Heic, neque more probo videas, neque voce serena
Ingentes trepidare Titos, cum Carmina lumbum
Intrant, and tremulo scalpuntur ubi intima Versu.
Persius Sat. 1. London, Printed for Robert Clavel, 1670.

AN EXCLAMATION TO All those that Love the LORD JESUS in SINCERITY.
SUch a Cloud of Dust has risen up amongst us by the Tumultuous Courses of
Ignorant men, Running from the Orders of Our Church concerning things
Indifferent (which themselves are sometimes pleased to call shadows, and
Circumstances) that we can hardly discern the great Danger we are fallen into
of becoming Guilty of a base Connivence to some Public, and most Contagious
Impieties, which are as it were established by a Law; I mean, are Obtruded upon
us with such Confidence, as if there were nothing in the Laws of Our Church, or
State to Oppugn and Suppress them: I shall Instance only in the Reprinting of
several Verses of Mr. COWLEY'S (since his Death) some of them so Notoriously
Lascivious, others so Profane, that it cannot be easily imagined how the DEVIL
could be more Gratified in any thing, then in the Plausible recommendation of
them to the Sprightly Youths, and Pregnant Wits of this Nation. In Opposition
to the Black Attempt of the Publisher of them, I shall here first Recite my
Thoughts of them, which I Published in a certain Epistle about eleven years
since: And then I shall make some Animadversions on what has been Written of
late in the Defense of these Artifices of Baseness, and Impurity, for which I
trust Mr. COWLEY was truly Penitent. For when He Died He Enjoined the Person,
whom Before GOD, and His Holy Angels I now Charge with the Guilt of this
Impurity, to revise his Works, and to blot out whatsoever might seem the least
offense to Religion, or good Manners. The words in the Epistle above mentioned
are these: And now Reader, if thou be a CHRISTIAN indeed, I shall entreat
thee by all the Love that thou owe to Him that was CRUCIFIED for thy sake,
that thou would Oppose with all thy Might, that Vain Spirit of Foolish
Talking, and Writing, which is gone abroad into the World to the great
Dishonor of HIS Name, who has told us that we shall give an Account of Every
Idle Word. And here I cannot but Exclaim aloud against some of Mr. COWLEY'S
Verses; particularly that part of his Book, which he entitles The Mistress, in
which there are several Expressions so provoking to Speculative Lust, and
Uncleanness, that I cannot conceive how a CHRISTIAN that casts his Eye on them,
can think otherwise, then that the Author did either Forget that There is a
GOD, or that it is Sinful to be Lascivious. What Profaneness also is this
Author guilty of, who uses these Sacred Words, HEAVEN, DEITY, DIVINE PRESENCE,
FAITH, etc. to set forth his Dissolute Amorous Conceptions! (I should rather
have said Wanton, or Lascivious, Amorous being too gentle a term) Let any man
of Common Reason judge whether the Minds of any Readers Vitiously Inclined (and
such surely are all those that Delight in those POEMS) be not as apt to be
wholly Debauched and Corrupted by a Work of this Nature, as those men's Bodies
are to take Infection, when they are amongst Sick Folk, who are already
disposed to the Disease. Alas! Alas! Are not men apt enough of themselves to be
Vain in their Imaginations! Must the Froth, and Vanity of Wanton Minds be
wrought up, and increased by the Wit, and Studies of such Learned Persons, and
those owning the Name of CHRISTIANS! O Tempora! O Mores! I desire the Reader
would take Notice, that This was Published in the Phanatick Times, after Mr.
COWLEY'S Book (as I was credibly informed) had been Publicly Commended without
Exception by an Eminent Person then in Oxford. And now let us see what the
Apologist can say for the things I so much Abhor.

If there needed any excuse to be made that his Love-Verses should take up so
great a share in his Works, it may be alleged that they were composed, when he
was very young. But it is a vain thing to make any kind of Apology for that
sort of Writings. If Devout, or Virtuous Men will superciliously forbid the
minds of the young, to adorn those subjects about which they are most
conversant: They would put them out of all capacity of performing graver
matters, when they come to them. For the Exercises of all Men's Wits, must be
always proper for their Age, and never too much above it: And by practice, and
use in lighter Arguments, they grow up at last to excel in the most weighty. I
am not therefore ashamed to commend Mr. Cowley's Mistress. I only except one or
two Expressions, which I wish I could have prevailed with those that had the
right of the other Edition to have left out. But of all the rest I dare boldly
pronounce that never yet so much was written on a Subject so Delicate, that can
less offend the severest rules of Morality. The whole Passion of Love is
intimately described, with all its mighty Train of Hopes, and Joys, and
Disquiets. Besides this amorous tenderness, I know not how in every Copy there
is something of more useful Knowledge very naturally, and gracefully
insinuated, and every where there may be something found, to inform the minds
of wise Men, as well as to move the hearts of young Men or Women.

The Author of this Empty Rhetoric must not be Over-Angry if I tell him that
it puts me in mind of a far greater piece of Wit (and that Accompanied with
Honesty) delivered by an Heathen Poet: Fur es, ait, Pedio. Pedius quid? Crimine
rasis,
Librat in antithetis --
A Fine Color for a Lascivious Poem, this, An Intimate Description of the
whole Passion of Love! But what does the man Intend? Is he in good earnest of
this Opinion, that it is Requisite that those Ingenious Young men, that are much
addicted to Venery, should Exercise their Phansies in Composing the most
Accurate Expressions of the Pleasures they take in the Imagination only or in
the Grossest Acts of Carnality; And that for this reason, that their Phansies
so Exercised in their Youth will make them the better Poets, or Rhetoricians,
when they come to a Riper Age? It may be alleged, says He, that they were
composed when he was very young. But by Publishing them so many years after, He
gave the World a sad Instance of that Saying, Quo semel est imbuta recens, etc.
If He had Observed the Instruction of the Wise Man, Remember thy Creator in the
days of thy youth, He would certainly even in those Days have Applied his
Mind to things Pleasing in His Sight, Who tells us that we shall give Account
in the Day of Judgment of every Idle Word.

It is a vain thing, etc. It is a vain thing indeed to make any kind of Apology
for that sort of VVritings in any Part of the world, not altogether Heathenish,
or Apostate from the Practice of the CHRISTIAN Religion; for such an Apology
will certainly redound to the Shame, at least to the Infamy of the
(Unrelenting) Author.

If Devout, or Virtuous Men will superciliously forbid, etc. Since no Devout or
Virtuous Men, as Such, can do any thing Superciliously, whether this passage be
not most notoriously Foolish and Impertinent, let any one judge, who is himself
a Person of True Honor and Virtue.

I am not ashamed, says He, to commend Mr. COWLEY'S MISTRESS: And I trust I
shall never be ashamed to Confess the Faith of CHRIST Crucified, and manfully
to fight under his Banner against Sin, the World, and the Devil: And with this
Resolution I Bid Defyance to him as an Enemy of the Cross of CHRIST; and Charge
him with the Guilt of Violating the Obligation laid on him by Mr. COWLEY,
(when he recommended to his Care the revising of all his works) That he should
be sure to let nothing pass, that might seem the least offense to Religion, or
Good Manners. To destroy all plausible Pretenses of the Innocence of this (...)
(expressly forbidden by the Holy Apostle, Coloss. 3.8.) I doubt not but by GODS
Assistance I shall in a few words clearly Demonstrate that such a Tenent, viz.
that It is Inoffensive to good Manners, is wholly Destructive to the CHRISTIAN
Religion, whose main Scope, and Drift is this, to make Man Partaker of the
Divine Nature through a sense of His Interest in GOD Assuming the Humane Nature
to Sanctify Him wholly in SPIRIT, SOUL, and BODY. Now I boldly averr to All
the world ( Despising the Shame of being never so much Reproacht by men Puffed up
by their Fleshly Mind) that GOD INCARNATE is the Principal Object even of Our
Passionate or Sensitive Love: And that the Habit of Exercising this PASSION
Directly upon CHRIST, and All Our other PASSIONS, or Sensitive Affections (upon
their various Objects) in a way of Subserviency thereunto, is the thing Chiefly
implied in the Sanctification of the SOUL and BODY, viz. as the SOUL is taken
in Contradistinction to the SPIRIT: But I conceive that the Sensible Heats
resulting from this Divine PASSION are in the Abhorrency of whatever is
Inconsistent therewith, and Apt to Extinguish it, then in the Direct Embraces
of its Object. If any Learned man shall find upon his thoughts any Objections
or Scruples to be proposed against what I have now written on this Mystical
Subject, I should be Glad to undertake the Solution of them, if he would
propose them in Latin, but I am very Averse from speaking of These Things at
large, Directly, and in the most Accurate Terms in the Hearing of the Vulgar,
being well Assured that the Power, and Virtue of this Truth may be Conveyed
into any Pious, and VVell-Dispos'd Soul in other Terms, then what will Convince
Gainsayers, etc. Now whether if so Great a WIT as Mr. COWLEY had Employed his
Youthful FIRE in the Exercise of such a PASSION, as would have made him to Cry
out unto GOD with the Spouse in the Canticles, Draw me, we will run after thee;
And to say with that Glorious Martyr St. Ignatius (...), My Love was Crucified;
and with that Mirror of Wit, Learning and Virtue, Prudentius (speaking of the
Name of CHRIST) O nomen praedulce mihi, Lux and Decus and Spes,
Praesidiumque meum, requies o certa laborum,
Blandus in ore Sapor, fragrans Odor, irriguus Fons,
Castus amor, Pulchra Species, Syncera Voluptas.
Whether, I say, if he had so Employed his Youthful FIRE, or Amorous
Constitution, it would not have been more to the Advantage of himself, and
others, then the Pleasing himself with the Writing of those wanton
Imaginations, I leave to the Consideration of those to whom this Paper is
chiefly Directed, viz. those that LOVE the LORD JESUS in Sincerity. But to
evince this great and important Truth to the meanest Capacity, viz. that this
cursed Tenent, that the Writing, or Reading of such Verses, as I here pronounce
so Odious, and Detestable (unless with an Holy Scorn and Indignation) is not
Offensive to Religion, or Good Manners; is wholly Destructive to the CHRISTIAN
Religion, I shall produce this plain Text of Scripture: Whatsoever ye do in
word or deed, do all in the Name of the LORD JESUS, giving thanks to GOD, and
the FATHER by him. Coloss. 3.17. Now if any man shall say that the making of
such Verses, etc. may be judged to be a work done in the Name of the LORD
JESUS, I shall only bid him to consider that our GOD is a Consuming Fire!

Iamblicus witnesses that Pythagoras and his Followers did hold that all our
Actions should tend to the sincere Acknowledgment, and service of the DEITY:
His very words are these ( De Vita Pythag. c. 28) (...). A blush would well
become the youthful cheeks of those whom this Apologist encourages in their
witty impieties, at the reading of this. Here I cannot but use the words of the
truly Learned Dr. CASAUBON (in a late Treatise of Credulity, and Incredulity,
p. 140.) O that Christians, or rather men professing Christianity, had as much
conscience, and sense of goodness, and piety as some Heathens have had! I shall
take the Confidence to tell this Gentleman (who contrary to the Request of his
dying Friend) has disturbed the CHRISTIAN world with the publication of these
filthy Lines (which certainly may be rightly termed Simulachra and pabula
amoris) that even the Epicurean Lucretius would have scorned this Action of his.

Sed fugitare decet (says he, Lib. 4.) Simulachra and pabula Amoris,
Absterrere sibi, atque alio convertere mentem.
Perhaps those who flight my words will be somewhat affected with what I shall
here collect out of Mr. Henry Vaughans Preface to his Book entitled Silex
Scintillans: SACRED POEMS, and private EJACULATIONS. A large Encomium of this
excellent Gentleman I find amongst the Poems of the incomparable Mrs. Katherine
Philips, (who I presume) by her acquaintance with Mr. COWLEY was the instrument
of the great and good GOD to excite him to that sense of Piety, which he
discovered in that desire above mentioned, that his works should be revised,
etc. O that he had lived to have blotted out those naughty things (particularly
his wicked Encomium of that disgrace of Our Nation, that detestable Apostate,
that LEVIATHAN Infidel) and to have testified his Repentance with his own Pen!
But the Judgments of GOD are unsearchable, and his ways past finding out.

Mr. Vaughans Repentance for the like Follies is by himself largely declared in
these following words:

Well it were for them, (the Authors of idle Poems*) if those willingly
studied, and wilfully published vanities could defile no spirits but their own;
but the case is far worse. These Vipers survive their Parents, and for many
ages after (like Epidemic Diseases) infect whole Generations, corrupting
always and unhallowing the best-gifted souls, and the most capable Vessels:
for whose Sanctification, and welfare the glorious Son of GOD laid down his
life, and suffered the precious blood of his blessed, and innocent heart to be
poured out.

A good wit in a bad subject is (as Solomon said of the fair and foolish woman)
like a Jewel of gold in a swines snout, Prove. 11.22. Nay the more acute the
Author is, there is so much the more danger, and death in the work. Where the
Sun is busy upon a Dunghill, the issue is always some unclean Vermin.

And here because I would prevent a just censure by my free confession, I must
remember that I my self have for many years together languished of this very
sickness; and it is no long time since I have recovered. But blessed be GOD for
it! I have by his saving assistance suppressed my greatest follies, and those
which escaped from me are (I think) as innoxious, as most of that vein use to
be; besides they are interlin'd with many virtuous, and some pious mixtures.
What I speak of them is truth, but let no man mistake it for an extenuation of
faults, as if I intended an Apology for them, or my self, who am conscious of
so much guilt in both, as can never be expiated without special sorrows, and
that cleansing, and precious effusion of my Almighty Redeemer: and if the world
will be so charitable as to grant my request, I do here most humbly, and
earnestly beg that none would read them.

But an idle or sensual subject is not all the poison in these Pamphlets.
Certain Authors have been so irreverently bold, as to dash Scriptures, and the
sacred Relatives of God with their impious conceits; And (which I cannot speak
without grief of heart) some of those desperate adventurers may (I think) be
reckoned amongst the principal, or most learned writers of English Verse.

The suppression of this pleasing and prevailing evil, lies not altogether in
the power of the Magistrate; for it will fly abroad in Manuscripts, when it
fails of entertainment at the Press. The remedy lies wholly in their bosoms,
who are the gifted persons, by a wise exchange of vain and vicious subjects for
divine Themes, and Celestial Praise. The performance is easy, and were it the
most difficult in the World, the reward is so glorious, that it infinitely
transcends it: for they that turn many to righteousness shall shine like the
stars for ever, and ever: whence follows this undeniable inference, That the
corrupting of many, being a contrary work, the recompense must be so too; and
then I know nothing reserved for them but the blackness of darkness for ever;
from which, O GOD, Deliver all penitent, and reformed Spirits.

The Divine PASSION I have been speaking of is expressed rarely well in several
of his Poems, particularly in one which he entitles Mount of Olives, which
begins thus.

When first I saw true BEAUTY, and thy Joys
Active, as light, and calm without all noise,
Shined on my soul, I felt through all my powers
Such a rich air of sweets, as Evening showrs
Fan'd by a gentle gale convey and breath
On some parcht bank, crowned with a flowery wreath;
Odors, and Myrrh, and Balm in one rich flood
O're-ran my heart, and spirited my blood;
My thoughts did swim in Comforts, and mine eye
Confessed, The World did only paint, and lie.
That the World is indeed such a Liar, they shall find by woeful experience, who
give Ear to the Songs of the SIRENS of this age, the charming Rhetoric of
seditious or lascivious Phansies.

If any Person of Learning, and Gravity find himself inclined to judge me Guilty
of Imprudence in publishing this Paper, I shall beseech him by the Mercies of
GOD to consider the advice I shall here give him in the Speech of that Noble
Martyr ROMANUS, as it is Recorded by Prudentius ((...) Hymn. 10)

Contemn praesens Vtile, o Prudens Homo,
Quod terminandum, quod relinquendum est tibi.
Omit Corpus rem sepulchri etc funeris,
Tend ad futuram Gloriam, perge ad DEUM:
Agnosce qui sis, Vince mundum, and saeculum.
For satisfaction to any man who shall think himself concerned in the
controversy I have here undertaken, I shall hereunto subscribe my Name: And I
do solemnly Promise, that if any Learned Person whatsoever shall undertake to
oppose me (either in public or in private) in this design to render such
Writings most odious and detestable to all those that have named the Name of
CHRIST; I shall give him an answer upon this condition, that he shall not
oblige me to conceal any Letters to be written upon this occasion (either his
or mine) if I shall conceive that the publication of them may any way conduce
to the Glory of GOD and the good of Men.

I shall conclude with that exhortation of the Blessed Apostle, Be not
deceived: Evil Communications corrupt good Manners. By those words of an
Heathen Poet: (...). He plainly upbraids those foolish men, who professing
Christianity, make excuses for that kind of wickedness which I here oppose, as
if (forsooth) much excess were to be allowed in Love, and even more in Poetry.

DIXI, and nulla meam vertet sententia mentem.

EDMUND ELYS Rector of East-Allington in Devon.

FINIS.

