THE COMPLETE BODY OF THE ART MILITARY: Exactly compiled, and gradually
composed for the Foot, in the best refined manner, according to the practice of
the Modern Times. Divided into Three BOOKS. The First, containing the Postures
of the Pike and Musket, with their Conformities, and the Dignities of Ranks and
Files: Their manner of joining to the completing of a Body: their several
Distances, Facings, Doublings, Countermarches, Wheelings, and Firings. With
diverse Experiments upon single Files. The Second, comprehending twelve
Exercises. Viz. Three with 24 Men. Three with 32 Men. Three with 64 Men. Three
with 144 Men.
The Third, setting forth the drawing up and exercising of Regiments after the
manner of Private Companies, with the forming Brigades, and Armies, the placing
of Cannon and Artillery, according to the practice of several Nations, Armies,
and Commanders in Chief. Together with the duties of all private Soldiers and
Officers in a Regiment, from a Sentinel to a Colonel. As also the duties of
the Military Watches. Lastly, directions for ordering Regiments or Private
Companies to Funeral Occasions. Illustrated with Variety of Figures of
Battle, very profitable and delightful for all Noble and Heroic Spirits, in
a fuller manner then has been heretofore published. By RICHARD ELTON, Sergeant
Major.

Cant. 3. 8. They all handled the Sword, and are expert in War. LONDON: Printed
by ROBERT LEYBOURN, in Monkswell Street near Creeplegate, MDCL.

portrait of Richard Elton engraved by John Droeshout after a portrait by W S
VERAET ACCVRATA EFFIGIES RICHARDI ELTONI GENEROSL BRISTOL NEC NON ARTIS
MILITARIS MAGISTIRI ANO 1644
If Rome unto Her conquering Ceasrs raise
Rich obelisks, to crown their deatfiles Praise,
What Monument to Thee must Albion rear,
To show Thy Motion in a brighter Sphere?
This Art's too dull to do it it is only done
Best by Thy Self, so hights' the World the Sun
We may admire thy Face, the Sculptor's Art;
But We are extasi'd at the inward Part
W S Fiut John Droeshout Sculp Lon


TO THE MIRROR of CHIVALRY, And HONOR of all MARTIAL DISCIPLINE, The most
Victorious Thomas Lord Fairfax HIS EXCELLENCY, CAPTAIN GENERAL of all
MILITARY FORCES for the PARLIAMENT OF ENGLAND. All Health and Happiness, here
and hereafter.
Most Eminent and Illustrious SIR. May it please Your Excellency,
THe Glory of all Arts is Action, the Honor of all Action is Virtue; the Crown
of all Virtues is Perfection: the Excellency whereof, (according to the
perfection of Humanity) is so essential in your Excellency, that you are
become, at once, the Wonder, and the Honor of Europe: Neither can that
immortal Fame of Yours be concealed from the rest of the habitable World, who
shall from age to age record, and from Antiquity to Infantry relate those
matchless Victories and unimitable Achievements which the Bounty and Blessing
of Heaven has enriched your Hand, and beautified your Name withal. In all
whose Honorable and succesfull Undertakings, I had an aim at no greater
happiness, then to have been the least Part in so Noble an Employment under
your Excellency, toward the perfecting of the Welfare and Happiness of this
Kingdom and Commonwealth, had not the Military affairs of this Honorable
Metropolis unavoydably engaged and obliged me to attend the service of their
own Militia.

And therein My Lord, I have spared neither Diligence nor Study that might
conduce to the great Work of Arms, then in Embrio, now in Perfection, excepting
only Opposition and Envy, which the greatest Honors never yet were free from:
A part of which Perfection has always flowed from the industry of the
Officers, and practice of the Students of that Warlike Academy, wherein,
although I have not (as a Member thereof) with such dexterity as Cadmus sent
out well experienced Soldiers in a Day, yet have I not sitten so idle, as
Lepidus, and wished to be warmed more from the Sun than my own Labors; of
which the effects are now upon the public Test, but more formidably under your
Excellencies censure: to whose Patronage and Protection I have presumed to
devoted the Eldest Son and Firstborn of all my forepast Studies, Practice and
employment in the gradation of Military affairs, for the space of a double
Apprentiship in that noble Science. All the following sheets, which relate to
that Heroic Subject, such as they are, and in such a dress as now they have
put on, submissively and primarily, present themselves with all their worth and
beauty, (if any be discernable within them) unto Your Excellency, as to their
tutelar Angel, and most Orthodox Warrior, that either Pole can boast of.

In confidence therefore, of your Excellencies native Candor toward all
Ingenuity (and more especially That, wherein your Own transcendent, and
unparalleld Honors are more perspicuously and really delineated, than all the
vain and empty Glory of the Dull and Phlegmatic Pretenders to Chivalry can Map
or Landscape by the effeminate hand of Flattery) this late abortive, in full
shape, due proportion, and (if Truth deceive me not) in just Maturity, has
broken from the Womb of my fourteen years endeavors to see the Light, both of
the censorious and judicious World, and in that Light it cannot but live; if
your Excellencies goodness shall vouch safe to foster it, and must not die,
except your displeasure please to wound it. And whether this shall live or die:
I shall not further aspire at any loftier pitch of Honor, than to have
Commission, to subscribe my self

Your Excellencies most humbly devoted Servant, Richard Elton.

The Right Honorable, the judicious and grave Trustees and Guardians of the
Militia of the Honorable City of LONDON.
The Lord Major, Isaac Pennington, Sir John Wollaston Knight; Thomas Atkins,
John Fowke, William Gibs, Thomas Foot, Christopher Pack, Rowland Wilson,
Aldermen of the City of London; Major General Philip Skippon, Colonel Francis
West, Lieutenant of the Tower, Col. John Venn, Col. Edmund Harvey, Francis
Allen, Major Richard Salway, Gregory Clement, Col. Owen Row, Col. Robert
Tichborne, Col. Matthew Shephard, Col. William Underwood, William Wyberd, John
Deathicke, John Strange, Daniel Tailor, Col. Richard Turner, Col. Nathaniel
Camfield, Lieut. Col. Doyley, Master Maurice Gethin, C aptain Nath: Lacy, Major
Edmund Waring, Col. Robert Manwaring, Col. John Heyes, Thomas Arnold, Samuel
Moyer, Thomas Noell, Stephen Eastwick, Richard Shute, Mark Hildersly, James
Russell, Tempest Milner, Captain Blackwell senior, John Pocock.
Right Honorable, Honorable; and ever to be honored Heroes:
WHose Honors jointly, and severally are all sprung more from your just
deserts, than ambitious desires; whose provident industry for this City and
Kingdoms security, shall more eternize your Names unto Posterity, than your
magnificent opulencie can make you after Death survive, and flourish in your
hopeful issue. Since it always seemed good in your Eyes, (even from my first
initiation into your Military Service, (more out of an in-nate humanity of
yours, wherewith your Honors abound, than from any merits of mine own, which I
acknowledge but mean) still to number Me for one and the same, both in degree
and service, in your Noble and Martial Employments, notwithstanding the many
changes occasioned by the necessity of our Times, when so many erratick stars
have shot from their Hemisphere, yet that you have been ever pleased, to
continue and fix me in the same Constant Orb, wherein I first moved as
Sergeant Major, under my Honorable Col. John Belamy sometimes a deserving Member
of your Honorable Society; and as if all this unusual Bounty and Honor had
been yet too litile, since you were further pleased, after a deliberate and
serious perusal of this ensuing Tract, The Complete body of Military Art, to
complete me so much more your Servant by obligation, in approving and
commending both my name and labors to the Press, thereby to make me more
eminent, if not more useful to the world. If I say after all these liberal
variety of your Honors favors, I should pretermit them as ungrateful; or
neglect them as forgetful; I might deservedly be rendered stigmatized unto
Futurity, with an iudeleble brand of infamy. But I have neither so slightly
studied your Honors, nor so easily read over my self, as to make so high a
Breach upon Humanity or Ethics. Accept therefore (Right Houorable and the
rest) this oblation and sacrifice of my Gratitude with as much aequanimity, as
it adresseth it self unto you with humility. It has but newly kissed the
triumphant Hand of our victorious Caesar, the very Prince and Master of War,
from whose glorious Tent, it has taken flight, to rest within your warlike
walls, where it was begotten, born, and bred, and where it shall (spite of
Envy) dwell, and inherit as legitimate (if your Honors deign to harbor it)
till Trophies lie forgotten, and Time shall be no more, what remains is only my
daily Orizon for all your Honors happiness, with the subscribed Attest of my
faithful duty in the Progress of your Military service, to which I stand in
duty and conscience obliged, and shall (God willing) perform to the utmost
faculties and endeavors of

Your Honors most strictly engaged Servant, Richard Elton.

To the truly valiant, and expertly accomplished Offificers and Commanders in
warlike Affairs, his fellow Soldiers of the Honorable Exercise, and Military
Meeting in that Martial AREA adjoining to Christ-Church LONDON. Major John
Haynes. Captain Henry Potter, Captain John Hynde, Captain William Johnson,
Master Richard Hobby, with the rest of those worthy Leaders and Soldiers of
that our Society, Respect and Greeting.

Honored SIRS, and my much endeared Friends:
IT is not my lowest happiness, nor my meanest Honor, that one and the same
Climate owns our Nativities, one and the same City allowed our Freedoms, one
and the same Society honors our Employment, and I hope one and the same
affection shall ever unite our Relations. When I cast up the revolution of time
wherein we have exercised together, and for so many years contemplate your
free and forward choice to honor me in the primary places of Direction and
Discipline, but more especially that remarkable honor of your respect and
favor, in the unanimous Election of me to be your Commander in Chief, upon one
of your grand and public Days of your drawing forth into the Champaigne, where
your several Exercises were the sole Object of that Days admiration, and the
subject of future Times applause. I must of necessity conclude my self your
Debtor, beyond the hope of satisfaction. Nor can the knowing world but confess,
that even in your private Academy, as able and as learned Soldiers have
commenced renowned Commanders, (excepting the two public Gardens Artillery,
and Military) as in any warlike Gymnasium, that this our Island can report off
for her own; yea, and to whose valor and discretion she owes as much for her
honor, and her safety. My earnest desires are, that your Resolves, and
Exercises in this Art, may never be retarded, but heightened to that glorious
pitch, that you may be able to send forth knowing Soldiers for all honorable
and lawful Engagements of war, whether Foreign or Domestic. Toward which I
humbly offer here my talent, which comes unto you as the latest Emissary from
the honorable Militia, to whom it has but now prostrated it is service; and the
best Orator of my grateful acknowledgment of your many and undeserved favors
toward me, for which I shall, in the most inviolable bonds of friendship, ever
express my self

Your observant Servant R. E.

To the impartial and judicious READER.
IF upon the first view of the Frontispiece or Title, thou may hapl^ lay by
the Book, as having already perused variety of Authors relating to the same
subject, and apply that of the Wise man, There is no new thing under the Sun, I
must reply with the Philosopher with reverence to the Preacher; and say, that
Ars longa, vita brevis, and that all the expert and learned in this art have
written before, and what succession shall dictate to the Ages to come, will be
too little to leave nothing new to perfect it, so long as there are those
Ratiocinia plurima, which the same wisest King complains off, those many
strange stratagems forged in the heart, and anvill'd in the Brain of man to
bring his ambitious and illicite Designs about: and so long as there are his
new inventions to offend, there must be our new preventions to defend that
Right He would abridge us off. The sad and heavy truth of these productions,
our own times have given us testimonies large enough off, and those have partly
occasioned the first conception of this Child of War, but the importunity of
friends have now mid-wiv'd it into the world, lest if it should have come forth
a Posthumall piece, after the Death of the Parent, it might not perhaps have
been born with perfect symmetrie, and due proportion in all the limbs of it is
Body; as it is now shaped, it is in thy hand to breed up for thy own service:
and I may modestly say, it will read thee some new Lectures, that thou will
confess have hardly yet been heard in the School of War, nor ever taught in our
Age but by

Thy well wishing and well meaning Friend Richard Elton.

To the Author.
HAd thy Compendium seen the light when first
Our English Nation Foes began to thirst
After the heart-blood of our Liberty,
To prick it is vital vein; our misery
Had been increast by it, so far as Art,
With Resolution joined, could play it is part.
Had thou led forth this Warrior at that tim
Thou had been guilty of this very crime,
Of joining nerves and sinew's to the Arm,
Of those who sought this Nation so great harm.
What strength's a number without discipline?
And in what volumes more then this of thine?
Happy we were in that Obscurity
Of this thy Tract; but not that from the eye
Of Englands friends 'twas hid: might there have been,
A view of it on this side of the Screen,
What aid should we have had? yet fiercer blows
To strik this Screen a side: we may suppose
The Quarrel would have changed; who should see
Elton's Compendium, have the immunitie,
And franchize of it is use, well we might
Fight to enjoy, this that does teach to fight.
He that shall look on thy Conformities
Of Ranks and Files, the several Dignities:
How these composed as Members do complete,
A Marshall-Body, fashions it so neat,
As that each part is fixed in's proper place,
And not Chaost together; but a face
Of distance, order's seen; he would soon say
The like's not not extant at this very day;
And well may I found forth the very same,
Who have beheld the book, to which the name
Of Elton's set; It Is for thy lasting praise
Which will survive the ancienst of thy days;
And for the honor of this Commonweal,
That it has bred one who by wound can heal,
That Is skillful to destroy, and thereby saves,
Our life of Freedom, keep it from the Graves,
The Enemies have dug; that it is Memory
(When therein laid) might not be seen in Story.
I Face about thy Facing to behold;
And face again, when once I do unfold
The work of others, to thy gallant Mode,
And there my thoughts do rally: for there is showed
Such Wheelings, Doublings, Firings, that report,
So loud the worth of no man in that sort.
As these do thine: Thy File-experiments,
Are pleasurable, and breeds discontents,
In none, but those, who'd be superlative,
In Martial Art: let them forbear to strive
Thee to excel: For who can go beyond
Perfection? thereat every man must stand
And exercise his Genius got so far.
Among the Planets let ^e fix this Star
Of Military Art, and round about
Twelve places Exercises: Then Mars look out
With glorious Splender, and in blood would wade,
For to maintain the rest are retrograde.
Ye men Strologicall, if ye would view,
These Signs below, ye must speak it as true
Astrology; that those above are bright,
But Mars arrayed in these of greatest light;
And wonder not to see a Man of War,
Of so much beauty as to want a scar
In Discipline; Order is the shield
Keep off advantages, often win the Field
As well as Valor: who can suffer rout
That Is on thy side? let him but face about
That fears to be overcome, and well observe
Thy Stations, Motions, eye where thy Reserve
Does stand, where Intervals are made
Where Cannons play: and he may drive a Trade
Of buying Courage; and by these Figures cast
On which side Conquest will triumph at last.
And if in Battle life is dispossessed
Of it is possession, (house of Clay the best)
By entry of force, tenure arbitrary
Thou have Mars clothed in Sable Military;
For to attend thy forced Funeral,
This is the sequel of thy manly fall;
Elton I Will leave thee at the very Grave,
But living: and when dead thou will sure have
Breath in the Body of this work, a Gaile
Unto posterity thy worth to sail.
Collonell John Backsteed.

An Ogdocostick on his much esteemed Friend the AUTHOR.
BArriff did bravely, Barr^ff's dead, yet lives;
His Worth^ull Work^, his Name a being gives.
^xcelling Elton, this of th^ne is such,
That after Ages shall applaud as much*
Thy fame; this thy Renowned Theory,
Will teach a Practique, raise thy Memory
When thou art dead, and lend thy Living Name
A Room in the Golden Calendar of Fame.
What thou have here with Skillful Study done,
I'^h Basis once by Barriff was begun,
Only begun, he framed a Preparation.
I saw it when it was in Agitation*
And surely had e're this at^ain'd it is Birth,
Had not he been translated from the Earth.
How new are thy Designs! How full of Worth?
How well approved? with what Rare Art set forth?
The Ingenious Reader that shall overlook,
And view, with single-sighted Eye thy Book,
Must say, that Writers all of the Art of War,
Of thee, both Foreign, and Domestique, far
Come short. Well may that Body be complete,
Where such a Genuine Genuis has his Seat.
This Art thou have compiled so exact,
So gradually composed throughout thy Tract
That well, the complete Body of that Art
It Is styled, where every Member, and each part
Of all Three Books, in manner best refined,
On him looks lovely, That to read's inclined.
Far be 't, o far from me, the thought to fl^ght
The Offensive, or more just Defensive light.
Bequeathed to us by Soldier's head, or hand,
Though born with us, or sprang from Foreign land;
Yea, or the knowing Skill of those that Thrive
In Mars, his Methods, and do now Survive:
I much commend them all, Praise worthy men:
Yet thee extol must most of all my Pen.
Plenty of Postures, and many Motions,
Various Figures, and Delightful Notions,
Of these large Volumes, I have seen; but who
Such Regimentall Forms as thine can show?
^achivell, ^arkham, Hexham* Weymouth, Ward,
Ael^^n, Bingham, Roberts, Cruso, Gerrard,
And diverse other, honored Sons of War,
Their famous, learned Tractates extant are;
Where we may read rare Castra-metations
With deep Stratagemick Demonstrations
Of the Persians, Thebans, and Athenians,
Of Lacedemons, and ^ae^nians,
With grave Grecian, and Italian Writers,
Brave Roman, and Macedonian Fighters,
Accomplished Achievements of Illyrians
Actings of the Asians, and Europaeans,
^odels of Marching, and levying Forces,
Incamp^ng, Trailing, Drilling Discourses
O^ both English-and, Low Country Spirits,
Whose victorious valor, Honor merits;
Bellona's Bleeding Battails, day and night
Both Ancient and Modern I might recite,
With Distances, Doublings, Wheelings, Facings,
And Front, Rear, Wings, Midst, and other placings:
Though with Minerva, mighty Mars conspire,
With their conjoined Cunning, Craft, and Ire,
Where Is thy Peer, Martial, or Military,
Private Practiser or Artillery?
Thine Initiation, yet is fresh in Mind,
When by thy self, thou were at first Assigned
For Christ-Church meeting, and entertained
Friendly. Which is weekly still maintained.
Thy little then, sithence so much acquired
Knowledge of Arms, is far and near admired.
What though the Ignoramus Doltishman
Do scoff, or Momus spit what Spite he can,
It matters not; here is no conceited froth,
It Is solid Substance, and Experience both,
True Discipline displayed no Painted Puff,
No Empty, Imped, or Bumbasted Stuff.
Heroicks all that love the Warlike way,
These Expert Exercises read, then say,
Doubtless you will, for you shall find it true,
Elton thou do Excel, Elton Adieu.
JOHN HAYNE. Sergeant Major.

Ad amicum charissimum Richardum Elton, Subchiliarchum, in hoc suo opere
praeclaro.
MArtius heu, nimium vere fuit Anglia Campus,
Et non una, rubet, ferrallibus All^a fastis,
Sic ut defleret nostros, vel Hibernia Casus.
Decolor erubuit Thamesis, vitreosque cruore
Mutavit fluctus, caruerunt arva Colonis;
Non aliter Cadmi pubes, simul edita sulcis
Emicuit, stringunt gladios and pectora ferro:
Donec quae cunas dederat, dat terra sepulchrum.
Ergo quid obductum jam recrudescere vulnus
Quid male sopitus juvat, heu, renovare favillas
Et licet infidum and fallax, turbare serenum.
At non ista tibi men's est, qui nempe venena
Describit, succos, and adhuc ignota novercis
Gramina, non ideo facit, ut Locusta perita
Disceret hinc stamen properatae obrumpere vitae
Palmatas alii trabeas, sellasque curules,
Electicandoris equos, and nominis arum
Jactent, at noster, quanto praestantior Author
Ipso victor ovans, ducit, de Mart triumphos
Pila Latinorum cedant, Grajaeque Sarissae,
Gesaque Gallorum, Rostrato Belga covino,
Nec fidas, nec Maure tuis pharetrate sagittis,
Exemplar petat hinc, ambit quicunque Trophaea.
Non posthac dubiis, nutet victoria pennis
Cui faveat, totus jactantior explicet alas
Certa, ille, qui te sequiente, se addicere parti.
Ovans. posuit and Composuit, Henricus Potter.

Eidem Ejusdem.
WHat make we thronging our Encomiums here
Before thy Book, racking the Readers ea^e
To gloss thy Work, for we can do no more,
Let him read thee, read thy Polemick store
There, he shall know thee better, then Poesy
Can render thee, or the choicest fancy
Reach too, though dropped from Homer's learned quill,
Or thee by culminate Pernassus Hill.
There, both the Scipioe's, were they here again
Might discipline their valors, and their men
Of War, by a new method teach to spare
More, the Conquering Caesar now in War:
There the bold Macedon might learn to gain
An other World, and keep it with less pain
Let Europe rise, and learn to war by thee,
They'de make the World in time one Monarchy.
If Poets, that the Acts of Heroes sing
Be crowned with Bays, let them the Laurel bring
And wreath thy Temples; this thy Work will tell
The World, Thou have done best, though many well.
To the worthy Author his honored friend Sergeant Major Richard Elton.
TO give thee praise according to thy skill,
I want both Virgils verse and Homers quill.
Experimental knowledge of thine art,
Commands my Muse to sacrifice her part
To thy Compendious Body: so complete,
It may be termed a Lezbian squires feat.
Such sure defense was never in Ajax shield,
As Mars and Pallas met in Eltons field.
Heroic art, indeed, that does unite
In one, a number numberless to fight
As if one hand did guide them all; nay more:
Never were such Principles in Print before.
The mighty Whale has not so nimble motion,
As many smaller fishes in the Ocean:
But many times would brush against a rock,
And break himself in pieces by some knock:
Were not for the little Musculus his friend,
That swims before and safely him attends.
A multitude that put on spear and shield,
If want this Musculus must loose the field:
But Musculus their friend, their eyes, their guide,
Thou keep'st them safe, though rocks on every side:
That show them Distances both broad and long,
Facings and Doublings in our English tongue.
Thy Counter-marches, and thy Wheelings are
Fit for the mighty King of Swedens War.
Thy experiments with single files descry;
Mars and Minerva joined dexterously.
But when thy many Maniples I see,
Drawn from on Cohors, in thy four times three
Composed Exercises, private Companies
In regimentall forms, placing Artilleries,
Cannons both great and small; denominations,
With the prime Artists of their several nations
Duties how private Soldiers may excel,
Though lain Perdu, or set as Sentinel.
Minors and Majors too, do^ not refuse
To learn your duties; oh! that 'twere in use
Amongst all Soldiers: Lust should make no man bleed,
Would day never saw so tragical a deed.
Variety of figures when we mark,
The Roman writers surely were in the dark.
But thou enlightenest them and all the earth,
By forming sundry Stars in this new birth.
The Heathens God of War, which heretofore
(How er'e great Greece, and Rome did him adore.)
But an apprentice was: so short of thee
The master of their trade, and now made free.
Fame blow aloud from every Marshall heart,
Here Is one impales a Kingdom; by his art
Teaches what is Modern, and of ancient days
Make him a garland of your greenest Bays,
Adorned with richest trophies: quickly too;
For he deserves a deeper die then blue.
Elton Telon thy name shall never die,
It Is Anagram'd in Soldiers memory.
John Hind, Captain.

In honorem RICHARDI ELTONIS.
SI vir sit quisquam militaris, doctus, and acer,
Hic ELTON certo carmina cerne mea.
Qui res conjungit varias, concordia libri,
Ut justo belli fulmine Turca fleat.
Respice RICHARDI Xisti certamina belli
ELTONIS; studio te colit, ornat, amat.
Munera fac igitur capias haec front remissa
Carmina, quin meritis inferiora tuis.
Johannes Hind Captain.

To his Honored Friend the worthy Author.
AN Army without rule a tumult is,
Great Powers have come to naught because of this.
But (Friend) he will see who does thy labor read
Confusion methodiz'd, and ordered.
And he that studies thee, in thee shall find
A martial hand, rull'd by a peaceful mind.
Thy Book does teach the use of Arms and then
Thy example how to lay them down again.
War is good Physic, but it is no good diet:
It Is the best art to study to be quiet.
And in a safe wel-grounded peace to rest
Of all the Postures in thy Book's the best.
The good Centurion.
THere is a Fort impregnable, a Tower
Whose top's in Heaven; which neither force nor power
Can scale or undermine, within's no guilt
It Is walled with brass, and on a Rock it is built:
Time cannot starve, nor treason make it yield:
Good conscience is a Feast, and Faith's a Shield.
He Is the best Soldier who has learned this art
To keep with diligence his life, his heart.
William Clark Captain.

For his intimate and worthy Friend the Author Major, Richard Elton.
SHould Art with Valor strive, 'twere hard to say,
Which of the twain should bear the bell away;
But both conjoined succeeding consequence:
Some makes discovery of eithers Excellence
Art under-valued: by power or will
Craves valor; its assistant conforming still
To Reason, Judgment, Experience, and Skill.
Where Valor breaking forth, to its ut-most length
Unfurnished of Judgment, Skill, or Strength:
Is termed Fool-hardiness, and often recants
The lack of that which should supply its wants
Thy Book my dearest Friend (both comprehends)
Valor b'ing taught by Art, Art force extends
To Reason, Judgment; and Heroic Ends.
Lo, in one Volume, here thou do explain
What Germany, Italy, Netherlands or Spain
Can render us; and to our doors have brought
What many thousands have so deerly sought:
Nay, without flattery thou do out-vye
In this thy Body of Thou Art Military
The exactest method, yet produced to the eye,
Not underval'ing those whose love and merit
By private acts declare a public spirit;
Whose study, charge, delight and industry
Are the supporters of arms art, deny
From whence as from the Ocean does flow
Those Rivolets that make us perfect grow
In this rare art to encounter with the fo.
Then ere I leave thee, give me leave to say
To any he that shall thy book survay
Love, Art and Valor; center in thy breast
Love, Art-commands; and art obeys Loves Hest:
Valor attending both; who can deny
But Eltons Work may to posterity
The name of Elton keep in memory.
Ex animo tuo, Armis and Artibus bellacibus, benecupiens utriusque Horti
Stratiotici and Militaris Officialium unus, Johannes Hunnings.

For his much respected Friend, and old fellow Soldier, Major RICHARD ELTON.
ENcomiums cannot add unto the praise,
Of those that much deserve, their Works will raise
Themselves a Name, as this great Work of thine,
(With no small pains) the which thou make to shine,
Renowned Elton; lo in thee I find
Bellona's Casket opened, and the mind
That Mars himself enjoyed, for what thou know
That others may obtein; therefore let all
Who do desire to learn Rules Martial
Peruse this Complete body, where they will find
That which delights the Fancy, please the Mind
In Facings, Doublings, Wheelings, with their Distance
Both Open, Close, to us, he gives assistance
He does direct new Figures for to raise
(Preceding times knew not, but these our days)
New Forms of Battle shown, with each their Firings
With Rules to guide in Onsets and Retirings:
Thus have we Elton's skill here brought to light
Which none can it obscure, no, not dark night
Of Envies rage, can blur what he has done,
But he shall shine as glorious as the Sun.
Thomas Walker Captain.

To my honored Friend, Major Richard Elton.
YOur Book needs not my Plaudit, it to sell,
It is enough if but your name it tell:
Who sees its Front, and does it understand,
Must needs condemn himself or praise your hand.
More could I say and would, but more to say
Were to light candles to the Sunshine day:
For such as read and do it not advance
Of Envy do it or of Ignorance.
John Brett Captain.

To the Author his much valued Friend, Major Richard Elton.
LEt them that undertake to praise a book,
Not on the Title, but the matter look,
To ground their judgment on: For to commend
The Work, because The Author is our Friend
Is an obsequious flattery, and does yield
Some savor of the Court, none of the Field
From depth of knowledge, then, we ought to raise
The high expressions of deserved praise
But then, with equal knowledge if we can
Judge and declare the merits of a man,
The envious will say, when we have shown
The Authors worth, we publicate our own:
But let those Momi talk. This work of yours
(Heroic ELTON) all assaults endures,
And all convinces of Detractions part;
And shortly will the Ignorant convert;
And make them Soldiers too: so sweet and plain
Your Demonstrations are that they will gain
Myriads of men now to bear arms, that bore
Nothing but only shapes of men before
Of Cock-braind Militasters store there are
That do pretend skill in the book of War:
Can Military Discipline express
In words of art, and windy flourishes;
Big looks and language louder than the Drum:
As knowing more than your Compendium,
When silly Vapors, they nere read or saw
More than the Statutes of the Martial Law
Such, now, must cast the feathers of their pride;
And here (if docible) be edified
Here Is the true art of Arms. Jehovah grant
That, as it is like we shall no Soldiers want
The Practice of it only may extend
To settle Right and Peace. That Is Wars true end.
Abraham Stanion Captain.

To the worthy Author of the Art Military.
It Was said of old, that arms do silence Laws
And learning, by their rude illiterate aws:
The Proverb lies, for courting in one sheet,
The Soldier and the Scholar here do ^eet;
The Sword and Pen: Mars does himself commense
Doctor of War; and does not more incense,
Then teach to fight; and by his learned Bands
An Areopagus midst of Athens stands;
And by a new found happy union
Parnassus, and the Campaigne are made one,
Whence quickly tutored from that sacred Rise:
The Soldier may descend and exercise.
Till now we did but butcher Victories,
And were but sloven Deaths-men; whilst our eyes
Were wanting to our hands, we fell upon
A Miscellaneous Execution:
So that it grieved the slain, that they must die
Without a method, and disorderly:
But now we have attained the handsome skill,
By order, method, and by rule to kill;
From which we owe the beauties of our death,
The features of our wounds to you, whose breath
Formed into this, your polemick word:
Makes you the Amanuens^s of the Sword.
And as when Cadmus Serpents teeth did sow,
A crop of armed men from thence did grow:
So from this learned issue of your brains
We may behold to spring: well ordered Trains
Of exact Myrmidons: and as at the sound
Of Orpheus harp, all the unweildy round
Of Lions, Bears, and Tygors, learned to meet
Well ordered measures with obedient feet;
Such is your book, at whose most sober word
The hand, the foot, the Musket, Pike, and sword:
Those livelesse lumps of steel, do act, and use
Obediently the Motions you infuse.
We read the Persian chivalry was such,
As teaches Elephants in a slender touch;
Of brideling art, most orderly to storm
Liking their strength: like bears into a form.
So the rude multitude, whose strength would be
A ruin to themselves, through Anarchy,
Bad Masters, but good servants are made good
By you, most regularly to let blood.
Order's the soul of things: then soldiers are
The body; but your book the soul of War.
Mars thus conjoined with Phoebus (some may fear) Hor. mil. Menc.
(Sans Thunderbolts) will transcend Jupiter.
Sam. Jervis Captain.

To my Ingenious Friend, Major RICHARD ELTON.
RIch Jems best praise Themselves; it is understood
The Bush is useless where the Wine is good.
How do they err, who with their looser Rhyme
Profane thy Prose, and with the adulterate Lime
Of wit erect, some Parapet, or Port
To raise their Fancy equal to Thy Fort.
This Crime's collateral mine; who strive to raise
And mix my Ivy with thy glorious Bays
Whose Branches in thy learned Book do spread
Themselves in Garlands to impale Thine Head.
How durst I then draw one Excentrique Line
Or thus Entrench upon this Work of Thine?
This Work of Thine; whose well composed Page
Shall strike amazement in the aemulous Age
Such as their Captive judgments shall surprise
And force their ears do Homage to their eyes.
Imperious Style! which can at once advance
Our towering thoughts; and strike them in a Trance.
How happily have Thou Improved thy Parts
Who art Proficient both in Arms and Arts!
Mars and Minerva who are counted two
Divided essences both join in You,
Whiles Practick and the Theorick Arts appear
In You their Center, and their proper Sphere.
But stay! Thy Praise (Dear Friend) needs here no more
Than Gold in Peru, or a Map on shore.
They that would know thee better, let um look
Upon these Leaves, and read Thee in Thy Book.
William Short Captain.

To his ever honored Friend, Major RICHARD ELTON.
MAny have fancied to themselves, that this
Is the Worlds leaden age, and think it is
Far worse with all men's wits, then with the time
That they live in, but clearly from this crime
Thou have redeemed us, no man ever writ
Better of Martial Discipline, for it
Thou rightly have displayed, in the Complete Body
Of the famous and renowned Art Military.
Here did I find, that which did please me better,
Then could another Indie's, every letter
To me's an Orient Pearl, and all thy words
Are silver Mines, in short thy book affords
So vast a treasure, that I dare foretell,
It will long flourish without parallel.
The postures of the Pike and Musket, thou
Do teach with their conformities, and how
The dignities of Ranks and Files, must be
Stated, in giving each his due, degree
Of Martial Honor, with their several Motions
As Facings, Doublings, Wheelings, and quaint Notions
Of Firings, who ever yet did see
Such Motions (ELTON) as are done by thee
It caused my admiration when I found,
How thy luxuriant wit, disdaining bound,
Did vary it is Experiments, upon
A single File, hence I went viewing on
To thy twelve Exercises, thy setting forth
The drawing up of Reg'ments, (a thing of worth
Near to be rightly valued) forming Brigades,
Placing artillery, with other aides
To Martial Discipline, but here is too much
To outvie all our ancients had but such
Brave rules been taught Achilles, sure less far
Then twice five years had end'd the Trojan War.
William Johnson Captain.

To his much honored and ever renowned Friend Richard Elton, Sergeant Major.
Anagram RICHARDUS ELTON, I HELD ARTS CROUN.
Distic. To honor Art, and eke my Name renown, Mars condiscends to say, I held
Arts Croun.

Acrostichon.
Rich in thy Art, brave ELTON, lo thy Fame
Is crowned above to eternize thy Name:
Can this thy Work be carped at? let none
Have such a Thought; (it is Momus carps alone:)
Away, away, let Silence be the word,
Read, ere thou censure; this Work does afford
Delight and Skill even to the knowingst men,
Unto the weaker sort, lo here thy Pen
Such Rules lays down, in Battle, and Retreat,
Each one is made (as this thy work) complete.
Leave then thy Work with us; now thou have done:
The Fame thereof does crown thee Mars his Son.
Of all that merit worth, o^ Art would gain,
None holds the Crown, but Elton, by his pain.
John Walker Lieutenant.

To his much honored friend Sergeant Major Richard Elton.
IF Authors ancient, and of modern days,
Justly by us deserved have much praise,
Who of the Military art have writ;
And for to honor them it was thought fit.
Then much more thon (brave Elton) who have shown,
Such skill in these thy labors; as yet none
E're saw before: for hereby men may learn,
A skillful Artist, rightly to discern:
Here thou have taught us how to use alike,
The Postures of the Musket and the Pike:
How every man his place may truly know,
And how of Files a Body great does grow.
But why do I endeavor for to show,
Thy worth, my pen to do it is too slow:
I only can admire thee, and will leave it,
To some brave English Homers pens to do it.
Then Fame by them, thy glory loud shall raise,
And trumpet out thy just deserved praise,
That so the World, may at no time forgit,
How by thy worth thou have advantaged it.
Richard Hobby.

On the COMPLETE BODY of the ART MILITARY: composed by my Good Friend Major
RICHARD ELTON.
I Was no Poet born; nor ere could mount
the Muses sacred Hill; or reach their Fount,
o swoop thereof: and come a Poet thence.
Prithee, my Genius then, tell me, from whence
is it, I have this my new whiffling Gale
for Meterizing? it is hence? men fail Seldom have Archetypes of this Nature
been perused by any, but who have been impuls'd to put to their Approbationall,
or Commendatory Verses. Witness the Books of Sir Thomas Kelly, Ward, Barriff,
and not a few more.

seldom of such a Trade-winde, when they pass
the Point of Mars 'is, or, Bellona's place?
Or, cannot one tho he would, endight so nigh
Files called by Grecians, (...); by Romans, VERSUS. Possibly from an old
fashion of Writeing, the Words of a Verse (not to the side of, but) under one
another.
Martial Verses, but he shall versifie?
The Influence came from that pure breath that bid
thee write; and, from the fertile blasts that did
blow from that Quarter of the World, where those
of Good Deserts, are Honored, not with Prose:
bur measured, scanned lines; and, Voices that
can tune it, and their Numbers modulate.
Where it is held a crime, to talk about
Meriting Works, and not to Rhyme-it-out.
It Is thence, Go forward now, and Warble forth
this Book's rich Contents: and therein it is worth.
The Pike's, and Musket's Postures, with their How much, concerning the right
Handling and true Use of (that famously succesfull engine for Arrows) the Bow,
was laid-down in that (...), spoken of 2 Samuel 11. 18, I ken not. But, Bows and
Arrows would be of special Service in the hands of our merely defensive
Picquiers. For, by these Feathery weapons they might annoy those, who by fiery
ones (too often directing destructive Bullets against subjective Stands) have
shamefully laid low abundance of Proper-men. And I remember, I have read (in
the Book called Londons Artillery) of some fights, where Archers have put Gun
men to flight
Use:
and necessary Motions which conduce
as Media's to attain them: Those Ways best,
most ready, safe, short, easy, comeliest.
A Metonymie so generally approved, that the Name Picquiers (or, Pike-men) is
rarely heard given to them: though those who carry Muskets, are commonly
called Mousquettiers.
The Pikes, and Musketeers conformity
in Posturing. Places of Dignity,
ordained so, that all the parts are decked
with men of equal worth, and like respect.
And to en-body them; the joining Files
flank-wise, (effecting Ranks) the Band compiles.
Due Distances, whereby just PARALLEL
Rank keeps to Rank, and File to File: as well
when they do Open, Close, Move; as when they Stand,
and save their Even-ning, Straightning Post-command. I speak freely. To bid
the Company, after every Motion, to even Ranks, and streighten Files, speaks no
less than the Commander extreme fond: Or, them very untoward. Me thinks, they
are Shameing-words.

Faceings no more, nor fewer than you see
the in-ner, and out-ter Sides, and Angles be.
Lengthning, or Strengthening Doubling Files, or Ranks;
Battle, Front, Rear, both; one, or both the Flanks.
We read of ((...), Saltatio Pyrrhica) A Dance in order of Battle, taught by
Pyrrhus to his Soldiers (Plin. lib. 2. cap. 16.) Without doubt the Motions
were not unlike those at the Coraean, Laconic, Macedonian Evolutions. Yet, I
cannot but think that in those days they were more nimble at them than in these;
and did 'm Galiard-like, frollickly. From the Noise (which durante motione,
their Arms made;) the Dance was epitheted Bellicrepa.
Daunce-like Counter-Marches. Wheelings Wheelings are the most Nice Motions of
all; and (if they may be so expressed) Solicitous Coagitations. That Angular-man
who is as the Hinge of the Motion, moving so much slower than the other
(Corner) end of the same Rank (to which, he ever-and-anon casts an eye) as it
has a larger compass to fetch, than he; The intermediat men being in like
manner obsequious; And the Followers (in Files) accurately paceing after their
Leaders.
precise.
Fierings that SERVE to MASTER Enemies.
Practice on Single Files: and bodyed
four several Numbers, each is three times Led.
The Drawing-up, and Exercisings due
to Regiments. The Forming Brigades too,
and Armies: Placeing their Artillery.
Duties of all the Private Soldiery,
and Officers to Colonels. The Charge
of Military Watches: and, their large
Commission. Then, to order Companies,
and Regiments at Funeral Obsequies.
These all are but the Heads (of such things, as
our Major ELTON in his Volumne, has
Completely Bodied:) sent to envite
(like Writs of Cheer) a Soldiers appetite,
to a large Banquet; where, thou may suffice
thy greatest Lust after such Exercise:
Where all the Flowers of other Gardens, Fields,
and Meddows, are; and, that whereby it yields
a Perfect Florilegium of the Art
unto our view, He does the Rest impart.
This he has done. But, what shall we repay
him for it? will the ingenuous Grandees say.
And (troth) what ere was given heretofore
to Tactick Writers, is his due. and more.
Tho I can pay but Love; And this alone,
In writeing of Wars Art, the have The Emperor LEO, and King PYRRHUS. and
Claudius ELIANUS ((...)) and a great many more than many great men more, did
write hereof.
KINGLY done.
And wrote of what resembles in it is guise
the various actings in men's various The l^fe of man is (somewhere) called a
Warfare upon earth. A Christians, is so. 1 Timothy 1. 18. and Epist. 2. cap. 2.
ver. 4. And in his Good Fight (1 Timothy VI. 12. and Ep. 2. cap. 1111. V. 7.) he
has our JESUS ((...)) both for his Leader, and Bringer-up (as we are
encouragingly minded of) Hebr. XII. 2. His Souldier-like Watch is hinted,
Ephesians. VI. 16.
Lives.
And we do find, that (in their several Spears)
GOD is named a Man of War, Exodus XV. 3. And Numb. XXI. 14. is mentioned a Book
of the Wars of the LORD, which is lost, but the Divine Ones we have speak much
of HIS Militia.
God, Christ we have ^ideing in the Head of the Cavalry in Heaven, Rev. XIX.
11. etc. and making War.
Christ, Saints warring, and prevailed against, Dan. VII. 21. but overcoming,
Rev. XII. 11.
Saints, Angels Hosts we read of Genesis XXXI 1. 2. Dan. 1. 11. 35. further,
compare Revel. XII. 7. with Job. XXV. 2.
Angels, Stars in their Roads, are said to have fought against Sisera, Judge v.
20. And they are often called the HOST of Heaven.
Stars are Warriers.
And (nearer,) Abram had his Disciplined, or, Exercised (habraice (...)) Genesis
XIV. 14. So that Military Discipline, and Martial Exercises were used
Multitude of Ages before the times of or the Roman, or the Grecian Empire. And
it is like enough, Abram himself had been these men 's (...).

But, wherefore (I pray) did he Arm these, rather than the rest? save, because
Taught Soldiers prevail (by God's Blessing) over the rude. And more Victories
have been got by the Warriers Skill, than by Strength of men. And (it is of
ordinary observation, that) as the Discipline of any Nation failed: So, their
height came down.


TRAINED -men
whom (after he had Armed) he Led-forth, when
he did pursue, then Camisado those
whose taking Lot, rendered them Abrams As they are called V. 20. And it is
worth Noteing, that this Fighter is forthwith met, and blessed by (Melchizedec,
who is also Melchisalem) the King of Righteousness, and King of Peace. Pax
bello quaeritur, etc.
Fees.
And David had among 1 Chronicles. XII. 23. etc.
the heads that came
to him at Hebron, Men of Skill to Frame,
Range, Draw-forth battles, Order them in fights:
Or, (to be sure) to expertly keep such rights.
And 11 Chron. XXVI. 11.
King Uzziah's fighting-host was Led
to War by BANDS, as they were Mustered.
And, blessed Isreal's Hosts, the Nations dread
(who were God's Armies: HE, their Armies Captain, 1 Chronicles. XIII. 12.
Head,
in' special manner: And (as HE saw't right)
did fight their Battles: and, they 1 Samuel XXV. 28.
His did fight)
these (I say) were by GOD from Sinai told
Numb. 11. and X. (I, and their Leaguers, and Stratagems too, Josh. VI. 2. and
VIII. 2. were Ordered by that Great (...), Maestro del Campo, or, Major
General JEHOVAH) The Figure of their Camp (which is worthily commended, Numb.
XXIIII. 5, 6.) was not one Oblong, or Equilaterall Square, caused by the
Tertia's of Reubens TETRARCHIE (Number. XXIII. 10.) on the South Side, and of
Dans, on the North's; Ranging FILE-VVISE to become so the Right, and Left
Flanks: But, was made by Ruben's, and Dan's Squadron's, moving outward entire,
to clear of the (Rear) Angles of Judah's Standing-Camp. (For, the Tribes under
these Regimentall Standards (And, every Tribe, called here, an Host, or Army,
had the Ensign of the Family, or of their Fathers House; and the Levites too
had their Stondards) did pitch, not one after, but, one by another (...). Verse.
12, 27. and each Battalion was to be a far off the Tabernacle, V. 2.) and
Ephraim's Camp ranging in the Rear directly behind Judah's in the Front. The
Levites were circumjected thus. On the South, the Cohathites: On the North, the
Merarites: On the West, the Gershonites: (And, on the East (the Face, and Entry
to the Tabernacle) MOSES, with Aar^* and his Sons) near the Tabernacle, which
was in the very midst of the Camps.

Their Marching Order, was a Deep-H^rse, produced from the former, by moving
away (1) the Front (which was followed by the Tabernacle, and it is Ministers,
the Gershonites, and Merarites. (2) the Right-Flank (immediately before the
Sanctuary, the Cohathites bearing it) (3) the Rear. (4) their Lest-Flank (thus
becoming, dureing the March, their Reer-ward, Verse. 25.) When they Log'd again,
they were Reduced by the Van's making Alt, etc.


what Marching, and Encamping form to hold
throughout the Wilderness, as well as there
Before the Mount, Exodus XIX. 2. their Figure was Lunar, or, a Concave,
half moon (like that described, Apoc. 1111) See. V. 12, 23 Deuteronomy. XX. read 1 Samuel XXX. 25.
before the Mount. (w) What Orders, Laws of War,
to Observe: And, Numb. X. read 2 Samuel 2. 23.
on what Sounds of Trumpet make
Assemblies; Or, their Marching-journey take.
Sure, in most Holy Writ, we find this Art's
laid-down before us, in the Whole, and Parts
thereof: It Jer. XIII. 21. Esaias. 11. 4. hence the Expressions in 1 Chronicles. v.
18. and Cant. 111. 8.
Taught, and Learnt, and Practiced
by God's own People. And, it may be sed,
The Postures of the Arms in those times held
Take the Texts together. I may not dilate, and perticularize the Poshires
spoke of Ezech. XXXIX. 3. Jer. XlVI. 3, 9. Psalm. XI. 2. Lam. 111. 12. Jer. l.
42. Esaias v. 28. lXVI. 19. XXII. 6. Ezec. XXVI. 8. and XXIII. 24. 1 Chro. XII.
8, 24. VIII. 40. X. 3. 11 Chro. XIIII. 8. Zech. IX. 13. Psalm. lXXVIII. 9. Amos
11. 15.
(of Bow and Arrow; Buckler, Lance; Spear, Shield.)
Neh. VII. 7. Ezech. XXXII. 2. Jer. XXXVI 1. 13. 11 King. IX. 17.
Watches and Wards. Deuteronomy. XXXIII. 17. Numb. XXXI. 14. 1 Samuel VIII. 12. Exodus
XVIII. 21.
Armies of Myriads,
Reg'ments of Thousands, Bands of Hundereds,
Fifties; Files of tens. 11 Chron. XIII. 3. 1 King. XX. 14.
Closeing Hosts for fight,
And -- what I have not room to write.
PTRPRY.

THE COMPLETE BODY OF THE ART MILITARY:
The First Book.
CHAP. I. A discourse of the Postures, and the handling of Arms.
HE that will be a complete Soldier, must first begin to learn the use of his
Arms, laying that down in his thoughts for his first foundation. But this has
been the neglect of many in our times, who have strived to know high thoughts
in the Art Military, before they can well perform their Postures. Therefore,
my advice shall be unto all such that desire to thrive in this Art, that they
will not soar too high; but first learn the A, B, C, thereof, after which they
may proceed by degrees to pronounce to the Soldier with boldness their
proficiencie therein. He therefore that with safety, ease, and delight desires
to handle his Arms, must set ti^es apart frequently to practice himself
therein. And here I cannot but much blame the Officers of our Trained Bands in
London, of two great neglect:: the first, in making men File-leaders either out
of respect, or favor they bear unto them; or else because one man has a
better Buf-coat than another: I speak not this to encourage any man to come
slovenly habited when he shall march forth with his Captain, but rather advise
all Soldiers to fit themselves with the best array they can, and could wish
all the Sergeants in drawing up their Files, to pitch upon such Gentlemen to be
File-leaders, as may take charge of his File, and shall be able, willing, and
ready upon all convenient times, to instruct and teach his File in all their
Postures, and neat handling of their Arms, which if carefully observed, they
would reap the benefit of much ease to themselves and the private Soldiers:
readiness in the performance of the Postures would much redound to the honor
of the Captain that shall lead them. But for the farther satisfaction of the
ingenious Soldier that shall enquire what Posture is, I shall briefly resolve
them thus.

Posture, as I conceive, is a garb or figure that a man stands in, in the
handling of his What Posture is.
Arms; which he uses for the better grace and becoming of them.

There are several motions belonging to each Posture, which some call
Postures, but they much deceive themselves, as shall appear clearly unto them
(by the survey) as they shall be set down in order. And first, we will begin to
set down the Postures of the Pike.

CHAP. II. Several reasons why the Pike is the more honorable Arms.
FIrst I shall begin to set down the postures of the Pike, before the postures
of the Musket, for these reasons following, as conceiving: First, They are the
more honorable Arms, in respect the Colors flying upon the head of them, and
upon the drawing up of the Company there is the most properest place for the
Captain to be, either upon a Stand or upon a March, provided he have ground
sufficient to March them all a breast. If upon a Stand the Captain shall have
occasion to engage against an Enemy, thither his Officers may repair unto him
upon the head of the Pikes, there to receive directions. And if the Captain
shall cause the Sergeants to draw off part or all the Musketeers from the Body
of Pikes to fire against the enemy, the Gentlemen of the Pikes in the mean time
stands undauntedly to undergo all the cruel shot of the Cannon from the
contrary part for to preserve their Colors, who are likewise a place of
Randezvous for the Musketeers to repair unto when they shall retreat from
fight. Farther, it has been the ambition of many Gentlemen, both in Holland,
France, and in these our late unhappy Wars in England, to trail Pikes with
several Commanders whom they shall think fit. And lastly, to conclude all,
that the Pike is the more honorable Arms, it is so in respect of its
antiquity, for there has been the use of the Pike and Spear, many hundred
years before there was any knowledge of the Musket, as in many Histories you
shall find. And so for present, I will conclude this discourse of the Pike,
desiring the Musketeers to have a favorable censure of me: for I intend not
by it to persuade all Soldiers to the handling of the Pike, and none to be
Musketeers, for that cannot be, I should rather advise all Captains that have
occasion to raise their Companies to have two thirds of Musketeers, and but
one of Pikes: that is to say, if they should have 18 Files, to cause twelve of
them to carry Muskets, and the other six Files Pikes. And in my judgment they
shall perform the better service unto any Nation where they shall be employed;
and I shall farther desire the Soldiers (especially those that be of low
stature) to handle and take delight in the use of the Musket; for it is an
exceeding great honor to him so to handle his Musket, as that he does it with
ease and in a comely manner, and he that shall become expert therein; I have
often observed this commendation to follow him, by the report of others; Such a
one is a good Muskettier, and an able Soldier; concluding thereby, he that
will take the pains to be a good Muskettier certainly cannot be idle, but has
gained something more to make him capable of such praise. To conclude, I shall
desire the Gentlemen of the Pikes, and the Gentlemen of the Musketeers to go
hand in hand in love like dear brothers, and neither of them to envy each
other, and in so doing, God will give a blessing to all their undertakings. But
now, fearing I have dwelt too long upon this discourse of the Arms, I shall
next proceed to set down, first the postures of the Pike, then the postures of
the Musket, with all the words of command tending to their Motions, after
collect them in order in a brief way, and then set forth unto you the equality
of number that the one Arms has with the other, in the postures as follows.

CHAP. III. The Postures of the Pike.
THE Pike lying on the ground, the first word of command will be, stand to your
Arms.

Handle your Pike Raise up your Pike
to your Open Order, Order, Close Order.


Charge with the But end of the Pike, at the inside of the right foot, your
Pike in the left hand, drawing your Sword over your left arm.

Charge to the Front Right Flank, Left Flank, Rear,
Order your Pikes, and put up your Swords.

This way of charging to the Horse, I have set down, as being practiced
sometimes amongst us in our private meetings, but I conceive it to be of little
use to receive a desperate charge of the Horse, for by these charges the
Soldiers are in so lame and weak a posture, that the Horse cannot choose if
they come on with a full career, but bear the Pikes and Pike-men down to the
ground: Therefore in my opinion the best way of opposing the Horse charge is
that which we learned of our ever honored Captain, Major Henry Tillier, in the
Military Garden; which was, Files closing to the midst to their closest Order,
insomuch that there was not above half a foot intervall of ground between File
and File, the Pikes Porting, and after closing their Ranks forwards so close,
that they locked themselves one within another, and then charged on. Which in
my judgment is so secure a way from routing, that it is impossible for any
Body of Horse to enter therein: and farther, to my best remembrance, I never
could meet with any Soldier that has been abroad upon any service that ever
saw any charging of the Pikes at the Foot, therefore I will further proceed.

From Order Advance, Your Pike. Shoulder, Your Pike. Port, Your Pike. Comport,
Your Pike. Cheek, Your Pike. Trail, Your Pike.
Order as you were.

From your Order charge to the Front, Right, Left, Reere,
Order as you were.

Advance your Pike. Shoulder Your Pike. Port Your Pike. Comport Your Pike.
Cheek Your Pike. Trail Your Pike.
Advance as you were.

From your Advance charge to the Front, Right, Left, Rear,
Advance as you were.

Shoulder your Pike. Port Your Pike, Comport Your Pike, Cheek Your Pike, Trail.
Your Pike,
Shoulder as you were.

From the Shoulder charge to the Front, Right, Left, Reere,
Shoulder as you were.

Port your Pikes, Comport your Pikes,
Cheek your Pikes Trail your Pikes
Comport as you were

From the Comport Charge to the Front, Right, Left, Rear,
Comport as you were.

Cheek your Pikes. Trail your Pikes, Cheek as you were.

From the Cheek charge to the Front, Right, Left, Rear,
Cheek as you were.

Trail your Pikes, from your Trail charge to the Front, Right, Left, Rear.
Trail as you were.

Order your Pikes, Lay down your Pikes.
Here is to be observed by this Method an endeavoring to perform all the
postures of the Pike, from each particular posture, only shortning it by
degrees, leaving out what was before commanded until we come unto the Trail.
Yet notwithstanding I spared not the charges, but have shown them from every
posture, in their due order. Next follows the postures of the Musket,
wherein, in answerablenesse to the Pike, I shall lay them down in full, and
afterward contract them in a shorter way.

CHAP. IV. The Postures of the Musket.
THE Musket lying on the ground, the first word of command will be, as to the
Pike.

Stand to your Arms, Take up your Bandiliers, Put on your B^ndilieres. Take up
your Rest, Put the string of your Rest about your left wrist.
Take up your Match, Place your Match, Take up your Musket, Rest your Musket.
Here the Soldier may perform the Saluting Posture, if he shall find any
occasion so to do, for the honoring of his friend, or any Gentleman of worth.

Poyse your Musket, Shoulder your Musket,
Un-shoulder your Musket and Poyse, Join your Rest to the outside of your
Musket.
Open your pan. Clear your pan. Prime your pan. Shut your pan.
Cast off your loose Corns, Blow off your loose corns, and bring about your
Musket to the left side.
Trail your Rest, Balance your Musket in your left hand.
Find out your Charge, Open your Charge, Charge with powder.
Draw forth your Scouring-stick, Turn and shorten him to an Inch.
Charge with Bullet.

Put your Scouring-stick into your Musket Ram home your Charge.
Withdraw your Scouring-stick, Turn, and shorten him to a handful, Return your
Scouring-stick.
Bring forward your Musket and Rest, Poyse your Musket and recover your Rest.
Join your Rest to the outside of your Musket.
Draw forth your Match, Blow your Cole.
Cock Your Match. Fit Your Match.
Guard your Pan, Blow the ashes from your Cole.
Open your Pan, Present upon your Rest, Give fire breast high.
Dismount your Musket, joining the Rest to the outside of your Musket. Un-cock,
and return your Match.
Clear your Pan, Shut your Pan.
Poyse your Musket, Rest your Musket.
Take your Musket off the Rest, and set the Butt end to the ground, Lay down
your Musket, Lay down your Match.
Take your Rest into your right hand, clearing the string from your left wrist,
Lay down your Rest.
Take off your Bandiliers. Lay down your Bandiliers.
Here ends the Postures of the Musket, from the taking of them up from the
ground, to make ready, and the proceeding in them to the laying of them down
again. Now if the Soldier will take his Rest into his right hand, for to be a
support and help to him in his march, he must observe the following words of
command.

Lay your right hand upon the Butt end of your Musket, Lay your left arm over
your Musket. The Musket being shouldered, you may proceed in these words of
command, to recover the Rest into the right hand.

Shift your match between the fingers of your right hand. Take your Rest into
your right hand, clearing the string from your left wrist.
Return your match, and take your Rest into your right hand, 'twill cause you
to be in a fit capacity for to march.
CHAP. V. The Postures and charges of the Pike, to be performed in a shorter
way, all things acted in order, and nothing done twice.
THE Pike lying on the ground, the first word of Command will be,

Stand to your Arms, Handle your Arms.
Raise up your Pikes to your open Order, Raise up your Pikes to your Order,
Raise up your Pikes to your close Order.
From your close Order charge to the Horse. Front Right Left Rear
Recover your Pikes, and put up your Swords,

Advance your Pikes, Port your Pikes,
Charge to the Front.

Shoulder your Pikes, Charge to the right. Comport your Pikes, Charge to the
left.
Cheek your Pikes, Trail your Pikes,
Charge to the Rear.

After lay the narrow end of the Pike to the ground, face about to the left to
your first Front, and move forward with the Butt end of your Pike on your right
side in your Funeral Posture. After face about to the right, raise up your
Pike, face then again to your first Front, you may lay down the Pike to the
ground and march from your Arms, having ended all the Postures and Charges in
their due courses. And here Fellow Soldier, whoever thou art, thou may
perceive that there are no more then eight Postures of the Pike, and four
Charges, that is to say, to the Front, Rear, and both Flanks. There are some
would fain have another Posture added to these, which they call the Lazy
Posture, which sometimes I have perceived upon a stand, that then the Pike-man
lets slip his Pike from the shoulder, until the Butt end rest upon the ground,
then laying his right arm over it, he stands in an il-favour'd lazit way. Such
Postures as these are not fit to be ranged among the former; but rather to be
condemned, in regard the Soldier will be apt enough to find out such Postures
as these of himself, if not prevented by the discretion of the careful
Officers; for upon a stand the Soldiers properest Posture is to Order his
Pike. And thus much in brief concerning the Postures of the Pike.

CHAP. VI. The Postures of the Musket collected in a brief way.
ACcording to my former promise I shall endeavor to give the best satisfaction
I can to the Musketeers, as well as to the Pikes, that there is an
answerablenesse of number in the proper Postures of the Musket to them of the
Pike: and they are eight (as I conceive) and may be proceeded on in order from
the taking up, to the laying down of the Musket, and nothing acted twice: the
words of command for the Postures follows,

The Musket lying on the ground, the words of command will be as before.

Stand to your Arms, Handle your Arms.
Now you are to take notice that in taking up the Bandiliers, putting them on,
taking up the Rest, putting the string about the left wrist, the taking up of
the Match, placing of it, the taking up of the Musket, these, or the like are
no Postures, but motions to the first Posture. Therefore I will proceed upon
them all in order as they lie, leaving out the words of command tending to the
Motions.

1 Order your Musket, 2 Rest your Musket, 3 Poyse your Musket, 4 Shoulder your
Musket, 5 Balance your Musket and Rest on the right with the barrel upwards,
6 Trail your Rest, and balance your Musket on the left side with the barrel
downwards, 7 Recover your Musket, and perform your Sentinel Posture. 8 From
this perform your Funeral Posture.
This being ended, a man may recover his Musket, and Rest, that knows how to
perform this last Posture, without bringing him again upon the Rest, and may
lay down his Arms again, observing the former Rule, where the Pestures of the
Musket are set down at large.

CHAP. VII. There is also a conformity of Posture with the Musket, to those of
the Pike, and Words of Command to be given, as may in many things be received
by both Arms.
THe Musket and Pike lying on the ground, these words of Command may properly
be employed to both; That is to say,

Stand to your Arms. Handle your Arms.
The But-end of the Musket standing, or resting on the ground, at the out side
of the right foot, is conformable to the Pike ordered.

The Musket poysed; to the Pike advanced.

The Musket shouldered; to the Pike shouldered.

The Musket porting; to the Pike porting.

The Musket reverst; (as in the Funeral Posture) to the Pike trailing.

The Musket rested, to the Pike cheeked; which is his proper Sentinel Posture.

The Musket presented; to the Pike charged.

As for the Motions of Posture, which conduce to the lading, and priming of the
Musket, as to cast about, trail, recover, and the like, they are all included
in that general Word of Command, properly to the Musketeers belonging, which
is to make ready.

Now, me thinks, I hear some ingenious Soldier begin to ask me, what are the
the use of these Postures so fully laid down by you? To whom I shall be so
courteous, as to satisfy them, according to my former Method, beginning with
the Pike, as follows.

CHAP. VIII. The use of the Postures of the Pike.
THe Pike being ordered is the proper Posture of a Soldier upon a stand, which
he The use of Ordering the Pike.
ought ever to mind upon any such occasion, so to make use of it. And I have
likewise seen in many places, in the day time, this Posture to be used by the
Soldier standing Sentinel.

The Pike advanced, is useful for the Soldier upon a Troop, when they are to
march The use of advancing the Pike.
swiftly, either for the relieving of some Court of Guard, or to repair to
their place of Randezvous, or upon some sudden approaching to an Enemy, to
make a Charge: for then he will be in a fit capacity to clap down quickly his
Pike, upon the breast of the Enemy. It is likewise very useful in the time of
exercise: to the half-files, and bringers up, upon any doubling to the Front,
for then they are always to be advanced, in respect of a longer march in their
doublings, then those that double Ranks and Files; but having doubled, they
must always conform in Posture to the part doubled.

The use of Porting was invented for the ease of the Rear half-Files, upon a
Charge; for the Front half-Files are only for to charge; the Rear haf Files in
the mean time are to The use of Porting.
port. It is likewise very useful at such times when the Soldiers are
marching through a Gate, or Sally-Port; from whence I conceive it does derive
its name porting.

The use of shouldering the Pike, is only properest upon the March, and in some
kind very useful upon a Stand in time of Fight; provided they are at
convenient distance from The use of Shouldering.
the Enemy. For it much preserves the Pikes, and Pikemen, from the danger of
the shot, the bullets then gliding off from their Arms; which if they stood at
such times, either ordered, or advanced; the bullets would make such a
clattering amongst the Pikes, that what with breaking of them, and the shivers
flying from them, may much endanger the Soldiers which shall carry them.

The comporting of the Pike is only useful to the Soldier marching up a hill,
for if then The use of Comporting.
he should be shoudered, the But-end of the Pike would always be touching of
the ground, to hinder him in his March; and much endanger his fellow soldiers
that shall come after him. Neither can he march advanced; for if there should
be any wind, it would be ready to blow him down. Therefore as above, that
which is most commodious for the Soldiers marching up a hill, is to comport
his Pike.

The trailing of the Pike is seldom used, but when the Soldier shall march
straight The use of Trailing.
forward through a Wood, the File-leader before he enters in, trails his Pike,
and consequently all the rest in his File: then stooping down, they take up the
But-end of their Leaders Pikes, which they may easily gripe with their own in
their right hands, and after march forward through the busling leaves in a
straight line, every file single by himself, but as near each other as
possible they can march for more security sake; that when they are clear,
they may find each other, and be in a condition to rally up again, as
occasion shall require. The trailing of the Pike, may also be of excellent use
in a Trench, that at such time when they shall have intelligence, where the
Enemy are preparing to make a Breach, they may then move forwards unto that
place undiscovered, and may defend the same.

The cheeking of the Pike, is the proper Sentinel posture, and then to be
used. The use of Cheeking.


CHAP. IX. The use of the Postures of the Musket.
I Conceive it will not be material to go over every posture of the Musket, to
describe the use of them, in respect the greater part of them has conformity
to the Pike. Those that shall remain, and of the chiefest consequence, I shall
not be wanting to satisfy the Soldier in.

The ballancing the Musket, and Rest, on the right side with the Barrel upward
is one The use of ballancing the Musket on the right side.
of the chiefest Postures belonging to the Musket; from thence he begins to
make ready, as to open, clear, and prime the pan, all being motions to this
Posture.

To traile the Rest, and Balance, the Musket on the left side, with the
barrel downward, The use of ballancing the Musket on the left side.
is a Posture likewise of as great consequence; for there are several motions,
belonging also to this Posture, as to find out the charge, to open it, to
charge with powder, to take bullet out of the bag and to charge with bullet,
with diverse other motions before you can recover your Musket and Rest again.

How a Musketier shall perform the Sentinel Posture.
THe Sentinel Posture is to be performed after this manner; first, the Musket
is to be laded with powder, and bullet, afterward he is to cock his match, and
to stand with his pan guarded, his Musket being upon the Rest, untillsuch time
that he is relieved; but as concerning him, I shall more fully set forth his
duty, treating upon the duty of the Sentinel.

CHAP. X. The manner and way to do the Funeral Posture.
NExt follows to show how to do the Funeral Posture; the properest and the
best way to begin this Posture, is when the Musket is rested, and is to be
performed after this manner. You must first slip up you your Musket upon the
Rest, so high, until the Fork of the Rest be within a handful of the cock;
after you must bring your right hand under the barrel of the Musket, close to
the Fork of the Rest, and then lift him off and after cast your Rest backward,
trailing him on the left side, and bring your Musket under your left arm, with
the barrel downwards, bearing the But-end upward, with your two fore-fingers,
and your thumb, holding off the pan, and that with the left hand. Now if you
begin to be weary in the March, by reason of the weight of the Musket; you may
to ease your self, bring your right hand backward, and there take hold of the
Musket, keeping still your left hand in it is first place, until you shall
reduce him to the Rest again.

The reducement of the Musket from the Funeral Posture.
FIrst, raise up your Musket a little, with your two fingers, and thumb, of the
left hand, as you formerly held him, then turn the Musket until you perceive
the barrel to be upward; after lay your right hand upon the barrel, much
about the lazy ^in, and then taking him, bring him up forward on the outside
of the Rest, recover your Rest, fall back with the right leg, you may with
ease bring your Musket again upon the Rest as at first. This Posture being so
seldom used, makes the Soldier much to seek in performance of the same; but
he that takes pleasure in handling of the Musket, and shall exercise himself
therein, cannot choose but find it very easy, and much delightful to him. And
I know no Posture more becoming a Muskettier then this, if it be neat, and well
performed by him. And here I shall conclude, and end discoursing of the
Postures.

CHAP. XI. The Soldiers desire to know every particular place of Dignity, as
they stand in Rank and File.
THe Soldier now having obtained some pretty knowledge, skill, and ready
aptness in the managing and performing the Postures, begins to look about
himself, what next is needful for to fasten upon, to make a further progress
in this Art And straight he meets with some that whispers to him, that it were
a gallant thing to know the Dignity of a File, true and rightly stated; to
which he answers, but where can it be found, the opinions of Soldiers are so
various, and differing therein, that none knows where for to atteine it. My
Captains eye (says he) is upon me, because I do the Postures well, which
causes the Sergeants to make me a File-leader, and that I know to be the
chiefest, and first place of Honor in the File, the second place to be the
Bringer up, the third, the half File leader: the fourth, the Bringer up of the
Front half-Files. Thus far, no Soldier of any known judgment can deny; but now
a days our Files being drawn up six deep, makes me altogether ignorant of the
honor of the Rest; Neither know I the Dignity of a File eight, or ten deep,
which still in some places they do retain, drawing them up so deep. If my
ambition were but now fully satisfied herein, I should in time come for to know
the Dignity of the Captains, as they are drawn up all in a Regiment; by which
Rule, I am informed they walk. And in my judgment, there cannot be a truer
stating the Dignity of a Rank and File, then that which shall conform to the
Dignities of the Captains, as they are drawn up a Breast all in a Regiment.
Now, for as much, as many Regiments, consist of several Numbers of Captains,
and Companies in them; as some six Companies, others eight; some greater, as
ten, and twelve Companies. It is expedient therefore not only for my self, but
for every Soldier that will be truly knowing to be resolved herein concerning
those several numbers, and as occasion shall alter to any other; they may
inform themselves by these how to fit their purpose. And therefore, not to
keep the apt and forward Soldier longer in suspense, but that he may proceed,
I shall amongst the rest, declare my thoughts therein, and set it forth unto
their view, everhoping from my fellow soldiers a favorable censure of my good
meaning to them, and to my Country, for to employ that little talent, which
lately my endeavors has obtained to do them service. And shall forthwith set
down unto them four Tables of Dignity, both of Ranks, and Files, which shall be
first of twelve a Breast, and twelve deep. Secondly, ten a Breast, and ten deep.
Thirdly, eight a Breast, and eight deep. And lastly, six a Breast, and six deep;
wherein every ingenious Soldier shall easily know his particular place of
honor and dignity, both in Rank and File, wherein he stands.

The Table being thus set forth unto the Soldiers view, as is before expres^,
methinks, I hear some say: Sir, we like the drawing forth and the manner of
your Table very well, we see clearly there the particular places how every man
stands in his dignity both in Rank and File according to your several Figures;
but we beseech you, Sir, be so favorable as to make us understand it by a
farther demonstration of the same, and be pleased out of your courteous nature
to explain your self a little farther therein; and to afford us some reasons
to confirm and back the same, that it may clearly appear to our judgments the
truth thereof, and that we may sit down and rest our selves with fullest
satisfaction therein. To Answer, me thinks, it should be strange to make
denial here to the modest desire of any ingenions Soldier, and clear
repugnant to my wonted custom; and therefore without any more delay, I shall
farther let them know.

military diagram

CHAP. XII. Reasons for the places of dignity both in Rank and File, for the
first four in a File eight deep.
THat which gives most life for the true explaining of the former table is, to
show the several places of honor and dignity of the Captains, how they are
drawn up a breast all in a Regiment. Be pleased therefore to go along with me,
and you shall understand that the Colonel has the first place of honor, as
being Commander in chief, whose Company stands upon the right, which makes the
figure (1) The second place of honor in the Regiment is the Lieutenant
Colonel, whose Company is drawn up upon the left, as being the outmost there,
and is described by the figure (2) The third place of honor is the Majors
Company, which is drawn up upon the right of the left half Ranks, whose place
is described by the figure (3) The fourth place of honor is the eldest
Captains Company; which is drawn up upon the left of the right half Ranks, and
is set forth by the figure (4) And now we have proceeded thus far, we will make
Alt and begin to examine whether we have rightly hitherto proceeded, or no,
therefore, for the more clearing and understanding herein, you must take notice
it is the discretion of every knowing Commander so to aim and state his
Battle, as that he makes his Front equivalent in worth, strength, and dignity
to that of the Rear, and with equal proportion of number, and in like manner
so to order his right half Ranks as that they may carry an equal balance in
worth, number and dignity with the left half Ranks. Now therefore to begin to
make some trial or experiment herein by examining the first worth with the
fourth, and that will make the number (5) and then put to trial the second
worth and third, and you shall easily discern it to carry the same proportion
of number. So that it may appear clearly in the judgment of any discreet
Soldier a true and equal proportion, the Front with the Rear, the right half
Ranks suitable to the left half Ranks, and that both in number, honor and
dignity.

Having thus far entered into the discourse, it remains to describe and show the
reasons of the other four of their places and dignity as they stand.

CHAP XIII. Reasons of the place of the second four as they stand in Rank and
File, the File being eight deep.
NOw for the further resolution herein, there is to be taken notice of, that
the general drawing up of Regiments, when they consist of so few Companies as
8, 6, or 7, is commonly in two grand Divisions, that is to say, two bodies or
two stands of Pikes, which are flanked with Musketeers. Therefore you may
observe the discretion of the Major who commonly is appointed to draw up the
Regiments, does so order the places of the Captains, that they may aptly fall
into their due places of Honor, upon a stand and upon a march; and does so
order their Dignities as before is expressed, as to make both the Front, Rear,
right and left half Ranks, equal in Number, Strength, and Dignity. And,
therefore, he draws up the third and fourth Captain between the Colonels
Company and the eldest Captain, which makes their number (13:) and in like
manner he draws the second Captain, and the youngest Captain between the
Lieutenant Colonels Company and the Majors, whose number likewise carries
equal proportion to be (13.) Now if you please to examine the whole number of
the right half Ranks, and that makes (18:) maketriall likewise of the left
half Ranks, in casting up of his account; and you shall find the same
proportion of number as is clearly set forth within the Table, both of Ranks
and Files, for as the honor of every Soldier stands in the Rank, you will
find the same to stand so in the File.

CHAP. XIV. Other Reasons to clear it further to the Soldier.
TO give you farther satisfaction, and Reasons for the placing of the second
four, in respect it is contrary to the Rule and Judgment of some Soldiers:
therefore farther observe with me this; When a Regiment is drawn up in the true
Order of a Regimentall way; there is as before expressed, two Bodies, or Stands
of Pikes, slanked with Musketeers; and it is the Office of every Major to give
forth in writing notes of paper unto every Captain, and Leiutenant, where their
place shall be upon a Stand, and where upon a March, that he may with more
readiness know where to lead, and where to fall in, or to bring up, as
occasion shall require. Now, for as much, that it has been the practice here
in England, and in most Countries also besides, as I have been informed by very
able knowing Soldiers; that the first place of Honor that is appointed out
unto the Captains, is first unto the eldest; who always leads the Colonels
Colors, or first grand Division of Pikes, which is the greatest Honor that
can be appointed out unto the Captains, and therefore most properest and due
to him as being Eldest. If so, as that it is then generally granted, that the
leading of the Colonels Colors, or the first Body, or Stand of Pikes in the
Colonels Grand Division, is the first and chiefest place of Honor amongst the
Captains; Why then, certainly, I must conclude the second Captain, which
carries the Number (5) would be infinitely wronged, and injured, if he were
denied, and not brought into the left half Ranks, for there he aptly stands to
fall in, to lead the Leiutenant Colonels Colors, or the second Body, or Stand
of Pikes, which is the second place of Honor. Now having resolved, that it is
clearly the due, and Right for the second Captains place, to lead the second
Body of Pikes; we must then of necessity, bring in the youngest Captain into
the left half Ranks likewise; who carries the Number (8) and that will make up
an equal proportion, as before expressed to the third and fourth Captains;
carrying with them the figures (6 and 7) which are drawn up in the right half
Rank.

CHAP. XV. Reasons given for the last Table of every particular Place of
Honor, and Dignity, as they stand.
I Conceive, what formerly has been expressed of the middle Table, may give full
resolution of the particular places of Honor, and Dignity, as they stand both
in Rank and File. It further now remains to speak somewhat of the rest, and
therefore, I shall go down-ward, clearing still the first four places of
Honor, which being rightly nuderstood, the rest will naturally fall into the
capacity of any ingenious Soldier. Therefore further pray observe with me this
again in examining of the sutablenesse, and equal proportion of Worth, and
number of the first and fourth Worth, carrying unto that of the second and
third. And thus far you may rest, and satisfy your self therein. We have
therefore now no more to place, and settle, but the fifth, and sixth Worth, and
then our work in this Table will be quickly finished. Therefore of necessity,
as formerly expressed, we must bring in the fifth Worth, into the left half
Ranks, as being the second Captain; whose proper place as I said before, is to
lead the Lieutenant Colonels Colors, or the second Body, or Stand of Pikes.
He being there thus fixed, we have no more to place, but the sixth Worth, which
is the last, or youngest Captain; and we have no other place to bring him in,
but between the first and fourth Worth, or if you will have it more clear,
between the Colonel, and eldest Captain. But, here by the way, I am like to
meet with some Objector, that will say, Sir, What Is become of your equal
proportion here? Your right half Ranks, with your left, as you have so
formerly stated them; your right half Ranks carries, or exceeds one more in
number then your left half Ranks does; and where we find the greater number,
we must conclude the lesser dignity, and if so, Why do you not rather contrive
it on the left, then upon the right? To which I answer first, that in raising
up of Companies into a Regiment, those that are the Field Officers by right
should have the most men, and greater Companies, then the private Captains
have; therefore if you will observe in the stating of this Dignity of a Rank
six a Breast, you will find in the left half Rank, two Field Officers, whose
Companies are the greater then any private Captains; certainly, they must needs
countervaile with any number of men with the right half Ranks, for although
the Colonels Company is, or ought ever to be the greatest, yet there is no
more Field Officers, but himself in his Division. And again, secondly, where
there cannot be an equal dividing of number, (as here you will find it of six
a Breast, or six deep) but that there will fall out some odd, either on the
right half Ranks, or on the left, and likewise the same either in the Front
half Files, or Rear-half -Files, as by example in the trial you will easily
find, by casting up the whole number, as they stand a Breast, and they will
fall out to be (21:) divide this number into two parts, and you cannot but must
cast the odd either on the right, or on the left. Therefore, to conclude, since
that there is a great possibility that there will be an equality of number of
men in the left half Ranks, suitable to that of the right, where there shall
fall out an odd number, that you cannot cast it into the left half Ranks, but
that you must remove the fifth Worth; in this extremity I say you may not do
it, but rather place it on the right. For the Major having no certain place to
march in a Regiment, it is the proper place of the second Captain to walk
along with the Lieutenant Colonel, taking his due place of honor in his
division, as the first shall do by marching with his Colonel; and thus much
shall suffice to be spoken of the last Table.

CHAP. XVI. Reasons likewise to be given for the Table, 12 a Breast, and 12 deep.
FOr as much as formerly has been spoken, that it is the discretion of every
Commander so to order his men, as to make an equal balance throughout the
battle, that his Front carry with it an equal proportion of Worth, Number,
and Dignity; with that of the Rear: and likewise so to steer, and order his
right half Rank, or right Flank, suitable with that of the left. The next way
then to receive further satisfaction herein, is by an examination thereof as it
lies, and is set open to view.

military diagram

Compare now the Worth and Diginity of the right half Ranks, and you shall
quickl^ perceive to carry a like proportion of number and worth with the left.
To make it ^ little more clear unto those that shall desire to be more
satisfied herein, you may take notice, and observe a true qualification
throughout the whole Rank. As first, begin with the Colonel, who is the best
and chiefest man of honor in the Regiment, and next to him is placed the ninth
or youngest Captain* to qualify his dignity and make his number (13,) the
Lieu^enant Colonel being the second man of honor, has placed to him the
eighth, which qualifies him in like manner to the Colonel, and makes his
number (13.) Next come we to the Major, and next to him is placed the seventh
Captain, which makes him suitable with the rest in his figure and qualification,
and to bear the number (13.) After we are to speak of the eldest Captain, who
has the sixth Captain joined unto him, and makes his number (13.) And so
comparing all the rest, dividing them by two's, they will stand as follows.

military diagram

Thus much, I conceive, may give a right understanding to any coming on
Soldier, of the true and right stating of a Rank twelve abrest, being a thing
very needful for to know, in respect that there are many Regiments which do
consist of twelve Companies; and when in course; as in the sequel of this
Book, when as I shall show the manner of drawing up of twelve Companies; there
will a little more light appear unto them to their farther knowledge of the
same. But thus much for the present, as concerning a Rank twelve a breast; and
now I shall come to speak or to touch a little of a Rank ten a breast, and a
File ten deep.

CHAP. XVII. Brief reasons to be given of the Dignity of places of a Rank ten a
breast, and of a File ten deep.
WHat has been formerly declared concerning a Rank twelve a breast as before
showed by every particular place of honor, as they stand with the reasons for
the same, it may give a clear understanding by the same rule to find the
Dignity of places ten a breast. For walking by the same way and rule of
examination, and you will find them to carry by dividing by two's, being added
to the four first places of honor, and they will carry suitable proportions, as
underneath is set forth.

military diagram

But for as much that in this Range of ten a breast there will fall out some
odd, we must then of necessity sake, place it upon the right, and not on the
left, for the reasons as formerly for a File six deep declared. I might now
here conclude with other flourishing Tables which might be little profitable
unto the Soldier, though holding out discourse more fuller in an Arithmeticall
way. But I have no desire to fill this subject with plenty of unprofitable
words and frothie flourishes, but rather driving really in a Souldierly way, to
make all things both plain and easy to every courteous Reader that shallbe
pleased for to peruse the same. And therefore, here for present, I shall
conclude, what more might here be spoken by dignities of Ronks and Files,
leaving what shall remain until such time in course I shall again meet with
them by the way in drawing up of Regiments.

CHAP. XVIII. What Distance is, and the reasons for the first beginning of the
same, with all their several uses.
HAving thus now passed over several reasons, and with as much brevity as I
could, to satisfy the longing desire of the young Soldiers request of every
particular place of honor as they stand in dignity both in Rank and File:
Which being passed over, the next will follow by course, before we come to
join the Files into a Body to satisfy the Soldier of each particular
distance with the several reasons and uses of the same: for next to the
Postures it is the first thing, or part of the Military exercise; and most
necessary for the Soldier to be knowing in, and to be exercised in. Yet I must
confess no Commander is so tied up or limited in the exercising of his men at
all times to begin with Distances, first, so as to show them all throughout;
but nevertheless, in all and every one of the Motions in the exercising of a
Body, care must be taken that the Soldier have his proper Distance for
performance of the same. Neither can any Leader exercise his men, but first he
must command them to some Distance suitable to what he will begin. As some I
have seen begin their Exercises with Faceings, some other with Doublings;
others with Countermarches and with Wheelings. Yet, nevertheless, whoever they
be that will so begin, as I said before, must command his Soldiers to some
Distance, which may be proper for^ the same. But for my own part, my purpose is
to go throughout all parts of the Military Exercise of Foot, and therefore
will go on in order as they lie; and first, as most properest, I shall begin
with Distances, to show them all throughout, and what the nature of them be.

Distance therefore really considered in it self, is no Motion, but there are
several motions to the attaining of each particular Distance both in length
and depth. Therefore, briefly thus: Distance is a place or intervall of ground
between every particular File and File, and betwixt every Rank and Rank as they
stand, and attained by the several motions of Ranks and Files, and consisting
of several proportions of ground, as easily may be understood by their
several words of command as they follow.

CHAP. XIX. The several sorts of Distances which are fit and proper for the
Soldier to be exercised in.
CLosest Order, Close Order, Order, Open Order, Double Distance, Twice double
Distance,
Which is both in Rank and File Half a foot, One foot and a half, Three foot,
Six foot, Twelve foot, Twenty four foot.


Having thus set down every Distance with their several proportions of ground,
I shall next proceed unto the words of command to the opening of the Ranks and
Files from their closest Order, and after satisfy the Soldier with the
reasons, and the uses of every particular Distance, as they go along in order.

CHAP. XX. Words of Command for the opening of Ranks and Files to all their
Distances, with their closings again.
THe Commander craving silence, and that they be commanded to close Ranks and
Files to their closest Order, the words of command for Distances are as
follows.

Files open to the right to your close Order, Ranks open backward to your close
Order,
Files open to the left to your Order, Ranks open backward to your Order,
Files open to the right and left to your open Order, Ranks open backward to
your open Order,
Files open to the left to your double Distance, Ranks open backward to your
double Distance,
Files open from the midst to twice double Distance. Ranks open backward to
twice double Distance.


The Ranks and Files being thus opened unto their twice double Distance from
their closest order, I conceive it to be a more Souldierly like way in the
opening and closing of Files, that the discretion of the Commander do vary, and
alter the hand in the commanding of them then always from every Distance to tie
himself to any particular hand; as to open to the right, and close to the
right. But as concerning the opening of Ranks, the properest way in my
judgment is to open them always to the Rear, in respect it is performed with
more facility: For every Rank from the first takes his due Distance, as he is
commanded, without any further trouble, or to a half facing to the right, by
taking it from the Rear, if from that place they shall be opened; and so
likewise it were a great deal better in the closing of Ranks, to close them
forwards, in respect it is for the more coveniency of their closing, then to
the Rear. For then, again, they must perform a half facing, which is not only
handsome, but troublesome to the Soldier. All that can be said for to maintain
it, (as, I conceive, in opening Ranks, forwards) is because they have not room
in the Rear, which seldom happens so in any Exercise, if discreetly ordered by
him that leads them. As for closing of the Ranks backwards, I cannot conceive
any solid reasons to confirm the same, and therefore will pass over it, and
come to close our Ranks and Files, to such Distance, from whence they first
were opened.

Files close to the right and left, inward to double distance. Ranks close
forwards, to double distance.
Files close to the right to your open Order. Ranks close forwards to your open
Order.
Files close into the midst to your Order. Ranks close forwards to your Order.
Files close to the left to your close Order. Ranks close forwards to your
close Order.
Files close to the right to your closest Order. Ranks close forwards to your
closest Order.


Concerning the Words of Command for Distances, in the openings and closings of
Ranks, and Files, what before is set down, may be sufficient for any Soldier
to use in time of his exercise. But now it will be expected to give some
reasons for every one of these, to show them in their proper uses.

CHAP. XXI. The use of each particular Distance, and at what time to be used.
WHerefore, first note, that your Distance of closest Order, is of chiefest use
unto the Pike, in these perticulers; as first, charging against the Horse, for
that the Ranks then clapping in their left legs, behind their Leaders right,
locking themselves so firm and steadfast, one within another, which 'twere
impossible for any Body of Horse to enter in amongst them. Secondly, it is of
excellent use for to maintain a breach, and to keep out an Enemy. Thirdly, it
is very useful to both arms at such time, when a Commander has any thing of
consequence to discover unto his Company, which he may have many occasions so
to do; as before his Exercise, to advise them to silence, to observe their
words of command, and their directions; and when they are to fight against an
Enemy, to persuade, and keep them off from fear, by assuring them good reasons
of hopes of overcoming. These, or such like speeches, manytimes a Captain may
have just occasion to express himself unto his Company, and being at so close
a Distance, they may more aptly hear his words, and obey his Comands. But here
now, by the way, too much preaching upon the head of a Company concerning
matters of Exercise, is too much a dulling of the Soldier, who rather would
fall into action, then so to be confounded with much talking.

Close order may be of very good use also, for most things which has been
spoken of the closest order; only here the Soldier has a little more liberty
in the handling of his arms, by being at a wider Distance. This Distance also
is of good use, before wheelings, because many times upon their moving, they
are apt to fly out to their proper Distance of order, which they always should
be at in their wheelings, where note, if first they were at order, they would
fly out to wider Distance.

Order is the Distance which the Soldier does fight upon, and is to be used
skirmishing against an Enemy; it is also useful at such time, when the Drum
shall beat a Troop, and that the Soldiers are marching to relieve some Court
of Guard, or making some expedition against an Enemy, for then they are in a
fit capacity of Distance, for to fight. It is also very useful, and to be
observed upon facings, for all entire doublings, and for wheelings; Order
likewise in File, and open order in Rank, is to be used at such time when the
Drum, shall beat a march, and the Body upon their moving, or marching.

Open order is the Distance proper for all doublings of Ranks and Files, by the
half -Files or by the Bringers up, wherein they have intervall of ground,
sufficient to move in. It is also a very proper Distance for facings, and ever
to be observed in time of Counter-marches

It is the properest distance for the Ranks to be in upon a March, but the
Files are then, to be at order, as is before expressed.

The use of double Distance is to be observed at such times when the Soldiers
shall stand, or happen to be in some eminent danger of the Cannon shot, from
the Enemy; for standing then so thin, they may be much preserved from danger;
it is likewise very good for Inversion, and Conversion.

You may take notice of these brief directions, in openings of Ranks and
Files, when the Files are commanded to open to the right, the left hand File
stands, and all the Files take their Distance from the left, observing always
in the Motions of Files, their Leaders, and to move altogether along with them.
If it be an opening of Files to the left, then contrary ways, the right hand
File stands, and they take their Distance from the right. So likewise for
closings unto what hand soever they be commanded to close, the out-most File is
to stand, the rest are to move and close to that. In opening or closing of
Ranks, the first Rank is always to stand, the rest are to move either opening
or closing, according as is commanded, always observing in their motions their
right-hand-men, and moving altogether.

CHAP. XXII. Directions of the way and manner of drawing up a private Company.
THe Postures being formerly described forth, the diginity of places in a File,
and words of Command made known unto the Soldier for their several Distances.
It next follows to show the joining of Files, and drawing up a Company; where
first pray mind at such times when the Drums are beating about the Quarters,
and in several places makes Proclamation, (as by order from their Captain,)
for all Gentlemen Soldiers that are under his Command, to repair unto his
Randezvous, unto such a place, and at such an hour; then it must be the
immediate care of every Officer under his Command, punctually at that hour and
place, thither to repair, for the more encouraging of the Soldiers as they
shall come in, and not to stir themselves from thence, without some order from
their Captain, for fear of giving bad examples unto others. And when they shall
perceive some considerable number of men to come in, the Sergeants then may
take advice with their Lieutenant and Ensign, which of them they will appoint
out to draw forth the Musketeers, and which the Pikes, and whom they shall
make the right hand File-leader of the Musketeers, and who shall be the left;
and again, who shall be the Leader of the right hand File of Pikes, and who
shall be the left. For these four, being such remarkable places of Honor unto
the knowing Soldier, that special care must be had in placing deserving men,
to be there. Now it is, or ought to be the discretion of every Lieutenant, and
Ensign, (as being Commission-Officers) to resolve the Sergeants herein, that
they may with more alacrity go on to draw the rest up between; and so to order
unto each of them their particular duties, as to carry equal pains in drawing
forth the Files. Therefore in respect, that for the most part in every Company,
they have three Sergeants, two of them ought to take charge in drawing forth
the Musketeers, (being help^ by the advice of their Lieutenant,) and the other
to draw forth the Files of Pikes, being assisted in Counsel by their Ensign:
for at such times the Officers ought not to be idle and to stand gazing upon
each other, but every one according to his particular place and relation,
should be very active and assisting to each other. In the drawing up the
Company, the properest way will be then, as you may understand, in perfecting
up a Company, to draw them forth into Files, and to make them six deep; as
being our custom here in England, and farther to have care in choosing able
Soldiers to be File-leaders, who having spent some time and pains in their
Files in showing them their Postures, they may be called to join into a Body.

For farther direction herein unto the Sergeants (whose proper place it does
belong unto) to observe this order in drawing up their Files, that they may
ingrosse the Pikes into one Body by themselves and the Musketeers into
another, and not to flank the Pikes until such time they shall perceive that
in both Arms they are complete. There are likewise several places of honor
that the Sergeants ought to take notice of, and to be informed of placing of
man of worth and desert in both Arms, that is to say, in the Body of Pikes,
and of the Musketeers, which underneath by figures I shall set forth for
farther satisfaction therein.

military diagram

Here I have set down the manner how the Sergeants should draw up their Files
in each arms a part by themselves, and have figured forth unto them the four
chief places of honor in both arms. It concerns them therefore very much to
mind and have regard to these particular places, and to order such men of
worth there, which may be well deserving of the same, and those Gentlemen whom
they shall think fit after to be worthy of File-leaders places, they are to
draw them up between the figure (1) and the figure (4,) and between the figure
(3) and the figure (2) and that rule to observe in both arms, and to be
careful to place good Soldiers in the Reere, and such who may be able
Soldiers for Halfe-file-leaders, because there may be much occasion by
doublings to bring them up for to assist the Front.

Thus much, I do confess, may be sufficient forth present to give directions
to the Sergeants for drawing up the Files and joining them together. Next after
I have shown how to flank their Pikes with Musketeers, I will set forth unto
them and the Drums, where their places are upon a stand, and where to be upon a
march.

Next follows to flank the stand of Pikes with the Musketeers; command the
Gentlemen of the Pikes to face to the right, and left half-ranks of Musketeers
to Face to the left, and then to march and interchange ground, facing after to
their leaders, and closing Files inward to order, they will stand as underneath
is set forth.

military diagram

If it should happen as sometimes it does, for a Company to be very large, as in
a Colonels, why then they may have just cause to have four Sergeants as I
have thus placed them. But here again it will be expected of diverse Soldiers
to show some reasons for the placing of the Sergeants being thus drawn up and
upon a stand, which I shall endeavor fully for to do, after I have set down
where their places are upon the march. Now before we shall come to treat of the
Company upon their long march, the Captain perceiving for his most conveniencie
of marching in the street or in a lane, that it will be convenient to divide
his Musketeers into equal divisions for their march, and therefore, according
to this number here set down; they may be divided into four divisions, that is
to say, two to march in the Van and two in the Rear, and two divisions of
Pikes. But before they are moving, it is the Sergeants duty to come unto the
Captain, to be informed from him where their proper places are to march, and
what divisions each of them shall lead, and likewise so the Drums, to know
their places where to beat upon the march. To answer to them all in the first
place, the Captain ought to give directions to his youngest Sergeant to lead
the second division of Musketeers in the Van; the first division of Pikes
being led by the ^nsigne, he commands the second for to be led by his second
Sergeant, and after orders or appoints the eldest Sergeant to lead the first
division of Musketeers of the Reerguard, and the third Sergeant to lead the
last division of Musketeers, the Lieutenant bringing up the Rear and Drums
commanded to fall in behind the two first Ranks of each division, and to beat
between the second Rank and fourth.

Having thus stated to them all their proper places, next it will be convenient
for the Captain to command them to shoulder their Arms, both Pikes and
Musketeers, and the Officers and Drums taking all their places as before
directed, they may begin to move and draw forth into a long March as follows.

military diagram

CHAP. XXIII. Several reasons given for the placing of the Sergeants after
this manner:
WHen a Body is drawn up in manner as before expressed; the Captain being
Commander in chief, his discretion is to balance the Officers as near as he
can with equal dignity and worth, his Front proportionally with the Rear. To
which purpose he takes unto himself the youngest Sergeant, and places him on
the right Angle in the Front, whereby he may be there ready to march down into
the Body or elsewhere, according unto the discretion of the Captain to fulfill
his commands, as also to stand there as a Spectator of the Captains actions,
and an assistant which may be much improvement to him. And in like manner he
commands the third Sergeant to the left Angle in the Rear; as being the second
youngest, and may be a help unto his Lieutenant there, as the fourth is to him
in the Front. The eldest Sergeant, he orders to the left Angle, in the Front,
as being the most honorable place for him, being there ready to lead upon a
march the Van of the Reer-Guard; and the second Sergeant he is appointed to
stand on the right Angle of the Rear, to make them equal in dignity unto the
Front. Now if you please to examine the dignity of the Sergeants, in the first
place, as the first Sergeant, and the fourth, making the number (5) and after
take a view of the second place, or Rear, and there you shall observe that the
second Sergeant, and third, may every way balance themselves, to be equivalent
in the worth, with the first, and fourth, carrying with them a like the same
number. So that it is clearly evident, that the Sergeants are rightly stated in
number, and dignity, the Front proportionably with the Rear, in the judgment
of any knowing Soldier. Something more may be spoken of the second Sergeants
place, which you may take notice in his March, to lead the second Division of
Pikes, which is the most honourablest place of leading, that is appointed forth
unto the Sergeants, the first only excepted, and upon a Stand, when they shall
lead up their Divisions, every Sergeant is to be take him unto his place, as
they were at first placed, and to continue there until such time they shall
receive further order from their Captain. Thus much, I conceive, may give
satisfaction unto the discreet Soldier, in these perticulers, leaving them
liberty to judge according unto their own best thoughts, while we endeavor to
draw up our Divisions all a Breast again, and to make some description of a Body.

The Captain upon his March having attained some convenient place to draw up
his Company, makes Alt, and commands the Sergeants to lead up their Divisions,
upon the left, and causes the Musketeers to open from the Pikes, making
sufficient intervalls for the Drums, to beat two a Breast, even with the Front,
the first two between the right hand File leader of Pikes, and the Musketeers
upon the right, the second two Drums doing the like, upon the left. And always
the Captain ought to march his Company after this manner all a Breast, provide
he have ground sufficient for the same. And being far more graceful so to do,
then to march them straggling upon a long March, for it does represent in some
kind the manner of marching of a Regiment, and at such times the Sergeants are
to march upon the Angles as is before described, moving to and again, sometimes
upon the Flanks, and causing the Soldiers to keep their Distance of order in
File, and open order in Rank, and to march all even a Breast, and after to
return again unto their places.

CHAP. XXIV. Before I come to make description of a Body, I shall show some
further Reasons of the Sergeants places of lesser Companies, with the placing
of the Drums.
IT happens many times, some Companies falls not out so large, as is before
forth, and that they have but three Sergeants, and therefore it would be known,
when that they have but one Division of Musketeers in the Van, two Divisions
of Pikes, and one Division of Musketeers, in the Rear, which is the
Reer-Guard, where then the placing of these three Sergeants, and three Drums,
shall be upon their long March, and where to be marching all a Breast. To which,
I answer, in the first place, the youngest Sergeant is always to attend the
Captain, and having no Division to lead, he is to be upon the right Angle of
the Front, there expecting his Captains pleasure and comands; and the second
Sergeant is to lead the second Division of Pikes, and the eldest Sergeant to
lead the last Division of Musketeers, or the Rear Guard, here are their places
upon the long March.

But when they are drawn up, and so march even a Breast, the youngest Sergeants
place, as is before expressed, is to march upon the right Angle in the Front, and
the eldest upon the left, the second Sergeant is to march in the right Angle in
the Rear. They having their places thus stated, are to move sometimes up and
down upon the Flanks, in their marching, causing the Soldiers to keep their
due distance of order in File, and open order in Rank, and to march even a
Breast, and after they may return unto their places again.

But here, me thinks, I meet with some Objector by the way, who says, the
eldest is much wronged herein; for that it is his proper place to be upon the
right; that when Forlorns are drawn off against an Enemy, he is there ready
first to lead them on, claiming it as his due, to give the first onset, and
therefore far more honor for him to be on the right, then on the left, and the
youngest Sergeant, rather to be placed on the left, then on the right; as for
the second Sergeants place, it is fit he should be in the Rear, to assist the
Lieutenant there, he having none but he, to help him, if any occasion should
require. To which, I answer, that it is the youngest Sergeants place to be upon
the right Angle, either upon a Stand, or upon a March, and not the eldest; for
these reasons following. The youngest Sergeant is not placed there for any
honor that it is to him, for he has no Division at all to lead upon the
March, (except the Company be very great) and if so, he is placed so near the
Captain, to be serviceable to him to carry, and convey his pleasures unto all
the rest of the Officers. As for the leading of the Vanguard, upon the March,
the Captain takes that place unto himself; and it is far more honor unto the
eldest Sergeant to be a Leader of the Reer-Guard, or entirely the left -Flank,
then to lead a Sub-division of Pikes. And besides that, it is properest for his
place to be upon the left, when they are all drawn up upon a Breast, for these
two reasons; as first, he is there upon in a readiness, to take his due place,
upon the sub-dividing on the long March; and again; upon a Stand, when they are
all drawn up, and ready to engage against an Enemy, and the Forlorns to be
drawn forth, equally a like from both Flanks, he is then as ready in the Front
to execute his Captains Commands, the youngest Sergeant, being likewise sent to
be something helpful to him, and attending after for further order from his
Captain, to send him relief by the second Sergeant, as occasion shall require.
So that in my judgment, take it either upon the long March, or others, when
drawn all up even a Breast, all things are so stated, for his due honor and
place, that he has no reason to complain, nor any of the rest, having all
their due, and proper places, which does belong unto them.

As for the placing of the Drums, upon the long arch, Mevery Division ought to
have his Drum to fall between such Ranks, as before expressed; excepting only the
second Division of Pikes, which may be excused, when they are to beat a March,
as being all drawn up, they are to fall in two, to beat even a Breast, upon the
right, and one, upon the left, as is before set down. If it should chance
further in a Company, to be so small to have but three Divisions, that is to
say, one Division of Musketeers, in the Van, the Body of Pikes in the midst,
and another Division of Musketeers, to bring up the Reer-Guard, and having but
two Sergeants, and two Drums; the youngest Sergeants place, will be as before
mentioned, upon the right in the Front, and the eldest Sergeant upon the left,
and to take his place to lead the last Division of Musketeers, upon the long
March; and the first Drum to beat in the first Division of Musketeers, and the
second to beat, and to march along amongst the Pikes. I have a little more
enlarged my self in this discourse of placing of the Sergeants, then I at
first intended; but meeting many times with several Soldiers, desiring
satisfaction in every one of these perticulers, I shall perhaps undergo here
the hard censure of some, for this my tedious discourse; but to such others
which desires to be knowing herein, I hope will have a more favorable opinion
of my good meaning unto them. And here I shall conclude for the present,
concerning the particular places of the Sergeants, in every private Company;
and now supposing, as by order from the Captain, the Sergeants have brought up
their Divisions, standing again, as before, expecting something more to be
spoken unto them, they silently stand to here what follows.

CHAP. XXIV. A Description of a Body of men through out, with all their
several parts, and kinds.
IT is a very necessary knowledge to every particular Soldier, to be
acquainted throughout with all the parts of a Body of men, drawn up, with their
several extents, and bounds, and with the true understanding of the same.
Where first note the Description of Files, a File is a Sequence of men,
consisting of Leaders, and Followers, from the first, unto the last; the
joining of Files Flank-wise, makes Ranks, and is the completing up of a Body:
for one File alone cannot be said to have any Ranks in it, but joining two, or
more Files together unto one, you may account them (provided they be six deep)
to have so many Ranks for number, as does extend from their Leaders to their
Bringers up. And further know, that a Rank is a Row of men, standing shoulder
to shoulder, in an even line from the left Flank to the right; or from the
out-most man upon the left, unto the out-most man upon the right; standing all
in a row File wise. Neither can it be said of one Rank, to have any Files in
it; for as the closing of Files to Files, makes Ranks, so the adding of Ranks
to Ranks, makes Files.

As for the Depth of Files, they have in these latter Ages, much varied
therein; sometimes making them sixteen deep, others ten, and eight deep, and
now lately, they have brought them unto six deep, as being the custom of the
Swedes, and the French, and altogether now the practice here in England. In
which form and way, I purpose to walk, but to proceed to my former promise to
the Soldier: There is in every Body of men, drawn up, consisting of Pikes, and
Musketeers, whether of greater or smaller number, it makes no matter; a Front,
a Rear, a Right-Flank, and a Left-Flank; there is also Front half-Files, and
Rear half-Files; there is a Right half-Ranks, and a Left half-Ranks; and there
is a Length, and Depth of the Battle: and of every one of these in their
several kinds, they have their particular extents, and bounds, according to
their number of men.

Therefore, take notice in the first place, that the Front is the first Rank,
or row of men, which are the File-leaders, and chief men of their Files, who
properly ought to take charge of their Files, being as it were their Captains,
and leads them first on in the Brunt against a furious Enemy; the extent of the
Front is from the left hand File-Leader, unto the Leader of the right hand File.

The Rear is the last Row or Rank of men, being the Bringers-up of the Files,
who next the Leaders are the chiefest men of honor in the File, and are as it
were unto them, their Lieutenants, and in the absence of the Leaders, they are
to take charge of the File, and to instruct them in their Postures: the extent
of the Rear, is from the Bringer-up of the left hand File, unto the place of
the Bringer-up of the right.

The right Flank is the out-most File, upon the right, where always ought, by
the way, to be very able Soldiers placed, because they first give onset, or
fire against the Enemy, if on that part they shall be charged; the extent of
the right Flank is from the Leader of the right hand File, unto the Bringer-up
of the same.

The left Flank, likewise is the out-most File upon the left, and his extent is
from the Leader of the left hand File, unto the Bringer-up.

The Front half-Files extent or bounds, reaches no further then from the
Front, unto the midst of Ranks, or to the Bringers-up of the Front half-Files,
which being but six deep, is the third Rank from the Front, and the Length of
the same reaches from the out-most part of the left Flank, until you come
unto the right.

The Rear half-Files begins from the midst of Ranks, or from the fourth Rank
from the Front, and runs downward in his depth to the Bringer-up of the
whole File, and the Length of the same is to be taken side-wise, as they stand
shoulder to shoulder, from the out-most man upon the left, unto the out-most
man upon the right.

The right half Ranks, in their Length, runs no further, then from the
out-most man upon the right, unto the midst of Files, or to the left hand
File-leader of the right half-Ranks; the Depth of the right half-Ranks reaches
from the Front, running down unto to the Rear.

As for the left half-Ranks, as much may be said, to take his Length, from the
midst of Files, or from the right hand File-leader, of the left half-Ranks unto
the out-most Files upon the left; the Depth of the left half-Ranks, may be
understood in form and manner, conformable to the right.

Next come we to speak of the Length and Depth of the whole Battle; the Length
of the Battle is ever to be accounted of the number of men in a Rank, and not
in a File; for the Files perhaps may not be above six deep, when that there may
be hundreds in a Breast in the Ranks, and farther the Length of any Battle is
to be taken from the out-most point of the left-Flank, or left hand
File-leader, stretching it self forth by an even Line along, until you come
to the outmost point of right Flank, or right hand File-leader; the Depth of
the Battle always is to be taken from the Front, or first Rank, and going down
backward in a straight Line down to the Rear, to the last Rank, or to the
Bringers-up of the Files. For as the Length of the Battle is to be taken from
the left Flank, going a long in Front unto the right, so the Depth of the
Battle is to be taken from the Front, going backward down to the Rear.

There is also to be understood that in every Battalia drawn up, there are
other parts and Denominations, very considerable to be known; that is, in every
such an one, there is a Vanguard, a Reer-Ward, and Main-Battail. The Vanguard
are the Musketeers, upon the right, or the right Flank; or as most commonly
called amongst us in these days, the Right-wing, or the Left-wing, which are
the Musketeers, and the Flankers of the Body of Pikes, the reason, as I
conceive, the Musketeers are accounted and called Wings, is because they are
first drawn off, as by flying motion in Forlorns, to engage against an Enemy;
but of this by the way, to proceed: the Reer-Ward, or Reer-Guard, are the
Musketeers, on the left Flank; and the Battle is the Body of Pikes, and here
I shall conclude concerning the Description of a Body.

CHAP. XXVI. Directions to all such as shall desire to exercise a Foot-Company,
with some admonitions to the Soldiers, as shall be exercised by them.
HE that intends to exercise a Body of men, must truly know what he shall
command, and so to give his directions unto the Soldiers, as they may aptly
make ready execution of the same. He must at such times* above all the rest,
assume unto himself the confidence and presence (as near as he is able) of a
complete Soldier. He is also to stretch out his voice so, as he may
conveniently be heard, and understood by the inferior Officers, and Soldiers;
which will cause them more readily to obey his Commands. He ought to carry a
cheerful countenance unto them, provided they do well; but otherwise, if
carelessly dis-regarding his Commands, he may look harshly upon them. His eyes
ought to be quick and nimble, observing all their Motions, whether it be to the
right, or left, to the Front, or Rear; and nimbly stepping to them, to stay
them, if disorderly they swerve awry from what he first intended. He must
likewise order all his Words of Command so, as that they may be proper, and
clearly pronounced forth unto the Soldier, without any faltering. And in every
one of these, to see the Soldier leasurely and easily perform the same in a
complete manner. He must not be two quick in his Words of Command, but
carefully see what before commanded, well done, and then he may proceed unto
the next. In time of his Exercise, he must seriously mind what he is to do, and
not to have his thoughts extravigantly carried away upon any other Subject, for
fear he be out, but if any such thing should happen through forgetfulness, he
ought not to be daunted, but to pull up the Spirit of a Soldier as well as he
can, and endeavor to reduce them again. For it is a rare thing to be found,
for a Leader to be so exquisite in his Exercising, as not to be sometimes out;
and in my observation of most, at one time or another, I have found them so to
be. His discretion also ought to be such, as to cull out, and choose those
things that be chiefest; as flowers out of a Garden, to fit and complete up his
Exercise in a Souldier-like way; which may be most properest for service and
use, which will bring to him far more commendations and praise in the judgment
of every knowing Soldier, then to spend his time upon unnecessary ^oyes; but
yet sometimes to please the fancy of the curious, at their private meetings, he
may use some things for delight, to support and uphold their private Exercises;
which have nursed up, here in London, many able Soldiers, and Commanders; who
have been serviceable to our Nation. It is a very necessary thing likewise that
a Leader sometimes do acquaint the Soldiers of the use of their several
Distances, Facings, Doublings, Coun-marches, and wheelings, and of all things
else he shall command; but in such a manner, that he dwell not too long upon
any thing, he shall declare unto them, for dulling of the, Soldiers, who
rather would be pleased with more actings, then by too much talkings: which
spins out the time, as sometimes ordered, to very little purpose. He must be
very careful of every Word of Command he gives, that the Soldiers be ordered
in their due Distance, suitable to the same, of what kind soever it be; and if
it shall be lost in their movings, or marchings; he must endeavor to bring
them to it again. He is likewise to acquaint the Soldiers when they are drawn
up, to look about them, and to mind their several places, how they stand in
the Body, whether they be in even Ranks from the Front, or odd; if even, and
upon any doubling of Ranks, they are the men to double the odd; if half
File-leaders, that they be commanded to double the Front; they must advance
their Arms, and are Leaders of that Motion to come up to double the Front: if
Bringers-up commanded to double, they are a like to do the same; if Bringers-up
of the Front half-Files, and that they be commanded to double the Rear, they
likewise are to advance their Arms; to face about, and are to begin to lead
them down to the Rear. They should likewise take notice, how they stand in
their Files, whether even from the right, or no; if even, and there be any
command to double Files to the right, they all are to move, and to double the
odd; if commanded to double to the left, they then stand odd, and the others
are to move, and double them. They likewise are to mind their places, who are
upon the Flanks; for a doubling either to Front, or Rear, by the half-Files,
they first begin to march, and how they stand there as right, and left hand men
in even Ranks; for by any doublings of Ranks entire, or by Division, they
likewise are the Leaders of the Motion. There ought also advice be given to the
middle File-leaders, to know their places; for if there should be any doublings
of the half-Ranks, they then are first to move, and to begin the Motion.

This caution being sometimes quickly run over in advising of the Soldiers,
that they should ever mind when they are first drawn up into a body these
particular places, they would not stand so carelessly and so ignorantly in a
Body, as many times they do, not knowing which way to move without a great
deal of pains and directions from their Leader, for there being so many
occasions of doublings of these kinds, that it is a necessary thing for every
Soldiers to be acquainted with the same.

Yet it is not only sufficient that the Soldiers do mind their places as
they stand in a body, according to the direction of their Leader, as before set
forth unto them, but that they be likewise, in the time of their Exercise, very
silent in the body, and helpful unto their Fellow Soldiers by pointing out
unto them with signs with the hand, where they should march, to perform what
was before commanded, and to be very civil, and orderly in their carriage to
each other, and to mind their Exercise so as a matter of great weight, and
high consideration in the well regarding of the same. And if a word of command
(as sometimes may happen) slip out of order, as by the mistaking of a hand or
the like, yet nevertheless it should be their modest care, if not prevented by
him, to be ready to execute what they conceive he intended, and walking along
in this civil and respective way unto him that shall lead them, it will not
only be a great encouragement unto him, but they will also reap much benefit
unto themselves.

And thus much briefly may be spoken in way of advice unto every Leader before
his beginning of his Exercise, and unto each particular Soldier as shall by
him be exercised.

CHAP. XXVII. Of Facings, of their several kinds, and of their use, with the
words of command for performance of the same.
FAcing is the altering or turning of the Aspect to either hand upon the ground
they stand, according to the words of command, whether it be to the right,
lef^, Front or Rear, or to the midst of Files or Ranks, or to any of the
outward or inward Angles, or to the Center.

The manner of execution of the same, it is a particular turning of every
Soldiers countenance unto each of those hands or places as above expressed, and
to be performed after this manner. The left foot is always to be kept fixed
like the hinge of a door, and unto what hand or part they shall be commanded to
face, every particular Soldier is immediately to turn his body upon the ball
or center of his left foot by wheeling, until he has brought his Aspest unto
the place commanded,

Facings is one of the most necessary and usefullest motions amongst all the
rest, for when the body shall be in such a straight that they cannot bring
their faces against an enemy by a Counter march or by a Wheeling, to bring
their best Soldiers there to fight, and likewise being debarred of room that
they cannot double it, nevertheless, facings are of such excellent use, that
they may with ease, although standing at close Order, turn every particular
face to charge upon that part where they shall be assaulted by an enemy, and
farther, this motion is performed with more facility then all the rest of the
motions. For in the others they alter the form of the Battle or changes the
place, but in this they preserve both, and it is ready for any attempt of an
enemy if they should be charged all at once in Front, Rear, Right and Left
Flanks, they may be commanded so to face as to answer them all in every one of
their charges.

Facings likewise are so necessary that they can hardly be spared in any other
of the motions having relation in one kind or other to them, all for to be
used: There is likewise farther to be understood that there are entire facings
and divisionall. Entire facings are when they turn their Aspects all one way:
Divisionall facings are when they diver or turn their faces several ways, as
to the Front, Rear, and both Flanks, all at one instant of time as shall be
commanded.

There are likewise facings to the front and rear Angles, that is to say, of
their outward and inward Angles. Outward Angles are when they are commanded to
face to the right Angle or to the left, or both facing to the inward Angles, as
when they are commanded so, as to face to the inward Angles toward the midst
of files. There is likewise facing to the inward Angles toward the midst of
Ranks as to the Center, where note, when there is any use of these facings unto
the inward Angles, it is occasioned by some former words of command, that has
made some large intervalls in the midst of Ranks or Files, and therefore they
may give them such commands as these for to open or stand so, that they may
march and close again as at first.

This facing to the Center, I do conceive, to be very, useful, when the
Captain or Leader has any thing of importance to speak unto the Company; they
standing at close order, he may sidewise move down into the midst of the Ranks
and Files, and command them to face all to the Center; they standing all round
about him so close; cannot choose but hear and know what his pleasure and
command will be, and in obedience thereunto, be very ready in performance for
the execution of the same.

But before I come to set down the words of command for facings, I shall desire
all Leaders not to tie themselves up so as not to begin in their Exercise to
command facings, until they have brought the soldiers to stand at open order
both in Rank and File, as if it were not proper for them to command them to
face till then. Therefore rather, for the reasons before set forth, command
them to choose upon such close Distances to face, that they may know the true
use of them, and at such times when they want ground that the other motions
cannot be performed.

CHAP. XXVIII. The words of command for Facings.
Face to the RIght, As you were, or, to your Leader. Left, To both Flanks,
Right about, Left about, To Front and Rear, Midst of Files, Midst of Ranks,
Right Angle, Left Angle, Outward Angles in the Front, Inward Angles in the
Front, Right Angle in the Rear. Left Angle in the Rear. Outward Angles in the
Rear, Inward Angles in the Rear, Inward Angles of the right Flank, Inward
Angles of the left Flank, Outward Angles both of Front and Rear. Inward Angles
both of Front and Rear. Inward Angles of both the Fanks to the Center. Front,
Rear and both Flanks from the Center, To the outward Angles of Front and Rear
from the Center.

Having concluded the words of command for performing of plain Facings, there
must be notice taken when any word of command shall be given to face to any of
the Rear Angles, they must be first faced to the Rear, and they will make more
easier performance of the same; and likewise, if any word of command be given
to face to the inward Angles upon the Flanks, they must face them there
likewise first, and it will be easier fulfilled: and likewise if any command be
given to face to the four Angles, or to Front, Rear, and Midst from the
Center, care must be first had that they may be first faced to the Center.

I might have proceeded a great deal farther in this place upon this Subject of
^acings, to have shown several figures of Battle that might be produced and
drawn forth, affording much variety of forms and number, and with much ease to
be performed upon their several marchings* according as they are ordered to
face, which might be very u^efull for service, and affording much matter for
any particular Exercise, to use several firings upon the same. But I shall
have occasion in another place to make use of diverse of them, and setting them
forth unto the view, when I shall begin to set down in any particular Leadings
of my own, which I have performed in our private meetings at Town-Ditch in
London, every Thursday morning, for the satisfaction of those loving Gentlemen,
who still do exercise there, and to such which shall come after.

CHAP. XXIX. The many variety of Doublings, with their parts and uses set
forth, for the practice of any Commander, to make use of according unto his own
description.
SInce there is in the true account, no other dimension of a Battle, but the
Length and Depth, so likewise it is to be understood, that the Length of the
B^ttail, is doubled by the doublings of ^anks* and half-files; and the Depth of
the Battle is doubled by the doubling of Files* and of the half Ranks. Now
there are several Words of Command for the performance of each of these, as to
double Ranks and Files, which do consist either of the doubling of number of
men, and persons, and not of place, or else the doubling both of number, and
place; as for example, command either the Ranks, the half-files, or Bringers-up
to double the Front to the right; here only is the doubling of number of men,
and not of place, for it adds but one man more to that hand, whereunto they
were commanded, and gains but his particular place. Again, Double Ranks to any
hand entire or double, the Front by the half-files to the right entire, it will
be not only a doubling of the number of men, but a doubling of the place, and
the Length of the Battle. The use of doubling the Length of the Battle may be
for two reasons, the one to over -wing an Enemy, the other to avoid over
-winging our selves. Yet there must be care taken, that in doubling of the
Length, that we fail not, or be too weak in our Depth, for the want of both,
either Length or Depth, may be very dangerous to our selves, and may give great
advantage to the Enemy. For if there should want a sufficient Depth, by gaining
much Length in the Front, we may perhaps be so weak there, that an Enemy may
quickly break through, whereby much danger may insult upon the same, if not
timely prevented by the discretion of the Commanders.

There is likewise in the doubling of Files, or the half-files, or the
half-Ranks, doubling to either Flank, a doubling of number of men, and not of
place, carrying much variety of Words of Command; but the doubling of Files,
and of the left half-Ranks entire, the Depth of the right Flank, is not only a
doubling of the number, but a doubling of the place and depth of the Battle.
In this doubling of the Depth, care likewise must be had, that we make not the
^ront too narrow, lest we give opportunity to the Enemy to incircle, and
incompasse it. To conclude, therefore take notice that Doublings were invented
to strengthen any part of the body that shall be weak; whether in the Front, or
Rear right Flank or left, whether it be in number of men, or place; Length, or
Depth, it is to be used according to the discretion of the Commander. There is
likewise farther to be considered in Doublings, whether they double the number
or place, Length or Dep^h, it is to be performed by one of these two, either
entire, or divisionall Doublings; therefore I shall proceed, and go on to show
what, I conceive, to be the properest way in the progress of them, in a right
order; and therefore I will begin to set down the Words of Command, first, to
double the Front, and so farther proceed to show the Doublings of the Flanks.
And first of entire Doublings, and next of the divisionall; and in the mean
time. I shall crave pardon from the courteous Soldier, that I put not down
several pricks or figures to set forth the same, endeavoring rather to give
him the Words of Command for each particular Doubling, with directions for
performance of the same, together with their several reducements, leaving it
to his ingenious study and practice, to make use of what he pleases, where he
may c^^ll and choose out such as shall be convenient, and fit, either for
service, or delight; by the way advising him to retein in his memory, what he
intends to practice, and not to meddle with any thing* but what he assuredly
knows will carry such weight and able reasons for their use and service, as
shall admit of no controlment from the judicious Soldier.

CHAP. XXX. The Words of Command, for all Entire Doublings to the Front, to be
performed one time or other, in time of Exercise.
Command. RAnks to the Right double.

Direction. Every even Rank move forward with the right leg, and with three
steps double the odd.

Reducement. Files to the left double; Or, Ranks as you were.

Command. Ranks to the left double.

Direction. Every even Rank, from the Front, move forwards with the left leg,
and at three steps double the odd.

Reducement. Files to the right double; or, Ranks as you were.

Command. Ranks to the right and left, double outward.

Direction. Every even Rank move outward, from the midst, and at three steps
double the odd.

Reducement. Files to the right and left, double inward; or, Ranks as you were.

Command. Ranks to the right and left, double inward.

Direction. Every even Rank from the Front move inward from the Flanks, and at
three steps double the odd.

Reducement. Files to the right and left, double outward; or, Ranks as you were.

Command. Half-files double your Front to the right.

Direction. Half-files advance your Arms, and move forwards to the right into
the Front.

Reducement. Files double your Depth to the left; or, half-files as you were.

Command. Half-files double your Front to the left.

Direction. Half-files advance forwards to the left into the Front.

Reducement. Files double your Depth to the right; or, half Files as you were.

Command. Half-files double your Front to the right and left, outward.

Direction. Half-files advance forwards to the right and left, from the midst,
and move up into the Front.

Reducement. Files double your Depth to the right and left inward; or
half-files as you were.

Command. Half-files double your Front to the right and left inward.

Direction. Half-files move forwards from the Flanks inward into the Front.

Reducement. Files double your Depth to the right and left outward; or,
half-files as you were.

Command. Bringers-up double your Front to the right.

Direction. Bringers-up advance your Arms, and move forwards with the right leg
into the Front.

Reducement. Files double your Depth to the left, every man falling behind his
Bringer-up.

Command. Bringers-up double your Front to the left.

Direction. Bringers-up advance forwards to the left, into the Front.

Reducement. Files double your Depth to the right, every man falling behind his
Bringer-up.

Command. Bringers-up double your Front to the right and left outward.

Direction. Bringers-up advance forward from the midst of the Rear, to the
right and left into the Front.

Reducement. Files double your Depth to the right and left inward, every man
falling behind his Bringer-up.

Command. Bringers-up double your Front to the right and left inward.

Direction. Bringers-up advance forwards from the Flanks, inward into the Front.

Reducement. Files double your Depth to the right and left outward, every man
falling behind his Bringer-up.

Command. Double your Ranks to the right entire.

Direction. Every even Rank from the Front face to the right, march forth, and
double the odd.

Reducement. Right half-ranks double your left Flank, or, ranks as you were.

Command. Double your Ranks to the left entire.

Direction. Every even rank from the Front, face to the left, march forth, and
double the odd.

Reducement. Left half-ranks double your right Flank; or, Ranks as you were.

Command. Double your Ranks inward entire.

Direction. Every even rank from the Rear, move away outward until you be
clear of the standing part, and after every even Rank from the Front, move
forwards, and double the odd.

Reducement. The in-most Files double your Flanks to the right and left,
outward, and after close.

Command. Double your Ranks to the right entire, every man placing himself on
the outside of his right hand man.

Direction. Every even rank from the Front, move away to the right, and place
your selves on the outside of your right hand men, and double the odd Ranks.

Reducement. Right-half-ranks double your left Flank, every man placing
himself on the inside of his left hand man.

Command. Double your Ranks to the left entire, every man placing himself on
the outside of his left hand man.

Direction. Every even rank from the Front, move away to the left, and double
the odd Ranks, by placing your selves on the outside of your left hand men.

Reducement. Left-half-ranks double your right Flank, every man placing
himself on the inside of his right hand man.

Command. Half-files double your Front to the right entire.

Direction. Half-files face to the right, and march clear of the standing part,
after face to your Leader, move up even a Breast, and double the Front.

Reducement. Right-half-ranks double entire, the Depth of your left Flank.

Command. Half-files double your Front to the left entire.

Direction. Half-files face to the left, and march clear of the standing part,
after face to your Leader, march up, and even the Front.

Reducement. Left-half-ranks double entire the Depth of your right Flank.

Command. Half-files double your Front inward entire.

Direction. Front-half-files face outward, and march clear of the standing
part, facing after to their Leader, the Reer-half-files may move up, and double
the Front.

Reducement. The in-most Files double entire the Depth of the out-most Files,
and after close.

These are as, I conceive, the properest and plainest Doublings for any
Soldier to use in his Exercise, out of which he may choose as many of them, as
he shall think fit, being all entire Doublings to the Front; next follows to
show some Divisionall Doublings to the same.

CHAP. XXXI. Divisionall Doublings to the Front.
Command. DOuble your Ranks to the right and left^ by Division.

Direction. Every even Rank from the Front face outward, march forth, and
double the odd.

Reducement. The out-most Files upon each Flank that moved, face inwards march
in, and strengthen the Body.

Command. Double your Ranks to the right and left by Division, every man
placing himself on the outside of his right and left hand man.

Direction. Every even Rank from the Front, move forth to the right and left
outward, and double the odd, placing your selves on the outside of your right
and left hand men.

Reducement. The out-most Files upon each Flank, that moved, double the in-most
Files to the right and left inward, every man placing himself on the* inside
of his right and left hand man.

Command. Half-files double your Front by Division.

Direction. Half-files face outward, and march clear of the standing part,
after face to your Leader, move up even a Breast, and double the Front.

Reducement. The out-most Files upon each Flank, that moved, double entire the
Depth of the in-most Files.

CHAP. XXXII. Entire Doublings to the Front by Wheelings.
Command. Wheel off your Reer-half-files, and double your Front to the right
entire.

Direction. Half-files face about, and wheel about to the left, march up, and
even the Front.

Reducement. Wheel off your right half Ranks, and double your left Flank,
entire to the left. Face outward, and Right half Ranks wheel about to the
right, moving forward until they range even a Breast with their left Flank, to
your Leader.

Command. Wheel off your Rear half-files, and double your Front to the left
entire.

Direction* Half-files face to the Rear, and wheel about to the right, move
forwards, and double the Front to the left entire.

Reducement. Wheel off your left half-Ranks, and double your right Flank entire
to the right. Face outward left half-Ranks, wheel about to the left, and move
forward until you have doubled the right Flank, to your Leader.

Command. Wheel your Rear half-files inward into the midst, and double your
Front inward entire.

Direction. Front-half-files open from the midst, until you be clear of the
standing part, then face to your Leader; half-files face about, and wheel your
Rear inward into the midst, move forward, until you have doubled the Front.

Reducement. The in-most files that doubled, wheel about to the right and left
outward, The in-most Files must have distance from the out-most Files, before
they can begin to wheel.
and double entire the Depth of the out-most files, after face to your Leader,
and close files to the midst to order.

CHAP. XXXIII. A Divisionall Doubling to the Front by Wheeling.
Command. WHeel off your Rear half-files, and double your Front by Division.

Direction. Half-files face to the Rear, and wheel about to the right and left,
move forward, and double the Front.

Reducement. The out-most files upon each Flank that doubled, Here likewise
must conveninient distance be given from the midst, for the out-most Files to
wheel about.
wheel about to the right and left inward, and double entire the Depth of the
in-most files, face to your Leaders.

Here ends the Doublings, that properly belong unto the Front according to
the practice of these times, whether they be Entire, or Divisionall, and of
their several kinds; as first, take them of themselves in the plain way, after
by Countermarches, as by the Bringers-up. Lastly, by Wheelings, and that first,
by Entire, after Divisionall. But here by the way, no Leader is tied to do all
these Doublings in his Exercise at once, but to use part of them what he shall
think fit. Yet, again, if he desire to be thoroughly knowing in all the
Doublings of Front, Rear, and both Flanks; and to show them unto the Soldiers,
he may then begin first to go over all the Words of Command for Doublings to
the Front, informing his Soldiers of their several uses for service, at one
time or another, and then proceed to show the use of the several Doublings to
the Flanks, and next to the Rear, which in this place I hold needless to give
Words of Command for the Doubling thereunto, in regard the former Words of
Command used to the Front, with small alteration, will serve to the Rear.

CHAP. XXXIV. Entire Doublings to the right Flank.
Command. FIles to the right double.

Direction. Every even file from the right by a half turning at three steps
double the odd.

Reducement. Ranks to the left double; or files as you were.

Command. Files to the right and left, double outward.

Direction. Every even file from the flanks move, and by three steps double the
odd.

Reducement. Ranks to the right and left double inward; or files as you were.

Command. Double your files to the right and left inward.

Direction. Every even File from the midst move inward side-wise, and double
the odd.

Reducement. Ranks to the right and left double outward; or files as you were.

Command. Double your files to the right advancing.

Direction. Every even file from the right move forwards, and by three steps
double the odd.

Reducement. Ranks to the right double.

Command. Double your files outward advancing.

Direction. Every even file from the Flanks, move forwards, and by three steps
double the odd.

Reducement. Ranks to the right and left double outward.

Command. Double your files to the right and left inward advancing.

Direction. Every even file from the midst move forwards, and by three steps
double the odd.

Reducement. Ranks to the right and left double inward.

Command. Left half-Ranks double your right Flank to the right.

Direction. Face all to the right, and left half-Ranks move forwards to the
right, and double your right Flank to your Leader.

Reducement. Double your Ranks to the left entire; or left half-Ranks march
forth into your places.

Command. Left half-Ranks double your right Flank to the left.

Direction. Face all to the right, and left half-Ranks move forwards to the
left until you have doubled the right Flank to your Leader.

Reducement. Double your Ranks to the right entire to the Rear, face to the
Rear, and the even Ranks from the Rear, move forth, and double the odd to your
Leader.

Command. Left half-Ranks double your right Flank to the right and left outward.

Direction. Face all to the right; and left half-Ranks move to the right and
left outward, and double your right Flank to your Leader.

Reducement. Front and Rear half-files double your Ranks entire to the left
Flank; Front half-files face about, and every even Rank from the midst move
forth, and double Ranks entire toward the left Flank, face to your Leader.

Command. Left half-Ranks double your right Flank to the right and left inward.

Direction. Face all to the right; and left half-Ranks move forwards to the
right and left inward, and double the right Flank, face to your Leader.

Reducement. Front and Rear half-files double your Ranks entire to the left
Flank; half-files face about, and every even Rank from the Front and Rear, move
forth, and double your Ranks entire toward the left Flank, face to your Leader.

Command. Left half-ranks double your right Flank to the right by Countermarch.

Direction. Right half-ranks face to the right, left half-ranks turn off to the
left, move forwards, and double your right Flank, face to your Leader.

Reducement. Double your Ranks to the left entire, every man placing himself on
the outside of his left hand man.

Command. Left half-ranks double your right Flank to the left by Countermarch.

Direction. Right half-ranks face to the right, and left half-ranks turn off to
the right, and double your right Flank to the left, face to your Leader.

Reducement. Double your ranks to the right entire to the rear, every man
placing himself on the outside of his right hand man; face to the rear, and
every even rank from the rear, move forth to the right, and double the odd,
face to your Leader.

Command. Left half-ranks double your right Flank to the right and left outward
by Countermarch.

Direction. Right half-ranks face to the right, and left half-ranks face to the
left, and turn off to the right and left, moving forward until you have
doubled the right Flank to the right and left outward; face to your Leader.

Reducement. Front and Rear half-files double your Ranks entire to the
left-Flank, every man placing himself on the outside of his right and
left hand man; Front half-files face about, and every even rank from the midst
move forth to the left-Flank, and double the odd, placing your selves on the
outside of your right hand men, and every even rank from the Rear half- files,
move forth, and double the odd, placing your selves on the outside of your
left hand men: face to your Leader.

Command. Left half-ranks double your right-Flank to the right and left inward,
by Countermarch.

Direction. Face all to the right and left out-ward; left half-Ranks turn off
to the right and left inward, move forward until you have doubled the right
Flank, face to your Leader.

Reducement. Front and Rear half-files double your Ranks entire to the
left-Flank, every man placing himself on the outside of his right and
left hand man; half-files face about, and every even Rank from the Rear, move
forth to the left Flank, and double the odd, placing your selves on the
outside of your right hand men; and every even Rank from the Front move forth,
and double the odd; placing your selves on the outside of your left hand men,
face to your Leader.

Command. Double your Files to the right entire advancing.

Direction. Every even File from the right, move straight forth until you be
clear, and double the odd.

Reducement. Half-files double your Front to the right; or Front half-files
double your Rear to the right.

Command. Files double your Depth to the right entire.

Direction. Every even File from the right face about, move down, until you
are clear of the Rear, and double the Depth of the odd Files; face to your
Leader.

Reducement. Half-files double your Front to the left; or Front half-files
double your Rear to the left.

Command. Double your Files inward entire to the right.

Direction. Half-files of every even File from the left, face about; even Files
from the left move forwards until you are clear of the standing part, after
face all to the right, and then every even File from the right, move forwards
into the Intervalls, and double entire the odd, face to your Leader.

Reducement. The three first, and the three last Ranks, double the six
middle-most Ranks to the right; the three first Ranks face about, and move down
to the midst by their own left-hands; and the three last Ranks move forwards to
the midst, to their own right-hands; face to your Leader.

Command. Double your Files to the right entire, advancing, every man placing
himself before his Leader.

Direction. Every even File from the right, advance forwards, and double the
odd, every man placing himself before his Leader.

Reducement. Front half-files by Countermarch double your Rear, to the right;
Front half-files turn off to the left, and double the Rear, face to your Leader.

Command. Files double your Depth to the right, every man falling behind his
Bringer-up.

Direction. Every even File from the right, face about to the right, and double
the odd, by placing your selves behind your Bringers-up.

Reducement. Bringers-up double your Front to the left.

Command. Left half-Ranks double your right Flank entire advancing.

Direction. Left half-Ranks march straight forth, until you are clear of the
standing part, after move to the right, being first faced there, and double the
right Flank, face to your Leader.

Reducement. Front half-files double your Rear to the right entire, face to the
left, and move clear of the standing part, after face to the Rear, move down,
and even the Rear; face to your Leader.

Command. Left half-Ranks double entire the Depth of the right Flank.

Direction. Left half-Ranks face about to the right, and move down, until you
are clear of the standing part, after face to the left, and move forward,
until you have doubled the Depth of your right Flank; face to your Leader.

Reducement. Half-files double your Front to the left entire, face to the left,
and march clear of the standing part, after face to your Leader, march up, and
even the Front.

Command. Left half-Ranks double your right-Flank inward entire.

Direction. Half-files of the right half-Ranks face to the Rear, right
half-Ranks move forward until you are clear of the standing part, face all to
the right, and left half-Ranks move forwards, and double the right Flank; face
to your Leader.

Reducement. The three first, and the three last ranks double the six
middle-most ranks, entire to the right Flank; the three first, and the three
last ranks, face to the right, and march until you are clear of the standing
part, after face inward, march, and close your Divisions, and face to your
Leader.

CHAP. XXXV. Divisionall Doublings to the right Flank.
Command. DOuble your Files to the right by Division.

Direction. Half-files of the even Files from the right, face to the Rear; even
Files march clear of the standing part, after move to the right and left, and
double the odd Files, face to your Leader.

Reducement. The three first, and the three last ranks, double the six
middle-most ranks to the left; the three first ranks face about, and march down
by your own right hands into the midst of ranks; and the three last ranks move
forwards to the midst, to your own left hands, face to your Leader.

Command. Double your Files to the right by Division, every man placing himself
before his Leader, and his Bringer-up.

Direction. Half-files of the even Files from the right, face to the Rear, the
even Files march, and double the odd, every man placing himself before his
Leader, and Bringer-up; face to your Leader.

Reducement. The three first, and the three last ranks, double the six
middle-most ranks to the left, every man placing himself before his Leader,
and his Bringer-up; the three first ranks face about to the left, and move down
to the midst of ranks by your own right hands, placing your selves before your
Bringers-up; and the three last ranks march forwards unto the midst, placing
your selves before your Leaders; to your Leader.

Command. Left half-Ranks double your right Flank by Division.

Direction. Half-files of the left half-Ranks face about to the right, the left
half-Ranks move clear of the standing part, after face all to the right Flank,
the left half-Ranks moving forward, until they have ranged even a Breast with
the right Flank; face to your Leader.

Reducement. The three first, and the three last ranks, double the six
middle-most ranks entire to the left-Flank; the three first, and the three last
ranks, face to the left-Flank, and move clear of the standing part, after face
inward, march and close your Divisions, face to your Leader.

CHAP. XXXVI. Entire Doublings to the right Flank by Wheeling.
Command. WHeel off your left half-Ranks, and double your right Flank entire to
the right.

Direction. Face outward, and left half-Ranks wheel about to the left, and move
forward until you have doubled the right Flank entire to the right; face to
your Leader.

Reducement. Wheel off your Rear half-files, and double your Front to the left
entire; half-files face to the Rear, and wheel about to the right, and march
fowards until you have ranged your selves even with the Front.

Command. Wheel off your left half-Ranks, and double your right Flank, entire
to the left.

Direction. Face outward left half-Ranks, wheel about to the right, and move
forward until you have doubled the right Flank entire to the left, face to
your Leader.

Reducement. Wheel off your Front half-files, and double your Rear to the right
entire, half-files face about, and Front half-files wheel about to the left,
move down, and double the Rear to the right, face to your Leader.

Command. Wheel the left half-Ranks inward into the midst, and double your
right Flank inward entire.

Direction. Half-files of the right half-Ranks face about, right half-Ranks
move clear of the standing part, then face to the right, and the left
half-Ranks face to the left, and wheeling inward into the midst, moving forward
until they have doubled the right Flank inward entire, to your Leader.

Reducement. Wheel off from the right Flank, the six middle-most Ranks, and
double In wheeling the six middle Ranks from the right Flank, they must have
ground sufficient for them to wheel about.
your Front and Rear entire to the left Flank, the six middle Ranks face to the
right, and wheel about to the right, and left, moving forward, until they are
clear of the standing part, and after facing to the Front and Rear, they move
again, and double the Front and Rear, toward the left Flank, face all to your
Leader, march forwards, and close your Divisions.

Or if they continue their aspect to the right Flank, then command the six
middle-most Files to wheel off to the right and left, and to double entire the
Depth of the out-most Files, then face to their Leader, and close their
Divisions.

CHAP. XXXVII. A Divisionall Doubling to the right Flank by Wheeling.
Command. WHeel off your left half-Ranks, and double your right Flank by
Division.

Direction. Face outward, and left half-Ranks wheel off to the right and left
about, and move forward until you have ranged even, and doubled the right
Flank, to your Leader.

Reducement. Wheel off the three first, and the three last ranks, and double
the six middle-most ranks entire to the left Flank, the three last ranks face
about, and wheel to the right, about moving up toward the midst of the left
Flank, and the three first ranks at the same time wheel about to the left, and
move down to the midst of the left Flank, face to your Leader.

Or if they continue their aspect to the right Flank, then command the out-most
Files to that doubled to wheel about to the right and left inward, and double
entire the Depth of the in-most Files to your Leader.

Here ends all the plain Doublings to the right Flank, performed by several
Countermarches, and Wheelings, which to any ingenious Soldier are sufficient
directions to know how to double the left Flank, only altering the hand by the
Words of Command.

And here Fellow-Souldier ends all the several kinds of Doublings, which if
any shall seem hard or difficult unto thee, either in their Commands,
Directions, or Reducements, thou may (care being taken) with much ease and
delight perform the same. And here the Captain is to take special notice,
when he comes to the point of Doublings, that his properest way, and will be
first to double the Front, as being the most honorable part of the Body, and
next the Rear, and after either to the right or left Flank, leaving it to his
discretion to use as many of them as he shall think fitting, and convenient for
his Exercise. And although I have somewhat varied from the practice of former
times in using more plenty of Words of Commands, the ripeness and curiosity of
wits in these our days, enforced me unto it; for they having much refined the
Military Discipline will not be pleased with ordinary stuff (as to say, as you
were) which, I confess, would save the Captain a great deal of pains, and be
more easy to the apprehension, and capacity of every private Soldier, for his
returning back unto his place again. Yet if Command should be given to double
any part of the Body, that Leader would quickly lie under a hard censure, and
be judged in most men's opinions insufficient, that could not find out some
other Words of Command to reduce them again. Endeavoring, therefore, to give
full satisfaction to both parties, I have taken the pains to set down other
Words of Command for Reducements, whereby those which shall profess themselves
curious, may cull out such plenty as may best please their genious* advising
them withal not to presume in the exercising of their private Companies,
before themselves be first well verst, and truly knowing in all and every of
the several Commands, Directions, and Reducements, beforementioned, which
being obtained, they may confidently and boldly proceed, so to inure their
Soldiers in the practice thereof, that their own knowledge in a short time
will reduce them to their former places without using these threadbare words,
as you were; variety being more profitable, and delightful unto them,
(provided they understand it) then to accustom them in an ordinary and plain
way of reducing.

But here some men will be ready to carp and say, that I have troubled my self
to little purpose, in setting down more Doublings then are used abroad upon
service. To whom I answer that there are none (if rightly understood) but are
of singular use one time or another, either in our private Meetings, or in
those great Nurseries of Military Discipline, the famous Academies of this out
Island, the Artillery and Military Gardens, who for ^ield-service have trained
up, and sent forth many worthy, able and gallant Soldiers into the Armies
lately raised in our Nation between the King and Parliament, whom I pray God
happily to reconcile. But, suppose, many of these Doublings have not been seen
by some to be used in the field: Are they not therefore useful? perhaps at such
time they have had no occasion for to use them all, which if not: must they be
rejected? the answer positively, that being rightly enquired into, they have in
them very useful, and serviceable things against an Enemy whether it be in the
Field or in Garrison. As for example the Musketeers being brought either all
into the Front or Rear or upon one of the Flanks which often happens, an Enemy
appearing there, then they would be of singular good use for our advantage, and
very disadvantageous to the enemy. The like may be spoken of the Pikes, who are
by several of these doublings brought into those places, being there very
serviceable to receive a desperate charge of horse, if upon any of these parts
they should fall on. Observe, further, that in many of these doublings, as the
one arms shall face or charge against an enemy, so contrariwise the other lies
more secure in safety to be preserved from danger of the shot. Moreover,
(according unto the number of men either in length or depth) a Leader may by
these words of Command or the like, at the same time double his Front, Rear, or
Midst by doubling of Ranks, and may farther make use of them at one and the
same time to double by files his right, left Flank and Midst all at one
instant. But I shall not not need to set down words of Command for the doubling
Front, Rear, Flanks and Midst, after this manner, but leave that unto the apt
Soldier to make use of such words of Command formerly shown, and to frame
them suitable for any such purpose so intended. But before I shall conclude
concerning the use of these doublings, as I said before, there are many of
them, which by command will bring any men in the body, to fight, unto that part
which shall be most weak, or assaulted by an enemy. And, again, he may cast
them, so into the body by a doubling, as shall preserve from danger, whom he
shall think fit. And to say more there is no part of the body or arms but by
words of Command in doublings may be brought forth as Frontiers against the
enemy, and may be placed again into the midst of the body for more security,
and others in like manner may be brought forth for their relief. Therefore it
much concerns all Soldiers and Commanders to be truly knowing in all the
several kinds of doublings, out of which he may make singular good use
according to his discretion at all such times as need shall require, whether it
be in Field, or otherwise in Garrison.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Of Inversion and Conversion.
NOt to omit any thing which may be beneficial for the knowledge of all them
that intends to be good proficients in this Art of Military Discipline, my
subject in this Chapter shall be of Ranks filing, and files, filing, and ranks,
ranking, and files ranking, which are by some called Inversion, and Conversion;
yet seldom mentioned by any Leader in the time of his Exercise, for this
reason, as I suppose, because the soldiers for the most part are unacquainted
with them; which causes all our Leaders in our private Meetings here in
London, to deliver forth unto their Soldiers such words of command as may
readily and aptly be understood by them, which are ranks, file to the right or
left, or files, file to any hand, which is no other then Inversion, and again
ranks, rank to the right or left, either in equal or unequal parts, or entire
to the front or files to rank in the like kind may be termed Conversion: And,
in my opinion, they do the better that shall thus express themselves to the
capacity of every Soldier, then for to pusle them with the words Inversion and
Conversion. I intend therefore without curiosity plainly to set down their
several commands, directions, and reducements, keeping my former method,
concerning doublings. For in all and every one of them, they do either double
the length or depth of the Front, Rear, Midst, or Flanks; no part of the
Military Exercise affording more plenty of matter then they, carrying always
along with them many things of excellent use. For example, suppose a Prince,
General, or any other person of quality were to pass through the Company, a
discreet Commander would presently command their ranks to invert, or file to
the right and left inward, which immediately becomes (as it were a Street or
Gallery, for the honoring and securing of their persons. Moreover, it is of
use for the lodging of the Colors, or upon funeral occasions, or taking their
leave from their Captain, where they may pour forth their volley's of shot all
at one and the same time. To be short, being necessitated to march against a
battery, it avoids the danger of the great Ordnance, and likewise secures the
front of the Battalia, from the imminent danger of any great shower of small
shot poured forth by the Enemy. As likewise it is of excellent use to march
over a narrow Bridge, or through a Lane, Thicket, or Salliport, or such like
difficult passages; or if any Commander have a desire to use ancient figures,
by it he may make the Saw, Sheers, or Diamond; or being in one file, they may
aptly be drawn into a Ring, where he that is an able posture man standing in
the midst, may show unto them their several postures, and after easily reduce
them again, and thus much briefly of Inversion, or ranks filing.

Next come we to show the excellent uses and services which may be performed by
Conversion, as first perceiving any man of worth to stand before the front of
the battle, or to pass by either of the flanks, then ranks, ranking, or files
ranking into the front, or ranks wheeling to either of the flanks, by these
commands the soldiers aspects are thither brought to present unto him a volley
of shot. It is likewise very useful for the making of a Line against a
Brest-work, or lining of hedges, carrying it self several ways secretly to lie
in Ambuscado, whereby they may fire upon the Enemy as he marches by. Or
approaching against any Fort or place of danger, they may daringly make a large
front, and firing upon them, after filing to the right or left, making large
intervalls, they much preserve themselves from the danger of the great shot
proceeding from the Enemy. Again, ranks ranking either in equal, or unequal
parts is of singular good use upon a narrow passage, where they can march but
2, 3, 4, or 6 a Breast; the Commander, notwithstanding, they marched before 20 a
Breast, may by it bring them to such small numbers, whereby he may much
preserve them in time of imminent danger and peril. To dwell no longer upon
this discourse, Inversion and Conversion, many times requres larger distance
then any other of the Motions, as sometimes double distance or twice double
distance, wherefore being so many occasions for the use of them both, I hold it
requisite for a Leader frequently to practice his soldiers in them, no part of
the Art Military, affording more commendations to the Soldiers that shall
readily and handsomely perform the same. Briefly, therefore, passing over what
might be more spoken concerning them. I shall in the next place set them all
forth in their full view, leaving every discreet Soldier to his own liberty,
to make use of as many of them as he shall think fit, and to use them after
what manner he pleases.

CHAP. XXXIX. The words of Command for Ranks, Ranking and Files Ranking to the
Front, they being twelve a Breast and six deep.
Command. RA^^s, rank to the right 2, 3, 4, or 6; as occasion shall require.

Direction. If to two; the two out-most men upon the right are to move away,
the next two, to fall behind them until the first rank has made six Ranks,
and the rest doing the like until the first six Ranks are become thirty six.

Reducement. Ranks, rank 12 to the left; the first Rank is to stand, the rest
are to move away two and two, until they have made up 12 in one rank, and the
rest are to do the like until they are made up all again as at first: or
command Ranks, rank as you were, the same rule is to be observed if you rank to
any of the other numbers, to divide them accordingly.

Command. Ranks, rank three to the left.

Direction. The first three men upon the left are to move away, the next three
are to fall in behind toward the left until the first Rank have made four
Ranks, the rest are to do the like, until they have made them 24 Ranks.

Reducement. Ranks, rank 12 to the right, the first Rank is to stand, the rest
are to move forth by three and three, until they have made twelve in one Rank,
the rest are to do the like, until they be as they were at first, or ranks,
rank as you were.

Command. Ranks, rank three to the right and left outward.

Direction. The three out-most men of the first rank upon the right, and the
three out-most men upon the left move away, the next three of each hand in the
same rank are to do the like, and every rank throughout to follow successively,
dividing themselves three to one hand, and three to the other, until they have
made twelve ranks in each Division, and falling in the Rear successively to
each hand of the first rank.

Reducement. Ranks, rank 12 to the right and left inward; or ranks, rank as you
were.

Command. Ranks, rank entire to the right into the front.

Direction. The first rank stand, the rest face to the right, and move away
every rank, placing it self successively to the right, until they stand all
in one rank in the front.

Reducement. Ranks, rank 12 to the left; the first 12 men upon the left are to
stand, the next 12 are to face to the left, and to move and fall in the Rear of
the first, and so consequently all the rest, or else to command ranks, rank as
you were.

Cmmand. Ranks, rank entire to the left into the front.

Direction. The first Rank stand, the rest face to the left, and move until
they have successively placed themselves, and made one entire rank into the
front.

Reducement. Ranks, rank 12 to the right, the 12 out-most men upon the right
stand, the rest face to the right and move, making 12 in every rank, or ranks,
rank as you were.

Command. Ranks, rank outward into the front.

Direction. The first Rank stand, the rest face outward, and place your selves
successively into the Front, facing after to your Leader.

Reducement. Ranks, rank 12 to the right and left inward; the 12 middle-most
men stand, the rest face inward, and move, ranking 12 successively behind the
first rank, and after facing to their Leader, and to even their ranks.

Command. Ranks, rank inward into the Front.

Direction. The first Rank is to move away to the right and left, the next rank
moving up into his ground, doing the like, and consequently so all the rest
until the last rank be come up entire into the front.

Reducement. Ranks, rank six to the right and left outward; the first six upon
the right, and the first six upon the left stand, the rest move outward,
falling in the Rear of the first rank, ranking six to the right and left, and
after closing their Divisions.

Command. Files, rank to the right into the front.

Direction. Files open to the left to your double Distance, and ranks close
forwards to close order, and move up to the right into the front.

Reducement. Rank, file six to the left, the first six upon the left are to
fall into a file, the rest doing the like, until you have made 12 files, as at
first, or command, rank file as you were.

Command. Files, rank to the left into the front.

Direction. Every man is to move forward to the left into the front, beginning
from the Leader of the File, and moving up successively, making one entire rank.

Reducement. Rank file six to the right, the six out-most men upon the right,
are to fall into a file, the rest in like manner are to do the same, or rank,
file as you were.

Command. Files, rank outward into the front.

Direction. Right and left half ranks close into the midst, to close order,
after move to the right and left outward, until they be come up into the front.

Reducement. Ranks, file six to the right and left inward, the midde men are to
stand, the rest are to move side-wayes to the right and left inward, and to
file as before commanded, or rank, file as you were.

Command. Files, rank inward into the front.

Direction. Right and left half Ranks open from the midst to twice double
Distance, and Files move up to the right and left entire into the front.

Reducement. Rank, file six to the right and left outward, the out-most men
stand, the rest move to the right and left outward, filing according to
command, and after to close their Divisions.

CHAP. XL. Ranks, ranking into the Front by Countermarch.
Command. RAnks, rank entire into the Front, every man placing himself on the
outside of his right hand man.

Direction. The first Rank stand, the rest move away to the right successively
into the Front, placing themselves on the outside of their right hand men.

Reducement. Rank, rank 12 to the left, every man placing himself on the
outside of his left hand man; the first 12 upon the left are to stand, the
rest are successively to fall in behind the first Rank, placing themselves as
before commanded, or Rank, rank as you were, placing your selves on the
outside of your left hand men.

Command. Ranks, rank entire to the left into the Front, every man placing
himself on the outside of his left hand man.

Direction. The first Rank stand, the rest move away to the left successively,
placing your selves on the outside of your left hand men.

Reducement. Ranks, rank 12 to the right, every man placing himself on the
outside of his right hand man, or rank, rank as you were, every man placing
man, placing himself as before.

Command. Ranks, rank outward into the Front, every man placing himself on the
outside of his right and left hand man.

Direction. The first Rank stand, the rest move forth to the right and left,
and successively to fall into the Front, every man placing himself on the
outside of his right and left hand man.

Reducement. Ranks, rank 12 to the right and left inward, every man placing
himself on the inside of his right and left hand man; the 12 middle-men are to
stand, the rest are to move to the right and left inward, six to one hand, and
six to the other, making 12 in Rank, and falling behind the first.

Command. Ranks, rank inward into the Front, every man placing himself on the
inside of his right and left hand man.

Direction. Right and left half-ranks open from the midst to twice double
Distance, the first Rank of each Division is to stand, the rest are to move
successively to the right and left inward into the Front* making one entire
Rank.

Reducement. Rank, rank six to the right and left outward, every man placing
himself on the outside of his right and left hand man; the first Rank of each
Division stand, the rest move to the right and left outward, ranking as before
commanded, falling successively in the Rear of the first Rank, and after to
close their Divisions.

CHAP. XLI. Files ranking into the Front by Wheeling.
Command. FIles, rank to the right into the Front by wheeling.

Direction. Face to the right, and wheel to the left, until they stand The
Files are to be at double distance, and Ranks at close order.
even a Breast in one entire Rank in the Front.

Reducement. Rank, file six to the left by wheeling; face all to the Rear, and
the first six men then upon the right, wheel to the right, and so consequently
all the rest wheeling by sixes to the right; their Leaders that were before,
being the hinges of the motion, and after face to their Leader.

Command. Files, rank to the left into the Front by wheeling.

Direction. Face to the left, and wheel to the right, until they make all one
entire Rank in the Front.

Reducement. Rank, file six to the right by wheeling; face to the Rear, and the
six out-most men upon the left, wheel to the left, the next six are to follow,
and consequently all the rest, until they have made 12 Files as at the first,
and after face to their Leader.

Command. Files, rank outward into the Front by wheeling.

Direction. Right and left half-ranks close into the midst to order, and face
outward, wheeling to the right and left, until you are one entire Rank.

Reducement. Rank, file six to the right and left inward by wheeling, face
about to the right, and the 12 middle-most men are to wheel to the right and
left inward, and the rest are likewise to do the same by sixes, until they
have made themselves into 12 files, after face to their Leader.

Command. Files, rank inward into the front by wheeling.

Direction. Right and left half-ranks open from the midst to twice double
distance, after face inward, and wheel to the right and left inward, until
they are all in one rank in the front.

Reducement. Rank, file six to the right and left out-ward, face all about, and
wheel by sixes to the right and left, the Leaders being the hinges of the
Motion, after face to the front, and right and left half-ranks may close into
the midst again to their double distance.

Here ends ranking into the front, with all their several kinds, the Rear
challenges the next place, but I shall spare the pains, and labor to set them
down, in regard that he who has a mind to rank his men thither, may if he
pleases make use of all the former words of Command for the performance of the
same, facing them upon every Command to the Rear. I come, therefore, in the
next place only to mention the ranking into the midst by Ranks and Files, which
may likewise be performed by the former words of Command, provided they have
convenient distance, and be faced to the midst, and after the Command is
executed, to face them to their first front. Yet there is remaining a ranking
unto all these places at once, for the performance of which, observe these few
words of Command following.

CHAP. XLII. Ranks ranking, or Files ranking at one and the same time into
Front, Rear, and Midst.
Command. RAnks, rank outward into the Front, Rear, and Midst.

Direction. The two last ranks are to face about, the first rank, They are to
stand at order in Rank and File.
and the last rank, and the third rank from the front, are to stand; the other
three are to move forth, six to the right, and six to the left, until they
have ranked unto all these places, after face to the front, and the last rank
moving forward to open order.

Reducement. Ranks, rank 12 to the right and left inward; the last rank face
about, the 12 middle-most men of each rank are to stand, the six out-most men
of each rank are to face inward, to move and fall into the right and left
behind the middle-most men, after the two last ranks are to face to the front.

Command. Ranks, rank inward into the Front, Rear, and Midst.

Direction. Right and left half-ranks open from the midst to twice double
distance, the two last ranks face to the Rear, the first and last rank, and the
third rank from the front stand, the rest move to the right and left inward,
ranking into front, rear, and midst, after that the last rank is to face to the
front, and to close forward to open order.

Reducement. Ranks, rank six to the right and left outward, the last rank face
about, and the out-most six men upon each rank are to stand, and the middle-men
are to divide themselves six to the right hand, and six to the left, and to
fall in the Rear of the first, last, and middle rank, after the last rank is to
face to the front, and then to close ranks and files to their order.

Command. Ranks, rank outward into the front, rear, and midst, every man
placing himself on the outside of his right and left hand man. Ranks ranking
by Countermarch.


Direction. The two last ranks face about, the first and last rank, and the
third rank from the front stand, the rest move forth to the right and left
ranking into front, rear, and midst, placing themselves on the outside of
their right and left hand men, face to your Leader.

Reducement. Ranks, rank 12 to the right and left inward, placing your selves
on the inside of your right and left hand men, the last rank face about, the
12 middle-most men in each rank are to stand, and the out-most six men in each
rank are to move to the right and left inward, placing themselves in the Rear
of the former ranks, and on the inside of their right and left hand men,
facing to their Leader.

Command. Ranks, rank inward into the front, rear, and midst, every man placing
himself on the inside of his right and left hand man.

Direction. Right and left half-ranks open from the midst to twice double
distance, standing th^n at order in each division in rank and file; the two
last ranks face about, and the first, last, and third rank from the Front
stand, the rest move inward, placing themselves on the inside of their right
and left hand men, after the last rank may face about, and move forward to open
order.

Reducement. Ranks, rank six to the right and left outward, every man placing
himself on the outside of his right and left hand man, the last rank face
about, the six out-most men of each rank stand, and the 12 middle-most men in
each rank are to divide themselves six to the right, and six to the left,
falling in the Rear of the out-most men, placing themselves on the outside of
their right and left hand men, after face to the front, and ranks, and files
close to the midst to order.

Of Files ranking into Front, Rear, and Midst.
Command. FIles, rank outward into Front, Rear, and Midst.

Direction. The two last ranks face about, the first, last, and third rank from
the front stand, the rest move to the right and left, after the manner of
doubling of ranks, and rank to front, rear, and midst, as before commanded, and
after the last rank face to the front, closing forward to order.

Reducement. Ranks, file six to the right and left inward, the last rank face
about, and the even men from the midst of ^iles are to fall in behind the odd,
after the manner of doubling files to the right and left inward, and after the
two last ranks are to face to the Front.

Command. Files, rank inward into front, rear, and midst.

Direction. They standing at the distance of order in rank and file, command
right and left half-ranks to open from the midst some thing more then to open
order, after the two last ranks are to face about, and the first, last, and
third rank from the front are to stand, the rest are to move to the right and
left inward, after the manner of doubling ranks to the right and left inward,
after the last rank is to face to the front, and to close forwards to open
order.

Reducement. Ranks, file six to the right and left outward, the last rank face
about, and every man from the flanks is to move outward, after the manner of
doubling files to the right and left outward, then the two last ranks are to
face to the front, and the whole Body may close their ranks and files into the
midst to order.

CHAP. XLIII. Of Files ranking by Wheeling.
Command. FIles rank outward into Front, Rear, and Midst, by wheeling.

Direction. The two last ranks face about, after face all outward, and The
Ranks must be at close order, and the Files at open order for these three words
of Command following, and it would be better to divide them into three
Divisions, that is to say, between every two Ranks, to have some six foot of
ground intervall, that they may more distinctly perform the same.
and wheel to the right and left, by two and two, until they be ranked into
front, rear, and midst, the last rank may after move forwards unto the same
distance, the former stands at being first faced to their Leader.

Reducement. Ranks, file six to the right and left inward by wheeling, the
first two ranks face about, and then every particular rank to wheel by two and
two, toward the midst of files, until they have made 12 files as at first,
and after to face all to the front.

Command. Files, rank inward into the front, rear, and midst, by wheeling.

Direction. Right and left half-ranks open from the midst something more then
open to order, the two last ranks of each Division face about, after face all
inward, and wheel by two and two to the right and left, until they have ranked
into front, and rear, and midst to the right and left inward, the last rank is
after to face to the front, taking his distance, conformable to the rest.

Reducement. Ranks file six to the right and left outward by wheeling, the two
first ranks face about, and each particular rank is to wheel by two's toward
the flanks, until they have made 12 files, as at first, after facing all to
the front, and closing their ranks and files, into the midst to order.

Command. Files, rank inward into the midst by wheeling.

Direction, Right and left half-ranks open from the midst to twice double
distance, after face inward, and let them know that the Bringers-up of the
Front half-fiiles and the half-file Leaders are the hinges of the motion, after
face them to the Front, and they will be in two Ranks.

Reducement. Ranks, file six to the right and left outward by wheeling, the
last Rank face about, and both Ranks wheel to the right and left by threes,
until they have made 12 Files as at first, after face all to the Front, and
close Files into the midst to order.

Command. Files, rank outward into the Front, and Rear, by wheeling.

Direction. Right and left half-ranks close into the midst to order, after face
outward, and wheel to the right and left, the Bringers-up, and the Leaders are
the hinges of the motion, and when they are brought into two Ranks, one in the
Front, and the other in the Rear, face them to the Front.

Reducement. Ranks, file six to the right and left inward by wheeling, the
first Rank face about, and both Ranks are to wheel by threes toward the midst
of Files, until they have filed according unto command, after facing to their
Leader, evening their Ranks, and straightning their Files.

And thus much of Conversion, or Ranks ranking, or Files ranking, they having
more variety in them, then many times can be useful, except it be to present
unto the Soldiers some things that are new in the motions, which many times
they love to see. I could upon this Subject have much more enlarged my self,
but conceiving what is already set down may be sufficient for the knowledge of
any intelligible Soldier. I come therefore briefly to treat of Inversion, or
of Ranks filing, and Files filing.

CHAP. XLIV. Of Ranks filing, or of Files filing, or of Inversion with their
several sorts and kinds.
Command. FIles, file to the right.

Direction. The right hand File is to move away clear of the standing part, and
after the next File to fall in the Rear of the first, and consequently so all
the rest until they become one File.

Reducement. File-leaders, lead up your Files to the left, or file, file six to
the left.

Command. Files, file to the right entire advancing.

Direction. The right hand File stand, the rest move away successively, placing
themselves in one direct file before the Front.

Reducement. File, file six to the right into the Rear, face all about, or
File, file six to the right toward the Front.

Command. Files, file inward into the right Flank.

Direction. Half-files face about, and the out-most Files then upon the left as
they are so faced, are to move away forward, and consequently all the rest, are
to fall in behind them, the like is to be performed by the Front, the out-most
File at the same time is to move away, and the rest successively falling in
until they have made one entire File, after they are to face to the Front.

Reducement. Front-half-file, file three to the left, Rear half-file face
about, and file three to the right, face to your Leader, and close your
Divisions.

Command. Files, file to the right by Division.

Direction. Half-files face about, the out-most file upon the right is to
stand, the rest are to move forward, and to place themselves successively into
one entire file, going forward after each other, and after face to the Front.

Reducement. Front half-file file three to the right, and Rear half-file face
about, and file three to the left, face to your Leader, and close your
Divisions.

Command. Ranks file to the right, every man placing himself behind his
right hand man. Ranks filing by way of Countermarch.


Direction. This may be done marching or standing; if marching, the right hand
man of the first rank does first move away, the rest in the same rank do fall
in behind him, and consequently all the rest, until they make one entire
file; if upon a Stand, the ranks are to open backward to such a Distance, as
they may conveniently fall into one File.

Reducement. File, rank 12 to the left; or File, rank as you were.

Command. Ranks, file to the right, advancing, every man placing himself before
his right hand man.

Direction. The out-most file stand, the rest are to move forward with their
right leg, The Ranks are to be at twice double distance and the Files at order.
placing themselves before their right hand men.

Reducement. File, rank 12 to the right, or file, rank as you were.

Command. Ranks, file to the right, every man placing himself before his
Leader, and his Bringer-up.

Direction. The half-files are to face about, only the right hand file is to
stand, the rest are to move forward, filing to the right Flank, every man
placing himself before his Leader, and his ^ringer-up, face to your Leader.

Reducement. Front half-file, rank 12 to the right, Rear half-file face about,
and rank 12 to the left; face to your Leader, and close your Divisions.

Command. Ranks, file inward into the right Flank, every man placing himself
before his Leader, and his Bringer-up.

Direction. Half-files face about, Front and Rear half-files are to march to
such covenient distance, as the ranks may fall into the midst of the right
flank, after they are to face about, or to face to the midst of ranks, and then
they are to move forward into the right flank, every man placing himself as
before commanded, and after face to their Leader.

Reducement. Front half-files rank 12 to the left, Rear half-file face about,
and rank 12 to the right, face to your Leader, and close your Divisions.

Command. Files, file to the right, every man placing himself behind his
Bringer-up. Files filing by way of Countermarch.


Direction. The out-most file stand, the rest face about, and move forward each
particular file to the left, placing themselves behind their right hand file,
and their Bringers-up.

Reducement. File, file six to the left, every man placing himself before his
Leader.

Command. Files, file to the right, every man placing himself before his Leader.

Direction. The right hand file stand, the rest move forwards, every file
successively placing themselves before their Leaders, and their right hand file.

Reducement. Files, file six to the right into the Rear, every man placing
himself before his Bringer-up, face all about, the last six men stand, the
rest are to move, and to file six to the right, placing themselves before their
Bringers-up, and after to face to the Front.

Command. Files, file to the right flank by Division, every man placing himself
before his Leader, and his Bringer-up.

Direction. Half-files face about; the right hand file is to stand, the rest
are to move forward to the right flank, placing themselves before their
Leaders, and their Bringers-up, making one entire file to the right, face to
your Leader.

Reducement. Front half-files face about, and file three to the right, every
man placing himself before his Bringer-up, and Rear half-file, file three to
the left, placing your selves before your Leaders, face to your Leader.

Command. Files, file inward into the right flank, every man placing himself
before his Leader, and his Bringer-up.

Direction. Half-files face about, and Front and Rear half-files move forward,
until there be sufficient Distance to file into the right flank, after face
them about to the midst of ranks, then the files may move successively into the
right flank, placing themselves before their Leaders, and their Bringers-up,
face to your Leader.

Reducement. Front half-file, file three to the left, every man placing
himself before his Leader, and Rear half-file face about, and file three to
the right, every man placing himself before his Bringer-up, face to your
Leader, and close your Divisions.

CHAP. XLV. Ranks wheeling into the Flanks.
Command. RAnks wheel to the right, into the right Flank.

Direction. Every particular Rank is to wheel to their right hand They ought to
be at twice double distance in rank, and at close order in file.
until they have brought their aspects unto the right Flank, after face to the
Front.

Reducement. File, rank 12 to the right, the first man is to stand, the rest
are to move forward to the right successively, 12 in a Rank to the right.

Command. Ranks wheel to the left to the right Flank.

Direction. Face all about, and Ranks wheel to the left, until you have
brought your aspects unto the right Flank, face to your Leader.

Reducement. File, rank 12 to the left, the first man is to stand, the rest are
to move forwards, making up 12 a breast to the left, until they have made six
Ranks as at first.

Command. Ranks wheel outward to the right Flank.

Direction. Half-files face about, the first three Ranks wheel to the right,
and the three last Ranks wheel to the left, to your Leader.

Reducement. Front half-files Rank 12 to the right, Rear half-files face about,
and rank 12 to the left, face to your Leader, march up and close forwards to
your due distance.

Command. Ranks wheel inward into the right Flank.

Direction. Half-files face about, Front and Rear, half-files march from the
midst to twice double distance, after Front and Rear half-files face about,
Front half-files wheel your Ranks to the left, Rear half-files wheel your Ranks
to the right, to your Leader.

Reducement. Front half-file Rank 12 to the left, Rear half-file face about and
rank 12 to the right, face to your Leader, and close your Divisions.

The left Flank challenges the next place, but I shall spare that pains, in
regard it is to be done by the same words of Command, only altering the hand: I
come therefore in the next place to show how Ranks and Files may file outward
to both Flanks and midst at one and the same time by proper words of Command as
follows.

CHAP. XLVI. Of Files filing, or Ranks filing to both the Flanks, and the Midst
at one and the same time.
Command. FIles, file to the right and left to both Flanks and the midst of
files.

Direction. The out-most file upon each Flank, and the two middle files are to
move away, the rest are to fall in suceessively behind to the right and left,
filing to both Flanks, and to the midst, after to stand, and even their Ranks,
and streighten their files.

Reducement. Files, file six to right and left inward, moving between the
Flanks and the middle files.

Command. Files, file to both Flanks, and to the midst of files advancing.

Direction. The out-most file upon each Flank stand, and so likewise the two
inmost files, the rest move forth and place themselves successively filing,
advancing toward both Flanks, and the midst of files.

Reducement. Files, file six to the right and left inward to the Rear, placing
your selves between the flanks and the middle files, the moving part is to face
about, and to march down according to command as before expressed, after face to
their Leader.

Command. Files, file to both flanks, and the midst by Division. They must be
at order both in rank and file.


Direction. The out-most file upon each flank, and the two in-most files stand,
half-files of the other files, face about, and march forth and file by threes
to the right and left into both flanks, and the midst; facing to their Leader,
they will stand in four files 18 deep.

Reducement. The six middle-most men in each File stand, the three first and
the three last ranks, file six to the right and left inward, the three first
ranks face about, then moving by threes between the out-most File of each
flank, and the middle Files, after facing to their Leader.

Command. Files, file inward into both flanks, and into the midst of files.

Direction. Half-files face about, march all, and open from the midst to twice
double distance, face all about to the right, the two in-most and the two
out-most Files stand; the rest move successively, by threes, until they file
into both flanks, and into the midst, face to your Leader.

Reducement. Files, file three to the right and left inward into the Front and
Rear; half-files face about, the three first, and the three last ranks stand;
the 12 middle-most men move inward by threes into front and rear, between the
out-most and the middle-most files: face to your Leader, and close your
Divisions.

Command. Files, file to both flanks, and to the midst of files, every man
placing himself before his Bringer-up.

Direction. Face all about, the two out-most files, and the two middle files
stand, the rest move forth to the right and left, placing themselves
successively before their Bringers-up, filing toward both flanks, and the
midst of files face to your Leader.

Reducement. Files, file six to the right and left inward, following your
Bringers-up, between the flanks, and the middle files, the first six ranks are
to stand.

Command. Files, file to both flanks, and to the midst of files advancing,
every man placing himself before his Leader.

Direction. The out most file upon each flank, and the two middle files stand;
the rest advance forward, placing themselves successively before their Leaders,
filing to both flanks, and to the midst of files.

Reducement. Files, file six to the right and left inward into the rear,
following your Leaders, between the flankers and the middle files, the six last
ranks face about, and after they have filed, they are all to face to their
Leader.

Command. Files, file to both flanks, and to the midst by Division, every man
placing himself before his Leader, and Bringer-up.

Direction. The out-most file upon each flank, and the two in-most stand,
half-files of the other files, face about, and then command them to move,
filing to both flanks, and into the midst, placing themselves before their
Leaders, and Bringers-up, to your Leader.

Reducement. The six middle-most men in each file stand, the three first, and
the three last ranks file six to the right and left inward; every man placing
himself before his Leader, and Bringer-up: the three first ranks face about,
and then with the three last, they are to move forward between the out-most and
the middle-most files, that is, by threes, to place themselves before their
Leaders, and their Bringers-up, face to your Leader.

Command. Files, file inward into ^^ch flanks, and into the midst, every man
placing himself before his Leader, and his ^^^^^er-up.

Direction. Half-files face to the (...), march all, and open from the midst to
twice double distance, face all about to the right, the two in-most, and the
two out-most files upon each flank stand; the rest move successively by threes,
placing themselves before their Leaders, and Bringers-up, filing into both
flanks: and the midst, face to your Leader.

Reducement. Files three to the right and left inward, into front and rear,
every man placing himself before his Leader, and his Bringer-up; half-files
face about, the three first and the three last ranks stand* the 12 middle-most
men move forwards by threes, between the out-most and the middle files, placing
themselves, as aforesaid, face to your Leader, and close your Divisions.

CHAP. XLVII. Of Ranks wheeling, to both the Flanks.
Command. RAnks, wheel to the right and left, to both flanks advancing.

Direction. The out-most men upon the right and left in every They are to be at
double distance in Ranks and at order in Files.
rank are the hinges of the Motion, the rest are to divide their ranks by
wheeling, six to the right, and six to the left, until they have brought their
aspects unto both the flanks, after face to their Leader.

Reducement. Files, rank 12 to the right and left inward into the Rear, face
all to the right and left about inward, and begin the Motion from each file, to
rank six to the right, and six to the left, making up 12 a Breast in the Rear,
the rest following, until they have made six ranks in a Breast, face to your
Leader.

Command. Ranks, wheel to the right and left toward the rear.

Direction. Face all about, the outside men are the hinges of this Motion, who
are to wheel from the rear to the right and left, until they have brought
their aspects unto both the flanks, face to your Leader.

Reducement. Files, rank 12 to the right and left inward, the right hand file
is to begin to rank six to the left, the left hand file is to rank six to the
right, making up even a Breast 12 in number, the rest doing the same.

Command. Front and rear half-files wheel your ranks outward into both flanks.

Direction. Half-files face about, and front and rear half-files wheel outward
into both flanks, until you have brought your aspects unto the right and left,
face to your Leader.

Reducement. Front and rear half-files rank 12 to the right and left inward,
toward the midst of ranks, front half-files face about, and begin the Motion
from the Bringers-up, of the front half-files, and the half-file-leaders;
ranking six to the right and left from each file making 12 a Breast, face to
your Leader.

Command. Front and rear half-files wheel your ranks inward into both flanks.

Direction. Half-files face about, and march all until you be at twice double
distance in the midst, then face all about to the right, and wheel to the right
and left, until you have brought your aspects unto both flanks, by wheeling
inward to them, face to your Leader.

Reducement. Files, rank 12 to the right and left inward into front and rear,
half-file, face about, and rank in front and rear, six to the right, and six to
the left, making 12 a Breast after face to your Leader.

CHAP. XLVIII. Of Ranks wheeling to the midst of Files.
Command. FRont and rear half-files wheel your ranks inward to the midst of
files.

Direction. Half-files face about, and front and rear half-files wheel your
ranks to the right and left inward, until they face in opposition, to your
Leader.

Reducement. Files, rank six to the right and left outward unto the midst of
ranks; front half-files face about, and rank six to the right and left outward,
rear half-files do the same to your Leader.

Command. Front and rear half-files wheel your ranks inward into the midst of
files.

Direction. Half-files face about, front and rear half-files march until you
have atteined twice double distance in the midst of ranks, face all about to
the right, and wheel to the right and left inward into the midst of files, to
your Leader.

Reducement. Files rank six to the right and left outward into front and rear,
half-files face about, and front and rear half-files rank six to the right and
left outward, as before commanded, to your Leader move forward, and close your
Divisions to your double distance.

CHAP. XLIX. Of Ranks wheeling to both Flanks, and into the midst, at one and
the same time.
Command. FRont and rear half-files wheel your ranks to the right and left into
They ought to be at more then open order in Ranks, and at order in Files.
both flanks, and the midst of files.

Direction. Half-files face about to the right, and the middle files, and the
out-most files upon each flank, are the hinges of this Motion, the rest are to
wheel their ranks to the right and left toward both the flanks, and to the
midst of files, face to your Leader.

Reducement. Files, rank six to the right and left inward to the midst of
ranks, and between the flankers, and the middle files, front half-files face
about, and rank six to the right and left inward toward the midst of ranks,
and between the flankers, and the middle files, the rear half-files doing the
same, face to your Leader.

Command. Front and rear half-files wheel your ranks inward into both flanks,
and into the midst of files.

Direction. Half-files face about, and front and rear half-files march until
you be at double distance in the midst, after face all about to the right, and
wheel your ranks to the right and left inward into both Flanks, and into the
midst of files, face to your Leader.

Reducement. Files, rank six to the right and left inward into Front and Rear,
between the flankers, and the middle files, half-files face about, and rank six
to the right and left inward to the rear between the flankers, and the middle
files, the front half-files doing the same to the front, after facing to their
Leader, and half-files move forwards, closing their Divisions to the distance
of the former ranks.

Having dwelt thus long upon this Subject of Inversion and Conversion
(occasioned thereunto by their great variety and difficulty in the performance
of them;) I hold it convenient to give a breathing space unto the wearied
Soldier, whilst I, in the mean time, prepare further matter for his longing
desire.

Yet before I enter in any other discourse of the Art Military, I hold it
requisite to give some admonitions to those that shall venture upon them. For
being very difficult, they are not easily understood by every punie; my advice
therefore, is to wave such things, in time of Exercise, which the Soldiers are
unacquainted with, providing for them such matter, as is both plain and easy,
and being frequently practiced in such, he may after drill them on to harder,
till by degrees he has brought them unto such perfection and knowledge, that
they shall be able to perform and execute what is commanded; not gazing upon
one another, (as I have often observed) neither knowing their Leaders meaning,
or if they did, they are altogether ignorant how to fulfill his commands.
Frequent practice therefore makes the Soldier expert, witness our gallant
Soldiers and Citizens of London, who are most of them so well grounded (by
frequent practice) that their Lenders can scarce give a word of Command which
is not easily apprehended by them, they being in their Exercises so often
inured to such difficult expressions as these of Inversion and Conversion.

CHAP. L. Of Counter-marches with their several sorts and kinds, affording
much variety in time of Exercise.
THose which have a longing desire to be thoroughly knowing in this part or
branch of Military Discipline, must take notice of these four sorts, (viz.)
Counter-marching of Files, next of Ranks, after the Front, and Rear half-files,
and lastly, of right and left half-ranks: all which, are performed either by
entire, or divisionall Counter-marches, or else by the entire changing of
ground, and that by many ways the Front half-files, with the Rear, the right
half-ranks with the left. So that an expert Leader may venture so far in them,
as to continue his Exercise, (without reducing) almost for an hour, and not to
express himself twice in any one word of Command; they affording such plenty
and variety in them, that with pleasure using but four words of Command, he may
bring each Soldier into his proper place again; observing these directions
following. As first, to look down in the Body where his File-leaders are, and
where his Bringers-up: and likewise making the several places of his half
File-leaders, and the Bringers-up of his Front half-files, together with his
Flankers, and his middle Files: this special care being taken, he may begin,
and proceed to their Reducement, after this manner.

If by some former Counter-marches, his File-leaders are in the place of his
half File-leaders, and that his Bringers-up are in the room of the Bringers-up
of the Front half-files, then he may proceed in this, or the like kind,
commanding them to countermarch their Front and Rear into the midst; which
being performed, they will stand in some pretty way of reducing, after facing
them to the Front, where he meets with his Bringers-up, in stead of his
File-leaders; which by one Countermarch will bring them up again into the
Front. Yet perhaps the Flankers have inter-changed ground with the middle
File-leaders, if so, then countermarch their Flanks into the midst, and face
them to the Front; and if it happen that the right Flank is become the left,
and the left; the right: then countermarch their Ranks to any hand, and after
face them to the first Front they are reduced. And farther take this for a
general rule, that when Files, Ranks, or Countermarch to any stand, command
them to countermarch to the contrary, and it will reduce them, or
counter-marching your Front and Rear into the midst, counter-marching of them
back again from the midst, will bring each man into his proper place again, the
same rule being observed, reduces the flankers, or Front and Rear half-files
counter-marching of them from the midst.

Counter-marches, rightly considered, branch themselves forth into these three
particulars.

The Macedonian. Lacedemonian. Chorean.

The Macedonian is a Countermarch of gaining ground, for that it leaves the
ground it formerly stood upon, and in lieu thereof takes the ground before the
front, and turns their aspects unto the rear.

The Lacedemonian is a Countermarch of losing ground, for that it leaves the
ground it first stood upon, and in room thereof takes the ground which is
behind the rear, thither likewise altering the Soldiers aspects.

The Chorean is a Countermarch maintaining ground, keeping the ground the
Battalia formerly stood upon, every Soldier taking another place, it likewise
turns the Aspect toward the reere.

Thus you see (for all their great variety which latter ages have invented)
they consist but of three sorts or kinds, either maintaining, gaining, or
losing of ground, and may be performed (as I said before) either by entire or
divisionall Counter-marches.

It may now be expected that I declare unto the Soldier the meaning of each
particular Countermarch, briefly, therefore, thus. Files counter-marching is
when every Soldier follows his Leader, ranks counter-marching is when every
Soldier follows his side man, whether it be to the right hand or to the
left: Front and rear half-files counter-marching is, sometimes when every
particular Soldier follows his Leader or his Bringer up, or else when they
follow their half-file leaders, or their Bringers-up of the Front half-files,
or the like: Right and left half-ranks counter-marching is, when every Soldier
in the rank follows the outmost men upon the right and left, or when they
shall follow their inside right and left hand men, or the like: What has
hitherto been spoken may be sufficient both for the instruction and direction
of any discreet soldier; I come in the next place to set them all before them
as they lie in Order.

CHAP. LI. Entire Counter-marching of Files.
Command. FIles to the
Right Hand Countermarch maintaining ground.
Left
Direction. File-leaders turn off upon the ground you stand, the rest moving up
successively into the file-leaders place turning off until the bringers up,
come up into the Front, after face to your Leader,

Command. File-leaders stand, the rest pass through to the right or left, and
place your selves before your Leaders.

Command. File-leaders face about, the rest pass through to the right or left,
and place your selves behind your Leaders, face to your Leader.

Command. File-leaders face to the rear, the rest pass through to the right or
left following your bringers-up, and placing your selves behind your Leaders;
face all to your Leader.

Command. File-leaders stand, the rest pass through to the right or left; and
place your selves before your Leaders following your bringers-up.

Command. Files to the right or left countermarch losing ground, placing your
selves before your bringers up.

Direction. Every file-leader turn off upon the ground he stands on, the rest
successively doing the same until they come to the last rank, who need do no
more then face about; after face all to their Leader.

Command. The last rank stand, the rest pass through to the right or left,
placing your selves behind your bringers-up, every man following his Leader.

Direction. File-leaders turn off to the right or left, the rest following
successively until they are all clear of the rear, then face to their Leader.

Command. Bringers-up stand, the rest face about, pass through to the right or
left, and place your selves behind your bringers up.

Command. Bringers-up face about, the rest pass through to the right or left,
and place your selves before your Bringers-up.

Direction. Face all to the Rear, and begin the Motion with the second Rank
from the Rear, moving forward, every man placing himself before his Bringer-up;
to your Leader.

Command. Countermarch your Front and Rear into the midst.

Direction. Half-files face about, and turn off to the left, Front half-files
turn off to the right; to your Leader:

Command. Front and Rear half*files countermarch to the right or left.

Direction. This is to be done distinctly, the Front half-files turning off to
the right by themselves, the Rear half files turning off in like manner; face
to your Leader.

Command. File-leaders, and half file-leaders stand, the rest pass through to
the right or left, and place your selves before your Leaders and half
file-leaders.

Command. Countermarch your Front and Rear half-files to the right and left
from the midst.

Direction. Front half files face about, and turn off to the right, Rear
half-files turn off to the left to your Leader.

Command. File-leaders and half file-leaders face about, the rest pass through
to the right or left, and place your selves behind your Leaders, and your half
file-leaders; to your Leaders.

Command. File-leaders, and half file-leaders stand, the rest pass through to
the right or left, and place your selves before your Leaders and half
file-leaders, every man following his Bringer-up, and the Bringers-up of the
Front half-files.

Command. File-leaders, and half file-leaders face about, the rest pass
through to the right or left, and place your selves behind your Leaders, and
half file-leaders, following your Bringers up.

Direction. The File-leaders, and the half file-leaders (being first faced)
are to stand, and the Bringers-up of the Front and Rear half-files are to move
forwards, until they be clear of the standing part, after they are to face to
the Rear, which being ended, they are again to face to the Front.

CHAP. LII. Divisionall Counter-marching of Files.
Command. FIle-leaders, and Bringers-up stand, the rest pass through to the
right or left, and place your selves before your Leaders, and your Bringers-up.

Direction. Half-files face about, the Countermarch being ended, command them
to move forwards, and close their Divisions.

Command. File-leade^s face about, the rest pass through to the right or left,
and place your selves behind your Leaders, and your Bringers-up.

Direction. The two last Ranks from the Rear face about, and then they are to
begin the Motion together, which being ended, face them to the front, and the
half-files are to move forward, and to close their Divisions.

Command. File-leaders, and Bringers-up stand, the rest pass through to the
right or left, and place your selves before your Leaders, and your Bringers-up,
following the half file-leaders, and the Bringers-up of the Front half-files.

Direction. Half-files face about, this Motion is begun by the Bringers-up of
each Division, which being ended, they are to face to their Leader, the half
files moving forwards, closing their Divisions.

Command. File-leaders face about, the rest pass through to the right or left,
and place your selves behind your Leaders, and your Bringers-up, following the
half file-leaders, and the Bringers-up of the front half-files.

Direction, The two last Ranks from the Rear face about; this Motion is begun
by the Bringers-up of each Division, who are to lead away the rest following
until they be clear of the Front and Rear, and after to face about, placing
themselves behind their half file-leaders, and the Bringers-up of the front
half-files, then facing to the front, the half-files moving forwards, closing
their Divisions.

Command. Countermarch to the right and left, your Front and Rear half-files
from the midst (losing ground) every man placing himse^^ before his Leader, and
his Bringer-up. Direction. Front half-files face about, and turn off to the
right, and the half-file leaders turn off to the left, and march clear of the
front and rear and after the file-leaders, the bringers up are but to face
about, and the Countermarch will be ended, then face the half-files to the
front, let them move forward and close their divisions.

Command. Front and rear half-files interchange ground to the right or left,
marching clear each from other.

Direction. Front half-files face about, and pass through to your own right
hands, until you be clear, six foot of each other, then face to the Front, the
half-files moving forwards, and closing their Divisions.

Command. Front and Rear half-files countermarch to the right, and
inter-change ground.

Direction. Half-files face about, and turn off to the right, and front
half-files at the same time doing the like, moving forward until they be clear
one of another six foot, then facing to their Leader, close their Divisions.

CHAP. LIII. Entire Counter-marches of Ranks.
Command. RAnks to the right hand counter-marching maintaining ground.

Direction. Face to the right, the right hand file that was, turn off to the
right, the rest moving up into the same ground, turning off likewise, to your
Leader.

Command. The out-most file upon the right, face to the right, the rest pass
through to the right or left, and place your selves before your right hand men.

Direction. Face to the right, and pass through as before expressed, to your
Leader.

Cmmand. The right hand file face to the left, the rest pass through to the
right or left, and place your selves hehinde your right hand men.

Direction. Face to the right, and move forwards, and place your selves behind
your right hand men, to your Leader.

Command. Ranks to the left hand countermarch losing ground.

Direction. The out-most is to turn off to the left about until he has
brought his aspect unto the right flank, and so consequently all the rest,
moving still forwards until they have gained upon the outside of the right
flank so much ground as they have lost, or that they have placed themselves
before their right hand men by following their left hand men, face to your
Leader.

Command. The right hand file face to the left, the rest pass through to the
right, following your left hand men, and placing your selves behind your
right hand File.

Direction. The out-most File upon the left face to the right, and march
through the Intervalls toward the right flank; and when he is moved away, the
rest upon the left are successively to do the same, until they have in lieu of
that ground they formerly stood, gained so much upon the outside of the right
flank, then facing about toward the left flank, after face to your Leader.

Command. Ranks to the left hand countermarch maintaining ground.

Direction. Face to the left, and the left hand File that was turn off to the
left on the same ground he stands, the rest moving up successively doing the
same, to your Leader.

Command. The left hand File stand, the rest face to the left, pass through,
and place your selves on the outside of your left hand men.

Direction. The left hand File face to the left, the rest pass through to the
left, and place your selves before your left hand men; to your Leader.

Command. The left hand File face to the right, the rest face to the left,
pass through to the left, and place yourselves behind your left hand men.

Command. The left hand File face to the left, the rest pass through to the
left, and place your selves before your left hand men, following your
right hand men.

Direction. Face all to the left, and the out-most Files upon the right move
forward upon the left, the rest successively doing the same, until you have
all placed your selves before your left hand men, to your Leader.

Command. The left hand File face to the right, the rest face to the left,
pass through to the left, and place your selves behind ^^ur left hand men,
following your right hand men.

Direction. The right hand file that was is to begin this motion, the rest are
consequently to follow until they have gained as much ground on the outside
of the left-flank as before they lost, after face about to the right, and after
to their Leader.

Command. Ranks to the right hand countermarch every man placing himself on
the outside of his left hand man, by following his right hand man.

Direction. The left hand file stand, the out-most file upon the right, is to
turn about to the right, until he has brought his aspect to the left-flanke,
then moving forward until he he be clear of the second file, after the rest
are to do the like forsaking the ground they stood upon, and in lieu thereof
to gain so much upon the outside of the left-flanke, placing themselves on the
outside of their left hand men; their Aspects being to the Front. Or you may
command the out-most file upon the right to face to the left, and so begin to
lead until he be clear of the second file, the rest doing the same until they
have all placed themselves on the outside of their left hand men, their
Aspects being to the Front; which I conceive, to be the easier way.

Command. Countermarch your Flanks into the midst.

Direction. Face to the right and left outward, right-flank turn off to the
right, left-flank turn off to the left, until they meet in the midst, to your
Leader.

Command. Right and left half-ranks countermarch to the right or left.

Direction. Face all to the right, the right half-ranks are to turn off to the
right by themselves, and the left half-ranks in like manner, to your Leader.

Command. The out-most File upon the right, and the right hand file of the left
half-ranke stand, the rest face to the right, pass through and place your
selves on the outside of your right hand men, face to your Leader.

Command. The out-most file upon the right, and the right hand file of the left
half-rank face to the right and stand, the rest pass through to the right, and
place your selves before your right hand men, face all to the right, and the
motion being ended, face to your Leader.

Command. The out-most file upon the right, and the right hand file of the left
half-rank face to the left and stand, the rest face to the right, pass through
and place your selves behind your right hand men, to your Leader.

Direction. For these three last Counter-marches is for the moving part to
begin to Countermarch, who are the next files of the standing part, and so to
follow successively until they have performed the command, and after to face to
their Leader.

Command. The right hand file of the left half-rank, and the out-most file upon
the right stand, the rest pass through to the right and place your selves on
the outside of your right hand men following your out-most files.

Direction. The out-most files are to face to the right, and to lead away
until they be clear of the next, who likewise are to follow successively.

Command. The out-most file upon the right, and the right hand file of the left
half-rank face to the right and stand, the rest pass through to the right, and
place your selves before your right hand men.

Direction. Face all to the right, and the out-most files that were, are to
begin the motion, placing themselves before their right hand men, the rest
following successively, to your Leader.

Command. The outmost file upon the right, and the right hand file of the left
half-rank face to the left and stand, the rest pass through to the right; and
place your selves behind your right hand men.

Direction. The out-most files are to turn about until they have brought their
aspects unto the right-flanke, then move away until they be clear of the
second file, and in like manner they are to turn off, doing the same until
they have placed themselves behind their right hand men, then facing to the
left-about, and after to their Leader, to even their ranks and straighten their
files.

Command. Countermarch your right and left half-ranks from the midst.

Direction. Face inward, right half-ranks turn off to the right, left
half-ranks turn off to the left; to your Leader.

CHAP. LIVE. Divisionall Counter-marches of the right and left half-ranks.
Command. THe outmost file upon each flank stand, the rest pass through to
the right and left, and place your selves on the outside of your right and
left hand men.

Direction. The rest face outward, and begin the motion by the next files, the
others following in order, and after to close their files into the midst to
open order.

Command. The out-most file upon each flank face outward and stand, the rest
pass through to the right and left, and place your selves before your outside
men.

Direction. The rest are to face outward, and the next files unto them that
first faced are to begin the motion, placing themselves before their outside
men, after face to their leader, and close files into the midst to order.

Command. The out-most file upon each flank face inward, the rest pass
through and place your selves behind your outside men.

Direction. The rest are to face outward, and to pass through to the right and
left, placing themselves behind their right and left hand men, and after to
move forward, and close their divisions and face to their Leader.

Command. The out-most file upon each flank stand, the rest pass through to
the right and left, and place your selves on the outside of your right and
left hand men following your in-most files.

Direction. The in-most files are to begin the motion, moving away to the right
and left, until they be clear of their second files, and then they are to move
away successively until they have all placed themselves on the outside of
their right and left hand men, and then close files into the midst to open
order.

Command. The out-most files upon each flank face outward, the rest pass
through to the right and left, placing your selves before your right and
left hand men, following your in most files.

Direction. The rest are likewise to face outward, and the inmost files are to
begin the motion, the rest following in order until they have placed
themselves before their outside men, after face to the Front, and close files
into the the midst to open order.

Command. The out-most file upon each flank face inward, the rest pass
through to the right and left, and place your selves behind your outside men
following the inmost Files.

Direction. The rest are to face outward, the in-most files begin to move
forward to the right and left, the rest consequently do the same, until they
all stand behind their outside men, then facing to the right and left about,
closing their divisions by moving forward, after face to the Front.

Command. Countermarch your right and left half-ranks from the midst losing
ground and placing your selves before your outside men.

Direction. Face inward, right half-ranks turn off to the right, and left
half-ranks turn off to the left, and move forward until you have placed your
selves before your outside men, after face to your Leader, and close files
into the midst to open order.

Command. Right and left half-ranks interchange ground.

Direction. Face inward, and pass through to your own right hand, until you
be clear six foot each of other, after face to your Leader, and close files
into the midst to open order.

Command. Right and left half-ranks countermarch to the right and left, and
interchange ground.

Direction. Face outward, right half-ranks turn off to the right, left
half-ranks turn off to the left, and march clear each of the other, after face
to the front, and close files inward to open order.

Thus much may suffice to be spoken of all the several sorts and kinds of
Counter-marches, which if any shall conceive my pains fruitless in culling out
such plenty and variety, there being so few of them practiced among able and
knowing Soldiers, my best apology will be the high and venerable esteem had
of Antiquity necessitated me thereunto, as also to give full satisfaction to
the Leaders of our private Meetings, who of late have labored to inure their
Soldiers in the full practice thereof, made me the willinger rather to undergo
the censure of some, then to incur the displeasure of many. Yet by the way,
give me leave fully to declare my self concerning the use of them; for, my
opinion is, that of all the Motions, tending to Martial Discipline: these may
the best be spared, as being of little use, and not so much as practiced abroad
upon service, and therefore the fewer of them any Leader shall use in his
Exercise, in my judgment, he does the better, not spending time in needless
speeches, telling of his Soldiers, that this is the Macedorian, this is the
Lacedemonian, or Ocean Countermarch; not to lie under the censure my self of
mispending time, I come, therefore briefly, in the next place to treat of
Wheelings, being a subject more profitable for the intelligible Soldier.

CHAP. LV. Of Wheelings, with their several uses.
HAving proceeded thus far in showing all the several sorts and kinds of
Military Motions, it will now in the next place be expected that I speak
somewhat of Wheelings, and as formerly, so now, to set before the Soldier their
several kinds and uses. Wherefore, take notice of two sorts, Wheelings
angular, and Wheelings on the Center, (which latter is commonly called the
Prince of Orange his wheeling) being acted, or performed by the Soldier two
several ways, that is to say, Entire, or Divisionall

Entire Wheelings to the Angles, are when the Soldiers turn their Aspects from
the front* proper to either of the Flanks, or Rear, whereby they may give the
wind, or Sun, or some like advantage, bringing their best Soldiers thither
for to encounter an Enemy. For the better performance of this Motion, it will
be convenient to close Ranks and Files into the midst to order, and to keep
their due distance both in rank and file, observing in their Ranks their right
and left hand men, and following their Leaders, always conforming themselves in
their Motion to the most commendable Posture, which is Pikes advanced, and
Muskets poysed. Wheeling the Battle on the Center, is when they are so
straightened with ground, that they have not room to wheel to the right or
left, as in the former, which gains as much more ground before the front, as
formerly they stood on; this wheeling brings their best Soldiers to either of
the flanks, or Rear; I could wish that this wheeling were more oftener practiced
amongst us, for by it the Soldiers are better kept together in their Motion,
being not so apt to fly out, as in the former

Divisionall Wheelings (provided they have sufficient number of men) are of
singular good use to encounter several Enemies at one and the same time, which
the front of our Battalia bringing our best Soldiers for to skirmish with
them. It is likewise useful to bring either Arms into Front, Rear, or both the
flanks: for suppose the Musketeers to be upon the flanks, and fearing a
desperate charge of the Horse, to fall upon them, by a Divisionall Wheeling the
Pikes, are thither brought to receive their onset, and in the mean space, the
Musketeers have time to recruit their Bandiliers again: much more might be
spoken, but my intent is not to fill my Book with impertinent discourses,
knowing what is already spoken is sufficient for the intelligible Soldier.

CHAP. LVI. Entire Wheelings.
Command.WHeel your Battle to the Right. WHeel your Battle to the Left. WHeel
your Battle to the Right. about. WHeel your Battle to the Left. about.
Direction. The right or the left hand men in the front are the hinges of these
Motions, the rest have a greater compass to march, then they to bring their
Aspects, unto the place commanded, following their Leaders.

Command.Wheel your Battle on the same ground to the Right. Wheel your Battle
on the same ground to the Left. Wheel your Battle on the same ground to the
Right. about. Wheel your Battle on the same ground to the Left. about.
Direction. The left half-ranks moves forwards wheeling to the right; and the
right half-ranks contrariwise faceth to the left side-wise falling backward,
moving still unto the place commanded.

CHAP. LVII. Divisionall Wheelings.
Command. WHeel the Battle off by Division from the Front.

Direction. Turn off to the right and left.

Command. Wheel the Battle off by Division from the Rear.

Direction. Face to the Rear, and turn off to the right and left.

Command. Wheel the Battle inward to the Rear.

Direction. Open from the midst to convenient distance, and turn off to the
right and left.

Command. Wheel the Battle inward to the Front from the Rear.

Direction. Face to the Rear, open from the midst, and wheel inward to the
front.

Command. Wheel off the Body by Division from the right flank.

Direction. Face to the right.

Command. Wheel off the Body by Division from the left flank.

Direction. Face to the left.

Command. Wheel the Body inward to the left flank from the right.

Direction. Face to the right, and open outward to convenient distance to wheel
inward to the left flank.

Command. Wheel the Body inward to the right flank from the left.

Direction. Face to the left, and open outward to convenient distance, to wheel
inward to the right flank.

Command. Wheel off your Front and Rear half-files by Division.

Direction. Half-files face about, and Front and Rear half-files turn off by
Division.

Command. Wheel your Front and Rear half-files inward to the midst of Ranks.

Direction. Half-files face about, and Front and Rear half-files open outward
to convenient distance to wheel inward to the midst of Ranks.

Command. Wheel off your Front and Rear half-files by Division from the midst
of Rank.

Direction. Front half-files face about, and Front and Rear half-files wheel
off to the right and left by Division.

Command. Wheel Front and Rear half-files inward, both to the Front and Rear
from the midst of Ranks.

Direction, Front half-files face about, and Front and Rear half-files open
from the midst to convenient distance, and wheel inward into Front and Rear.

Command. Wheel off your right and left half-ranks by Division.

Direction. Face outward, and wheel off to the right and left by Division.

Command. Wheel your right and left half-ranks inward to the midst of files.

Direction. Face outward, and open to the right and left to convenient distance
to wheel inward to the midst of files.

Command. Wheel off your right and left half-ranks by Division from the midst
of files.

Direction. Face inward, and cause them to move backward to convenient distance
to wheel off by Division from the midst of files.

Command. Wheel your right and left half-ranks inward to both flanks from the
midst of files.

Direction. Face inward, and open to the right and left to convenient distance
to wheel inward to both the flanks.

Command. Wheel the outward Angles to the right and left about, to the Center.

Direction. Face to the outward Angles, and close ranks and files to close
order, and the Angles on the right turn off to the right, the Angles on the
left turn off to the left.

Command. Wheel the inward Angles to the right and left about inward from the
Center.

Direction. Face to the inward Angles, or to the Center, and wheel about to the
right and left inward from the Center.

These are all the entire and divisionall Wheelings, that have hitherto been
practiced by any, according to my best observation; there are other Wheelings
which may properly be termed Doublings, which I have placed amongst the
Doublings, where they more properly belong. Now if any shall demand of me a
reason why I have omitted the Reducements, to each particular Command; my
answer thereunto is easy, for as in the Countermarches, so in these, they may
be reduced by three or four words of Command, except a Commander shall of set
purpose keep them off from the same; to make some experiment, after any
wheeling is performed, face them after to their first Front, and command them
to even their ranks, and straighten their files, they will be as at first; and
unto what hand soever they wheeled, command them to wheel to the contrary hand,
and they will be reduced unto the first front, or what part is wheeled off by
Division, wheel them inward again from that place, and it will easily reduce
them. Thus you see that it is almost impossible for a Leader to be out, unless
he be extremely ignorant, therefore he need not fear to venture far in the
progress of them, before he shall reduce them, provided he use no Doublings:
which if he shall, great care must be had that he be not put to a stand; for
the prevention whereof, let him look back unto those doublings by wheelings,
wherein one does reduce another, where he may find some remedy to help
himself forth again.

CHAP. LVIII. Of Firings, either for delight or service.
THe chiefest thing required of the Musketeers next their Postures, by which
they are taught how to handle their Arms with delight both marching or
skirmishing, is firing, which to speak the truth, is the full accomplishment of
all the rest; for unless they be really performed, the rest are of no great
advantage. For to what end is it for any man to prime, lade, or cock, if he
present not answerably; therefore firings are the execution of all the former;
in so much my advice shall be to all Commanders, that they be careful and
diligent to have all their Musketeers often practiced with false firings,
which is, firing in the pan only, and falling off, as hereafter follows to
the end, that in time of need they may not spend their powder, and bullets, in
vain. And that they may likewise know where to fall off, that others may do the
like, and where to place themselves securest from danger; yet so as they may be
still aiding the one, unto the other: I shall, therefore, for the good of my
Country, and for the benefit of all such as are herein concerned, collect
forth some firings, which shall be every one differing from the other in one
kind or other, either in the execution or reducing, whereby the ingenious
Soldier may cull forth such as he best likes to make use of, what he shall
think to be most fit and pertinent to his intended purpose; be it either for
delight or service, briefly therefore thus. Firings really considered can be
performed but five ways, that is to say, to the Front, Rear, right or
left-Flank, Oblique, or Angular; but there is so much variety to be expressed
in the performance of each of these, that it makes them seem so many several
firings, as by the following discourse shall be fully demonstrated.

CHAP. LIX. Several Firings to be performed with any number of men.
THe Front being the head of the Body, and therefore the more honorable part
challenges the superiority, or first place, and therefore without any farther
circumstance, I come directly to the firings as they lie in order* as
follows; draw all the Musketeers before the Pikes, before you begin you^
firings.

Firings to the Front.
1 Two Ranks advancing ten paces. falling in the Rear of themselves. By single
miles, advancing three paces. falling in the Rear of themselves.
2 Fire. 3 Fire and flank the Pikes. 4 Fire by Files advancing 10 or 20 paces,
first, single, secondly, ranking inward, 1, 2, 3, 4, or more, falling down into
rheir places again. 5 Fire by Ranks filing, and advancing 10 or 20 paces, and
moving down, and ranking in the Rear of their own Divisions. 6 Fire by
Divisions drawn off 10, or 20, or 30 paces, and returning again. 7 Fire even
with the Front, and falling in the Rear of their own Divisions. 8 Fire even
with the half-files, and fall in the Rear of themselves. 9 Fire by way of
Introduction, thus, the first rank fires, and stands, the last rank passes up
between the files, and placing themselves before the File-leaders, or first
rank, then stand, and give fire, the rest doing the like till the file-leaders
come up again into their places, and fire the second time. 10 Fire by
Introduction after this manner, the first rank gives fire, and stands, the rest
moving forward until the next rank has placed themselves before the first;
then stands, and gives fire, the rest moving up, and doing, the like until
they have all fired twice. 11 Fire even with the Front, falling in the Rear of
Pikes. 12 Fire by Extraduction, the first rank passing from the Rear upon the
outside of the Pikes, upon the left, until they have placed themselves in a
rank, in the Rear of the Musketeers, the rest successively doing the like,
until they have fired all over, and brought themselves as at first. 13 Fire by
the out-most files, wheeling or ranking outward into the Front, falling off
Here the Musketeers are upon the Flanks again.
likewise, being led off by Bringers-up, leading up next the Pikes, this done
twice reduces. 14 Fire two Ranks together. falling off, or falling down. 15
Fire four Ranks together; two kneeling, and two standing upright. falling off,
or falling down. 16 Fire six Ranks together, two kneeling, two stooping, and
two standing upright. falling off, or falling down. 17 Fire some Ranks drawn
forth to the right or by division, and in again. left or by division, and in
again.

Note also if you please, you may draw forth one Rank to the right, and another
to the left, at one and the same time together.

18 Fire by files drawn forth oblique, then face about, and move into their
places. Note also that several figures may be made by these kinds of firings;
as the V: the W: or the Fort-battail, and the like. 19 Fire by ranks, ranking
into the front, or files ranking into the front, and ranking, or filing as they
were. 20 Fire by files wheeling outward or inward into the front, and filing
again as they were.
Thus much briefly of firings to the Front, the Rear challenges the next
place, where suppose all the Musketeers to be in the Rear of the Pikes, the
Body marching.

Firings to the Rear.
1 Fire to the right about falling in the front of their own Divisions. left
about falling in the front of their own Divisions.
2 Fire and fall off to the right and left, and rank with the first rank of
Pikes, into the front. 3 Fire even with the Rear, and fall off before the Front
of your own Divisions of Musketeers. 4 Fire even with the Rear, or last rank,
and fall off to the right and left with a swift Motion, placing your selves 10
20 or 30 paces before the front of Pikes, still facing to the Body, and making
ready again, and opening to the right and left, until they be clear of the
Pikes. 5 Fire by Introduction to the Rear twice over until they come down even
with the Rear, and flank the Pikes. 6 Fire to the right and left about to the
Rear, Ranks drawn forth, and in again. 7 Fire so the Rear, every rank drawn
forth clear each from other, and falling in again, and flanking the Pikes. 8
Fire to the right and left about files ranking downward to the Rear, and filing
as they were. 9 Fire to the right and left about, ranks, ranking downward to
the Rear, and ranking as they were. 10 Fire losing ground, falling off to the
right and left about, just before the front of Pikes. 11 Now if the Enemy
pursue eagerly, and that you candot make a safe retreat marching, face all
about, and fire upon them by way of Extraduction, or by half-ranks, divided as
formerly has been shown.
And thus much likewise briefly concerning firings to the Rear; in the next
place I shall Firings to the Flanks marching.
show some firings to the flanks: for performance whereof, it will be expedient
to bring all the Musketeers upon one of the flanks, but for order sake, I will
begin with the firings from the right flank.

1 Fire to the right, and gather up your files, it is to be performed after
this manner, the out-most file upon the right is to face to the right, and to
give fire, and after to face to the front, and stand, until the next file have
fired in like manner, and then the first file gathers up unto him upon the
right even a Breast, and standing until the third file have faced to the right,
and fired in like manner, and after facing to the front, the other files moving
up in the like way as before, and following successively this rule until all
have given fire, and then to march up, and even the front of Pikes, the
Musketeers will stand as at first, when they were brought upon the right
flank. 2 Fire to the right, File-leaders leading up their files next to the
Pikes. 3 Fire to the right, Bringers-up leading away next the Pikes, which
being twice done, reduces them. 4 Fire to the right, leading up on the
contrary flank, either by the File-leaders, or Bringers-up. 5 Fire to the
right, and leading up by Bringers-up between the Pikes, and passing thorough to
their places again, doing the same, reduces them. 6 Fire to the right, and
leading up between the Pikes by the Leaders, and passing thorough the Pikes
again to the right, they will be as at first; the like may be done to the left,
or in some kind to both flanks, at one and the same time. 7 Fire to the right
by ranks wheeling and ranks, to rank as they were to the right, upon their
marching reduces them. 8 Fire to the right by ranks inverting, or filing, and
upon the March the Soldiers ranking, reduces them. 9 Fire to the right files,
filing, and gathering up their files to the left reduces them.
These firings being performed marching, the next shall be upon a Stand, where
note you must cast all your Musketeers upon that flank, where you conceive the
Enemy will fall on, whether right, left, or both, but for order sake we usually
begin with the right* wherefore face to the right, and proceed as follows.
Firings to the right Flank upon a Stand.


1 Fire and fall in the Rear of your selves. 2 Fire and flank the Pikes. 3 Fire
even with the Pikes, and fall in the Rear of themselves. 4 Fire even with the
Rear, moving forth to the right and left, by ranks falling in the Rear of
themselves. 5 Fire by extraduction by half-ranks drawn forth, and falling rank
after rank in the Rear of the Pikes, after to reduce them as at first, cause
them to double their front by Division.
These firings may as well be performed to both the flanks, as to one, the Body
being faced accordingly, which would make many firings more, but these already
set down, may be sufficient for any ingenious capacity to work upon for the
present, observing this rule, that in every firing he shall make use in time of
his Exercise, he may reduce them by another, which will be more pleasing to the
Soldier, by reason of the great variety it affords unto them. And now, in the
last place, I know it will be expected, that I should speak something of the
use of firings: wherefore briefly thus.

Firings to the front marching, or moving, when we either pursue after, or
approach to an Enemy.

Firings to the front, maintaining ground when two Bodies encounter one another.

Firings to the front, losing ground, when either we are forced thereunto by
necessity, or that we do it out of policy, to draw the Enemy into a train, or
snare.

Firings to the Rear marching, when we are pursued by an Enemy, yet would
continue our March until we have gained some place of importance, or advantage.

Firings to the Rear upon a Stand, when we are compelled thereunto by the
violent pursuit of an Enemy; or else when we have gained a place of advantage
of ground, or have recovered the wind or Sun, whereby we are the better able
to encounter with them.

Firings to the flank, or flanks marching, when we are assaulted by some
Ambuscado secretly placed to hinder our passage; or supposing two Armies are
marching to one and the same place, a river being betwixt them.

Firings to flank or flanks standing when the Enemy charge on with a
resolution to cut off or divide part of the Army from the other.

Having thus briefly set down several firings to front, rear, and both flanks,
with their uses either marching, or standing, I hold it convenient in the next
place to give some short directions in time of Battle, both to the Officers,
and their Soldiers.

First, that the Drummers have a vigilant eye upon their Commanders, whose
voices are drowned by the loud thundering of the Cannon, or Musketeers, as
also by the neighing of Horses, or the lamentable cries of the maimed and
wounded Soldiers, at which time the Leaders Staff, half-Pike, or what else he
carries in his hand may be sufficient for to instruct them to continue their
charge, retreat, or else to charge home.

Secondly, that the Sergeants be careful in time of Battle, that their
Soldiers be at their due distance of order both in rank and file, and that
upon their firings, whether they be by forlorns either of files, or ranks drawn
forth, or otherwise by Divisions, they see them neatly and handsomely performed
by cocking their matches, and presenting something lower then brest-high, and
after uncocking and returning them, wheeling off either to the right, left, or
both, falling in the Rear of themselves, or else where as shall be appointed in
an orderly manner, whereby they may decently come up again to fire against the
Enemy.

Thirdly, that the Soldiers present and give fire upon their Rests, not using
that slovenly posture of popping their Matches into the Pan, their Muskets
being on their left sides, which is not only hurtful unto themselves, but much
endangers their Fellow Soldiers, and by so doing, they scarce or ever do any
execution against an Enemy. But here I meet with an objection framed by the
Soldiers after this manner; our Rests are of little or no use unto us in time
of skirmishing, fit they are, we confess, in the Military Gardens, but in time
of Battle both troublesome and cumbersome unto us, to whom I reply, what if
they be a little cumbersome at the first, must they therefore be rejected, and
carelessly thrown away, nay, rather they ought frequently to practice themselves
in the use thereof, which if they did, they would find the same very
serviceable unto them in time of skirmishing, wherewith they fire better, and
in a more comely and graceful way, far more securing both themselves, and
fellow soldiers from danger, and likewise upon their March, it is both a help
and support unto them.

Fourthly, their eyes ought likewise in time of Battle to be fixed steadfastly
upon their Captain, always conforming to him in Posture when he shall prepare
to charge or retreat, and likewise they ought to be knowing and well verst in
the several beats of the Drum, which if well observed by all, there would not
be so much confusion in time of Battle amongst them, as many times by sad
experience has been found, when disregarding their Officers commands, and the
beating of the Drums, they ignorantly and rashly run on in a disorderly manner,
by which means they have cut off their own Officers and fellow soldiers, many
times more then they have dangered the enemy.

Thus you see what great necessity there is of instructing and training up the
Soldiers in their Postures, and how requisite it is to conform themselves to
their Officers in time of Battle, performing thereby better execution against
their Enemies; and by their decent and comely array preserve themselves from
imminent dangers and perils.

The Soldiers having now all the groundwork of the exercising a body of men,
laid down before them, in the next place he labors to make experiment thereof,
but being no Officer he cannot attein thereunto without special leave from his
Superiors, and therefore (being a File-leader) he craves leave for to exercise
his single File both in their Postures and Motions, contenting himself for
present with that small number whereby he is able to run through many plain
things of Distances, Facings, Doublings, Countermarchings and Wheelings. But
being not fully satisfied, he presumes upon the former favor had from his
Superiors to go on to make every man in his File a File-leader, first, by
succession, and after (being not called away by the beat of the Drum, or by his
Officers to lead up his File, and to join into a Body) according unto Dignity,
and after endeavors to reduce them again by proper words of command.

This liberty being granted at convenient times unto a File-leader, much
indeers the Soldiers good affections unto their Officers, and is a means
whereby many others are brought in to be true lovers of Military Exercises, as
being much taken and well pleased with the sight of the former things. And
therefore, I could wish, that they were not hereafter prevented, as formerly I
have observed by the malice of some, who have had places of command bestowed
upon them, more through favor or by reason of their riches, then for any worth
or desert found in them: They perhaps hold it a great disparagement unto them
to be eclipsed, but a judicious and discreet Captain accounts it a great honor
to lead such gallant men that are as able, and as well knowing as himself.

CHAP. LX. The way to make every man in a File six deep according to
succession a File-leader, by doublings, not The File. 1 2 3 4 5 6
using one word of command twice.
2 Command. FIles rank two to the left Files to the left double. Brings the
second man into the Front.

3 Command. Halfe-files double your Front to the left, Files double your depth
to the left.
4 Command. Bringers-up double your Front to the right, Double your Files to
the left entire advancing,
5 Command. Bringers-up double your Front to the left, Double your Files to the
right entire advancing.
6 Command. File, rank two to the right, Files to the right double,
Reducement. File, rank to the left into the Front, Rank, file six to the left.
CHAP. LXI. The way to make every man in a File six deep File-leader, according
to dignity by a doubling, not using one Word of command twice. The Dignity of
the File. 1 6 4 3 5 2

2 Command. HAlf-files double your front to the left. Files double to the right
entire advancing, every man placing himself before his Leader.
3 Command. Front half-file double the rear to the left. Files double to the
left entire advancing, every man placing himself before his Leader.
4 Command. Bringer-up double your Front to the right. Files double your depth
to the right, every man falling behind his bringer-up.
5 Command. Half-files double your Front to the right. Files double to the left
entire advancing. Files rank two to the right. Files to the right double.
6 Command. Bringer-up, double your Front to the left. Files double your depth
to the left, every man falling behind his bringer-up.
Reducement. File, rank two to the left. Files to the left double.
CHAP. LXII. The File. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
The way to make every man in a File eight deep File-leader by succession, and
that by doubling, not using one Word of command twice.
2 Command. FIle, rank two to the left. Ranks invert to the left.
3 Command. Half-file double your front to the right. Double your files to the
right entire advancing, every man placing himself before his Leader.
4 Command. Files rank two to the right. Files to the right double.
5 Command. Front half-files double your rear to the right. Double your files
to the left entire advancing.
6 Command. Files, rank two to the right into the rear. Ranks invert to the
right.
7 Command. Half-files double your Front to the left. Double your files to the
left entire advancing, every man placing himself before his Leader.
8 Command. File, rank two to the left into the Rear. Face to your Leader.
Double your Files to the right advancing.
Reducement. File, rank to the right into the Front. Rank, file right to the
right.
CHAP. LXIII. The way to make every man in a File eight deep, a File-leader
according The Dignity of the File. 1 6 7 4 3 8 5 2
unto dignity, by a doubling.
2 Command. BRinger-up double your front to the left. Double your files to the
right entire advancing
3 Command. Half-files double your front to the left. Double your files to the
left entire advancing.
4 Command. Bringer-up double your Front to the right. Files double your depth
to the right.
5 Command. File, rank two to the right. Double your files to the right entire,
advancing, every man placing himself before his Leader.
6 Command. Front half-file double your Rear to the right, following your
Leaders. Double your files to the right by Division, every man placing himself
before his Leader, and his Bringer-up.
7 Command. Front half-file double your Rear to the left, following your
Leaders. Double your files to the left by Division, every man placing himself
before his Leader, and his Bringer-up.
8 Command. The two first, and the two last men double the four middle-most men
to the right, following your Leaders, and your Bringers-up. Files double your
Depth to the left.
Reducement. Half-files double the front to the right. Bringers-up double your
front to the right. Files to the right and left double inward. Double your
files to the left entire advancing.
Although I have here set down words of Command to make every man a
File-leader, both by Succession, and Dignity; a Commander is not thereby tied
up, but may if he please, practice the same upon a whole Company, altering but
a little some words of Command; As for example, we cannot say in a file, double
your ranks, there being none, until there be some other files joined
thereunto, and therefore if we intend a doubling by a single file, we command
it to rank two to the right or left, which in a Company must be expressed Ranks
to the right or left double. Thus you see with a little alteration every man is
brought up into the Front, either by succession, or dignity, whether the files
be even numbers or odd, great bodies or small. But here by the way, I must
crave pardon to speak something in commendation of these Doublings, in answer
to them that accounts them but toys; to whom I will be so bold as to tell them
that it is not for want of ignorance, they so slightly esteem of them, for were
they truly knowing in the Art of Drilling, they must of force confess
abundance of variety in them, affording much delight to him that shall command,
and great content unto them that are commanded, perceiving themselves to be
made file-leaders by the skill and worth of their Leaders. And, besides, there
may be just cause (at one time or other) many times to alter the ranks,
exchanging the one for the other, bringing thereby their best deserving
Soldiers into the chiefest places of honor, and casting others into their
rooms at the discretion of the Commander. Therefore, I could wish, all Leaders
whatsoever to be well skilled and verst in these Doublings, the frequent
practice whereof will make them more apt in the Exercise of more difficult
things in the Art Military. To which ingenious study I leave them, and in the
next place proceed to show them several figures of Battle to be performed by
single files, consisting of several Depths of men.

CHAP. LXIV. Concerning Figures of Battle to be performed by single Files,
with some admonitions to those that shall practice themselves therein.
THe great plenty, and variety of matter, that may be performed in the
exercising of a single file, makes me wonder at the ignorance of those who are
famed abroad for able knowing Soldiers, who after they have passed over the
Postures, are at a Stand, as if there were nothing else to be done. with the
same. But did they truly understand what dishonor and disparagement it is unto
them, they would not be so idle and backward, but set times apart, often
inuring themselves to the practice thereof, going through all the Motions,
Distances, Facings, Doublings, Counter-marches, and Wheelings, and may farther,
if he please, with his single file draw forth diverse figures of Battle,
declaring unto his Soldiers their several reasons and uses. The exercising
his Company after this manner, affords unto them both content and delight, and
it is likewise very useful in greater Bodies, when time of need shall require,
as shall appear in the sequel of this Book.

But here, me thinks, I hear some say, of what use are your figures? seeing
for the most part, in pitched Battails, or skirmishing in the field, they
commonly fire one again another in Squares, or by Forlornes, drawn forth from
the Body, and being relieved, return into their places again. To whom, I
answer, that in one respect it is true, there being scarce any pitched Battle
in the field fought in these latter times, but it has been with even fronts,
who ever are first engaged, whether it be by Divisions drawn off by way of
Forl^rnes, as have Wings, or Battle, the Fight with even Fronts, or Squadrons,
as having every five or six files divided a part from each other, having six
foot ground intervall, betwixt the above said number of files for the
convenience of the Ranks wheeling off after they have fired, As concerning such
figures as are framed like the Wedge, Saw, Sheers, or Diamond, I must confess,
there is little or no use at all, except it be for delight, or for the practice
and experience of some young Soldier, whereby he may plainly see the custom
of the Ancients in setting forth such ancient figures. But to let this pass,
and to come to the place where we left, I shall show unto the Soldier how
needful it is for him to be well skilled in the framing of figures of Battle,
and likewise to be thoroughly acquainted with their several uses. Wherefore
take this for a general rule, that there was never any pitched Battle, but
there were Reserves appointed out unto all the parts thereof, whereby they
might bring off, and at time of need relieve each other; and if so, certainly,
they must of necessity carry along with them several forms, and figures of
Battle, according to the discretion of the Major-Generall, or other Commanders
in chief whom it shall concern. It will therefore be expedient (since there is
a necessity of figures of Battle, and for the setting a part of Divisions for
the relieving of each other) for every Commander that will be truly knowing, to
have always some imprinted in his memory, that in time of need, he may not be
to seek, or wanting in them. To which purpose, I have collected some few,
putting them to their view, being formerly-practised by me, for the
satisfaction of those loving Gentlemen which have private Meetings in London;
but more especially for those of the Town-ditch, unto whom I am most especially
bound. And therefore, without more delay, I shall lay before them certain
figures of Battle upon all the Depths of files set forth in the former Table,
leaving them to their own discretion to make use of what shall best comply and
suit to their intended purpose.

CHAP. LXV. Military Experiment upon a File six deep, branching forth eight
several Figures of Battle, with their reducement.
Command. FIle rank two to the left.

military diagram

Command. The middle-most rank open to the right and left to open order.

military diagram

Command. The last rank advance forward into the next rank that is before you,
and to open from the midst to open order, and the first rank move forward one
pace.

military diagram

Command. The first rank open outward two foot beyond open order; the last rank
close forward to order.

military diagram

Command. Division upon the left face about; march all till you be clear each
of other, face all to the left, and march two paces; face to your Leader: the
last rank open outward to double distance.

military diagram

Command. The first rank open outward to double distance; the first man in the
front face about, move down, and double the middle-most man to the right
rank-wise.

military diagram

Command. The left hand man of the middle-most rank face about, the middle-most
rank march two paces before the front and rear; face to your Leader, and close
ranks and files to order.

military diagram

Command. The second rank from the front double the first to the right and left
outward by Division; the last man in the Rear close forward to order.

military diagram

Command. The out-most men of the middle rank face about, and move down even
with the Rear; to your Leader.

military diagram

Reducement, The middle-most man in the Rear advance forwards to the left into
the front.

Files close inwards to your order.

Files to the right double.

Half-files double your front to the left.

Files double your Depth to the right, every man falling behind his Bringer-up.

File, rank two to the right.

Ranks, rank entire to the left into the Rear, every man placing himself on the
outside of his left hand man.

Direction. Face about; and after being faced to their Leader, they will stand
after this manner, 6: 5: 4: 3: 2: 1.

Rank file to the right, they are reduced.

CHAP. LXVI. Words of Command to produce the first eight Figures of Battle,
with their reducements.
Command. HAlf-file double your Front to the left.

military diagram

Command. The last rank face about, the two middle ranks face outward; march
all some two paces, to your Leader.

military diagram

Command. The first rank move forwards two paces; the third rank close inwards
to open order.

military diagram

Command. The third rank from the front face outward, march all three paces; to
your Leader.

The first rank stand, the rest face outward, and move two paces; to your
Leader.

military diagram

Command. The first rank face about, march all until you be clear one of
another; to your Leader.

military diagram

Command. The last rank move to the right and left, and place your selves three
foot behind the Front Divisions.

military diagram

Command. Division on the right face about, march all until you be clear one
of another; then face to the right, and march until you stand even a Breast of
each other; face to your Leader.

military diagram

Command. Rear Division face about; the last man in each Division move forwards
into the midst of the rank that is before you, face to your Leader, and close
your Divisions to order.

military diagram

Command. The last man in the Rear move forwards to the right in the rank of
him that stands before you, the last rank open outward to order, to your
Leader.

military diagram

Reducement. Face all about: the last man in the Rear move forwards on the left
into the rank that is before you; even your ranks, and streighten your files,
to your Leader.

Files double inward by Division.

Double your ranks to the left entire into the Front and Rear.

Direction. Half-files face about; after face to your Leader, and the last rank
close forward to order, and even your ranks, and straighten your files.

Wheel Front and Rear to the left flank.

Direction. The last rank face about; then face to your Leader; and
countermarch the file, they are reduced.

CHAP. LXVII. Words of Command for the second eight Figures of Battle with
their reducement.
Command. FIle, rank to the left, one, three, and four, the last rank face
outward, and move three paces, to your Leader.

military diagram

Command. The two in-most men of the last rank close inward to close order, the
two out-most men of the last rank fall back two paces.

military diagram

Command. The middle-most man in the first rank face about, march all till you
are clear one of another; to your Leader.

military diagram

Command. Files close into the midst to order, the last man move forward to
order.

military diagram

Command. The middle-most rank open to the right and left to double distance.

military diagram

Command. The out-most men upon the flanks face inward, the last man in the
Rear, face about, the first and the last rank face to the four Angles, move all
3 paces; to your Leader.

military diagram

Command. The first man in the Front, and the last man in the Rear stand, the
rest face outward, and march three paces; to your Leader.

military diagram

Command. The last men of the out-most files move forward to the right and
left, until you range even a Breast with the middle-men.

military diagram

Reducement. The last man in the Rear move forward, and range even a Breast with
the first rank, Ranks file to the right following your Leader; they are reduced.

CHAP. LXVIII. Words of Command for the third eight Figures of Battle, with
their reducement.
Command. BRingers-up double your Front to the left.

military diagram

Command. The first and the last rank stand, the third rank double outward
rank-wise, the middle -rank face outward, march all two paces, to your Leader.

military diagram

Command. The middle rank stand, the rest double to the right file-wise; face
all to the Center, and march some two paces to your Leader.

military diagram

Command. The middle -rank double inward file-wise, and move a little forward.

military diagram

Command, Half-file of the middle file double your Front to the left;
Front-division face to the right, and move one pace; to your Leader.

military diagram

Command. The left hand file in the Front, face about, and march clear of the
Rear, face to your Leader. The middle file double to the left rank-wise; files
close into the midst to order: Files rank outward into the Rear, and then begin
from the right to wheel them about to the left in a ring.

military diagram

Command. Files close into the midst to order, the first rank close inward to
close order; the third rank open outward to open order: the last man in the
Rear, move even a Breast with the rank that is before you.

military diagram

Command. Files open to the right and left until you stand straight with your
Bringers-up, the rest moving forwards until they have ranged even a Breast with
the first man.

military diagram

Command. Angle-men face to the four Angles; the middle-men in the out-most
files face inward; the middle-man in the Front face about, march all three
paces: face to your Leader.

military diagram

Reducement. The last man in the Rear of the middle file face about, middle
file march clear of the standing part; files close into the midst to order: the
last man in the Rear fall in Rear of the right hand file, the first man in the
Front move to the left, and fall in the Front of the left hand file; close your
ranks and files forward to order, and make an even Front, files double your
depth to the left, every man falling behind his Bringer-up reduces them.

CHAP. LXIX. The way to make twelve several Figures of Battle with a File ten
deep, with their Reducement.
Command. FAce to the right, and wheel your Front into the midst, Face after to
your Leader.

military diagram

Command. The last men in the Rear of the outmost files face about, outmost
files move clear of the standing part, face inwards, and close your Divisions,
to your Leader.

military diagram

Command. The last man of the middle file and the last rank face about the
first rank, and the last rank, and the middle file move forwards two paces, the
rest open outward two paces, to your leader.

military diagram

Command. The last man in the front division advance forward three foot before
the Front, the first man of the Rear division face about, and move three foot
behind the Rear; the outmost files double ranks inward; ranks close forwards
to order, and face to your Leader:

military diagram

Command. The first man in the Front face about, the last man in the Rear
stand, the rest face outward, march all until the first and the last man
meet, face all to your Leader; middle men double to the right rank-wise, and
close outward to order.

military diagram

The two middle-men in the Body face about and move clear of the Rear three
foot, face to your Leader, middle-men of the out-most files close inward to
order.

military diagram

Command. Middle-man upon the right of the second Rank advance forward three
foot before the Front, the three first men in the Front, and the middle-man of
the second rank move forwards three paces, the rest closing inward one pace.

military diagram

Command. The last rank open outward to double distance, and the next rank open
outward to open order, and the third rank from the Rear to close inward to
order.

military diagram

Command. The second man from the Front face about, move down and range even
with the Rear: outmost men of the last rank advance forward, and range even
with the second rank from the Front: the last rank move forwards until they
have exceeded three foot the next rank that (stands before them) divisisions on
the wings face outward, move two paces; to your Leader.

military diagram

Command. Front-Division, face about, and march down even with the Rear, the
las^ man move forwards to order, to your Leader.

military diagram

Command. Middle-Division advance forward clear of the standing part; Divisions
in the Rear close inwards to order; wheel your Rear into the midst; to your
Leader.

military diagram

Command. The last rank close inward to order, and to double to the left
file-wise; the second man from the Rear move forwards into the second rank that
is before you.

military diagram

Reducement. The first man in the Front move a little to the right, the second
man from the first rank double the first man to the left rank-wise; the first
rank wheel off by Division, and double the last man in the Rear to the right
and left rank-wise; ranks close forwards to order, and face to your Leader.

military diagram

Reducement. The first and second rank face about; the first rank double the
second to the right and left outward; to your Leader; the last rank move
forward, and even your ranks, and straighten their files; wheel Front and Rear
to the left -flank; the last rank face about before they wheel; then facing to
their Leader, they are reduced.

CHAP. LXX. Twelve several Figures of Battle with a File 12 deep, (...) their
reducement.
Command. FRont half-file double your Rear to the left; face to your Leader.
Half-files double your Front to the left.

military diagram

Command. the middle-most men upon each flank, face outward; the two middle-men
of the last rank face about: those that are thus faced, and the two middle-men
of the first rank move forward to your Leader three paces; the first, and the
last rank stand, the rest move outward two paces; face to your Leader.

military diagram

Command. The out-most Divisions open from the midst almost to twice double
distance; the first rank face about, and rank even with the midst of ranks,
face to your Leader; the last rank double to the right file-wise; the second
man from the Rear advance forward, and place himself 3 foot before the
middle-men, the last man at the same time closing forward to order.

military diagram

Command. The outmost division upon the right move away, the rest successively
falling in the Reeer of them until they stand straight after the first
division.

military diagram

Command. The outmost man upon the left of the middle division to open to the
left to double distance; the rest of that division to face to the right, and to
move clear of the standing part, face to your Leader; the last man in the
Front, face about to the last Division, the first man of the Front-division,
and the first man of the Reer-division to move forwards and to close to open
order: after facing to the left flank, closing to the outmost man to order;
face to your Leader; and after face all to the Center, and move a little
forward, to your Leader.

military diagram

Command. The outmost man upon the right, and the outmost man upon the left
close inward to order.

military diagram

Command. The two middle-men move forth to the right and left three foot clear
of the standing part; the first man in the Front face about: the first man in
the Front, and the last man in the Rear move into the second that is before
you: to your Leader.

military diagram

Command. The two outmost men upon each Flank close inward to open order.

military diagram

Command. Face all to Front, Rear, and both Flanks, and the four middle-men
move forwards into the rank that is before them, and they will stand in a
Square: face to your Leader.

military diagram

Command. Files rank outward, the middle man of the first rank move forward,
and place himself three foot before his right and left hand man, the outmost
and the middle man of the last rank move backward, and place himself three
foot behind the Reer-division, close forwards to open order.

military diagram

Command. The first and the last rank move to the left one pace, and after
double to the right filewise, the middle rank close inward to order.

military diagram

Command. The two out-most men of the middle rank face about, move down and
range even a breast with the middle-man of the Rear Division, closing inward to
order, and facing to the Front; even men from the left, move forwards, and rank
even a breast with the middle-man of the Front-division, and close inward to
order, the out-most men open outward to double distance.

military diagram

Command. Rear division face about and move two paces, the outmost-man upon the
left face about to the right, the outmost-men move forward and rank to the
right with the last man in the Rear of each division, face to your leader, and
move forward two paces.

military diagram

Reducement. Rear division face about, middle-man of the first rank of each
division move forward and rank two to the left into Front and Rear: Files close
into the midst to order ranks close forwards to order: Halfe-files double the
Front to the right entire: Ranks rank outward into the Front, every man placing
himself on the outside of his right and left hand men: Ranks file to the right
and left inward: Files double your depth to the left: Face to your Leader.

It might be expected that I should show the several Charges upon all these
Figures, but in regard I may, perhaps, meet with some of them again in greater
Bodies, or the like, I shall for present pass them over, and in those places
endeavor to give them the best satisfaction I can. In the mean time they may
with ease find out in every one of them such charges as may instruct the
Soldiers how to fight, whether it be to Front, Rear, both Flanks or Angles,
they may be shown and exercised in them according to the discretion of him that
shall command them, whether they be Musketeers or Pike-men: and therefore,
thus much shall suffice, concerning the exercising of a file for matter of
Figures: In the next place follows the Exercise of greater Bodies.

The end of the first Book.
THE COMPLETE BODY OF THE ART MILITARY: The Second Book.
CHAP. 1. Concerning the Artillery and the Military Gardens, together with the
Private Meetings; in and about the City of LONDON.
THe great delight in handling of Arms in Military Exercises, makes the City of
LONDON and the Suburbs thereof famous through the whole World, by reason, as I
conceive, of those two great Nurseries or Academies of MILITARY DISCIPLINE, the
ARTILLERY and MILITARY GARDENS, from whom, as out of pure Fountains, all other
our Private Meetings (as of Town-ditch, and Cripplegate, etc.) are derived.

The Artillery Garden deserves the first place, in respect it is the greatest
Meeting, from whence, as it were out of a Nursery have been transplanted many
able knowing soldiers both at home and in foreign Countries to the great
honor of our Nation.

The Military Garden is famous likewise for the great improvement of diverse
worthy persons of quality daily thither resorting, whose excellent skill in
Military Exercises has raised many of them to high preferment here at home,
and places of honorable command abroad. The Captains in chief of these
Academies are Major General Skippon, and Major Henry Tyllier, which later was
the first that ever showed in the Military Garden (of which I am a member) the
marching of the Soldiers in a Regiment all way, whose great pains amongst us
deserves much honor and high commendation; showing unto us such variety of
matter in a Souldier-like way, as was never before seen, by any member thereof.

Not to eclipse the forementioned Private Meetings in London, but to give
them that due which belongs unto them, they likewise are of great honor and
same for their frequent exercising of their Soldiers in the handling of their
Arms, whether it be of the Pike, or Musket, and instructing them in the
knowledge of Drilling, and drawing up of Companies, and Bodies of men,
furnishing both Kingdoms with able knowing soldiers. My hearty wishes
therefore that all and every one of them may be propt up, and supported to all
ages, that when need shall require, we may draw from these fountains such
skillful and experienced Commanders, and Officers as may be, as it were, a
Bulwark to this our Nation.

Not to dwell any longer upon this discourse, I come, therefore, briefly to set
forth several Exercises (formerly practiced by me amongst those loving
Gentlemen of Town-ditch) according to the usual numbers there appearing,
whether they be great or small, practiced for the most part with 24 or 32 men,
and sometimes (although seldom) with 64 men, unless it were upon general
days, when they were drawn forth into the field; at such times, perhaps, there
might be an appearance of greater numbers, as 120 and upwards.

My purpose, therefore is to pitch upon, and to make use of all and every one
of these numbers, making 12 Exercises, dividing them by threes, until I have
run over them all, conceiving them sufficient for the industrious to gather
from thence matter enough for his intended Exercise. And for the more enabling
of them, I shall endeavor (in these curious times) to walk a long in as plain
a way as possibly may be, giving directions unto all Words of Command, for the
better performance of the same; wishing all my loving fellow soldiers to
conceive well of my good meaning intended to them: desiring withal to be
rightly informed of what part soever they fall upon, that they proceed
leasurely and orderly in the same, which will not only be an encouragement unto
the Author from whom they gather their Exercises, but will bring much praises
and commendation to themselves; But to leave every one to their own best
thoughts, whilst I proceed to practice what before promised concerning the
several Exercises following.

CHAP. II. The first Exercise of four Files six deep.
EAch File-leader (as being his duty) having gone over the Postures, showing
and instructing his file, with their uses, and neat handling of their Arms:
hearing the Drums beat a Call for all to repair and stand to their Arms, begin
to lead up their files, according to order, the Leader then closing their ranks
and files to close order, craving their silence, may proceed to show unto them
all their several distances and facings, according unto the former rule set
down, and after he may proceed to Doublings (if he pleases) as follows.

CHAP. III. A Doubling consisting of sixteen in number, every one differing
from the other, and not reduced until the last Word of Command.
Command. FIles, file to the right entire advancing.

Command. Bringers-up, double your Front to the left.

Command. Half-files double your Front to the left.

Command. Front half-files double your Rear to the right entire.

Command. Right half-ranks double your left flank entire advancing.

Command. Half-files double your front to the right entire.

Command. Left half-ranks double entire the Depth of your right flank.

Command Files, file to the left entire advancing.

Command. Bringer-up double your front to the right.

Command. Front half-files double your Rear to the right and left outward,
following your Leaders.

Direction. Rear half-files face about; the file-leaders are to turn off to the
right and left, the rest are to follow them until they are marched down into
the Rear, and have doubled it to the right and left outward.

Command. Half-files double your front inward entire.

Command. The two out-most files upon each flank double entire the Depth of the
inmost files.

Direction. The two out-most files face about inward, and move straight down
clear of the standing part; afterward face inward, march, and close your
Divisions, to your Leader.

Command. Front half-files double your Rear inward entire.

Direction. Rear half-files face about, and move outward clear of the standing
part; front half-files, face about, march down and even the Rear to your Leader.

Command. The two outmost files upon each Flank, double entire, advancing the
four inmost files.

Direction. The two outmost files move forward clear of the standing part, face
inward, march and close your Divisions, face to your Leader.

Command. Double your files inward entire, advancing, every man placing himself
before his Leader.

Direction. The two inmost files stand, the two outmost files move forwards,
and double your inmost files entire advancing, placing your selves before your
Leaders.

Command. Half-files double your Front to the right, they are reduced.

CHAP. IV. Eight several Counter-marches with their Reducement.
Command. FIle-leaders stand, the rest, pass thorough to the right, and place
your selves before your Leaders.

Command. The right hand file stand, the rest pass thorough to the right, and
place your selves on the out side of your right hand men.

Command. File-leaders and Bringers-up stand, the rest pass thorough to the
right, and place your selves before your Leaders, and your Bringers-up.

Command. The outmost file upon each flank stand, the rest pass thorough to the
right and left, placing your selves before your outside men.

Direction. Face outward, and pass thorough to the right and left, placing your
selves before the outmost files, to your Leader, and close your Divisions to
open order.

Command. Bringers-up stand, the rest pass thorough to the right, and place
your selves behind your Bringers-up.

Direction. The five first ranks are to face about, the next rank to the Rear
is first to begin the motion, the rest are successively to follow, until the
Leaders are become the Bringers-up.

Command. The left hand file stand, the rest pass thorough to the left, and
place your selves on the outside of your left hand men.

Command. File-leaders and Bringers-up stand, the rest pass thorough to the
right, and place your selves behind your Leaders and Bringers-up.

Direction. The first and the two next ranks from the Rear face about, the two
first ranks from the Front, and the two last ranks from the Rear move forwards,
placing your selves behind your Leaders, and your Bringers-up, face to your
Leader, and close your Divisions.

Command. The out-most file upon each file face inward, the rest pass thorough
to the right and left, placing your selves behind your right and left hand men.

CHAP. V. Ten several Wheelings with their Reducement.
Command. WHeel the Front half-files, inward into the midst, and double your
Rear inward entire.

Direction. Half-files face outward, and march clear of the standing part,
after face to the Rear; front half-files open from the midst to open order,
after wheeling to the right and left inward into the Rear, to your leader.

Command. Right and left half ranks double the depth of the Battle, by
wheeling into the front.

Direction. Right half ranks wheel to the left; and left half ranks wheel to
the right, to your leader.

Command. Wheel off the front half-files, and double the Rear by division.

Direction. Half-files face about, and front half-files, wheel off by division,
moving down even with the Rear, to your Leader.

Command. Wheel off your right half ranks, and double your left flank to the
right entire.

Direction. Face outward, and right half ranks wheel about to the left and move
away, and double the left flank to the right, to your leader.

Command. Front and Rear half-files, double the depth of the Battle by
wheeling into Front and Rear.

Direction. Half-files face to the Rear, and Front and Rear half-files wheel to
the right and left inward, face to your Leader, and close your divisions.

Command. Wheel off your left half-rankes and double your right flank by
division

Direction. Face outward, and left half-ranks wheel off by division, and move
even with the right flank, to your Leader.

Command. Wheel off your Rear half-files and double the Front to the right
entire.

Direction. Half-files face about, and wheel to the left until you have ranged
even with the front.

Command. Wheel your Battle off by division from the Front.

Direction. Right half-ranks wheel about to the right and left, half-ranks
wheel about to the left, and move down to the Rear, face to your Leader, and
close into the midst to order.

Command. Wheel off your left half-ranks, and double your right flank to the
left entire.

Direction. Face outward, left half-rankes wheel about to the right, and move
forward and double the right flank to the left entire, to your Leader.

Command. Wheel off your Front half-files and double the Rear to the left
entire.

Direction, Half-files face about, and front half-files wheel about to the
right, move down and range even with the Rear, face to your Leader, reduces
them.

CHAP. VI. Six Figures of Battle with several firings thereunto belonging.
Command. RAnks and files close to order, they will stand us underneath is set
forth, from which we will draw our figures after we have fired upon this
Platform three or four times.

military diagram

Command. Double your files inward entire advancing.

The first firing. Let the first two ranks advance forward ten paces, give fire
and fall in the rear of themselves, after wheeling off to the right and left,
placing themselves before the front of Pikes; the next two Ranks, and so the
rest successively doing the like until they have fired once over which
reduces them.

The second firing. Let the first Rank advance three paces, give fire, and fall
in the Rear of themselves; the rest doing the like until all have fired once
over, as before.

The third firing. Let them give fire on the ground they stand, and fall off to
the right and left, and flank the Pikes.

The fourth firing. Let them fire even with the front, and fall in the Rear of
the Pikes; which being ended let the Pikes charge on.

Reducement. Musketeers double your front by division.

Command. The first two Ranks stand, the rest face outward and move clear of
the standing part, to your Leader; the two last Ranks move outward side-ways
two paces.

military diagram

The first firing. Let every Division give fire on the same ground they stand,
and fall in the Rear of themselves.

The second firing. Let them advance forwards until they be clear of the
Pikes, give fire, and fall in the Rear of themselves, after moving down into
their places.

Command. Front division advance forward three paces, the two next divisions
move outward one pace; Pikes in each division face about, and move two paces,
to your Leader: Divisions of Musketeers in the Rear advance forwards and range
even in Front and Rear with the middle divisions of Pikes, the first rank of
Pikes in the Front division move three foot clear of the standing part.

military diagram

The first firing. Let them give fire to the Front, and fall in the Rear of
themselves.

The second firing. Let them give fire to Front, Rear, and both flanks
altogether.

Direction. Rear divisions face outward, the last rank of Pikes and Musketeers
of the Front division face to the Rear; the last rank of Musketeers move down
clear of the Rear and close inward to order; then let the Pikes port, and after
the Musketeers have fired charge on, then retreating into their places again.

Command. The first and the last rank of Pikes face about and move down clear
of the Rear, and close ranks forwards to order; outmost divisions of
Musketeers face about, move down and flank your own divisions of Pikes: the
first division of Pikes move forward and range even abrest with your own
division of Musketeers, the Front division of Musketeers closing into the
midst to order.

military diagram

The first firing. Let the Front division give fire and fall in the rear of
themselves, after wheeling off to the right and left move down and flank the
rear division of Pikes.

The second firing. Let the Front divisions of Musketeers fire and fall in the
rear of themselves, then face about, and move down upon the inside of the next
division of Pikes, and after face to their Leader.

The third firing. Let the Musketeers upon the flanks move up into the room
of the former, and fire, falling in the rear of themselves, and after face
about and move down into their places again; the Musketeers on the inside
moving up into their places again.

The fourth firing, Let the rear division face about, then let them fire to
Front and Rear, and fall in the Rear of themselves; let the Pikes charge, and
after ordering their arms the Rear division facing to their Leader, the
Musketeers thereof may move up into their places again.

Command. The outmost Divisions face outward, and move two paces, face to your
Leader, move up until you range even a breast with the second Divisions next
the Front, Rear Division move straight forward two paces.

military diagram

The first firing. Let them all give fire, and fall in the rear of themselves.

The second firing. Let the Musketeers advance forwards until they be clear
of the front division, and then rank outward and fire altogether; after filing
inward as they were, move down again into their places: the Pikes at the same
time charging, and after order their arms.

Command. Front division advance forward three paces; the outmost divisions
upon the Flanks move up, and range even with the Front.

military diagram

The first firing. Direction for the same: let them all face to the Rear, and
the middle division of Musketeers move forwards, and flank the Rear Division
of Pikes; after let all the Musketeers advance forwards three foot clear of
their own Divisions of Pikes, and give fire falling in the Rear of themselves,
and after facing about, move into their places again.

The second firing. Let them fire as they stand, and fall in the Rear of
themselves; and the Pikes in the Rear may charge on, and after facing to their
Leader.

Command. The out-most Divisions face inward, march three paces; and the next
two Divisions face outward, and move two paces, to your Leader; Reer-Division
move outward until you stand straight with the Front-Divisions.

military diagram

The first firing. Let the Front-Division of Musketeers give fire, and fall in
the Rear of themselves; and after moving down in the room of them in the Rear:
they at the same time moving up into the front firing in like manner moving
down, and exchanging places with them in the Rear.

The second firing. Let the Musketeers upon the flanks move forward even with
the front give fire, and fall in the Rear of themselves, and after move down
into their places again, and face to their Leader.

The third firing. Let them face to front-reer, and both flanks, and let the
Pikes port, and the Musketeers give fire.

The fourth firing. Let them give fire on the ground they stand, and fall in
the Rear of the Pikes; the Pikes charging whilst the Musketeers make ready
again.

The fifth firing. Let the Pikes charge at foot, and the Musketeers give fire
over their heads; then recovering their Arms, face to their Leader.

Reducement. Front-Divisions face about; Front and Reer-Divisions march, and
interchange ground, to your Leader; The out-most Divisions face inward, and
close your Divisions, to your Leader: even your ranks, and streighten your
files, and close to order, they are reduced.

The Captain may now command the Musketeers to poyse their Arms, and file away
to the right and left, making as it were a Street or Gallery for him to troop
away the Pikes, and lodge his Colors.

CHAP. VII. The second Exercise with four Files six deep.
THe Soldiers being the second time summoned to appear at their place of
Randezvous, the Sergeants having drawn forth the files, may give liberty to the
Leaders thereof, to exercise them in their several Postures, which being
ended, their Captain, or other Officers may command them to lead up their
Files, and to join them into a Body; after which he may show unto them their
Distances, and Facings, with their several kinds, following the former rule,
and after proceed to these or the like Doublings following.

CHAP. VIII. Eighteen several Doublings with their reducements.
Command. HAlf-files double your Front to the left.

Command. Double your files to the right entire advancing.

Command. Front half-files double your Rear to the right entire.

Command. Left half-ranks double your right flank to the left.

Direction. Face all to the right, and left half-ranks move forward; and double
your right flank to the left, to your Leader.

Command. Double your ranks to the left entire.

Command. Right half-ranks double your left flank entire advancing.

Command. Left half-ranks double your right flank inward entire.

Direction. Half-files of the right half-ranks face about, right half-ranks
move clear of the standing part; face all to the right: left half-ranks move
forwards into the right flank, to your Leader.

Command. The three first, and the three last ranks double the six middle-most,
entire to the left flank.

Direction. The three first, and the three last, face to the left, march clear
of the standing part, face inward, move and close your Divisions, to your
Leader.

Command. Right half-ranks double your left flank to the right.

Direction. Face all to the left, and right half-ranks move forwards, and
double your left flank to the right, to your Leader.

Command. Double your ranks to the right entire.

Command. Right half-ranks double your left flank inward entire.

Command. The three first, and the three last ranks, double the six middle-most
ranks entire to the right flank.

Command. Left half-ranks double your right flank entire advancing.

Command. Front half-files double your Rear to the left entire.

Command. Half-files double your front to the right.

Command. Double your files to the left entire advancing, every man placing
himself before his Leader.

Command. Front half-files double your Rear to the right, following your
Leaders.

Direction. Half-files face about, file-leaders turn off to the left, and move
down upon the right of the Rear, the rest following successively; to your
Leader.

Command. Files double your Depth to the left entire; they are reduced being
faced to their Leader.

CHAP. LXVI. Twelve several Counter-marches with their reducements.
Command. FIles to the right hand countermarch losing ground.

Command. Ranks to the right hand countermarch, losing ground.

Direction. Face all to the right.

Command. Front and Rear half-files inter-change ground.

Direction. Front half-files face about to the left.

Command. Right and left half-ranks inter-change ground.

Direction. Face inward.

Command. File-leaders face about; the rest pass through to the right, and
place your selves behind your Leaders, face to the Front.

Command. Countermarch your Front and Rear into the midst.

Command. Countermarch your flanks into the midst. Face out-ward.

Command. File-leaders, and half-file-leaders stand, the rest pass through to
the right, and place your selves before your Leaders, and half file-leaders.

Direction. The second rank from the front, and from the half file-leaders,
are to begin the Motion, placing themselves as before commanded.

Command. The out-most file upon the right, and the second file from the left
stand, the rest pass through to the right, and place your selves on the
outside of your right hand men.

Command. Files to the left hand countermarch, losing ground.

Command. Front and Rear half-files countermarch to the right.

Direction. Front and Rear half-files turn off distinctly by your selves, on
the ground you stand; face to your Leader.

Command. Right and left half-ranks countermarch to the right.

Direction. Face to the right; and right and left half-ranks turn off
distinctly to the right, face to your Leader; they are reduced.

CHAP. X. Twelve several Wheelings with their reducements.
Command. WHeel your Rear half-files inward into the midst, and double the
Front inward entire.

Direction. Right and left half-ranks open from the midst to double distance;
Rear half-files face about, and wheel your Rear inward into the midst, moving
forward, doubling the front inward entire.

Command. Wheel off your right half-ranks and double your left flank to the
left entire.

Direction. Face outward right half-ranks, wheel about to the right, and double
your left flank to the left, to your Leader.

Command. Right and left half-ranks double the Length of your Battle by
wheeling outward to the front.

Direction. Face outward, and right half-ranks wheel to the left, and left
half-ranks wheel to the right, and after close files into the midst to order.

Command. Wheel off your right half-ranks, and double your left flank by
Division.

Direction. Face outward; right half-ranks wheel about to the right and left
outward moving forward, and doubling the left flank to the right and left
outward.

Command. Wheel your left half-ranks inward into the right flank.

Direction. Face outward, and open from the midst to double distance; the front
and Rear half-files, and after the left half-ranks may wheel inward, and double
the right flank inward entire.

Command. Wheel off your Rear half-files, and double your front to the left
entire; Half-files face about.

Command. Wheel your right half-ranks inward into the midst, and double the
left flank inward entire.

Direction. Face outward, and Front and Rear half-files that were are to open
from the midst to double distance, and right half-ranks wheel inward, and move
forward into the left flank.

Command. Wheel off your Rear half-files, and double your front to the right
entire. Half-files face about.

Command. Wheel off your left half-ranks, and double your right flank by
Division.

Command. Wheel off your Front half-files, and double your Rear to the right
entire. Half-files face about.

Command. Double the Depth of the Battle by wheeling front and rear into the
midst of each Division.

Direction. Front half-files move forward four paces, then the last rank of
each Division face about, and wheel into the midst of Front and Rear of each
Division, face to your Leader.

Command. Wheel off your Front half-files, and double your Rear to the left
entire, Half-files face about.

Command. Wheel your Battle off by Division from the Rear.

Direction. Face all about, and right half-ranks wheel about to the right and
left outward to the front, and closing files into the midst to order, they will
be reduced as at first, and stand as underneath is set forth.

military diagram

CHAP. XI. Several plain Firings upon this Exercise of 24 men, with Figures of
Battle, belonging to the same.
A Commander having thus passed over the Motions, may next prepare for Firings,
and calling up his Sergeants, he may give them order how the Musketeers shall
fire in front and rear, but before he begin his Firings, it will be expedient
that he double his Front to the right and left inward by the Bringers-up, which
being ended he may proceed as follows.

The first firing. Let them fire by Divisions drawn forth ten paces before the
front of Pikes, and fall in the Rear of themselves.

The second firing. Let them fire again, and fall off to the right and left
moving down before the front of Pikes and closing their Divisions.

The third firing. Let the first rank kneel down, the next stoop, and the last
stand upright, and give fire altogether; the Pikes in the mean time are to
advance their Arms, and open to the right and left, charge on to the front,
until they be clear of the Musketeers, and then face inwards, and close their
Divisions; then facing all about, they may give fire to the Rear marching.

The fourth firing. Let the last rank face about to the left, and give fire,
and fall off to the right and left, placing themselves before their Leaders of
their own Divisions of Musketeers,

The fifth firing. Let them face about to the left again, give fire, and fall
off to the right and left, and flank their Pikes; the Pikes at the same instant
facing about, and charge on clear of the Musketeers, the Musketeers after
facing inward, and close their Divisions; the Pikes may charge to the Horse,
and the Musketeers may give fire over their heads after this manner.

The sixth firing. Let the first rank stoop, and the other two stand upright,
and give fire altogether, after recovering of their Arms, they may all face to
the front, commanding the Pikes to double the front inward entire, and
afterward files to double their Depth to the right and left outward, every man
falling behind his Bringer-up, closing files into the midst to order, and
wheeling about into the first front, he may proceed as follows.

Command. Front half-files advance forwards three paces; the middle -rank of
each Division face outward, and move clear of the standing part, face to your
Leader.

military diagram

The first firing. Let the in-most Divisions of Musketeers in the Front fire,
and fall off in the Rear of themselves, after facing about, move down, and
inter-change ground with them in the Rear; they at the same instant moving up
firing, and in like manner inter-changing ground with them in the Rear, and at
the same time the out-most men are to move up, and fire to the front, and to
fall off to the right and left, into the place of them in the Rear, they at the
same time moving up, and firing in like manner, this firing may be continued
twice over.

The second firing. Let them face to both the flanks, and let the Divisions of
Pikes in the midst open outward until they be clear of the standing part, then
Porting; let the Musketeers give fire on the same ground they stand, and the
Pikes after may charge on until the Musketeers make ready again, and then
retreating into their places again, the Musketeers may give fire, as before is
mentioned, the Pikes in like manner charging on, then retreating to the paces,
face all to their Leader.

Command. In-most Divisions of Pikes move to the left one pace, and double to
the right file-wise, and face to Front and Rear, and march three paces;
Middle-file of Front and Reer-Divisions open from the midst to double distance:
face to your Leader.

military diagram

The first firing. Face to Front and Rear, and then give fire, and fall in the
Rear of themselves.

The second firing. Let the Musketeers move forwards, and the in-most Division
ran outward into Front and Rear, and then give fire altogether, and file as
they were, the Pikes may charge whilst they make ready, and fall into their
places again, they may continue upon this firing a second time.

The third firing. Let the Musketeers, and the two out-most men of the Pikes,
face to both flanks; and likewise the middle-divisions of Pikes are to face to
both flanks after this manner; the first two of the Reer-division are to face
to the right, and the two last men of the Front-division are to face to the
left, then let the Musketeers give fire to both flanks, and the Pikes may
after charge to the Front, Rear, and both flanks until the Musketeers make
ready again; this firing may be continued twice; to your Leader.

Command. The out-most single men of Musketeers in the front-division face
about; the two out-most men of Musketeers, both of Front and Reer-divisions
move forwards and close to order, face to your Leader, and close inward to open
order.

military diagram

The first firing. Let them give fire to the front and fall in the rear of
themselves, then face about and move down into the rear, the rest moving up
successively giving fire and falling off in like manner, this may be continued
twice over, then face them to the rear and let the Musketeers rank to the
right and left outward.

The second firing. Let the first rank of each division give fire, and fall off
to the right and left in manner and form of the former firing until they have
fired twice over, then to file as they were, and face to their Leader.

Command. Front and Rear divisions of Pikes move to the right one pace; the
second division of Pikes move forward and double the front to the left; the
second division of Pikes from the rear face about, move down and double the
Pikes in the rear to the left, to your Leader; middle divisions of Musketeers
open outward to twice double distance: face all to the center, and march two or
three paces, to your Leader.

military diagram

The first firing. The three last divisions face to the rear the two outmost
men both of Pikes and Musketeers face to the flanks, then let them all give
fire and fall in the rear of the Pikes; the Pikes may charge while the
Musketeers make ready again.

The second firing. Let the Musketeers move forth and give fire as at first,
and after fall in again.

The third firing. Let them give fire by Extraduction, and fall again in the
rear of the Pikes.

The fourth firing. Let the Pikes charge the horse, and the Musketeers give
fire altogether over their heads, then move forth into their first places and
face to their Leader.

Command. Front and Rear divisions of Musketeers open outward to double
distance; the outmost men of Pikes close inward to open order: the third rank
of Pikes from the front face about, the third rank of Pikes from the front, and
the third rank of Pikes from the rear move forwards to order, face to your
leader; front and rear divisions stand, the rest face outward and move two
paces to your Leader.

military diagram

The first firing. Let the first divisions fire and fall in the rear of
themselves, then wheeling off to the right and left into the place of those
Musketeers in the rear, they at the same time moving forward into their
places, and firing, falling off in like manner, the Musketeers may give fire
on the ground, they stand falling in the rear of themselves; this firing being
twice performed we proceed to another.

The second firing. Let the Front divisions of Musketeers and those upon the
flanks give fire and fall in the midst of Pikes, in the mean time the last
division of Pikes may open outward until they be clear of the standing part,
then let Pikes charge all whilst the Musketeers make ready again; this firing
may be performed twice, after which, let them move forth into their places
again and face to Front and Rear, and give fire, and fall off in the rear of
themselves: the Pikes may charge, which being ended, face them to their Leader.

Command. The last rank of Pikes of the middle division face about, middle
division of Pikes move forward until you range even a breast with the midst of
the Front and rear divisions of Pikes, to your leader; the last man of the
outmost divisions of Musketeers face about, outmost men move forward three
paces and face to your Leader; ranks of the Front and Rear divisions open from
the midst to open order; Rear divisions move forward two paces.

military diagram

The first firing. Let them fire to the Front and fall in between the Pikes,
this may be done twice; after which face to front and rear and fire there in
the same manner: then let Pikes and Musketeers inter-change ground, let them
give fire altogether unto Front and Rear, then facing about, interchange ground
with the Pikes, who are to charge on whilst the Musketeers make ready again,
then retreating let them all face outward, and they will stand in form like a
Saw after they have moved two paces.

The second firing. Let the Musketeers give fire altogether to both flanks,
and the Pikes to charge on, and after retreating, they may order their arms,
and face all to their Leader.

Reducement. The outmost Musketeers upon the Flanks move to the right and left
inward, placing themselves in the midst of their one divisions, the outmost men
of Pikes to stand, the rest to double ranks to the left, and the first rank of
Pikes to double to the right file-wise, and the second rank from the rear to
double to the left file-wise, after let the outmost men of Pikes double their
inmost files into the midst, then moving forward their divisions, evening their
front closing files to the midst to order, they are reduced.

And now we will lodge our Colors, and repose our selves, until by the next
beat of the Drum we shall be summoned to make our appearance.

CHAP. XII. The third Exercise with four Files six deep
BEing the third time brought into the Field completely armed, where being
drawn forth into files, and by the Leaders thereof exercised, as before, they
are commanded tolead up their files, yet not presuming to place themselves, but
leaves that to the discretion of their superior Officers, who knows best the
desert of each particular man. But by the way, give me leave, in this place to
tell the Soldiers and Leaders of our Private Meetings that this decorum is not
rightly observed; the soldier thinking himself wiser then his Loader presumes
to chop and change by Counter-marching of his file* making some part of the
Rear to be more honorable then the Front, which cannot be, for the youngest
soldier there is off more honor then the eldest in the Rear, in regard it is
the more honorable part of the Battalia, therefore it is plain, that they take
more upon them then becomes them, for no file-Leader ought to meddle with his
file in matter of motions without consent of the Superior Officers: neither
ought the Leader either through favor, or out of malice when all the files are
joined into one complete Body to Countermarch the files, (and after proceeding
to other Motions) depraving thereby the Leaders thereof of their due honor;
for else, why (just in the time of Exercise or Marching) should one single file
as the right or left be counter-marched if he bore not malice to some,
thrusting them by this un-souldier-like way out of their places, and through
favor or affection often times putting men of little desert into their places.
To leave this discourse not pleasing to some, let the Commander draw forth one
file of Pikes, and double it by the half-file, and send a Sergeant to fetch the
Colors, and after closing his ranks and files to order, he may begin to make
some alteration in the exercising of them in their Motions, spending his time
altogether upon Inversion and Conversion.

CHAP. XIII. Thirty several Words of Command, of Inversion and Conversion.
Command. RAnks, rank entire to the left into the Front.

Direction. The first rank stand, the rest face to the left, and successively
move into the Front.

Command. Rank, rank four to the left.

Direction. The first four upon the left stand, the rest face to the left and
by foures fall successively behind the first four upon the left.

Command. Files rank outward into the Front.

Direction. The inmost files stand, the rest open outward to double distance,
and after rank outward into the Front.

Command. Rank, file three to the right and left outward by wheeling.

Direction. The three outmost men upon the right and left wheel to the right
and left outward, the rest doing the like by threes; after close into the midst
to order, and face to their Leader.

Command. Files, rank inward into the rear.

Direction. Face to the rear, and move to the right and left inward into the
rear, to your Leader.

Command. Rank, file six to the right and left outward advancing.

Direction. The outmost man upon the right and left stand, the rest move
outward until they be six in a file, and the next outmost men are to stand,
the other doing the like, and after close files into the midst to order.

Command. Files, rank inward into the midst of ranks.

Direction. Front half-files face about, and right and left half ranks open
from the midst to double distance, the rest open outward to order, and move to
the right and left inward to the midst of ranks, to your Leader, and close
files inward to order.

Command. Ranks, file 12 to the right and left inward, every man placing
himself before the Leaders and the Bringers-up of the middle Files.

Direction. Ranks open backward to double distance the middle-file stand, the
rest advance forwards, and file 12 to the right and left inward, placing
themselves before the Leaders, and Bringers-up of the middle-files.

Command. Files, rank six to the right and left inward.

Direction. Files open from the midst to double distance, and move three to the
right, and three to the left inward until you have made four ranks six a
Breast, after close ranks forward to order.

Command. Ranks, rank outward into Front and Rear, every man placing himself
on the outside of his right and left hand man.

Direction. Half-files face about, and rank to the right and left outward into
Front and Rear as is commanded, face to your Leader, and close ranks forward to
order.

Command. Ranks, file 12 to the right and left inward, every man placing
himself behind the Leaders, and Bringers-up of the middle-files.

Direction. Ranks open backward to double distance, the middle-files stand, the
rest move side-wayes to the right and left, and place your selves behind the
Leaders, and Bringers-up of the middle-files.

Command. Files rank six to the right and left inward into Front, Rear, and
Midst.

Direction. The three last ranks of the Front and Rear half-files face about,
and Files open outward to double distance, and move to the right and left
inward into Front, Rear, and Midst, making four ranks six a Breast, after face
to your Leader, and close ranks forwards to order.

Command. Ranks, rank outward into the midst.

Direction. Front half-files face about, and move outward, and rank to the
midst, and face to your Leader.

Command. Ranks wheel to the right and left outward.

Direction. Half-files face about, and wheel to the right and left outward into
both the flanks, face to your Leader, and close files into the midst to order.

Command. Files, rank six to the right and left outward into Front, Rear, and
Midst.

Direction. The three last ranks of the Front and Rear half-files face about,
and rank outward three to the right, and three to the left into Front, Rear,
and Midst, face to your Leader, and close ranks and files to their distance of
order.

Command. Ranks, file to the right entire advancing.

Direction. The out-most file stand, the rest move forward, and file to the
right entire advancing.

Command. File, rank three to the right.

Direction. The first three men from the Front rank three to the right, the
rest successively doing the same, closing ranks forward to order.

Command. Ranks wheel to the left.

Direction. Ranks open backward to open order, and wheel to the left.

Command. File, rank six to the left.

Direction. The first six men rank six to the left, the rest successively doing
the same, until they have made four ranks, six a Breast, then close ranks
forwards to order.

Command. Ranks, rank outward into the midst, every man placing himself on the
outside of his right and left hand man.

Direction. Front half-files face about, and Front and Rear half-files rank
outward into the midst, placing your selves on the outside of your right and
left-handmen, face to your Leader.

Command. Ranks wheel three to the right and left outward.

Direction. The last rank face about, and wheel by threes to the right and left
outward toward both flanks, face to your Leader, and close files to the right
to order, they will stand four a Breast, and six deep.

Command. Files, file outward entire advancing.

Direction, The out-most file stand, the rest advance forward, and place your
selves before the out-most files, after close files into the midst to order.

Command. Files, file to the right.

Direction. The right hand file stand, the rest face about, and fall in the
Rear of your right hand file, to your Leader.

Command. File, file 12 to the right.

Direction. The first 12 stand, the other move forward, filing 12 to the right.

Command. Files, wheel inward into Front and Rear.

Direction. Files open from the midst to twice double distance, after face
inward, and wheel six to the right, and six to the left, until you have made
two ranks 12 a Breast, face to your Leader, and close ranks forwards to order.

Command. Ranks wheel inward to both the flanks.

Direction. Ranks open from the midst to twice double distance, the first rank
face about, the first and the last rank wheel six to the right, and six to the
left inward to both the flanks, face your Leader, and close files to the midst
to order.

Command. Files, file three to the right and left outward into Front and Rear.

Direction. Half-files face about; the three first, and the three last ranks
are to stand, the rest are to move by threes, filing to Front and Rear to the
right and left outward; and after face to the Front, and close their ranks
forwards to order.

Command. Files, file to the midst by Division.

Direction. Half-files of the out-most files face about, and the out-most files
move forwards, and file by Division unto the midst of files; face to your
Leader.

Command. Files, rank inward into the Front.

Direction. Files open from the midst to twice double distance, and move
forward to the right and left inward into the Front.

Command. Rank, file six to the right and left outward.

Direction. The out-most men are to stand, the rest are to move side-ways to
the right and left, making six in a file, and then the next outside men in
like manner are to stand, the rest successively are to file as before.

CHAP. XIV. Next follows several Figures of Battle, with Firings, upon the
same, for the performance whereof.
Command. BRingers-up to double their Front to the right and left inward, and
ranks and files to open to open order, and Musketeers to close outward to
close ord^^; the in-most files of Pikes close outward to the same distance, and
they will stand in four Divisions, after let the middle -rank in each Division
open outward to open order, they will produce the first Figure.

military diagram

The first firing. Let the first rank give fire, and wheel off to the right and
left, and place themselves in the room of them in the Rear, and they at the
same time moving forwards into their places, and give fire as the first; after
wheel off into their places again.

The second firing. Let the middle -ranks advance three foot before the Front,
and give fire, face about, and move down into their places again.

Command. The last rank in each division move to the left one pace, and double
to the right file-wise, and then advance forward until their first men exceed
two foot the Front of each division, then let the first rank open outward to
open order, and the last rank close inward to the same distance.

military diagram

The first firing. Let the middle file give fire to the front and fall in the
rear of themselves.

The second firing, Let the first rank give fire on the ground they stand, and
after fall off to the right and left into the room of them in the rear, they at
the same time moving forward into their ground and give fire in like manner,
and fall off into their places again, and then the Pikes may charge on whilst
the Musketeers make ready again.

Command. Face all about; middle file move forward three foot clear of the
rear; the first rank close inward to order, the last rank open outward something
more then to open order.

military diagram

Upon this figure let the first man in each division kneel down, and then to
give fire altogether over one another head, the Pikes at the same time
charging breast high to the horse, then face all to their first front.

Command. The last men in the rear double to the left rank-wise; files close
into the midst to order; Musketties double your Pikes inward entire advancing,
and move forward three paces; Files double your depth to the right and left
outward of each arms, every man falling behind his Bringer-up; Front half-files
double your rear entire into the midst; Files double to the right and left
outward; files, file to the right entire advancing, which being done wheel them
to the right about into a ring, in form as follows.

military diagram

Upon this figure let the Pikes charge round, and the Musketeers give fire
altogether; which being ended let the Commander go to the place where the
file-Leader stands, and wheel them off again to the left until he has brought
them into one straight file, and then proceed.

Command. Half-file double your front to the right; ranks double to the right
and left inward; files double outward entire advancing; Half-files of each
arms double your ranks forwards to the left; ^ront half-files double the Rear
to the left; files file to the left entire advancing, and wheel about into a
ring, then face all to the center, and close files of each arms to the right
and left inward to close order.

military diagram

Command. Middle men in each division move backward and place yourselves two
foot behind your right and left hand-men; face all about to the right, and
close ranks inward to order.

military diagram

Upon this figure let them fire by circumduction after this manner, let the
odd men of Pikes port, and then the odd Muskettier where the first front was
is to give fire and to move away to the left, and the next odd man of
Musketeers upon the right immediately comes stooping underneath the Pikes into
the first man's place firing in like manner, moving away into the next odd man's
place of the Musketeers upon the left, the rest doing the same until the
first Muskettier come into his place again.

Command. Face all to the center, odd men move forwards and place your selves
two foot before your right and left hand-men, after face all to the right about.

military diagram

Upon this figure you may fire likewise by way of circumduction, the Pikes
porting all round, and having performed one firing in this manner, in the next
place let the odd Musketeers and Pikes move forth again, and kneel down, the
odd Pike-men charging at foot, the Musketeers may give fire altogether, then
let them face to the center, and let the odd men move forwards and place
themselves between their right and left-handmen, then moving forward and close
their ring, let them face all about to the right; Then let the Captain go
where the Leader of the file stands, and wheel him about to the left, the rest
following until they be all brought again into one straight file.

Command. File, file three to the left into the Front, files double to the
right entire advancing; Front half-Files move forwards three paces, files
double your depth to the right of each division; half-files double your front,
entire into the midst. The two first and the two last men of Pikes upon each
flank face inward, the two middle ranks face outward, the two last ranks of
Musketeers face about, march all three paces, to your leader.

military diagram

To pass by the firings which may be performed upon this figure I shall
proceed from hence to draw another.

Command. The outmost divisions of Musketeers close inward to order; front and
rear divisions of Pikes open outward to double distance; Pikes double inward
rank-wise; and they will stand as follows.

military diagram

Upon this figure fire to the front in their several divisions one after
another, and fall in the rear of themselves, then wheel off to the right into
the rear, the rest of the divisions moving forward in their room doing the
like until all have fired over twice.

Command. Musketeers double your Ranks outward in each division, and they will
stand as underneath.

military diagram

Upon this figure as in the former they may fire like-wise to the front falling
down into the rear, and after every rank successively moving up into the front
may fire and fall off in like manner; this firing may be done twice to the
front, and being faced to the rear they may there give fire after the same
manner, and after face to there first front.

Command. Musketeers double to the right and left inward file-wise;
middle-most division of Musketeers face outward, and march until you have
placed your selves in front and rear of the out-most divisions of Pikes: The
last rank of front and rear divisions of Musketeers double to the right
file-wise and move for-ward until your first men exceed two foot the front of
each division, which occasioneth the next figure.

military diagram

It is now high time that we put a period to this Exercise, wherefore let the
Ensign unsurle his Colors, the soldiers shoulder their arms, and the Drum
beat a march, upon which the Ensign being in the midst may display his Coleurs
so long as shall be convenient, and after the Leader may proceed to their
reducement as follows.

Reducement. Middle file of Musketeers face about, and march clear of your
own divisions and double to the left rank-wise Musketeers close inward to
order; Pikes double to the right and left outward file-wise: files close into
the midst to order, ranks close to order; Pikes move forward and even your
front; Pikes and Musketeers inter-change ground, they are reduced.

Now the Leader may command the Musketeers to troop away, and after he may
lodge his Colors; thereby refreshing both himself and his soldiers until the
next summons by beat of the Drum.

CHAP. XV. The fourth Exercise consisting of four Files eight deep.
THe Soldiers upon the fourth summons coming unto the place of Exercise makes
fuller appearance then before, insomuch that their files are drawn forth eight
deep, the Leaders thereof having spent some time in exercising them in each
particular posture, are called upon to join into a body; where their leader
stands be thinking of himself what new matter he should delight them with,
there being sufficient in any one particular motion for their Exercise, pitches
for present to spend his chiefest time in Motions upon facings continuing
longer in them, in respect of the several figures of Battle demonstrated by
them.

Now for the more ready performance thereof I shall only give the several
words of commands for each particular figure which may be drawn from these
facings, referring the reader to the figures themselves where I shall have
occasion to make use of them upon firings, which shall be made known unto him
by Alphabetical letters, pointing from each facing to the figure it produces.
To come briefly to the exercise in hand, silence being craved, and ranks and
files closed to order, the Leader may proceed to these or the like particular
facings producing eighteen figures of battle alphabetically set forth, with
their reducements.

Command. Half-files double your front to the left

Direction. Files open from the right to open order, half-files advance your
arms, and move forward to the left and double the front.

Command. Files open from the midst to open order; Musketeers close outward to
close order; the inmost files of Pikes close outward to close order: Ranks
close to Front and Rear to order, and they will stand in eight divisions.

military diagram

Command. Rear divisions of Pikes face about; Musketeers face outward move all
three paces, to your Leader; points to the first figure marked by the
Alphabeticall letter A.

Command. Musketeers face inward, divisions of Pikes face outward, march all
until the Pikes are clear three foot of the Musketeers to your Leader: this
forms the figure demonstrated unto you by the alphabeticall B.

Command. Rear Division of Musketeers upon the left face about to the right;
Rear division of Musketeers upon the right face to the right: Front division
of Musketeers upon the left face to the left; divisions of Pikes face to the
center, move all until your Musketeers be clear three foot of Front, Rear,
and both Flanks; then let them stand, and face the divisions of Musketeers to
the left, and the divisions of Pikes to face about to the right, and to move
all two paces, then face all to the center, and close their divisions a little,
after face to their Leader. C

Command. Rear divisions of Musketeers stand, the rest face to the Rear, march
all until your rear division range even a breast with those upon the flanks, to
your Leader. D

Command. Rear divisions of Pikes face outward, march all until the rear
divisions of Pikes be clear of the outmost divisions of Musketeers, then let
the rear divisions of Pikes face to the Front, the rest face to the rear march
all three paces, to your Leader. E

Command. Divisions of Musketeers in the midst face about, march all until
the middle-division of Musketeers range even with the Rear, to your Leader. F.

Command. Front-divisions of Pikes face to the outward Angles; Reer-division of
Pikes face about, and after face to inward Angles of the Rear; out-most
division of Musketeers face to your inward Angles; Front-division of
Musketeers face about, as you are now faced, move all some three paces to your
Leader. G.

Command. Musketeers face to Front, Rear, and both flanks; divisions of Pikes
face to the Center, march all until you be even a Breast in Front, Rear, and
both Flanks, to your Leader. H.

Command. Reer-divisions of Musketeers face about the out-most Divisions face
inward Divisions of Pikes face to the Center, march all some three paces to
your Leader. I.

Command. Division of Musketeers upon the left in the midst, and the three
last Divisions of Pikes and Musktteiers to face to the Rear, and move three
paces, and stand; middle-divisions face to the left, the rest face about to the
right, and move three paces, to your Leader. K.

Command. The four last Divisions face to the left; the four first divisions
face to the right, move all until you be clear one of another, then face to
the right, and march until you range even a Breast in Front and Rear, face to
your Leader. L.

Command. The two in-most divisions of Pikes stand, the rest face inward, march
all until the middle-divisions be three foot clear of the Front, to your
Leader. M.

Command. Front-divisions of Pikes face outward, the rest face inward, march
all until the Front-divisions range even with the out-most divisions of Pikes,
face to your Leader. N.

Command. Front-divisions of Musketeers face outward, the rest face inward,
march all until the Front-divisions of Musketeers are clear of the Pikes,
then stand, and the six last divisions to face about, and move three paces, to
your Leader. O.

Command. Reer-divisions of Musketeers face outward, march all some six paces
Rear -division of Musketeers face to the Front, the rest face to the Rear, and
move until the Reer-divisions range even a Breast with the Front, to your
Leader. P.

Command. Front-divisions of Pikes upon the left face about, march all until
that divisions be six foot clear of the Rear, then stand, and Front and
Reer-divisions of Pikes face to the left, and move two paces to your Leader. Q.

Command. Front-division of Pikes face about, march all until the
Front-division of Pikes range even a Breast with the first division of
Musketeers, to your Leader. R.

Command. The two out-most divisions of Musketeers face about; out-most
divisions of Pikes face outward, move all until the out-most Musketeers stand
straight with the Front-division of Musketeers, then face to your Leader. S.

Reducement. Divisions of ^ikes face inward, the three last divisions face
about, march all some six paces; Front and Rear divisions of Pikes face to the
left: Musketeers face about, move all two paces, to your Leader; Divisions
move forwards, and double your Front, close Files inward to order, and Ranks
forward to order; double files to the left entire advancing, reduces them.

Thus much, I conceive, may be sufficient at one time for a Leader to exercise
his Company with the Motions upon their Facings, so that he shall not need to
trouble himself with any more then Firings, where first, as is most properest,
we will begin with some plain Firings to the Front: for the performance whereof
let the half-files double their Front to the left, and ranks and files close
forward and inward to order.

The first firing. Let them fire by Divisions drawn forth 10 or 20 paces, and
fall in the Rear of themselves.

The second firing. Let the Musketeers close their Divisions before the Front
of Pikes, and give fire and fall all off upon the right Flank.

The third firing. The Body moving or marching, let the out-most files face to
the right and give fire, and lead away by the contrary side of their ^ikes, by
the Leaders of the file, the next file may do the same, and consequently all
the rest until all have fired, then let them face to the right, the Pikes in
the interim charging on whilst the Musketeers make ready again.

The fourth firing. Let the Pikes open from the midst that the Musketeers, may
come up between them; two ranks may kneel down, and the other two stand
uppright and fire altogether, the Pikes then charging, and after retreating
they may close again into the midst continuing their aspects to the right flank
the Pikes may port and the Musketeers may slieve up upon the right and left of
the Pikes, the first rank giving fire and presently falling before the front of
Pikes, the next rank doing the same falling still behind their own
Musketeers, and before the front of Pikes as they are then faced; and having
all fired after that manner they may fire again, and flank their Pikes, then
facing to front and rear they may give fire to both places and fall off to the
right and left, and flank their Pikes from Front and Rear, and after face to
their leader.

Command. ^iles open outward to open order; Musketeers close outward to order,
the inmost files of Pikes close outward to order, ranks close to front and rear
to order; Rear divisions of Pikes face about, Musketeers face outward, move
all three paces to your Leader; And now you have the figure of battle pointed
out in the first place unto you by the alphabet.

A military diagram

The first firing. Let them fire to the Front and fall in the Rear of
themselves, then wheel off to the right into the place of those Musketeers in
the rear, they at the same time moving up into the front firing in like manner,
and moving down into their places again.

The second firing. Let the rear divisions face about, and after let them give
fire both to front and rear, and falling in the rear of themselves, the Pikes
may charge while the Musketeers make ready again; they may fire a second time
in the same manner.

The third firing. Face all to both flanks, then let them give fire and fall in
the rear of themselves; the Pikes after charging on three paces, and the
Musketeers retreating three paces, after facing to their Leader, preduceth
this figure following.

B military diagram

The first firing. Let the two first Divisions advance three paces before the
Front, give fire and fall in the Rear of themselves, and after move down into
the places of them in the Rear, they at the same time moving up into their
rooms giving fire, in like manner falling down into their places again, this
may be performed twice over, after face them to Front and Rear.

The second furing. Let them give fire, their Divisions advancing three paces
before the Front and Rear, falling in the Rear of themselves, the Pikes
charging on and the Musketeers retreating into their places again, facing to
their Leader.

Command. Rear division of Musketeers upon the left face about, Rear division
of Musketeers upon the right face to the right, Front division of Musketeers,
upon the left face to the left: Musketeers march all clear of the Pikes then
stand, after face them in their several divisions to the left, and move two
paces, to your Leader.

C military diagram

If you find by the words of command given to make the former figure that your
divisions stand too thin, you may face them all to the center, and move forward
every division two or three paces, then face to their Leader.

The first firing. Let the Front division of Musketeers give fire, and fall in
the Rear of themselves, after wheel off to the right into the room or place of
them in the Rear, they at the same time moving up into the Front, firing and
falling off in like manner, this firing may be performed twice.

The second firing. Let the Musketeers upon the Wings advance forward three
paces, give fire and fall in the Rear of themselves, after face about and move
into their places.

The third firing. Let the front division of Musketeers move to the right two
paces, Rear division move up upon the left of them, then let them all both in
front and rear give fire on the ground they stand, and fall in the rear of
themselves, the Pikes after closing forward their divisions may charge on, and
after retreating into their places again, the division of Musketeers upon the
left in the front in the mean space facing about, and moving down into their
places.

The fourth firing. Let the Musketeers face to front, rear, and both flanks,
the Pikes face to the outward angles of front, and rear, and port, then let
them give fire on the ground they stand and fall in the rear of themselves;
Pikes may charge on to the four angles, then ordering all their arms, move
the rear division of Musketeers forward even with them of the wings, then face
all to their Lerder.

D military diagram

The first firing. Let the first division fire, and fall in the Rear of
themselves, after face about, and move down into the middle rank of
Musketeers, they at the same time marching up into their ground, firing, and
falling off in like manner.

The second firing. Let the Musketeers upon the Wings advance forward even a
breast with those in the Front, and fire altogether, the three Divisions falling
in the Rear of themselves, and after the outmost divisions facing about, and
moving into their places again.

The third firing. Let the Front Division of Musketeers face about, move down,
and double the middlemost by division; after let the Musketeers face outward,
and move three paces, and give fire to both the flanks, falling off to the
right and left, the middle Divisions making good their ground, and firing in
like manner falling off.

Having fired twice over to both the flanks, face them to their Leader, and
draw forth the outmost files of Musketeers of the middle Division before the
front of Pikes, and close their files inward to order.

Command. Rear division, of Pikes face outward, and move two foot clear of the
standing part: To your Leader.

E military diagram

The first firing. Let the first division of Musketeers give fire, and fall in
the Rear of themselves, and after wheel about, and fall in the midst of the
Rear, and range even a breast between the outmost divisions of Pikes, after face
to their leader.

The second firing. Let the three other divisions advance forwards altogether
three foot before the Front, and give fire, and fall in the Rear of themselves,
the Pikes charging on, and the Musketeers still preserving their ground,
making ready again whilst the Pikes retreat into their places.

The third firing. Let them give fire again in like manner, the Pikes charging
on, and retreating as before, then let the last divisions of Pikes move inward
in a straight line with the outmost divisions of Musketeers in the Front, and
they will stand as follows.

military diagram

The first firing. Let them give fire to the Front, and fall in the Rear of
themselves, this may be performed twice; then face to Front and Rear, the last
rank of the middle division is to face about, the first rank are to continue
their aspects unto the Front.

The second firing. Let the Pikes port to Front and Rear, and the Musketeers
give fire to Front and Rear, and fall in the Rear of themselves, and after the
Pikes may charge on, and retreat again; they may continue this firing twice,
the Pikes charging, and after face to their Leader.

Command. Rear divisions of Pikes face about, and move three paces, and face to
their Leader; Front division of Musketeers face about, and move down into the
midst, as before, interchanging ground with the Rear division of Musketeers:
the two last divisions of Pikes move outward, until they be two foot clear of
the next range of Musketeers; middle division of Musketeers move backward
even with the Rear divisions of Musketeers, to your Leader.

F military diagram

Upon this figure face the three last divisions of Pikes and Musketeers to the
right about, and let them give fire to Front and Rear, and fall in the Rear of
themselves, the Pikes may afterward charge on to Front and Rear; and retreat
back again into their first places, they may perform this firing twice, the
Pikes likewise charging up before, and retreating into their places again, face
all to their Leader.

And now it will be expedient having almost tired the Musketeers with these
several firings to end our fourth Exercise, and lodge the Colors; but first
we will reduce them.

Reducement. The outmost division of Musketeers on the right move forward, and
fall in the Rear of them in the front: Rear division of Musketeers move
forward and fall in the Rear of the left division of Musketeers, then let them
move straight forwards and join with them in the front, and close the Pikes
into the midst to order, and their ranks forward to order; let the Pikes double
the front inward entire, and after files to double to the left entire
advancing, closing files inward to order; they are reduced.

CHAP. XVI. The fifth Exercise with four Files eight deep.
THe Soldiers having made timely appearance according to the Drums summoning
unto such place as was appointed by their Commander, and being by the Sergeants
drawn forth into Files, the Leaders thereof being permitted to instruct and
teach their Files the Postures, and handsome handling of their arms, are
forthwith by warning of the Drum to lead up their files, and being joined in a
body, according to the discretion of the superior Officers, do their stand
silently, expecting what will follow; The Captain, or other that shall exercise
them, first commands the Bringers-up to double their Front to the left, and
after appoints one of the Sergeants to fetch the Colors; to which purpose he
draws off the two inmost files of Pikes, and advancing their arms, the Drum
beating a troop they move away, and bring them to the Company, being led
thither by the Ensign, the Sergeant falling in the Rear of the Pike, and they
falling into their places again, they may be commanded Files to double their
depth to the right, every man falling behind his Bringer-up. Now the former
days Exercise being chiefly spent in the Motions by several facings, they may
be bespar'd in this, and in lieu thereof the Leader may out of the former plain
doublings collect one that may continue long in exercise before reduced, and in
this exercise he shall not need to trouble himself with Counter-marches or
Wheelings, but fall immediately alone upon the Motions with this doubling or the
like as follows.

CHAP. XVII. Thirty several Doublings with their reducement.
Command. HAlf-files doule your Front to the left.

Command. Double your files to the right entire advancing.

Command. Half-file double your Front to the right and left outward.

Direction. Half-files advance your arms, and move to the right and left
outward, and double the Front.

Command. Double your files outward entire advancing.

Direction. Even files from the flanks move forward and double the odd, and
after close files into the midst to order.

Command. Half-files double your front to the right entire.

Command. Right half-ranks double the left flank to the right.

Direction. Face to the left, right half-ranks move forward, and double the
left flank to the right, to your Leader.

Command. Double your ranks to the right entire.

Command. Right half-ranks double your left flank entire advancing.

Command. Half-files double your Front to the left entire.

Command. Left half-ranks double your right flank to the left.

Direction. Face to the right, left half ranks advance your arms and move
forward to the left, and double your right flank.

Command. Double your ranks to the left entire.

Command. Left half-ranks double your right flank entire advancing.

Command. Half-files double your Front inward entire.

Direction. Front half-files face outward, and march clear of the standing
part, to your Leader, half-files move forward and double the Front inward
entire.

Command. Right half-ranks double entire the depth of the left flank.

Direction. Left half-ranks stand, right half-ranks face about, and march clear
of the standing part, then face to the right and move forward even with the
left Flank, to your Leader.

Command. Front half-files double the Rear, to the left entire.

Direction. Front half-files face to the right, march clear of the standing
part, face all to the Rear, Front half-files move down and double the Rear to
the left.

Command. Right half-ranks double your left Flank to the left.

Direction. Face all to the left, right half-ranks move forward, and double the
left flank to the left, to your Leader.

Command. Double your Ranks to the left entire into the Rear.

Direction. Face all to the Rear, and every even rank from the Rear move forth,
and double the odd, to your Leader, and close ranks forward to order.

Command. The two out-most files upon each flank double, entire advancing the
four in-most files.

Command. Front half-files double the Rear to the right entire.

Command. Right half-ranks double your left flank inward entire.

Direction. Half-files of the left half-ranks face about, left half-ranks move
clear of the standing part, face all to the left, right half-ranks move
forwards, and double the left flank inward entire.

Command. The four middle -ranks double your Front and Rear inward entire.

Direction. Half-files face about, the two first, and the two last ranks open
outward until you be clear of the standing part, then the four middle -ranks
move forward two to the Front, and two to the Rear, doubling entire to both
places, face to your Leader, and close your Divisions.

Command. The two out-most files upon each flank, double the four middle-most
files by Division.

Direction. Half-files of the two out-most files face about, out-most files
move clear of the standing part, then close inward to order, and face to your
Leader.

Command. The two first, and the two last ranks, double the four middle-most
ranks inward entire.

Direction. The four middle -ranks face outward, and move clear of the standing
part, then face to your Leader, the two first ranks face about, move forward
with the two last, doubling the middle-most inward entire, to your Leader.

Command. The four in-most files double entire advancing the two out-most files.

Direction. The two out-most files stand, the in-most files move forward clear
of the standing part, then face outward, and move straight with the out-most
files, to your Leader, and close files into the midst to order.

Command. Front half-files double the Rear by Division.

Direction. The four middle -files double the two out-most files inward entire.

Direction. Half-files of the two out-most files face about, out-most files
move forward clear of the standing part, face all to the right and left
outward; in-most files move forward, and double the out-most inward entire, to
your Leader, and close files into the midst to order.

Command. Front half-files double your Rear to the left.

Command. Files double your Depth to the right.

Command. The two first and the two last ranks double the four middle -ranks by
Division.

Direction. The two first and the two last ranks face outward, and march clear
of the standing part, then face inward, and move forward, doubling the in-most
files by Division, face to your Leader.

Command. The two out-most files upon each flank double entire, the Depth of
the four in-most Files, reduces.

CHAP. XVIII. Plain Firings, and Figures of Battle.
HAving passed over these Motions of Doublings, in the next place we will
proceed to Firings, command therefore Files to open from the midst to open
order, and after let the Bringers-up double the Front to the left.

The first firing. Let the Musketeers give fire, even in the Front, and fall
in the Rear of themselves.

The second firing. Let the first rank give fire, and fall in between the
Pikes, every rank doing the same until all have fired; then let the first rank
move forth by Division, give fire to the Front, and fall in again, every rank
doing the same.

The third firing. Let them face to both flanks, and give fire, and fall off to
the right and left and flank their Pikes to front and rear, the Pikes may now
port, and move all forward three paces, the Musketeers may give fire again and
fall in the rear of the Pikes, the Pikes charging on, and after retreating to
their first ground may charge at foot, and the Musketeers may give fire by two
ranks altogether over their heads, after recovering their arms let them face
to front and rear, and let the Musketeers move forth clear of the standing
part, then stand and give fire to front and rear and fall off to the right and
left and flank the Pikes who after may charge on to front and rear, then
retreating, face all to their Leader.

Command. Half-files of Pikes face about, Musketeers face outward, march all
three paces Pikes face to the right and left, Musketeers face about to the
right, march all three paces, then let the last rank Face about, the first and
the last rank double file-wise inward advancing; Pikes face to the outward
angles of front and rear, Musketeers face to front, rear, and both flanks, and
move all two paces, to your Leader.

G military diagram

The first firing Let the first division of Musketeers fire to the front, and
fall in the rear of themselves, and after wheel off to the right, moving down
into the place of the rear division who may at the same time move forward into
their ground and fire in like manner, wheoling off as the former did.

The second firing. Let the two out-most divisions move forward into the front,
give fire and fall in the rear of themselves, and after move down into their
places.

The third firing. Face all to the rear, and let the Musketeers give fire
there in the same manner as they did to the front.

The fourth firing. Let the Musketeers face to front, rear, and both flanks
and the Pikes face to the outward angles of front and rear, then let
Musketeers move forth three foot clear of the Pikes and fire to front, rear
and both flanks, and fall in the rear of themselves, after facing above, move
into their places again.

The first firing. Let them face as before and give fire on the same ground
they stand and fall in the Rear of themselves, the Pikes may after charge on,
and retreat into their places again.

Command. Musketeers move forth, and range even a breast with the Pikes into
Front, Rear, and Midst, and they will stand in a square as follows.

H military diagram

The first firing. Upon this figure as they are faced to front, rear and both
flanks, and the Pikes to the outward angles of front and, rear it will be best
to fire on the ground they stand, and to fall in the rear of themselves, the
Pikes may after charge to the four angles.

The second firing Let them double their ranks outward, and give fire, after
face about and move three paces into the midst of Pikes, and having made ready
again, let them face about and move forward and fire as they did before, and
after dismount their Muskets taking them in both hands they may, as occasion
shall require, make use of the Butt end thereof against the horse, and the
Pikes may stand upon their charge.

The third firing. Let the Musketeers double inward file-wise, the Pikes keep
their aspects to the four angles, the Musketeers, as before, may give fire to
front, rear and both flanks, and fall in the rear of those Pikes next their
right hand; And having their aspects unto the the same angles they may fire
there if they please by way of extraduction, and move forth to the left into
their places again, then let the Pikes face to the front, and Musketeers upon
the wings face about to the right, and Musketeers move forward three paces,
face to your leader forms the following figure.

military diagram

The first firing. Let the first division give fire together, and wheel off
into the rear, the rear the next two divisions moving forward into their ground
giving fire altogether, and wheeling off to the right and left into the rear,
the rest still moving forward until the rear division is likewise come up into
the front, and gives fire in like manner, and falling off to the right into his
first place again, this firing may be continued twice.

The second firing. Let them give fire altogether to the front, after this
manner, let the middle divisions move forth to the right and left clear of the
Pikes, the rear division at the same time moving forward upon the outside of
those in the front, and give fire and move into their places again, making
ready whilst the Pikes close forward and charge on five or six paces they may
retreat again into their places.

The third firing. Let them face all to the rear and fire after this manner,
the first division kneel down, the middle divisions move forth clear of the
Pikes, the front division marching down into the rear, may give fire
altogether, the out-most, division and the front division over the heads of
them in the rear, and move in, and back again into their places, then face to
their leader.

Command. The outmost division of Musketeers upon the left in the midst, and
the three last divisions of Pikes and Musketeers face about, march all three
paces, and stand; Middle divisions face to the left and move two paces, face
all to your leader; divisions of Pikes face inward; front division of
Musketeers, and the second from the rear face about, and move little, and
close your divisions, to your leader.

military diagram

The first firing. Let the first division give fire and fall in the rear of
themselves, then wheel down into the rear, the other divisions successively
moving up into the front and firing in like manner; this firing may be
continued twice over.

The second firing. Let the divisions of Musketeers double their ranks to the
right and left outward, and give fire in single ranks as they did before,
until all have fired twice over.

The third firing. Let them double their files to the right and left inward,
and the rear divisions to face about, then let them give fire both to front and
rear falling first in the rear of themselves, after to wheel off into the midst
and facing to front and rear, the middle divisions may move forth into their
ground firing in like manner, the Pikes may after charg whilst the Musketeers
make ready again, and after retreating into their places they may continue
their firing as formerly the Pikes charging on as before.

The fourth firing. Let each division of Musketeers double ranks outward, and
fire to front and rear and to wheel off in one single rank to the right and
left, and rank again in the midst and after double inward file-wise, and face
to their leader.

Command. The four last divisions face to the left, the four first divisions
face to the right, march all until you be clear one of another, then face to
the right and move until you be even a breast in front and rear, to your leader.

L military diagram

The first firing. Let the first divisions give fire and fall in the rear of
themselves, after wheeling off to the right and left into the rear they at the
same time moving forwards into their places firing and falling off in like
manner; they may perform the same firing to the rear being thither faced.

The second firing. Let the rear, divisions move to the right and left outward
clear of the standing part, then face to the front move up even a breast with
the front divisions, and let every division fire to the front and fall in the
rear of themselves, the Pikes may charge and after both they and the outmost
divisions may move down into their places.

Command. The in most divisions of Pikes advance forward three foot before the
front, the rest face inward and move two paces, to your Leader.

M military diagram

Upon this figure let the first ranks of the front division fire and fall
behind the front divisions of Pikes, the next rank may fire and fall behind the
first, then let the rear division move up and give fire and fall in the rear of
themselves, and after wheel about to the right and left inward, moving down
clear of the rear, and facing again unto their Leader, then they may fire a
second time in the same way, the front divisions moving forth and firing first
and falling behind the Pikes, the rear divisions coming up into their places,
firing and falling off again by wheeling about inward, until they be clear
three foot of the rear, then facing to their leader, they will stand as
follows, where the Ensign may display his colors, if the Leader pleases to
march upon it.

military diagram

Having now spent much time in these particular firings, it will be convenient
to give the soldiers some respit to refresh their almost tired spirits that
they may more cheerfully appear upon the next summons of the Drum; and
therefore we will conclude this Exercise, and prepare for the lodging of the
colors.

Reducement. Rear divisions of Pikes move straight forward, until you range
even a breast with the front divisions of Pikes; Rear divisions of Musketeers
move forward and range inward even a breast with the front divisions; files
close into the midst to order; front and rear half-files open from the midst to
double distance; the four in most files of front and rear half-files face
inward and interchange ground, then let each two files of Pikes close outward
to order, and after to double there divisions to the right filewise, and to
close files to the left to order; the two outmost files of Musketeers upon the
right double ranks inward, and lead them away before the left half-ranks of
Musketeers; the next two files doubler ranks outward, and lead them away
behind the rear by first facing them about; Pikes face to the left and move
straight before the Musketeers, and then double the rear inward entire, and
after files to double their depth to the right, every man falling behind his
Bringer-up, they are reduced.

CHAP. XVIII. The sixth Exercise with four Files eight deep.
THe Soldiers being met at the place appointed, and their files being drawn
forth according to the usual custom, the Leaders begin to show each Soldiers
how to handle, and use his Arms, and after leads up their files, and joins them
into a Body, where the Commander having sent for his Colors, stands at the
head of them, commanding their silence, and attention unto the words of
Command. Now having in his former Exercise spent most of the time upon plain
Doublings, he may in this show unto them the great variety of Doublings by
Counter-marches, and although they are very difficult, yet they will afford
much delight and content unto the Soldiers.

CHAP. XIX. Thirty Doublings by Counter-marches with their reducement.
Command. BRingers-up double your Front to the left.

Command. Double your files to the left entire advancing, every man placing
himself before his Leader.

Command. Front half-files double your Rear to the right and left outward,
following your Leaders.

Command. Double your files outward entire advancing, every man placing
himself before his Leader.

Command. Bringers-up double your Front to the right and left inward.

Command. Double your files inward entire advancing, every man placing himself
before his Leader.

Command. Front half-files double your Rear to the right and left inwards,
following your Leaders.

Command. Files double your Depth to the right and left outward following your
Bringers-up.

Command. Double your files to the right by Division, every man placing
himself before his Leader, and his Bringer-up.

Direction. Half-files of the even files from the right, face about, even files
advance forward, and double the odd according to command, to your Leader.

Command. The four first, and the four last ranks, double the eight middle-most
ranks to the right and left inward following your Leaders and your Bringers-up.

Direction. The four first, and the four last ranks advance your Arms, and the
file-leaders, and the bringers-up begin the Motion, the rest are to follow,
after order their Arms, and face to their Leader.

Command. Double your files to the left by Division, every man placing himself
before his Leader, and his Bringer-up.

Direction. The eight middle ranks double your Front and Rear to the right and
left outward, following the half-file-leaders, and the Bringers-up of the Front
half-files.

Direction. The four last ranks of the Front and Rear half-files face about,
the middle-ranks are to begin this Motion, and to advance their Arms, and to
turn off to the right and left, every rank following them until they have
doubled the Front, and Rear, then face all to the Front, order their Arms, and
close their Divisions forward to open order.

Command. Double your files inward by Division, every man placing himself
before his Leader, and his Bringer-up.

Direction Half-files of the out-most files face about, the out-most files
advance your Arms, and move forward, placing your selves before your Leaders
and your Bringers-up, face to your Leader, and order your Arms.

Command. The four first, and the four last ranks double the eight middle-most
ranks to the right and left outward, following your Leaders, and your
Bringers-up.

Direction. The four first and the four last ranks advance your Arms, and move
away to the right and left, and double the eight middle-most ranks, to your
Leader.

Command. Front half-files double your Rear to the right following your Leaders.

Command. Files double your Depth to the right, every man placing himself
behind his Bringer-up.

Command. Right half-ranks double your left flank to the right, following your
right hand men.

Direction. Face outward, and right half-ranks turn off to the left, and double
the left-flank to the right, to your Leader.

Command. Double your ranks to the right entire, every man placing himself on
the outside of his right hand man.

Command. Left half-ranks double your right flank to the left, following your
left hand men.

Command. Double your ranks to the left entire, every man placing himself on
the outside of his left hand man.

Command. Double your ranks by Division, every man placing himself on the
outside of his right and left hand man.

Command. The in-most files double the out-most files placing your selves on
the outside of your right and left hand men.

Derection. The in-most files advance your Arms, face outward, and move
forward, and double the out-most files, placing your selves on the outside of
your right and left hand men, order your Arms, and close files into the midst
to open order.

Command. Double your ranks by Division into the Rear.

Command. The two out-most files double the four in-most by following of your
outside men.

Direction. The in-most files face inward, the rest face outward, and turn off
to the right and left toward the Rear; and double the four in-most files, to
your Leader.

Command. Double your ranks by Division into Front, Rear, and Midst, every man
placing himself on the outside of his right and left hand man.

Direction. The two last ranks of the Front and Rear half-files face about,
even ranks from the Front, Rear, and Midst, advance your Arms, and face
outward, and move forth, and double the Front, Rear, and Midst of ranks,
placing your selves on the outside of your right and left hand men, face to
your Leader, and close ranks forward to open order.

Command. Double your two out-most files to the right and left outward, and
Midst following of the in-most files.

Direction. The two out-most files face outward, the rest face inward, and
Front and Rear half-files distinctly turn off to the right and left, and double
the out-most files to the right and left outward, and midst following of the
in-most files to your Leader; files close into the midst to order.

Command. Double your files to the right entire advancing, every man placing
himself before his Leader.

Command. Bringers-up double your Front to the right.

Command. File-leaders double your Rear to the left.

Command. Double your files to the left entire into the Rear, every man placing
himself before his Bringer-up.

Direction. Face to the Rear, and even files from the left advance your Arms,
and move forward, and double the odd, placing your selves before your
Bringers-up, to your Leader.

Command. Files double your Depth to the left following your Bringers-up.

Command. Half-files double your Front to the right and left inward, every man
placing himself before his Leader, they are reduced as at first.

CHAP. XX. Plain Firings, and Figures of Batail.
HAving spent so much time upon these Doublings by Counter-marches; in the next
place I shall proceed to Firings, and several Figures of Battle, where first
command the half-files to double the Front to the left, and then go on to your
Firings.

The first firing. Let them fire even with the Front, and fall off, and rank
even with the half-files, and fall in the Rear of themselves; the Pikes may
after charge on, and the Musketeers may give fire again, and fall in the Rear
of the Pikes.

The second firing. Let the Pikes port, and the Musketeers give fire by
extraduction.

The third firing. Now the Musketeers being in the rear fire them there upon
the march, wheel them about to the right, and let them fire after this manner;
face about to the right and left, let the last rank fire, fall off and flank
the first rank of Pikes, and so consequently all the rest; after fire them to
the rear and fall off to the right and left some six paces before the front of
Pikes and in the rear of themselves; then face the body about and let the Pikes
charge to the rear, and after port, the Musketteirs may give fire to the rear
by way of extraduction

The fourth firing, Next fire to the rear by dividing the Musketeers and
bringing them even with the rear and ranking outward, and falling again as they
were; face to your leader.

Command. Ranks and files open to your open order, Musketeers close outward to
order, the outmost Files of Pikes stand, the rest close outward to order; front
half-files open forward three paces; ranks close to front and rear to order:
Pikes move forward two paces; Pikes face outward, Musketeers face inward, and
move clear one of another; to your leader.

N military diagram

The first firing. Let them give fire to the front and fall in the rear of
themselves, then wheel off to the right and left into the rear they at the same
time moving up into their ground give fire, and falling off as before, the
Pikes may after charge on while, the Musketties make ready.

The second firing. Let Pikes and Musketieers rank outward and give fire and
fall off in like manner as before; after let them fire and fall in the rear of
the first rank of Pikes of the front divisions, then the Pikes may port, then
let the first divisions give fire and fall in behind the Pikes, the rear
divisions after moving up into their places may give fire and face about, march
down into their places, then face to their Leader; this firing being continued
twice or oftener over, you may fire them to the rear (they being thither faced)
after the very same manner the Pikes there charging, after facing all to their
Leader, let them double files to the right and left inward of each division.

Command. Front divisions of Pikes face inward, Front divisions of Musketeers
face outward, the rest face about, move all six paces, to your leader, Rear
divisions move forward two paces.

O military diagram

The first firing. Let the front divisions give fire and fall in the rear of
themselves, then wheel off to the right and left into the rear; they at the
same time moving forward into their places may give fire and fall off as
before; this may be twice performed.

The second firing. Let the front divisions give fire and fall in the rear of
the front divisions of Pikes, the rear divisions of Musketeers moving into
their ground firing and falling behind the rear divisions of Pikes, then they
may move forth clear of the Pikes and fire and fall in again, they may fire
after the same manner to the rear, but I shall let that pass and go on to the
next.

Command. Rear divisions of Musketeers face outward and march three paces
clear of the rear divisions of Pikes, then face to your Leader and move forward
until they range even a breast with the rear divisions of Pikes.

P military diagram

The first firing. Let the first divisions of Musketeers give fire to the
front and fall in the rear of themselves, after wheel off to the right and left
into the room of them in the rear, they at the same time moving up into their
places firing and falling off in like manner; this firing may be continued
twice over, then the Pikes may charge whilst the Musketeers make ready again.

The second firing. Let the rear, divisions move forward even a breast, then let
the Musketeers give fire altogether and fall in the rear of themselves, this
firing may be continued twice over and the Pikes may charge, after let those
divisions that moved, march down again into their places.

Command. Front division of Pikes upon the left face about and move down four
paces clear of the rear, front and rear divisions of Pikes move to the left two
paces, to your Leader.

Q military diagram

Upon the former figure fire first to the front and fall in the rear of
themselves, then wheel down into the place of them in the rear they at the same
time moving up into their places firing and falling off in like manner. This
firing being twice performed, let the rear divisions of Musketeers move up
even a breast with the front divisions, and fire altogether and fall in the rear
of themselves, after let the Pikes charge on, and the outmost divisions of
Musketeers face about and move down into their places.

Command. Front division of Pikes face about and march until they range even a
breast with the front division of Musketeers; to your Leader; Rear division of
Pikes move forward three paces.

military diagram

Upon this figure let each division fire as they stand and fall in the rear of
themselves, performing it twice over the Pikes, may after charge on, whilst the
Musketeers make ready again, who after may give fire by two ranks together as
they in each division, the Pikes charging as before.

Command. Outmost divisions of Musketeers face about, march until you range
even with the rear, face inward and move until you stand straight after the
front divisions of Musketeers, to your leader; middle divisions of Pikes face
outward and move clear of the standing part, to your leader.

military diagram

The first firing. Let them give fire to the front by divisions relieveing each
other; after face them to both flanks and let them give fire upon the ground
they stand and fall in the rear of themselves, this firing may be continued
twice, and after the Pikes may charge on whilst the Musketeers make ready
again, and after retreating into their places.

The second firing Let the middle division of Pikes in the rear face about, and
the middle division of Pikes face to the front, and Musketeers to face to the
outward angles of front and rear, and let them give fire to the four angles and
fall in the rear of themselves, or fire altogether, and the Pikes may after
charge on to Front, Rear and both flanks, being all faced unto those places,
and retreating again to their places, they may if they please fire a second
time, and charge on in manner as before. Now if the Leader have a desire to
fire to Front and Rear let him face them thither and let them fire on the
ground they stand and fall in the rear of themselves, the Pikes after charging
on and retreating again into their places, face them all to their leader and
open the Front and rear divisions from the midst to sufficient distance, and
let the Ensign display his colors.

Reducement. Rear divisions of Pikes advance forward unto the left into the
Front, outmost divisions of Pikes face inward, march and close your divisions;
Musketeers in the rear move and close ranks forward to order; files double
your depth to the right every man falling behind his Bringer-up, reduces them.

Then let the Musketeers poyse their Muskets if they be near the place of
lodging the colors, and to move unto that place making a guard, their Muskets
being rested, after which the colors being furled up, and the Pikes advanced,
the Leader being on the right hand, and the Lieutenant on the left, and the
Ensign in the midst, the Sergeants following them, and in the Rear of them the
Drums beating a troop, let them march away and lodge the colors, the
Musketeers giving of a volley, they may all betake themselves unto their
several habitations until they shall be summoned again by beat of the Drum unto
their place of randezvous.

CHAP. XXI. The seventh Exercise consisting of sixty four men, eight Files
eight deep.
THe Soldiers appearing unto the place of Exercise, according unto the
appointment of their Leader, or accustomed thereunto by beat of the Drum, are
drawn forth into several Files, as is the usual custom. And the Soldiers
being instructed of the use and handling of their Arms by the Sergeants,
Corporals, or Leaders of the Files, spending such time therein as shall be
convenient until the fetching of the Colors; to which purpose they draw up
their Files, and join into a Body, doubling the Front to the left by the
half-files, and send for the Colors. Which being brought unto the head of the
Company, and the Soldiers returned unto their several places, and that the
Body is closed in rank and file to close order, then silence, and the well
minding of their Directions, and their obedience, is required of them, being
three main properties belonging unto every Soldier. Now for more variety sake
in matter of Motions, the Leader may spend his chiefest time in Doublings by
Wheelings, giving, upon all occasions, the Soldiers their due distance unto
every word of Command, and instructing them with their several reasons and
uses, and so proceed to this that follows.

CHAP. XXII. Two and twenty several Doublings by Wheelings, with their
reducement.
Command. WHeel off your Rear half-files and double your Front by Division.

Direction. Half-files face to the Rear, and wheel about to the right and left,
until you come up even with the Front.

Command. Right and left half-ranks double the Depth of the Battle, by
wheeling into the Front.

Direction. Right half-ranks wheel to the left, left half-ranks wheel to the
right; to your Leader.

Command. Wheel off your Front half-files, and double the Rear by Division.

Direction. Half-files face to the Rear, and Front half-files wheel about to
the right and left, and move down even with the Rear; to your Leader.

Command. Wheel off your right half-ranks, and double the left flank to the
right entire.

Direction. Face outward, and right half-ranks wheel about to the left, and
double the left flank to the right entire, to your Leader.

Command. Wheel off your right half-ranks, and double your left flank by
Division.

Direction. Face outward, and right half-ranks wheel about to the right and
left, and double the left-flank by Division; to your Leader.

Command. Front and Rear half-files double the Length of your Battle, by
wheeling into the left-flank.

Direction. Face to the left, and Front half-files that were, wheel to the
left, Rear half-files wheel to the right, to your Leader.

Command. Wheel off your left half-ranks, and double your right flank by
Division.

Command. Front and Rear half-files double the Length of the Battle by
wheeling into the right-flank.

Command. Wheel your left-half-ranks inward into the midst, and double the
right flank inward entire.

Direction. Front and Rear half-files open from the midst to more then double
distance; after face outward, and left half-ranks wheel inward into the midst,
and move forward, and double the right-flank inward entire; to your Leader.

Command. Wheel off your Front half-files, and double the Rear to the right
entire.

Direction. Half-files face to the Rear, and Front half-files wheel about to
the left, and move down upon the right into the Rear, and face to your Leader.

Command. Wheel your right half-ranks inward into the midst, and double your
left flank inward entire.

Command. Wheel off the Front half-files, and double the Rear to the left
entire.

Command. Wheel your Reer-half-files inward into the midst, and double your
Front inward entire.

Direction. Right and left half-ranks open from the midst to more then double
distance, and half-files face about, and wheel inward into the midst, and move
forward, and double your Front inward entire.

Command. Right and left half-ranks double the Depth of your Battle by
wheeling into the Rear.

Direction. Face to the Rear, and right half-ranks wheel to the left, and left
half-ranks wheel to the right until you meet; to your Leader.

Command. Wheel your Front half-files inward into the midst, and double the
Rear inward entire.

Command. Wheel off your left half-ranks, and double your right flank to the
right entire. Face outward.

Command. Wheel off your Rear half-files, and double the Front to the left
entire. Half-files face about.

Command. Wheel off your left half-ranks, and double your right flank to the
left entire.

Command. Wheel off your Rear half-files, and double your Front to the right
entire. Half-files face about.

Command. Wheel off your right half-ranks, and double your left -flank to the
left entire. Face outward.

Command. Wheel off your left half-ranks, and double entire the Depth of the
right flank.

Direction. Left half-ranks face to the left, and wheel about to the left,
until you come down in the Rear of the right flank; to your Leader.

Command. Wheel off your Rear half-files, and double the Length of your Front
to the right.

Direction. Half-files face about, and wheel round to the left, and move
forward, and double the Length of the Front to the right, they are reduced.

CHAP. XXIII. Several Firings, and Figures of Battle, with sixty four men.
HAving passed over these several Wheelings by way of Doublings; it will be
sufficient time to proceed unto Firings, wherefore, first, command them to open
their Files from the midst to open order, and the Bringers-up thereof to double
the Front to the right and left inward.

The first firing. Let them fire to the Front, by ranks, ranking outward, and
after to rank as they were.

The second firing. Let them give fire to the front, by ranks ranking inward,
and ranking again as they were, and closing again to the Body of Pikes.

The third firing. Let the half-files face about, and let them give fire to
Front and Rear by ranks ranking outward, and ranking in again as they were.

The fourth firing. Let them advance forwards by two Ranks some ten paces
before the Front and Rear, and give fire, and fall in the Rear of themselves;
then face about, and fall before the Front and Rear of Pikes, and then fire
again falling off to the right and left, and flank the Pikes, then the Pikes
may charge on, and the Musketeers may fall in the Rear of the Pikes, and then
Pikes may charge at Foot, and the Musketeers may give fire altogether over
their heads.

The fifth firing. Let the Pikes port, and the Musketeers move forth to the
right and left, and fire by extraduction, then the Pikes may charge again, and
the Musketeers may move forth as before, and the first Rank of each Division
may give fire even with the Front and Rear, and stand, the rest may after move
forth clear of them, and give fire, falling behind their own Divisions of
Musketeers, then face all to their Leader, and close their Divisions forward
to order, and then proceed to Figures of Battle.

Command. Half-files face about, Musketeers move forward until you be clear
of the Pikes; the two in-most files of Musketeers stand, the two out-most
files of Musketeers move forwards until you be clear of the in-most files;
the two out-most files of Pikes face outward, and move three foot clear of the
out-most Divisions of Musketeers, and after to face to Front and Rear, and to
move forward until they range even with the Reer-divisions of Musketeers;
then let them face all to the front, and stand straight in their Divsions both
rank-wise and file-wise, and they will stand as in the next Figure, when they
have closed

military diagram

Upon this figure let the first divisions of Musketeers give fire and fall in
the rear of themselves, after wheel off to the right and left into the room of
them in the rear, they at the same time moving up into their places firing and
falling off in like manner. Then let the inmost divisions give fire in like
manner as the former did, and wheel off to the right and left and be relieved
by their own rear divisions of Musketeers, then let the Pikes charge on, and
after recreating back again into their places.

Command. The two middle ranks of Pikes, face outward and move clear of the
standing part, then let the first rank of Pikes face about, and the first and
last rank of Pikes to move forward to order, face all to your Leader.

military diagram

The first firing. Let the front divisions fire and fall in the Rear of
themselves; then wheel off to the right and left into the room of them in the
near, they at the same time moving forward into their places, firing and
falling off in like manner; Next let the inmost divisions of Musketeers do
the same, who may be relieved by the inmost divisions of Musketeers in the
rear.

The second firing. Let them all face to the rear and give fire as they did to
the front.

The third firing. Let them face to front and rear and give fire and fall in
the rear of themselves first, after falling off and inter-changing divisions
relieving each other, then let the Pikes charge on to front and rear and after
retreating back into their places.

Command. The inmost divisions of Musketeers to move forward until they be
two foot clear of the standing part, then let them face all inward, and move
until the utmost divisions of Musketeers range even a breast with the middle
divisions of Pikes, to your Leader.

military diagram

Upon the former figure fire them to both flanks, where first face them
outward; let the first division give fire and fall in the rear of themselves,
and after wheel off to the right and left into the places of the Rear
divisions, and they move up at the same instant of time into their rooms,
giving fire and falling in the rear of themselves, afterward into their places.
Next let them fire and fall in the rear of themselves, and after move inward
and fall in the rear of the next division of Pikes, and then the first division
of Musketeers move forth and give fire in the ground they formerly stood on,
and fall in the rear of themselves, and stand, and the next division of
Musketeers is likewise to move forth where formerly they stood and to fire and
fall in the rear of themselves, the Pikes may after charge on, and after
retreat back again into their places, and face to their Leader.

Command. Rear divisions of Musketeers move to the left two paces and double
to the right file-wise; the two middle divisions of Pikes face outward and move
two paces, to your leader; rear divisions of Musketeers move forward until
the first divisions of Musketeers be placed three foot before the midst of the
middle divisions of Pikes, and the second division be three foot behind the
same, standing straight with the front divisions of Musketeers in the midst.

military diagram

Upon this figure they being faced to front and rear both Pikes and
Musketeers, let the first divisions give fire and fall in the rear of
themselves and stand, let the rest move forward until they be clear of the
front divisions of Musketeers and fire and fall in the rear of themselves, and
after face about and move down into their places again; then let the Pikes open
a little outward and charge all to front and rear, and when they shall retreat
back again into their places, the Musketeers may fire again as they did
before, and continue it as long as they please. Or they may fire upon this
figure either to front or rear according to discretion as long as they please.

Now in respect much time has been spent in the motions by wheelings in plain
firings and figures of battle, we will draw forth one figure more from the
former that the colors may be displayed, and that we may conclude our seventh
Exercise to refresh the soldiers for a space until they shall again have
warning from their Commander for another appearance.

Command. The last division of Musketeers in the midst to face about, middle
divisions of Musketeers advance forward until you be three foot clear of the
front and rear, to your leader; each division of Pikes face outward and move to
convenient distance for the colors to display, to your leader.

military diagram

Reducement. Front and Rear division of Musketeers face about, front division
move down and double the rear division to the left rank-wise, to your leader;
the two first divisions of Musketeers in the front face about, then let them,
and the two last divisions of Musketeers in the rear move forward until they
be even with the next divisions of Musketeers, to your leader. The two middle
divisions of Pikes close into the midst to order, and to open their ranks from
the midst to something more then open order; the two outmost divisions of Pikes
face inward and move forward into the midst of the two middle ranks in the
body, to your leader. Front divisions of Pikes face about, and front and rear
divisions to move forward and to close their divisions, to your leader. Files
close to the right and left inward to order: Musketeers in the front and rear
double your Pikes by division. Files double your depth to the right and left
outward, every man falling behind his bringer-up, they will be reduced as at
first.

Now the Sergeants may draw off the Musketeers filing them to the right and
left outward thereby making a guard for there Captain and other Officers to
march through, trooping away and lodging the colors which done, one of the
Sergeants command the Musketeers to face about to the right, and to present
all, and no man to give fire until they hear the beat of the Drum, no man
pulling his tricker but once which will be a means that they all fire handsomely
together, which being ended every man may depart home until he shallbe called
forth again.

CHAP. XXIV. The eighth Exercise consisting of sixty four men, eight Files
eight deep.
THe Soldiers being again brought into the Field, or place of Exercise, the
Sergeants, according to their wonted manner, drawing forth the Files, bids each
File-leader to take his File into some convenient place a part, to exercise
them in their several Postures, and Charges, and after what manner they may
fire, whether it be to Front, Rear, or both Flanks. Which being performed, they
are called up to join into a B^dy, and commanded to close their Ranks and Files
to their distance of order, and the Front doubled to the right and left inward
by the half-files, distance, before hand, being prepared for their moving up.
The Leader appoints one of the Sergeants to fetch the Colors, which being
brought up to the head of the Company, the Leader for variety sake may spend
the chiefest of his time in Firings, as follows.

The first firing. Let the Musketeers move forward until their Bringers-up
range even with the Front of Pikes; after let the two out-most Files of
Musketeers move forward until their Bringers-up range even a Breast with the
Front of the two in-most Files; Let the Front or fore-most Divisions of
Musketeers give fire, and fall in the Rear of themselves, then let them face
about, and move down into their place where they were last, then let the two
in-most Files of Musketeers of each Division advance forwards until their
Bringers-up range even with the Front of the two out-most Files, and then let
them give fire, and fall in the Rear of themselves; and after face about, and
march down into their places again where they were last drawn off.

The second firing. Let them give fire on the ground they stand in each
Division falling off to the right and left in the Rear of themselves.

The third firing. Let the first rank in each Division fire as they stand, and
after move inward in a straight line before the Front of Pikes, which gives way
for the next rank to fire in each Division; and after to move inward into the
Rear of the first Rank, and so consequently all the rest to fire in like manner
until they have all fired, and stand straight before the Pikes.

The fourth firing. Let their ranks rank outward into the Front, and then give
fire all entire in one rank, and ranking again as they were.

The fifth firing. Let the half-files of Musketeers double the Front by
Divsion, and give fire by two ranks together, and after to move back again into
their places.

The sixth firing. Let the two first ranks kneel down, the other two stand
upright, and give fire four ranks together.

The seventh firing. Let the half-files, or Pikes to face about, and move three
paces, to your leader: and then Files to double their Depth to the right and
left outward of each Arms, then let them give fire eight ranks together after
this manner, two kneel down, two kneeling, two stand upright, and the two last
to be drawn off to the right and left, and so to fire altogether, which being
ended, command the Pikes by their Files to rank outward into the Front, and
then open outward to the right and left, and charge on in the Front, and File
again as they were.

The eighth firing. Let the Pikes open their Files from the midst to double
distance, then command the Musketeers to face about, and move down into the
midst of the Pikes, then let the half-files face abour, and let the Musketeers
be at open order in their Files, and the Pikes at order; and then let them give
fire first to Front and Rear by intraduction after this manner: let the first
rank in Front and Rear present, and give fire on the ground they stand, and
presently make ready again; the next ranks may move forward, and place
themselves three foot before them, and fire in like manner, and after stand,
the other ranks still moving forward into the next rank until the first have
fired, and then immediately to clap before them, and fire in like manner,
until all have fired twice over.

The ninth firing. Let them close their Files into the midst to order, and fire
on the same ground they stand, and fall in the Rear of themselves.

The tenth firing. Let them fire and fall off to the right and left into the
midst of Pikes again, then let the Pikes charge on to Front and Rear, and when
they are clear of the Musketeers, let them close to the right and left inward
to order.

The eleventh firing. Let the Pikes port, and let the Musketeers be drawn
forth one whole rank to the right, and another to the left, both to Front and
Rear give fire, and fall into their places again, then let the other four be
drawn forth in like manner, and fire and fall into their places again; the
Pikes if occasion shall require, may again charge on.

The twelfth firing. Let the Musketeers range to the right and left outward,
and fire even a Breast with the Rear of each Division, and move in again into
their places.

The thirteenth firing. Let the Musketeers rank outward, and move even a Breast
with the Front and Rear, and there present and give fire, and whilst the Pikes
are charging on, they may rank again as they were, and fall in the Rear of the
Pikes, and make ready again.

The fourteenth firing. The Pikes being retreated into their first ground, you
may open them to the right and left, and then the Musketeers may move forward,
and fire two ranks kneeling down, and the other two standing upright, then the
Pikes may continue their charge till the Musketeers make ready again, and
after they may retreat, and fall in the Rear of the Musketeers, and close
their Divisions inward to order. These firings being all upon a stand, and the
Musketeers being now in Front and Rear, they may be moved away, and may give
fire upon the march to Front and Rear after this manner.

The fifteenth firing. Let the first rank in the Front, nimbly advance forward
ten paces, then present and give fire, in which interim, the rest will be moved
up unto them, the others having fallen off to the right and left in the Rear of
their own divisions of Musketeers, the next rank may give fire in like manner,
until all have fired thus once over; the Rear are to fire at the same time
with the Front facing about the last rank, who are to fall off and to place
themselves before their own divisions of Musketeers.

The sixteenth firing. Let them fire as before, and the first rank of the
Front-division to fall off, and flank the Pikes to the right, the rest of that
Division falling off, and placing themselves in the Rear of them; and likewise
the first rank of the Reer-division, when they have fired, let them fall off,
and range even a Breast with the half-files of Pikes, and still preserving
themselves in their places to be right hand men to those which were at first,
and the rest to give fire and fall in the Rear of them.

The seventeenth firing. Now the Musketeers being all upon the right flank,
let the out-most file face to the right, and fire, and lead away by Bringers-up
between the Musketeers, and the out-most file of Pikes, let this be continued
in the same manner until all have fired.

The eighteenth firing. The Body still marching, let them fire again, after the
same manner, as before.

The nineteenth firing. Let them fire by ranks wheeling to the right flank, and
after to rank to the right, so many a Breast as they were at first, marching a
long with the Body.

The twentieth firing. Let them fire and fall off on the contrary flank.

The one and twentieth firing. Let them give fire upon the gathering firing
after this manner, let the out-most file upon the left face to the left, give
fire, and then face to the Front, and until the rest be clear, and then the
next file to face to the left, and fire, and after face to the Front, and then
the first file may gather up even a Breast upon the left of the second file,
then the third file may face to the left, and give fire, after face to the
Front, and stand, until the other two march up on the left, and join even a
Breast with him, and consequently so all the rest until every file have fired,
and that they be all moved up even a Breast with the Pikes.

The two and twentieeh firing. Let them wheel ranks to the left, and fire, and
after rank four to the left as they were at first, and march even a Breast with
the Pikes.

The three and twentieth firing. Let them fire to the left flank, ranks
inverting, and after face to the Front, and to rank again as they were.

The four and twentieth firing. Let them fire by files, filing to the right,
and facing after to the left, and fire to the left flank: and then facing to
their first Front, and to lead up their Files to the left again as they were.

The five and twentieth firing. Let them fire by the out-most files to the left
flank, and lead away by the Leader, up between, or in the middle of Pikes.

The six and twentieth firing. Let them face outward, and fire upon a stand
after this manner by ranks dividing, moving forth to the right and left, and
fire and fall in again

into their places, the Pikes may after charge on, and retreat again into their
places.

The 27th. firing. Let them fire by ranks, ranking outward into both the
Flanks, and moving forward, and firing even a breast, and ranking again as they
were, but not returning again into the midst of Pikes from whence they were
drawn forth, but fire to both flanks, and fall in the Rear of themselves.

The 28th. firing. Let them fire again, and fall in the Rear or midst of Pikes.

The 29th. firing. Let the Pikes port, and let the Musketeers fire by
extraduction to both flanks, and return again into their places.

The 30th. firing. Let the Pikes open to the right, and the Musketeers move up
into the midst, and the first rank give fire, and slieve up to the right and
left, and place themselves before the Pikes, the next rank moving forward into
his ground, and slieving away in the Rear of them until all have fired.

The 31th. firing. Let them close their Divisions, and fire, and fall in the
Rear of themselves.

The 32th. firing. Let them fire by files ranking outward, and filing again as
they were.

The 33th. firing. Let them fire by ranks wheeling outward into both flanks
toward Front and Rear, the half-files are to face about, the left half-ranks
are to wheel to the right, the right half-ranks to the left, the Front
half-files doing the like, may give fire, facing after to the right and left
inward, ranking as they were into the midst of ranks, and facing again to the
flanks.

The 34th. firing. Let them fire two ranks together, and slieving presently
away, and flank the Pikes.

The 35th. firing. Let them face to Front and Rear, and after move outward, and
facing to the outward Angles of Front and Rear, and let them fire and fall in
the Rear of themselves.

The 36th. firing. Let them close files into the midst to order, and fire
again, and let them fall off to the right and left, and flank the Pikes, then
face all to their first Front, they are reduced.

Having spent all this time in the plain Firings, we will in the next place
proceed to Firings upon such Figures of Battle as follows.

CHAP. XXV. Several Figures of Battle.
Command. HAlf-files double your Front to the left, Musketeers double your
Pikes entire advancing; Files open from the midst to double distance: the two
out-most Files close outward to open order, and the two in-most Files close
outward to the same distance; half-files of each Division double the Front
inward entire. Ranks and Files close to order: The four out-most Files upon
each Flank stand; the four in-most Files upon the left face to the Rear, then
let the four in-most Files upon the left, and the four in-most Files upon the
right move forward three foot before the Front and Rear, and then face to the
left, and move two paces, then face all to the Front, and move straight in
their Divisions, both rank-wise and file-wise, they will stand as follows.

military diagram

The first firing. Let the front division of Musketeers move forward until
they be clear of the standing part, then give fire and fall in the rear of
themselves, and then closing their files into the midst to order before the
front of Pikes, the rear division of Musketeers may move forward unto the
front of the first division of Pikes, and there rank outward and give fire
altogether, and file again as they were, and after face about and move down
again into their places; the two out-most divisions of Musketeers may next
move forward some six paces; there stand and rank inward and fire, face about,
and file again as they were, and move forward to the front of their own
divisions of Pikes and face to their leader.

The second firing. Let the front division of Musketeers fire and fall off to
the right and left and flank their Pikes, and at the same time let the rear
division of Musketeers move forward as they did before and fire even a breast
with the first division of Pikes, and fall in the rear of themselves, then face
about and move down into their places, and face to their leader; then let the
two outmost divisions upon the flanks give fire on the ground they stand and
fall off to the right and left and flank the Pikes; They may fire to the rear
in the same manner being thither faced.

The third firing. Let them face to front, rear, and both flanks, and fire the
first rank of each division and fall off to the right and left in the rear of
the Pikes, and the last rank at the same time move forth and give fire and fall
into their places again; but before they thus fire the front and rear divisions
are to be wheeled to the left, then let them fire by Move forth those
Musketeers into their former places, before they fire by Extraduction.
extraduction, and the Pikes may after charg on, and then retreat back again
into their places.

Command. Each division as they are faced to move forward three paces;
half-files of each division open to the right and left until they be clear of
the standing part, they will stand as follows.

military diagram

Upon the former figure being faced to front, rear, and both flanks fire them
according unto all those places, the foremost divisions fire first, and let them
wheel off to the right and left, and fall in the roomor place of them in the
next divisions, firing twice in this kind. Then let the foremost divisions fire
and fall in the Rear of the Pikes, then let the Pikes port, and the Musketeers
in each division may move forth again, and give fire by Extraduction, then let
the Pikes charge on, and after charge at foot, and let the Musketeers give
fire over their heads, which being ended, let the foremost rank of Musketeers
in Front, rear, and flanks, move forward, and interchange ground with the
Pikes, and face all to the front, and after the third divisions from the front,
and the third divisions from the rear face inward, and move three paces, then
face to their leader, and close files outward, and ranks forward to order in
each division, and stand straight and even in their divisions, both rank-wise
and file-wise, and then proceed to the next figure.

Command. The out-most divisions upon the flanks face about, and move down two
paces, to your leader: half files of the two out-most divisions double to the
right and left inward rank-wise, and after move that part that doubled two
paces to the right and left inward: face all to your leader.

military diagram

Upon this figure let the first and the last rank of Musketeers double to the
right and left inward file-wise, then let the first division give fire to the
front and fall in the rear of themselves, then wheel off to the right about
down into the rear, and let every division that are in the midst move up
successively into the front until all have fired and fallen off in like manner
as the first, and every division be come again into his place, and the front
and rear divisions have doubled ranks to the right and left outward; Then
command the first and the last rank of Musketeers from the front and rear to
double to the right and left outward file-wise, and let them give fire and fall
in the rear of themselves, and after fall off into the rear in like manner and
form of the firing of the former divisions; either of these firings may be
continued twice over, after command the first division of Musketeers from
front and rear to double to the right and left inward rank-wise, and then
proceed.

Command. The third division from the front, and the third division from the
rear to face outward, and to move three paces until they stand straight in
front and rear between the middle divisions, and after face to their leader.
Then let the front divisions face about, and front and rear divisions move
forward until they range even a breast with the second divisions that stands
before them and then face to their leader: it occasioneth the next figure.

military diagram

Upon this figure you may fire them to front, rear, and both flanks, therefore
face the two outmost crosses to the flanks, which contains on each side four
divisions of Pikes and Musketeers, and let the rest face to front, and rear,
and let all the Musketeers in the rear of each division of Pikes move forth to
the angles of the Pikes give fire, and fall back again into their places, and
whilst the Pikes are charging on, the Musketeers may make ready again and fire
in like manner as before, and ^all back again into their places, the Pikes
charging on to front, rear and both flanks, as before, and retreating again
into their places. Then face them all to the front, and let the second division
from the rear face about, and then the second division from the front, and the
second division from the rear move forward until they be three foot clear of
the front, and rear, then face them to their Leader, and they will stand in a
convenient figure for marching wherein the Colors may display so long as a
Commander shall think fit.

military diagram

Reducement. The two middle divisions face to the right and left outward, and
march clear of the standing part, to your Leader; then let them double to the
right and left outward file-wise. After let them face to front, rear, and both
flanks, and close their files into the midst to order, and ranks forward to
order. Then command front, and rear divisions that formerly wheeled to the
left, to wheel back again to the right, then face all to the front, and let the
front division face to the right and move three paces, and then face to their
Leader; then let the rear division move up upon the left of them in the front,
and let the Pikes in each division double their depth to the right and left
outward; and let them close files into the midst to order, and ranks forward to
order, and to move up even with the front they standing in their distance of
order both in rank and file, let the half-files double their front inward
entire and after files to double their depth entire to the right, they are
reduced.

Then the Leader may appoint one of the Sergeants to draw off the Musketeers,
and file them away to the right and left outward either by ranks filing, or
files, filing, and every Muskettier to poyse his Musket, then the Pikes may
advance their arms, and the Drum beat a troop, and the Commander may lead them
away and lodge his Colors.

CHAP. XXVI. The ninth Exercise consisting of 64 men, eight files, eight deep.
IN this Exercise a Commander may in matter of motions present unto the
Soldiers f^rther variety to delight them withal, in bringing up each man
into the Front to be a File-leader, according unto succession and dignity by
proper words of Command by doublings, with their Reducement. Therefore, to
avoid any further circumstance, we will pass over the Postures, and fetching
of the Colors, and suppose the Soldiers standing in a condition to be
exercised, begin first to make them all File-leaders by succession as follows.

Command. Ranks to the left double.

Command. Files to the left double.

Command. Half-files double your front to the right.

Command. Double your files to the right entire advancing every man placing
himself before his leader.

Command. Ranks to the right double.

Command. Files to the right double.

Command. Front half-files double the rear to the right.

Command. Double your files to the left entire advancing.

Command. Double your ranks to the right into the rear; face all about.

Command. Double your files to the left advancing.

Direction. Every even file from the left move forward to the left and by three
steps double the odd advancing.

Command. Half-files double your front to the left.

Command. Double your files to the left entire advancing, every man placing
himself before his leader.

Command. Double your ranks to the left into the rear; face all about.

Command. Double your files to the right advancing.

Reducement. Files rank to the right into the front.

Rank, file eight to the right, reduces them.

Next follows to make every man file-leader according unto dignity, with
their Reducement.

Command. Bringers-up double your front to the left.

Command. Double your files to the right entire advancing.

Command. Half-files double your front to the left.

Command. Double your files to the left entire advancing, every man placing
himself before his leader.

Command. Bringers-up double your front to the right.

Command. Files double your depth to the right.

Command. Ranks to the right double.

Command. Front half-files double your rear to the right following your leaders.

Command. Double your files to the right by division every man placing himself
before his leader and his bringer-up.

Command. Front half-files double your rear to the left following your leaders.

Command. Double your files to the left by division, every man placing himself
before his leader and his bringer-up.

Command. The two first and the two last ranks double, the four middle-most
ranks to the right following your leaders and your bringers-up.

Direction. The four middle ranks stand, the file-leaders are to turn off to
the right, and the next rank is to follow them until the leaders rank even
with the bringers-up of the front half-files; and at the same instant of time
the bringers-up are to move forward to the right, the rest following until the
bringers-up range even a breast with the half-file-leaders; to your leader.

Command. Files double your depth to the left.

Reducement. Half-files double your front to the right.

Bringers-up double your front to the right.

Then divide every four files distinctly apart making five divisions.

Files double to the right and left inward in each division, and close files
into the midst to order.

Files double to the left entire advancing; reduces.

CHAP. XXVIII. Eight, several Counter-marches with their Reducement.
Command. FIles to the right hand countermarch maintaining ground.

Command. Ranks to the left hand countermarch losing ground.

Command. Countermarch your front and rear half-files into the midst of ranks.

Direction. Half-files face about and turn off to the left, and front
half-files turn off to the right until they meet the front and rear into the
midst, to your leader.

Command. Right and left half-ranks countermarch into the midst of files.

Direction. Face outward right half-ranks turn off to the right, left
half-ranks turn off to the left, to your leader.

Command. Files to the left hand countermarch losing ground by following your
leaders.

Command. Ranks to the right hand countermarch mayntaining ground.

Command. Countermarch your front and rear half-files to the right and left
following the half-file-leaders, and the bringers-up of the front half-files.

Direction. Half-files face about, the bringers-up of the front half-files, and
the half-file-leaders are to begin the motion, the rest are to follow until
they have gained so much ground beyond the front and rear as they formerly
possessed in the midst, to your leader and close your divisions.

Command. Countermarch your half ranks to the right and left by following of
the inmost files.

Direction. Face outward, the inmost files are to begin the motion moving
forward, the rest following, until they have gained so much ground beyond the
flanks as they formerly possessed in the inmost files, to your leader, and
close files into the midst to order, they are reduced.

CHAP. XXIX. Ten several Wheelings with their Reducement.
Command. WHeel the battle off by division from the front.

Command. Wheel the body off by division from the right flank, face to the
right.

Command. Wheel the battle off by division from the rear, face about.

Command. Wheel the body off by division from the left flank.

Command. Wheel your battle inward to the rear from the front.

Direction. Open outward to convenient distance, to your leader.

Command. Wheel your battle inward to the left flank from the right.

Direction. Face to the right and open to convenient distance, to your leader.

Command. Wheel your battle inward to the front from the rear.

Direction. Face about and open to convenient distance, and wheel inward into
the front. Close ranks forward to close order, and files into the midst to
close order.


Command. Wheel your battle inward to the right flank from the left.

Command. Wheel the outward angles of front and rear to the right and left
about into the center, face to the outward angles.

Command. Wheel the inward angles to the right and left about from the center.

CHAP. XXX. Plain firings, and figures of Battle.
IN the next place I will proceed to some plain firings, wherefore first double
your ranks forward to the left by half-files and fire even with the front of
pikes, and fall in the rear of themselves, then fire and fall between the Pikes,
then move forth after this manner, one rank drawn forth to the right, and
another to the left, fire and fall in again as before. Then command the first
rank to stand, and the rest to move forth both Pikes and Musketeers to the
right and left until each rank be clear of other then let the Pikes charge,
and Musketeers give fire altogether, and after fall behind each rank of Pikes,
then let the Pikes charge at foot, and let the Musketeers give fire over their
heads. After let the Pikes port, and let the Musketeers come forth again and
give fire by extraduction; and after command the ranks to face to the right and
left inward, and to close their divisions: then let the Musketeers move forth
again into their first places and flank their Pikes. And having passed over
some half a dozen firings after this manner, then command half-files to double
their depth to the right entire, and proceed to figures of battle and firings
which comes in the next place to view for a leader to spend his time further in
the exercising of his soldiers therein.

Command. Half-files face to the Rear and march six paces, to your Leader;
half-files of Musketeers of each division face to the Rear. Musketeers march
all until you be clear of the Pikes to your Leader. The two middle-most ranks
of Pikes of each division face outward, and move clear of the Musketeers, to
your Leader; the first and third rank of Pikes in the body face to the Rear,
and close ranks into the midst to order, the following Figure will appear.

military diagram

The first firing. Let the front divisions give fire, and fall in the rear of
themselves, the rest of the divisions moving up into their ground and fire
wheeling off to the right and left, having all fired over once they will be
reduced.

The second firing. Let the four inmost divisions of Musketeers face outward
and move clear of the Pikes, then face to their Leader, then let the eight last
divisions of Pikes and Musketeers face to the Rear, then let them fire to
front and rear falling in the rear of themselves, their being intervalls for
the Pikes to move forward upon their charge, and being retreated back into
their places will produce the following figure.

military diagram

After the figure is reduced unto his first aspect, command the Musketeers or
divisions upon the wings to face to the right and left inward, and to march
until they stand as in the first figure, then face to their leader; and
commadd the eight first divisions of Pikes and Musketeers to face outward
marching until you perceive an intervall for the eight rear divisions to move
up and make an even range with the front divisions, which being done they will
appear as follows.

military diagram

Upon this figure let the front divisions of Musketeers give fire and fall in
the rear of themselves, then wheel off to the right into the room of them in
the rear, they at the same time firing and wheeling off into their places again.

Then let the Commander face them all to the right, and they will stand in four
crosses, with Musketeers on the wings file-wise, upon which facing they may
march, the Officers being placed according unto discretion; and after they have
marched, let them face again to their first front.

Command. Front divisions of Musketeers face, to the right and move two paces,
to your leader; Rear divisions of Musketeers move up and double the front
divisions to the left rank-wise, which produces the next figure.

military diagram

Upon the former figure let all the Musketeers give fire together and fall off
to the right and left in the rear of themselves, the Pikes after charging
through the intervalls, and after retreating again. Then command Musketeers
that doubled to face about, and to move down into the rear, until they be
clear of the Pikes and stand; then let the Musketeers both in front and rear
face to the left, and march until they stand straight in their divisions, then
face to their leader, and they will stand as in the former figure, then proceed.

Command. The four inmost divisions both of Pikes and Musketeers on the left
face to the rear; inmost divisions both of Pikes and Musketeers both upon the
right and left, march clear of the standing part, then let them face to the
left and move three paces, to your leader. The four outmost divisions both of
Pikes and Musketeers upon the right wheel to the right; the four outmost
divisions upon the left both of Pikes and Musketeers wheel to the left, which
will set forth the next figure.

military diagram

The first firing. Let them face to front, rear and both flanks; and give fire
and fall in the rear of themselves, after wheeling off to the right your
divisions on the outside of the Pikes into the place of the rear divisions,
which are to advance forward into the front performing the like as the other
front divisions.

The second firing. Let the front divisions of Musketeers move to the right
two paces, after command divisions of Musketeers to double to the left
rank-wise, and let them give fire in front, rear, and both flanks altogether,
the Pikes may after charge to all these places whilst the Musketeers make
ready again, and retreat again into their places.

The third firing. Let them give fire again and fall in the rear of themselves
which being ended you may proceed to another figure.

Command. The left division of Musketeers wheel off to the left, and place
your selves in the left intervall between the Pikes, which occasioneth the next
figure.

military diagram

Upon this Figure let the Musketeers give fire in the front, rear, and flanks,
and angles falling in the rear of themselves, and the Pikes may after charge
on. Many other firings might be performed upon this figure, but I shall not be
tedious to relate any more, but leave them to the discretion of every leaders
genious, and shall now show the way to reduce them.

Reducement. Divisions of Musketeers upon the Angles face to the center and
move three paces, after wheel the divisions a little to the right until they
be brought in the rear of their own divisions of Musketeers, which being done
command the four divisions of Pikes and Musketeers on the right to wheel to
the left; and the four divisions of Pikes and Musketeers upon the left to
wheel to the right. After command the four divisions of Pikes and Musketeers
upon the left, to face to the left and march to such a convenient distance, as
that the four last divisions both Pikes and Musketeers may move up on the left
to range even with the Front* they on the flanks moving up also until they
stand all even a breast. After command the inmost eight divisions to face to the
rear, and let them all move* until they be clear one of another, then face to
their leader; and let the eight front divisions to face inward and to move
until they stand straight with the rear divisions. After let the Pikes in the
body in each division open their ranks to front and rear to their open order.
And then command division of ^ikes upon the flanks to face to the right and
left inward, and march in and strengthen the body of Pikes; which being done,
let the front divisions of Musketeers face to the rear, commanding them all to
close their ranks forward to order, and face to their leader, they are reduced.
Which being performed the leader may lodge his colors having finished his
ninth Exercise.

CHAP. XXXI. The tenth Exercise consisting of 24 Files being six deep,
according to the first drawing up of a private Company.
THere being a greater number appearing upon this days Exercise then in the
former, it concerns a Leader more especially to give special charge to the
inferior officers to be careful in the drawing forth the files, that they
make no man a file-leader bringer-up, half-file-leader, or bringer-up of the
front half-files, but such able soldier as may be deserving of the same; whose
diligence and care upon all motions is principally required, being as it were
the hinges of the Leaders several words of command. Wherefore supposing them
to be drawnup in battalia, and the colors being brought to the head of the
Company, the four Sergeants ready at hand attending their Captains commands,
and the body being closed in ranks and files to their distance of order, and
silence craved at the Company, he that shall exercise them may begin after
distances and facings shown, with this or the like doubling following.

CHAP. XXXII. Eight entire several Doublings with their Reducement.
Command. FRont half-files double your rear inward entire.

Command. The twelve inmost files double entire the depth of the six out-most
files. In-most files face about.

Command. Half-files double your front to the right.

Command. Double your files to the right entire advancing.

Command. Half-files double your front inward entire.

Command. The six outmost files upon each flank double entire, advancing the
twelve middle files.

Command. Half-files double your front to the right entire.

Command. Right half-ranks double your left flank entire advancing, which being
performed they are reduced.

CHAP. XXXIII. Eight several Counter-marches with their Reducement.
Command. FIle-leaders stand, the rest pass thorough to the right, and place
your selves before your leaders.

Command. The right hand file stand, the rest pass thorough to the right, and
place your selves on the outside of your right hand men.

Command. Countermarch your front and rear into the midst of ranks.

Direction. Half-files face about and turn off to the left, front half-files
turn off to the right, to your leader.

Command. Countermarch your flanks into the midst of files; face outward.

Command. Files to the right hand countermarch maintayning ground.

Command. Ranks to the left hand countermarch losing ground.

Command. Countermarch your front and rear half-files from the midst of ranks
maintaining ground.

Direction. Front half-files face about, and turn off to the left, the rest
turn off to the right, every man moving up into his leaders ground, to your
leader.

Command. Countermarch your right and left half-ranks from the midst of files
losing ground.

Direction. Face inward, and turn off every rank on the ground, they stand;
face to your leader, and close files into the midst to open order, they are
reduced.

CHAP. XXXIV. Eight entire Doublings by Wheelings with their Reducement.
Command. WHeel off your rear half-files and double your front to the right
entire. Half-files face about.

Command. Wheel off your left half-ranks, and double your right flank entire to
the left. Face outward.

Command. Wheel off your rear half-files and double your front to the left
entire. Half-files face about.

Command. Wheel off your right half-ranks and double your left flank to the
left entire. Face outward.

Command. Wheel off your front half-files and double the rear to the right
entire. Half-files face about.

Command. Wheel off your right half-ranks and double the left flank to the
right entire. Face outward.

Command. Wheel off your front half-files and double the rear to the left
entire. Half-files face about.

Command. Wheeel off your left half-ranks and double your right flank to the
right entire. Face outward.

CHAP. XXXV. Plain Firings and Figures of Battle.
The first firing. LEt the two outmost files of Musketeers upon each flank
advance ten paces before the front, give fire, and fall in the rear of
themselves, after face about, and move down into their places again, then face
to their leader. Then let the next two files upon each flank move away in like
manner, and fire as the former did, and move down into their places again.
After let the other remaining files be led forth by the other two Sergeants,
and give fire as before, and fall back again into their places.

The second firing. Let two Sergeants draw four files upon each flank, and move
them away 10 or 20 paces before the front, and give fire, and fall in the rear
of themselves, and after face about and move down into their places. And
whilst they are moving down, let the other two Sergeants draw forth the
remaining four files upon each flank, and fire as the former did, and after
return again into their places.

The third firing. Let all the Musketeers move forth clear of the Pikes, and
let them open from the midst, until they stand in four divisions, leaving
sufficient intervalls for their wheeling into the rear of themselves; first,
let them fire in each division falling in the rear of themselves, until they
have all fired over two or three times after this kind.

The fourth firing. Let them close their files before the front of ^ikes into
the midst to order, then let the two first ranks kneel down the next two stoop,
and the last two stand upright, and give fire six ranks altogether, then let
the left half-ranks of Musketeers be wheeled about to the left into the rear
of the Pikes, and the right half-ranks move to the left until they stand
straight before the front of Pikes.

The fifth firing. Let the half-files face about, and let them give fire to
front and rear after this manner by two ranks drawn off ten paces before the
front and rear, and fall off to the right and left into the rear of themselves,
then facing about let them open outward and give way for the next two ran^s to
come forward into their places, who are to fire and fall off as the former did,
the other two ranks doing the same; this firing may be continued as long as the
Leader pleases.

The sixth firing. Let them give fre on the ground they stand, and fall off to
the right and left into the rear of themselves.

The seventh firing. Let them rank outward into front and rear and give fire
altogether, and rank again as they were.

The eight firing. Let them give fire on the ground they stand, and flank the
Pikes, those in the front flanking the Pikes on the right, they in the rear
flanking them on the left; after let the Pikes charge on, and being retreated
into their places, let them face all to their leader, and in the next place
proceed to figures of batt^^^.

Command. Files open outward to open order, ranks open backward to your open
order, then let every four files close outward to order, and ranks close to
front and rear to order, they will stand in twelve divisions as follows.

military diagram

Command. The two inmost divisions of Musketeers in the rear face about,
inmost divisions of Musketeers in front and rear move forward clear of the
standing part, and stand; Pikes face outward, Musketeers upon the flanks face
inward, the rest face about to the right, move all two paces, to your Leader.

military diagram

The first firing. Let the front divisions of Musketeers give fire, and fall
in the rear of themselves, then wheel off to the right and left into the room
of them in the rear, they at the same time moving up into their ground, firing,
and falling off in like manner as before. Then let the front divisions upon the
flanks fire, and fall in the rear of themselves, and after wheel off to the
right and left into the ground of those divisions that stand in the rear of
them, they at the same time relieving them, firing and falling off as before,
then let the Pikes charge on, and after retreat back again into their places.

The second firing. Let them face to front and rear, and let the first
divisions give fire, and fall in the rear of themselves, then wheeling off to
the right and left and interchange ground with the next divisions, who are at
the same instant of time to move up into their places and to give fire in like
manner, and to fall off and return where they were before, then let the Pikes
charge on to front and rear, and after retreat into their places, and face all
to their leader.

Command. The four last divisions next to the rear both of Pikes and
Musketeers face about, move down, and range even a breast with the rear; rear
divisions of Musketeers that are faced to the front move forward, and place
your selves three foot short of the next divisions that stands before you, to
your leader.

military diagram

Upon this figure let the front divisions give fire and fall in the rear of
themselves, then wheel off to the right and left, and range even a breast with
the next divisions, yet keeping themselves distinctly from the other divisions.
Then let those divisions of Musketeers that stood in the rear of them move
forward into their ground and give fire, and fall in the rear of themselves,
after face about, and move down again into their first places; then let those
that first fired move up again into their ground, and let the outmost divisions
begin to fire after this manner, let the first divisions fire and fall in the
rear of themselves, and after fall off to the right and left, and place
themselves in the room of the rear divisions, who are likewise to move up into
their ground, and thereto fire and fall off as before, the Pikes may after
charge on and retreat back again into their places. The same firings may be
performed to the rear, they being thither faced, but to let that pass we will
fall upon the next figure, wherefore.

Command. Divisions of Pikes move forward until your rear divisions range even
a breast with the outmost divisions of Musketeers; rear divisions of
Musketeers face inward, and move straight in the rear of the rear divisions of
Pikes, to your leader.

military diagram

The first firing. Let the two last divisions of Musketeers face about, and
the other divisions of Musketeers to face to the right and left outward, and
let them give fire on the ground, they stand; and fall in the rear of
themselves, the Pikes may charge on whilst the Musketeers make ready again.

The second firing. Let them face all to the rear, and let the rear divisions
move forth to the right and left outward, and give fire altogether, and fall in
the rear of themselves.

The third firing. Let the four first divisions of Musketeers, and the two
first divisions of Pikes face to the front, and let them give fire to front and
rear, and fall in the rear of themselves, then face all to the front, and
proceed farther.

Command. The front and rear divisions to move outward two paces; rear division
of Pikes upon the left face about, rear divisions of Pikes move three foot
before the front and rear, to your leader; divisions that moved outward, close
inward to your first ground, and they will stand as follows.

military diagram

The first firing. Let the first divisions of Musketeers give fire to the
front and fall in the rear of themselves, then face outward, and march clear of
the standing part, then face to their Leader, then let every division of
Musketeers come successively into that ground, fire and fall in the rear of
themselves, then face about and move down into their places, then let the Front
divisions of Pi^es charge on, and after retreat back into their places.

The second firing. Let them face all to the Rear, and let every division give
fire on the ground, they stand and fall in the Rear of themselves.

The third firing. Let half the Musketeers and three divisions of Pikes face
about to the right, and give fire to Front and Rear on the ground they stand
and fall in the Rear of themselves, then let the Pikes charge on, and after
retreat back into their places, face all to their Leader.

Command. The out-most Divisions of Musketeers face outward and move two
paces, to your Leader; the other divisions both Pikes and Musketeers open your
files outward to open order; the five first Divisions face about, the five
first and the five last Divisions move straight forward and interchange ground,
and after face to their Leader, and close files inward again to order; then
lead up the two out-most Divisions of Musketeers to stand even a breast against
the middle Divisions of Pikes, face all to your Leader; then move the two
out-most Divisions to the right and left inward, to stand straight in the
middle of the Front and Rear Divisions of Musketeers.

military diagram

Upon this Figure several firings might be performed, to the Front, Rear, both
Flanks, and four Angles, all at one and the same time, but being so easy to
the view, I shall leave them unto the discretion of those which shall be
pleased to make use of them, and in the next place endeavor to reduce them.

Reducement. Middle divisions of Musketeers upon the flanks face out-ward, and
move clear of the standing part, to your Leader; the five first Divisions face
about, the five first, and the five last Divisions open files outward to open
order, and move forward and interchange ground, and close files inward again to
order; out-most divisions face about, and move down again into your first
places, face all to your Leader. Here the Captain if he please may command the
Ensign to display his Colors, which being ended, he may proceed, commanding
Rear divisions of Pikes to move forward, and to place themselves in the Rear of
the out-most division of Pikes upon the left in the Front; then let the Front
division of Pikes move down and place themselves in the Rear of the second
division of Pikes upon the right, then close Pikes into the midst to order.
In-most divisions of Musketeers move forward to order, and march up even with
the Front; Rear divisions of Musketeers face outward, and move until they
stand straight with the out-most divisions of Musketeers, then face to their
Leader, and close ranks forward to order, and march up and make an even Front,
and close files into the midst to order; they are reduced.

CHAP. XXXVI. The eleventh Exercise with 24 Files six deep.
THe Soldiers being met unto the place appointed, and the Officers being
vigilant and careful in their several places, in drawing forth the files, and
joining them into a Body; the Leader without any farther delay may crave their
silence, and close their ranks and files to order, and after some distances and
facings shown unto them, drawn forth from the former rule, he may proceed to
this following doubling, making every man a file-leader, according to
succession, and after reduce them again.

Command. Ranks to the left double.

Command. Files to the left double.

Command. Half-files double your front to the left.

Command. Files double your depth to the left.

Command. Bringers-up double your front to the right.

Command Double your files to the left entire advancing.

Command. Bringers-up double your front to the left.

Command. Double your files to the right entire advancing.

Command. Ranks to the right double.

Command. Files to the right double.

Reducement. Files, rank to the left into the front.

Rank, file six to the left, they are reduced.

CHAP. XXXVII. Eight Counter-marches with their Reducement.
Command. BRingers-up stand to the rest, pass thorough to the right, and place
your selves behind your Bringers-up. The rest face about.

Command. File-leaders and Bringers-up stand, the rest pass thorough to the
right, and place your selves before your Leaders and Bringers-up, half-files
face about.

Command. Ranks to the left hand countermarch maintaining ground; face to the
left.

Command. Right and left half-ranks countermarch from the midst of files
maintaining ground; face inward.

Command. File-leaders face about the rest, pass thorough to the right and
place your selves behind your leader; to your leader.

Command. Countermarch your front and rear half-files from the midst of ranks
losing ground; front half-files face about.

Command. Ranks to the right hand countermarch losing ground.

Command. Countermarch your right and left half-ranks every man placing
himself one the outside of his right and left hand-man, they are reduced.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Eight several Wheelings with their Reducement.
Command. WHeel your right and left half-ranks inward to the midst of files.
Face outward.

Command. Wheel the battle off by division from the rear;

Command. Wheel the battle inward to the right flank, from left. Face to the
left.

Command. Wheel front and rear half-files inward to the midst of ranks.
Half-files face about.

Command. Wheel off your right and left half-ranks by division from the midst
of files. Face inward.

Command. Wheel off your front and rear half-files by division from the midst
of ranks; front half-files face about.

Command. Wheel off your front by division.

Command. Wheel your battle inward to the left flank from the right; face to
the right.

CHAP. XXXIX. Plain Firings and Figures of Battle.
The first firing. LEt them give fire to the front by introduction, where first
command them to open their files outward to open order, and then let the first
rank give fire on the ground they stand; then let the next rank move forward
and place themselves before the first rank, and give fire likewise, and stand,
and so successively every rank is to move forward and place themselves before
the rank that fired, until all have given fire; this being twice performed
reduc^th them, and is termed a firing of gaining ground.

The second firing. Let them fire by files inward to order, and fire on the
ground they stand, and fall off to the right and left into the rear of
themselves.

The third firing. Let them close their files ranking outward into one entire
rank into the front, all at one and the same time, and to file again as they
were.

The fourth firing. Let the Musketeers double ranks to the right and left
outward, and give fire three ranks together, the first kneeling, the second
stooping, the third standing upright, and after to double files to the right
and left inward.

The fifth firing. Let them fire again, and fall off to the right and left, and
flank the Pikes, who may after charge on, and after retreat back again into
their places.

The sixth firing. Let them face outward and give fire to both flanks on the
ground, they stand and fall in the rear of themselves.

The seventh firing. Let the half-files of Musketeers face outward, and move
clear of the standing part, then let every division give fire again, and fall
in the rear of themselves, and then close their divisions.

The eight firing. Let them give fire eight ranks together (viz.) two kneel
down, two stooping, two standing upright, and the last two to be drawn forth
and so fire them altogether.

The ninth firing. Let the four first ranks upon each flank fire again, and
fall off to the to the right and left and flank the Pikes, and, let those
Musketeers face to front and rear, and draw forth the last rank of Musketeers
upon the flanks to the right and left outward, and place them in the midst of
those intervalls upon the angles, the Pikes being impaled, then fire them to
front, rear, and both flanks and four angles, and fall in the rear of
themselves. This firing may be continued as long as a leader shall think fit;
then face about those files standing at the angles, and move them into the rear
of those divisions of Musketeers upon the flanks from whence they were first
drawn forth; then let them face all to their leader.

The tenth firing. Let the Musketeers in front and rear face outward, and
march clear of the standing part, then let them face to front and rear, and
give fire, and fall in the rear of themselves, then let the rear divisions of
Mukettiers face to the front, and the outmost divisions of Musketeers in the
front face to the rear, then let the outmost divisions move, and close ranks
forward to order, and let the Pikes charge on, and being retreated back again
into their places, face all to the front and proceed to figures of battle
according to the next direction.

Command. Half-files of Pikes face about; half-files of the four outmost Files
of Musketeers face to the rear; the four outmost files, and the body of Pikes,
move forward clear of the standing part, to your leader; then let them face
outward, and move two paces, then face to front and rear and move the like,
face all to your leader, and close ranks forward, and files inward in each
division; they will stand as follows.

military diagram

The first firing. Let the rear divisions face about, then let the first
divisions give fire and fall in the rear of themselves, then wheel off to the
right and left and fall in the room or place of the next divisions, and they at
the same time are to move up into their ground giving fire, and falling off in
like manner.

The second firing. Let them give fire on the ground they stand in each
division and fall in the rear of themselves, then let the Pikes charge on
whilst the Musketeers make ready again.

The third firing. Let the rear divisions of Musketeers move up, and range
even a breast with the first divisions, then let them fire altogether and fall
in the rear of themselves, then let those that formerly moved up face about and
march down again into their places, then let the Pikes charge on again as
before, and being retreated, let them face all to both flanks, and give fire in
form and manner as they did to front and rear.

The fourth firing. Let the middle divisions of Musketeers advance forward
until they be clear of the standing part, then let them all fire and fall in
the rear of themselves, and the middle divisions to move back again into their
places, then face to their leader, and move the inmost division of Musketeers
upon the right in the rear, to the left three paces, then proceed.

Command. Inmost divisions of Musktttiers in the rear double to the right
file-wise, and after, that division that doubled to face about, and pass
thorough the intervalls of Pikes and place themselves three foot behind the
rear, and the other division that was doubled to advance forward through the
interval of Pikes, and place themselves three foot before the front; then face
to their leader. Let the second divisions of Musketeers from the front stand,
and all the rest move forward three paces; then move the second divisions of
Musketeers to the right and left inward, until they stand straight between
the front and rear divisions of Pikes; front division of Musketeers face
about, and let them and the rear division move forward and inward three paces,
and after face to their leader.

military diagram

The first firing. Let the front division of Musketeers fire and fall in the
rear of themselves, then wheel off to the right by the outmost divisions of
Musketeers and come down into the place or room of them in the rear; and they
at the same time are to move straight forward up into the front, and to give
fire and fall in the rear of themselves, then to wheel off to the right as the
front division did until they come into their places again. Then let the first
out-most divisions give fire and fall in the rear of themselves, and after
wheel off to the right and left into the ground of the rear divisions, who at
the same time are to move forward into their places, and give fire and fall off
as the former did. The same firings may be performed to the rear, they being
thither faced.

The second firing. Let them face to both flanks and give fire and fall in the
rear of themselves in each division, then let the Pikes charge on to both
flanks, and being retreated back again into their places, let the rear division
of Musketeers move forth clear of the standing part, then let them double
ranks to the right in each division and give fire altogether, after let them
double files to the left, and fire again four ranks together, two kneel down,
and two stand upright, then let the Pikes charge on, and being retreated, you
may farther proceed.

Command. Front divisions of Musketeers face about and march into your first
places, face all to your leader; middle divisions of Musketeers face outward,
and move clear of the standing part, front division of Musketeers face about,
front division, and rear division of Musketeers move forward until you be
clear of the next divisions of Pikes that stands before you, face all to your
leader, and they will stand as follows.

military diagram

The first firing. Let them face all to the right flank, and let the front
division give fire and fall in the rear of themselves, then let them wheel down
into the rear, they at the same time moving up into their ground firing, and
falling off, and moving down accordingly into their first places; Then let the
other six divisions fire after this manner, first the Front divisions and fall
in the rear of themselves, then wheel off to the right and left into the rear
of their own range, and the next divisions may move forwards into their ground,
give fire and fall off in like manner, and so successively let every division
move up into their first ground relieving each other, until they have fired
two or three times over in this manner.

The second firing. Let them face to both flanks, and let the inmost divisions
of Musketeers move forth to the right and left until they be clear of the
Pikes, who are to port, then the Musketeers in each division may give fire and
fall in the rear of themselves, then the Pikes may charge on, whilst the
Musketeers make ready again, and being retreated into their places again you
may proceed to another firing.

The third firing. Let the outmost divisions of Musketeers face to Front and
Rear, and the Pikes to the four angles, then let them give fire to Front, Rear,
and both flanks, on the ground they stand, in each division, and fall in the
rear of themselves; then let the Pikes charge on to the four angles, and being
retreated into their places, move in the outmost divisions of Musketeers into
their places again, and then face all to their leader.

Command. Outmost divisions of Musketeers face to the right and left inward
and march until you range in the midst of Front and Rear divisions of Pikes,
to your leader.

military diagram

Upon the former figure let the front divisions of Musketeers upon the flanks
move even with the front of Pikes, then let them fire and fall in the rear of
themselves, then wheel about to the right and left into the place of the rear
divisions, who are to move forward into their ground and to fire and fall off
accordingly. Then let the middle divisions of Musketeers in the front move
forward likewise until they range even a breast with the front, give fire, and
fall in the rear of themselves, and then move clear forth, and wheel off to the
right about into ground of the rear division of Musketeers standing behind
them, and they at the same time to move up into the front, and to give fire in
like manner, and to fall off accordingly, until they have attained their first
places. Then let the three last divisions of Musketeers and the rear divisions
of Pikes face about, and let the two middle divisions of Musketeers face
outward, and move clear of the standing part, then let the Musketeers in front
and rear move forward clear of the Pikes, and let them fire to front, rear, and
both flanks, and fall in the rear of themselves, then the Pikes may charge on
to front and rear, and being retreated back into their places, the Musketeers
in front and rear may face about and move down again into their first ground,
and the Musketeers upon the flanks are to face inward, and to move into their
places where formerly they stood, then face them all to their leader, and
proceed.

Command. Rear division of Musketeers in the midst face about, middle
divisions of Musketeers move forward three foot before the front and rear;
division of Mu^kettiers in the midst upon the right, face to the left angle,
and move until you stand even and straight in the next range of Musketeers,
the next division of Musketeers in the midst upon the left face about, and
then likewise face to the left angle and move down into the next range of
Musketeers to them and to stand straight in the rear, of the rear division,
face all to your leader, produces the next.

military diagram

Upon the former figure let the six last divisions face about, and let the
first divisions give fire and fall in the rear of themselves, then wheel them
about to the right, and interchange ground with them that stand in their rear,
who just upon their wheeling about are to move up clear of the Pikes to make
them room to fall down through the middle intervall, into their places, who
also are immediately to give fire and fall off accordingly. Then let the
outmost divisions give fire, and fall in the rear of themselves, then let the
Pikes charge on to front, and rear, face them after to the front at such time
when the Pikes have retreated back into their places again. Now if you will
fire them to the front, the Musketeers stands in such good order, that you may
fire them by divisions, by their several turns as long as you please, they
relieving each other. After you may fire them to front, rear, and both flanks,
the Musketeers standing in fit condition for the same. But fearing to keep the
soldiers to long in Exercise, debarring them thereby of there wonted
refreshment, I will hasten to the reducement, and for present, lodge the
colors and conclude the eleventh exercise.

Reducement. Out-most divisions of Musketeers face outward and move six paces,
to your leader; the two first divisions of Musketeers in the midst face to the
right, and move clear of the Pikes, then face to the right and left inward, and
move, and interchange ground, then stand, and face to your leader; The two last
divisions of Musketeers in the midst, face to to the left, and move clear of
the Pikes, face all to your leader; then let every division close forward to
order, and move up even a breast with the Pikes, they are reduced.

CHAP. XL. The twelfth Exercise consisting of 24 Files, six deep.
THe place of Exercise appointed for the soldiers to meet, they upon a just
summons make full appearance, being indeed the very life of any Exercise,
affording much comfort to him that shall lead them. And therefore seeing their
readiness, and forwardness (as in duty they are concer'nd) the leader cannot
choose but forthwith to give order unto his officers, for the completing up of
the body; who knowing his commands go nimbly and cheerfully to work in drawing
forth the files, and joining them together, after fetching the colors, and
bringing them to the head of the company. So that nothing being wanting, the
leader craves their silence, and attention, commanding them to their distance
of order, both in rank, and file, and after some few distances shown unto them,
he may proceed in the next place to such facings as follows.

Command. Face to the right, and left outward, and move four paces Face to
Front and Rear, and move three paces Face to the outward angles in the Front
Face to the inward angles in the Front Face to the inward angles of the right
Flank Face to the inward angles in the left Flank Face to the outward angles in
the Rear Face to the inward angles in the Rear Face to the outward angles both
of Front and Rear Face to the inward angles both of Front and Rear Face to the
midst of Files Face to the midst of Ranks Face to the Center. Face to the
outward angles of Front and Rear from the center Face all about to the right
Face to Front, Rear, and both Flanks from the Center.
As you were to to your Leader.
CHAP. XLI. Doubling to make every man a File-leader by dignity.
Command. HAlf-files double your front to the left.

Command. Double your files to the right entire advancing every man placing
himself before his leader.

Command. Front half-files double your rear to the left.

Command. Double your files to the left entire advancing every man placing
himself before his leader.

Command. Bringers-up double your front to the right.

Command. Files double your depth to the right, every man falling behind his
bringer-up.

Command. Half-files double your front to the right.

Command. Double your files to the left entire advancing.

Command. Ranks to the right double.

Command. Files to the right double.

Command. Bringers-up double your front to the left.

Command. Files double your depth to the left every man falling behind his
bringer-up.

Reducement. Ranks to the left double.

Files to the left double.

CHAP. XLII. Several Wheelings with their Reducements.
Command. WHeel off your rear half-files and double your front by division.

Command. Right and left half-ranks double the depth of your battle by
wheeling inward to the rear. Face to the rear.

Command. Double the length of your battle by wheeling inward to front and
rear. Half-files face about.

Command. Front and rear half-files double the depth of your battle by
wheeling outward to the right flank. Half-files face about, and wheel to the
left, front half-files wheel to the right

Command. Front and rear half-files double the length of your battle by
wheeling inward to the left flank; face all to the left.

Command. Front and rear half-files double the depth of both flanks by wheeling
to the right and left outward. Half-files face about.

Command. Front and rear half-files double the length of the battle by
wheeling inward to the midst of ranks. Face inward.

Command. Front and rear half-files double the depth of your left flank by
wheeling to the right and left outward. Half-files face about.

Command. Front and Rear half-files double the length of your battle by
wheeling inward to the right flank. Face to the right, and as they then stand,
right half-ranks wheel to the left, and left half-ranks wheel to the right
until the right flank meet together, they are reduced.

CHAP. XLIII. Plain Firings and Figures of Battle.
The first firing. LEt two ranks advance forward ten paces and give fire, and
fall in the rear of themselves, and after wheel off to the right and left
outward, and move down in the rear of their own divisions of Musketeers, and
then the next two ranks are to move forward, and to give fire, as the former
did, and so consequently all the rest until all have fired, and reduced back
again into their places.

The second firing. Let them fire even with the front and fall in the rear of
themselves, and let the Pikes charge on whilst the Musketeers make ready again.

The third firing. Let single files be drawn off and rank inward into the
front, and fire, and file again, face about, and move down into their places,
then let two files be drawn off clear, and let the inmost files rank inward,
the outmost files rank outward, and give fire, and file again as they were, and
fall into their places.

The fourth firing. Let the four out-most files upon each flank be drawn off
until they be clear of the front, then let them close before the front of
Pikes, face then the in-most files of Musketeers to both the flanks, and let
them give fire to the front, and both flanks on the ground they stand and fall
in the rear of themselves.

The fifth firing. Let them give fire altogether six ranks at once in the
front, and four in the flanks, observing the former rules of firing so many
ranks together, as you may find in the place of the description of firings.

The sixth firing. Let those Musketeers upon the flanks face to the rear and
move clear of the Pikes, then close to the right and left inward to order; then
let the half-files of Pikes face about, and let the Musketeers give fire to
front and rear, and fall in the rear of themselves.

The seventh firing. Let the Pikes move forth to the right and left outward
until they be clear of the Musketeers, then let the Musketeers give fire in
an oblique manner, thus, let every two files open to the right and left outward
to something more then open order, then close the two first ranks of the four
in-most files to the front to order, and let the other two ranks close likewise
almost to that distance, but the two last ranks only are to face to their
front, and after in the same kind close the four ranks inward to the rear of
the four out-most in manner and form there, as the other files were to the
front, and so let them give fire in each division, an oblique way, two ranks
kneel down, two kneeling, and two stand upright.

The eighth firing. After the former firing, close the four inmost files to the
right and left outward to order, and to join with the outmost files, when their
aspects being to the outward angles of front and rear, let the Pikesport, and
Musketeers give fire to the four angles and fall in the rear of themselves,
then let the Pikes charge on whilst the Musketeers make ready again, and after
retreat back into their places again.

The ninth firing. Let them give fire again the first rank in each division and
wheel about to the right, and move down into their first places where before
they were drawn forth, and every rank consequently fall in the rear of them,
then let the Pikes close into the midst to order, and face all to their leader.

Command. Musketeers face to the right and left outward, and move twelve
paces, then face to the rear and move likewise twelve paces, after face to
their leader. Front half-files of each division move forward three paces; right
and left half-ranks of each division move outward two paces; Front divisions of
Pikes and Musketeers stand, rear divisions of both arms move to the right and
left outward until you be clear of the front divisions, then close ranks and
files in each division to order, and face to their leader, they will stand in
the first figure.

military diagram

The first firing. Let the front divisions of Musketeers move forward and
range even a breast with the front of Pikes, give fire and fall in the rear of
themselves, then face about and move down into their own ground again, and face
to their leader, then let the outmost divisions of Musketeers move in like
manner as the former did, and give fire, and fall off in like manner, and down
again into their places. Let the Musketeers in the next place face outward and
move three paces, and after face to the front, then let the rear divisions of
Musketeers advance forward until they range even a breast with the front
divisions, then let them give fire altogether in each division, and fall in the
rear of themselves, and after let the out-most divisions that moved up, move
down again into their places, then let the Pikes charg on, and after retreat
again into their places.

The second firing. Let the out-most divisions of Musketeers in the Front move
forward, before the Front of Pikes, and the in-most divisions of Musketeers in
the Front, let them likewise move at the same time before the Rear divisions of
Pikes, then let the Pikes port, and Musketeers in each division give fire on
the ground they stand, and after fall in the rear of themselves, and those
Musketeers that formerly moved forth from their places, let the Sergeants
wheel them off to the right and left into their first ground, and face to their
Leader.

Command. In-most divisions of Musketeers in the Front face to the Rear,
divisions of Pikes upon the left in the Front face about to the right;
divisions that are thus faced, move down three foot clear of the Rear of each
Arms. Front divisions both of Pikes and Musketeers, and those that last moved,
face to the left, and move two paces, face all to your Leader, and Musketeers
move forward until your middle divisions range even a breast with the Rear
divisions of Pikes, and they will stand as follows.

military diagram

Upon this Figure let the Front divisions give fire, and fall in the Rear of
themselves, and then wheel off to the right and left, into the ground of the
Rear divisions, and they at the same time are to move up into their places, and
to give fire, and fall off accordingly into their first places. Then let the
middle divisions move forward until they range even with the Front of Pikes,
and let them give fire, and fall first in the Rear of themselves, and after
face about, and move down into their places again, and face to their Leader,
then let the Pikes charge on, and after retreat back again into their places.
They may fire to the Rear after the same manner as they did to the Front, they
being thither faced, and after they have all fired, face again to their Leader.

Command. Let the four divisions of Musketeers upon the right to move away,
and let the divisions of Pikes fall in the Rear of them, and the four divisions
of Musketeers on the left to fall in the Rear of the Pikes, then standing
straight in their divisions both rank-wise and file-wise, and they will stand
as follows.

military diagram

Upon this figure let the rear divisions face about to the right, and let the
first divisions give fire to front and rear, and fall in the rear of
themselves, then let them advance forward three paces and after wheel about to
the right, and interchange ground with the rear divisions, and they at the same
time are to move up and give fire, and fall off accordingly. Then let the other
divisions move forward until they range even a breast with front and rear, give
fire and fall in the rear of themselves, after face about and move down into
their places, then face all to their leader.

Command. The four first divisions stand, the rest face to the left and march
clear of the standing part; then let the Pikes face to the front, and march up
even a breast with the Musketeers; Rear divisions of Musketeers face to the
front, and move up likewise; Musketeers face inward, move all three or four
paces until they stand in form of the second figure, face all to your leader;
Rear division of Pikes face about and move down three foot clear of the rear,
to your leader, which produces the last figure.

military diagram

Upon this figure let the rear division of Pikes face about, and Musketeers
face outward then let Pikes port, and let the first divisions of Musketeers
give fire and fall in the rear of themselves, then face about and interchange
ground with the rear divisions, and face again to front and rear, and let those
that came up into their room give fire in like manner and fall off and down
again into their places. Then let the next divisions give fire, and fall in the
rear of themselves, and let the Pikes charge on, and being retreated back again
into their places, command the two middle divisions of Musketeers to face to
the rear and move down and range even with the rear, then let every division of
Musketeers give fire on the ground they stand to both flanks and rear, and
fall in the rear of themselves, the Pikes may charge on again, and those
Musketeers that moved down into the rear may face about and move back again
into their places and face all to the front.

Reducement. Rear division of Pikes advance forward to the left into the front,
the two inmost divisions of Musketeers face about and march clear of the rear,
then face to the right and left outward and place themselves behind the rear
divisions of Musketeers; outmost divisions of Musketeers face inward, and
move straight in the rear of the front divisions, and let the Pikes fall in the
rear of their front divisions, and face all to their Leader; Half-files of
Musketeers double your front to the right and left inward, and after move
forward and even the the front, they are reduceed.

The end of the second Book.
THE COMPLETE BODY OF THE ART MILITARY: The Third BOOK.
CHAP. I. Concerning the drawing up of Regiments, with their several numbers,
forms, manner and ways.
HE that shall be desirous to be truly knowing in this point of Military
Discipline, in the drawing up of Regiments, whether they be of lesser or
greater Bodies, as in some 6, other 7, 8, 10, or 12 Companies, they must be
drawn up into Battalia, either in one two or three Squadrons (or grand
divisions) of Pikes flanked with Musketeers, having always in the Rear a
sufficient number of Musketeers for the guard of the Bagage, Cannon, or to be
Convoys for to convey Ammunition and Victual to the rest of their fellows: Who
are to be drawn forth (by the discretion of the Major) from each particular
Company according to their several strengths, as in greater Companies more
files then in those which be lesser, ordering them timely relief, whereby the
several duties amongst the Soldiers throughout the Regiment by an equal way
may take their turns. Now for as much as the true stating of the dignities of
every particular Officer, in the opinions of many, differ very much, and our
former Military Authors have been very sparing in their pains, in setting down
their due places of honor; I shall, for the satisfaction of those which desire
to be rightly informed, collect out of the many former practiced abroad, and at
home, one good way to perfect it.

But here, by the way, I must crave pardon from the courteous Reader by reason
I foresee certain objections like rubs or blocks, lying in my way to digress a
little from my intended purpose, to give answers unto each of them, which are
first, that I seem to slighten the pains of former Authors.

Secondly, that it will be a means to occasion much idleness in the Soldiers.

Thirdly, that it is too great a knowledge to be laid open to their view.

To the first I answer, that the reason, as I conceive, why they have been so
sparing of their pains in this kind, was not for want of abilities, or
knowledge amongst any of them, whose works for the most part I highly honor
and esteem, but rather believe that they left it forth for the curious search
of such who are called unto Field-officers places, knowing well that before
they are capable of that preferment they must be good proficients in this part
of Military Exercise.

2 Although many that know but a little, may be puffed up with high conceits of
themselves, conceiving what the Author has done, 'twere easy for any man to
perform the same; yet to them of riper judgments, the more variety in this
kind is presented to their view, the more painful they are in the curious
practice thereof, thinking every moment lost which is not spent in the
searching after, and informing of their judgments in this point of Military
Discipline.

If it had not been for the worthy pains and labors of our ancestors
published to the view of the world, this our age might have been ignorant both
in this, and all other Sciences, for from them we borrowed our first light, God
putting it in their hearts to publish their several gifts to after
generations, which though at this day much refined, yet for our first grounds
and principles we are beholding unto them. Therefore, give me leave, according
as God has inabl'd me, not to conceal or keep back any thing which may
concern the good and welfare of my country; for, I conceive, there is none
worthy to receive benefit from those that have gone before him, if he
conceales that good to such as shall come after him. And if I happen to lie
under the hard censure of some for my pains, it makes no matter, so the major
part receive benefit thereby, for as I gathered somewhat of others: so my desire
is that others may do the like by me.

The opinions of Soldiers in the drawing up of Regiments are very various both
in their forms and figures, according to the custom of their Countries,
commands of their Generals or Officers in chief, which nevertheless may prove
very good and serviceable when need shall require, I shall therefore for the
satisfaction of the ingenuous soldier set before them the best collections
drawn from them all, such as may be most useful for to fight against the
enemy, according to the situation of the place, the number of men, and aptness
of ground to contain them, which in the next place comes to be handled.

CHAP. II. The manner of drawing up a Regiment consisting of six Companies,
containing in it a Colonel, a Lieutenant Colonel, a Major, and three
Captains, every one having 108 men in a Company, and the three Field Officers
144. which makes completely up 756 men, whereof two thirds are Musketeers, and
one third of Pikes, the Files being six deep.
THe general place of Randezvous being appointed out unto the Major, it is his
care to take a timely view thereof, that there be ground and room sufficient
enough for the drawing them up. And having received orders from his Colonel,
Major General, or other superior officers for the Regiments marching thither,
he may appoint the Companies to march either of these two ways, either by
succession, or dignity. If by succession, first the Colonels Company moves
away, next, the Lieutenant Colonels in the rear of him, then the Majors and so
consequently all the rest from the eldest to the youngest who brings up the
rear of all. If by dignity, first the Colonels Company, and in the rear of him
the youngest Captain, and after him the eldest, then the Majors, then the
second Captain, the Leiutenant Colonel bringing up the rear of all. But it
concerns the Major before their marching to give notice unto the Leiutenant
Colonel and the eldest Captain to countermarch their ranks of their two
particular Companies as soon as they come into the place of the general
randezvous before he shall draw them up, to preserve the honor of the right
hand File-leaders and Bringers-up of both arms. He is likewise to be there
before hand attending their marching in, and after the Colonels company have
made Alt to draw up each particular company on the left of him, all in one even
range, commanding them to close ranks forward to order, and files into the
midst unto the same distance. He is likewise to inform himself of the
Captains, Lieutenants and Sergeants how many files of Pikes, and Musketeers
they have in each particular company, and accordingly he is to enter it down in
his paper book, and to make use thereof as follows.

He is to require one single file apiece of Musketeers to be drawn off from
the three smaller Companies, and two files apiece from the greater, which makes
9 files, and contains 54 men, which are to be led away by an able Sergeant into
the Rear, for to be a guard to the Bagage or other occasions. From thence he
may proceed commanding all the Musketeers to stand, and the Pikes to advance
their Arms, and move forward 10 or 12 paces, and then to stand and close their
files outward to order, three of their colors moving with their Pikes to the
right hand, the other three moving away to the left. After he may command
Musketeers to close their files outward to order, and they will stand in four
divisions, two of Pikes, and in the rear of them two of Musketeers, as
underneath is set forth, the Captains being all upon the head of the Pikes
with their Ensigns, and the Lieutenants in the rear, the Sergeants attending
upon the flanks of each division.

military diagram

This being done command each division of Musketeers and Pikes to face
outward, and to move to such convenient distance that being faced to the front
there may be room sufficient upon the subdividing of each division of
Musketeers for their moving up, and flanking each body of Pikes. After which
the Major may assign unto every Captain and Lieutenant his due place of
honor, as they stand all abrest; And that they may also naturally fall into
their proper places upon the march, which shall be set forth in the next figure
standing in two grand divisions the one in the rear of the other, which may
happen sometimes for want of ground, but provided they have ground enough they
ought to stand in one even range as in folio. 5. The Major after they are thus
drawn up in one even range will find three files of Musketeers more in the
second grand division, and two of Pikes, then is in the first, therefore he
must take from thence one file of each Company, and add them to those nine
files in the rear, which makes them twelve, and then he will have balanced the
divisions equal, taking off one file of Pikes, and placing it amongst the
eldest Captains Pikes

military diagram

CHAP. III. The Reasons follow for the placing of the Captains, their Colors,
and their Lieutenants, after the manner before set down.
WHat has formerly been declared concerning a Rank or File, six a breast, or
six deep, may be satisfactory in some kind unto this point, which takes his
rule from hence. For all private Companies, smaller Bodies, or single Files,
must, or ought to be as near as they can conformable to greater Bodies, as to
Regiments, and consequently, they to Brigades. Therefore take notice that this
rule ought ever to be obs^rved in the drawing up of Regiments, that the right
flank as near as may be ought to be suitable with the left, both in strength,
number, and dignity; and likewise to be so when they are drawn forth upon a
long March, the Front equal with the Rear. Now, suppose, th^se two grand
Divisions stood even a breast, we will begin to examine the first worth, which
is the Colonels, and the fourth worth, which is the eldest Captains, and
placed upon the right and left of the first grand Division, with the second and
third worth, who are the Lieutenant Colonel, and Major, drawn up upon the
right and left of the second grand Division; and you shall find they are every
way equivalent in number, worth, and dignity, with that of the first.

In the next place, there are no more to place, but the fifth and sixth worth,
who are the second and third Captains: and therefore since it is the first
place of honor among the Captains in a Regiment, to lead the first Body or
Stand of Pikes, it must then consequently follow, that the second place of
honor must be to lead the second grand Division of Pikes; and therefore the
fifth worth is brought into, and placed between the second and third, that he
may aptly stand there to to lead the second Body of Pikes; wherein the
Lieutenant Colonel, the Major, and his own Colors are placed: so that there
remains no more but the sixth worth, or youngest Captain to place, who is
drawn up between the Colonel, and eldest Captain. Now if we shall further
proceed to balance it more clearly, consider them by dividing them by two's,
in their places, as first, we will begin with the Colonel, the first worth,
who has joined to him the youngest Captain, which is the sixth worth, and they
two make the number (7) then compare the Lieutenant-Collonel, who is the second
worth, unto the second Captain joined with him; which is the fifth worth, and
they make a like the same number; after compare the Major, and eldest Captain,
who are drawn up into the midst of the Regiment, whose places carry the third
and fourth worth, and their number is suitable with the rest. And thus much may
be spoken in general, now I shall come more perticulerly to give further
satisfaction both for them, and for all the rest; and therefore I will give
reasons for the placing of the Officers of the first grand Division, and
clearing that, the second will quickly be laid open to the view.

CHAP. IV. More particular reasons for the placing of the Captains, and
Lieutenants, of the first grand Division.
IN this grand Division, there is the Colonel, the eldest Captain, and the
youngest drawn up into the midst, and they having each of them Lieutenants,
take notice therefore of these reasons for their placing thus. That always upon
such small Bodies as these, the first honor is ever placed upon the right, and
the second, upon the left, and that which remains, must of necessity be drawn
up into the midst; they standing all a breast. These three Companies being
ordered into a right and left Flank, and one Stand of Pikes, or Vanguard,
Reer-ward, or Main-battail, as they may be termed, the reasons follow for the
thus standing of the Officers, whether marching all even a breast, or upon a
stand; it is the Colonels proper place to be on the head or midst of his grand
Division; which is his chiefest place of security, and where he ought to fight;
for standing there, the other may more conveniently repair unto him for their
orders, as occasion shall require. Now the Colonel being a Field-Officer, is
not absolutely tied to any one place to fight, as the rest are, many occasions
calling him from thence; the eldest Captain therefore is appointed to take
charge of the Body of Pikes, whether it be upon a March to lead them, or upon a
Stand to fight them, he ought never to forsake them, but upon special command
from his Colonel, or other Field-Officers. Now the reason why the first Body
of Pikes is the most honourablest place to lead, is, as I conceive, because the
Colonels Colors are there flying, and besides being the more ancienter Arms,
far more honor it is to lead them; for most commonly the gallantest men of the
Infantry desire rather to trail Pikes, then to carry Muskets; Moreover, it has
been a constant practice in most places, that the eldest Captain should have
that place to lead on foot, although many times his Colonel being on
hors-back, may be a little before him. Having spoken of these two, it remains
to speak something of the youngest Captain, who is appointed either upon the
Marching all a breast, or upon a Stand, to take charge of the Reer-ward, or left
Flank of the first grand Division to fight them, but upon the long March, it is
more honorable for him to fall down in the Rear, and to bring up his own
Lieutenant coming up into his place; for it is greater honor (though many
times not believed) to bring up a grand Division, then to lead a Sub-division.
In the next place, it may be supposed, that the Captain Lieutenants place is
too honorable to lead the Vanguard, to which I answer, that the Colonel
himself is consigned thither; for upon the long-March he draws off the
Vanguard, and leads them himself, being attended on hors-back by the Martial
and Quartermaster of his own Regiment. Now leading away the Musketeers of his
own particular Company, the Captain Lieutenant being subservient unto him,
marches a foot upon the head of the first Division of Musketeers, and takes
charge of them, as assisting to his Colonel, and fighting them, if he receives
no command to the contrary, when they are all drawn up again even a breast, it
concerning him especially to be there resident in the absence of his Colonel,
for the better regulating of them. The eldest Captains Lieutenant is always
placed in the Rear of the Pikes, either upon a Stand, or upon a March, it being
very honorable unto him to bring up a grand Division of Pikes. The third
Captains Lieutenant is ordered to bring up the left Flank, except it be upon
the long-March, and then he is to exchange places with his own Captain. There
is yet one place vacant, which is to bring up the right Flank, and the Captain
Lieutenants Bringer-up, many times through courtesy is called a Lieutenant,
therefore a Major may be so courteous as to assign him that place; and here I
shall conclude with the reasons of the places of the Officers of the first
grand Division.

CHAP. V. Reasons for the placing of the Officers of the second grand Division.
ALthough the Colonel is Commander in chief, yet his discretion is such, as
to leave the ordering of places to his Major; and as he takes charge of the
first grand Division, so he leaves the second to his Lieutenant Colonel, who
stands upon the head or midst of the same, being drawn up all even a breast; and
many times leads the second grand Division, as the Colonel does the first, as
was the practice in the Regiments upon their March, under the command of the
Earl of Essex, General of the Parliaments Forces. To such as shall approve of
this way (which may be very good) they shall not need to countermarch the
Ranks of the Lieutenant Collonell, as is before expressed, before the drawing
up of the Lieutenants Colonels Company, but draw them up on the right of that
Division, and to countermarch the Ranks of the Majors, and draw his Company up
on the left. But I shall leave that to the liberty of those that shall best
fancy this kind, and proceed to that which is of more use.

The second grand Division standing in an even range with the first, it will be
convenient for the Lieutenant Colonel to be upon the head thereof. As
concerning the Major, he being an Officer at will, has no certain place
assigned unto him, by reason of his moving, as occasion shall require, to both
Divisions, whereby he may give orders unto them all, minding the good order of
the Regiment, throughout every part thereof. But if he will take his place, to
march in the properest place for him, if they march all a breast, will be in the
Front, between the Colonel and Lieutenant Colonel, but in the long-march in
the midst of both grand Divisions, whereby he may have freer access unto them
both, whose vigilant eye in the well ordering of the Regiment is chiefly
concerned, observing all the passages, whether there be need of sub-dividing
their Divisions; and if at any time they shall be divided, when there is ground
sufficient enough, he must give order again for the drawing them all up even a
breast, it being far more graceful to the Regiments marching. In the next
place, the second Captain may claim it as his due, to lead the second Body of
Pikes, as the eldest Captain challenges the first, and the reason given for
his place, may suffice for both: The eldest Lieutenant in this grand Division,
which is the Lieutenants Colonels Lieutenant, is assigned unto that place,
where he is set down for to be an assistant there-unto his Lieuteaant
Collonell, for the well regulating of his men which march in the Rear, as the
Captain Lieutenant is to the Colonels men, who march in the ^ront, and his
Lieutenant Colonel bringing up the whole Regiment is the second place of
honor. Some may conceive the Majors Lieutenant has too great a place of
honor in leading the Van of the second grand Division, to which I answer, if
the Lieutenant Colonel marches not there himself, but shall bring up the
Regiment, certainly it must be clear, that it is the Majors due, for to march
there himself at times convenient, and being so, there is good reason in his
absence his Lieutenant should lead his men, or in his presence to be thereas a
helper unto him, for the well regulating of his men, as the other Lieutenants
are to the other long Field-officers who every one of them according to their
several places may have several occasions to call them off, their Lieutenants
therefore ought to be at hand, and to march with them in their places, whereby
they may receive orders from them, and know how to act in their absence
concerning their own particular Soldiers. The second Captains Lieutenant is
ordered to bring up the second Body of Pikes, which being a grand Division it
falls to him as due there, as the eldest Captains Lieutenant does in the first,
it being the greatest place of honor that can be given him in the Rear next to
the Leiutenant Colonel. Having spoken thus much concerning every
Field-officer, the Captains, and their Lieutenants, where their places are to
march, with the reasons for the same, it will be expected to supply two places
which are vacant in the Rear of the second grand Division; to which I answer
upon the long-march the Lieutenant Colonel himself moves down there, and
brings up the Rear of the whole Regiment; and therefore it is left vacant for
him, but then you will say there wants an Officer to bring up the Rear of that
Division, wherein the Majors Lieutenant is placed; to which I answer, that
there is none remaining to do it, except it be the Majors Lieutenant himself.
For if the Major shall lead the second grand Division, then his Lieutenant may
move down to bring up that particular Division for to supply the same, but in
regard the Major (as has been shown before) has many occasions to call him
off, it concerns his Lieutenant to keep his place which was first assigned unto
him, to avoid the trouble of moving up again in his Majors absence. Some are of
opinion it would be convenient to place the Lieutenant Colonels eldest
Sergeant there, but in my judgment it is very unhandsome to see any
Halberteer, either to lead or bring up any Division marching in a regimentall
way, and rather then I should do it, I would let it go unsupplied; but if he
shall be there placed to bring up, his best way of marching, is either with a
Pallizado, or Half-pike, and not with his Halberd.

CHAP. VI. The ordering of a Regiment to the Long-March, with the placing of
the Officers, and the leading of Carriages.
THe Major giving to every Captain his proper place to march in, and what
Divisions they are to lead, and what to bring up, in written notes under his
hand, commands the Drum-Major to beat a March, and so consequently all the rest
to take it from him. The Soldiers being warned thereby, begin to shoulder
their Arms, and prepare to move; the Colonel on hors-back being attended on by
his Martial, and Quartermaster draws off the first Division of Musketeers,
his Captain Leiutenant being some six foot behind him, which Division is
brought up by the Captain Lieutenants Bringer-up. The eldest Captain follows
next, leading the first Division of Pikes, and brought up by his own
Lieutenant. The next Division of Musketeers is lead by the third Captains
Lieutenant, and the Rear of the first grand Division is brought up by the third
Captain. There ought to be full 18 foot of ground betwixt each Division, he
that brings up a Division, ought to be six foot clear behind the same, and he
that leads, to be six foot before, so that there will be six foot proportion of
ground betwixt them both, for the better distinguishing of their Divisions, the
Leaders, and Bringers-up thereof. And where there is not room sufficient for
the marching so many a breast, as they are now ordered, they must subdivide,
being careful to preserve their Divisions, marching in greater depths, at
their due distance of open order in rank, and order in file. For the Sergeants,
must not presume upon any sub-dividing to make any more Divisions, whereby they
may be Leaders thereof, but it must be their care upon sub-dividing to bring
them down in the Rear of them that march before, and keep them entire in all
their respective Divisions. And it must be their observation to attend upon the
Flanks, even a breast with those Leaders of Files, that were taken off, that
when there is ground and room enough, they may more readier know where to
find them, and to lead them up again as they were at first. Care likewise must
be had upon any sub-dividing of the Pikes, that there be none of the Colors
divided who are in a regimentall way to march all three together, according to
their first placing. These rules and observations concern both grand Divisions,
now the first being led away, as is before expressed, there ought to be
sufficient ground betwixt each grand Division; for the leading of the Cariages,
and in the first place, there is to be considered that to most Regiments, there
is allowed two Wagons, for the Bagage, and Ammunition, and two Field-peeces,
or great Cannon besides other Cariages, which more concern the victual for the
Soldiers, as occasion shall require; now concerning the ordering, and securest
placing of all these upon the March, will be in the midst of the Regiment, and
to have those which are ordered for their good, to be Firelocks, or to have
Snap-hances, for the avoiding of the danger which might happen by the Cole of
the Match; and being placed where any attempt of the Enemy shall fall on either
to Front, Rear, or either Flank, the Cannon may be easily drawn forth to fire
upon them, and all the wood of the Carriages, with their Guard, to be ordered
in the Rear, where ever the assault should happen, for their better security
and safety. The Major in the next place, if he please, may lead the second
grand Division; to which purpose he draws off (with the assistance of his own
Lieutenant) the first Division of Musketeers, his Lieutenant being six foot
behind him, and so much before the Musketeers. The next that follows, is the
second Body of Pikes, which is led by the second Captain, and brought up by his
own Lieutenant. The last Division of Musketeers is led by the Lieutenant
Colonels Lieutenant; and the Rear of the whole Regiment is brought up by the
Lieutenant Colonel. The Sergeants are to march upon the Flanks, attending
their own men, that when they are to be reduced into Companies, they may know
more readier where to find them, and according to order they may draw them off
to complete up their Captains Companies. As for the Drums, the care thereof
belongs to the Drum-Major to place, and to ease them timely by reliefs, to beat
as many, or as few as he shall think fit, to which purpose, he orders them to
fall in betwixt the second and third Rank of Musketeers, and Pikes, of each
Division; but when they are all even a breast, the Drums are placed according as
you see them marked: the figure for the long-March in the next place follows.

military diagram

CHAP. VII. The first Exercise of a Regiment in the plainest and easiest way.
THe Major finding the commodiousnesse of the ground, may draw them up all even
a breast again, and proceed to exercise them in a regimentall way, conferring
beforehand with the Captains, Lieutenants, Ensigns, and Sergeants, what he
intends to do. Whether he will exercise every Manniple, or Division (as is
usual in a private Company) in all their plain Motions and ^irings, which may
be very proper, and easily done, or otherwise proceed to more variety in every
Division, to give them commands as one man, either to face, double, or
otherwise according to discretion. And having fully instructed them of all his
intents and purposes, he must begin to consider of the best manner for the
managing of the same. To which end, he shall do well to command the first grand
Division to advance forward 12 paces clear of the second, and after face them
to the left, and m^^ch them until they stand straight before the second grand
Division, then face them to the ^ront, and they will stand in manner as in
Folio 141. After he must consider how many Files of Musketeers there are, and
whether he can branch them forth into equal Divisions suitable to the Pikes,
but finding them to stand but 18 of a side, he shall do well for time of his
Exercise, to draw off eight ^iles of Musketeers, from the Rear, which were
formerly appointed to guard the Ammunition, or Baggage, and add two to every
Division of Musketeers, which will make them 20 Files of each side of the
Pikes, and then he may thus proceed.

Command. Files to the^r op^n order, and ranks to close forward to order in
each grand Division; every five files of Musketeers of each Division close to
the right to order; the first six files of Pikes in each grand Division close
to the right to order, the rest of the Pikes close every five files to the
right, to the same distance; then there will be in each grand Division, four
Divisions of Pikes and eight of Musketeers, in manner as set forth to your
view in Folio 147.

Before the Major shall begin his Exercise, he shall do well to appoint unto
each Division, the Captains, and their Ensigns, (whose Colors in the mean
time may be stuck in the ground, or given to any of the File-leaders of Pikes,
to hold during the time of Exercise) to take charge of them, to order them
according unto every word of command, and the Lieutenant and Sergeants to each
Division of Musketeers, that after silence is craved throughout the whole
Regiment, the Major by stretching out his voice in every word of command, the
rest as his echo are immediately to give it out a long the whole Front, and
from thence unto the Rear, and every Officer to lead his men accordingly.

The Major having stated all things according to the former directions, may if
he please, either face, double, countermarch, or wheel, to Front, Rear, or
both Flanks in every particular Division. And may after fire them by way of
Divisions drawn off ten or twenty paces before the Front, firing them 7 or 8
times over, relieving them by other supplies, marching up into their ground.
And may after face the Rear divisions about, and fire them to Front and Rear on
the same ground they stand, there being sufficient intervalls for their
wheeling off in the Rear of themselves. And after several firings in this
kind, the Pikes may charge on; but before they begin their firings, the Pikes
must close into the midst to order, and Musketeers to close their Pikes to
open order, and every Division to preserve so much ground betwixt each other
for their conveniencie, that after firing they may wheel off.

Now if you will fire, or skirmish the one with the other, then draw off the
Rear, or second grand Division, and move them away, and draw them up in
opposition 100 foot distance of ground betwixt each Front, and let the
Lieutenant Colonels Company be drawn up upon the right, and the Majors upon
the left of that grand Division, that it may carry some answerablenesse with
that of the Colonels. The Musketeers having six foot intervall of ground
betwixt each other before they begin to fire, they may continue their firings
of this nature, as long as they please, and the Pikes may after charge o^ to
such convenient distance, as that they come not within three Pikes length one
of another, for avoiding doing hurt the one to the other, the Musketeers still
continuing their firing, and falling in the Rear of themselves; and when they
come within distance, not to present above knee height, for the abovenamed
reasons. Now the Soldiers being almost tired, and all their powder spent, and
retreating from each other, that side which falls out to be the strongest, (as
being the Colonels grand Division or party) may be at a parley, to invite the
weaker to come into mercy, offering them all fair Quarter, provided they timely
and presently receive it, and that they will cheerfully and willingly go a long
with them, and never any more revolt, but ever be on their side, to fight with
them upon all just occasions, as shall be required. After which, the Lieutenant
Colonel yiedling, they may wheel about, and march into the same ground from
whence they were first drawn forth, and be reduced to the same order and
condition as they were before they began to skirmish. And thus much shall
suffice concerning the ordinary plain way of the exercising of Regiments: but
those that shall desire a little more curiosity, they may observe such
Exercises as in the next plac^ shall be set forth unto them.

CHAP. VIII. A second way of exercising Regiments of the same number of men.
THe first grand Division being in the Front, and clear of the second 12 paces,
every five files being 18 foot of ground a part from each other, and at their
distance of order, both in rank and file, in their own particular divisions, as
was mentioned in Folio 146. comes in this place to be set forth to their view.
And having past over some of the distances to bring them to this Station, in
standing in 24 Maniples, or Divisions, the next thing that I shall show for
Exercise, shall be four several Figures of Battle, branched forth from
thence, by proper words of Command, with their reducement.

military diagram

Command. Divisions of Musketeers face outward, Pikes and Musketeers march
all 12 paces, and stand; to your Leader. The two middle divisions of Pikes and
Musketeers in the Rear next the Flanks face about: outmost divsions of Pikes
and Musketeers in Front and Rear face outward: march all four places, and
stand; Again, let the outmost divisions of Pikes and Musketeers face about to
the right, then march all three paces then stand, and face to their leader, it
produces the first figure.

military diagram

Each of the former divisions containing five files a piece, excepting the
outmost division of Pikes upon the right in Front and Rear, and they contein
six files in each of them.

Command. Divisions of Musketeers face outward, Pikes face about to the right,
march all, until the Pikes range even with the Rear, then face to their Leader
occasioneth the next.

military diagram

Command. The four last divisions of each arms in the midst, face about, the
six outmost divions of each arms face outward, the two middle divisions of
Pikes in the front face about, march all four paces and stand, then face the
six outmost divisions about to the right, and the four middle divisions of
Pikes about to the left, then march all four paces, and face to their Leader.

military diagram

Command. The two next divisions of Pikes in the midst from the Rear face
about, middle divisions of Pikes move forward six foot before the Front and
Rear, to your Leader.

military diagram

Reducement. The 12 last divisions face about then let every division march
forward until they range even abrest with the Front and Rear, and face to
their Leader; then let the Rear divisions move forward within 18 foot of the
Front divisions, and they will be in two grand divisions, the one in the Rear
of the other, as at first when they began their facings.

Having past over part of the distances and facings, the next which in order
falls to be handled is Doublings, and having by command gained 18 foot distance
betwixt every five files, if in their former motions they should chance to lose
it, you may then proceed to Doublings by way of divisions, as shall be in the
next place set down.

CHAP. IX. Doublings belonging to a Regiment.
Command. DIvisions double to the right file-wise.

Direction. Every even division from the Front face to the right, and march
down clear until you stand straight with the next intervall; then face to the
left, and move in, and double those Divisions on the right sile-wise to your
Leader.

Command. Divisions double to the right rank-wise.

Direction. Every even Division from the Front, face to the right, and march
forward six paces, then face to the Front, and move forward, and double your
divisions to the right.

Command. Divisions double the Length of the Battle to the right and left
outward.

Direction. The 12 last divisions face outward, and march clear of the standing
part, face to your Leader, move up all even a breast, and double according to
command.

Command. The 12 in-most divisions double the six out-most to the right and
left outward advancing.

Direction. The 12 middle divisions advance forward until you be six foot
clear of the standing part, then face outward, and march until you stand
straight before the six out-most, face to your Leader, and after face inward,
and move forward, until they stand again unto 18 foot distance from each other
to your Leader.

Command. Divisions double the depth of the Battle to the right.

Direction. Every even division from the right, face about to the right, and
move down 18 foot clear of the Rear, face to the left, and move until you
stand straight with those divisions on the right, which you are to double, to
your Leader.

Command. The 12 last divisions in the Rear double the Front to the right.

Direction. The 12 last divisions face to the right, and move six paces, then
face to the left, march forward, and double the Front to the right, and they
will be reduced.

CHAP. X. Four several Wheelings with their Reducement.
Command. DIvisions wheel about to the right, and move down into the Rear.

Direction. Front divisions wheel about to the right, and move down into the
Rear, the rest march up into the same ground, wheeling to the right hand, and
following successively, after face to your Leader.

Command. Divisions wheel about to the right to the left flank.

Direction. Face to the right, and the out-most divisions wheel about to the
right, and march away unto the place of the left Flank, the rest moving up into
the same ground, wheeling about to the right, and following accordingly, to
your Leader.

Command. Divisions wheel about to the right from the Rear into the Front.

Direction. Face to the Rear, and let the first divisions wheel about to the
right, and move up into the Front, the rest marching forward into their ground,
wheeling off, and following in like manner.

Command. Divisions wheel about to the right, to the right flank.

Direction. Face all to the left, and let the out-most divisions wheel about to
the right, and move forward to the right flank, the rest marching up into their
ground, following after in the same kind, reduces them.

CHAP. XI. Counter-marches not fit to be used in the exercising of Regiments.
IT might be expected after Doublings, that I should show some kinds of
Counter-marches amongst the Military Motions, in the exercising of a Regiment;
but being of very little use or practice amongst Commanders in these times,
especially in such great Bodies, and for my own part, I fancy them not, and
therefore have passed them over, and pitched upon

military diagram

such wheelings, which by some are accounted counter-marches. Whose judgments
my desire is better to inform by these several reasons following, wherein,
and in what kind, they differ from them. As thus, by these wheelings, they
keep their distance in rank and file unto order, and wheeling entire unto any
hand down to the Rear, cannot be performed but by gaining in the Motion before
the Front, and unto all places as they move so much ground as is the Length of
their particular Divisions, and in the execution thereof they still preserve
the honor of the right and left hand Tile-leaders, and all others as are
concerned in their particular Divisions unto any accidental Front which they
shall be brought unto. Now concerning counter-marches, they are to be performed
either by single files, ranks, half-files or half-ranks, and at their distance
of open order, their words of command having relation to all these perticulers.
Their counter-marching of Files to the Rear gains no ground before the Front,
in the Motion, but only the room of one particular File upon the right; it
preserves not the honor of the right and left hand File-leader at one time by
any one word of command unto any of their Motions to such accidental Fronts
they shall make, but ever loses it to some, and gains it to others. And,
therefore, it may appear clearly unto any ingenious capacity, that the former
wheelings cannot be accounted, or given in their Motions in that kind to the
Soldiers for counter-marches, but by such terms as in their place are set
down. In the next place I shall speak something of the great benefit, or use
that may be made of these sorts of wheelings; as first, a Commander may use
them in the Motions of Doublings to Front, Rear, right Flank, or left, or
double either the length or depth of the Battle, unto all needful places, as
occasion shall require, which I shall forbear to set down, but leave them to
the discretion of the ingenuous Soldiers practice, when time and opportunity
shall serve him to make use of them. In the next place they are very necessary
to draw off any part, and to bring them unto such needful places for Service
as are in eminent danger; Therefore passing over for present what might be more
spoken of in this kind, I come in the next place to show one Figure of Battle
to fire upon, and then conclude my Exercise upon this Regiment, and go on unto
the rest.

Command. Pikes close Files to the right to order, then let them in the Rear
double their Front to the left entire; Musketeers advance forward until your
Front-Divisions exceed six foot the Front of Pikes; the two inmost Divisions of
Musketeers in the Front, move forward 20 paces, and close inward to open
order; the two in-most Divisions of Musketeers in the Rear face about, and
move down six paces, and close inward to open order, to your Leader;
Musketeers upon the Flanks close to the Body of Pikes to your open order:
middle Divisions of Musketeers in the Rear by each Flank face about; middle
Divisions of Musketeers by each Flank move forward six foot clear of the
standing part, face to your Leader, and it will set forth the Figure as it
stands in Folio 151.

CHAP. XII. Several Firings to be performed upon the former Figure, and how to
be managed by the several Officers.
THe Regiment being drawn up into the former Figure, they may proceed to
Firings upon it, first let the Forlorns fire five or six times over, being
commanded by the eldest Captains Lieutenant, who is to be assisted by a couple
of able Sergeants; after let him wheel them off to the right and left, and
bring them down in the Rear of the Pikes. Then let the second Captains
Lieutenant being assisted by two Sergeants lead up the reserves by the outside
of the Pikes, at such time when the Forlorns begin to come off, for the better
securing of them from danger upon their retreat, then let them move forward to
their ground, and give fire in like manner, falling in the Rear of themselves,
and after wheel them off to the right and left, and bring them down in the Rear
of those Musketeers that are behind the Pikes. Then let the Front and Rear
Divisions of Musketeers next the Flanks advance forward 12 paces, the
Musketeers upon the right to be led away by the Captain Lieutenant, and those
upon the left by the third Captain, being assisted by four Sergeants a piece,
let them fire the first Divisions some six or eight times over, falling in the
Rear of themselves, then wheel them off to the right and left into the ground
of those Divisions that follow them, and facing again to their Front; then let
the Rear divisions advance forward into their places, and give fire in like
manner, to the former: which being ended, let those four divisions be led down
into their first places. Then let the next eight divisions by the Pikes advance
forward until they be clear of the standing part; those four divisions upon
the right, are to be led a way by the Majors Lieutenant, and the Captain
Lieutenant Bringer-up, and those four divisions upon the left, by the
Lieutenant Colonels Lieutenant, and the third Captains Lieutenant assisted by
12 Sergeants, then let them fire some half a score times, the Front divisions
falling in the Rear of themselves, after wheeling off to the right and left
into the ground of their Rear divisions, they then moving up into their places,
may fire after the same manner, and having ended they may be led down all again
into their first places.

Then command the first divisions of Musketeers to face about to the right,
and let them and the two last divisions move forward, and range even a breast
with those that stand before them, and after face all to the Front; then let
the Musketeers, face outward, and move 12 paces, and after face again to the
Front; then move up those divisions that were the Forlorn hope to the right
and left into the Front, unto their first places, and those that were the
Reserves up even a breast with the Rear, from whence they were first taken,
after let them fire in, and even Front altogether, some half a score times
over, and fall in the Rear of themselves; then let the Colonels eldest and
second Captains move forward the Pikes, and charge on if they please, the
Colors falling in the second rank being furled up, and after let all order
their Arms, and reduce them into Companies again.

Reducement. Left half-ranks of Pikes face about, and move down until you
range even with the Rear divisions of Musketti^rs, face to your Leader; Right
half-ranks of ^ikes advance forward, and range even a breast with the Front
divisions of Musketeers; Files close to the left to order of each grand
Division, then they will stand in two grand Divisions as at first, the one in
the Rear of the other; then draw up the second grand Division, provided there
be room upon the left of the first. Then let a Sergeant of each particular
Company draw off those 13 Files which before were taken off to balance the
Divisions into equal number, and were appointed for the guard of the
Ammunition, or Baggage, and being then to join with their own Arms, with
their Captains Companies stands. Which being done, let every Captain draw off
his own men, being assisted by his Lieutenants and Sergeants, and completing
them up into a Body as at first; his Pikes to be flanked with Musketeers, they
may after march away in single Companies after such manner, unto their several
Quarters as shall be appointed to them by the Major; and here I shall conclude
concerning a Regiment of six Companies.

CHAP. XIII. The manner of drawing up a Regiment, consisting of seven
Companies, containing in the four Captains, twelve Files of Musketeers, and
six of Pikes, in each of their particular Companies, and in the three
Field-officers, sixteen Files a piece of Musketeers, and eight of Pikes, which
amounts to the number of 864 men.
IT has been my observation in the City of London, and the Suburbs thereof,
there being 18 Regiments, nine of the Trained Bands, and nine of the
Auxiliaries, that their Regiments in some have but six Companies; others, and
that for the most part, seven, and again, in some, and but a few to have eight
Companies. I shall therefore for the better satisfaction of such as remain
unskilled herein, go through them all, partly to show the practice of this our
City in their several drawings up, with the reasons to confirm the same. And
having passed over as much as is convenient, to satisfy any ingenuous Soldier
concerning the drawing up of six Companies in a regimentall way, with the
confirmation and reasons of every particular Officer, as he there stands, it
may in many things give full light to this that follows of seven Companies.
Yet, nevertheless, for more fuller satisfaction herein, I shall show the true
manner hereof, that I may not be wanting to any Soldiers benefit that he shall
receive thereby. Where, note for better order herein, that I have pitched upon a
particular number of men, although it may many times fall out so, that the
Captains Companies, and the Field-officers cannot be so full as I have here
set down. Or again, it may chance to fall out (as in our Trained Bands of
London) that they be a great deal fuller, as sometimes they are, for I have led
a particular Company my self upon a general day being drawn into the ^ield
consisting of above 300 men. Yet, nevertheless, whether the Companies be great
or small, observe this general rule, make two grand Divisions, and balance
their number equal in both Arms, and make no more Subdivisions then what you
have Captains to lead, and Lieutenants to bring up; and let the Sergeants March
by the Flanks, and not presume either to lead, or bring up any Divisions, being
conceived by most to be very improper. And again, if you fight the Regiment,
let your Musketeers as near as you can be equal alike in their Subdivisions
as they may most conveniently fall out, whether four, five, or six a breast, it
makes no great matter, always leaving in time of fight, between such number of
Files six foot of ground intervall, for to wheel off their Ranks after they
have fired.

Now suppose, the whole Regiment were marching to their general place of
Randezvous; the Major being there before hand, attending the Companies coming
in, he orders to the Colonels Company the most convenient place for their
drawing up, and next to him the fourth Captains Company upon the left, and next
to him the third Captain, and after him, the eldest or first Captain, which
makes the first grand Division. In the next place he orders the Lieutenant
Colonels Company to be on the left of the whole Regiment, standing in even
Front with the Colonel, upon the right of him, the second Captain is placed,
and after him the Majors own Company, which makes up the second grand Division.

Having thus far proceeded, let the Major command the Pikes, and Colors to
advance forward ten paces, before the Front of Musketeers, then let him close
the Pikes of the first four Companies, to the right to order, and the Pikes of
the last to the left to order, and the like of the Musketeers in the Rear to
those hands to the same distance, then they will stand in four Divisions; two
of Pikes in the Front, and two of Mukettiers in the Rear. In the next place let
him count how many Files of Pikes there are in each Division, and he will find
in the Colonels Division 26 Files, and in the Lieutenant Colonels but 22. To
make these even, he must take off one file a piece from the youngest Captains,
and bring them into the midst of the Lieutenant Colonels Division, and then he
will make them equal, there being in each grand Division 24 files of Pikes.
The Pikes being made thus equal, let him move down into the Rear, and examine
the Musketeers, where upon the right he will find 52 files, and upon the left
but 44; to make these even in number, he must take off one file a piece from
the four Companies of the first grand Division, and lead them away up into the
midst of the second, and then there will be in each grand Division of
Musketeers 48 files a piece. In the next place let him face them to the right
and left outward, and move them to such convenient distance, as he may after
divide his Musketeers into four Divisions to move up, and flank the Pikes.

This being performed, he ought to appoint unto every Captain and Lieutenant
his place where to lead, and where to bring up, and what men upon all occasions
they are to fight. To which purpose, there being in the first grand Division
four Captains, there must be four places to lead, and four to bring up, and
therefore having their four Colors upon the long-march, that Body of Pikes may
be divided into two Divisions, and to march with two Colors in the first
Division of Pikes, which are to be led by the eldest Captain, and brought up by
the Captains Lieutenants Bringer-up; the second Division of Pikes is to be led
by the fourth Captain, and to be brought up by the eldest Captain Lieutenant.
The Reer-guard of Musketeers in this grand division is to be led by the third
Captain, and to be brought up by his Lieutenant, who upon the long-march his
Captain if he pleases, may exchange places, being more honor to him to be
there to bring up, then to lead that Division, as has been formerly expressed.
As concerning the Captain Lieutenant his place is to be fixed according as in
the Figure to lead the first Division of Musketeers, and to be brought up by
the fourth Captains Lieutenant, but at such time when they are drawn up all a
breast, they are to take their places as at first fixed, both in their leading,
and bringing-up, as shall be set forth in the following Figure, with all their
several places appointed thereunto. As concerning all the rest, they are
placed in manner as was showed in my discourse of a Regiment consisting of six
Companies.

But here it may be objected, that in the first grand Division I have placed
the Colonel, eldest Captain, third, and fourth, and by casting up their number
of dignity, we find it to amount unto 18, and in the second grand Division,
the Lieutenant Colonel, Major, and second Captain, whose number amounts but to
10: here we find (say they) a great deal of difference, and alteration, your
intentions principally tending to make them equal in dignity, for certainly,
where the greater number is, there is the lesser dignity, and therefore a wrong
unto that part where ever it so falls out.

To which, I answer, where there is no just exceptions to be made to the
contrary, the former rule ought ever to be preserved in the keeping an equal
balance of the number of dignity, but herein it does not. For the Colonel
ought always to have placed in his division the eldest Captain, who is to lead
his colors, and the first Body of Pikes, which is the first place of honor
among the Captains, and in the second place the Majors Company is always drawn
up, upon the out-most part, on the right of the Lieutenant Colonels grand
Division, to carry an equal proportion of number, they being the second, and
third worth, unto that of the first, or fourth, as is in the Colonels. In the
next place, the second Captains turn comes to be regarded, who by the same
rule, as the eldest Captain lays claim to carry the first honor, by leading
the first Body of Pikes, and the Colonels colors: so the second Captain
cannot expect any other, but to be placed to lead the second Body of Pikes, and
the Lieut. Colonels colors. Now, there being an odd Captain, he must be
either placed upon the right, or left, he is therefore thought in discretion to
be rather placed with the Colonel in his Division, that his colors may there
fly, marching four together, being far more honor and graceful, then that of
three, as in the Lieutenant Colonels, and therefore where there is an honor
in that kind which cannot be divided, it is very fit and requisite to place and
fix it with him that is the Commander in chief. As for number of men, both
Divisions are equal a like, and therefore, I conceive, what has been spoken
may take off all objections of this nature.

And now, according to my promise, I shall set forth the manner of the standing
of seven Companies in a regimentall way, with all the several places of honor
appointed forth unto them, either marching, or standing all even a breast. If
they be upon the long-march, they are to observe that manner set down in six
Companies, only to mind that alteration before expressed, the Figure of their
drawing up, and the Officers stated in their proper places, follows in Folio
156.

From which Figure, I will draw up another, placing the Soldiers in Battalia,
which may be very useful for them to fight upon.

Command. Pikes in both Divisions face inward, in-most divisions Musketeers
face outward, Let them be at open order in their Ranks and Files; and the two
grand Divisions standing in one even Front together.
march, and interchange ground each with other, face to your Leader. The four
inmost files of Musketeers next the Pikes face about, and march six foot clear
from the Pikes, and stand, then close their Files to the right and left to
order in their own particular divisions, then face inward, and march all
together, until they stand six foot clear of each other, face to your Leader.
The next five Files of Musketeers in each side of Pikes, advance 18 foot
before the Front, then close their Files into the midst to order, and Ranks
forward to order; Pikes close your Ranks forward to order, and Files into the
midst to order; Every five Files of Musketeers close inward to order, and
Ranks forward to order, then face to the Pikes, and march forward, being
betwixt every five Files of Musketeers, six foot of ground distance each from
other, and the same distance from the Body of Pikes, face all to your Leader.
The 12 out-most Files of Pikes and Musketeers advance forward six foot clear
of the standing part, then move forward the three out-most divisions of
Musketeers 12 paces, then face them inward, and move them until they stand
straight before the five remaining divisions, face all to your Leader. The
middle division of Musketeers of those three taken off before from each Flank
move forward six foot clear of the standing part; the three middle-most
divisions of the five remaining upon each Flank, move up until you stand six
foot short of the divisions which are before you; the two out-most divisions of
the last three that moved, face outward, and march six foot clear of the former
divisions before them: the two remaining divisions by the outside of Pikes
move inward, until you stand straight in the Rear with the two Front
divisions, facing all to their Leader, they will stand as is set forth unto
your view in Folio 156.

Notwithstanding the former directions of drawing forth the Figure, make this
alteration; wheel off the first two divisions of Musketeers before the Pikes,
and place them six foot behind the Rear of those upon the Flanks, and before
you reduce them, carry them into their first places.

In this Figure, you have Forlornes, aptly standing to the Wings, and main Body
of Pikes, with Reserves to them all, so that I shall not need to trouble my
self for to describe what firings might be here performed upon the same, they
lying so apparent to the view, the divisions being clear each of other, any
ingenuous Commander may fire them according unto his own best discretion,
continuing the same as long as he shall think fitting, and therefore passing it
by, and leaving it to their own liberty, I come in the next place to reduce
them again into private Companies.

Reducement. Pikes of the Main Body, advance forward, and range even a breast
with the Pikes before you, the two last divisions of Musketeers in the Rear
move up, and flank the Pikes; the two divisions of Musketeers before the Front
face about, and move down upon the right and left of the other two divisions of
Musketeers, to your Leader. The two last divisions of Musketeers in the Rear
of the Flanks advance forward to the right and left, and range even a breast on
the outside of those three divisions that stands before you; Single divisions
of Musketeers in the Front of each wing, face about, and move down even a
breast with the Rear of the next divisions; The eight divisions of Musketeers
upon each wing face about, the five first divisions move down, and range even a
breast with the Rear; the three last move to the right and left outward until
you be clear of the rest, face to the Rear, and move down in like manner, and
rank even with the rest, after face all to the Front, and they will all stand
in one even Front. Next command the Pikes to face outward, and the five in-most
divisions of Musketeers in each flank, face inward, then march and interchange
ground each with other, and face to their Leader; they will stand again in two
grand Divisions all even a breast in the Front. In the next place let those six
files be taken off by the Sergeants of their own Companies from the two grand
Divisions, and be brought into their first pl^ces. After the Major may give
order to every Captain, to draw off his men, and put them into Companies again,
which is easily done, after the Regiment may be ordered to march home in single
Companies, either by succession or dignity, which he pleases. And here I shall
conclude concerning a Regiment of seven Companies.

military diagram

military diagram

CHAP. XIV. The manner of drawing up, and placing the Officers, of a Regiment,
consisting of eight Companies, having in it a Colonel, a Lieuteuant Colonel,
a Major, and five Captains, their number of men in each Company, being equal
with the former Regiment, they amount unto 972 men.
IT concerns a Major (provided he have room enough) to draw up every Company
even a Breast, and to give unto every Captain, his due place of honor, after
whith, he may proceed to order them in a regimentall way. Wherefore, briefly
thus, observe the manner of the dignity of every Captain, how they ought to be
placed; first the Colonels Company being drawn up in it is convenient place,
next to him upon the left stands the third Captain, and next to him the fourth,
and the next that follows, is the eldest, these four Captains being drawn up
after this manner, makes the first grand Division; and therefore I shall
endeavor to give reasons for to confirm this, before I shall proceed upon the
second, as being the right half-ranks which ought to carry an equal proportion
of worth, honor, and dignity, with that of the last. Where, first, take
notice, that the Colonel being the most worthiest man, is placed upon the
right, and is the first place of honor, and the out-most upon the left, is the
eldest Captain, which is the fourth worth, there being the Colonel, Lieutenant
Colonel, and Major, above him; now consider that the first and fourth worth
makes the number five, betwixt these two is drawn up the third and fourth
Captains, which are the sixth and seventh worth, whose number carries 13, add
them to that number above, and it makes 18. In the next place, since it is the
judgment of most Soldiers, that there should be an equal proportion of
skill, valor, and worth, the Rear half-files answerable to them of the Front:
so likewise the same rule is to be observed between the right and left
half-ranks. That whether we consider the Front divisions, or Rear, right, or
left half-ranks, they may be so balanced in every kind of respect, with true
proportion; so near as the knowledge of the Soldiers, and number of men will
give leave. To which purpose, I will proceed to draw up the second grand
Division, and compare it to the first; the Lieutenant Colonels Company being
drawn up, upon the left of the whole Regiment, upon his fight, is the second
Captain drawn up, and next to him the fifth Captain, after the Major, upon the
right of the Lieutenant Colonels division. Now, if we consider, the Lieutenant
Colonel he is the second man of honor, and therefore ought ^o be upon the
out-most part of the Front on the left* when the Com^^^^^s are marching all
even a Breast, but upon the long-march he is to fall down into the Rear; the
out-most upon the right of his Division is the Majors Compan^ placed, and he is
the third man of honor. Now the third worth and second will carry ^quall
balance of number with that of the first and fourth, and so have I set forth
the four first places of honor, which, I suppose, no knowing Soldier can
deny. Betwixt the second and third worth is drawn up the second Captain, and
fifth, the second Captain is the first worth; and the fifth Captain is the
eighth, which makes the number 13; and will carry an equal weight of number
with those in the midst of the first and fourth worth. Now having stated the
several worths of the second grand Division, being compared together makes a
like number of 18 unto that of the first division. And to take off all
objections that might be made concerning the second Captain, and sift, why they
should not rather be placed in the first division, then in the second, because
it has been held by the opinion of some, it should be so, but never any
substantial reason to be given for the same. Therefore, unto this I shall say,
that they ought to be there where I have placed them, in respect of what I have
formerly said, that as it is the first place of honor amongst the Captains to
lead the first Body of Pikes, where the Colonels colors flies: so I say, it
must necessarily follow the second place of honor must be appointed to the
second Captain, which is to lead in chief the second Body of Pikes, where the
Lieutenant Colonels colors does fly, and to make them of the second division
equal in number with the first, the youngest Captain, which is the eighth
worth, is brought in, and joined to the second Captain, who is the fifth, and
therefore a File or a Rank ought to be set forth in dignity, after this manner.
in respect there is no truer stating the dignity of a single File, or Rank,
then that which shall conform to military diagram greater Bodies as that of
Regiments. And thus much briefly shall suffice to be spoken concerning the
second grand Division, for the placing the second and fifth Captanins betwixt
the Lieutenant Colonel, and the Majors, in respect of the second Captain
stands aptly there to receive his proper place, and the youngest Captain is
brought in to balance their Dignities unto that of the first.

In the n^xt place, I shall show how they ought to be drawn up in a regiment
all way, being all even a breast as before, command Musketeers to face about,
and to march down 12 foot clear of the Rear, then face to the Front, after
close files outward to order of each Arms, then subdivide each division of
Musketeers, and move them up to flank each Body of Pikes. And having accounted
and cast up the number of files of each Arms in each grand Division, you will
find in the Colonels division to have in it 26 files of Pikes, and 52 files
of Musketeers; next the Lieutenant Colonels division, being examined, you
will find there to have in it 28 files of Pikes, and 56 files of Musketeers;
now to make these equal in number, there must be taken forth one file of
Pikes, and two of Musketeers from the second grand Division, and place one a
piece in the midst of the first division, in every one of their particular
divisions, and they will contein equal a like in each grand Division 27 files
of Pikes, and 54 files of Musketeers. In the next place, the Major may assign
unto every Captain and Lieutenant where his place shall be to lead, and where
to bring up; the Colonel being upon the head of his Division, and the
Lieutenant Colonel upon the head of the second grand Division, the Major in
the Front betwixt them both, or where else he pleases, being an Officer always
to act through the whole Regiment. And in the first place he appoints the
Captain Lieutenant to be on the head of the first division of Musketeers, and
to be brought up by the fourth Captains Lieutenant; next he orders the eldest
Captain to be on the head of the first division of Pikes, and to be brought up
by the Captains Lieutenant Bringer-up, and the fourth Captain to be on the head
of the second division of Pikes, and to be brought up by the eldest Captains
Lieutenant; and the second division of Musketeers he appoints unto the third
Captain, and to be brought up by his own Lieutenant, and upon the long-march,
let him and his Captain change places until such time they shall draw up
again. After he orders his own Lieutenant to be on the head of the third
division of Musketeers; and the third division of Pikes, he appoints to the
fifth Captain, and to be brought up by his own Lieutenant; the fourth Division
of Pikes, is ordered to be the second Captains place, and brought up by his own
Lieutenant, the Lieutenant Colonels Lieutenant is appointed to the fourth and
last division of Musketeers, the Lieutenant Colonel upon the long-march
bringing up the whole Regiment. It might be supposed the Captain Lieutenant,
Lieutenant Colonels and Majors Lieutenants, have too great places of honor,
but to answer them all, their Captains being Field-officers and upon several
occasions moving off, their Lieutenants do officiate there in their rooms, and
are but as assistants unto them, for likewise upon several occasions they come
to those places themselves to lead marching there before their Lieutenants. As
concerning the placing of all the rest of the other Officers, they lie clearly,
for as much as formerly has been spoken in their proper places, without (as I
conceive) the exceptions of any.

Secondly, upon the long-march, the Colonel draws off the first division of
Musketeers, and leads them, marching some 12 foot before his Captain
Lieutenant, and that division is brought up by the fourth Captains Lieutenant,
the colors marching two and two upon every division, whereof the first is
drawn off, and led by the first Captain, and brought up by the Captains
Lieutenants and Bringer-up, the next division of Pikes falling in the Rear of
the first, and led by the fourth Captain, and brought up by the first Captains
Lieutenant; the second division of Musketeers, is led by the third Captains
Lieutenant, and brought up by his own Captain; the fourth or first division of
Musketeers in the second grand Division is led by the Major, when he pleases,
some 12 foot before his own Lieutenant; and the third division of Pikes, is led
by the fifth Captain, and brought up by his own Lieutenant, the fourth and last
division of Pikes is led by the second Captain, and brought up by his own
Lieutenant, the fourth and last division of Musketeers is by the Lieu. Col.
Lieutenant, the Rear of the whole Regiment being brought up by the Lieut. Col.
thus every Division is to march by succession, the one in the Rear of another,
keeping 18 foot distance betwixt every Division, until they shall have room to
march all even a breast, and then with very little alteration with the third
Captain, changing places, with his own Lieutenant, they are all to take their
places again as at first.

Having now set forth the true dignity of every Captains and Lieutenants place,
what men they shall take charge on to fight, where to lead, and where to bring
up, I shall spare the figure in respect I shall show (with very little
alteration) the manner of drawing up and marching of diverse Regiments that were
under the command of the late Earl of Essex.

The first grand Division in respect of every Officer and place, is to be
ordered as the former; only in the second, there will be this small alteration,
the Lieutenant Colonels Company, and the Majors are to interchange places, the
rest are to remain as they were, only with th^s alteration following; the
Lieutenant Colonels Lieutenant is to lead the first Division of Musketeers,
until such time that his Lieutenant Colonel shall come unto that place, and
then he is to bring up that Division being near at hand, that if his Lieutenant
Colonel should upon some just occasions be called off, he may immediately move
up, and lead there in his absence. For upon the long-march, as the Colonel
leads the first grand Division, so it is conceived by some, (they marching in
two grand Divisions some 20 paces distance from each other in manner of two
regimentall marchings) that the Lieutenant Colonel ought to lead the second.
Next, let the first Division of Pikes be led by the second Captain, and to be
brought up by the fifth Captains Lieutenant, and the second Division of Pikes
to be led by the fifth Captain, and brought up by the second Captains
Lieutenant; the last Division of Musketeers to be led by the Majors
Lieutenant, and the Rear of the second grand Division being left for the Major
to bring up, at such time as with convenience he may be spared. Therefore, to
march thus, it being a very good way, and with very little alteration to be
made, I was unwilling to pass it by, leaving it to the discretion of every
ingenuous Soldier, to make use of which way he best pleases, or likes of,
whilst I in the next place, shall set forth the Figure, which follows in page
161; affording more variety in the same.

CHAP. XV. How to make the Figure of a Ring, with it is use and service.
THe way to make this Figure in the most readiest manner, is to be performed
after this kind; both the grand Divisions, standing all a breast in even Front;
first move forward all the Musketeers some ten foot clear of the Pikes, after
let them close Files both of Musketeers and Pikes, into the midst to order,
then they will stand in two Divisions, one of Musketeers, and in the Rear of
them, one of Pikes; then open the files outward to open order of each Arms,
and after let them double the Front to the left of both Arms by Bringers-up,
and they will be but three deep of each Arms, having in the Fronts the best
Soldiers; then command them to face all to the right, then wheel them about
still to the right of both Arms; the Pikes wheeling all in the inside of the
Musketeers, until you have brought them into two Rings, provided thus that
you close your Rings unto that place which was your first Front, then face them
all to the Center, and after face them about to the right, and they will then
be faced round and stand suitable to the following Figure (page 163.) and to
have in it two Rings, the one of Musketeers, the other of Pikes, some ten foot
short on the inside of them. And by reason it cannot be well otherwise, in
respect there are as many Musketeers again as there are Pikes, and the
Officers following the Soldiers in their places formerly fixed in this Motion
will also naturally stand in manner and form as is set down in the Figure.

But, me thinks, I hear some say, of what use or service upon any occasion may
this Ring be unto the Soldier. To whom I answer, that it is one of the most
serviceablest Figures that can be made, to secure the Soldier from danger
against the furious charge of horse in Campania, the accomplishing or making of
it up, being easily and suddenly performed, the Musketeers having Pallizadoes
may advance forward three or four paces, and stick them down in such manner, as
that they may keep the horse from breaking in among them. And after if they
should be charged round, they may give fire over them, against their Enemies,
and fall in the Rear of themselves; yet nevertheless, if the horse should be
undaunted, and military diagram Place this Figure of the Rining between Folio
160 and 161.
attempt to come on again, they may resist them with a more desperate charge
after this manner, bringing all hands to fight, and to pour out their shot, or
to fire altogether after this kind. Command first the Pik^s to move forward,
until they be three foot behind the Musketeers, then let every file rank to
the right, which will make them to stand but one a breast in one single ring
behind the Musketeers, now that all hands may be brought to fight together,
command the first rank of Musketeers to kneel down, the second stoop, and the
third stand upright, then let all close forward to close order, and let the
Pikes as occasion shall require charge betwixt the Musketeers, who may fire
altogether, and the Pikes may charge on whilst the Musketeers make ready
again. The Pallizadoes formerly stuck, keeping off the horse from breaking in
upon them, they may fire after this manner, as often as they please; and so
much may suffice to be spoken concerning the service and use that may be made
of it in time of fight, and now in the next place I come to reduce them into
Companies again as at first.

Let the Pikes that ranked to the right, file three to the left as they were,
and let the Bringers-up that doubled face about to the right, and march forth
into their places. Then let the Major come to that place where he closed the
Ring, and break it off, wheeling them all a long about to the left until he
has brought them to stand in one even Front as at first, the same in like
manner to be performed of the Pikes, and to stand in the Rear of the
Musketeers. Next, let the Mukettiers and Pikes face outward, and move to such
convenient distance, that after the Musketeers may be subdivided again, and
the Pikes move up, and double their Front inward entire in each grand Division.
Which being brought into that form, each Captain may draw off his men, being
so commanded by the Major, and complete up his Company again, and be after
disposed of to farther duty, or to march home to their Quarters according to
command; and here I shall conclude this Regiment of eight Companies.

military diagram

CHAP. XVIII. The manner of drawing up a Regiment, consisting of ten Companies,
having in it seven Captains, and three Field-Officers, being in each particular
Company, the former numbers, which in all amounts unto 1198 men.
THe Major having ground sufficient for the drawing up the Regiment, after the
Colonels Company has made Alt, next to him upon the left he draws up the
youngest Captain, which is the tenth, and the next to him the third Captain,
which is the sixth, after that the fourth Captain, which is the seventh, then
the first Captain which is the fourth. Then the Majors which is the the third,
next to him the fifth Captain which is the eighth, and after that the second
Captain, which is the fifth, then the sixth Captain, which is the ninth, all
these being drawn up upon the left of the Colonels Company, the closier of all
upon the left, is the Lieutenant Colonels Company, whose figure carries the
number 2. Place now all these numbers of dignity according to the former
figures, and they will stand as follows in a rank.

military diagram

In the next place compare the dignity of the right half-ranks, with the left,
and they are balanced as near as can be possible to be equal, there being one
odd, which of necessity must be cast upon the right half-ranks for the reasons
formerly expressed, in placing the second Captain into the Lieutenant Colonels
division. Then according to the former rule draw forth the Pikes, and ingrosse
them into two Bodies, and the like of the Musketeers, after sub-divide the
Musketeers, and make them four divisions, and move them up to flank the Pikes,
and then they will be in two complete grand Divisions. In the next place, let
the Major order forth unto the Captains and Lieutenants, their several places
to lead, and to bring up, after this manner. There being two grand Divisions,
having in them five Captains, and five Lieutenants, it will be necessary to
appoint out five several Charges in the first grand Division to lead, and five
to bring up, after this manner. As first, divide the Vanguard into two
divisions, the first to be led by the Captain Lieutenant, and brought up by his
Bringer-up; the second division of Musketeers in the Van to be led by the
third Captains Lieutenant, and to be brought up by the fourth Captains
Lieutenant. The first division of Pikes is to have the three first colors to
fly upon the head of them, and to be led by the eldest Captain, and brought up
by the seventh Captains Lieutenant, the next division of Pikes to be led by the
fourth Captain, having his own, and the eldest Captains colors flying upon the
head of them, and to be brought up by the seventh, or youngest Captain in the
Regiment; the Reer-guard of Musketeers of the first grand Division to be led
by the third Captain, and brought up by the eldest Captains Lieutenant, who
upon the long-march these two are to inter-change places if the third Captain
desire it, and having such permission from the Major, being more honor to
bring up, then to lead, as was said before in the former Regiments.

Next follows the placing of the Officers in the second grand Division; let
the Vanguard of Musketeers there be led by the Majors Lieutenant, or by
himself when he pleases, and be brought up by the fifth Captains Lieutenant;
next let the first division of Pikes there be led by the fifth Captain, having
two colors flying on the head of them, the Majors, and his own, and to be
brought up by the sixth Captains Lieutenant; let the next division of Pikes be
led by the second Captain, having three colors flying on the head of them, the
Lieutenant Colonels, his own, and the sixth Captains, and let that be brought
up by the second Captains Lieutenant, let the last division of Musketeers, be
led by the sixth Captain, and brought up by the Lieutenant Colonels Lieutenant;
the Lieutenant Colonel upon the long-march bringing up the Rear of the
Regiment, some 12 foot behind his own Lieutenant.

I shall in the next place show the reasons for the thus placing of the
Officers, where first I shall endeavor to clear the first grand Division, which
will occasion the second to be more easily resolved. Where briefly thus, as
concerning the Colonel, eldest Captain, third Captain, and Cap. Lieutenant, I
shall pass them over, having formerly spoken sufficient to satisfy any
Soldier therein. It follows therefore to speak of the fourth Captains place,
which is the next man of honor after the former, and therefore is placed to
lead the second division of Pikes, which is more honor to him to lead there,
then to lead a sub-division of Musketeers. In the Vanguard next to him in
honor in this division, is the seventh Captain, who is appointed to bring up
the first grand Body of Pikes, which likewise is more honor unto him, then to
lead or bring up any sub-division of Musketeers, as before expressed. Having
thus resolved of all the Captains, and Captains Lieutenants place, next follows
the reasons of the Lieutenants places, where first take notice that the eldest
Captains Lieutenant is appointed to bring up the Reer-guard, which next the
Pikes is the greatest place of honor in the Rear, and a very honorable place
unto him; or if he alters places with the third Captain upon the long-march,
yet nevertheless he has the chiefest place of honor after the Captain
Lieutenant amongst all the Lieutenants unto those places he is ordered unto.
The third Captains Lieutenant is assigned to the next place, who leads the
second division of Musketeers in the Vanguard, which is more honor to him
then to bring up any such division; after follows him the fourth Captains
Lieutenant, who brings up the Rear of the Vanguard, which is more honor to
him, of the places remaining to be there, then to bring up either the first
division of Musketeers, or the first division of Pikes. Lastly, the seventh
Captains Lieutenant is placed to bring up the first division of Pikes, which
being the more honorable Arms, it adds more honor to him to be there to bring
up, then the first division of Musketeers, which being the last place of
honor, it is given to the Captain Lieutenants Bringer-up to be there; and thus
much shall suffice for the reasons of the places of the first grand Division.

Now for placing of the Officers of the second grand Division, I shall not need
to speak any thing concerning the Lieutenant Colonels Major, Second Captain,
and the Majors Lieutenants place, in regard in the former Regiments I have
endeavored to give the Soldier satisfaction therein. Therefore next to those
in this grand Division follows to be spoken is the fifth Captain, who is the
next man of honor, and therefore has his due place appointed out to him to
lead the first division of Pikes, where the Majors and his own colou^ fly,
which is more honor to him to lead there the Van of the Pikes, then the
Reer-guard of Musketeers. Next to him is the sixth Captain, which next the
Pikes has his due place of honor, remaining to him to lead the Reer-guard.
Having thus resolved the Captains places, I shall in the next endeavor to show
the Lieutenants, where first it falls to the Lieutenant Colonels Lieutenant to
be placed first, who is ordered to bring up the Rear, to be an assistant unto
his Lieutenant Colonel, who is a Field Officer, and may have many occasions to
fall off, and therefore he requires his Lieutenant to be present with his men
there, as the Colonels does his in the Front. And as much may be said of the
Majors Lieutenant, but passing him by, I come next to the second Captains
Lieutenant, who is appointed to bring up the Rear of the second Body of Pikes,
which is the greatest place of honor that is in the Rear next to the
Lieutenant Colonels Lieutenant. After him follows the fifth Captains
Lieutenant, who is placed to bring up the Rear of the Vanguard of this
division, which is more honor then to bring up the Van of the Pikes, whose
turn being the last place of honor falls to him that is the youngest
Lieutenant, which is the sixth Captains Lieutenant.

And thus as briefly as I could I have run over all the reasons for the placing
of the Officers in the Regiment drawn up after this manner, that I might not be
wanting unto the desire of any such who are willing to be informed herein,
being always ready to employ my self in as plain a way as I can for the
benefit of all true loving Soldiers, who are concerned herein. And therefore,
for their better satisfaction, let them cast their eye upon the Figure as it is
demonstrated between Folio 161 and 162, where they shall see every man placed
according to my former discourse.

CHAP. XVII. The manner both of the drawing up, and the order of the Long-march
of Colonel Rainsborough his Regiment, bringing up the Rear of the foot of the
Army, under the Command of the Lord General Fairfax, at their first marching
through the City of London, on the seventh of August, 1647.
THe first order of drawing up the Regiment at their first place of Randezvous,
before they marched or joined with the Army was thus; The Colonels Company
being upon the out-most part of the right of the Regiment, next to his left by
succession was drawn up the second, sixth, fifth, and first Captains, which make
up his division, or the right half-ranks in their first drawing up to be
complete, and may in their figure of dignity standing in a rank be demonstrated
as follows, 4: 8: 9: 5: 1. This number of worth being cast up amounts to
27, and thus much for the Colonels Division.

Now for the left half-ranks, or Lieutenant Colonels Division, (as many times
it is so ordered and appointed) his own Company being drawn up upon the
out-most part on the left of the Regiment, and next to his right after each
other is drawn up the third, seventh, fourth, and Majors Company, whose figure
of dignity standing rank-wise, may be thus described, 2: 6: 10: 7: 3. and their
number of dignity in all amounts to 28. Where you may perceive a rule that
the discretion of the Major walks by, in the drawing up of the Regiment, to
balance with as near proportion as he can the number, worth, and dignity of
his right half-ranks, or right flank, suitable with that of the left. For it
would be unreasonable that all the best men should be on the right, and that
the left of the Regiment who are to oppose the Enemies right should have the
weakest or meanest men of worth; therefore without all question that Body of
men that shall be drawn up so as to make all parts of equal worth, and
strength, as the right flank with the left, the Front with the Rear, so that
where ever the Enemy shall fall on to charge any one of these parts, being all
made equal in strength, and worth, it must needs prevent all murmuring
complaints, and carry best approbation to all knowing Commanders; And thus much
briefly may be spoken in the commendation of the ordering of his Regiment thus
far.

The Captains now standing by their own colors, on the head of the Pikes, and
their Companies being drawn up all, and standing in an even Front, the Major
next commands the Musketeers to stand, the Pikes and Colors to troop forth
some ten or twelve paces clear of the Musketeers, and then they likewise to
stand, and after to close their files to the midst to order.

Next he commands the Musketeers in their files to close outward to order,
commanding them afterward to move up, and flank the Pikes, after which he
orders the Body into thirteen remarkable divisions, four divisions of
Musketeers upon each side of the Pikes, and the Pikes into five divisions,
having their colors fly by two and two, and to be led by those Ensign-bearers
that do belong to each of them, excepting the first and middle divisions, for
they have Leaders in chief, as the first and fifth Captain, and the third
Captain, to bring up the Rear of the whole Body of Pikes. For more fuller
illustration of the leading and bringing up of each division, in the Regiment
upon their Long-march, observe these following directions.

1 The Regiment being upon their March, the first division upon the right, is
led by the Colonel, his Captain Lieutenant marching in the Rear of him
several paces, and that particular division is brought up by the Captains
Lieutenant Bringer-up.

2 The second division of Musketeers is led by the second Captain Lieutenant,
and brought up by the first, or eldest Cap. Lieutenant.

military diagram

3 The third division of Musketeers is led by the sixth Captain, and brought up
by his own Lieutenant.

4 The fourth division of Musketeers is led by the fifth Captains Lieutenaut,
and brought up by the fourth Captain.

5 The first division of Pikes is led by the eldest Captain, having the
Colonels, and second Captains colors flying on the head of them.

6 The second division of Pikes is led by the fifth and sixth Captains Ensigns,
having their own colors flying upon the head of the same.

7 The third division of Pikes, is led by the fifth Captain, having the Majors
and eldest Captains colors flying upon the head of the same.

8 The fourth division of Pikes is led by the fourth and seventh Captains
Ensigns, having their own colors flying upon the head of the same.

9 The fifth and last division of Pikes is led by the Lieutenant Colonels, and
third Captains Ensigns, having likewise their own colors flying upon the head
of the same, and the Rear of the Pikes is brought up by the third Captain.

10 The first division of Musketeers on the left flank is led by the second
Captain, and brought up by the fourth Captains Lieutenant.

11 The second upon the left is led by the third Captains Lieutenant, and
brought up by the Majors Lieutenant.

12 The third division is led by the seventh Captain, and brought up by his own
Lieutenant.

13 The fourth or last division of Musketeers is led by the Lieutenant
Colonels Lieutenant, and the Rear of the Regiment is brought up by the
Lieutenant Colonel.

Notwithstanding, I have thus laid down the manner of the Divisions, with the
placing of the Officers, there are also from all these divisions both of the
Pikes and Musketeers, subdivisions drawn off upon the long-march betwixt every
fifth or sixth file as they can equally divide them, with even proportions to
march. And for the leading of such divisions there are Sergeants cast in that
properly belong unto them which do lead* and bring them up, so that upon this
account they make in their long-regimentall-march some thirty divisions, by
reason, as I conceive, upon any Alt, or convenient place of drawing them all up
even a breast, the Sergeants as well as the rest of the superior Officers may
be helpful to bring up the file-leaders again as at first into their
properplaces. And thus far I have endeavored for the satisfaction of all
ingenuous Soldiers to set forth the manner of Collonell Rainsborough's
Regiment of their drawing up, disposing of colors, and placing of Officers, as
was the Observation of my ever honored Friend, and most exquisite knowing
Soldier Thomas Walker, one of the Captains of the same Regiment, and a true
lover of the Military Art, who friendly communicated to me the practice of
their Regiment. Which although it differs from the drawing up of all others in
our Army (as I am informed, they varying in one kind or other by their several
ways) I question not, but this may be as good as any of the rest, which I leave
to the judgment of the curious searchers into this Art; whilst I proceed to
show the Figures following.

CHAP. XVIII. A third way of drawing up a Regiment of ten Companies, after the
manner used amongst the Swedes.
THe Companies meeting altogether, whether it be in the Alarm place, otherwise
at their general Randezvous, where they have ground and room sufficient enough
for their drawing up; The Major appointing forth unto the Lieutenant C^llonels
Company a place most convenient to stand, he draws all the rest of the
Companies upon the left of him after this manner. The seventh and the second
Captain, then the Colonel, after him the sixth, fourth, and first Captain,
then the Major, after him the fifth, and third Captain, who closes up the left
of the whole Regiment, the figures of their dignity, standing after this manner.

military diagram

Here you may perceive they follow a rule to balance their number of dignity
as near as they can, carrying their odd number on the left half-rank, and not
upon the right, for these reasons, as, I conceive, following. Their Regiments
being so full of men, they draw them up for the most part into three Squadrons,
or grand Divisions, giving unto the Lieutenant Colonel the right wing, the
Major the left, and the Colonel, the Main-battail. The Colonels grand
Division consists of the four middle Companies, where you are to take notice,
being drawn off some ten paces clear from the rest, they stand after this
manner by way of figure 4: 7: 9: 1. The Leiutenant Colonels Division after
this manner, 5: 10: 2. and the Majors after this kind, 6: 8: 3. Wherein I do
observe in each grand Division this rule, that by succession and degrees they
put the best Soldiers upon the right, and the second according to course upon
the left, and the rest between them. As first, the Colonel being the chiefest
man of honor is placed upon the right of his Squadron, next to his left is the
sixth and fourth Captain, and the closing up of his grand Division, is placed
the first or eldest Captain. The Leiutenant Colonel being the second man of
honor is likewise placed upon the right of his Squadron, and next to his left
the seventh Captain, his grand Division being closed up by the second Captain.
In the next place, the Major, he being the third man of honor, is placed upon
the right of his Squadron, and upon his left, the fifth Captain, and his grand
Division is closed up upon the left by the third Captain. So that you may
observe in the closing up of every Division, that as every Field-Officer is
upon the right of their Squadrons, so they take by degrees upon the out-most of
their left to close their Divisions, the Captains according to their degrees by
succession. As first, and more clearly, the Colonel takes the eldest Captain
to him on his left, who will aptly fall in to lead his Body of pikes, and
colors; the Lieutenant Colonel takes the second Captain, for to lead his
Stand of pikes and colors; the third Captain being placed upon the left of the
out-most part of the Majors Squadron, to lead likewise his colors, and Body of
pikes. And further if you observe the number of worth, and dignity, that the
right wing has with the left, you will find them to be equally balanced, and
to be 17 a like in number. Now in respect there cannot be an equal Division of
the colors by threes, there is very good reason that the odd should be placed
in the Colonels Squadron, who is Commander in chief, and to whom it properly
belongs unto.

In the next place, I shall show you how to draw them forth in a regimentall
way; the four middle Companies being advanced forward ten paces clear from the
three out-most Companies, may stand, then draw forth the Pikes of each
Squadron, until they be ten foot clear of their Musketeers, then close Pikes
into the midst to order in their files in each Division, and they will be in
three Bodies, after close the Musketteiers into the midst to order, then
sub-divide them in as equal a way as you can, and let them move up upon the
right, and left, and flank each Body of Pikes. Then let the Major examine the
files in the Colonels Division, how many they exceed in number the other two,
and he will find twelve files of Musketeers, and six files of Pikes, more
then in the rest. Now to make military diagram them equal a like in each
Squadron, let him take off from each particular Company of the Colonels
Squadron, one file of Pi^es, and place two of those four in the midst of the
Lieutenant Colonels Squadron, and the remaining two in the midst of his own
Squadron, which being done each Body of Pikes will have in it 22 files. After
let him take off from each Company two files of Musketeers, which will be
eight files, and let him place two files in the midst of each flank of
Musketeers, both in the Divisions of the Lieutenant Colonels, and his own,
and then there will be in each particular division of Musketeers 21 files.
This being likewise a very good way to draw up a Regiment of so great a number
of men, I was unwilling to pass it by, but to present it unto the view of all
loving Soldiers, which will more fuller appear in the figure following (Folio
167) in which figure I shall show the several places of the Captains, and
their Lieutenants, where they are to lead, and where to bring up.

But before the former figure be drawn up, it will be convenient for the Major
to take off from every Company four files of Musketeers, (excepting the
Colonels) and move them down by 12 files a piece some ten foot clear of the
Rear of Pikes of each division, and then close them in their files inward to
order, and face them after to the Front, and they will stand there ready upon
all occasions to be Reserves unto the Wings, or any other part of the Body, or
to be Convoys to fetch in Victual, Ammunition, or any thing else that shall be
wanting unto the Regiment. I shall not need to draw any other Figure of Battle
from this, they standing in a very good form to fire upon, opening every five
files clear from each other six foot that the Musketeers may have room enough,
to fall off, and to move down in the Rear of themselves, after such time their
ranks have fired. Neither shall I need to give any further reasons for the
placing of the Officers, in respect it lies clear and easy to the view of
every ingenuous Soldier to apprehend. As for matter of marching, if they have
ground sufficient, it will be very graceful to them for to preserve this
figure; but if they have not room, but must be constrained to draw off, and
march in particular divisions it will be convenient to keep this decorum, if
the Colonel thinks fit to change places every day, after this manner. He that
leads the Vanguard one day, falls off the next, and bring up the Reer-ward;
and he that before led the Main-battail, comes to lead the Van, and he that led
the Reer-ward, comes to be in the place of the Main-battail. And thus they
change, and take their turns by course, to lead the Van, the Battle, and the
Reer-ward. They ought likewise in their March to have thirty foot of ground
distance betwixt each grand Division, and when they have ground sufficient,
they may draw up again into their first figure. Now in respect I purpose to go
on upon the next drawing up of a Regiment of 12 Companies, I shall break off to
discourse any more of this. For the reducing of them again into Companies, it
will be easy, let the Sergeants of each particular Company fetch off those men
of theirs which were drawn off for Reserves, and to make the Squadrons even in
number, bring them to join with their own men; then let every Captain take off
his Pikes and Musketeers, and complete them up into one Body, they will be
ready to receive Orders, and to be in a condition for marching away, either to
their Quarters, or other duties, which they shall be appointed unto by their
Major.

CHAP. IX. The way of drawing up a Regiment consisting of 12 Companies, the
nine Captains, having 18 Files in each Company, and the three Field-officers
everyone them 24 Files, whereof, there are two thirds of Musketeers, and one
of Pikes, in each particular Company, amounting in all to 1404 men.
THe Major having convenient place, be first orders where the Colonels Company
is to stand, and after draws all the rest of the Companies upon the left of
him, after this manner. The ninth, the fourth, the third, the sixth, and the
first, Captains; then the Major next the seventh, the fifth, the second, and
the eighth Captains and the out-most of all upon the left, the Lieutenant
Colonels Company, in manner of the dignity of a Rank, as they thus stand.

military diagram

The dignity of places cannot be better stated, then in this of 12 Companies,
as first, the right half-ranks is equal with the left in number of dignity.
Again, divide them into three parts, and their number of dignity falls out to
carry a long with it an equal number of 26 all even a like. Consider likewise,
the stating of every Captain in the Regiment, and they are qualified equal
throughout, the best, and the youngest Soldiers joined together, as by
examining them how they stand by two's, their number of worth and dignity
throughout carries 13 all equal a like. In the next place, draw forth all the
Pikes, and ingrosse them into two Bodies, then divide the Musketeers into four
parts, and move them up, and flank those Stands of Pikes, and they will be in
two grand Divisions; then place the Officers after this manner; beginning first
with the Colonels division, make two divisions of Musketeers in his Van, let
the first be led by the Captain Lieutenant, and be brought up by his
Bringer-up, let the next division of Musketeers be led by the fourth Captains
Lieutenant, and brought up by the third Captains Lieutenant; let the Pikes be
divided into three divisions, the Colors flying two and two upon the head of
them, let the first division be led by the eldest Captain, and brought up by
the ninth Captains Lieutenant, let the next division be led by the sixth
Captain, and brought up by his own Lieutenant, let the last division be led by
the fourth Captain, and the whole Body of Pikes be brought up by the ninth
Captain. Then let the Reer-guard of the Colonels division be led by such
observations as is set forth in other Regiments by the third Captain, and
brought up by the first Capt. Lieut.

Having placed the Officers in the first grand Division, he may proceed unto
the next, let the first division of Musketeers be led by the Majors
Lieutenant, and brought up by the fifth Captains Liutenant. Let the Pikes be
divided into three parts, the Colors likewise flying, two and two upon the
head of them; then let the first division be led by the fifth Captain, and
brought up by the eighth Captains Lieutenant, next let the second division be
led by the eighth Captain, and brought up by the seventh Captains Lieutenant;
Lastly, let the third division be led by the second Captain, and brought up by
his own Lieutenant, let the last division of Musketeers be led by the seventh
Captain, and brought up by the Lieutenant Colonels Lieutenant; The Colonel is
to be on the head of his division, and the Lieutenant Colonel upon the head of
his, and the Major between them both in the Front. The Officers before they are
thus placed, are to have their grand divisions of both Arms equally balanced
for number of worth, observing still the former rules in the execution of the
same It might be here expected I should show reasons for the thus placing of
the Officers, after this manner; but to satisfy such, if they please but to
observe and take notice of the reasons given in the former Regiments, which
will give satisfaction unto this, carrying with it the same order and way. And
likewise it might be expected, that I should here set forth a figure for the
thus drawing them up as before expressed, and placing of the several Officers.
But since this Regiment falls out to be so full in number, I shall set it forth
after the manner of drawing up a Brigade, according to the Swedish practice.

CHAP. XX. The manner of drawing up a Regiment, according to the Swedish
Brigade.
AFter that the Major has placed the Lieutenant Colonels Company in such a
convenient place, that he may draw all the rest up on the left of him, he thus
proceeds in bringing up the Companies; he first places to him the eighth
Captain, then the fifth, after that the second, then the Colonels Company, next
to him the ninth Captain, then the sixth Captain, and first Captain, after the
Majors, then the seventh Captain after the fourth Captain, then upon the
out-most part of the left, is placed the third Captain, in manner and form, as
they thus stand.

military diagram

Having thus far proceeded, he may command the four out-most Companies upon
each Flank, to advance forward some ten paces clear from the four middle
Companies, then let them stand, and after let him draw forward the Pikes clear
from the Musketeers, and close their files outward to order, then let the
Musketeers be divided into four parts, their files being closed to order, let
them move forward, and flank those two Bodies of Pikes. After in the same
manner move forward the Pikes in the four middle Companies until they be clear
of the Musketeers, and close their files into the midst to order, and divide
their Musketeers, into two parts, and let them move forward, and flank that
Body of ^ikes, and then they will stand in three Squadrons, or grand Divisions,
their dignities standing after this manner in the Colonels division, thus, 4:
9: 12: 1. In the Lieutenant Colonels division, thus, 5: 8: 11: 2. and in the
Majors, thus, 6: 7: 10: 3. So that you may perceive this to be a very good way
amongst the rest, each particular Squadron bearing the number of 26, and having
unto every one of them their dignities and worths equally divided, and stated a
like. In the next place, the Major ought to inquire of the number of men they
carry in each division of both Arms, where as first, he shall find in the
Colonels Squadron, to have in it 26 files of Pikes, and 52 files of
Musketeers, and examining all the rest, they will fall out to the same
proportion of number. So that in each division there conteines, whether they be
Pikes, or Musketeers, to have in every particular thereof 78 files. In the
next place he shall do well to appoint forth unto them their several places to
lead, and bring up; and first, of the Colonels grand Division, he being on the
head thereof, the Captain Lieutenant leading the first division of Musketeers
in his Squadron, being brought up by his Bringer-up; the first two Colors, and
his half Body of Pikes to to be led by the eldest Captain, and brought up by
the ninth Captains Lieutenant, the next two Colors, and half Body of Pikes to
be led by the ninth Captain, and brought up by the eldest Captains Lieutenant,
the last division of Musketeers in his Squadron to be led by the sixth Captain,
and brought up by his own Lieutenant. The first division of Musketeers in the
Lieutenant Colonels Squadron, is led by his own Lieutenant, and brought up by
the eighth Captains Lieutenant, his first two Colors, and half Body of Pikes
is led by the second Captain, and the next two Colors, and half Body of
Pikes, is led by the eighth Captain, and brought up by the second Captains
Lieutenant, his last division of Musketeers is led by the fifth Captain, and
brought up by his own Lieutenant; himself standing as the Colonel does, upon
the head of his Squadron. The first division of Musketeers in the Majors
Squadron (himself being upon the head) is led by his own Lieutenant, and
brought up by the seventh Captains Lieutenant, his first two Colors, and half
Body of Pikes is led by the third Captain, and the next two Colors, and half
Body of Pikes, is led by the seventh Captain, and brought up by the third
Captains Lieutenant, his last division of Musketeers is led by the fourth
Captain, and brought up by his Lieutenant, as in the next place, in the Figure
set forth in Folio. 170, more fully appears.

military diagram

They standing according to the former directions in three Bodies of Pikes
flanked with Mus^ettiers, before they come to the Figure set forth, you must
command in each grand Division, the six in-most files of Musketeers next the
Pikes, to face about, and to march six paces clear of the Rear, and then close
them inward to order. Afterward open every four files outward to open order, of
those 12 files, and let the middle division there face about, and move down six
foot clear of the Rear, and after face to their Leader. Then there will remain
20 files of Musketeers upon the flanks of each Body of Pikes; after move
forward the eight middle files of particular division of Musketeers, some ten
foot before the Front. Then comm^^d the left half-ranks, or the four files of
Musketeers upon the left of those divisions drawn forth to face about, and to
move down ten foot clear of the Rear, and after face to the Front. Then let the
12 remaining files of Musketeers close to the Pikes to open order, and let
every four files of those remaining 12 upon the flanks open outward six foot of
ground betwixt each four files, and move the ^ront and Rear divisions of
Musketeers just against the midst of those three divisions of Musketeers that
are the ^lankers to the Pikes, and they will stand in the figure as it is
placed in Folio 170.

They standing now in a perfect order of a Brigade, the number of men in this
Regiment allowing it in a full manner according to the small Brigades of the
Swedes, I shall not need to point out of what service this figure, or drawing
up may be; in repect there is no ingenuous Soldier but may clearly perceive
they stand in a very good order to fight against an enemy: their Commanders
being appointed forth to manage it accordingly. Therefore I shall leave it to
the practice of such who in time of need shall have occasion to make use of it,
and in the next place show the manner of reducing them again into Companies.

First move forward those 12 files of Musketeers in the rear of each body of
Pikes, six to the right, and six to the left, next to the outside of their own
body of Pikes; After command the rear divisions of Musketeers to advance
forward upon the left of those divisions of Musketeers in the front, then face
them about, and move them down into the midst of those Musketeers that were
the Flankers. After let every Captain draw off his Pikes and Musketeers, and
ingross them into particular Companies, and they will then be ready to march
away to their several quarters; and here I shall conclude concerning a
Regiment of twelve Companies.

CHAP. XXI. The manner of drawing up a Brigade or Tertia, being a third part of
an Army, according to the practice of the Netherlands, under the command of the
Prince of Orange.
BEfore I shall begin to draw up this Tertia, Army, or Brigade; I shall set
down the observation of Coll. Hen. Hexam, in his Book treating of the Office of
the three Sergeant Majors of the Tertia, otherwise called the three Field
Corporals. His words are these:

The States Army by order of his Highness is divided upon a March into three
Brigades, or Tertia's, and a Sergeant Major of a Tertia, being one of the great
Corporalls of the Field, receives his Order immediate from the Lord General,
or the Lord Martial, but most commonly of the Sergeant Major General of the
Army, how he shall f^rm and order his Brigade or Tertia, and how many Regiments
of Horse and Foot, are to march under it, and with what Ordnance and Baggage.
He assigns and shows him the place where they are to draw out into Battalia,
and receives orders from the Sergeant Mayor General, whether they are to march
in the Vanguard, the Battle, or the Rear. So that in marching in every one of
these he shall attend upon his Brigade and several Divisions, and in the
absence of the Sergeant Major General, see that the order of marching and
embattailing be duly kept and observed. And every one of these three Sergeants,
Majors of Brigades, are to be at the command of the Collonell General, or he
that leads or commands that Brigade or Tertia, and is to be sent to the Lord
General, Lord Martial, or Sergeant Major General upon any occasion belonging
to the service.

These three Majors of the Tertia's are to be lodged as near the Sergeant Major
General as conveniently may be, and those three which attend upon the
Vanguard, the Battle or Rear, which the Sergeant Major shall ma^e choice of
ground for the placing of Guards, and ^ssigne them to the Sergeant Majors of
every Regiment. They are to go the R^und, and to visit the Guard commonly
every night, and at such an hour as the Sergeant Major shall appoint them
^i^^er by day or night.

If any ^f these three Sergeant Majore of the Field shall find any want of
powder, Ammunition, or victuals, either in the Vanguard, Battle, or Rear, as
well upon the March, as when the Troops are qu^r^^red, or during fight, he is
presently to advertise the Sergeant Major General of the ^ield with the sai^
wan^s. And then by his direction shall go with an Officer of every Regiment of
that Tertia, to the General, or Lieutenant of the Ordnance, or to the
Commi^^ary General of the Ammunition, or Victuals.

A Sergeant Major of a Tertia, to conclude, having received his Orders from the
Lord General, the Martial, or Sergeant Major General, gives them to the
Sergeant Majors of every p^rticuler Regiment. But because the Word and Orders
are to be sent to Quarters far distant one from another, the Sergeant Major of
every Regiment cannot come convetend every morning, and evening, upon the
Sergeant Major General, to receive their Orders, and to carry the word to the
several Quarters, whether the Sergeant Majors of Regiments comes to him, and
from him receives the Word, and Orders.

The drawing up of Brigades in the next place comes to be handled after the way
of the Holl^nders; therefore, first, take notice, that Brigades are not tied to
a set ^u^ber of Companies, or Regiments, but are ordered according to the
several strengths of an Army. As sometimes they consist of 12 Companies, some
of two Regiments, others of three, or four, having in them not a like number of
Companies or men, which ought accordingly unto the several divisions of a
Brigade to be balanced a like, both in number of men, dignity, and worth, as
is in particular Regiments fully set forth. And in respect that several
divisions make a Brigade, and that according to the disposition of an Army, all
the Officers and Soldiers are divided into three parts, called Brigades, or
Tertia's, each of them having a several name, to wit, the Vanguard, Battle,
and Reer-guard. Now that Tertia which is to march first, is called the
Vanguard, that which marches next in the middle, the Battle, and that which
comes up last, the Rear. Every one of these upon march as was formerly
expressed in the Swedish Brigade, take their turns interchangeably; for the
second day of the March, the Battle becomes the Vanguard, and the Rear the
second day the Battle, and the third day, the Tertia, that had first the Rear,
is become the Vanguard. So likewise, there ought to be in every particular
Brigade, or Tertia, a Vanguard, Battle* and Reer-guard, to each of them,
which with more convenience may be orderly brought to fight by him that shall
be Commander in chief for the relieving each other, according as occasion
shall require.

In the next place, for a Brigade, I shall point forth four Regiments, having
in them eight Companies a piece, after the manner of a Regiment of eight
formerly set down, which amounts to 3888 men, which number may serve for a
third part of an Army of foot, and make up a very complete and sufficient
Brigade. And I shall order in this Brigade to have in it four divisions, that
is to say, a Vanguard, Battle, and Reer-guard, represented in the three first
Regiments, but the fourth shall be a reserve, standing in the Rear of the
Main-battail, or Brigade, whereby upon all occasions of the other retreating,
or being driven backward that Regiment may move up to relieve each part thereof
that shall be distressed. But upon the long-march of this Brigade, the two
middle Regiments according to their order of dignity, are to make the Battle,
which in the Figure were made the Vanguard, and Reer-guard, and that which
formerly was the Vanguard, is become the Battle, and the Reer-guard the
Reserve; but where they have ground sufficient it will be better to march in
that form of Battalia set down according to the figure, Folio 176.

This Brigade consisting of four Regiments, must be drawn up according to the
dignity of their Captains, but with this alteration of Arms, for the former
Regiments consisting of two divisions, this has but one, after this manner.

First when the Captains Companies are all drawn up into an even breast in their
true dignity, then let the Pikes be all drawn forth, and engrossed into one
Body, after let the Musketeers be closed in their files into the midst into
another Body, after let those Musketeers military diagram as near as i^
possible be divided into two par^s, (if there should be an odd file, let it be
carried to the right) and let them move up, and flank the Pikes which will make
up one complete Battalia, or grand Division. Now let the Officers be placed
according to the manner in the next place, as in every Regiment shall be set
forth, which may be a satisfaction unto the Soldiers, to know a third way of
drawing up, and placing the Officers of a Regiment consisting of eight
Companies. ^our Regiments thus drawn up makes a complete Brigade, to be ordered
according to dignity in their Regiments after this manner. The chiefest
Commanders Regiment, or eldest Colonels, is to be on the right of the Brigade,
the next man of honor to be on the left, the third to be on the right of the
second, and the fourth on the left of the first, after the manner of these
figures, 2. 3. 4. 1. wherein it clearly appears that their number of worth is
equally divided. In the next place, as concerning Command, and ordering of such
great Bodies into Brigades, the shortest and soonest way is the best,
wherefore, command the out-most Regiment upon the right, or the Vanguard to
advance f^rward 18 foot before the ^ront* then face to the left, and move until
they stand straight against the midst of the two middle divisions, or
Main-battail that was, then face to the Front, then let the out-most Regiment
upon the left face about, and move down 24 foot clear of the Rear, then face to
the left, and move until they stand straight in the Rear of the two middle
Regiments, or Vanguard, then face to the Front; next let the two middle
Regiments move forth to ^he right and left, until they stand clear for the
Reer-guard or Reserve to come up, and rel^eve each part, as occasion shall
require, they being all faced to the Front will stand in a complete Brigade, as
formerly was expressed. The former Brigade being imbattelled into so many
divisions, and joined so near on the other, can best second and relieve each
other, better then y^u^ great Battalia's which unwildy bodies being once
broken, and routed, can hardly be rallied again, neither can they bring so many
men to fight in that good order, as the lesser bodies will do. As for example,
three of these ^rigades, or Tertia's, make a complete Army of foot, the
Battle, one of the Tertia's of the Army, being placed in the midst, that of
the Vanguard may be drawn up on the right, and the Rear on the left flank of
the Battle. The first divisions that are to fight are those that stand in an
even line of the first range, and are so ordered, that if they should be
overcharged, and forced to give ground, then the second range may move up, and
relieve the first, and may give the second Charge against an Enemy, whilst the
first move down into the midst, and rally again; or may move, and interchange
ground with those that are the Reserves. The second range having fired, may be
relieved by the third, who may move up into the ground of the first divisions,
and their may take their turns to give a third Charge, whilst the second
divisions rally up again. And thus they may maintain their fighting in this
order, so long as there shall be just occasion: provided the Musketeers make
six foot ground intervall betwixt every five or six files, for their ran^s to
wheel off either to the right or left, and to rally themselves in good order in
the Rear of their own divisions. There is likewise another way to make a
Brigade, by engrossing all the Pikes of every Regiment into one Body, flanking
them with Musketeers; or by making them into two or three Stands of Pikes, and
flanking each Body of Pikes with Musketeers. But, I conceive, the former way
to be one of the best, and chiefest amongst them all; and therefore I shall
spare the pains to make any other figure, having placed every Officer where he
is to lead and where to bring up. And upon the long-march this rule must be
observed in every Regiment, where they cannot march all a Breast, they must make
in every Regiment seven divisions, three of Pikes, the first three Colors to
fly upon the head of the first division, the next two Colors to fly upon the
head of the second, and the three last upon the head of the third division; and
they must likewise make two divisions of Musketeers in the Van of their
Regiments, and two divisions in the Rear, the Officers are accordingly placed
down upon these sub-divisions, where to take their places both to lead, and to
bring up. The Regiments are to march after this manner; first, his Regiment in
the Van, who is Commander in chief, next to him the fourth man of honor,
after him the third, these two making the Battle, and let the Rear by brought
up be the second Colonel, or second man of honor, his Regiment likewise
marching there; and here I shall conclude concerning a Brigade.

CHAP. XXII. How to draw up an Army of twelve Regiments of Foot, and three of
Horse, the Foot amounting unto 11664 Men, and the Horse unto 3000; in all 14664
Men.
THe drawing up of an Army most properly belongs to the Sergeant Major
General, whose place and charge is of an high degree, his commands being full
of action, and therefore ought to be a wise, grave, and able person, and an
able an experienced Soldier. In respect he has the ordering and disposing of
the Divisions and Battalions, according to that form which the General shall
command him. And upon all occasions he must be active, and stirring up and
down, to spy out all advantages, which might offend an Enemy; and wisely to
foresee all disadvantages that may bring the Troops into any disorder or
confusion. He has absolute command over the three Sergeant Majors of the
Brigades, otherwise called the three Grand Corporals of the Field, who are to
be his assistants, and his mouth, as he is the mouth of the Lord General, or
Martial of the Field; and therefore must have a vigilant eye over all things,
seeing that the Generals Command delivered to him be strictly kept, and
observed, and withal, acquainting, and informing the three Sergeant Majors of
the Brigades of the Generals pleasure, that they may forthwith put the same
into execution.

Now the Method (that I shall observe,) shall be according to the form of the
former Brigade; wherefore, in the first place, the Sergeant Major shall do well
to appoint out unto the eldest Sergeant Major of the Brigades, how to draw up
that Brigade which shall be the Battle, wherein the Lord Generals Regiment,
and the Colonels, is to be upon the right, and left of that Brigade, and
betwixt them the youngest Colonel, and ninth Colonel, according unto this
rule of dignity in the figure set forth, 4: 9: 12: 1. In the next place, let
the next Sergeant Major of the Brigades in seniority draw up that which shall
be the Vanguard, and place the second Colonels Regiment upon the right, and
the fifth upon the left, and between them the eleventh and eighth Colonels,
after this manner, of this figure, 5: 8 11: 2. Let the last Sergeant Major draw
up that Brigade, which shall be the Rear, and let him draw them up after this
manner, the third Colonels Regiment upon the right, and upon the left, the
sixth Colonels, and between them the tenth, and seventh Colonels Regiment,
after this manner, 6: 7: 10: 3. This charge being given by the Sergeant Major
General, unto the three Sergeant Majors of the three Tertia's, or Brigades,
how each particular Regiment shall be drawn up, being every one single, and
compared a like each to other, being rightly stated according to the rule of
dignity avoiding thereby confusion and disorder. In the next place, for the
better expedition in drawing up the Army, every Sergeant Major of each Brigade
draws the former Regiments assigned unto them, unto such place as shall be
appointed forth unto them by the Sergeant Major General, being helped, and
assisted by the Field-officers of the same Regiments, the Sergeant Major
General likewise being an assistant unto them all, seeing thereby all the
Commands of the General rightly observed and fulfilled.

Having drawn up the 12 Regiments according to the former directions, let the
Sergeant Majors of the Brigades order them to stand all even a breast according
to the form and figure of that single Brigade formerly set down. Wherein to
every Brigade there will be a Vanguard, Battle, and Reer-guard, and Reserves
to them all three. Next inquiry must be made of the several strengths of the
Brigades, some of them perhaps having many more files then the other, for
remedy whereof, there must be files drawn forth (provided there be convenience
of time) from each particular Company, and Brigade, and added unto those which
shall be weaker, to make their strengths equal a like. Next it lies in the
breast of the Lord General, to appoint unto every one of these Brigades
Commanders in chief, there being in every one of them Officers above the three
Field-Corporals, or Sergeant Majors of Brigades. Wherefore, it is conceived,
that he will appoint the most honourablest men to be Commanders thereof; as
first, himself of that Brigade, which is the Battle in time of fight, the
Vanguard to the Martial General, and the Reer-guard either to the Major
General or Commissary General. But whosoever the Lord General, shall appoint
to be Commanders military diagram military diagram military diagram in chief,
to them the Serieant Majors of every particular Brigade, are to be subservants,
assisting them in all their Commands. These several orders and directions,
being thus equally divided amongst the Commanders of every Brigade, an Army may
quickly be brought into any for me of Battle to fight against an enemy,
according to the ground and situation of the place, which may afford the best
advantages for the same.

After this the General of the Ordance his duty and care must be in the day of
battle, to see that the Ordnance be well placed; for at such time his wisdom
is most discerned, keeping (with the assistance of his Lieutenant) the Tram of
Artillery together in good order. He must have a vigilant eye upon all
accidents that may fall out, and make choice of such ground for their planting,
as the General of the Army, and he shall think most fit and convenient. He
must be careful that all things be in a readiness, putting the Master
Gunners, Gentlemen of the Ordnance, and Commanders in mind of their duty, that
they do their best endeavors, and acquit themselves like men. It is likewise
partly his charge, to see that the whole Army be well provided with Ammunition,
because the Ammunition marches under his Train. He must also be near the Genesis
of the Army upon all occasious, to receive his directions and commands, and to
know from him after what manner he will make his battle, that he may plant his
Ordnance accordingly, finding out hills and heights to play over his own men.
And when the Enemy shall present himself, and come up to charge, he must draw,
and plant his Ordnance, as near their horse as possible may be, to hinder them
from breaking in upon the divisions of foot, taking a long with him Saylours,
and Pioneers, to help to draw up the Ordnance, and sufficient Guards to defend
them.

As concerning the planting of the Ordnance, when the Battalia is drawn up,
they may be disposed off several ways; as sometimes they are placed upon the
head of the Battalia, others again, between them, by two and two, and others,
by threes, upon the flanks and wings of the Musketeers. Some are of opinion,
that they ought to be planted upon the flanks, and in the Rear of the Battalia,
by leaving a free place for Arms which may give no offense to their own men.
But as concerning this last way, it might be answered, it can no way be
expedient; for if an Enemy should perceive that the Front is left bare without
Ordnance, it will give them cause to come up with more courage to fall on upon
the Charge. Therefore, the best way amongst the ancient experienced Soldiers,
is, that the Artillery be divided, some here, some there, both before the
Front, between the Battalions, and upon the Flanks, and to be placed some 50 or
an 100 paces one from another, and then there will be no danger when the Enemy
shall come up to shock to encounter you, or to offend our own men. Especially,
when they are fastened to them by drawing ropes, and iron rings, that upon an
instant they may be removed, and turned for the advantage of our own Troops,
giving fire, as fast as they can charge and discharge against the Enemies
Troops, it being a matter of great moment for the obteining of a victory, and
gaining the day from the Enemy.

But that many times the Ordnance cannot be planted in such convenient places
as could be wished for, in respect an Army may be driven into such places, as
the Ordnance must be planted according to the best ground it will afford, by
reason of woods, hills, or marrish grounds, and such like disadvantageous
places, may be oftentimes met withal, for which no certain rule may be given,
but that the General by his wisdom and discretion may make choice of the best
advantages which might annoy an Enemy most, and give the least offense to his
own men, either by dazzling them by the Sun, or by raising of the dust,
observing the wind which drives the smoke both of the Ordnance and small-shot
full upon them. To conclude, it is conceived, the best way for every Captain of
the Ordnance, and Master Gunner to use some light Field pieces and small
Drakes, which upon any occasion may be removed from one place to another, being
with ease planted upon such places of advantage as may most annoy the Enemy.

In the next place, 3000 horse may be a good proportion for 10000 or 12000
foot, which ought to be equally divided in their Troops, and placed upon the
flanks of the foot in such good order, as the Troops may come with convenience
to fight, for the relieving of each other. But in case you shall perceive the
Enemies horse, as sometimes through necessity of ground, or by other political
ends, may be inter-laced and placed between the intervalls and divisions of
their foot, it will be needful then that we should observe the same form, and
likewise have horse to come forth, and encounter with their horse, least they
should ^reak in upon our divisions of foot, which by this means, and good
order* may be timely prevented; next follows the Figure of the Army, as before
described, and ordered to be drawn up, ^olio 176.

CHAP. XXIII. The several duties belonging to the Foot in a Regiment as
followth by degrees from a private Soldier unto a Colonel of the same: and
first of a private Soldier.
A Private Soldier ought to be very active, not slothful and idle, informing
himself of his duty learning from his Corporal, or other Officers the true
use, and well handling of his arms, always keeping them neat, clean, and well
fixed. Upon the beat of the Drum he is to repair to his Colors, Squa^ron, or
Company, upon the march he must observe his, Leader, and his right, and left
hand men, that he may march straight in file, and even in rank; in time of
Exercise he must be silent in the body, well minding the words of command and
directions which are given forth by the leader. He ought likewise to be well
verst in all the ordinary words of command, and to mind the place wherein he
stands, that he may the more readier move, and not be to seek at such time
when he shall be commanded, wehther it be to face, double, countermarch, or
wheel. He m^st inform himself of all the several beats of the drum, as first
of a Call, second a Troop, third a March, fourth a Preparative, fifth a Battle
or Charge, sixth a Retreat, and also of the Revall^y and the Tattoo.

By the first, he is summoned to hear present proclamation, or else commanded
to repair to his colors, upon the beat of the second he is to advance his
arms, and to close in rank, and file, to the distance of order, and to troop
along unto such places, and services, as he shall be commanded unto, upon the
hearing of the third he is presently to shoulder his arms, and to take his
distance of six foot in rank, and three foot in file; upon the fourth he is to
close both in rank and file, unto the fighting distance which is called order,
and to prepare himself for skirmish; upon the beat of the next, he is
undauntedly to move forward, boldly steping in good order into the place of his
fellow soldier that shall happen to fall down dead before him. Upon the beat
of the last he must orderly fall back either for releife, or advantage of
ground, or other polliticall ends whereby he may draw the enemy into a suare.
The first of the remaining two gives warning in the morning for some of the
Sentinels to fall off, or to be taken in; the latter is used in the night to
give notice unto the soldiers or others for their repairing to their several
guards, watches, and lodgings. To conclude, a private soldier ought to avoid
all quarrelling, mutinies, swearing, cursing, or lying, and to be content with
his w^ges, and likewise to be a good husband in the well managing of his means,
keeping himself neat and handsome in his apparel, avoiding drunkenness, and
all manner of gaming, truly to serve and fear God, and to be obedient unto all
the commands of his superiors, cheerfully going on upon all duties, and to be
loving, kind, and courteous, unto all his fellow soldiers.

The duty of a Sentinel.
A Sentinel must be very vigilant, carefully casting his eyes about him, and
harkning whether he hear the noise or approach of any drawing near him; which
if he perceive, he is presently to command them to stand, presenting his Musket
or Pike to their breast, and after calling his Corporal for to take the word,
unless he should be commanded to come in silently. He is not to come off until
he be relieved by the Corporal or Lanspassadoe.

His proper posture being a Muskettier is to have his Musketrested, and loaded
with powder and bullet, his match cockt, and his pan guarded, being a pike-man,
if he stand Sentinel in the night, he must have his pike checked, if in the
day, his pike ordered. Or it may be a very proper posture for a pikeman to
stand sentinel with his pike in his left hand, holding it a little below the
cheeks thereof, and with his sword drawn, being held in his right hand, which I
leave to judge, or to be made use of according to discretion, and as occasion
shall require.

Of a Gentleman of a Company.
A Gentleman of a company ought to have such worth in him as may make him
capable to be a file-leader, or Captain of his file, and he more especially
above the rest ought to be well skilled in all the postures of such arms he
wears, and at convenient times instructing and teaching his file in the neat
and graceful handling of their arms. He ought to be of an undaunted courage
and gallant resolution, for the better example and imitation of the rest, whose
worth and valor many times indears them so much into the savor of their
Comanders that they raise them up to greater places of preferment. In the Low
Countries a Gentleman of a Company has his full pay, having nothing kept back
for after reckonings, as common private soldiers have. At his first entrance
he sometimes stands Sentinel to inform himself of the duties thereof; but
most commonly he is placed to be a Sentinel per-due intime of iminent danger,
either in the field or upon approches. He is to lie perdue with his sword and
pistol, not removing from his place till he be relieved, nor is he to retreat
for one man, but in case of more, then he is to fall back to the second; and
discovering an enemy he is to come off betimes, and silently to give the
alarm, whereby the Corpse du Guard, or company may be provided for their own
defense. A Gentleman of a Company does many times go the round with the
Captain of the watch, or his fellow Gentlemen who are likewise rounders, either
in the field, or in garrison, and do give the Corporals of the Guards the
word, charging the Sentinells to look well about them. To conclude, he ought
truly to love, respect, and obey his Captain, and to stick close unto him,
vindicating him upon all just occasions, when he shall be wronged, and injured
by any mu^^^es of the common soldiers, or others.

Of a Barber Chyrurgion.
IN every Company there ought to be a Barber Chyrurgion for the trimming of the
soldiers, who ought likewise to have some skill in Chyrurgery, that when the
soldiers are upon the watches, and guards, where iminent danger may be, he may
be then at hand, to be ready in the absence of the Chyrurgion of the Regiment
to bind up, and dress the hurt and wounded men. He is free from duties
belonging to the Company, and in some places is allowed to be an Officer in the
list of their armies, which, I conceive, it ought so to be, in respect they
allow but of one Chyrurgion to a Regiment, and if it should happen many to be
wounded, as oftentimes in field fights there are, one man is not able scarce in
three days to bind up the wounds, and dress the sores, of them that are
maimed. And therefore it concerns every Captain to be provided, and to have in
the absence of the Chyrurgion, a Barber Chyru^gion attending on his Company.

Of a Clerk of a Company.
HI^ carriage ought to be very just and honest, his chiefest duty is to keep
the muster Roll and to have it ready upon all occasions for the entering of his
men upon the muster Roll, and pay bill. He is many times entrusted to receive
the service money of the Company and pays such moneys unto the soldiers as
shall be ordered him from his Captain to pay. He must inquire out in their
quarters where they lie, and duly for to pay them, and every pay day to deliver
up a true bill, giving an account unto his Captain of all such moneys he
hath-either received, or paid forth.

Of a Drum Major.
THere ought to be in every Regiment a Drum Major, being skillful in his
profession, instructing the others in the true beating of a march, with all
other points of war. A Drum-Major must likewise be well skilled in several
languages, and tongues, and to be wise and courteous when he shall be employed
or sent to an enemy; He is in a discreet manner upon the marching of a Regiment
to order part of the Drums where they shall beat, seeing them ti^ely and duly
relieved by the others for the better performance of their service. For upon
the march if all the Captains Drums should beat together, it would quickly tire
them out, therefore for their ease, it is his place and duty to order them
according to discretion to take their turns to beat, and to be relieved by
each other. He is moreover to take into his charge such Drums as shall be
brought in from the enemies by their Drummers, when they come to ransom their
prisoners, and upon their return to deliver them again unto them. He ought to
be lodged near the Sergeant Major in respect he is to give instructions to the
rest of the Drummers, and may upon fail of their duties give them correction.

Of the Drummers to a private Company.
EVery Captain ought to have two good Drummers that knows how to beat all the
sever^ll points of war before mentioned. It is likewise expedient that he
should be a good linguisht, in respect sometimes he may be sent unto an enemy
for the ransoming of prisoners. His duty is coming to the camp, or garrison of
an enemy, having his Generals Pass in his hat to beat a call, till he is fetched
in; and because he shall not discover the weakness of guards, works, or
trenches, he is is led blindfold, and so carried to the Commander, and place
where his prisoners are; With whom (after he has ransomed them) he is to
return to his own quarter^, giving an account of such things he has seen or
heard, which may prove advantageou^ to his own party, or of any other thing he
had opportunity by their neglect to take notice of.

Of a Gentleman of Arms.
HIs duty is to see that the soldiers keep their arms neat and clean, and
that they be well fixed, and if any thing be amiss or broken, he is to have
them carried to the Armourers to be repaired. And if any soldier shall be
sick, dead, or have leave to return to his own country, he is to bring his
arms to his own lodging, there preserving, and keeping them clean, until he
shall have occasion to deliver them to some other newly entertained. He is
likewise to mark and figure the arms of the Company, and to preserve and keep
a list what number of figure each soldier shall bear upon his arms. He is
likewise to keep the powder, bullet, and match, and to deliver it forth upon
occasions to the Corporalls, or Lanspassadoe.

Of a Lanspassadoe.
HIs duty is concerned in the absence of his corporal to officiate in all
things belonging unto his place, and is at all times to be an assistant unto
him, for his ease and help-mate upon all occasions, for the better managing of
his place, and many times they arerounders and Sentinel perdues in time of
great necessity.

The duty of a Corporal.
THe Corporals of a Company are not tied to a set number, but to be ordered
according to the several strengths and divisions of the same, for each to take
his charge and care of every Squadron thereof. And unto each of them there is a
Lanspassadoe for an assistant, for their rule of dignity, I conceive, it makes
not much more matter then to make them the right hand file-leader in every
particular division; but if any will be so curious to order them according to
that, let them apply themselves unto the former rules for directions to the
sa^e. The Corporalls duty in his Squadron is to teach and instruct them in the
use of the Pike, and Musket, and to have a Roll and list of his men in his
division or squadron. And when a soldiers name is crossed out he is to give
notice unto his Sergeant, and when a new one shall supply his place his care
must be to instruct and enable him in the postures of such arms as he shall
bear. Being with his Squadron upon his guard he is to provide them with wood,
coal, candle, and light. Having an out-guard his care must be to strengthen
ti, his little Corpse due guard and sentinels must be set forth according to the
avenews or commings on of the enemy, whereby he prevents their cuttings off, or
surprisall, the negligence whereof proves both dangerous to themselves, and the
whole army. Wherefore it behooves hi^ to be very careful, and vigilant to visit
them, after giving them an especial charge to be both faithful and careful
in the great trust reposed in them. He must likewise preserve and keep the word
constant in his memory, when the Captain of the Watch goes the first Round, he
shall with his Sword drawn against his breast give it him, and receive such
orders from him as he shall command him; but afterward when the Round shall
come again, he shall cause the Rounders, or Gentlemen (with his Sword drawn) to
give the word to him before they pass. He ought never to go alone, being
called forth by the Sentinel, but to have a Guard of three or four Musketeers
a long with him, selected out of his Corpse due Guard. He must advise his
Sentinels how to demean themselves upon the discovery of an Enemy, eitherto
give an Alarm, or else to give notice without making an noise. And if upon his
Guard he shall either observe, or be advertized by his Sentinels of the
approach of the Enemy, then he is to have his men in readiness with bullets in
their Muskets, and their matches lighted, himself secretly coming in, giving
intelligence unto his Captain, or other superior Officer, whereby they may all
be in a readiness before the Alarm be given. He is likewise to distribute the
victual, powder, bullet, and match, unto his Squadron, and to take notice of
the best experienced men, and accordingly to employ them upon action upon the
Watches. He must cause respect to be given to the Corpse due Guard, and silence
to be kept, whether it be about the Walls or Gates, that so the noise may not
hinder the hearing of the advertisement from the Sentinels. He is likewise to
have an eye to their lives and manners, and to take care of the baggage and
money of such as are hurt, or sick, and to be in his own carriage sober, wise,
and discreet, for the avoiding ill example unto others.

Of the Martial of a Regiment.
HE ought to take into his custody all persons committed unto his charge by the
chief Officers of the Regiment, and if they be called to justice, he is to
bring them to the Martial General, who are to be carried from thence to the
Council of War. It is also the care to see that all women, boys, servants,
bread, and Aquavita-sellers, belonging to the Regiment do march in the Rear,
and not before, or upon the Flanks. He is likewise to set such prizes upon
bear, and victuals, as the Lord Martial, or Sergeant Major General shall
appoint, which order he shall receive from the Provost Martial of the Army,
and to see it duly executed within the Circuit of the Regiment; And that the
Sutlers do not sell their bear and victuals above the set rate, lest they
grate upon the Soldiers. After the Captain of the Watch has gone the first
Round, he is to see that the Sutlers keep no tippling or disorder in the night,
but make them put out their candle light, and fires; during the time of Divine
Service, he is to go the round, for fear any disorders should be committed in
the Quarters.

Of a Quarrermaster.
IF the Regiment be marching with the Army, (and not alone) he is then every
evening to attend upon the Quartermaster General, to receive his directions,
and to take the place, ground, and houses, appointed by him, for the Quarter
and Lodging of the Regiment, who presently is to acquaint, and advertise his
Colonel of the same, and after to follow his charge. First, he appoints or
prepares the Colonels lodging, and other Officers of the Field in the Center
or midst of all the Quarters, and near them himself, and all the other Officers
of the Staff. After, according to the seniority of the Captains, and their
marchings to distribute forth their Quarters as may be designed. Having thus
far acted through the help of the Constables, and Headboroughs of those places,
where the Regiment is to quarter, and having drawn forth their Billets in a
good and orderly way, he is before the Regiments entering the Quarters to
deliver the same to the Colonel, or other Field-officers, of that Regiment,
and they to deliver it to the rest of the Captains, to direct them to their
lodgings, with the particular Soldiers of their Company. And during the time
that he is about the visiting the distribution of the lodgings, all the Troops
are to keep watch round about the place, and to send out to discover, he must
also be informed of the Lodgings of the whole Army to know whom to give, or
whom to receive Supplies in case of necessity.

If the Quarter be in the open field, the Quartermaster General shall appoint
to each Quartermaster the place and ground which he shall take, which he is to
distribute to the Sergeants of every Company of the Regiment, who are to assist
him in taking the depth, length, and breadth of their Quarters, with the
distances of the Alarm place between the head of the Quarter, and the Trench,
and the true distance of the Streets betwixt the in-getting of each Captains
particular Company.

When an Army or Regiment shall sit down before a Town, or forraging place, to
besiege it, they are employed sometimes to be Forragers to fetch in provision
for the Army, or particular Regiments. Which when they shall be required, they
ought to have sufficient Convoys and Guards both of Infantry and Chavalry to
secure them, who are to be commanded by able Officers, and the Irovost Martial,
or one of his Assistants is to go a long with them, to punish such as are
exorbitant, or do straggle. It will be expedient to the Regiment that the
Quartermaster upon his Service may be employed twice in a week, to bring in a
fresh victual to the Soldiers, but not to go twice to one place, lest they be
discovered by an enemy, and be waylaid by their forces, who may sometimes prove
stronger then themselves to prevent, or to cut them off by way, laying of them
secretly in some Ambushments. Which being truly considered of, care may be
taken accordingly of Supplies in other remote places, free from the danger of
the Enemy. To conclude, a Quartermaster ought to carry himself honestly and
carefully in his place, and to be well skilled in the Art of Mathematics, that
he may the better give directions for fortifying and measuring of ground,
quartering of his whole Regiment, and in-getting of the particular Soldiers.

The duty of a Sergeant.
HE that is a Sergeant to a Company, ought to be well skilled in the Postures,
and all Military Motions, whereby in the first place he may endeavor to correct
the errors of such who handle not the Arms in a handsome, or a serviceable
way. And secondly, that he may be helpful to his Captain, or other superior
Officer. In time of his Exercise, his duty is to draw forth the files according
to such depths as shall be appointed unto him by his Captain, or other
superior Officer, and to order them in the drawing up, and joining together
the Soldiers unto such places of honor, as they shall direct him unto. In a
single Company he leads often times a division, but ought not always there to
march in respect he is concerned to see that the Soldiers march even in their
ranks at their distance of order in file, and open order in rank. To which
purpose, he ought many times to be upon the flanks, and perceiving any Soldier
out of order, he may cast in his Halbert between their ranks, to cause him to
march even a breast with his right and left hand men. He is likewise either in
Field or Garrison to lead his Squadron to their Guard, and to carry to prison
such Offenders as his Captain, or other superior Officer shall commit, to the
Provost Martial. He is to see that the Musketeers in time of skirmishing
present all even a breast, with their matches all cockt, giving fire all
together in good order, and to direct them how to fall off, and rally again in
the Rear of their own divisions. His duty likewise is to fetch Ammunition,
Powder, Match, and all other Materials for the Company. He is, moreover, every
particular evening to attend at the place of Parade, or at the Majors Lodging,
to fetch the word, and carry it to his Captain Lieutenant. Ensign, and
Corporals, and likewise as soon as he is come into his Guard, he must direct
the Corporals where to set out the Perdues and Sentinels, and how to order his
Watch. He must likewise make frequent Rounds, and if he find a Sentinel a
sleep in the Field, he is to commit him to the hand of Justice, and thus much
concerning the duty of a Sergeant.

Of an Ensign.
AN ^nsigne being a Commission Officer, in the absence of his Captain and
Lieutenant, is Commander in chief of the Company, and ought to march upon the
head of the same, leading them with a half-pike. His Captain and Lieutenant
being present, and upon a Stand, his Colors ought to rest upon his side, being
held by his right or left hand, and unfurled; upon the March his colors ought
to be shouldered, taking up the corner end of them in his right hand, and to
let them be half flying, the Pikes and Muskets all conforming unto the same
Posture. Marching through a City for the more grace, his col^urs may be wholly
flying, being advanced and held up by his right hand, or resting upon his right
side. He ought to be a proper man, grave, valiant, and discreet, and to be well
skilled in the Postures of the Pike; in respect he leads them, and they expect
from him to be taught the Postures thereof. He ought to be well skilled in all
the lofty figures of the displaying of the colors above the head, and to make
use of them according to discretion, and command, which is not only a
healthful exercise to his body, but also most becoming to him, or any other
Gentleman, or Commander whatsoever, that shall sometimes make use of the same,
although condemned through sloth and ignorance, by others, who will not take
the pains to learn it. An Ensign upon a Troop, lodging the colors, or in time
of skirmishing may fold them up, and retreat into the second rank for the
securing of his colors, which he ought to stick by, and not to stir from them
at such a time, although he hazardeth his last drop of blood, or makes them his
winding sheet. When the General shall pass by, or any such man of worth, he
ought a little to veil his colors, inclining the head, or narrow end thereof,
a little down-ward, but not to bow his knee, or uncover his head. He may
sometimes for his ease or recreation upon the March, request some Gentleman of
knowing trust of the Pikes to carry his colors for him, until such time as he
shall come again for to take them. In the absence of his Lieutenant, when his
Captain shall exercise the Company, he may stick his colors in the ground, or
deliver them to some Gentleman of the Pikes, and fall down himself in the Rear
with a half-pi^e or cane there to be an assistant to his Captain in supplying
the Lieutenants place, except his Captain should command him to the contrary.
He ought to have a Guard a long with him as well to the lodging of his colors,
as to any other place. He ought to perform all courteous offices for the
Soldiers unto his Captain, which will gain him both love and reputation
amongst them, they thereby better respecting him, and more courageously
following of him.

Of a Lieutenant.
HE that is a Lieutenant to a Company, ought to be a good and able Soldier,
and well to understand the duty of a Captain; in respect that in his absence he
is as Captain, and Commander in chief over them. He is likewise to receive all
Orders, Charges, and Commissions from his Captain, assuming no authority unto
himself, but in the absence of his Captain, he is to see all such Orders he
has received dutly executed, for the better ease unto him. He is likewise at
such times frequently to exercise the Company in all their Military Motions,
Skirmishings, and False-firings in the pan. He is to hold the Sergeants and
Corporals strictly to their duty, causing them to provide all things necessary
for the Company, and to be assistants unto him where he shall see cause. He is
to teach and instruct the Soldiers in the use of their Arms, and sometime for
their ease, he may command every file-leader to draw forth his file, and to
show them their Postu^es. By which means he shall do such good service to his
Captain, that when he shall exercise them himself, he may find them more
apter, and readier to fulfill his commands at which time the Lieutenant ought
to be in the Rear, and to see all things there truly executed according to the
Captains commands. He is in time of danger and great importance to advise with
his Captain about the welfare of the Company, for knowing his Captains
intentions and purposes before hand, he may be the better provided to withstand
the furious onset of the Enemy. He ought to have the Ensign, and all other
Officers of the Company as near him as may be, there being often times urgent
business to make use of them as occasion shall require. He must neither
cashiere, nor punish any man in the presence of his Captain, but ought to make
him acquainted therewith, that he may punish the offendour by committing him
either to prison, or cause him to give recompense to the party wronged. To
conclude, he ought to know how far his power does extend either in the
presence, or absence of his Captain, always demeaning himself so, that he may
gain the love of all the whole Company, by acting those things amongst them as
may be just and honest.

Of a Captain.
HE that is a Captain of a Company, ought in respect he leads the same, and
is chief, to appoint unto the Officers their several places, what divisions
they shall lead, and where they shall march, and according to the number of
files to make his divisions answerable thereto, by dividing his Musketeers as
near as he can, the one half upon the right of the Pikes, and the other upon
the left. For they being the Flankers ought equally to be balanced, but if
there be an odd file, it ought to be contrived, and carried to the right. In
the Van, Battle, or Rear, he must according to the number of his men, order
his Officers places, and draw them off accordingly in as equal a way as they
will afford. He is as well as his own, to know all the several duties of his
Officers, and to be a good Posture-man himself, that when he sees any of his
Soldiers handling their Arms in an undecent, and slovenly manner, he may the
better reprove them for the same. And although many Captains regards them
not, but leaves them to be instructed by the inferior Officers: yet it is a
great deal of honor to him, when his Soldiers shall be ^aught by himself,
they more cheerfully, and confidently marching a long with him, when as they
perceive that he is thoroughly knowing in all things belonging to his charge. He
shall do well to exercise his Company sometimes himself, teaching them how to
fight upon all occasions, whether it be to Front, Rear, or Flanks, or upon
surprise of an Ambuscado, or any other disadvantage which may befall them,
informing them how to fall off and rally again in good order. And at such times
he must courageously and wisely behave himself, and encourage his Soldiers of
hopes of victory, casting off all appearances of fear or danger whatsoever,
cheerfully animating his Soldiers to fall on, taking care, and making much of
them, and not to forsake them until such time they may be relieved by others.
He is to have a fatherly care of his Soldiers, timely providing for the
maimed, wounded, and sick; such helps and remedies as their present conditions
requires. He must likewise see that there be no want of Victual, Arms, or
Ammunition; he ought not to be covetous, nor keep back his Soldiers pay, but
to see them duly paid, visiting and relieving them according to their several
wants and necessities. His care must be to execute justice, appease quarrels,
punish offenders; by doing whereof, he will maintain the honor and dignity of
his place. He ought to carry a very even hand over his Soldiers, and to be
very courteous, and kind unto them, yet with that restriction of familiarity
that he come not under contempt. And again, he must not be too rigid, and
harsh, caning or beating them, without just cause, lest he incur their
hatred, who secretly, or in time of battle, will seek to be revenged of him,
endeavoring to kill him, before their enemy. Therefore he ought to be wise and
discreet, in his commands and carriage toward them; his place of marching with
his Company, is some six foot before the first division of Musketeers; but if
his Company be drawn up, he is either upon a Stand, or upon the March, to be on
the head of the Pikes, six foot before his Ensign. In time of battle although
he leads his men up first against the Enemy, yet he is not always tied to be in
the Front, having often just occasion to remove down into the Rear, Midst, or
Flanks, carefully casting his eye upon all parts of the Body thereby preventing
the least error or neglect of his Soldiers, directing them what to do,
keeping them in good order as long as occasion shall require. Moreover, he
ought to be very religious, temperate, and discreet, faithful in his trust,
valiant in the field against the face of his Enemy, and being besieged in
either Town, or Fort, (for to preserve his honor) never give his consent for
the yiedling it up, until it be past hope that there is no possibility to hold
it out any longer.

Of a Sergeant Major.
HIs duty is every morning, and evening, or upon any other occasion to attend
upon the General, Martial of the Field, or Sergeant Major General of the
Army, to receive his Orders how, or in what manner, the Regiment shall march,
whether in a single Battalion, or else in two to be joined with others. After
which he gives order accordingly unto the Captains how to draw up their
Companies and orders them accordingly. At which tune of imbattelling or
marching, he ought to be as near the midst of the Regiment as he can, for the
better regulating of them. He is to place all the Officers according to their
dignity where they are to lead, and whereto bring up; and which men they shall
take charge of to sight, causing the Drum Major (after they are all drawn up)
and the other Drummers to beat a March, and to move all at one instant as
occasion shall require. He ought to make all the Divisions as near qually a
like as possible he can; he must likewise be well verst in the several drawing
up of Regiments with their various forms of Battle, that according to the
condition of the place, ground, number of men, and Orders received from the
Major General, or Majors of the Brigades, he may not show himself a Novice,
or one that is to seek, nor ought he to go dully or slothfully upon his Charge,
or place, but to be very ready, quick, and nimbly performing with much ease and
readiness, his Battalions and grand Divisions. In their drawings up he may be
permitted to have pen, ink, and paper, for to take an account of the several
strengths of the Captains Companies and to order his men accordingly, and ought
to give unto all the Officers of the Regiment; notes in writing, of their
several charges and places. In time of fight, or otherwise marching with the
Regiment, he is to be on horseback, in regard he is the eyes, hands, and feet
thereof; in time of battle he is to see every Officer to perform his charge,
and Soldier his duty, forcing and compelling them forward, if in case they
turn their backs. He is also to distribute to the Captains and other Officers
such Orders as he shall receive from his Colonel, or other superior Officer.
In marching with the Regiment, not alone, but with the Army, he must know from
the General, Martial, or Major General, whether the Regiment be to march in
the Vanguard, Battle, or Rear. He ought to have some knowledge, or
information of the Country, whether it be long, or straight, thereby judging
how to order his marching so, as he may not be disturbed by the Enemies Horse,
or Artillery. Being troubled with baggage, if there be any difficult passage,
he ought to be there present to prevent such disorders as may happen, giving
directions for their placing, and marching as they may not be any hinderance to
the Regiment, putting them in order again before the Regiment shall enter into
their Quarters; at which time he may give license to the Captains, and their
Ensigns, to take their Iodgings, excepting only those who are appointed for
Guardians, who must enter the Corpse due Guard, and place their Sentinels,
until such time as they shall be relieved by others.

Now if a Regiment be to be quartered or lodged either in the Field, or under
shelter; if in the Field, he must cause it to be barrcadoed, or entrenched by
the wagons, or other defenses of the Field, after which he is to place his
Corpse due Guard round about the Quarters, and the Sentinels at so near a
distance that they may hear one the other speak, being about 80, or 100 paces
off from the Corpse due Guard, being placed double, a Pike, and a Musket; and
five paces from them, other single Sentinels are to be placed which are called
Per-dues. And in case of an Alarm the Sentinel Per-due shall retreat to the
double Sentinel, and in case of necessity, altogether having given fire, are
to retreat to the Corpse due Guard. He must likewise at diverse hours of the
night visit the Corpse due Guard, and if an Alarm be given in the field, he is
to betake himself to the Alarm place of the Regiment, and there to form his
Battalion, and to send men to double the Guards on that part where the Alarm
was given and to give notice thereof to his Coll^nel, or other superior
Officer, if they be present of what passes. The Ensigns ought not to retreat
unless their Colonel, or he give leave; no order at any time ought to be
altered, but by him, in respect he gives none but such as he receives from
the Colonel. It is his duty to speak for Ammunition, as powder bullets, match,
and for victuals, if there shall be any want in the Regiment, which provisions
ought to be delivered unto him, and he to see it equally distributed unto the
Companies according unto the proportion given ^ur. And likewise he is to give
order what proportion or number of work men, on commanded men shall be drawn
forth to work.

If under shelter, then he is to view the place, both within and without,
appointing the places for the Corpse du Guards, and Sentinels, and the way of
the Rounders, that it be free. It will be expedient for him to choose the
Alarm place, whether the Companies upon the Alarm given are to repair, being
the Randezvous for the whole Regiment, being careful to place sufficient
Guords both upon the walls, and about the Gates for their more security. Which
being ended, he may give leave to the Captains to go to their lodgings and
several Quarters, there to remain until they shall be called upon duties, for
the due performance whereof, he is to cause them to cast lots, whereby they may
know what part of the walls may fall to their turn. He is to command the
Companies to enter the Guares about ten, or cleven of the clock in the morning,
he is likewise to open, and shut the Gates at the rising, or setting of the
Sun, and to place the Watches upon the walls, presently upon the shutting of
the Gates, and to relieve them upon the opening thereof.

And as he does receive his directions for marching, imbattelling, viewing of
ground, and placing of Guards, from the Sergeant Major General, or Sergeant
Major of that Brigade: so he is to deliver them over to the Captains and
Officers of that Regiment, and to call upon them to whom it appertains, to see
them duly executed. In the presence of his Colonel, and Liutenant Colonel, he
is to be an assistant unto them, in seeing all orders, and directions duly
performed, and in their absence, he has the same authority and command as
they. He ought after he has received the word and orders from the Sergeant
Major General, or Sergeant Major of the Brigade, he presently delivers them to
his Colonel, and Lieutenant Colonel, and afterward to the Sergeants of every
Company, drawn in a ring, according to the Seniority of their Captains* which
are to come, and attend upon him for the same. In the absence of his superior
Officers he gives the word himself, every night he is to visit all the
Guards of the Regiment, commanding them duly to keep the tums of their Watches
and Marches, seeing that one Captains Company perform not more duty than
another, to the end, that both the honor, and labor may be equally divided
among them. And as he has power to exercise his own Company in all the
Military Motions: so be may exercise the whole Regiment, being thereunto
required, by his Colonel, or Lieuten^nt Colonel, in all their Distances,
Facings, Doublings, Wheelings, and False firings; and or in their absence of
himself he has full power so to do. To conclude, he ought to be well grounded
in all Military Affairs, and to be both wise and valiant.

Of a Lieutenant Colonel.
HE that is a Lieutenant Colonel to a Regiment, has a very honorable place,
having power and command over all the Regiments, in the absence of his
Colonel, and may also at such time exercise the Regiment in all the Military
Motions, and is to lead the Regiment upon the head thereof; But when his
Colonel is present, he brings up the Rear, if they march in one division,
but if in two, in some places he leads the second, as his Colonel does the
first; or if in three, as formerly is shown, he commands the Vanguard, the
Colonel the Battle, and the Major the Reer-guard. His place is not of so
great pains and toil as the Majors is, therefore, he ought in the drawing up
of the Regiment to be helpful and assisting unto him in that particular, and
in all others where he shall think fit. To conclude, the greatest Affairs of
the Regiment being carried forth by the Major, there is the less remaining to
be spoken concerning him, but that he see all things duly observed throughout
the Regiment, according unto such orders received from those which are above
him.

Of a Colonel.
IT concerns every Colonel to take care that his Companies be full and
complete, (if it may be) that they be well provided of Arms, and to take
cognizance what Exercises are con^inually performed by them, communicating
Orders, and commanding all Officers of his Regiment what is to be performed by
each Company respectively, whenever they shall happen to be upon their March.

In the Head of his Regiment, is his most honorable, and proper place, and
there he ought to be most frequent. He is to be subservient to the Lord
General, Lord Martial, and Sergeant Major General of the Field, to whom he
is to pay like respect and observance, as he himself expects, (and that
justly) from all inferiors to him. For from those his superior Officers, by
him are received in charge, all such Orders, as refer to the Place of Alarms,
Marchings, Imbattailings, Guards, or Convoys. Furthermore, it is requisite that
every Colonel should acquaint himself at least once every week, how and in
what manner the Soldiers of his Regiment have deported themselves in their
several Quarters, by a due and strict examination of the qualities of all such
offenses, as have occurred, and been committed by the several and distinct
Soldiers under his command, hereby preparing every several misdemeanour for a
readier hearing before a Council of War, or Court Martial, and this is easily
effected by convening the Captains, or other Officers under him at such
convenient times, as may suit with his occasions, every Colonel being bound to
make his appearance at each Council of War, as Assistant to the Lord Martial,
and President of the said Council, for hte hearing and determining of all such
propositions and matters in question relating to the Army.

In all matters of Advice and Counsel, but more especially when any Stratagem,
Siege, or intended Battle, is in agitation to be put in action, the Colonel
ever as one of the Primary, Field-Officers is summoned to consult with the
General, and with all freedom to deliver his opinion in all things that shall
be there discussed, for the best advantage (as he shall conceive) for the
designs in hand, how weighty and important soever, and to be ready to go upon
any such service as shall be cast into his change to be executed, by the
Major-part of the said Council, and to express his obedience to his General,
although it be a service that corresponded not with his own opinion at the
first, but being cleared by the large, number, to be more conducing to the good
of the Design, courageously to undertake it and faithfully to perform it.

In the quartering of his own Regiment, which is always ordered for Quarter in
two grand Divisions; regard is to be had that his own Lodgings be ever taken up
in the most equal place between his grand Divisions, that so he may with more
facility and celerity dispense and import his command to either Party. What
commands soever shall descend unto him in charge from his superior Officers,
as relating to the Guards, disposing of Marchings, appointing Imbattailings,
ordering of Quarters, etc. He is carefully to see executed. He must do justice
unto all without partiality, so far as he exceed not his proper Authority, and
at all times to be diligent in suppressing of Mutinies, even in their first
growth by a discreet punishment of the principal offenders, for preveution of
further mischief and incovenience.

Of Guides.
MAps with the right use and knowledge of them, are great helps toward the
finding out of the best and most convenient ways. Skillful and expert
Inhabitants of the Country, are most proper to be elected for Guides, and it
is necessary, for their better encouragement, and the Armies sudden and
necessary use of them, to have them listed in Soldiers pay. For the finding
out of the fittest and ablest persons for this employment, it is most
especially the duty of the Wagon Masters, who are to see and enquire certainly,
that they be men known and practiced in all passable Bypath, Crosse-ways,
etc. That they be able to give an account of the distance of places, of the
evennesse, and straightness of them, whether they be plain, or crooked, hilly,
or stony, and difficult for passage; what Rivers, Hedges, Ditches, and Bridges,
lie in the way, and which way (if there shall be several ways) is the safest
and shortest, which the nearer or farther, to, or from the Enemies Quarters,
which more probable for their approaches, as likewise for Quarter, what
Forage, what Water is to be had, and how convenient the way is for Baggage. If
it shall happen that these Guides may be chosen partly out of the Soldiers,
and partly from the Contrymen, and so any scruple, jar, or difference happen
in opinion, such Officers, and others as are best skilled in those parts and
places, are either to reconcile the difference, or from the most probable
intelligence, to conclude upon the most convenient passages. In respect of the
danger and great hazards, if not utter ruin, that the Guides sometimes do, and
often may draw the Soldiers into, by treachery and false play, they are many
times caused to ride halter'd about the neck, to put them in mind of capital
punishment, if they shall mislead the Party they guide, but in case they
discharge their trust faithfully, and ably, they ought to be as well rewarded
for the encouragement, as otherwise to be punished for the terror of others.

Of Scouts.
AN active Enemy is always watchful, and diligent to apprehend every
opportunity that may make for his advantage, and therefore it concerns every
Commander by way of Counter-mine, as it were, to be careful, that he rightly
and fully inform himself of their ways and courses, for prevention of his own
danger, in case of sudden assaults, and the better infesting of his Enemy. And
to this end, he must make choice of such as are approved for their valor and
fidelity, discretion and vigilance, not probable to be corrupted with gain, or
daunted through fear. These men, are not only to take direct, plain, or high
ways, but also by, private, and unsuspected passages, and scouring as they
scout all places whatsoever, that are accessible, and when they have made
diligent observation in all places, to inform of nothing but what they can
give the ocular proof of, lest by their error and mistake, the whole Army
possibly may be led into an irreparable ruin, and whosoever is the Conduct or
Officer of these Scouts (for one, and an able one, they must have always with
them) must be exceeding careful of his reputation, that he inform of nothing
more then what he can justify from his own eyes, or ears, and if he inform
further, to inform them also that that information is but from report, that it
may be considered of accordingly, and his Repute preserved entire.

Of Spies.
OF all men, these are, at all times necessary for an Army, and in all Armies
of all men they will deserve to be most certainly and liberally rewarded, to
the intent, that they may at all times cheerfully and faithfully undertake any
employment of the greatest trust, hazard, or danger. And he that will make
choice of able and trusty men in this kind, must, after diligent observation,
and weighing of their dispositions and courage, select them out of his own
Soldiers, who under pretense of some discontent for want of pay, etc. may
thereby with less suspicion receive entertainment from the Enemy, and (if it
be possible) to be listed with the Horse, whereby they may gain the fairer
Opportunities in Field, or Garrison, to give certain intelligence of all
Designs and Occurrences in the Enemies Quarters.

Before their departure from you, let them take their several instructions
(for the more you have the better, so that that they be designed for several
places, and unknown unto each other) both for times, and places of conveyance,
which places must be strictly observed, and duly searched for such
informations, as your Spies shall convey thither, and thither let your answers,
and advises be re-conveyed for their further instruction.

Sometimes there may arise matters of such importance and consequence, that it
will not only be convenient to certify by letter, but most necessary to make
appearance in person, and there to consult and advise together, if perhaps the
Enemy shall be resolved to fall upon some of the opposite Quarters suddenly,
etc.

For Cursary Spies, and present Intelligence, the people of meanest rank, and
quallity, are the fittest Instruments; as common Peasants, Pedlars, Sellers of
Strong Water, or Tobacco, and the like, who may pass unsuspected, and with
more security effect your purpose.

There are yet another sort of Spies of another nature, who are denominated
Double, who being chosen to this Office upon great experience of their trust
and constancy, may in some cases be allowed to inform the enemy aright, in
some such Affairs of yours, as may not be prejudicial to you, but to insinuate
and win belief upon the contrary Party; and hereupon let them secure
themselves into the private service of some of their Prime Officers, whence
they shall (as being better acquainted) more easily discover, and more
certainly inform of the Enemies proceedings and intentions.

CHAP. XXIV. Of Military Watches.
HOw necessary these Watches are in all Armies is evident to all men; the grand
and chiefest care whereof, for order and direction, rests in the Sergeant
Major, who issues out such precepts therein to the Captains, or Companies, as
he himself before received from his superior Officer, and according to the
said precepts received, whether it be in Garrison or Field, the work and duty
required, is to be performed either by Squadrons, or full Companies, having
respect unto the strength or weakness of the Place to be guarded, and in such
places as are most likely for the Enemy to make his approaches in, and that
there they be careful to fortify the Guard above other places of less
concernment; which must be observed by the Major, in surveying the Guards, and
Guard Places, in his walking of the grand Round, and so, according as his
discretion shall see fit, to take from the stronger places of Guard such
Soldiers as may supply the defects of the weaker.

The appointmtment of particular Guards unto particular Captains, is in the
power of the Major, or otherwise, He commands the Sergeant of each Company to
attend him at his Quarter, at any certain hour of the day as he shall think
fit, where every one is to do duty upon the Guard that night, takes his lot in
order, (which lots are shuffled together in an Hat) which directs him upon
what Guard to attend that night. This being done, all the Sergeants that have
their direction for the duty of the Guard, are to make a Ring, or Circle,
according to their degrees in Seniority. To the Senior of all which Company of
Sergeants, the Major gives the word privately in his ear, who after the same
manner passes it to the next, and so from Man to Man unto the youngest, who
whispers it in the ear of his Major; who sends it back again in the former
manner for Securities sake, until it come to the Senior Sergeant again, who
then leaves it in the care of his Major, which preventeth all mistakes for each
particular Company.

The Guards being thus set in order, the Officers relieved ought to inform the
Officers of the Relievers, of all the several duties of their several Guards,
etc.

Every Commander in Chief of that particular Squadron, which he is appointed
unto, leads up his own Squadron from the Parade to their appointed Guard, to
which, when they approach, the Officer in Chief delivers the word to the
Corporal or his Lance-prizadoe, and they to their Superior Officers.

The manner of relieving is by planting a Guard of Pikes next to the Relievers,
and adjoining to them in the Rear a Guard of Musketeers, through whom the
Relievers are to pass, and the Relieved to march back to their Quarters. After
all things thus set in order, the Captain of the Guard in person, by strict
injunction commands every man to his duty, from which no man either Officer
or other is to depart without an especial License, and in all Alarms to stand
close, and quietly to their Arms, expecting further instruction and command
what they are to do. And all this time, and constantly a Sentinel is appointed
to guard the Eutrance into the Main-Guard.

Every Officer and Soldier in a Regiment, is worthy of Honor, Pay, and
Encouragement, according to his Merit and Seniority; and to this end, there
ought to be a perfect List of the names and number of all particular Soldiers
and Officers in every Squadron, which List or Catalogue is to remain in the
hands of the several Corporals, or Lance-prizadoes, which Corporals are
diligently to see what defects there are of all several necessaries in then
Corpse du Guard, and to be careful that they be continually supplied; which he
must do, by information to his Major, and (in case of his absence or neglect)
to his Captain, who may inform the Governor, that all wants of Fire,
Ammunition, or Lights be made good, and completed.

The Corporals according to order and precept given to them, are to dispose of
the several Sentinels, as well Pikes as Musketeers, and to have an especial
care, that they keep their Muskets prim'd and laden, and their Match cockt and
lighted, with their Pan guarded, which must be observed by their often visiting
the several Sentinels, to see that all things be in due order, and with
silence, to the end that the Sentinels may always be heard, as often as
occasion is offered.

The Office of every Sentinel after he is placed upon his duty, and in his due
Pesture, (according as is above declared) is to enquire of every passenger, or
other that shall but stir, who goes there? yea, though it be the Captain
himself, and howsoever the remotest Sentinel from the Corpse du Guard, is to
permit him with his Retinue to pass; yet he is bound to have an eye upon them,
till he approach the nearest Sentinel to the Corpse, who upon the like demand,
is answered. The Captain of the Watch, which latter Sentinel commands him to
stand, and thereupon with a loud voice calls forth his Corporal, the Sentinel
not stirring from his place, or Posture, until the Corporal with his Sword
drawn shall approach with a Guard of Musketeers, who are to be all armed, and
appointed as the Sentinels ready to present; whereupon the Corporal with one
only Muskettier advancing, and perceiving him to be the Captain of the Watch
indeed, is to give him the word in his ear, having respectively first cast
down the point of his Sword, afterward receiving further instructions from him,
he conducts him to his farthest Sentinel. But if it shall appear that he be
not the Captain, or the Corporal knowing him not justly to be so, by a just
suspicion, He may then detein him (although he shall give him the word) and
then he shall further demand the word of some other attending him, from whom
having received it, he may more safely permit them to pass; but of all others
whatsoever shall attempt a passage he is to receive the word from them, and not
to deliver it to them.

The Captain himself having done the duty in person of passing the first
Round, upon his return, he is to send forth others upon the like duty, such as
he shall out of his discretion choose from his Main-Guard, and may most confide
in, to whom he is to impart the word at their setting forth upon the duty, and
not before, with strict admonitions, and full instructions what they are to do,
and what way to take.

Now if he shall be supplied with men enough upon his own Guard, he may at the
same time command out several Rounders to be taken several ways; who are
diligently to observe their directions given them, and to be very vigilant in
the observation of all things in their passage, both by the eye and the ear,
and to admonish the Sentinels (in case of neglect) that all things be more
carefully looked unto in their duty. And of these Rounders likewise (as before)
the fore-most Sentinel demands, Who goes there? When being answered
satisfactorily, as by the name of the Round, or Friends, he permits them
passage to the nearest Sentinel, who having stopped them there takes a further
account, what, and who they are. Which is done by calling forth his Corporal,
who placing the point of his Sword at one of their breasts, takes the word
privately, and so passes them by conduct to the furthest Sentinel. But if
there shall happen a mistake in the word, the Corporal is either to secure
them with himself, or by Guard to transfer them to the Main-Guard.

Such as shall walk the Round, are to take a strict account of all they meet,
what, and who they are, and in case of deficiency, of answering justly on the
one side, or suspicion of the other; they are to secure and guard them to the
Captain of the Watch.

Now setting a side those Queries which some do make between Rounders and
Counter-Rounders, if they meet, who shall give or take the word; the best and
safest course is, for them all that before the word be either given or taken,
they go together to the nearest Corpse du Guard, and there to give the word,
after which they are to pass upon their duty again; and so having finished the
Round, and returning to the Captain of the Watch, he takes acompt of them of
all things that they have done and observed in their duty and course upon the
Round, and thus the Captain still supplies the Rounds successively by such
others as he shall take by seniority and dispose off for the like service.

Furthermore, that all disorders, irregularities, and such persons as shall
cause the same in a Town of Garrison, may be found out and rectified, and that
all dangerous accidents by fire, or other wise may be prevented; the Captain of
the Watch commands out a Guard of Firelocks, or Musketeers, to view the
Streets, and all suspicious and irregular persons as they take, they are to
bring to the Main-Guard of this Guard, which is always conducted by a Sergeant,
and is called the Patroville, happen to be Musketeers, and not Firelocks,
then they are to be every one provided of such an instrument as may cover the
lighted Matches, and keep them from discovery. From these also, as from the
Rounders, the Captain of the Watch takes full account of all their passages and
observations on their duty.

When at any time any sudden approach shall be made, or any Enemy discovered,
the Sentinel (who is to be firm and constant to his Place and Posture, till he
shall be relieved) forthwith by firing gives the Alarm, and immediately seconds
it by crying with a loud voice, Arm, Arm. When the Alarm is thus given, the
other two divisions immediately led by their Officers, are orderly to march up
to the Captain of the Main-Guard, to the intent, that all Guards of the
Garrison may with expedition be made good, and it is necessary that these
instructions be given them indeed by the Sergeant Major, when he shall give the
word to the Minor Sergeants, who must likewise inform their chief Officers of
it, and from them the Soldiers are to be charged and acquainted therewith,
that so upon all occasions they may not be ignorant of this part of their duty,
but ready to perform it.

The duty of a Sentinel, is to stand in his Place and Posture, a full hour,
and no more, at which time the Corporal or (in case of his absence) his
Lans-pazadoe is to relieve him, and not only him, but all the Sentinels that
are out upon duty, relieving the farthest Sentinel first (who falls in the
Rear of the rest) and so all the others backward in the like order, and then
conducts the relieved Sentinels back to the Guard again.

At an early hour of the morning appointed for beating up the Revally, the two
Sentinels next unto the Guard are to retreat into it.

At the time appointed, in the morning for opening of the Gates, the Sergeant
Major attended with a sufficient Guard, repaires to the Governor, or place
elsewhere allotted, and there, receives the Keys, which being done, he is to
unlock first that Gate which is most remote from danger of the Enemy, and the
rest in order answerable, but if it happen to be in place and time of imminent
danger, the Major commands forth a party of Soldiers conducted by an able
Officer to go first, and make diligent search for discovering of Ambuscadoes,
which may happen to be in any close suspected places, as Lanes, By-ways,
Hedges, ruinous Cottages, Churches, Pits, or Hallow-trees, Woods, Gardens, and
all such like Enclosures, at which time he opens not the Main-Ports, but only
the Wickets. And except upon command to the contrary which is not usual, both
the Guards and the Watches at the Gates, are to be kept night and day, and all
persons upon them to continue upon their duty until they shall be relieved by
order.

Upon the discharging of the Watch, to the end, that every Officer and Soldier
may have notice, to make speedy repair to their several Guards, each several
Drum first beats a Troop, and a^erward a March in the Main-Guard. Hereupon, it
is to be supposed, the Relievers are advanced toward the Main-Guard, where the
relieved are to be drawn off, and to make a Stand, expecting till the Relievers
shall come up; which being done, the Relieved then are to troop home-ward, and
after that they have attended and seen their colors lodged, they are to
disband, and not before.

And now, further, to satisfy the expectation of the Lovers of the Art
Military, it shall not seem unseasonable here to declare somewhat concerning the
manner of Field-Watches, or Vigils de Champe, denoted unto us by the Expert and
Ancients, under these three Notions. The first are Castra temporanea, aleager
ad placitum, pitched only for the present, and may perhaps alter and change it is
Station in a day, or an hour, according to the pleasure and judgment of the
General, and Commanders in chief, Secondly, There are Castra, A select, or
constant Camp, so called, because of their intentions of continuance in the
besieging of a Castle, or Town, etc. until they shall have taken the same, or
by some other necessity, or further advantage, forced to raise their Siege. The
third, and last, called Castra, Such a Camp as is pitched before, or near some
River side, to oppose and frustrate the Incursions of the Enemy, who otherwise
might this way break in for the infesting or taking of a Country. Now,
concerning such Watches, or Guards, which shall relate unto these several
Camps, both in regard of the several and most convenient places for securing
the Camp by Sentinels, and Per-dues, they are to be primarily appointed and
ordered according the discretion and command of the Masters of the Field,
whether Generals, or Majors of Brigades, and afterward the Sergeant Majors and
Captains of Regiments according to their commands, and relieved order, are to
design them for the aforesaid place.

The enlarge the several Arguments and Disputes that might further arise, in
point of Field-duties, relating hereunto, would be too tedious, and to little
purpose; in regard that whosoever shall but diligently observe what has before
been set down concerning the duty of Watches in Garrisons, and Fortresses, may
sufficiently be able to apprehend and perform all manner of duties that shall
concern this Field Service, provided that he be careful to adhere to the
directions of the Field-Officers in all points, and diligent to observe the
manner of managing of all things according to their instructions. And therefore
to avoid prolixity and fruitless disputes, I refer the Reader to what has
been above related.

CHAP. XXV. The ordering of a private Company, unto a Funeral Occasion.
WHen any Commander or Soldier of worth shall be deceased, a private Captain
that would show respect and honor, by marching a long with his Company
attending the Corpse to the place of burial, must order his Soldiers after
this manner.

They being summoned by beat of the Drum, to meet at their usually place of
Randezvous, they may be drawn up according to the usual manner, having a
Vanguard, Battle, and Reer-guard, being thus ordered, and each of the
Soldiers having either in his hat a black feather, or ribbin, the Captain may
draw them off, and order them to their long-march; moving them away in an
orderly manner unto the place of him that is deceased, and there make Alt.
After which he may command the Musketeers in the Van to open to the right and
left outward to such convenient distance as the Pikes may move up between them,
and take possession of their first ground, and those Musketeers may face
about, and move down clear of the Pikes, and after close their files inward to
order, and face to their Leader.

Now being in two divisions, let them so continue with their Arms ordered,
until such time as they shall perceive the Corpse to be brought forth into the
Street, then the Captain may face them all about, and move them some three
Pikes length before the Corpse, after which he may command his Musketeers to
perform their Funeral Posture, which is to have their Muskets under their
left arm with the But-end upward, their Rests likewise on that side trailing.
After which the Pikes are to face again to their first Front, and to lay the
narrow end of their Pikes down upon the ground, after facing about to the left,
and and bringing up the But-end of their Pikes on their right side, conforming
themselves with the Musketeers in their Funeral Postures. In the next place,
the Ensign strips his colors off from his Staff, and ties them about his
right Wast, putting a black Ribbon toward the very end of his Staff he after
faceth to the Body of Pikes, standing in the Rear of them, and trailing his
Staff in the same Posture, next follows the Captain, having in his hand a
half-pike, or leading-staffe, conforming himself likewise to his Funeral
Posture. Thus being all ready to march, and rightly faced toward that place
where the Corpse are to be interred, are after this manner following to lead and
to bring up.

The first division of Musketeers which was the Reer-guard, is led by the
Lieutenant, the next division of Musketeers that was formerly the Vanguard,
is led by the second Sergeant, the Body of Pikes is led by the eldest Sergeant,
he trailing a half-pike upon the head of them, the Ensign bringing it up, and
the Captain 12 foot short of him bringing up the Rear of the whole Company. And
after him the Ministers marching just before the coffin, and in the Rear, and
next unto it the nearest kindred, and after them those that are invited to the
Funeral.

Having thus stated the manner and order of the Military Part, with all others
belonging thereunto, for any ordinary Funeral Occasion; I shall in the next
place proceed to show their order upon the March, and how each Arms ought to be
disposed before the Corpse enter into the Church, with the rest of the Train.

All persons being ordered as before expressed, the Drums being covered with
black-bays, and placed betwixt the second and third ranks in each division, and
all being ready to move, the Drums may begin to beat their Funeral March, and
the Lieutenant leading them away with the But-end of his Pattison upward and
comported, the rest following, and marching in a leasurable, and slow way a
long together, until they come within a hundred foot of the Church-doore, or
place where the Corpse are to be interred, there making Alt. After which let the
Musketeers in their ranks file to the right and left, not advancing ground,
and face in opposition, making a Guard for the rest to pass through, and
resting their Muskets, or putting the But-end thereof to the ground, with the
barrel toward them (which is a conformity to the Pikes being ordered.) In the
mean time, let the Pikes advance their Arms, and immediately after move forward
betwixt the Guard of Musketeers, and let their ranks afterward file to the
right and left, making also a Guard, their Pikes being ordered, and they, as
the rest, facing in opposition. Then let the Captain who bring up the Rear of
all his whole Body move forward, with the rest to the Church-doore, then
falling off in respect of ordering his Company, the rest of the Train marching
into the Church.

After which the Captain may cause them all to face to the Church, or to their
Leader, he standing then before the Church-doore, commanding them to rank again
as they were. After every Leader may draw off his file, and set their Arms a
part in each file by themselves, and go in to hear part of the Sermon, if there
should be any such order beforehand from their Captain, placing Sentinels to
look to their Arms. And when Sermon is almost done, they ought to go forth of
the Church, and draw forth the files by some little warning of the Drums, to be
in readiness to answer such directions as they shall receive from their
Captain. Who may, if he have convenience of room, draw all his Musketeers into
a Ring, and the Pikes in like manner on the outside of them, and as soon as
the Soldiers have notice (being all ready, and presented) that the Body is
laid down in the grave, they may upon warning of the Drum, give one volley of
shot altogether, and after make ready again, performing the same twice over
more. After which, the Ensign may put his colors upon his staff, and furle
them up, then the Pikes may be drawn up again into one Body, and the
Musketeers into another, and falling in the Rear of the Pikes, they may troop
away. And a little before the place of lodging the colors, they may make Alt,
and the Musketeers may fleeve up by the outside of the Pikes from the Rear
filing to the right and left, making a Guard for the colors and pikes to march
through them, and being clear, and the colors lodged, they may face about
again to the right, and give another volley of shot; but if there should be
such astreight of ground, that the Musketeers cannot be drawn into a Ring,
then they must be otherwise disposed of by making them into two ranks, the one
on the one side of the Street, and the other of the other side, facing them
either in opposition, or in an oblique manner; if in opposition, they must
present very low, and give fire three times altogether as before, with one
volley after another; if oblique, the one rank is to be faced toward the upper
end of the Street, and the other toward the lower end, and so may fire with
less danger to each other, the Pikes to be siled away to the right and left,
behind the Musketeers before they were thus faced. And again, where they have
not length of ground to contrive the Musketeers into two single ranks, they
may fire altogether, as they stand at order, mounting up the Muzzels of their
Muskets into the air, without offending each other. Therefore according to the
convenience of the ground, it must be the discretion of every Commander to
order his men accordingly to perform his three volleys of shot, in the most
gracefullest way, which being ended they may all return to their Quarters. And
thus much may suffice for satisfaction to any Commander in ordering his single
Company to any Funeral Occasion, marching alone of it self.

CHAP. XXVI. The Ordering of a Regiment, to a Funeral Occasion.
WHen Companies are to march in a Regimentall way, care must he had that the
Regiment be first drawn up according to this rule. The Pikes to be in one Body
and the Musketeers equally divided to flank that Body; after which let the
Major make his divisions, appointing the places of every Captain, and
Lieutenant, where they shall lead, and where they shall bring up. After that
they may move away toward the place, or lodging of him that is to be interred,
and there make Alt, opening the Vanguard of Musketeers, and facing them to
the Rear, then let the Body of Pikes, and them interchange ground, that the
Pikes may march next the Hearse, in manner, as before expressed of a private
Company, whose smaller Bodies take rule from the greater. Then let the
Lieutenant Colonel lead the Regiment, and the Colonel bring it up, and so in
like manner in every division, the Bringers-up are to lead, and the Leaders to
bring up. All Officers and their Arms being thus reverst, the Front becomes the
Rear, and the Rear, the Front, they must move slowly away, and before the Corpse
pass into the Church, there must be ground reserved, that after the
Musketeers have first made a Guard, the Pikes may move through them, and may
also in like manner file in their ranks as the Musketeers did, joining to
them, and making a Guard in like manner of each Arms. After which, the whole
Train may pass through in an orderly manner into the Church, the Soldiers in
the mean time attending without until Sermon be passed over. And being all in
a readiness, they may give three several Peals, or Volleys of shot, according
to such warnings as shall be given them. After which, the Soldiers being
ranked again as they were; if they have convenience of ground, the Major may
cause the Captain to draw off their Companies, and troop home to their several
Quarters, according to their best convenience. But if they have not room it
will be most properest for the Major to command the Musketeers to stand, and
first to rank the Pikes again as they were. Then let the Drums beat a Troop
upon the head of the Pikes in the Rear of the Colors, and let the Ensigns and
Pikes first troop away, through the Guard of the Musketeers, who being clear
of them, and being led by the Colonel, and other Officers, there appointed,
the Musketeers may also rank again in like manner, and fall in the Rear of the
Pikes, following them until they come unto a convenient place, or ground, for
the Captains drawing off their Companies, as they shall receive order from
their Colonel, Lieutenant Colonel, or Major; And here I will conclude my
Discourse concerning the Exercising of the Infantry in all their Military
Motions, and Exercises.

FINIS.
The CONTENTS of the Chapters.
The first Book.
A Discourse of the Postures, and the handling of Arms, page 1 Several reasons
why the Pike is the more honorable arms, p. 2 The postures of the Pike, ibid.
The Postures of the Musket, p. 3 The postures and charges of the Pike, to be
performed in a shorter way, all things acted in order, and nothing done twice,
p. 4 The Postures of the Musket collected in a brief way, p. 5 There is also a
conformity of posture with the Musket, to those of the Pike, and words of
command to be given, as may in many things be received by both arms. p. 6 The
use of the postures of the Pike. ibid. The use of the yostures of the Musket.
p. 7 How a Muskettier shall perform the Sentinel posture, ibid. The manner and
way to do the Funeral posture, ibid. The reducement of a Musket from the
Funeral posture. p. 8 The Soldiers desire to know every particular place of
Dignity, as they stand in rank and file. p. 8 Reasons for the places of dignity
both in rank and file, for the first four in a file 8 deep. p. 9 Reasons of
the place of the second four as they stand in rank and file, the file being 8
deep, p. 10 Other reasons to clear it further to the Soldier, ibid. Reasons
given for the last Table of every particular place of Honor, and Dignity, as
they stand. ibid. Reasons likewise to be given for the Table 12 a breast, and 12
deep. p. 11 Brief Reasons to be given of the Dignity of the places of a rank 10
a breast, and of a file ten deep. p. 12 What distance is, and the reasons for
the first beginning of the same, with all their several uses. ibid. The
several sorts of distances which are fit and proper for the Soldier to be
exercised in, p. 13 Words of command for the opening of ranks and files to all
their distances, with their closings again. ibid. The use of each particular
distance, and at what time to be used. p. 14 Directions of the way and manner
of drawing up a private company. p. 15 Several reasons given for the placing
of the Sergeants after this manner, p. 17 Reasons given for the placing the
Sergeants and Drums of lesser Companies. p. 18 A description of a Body of men
throughout, with all their several parts and kinds, p. 19 Directions to all
such as shall desire to exercise a Foot company, and admonitions to the
Soldiers to be exercised, p. 21 Of the several kinds of facings, and their
use, with the words of command to perform the same, p. 22 The words of command
for facings, p. 23 The varieties of Doublings, with their parts and uses, p. 24
The words of command for Entire Doublings to the Front, p. 25 Divisionall
Doublings to the Front., p. 26 Entire doublings to the Front by Wheelings, p.
27 A divisionall doubling to the Front by wheeling, ibid. Entire Doublings to
the right Flank. ibid. Divisionall doublings to the right Flank, p. 30 Entire
doublings to the right Flank by Wheeling, ibid. A divisionall doubling to the
right Flank by Wheeling, p. 31 Of Inversion and Conversion, p. 32 The words of
command for Ranks Ranking and Files Ranking to the Front* they being 12 abrest,
and 6 deep, p. 33 Ranks Ranking into the Front by Countermarch, p. 35 Files
ranking into the Front by wheeling, ibid. Ranks ranking, or files ranking at
one and the same time, into Front, Rear, and Midst, p. 36 Of files ranking into
Front, Rear and midst, p. 37 Of files ranking by wheeling. ibid. Of Ranks
filing, or of files filing, or of inversion with their several sorts and
kinds, p. 38 Ranks wheeling into the Flanks, p. 40 Of files filing, or Ranks
filing to both flanks, and the midst at one and the same time, ibid. Of ranks
wheeling to both the Flanks, p. 41 Of ranks wheeling to the midst of files p.
42 Of ranks wheeling to both flanks, and into the midst, at one and the same
time, ibid. Of Countermarches with their several sorts, p. 43 Entire
countermarching of files. p. 44 Divisionall Counter-marching of files, p. 45
Entire Countermarches of Ranks, p. 46 Divisionall Counter-marches of the right
and left half ranks, p. 48 Of Wheelings with their several uses, p. 49 Entire
Wheelings, ibid. Divisionall Wheelings, p. 50 Of filings, either for delight or
service. p. 51 Several firings to be performed with any number of men, p. 52
The way to make every man in a file six deep, according to succession, a
file-leader, by doublings, not using one word of command twice, p. 55 The way
to make every man in a file six deep file-leader, according to dignity, by a
doubling, not using one word of command twice, ibid. The way to make every man
in a file eight deep file leader by succession, and that by doubling, not
using one word of command twice, p. 56 The way to make every man in a file
eight deep, a file-leader according unto dignity by doubling, p. 58 Figures of
Battle to be performed by single files, with some admonitions to those that
shall practice themselves herein, p. 57 Military experiment upon a file six
deep, branching forth eight several figures of Battle, with their reducement.
p. 58 Words of command to produce the first 8 figures of Battle, with their
reducement, p. 59 Words of command for the second 8 figures of Battle with
their reducement, p. 60 Words of command for the third 8 figures of Battle,
with their reducement, p. 61 The way to make 12 several figures of Battle with
a file 10 deep, with their reducement, p. 62 Twelve several figures of Battle
with a file 12 deep, with their reducement. p. 63

The second Book.
Concerning the Artillery and the Military Garders, together with the Private
Meetings; in and about the City of London, p. 67 The first Exercise of four
files six deep. p. 68 A doubling consisting of 16 in number, every one
differing from the other, and not reduced until the last word of command,
ibid. Eight several countermarches with their reducement, p. 69 Ten several
wheelings with their reducement, ibid. Six figures of battle with several
firings thereunto belonging, p. 70 The second Exercise with four files six
deep, p. 73 Eighteen several doublings with their reducements, ibid. Twelve
several countermarches with their reducements, p. 74 Twelve several wheelings
with their reducements, p. 75 Several plain firings upon this Exercise of 24
men, with figures of batrail, belonging to the same, p. 76 The third Exercise
with four files six deep, p. 80 Thirty several words of command, of Inversion
and conversion, ibid. Next follows several figures of battle, with firings,
upon the same, for the performance whereof, p. 82 The fourth Exercise
consisting of four files eight deep, p. 88 The fifth Exercise with four files
eight deep, p. 94 Thirty several doublings with their reducement, ibid. Plain
firings, and figures of Battle, p. 95 The sixth Exercise with four files eight
deep, p. 100 Thirty doublings by countermarches with their reducement, ibid.
Plain firings, and figures of Battle. p. 101 The seventh Exercise consisting
of 64 men, eight files eight deep, p. 105 Two and twenty several doublings by
wheelings, with their reducement, ibid, Several firings, and figures of
Battle, with 64 men. p. 106 The eighth Exercise consisting of 64 men eight
files eight deep, p. 110 Several figures of Battle, p. 112 The ninth Exercise
consisting of 64 men, eight files, eight deep, p. 115 Eight several
countermarches with their reducement, p. 116 Ten several wheeling with their
reducement, p. 117 Plain firings, and figures of Battle, ibid. The tenth
Exercise consisting of 24 Files being six deep, according to the first drawing
up of a private Company, p. 121 Eight entire several doublings with their
reducement, ibi. Eight several countermarches with their reducement, ibid.
Eight entire doublings by wheelings with their reducement, p. 122 Plain firings
and figures of Battle, ibid. The eleventh Exercise with 24 files six deep, p.
127 Eight countermarches with their reducement, ibid. Eight several wheelings
with their reducement, ibid. Plain firings and figures of Battle, p. 128 The
twelfth Exercise consisting of 24 files six deep, p. 132 A doubling to make
every man a File-leader by dignity, ibid. Several wheelings with their
reducements, p. 133 Plain firings and figures of Battle, ibid.

The third Boook.
Concerning the drawing up of Regiments, with their several numbers, forms,
manner and ways, p. 139 The manner of drawing up a Regiment consisting of six
companies, containing in it a Colonel, a Lievte. Colonel, a Major, and three
Captains, every one one having 108 men in a company, and the three
Field-officers 144, which makes completely up 756 men, whereof two thirds are
Musketeers, and one third of Pikes, the Files being six deep, p. 140 The
reasons follow for the placing of the Captains, their Colors, and their
Lievtenants, after the manner before set down, p. 142 More particular reasons
for the placing of the Captains, and Lieutenants, of the first grand Division,
ibid. Reasons for the placing of the Officers of the second grand Division. p.
143 The ordering of a Regiment to the long march, with the placing of the
Officers, and the leading of carriages, p. 144 The first Exercise of a Regiment
in the plainest and easiest way. p. 146 Doublings belonging to a Regiment, p.
150 Four several wheelings with their Reducement, ibid. Countermarches not fit
to be used in the exercising of Regiments, ibid. Several firings to be
performed upon the former figure, and how to be managed by the several
Officers, p. 152 The manner of drawing up a Regiment, consisting of seven
companies, containing in the four Captains, 12 files of Musketeers, and six of
Pikes, in each of their particular companies, and in the three Field-officers,
16 files a piece of Musketeers, and eight of Pikes, which amounts to the
number of 864 men, p. 153 The manner of drawing up and placing the Officers of
a Regiment, consisting of eight Companies, having in it a Col. a Lieutenant
Colonel, a Major, and five Captains, their number of men in each company, being
equal with the former Regiment, they amount unto 972 men, p. 158 How to make
the figure of a Ring, with its use and service, p. 160 The manner of drawing up
a Regiment, consisting of ten Companies, having in it seven Captains, and three
Field-Officers, being in each particular company, the former numbers, which in
all amounts unto 1198 men, p. 162 The manner both of the drawing up, and the
order of the longmarch of Col. Rainsborough his Regiment, bringing up the Rear
of the foot of the Army, under the command of the Lord Genesis Fairfax, at their
first marching through the City of London, on the seventh of August, 1647. p.
164 A third way of drawing up a Regiment of ten companies, after the manner
used amongst the Swedes. p. 166 The way of drawing up a Regiment consisting of
12 companies, the nine Captains, having 18 Files in each company, and the three
Field-officers every one of them 24 files, whereof, there are two thirds of
Musketeers, and one of Pikes, in each particular company, amounting in all to
1404 men, p. 169 The manner of drawing up a Regiment, according to the Swedish
Brigade, p. 170 The manner of drawing up a Brigade, or Tertia, being a third
part of an Army, according to the practice of the Netherlands, under the command
of the Prince of Orange, p. 171 How to draw up an Army of 12 Regiments of Foot,
and three of Horse, the Foot amounting unto 11664 men, and the Horse unto 3000;
in all 14664 men, p. 174 The several duties belonging to the Foot in a
Regiment, as follows by degrees from a private Soldier unto a Colonel of
the same: and first of a private Soldier, etc. p. 176 Of Military Watches, p.
187 The ordering of a private company, unto a Funeral occasion, p. 190 The
ordering of a Regiment, to a Funeral occasion, p. 191

Errata.
PAge 5 line the last read right side, p. 18. l. 41. r. eldest Sergeant, p. 19.
l. 8. r. otherwise, p. ibid. l. 11. r. long March. Every p. 22. l. 14. by their
leader, p. 24. l. 7. r. in the p. ibid. l. 36. r. ensue, ibid. l. 38. dele or
the half-files, p. 32. l. 12. r. not, p. ibid. l. 13. r. I, p. 33. l. 6. r.
outward, p. 43. l. 38. r. marking, p. ibid. l. 46. of files, p. ibid r. or. p.
45. l. 34. r. and faced again to the front, p. 46. l. 39. r. file, p. 49. l.
11. r. Chorean, p. ibid. l. 23. r. gain, p. 52. l. 9. r. ranks. p. ibid. l. 27.
r. right for left, p. ibid. l. 28. dele in the rear of the Musketeers, r.
before the pikes, p. 55. l. 40. deles, ibid. l. 42. dele s, p. 56. l. 42. r.
eight, p. 56. 7. dele as have, p. ibid. r. they. p. 74. dele, l. 33. p. 104. l.
13. r. they stand, p. 139. l. 49. r. forms, p. 140. l. 13. put in 3. p. ibid.
l. 53. r. from. p. 144. l. 13. dele long, p. 145. l. 29. for good r. guard, p.
ibid. l. 34. r. thus, p. ibid. l. 13. r. rest, p. 146. l. 15 r. 147. p. l. 152.
15. r. gives, p. 153. l. 29. r. bring them, p. ibid. l. 29. r. where, p. 158.
l. 40. r. fifth, p. 159. l. 50. dele and, p. 171. l. 40. r. Captain, p. 174. l.
25. r. the eldest, p. 180. l. 24. r. in hutting, p. 188. l. 53. r. and if they,
p. 189. l. 51. r. to. In Major Hayne's Ogdocostick correst these few faults,
line 22. read Genius, ibid. line 30. dele a, ibid. l. 34. dele a, in column 2,
l. 8. r. Of the ibid. l. 28, r., for a.

In the Dedication the last line, dele the liberty.

Imprimatur,

April 13, 1649. Sir Nathanael Brent.

The Copy of a Letter, written by the Honorable, the Militia of the City of
London, to Sir Nathanael Brent.
Honored Sir:
The bearer hereof will present you with a TREATISE of THE COMPLETE BODY OF THE
ART MILITARY: Which being approved of by diverse of the most experienced
Commanders amongst us, we desire for the Public good of the Nation, that you
will give an alowance of it for the Press with expedition.

Sir, Your affectionate friends, Isaac Penington: Sir John Wollastone: John
Dethick: Philip Skippon: Robert Manwarring: Owen Row: William Underwood:
Matthew Sheppard: Robert Tichborne: Thomas Noel: Mark Hildersley: Daniel Tailor:

Guild Hall, London, April 11, 1649.
To the Mirror of Chivalry, And Honor of all Martial Discipline, the most
Victorious THOMAS LORD FAIRFAX His Excellency, Captain General of all Military
Forces for the Parliament of ENGLAND; All Health and Happiness, here and
hereafter.
Most Eminent and Illustrious SIR. May it please Your Excellency,
THe Glory of all Arts is Action, the Honor of all Action is Virtue; the Crown
of all Virtues is Perfection: the Excellency whereof, (according to the
perfection of Humanity) is so essential in your Excellency, that you are
become, at once, the Wonder, and the Honor of Europe, neither can that
immortal Fame of Yours be concealed from the rest of the habitable World) who
shall from age to age record, and from Antiquity to Infantry relate those
matchles Victories, and unimitable Atchievments, which the Bounty and Blessing
of Heaven has enriched your Hand, and beautified your Name withal. In all
whose Honorable and succesfull Undertakings, I had an aim at no greater
happiness, then to have been the least Part in so noble an Employment under
your Excellency, toward the perfecting of the welfare and Happiness of this
Kingdom, and Commonwealth, had not the Military Affairs of this Honorable
Metropolis unavoidably engaged and obliged me to attend the Service of their
own Militia. And therein my Lo: I have spared neither diligence, nor Study,
that might conduce to the great work of Arms, then in Embrio, now in
perfection, excepting only ppposition and Envy, which the greatest Honors
never yet were free from: A part of which perfection has always flowed from
the industry of the Officers, and practice of the Students of that Warlike
University wherein, although I have not (as a Member thereof) with such
dexterity as Cadmus sent out well experienced Soldiers in a Day, yet have I
not layn so idle, as Lepidus, and wish to be warmed more from the Sun than my
own labors; of which the effects are now upon the public Test, but more
formidably under your Excellencies censure: to whose Patronage and Protection I
have presumed to devote this eldest Son and Firstborn of all my forepast
Studies, Practice and Employment in the gradation of Military Affairs. All the
following sheets, which relate to that Heroic Subject, such as they are, and
in such a dress, as now they have put on, submissively and primarily present
themselves, with all their worth and beauty, (if any be discernable within
them) unto Your Excellency, as to their tutelar Angel, and most Orthodox
Warrior, that either Pole can boast of. In confidence, therefore, of your
Excellencies native Candor toward all Ingenuity, (and more especially that,
wherein your own transcendent, and unparalled Honors are more perspicuously
and really delineated, than all the vain and empty Glory of the Dull and
Phlegmatic Pretenders to Chivalry can be Map'd, or Landskip'd by the
effeminate hand of Flattery) this late abortive, in full shape, due proportion,
and, (if Truth deceive me not) in just maturity, has broken from the womb of
my seven years endeavors to see the Light both of the censorious and judicious
World, and in that Light it cannot but live; if your Evcellencies goodness
shall vouchsafe to foster it, and must not die, except your displeasure please
to wound it. And whether this shall live or die: I shall not further aspire at
any loftier pitch of Honor, than to have Commission, to subscribe my self

Your Excellencies most humbly devoted Servant, Richard Elton.


