The Curious Destillatory.
Tho. Cross sculpsit.



THE Curious Distillatory: OR The Art of Distilling Colored Liquors, Spirits,
Oils, etc. from Vegitables, Animals, Minerals, and Metals.

A Thing hitherto known by few.

Containing many Experiments easy to perform, yet Curious, surprising, and
useful: relating to the production of Colors, Consistence, and Heat, in diverse
Bodies which are Colorless, Fluid, and Cold.

Together with several Experiments upon the Blood (and its Serum) of Diseased
Persons, with diverse other Collateral Experiments.

Written Originally in Latin by Io. Sigis. Elsholt.

Put into English By T. S. M. D. Physician in Ordinary to his Majesty.

London, Printed by I. D. for Robert Boulter, at the Turks-head, over against
the Royal Exchange in Cornhil, 1677.

TO THE Right Honorable PHILIP, Earl of Chesterfield, Lord Stanhope of
Shelford, etc.
My Lord,
IN the Eastern parts of the World, no Man approaches a Great, an Illustrious
Person, without a Present: And in these Western parts it has been for many
Ages a Custom, (and still remains so) to dedicate Books of Curious and Polite
Learning, to Eminent, and Worthy Men. And this for several Reasons: for by
prefixing before the Books they publish the Names of those Excellent Men to
whom they are obliged for former benefits, They do thereby in some measure
express their Gratitude: As also by that means their works are better Adorned;
and thus receiving Splendour from their Patrons Glory, they thereby gain the
better acceptance in the World. Some propose the writing of Panegyricks in
Honor of their Patrons. But that looking so like Flattery, I willingly avoid.
Besides, it were madness to suppose, your Lordships Masculine Virtues both of
Mind, and Body; As your Courage, Generosity, Singular Prudence, Equity, Candor,
Affability, Compassion to the Afflicted, etc. can possibly be described, or
comprised, within the Limits of an Epistle: Nor need I attempt the doing this,
since your Lordships truly Noble Qualities, are so Eminently known to the whole
Nation.

I Address this Book to your Lordship, not for any of the aforegoing Arguments,
but chiefly for the following Cause. The Art by which the Experiments produced
in these Papers are made, ( viz. Chemistry) has in all Ages been embraced, and
cultivated by both the Learned Magi and Kings, and is at this day much prized,
and Practiced by many of the Princes of Germany: And highly esteemed and
promoted by the Example of our own Sovereign's delighting in it, and favoring
of it. And it must be granted that the Ancients could not bestow so much Honor
upon it, as it has gained (in this our time) by obtaining your Lordships
Favor. For you have added new Rays to Illustrate it, by your Studying and
Practicing of it.

My Lord, Having mentioned this, I have showed the cause why I presume to make
you this Present: The Treatise it self being of that Art, whereof your Lordship
is so great a Master; And therefore I hope the Argument will not be ungrateful.
The Original Author is sufficiently known (abroad) to be both a Learned, and
Practically knowing Man, and he thought this piece worth the presenting to a
whole Society of Men, that are likewise such themselves; I mean the German
Academy of the CURIOSI. It has also the Applause of many of our ingenious
Vertuosi of the Royal Society: These Reasons have encouraged me to put it into
English: And to deposite it at your Feet. Desireing your Lordships acceptance
of it, as a Testimony of Veneration, And the Eternal devoting of my Self,

From my Study London, this 4th of April, 1677. Your Lordships Most Humble,
Affectionate and Faithful Servant, Tho. Sherley.

To the Reader.
READER,
GOod Wine needs no Bush; Nor Good Books Commendatory Epistles: And yet as the
Vintner will hang out his Garland to draw in Customors to his House, So also
the Bookseller thinks himself obliged both in interest to himself, and Civility
to Thee, to put out this Sign to acquaint Thee with the quality of the Ware he
here exposes to Sale.

Know then, this Treatise consists of many Curious Experiments, which both upon
the account of their variety, usefulness, singularity, and ease in performing
them, must needs prove delightful, and consequently acceptable to him that
desires to improve his Dominion over the Creatures: which is only to be
acquired by gaining a true knowledge of their Natures and qualities, which can
no way be attained so well, and with that certainty, as by making Experiments
upon them: of which here are such plenty, and of such different kinds, and
those such as will afford such fruitful hints to a considerate Reader, for
Analogous Experiments, That I cannot but give this Testimony, That I have not
met with a Tract which contains so much, in so little room, and without
Confusion. Add to this, That the Experiments here alleged, are so easily
practicable, That a great part of them may be performed in a Chamber, (by such
common and cheap means, as are constantly to be had, either at the Druggists,
or common Chemists) and do not require a Specious Laboratory, (which is
expensive,) nor long attendance (as many Chemical Processes do) which is
tedious: And yet these are not of the Nature of Contingent Experiments (which
sometimes happen, and sometimes fail, being much varied by flight and unheeded
Circumstances:) But they are certain in their event, and seldom subject to
Miscariage. If therefore Reader thou art virtuously inclined, and had rather
spend Thy time innocently, and usefully, than viciously, (not to say Modishly:)
Thou may here be furnished with occasions to do so. And to be serviceable to
Thee in this end, was indeed one of the chief Motives which caused me to render
this Book into English; the Original being so valued beyond Sea, that it was
gratefully accepted there; and those few Copies, which were transmitted hither,
were quickly bought up, so that the Book becoming scarce, I thought it a
charitable act to Translate it; and thereby preserve it for thy use, and
satisfaction, to which intent I commend the perusal of the Tract it self to
Thee, And Remain Thy Friend,

Tho. Sherley.

THE CONTENTS OF THE CHAPTERS.
CHAP. I. THe Occasion of writing. Page 1 2. Of Color, and of the Appearances
of Colors. 4 3. Of the Different ways of Distilling, and particularly of
bringing the Tinctures of Simples over the Helm, or Alimbeck. 15 4. Experiments
in Metals, and Minerals. 19 5. Experiments upon Animals. 26 6. Experiments
appearing in Vegitables. 28 7. Of Veronica, or Fluellin. 31 8. Of Camomile. 35
9. Of Lignum Nephriticum, or the Wood against the Stone. 41. 10. Of the Dregs
of Wine, of wild Carnations, or Pinks, and of Parsley. 47 11. Of Wild Flower de
Luce. 49 12. Of Ros Solis, or Sun dew. 52 13. Of Blew Pimpernel, and of
Curcuma, or Turmerick. 55 14. Of Cinnamon. 61 15. Of Corrals, and the Tincture
of them. 66 16. The Conclusion, containing three sorts of Observations. 73
First, Observations relating to Effervescency, Incalescency, or the production
of heat in Bodies. 74 Secondly, Observations of Attenuation, and of
Coagulation, or of making solid Bodies Fluid, and Fluid Bodies Solid, or
Consistent. 77 Thirdly, Several Experiments, and Observations upon the Blood,
and Serum, of Scorbutic, Consumptive, and other Diseased Persons. These are
digested into four Classes. 84 Lastly, Two Epistles written to the Author: the
first contains many curious Experiments made upon the Grunwalden-Stone. 91 The
Second Contains an Experiment, by which the Color may be wholly taken out of a
Brick. 105
Mend the Errata's, Thus.
Page 2. line 24. read, they if. P. 7. l. 6. r. intencely. P. 13. l. 26. r.
Particles. P. 27. l. 13, etc. and P. 50. l. 8. etc. Tbe Paragraffs in
High Dutch are both misprinted; but the sense being truly rendered in English,
the Reader is desired to excuse it. P. 30. l. 5. r. Alimbecks. P. 34. l. 15. r.
swiftness when they are distilled. P. 41. l. 16. r. Tree. l. 24. r. enode. P.
42. l. 6. r. assulatim. P. 44. l. 23. r. Experiments which follow were etc. P.
46. l. 20. dele by, and r. Salt is broken, and the Particles are. lb. l. 22.
dele. which were kept under. P. 49. l. 16. dele are. P. 56. l. 5. for which, r.
this. P. 60. l. 8. for to, r. does. P. 62. l. 15. for but, r. more then. P. 66.
l. 20. r. or of an Orient. P. 75. l. 26. r. well. P. 83. l. 1. dele now. P. 84.
l. 2. r. ounce. l. 7. r. l^te it. P. 97. l. 14. r. Illustration. P. 98. l. 1.
r. Experienced Sir. P. 104. l. ult. r. Menzelius. P. 107. l. 18. r. contained
in it. P. 108. l. 5. r. and under the form of.

The curious Distillatory; OR The manner of drawing colored Liquors by an
Alimbeck, which thing if it has not been altogether unknown, yet has been
hitherto observed, and noted by very few.
CHAP. I.
The occasion of writing.
THe English Philosophical Transactions have now a long time been published,
and are grown into Volums; also the French Diary, does consist of and has
completed five Tomes: And likewise the German Academy is now employed in
putting forth their fourth Volume: so great every where at this day has been
their studious labor, and so great is the Aemulation, and struggling of the
most flourishing Nations betwixt themselves: that every one of them do seem to
hope in a small time to vanquish and triumph over Nature. Truly it is a most
Noble Employment, and such an one as former Ages has been unacquainted with:
to which if there shall be added, the greater Munificence of Kings, and
Princes, there is no doubt left, but that at last from thence, there will
redound great Advantage to the Public.

All of these are employed about new Inventions, and observations, in the
Mathematics, in Natural Knowledge, or Philosophy, in Anatomy, in Surgery, in
Medicine in General, also in the Books of Politics, Histories, and other Books
lately Printed to adjudge, and revive them. Also they have mixed many things
which particularly belong to the Chemical Art: but they if compared with the
rest are but few: although from thence a more plentiful crop might certainly be
expected, than from any of the other Sciences.

Upon this very occasion, I evolving those kind of writings, it came into my
mind that perhaps it were convenient, that those most excellent Academical men,
were by some public admonition excited to bestow more pains for the future
upon that Art, in whose deep Well lies hid an infinite plenty of Arcana's, or
secrets. To this intent therefore we have written this Book, and Entitled it
Destillatoria Curiosa; I say Curiosa, for neither is it such, that it should be
extold by us with high Encomiums, nor can it promise of it self very great
advantages, or utility, but this praise is sufficient for it, if by occasion of
it, a Spur shall be added to men of sublime ingenuity, and expert Artists, that
thereby they may not only find out the like experiments, but having found them
out, communicate them without envy.

CHAP. II.
Of Color, and of the Appearances of various Colors.
EXactly to teach the Nature of Color, is as hard as to explain the true
reason of Light, of it self most clear: Iul. C. Scaliger, Exert. 325. Sect. 1.
Rightly says, The Causes, and Essence of Colors are as full of controversy,
and obscurity to the Intellect as they are manifest to the sight. Aristotle
Lib. de sens. and sensit. cap. 3. Defines Color, that it is perfiicui
terminante extremitas: The extremity of a terminated body that may be seen, or
seen through. Neither more clear is the description of others, That it is a
quality of a colored Body. Also that it is modifyed Light. Many of the
Chemists do attribute all Colors to their principle of Sulphur, others of them
to Mercury: of which opinion what is to be thought, it is very well worth the
reading of Dan. Sennertus, lib. de consensu, Cap. 11. Excellent also is what
has been delivered upon this Argument by Antonius Scarmilionius Fulginas, and
Mr. Boil in his Book of Colors. See also upon this subject, Petrus Maria
Capenarius lib. de Atrimentis, and Johan. Christoph. Kolhansius Tract. Optic.
and others.

But these controversies not properly belonging to our design, leaving them, we
will rather note the differences of Colors; yet not all of them, since they
are many; (and already amongst others) they have been sufficiently and subtly
explained by Scaliger. Exercit. 325. Sect. 6. and in the following: we will
only touch upon and handle slightly such of them now, as will lead us the
shortest way to our prefixed end.

For the material subject of Colors we distinguish them into those which are
real, or true, and into such as are Emphatick, and Apparent, or seeming. A
Specimen, or example of these is afforded by the Rainbow, a Prismatick or
Triangular Glass, the redness of Wine spilt upon a Napkin. These we divide
again into Penetrative Colors, such as Obryz, or pure Gold, and Sealing Wax:
and into such as are Superficial, of which sort are Apples appearing outwardly
red, and yet are inwardly white.

Moreover Colors considered in the abstract are either Primitive, or Simple;
to wit, White, Yellow, Green, Blew, Red, Black; I say considered in Abstracto,
or as they are to be distributed into certain, and distinct Clauses: for
otherways Green seems rather to be composed of Yellow and Blew, whether it be
made of Vegetables, or Minerals. So Auripigmentum, or Orpiment if mixed with
Indigo; or Gum of Peru cemented with Cobalt, or Bergblau, as the Germans call
it, supposed to be the Native Cadmia, or Copper-Stone: or mix Vltra Marine with
Saffron and you shall see a Green Color will proceed from these mixtures.

Or else they are divided into compound Colors made from the mixture of simple
ones: or else they are decompositi, or doubly compounded, which are made again
in infinite variety by the mixture of compounded ones among themselves, as may
be seen upon the Palates of Painters: but if you go to the Laboratories of
Chemists, there you will be supplied with a reason very different from these,
by which Colors may be so changed, (and that with a most delightful variety to
behold) that adding what is necessary to be added, there will suddenly result,
and appear new Colors.

1. As Spirit of Turpentine, though of it self it be clear, if it be poured
upon Saecharum Saturni, (or Sugar of Lead) which is also of it self exceeding
White, if it be digested upon it, will in a small time become a Tincture
intercely or extremely Red.

2. Also Spirit of Turpentine, if it be mixed with Water, and strongly shook
together, will look like Milk; although this milkiness is not lasting, but this
oily Spirit, ascending to the superficies is diminished, or plainly vanishes
again. The like of which happens if Oil of Olives be mixed with the Lixivium,
or Lees of Vine Ashes.

3. Distilled Oil of Aniseeds, (which is wont to coagulate, and grow thick with
the cold Air,) if a Leaf of white Paper be anointed with it, and a few drops of
Oil of Vitriol be poured upon it, it will presently grow Red; I say the Oil of
Vitriol, not the Spirit.

4. Syrup of Violets, which is of its self of an obscure Purple Color, is
changed into a vivid and brisk red, if you mix by drops with it Spirit of
Vitriol: (which knack is now known to all the Apothecaries Shops) if you shall
add Oil of Tartar to this, a Green Color will emerge from thence: which will
perish and be lost again, If you add Spirit of Vitriol to it again.

5. Syrup of Piony Flowers, if you mix Salt of Vitriol with it, will become
wholly Black: the same happens to Syrup of Clove Iuly-Flowers, if in the time
of boiling it be stirred with an Iron Spatula.

6. Tincture of Coral, prepared with distilled Vinegar, mixed with the Tincture
of Dasey Flowers, there will result from thence a Liquor of an obscure Blew.

7. If you mix Silvius's Sal volatile, or the like Vrinous Spirit in small
quantity, with the same Tincture of Dasyes, or Roses, there will arise an
obsure Blew Color; but if you drop in a little more, it will be made an
obscure Red: Neither can you make that Red Color clear, although you should
add more ( Spirit or Volatile Salt) to it. It therefore follows that acid, or
sour Spirits, do strike a red Color with clearness, but urinous ones with
obscureness.

8. A Solution of Lead made with distilled Vinegar, appears clear like common
Water: If you shall add to this Oil of Tartar, ( per deliquium) which is also
clear as Water, the mixture will presently grow White as Milk.

9. If Antimony which is calcined with Nitre be boiled in Fountain Water, the
straining will be clear, and almost without smell, which nevertheless by
pouring any Acid upon it, will acquire a Saffron Color, with a stinking scent.

10. Common Water in which Mercury Sublimate has been infused, does presently
grow Yellow by dropping into it Oil of Tartar.

The solution of calcined Tin, mixed with dissolved Salt of Tartar becomes
Blew. Dr. Willis lib. de Ferment. cap. 11.

11. Quicksilver and Sal Armoniack ground together, and sublimed in a bolt Head
with a heat of Sand, will become a white Powder, which suffered to dissolve (by
it self in the Air) will produce a clear Liquor like Spring Water, which for
all its clearness, if Copper or Brass be moistened with it, they will appear
silvered; and if Copper Vessels be slightly rubbed with it, it will render them
as if they were perfectly silvered: although this be rather an incrustation,
(or coating of them over.)

12. But a Powder to gild with, is made thus. Dip fine Lint, made of
Linne-Cloath, in Aqua Regis, in which Gold is dissolved, and having cast it
into a Crucible, make a Circular Fire about it, at a distance; and so by
degrees reduce it into a Powder: But toward the end increase the heat by
bringing the Fire nearer to the Crucible, and at last if you please, take out
the Powder and free it from dirt by pouring Water upon it, it will be without
splendour, or shining, and is of a Violet color; but if you rub it upon Silver,
the genuine splendour of Gold will appear, which afterward will be made more
splendid, and shining by polishing.

13. Lignum Acanthinum, or the Wood which is brought from Brazil, infused in
common water, will communicate a pleasant redness to it, like that of red Wine:
If you pour upon this a little distilled Vinegar, the Liquor will appear clear
like white Wine, but a few drops of Oil of Tartar reduces the Color to a deep
Purple, after which, if you drop in Spirit of Vitriol, it will be yellow like
Sack: if you cast on it Salt of Lead dissolved per deliquium (or in the Air)
the mixture will be whitish like Milk. Dr. Willis (lib. de Ferment. cap. 11.)
proposes this Experiment, every Branch of which will answer the Trial but the
fourth, for we by adding Spirit of Vitriol could not produce a pale Yellow, but
made a certain obscure Blew Color.

14. Have in a readiness a solution of Vitriol, and likewise by it self an
infusion of Galls. If you pour both of them together, you will make Writing
Ink. Add Spirit of Vitriol to this, and the Blackness will clear up; then cast
in Oil of Tartar, and after a little working, and heat, there will appear a
light Red, or bright Bay Color: which by mixing Spirit of Vitriol again will
be taken away, all clearing up again: And you may reiterate this Circle as
often as you do by turns put in Oil of Tartar, or Spirit of Vitriol: So that as
often as you please you may render the Liquor of a light Red or Bay Color, or
else clear again.

15. It is also a pleasant Metamorphosis, which is proposed by the excellent
Mr. Daniel Major, the Famous Professor of the University of Denmark. Lib. de
Chirurg. Infusar. Dub. 9. to this purpose. Pour into a good transparent Glass
the Sapphire colored Water, made by the help of Spirit of Sal Armoniack being
put into a Brass Basin: Afterward add the common Clyssus of Antimony, and the
mixture being shook, it will become clear: but if you add to it Oil of Tartar
it will be restored to its former Blewness.

16. Take one Ounce of the solution of Crabs eyes, made with distilled Vinegar:
drop into it of the Salt Spirit of Sal Armoniack 120 drops, and you shall
perceive the matter to grow Milky, and a white Powder will fall to the bottom,
if by turns you pour upon this Liquor as many drops of Ioac. Polemanus his
Tincture of the Bloodstone, after some bubling, the Powder which lay in the
bottom will be dissolved again, and the whole will be changed into an exceeding
Red transparent Liquor, endowed with a grateful Saline taste.

17. The change of light does also cause a new Color to appear. So we have
observed, the Flowers of Convolvulus or Bird-weed (that sort with the Blew
Flower and Ivy-shaped Leaves, with sharp points,) which Lobelius calls Asureum,
in the day time is of a delicate Blew, but at night by Candlelight it appears
of of a Violet Color. Wooden Tables, and such like Utensils, if they be
painted Blew, by day show their own Color, but by night they appear Greenish.

18. Let there be taken two parts of Oil of Tartar, and one of Cows Milk: this
mixture in a heat of Sand will grow Red, a part of the Cheesy, or Curddy part
of the Milk swimming at the top, if you strain this through a Cloth, the Red
Liquor will be more transparent. Being led by the Analogy, or resemblance of
this Experiment, I have thought (that I may add this by the by) whether or no
the whitishness of Chyle in an Humane Body, being mingled every day with the
red Blood, does not perhaps grow red upon the like account also. Although the
common People wrongfully suppose, this redness is induced upon the Chyle by the
Circular motion of the Blood: but motion of it self does hardly appear
sufficient for to change the Color, unless there be hid also in the Blood it
self a Saline Principle, which may continue this Tincture so many years, even
to old Age, which is perfected by the assistance of the Heart, its Vessels and
Heat.

These and the like Phaenomina, or appearances and their causes, perhaps might
be conveniently demonstrated, by the smallest Particulars of which these
Liquors consists. A Battle composed of some thousands of thousands which may be
dilated, and contracted at the will of the Commander; nay being disordered by
the Enemy, may again be rallied, and reduced into order. After the same manner,
from the small Particles of Liquors dilated arises perspicuity and whiteness:
but from their contraction obscurity and blackness. Again, according as the
dilatation and contraction is more or less, there will arise intermediate
Colors; Yellow, Red, Green, Blew. Whether those that study the Optics can
render a more exact account let them try.

CHAP. III.
Of the different ways of Distilling, and particularly of bringing the Tincture
of Simples over the Helm, or Alimbeck.
THe various ways of Distilling depends partly from the variety of Furnaces,
of which some are to distill by Ascension, others by Descention: to say nothing
of Probatory, Cementatory, Reverberatory, or Wind-Furnaces, partly also from
the difference of Vessels, of which sort are Vesica's, Cucurbits, or Bodies,
Retorts, Phials, Alimbecks, Receivers, and others of that kind. All which
Apparatus or Furniture may not only be seen in our Laboratory, but are also
described both by Writing, and Figures by Andr. Libavius. Johan. Rhenanus, and
the rest of those kind of Artists.

There is also other ways of Distilling, respect being had not to the Furnaces,
or Vessels, but to the Matter which comes forth during the Operation. For
whilst the Fire works upon the Matter committed to Distillation, Vapors
ascend, which being collected again fall into the Receiver under the Form of a
Liquor.

To say nothing of Sublimation [to wit, of Antimony, with Sal Armoniack] by
means of which there will also arise fair, and great variety of Colors in the
head of the Alimbeck.

Therefore, first, as to what concerns the Vapors, or Fumes, they also differ
in their color. For Nitre though it be a white Body, yet in Distillation (at a
certain time of the operation) gives red Fumes. Vitriol of it self Green, or
Blew, affords white Fumes. Soot though it be never so Black, yet the Fumes
which fill the Receiver are so White, that it seems to be washed within with
Milk.

But secondly, as to the Liquors which are come over into the Receiver,
although all of them compared together are not altogether of the same Color;
yet it is certain, if you consider almost infinite plenty of Simples, there
will be very little difference or variety in them.

Those which draw Aromatical Oils, may easily observe, that they come over not
White, but Colored: As to instance Oil of Cinnamon is Yellowish, Oil of Mace
is of a Yellowish White, Oil of Cloves is of a Yellowish Black, Oil of Rhodium
Wood is of a Yellow Color tending to Red. And as to distilled Waters, I think
it worth our remark, that every one of them (not excluding all manner of
Spirits) which are commonly found in the Apothecaries Shops, every one of them
I say are limpid* and without Color: Notwithstanding the so great variety of
Color in the Herbs, Roots, Leaves and Flowers from whence they were distilled.
All that Blackness, Greeness, Blewness, Redness, Yellowness, etc. is left
behind in the bottom of the Cucurbit, or in the Copper distilling Vessel, or
Vesica, or rather perishes: there arising (which is worth noting) nothing but
limpid, and almost colorless liquor.

Truly, heretofore this Subject tired my thoughts, and I have many times
weighed this Problem; Whether or no amongst so great variety of Simples, there
were not at least some Species, or sorts of them which would bring over the
Helm or Alimbeck with themselves their own Native Colors; I mention an
Alimbeck only as the chief Instrument, not excluding a Retort, or any other
distilling Instrument. That there are some such Species in Nature which will do
this, Labor has taught me, nor do I repent the pains; part of these I have my
self observed, part I have collected from the observation of others: The
Observations, and Experiments are comprised in the following Chapters. Let the
Industry of others add more to them.

CHAP. IV.
Experiments in Metals and Minerals.
THat we may begin this Business, first with Metals, although if they be left
to themselves, they constantly retain their Native Colors, better than
Vegetables do, by reason of their solidity of substance: yet being tried with
Menstruums, or dissolving Liquors, they are much varied; there does also arise
much more difficulty in distilling them than in Vegetables. The case is the
same also in Minerals, although the difficulty in distilling them be somewhat
less: but let the difficulty be what it will, having made trials in both sorts,
we will produce a few; which Experiments (if not all of them in general) yet
most of them are made by the help of an Alimbeck.

Experiment the first, upon Gold.
Take the Calx of Gold prepared with Aqua Regis, and by reverberating reduced
to extreme fineness, and an exceeding red Color; Pour upon it a Menstruum (or
dissolving Liquor) composed of equal parts of the best Spirit of Wine, and of
the Volatile Salt of Urine; digest it for fifteen days in a Vessel
(Hermetically sealed,) with the heat of a gentle Bath, and repeat this as often
as there is occasion: Afterward join all the several solutions of the Gold,
which will be red like Blood, and digest them for a Week or two. If you then
distill this Liquor by a low Body, or Retort in Sand, at length the Gold
together with the Tincture will pass over by the Alimbeck, with an intense
redness, leaving in the Body an acid, black and spongy Earth. Mr. Boil in his
History of Fluid, and Firm, Sect. 5. says thus: We prepare a Menstruum, by the
help of which, without much difficulty we can bring over the Helm, at the
first, or second distillation, so much Gold as is sufficient to communicate to
the distilled Liquor a lasting Gold color. It Is an Artifice worth remembering,
which Joel Langelot, in Epist. de Pretermiss. relates in these words: The
Powder of Gold ground in the Philosophical Mill, and put into a little Retort,
not too high an one, but a plain one, such as the English ones use to be; press
it by a sand fire by degrees, and at last, with a very strong fire; and so it
will distill a few it is true, but those exceeding red drops; which digested by it
self, or with the Tartarous Spirit of Wine, will become an Aurum Potabile,
which is (true, and) not sophisticate with any other peregrine or strange
quality.

Experiment the second, upon Silver.
Calcine Silver with Mercury sublimate, after which pour upon it the very same
Menstruum of which mention is made in the foregoing Experiment: and so there
will appear a most elegant or lovely blew Tincture; upon which if you pour
Spirit of Salt, it will become a green.

Experiment the third, concerning Iron.
The Tincture of it is reddish, and is made, by taking the filings of Steel in
sufficient quantity: Pour upon them distilled Vinegar, and extract the redness;
afterward pour on more distilled Vinegar, and reiterate this for a Month, or
longer, till you perceive it will extract no more redness. Then join all the
tincted Vinegar together, and distill it in Balneo, and put Spirit of Wine upon
that which remains; and digest it so long till it has drawn a Tincture.
Abstract the Spirit of Wine from it by distillation, pour it on again; after
you have done this six times, the Tincture of Steel is perfect. It is complete
indeed, but the Tincture is much promoted by the Salt of Vinegar, extracted by
the Phlegm of the Spirit of Wine: but yet so nevertheless, that it is very
probable that there is some small portion of the Iron in it.

Experiment the fourth, about Copper.
Concerning this the Noble Mr. Boil, in his Book of Colors, page 305.
observes, That it is a Metal upon which diverse and distinct sort of Liquors do
act so easily, that there is scarce any Mineral that will concur to the
production of so many different Colors as Copper, it being dissolvable in most
sorts of Menstruums: To wit, in Spirit of Vinegar, Aqua Fortis, Aqua Regis,
Spirit of Nitre, of Urine, of Soot, Oils of diverse sorts, and in most other
Liquors, the Colors of which are not a little different, and various from each
other, although they are comprehended within the limits of Green, or Blew, or
of a bluish Green. But it seems the before praised Mr. Boil had not took
notice that if the duplicate Spirit of Ioac. Polemanus made of the Boodstone,
and Sal Armoniack, were poured upon Copper, that the Liquor would distill over
Green, and that green Chrystals would shoot in it.

Experiment the fifth, concerning the rest of the Metals.
Tin, Lead and Quicksilver dissolved in Corrosive Waters, do not tinge their
Menstruums after the manner that we have related above, as Gold, Silver, Copper
and Iron do, etc. for these Metals are of a baser nature, and whitish;
wherefore their solutions also are white: nor is it likely they should easily
pass over the Alimbeck of another color.

Experiment the sixth.
When we make Spirit of Vitriol, if there be added a little Vinegar, the Spirit
will come over the Alimbeck of a green Color: Also the Phlegm of Spirit of
Venus, or verd. Aeris, is greenish.

Experiment the seventh.
If you mix Sulphur, Sal Armoniack and Quicklime, and distill them by a Retort,
although they are Bodies which of themselves are not Red, yet by distillation
they yield a red Liquor: which red Liquor being rubbed upon the Fingers does
color them black. Mr. Boil, de Coloribus, Experim. 34.

Experiment the eighth.
Spirit of Quicklime, prepared after the way that Basilius Valentinus
prescribes in Test. Part. 5. and from him is repeated by Thomas Keslerus
Process. Chym. Number. 287. This before it be rectified does please the eye with
an elegant blewness.

Experiment the ninth.
Take of Vitriol calcined to a yellowness, one part; Flint-stones beaten to a
Powder two parts; and of Spirit of Wine as much as is sufficient to make them
all into a Past. After which if you distill it by a Retort, there will come
forth a Red Oil. To this purpose confer with Christoph. Glucrad. in Not. ad
Tyrocin. Ioa. Beguini lib. 11. cap. 6. Also Andreas Tenzelius in Exegest.
Chymiatrica, and Joan. Schroderus. lib. 3. Pharmacop. cap. 26. Where more Oils
of Vitriol are discovered which pass over the Retort Red.

Experiment the tenth.
This is to be observed concerning Sinobar, as well that which is Natural as
that which is Artificial; if you put Spirit of Turpentine upon it, and then
distill it by a Glass Body in Sand, the Liquor which comes forth will be of a
very fine Red Color.

CHAP. V.
Experiments upon Animals.
WE may admire in the Animal Kingdom the diversity of Colors with which the
chief Master Picture-Drawer has most curiously spotted many Fishes, and also
Shells; and amongst Insects, Butterflyes of all sorts; and among four-footed
Beasts, the Leopard, Linxes, Tigers, etc. but when we come to Birds, who is
there that is not amazed at the Feathers of Peacocks, and Parrots? But whatever
variety there is in this kind in general, the Alimbeck makes no discovery of
them, for whatsoever passes over by it, as much as is hitherto discovered, is
Whitish, only excepting from this rule those which by way of Gleaning we have
annexed lest, this place should be empty.

1. From the several parts of a Stag, or Heart, various and efficacious Shop-
Medicines are prepared, amongst which the chief are the Horns, whose Spirit
being drawn by a Retort, shines with a Yellow, or rather Golden Color;
although I deny not when the Oil is exactly separated it grows white.

2. Amongst Insects, Bees make Honey; from which the Water which flows at the
Beginning of its distillation is White, but the following Spirit is first
Yellow, and toward the end of a Gold Color, and so distills constantly, and is
of many uses in Art.

3. Of the Blew Water of Gnats, this following Experiment is produced by Adamus
Lonicerus Herb. German. part. ult. page 349.

Basser von geme^nen Mussen gebraunt wird blaufarb. Dasselbe bereite also:
Spreite ein Sacflein, so Laufft das Basser durch das Sacflein oder zuch in die
Rachel. Bo du es aber in einem helm brennest, so Wird der helm stiufend. Water
( says he) distilled from common Gnats is Bluish, I make it thus: Spread a
Cloth over a Caldron, but put the Gnats into a Sack, or Bag: and so let them
fall out of the Sack, or Cloth into the Cauldron of Water, which if you distill
by an Alimbeck, the Alimbeck will contract a stink. Thus far Leonicerus.
Although I do not deny that this way of distilling Gnats is partly obscure, and
partly defective.

CHAP. VI.
Experiments appearing in Vegetables.
THere goes about a Story of a great Person that was very curious, who having
called together to him certain Alchymists, showed them diverse Simples, which
having mixed together, he caused them to be committed to distillation in their
presence: but it happened that the Liquor as it distilled did breath forth a
grateful scent of Musk. When this Illustrious Person required of these Artists
a reason of this Odor, for they saw not the least Grain of Musk mixed with the
Simples; They afflicted themselves all day long, and yet could produce no
reason for the thing, unless this Fragrant scent did arise from the mixture of
the Simples in a certain proportion; at length, about the Evening, the Nobleman
discovered to them the fallacy, to wit, that unknown to them, he had put Musk
into the Nose of the Alimbeck.

As therefore we may counterfeit a Scent, by putting into the Alimbeck, Musk,
Civet, or Odoriferous Flowers; In like manner it is possible to fain Colors
since the Water in its passing carries along with it self the Tincture of those
things which are imposed in the Alimbeck: provided you light on such Spectators
upon whom this Legerdemain or trick may pass.

1. The most facile way of all is, by putting Flowers into the Beak or Spout of
the Alimbeck, (for example) put in Blew-Bottle Flowers: so the Water by passing
through them will gain a Blew Color.

2. If you think it necessary to do the thing with more care, put betwixt the
Beak of the Alimbeck and the Receiver, a Fistula or Pipe, wider in the middle
then at each end, or Bellyed like a Bottle, in which let those Flowers be
contained (the Figure is thus.)

-- Moreover this Pipe ought to be somewhat wider in its uppermost end, and
narrower in its lowermost: as is to be seen in the Figure.

3. This is a Spectacle for Mountebanks to show upon a Stage, Thus: if there be
four Cucurbits or Bodies full of Water all in one Furnace, put an Alimbeck upon
each of them, let it be done so that the Alimbeck may only be seen, and the
Pipes, or Beaks hid. Let there be put into every Beak several Flowers (for
example) Blew-Bottles, Violets, Marygolds, Red-Roses, Saffron, Sanders, etc.
suddenly by the help of the Fire the Liquors which are forced into the
Receivers will obtain different Colors, not without the admiration of the
common People which stand by. The same thing may be performed with those
Bellyed Pipes put betwixt and covered.

4. This also is for ostentation, and show: If you take one, or more Wallnuts
made Hollow and Empty, and fill them with the Spirit of the roots of Sapphire,
colored Pimpernel, described below in the 15th Chapter, and stop them up
lightly with wax. Then before the Spectators take these Nuts thus filled, and
cast them into a vessel half full of Spirit of Wine, and putting on an
Alimbeck, distill it in Sand; from the heat within the Wax will be melted, and
the matter flowing out, the clear Spirit will be so tinged that to admiration
it will appear all Blew.

CHAP. VII.
Of Veronica or Fluellin.
BUt some body will answer; Ah! but these are fallacies. It Is true. But you must
know, that these ridiculous things are also necessary, lest you be deceived
your self, and that you may be able to detect the fraud of others. Aristotle's
Sentence concerning a wise man is this: Qui ipse non mentitur, and alium
mentientem facile deprehendit. Who is not false himself, and can easily
discover the falsehood of others. But now passing over crafty cheats, let us
proceed to Operations, which are Genuine, and agreeable to truth.

Veronica, or Fluellin, is a Plant known to all the Apothecaries, and its
Virtues both as to the Breast, and Spleen; also its curing of Ulcers, and
Wounds, are much cried up to the Sick. Whether it were known to the Ancient
Writers both Greek and Latin, is uncertain: Although Caesalpinus refers it to
Diascorides, Myosotida or Mouseare. lib. 11. cap. 214. others make it another
Plant. The kinds of it are commonly (by Herbalists) recorded to be eight:
amongst which the most usual is that which by Caspar Bauhinus is called
Veronica Mas, supina and vulgatissima. The Male Fluellin the Superior, and most
common. There is prepared from it a Syrup, Conserve, Salt, Wine, and also
distilled Water: of the former nothing, but concerning the Wine, and the Water,
take a couple of Observations.

Experiment the first.
Take fresh Veronica, when it begins to be in the Flower, cut it, and
sprinkling it with a little Water, cast it into a Glass Body, and applying the
like Alimbeck to it distill it by Balneo Mariae, or Water. So the Water which
distills, will not be white and limpid like to other Waters, but Greenish. This
Greeness though it be not constant, yet it will last at least three months, and
afterward it will begin to vanish by degrees.

Experiment the second.
If in the place of Fountain Water you put on Wine, and draw it the same way by
Balneo, you will then also have a Green Liquor, but in which the Greenness is
much deeper, and will also continue for a year, and longer.

Truly this neat Tincture which Veronica brings over the Alimbeck with it,
seems to be a Note, or Character of the efficacy, which is indulged to that
Plant before a thousand others.

Let no Body here accuse Copper for giving this Tincture: for if the
distillation be made in Glass Vessels, the Water of Veronica will be equally
Green. The latter way by Glasses is best to perform it, and by that means it
will clearly evidence that this Greenness does not proceed from Copper, but
springs only from the peculiar Nature of the Plant.

But concerning Vegetable Waters distilled by Copper Vessels not exactly Tyn'd,
we have observed this; if they contain any thing of Copper, by putting in a
drop, or two of the Salt Spirit of Sal Armoniack, they will become Milky or
White; but if they have no Copper, they will remain clear. However the
observation of Otto Tachenius ( an excellent Physician of Venice) may seem to
look otherways, concerning Rose Water distilled by a Copper-Vessel; which he
proposes, chap. 19. Hippocr. Chymic. to this sense: It does eat off certain
Atoms from the Copper, which are invisibly mixed with the Water. Would you see
the Copper? drop into the Water some drops of an Vrinous Alcaly, and by it the
whole Water will grow greenish: because the acidity of the Rose Water, does
with more greediness snatch to it self the light, and more like it self Alcaly
than the Metal, which therefore by degrees falls Green to the Bottom.

Whilst I am writing this a certain not inexpert Man in the Art of distillation
does affirm, that the Water of Sage, and also of Rosemary, will be Green, as
well as that of Veronica, if they be managed with a certain dexterity, and
moderate swiftness. The truth of which Experience will determine.

CHAP. VIII.
Of Camomil.
BOtanists, or Herbarists, are wont to reckon ten sorts of this Plant, amongst
which the most eminent are the common Camomil with the Noble Flower Single, and
with the full, or double Flower Camomil without scent, and stinking Camomil or
Mayweed; but I shall chiefly have to do in this place with the first sort or
common Camomil.

The distilled Water of this is to be had in Apothecaries Shops after the
manner of other waters limpid and colorless. There is also to be sold its Oil,
made by infusion from the Yellow Flowers. But that which is made by
distillation from the same Flowers is very different from this, for it is
deeply saturated and filled with a Sapphire Color, very pleasing to the sight.

Experiment 1.
Take the fresh Flowers of common Camomil, sprinkle them with fair Water, and
bruise them together; after they have stood some days cast them into a Copper
distilling Vessel, well covered with Tin, and applying a Head to it, distill
it. The Water being drawn forth, you shall perceive the Oil to swim at the top
of it, which though it be but little in quantity, will be of a true Sky Color.

Experiment 2.
We have with the same success tried the same, with the dried Flowers; but the
infusion of them stood for fourteen days to procure the greater extraction.

Experiment 3.
If you mix with them a handful or two of common Salt, or the like quantity of
Tartar, the Blew Oil will come over in greater plenty.

Experiment 4.
We substituted in the place of these the Flowers of Roman Camomil, but we had
then a Yellowish Oil, not a Sapphire colored one: what there is to be found in
the rest of the sorts of Camomil we have not yet tried.

Experiment 5.
This innate Blewishness of the Camomil is of that contagious, or communicative
Nature, that it is able to infect other things, and render them like it self.
For Example: Take the tender tops of a Pine, or Firr-tree, and being cut into
pieces, cast them into a Copper Body, adding a good quantity of Camomil
Flowers, distill them by themselves, and there will come over a compound Oil,
which may be named Oleum Pini Caeruleum, or the Sky-colored Oil of Pines.

Experiment 6.
After the same way you may prepare the Saphirine Oil of Juniper, by mixing
with a fit proportion of the Camomil Flowers, some Juniper Berries; and this
not without a communication and exaltation of the Medicinal Virtues, with which
the Juniper it self does abound.

Experiment 7.
The same way the shavings of Lignum vitae, being mixed with the Flowers of
Camomil, you may make a bluish Oil; which though it be well scented of it
self, yet adding Oil of Rhodium to it, it will be rendered more odoriferous.

Experiment 8.
Nay these Flowers seem to be of such a disposition, that whatsoever Rosiny
matter they are mixed with, they yield a Saphirine Oil. An Argument worthy a
further speculation, whether or no by this Method many more Oils may not be
prepared against particular Diseases, by the mixture of peculiar and specific
rosinous Simples.

Experiment 9.
There is a decompound Oil, which is described by Boethius. lib. 11. de Gemm.
and Lapid. cap. 43. Impostures (says he) join the Flowers of Camomil, and the
white Oil or Spirit of Turpentine, and a very large proportion of Artificial
Sal Armoniack, They put this mixture into a Copper Body, and to this they add
common Water, from whence they distill Water and Oil after the common way. The
distilled Water contains on the Superficies or top of it Oil of a Color like a
Sapphire; this is Oil of Turpentine joined with the Oil of Camomil: for this
Herb, or the Flowers of this Herb, do yield some of the Oil: But the Color is
produced by the Sal Armoniack, which it extracts from the Copper, and
communicates it to the Oil. If the Oil be kept long it will be spoiled with
age, and then you will manifestly discover the Scent of Turpentine. This is an
usual cheat with common Chemists or Preparers of Chemical Medicines for the
Shops here in London, because many are deceived by this means, and many
Chemists are so simple to think the Color proceeds from the Camomil. I
thought fit hereto discover the Imposture, Cheat and Error of Chemists.

Thus far Boethius, who in vain suspects a fraud in this matter: For, as we have
showed before in the first and second Experiment, that also without any manner
of Salt, either common, or Armoniack a Sk^-coloured Oil may be drawn fron the
Flowers of common Camomil; wherefore the Color does not result from the Copper
Body: for otherways the same thing would happen in distilling other Plants in a
Copper Body, which nevertheless is very far from being true. It remains
therefore in these operations, that the blewishness is produced altogether from
the Flowers. But what is affirmed by Boethius concerning the blew Color being
drawn out of the Copper by the Sal Armoniack, signifies nothing in this case,
That being an Artifice, commonly known to Barbers.

Experiment 10.
As to what concerns the duration, or lastingness of the Oil, we have an Oil
which was extracted from Camomil Flowers above three years since, without the
addition of Salt or Tartar, whose Sapphire Color appears so constant, that if
it continue not for ever, yet it seems to promise to last many years.
Nevertheless I do not deny what Boethius alleges, of his false Sapphire Oil,
that the Blew Color does perish with Age, and that the whitishness of the
added Oil of Turpentine will emerge or be apparent.

CHAP. IX.
Of Lignum Nephriticum, or the wood against the Stone.
CAsper Bauhinus in pinnace Botanic. calls this Wood, Lignum peregrinum, sive
Mexicanum, Aquam caeruleam reddens, i. e. The strange, or Mexican wood,
coloring Water Blew. And places it among the Species or Kinds of Ash trees.
Franciscus Hernandes in his Book Entitled Thesaurus Rerum Medicarum Novae
Hispaniae, which afterward was published by Nardus Antonius Recchus in the 4th
Book, chap. 25. says thus: It Is called Coatlis, by others Tlapalezpatl, or the
Medicine of the Scarlet or Crimson colored Blood. It is a great Trees-Shrub,
with a body thick and without knobs, like the Pear Tree wood, the Leaves like
Sheep Pease, or Rue, with a Yellow Flower growing among Prickles. It is also
excellently described by Nicol. Monades in his History of Simples, chap. 27. in
these words; Mittit Nova Hispania Ligni quoddam genus crassum and erode,
Materiae piri, cujus usus jamdiu receptus fuit in his Regionibus, ad Renum
vitia, urinaeque difficultates and incommoda. Postea experimento comprobatum
est, ejus Aquam in Iecoris and Leinis obstructionibus utilem esse. Illa autem
hac ratione paratur, Lignum assutatim, and minutim, concisum in optima and
lympidissima aqua fontana maceratur, atque in ea relinquitur donec aqua a
bibentibus absumpta sit. Dimidia Hora post injectum lignum aqua caeruleum
dilutiorem colorem contrahit, qui sensun intenditur pro temporis diuturnitate,
tametsi lignum candidum (potius ruffum) sit, caeruleum ideo dico quoniam
adulteratur alio ligno simili, quod aquam croceo color inficit, ne quis
fallatur. That is, there is sent from New-Spain a certain kind of thick Wood,
without Knotts, like the substance of a Pear Tree, it has been long made use
of in these parts, against the distempers of the Kidneys, and the difficulties,
and inconveniences of making Urine. Afterward it was found by experience that
its Water was beneficial in the Obstructions of the Liver, and Spleen. It is
prepared after this manner; The Wood being shaved and small cut, let it be
steeped in the best and clearest Fountain Water, and left in it till it be
consumed by those that drink it: Half an hour after the Wood is put into the
Water, the Water will contract a pale Blew, which is heightened by degrees
according to the time it remains in it, and yet the Wood is White (or rather
Brown.) I therefore mention this Blewness, because it is counterfeited with
another Wood like it, (which gives the Water a Saffron Color) lest any body
should be deceived.

This (...), or knack, is now a days commonly known, and certainly except it
were so well known, it would be more esteemed. Of which Fire is an Example:
which although there be nothing more admirable then the nature of it, yet we
despise it as a common thing; which were it brought from the remotest parts of
the Indies, and suddenly and unthought-of showed to us, I doubt not with how
much amazement we should contemplate it.

Experiment 1.
Being about therefore to search, if that Golden Bluish Color, would remain
with the same constancy in passing over the Alimbeck, I cast into a Glass Body,
the infusion, together with the rasped shavings of Lignum Nephriticum, and drew
it off. The Distilling Water, although it lost both the Colors, and was become
clear: yet for all that I observed that it breathed forth a grateful rosinous
Odor. But the Scent of the Shavings themselves might be observed to be much
more pleasing, although the crude Wood of it self was almost (...), without
Scent.

Experiment 2.
We substituted in the place of Fountain Water Spirit of Wine, which being
poured upon the shavings, in like manner became of a double Color: But being
drawn over by the Alimbeck; it became White like common Water. And because I
easily foresaw, that I could do nothing further with this Wood, by distillation
with an Alimbeck, I desisted: yet nevertheless I tried other ways, and the
Experiment which follows was produced thereby.

Experiment 3.
We distilled some drops of Oil of Tartar per deliquium into the Golden Bluish
Colored Infusion, made with common Water, and we perceived both the Colors
remained constant.

Experiment 4.
We poured into the same Infusion Spirit of Vitriol drop by drop, and the
aforesaid bluish Color vanished, the Yellow one only remaining.

Experiment 5.
We tried the same with Spirit of Salt, Sulphur, Nitre, etc. and the Golden
Color continued, the Blew one disappearing, as it did happen in Experiment the
4th. A clear sign that the acid Salt by its penetrative power did infringe, and
otherways dispose those Particles, which the Vrinous, and as it were blunt Salt
of Tartar could not infringe or otherwise dispose.

Experiment 6.
Many considerable Remarks are produced concerning this Nephritick Wood, by
that careful and industrious searcher after Nature, Mr. Boil in his Book of
Colors, Experiment the 10. and in those which follow, which worthily deserve
to be read. But I may repeat one of them here, which concerns the
redintegration of the once lost Blew Color. But because the Authors Relation
is a little too long, I will repeat it with more brevity. Drop into the double
colored Infusion of the Wood, a few drops of the Spirit of Wine Vinegar, so
the Blew Color will vanish, the Saffron one remaining. Upon this pour a little
Oil of Tartar per deliquium, and immediately the Blew Color will return, and
the Infusion will appear as before of two Colors, perhaps by the acidity of
the Salt the Particles are broke, and returned to their former position, which
were kept under by the heavy Oil of Tartar.

CHAP. X.
Of the Dregs of Wine, of wild Carnations, or Pinks, and Parsley.
OLd Wine deposits two sorts of Excrements; to wit Dregs, and Tartar. The Dregs
are the grosser, and earthly parts of the Wine which after fermentation it lets
fall (like Slime and Mudd) to the Bottom of the Vessel, it not being void of a
useful saltness, from whence the Wine gains strength: So that taken from this
root as it were, and put into another Vessel, it will not endure any long time,
but will easily degenerate.

Concerning the usefulness of these Faeces, or Dregs, we have a testimony in
Brandy, or Spirit of Wine, which the Vintners, and Distillers make from them:
That we may omit other uses now, which are not unknown to the common people.

But this we suppose is hardly taken notice of by every body, that an Oil is to
be prepared from these Faeces or Dregs which ascends the Alimbeck of a Green
Color. In this Operation it is to be observed, that that Oil is most green
which distilleth last, but this Greenness does vanish with length of time: Nay
presently, if you rectify the Oil, it being changed into a Yellowishness. Let
the distilling vessels be well covered with Tin, lest you suppose the Tincture
does arise from the erotion of the Copper in its passage. Many affirm that from
the pressings, or husks of Grapes, an Oil may be likewise made, after the same
manner, which will ascend Green. Wild Pinks, or Carnations whilst they are in
Flower, and running up to Seed, if the whole Plant be fresh gathered, cut
small, and distilled after the usual manner, there commonly swims on the top of
the Water drawn by the Alimbeck, a Greenish Oil.

You will find the same thing to be true, with the Garden Smallage, or Parsley
distilled after the same manner, if you have wrought aright: but this Greenness
is but temporary, and of small duration. But the Oils of Chervil, and Parsley
which are to be seen in the Shops, are wont to be prepared by long
fermentation, and are of a deep Gold Color, which they constantly retain.

CHAP. XI.
Of wild Flower-de-luce.
IT is called Iris, and receives its name from the similitude it has to the
Rainbow, it being variously painted with the colors of diverse Flowers. From
the Form of the Roots it may conveniently be divided into Classes, the first of
which is contained under that of the Bulbous, or round rooted, and are in
number twenty: the other sort is tuberous, or full of swellings, and of this
sort truly there is but one: The third sort is Geniculate, knotted, or jointed
on the stems, of which there is about sixty four; the jointed are are
subdivided into broad leaved, narrow leaved, and dwarfs. First the broad
leaved, which is called by Casper Bauhinus, the common wild German
Flower-de-luce, which is so well known, that it is called in the Shops our
Orris, or flower-de-luce. They commonly reserve only its root, from whence they
make juice, Oil by infusion, and a Powder called Faecula: The bluish Flowers
are beheld for their neatness, but never preserved or kept. Moreover, Ioachimus
Camerarius in his Notes upon Petr. Andrea, Mathiolus German Herbal, which was
printed 1590 at Frankfort, to wit, upon the first Book, cap. 1. fol. 2. lays
down an observation concerning these blew Flowers worthy our noting, in these
words, Das Basser aus den Blumen der schonen jris destilliret, is it gut fur die
Bassersucht: and is it solches viel ^rafftiger, Wann also dasselbe destilliret
wird, dak es der blvmen natvrlich Iarbe behalte, tvie den solches ohne allen
frembden Busa Bivictlich geschehen-san. Water (says he) distilled from
Flower-de-luce Flowers is available in the Dropsy, and is the more efficacious
if it be so distilled that it retains the native color of the Flowers: as also
it may easily be performed without any strange additament. And truly except we
will impute the crime of falsehood to Camerarius, there is a way to be found by
which a blew Water may be distilled from that Plant, but the way of doing this
Camerarius himself ought to have discovered to have freed himself from censure,
lest there arise a suspicion in the Readers, that the thing is done by the
Artifice mentioned above, in Chap. 4. for whether or no the Water distilled by
the common method will be Blew, we have not yet had leisure to try.

Curcuma, or Turmerick roots are vulgarly known, but the entire Plant few are
acquainted with. The figure or picture shows it to be Indian Saffron (to which
the name of Curcuma is added) also it is clearly described by Jacob Bontius in
lib. 6. Histor. Oriental. cap. 30. put out by Gulielmus Piso in his Works
printed 1658. He attributes to it the Leaves of white Hellebore, and purple
Flowers, with a fruit prickly, or like the outward hairy barks of Chessnuts,
which includes a Seed of the form of a Pea. If there be poured well rectified
Spirit of Wine upon the Powder of common Turmerick, the Liquor being distilled
somewhat swifter than ordinary, will be of a light yellow Color, which
yellowness will continue so long only as it shall be kept in a cold and shady
place: but it is easily dissipated, and caused to vanish, by the rays of the
Sun, or any other heat. But if any do contend that this yellowness is caused by
the coming over of very small particles of the Turmerick with the Spirit, by
reason of the swiftness of the distillation, I will not stiffly deny it.

CHAP. XII.
Of Sun-dew.
SOme Plants comprehend many Species or kinds under them, as Tulips, Hawk-weed,
Cranes-bill, Orchis, or Dogstones, Treacle Mustard, and Grass. Others contain
no variety of kinds, in as much as we hitherto know of; as Annise, Cymbalaria,
or Bastard-Italian-Navelwort, Wall-Rue, Matthiolus his Orpine. Others hold a
middle betwixt these, and contain but few Species or sorts: As, Goats-Rue,
Liquoriss, Celandine. And the last of the three is the most ample, containing
under it, amongst other sorts, a Plant of a most excellent structure, which
from a dewy Liquor which stands upon the leaves of it, even when the Sun is
hottest in Summer, is commonly called Ros Solis, or Sun-dew. Nor do our
Botanists know more then two species, or sorts of it: of which one sort is
called Sun-dew with the round Leaf, and is the most usually known in the Shops.
The other which is rarer with us, is wont to be called Sun-dew with the longest
Leaf.

Experiment 1.
Take either of the sorts of this Plant fresh and new gathered, and let it be
the whole Plant, and in the middle of Summer gathered in a hot clear Air; after
you have made it all clean, cut it, and sprinkling it with a small quantity of
Water, let it be bruised; then put it into a Glass Body, and without addition
distill it by an Alimbeck. There will come over (not without the delight of the
Beholders) a Golden Liquor, tending toward redness.

Experiment 2.
We would try the same also with the dried Plant, pouring Spirit of Wine upon
it; after standing some hours, by the help of a Bath, we distilled it with
Glass Vessels, observing (which was a pleasant Spectacle) the Liquor distilled
by the Alimbeck was of a Gold color. Concerning the causes of this effect, if
I may guess, I believe the Sun-dew is so composed, that it abounds with
volatile Salt, which in the time of distillation does join it self with the
Rosiny Particles which are dispersed through the whole Plant: for if you behold
its external face any manner of way, you will easily discern it to grow reddish
from goldishness. Moreover this must happen from a peculiar proportion of Salt:
because there are not wanting many Herbs which are both reddish, and rosiny,
whose distilled Waters nevertheless do not in the least look reddish, or
yellowish.

After we had made these our Experiments, we happened upon Conradus Kunraths,
Medulla Distillatoria, who in the fifteenth Tract written upon Ros Solis,
propounds (after his custom) a tedious method of making Medicines out of this
Plant; and amongst other things asserts, that the distilled Water of it is
yellow, and that there is to be prepared from it a Quintessence which is a
Panacea in all manner of diseases. Which thing we will leave to its Author, or
rather to Isaac Hollandus, out of whose Book, entitled, De Opere Vegetabili,
all that Kunrath has writ seems to be taken.

CHAP. XIII.
Of Blew Pimpernel, and of Curcuma, or Turmerick.
THe Family, or kind of Pimpernels may be conveniently divided into two
Classes. The first contains those Pimpernels called Sanguisorbae, or Burnet, of
which there are four sorts: to wit, the greater, the lesser which is hairy or
rough, the lesser which is smooth, and that which is without scent. Of the
latter sort are those Pimpinels commonly known by the name of Pimpinella
Saxifraga, of which five kinds are reckoned up by Bouhinus in Pinac: that is
the greater with the white boss or Top, the other greater, the greater with the
red boss or Tuft, and the lesser with the thin Leaf. To which may be added
those which were unknown to Bouhinus: Pimpinella Cadanensis Maxima of Iacobus
Cornutus, and the Pimpinella Maxima Cadan. with the long red spire or ear, and
that with the red ear conglomorated, or heaped together, of Robert Morisons;
also Pimpinella Agnimonoides, of the Physic Garden of Padua.

But besides all the aforementioned, there is another sort which grows with us,
in the Fields near the City, which for certain reasons we call the Blew
Pimpinel; the same also may be found near Steinford, a place six Miles distance
from hence, where it is propagated in the Physick-Garden of the Court; and also
at Frankfort by the way side.

If you regard its Figure, it does not seem to belong to those sort of
Pimpinels called Sanguisorbes, but to that other sort called Saxifraga's,
amongst them to these called Major Vmbella, Candida, or the greater with the
white boss, or Tuft, to which it approaches very near. But again it does
differ from it; First, In the Native Soil, or place of its growth: for Blew
Pimpinels grow in a blackish Earth, but the other in a sandy. Secondly, The
root of Blew Pimpinels is outwardly of a gray color, and inwardly is white:
the other root is white both without and within. Thirdly, These roots do abound
within with a bluish juice, which is never seen in the common sort, for which
cause it has seemed convenient to me to give it the name of Blew Saxifrage
Pimpinel.

Experiment 1.
It is a wonder that so fine a Spectacle should be so long unknown, which this
Plant distilled can expose to the sight; for if the roots, either fresh, or
dried, be cut into pieces, and Spirit of Wine poured upon them, it will be
tinged with a yellow Color, and if you distill it by an Alimbeck, the Liquor
will pass over of an exceeding Saphirine Color. The Spectators which are
ignorant of the thing, will be amazed, and be ready to swear there is some
juggle or cheat in it.

Experiment 2.
But if you put the roots either cut, or bruised, into Oil of Turpentine, with
a triple proportion of Fountain Water, and afterward shake the Glass, the Oil
that swims at the top when it stands still, will be Blew: and if afterward you
distill all of it with a strong fire in Sand, the blew color will vanish, and
the Oil which swims upon the Water will be of a Gold color.

Experiment 3.
Wherefore if you have a mind to transfer this operation to a Medicinal use,
and particularly to prepare a Physagogal blew Water, then let there be added
with the roots of this Pimpinel, the seed of Anise, Fennel, and the other
Carminatives, or breakers of wind.

Experiment 4.
If you have a mind to make a blew Water against the Stone, then add to these
roots, the seeds of Winter-Cherries, Parsley, and such like; but if you would
have the blew Color to prevail, there ought to be more of the Pimpinel roots
then of the rest.

Experiment 5.
If you take equal parts of the blew Pimpinel roots, and of the Herb Sun-dew,
and mix them together, and then put them into Spirit of Wine, there will flow
from them, distilled by an Alimbeck, a Liquor of a most pleasant Seagreen
color, the blewishness being refracted or broke by the native redness of the
Ros Solis, or Sun-dew.

Caution 1. No waterish Liquor will extract the Saphirine color of these
Roots, but it ought to be a Spirituous Liquor; but the best way of all is, with
Oleaginous Liquors, by reason of the resemblance betwixt them, and the Rosinous
juice of the Roots. This is further to be added, if you pour Oil of Citrons
upon them, they will presently after a little stay let fall their blew Color.

Secondly, The distillation in these Operations is not to be too gentle, for
then the Liquor will be white, but a little brisk, and swift; so at first the
Liquor will be of a bluish white, but the latter will appear of a perfect
Saphirine color.

Thirdly, This Blew color (as you may observe in the two former Experiments)
is not so very lasting, but that after three or four Months it will degenerate
into yellowness by degrees, but it will endure the longer if it be kept out of
the rays of the Sun, and in a cool place.

Fourthly, These Roots ought to be gathered in the Spring, Summer, or Autumn,
and to be kept all the Wint^r: for the dried Roots, as well as the fresh, are
fit to produce this Phenomenon, or appearance: although by very long keeping
the Blew juice is dissipated, and after the manner of other Roots they become
useless.

Fifthly, Sometimes we steep the very fresh gathered Roots, only in Oil of
Turpentine, and have observed that the day following a Sea green, not a Blew
color to arise: And although we afterward added a triple proportion of Water,
and by fits shook it strongly, yet the Oil which swam at the top, remained of a
Sea color.

CHAP. XIV.
Of Cinnamon.
BY reason of the difficulties, and length of Navigations, there has been
related both by the Ancient Greek, as well as Latin Authors, many uncertain,
and also fabulous things concerning Cinnamon. And from hence, heretofore there
has sprang so many controversies amongst Botanists, about the differences and
identities of Cinnamon, and Cannella; which quarrels will be easily determined
by reading of the writings of latter Authors.

The most noble sort of Cinnamon is the Cannella Zeilanica, or the Cinnamon of
Zeilan: the next to this, is that of Malaver, or Iava: the next is, the
Peruvian. Nor must we pass by the Clove Cinnamon, or Clove Bark, so called from
its taste, which in this Age begins to be brought to us from the Southern
Provinces of America, called Guiana.

But the History of Cannella is above all others most exactly described by
Gulielmus Piso, cap. 1. and 2. of his Mantissae Aromaticae, which he has
described and annexed to his splendid and neat work, De Indiae utriusque re
naturali atque Medica. Printed Anno 1658 at Amsterdam. I confess I was not a
little joyed when I turning over this Volumn, first beheld the Cut or Figure of
the entire Cinnamon Tree: having been troubled at the negligence, shall I say,
or ignorance of the rest of Herbarists, for almost every one of them in their
Commentaries, have hardly afforded us but one Leaf, with a Berry, with a small
Pipe, or Stem. Moreover, because this Author, as Johan. Iohnstonus (who follows
his steps in his Hist. Not. de Arboribus,) is not to be found in every bodies
hands, and that besides there is hardly any hope left, that this Tree will ever
be procured to grow in our colder Clymat: Therefore we esteem so much of this
Cardinal, and most fragrant Spice, that being led by the example of Piso, I
have caused its Effigies to be ingraved, and that it might be the better known
to our Countrymen, have taken care to insert it in this place.

Cinnamon of Zeilan.
Tho. Cross sculp.



But that we may draw nearer to what we design, there is made of this Bark a
Water to be had in the Shops; which if you reckon to be the first of
Aromatical, or spicy ones, you will not be mistaken; for it is so cordial and
friendly to the Vital Spirits, and does so powerfully expel Wind in the Stomach
and Guts, and also is so grateful, and pleasing to the Palate, that it leaves
other Spices much behind it. They are wont to distill it with Wine, or without
with Borage Water: either way that which first distills over the Alimbeck, is of
a Milky color. But this Milkiness is hardly native, or true, but does proceed
from the Oil, with which this Spice does abound: which being dispersed through
the Water in small Particles, causes a Milky color: And if these, as it were
Atoms, shall by length of time be united, they will be carried to the top of
the Liquor, and there will show themselves small Oily drops of a Golden color,
leaving the Water clear: although that Oil, if it be somewhat more plentiful,
does usually at last fall to the bottom.

Nor ought this so to be interpreted, as if this milky Color were only proper
to Cinnamon water: for it appears also in the Water of Cloves, Nutmegs, and
the rest of waters drawn from Spices. But I thought fit to name Cinnamon above
the rest, because, as we said a little before, it does excel other Waters. And
also, because it is more frequently used every where.

CHAP. XV.
Of Corrals.
THere are three kinds of Corrals: Red, Black, and White. The White may also
conveniently be distinguished into branched, starred, joynted, and that which
is warty, or knobby. There is also a sort of Corral which is Red without, and
Black within. But that which is prised above the rest in Medicine, is the Red
called the Male Corral, of which Pedac. Dioscorides. lib. 5. cap. 139. Thus:
Sea Corral is a Shrub, which drawn to the top of the Water growth hard
presently, and swims, and as it is encompassed with air it concretes, or
hardens. Much of it is found in a Promontory by Syracuse. The name of which is
Pachyno. The most commended is the Red sort, of the Color of a Daffidil stalk,
or of the deep colored Sardix or Orient bright Purple. Being of a long and
round figure easy to break, and of a like hardness in every part of it: again,
it is of the scent of Oreweed, or Sea-grass. It is very full of small branches,
and is like in form to the Shrub Cinnamon. The like description to this Pliny
has lib. 32. Histo. Nature. but that he erroneously alleges that these
Berries or little Balls, which are worn for ornament about woman's Necks, do grow
of their own accord on this small Sea tree: for it is sufficiently known at
this day, that they are made by Turning; and that also might as well have been
known heretofore. Of the same reddish Beads, is to be understood the most
ancient of Poets, Orpheus, in his peculiar verses of Corral, in which he
elegently prosecutes the virtues of it, and the Fables of it also.

Concerning this bright sparkling Corral, whether or no the true tincture of
its genuine Color, can be extracted, has been already examined: The Solutions
made with Juice of Lemmons, or of Barberries, although they delight us with a
false show, yet they will not answer the thing designed: Neither also will
those Liquors which after abstraction remain of a Red Color in the bottom of
the Vessel. Of this sort may be seen many Processes or Methods in Anselm.
Boethius. lib. 11. Histor. Gemm. and Lapid. cap. 154. But many more in Io.
Lodov. Gansius Histor. Corral. caput 7. Also amongst other late Authors. The
business consists in this point, that a reason may be showed, how without the
addition of any suspected thing, there may be drawn either by Alimbeck, or
Retort a Red Liquor from Corrals, that is, a Genuine and true Tincture.

Expirement 1.
The forecited Io. Lodov. Gansius, sect. 8. does testify that it was sometime
observed by the famous Physician of his time, Iac. Zuingerus, That a Tincture
might be drawn by distillation in an Alimbeck, if the Corral being made into a
very fine Calx or Powder, and being well digested with Spirit of Wine, it be
distilled nine times, first with a gentle distillation, afterward forced over
with a vehement heat, so that the Water will come forth first Yellow, and at
last Red, which is believed to be the Tincture.

Experiment 2.
The same Gansius in the same chap. sect. 16. has this following. Let the
Powder of Corral be calcined with Spirit of Salt: then wash the Calx with
distilled water, that the saltishness may be taken away. After which extract
it, by adding Spirit of Wine. Let the extractions poured back again upon the
Corrals be distilled so long till the Tincture ascends by the Alimbeck. From
this separate the Spirit by a Balneo. Note in this place that what is
extracted, is always to be circulated ten days space: and after each time to be
cohobated, or poured back again, and distilled.

This is to be done six times, always adding new Spirit. The Red Color is said
to come forth in the fifth distillation, and in the sixth a Powder altogether
Red will remain at the bottom.

Experiment 3.
Agreeable to this way, is that of Conradus Kunrath in his Medulla
Distillatoria, Tract. 10. written upon Corral, which therefore at this time we
will not repeat, but leave untouched.

Experiment 4.
Daniel Sennertus lib. 5. institut. Medic. page 3. sect. 3. cap. 9. lays down
the following way. Let Corral dissolved in Vinegar be impregnated with Spirit
of distilled Vinegar till the Salt will receive no more of that Spirit; which
is performed thus: To one pound of Corrals, add two ounces of the strongest
Vinegar, and distill it gently, there will only distill from it an insipid
phlegm. The second time add to the Corrals three ounces of Vinegar, and distill
it again, and so proceed every time, adding of one Ounce of Vinegar more than
formerly, and continuing this, so long, till the Vinegar distill as sharp, and
strong, from the Salt of Corral as it is put upon it. Let the Salt so
impregnated be digested for thirty days in Balneo Mariae, or a Bath of hot
Water, and afterward distill it in a close Reverberatory, by a Retort, but so
that the Phlegm may be received first by it self, and then the White Spirits by
themselves, till all the Spirits are come forth, together with an Oil, Red as
Blood. This Spirit is to be rectified by an Alimbeck, and the Red Oil will
remain at the bottom. But this Spirit poured upon fresh Corral does extract a
Red Tincture like to Gum Lacca, which if it be again freed from this Spirit by
distillation, and the Corrals be joined with Spirit of Wine, or some Cordial
Water, and by distilling, and cohobation, it will be made volatile, and will
then be the Tincture of Corral.

Experiment 5.
Also this following is a compendious way. Take of Red Corrals three ounces,
and of Sugar half a pound, being finely bruised and mixed, distill them in a
Retort, and you will see a Red Liquor to come forth.

But it is not to be doubted concerning these Operations, that this Redness is
hardly due to the Corrals: but is more owing to the Spirit of Salt, Salt of
Vinegar, Sugar, and the like additions: and much of it also to long digestions.
Insomuch that these sort of Tinctures, are rather to be taken for Analogous,
then Genuine, until the Fates grant us the true one. And truly whilst I am
writing this, there is come to my hand the Epistle of that most excellent man
Dr. Joel Langelot (chief Physician of the Duke of Holsteen, my most Noble
Friend.) De quibusdam in Chymia praetermissis, wherein he sets down an hitherto
unknown solution of Corral, which (as I suspect is performed by Oil of Citrons)
does first mollify the hard Fragments, and afterward does dissolve them into
an exceeding Red Mucilage, or slimy Substance, and afterward (as may be seen)
by pouring on of Spirit of Wine that is Tartarised, it will go also into an
exceeding Red Tincture.

CHAP. XVI.
The Conclusion: Containing three sorts of Observations.
SInce we have spoken concerning Colors emerging, and resulting from mixture
in the second Chapter: we shall not seem to wander from the matter, if by way
of Colophony or conclusion, we produce also by way of Example, the various
effervescencies, and incalescencies of things, together with their attenuation,
and coagulations. These also are Chemical, and afford much light toward the
Knowledge of Nature, and of the differences of Acid, and Vrinous Salts. As also
it will easily appear from hence, which Saline Spirits will either suffer
themselves to be joined to each other, or refuse it. Which Doctrine, as it
contains under it the foundation of some of the most noble Operations, and is
not commonly known to all men: So upon its own account it seems worthy to be
annexed to our Distillatory, by way of Mantissa, or overplus.

Observations relating to effervescency, and incalescency, or production of
heat.
To begin with those things best known: It is well known to the common people,
that if Water be sprinkled upon QuickLime, it will excite from it both heat,
and smoke: which Operation is by Brick-layers, and Plaisterers called slaking,
or extinguishing of Lime.

2. If you moisten with Aquafortis, the filings of Iron, Copper, or Tinn, the
Glass in which it is done will grow so hot, that you can scarce hold it in your
hand, there also ascending at the same time plenty of Fumes.

3. Almost the like effect does follow, if you pour the Caustic Water upon
Quicksilver, Lead, or Marcasite. But as to what relates to the more perfect
Metals; Luna, or Silver, does stronglier resist Aquafortis, than the imperfect
Metals are wont to do: but Gold does plainly elude its force, except Sal
Armoniack be added.

4. You may also observe an exagitation, if you pour Aqua Fortis upon Salt of
Tartar.

5. Pour Fountain Water upon calcined Vitriol, whilst it is yet warm, stirring
it softly; and you shall perceive it to wax vehemently hot. The same will
happen if you pour Water upon any Alcalizate, or fixed Salt whilst it is yet
hot.

6. Distill drop by drop of the Spirit of Vitriol, into the Salt, or the Oil of
Tartar prepared per deliquium, and there will be caused a crackling noise:
which being finished there will appear a coagulum which is commonly called
Tartarus Vitriolatus.

7. Mix the same acid Spirit of Vitriol, or of Sulphur with the Gall of an Ox
(which is filled with its own native Vrinous Salt,) and you will presently
perceive them to fight. But the ebullition will be much stronger, if you mix
Gall with Aquafortis: insomuch that a great disturbance will follow it, and a
White froath will arise a great height upon it.

8. If the Genuine Red Oil of Vitriol, and Spirit of Turpentine be mixed
together; the Glass does begin to wax so very hot, that it cannot be touched by
naked hands.

9. Neither does the Spirit of Salt Nitre, or Peter will agree with the butter
of Antimony, but these two Liquors being mixed together, are seen rather like
Enemies to fight between themselves.

10. I had lately reserved for a use, Spirit of common Salt, and after it was
consumed, I put into the Glass (perhaps whilst it was yet moist) Spirit of Sal
Armoniack, tincted with the Flowers of Brass, (which many now a days call the
Saphirine Spirit) I observed when I poured it in, immediately the first drop
stirred up a Cloud in the Glass, and a Smoakie Vapor did manifestly exhale
from it. A not obscure Argument, that these two Spirits were almost insociable,
upon the account of their contrary Salts.

11. To this place belongs the Observation of Regnerus de Graff. in his Book de
Succo Pancreatico, page 60. which he lays down to this sense: We took, says he,
Oil of Tartar per deliquium and we poured it into Cows Milk, after which we
added a small quantity of Spirit of Vitriol, and presently there arose an
effervescence, and that of longer continuance, than if Milk had not been added.
Which differency seems to depend upon the viscidity of the Milk: this
effervescence will not proceed so well, if you put the Spirit of Vitriol into
the Milk before you put in the Oil of Tartar, ( to wit,) because of its aptness
to be coagulated by the Acid.

Observations of Attenuation, and of Coagulation.
1. We call Attenuation, when a solid and Gross Body, is rendered thin and
fluid: but the contrary to this is called to inspissat, thicken, or coagulate,
when such things which of themselves are fluid, and thin, acquire firmness and
subsistence, and are thickened, either by the means of Coagulation, or
Glaciescency, (that is, freezed or made Ice) or else altogether Lapidificated,
or turned into Stone; which Physical, or natural affections above all others
are most frequently known not only in the Apothecaries Shops, but also in other
Mechanical Arts: wherefore the whole Spagirical Art is by many believed to
receive its name from dissolving and congregating, or compacting together, for
which reason these two qualities (in our opinion) justly deserve a peculiar
consideration.

2. When the Apothecary prepares Decoctions, or Infusions, and the Cook makes
fresh Broth, by pouring on of Liquids: gross and dense bodies are attenuated,
and their nobler parts extracted. There is the like reason in Iuleps, or
emulsions, and the rest of Medicines in a Liquid form.

3. Thus we see the bodies of all dry Salts, are melted and attenuated, by
effusing watery Liquors upon them: From whence those Solutions called the simple
ones, of which sort for Example is that of Vitriol dissolved into Fountain
Water, which being mixed with the infusion of Galls produces Ink, of which
mention is made above in chap. 2.

4. Relating to this purpose are all the corrosive Solutions made by Caustic
Waters, upon the solid compage of Metals. For Gold by its smallest parts does
swim in Aqua Regia, so that, that which if left to it self stops the sharpest
sight from looking into, it presently changes its Species, and Texture, and
appears diaphanous, or transparent.

5. Nor is it less to be wondered at, that the same Gold, and the rest of the
Metals will suffer themselves to be so attenuated by the Fire, (by as it were a
certain corrosion) that they will flow like Waves of Water: which fusion truly,
unless the thing were so common as it is, would hardly be believed by such as
were ignorant of it.

6. Alablaster, and Gypsum, or Plaster of Paris, may be burned as they do
Limestone, as is commonly known; and it is particularly asserted by Anselmus
Boethius, lib. 2. de Lapid and Gemm. cap. 269. But whether or no the following
Experiment be much noted, I know not, (and therefore will set it down) Cast
into a vessel of Brass, or Iron with a Flat botom, Alablaster, or in stead of
it Plaster of Paris, (very finely grown'd, and sifted) some pounds weight:
Apply Fire to it by degrees, even to the utmost height. And you shall see this
Stony Powder to put on the form of a Liquor, and to boil like Waves, sending up
White Vapors, resembling Smoke; moreover if you then stir it with a Stick, you
will not find it to resist the motion of your hand, like Sand, but to yield
like Liquor: which thing truly does produce no small delight, to the curious
Spectator, as Mr. Boil does witness of himself, in his History of Fluidity,
Sect. 18. where he adds more notes, and cautions upon this thing.

7. It is also a (...), of a species of attenuation, by which Salt of Tartar is
dissolved into a Liquor per deliquium: And amongst Natures works, it is an
Illustrious Attenuation, by which the thickest Ice of Rivers in the Spring time
is dissolved by the heat of the Sun.

8. But that we may also come to the Phenomenon or appearances of Coagulation,
amongst those which are best known is that of making Bread, whilst the Bakers
by mixing Water with Flower or Meal coagulate it into a Mass, to make Bread out
of. The like, but more compounded work, is that of the Confectioner, who mixeth
together Butter, Sugar, Eggs, and diverse other ingredients.

9. But there is hardly extant a more domestic, or familiar Example, than the
coagulation of Milk, whether it be performed by Calves, or Lambs Runnit, or by
juice of Limons, or by sour Herbs, Spirit of Vitriol, or other acid Salt: by
which means the fluid substance of the Milk separates it self from the whey,
and suddenly joins together into a cheesy Mass.

10. In the Canary Islands they thicken, (by boiling) the fluid juice of Canes
and Reeds into innumerably useful, and most sweet Sugar: And on the contrary,
in the Island of Succotra, they make Aloes of the juice of a Plant, which is so
exceeding bitter that it is become a nickname, for other bitter things: [You
will have a large account of coagulations of this nature in the Philosophical
Essay of Petrification, written by the Translator of this Treatise, and printed
Anno 1672.] Nay without Art, or Labor, Water is converted into Stone in diverse
dens. And to omit other Countries, the Cave called Baumanus's Cave, not far from
the Mountain Bructer in the great Forest of Hircinia in Germany, in which not
only Waters are turned into stony Icicles, but also there is found a wonderful
company of the Bones of Animals, but from what Original, or how they came
there, is yet uncertain.

Eleventhly. But as to what concerns Minerals. If you mix the best Vrinous
Spirit of Sal Armoniack equal parts, with the most dephlegm'd Spirit of Wine,
they will set, or fall to the bottom of the Glass in the manner of Icy flakes,
or rather like Snow. For whilst the Acrimony of the Armoniack Spirit is blunted
and mitigated* by the sweetness of the Spirit of Wine, the crisped, and sharp
pointed Particles of the Salt falling to the bottom, and others falling still
upon them, they represent the form of Snow.

Twelfthly, If Spirit of common Salt be mixed with the Acid Spirit of Sal
Armoniack, (not with the Salt Urinous one) then at first the mixture will grow
hot, and presently it will be troubled, and thick, and at length it will begin
to conjoyn together plainly in the form of Butter.

Thirteenthly, If there be mixed together equal parts of highly rectified
Spirit of Wine, and exquisitely dephlegm'd Spirit of Urine, they will coagulate
(by agitating them) in a quarter of an hours time: first, into the form of
Snow, and a little after, into a solid Mass. But unless both the Spirits be
freed from all Phlegm, this business will want success: As Mr. Boil does
prudently admonish in his History of Fluidity and Firmness, Part 2. Sect. 32.

Fourteenthly, Beat the white of an Egg, even to thinness, then mix with it
half as much of the best Spirit of Salt: and you shall see this mixture will
coagulate, even in a few Minutes of an hour by agitating it.

Fifteenthly, Many have attempted di^^^s ways to coagulate the most Fluid Body
of Quicksilver Io. (...) Part 1. Page 35. proposes his way. And that I may
omit others, Thomas (...) now has propounded his, Cent. 1. Number. 79. But the
most exquifite, and no less certain way, is by the vapor of Lead; if you make
a hole with a Stick in melted Lead, being removed from the Fire, and beginning
to cool, then sprinkle some Ashes into the Hole, and nimbly pour in the
Quicksilver: and so the Vapor ascending from the Lead will congeal it,
although there are not wanting those which doubt of this coagulation. But the
Translator of this Treatise has experimented it to be true.

Sixteenthly, It Is a more difficult operation which I make use of to procure a
yellow coagulated Mercury: for I take of Quicksilver one ounce, of rust of
Brass, and common Salt, of each an ounce and a half, Wine, Vinegar a pound or
pint: boil them in an Iron Drying Pan the space of an hour or two, continually
stirring them with an Iron Spatula; till at length the Mercury coagulate into
an Amalgame, which afterward wash several times from the Salt* and then form
it into little Balls, the bigness of Pease. These little Balls being exposed to
a temperate Air, after a few hours, will harden of then own accord: But if you
have a mind also to induce a color upon this coagulated Mercury, then take of
Turmerick roots fourteen Drams, and of prepared Tutia one ounce, and mixing
them together, make with the Balls Stratum super Stratum, that is, one row of
the Powders, and another of the Balls, and so do till you have filled up a
Crucible, which lute well, that nothing may expire. Let it stand at first in a
gentle fire, that the matter may dry: afterward for an hour or more, apply a
strong fire to it; then take it off, and after it is cold, melt it as they use
to do Metals, and pour it into an Ingot, and you will have a Mass very much
resembling Rhenish Gold, of which may be made Rings, Bracelets and Medals. If
there be any body that will not allow this Mass any longer to participate of
the Quicksilver, I will not contest with him; because others which are
acquainted with that Planet, will not be induced easily to believe, that it can
freely endure a vehement fire for an hour together.

Observations upon Blood, and its Serum.
How much the Blood within is altered, by attenuating, or coagulating it, by
means of Mineral Spirits injected into the Veins of Brutes, has long since
been declared by us, in Clysmatica Nova, cap. 5.

But, moreover, we have tried many things upon Humane blood whilst it was yet
warm, and newly drawn out of the Veins by Phlebotomy: observing that by
instilling those Mineral Spirits, the Blood has undergone various mutations:
of which kind are Ebullitions, (or boiling, and bubling,) Attenuation, (or
becoming thinner,) grumescence, curdling or coagulation, and the exaltation or
heightning of its color, or the obscuration, darkning or hiding of it, and
many the like variations. But before Humane blood, let out by opening a Vein,
do lose its heat, and begin to thicken, there uses to swim upon it a Liquor,
heretofore taken for Bile, or Choler, now esteemed its Serum, or Whey.
Certainly it is not so bitter that it can deserve the name of Gall, or Choler:
neither is it so thin that it altogether deserves to be called Whey, or Serum.
If it be taken up gently in a Silver Spoon, and without the mixture of the
bloody substance, if it be held a little while over warm Embers or Coals, it
will be coagulated like to the white of an Egg boiled, both as to its substance
and color, and is also almost like it in taste. As to what concerns its
color, I have taken notice of this difference; that in many it is perfectly
white, in others it is palish, in others it tends toward yellowness: which
variety may depend either from the temperament, or from the healthy, and infirm
state of the Body, or from those things which are received into the Body, (for
it appears that some portion of the Chyle is not changed altogether into
Blood.)

If you put in of the aforesaid Mineral Spirits by drops upon this Chylous
Serum put into several Vessels, there will also appear various Phenomenon,
which will be useful for a careful Physician to take notice of. In these kind
of examinations, our very much honored Collegiate, that excellent man Dr.
Godfredus Leisnerus, when he was living, did lately take much pains, who
himself writ these following Observations, and a little before he yielded to
Fate, communicated them to me to be divulged in this place.

Observation 1.
Mr. N. N. by birth of Clive, of thirty years of age, he was Scorbutic, had
red Spots, and Pustils in his Face, a heaviness and weariness in his Ioints,
and a numness, a flushing in his Face after drinking strong Wine, or strong
Beer, or the Swalbasher Spaw Water, and was obnoxious to bleeding Gums, and the
like; after having take Pills upon the 28 day of July, 1671. He was let Blood
in the left Arm, and had about seven Ounces taken from him, in three
Porringers. The Blood was very hot in its flowing forth: the day before he had
drank Wine largely, after which he was cold, his Blood had much Serum, and the
grumous and curdled parts were very red, and would easily be divided by a Twig;
in the bottom it was of a bright Bay color, the Serum poured off, was of the
color of Lee, like Urine of a Citron color tending to red: It was divided
into twelve Dishes, and the Liquors being mixed with it, things appeared thus.

First, With Spirit of Nitre dropped on it, it presently coagulated into a
substance like cheese, from the top to the bottom of the Liquor, in that space
the Spirit was dropped into: This Curd was white on the top, but toward the
bottom yellow like Sulphur, the rest of the Serum swimming about it was clear,
but dropping in Spirit of Nitre it also became of a Cheesy substance; some of
the Liquor which remained, poured out clear like water, upon inclining of the
Vessel.

Secondly, The sweet Spirit of Nitre being dropped on, made no alteration; but
after a short time, the upper half of the Liquor grew altogether clear, but the
lower half was a little troubled, yet so, that there could scarce any
difference be discerned but by curious Chemical eyes.

Thirdly, Spirit of Salt did presently pervade the Liquor, not only in that
place where it was dropped in, but through the whole circumference of the
Liquor, and about the bottom precipitated a white coagulum, but not stiff.

Fourthly, The sweet Spirit of Salt did trouble the Liquor a little, but in a
short time there was a separation made like the cream of Milk, which swam at
the top.

Fifthly, Spirit of Vitriol, did precipitate a White Curd equally from all
parts to the bottom, almost Analogous to the curd made with the sweet Spirit of
Salt, but thinner.

Sixthly, Aquafortis did altogether agree with the Spirit of Nitre, both in
the whiteness of the Curd, its yellowish bottom, and the clearness of the
Liquor which was left uncoagulated.

Seventhly, Spirit of Sulphur, converted the whole Liquor into a white
coagulum, or Curd, except a few drops which were left.

Eighthly, The Clyssus (or the Sulphurous acid Spirit of Antimony) being
dropped in, precipitated to the bottom of the Liquor a Curd, which was on one
side White, and Cheesy, and on the other side transparent, and like a Ielly.

Ninthly, Arcanum Nitri (that is the Solution of the Salt of the caput Mortuum
of Aquafortis, or its red Earth left in the bottom of the Retort) dropped in,
at the beginning it did presently fall to the bottom of the Liquor in which it
was put: nor would it be mixed with it, so that it might be very well discerned
from it, but after an hour or two, the Liquor was of an bigher Color, and
there settled in the bottom of the Vessel a troubled Sediment, which upon
slightly shaking of the Glass united again with the Liquor.

Tenthly, The Salt Spirit of Sal Armoniack did introduce no alteration at all
in the Liquor, neither in its Color, nor in its consistence.

Eleventhly, The fixed Liquor of Nitre, did thicken and trouble this Liquor,
and precipitated to the bottom a certain Saltish Curd, the Liquor which swam at
the top was very clear.

Observation 2.
A Young man who was descended of consumptive Parents, and was himself
consumptive, (with much coughing casting out both Blood, and Matter;) a Vein
being opened there was taken from him about eight Ounces of Blood. The grumous
Blood was of a florid Color, Thin, and had much Serum, which being poured out
into little dishes, it brought off with it from the top of the Blood a little
redness, this subsided and fell to the bottom in a days time.

1. Spirit of Nitre, And

2. Sweet Spirit of Nitre, both produced the same effects, as in the former
Observation.

3. Spirit of Salt did the same, but with this difference, that the Coagulum
was more Phlegmatic on the top of it, and as it were a Ielley.

4. The Sweet Spirit of Salt, did the same as in the former Observation, but
the Cream was thicker.

5. Spirit of Vitriol, And

6. Aquafortis, did the same as in the former Observation.

7. Spirit of Sulphur made a Coagulum like Spirit of Salt, but a little
thinner, and more like Ielley.

8. The Clyssus made a white and thick Curd.

9. Arcanum Nitri. And

10. The Salt Spirit of Sal Armoniack. And

11. The Liquor of fixed Nitre, did the same as in the former Observation.

12. Spirit of Verdigrece, at the first dropping into the Glass did make the
clear Liquor to look Milky, and afterward did make no further change.

Observation 3.
Mr. N. N. Splenetick, and Scorbutic, afflicted with a Vertigo, or Giddiness,
and a straitness in his Breast, upon the 27th day of July, Anno 1672, was let
blood, the Blood was good, and had much tincted Serum, into which the following
things were dropped.

1. Aquafortis, from which there was a cheesy and white concretion, the Serum
which swam at the top was pale; this Coagulum was not dissolved, by dropping
into it Spirit of Sal Armoniack.

2. By the Clyssus there was made a white Curd, which fell to the bottom, but
was less tenacious, or tough.

3. Spirit of Nitre, made a Coagulum like Aquafortis in all things, and when
more Spirit was put in, the Serum was almost all coagulated.

4. Sweet Spirit of Nitre, made no alteration at all.

5. Spirit of Salt did equally precipitate a white Curd to the bottom, like a
Ielly, and of a pale Yellow Color at the top, leaving a Liquor that was
somewhat paler above it.

6. Spirit of Vitriol, did absolutely the same thing, excepting that the Liquor
which swam at the top, did remain somewhat more tincted.

7. Spirit of Verdigrece made no change at all.

8. The Spirit of Sulphur made the same Coagulum with Spirit of Vitriol.

9. Polemanus's double Spirit, did the same with Spirit of Salt, excepting that
the Coagulum was a little thicker, and less white.

10. Arcanum Nitri, made a troubled bottom, but the Glass with the Liquor being
shook it was exactly mixed again, and no alteration appeared. Into this mixture
there being dropped one or two drops of Aquafortis, it produced a milkie curd
after the usual manner.

11. The Liquor of fixed Nitre also made a troubled bottom, and shaking the
glass it was exactly mixed again, but dropping in Aquafortis there was an
ebullition made, and much Spume, or Forth raised of a Sulphurous color, but
nevertheless nothing was precipitated.

12. Spirit of Sal Armoniack prepared with the Bloodstone, did not thicken the
Liquor, but only a little heighten the Color, a drop or two of Aquafortis
being added to this, presently made a milky curd: but a greater quantity of
Spirit of Sal Armoniack being poured upon it, it was again dissolved with small
bubbles, and instead of the Coagulum there remained as it were a little thin
transparent Phlegm.

Observation 4.
These were instituted not in the Serum, but in the clotted blood it self. To
wit Mr. N. N. after he had spit blood for some years, fell into a spitting of
Matter, with an inordinate or irregular Fever, after exhibiting of Medicines,
and chiefly of Adstringents, the thirtieth day of May he fell into a large
Haemoptisis, or spitting of blood, he having been afflicted before it with a
weightiness, and weariness of his Joints: upon the first of August this Symptom
was urgent again, and he cast up much florid blood* which was easily
coagulated. The 2d day of August after Midnight, his spitting of blood was very
urgent, only he perceived his blood which he threw up to be hotter whilst it
was in his mouth: it was neither putrid matter, nor Salt as heretofore. I
commanded to take about four ounces of Blood, by opening a Vein in the Right
Arm. The Blood which was let out was taken in two Silver Dishes, and appeared
black even whilst it was flowing forth: it had little Serum, scarce two drams,
and that of a Yellow Color. The clotted blood had a florid red circle about
it, the middle part was like the skin of a Jelly. To this blood, being well
dried with spongy Brown Paper, these following things were applied.

1. One drop of Spirit of Nitre, did presently and sooner than in the twinkling
of an Eye, impress a white spot upon it, and that not superficially, but
sufficiently deep, and very white.

2. The Sweet Spirit of Nitre, made no change at all.

3. Spirit of Salt, did more slowly make a spot, and that less white, and less
deep. The red Circle of the blood it self, and the circumference of the drop,
were both black.

4. Sweet Spirit of Salt, at the first did nothing, but after it had stood
sometime upon the Liquor it did a little dissolve the outward skin of the
Blood, and made a hole in it, and rendered the blood under it, (in which it was
contained) of a livid flesh Color, spotted like Marble.

5. Spirit of Vitriol did slowly make a spot a little whitish.

6. Aquafortis did swiftly and immediately (with some Fume) make a spot
altogether agreeable with that of Spirit of Nitre.

7. Spirit of Sulphur, made a Spot like that of Spirit of Vitriol.

8. The Clyssus produced a white spot.

9. Spirit of Verdigrece as to its effect agreed with the Sweet Spirit of Salt.

10. Arcanum Nitri stood upon the Blood in its own circumference, afterward it
made a yellowish spot, and rendered the skin of the Blood thinner, so that it
might easily be divided by a twig.

11. Spirit of Sal Armoniack made no change, or spot.

12. The Liquor of Fixed Nitre rendered the Blood much Redder and transparent.

FINIS.
Of the Grun-Waldensin-Stone.
An Addition to the second Chapter.
Concerniug this the most Noble, and Excellent Doctor, Christianus Menzelius,
Councellor and chief Physician to the most Serene the Elector of Brandenburg,
has not only made Egregious and Worthy Experiments: But has also whilst this
Book was under the Press, sent them to me in a Letter. And because they make
much toward the illustrations of the second Chapter of this our Curious
Distillatory, we thought fit to subjoyn them by way of Addition.

Noble and most Experient Sir, my Collegiate, and most Honored Friend.
YOu demanding that I would cast in some of my Chemical Observations, to be
added to your curious Distillatory, (by reason of the great Friendship which
has been betwixt us from our Youth,) I could not deny it: although I always
desired, and had rather have lain hid, than to have ventured writing either
upon my own accord, or with others. But omitting an infinite Number which seem
to look toward your second chapter, I will therefore communicate only one
Observation of my Chemical labors, about a certain Stone, which from the place
of its growth, I call the Grun-Walden-Stone. It was found here hard by Berlin,
by my self, and Rhewend the Goldsmith (who is yet living) Anno. 1663. in the
Month of May, near the Wood commonly called der Grunwald, by the help of a
Shepherds Boy, who knew the place, and showed it to us. This Stone contains of
Metals, Iron, and Copper: and of Metalline Juices, Sulphur, and Vitriol, which
are hid in a Golden Markasite, with which this Stone abounds. This Markasite
therefore (which the Greeks calls Pyrites) I separated from the rest of the
Stone, and having reduced it into Powder, dissolved as much of it as I could in
Aquafortis. I put the Solution in Sand to evaporate, and there remained in the
bottom a matter that was fine, spongy, and of a yellowish Sulphur Color. Upon
several parts of this matter I poured,

1. Some Spirit of Wine, that I might dissolve, and digest it: and behold all
became immediately exceeding Black.

2. Upon another part of this Matter, I dropped Oil, or Liquor of Tartar in some
quantity, and presently there was a crackling noise, and ebullition, and there
was induced upon it a bay Color, but thick, and obscure.

3. This Liquor being Philtred, I mixed the Acid Spirit of Sulphur with it, and
there emerged a most lovely Scarlet blood Color, splendid like a Ruby, and
transparent, there remaining in the bottom a gross, and black Sediment.

4. To this Ruby-coloured Liquor I added some drops of a Solution of Silver
made with Aquafortis, and sooner than you can speak it, the Solution of Silver
was coagulated upon the Liquor, into a Curd as white as Snow, and was like Fat,
or the white of an Egg boiled hard, which after a little time fell down white
to the bottom like Lime; the Liquor retaining its Scarlet blood Color.

5. After I had abstracted this lovely Ruby-coloured Liquor almost to dryness,
there remained in the bottom a snowy Salt, Lanceolated or Chrystallized like
Nitre. I poured upon these Chrystals clear Spring Water, and they were most
easily dissolved in it, and the Liquor was clear, Limpid, and Transparent even
like fair Water. But when I added to it the Oil or Liquor of common Tartar,
immediately the former Scarlet blood-Colour returned again.

6. I have a Liquor of Tartar digested with an Hungarian Gold Mineral; of this
Oil, or Liquor, when I put in a few drops, the whole Liquor became a bluish
green Color.

7. I took again also of the aforesaid Scarlet Blood-Coloured Liquor one ounce
or there abouts, and to it added only one drop of the Solution of Gold, made
with Aqua Regis: and in less then a moment the whole Liquor of this lovely Red
Sanguine Color, was changed into a Goldish Yellow Color, such as the Solution
of the Gold was like that Kingly Star the Sun, discussing the Clouds, and
filling all things with his commanding light.

Moreover, I here omit many more Chemical Phenomenon, wrought upon this Stone,
which have slipped out of my mind: as also a Menstruum which turned that
blood-coloured Liquor presently into clear, and Diaphanous Water; and another
Menstruum, which turned the same Liquor into a Violet-Colour; and others which
transformed it into other Colors. I yet keep by me a Sky-colored Powder
prepared of this Stone, which in its fairness is not exceeded by the Mountain
Blew, or Sky color, called Bergblau. For I confess there are no kind of true
Colors which Painters do make use of; which do not in my opinion result from
the Calxs of Metals or Minerals variously prepared. I send together with these
a piece of this Grun-waldenStone, that so if you please you your self may
experiment the before recited Phenomenon. I have also sent a portion of the
wonderful Violet colored Powder, so called by Geber the Arabian in his Summa
Perfectionis. Cap. 28. lib. 1. Which I obtained from Copper calcined with
Sulphur, about three days since. By way of Conclusion I add, an Experiment
which happened to me concerning that Bilious Liquor, contained in the bladder
of Gall: In this (above twenty years since,) I dissolved some Aloes Rosatum, or
depurated Aloes, and the Green Color of the Bile, or Choler was changed into a
true blood Color. The consideration of which thing, cannot I suppose but be
beneficial to all Men, Farewell.

Written in have From my Study, this 8th of March, 1674. Your Excellencies in
all studious Observance. Christianus Menzelus.

AN Addition to the fourth Chapter concerning a Diuretical Tincture, commonly
called the Solar Tincture.
As also a singular Experiment concerning Tyles; proposed in a Letter to me by
the Noble and Excellent Doctor Casper Marchius.
Most Noble and Experienced Sir, My Friend and Favourer, much to be Honored.
AFter that a little while since, (according to the singular civility with
which you abound,) you permitted me to read your Curious Distillatory, (which
now sweats under the Press;) I began to think, if I could not remember of my
Chemical Labors, an Experiment or two, which might have some relation to the
things you treat of: And behold there came Two into my (...), perhaps as well
known to your self, but not alleged in that Elegant Writing of yours, if I
remember rightly: in both of them there comes a Golden Color over the
Alimbeck, in one of them in the form of a Spirituous Liquor, in the other of
them inhaering in the form of a Salt, sufficiently Volatile; You know, worthy
Sir, how from the Mineral of Hungarian Antimony, Nitre, Tartar, and the like,
(chiefly such sorts of them as are thought to be Auriferous, or to contain
Gold, adding according to the opinion of some men, Sal Armoniack also,) being
well mixed together, and cast into a certain instrument, by the help of an open
Fire, there is drawn that sufficiently celebrated Liquor against the Stone, by
many highly commended also against diverse obstructions, and impurities of the
Blood; which that it shines in its first distillation with a Golden Color will
hardly procure admiration to any one, since it is a true Solution of the Salt
and Sulphur, expelled from these different Matters by the violence of the Fire;
as also no man wonders that Spirit of common Salt is endued almost with the
same Color; but if it be rectified by a Retort, with a moderate Fire, it will
be discovered how much Corporeal Salt it contained; and this rectified Spirit
of Salt, will be almost Diaphanous, and without Color. But concerning our
almost Goldish Color, I have often taken notice that being rectified more than
once yet it brings over with it self the goldish Tincture, although it be not
quite so deep as before: which is a sign that the Salt and Sulphur, are more
intimately united, and under a Volatile Salt.

The Other Observation which I offer, is not so commonly known, nor have I
happened to read of it in the writings of Chemists: every body knows that baked
or burnt Tiles are of a reddish color throughout, which Color should any man
have told me heretofore, that it were separable from them, I should have given
as much credit to it, as to those who contend that the Tincture, or red Color
may be separated from Corals; which as to the Color, as it is a Naked quality,
I hold to be impossible; but in respect of some certain proportion of
substantial matter (which I acknowledge to be the chief Subject of this Color)
which may be taken out of the Corals, by certain Menstruums, to account that
thing impossible is neither well nor true. It happned (as I have known by
experience) that the rusty, or rather red Color with which the Tyles are
tinged throughout, may be so separated from them, that nothing of it will be
left, or remain in them. I was about to prepare the Volatile Urinous Spirit of
Sal Armoniack, and therefore took, as the custom is, a Lixiviate Alcaly in the
preparation of it, by which means I obtained a pound or two of Salt, composed
of both of them, to wit, the Alcaly, and the Sal Armoniack; from which being
desirous to draw a Spirit, I did, after the most usual Method* mix it with
three times its weight of Powder of Tyles, and attempted to drive over the
Spirit by a Retort, in a naked Fire, but I did not obtain what I would have
had: for there distilled but very little Liquor, but at length there arose a
Corporeal and Volatile Salt, in such proportion, that it almost filled up the
Neck of the Retort, for which cause it would at last break it of necessity; The
Retort therefore being taken out of the Fire, I observed all the Salt to be
sublimed into the Neck and the upper part of the Retort, and it was Tincted
with a Saffron Color, and the Powder of the Tiles which was left, was deprived
of all its Color, and was like Ashes. Which extracting of the Color by an
Alimbeck from a body which had endured so great a stress of Fire before, As it
is an Experiment worthy consideration: So I believe, Noble Sir, it will not be
ungrateful, if it be added to your Experiments. Farewell. And as you have
hitherto excellently done, Study the public Good, and advancement of Learning,
and continue to Love me,

Yours Ready upon all Friendly occasions, CASPER MARCHIUS, Doctor, Counselor,
and chief Physician to the Elector.
Berlin 10 th of March, Anno. 1674.
END.

