THE WORLDS PROSPECT: OR, A Commentary upon the 33 of ISAIAH, and the 14
verse. In these words: The sinners in Sion are afraid. In which words are
declared, how far the Saints may sin against Knowledge and Conscience, and
yet not sin the sin against the holy Ghost. Delivered, And set forth by JOHN
EMERSONE sometime pastr, Dispencer of the word in private.

LONDON: Printed by E. P. for Nicholas Gamage, and are to be sold at his shop
on London Bridge near the Gate. 1646.

The Contents.
THe point from the Text is this:

That sins against Knowledge and Conscience, are sins of a high nature; and
when God does once set them upon the Conscience, they cause horror and
vexation, both in the Saints and Rebrobates.

From the points, there be these nine particulars derived.

1. All sins committed against Knowledge and Conscience, are not the sins
against the holy Ghost; for, sins against Faith, are not this sin. 2. All
sins done wittingly and contrivingly, and willingly, are not this sin. 3.
The sin of unbelief, which some maintain to be the sin against the holy
Ghost, is not that sin. 4. Every for swearing and denying of the truth of
Christ, is not this sin. 5. What sins of Knowledge be, and how they come to
be the sins against the holy Ghost. 6. A Declaration of this sin against
the holy Ghost. 7. A reason given, why it is a sin unpardonable. 8. Who the
persons be that commit this sin. 9. With what knowledge they must be endued,
that commit this sin against the holy Ghost.
In this ensuing Treatise, Every one of these particulars are fully proved; As
also, with a word of comfort, spoken in due season to troubled Consciences,
showing that they need not fear the assurance of their eternal wel-being.

With many other points, which are not named in this preamble.

THE Worlds Prospect.
ISAIAH 33. 14. verse. The sinners in Sion are afraid.
IN these words, there be these three things considerable:

1. The persons who they are, in these words, Sinners. 2. The place they dwelt,
which was, in Sion. 3. The effect of sins, in these, Sinners.
In the last part of my Text, in these word, They are afraid.

From whence, I observe (by the way) this observation; That sin is the
original cause of wicked men's fear.

In the word sinners, I note only these two sorts of sinners.

The first sort of sinners that have the guilt of sin lying upon their
souls, which guilt of theirs shall never be washed off with the blood of
Christ, for these two Reasons:

First, Because Divine Wisdom did never set love and mercy on work for the
satisfying of Divine Justice in their behalf.

Secondly, God the Father did never appoint the blood of his Son to wash off
the guilt that is upon their souls; and therefore they must dye in their guilt
which lies upon their souls.

The second sort of sinners, which have the guilt of sin lying upon their
souls, yet shall not dye in that guilt, for these two Reasons:

First, Because God the Father did wisely contrive ways, to satisfy Divine
Justice in their behalf.

Secondly, God the Father loved them, and did freely wash them in the fountain
of his Sons blood; therefore, though they were in guilt, yet they shall not dye
in their guilt.

Now, in the handling of my Text, in the forenamed particulars, I shall show
from whence, sinners were first derived, viz. Adam was the first man that ever
sinned, and thus: The first sin that ever was in man, was first found in our
first Parents Adam: And so, I say, by that means, the sin of our first
Parents Adam was imputed unto Romans 5. 12. and so called our sin, Romans 4. 25.
Sin was the only cause of Adams fear, Genesis 3. 9. So in like manner sin is
an original of our fear, who are the posterity of sinful Adam.

I come now to speak of the place where these sinners dwelt, and that place I
told you was in Sion, a place, I say, which God did choose above all other
places, there only of purpose to put or place his Name in. This place Sion, is
a place unmovable, and therefore in the Scriptures called, Mount Sion, of old,
called Salem, being the Mount on which David's house and Castle was placed,
being in the City of Jerusalem, to the East part of the same, 1 King. 11. 36.
Deuteronomy. 11. 7, 11. Psalm. 132. 14. Psalm. 125. 1. Rev. 14. 1. Sion a place where
the means of grace was; out of which place, came also Perfection of Beauty,
Psalm. 52. 2. Jehovah, there was found in the purity of Ordinances, Sion was
the Saints inquiring place in the old time; I say, it was their place of
Residence, there was their hopes in times past in an ordinance-way, and there
is still their hopes to enjoy Christ in a visible and glorious way for ever.
Though all the earth be mine, yet Sion have I chosen to be the place of my
habitation for ever and there will I dwell amongst my people, and will go in
and out before them for ever, leading them forth even as a Shepherd does his
flock. Glorious things are spoken of thee thou City of God: Mat. 5. 35.
for it is the place and City of the great King (even Christ Jesus) And I heard
him say unto me, Ezekiel. 43. ^, 8.
Son of Man, this is the place of my Throne, and the place of the soales of
my feet, where I will dwell in the midst of the Children of Israel for ever,
and then my holy name shall the house of Israel no more defile, neither they
nor their Kings.

These sinners which my Text speaks of, had their names given unto them from
the heinousness of their sins. I say, as they were sinners, so they had the
names of sinners given unto them; And because they sinned against the gift of
grace in Sion, so they were called sinners of Sion, and in the place where they
dwelt They were afraid.

Sins committed against Knowledge, be sins of a high nature, and cause
fear, from these three particulars which were considerable in my Text: From
them, I ^ay, are these points derived, which are these:

That sin committed against Conscience and Knowledge, be sins of a high
nature, and when God does charge them upon ^he Conscience, they cause terror
and vex^tion, both in the Saints, and also in the Reprobates.

In the opening of the point, I shall show unto you, how that all sins
committed against Conscience and Knowledge, is not ^he sin against the holy
Ghost:

1. All sins committed against Knowledge and Conscience, Luke 1. 20.
are not this sin, Numb. 2. 12.
2 Samuel 12. 9. 1 King. 15. 5. sin against faith is not this sin.

2. Sins done wittingly and contri^ingly, against Knowledge and Conscience,
are not this sin.

3. All sins against gifts and graces, are ^ot this sin, 1 Cor. 1. 7, 11,
12. 2 Samuel 11. ^, 25. 2 Samuel 12. 9. The sin of unbelief, which some
maintain to be the sin against the holy Ghost, is not that sin; if it had
bin this ^^nne, then had the Disciples of Christ committed this sin. For, the
Lord did oftentimes discover heavenly truths unto them yet notwithstanding,
they believed not.

4. Every forswearing and denying o^ the truth of the Lord Jesus, are not this
sin.

Francis Spyra forswore the truth o^ Christ, and denied the same, against the
Knowledge of Conscience, and against the voice and dictate of the Spirit; yet
for all that, some think that he obtained mercy* Also, Mat. 26. 70, 72, 74, 75.
Peter denied and forswore the truth of the Lord Jesus, yet not damned.

5. I will show you what sins of Knowledge be, and will show you how they
come to be the sin against the holy Ghost.

6. I will discover unto you, what the sin against the holy Ghost is.

7. I will discover the Reason, why it is a sin unpardonable.

8. Who the persons be that commit that sin.

9. With what knowledge they must be endued that commit this sin.


These nine particulars I shall endeavor to draw into one complete body, as if
I had named them one by one.

I say, all sins committed against Know^edge and Conscience, are not the
sin against the holy Ghost: If it had been that sin, then had David
committed the sin against the holy Ghost; for he sinned against his Knowledge
and Conscience, wittingly, willingly, and contrivingly.

As for instance, in the matter or Uriah: First, he sinned seeingly; Secondly,
he sinned by the way of sinful forecast. For the first, he sinned seeingly,
in that he saw that Bershebah was with-child, he thought to have fathered the
child upon innocent Uriah, although he never knew of the begetting of it; he
thought, if that he could have got this good man unto his hands, all had been
well, much more if Uriah had been with his wife. Take notice, I pray you, how
David seemingly loved this good man, Vriah, 2 Samuel 11. 8, 12. And David said
unto Vriah, Go down to thine house, and wash thy feet. And Vriah departed out
of the kings house and there followed him a mess of meat from the king. And
David said unto Vriah, came thou not from thy journey? why then did thou
not go down to thy house? And David said unto Vriah, Tarry here to day also,
and to morrow I will let thee depart.

I say, here was David's fair love to Urias for his own selfe-ends, for the
preventing of that open shame which was coming upon him: I am verily persuaded
that his Conscience told him then, that he had sinned in this matter of Uriahs
wife and that made him by might and policy to seek some cloak to cover his
shame* for if that he had not known it, it had not been a sin to covet his
neighbors wife, especially to commit adultery with her, he would never have
sought out for a cloak to have covered his shame.

I say, his knowledge was so effectual by education, that he knew the breach
of the seventh and the tenth Commandment: the tenor whereof is thus, Thou
shall not covet thy neighbors wife: Also, he knew the breach of the sixth
Commandment, Thou shall not kill;

Yet I say, by way of sinful forecast, he knew how to act the breach of the
sixth Commandment, as you may see, how he acted his wicked action by a wicked
Agent; he had no better way to contrive the death of so good a man as Uriah
was, but only making of Joab an Agent, to make Vriah privily to carry the
secrets of his ^wne death, as by this Story at large appea^eth in 2 Samuel 11.
15, 16. And it came to ^asse in the morning, that David wrote a letter to Joab,
saying, Set Uriah in the forefront ^f the hottest battle, and retire ye from
him, that he may be smitten and dye.

In these words, you may observe David's ^^nfull forecast, for the bringing
about of ^is sinful action; he would not be seen to ^ave a hand in this good
man's death: yet ^he holy Ghost does to all posterity set ^orth, That this holy
man David had a hand ^n Uriahs death, 2 Samuel 12. 9. Thou have ^^aine Uriah with
the sword: As if the holy Ghost had said thus, Though unto the eye of the world
thou art not seen to have a and in this good man's death, yet this se^ret act
of thine is not hid from the All-seeing eye of Jehovah. I pried into thine
heart, and there I saw thy secret intention ^cted, before ever thou did use
the outward means to bring it to pass. Yea, I saw in thine heart the Agent
that thou did assign, for to bring to pass this thy sinful action. I saw
all thy turnings and windings concerning Uriah, which by thee* were contrived;
and because thou did go so cunningly to work, to make the world believe that
thou had no hand in this man's death, I therefore thought good to discover to
all posterities after thee that which thou did so secretly act and contrive.

I will relate the chief heads of thy proceedings concerning Uriahs death;
Although thou did use Joab as thy Agent to act thy wicked intent and purpose;
yet I will lay the guilt of that sin, not upon Joab the Actor, but upon thee
the contriver thereof; Thou have killed Uriah with the sword:

I could relate more of it then this, but I stand not upon a public relation,
but only to let the world see that thou art not without public sins: I did
look upon thee at that very time of sinning, as upon a perfect man, Save only
in the matter of Urias, 1 King. 15. 5.

David* because he would be sure of the death of so good a man as Vriah was, he
went politickly to work, That if there were but two or three men slain, Vriah
without question might be one of them, as appeared afterward in the 2 Samuel 11.
17. And it came to pass, when Joab observed the City, that he assigned Vriah
unto a place, where he knew that valiant men were. And the men of the City
went, and fought with Joab; and ^here fell some of the people of the servants
of David, and Vriah the Hittite dyed also.

In the 2 of Sam. 12. 5. see how holy David seemed to be sorrowful when the
Prophet Nathan came unto him, and spoke parabolically concerning Vriahs death,
and concerning the coveting of his wife. See, I say, how David expressed sorrow
for Vriahs wrong (not yet being convinced of his death) until God by the
ministry of Nathan did set home the sin, and also the guilt thereof, upon the
Conscience of this good man, David.

I say, that although this good man, David, did sin grievously, both
wittingly and contrivingly; yet he sinned not that sin against the holy Spirit:
Yea, although David sinned deeply against his own knowledge and conscience,
yet he found and obtained pardon, 2 Samuel 12. 13. And Nathan said unto David,
The Lord has put away thy sin, thou shall not dye.

I say, that mercy which he obtained from the Lord, Isa. 55. 3.
is called in the Scriptures, His sure mercies, Psa. 32. 15
Isa. 55. 3. Jehovah had sworn that he would never fail David.

Those whom Jehovah swears to shall never want protection.

I say, though this holy man sinned so grievously, yet he found and obtained
pardon, and was accounted of God a perfect man; yea, even in that very time of
seeing, 1 King. 15 5.
saving in the matter of Vriah, 1 King. 15. 5.

All sins committed against great gifts and graces, are not this sin
against the holy Ghost. If it had been this sin, then had Solomon also
committed this sin against the holy Ghost; The Reas.
for he sinned against the graces and estate of a Saint-seeing spirit, 1 King.
11 9.
who was angry with him. 1 King. 11. 9. God appeared unto him three several
times, and did discover himself unto him in an abundant manner, as you may
see in 2 Chro. 1. 7, 11, 12. 1 King. 3. 5, 12. 1 King. 9. 3. chap. 11. 9.

I say, Solomon sinned in a high nature against the largest requests that ever
man had granted unto him; yea, he sinned against all those graces which
Elshaddai the strong Omnipotent God infused into him. He angered the Lord; yea,
he did evil in the sight of the Lord, 1 King. 11. 6. He is said, To walk
contrary unto the good ways of David his Father; and as Solomon angered the
Lord, even so the Lord was angry also with him, verse. 9. who had then appeared
unto him twice.

He was a man endued with more knowledge then ever any mere creature was endued
with; yea, he dived into the nature and use of Plants; yea, into the very Hysop
that sprung upon the wall. I am persuaded, if that the writings of Solomon had
not been lost (in the Capitvity) which he had written upon the nature and use
of Plants and Herbs, then our Physicians would have been (next under God) able
to have cured all manner of diseases whatsoever, except Hereditary diseases.

If God did furnish him with so much humane knowledge and skill in natural
things, then much more did God indue him with all heavenly graces. I say,
Jehovah, the strong Omnipotent God, gave unto him abundantly all wisdom and
graces, at his request, 2 Chro. 1. 7.

He had a great enlargement of graces; yea, grace I say, as large as the waters
in the Ocean Seas: He had the largest stock of grace that ever any man had,
save the Lord Jesus, who was God and Man in one Person.

If any man shall ask me the question, Quest.
whether ever any mere man shall attain unto the like measure of gifts and
graces as Solomon did?

I answer, Answ.
Solomon was a Type and figure of our Lord Jesus; and therefore, it was
necessary that he should be endued with more gifts and graces then any other
after him saving the Lord Christ, whom he Typified, that so he might, in that
age of the world, represent the Substance of him, of whom he was the shadow,

Solomon was a true figure of Christ, as he was a subject of grace, and not as
he was a subject of foul sins. I say, that all these, and such like Typical
representations of Christ, are now, since his coming in the flesh, ceased, he
being the Substance of all those Types, figures, and shadows.

But as the Ceremonial Law was a figure of Christ in its Typical
observations, as S. Paul speaks, Heb. 10. 1. Saying: Now the Law is the
shadow of good things to come.

Therefore, although believers now do not enjoy such a larg measure of grace
as Solomon did, yet they shall enjoy as true grace (according to measure) as
ever he did.

I say, no man shall ever enjoy such a large measure of common grace as he did;
yet there is the same measured fullness, as is by Christ measured out for his
Saints, without being figures as Solomon was, though he most grievously sinned
against so large a stock of grace as he possessed; yet not withstanding, he
obtained pardon, 2 Samuel 7. 15. Psalm. 89. 24. 3, 34. 2. Sam. 12. 24. according
to this promise of Jehovah himself, in these words: My loving kindness will I
never take away from him, my truth also and my mercy shall be with him, he
shall cry unto me, thou art my Father, my God, and the Rock of my Salvation. My
covenant will I not break, nor alter the thing that is gone out of my mouth.

Although in truth, these words of David do most truly and properly allude
unto Christ himself, as the Substance, with whom the everlasting covenant was
made by the Father, for the work of Salvation in due time; yet they are
shadowed out unto us by the person of Solomon, who was the shadow of the
Substance, Christ; and whose very Name, Solomon (being Wisdom) carries in it
self the true portraiture of Christ the Substance, who is the true Solomon,
the true Wisdom of the Father.

In these words is the purpose and promise of Jehovah confirmed, from his
former resolution in the showing and bestowing mercy on Solomon;
notwithstanding, all his sins committed against Gods great love and mercy
showed unto him.

He sinned deeply and in a very high measure, and did, as it were, outlive
grace (in regard of the life and sweet sense and being of grace.) Yet, I say,
he enjoyed the former sense and sweet enjoyment of grace again.

I might abundantly confirm the truth of this point more fully, but I have
other matter to deliver.

Francis Spyra, Though he denied the truth of the Lord Jesus against his
Knowledge and Conscience, and against a secret Dictate and a sudden voice,
which forbad him not to do that which he was resolved to do. I say, a secret
Dictate bad him take heed unto himself, and to look back unto his former
estate, and not to deliver up all into the hands of those that would bring both
him and his into bondage, and not to yield unto that Legate, who told him that
if he would forswear the truth of the Lord Jesus, and yield to them in all
points, he and his should be maintained.

When this Francis Spyra, was going about to subscribe unto their wicked
assignment then, even then, he heard a secret Dictate, which forbad him not to
go against that truth which he formerly had professed: yet notwithstanding, he
did wilfully deny the truth of the Lord Jesus, yet afterward he had remorce of
conscience, and was deeply wounded in his soul and conscience: Yea, he
afterward made Recantation, and was deeply wounded, and his conscience
tormenting him, he made a large Confession of his sins, and the heinousness
of them, and withal, acknowledging, that there was abundance of mercy in God
if he could repent, saying, If I could but Repent, then there would be mercy
for me, but I cannot Repent of my present state and condition, it being like
the state of Cain, Saul, and Judas.

I confess, that if God should damn me, he might be just in all his dealings
with me: When those which were about him bad him pray, he told them, that he
could not pray; yet afterward they got him to pray, and it is reported of him,
that he prayed in the Latin tongue, and expressed such heavenly expressions,
that no Reprobate could express the like heavenly expressions.

If you do but look into the book, called, The Relation of Francis Spyra,
therein you may see more fuller of him then my tongue shall express at this
time, my conscience bidding me keep within the compass of Christian charity,
judging him to be a glorified Saint in heaven; using, in I say, the time of his
distress, such unexpressable words, which I in all the days of my life never
heard nor read of, could be in any dying or living Reprobate.

I do also bring in S. Peter, who with him denied the truth, forswore that he
never knew him, whom formerly he professed, yea, wittingly, though not
willingly, he denied the Lord Jesus, who by his most precious blood bought him,
yet he for all that found and obtained pardon: For, it is said, that the Lord
Jesus, after he had denied him, looked back upon him; Then says the Text,
Peter remembered the words of Christ, who said unto him, Before the cock crow
twice, thou shall deny me thrice; Then he remembered the words of Christ and
went out, and wept bitterly. I say, Christ told him, that Satan had a desire
for to winnow him, as wheat was sifted: But Christ told him, that he had prayed
him, that his faith should not fail, Luke 22. 31. intimating thereby, that
this fall of blessed Peter was but a permission of Satan's temptation and trial
of his faith (rather then eternal rejection) to show unto after-posterities
that Satan may sometime (by permission) have power given him to batter the
faith of the strongest Saint, and to make him sometime lie down in sorrow, as
the holy Ghost uses the phrase in Esaiah, 50. 10, 11.

This Peter, after his Conversion, or after the manifestations of pardon, he
was more courageous then before: And the reason why blessed Peter fell so
grievously, was (as I conceive) only to let him know, that the strength he had
was not his own, neither could he stand by that strength, but only in, and by
the strength of a stronger then himself was, and afterward to make, and to
cause him to wait on the Lord, that so he, in the time of want, might renew his
strength as the holy Ghost does use the phrase in Isaiah, 40. 31, 32.

The sin of unbelief, which some maintain to be the sin against the holy
Ghost, is not this sin; If it had bin this sin, then had there some of Gods
Worthies committed this sin. As for instance, Moses, although a believer, and
faithful in his place, Heb. 3. 2. 5. yet in the very time of trial, was found
unbeleeving, Numb. 20. 11. And to show, that he was found unbeleeving, the Lord
told him, that he should not bring the people into the Land of Canaan, as the
12 verse. tells you.

Zachariah, though a just man, as the word testifies, Luke 1. 6. yet he was
found unbeleeving, verse. 20. and to show unto all posterity this, that it was
a sin, God did inflict a temporal judgment upon his body.

Also, blessed Thomas, although a believer, yet he was found unbeleeving, Joh.
20. 25. And to confirm that which I have spoken, read to the 26. verse. In
which verse. the Lord Jesus stoops unto the act of Thomas his unbelief, and and
confirming his faith with his willingness to cure his unbelief.

I will but give you one instance more, to confirm what I have hitherto spoken
concerning this sin of unbelief, which is also supposed of some to be the
sin against the holy Ghost.

I will bring in these places, which they unskilfully name, to prove this sin
of unbelief, to be the sin against the holy Ghost.

I say, the Disciples of Christ were in the maine point of Faith, found
unbeleeving, questioning the truth which Christ did formerly, and at that time
discover unto them, Mark. 9. 10. Luke 24. 21.

And to show that it was a sin not to believe, he gently reproves their
unbeleeving spirits, v. 25. 26. and afterward labors by the expposition of
those Prophets which had before prophesied of him, was now since his
resurection manifested to be a clear truth which they before believed not,
verse. 27.

And thus I have proved, that the sin of unbelief, which some maintain to
be the sin against the holy Ghost, is not this sin.

I come now to handle their proofs, which they produce for their consequences,
Ioh. 8. 24. If you believe not that I am he, ye shall dye in your sins.

Upon these words, I thus paraphrase* The Lord Jesus convinces the Jews of
their unbelief, because that they believed not that he was the Christ: And the
reason of their unbelief, was, because they believed not that it was he that
was to come, even the Messiah; but they looked on him with a carnal eye,
being* I say, more carnal then spiritual, looking only for a King, whose
Kingdom and Reign shall be altogether temporal. And so I say, dreaming to
Reign with him in this world, they looked that he should have established and
restored that their Kingdom.

But then, they seeing the personal presence of Christ, so contemptible (as
the Prophet Jeremiah says, and also the Prophet Isaiah, His presence shall be
by us not desirable (or) contemptible: When we see him, he shall have neither
form nor beauty.

Therefore, these Jews, when they saw Christ with their natural eyes only,
they did not believe that he was he which was to com. And in the 18. verse.
There the Lord Jesus tells the Jews. That he was one that did bear witness
of himself, and that the Father did also bear witness of him. And in the 19.
verse. They had a ^esire, that he would show them his Father. Whereupon he tells
them, That if ^hey had known the Father, they would also have known him: And
from hence did (...) second cause of their unbelief arise: And ^ur Savior
Christ tells them plainly, That ^f they did not believe he was that Christ,
^hey should dye in their sins.

Another place is the 1 of Judges, 5 verse. How that the Lord having saved the
people out of the Land of Egypt, afterward destroyed them that believed not.
Also, Mark. 16. 16. He that believes not shall be damned. Joh. 3. 18. He that
believes not is condemned already, because he beleveth not in the Name of the
only begotten Son of God.

Unto this place I do thus reply:

That our Lord Jesus does not absolutely speak of an eternal condemnation, if
it were spoken of an eternal estate of condemnation, then must the Elect
themselves be in that estate, for their is no difference, Romans 3. 23. The Elect
themselves, before they be in the estate of faith, are first in the estate of
unbeleeving, 2 Cor. 6. 11. Such were some of you, but now ye are washed, but
ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in t^^ Name of the Lord Jesus, and by
the Sp^^^ of our God.

In these words, you may see the cond^tion of believers set forth unto you, ho^
that they are prone unto all manner of sin^ as well as the sin of unbelief,
but no^ you see a blessed change in them: Ther^^fore the sin of unbelief
cannot be (...) sin against the holy Ghost, as some ide^^ have affirmed.

I now will in a word or two show yo^ how that the Saints of God can fall into
(...) unpardonable sins, though they may fa^^ into many great sins (as you
heard.) Yet say, for the comfort of all distressed consciences that are
encumbered with false fear from false grounds; whose fear, becau^^ their
sins appear great in their apprehension, and so from a false ground as said
before.

Therefore, from hence they conclude that they have sinned against the holy
Ghost, and that thus, their sins are unpardonable. Therefore, for the helping
o^ such poor distressed consciences out of these false fears, and to satisfy
their consciences that they have committed this unpardonable sin. I adds
these two reasons ^^r their satisfaction.

The first Reason is this, because all the ^^ints of God, are all borne of God,
Joh. 5. 18. That is, they are Regenera^^d, and thus made new creatures, Joh. 3.
3. ^^d so are saved, Tit. 3. 5. and cleansed, Cor. 6. 11. by the Spirit of their
God, ^^d so enter in with the Lord Jesus, who is ^^e door, Joh. 1. 10. and
enter into the ^^ait gate, Luke 13. 24. who is the Way, the truth, and the
life, Joh. 14. 6.

You Saints that are full of false fears, ^^t me speak unto you, I say, that
you cannot commit this unpardonable sin, be^^use the Father gave his Son
unto this ^^ery end and purpose, for to redeem his ^^ople from their sins,
Tit. 2. 14. I say, ^ehovah has for his own names sake for^^ven all your
sins, Isa. 43. 23, 44, 22. ^er. 31. 22, 32, 31, 33, 33, 6. And Heb. ^. 12.
Mich. 7. 18, 19. Psalm. 103. 13. Who (...) a God like unto thee, that will
pardon the ^^iquities of the remnant of his heritage, and ^ill subdue them into
the bottom of the Seas? The second Reason is, The Lord Jesus and his Saints
have all one oneness, ^ Cor. 5. 7. They that be joined unto the Lord Jesus,
they be one Spirit, yea, one ^^ union, one in love, one with the Lord Jesus,
and with all the three Persons in all the glorious Trinity. See to this
purpose Ioh. 17. 23, 25, 26. I in them, and they ^^ me. I say, God is
abundantly glorious unto believers, yea, to multiply pardon Isa. 55. 7.

And for a farther Relation of Gods from mercy, in pardoning of those that turn
unto him, I note these several places (...) Scriptures for confirmation, 2 Chronicles. 30* 9^ 33, 12, 13. Genesis 18. 15. Exodus 6. 1, 9, 11, 26, ^, 7, 20, 6, 34,
7, 8. Numb. 20. 8. Deuteronomy. 4. 30, 31, 5, 10, 17, 18, 28, 1, 15, v. 30, 1, 11, 32,
4, 3, 6, 10. 2. Sam. 7, 8, 9, 15, 12, 13, 24, 10, 11, 13, 1 King. 8. 23. Levit.
20. 5, 10. Nehem. 9. 17. Psalm. 21. 7, 35, 5, 7, 5, 10, 86, 5, 10, 111* 4. Psalm.
145. Isa. 30. 18, 54, 8, 9, 10, 55, 3, 7. Ier. 12. 15, 16, 18, 8. Ezekiel. 18. 32,
33, 14, 15, 16. Hos. 2. 14, 19, 23. Joel. 2. 13. Ion. 4. 2. Ier. 3. 2, 12, 14,
Luke 1. 50, 58, 72. Luke 18. 4, 6, 36. Luke 7. 47, 23, 34, 43. Romans 4. 7. 2
Cor. 1. 3. Ephesi. 2. 4. 1 Timothy 1. 13, 15, 16, 18.

These places of Scripture do set forth the freeness of Gods love unto all
believers: Yea, I say, they do show the freeness of Gods love in his showing
of mercy, and in manifesting of it unto all believers, who, I say, shall never
come into condemnation, because the Lord Jesus Christ has cast out of them the
sin of condemnation, Romans 8. 1.

Thus you may see, that all believers be happy and blessed. Oh! the
blessedness of that man, as it is in the original, Romans 8. 32, ^9, verse. Who
shall lay any thing unto the charge of Gods chosen? It is God that justifies:
Who shall condemn? It is Christ which is dead, yea, rather, which is risen
from the dead, who is also at the right hand of God, and makes request for us.
Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? shall Tribulation, or Anguish or
Persecution, or Famine, or Nakedness, or Peril, or Sword? As it is written,
for thy sake are we killed all the day long, we are accounted as sheep for the
slaughter.

In these words, the sure state of the saints is set forth unto us, to show
Gods Omnipotent will and purpose which never changes: It is not the Devil, nor
any belonging unto him, can alter Gods love to his Saints or do them any wrong.

Christ, I say, has set them in a glorious liberty, Gal. 5. 1. Ioh. 8. 38.
Now I come to show unto you what the sin against the ^oly Ghost is.

The sin against the holy Spirit i^ when a man has been enlightened with the
heavenly truth (Christ Jesus) by the holy Spirit of the Father, What the sin
against the holy Ghost is.
who is that Spirit of truth spoken of, Ioh. 14. 26. Whose office is to seal
us unto the day of redemption* Ephesi. 4. 30.

And then, not only strive against that truth, but also blaspheme that truth,
as the Jews did, saying, He casts out Devill^ by Beelzebub the Prince of the
Devils. And thus shall wittingly and willingly against the checks of his own
conscience, persecute that truth in his members, the Saints* because he knows,
that it is the truth therefore he is of purpose resolved to oppose that sacred
truth, and to despise that sacred light wherewith he was enlightened; and also,
esteeming that sacred blood of Christ as nothing, treading it under foot: And
thus, out of a pernicious spirit, most wickedly persecutes the truth in his
members, even the sons and daughters of truth, because he knows, that they are
the subjects of that sacred truth. This is the sin against the holy Ghost.

I say, The persons that commit this sin, must be knowing persons, and men of
knowledge.

Such a one was Julian the Apostate, who notwithstanding his certain knowledge
of Christ to be the Son of God, yet against knowledge, fell off and became a
great persecutor of Christ.

They must be such as are acquainted with the Truth, even the Lord Jesus, being
enlightened with the saving Light of the holy Spirit; such were the Scribes,
and Judas, and many other Reprobates, which the Scripture speaks of in many
places.

Judas sinned against his Knowledge and Conscience; Cain also in like manner
against Knowledge and Conscience, his Conscience at that very time informing
him, that Elshaddai, the strong and omnipotent God, had respect unto the
offering of righteous Abel; and that his person was accepted, according unto
the rule of the Law, perfect shall it be accepted.

Although Cain knew, that God had a respect unto his brother Abel, and to his
offering; yet notwithstanding, he did against his knowledge persecute his
brother: as S. John says, Abels works were good, and Cains evil.

Sin against Knowledge is this: as when a man or woman is informed of diverse
Truths, and by the judgment of their understanding give an approbation unto
those Truths discovered unto them, and yet notwithstanding will sin; this is
called by me, sins against Knowledge.

Sin against Conscience is, when a man's Conscience is enlightened with
Knowledge, concerning the acting this thing or that thing, which is evil, and
yet is resolved to do it; this is called, sin against Conscience.

I say, all that be damned sin not against Knowledge, openly discovered unto
them; as the Heathen, who knew God no farther but only by the instinct of
Nature, having the Law written in their hearts, Romans 2. 15. Which Law shall not
leave them without excuse at the last day: for they know so much of God, as
shall be a means for to condemn them, their Consciences bearing witness
against them, and so leaving their Consciences void of all excuse; telling
them, that there is a God before whose Judgment Seat they must one day appear.

I am persuaded, that the Consciences of the Heathen cannot choose but sometimes
cast forth some light of terror unto them, and so cause an amazement unto them;
although they as Heathen be without the knowledge of Conscience toward God and
man.

I say, sins committed wittingly and willingly, are the original cause of
sorrow both in the Saints and Reprobates.

The sorrow of the Saints for sin, comes from an apprehension of Gods love in
the Lord Jesus, looking upon the love of God and his holiness, and then
casting back his eye upon his own sinfulness, which produces a mourning in
them; whereby, from an apprehension of Gods abundant goodness toward him, he
is enforced with blessed Paul to cry out, saying, Romans 7. 24
O wretched man that I am! O, how unlike unto God am I in holiness! O that God
would once lift up upon me the light of his countenance, and smile graciously
upon my soul, in the face of the Lord Jesus! O that God would but go into my
soul, and discover Christ there unto me, and go out again by the
manifestation of his holy Spirit, that so my soul may be acquainted with the
Commings in of the Lord Jesus.

The sense of a Reprobate, is only from an apprehension of Gods wrath for
sin* and so, out of a slavish fear, confesses hi^ sin, because he sees the
wrath of God appearing ready to be poured out upon him for those sins which
he has committed against God: and so cries out, as being void of all hope of
mercy, like Cain, Saul, and Judas, concluding that their sins are
unpardonable.

I say again, the persons that commit this sin against the holy Ghost, must
be such persons as in some measure knew the maine fundamental grounds of
Religion, and withal they must have some soule-taste of heaven, yea of
heavenly things, as blessed Paul speaks in Heb. 6. 4. For it is impossible
for those who were once enlightened, and have tasted of the heavenly gifts, and
were made partakers of the holy Ghost, and have tasted of the Word of God, and
the powers of the world to come, if they fall away, to renew them again unto
repentance, seeing they crucify unto themselves the Son of God afresh, and
put him to open shame.

In these words you see, that those that commit this sin, must be knowing
persons: they may have a taste seemingly of the holy Ghost; I say, the holy
Ghost may seemingly discover Truths unto them, yet they shall never taste of
them savingly; yet they shall taste of them so fully, as to their thinking they
shall be, as it were, elevated into heaven, and ravished with a kind of
sweetness so far, as that they shall conceit themselves to be in a heavenly
condition.

Judas tasted of the heavenly gifts seemingly, and was endued with great light;
yea, with such a measure of gifts, that he was enabled by them to walk so
warily, that he was not found out to be an hypocrite until he made a discovery
of himself: he had the same power given unto him as the rest of the Disciples
had, Mat. 10. 2: He had a legal faith, but not a saving faith: he possessed a
common enjoyment from the holy Ghost in regard of gifts, I say, a common taste;
he enjoyed not such a taste as the Saints do taste, it is impossible for
wicked men to enjoy that true inward taste, and sweet saving enjoyment of the
holy Ghost, as the Saints do; Yet the common enjoyment of the Spirit of God
they do possess, which shall leave them without excuse. Sometimes a wicked
man may go in some things beyond the Child of God, and may find more comfort
in the way of Ordinances, then the true child of God does (for a time.) Yea, he
may also walk more warily, then those who have more truer relation unto God,
even as the Scribes and Pharisees did, who in hypocrisy lived more precisely
then the true Children of God, for that none could tax them of any thing, but
only Christ, who knew their hypocrisy and corruption of their hearts; as also
the vanity of their Traditionall works.

The Disciples of Christ knew not Judas to be an hypocrite, until he
discovered himself. And as I said before, the persons that commit this sin
against the holy Ghost, must be knowing persons, such as Judas was, and the
Scribes and Pharisees. I told you, that the heathen could not commit this sin
against the holy Ghost, nor can any infant commit this sin, although God may
justly damn infants, for the original sin of their first parents.

It follows now, Why it is called the sin against the holy Ghost.
that I must according to my power, show unto you the Reason, why this sin
against the holy Ghost is an unpardonable sin.

It is called the sin against the holy Ghost, because he discovers and
reveals truth: And it is unpardonable, so long as those do commit sin
against him, who is called the third Person, and is the representative power of
the whole Deity: when they sin against the holy Spirit, they sin against the
whole Trinity, as it is said, They grieved the Spirit of God, even him, whose
office is to seal the Saints unto the day of redemption.

Men, I say, by sinning against this Person, confirm their guilt upon their
own souls. To give you a bigger Reason then I have yet done, why this sin
against the holy Ghost is unpardonable, I say, the full Reason is,

Because it is his place to reconcile, or work reconciliation between the
other two Persons and the sinner, which before were unreconciled: By this
means the sinner comes to stand before the other two Persons the Father and
the Son, and thus finds acceptance. And on the contrary, when this Person
will not reconcile the sinner unto God the Father, not he himself pleased to
be reconciled unto the sinner; I say, it is then a very sad and heavy time with
that soul. It cannot be, but that soul must remain in a state of guilt, and
that for ever, and it must be guilt of a deep dye, that cannot be washed (and
in respect of the majesty and honor of the Trinity) must not be washed off
with the blood of the Lord Jesus, because so decreed by Jehovah from all
eternity.

I say, unto all you that stand to hear me this day, That it will prove a very
sad time with you, if that the Lord Jesus has not by his blood washed off your
guilt, that does as yet lie upon your souls: sad will it be with you, and
black will be your day, when God comes to avenge the black sins of guilt,
besides your other sins; There is therefore but two ways with you, either to
be purged from your guilt, or else for ever to dye in your guilt of sin. Sad
will be your condition, if ever God should say unto you now, or at the last
day, What make you here among these, whose guilt of sin, my has Son by his
most precious blood washed off? What do you here? Depart, I know you not: my
Son never dyed for you, nor shed one drop of his blood to wash off your
guilt. If my Son had shed but one drop of his most precious blood for you,
then should you have been, at this time, made partakers of it: For my part, I
would never have detained that blessedness from you, that should have accrued
unto you by it, one drop of it being able to have washed off all your guilt:
But seeing it is not so, therefore you have no part nor portion in the Son of
my love: Away therefore from me you Reprobates, go along with the rest of your
fellows the Reprobates, into the lake that burns with the flames of my
eternal vengeance, and there remain for all eternity: Yea, I will enable you
to suffer eternal torments, so long, as I am, which is, God, blessed for ever;
yea, I will hold you up in torments so long as I remain amongst my Saints in
glory, which is, for evermore. And as I do delight to fill my Saints full of
joy and glory unspeakable; so will I in like manner delight to satisfy the
justice of my eternal malediction upon you, that those guilty souls and
consciences of yours, unto all eternity may undergo the portion of my wrath
assigned them, For I know your works, Isa. 6618. Hos. 7. 2. I remember all
their wickedness. And so Hos. 9. 9. Therefore he has remembers their
iniquities, he will visit their sins. Ezekiel. 9. 10. And as for me also, mine
eye shall not spare them, neither will I have pity; but I will recompense
their ways upon their own heads. And so, Ezekiel. 7. 9. Hos. 12, 14. the 9, 15.

I say, The sin against the holy Ghost is unpardonable, for this one Reason
more, which is more consonant then any which I have given you hitherto. I say,
this sin is an unpardonable sin, because the holy Sanctifying Spirit does,
as it were, prefer a Bill of Indictment against the sinner that has sinned
against him.

By the way, give me leave to bring in a Supposition (which shall never be
brought to pass.) Suppose I say, That God the Father should take a sinner that
had committed the sin against the holy Ghost, and set him before the Bar of
his justice, and there should appeal unto his justice in the souls behalf,
saying, Justice, I am come unto thee in this sinners behalf, what say thou
unto me? Art thou willing to be reconciled to this sinner? he is a great
sinner. Justice gives in (as it were) his answer unto God the Father, saying, I
am willing to be satisfied in this sinners behalf, be his sins never so
great; yea, even the sin against the holy Ghost.

Then God (as it were) goes unto the Lord Jesus, and tells him, that he has
been with Justice, and Justice is willing to be reconciled in this sinners
behalf: What say thou unto me? Art thou willing to bind thy self over to
satisfy my Divine Justice in this souls behalf? Art thou willing to become a
fountain of blood, to wash off the infiniteness of this souls guilt, that so
this sin against the holy Ghost, which this soul has committed, might be
forgiven, and for ever pardoned?

I am, says Christ, (as it were) unto God his Father, very willing to yield
unto this, concerning this soul that stands here at the Bar of Justice, for
mercy.

Father, if it be thy will, to have this souls guilt washed off, I am willing
to give consent, that so this souls guilt by my blood might be washed off,
that so this unpardonable sin which this soul has committed against thy
holy Spirit might be forgiven, and for ever pardoned, that so he might not for
ever dye in his guilt.

If this were so indeed, as I have said, then were there some possibility of
mercy to that soul, that stands thus at the bar of Justice. But if the
third person comes not in like manner with a proposition, and so answers the
supposition; then I say, is that (which was only supposed to be) quite
overthrown: for, a supposition depends upon a proposition.

God goes (as it were) unto the third Person, and (as it is only supposed)
asks him in like manner, saying:

I have been with Justice, and I have been with my Son, and asked his
consent, and he is willing to satisfy me and my Justice, and we are all
agreed, and have given in our consents concerning this soul, and in his
behalf we want the consent of none, but only thy consent; Art thou willing
to seal unto this souls pardon, if I wash off his guilt with the blood of my
Son, will thou do thy office, and seal to him the assurance of his pardon?

If thus the sinners guilt be pardoned, the holy Ghost then looking upon the
guilty soul, appeals unto God the Father (in this supposed manner saying)
What have you done here? You gave in your consents to appease Justice. Is there
a pardon by blood granted, and do you want nothing thereunto, but only the
Seal, to give assurance to that pardon? I say, you want nothing but my consent
in this sinners behalf. If that you had but my consent equally unto yours,
then might this souls sins be pardoned, though he has sinned against me in
such a high manner as he has done. I say, it is not with my consent, that this
sinner should ever find pardon, for he has been a very great sinner against
me wittingly, as also against those divine discoveries which I according unto
my office did discover unto him; against all which he has most wittingly and
wilfully transgressed, yea, he has out of a pernicious spirit sinned against
me and all those forenamed discoveries which I did infuse into him. If that
he had not sinned against me out of malice, and out of a set purpose; it would
never have grieved my holy Spirit so much as now it does: he strove against
that Light which I enlightened him with.

Shall I give in my consent to have the sins of such a soul as this
pardoned? I can in no wise yield, and so go against Justice. Justice,
according unto truth, must be a subject unto me, because I am the very Spirit
of Truth it self, and have a proper relation and dependancy upon the other two
Persons in the most sacred and glorious Trinity; And therefore, I say, Justice
must yield unto me as well as to you.

You know, that soul that sins, that soul shall dye: But this soul has
sinned, therefore this soul shall dye.

And because thy Divine Wisdom did never appoint thy willed act wisely to set
thy love and mercy on work, to contrive a way for such wilful sinners, that
so their guilt might have been washed off: Therefore, as they are in guilt,
even so let their guilt remain to all eternity.

This sinner has outlived grace, and the day of redemption is past, and all
hopes of mercy is now expired.

Shall therefore such a soul find mercy, who has thus wilfully opposed me,
and turned from me? Shall he, I say, find pardon?

He that has often sent me away sad, shall such a soul as this find mercy?
This soul, I say, that has more then once or twice sent me away sad,
whenever I came to execute my Office: This vild wretch, that has made flight
of me, and of those Sacred Dictates which I discovered unto him, at such a
time, and at such a time.

Surely, as I am God, equal with you this soul that has thus and thus
sinned' he shall never find mercy. If he find mercy, if he be washed in thy
Sons blood from this his guilt, then where is the unity in us? The glorious
Trinity, and the most glorious conformity in our unity? If that this Souls
sins be pardoned, where then is the firmness of our Decree? If this souls
sins be pardoned, then is our unity in Trinity, and conformity in unity
overthrown, and the word of truth is falsified, which showed unto the world,
what oneness there was with us before these worlds were created. What, shall
all our oneness be dis-joyned for this souls sake?

Upon this (supposed) speech, the other two Persons give in (as it were) their
consent against the soul then standing at the Bar of Justice, and God
speaking to that guilty soul in this manner, As a Judge does unto a
Malefactor, being cast by the the Jury that goes upon life and death; The
Judge telling the Malefactor, that he can do no less then the Jury of life
and death has done: And therefore I must, and do pronounce sentence of death
against thee, according unto the Iuries Verdict, it being according to
righteous judgment.

I say, God in like manner speaks unto the guilty soul, saying (as it were)
in this manner: I have pleaded hard in thy behalf, and we cannot prevail in a
full consent for thy personal recovery, because we cannot attain unto the
third Persons consent. The Sentence of death is passed upon thee, according
unto the Sentence of a Divine Law, and according unto our everlasting Decree,
written and established in our Divine Law, and sealed by all our unanimous
consents. Upon this one Sentence, we hold all in Oneness, we cannot dis-joynt
our unity in Trinity, and unity in a glorious conformity. The Law of the
third Person, is also the Law of the first Person, and the Law of the first
Person is also the Law of the second Person; and so a general stabilitie in a
blessed and glorious Trinity.

And thus the Law of the three glorious Persons is in one Seame; like unto the
Laws of the Medes and Persians, which alters not.

Now, because I would not have the Consciences of men troubled, because I have
showed you the sad condition of the soul, that has the guilt of sin upon
it; I will, I say, speak a word in due season unto those distressed
Consciences, and I will a little enlarge my self; although, in regard of the
weakness of body, I am almost spent.

My beloved friends, I speak unto all of you, but especially unto believers: I
say, there is abundance of mercy in God for you; I say it lies hid, and
treasured up in the bowels of Divine goodness, and thus to be revealed in due
time unto you in the Lord Jesus, when God his Father breaks out in the sweet
influences of his Love, in the object of his Love, who is the Lord Jesus.

The breathings out of the manifestation of the Lord Jesus, shall be the
breathings out of thy Graces, and of thy Solaces; and the in-comming of the
Lord Jesus shall give light unto all those manifestations of thy souls
pardons, which thou had ever since that thou were estated in Christ, which
for a long time has layne hid in the Hive of thy unbeleefe, and has been the
original cause of making you to call in question your estate in Christ, and
your interest in the Lord Jesus, and that object upon whom your ever-being
depends.

There is, I say, this one thing, which is the only cause which makes many a
distressed Conscience to call in question his souls interest in Christ,
because he finds in his own apprehension a world of soules-deadnesse, and
weakness in his growth of grace.

I say unto thee, whosoever thou art, that stand to hear me this day, that
thou, in thy souls distress, art altogether unfit to be thine own judge in
the want of thy souls comfort, thou will be ready to say that, which thou will
be again ready to unsay, in thy enjoyment of true comfort, as David did, Psalm.
116. 11.

You know, that there may be in the midst of Winter abundance of Bees in the
Hive, although unto the eye of our sense and reason there be but two or three
playing about the Hives mouth: Even so I say, although there but a few graces
in thy soul now in the time of this thy affliction;

I say, this time of thy affliction has not lessened any of thy former graces
which thou formerly did enjoy. I say, it has but covered over those thy
graces in thy sense and feeling: Thy graces be all still where they were in thy
first installment into the state of grace. We have a Proverb, That the Spring
brings forth all those Herbs and Plants which lay dead all the Winter before:
Even so I say unto thee, That the Spring, which is the Morning of the
in-comming of the Lord Jesus, shall receive all those bosome-discourses which
lay dead in thy soul.

In the time of thy ascension, the Son of Righteousness shall arise, and
shine upon thee by the blessed force and glorious power of God the Father, and
so cause the Spirit of God to cast into thy soul a glorious discovery of the
interest of thy well-being.

It is not thy want of grace that is the cause of thy souls complaints, but it
is the only want of thy discovery of them, that is the cause of thy souls
grievance: There Is but a curtain (as it were) drawn between thee and thy
enjoyments of all thy graces, all thy graces are within that curtain, as the
Priests of the old Law were sometimes within the holy place.

When this curtain is once drawn, then will all thy enjoyments appear, then
shall thou be swallowed up in the very life of discovery.

I confess, Sometimes the life of discovery may be dis-joynted from the life
of enjoyment for a small time.

The Saints have an absence in the midst of their enjoyment. Yet blessed be
that Divine absence, which afterward wins us unto a Divine enjoyment of him,
who for a time was pleased to absent himself.

I say, here is the comfort of believers, that a temporal absence is not an
eternal withdrawment.

Blessed be God, who though he does sometimes withdraw the sense and feeling
of a Divine presence in their enjoyment, yet in the want of that enjoyment, the
Saints enjoy a Divine enjoyment of the Lord Jesus.

Although the Lord Jesus, in thy sense and feeling, be with-drawne from thee,
yet note this one Consequence; It is impossible that he should ever withdraw
himself from thee.

Thou do enjoy the same presence now, which thou did enjoy ever since thy
very first estatement in the state of grace.

Yesterday thou did enjoy the Lord Jesus, and so thou shall enjoy him in like
manner for ever; Yea, with an eternal, most glorious, unspeakable inioyment.

So much for this time.
FINIS.

