Deceit Discovered and Malice Manifested In L. KEY'S late Paper from READING
the third of the fourth Month 1693.
By THOMAS ELWOOD.
BEing lately in London, I there saw a Paper, Subscribed by B. Coal, and
recommended to the Press by C. Harris, proposing Expedients for a true
Reconciliation among the People of God called Quakers. At the reading whereof
considering with my self the manifeld Reproaches that have been cast upon
Friends in Print, by diverse of that Party that have opposed Friends, whereby
Friends have been publicly traduced and defamed, being represented to the
World as Apostates and Innovators, Idolaters, setters up of Images and Idols,
Introducers of Popery, and but one step from it, with more of like kind, in
bitter-Terms expressed, it seemed strange to me that the Authors of that Paper
(if they were in earnest in what they proposed) should offer Expedients for a
Reconciliation, before they had given Friends and the World satisfaction that
they are now sensible we are not what they (or some of their Party) have
misrepresented us to be; which their seeming to desire a Reconciliation with us
implies, and which we may charitably hope some among them sincerely intend: for
they would render themselves guilty of gross Hypocrisy indeed, in desiring to
be reconciled to us, if they yet believe us to be such. It had been fit
therefore that before other Expedients for Reconciliation had been offered by
such who had falsty accused Friends, and exposed our holy Profession to the
Contempt of the profane, they should have acknowledged their Evil in having so
done, and given Proof of their Repentance thereof, that by, first clearing us
from those false Accusations, they might have declared us to be such, as men
pretending to Truth and Godliness, might fairly be reconciled to; and might
thereby have given us some ground to hope, that as the sincerity of their
Repentance should manifest it self, by an honest and hearty Confessing and for
saking their former Works of Envy, Strife, Bitterness, Railing, False-accusing,
Division and Separation, we should feel them return in the Peaceable Spirit of
Truth, in which we could with gladness receive them, and in which only we can
be truly reconciled to them.

When I returned home, I there found a Letter directed to me from L. Key of
Reading, with a Printed sheet enclosed therein, (...) Terms and Tendency so
contrary to the before mentioned Paper signed by B. C. and C. H. ( That
proposing Expedients for Peace, and Reconciliation: This renewing the
Difference, and stirring up Contention a flesh) that I could not but wonder at
it; and the rather because I had understood that L. Key (if he himself did not
bring up that Paper of B. Coals to be printed) was very active and busy in
spreading it after it was Printed, which showed he was privy and consenting
thereunto. Comparing the Dates of these two Papers together, I found them both
dated from Reading, one of them on the 3d. the other on the 4th. of the 4th
Month 1693. not one day between. And so Contrary are the Terms and tendencies
of them, one to the other, that hardly any thing can be more. For in the
Proposals for Reconciliation, they say, Let all Whisperings, Backbitings, Wrath
and Envy be watched against and denied: Yet the other Paper, Signed by L. Key,
is made up mostly of Back bitings, Wrath and Envy. In their Paper for
Reconciliation they say, All things relating to former Differences, let it be
buried in Oblivion on all hands: Yet in the other Paper, Signed by L. Key, the
Reader is bid See the Memorial for the present Generation, and also for that
which is to come; It gives (says he) an account of the Difference that has
happened among the People called Quakers in those parts; Also see the Revival
that was published from Reading in 1692. it giving an Account how the
Difference was brought in there. (This Paper which he calls the Revival, was a
single Sheet Signed by L. Key himself ( I. R. and C. H. Signing some part of
it) in which about half a Score of their Contentious, and abusive Pamphlets are
named, and recommended to the Readers view.) Thus while in one Paper
Reconciliation is proposed, and that not only former Differences, but all
things relating thereunto, should be buried in Oblivion (that is, be utterly
forgotten, never to be mentioned or remembered any more:) in the other Paper
(left the Difference should dye, or be forgotten) the Titles of those former
Printed Papers (wherein, he says, an Account is given of the Difference, and
how it was brought in here and there) are reprinted, and the Reader referred a
fresh to them, for further information in the Difference; and particularly to
that paper of J. Raunce and G. Harris, which appears by its Title to be
intended for a lasting Monument of the Difference, to continue it in
Remembrance, that it might not be forgotten either in this Age or the next, and
therefore was called A Memorial for the present Generation, and also for that
which is to come. Was this the way to bury the Difference in Oblivion? Or was
this plain and honest dealing in L. Key, to reprint the Titles of those Papers,
which he himself says give Account of the difference, and recommend them anew
to his Reader at the same time that he is spreading the Expedient for
Reconciliation, in which all things relating to former Differences are proposed
to be buried in Oblivion on all hands? (...) would not charge this
double-Dealing upon the whole Party nor upon any of that Party that are not
guilty thereof; but upon such only as take it upon themselves by spreading or
owning both those Papers, as some I know have done, particularly J. Raunce, who
has sent them abroad together, thereby concerning himself alike in the one as
in the other. But I recommend it to the Consideration of all of that Party, who
would be accounted sincere and honest, how little it makes for their Reputation
to hold Communion with such, and how much it concerns them to clear themselves
from owning L. Key, and tho^ that abet him, herein, who by this deceitful
Dealing have manifested themselves to be like those ^orkers of Iniquity, whom
the Psalmist mentions, ( Psalm. 28.3.) which speak peace to their Neighbors but
mischief is in their Hearts. Having premised this, I shall now take notice of
some particular passages in L. Key's Paper.

First, I observe the Account I formerly gave of that Scandalous Marriage (of
the Woman that lay with her Father) promoted and highly contended for by J. R.
and C. H. and carried on against the mind of Friends, has stuck so fast on
them ever since, that they have not been able to clear themselves of it, though
they have labored at it with all their might, and used many tricks to do it.
First they gave out that I writ the Certificate, insinuating thereby that I
owned that Marriage as well as they. But I having cleared that point in my
Answer to L. Key's former Paper, and thereby laid their Deceit more open, their
Agent L. Key in his last She^t^ has published a Paper Subscribed by the Woman
her self, which he introduces thus, viz. [ And a Paper is made public, that
was left by the Woman that he has so much reviled, and is not in being to
Answer for her self] Who, thus should read these Words, and knew not the
Business before hand, but would conclude the Woman at the time of her death,
had left this Paper behind her to clear her self of that Report? Whereas in
plain Truth, the Paper there mentioned, was by the Woman her self, delivered to
the Monthly Meeting (before she Married) under pretense ( not of Clearing, but)
of Condemning her self for what she had done; and is the very same Paper I
formerly mentioned in my Book called The Account from Wickham examined, etc. p.
4. The Original of which Paper as delivered by the Woman, I have in my keeping,
written (if I do not mistake the Hand) in C. Harris his own hand Writing, by
whom it was then understood to be drawn up for her, and was so favorably
Worded, that it seemed rather to palliat and excuse her Offense, than condemn
it. Yet that Paper, as L. Key has now Printed it (though C. H. did what he
could to mince the Matter in favor of that bad Woman) plainly prov^s what I
have written of her, acknowledging that it was reported she did Lodge with
(which is a fulle Expression than to lie with, implying a continued use or
course of lying with) her Father, which, as to Matter of Fact, she does not
deny, but alleges it was with no evil intent, etc. And though her Advocate C.
H. in drawing up that Paper for her, to extenuate her Fault, did put in the
Word [ sometimes] and [ in the time of his aged weakness, and when he was sick
unto death] yet it is known the Report was not so: but her lying with her
Father was spoken of by her Neighbors of the world with Abhorrence, and
charged upon her as a Scandal to Religion. And those Grave Women Friends whom
at the Request of the Men's Meeting, the Woman's Meeting sent to Examine her, and
inquire into that Business, made report to the men's Meeting, in as modest terms
as they could, that they found she had behaved her self very immodestly in her
Carriage toward her Father. So that the more these men stir in this foul
Matter, the worse they make both it and themselves to smell.

Another shift they have invented to excuse their altering the Certificate, and
bringing that Marriage among Friends, is, That it was then a time of
Persecution, and the People that owned the House were not willing a Meeting
should be there. This L. Key says he has been told, and this J. Raunce has
written to me and others: But this (so far as I can find) is another d^c^i^ful
Artifice of theirs, quite void of Truth. For I have not only recollected my own
Memory, and inquired of other Friends, but searched also the general Record of
the Sufferings of Friends in this County, and do not find there was any
suffering upon Friends in these Parts, for Meetings either then, or a
considerable time before or after. But since they have affirmed it was a time
of Persecution, let them name, if they can any one Friend that suffered about
that time on the account of Meeting; in this Country. If they do not, it may be
concluded they cannot; and that this pretense (of its being then a time of
Persecution) is but an invented falsehood, to excus^ their dirty Doings.

He complains that Nothing will serve me but an Answer in Print. He mistakes,
if he and they that set him on work, had honesty enough to acknowledge their
faults, that would serve me as well, and themselves, better then any answer he
or they could make. I say [ they that set him on work] because I look on him
but as a Key, and others at Wickham to be the Hands that turn him forward or
backward, at their pleasures, who being conscious to themselves of the badness
of their Cause, are not willing to appear publicly in it themselves, and
therefore have set this Tool to Work, who can blunder on at any rate, as little
regarding to write Truth, as knowing how to write common Sense. In which
respect I think it, I confess an Unhappiness to me, to have to do with such an
one: For one had better deal with ten wise men, than one that thinks himself
so, and is nothing less.

They are angry that, while their abusive and slanderous Papers will not go
off, unless they be given away, my just Defenses are Printed and sold without
Charge to me. This made I. R. and C. H. formerly inquire, whether they were not
paid for out of the public Stock; and this makes L. Key now say of me, If he
did pay for what he does out of his own Pocket, I am ready to think we should
not hear so often from him. This is neither Christian nor Manly; but silly and
Cowardly: for since they hear no of^ner from me than they off (...) Truth,
Friends and me (what I have written to them being only Defensive) so far as I
remember) it seems they would be glad that I were disabled from answering them,
that so they might at pleasure rail, revile, abuse, reproach, defame, belly,
slander Truth, Friends and me, in Print, and hope to (...) secure from being
Answered, at least by me. How much this makes for their Credit, let them (...)
and the Reader Judge. Yet let them not deceive themselves herein, but know
assuredly (...) were I (as they with) incapable of Answering them, through
inability to pay for Printing, (...) should they not thereby escape unreproved.

In my last, I charged L. Key with having ch^ged the express and plain Words of
my Book, and thereby falsified the intent and meaning of them. As that was too
manifest to be denied, so he had not honesty enough to confess his fault, nor
ingenuity enough to be ashamed of it. But in his last paper, not attempting to
clear himself, nor answer my Charge, but thinking to wind himself off by a
Wile, she has run himself into a most foolish Absurdity. He says, The
Certificate (of that Marriage before mentioned bears date the 12th. of the 1st.
Month, in the year 1677. And a few lines after, says, The old man that set up
the Woman's Meeting (so scornfully and contemptibly does he think and write of
that honorable Servant of God G. F.) did come to Reading to endeavor it in
the 6th. Month in the year 1681, Then he adds, Observe, this was above four
years before that Marriage that T. E. has made all this Clamor about. Is not
this a rare Accomptant^ who has made the year 81. to be 4. years before the
year 77? This is so obvious an Error, that as ^^one but such a Fumbler would
have made it, so had he not been blind he might have seen and corrected it. But
he, being blinded with envy, and thinking to twist himself out of the Toil he
had run himself to before, plunged on Headlong into this Brake, without fear or
wit, Consideration or common Sense. This one would think were enough to have
drawn blushes into the Cheeks of any one, that deserved the name of Man. But so
stupid was he, that, thinking he had gained some Advantage by the Project, he
falls to improving it, saying of me thus [ so he was right in saying, it was
before any Marriage had gone to the Women's Meetings.] This he infers from his
notable Discovery, that 81. was 4. years before 77. but (not to let his folly
excuse his falsehood) it I was right in saying as I did, let him and all that
abet him, consider how wrong he was in altering those Words of mine, and
instead thereof, affirming I said, It was before the Women's Meetings were set
up. A sort of Forgery, the guilt whereof I still charge upon him.

Notwithstanding this ridiculous blunder that he has made, so void of sense he
is, that, as if he had exposed some weakness on my part, he scornfully reflects
this sentence on me, Great men are not always wise: Not understanding the
Proverb that says ( Nemo mortalium omnibus horis sa^it) No man is always wise.
But (...)! there is a sort of Great men that are never wise (never were, nor
ever are like to be) and they that know L. Key, know he is none of the least
men, either in Person or Conceit: He reflects on the Approvers of my Work: but
I think the Approvers of his will get little Credit by it, unless he mend his
hand at it. And indeed it is an Argument of judicial blindness, and great
Infatuation of mind, in him and them that promote his Paper, that they should
spread it about as they do, without seeing the shameful blunder he (...) made
in it. He adds another Text out of Job, which begins thus, Upright men shall be
astonished (...) this, and ends thus, I cannot find one wise man among you.
Job. 17.8, 10. But surely if he and his (...), do but once as clearly prove, as
he has confidently asserted, that 81. was 4. years before (...) men that hear
it, will be astonished at that, and I shall be forced to acknowledge, there are
many wise men among them such as they be.

Three great Instances he has already given; on^ of his Dishonesty, in altering
my Words; another of his Hypocrisy, in spreading a Paper of Prop^sals for
Reconciliation and Peace, and at the same time printing another Paper to renew
Contention and War; A third, of his Folly in computing the times. Now, to
manifest that his Malice is equal to the rest, he here repeats his former
Slander about my having suffered my Father to want^ Which having in his former
Sheet delivered upon an [ it has been said] I returned upon himself, showing
how basely I had been abused in that case by C. Harris, and another before, who
when publicly called to Account for it, slunk back and durst not undertake to
make good their Charge (...) Whereupon I laid it upon L. Key to name whom he
had heard say it, to free himself from being ^eputed the Author as well as
Publisher of that envious slander. Which as it behoved him to have done, ^o I
conclude he would have done it, had he been able to have named any. But though
he (...) renews his slander, yet he names no Author of it; but says, it has
been so said by those the (...) etc. (...) his Proof that it has been so said,
is saying again, that it has been so said, (...) depends only on his credit,
who in this case, deserves none.

He cavils also at my Fathers being buried in that part of the ground, where
(he says) they did use to Bury Strangers and Vagabounds. Had not he and his
imployers, been Strangers to Christianity and Civil^y, they might have employed
themselves better than to ride so many miles as some of them have done (perhaps
20. or more) to see if they could pick up^ Stone at my Fathers Grave to throw
at me. I confess I am not so well acquainted with the Grave Yard, as to
understand the difference of Places in it, or whether some parts of it be more
consecrated than others: Yet methinks, had he and his Informers remembered their
former Principles they should not have quarrelled with me for that. However,
the Place for the Grave was not of my appointing: for, being prevented from
being at the Burial, by a Message my Father received in his Sickness, that my
Sister lay then sick in London, near un^o death, after I had waited upon my
Father until he had finished his life, and given direction for his In^erment, I
hasted up to my Sister at London, as thinking I might be more serviceable to
the Living, than to the Dead, and knew not in what part of the Ground the Grave
was made, till at my return from London, I went thither to discharge the Charge
of his Sickness and Funeral. This some of these men knew long since, which (had
they been men of common Ingenuity) might have pre^ted, as it may now Answer
that other idle cavil about my not being present when my Father was laid in the
Ground.

To conclude, as I neither need nor desire favor, nor expect Justice from men
so filled with Envy, and devouted to Mischief: So I am glad that after all the
pains they have taken, their running and riding, traversing the Countries, from
Wickham, Reading, and other parts, viewing the place, visiting my Fathers
Grave, (above seven years after his death) not in love to him, but hatred to me
(even J. R. himself, going to the Grave, who is old enough, one would think, to
have been wiser, and has known that which would have made him better) examining
Persons, Sifting matters, asking many cunning and tempting Questions of the
people of the World, to draw forth if they could, some matter of complaint
against me, yea provoking (not to say suborning) some to pretend they had
showed kindness to my Father, that they might thereby either oblige me to
reward ^ch, (for nothing) or upbraide me with ungratitude, if I did not (while
I not suspecting such ^ly baseness among them sat innocent^ still) they have
not been able to pick or rais^ up any thing, that might answer their Pains, or
gratify their envy, but instead of defaming me (which they designed) they have
sufficiently defamed themselves, in discovering so ill a mind. To whom yet, for
all their evil Will, and evil Acting toward me, I wish nothing but Good. And
though I cannot ^y of some of them (as our Lord said of others of old) Father
forgive them, they I now not what they (...), (...) persuaded that most of them
that have a hand in this Work do sin against knowledges as (...) they do evil:
yet, in pity to them, I can, and do (...) say, Fath^, if their day (...), give
them Repentance, and forgive them.

(...).

LONDON, Printed and sold by T. Soul, at the Crooked-Billet in (...).


