Enchiridion Legum: A DISCOURSE CONCERNING The Beginnings, Nature, Difference,
Progress and Use, OF LAWS in GENERAL; And in Particular, OF THE Common and
Municipal LAWS of ENGLAND.

LONDON, Printed by Elizabeth Flesher, John Streater, and Henry Twyford,
Assigns of Richard Atkins and Edw. Atkins, Esquires.

And are to be sold by G. S. H. T. J. P. W. P. J. B. T. B. R. P. C. W. T. D. W.
J. C. H. J. L. J. A. J. W. and J. P. M DC LXX III.

THE HEADS Of the several CHAPTERS Contained in this TREATISE.
CHAP. I. THE Definition, Etymology, Division, Perfection and Imperfection of
Laws: What is required to the making of them, and of their necessity. page 1.
CHAP. II. The differences betwixt the Laws of Nature, of Nations, the Civil and
Municipal Laws. page 16. CHAP. III. Of the grounds of the Laws of England, and
how they do differ from other Laws. page 31. CHAP. IV. An answer to certain
Objections usually made against the Laws of England. page 57. CHAP. V. Of the
Books written of the Laws of England, whereby the Knowledge thereof is Chiefly
obtained. page 83. CHAP. VI. Of Estates allowed by the Law of England. page 89.
CHAP. VII. Of Assurances and Conveyances which grow out of these Estates by the
Common Law. page 95. CHAP. VIII. Of Actions and of their Trials according to
the Common-laws of England. page 103. CHAP. IX. Of Trials allowed by the Laws
of England. page 106. CHAP. X. Of some things in the Ministers and proceedings
of our Laws conceived worthy to be reformed. page 111.

Enchiridion Legum.
CHAP. 1. The definition, etymology, division, perfection, and imperfection of
Laws: What is required to the making of them, and of their necessity.
MEaning to treat first of Laws in general, and next of the Common or Municipal
Laws of this Kingdom; I conceive it cannot be unprofitable for an Introduction
unto this intendment, to set down the definition of a Law: whereof Justinian
has delivered three, derived out of Demosthenes, Chrysippus, and Papinian.

One is, that a Law is said to be of the Gods, a decree of Wise men, a
correction of offenses committed, either wittingly or ignorantly, a Covenant of
the whole Commonwealth with one accord, after the direction whereof every
Citizen ought to order his life. The other is, that the Law Divine and Humane:
That is, a Commander, a Guide, and a Square both of good and bad, enjoining
that which is fit, and forbidding the contrary. The one of these, is rather a
description, than a definition; and it describes rather the Natural, than the
Positive Law: And the other is fitting rather to an Orator, than a Lawyer. We
may therefore let them pass, and proceed to the third; which Jason observes,
that the Law is a general Commandment in three respects: either because it is
founded upon a general Authority; or because it belongs to, and binds all;
or else because it is intended general for the profit of all. Cicero defines
the Plato says, that Therefore to conclude; humane

If any do desire to know from The derivation of the word Lex, which we call
Law.
whence this word Lex (which in English we call Law) is derived: Some will say
with Isidorus, that it has his etymology, a legendo; because

Others will derive the word Lex, a ligando; for as much as Divines hold, that
men are tied in foro conscientiae, to the observation of the Laws, as well as
they are bound under penalty to observe the same: Yet Cicero concurreth with
the first derivation, (but with a farther-fetch'd reason than the former) quod
Lex idem sit, quod legendi, hoc est eligendi regula; the reason is, nam regula
dirigendo, docet eligere. It may yet well enough agree unto both, for one
says, Habet Lex quod sit Regula, and quod sit obligatoria praeceptio. How
soever these derivations of the word Lex, do stand false or true, it makes not
much matter, so we leave them as more Grammatical and Conjectural, than certain
and infallible.

The word Lex, which in English we A double signification of this word Law.
call Law, has in our language a double signification, or is taken two ways;
for it is taken both for that which the Latins term Lex, and for that which
they call Juris prudentia; the one being the Art of the other: For Lex is the
rule, and measure of things to be done, and to be left undone; but Juris
prudentia, is the knowledge and method of that rule: as Justice is the
Execution of them both, which has his force in giving to every man that which
is his in praemio, paena, and debito. So then in the first sense the word Law
is properly applied; but in the second, it is somewhat largely extended; yet
use and common opinion has so accepted it.

This Law has for his subject and object the Rule of all Divine and Humane
things, (except God himself) who is the great Rule-giver and Lawmaker; and he
being Liberum agens, is subject to no Law; but his own Will is the perfect Law
of Justice, which is the Fountain from whence all Laws are derived, to all
things in Heaven and in Earth.

Law has a threefold respect, and is divided according to the diversity of
things to which this great Lawgiver does dispense Law: They are of three kinds,
to wit, the Natural, Sensible, and Reasonable agents. To the first are referred
the Elements, and all compounded things without life: They are guided by that
Law which was imposed on them at the beginning, and they do never break it. The
second, which is the Sensible agents, are all living Beasts, which are guided
not with so forcible a Law of necessity as the first; for they are not ordained
to keep their certain and settled stations, but they do follow their own kind
and appetite: wherein yet they do not transgress the Laws of Nature. The third
kind of agents, called Reasonable, are Men and Angels, and they at first were
created with a possibility of performing or not performing the Laws imposed on
them.

According to these three forenamed A threefold Law.
Subjects of Law, there is a threefold Law (as some say) given unto them; that
is, the Divine, Natural, and Humane: The first delivered by God, and written by
the direction of his Holy Spirit in the Old and New Testament. The second,
stamped and as it were engraved by him in men's hearts. The third, derived out
of the two first; and devised for Government and Society amongst men.

Some others do divide Laws into four parts, that is, the Law of Providence,
Antiquus dierum, has pre-ordained all things before their beginning, whereof
St. Paul speaks, when he says, that Deus voeat ea quae non sunt, tanquam ea
quae sunt. The second is, the Divine Law Jeremiah speaks by the Spirit, and
as in the Person of God, Dabo Legem meam, in visceribus eorum scribam eam. Of
the third, which Natural Law, the Apostle Paul makes mention, Gentes quae
legem non habent, naturaliter quae legis sunt faciunt. Of the fourth, which is
the Humane Law, (warranted by Gods Word) the Apostle Paul likewise speaks;
Omnis anima potestatibus sublimioribus subdita a sit: So that all these Laws
have their warrant from Gods Word; save the Eternal Law, which was his will and
wisdom, being from the beginning before any Law was written, or could be
divulged.

Therefore next to the Eternal Law, The excellency of the Divine Law.
the Divine Law springing from the same, has his place and pre-eminence,
before all other in Dignity and Antiquity; because from it all other good Laws
have their derivation and foundation, or else are squared by it; and for that
it suffers no mutation in it self: In amplitude, because it affords the
self-same Rules and measure to all Men, and Nations, without difference of
Persons, Place, and Time, or any other such like circumstances by which other
Laws are often altered. And of this Divine Law, the Decalogue or Ten
Commandments, delivered by God unto Moses on the Mount, and by him to Gods
people, is a Compendium, or full Epitome of all the rest; as unto which the
rest may be reduced, as Conclusions drawn out of certain Principles.

The Law Divine delivered by God The Law of Moses, or of the Old Testament,
more ancient than any humane Law.
unto Moses, is in Antiquity before all Humane Laws: for though Pliny goes
about to prove, that Ceres was the first gave Laws unto men, and as others
attribute that honor unto Radamanthus; yet Josephus writing against Apion,
directly proves, that Moses was the first did promulgate unto men, the Laws
delivered unto him from God, and that long before those Lawgivers, whom
Isidorus names, as Pharonius to the Grecians, Mercurius Trismegistus to the
Egyptians, Solon to the Athenians, Lycurgus to the Lacedaemonians, Numa Pompil.
to the Romans.

The Law of Nature, is next to the The Law of Nature next to the Divine Law.
Divine Law, in excellency, antiquity, immutability, and severity: because it
began with man's Creation, it never changes, being nothing else (as one
defines it) according to the part of the Law of Nature which is called
secondary, (whereof we shall have cause to speak somewhat in the next Chapter)
but, dictamen rationis in rationabili creatura; therefore this Law of Nature
secondary, is the effect of Gods Law in the mind of man, and the impression
thereof; as a step in dust, is the effect of the foot which first framed it:
And this secondary Law of Nature, is in some sort contrary to that first Law,
which St. Paul calls the Law of the Members, being a natural inclination to
sensuality.

After these Laws follows the Humane or Positive Laws of men, which being the
prescript and particular rules by which the actions of men should be reduced
and conducted to their due ends, and this grounded on the Eternal, Divine, and
Natural Laws, (mentioned before) but yet still measured, and molded by the
reason, invention, and disposition of men, which is most commonly variable and
diverse; no marvel then, if also the Laws of men (settled upon such slippery
foundation of different reasons and affections) be also changeable, and subject
to imperfection; whereof Justinian in his Preface to the Digests, does render
the like reason: says he, Sed quia divinae res quidem perfectissimae sunt;
humani vero juris conditio semper in infinitum decurrit, and nihil est in eo,
quod stare possit perpetuo: multas enim formas natura novas edere deproperat.
No Humane Laws can be made absolutely perfect, no more than other Arts and
Sciences can be perfected by men; since Art is the imitator of Nature, and even
Nature her self is imperfect in her works. The conclusion therefore is short,
and certain; That those Humane Laws tend most (although hardly can they attain)
to perfection, which do square most, and most depend on the Divine, Eternal,
and Natural Laws. And on the contrary, those positive Laws of men, are most
corrupt and unprofitable, which swerve most from them.

Since we see what Laws are perfectest, and which are subject to most
imperfection, let us a little consider what conditions are required in Humane
Laws to help them toward perfection: They by Isidorus are described to be
these; that is, that they be honest, Certain conditions requisite to bring Laws
toward perfection.
just, possible, according to nature and custom, convenient and agreeable to
the time and place; that they be necessary and profitable, manifest and
perspicuous, (lest by their obscurity the uncircumspect be intrapped) that they
be not made for private profit, but for public utility: Others require fewer
(yet as effectual) qualities in Laws, that is, to contain honesty, justice,
possibility, convenience; for the end of Humane Laws is, that by the dread of
their punishment innocence may be safe in the midst of wicked men.

There are also certain habilities requisite Certain habilities necessary for
Lawmakers.
in those who are Lawmakers, amongst which the Schoolmen do chiefly esteem
these three parts or potential faculties of prudence, Ebulia, Synesis,
Providentia: The first is, the faculty of Counselling, and advising aright: The
second is, the habit of judging soundly, (not so much the Cases of Law already
made, as the Considerations of Laws to be made:) The last, which is Providence,
being a foresight of future events; this has two parts, Circumspection, and
Caution: the one being the consideration of Circumstances, lest any thing be
defective in the provision of the Law; the other searches into the
Incommodities and Inconveniences whereto such Laws (or they for whose safeguard
it is made) may be exposed.

The Philosopher requires to the What the Philosopher requires in making of
Laws.
making of good Laws, Authority, Reason, general Justice, which is honesty, and
Agreement of the People. By the first the Lawmakers does bind, by the second he
does know, by the third he does desire to make such Laws as shall be possible,
and profitable, not for himself only, or for a few, but for all, or at the
least the greatest number; for Suprema Lex, Salus Populi. The notions, and
general rules of Nature do teach to shun that which is hurtful; but where the
Naturalist or Moralist does not persuade, the Politician and Lawmakers does
enforce. The Moralist does indeed prescribe general Rules, and Precepts what
ought to be done: But does not show so particularly, how it should be done. The
Rules of good and evil prescribed by Nature, and set down by the Moralist, are
by them both enjoined to be practiced, by and to our selves; but by the
Politician, and Lawgiver, those general Rules are applied and accommodated to
the particular Laws of each Nation, to be fashioned not only for our selves,
but for others. Therefore it is aptly said, Vbi Ethicus desinit, ibi incipit
Jurisperitus; as in Nature, Vbi physicus definit, incipit medicus.

Though these positive and politic The necessity and utility of Laws.
Laws of Men cannot attain to absolute perfection, yet that they are of evident
utility and urgent necessity, I suppose no man doubts. For both nature and
necessity (the two raisers of Sciences and Invention) have as it were conspired
to direct, and require the use of these Humane Laws; because as it is natural
unto men to desire and to like that which is others, and yet to dislike and
abhor other men; from whence come questions, controversies, quarrels,
opposition, and defense: so out of these does arise an inevitable necessity, to
lay certain limits (which are Laws and Civil Constitutions) by which these
inordinate desires, and designs of men (being full of disturbance) should be
bounded; and without which, as the appetites and affections of men are
restless, and of themselves unrestrained; so except they were confined and
restrained by positive Laws, the lawless wills of men would make society
uncomfortable and unsafe.

CHAP. II. The differences betwixt the Laws of Nature, of Nations, the Civil
and Municipal Laws.
HAving said somewhat of the definition and nature of Laws, (especially of the
Eternal, Divine, and Natural Law) it now follows, that we should descend to
discover the differences betwixt the Humane Laws of several sorts. These, by
some, are divided into three branches, (from whence it is supposed that all
other particular positive Laws do spring and grow:) The first is the Law
Natural, (whereof there has been a little spoken before) this is defined, to
be that which Nature has taught all living Creatures: The second is the Law of
Nations, which is received amongst all Countries and People: The last is the
Civil Law, which every free Commonwealth ordains for it self.

Caius, a Civil Lawyer, divides A division of Laws into two parts.
these Laws but in two parts; that is, the Natural, and Civil Law: for some
think, that whatsoever Law is Natural, the same is also the Law of Nations; and
so on the other side interchangeably. The reason is thus; What else is the Law
of Nations, A question concerning the former division.
but that which natural Reason has taught and persuaded all men, to be equally
good for all? So that it is called National, or the Law of Nations, because all
Countries have received it: Natural, because it had its beginning from natural
Reason.

For the deciding of which doubt, The Law of Nature twofold.
it is to be understood, that the Law of Nature is twofold, Primary, and
Secondary; the one being that which Nature (or rather the God of Nature)
teaches all living Creatures; the other, that which Nature teaches Men. The
first, called the instinct of Nature; whereby it is common to all living
Creatures, by the instinct of Nature, to procreate, and to seek the
preservation of their own kind; to avoid that which they find to present death
and danger; to repeal force with force; to seek things needful for sustenance,
and the like. This in a general sense, is called Jus primaevum, or the primary
Law of Nature: And this does differ from the Law of Nations, which is a Law
proper only unto Men, and not to other Creatures. But the Secondary Law of
Nature, or of God, (for both is one and the same) contains and comprehends
the Precepts of honesty, which God and Nature has infused into Man's heart, at
his Creation; given only unto Mankind, and unto him from his beginning; as, to
yield Religious reverence to the Supreme and Divine power, to exhibit love and
duty toward our Parents, and the like. This latter part of the Law of Nature,
does answer and concur with some part of the Law of Nations, which likewise
(as the former) is twofold, that is to The Law of Nations twofold.
say, Primary, and Secondary. The Primary Law of Nations is that which natural
Reason has insigned all Nations, (as has been expressed in the Secondary Law
of Nature) therefore some have termed the Secondary Law of Nature, the ancient
Law of Nations. But there is a Secondary Law of Nations, which is no part of
the Primary or Secondary Law of Nature; this comes not by nature, but by a
Judgment gathered out of experience and discourse, thereby collecting what is
commodious for common society, and equally behoofeful to all Nations; and this
is not ingraffed in nature at first, but gotten and gathered by use and
necessity, which makes thereof a Law: as, to punish offenders and wrong-doers,
which is the first head of the Secondary Law of Nature, yet not a Rule or Law
begotten or bred by Nature. But when the perverse nature of Man could not
contain it self in temperancy, then wrongs offered, public necessity required,
that they should be punished who would hurt others, and trouble the common
peace and society of Men; lest the like occasion of wrong doing should grow
general, and so in the end hurtful to all: So by this Secondary Law of Nations,
grew the division of Goods, the distinction of Properties, free Commerce
betwixt Nations, common Contracts, and the like. By this we see, that the
Secondary The secondary Law of Nations no part of the Law of Nature.
Law of Nations is no part of the Law of Nature, and differing also from the
Primary Law of Nations it self. Now let us see next, how the Civil Law
differs or is distinguished from these Laws of Nature and of Nations.

The Civil Law (or the appellation The name of the Civil Law taken two ways.
thereof) is taken in two several significations; for either it is in a strict
signification, accounted particularly and only for the Roman Law, first set
down by Papirius, Papinian, Vlpian, and others, and afterward collected into
the Institutes, Pandects, or Digests, Novels Constitutions, and the Feuda, by
Justinian's commandment: or else in a more proper sense, it is accepted for the
particular Laws which every Kingdom and Commonwealth does constitute for it
self. And although Caius, with other learned Civilians, do confess, that the
Laws which every City does make for it self, be properly entitled Jus Civil,
quasi jus proprium ipsius Civitatis; yet the Romans having gotten under their
subjection the greatest part of the known World, gave Laws unto all Nations
Conquered by them, which by a kind of Excellency they termed Jus nostrum, or
Jus Civitatis. Therefore Justinian, after he had caused the Digests to be
compiled, commanded his Judges, that these Laws should be used in all
Countries; and that his Pretors of the East, of Illyria, Lybia, and other
parts, should put them in practice: Whereby it came to pass, that the Roman or
Imperial Laws were generally called the Civil Laws, and have for the most part
(in most places) been ever since so observed. Whereas otherwise, in proper
sense and signification, the particular Laws of each free City and State, ought
to be called their Civil Laws. But both these, that is, the Roman and Imperial
Civil Laws, and The Civil and Municipal Laws do not wholly differ from, or
depend on the Laws of Nature and Nations.
the particular Civil or Municipal Laws of every City, Commonweal, or free
State, do not wholly differ from the Laws of Nature and of Nations, nor wholly
depend on them; in this, because the Laws of Nature and of Nations are
permanent and perpetual, being always the same without any alteration: But the
other, that is to say, the Roman Civil Laws, have been subject to many The
Roman Laws subject to sundry mutations.
mutations, alterations, and abrogations: So likewise all other Civil and
Municipal Laws, have been, and are, according to the variation of Times, of
States, and of sundry circumstances.

For example, in the Roman Laws, The Laws of the Kings of Rome.
whilst the Roman State was under the Government of Kings, they made such Laws
as they thought fit for that time, the present state of the City, and their own
purposes, which were all digested into one Volume by Sextus Papirius, (as is
recorded by Pomponius:) But the force of these Laws ended with their Reign; and
as soon as the Commonwealth was transported into a New State, at the first they
could not frame any certain or constant Laws; for the Commons and Gentry
opposing each other for The Laws of the Consuls and Commons of Rome.
twenty years together, such Laws as were then made, did rather seem to cross
and contend one with the other, than to concur in any mutual harmony for the
good of the Commonwealth. For the Consuls made Laws according to the minds of
the Senate, and the Tribunes of the people according to their affections;
until they agreed to send certain Legates unto Athens, and other Cities of
Greece, (famous at that time for good Laws and Government) that they might be
better pleased with Foreign Laws, who envied and held not their own
indifferent: Which done, they drew those Laws brought The Laws of the 12 Tables
fetched from Greece to Rome.
from thence into Ten Tables, to which they added two more of their own; these
they called the Twelve Tables, (being the grounds of the Roman Laws:) But yet
two years after these Laws were brought to Rome, and established there, the
Authority of the Decemviri (upon which the force of these Laws did depend)
ceased and was extinguished, by the lust and licentious life of Appius
Claudius, being one of them. And although those Laws of the Twelve Tables,
continued afterward as grounds of other Laws, yet were they still added to,
and altered as the Roman State did change. For when The Emperors of Rome make
and change Laws at their pleasure.
the Emperors set up their Sovereign and supreme Authority, they made such
Laws, Edicts, and Constitutions, as were answerable to their own ends, the
succeeding Emperor often disannulling what his predecessor had ordained. And as
they abrogated the Laws of others, so did they not long uphold their own; For
who almost was there amongst them, that did not change their own Constitutions?
Besides, as the state of the Empire The admixture of diverse Laws in the City of
Rome.
grew greater, they were forced to alter their Laws, with admixture of their
Decrees of the Senate, Statutes of the Commons, Ordinances of the Magistrates.
As the Pretorian Laws (called Jus honorarium) which were of great force for the
time, but of no long continuance; for they were founded upon the Authority of
the Pretors, and did often end with their years. Thus the Roman Laws remained
in much uncertainty, till the Reign of Adrian the Emperor, who with consent of
the Senate, did cause these Laws to be made perpetual; whence grew the name of
Edictum Adrian's Edictum perpetuum infringed.
perpetuum. But yet in diverse succeeding Ages, sundry of these Laws were also
abrogated; and even the Laws compiled in the Pandects and Codes, by Justinian's
commandment, were some of them by him altered, and many taken away in a latter
Book called the Authenticks. All which is alleged to show the instability,
change and uncertainty of the Roman Laws. The like might be said of the Laws of
other Nations, which have been found uncertain in their grounds, and unstable
in their continuance.

Secondly, We may see that there is difference betwixt the Civil Roman Laws,
and the Municipal Laws of other States: For though the Roman Imperial (called
the Civil Laws) do bear much sway in most Countries of Christendom, and have
place in All Countries have some particular Laws and Ordinances, different from
the Civil Roman Laws.
their proceedings of Justice, (but least of any place within this Kingdom of
England) yet have all Countries their several Customs, Statutes, and particular
Ordinances, discrepant in diverse points from the Rules of the Roman Imperial
Civil Laws: which is no marvel, since in the Digests there is delivered as from
Papinian, some distinction betwixt the Roman Civil Laws, and the Pretorian Laws
made in the same City; For it is said there, that the Civil Laws did consist of
the Statutes of the People, the Ordinances of the Senate, and Decrees of the
Princes, with the Authority of Wise men: But the Pretorian Laws were those,
which the Pretors did introduce to supply, to help, or to correct the Civil
Law. So is there alleged in the same Digests (out of Paulus) another division
of Laws: The first is the Law of Nature, the second is the Civil Law; the first
is freed from Injustice, the second is deemed profitable to all, or the
greatest part of the City; and there is added, Jus The Pretorian Law differing
from, and correcting the Civil Law.
honorarium, or the Pretorian Law, as if it were no part of the Civil Law;
wherein it is said, the Praetor does give Law, though he does determine
unjustly; having relation not unto that which the Praetor does, but to that
which is convenient for him to do. So that it is not to be wondered, that the
Municipal Laws of every Country, do differ from the Civil or Roman Law; or that
the Civil Roman Law has not his full force in all Countries, or that it is not
the only Law that governs in any Country: Because the City of Rome it self,
did admit some other Law to be administered within the City, than that which was
called and accounted their own Civil Law, or Jus Civil. And where there was
question made before, concerning the Civil Law, whether the same were only the
Roman Laws, or as well other Municipal Laws? Some Civilians do distinguish A
division of the Civil Law.
them into two parts; the Roman Laws they call, Jus Civil commune; and the
other, Jus Civil particulare: To the first they referr also some Municipal
Laws, especially those Constitutions of the Empire, since it was translated to
Germany, as the Aurea Bulla of Charles the 4th. Also the Constitutions and
Edicts of The Municipal or Civil Laws of Germany.
the German Emperors, in their Diets or Parliaments, which are reckoned and
referred to the common Civil Laws, because they are ordained by Authority of
the Emperor; and yet they are in true construction but particular Civil or
Municipal Laws, because they bind none but such as are subject to the Empire,
or to those places of the Empire for which they are made, and which do submit
themselves thereto.

So has the Kingdom of France The Municipal Laws of France.
certain particular Civil or Municipal Laws, made in their Parliaments, (which
were anciently the Councils of their Kings:) but when the Kings of France did
separate their Councils of State from those Parliaments, yet the Parliaments
have been held in certain Cities of France, (as says Brison President of the
Parliament of Paris) at certain times of the year; The first and principal held
at Paris, established by Philip the Fair, or as some say by Lewis Huttin his
Son; the second at Tholose, for Languedoe; the third at Bourdeaux, for
Aquitain; the fourth at Grenoble, for Daulphine; the fifth at Dijon, for
Burgoigne; the sixth at Rouen, for Normandy; the seventh at Aix, for Provence;
the eighth for Bretaign, instituted by Henry the 2d. Anno 1553.

They have also Municipal and particular The Municipal Laws of Spain.
Civil Laws ordained for the Kingdom of Spain, as those set down by Alphonsus
the 9th. And the like for that and other Countries are extant and in use.

The Kingdom of Scotland has (as The Municipal Laws of Scotland and of
England, not altogether different.
this Realm of England) several and particular Municipal Laws, differing from
the Roman Civil Laws: As for the Laws of Scotland, they are not so far
different from the Laws of this Kingdom of England, as diverse do conceive; and
that the Laws of Scotland are not altogether unlike these of England, (but in
many points do concur with them) is not improbable: For that there is a Book,
concerning The Law Book of Regia Majestas in Scotland, like to Glanvil's Book
of the English Laws.
the ancient Laws of that Kingdom, termed Regia Majestas; which, as some
Students (having read the same) do affirm, (and as it is set forth in the
Printers Epistle to Glanvil's Book) do agree much, and in many places word for
word with the said Glanvil's Book, and does often vouch him: So that it is
supposed the ancient Laws of both these Realms did then agree, and do yet in
most points; which have not been altered by Statute since in either of these
Realms. Also King James in one of his Speeches (made to the Knights and
Burgesses of the lower House of Parliament) did pronounce and declare, that the
Trial in the Chancery of Scotland, was brought from this of England, showing
the time, Author, and occasion thereof. Therefore it An opinion that the Laws
of both these Kingdoms, may in main points be conveniently made all one.
may be conceived, that there is not such great discrepancy or contrariety
betwixt the Laws of both these Kingdoms; but that by due examination it will be
found, that there is, or at least may be, a consonance betwixt them in many, if
not in most points. But for the Laws of England, how they do differ from the
Civil and other Laws, shall be showed in the next ensuing Chapter.

CHAP. III. Of the grounds of the Laws of England, and how they do differ from
other Laws.
OUr Laws of England do differ, as in name, so in diverse other circumstances,
considerations and conditions, from the Laws of other Kingdoms and Commonweals.

First, for the name; they receive a common appellation of the Common Laws of
England; a name scarce given to the Laws of any other Nation: Why our Laws are
called the Common Laws of England.
Therefore whence it received this denomination of the Common Law, may breed
some question. Some say, that it is called the Common distinguished from the
Common Law. Some others suppose, that it is called

Howsoever it may be a question, how at the first the name of our Common Law
came, or how the same may differ from the Statute Laws, or from any other Law
allowed within this Kingdom; Yet it is certain that the The municipal Laws of
England is the most proper Title of our Laws.
Term and title of the municipal Laws of this land, is both proper to our Laws
and does include all our Laws, as well the Statute as Common Law. First, it is
proper in that our Laws of this land are peculiar to this Kingdom and the
territories thereof (and thereto adjacent) being not elsewhere in use or
allowed. Now for the Municipal Laws of this Kingdom (under which title the
special and particular kinds of our Laws of England may The division of our
Laws of England into several parts and grounds.
be most aptly comprehended) sundry persons have made several Divisions
thereof: Some have divided them into Customs, which is like to the Civilians
Jus privatum, and into Statute Law; others into Common Law, Customs and
Statute Law; This last Division consisting of three Another division of the
grounds and parts of the Laws of England.
parts Seingerman (in his fundamental partition of our Laws) doubleth, by
adding thereto another foundation and division of our Laws, which is the Law of
God, the Law of Reason, and certain principles or maxims which (with the three
former) he makes as several grounds of our Laws of England. They which stand
to the first bipartite division of our Laws, (setting them to stand only as it
were upon two legs) do conjoyn Custom with our Common Law; for they say, what
is any Custom allowed by the Laws of the land but the Common Law of the land?
since that the Judges (to whom delegation is made for the Whether Customs
allowed for lawful be ground, or made parts of our Law.
determination of civil Causes) do admit those Customs to be pleaded before
them, and do give judgment for the same: yet the difference between them will
be; first, that these Customs do not equally extend throughout the Realm, and
therefore if they be incorporated into our Laws, they are but private, and not
our Common Laws: Secondly the Judges do ex officio take notice of the one, but
not without a special pleading of the other: So it may well be said in some
sort that Customs allowed for Laws, or for lawful, may be made some part of
our Laws, but yet I can hardly allow them the honor, to be made grounds of our
Laws, unless they be first reduced to certainties, and so be made as it were
maxims. So are general received opinions by Custom, continuance, and
approbation of authority and Judgment, made Common Laws; whereto some add this
rule, Communis error facit Legem. As for the other addition of St. Germans St.
Germans division of the grounds of our Laws not allowed.
sextuple division of our Laws of England, although he has therein showed some
learning (yet without offense be it spoken) he has mustered together diverse
things different in name, but the same in nature. For what is the Law of
reason, other than the Law of God (if it be rightly understood) because what
proceeds from reason (not darkened with the clouds of error,) but such things
as were charactered in the soul by him, which first framed it, according to his
likeness? And says Seneca, quid est ratio? he answers himself, naturae
imitatio. Therefore that our Laws of England are composed and wholly framed on
the Laws of God is more than may be said of them, or of any other humane
positive laws; but that they do depend on them, and not mainly differ from them
may be well and truly justified.

Now for as much as there has been mention made of three principal parts of
our municipal Laws, let us a little take some particular and several view of
them what they are: they are said to be the Common Law, the Statute The
particular parts of our Law examined.
Law, and Customs allowed for law.

The first, which is the Common Law of this land, consists partly of the
collection of such laws as were allowed by King William the Conqueror, What
Laws King William the Conqueror allowed in England.
who neither wholly introduced his Norman Laws, nor altogether allowed of the
former, but out of the best parts of either, took that which was fittest for
the time, and present government. The former laws which he allowed of, were
such of the Saxons and Danish laws, as he found fittest for the time.

And first of the Saxons, who came into this Kingdom about Anno 449. whose King
Ethelbert of Kent did constitute (as Beda says) decreta judiciorum, Some part
of the Saxon and Danish Laws allowed by the Conqueror.
cum consilio sapientum, quae conscripta (says he) Anglorum sermon, hactenus
habentur and observantur. The succeeding Saxon Kings did in their
Wintenagemotes or conventus sapientum (which were in the nature of Parliaments)
make diverse constitutions cum consilio sapientum and senatorum, cum Episcopis;
as that Learned and industrious gentleman Mr. Lambert affirms, who compiled
some of them into one book, as the Laws of Inas, Alfred, Athelstan, Atheldred,
Canutus, Edgar, Edward the Confessor, and others; out of which the Conqueror
took such as he thought convenient, whereof some are enumerated by the
forenamed Mr. Lambert, and by Hoveden. Also Gervasius Tilburiensis, he The
Conquerors allowance of the former Laws.
says of the Conqueror: decrevit subjectum sibi populum viri scripto,
legibusque subjicere: propositis igitur Legibus Anglicanis, secundum
tripartitam earum distinctionem, hoc est Merchenleg, Daneleg, and West
Saxenleg; quasdam reprobavit, quasdam autem approbans, etc. The first part of
the Common Law of England.
So then we see that King William the Conqueror took some of the ancient Laws
of this land, which is the first part of our Common Law of England. The residue
which came for a supply unto the same, sprang out of the judgments given since
in particular cases upon arguments made before, and by the learned Judges of
this Land.

The second part of the Municipal The statute law differing from the Common
Law, yet a part of our Municipal Laws.
Laws of this land (though not properly called but differing from the Common
Law, as the Pretorian Law amongst the Romans did differ from their Civil Law)
is the statute Law of this Realm, made by the King as head, with the Nobles and
Commons, as members of this body politic.

This Law was invented to give speedy remedy and redress unto such sudden
matters as were mischievous in the Commonwealth, the punishment and prevention
whereof was defective, dispunishable, or not fully provided for, by the Common
Law; the first of which statute Laws now extant was made in the nineth year The
first statute law that is now extant.
of King Henry the third. For the making of Statutes and assembling of
Parliaments (in which they were ordained) he which will diligently read the
ancient Stories of Malmesburie, Huntingdon, Hoveden, and Math. Parisiensis
(especially above others) shall find that there are no small mistakings in some
things about the antiquity and true conceit of their Customs and strength.

There is (according to the partition of some) another part of our Law (or at
the least, a derivative out of the same) that is, the Customs held for Law, or
judged lawful, which have been allowed of ancient times Custom laws, another
part of our Laws as some hold it.
in particular Counties and places of this Kingdom, as in Kent they have many,
and especially that of Gavelkind throughout the whole Country, whereby as well
the youngest as the eldest Son should equally inherit, which they reserved and
retained by offering battle to King William the Conqueror. The Custom of
Borough English is another, whereby the younger Son is only inheritable, and
this is particular to some ancient Boroughs, and peculiar only unto them. There
is likewise the Custom of Gloucester Honor, containing many privileges
particular to that place. So have diverse other great Lordships, Manors and
some Corporations their particular Customs and special privileges, which are
therefore properly called privileges, quasi privatae leges; How privileges are
called Laws.
and these having by long Custom and consent had continuance and allowance,
they are thereby made lawful, and in some sort styled and reckoned as part of
our Laws, although in some points they do differ from the rules of the Common
Law. And therefore the Civillians call such Customs, jus singular, quod contra
tenorem rationis propter aliquam utilitatem, authoritate constituentium
introductum est.

That the Laws of England do differ from the Laws of other Countries, there is
no doubt; as there is no Country but has some constitutions contrary to any
other even of their neighbor Countries Laws.

But if any do demand how the Wherein the Laws of England do differ from other
Laws.
Laws of England do differ from other Laws, it may be found somewhat in their
institution and foundation, more in their form and method, but most in the
course of their proceedings and execution.

For the first it is apparent that the Roman and Imperial The Laws of England
take not their grounds from the Civil Roman laws as other laws do.
Civil Law, but the Laws of England are not founded, nor do any way depend, on
the Civil or Roman Imperial Laws. For the Laws of England take their grounds
from the considerations and Rules of reason, equity and general respects:
weighing therewith what is convenient or inconvenient to the whole
Commonwealth, or the greatest part thereof, and holding it for a general Rule
to be safer and better to suffer a mischief than an inconvenience.

The second difference betwixt the The Prince does not of himself alone make
the Laws of England as the Emperor, and other Princes have done.
by the Prince only, as sometimes the Laws of the Empire and of some other
places were, where the Princes had both an affirmative and a Negative power in
ordaining Laws for the people under them. But in England, as the Laws
concerning penalties in Criminal causes, or in Civil, cannot be enacted and
established without the Kings Royal approbation: So does not the King make
these Laws without the consent of his Parliament.

The Laws of England do likewise England is not all written and certainly set
down; but does rest much The Law of England not all written nor all set down in
Method.
as some say in Pectore Judicis; and also it does differ in Method from the
Civil Law and from some other Laws, because it is not digested into Method by
Titles, Chapters and distinctions. For the first, though it were to be wished
that the Common Law were all written, and that it were so made certain (if that
might be possible) as it should not need to depend upon private and particular
opinions; yet if that may not be, the inconvenience is not altogether so great,
as some conceive it: for all Countries Some countries had their Laws written,
and some had not.
have not had their Laws written and set down alike: The Athenians used only
written Laws: The Lacedaemonians had none written: The Romans had both.

The last difference betwixt the England and other Laws, but especially the
Civil Law, being in the proceedings and execution thereof, which will appear
principally in these three parts; First, in the manner of Three differences
betwixt the Laws of England and the Civil Laws.
Summoning (as we say) or Citation (as the Civilians call it.) Secondly in the
form of pleading in the Courts. Thirdly in the Judgment or Sentence, to which
may be annexed also the Execution upon the same.

For the manner of summoning, or Rome) a man might of himself Difference in
summoning or Citation.
without any process, cite his Adversary, and compel him by force to come into
the Court; whence the phrases of in Jus rapere, in Jus ducere and such like,
are used by Plautus, Horace, and other authors. This was not in ure at any
time within this Kingdom of England, but it has been held better, and always
fit, That there might be some process sent forth, and so a plainer, more
peaceable and lawful course should be taken, (as if the King who is the head
and fountain of Justice or the Judge under him had been first informed of the
Suite) the like course was afterward and is now taken in the Civil Law. For a
Citation by Math. Wisenbich is defimed to be, actus Judicialis, seu Judicii
praeparatorius quo is, quem coram sisti opus est, Judicis mandato legitime
vocatur, jur is experiendi causa; of which (according to other Civilians) he in
his paratitles makes three parts, 1. Praeceptio Judicis, Three parts of a
Citation according to the Civil Laws now used.
2. Verbalis citatio nuncii, 3. ejusdem nuncii relatio, quae (says he) nisi
exactis appareat, non valet citatio. In these three parts of summoning or
Citation, the Civil Laws and the Laws The Writ of Summons in our Law goes out
in the Kings name in some Courts, but not so in the Civil Law.
of England do not disagree, save that in England the Writ of Sommons in many
Cases, and in some Courts, goes out in the Kings name. Also for the conventing
and summoning of any man before the Judge, greater Liberty is given by the Law
of By the Civil Law one might not convent a Magistrate, etc.
England, than was anciently allowed by the Civil Law. For by the Civil Law, a
man might not convent a Magistrate, nor Judge, nor one that was marrying a
wife, or a man that is performing the Funerals of his friend, or a man that is
pleading or following his Cause before a Judge, nee parentem patronum; parents
patroni in Jus (says the Praetor) sine permissu meo, ne quis vocet. But by the
None exempted from Suite by the Laws of England.
Laws of England, none are exempted from Suite; only Dukes, Earls, Barons and
their Wives are privileged, that a man cannot attach or take their persons by
Capias, both for the honor of Nobility, and because it is supposed they are
never without some goods or land, which may satisfy the Debts. But if the
action be against the Crown and Dignity, or Contra pacem, then for their
violence, their bodies also were subject to the Kings Writ. The same Law is of
Abbots, and Priors. The Civil Law allowed more exemptions from appearing to
Suits than the Law of England.
But the Civil Law allows a greater Liberty, and says generally, eas
personas quibus reverentia praestanda est, sine jussu Praetoris in Jus vocare
non licet. And yet although the Civil Law be more liberal in allowing
exemptions from Citation, and summoning of persons to appear, than is our Law
of England; notwithstanding there is difference betwixt these Laws in the form
of Suite and pleading upon diverse process (wherein these two Laws might perhaps
correct each other) whereof but a touch shall be given at this time, and it may
be more shall be said at the conclusion of this tract, when the remedy and
redress of some things conceived to be amiss in our Laws shall be spoken of.

The second point concerning the The second difference in the form of pleading.
difference betwixt our Laws of England, and the Civil Laws being in the form
of pleading and diversities of process; For the first, which is the form of
pleading, only they agree in this, That both the Laws have had a special
respect of nice observation, and also have endured alteration in pleading. For
first the Civil Law, after that in Rome the Decemviri had gotten the Law of the
12 Tables, and that Interpretation grew frequent upon them, then says
Pomponius, Ex his legibus, eodem fere tempore, actiones compositae sunt, quibus
inter se homines disceptarent, quas actiones ne populus ut vellet institueret,
certas solennesque esse voluerunt, and appellata haec pars juris, legis
actiones; id est, legitimae actiones: and immediately after says he, Omnium
harum interpretandi scientia and actiones apud Collegium pontificum erant, etc.
Afterward the Actions were, (as Livy reports) and the Book of them, gotten
by C. Flavius Secretary to Appius Claudius, was by him published and so
communicated to the common people, for which they bestowed on him the
Tribuneship and other Magistracies; they called that Book Jus Civil Flavianum:
Like to which also Sextus Aelius framed another which was called after his name
Jus Aelianum. These formulae Juris were used very strictly; for says
Wesenbechius, Olim ut omnia ordine, and recte procederent, and ne temere,
sineque causa quis ad jurgia and lites conudaret: impetrandum erat a praetore
judicium, qui actori postulatam a se actionem impertiebatur, and formulam
agendi disceptandique pedaneo judici, and litigatoribus praescribebat. So that
then by the Civil Law, the planitiffe did get his form of pleading from the
Judge, or Praetor, which was afterward upon experience of inconvenience
altered by the rescript of Constantine (which Justinian has put in his Code)
likewise Theodosius and Valentinian has done the same. But the difference
betwixt this and the pleading of our Common Law is, That at no time was the A
strict form of pleading required but not particularly prescribed by our Laws.
plaintiff tied by the Common Laws of England to receive his whole form of
pleading from the Judge, although it be true that he is required to set down a
strict form of pleading according to the Law upon his own peril.

Also another difference there is, in Different forms of pleading in our own
Law in several Courts and much more betwixt both the Laws.
the forms of pleading betwixt these two Laws. First, that our forms of
pleading do differ according to the different forms of pleadings and
declarations in several Courts, which the Civil Law does not. Secondly, and
particularly, the form of pleading in the Civil Law is, in all actions personal
(because they do ex obligatione tanquam causa proxima competere actoribus) in
the Libel you must express the remote Cause and not only the next Cause: as for
example, I lend money to Titius, now I may have an Action against him for it;
The remote cause is the lending, the next and immediate of the Action is the
obligatio as they call it. Now if I Libel against Titius, if I say, Ago ad
december, ad quae Titius est mihi obligatus. This is naught, says Minsinger
(showing it out of other The Civil Law in personal actions does express the
remote cause in the Libel, but in real actions the next Cause.
authorities) because the remote Cause is not in the Libel: But if that had
been in alone, that had been good, as Mutuam Titio december, pe^o eum condemnari.
But in real Actions they go inversa via, putting in always the next Cause, but
not of neccessity the remote; (but at the pleasure of the Advocate) as, Peto
fundum istum a Sempronio, quia ejusdem sum dominus fundi; here the dominium is
the Causa proxima; and if the Advocate dare venture it, he may say also, sum
dominus quia emi; where the remote Cause is also contained. A very nice
difference which is not exacted in the form of pleadings How in our Law the
remote and next Cause are both expressed in all actions.
in our Law. But it is usual with us, that in every Man's real, personal, and
mixed Actions, the Causa propinqua and remota are both put in the Declaration;
yet so that in the Common Pleas in the Writ commonly is expressed the next
Cause, and in the Declaration which contains the Writ also, the remote Cause
(but in some the Writ does contain the other) as in wast, the Writ quare fecit
vastum in terris quas tenuit ex dimissione ad exhaereditationem^ here is the
remote Cause: But in Action of Debt, praecipe quod reddat vj. libr. quas debet;
here is the next Cause and the Declaration contains the remote, as Contract,
Bargain, etc. Neither is there any Declaration in our Laws (as the form is now
used) but contains both Causes in it: besides there are other differences
betwixt the forms used in the pleadings and declarations of both the Laws,
which would be too long and tedious to recite.

The next difference is in the Process 3. The third difference in the awarding
of Process.
awarded in both the Laws. Concerning the awarding of Process we find that with
us in personal actions (I mean in many of them joining Statute Law and Common
Law together) In Actions personal more Process and delay permitted by our Law
than by the Civil Law.
there are commonly awarded (if the Suite be commenced in the Common Pleas)
summons, attachment, distress, three capias with an exigent at the last,
whereby the King has Title for the parties contumacy to his Goods and Chattels.

So that the plaintiff has now remedy by accident only, and if the defendant
appear and reverse the Outlary, or get pardon and so answer, etc. (which is a
long time before this can be brought to pass) and by this means this Suite may
depend long, yet the defendant never convented, but at two or three years end,
the plaintiff may be driven to declare anew (as if he had but then begun his
Suite.) But by the Civil Law, as the Pandects show us, and Wesenbech affirms
the Term to be now in the Empire, post absentiam adversarii, petat quis edictum
primum, mox alterum, per intervallum (non minus december dierum) and tertium:
quibus propositis, tunc peremptory impetret, quod inde hoc nomen sumpsit, quod
perimeret disceptationem, hoc est ultra non pateretur adversarium tergiversari.
Then if the defendant appear at the day given him by the Peremptory edict, No
judgment given in the absence of the plaintiff at the Civil Law.
or if he do not, the matter shall be discussed, and judgment given for him
whose part shall be found best. But if the plaintiff appear not, then nothing
shall be done but circumducendum erit edictum perpetuum. And the peremptory
edict may at the pleasure of the Judge be granted, at the first by the same
authority: So that The interest of the plaintiff less subject to prejudice in
Actions personals by the Civil Law than by our Law.
hereby the Interest of the party who has right, is less subject to prejudice
by that Law than by ours. And this course of the Civil Law does not admit so
much delay as does our Common Law. For by our Law in such Cases where no
Outlawry lies in personal Actions, there the Process of distress goes out
infinitely, and then is there no end of the Suite, as in per quae servicia,
quae juris clamat, and such like; wherein it is true, that our Law severely
punishes the party which so much shows contumacy to the Law, yet does it no
good or very little to the plaintiff for his satisfaction.

But there is another difference, that in Actions altogether real, as Entry,
Escheate, Right, Dower, and such like, the remedy allowed by the Laws of
England is far better; for in them if at the day appointed, upon the first
summons, the party make default, and the quarto diepost be past, then is there
a graund cape to take his land into the hands of the King, and the plaintiff
shall have it from the King by judgment if the defendant do not come to replevy
it by oath, that he was not summoned according to the Law or such like (always
remembered that Essoynes upon just occasion may herein breed much delay.) And
herein is there much difference betwixt the Civil Law and our Law, for in the
Civil Law upon their peremptory edict, notwithstanding the defendant A main
difference betwixt the proceeding of our Law and the Civil Law in Actions real.
does not appear, the right shall be examined and thereupon judgment given, but
with us upon the default at the graund cape, the plaintiff shall have the land
by judgment although the right be not examined. As also upon the appearance if
by oath he cannot save the first default, likewise if he once appear and
afterward make default, before judgment given there must be a petit cape
awarded, at which Writs return if he do not save the first default, there shall
be judgment given against him. That all this was ancient Law may be seen in
Bractons Treatise de defaltis. So that in personal actions the Civil In
personal actions the Civil Law is more severe, but in real more remiss than our
Law of England.
Law has a more severe and speedy course for recovery than the Common Law of
England, but in real actions it is somewhat more remiss, or at the least ours
is more severe.

For the last difference spoken of betwixt 4. The last difference is in the
giving and Execution of judgment.
these Laws which is for the giving of judgment and Execution upon the same in
real actions being in rem, although the form and circumstance thereof may be
diverse, yet in these real actions quoad substantiam and effectum, the
difference is not very great, for both Laws must make Execution of the same
thing, though perchance not in the same manner; But for personal actions it is
manifest by the course of ancient and present times that for Debt ever since
King Edward the third his time, and damages and account ever since Henry the
third his time, in actions upon the Case ever since King Henry the 7th. his
time, and in all actions Execution against the person after judgment by our Law
in actions personal.
where Capias lies in the Process before judgment, there Capias ad
satisfaciendum lies after judgment to put the party in prison for Execution;
than the which although a more rigorous Law were by the 12 Tables, whereby
Corpus inter creditores secari licebat (whereof Rivallius says an example is
not read in any History or other Book) yet afterward by their Lex Petilia it
was decreed (as Livy reports) that no man should be for Debt, nervo aut
compedibus vinctus, which notwithstanding was used sometimes by the violence of
Usurers, and therefore sometimes renewed by the Laws Portia, Sempronia,
Popilia, and other, whereby terga civium were made tanquam sacrosancta. Also by
the Lex Julia, if the Debtor would leave his goods his Body was free, as
appears by the same, reported in the Code; But this Law Hottoman thinks not
to extend unto Banquerupts, or such as are non solvendo by their own default.
But by the Anthentiques and Latin Law, if The Civil Law more mild of latter
time than ours for Execution against ones person in debt, etc.
a man were poor by some external misfortune and not by his own means, if he
would ejurare copiam bonam, he need not leave his goods for his Creditors, nor
subject himself to Prison; which is so mild a Law toward Debtors, that it has
no proportion with ours. But where by our Law we do not admit that Beast for
the Plough shall be taken upon Elegit facias which is constituted by the
Statute of Westminster the second (although that be referred by Polydore to
Mulmusius Law) therein the Law of this Kingdom agrees with the Civil Law, as
it appears in the Code: so that we show in the Execution of judgments there
are some differences even in the Civil Law it self according to the alteration
of times; at the first far more severe, but in the end much more mild. And also
by these forementioned examples there are differences betwixt the Civil Law,
and our Laws of England in the Execution The Civil Law differed from it self in
different times for Execution on men's persons.
of their judgments. Many more differences might be found, both in this and in
the other forenamed points betwixt both the Laws, if time did serve or were
required to search and set down the same. But this may suffice as a taste for
this time and purpose.

CHAP. IV. An answer to certain Objections usually made against the Laws of
England.
BY way of imputation or indeed of Scandal, there are usually amongst others,
these Objections made against our Laws of England.

1. That they are written in a Barbarous

2. That they are framed without

3. That they have no Maxims, or

4. That the Judges opinion (which humane affection) does make or alter the
Law: so that it consists not (say they) in scrinio principis, that is, in the
Records of the State, but in scrinio pectoris of the Judge; the key whereof the
Judge may alter, and by a new lock fastened on, make a way to come at unheard
of reason, according to his own conceits, which must be admitted for Law, at
the least for the time.

For the first Objection, I conceive Justice Cook has in his preface to his
third Book of Reports, Siquidem relationum istarum phrasis aut stylus tibi
minus arrideat, ut rei ipsius subjectae praestantia atque utilitas, and
delectet and satisfaciat? Vnde fiat ut totum te admirabili plane dulcedini
cogitationis atque scientiae dedas and addices. Admitting that this were the
effect of the defense, surely we alone should not be driven to this shift, to
praise only the matter, and to reject or omit complements of form; for let the
opponents herein but view other faculties (which they that profess those
faculties would have to excel either of the Laws multis parasangis) observe
Other Arts written in as ill style and phrase, as is our Law.
but the excellent part of the mixed Mathematiques, as judicial Astrology, it
will not be denied but some, nay most of their antientest Authors (especially
which wrote in Latin) do by their Barbarism in the Roman tongue, equal the
worst seeming Soloecismes in our Common Laws: witness hereof Haly Ben Rodan his
Comment upon the quadripartite of Ptolomy in Latin, to whom may be added Guido
Bonatus most especially, with Alchabitius and Johannes de Saxonia his
paraphrase upon him; it may be truly said, that a pleading in Westminster Hall
for Latin, or a Case argued in a private Inn of Court moote for French, shall
respectively in many phrases and good words exceed most of these authors, nay
in this Art the best tongued author (namely Julius Firmious) is accounted the
The best Author in some Arts writes the worst phrase and style.
worst Artist. How many Latin phrases or words are there to be found in the
side of a leaf in any of the chiefest and antientest School Divines (who
respected not the language, but the points of learning which they handled.)
Neither in this, or almost in any other study does the language add to the Art,
seeing that as the ancient Hieroglyphical notes to express words and syllables
were added only as instruments of memory and tradition, and in other Arts the
voces secundae intentionis (as the Logicians call them) Terms of Art do not
give grace, but help to learn the Art.
being the Terms of Art, give no grace to the study or language, but only help
to learn the Art whereof they are written; therefore the language is but an
instrument to the science which it contains, and is as it were the Table
wherein is pictured the sense of the Law. So the Civilians say, tabula picturae
cedit, and yet most modern languages (nay in a manner all) have been forced to
borrow from Most languages forced to borrow words of others.
other, words, and names, especially of Art and invention: neither can the
lofty styled Greek, or the more penurious yet pleasant Latin, name all things
in their own language according to their proper Nature, except they participate
of the Hebrew which does name things according to their Nature, but that cannot
be done by any other language so fully.

Besides all this, it may be showed that the speech wherein the Law is written,
is not to be so much disliked in suo genere; for it appears by the Histories
of ancient time, that when the Normans came hither, the The Conqueror commanded
the pleading and Statutes to be done in French.
pleading of Law, Statutes, and such like things were commanded to be all in
French; so says the Abbot of Croyland, Normani enim ipsum idioma tantum
abhorrebant, quod leges terrae, statutaque Anglicorum Regum lingua Gallica
tractarentur, and pueris etiam in scholis principia literarum grammaticarum
Gallice and non Anglice traderentur. Whereupon (as it appears) our Statutes
which are extant, especially those of Edward the first his time (though not
all) Edward the second, Edward the third, and so forward, were the reports in
the Nature of responsa prudentum among the Romans, taken and published in
French, which then was not accounted Barbarous, for in likelihood it was the
same language which at the first was spoken amongst the Normans; and so were
all Pleas at the Bar pleaded in French until the 36. of Edward the 3. which
although it were not so good French as Dubertus his days and weeks, yet it came
then in a manner near to Frossard his Our Laws written at the first in French
came then near the speech at that time used.
French in his History (which was made about that time) as Apuleius his Latin
being no Roman, did unto the phrases of Livy, Cicero, and such like. Some
corruption there must needs be in tract of time, of a tongue spoken in another
Country, and consonant with another different language, as the French was here.
It is evident that the ancient Books, as Britton, Hengham, and the year Books
of the first succeeding ages are in better French than our later Books are,
because our common Lawyers now do imitate the ancients in such words, as they
have there learned, and if they want a fit word in French, then do they as Sr.
Thomas Moore says of Lalus,

Gallicis si quid nequit vocabulis,
Conat id verbis licet non Gallicis,
Canore saltem personare Gallico, etc.
So that indeed, the tongue wherein Our Law French of later times much mingled.
the Law is published of late has been much mingled with French, Latin, and
some English; that a man might compare it to that supposition of Horace, Humano
capiti, cervicem pictor equinam, etc. And our late Law French does corrupt the
ancient Law French, as that in those primitive times was corrupted some what by
the English: so that the most of our Law being in the ancient French (for so
are the year Books until Henry the 7th his time inclusively) deserves no more
to be ill thought on for the language (although not spoken in our or in any
Country) than Plautus his Comedies because they agree not with Latin Authors
in their Latin, or Chaucers writings because in words and style they differ so
much from Sr. Philip Sidneys selected and exquisite phrase. Should any man
think the worse of the study of antiquity because that most things wherewith
they have dealt withal being The study of antiquity not to be misliked for the
ill Latin.
Histories of the middle and later age on this side Christ's nativity, are
written for the most part in very mean Latin. Neither is it any good objection
to say that our tongue, wherein the Law is written, is no tongue, because it is
not spoken; for about Charlemain his time (as appears in Lipsius his epistles)
the right French did more differ from, and seem more Barbarous in respect of
the smothtongued now used in France, than our Law French about Edward the first
The ancient French more rude, than that now used.
his time did differ from the Natural French then in use; so as it was a tongue
then much spoken, but now much varied and altered. Where it is objected that it
is a tongue unknown certainly: It is by students of the Law, as easily, and far
more easily learned than any other language can be; for within less than a
sevennights study it will be indifferently understood. And that it should not
be commonly understood of all men, Our Law French easily understood. Fit that
the language wherein our Law is written should not be commonly understood.
there is great reason and no profit but peril in the contrary; (for if all men
(whereof the greatest number are of unquiet spirits) should at the first fight
understand the language wherein our Laws are written, that would breed but
small rest to them that would most desire peace.) Therefore I cannot see what
impeachment of credit it is to our Laws that they are written in such a
language, if of themselves they are not to be discommended, which in the other
points will somewhat appear.

For the second objection that our 2. The second objection, that our Laws do
want Method.
Laws want Method and order: For Method which indeed in all learning is to be
wished for, (and yet is not found or framed in our Laws) but that is no great
disgrace to the Laws, for hardly shall we find any faculty that is without any
defect (as Sr. Francis Bacon in his second Book of the advancement of learning
has well noted) whereas also there is not an harder point in Logic and
Rhetoric, than the right distinguishing of the true Methodical parts in any
faculty, as appears by the multitude of writers in each faculty. Indeed the
Long, before the Civil Law was brought into Method.
Civil Law was easier for Students after such time as Justinian had digested
the 2000 Books and 300000 verses, wherein it was scatered and confused? the
like whereof might be wished in our Laws; but upon what grounds hoped for, I
cannot yet The difficulty of digesting our Laws into a Method.
discern; for no small impediment therein would be, seeing our Laws are
grounded so much upon reason, which alters and reforms other precedent errors.
Hardly could there be a Methodical digest drawn of all the year Books (I mean
for authority and not only for Study) which might be sure to stand always firm
for Law, without it were first so determined by Parliament, the confirmation
whereof I conceive would come ad Calendas Graecas.

But for Study the time may come A private Method for study, more easy and
profitable.
that by the example of Littleton for Tenures, and Common Law conveiances, and
Estates; Stanford for the Crown pleas; Theloal for Writs; Gregory for Warranty,
and few more heads; Kitchen for Courts; together with Crompton, and Lambard; so
by their example, some great Lawyers may settle themselves to imitation; this
perchance may be remedied by some skilful Scholastical Lawyer, but whether the
remedy would not be worse than the disease, and whether it will not make any
truants of such as otherwise might prove painful Students, let it be their
judgments who are judicial, and not theirs who are altogether ignorant in our
Laws; What inconvenience might follow the digesting of our Law into a precise
Method.
for this is most to be feared; which we find by experience, that where
abridgments are, and where by compendious Method some strive to give life and
luster unto the Art they profess; the Students thereof coveting to come the
next way to their Jornies end, do like those Travelers which to avoid some
long (though the safer) way, do choose to adventure the passage over a bridge,
whose foundation may yet be faulty, and so fall short of their Journey, rather
than to go somewhat farther unto a ford where there is less danger and a surer,
though somewhat a longer passage. I will not say that there is the like hazard
in Methodical composition of our anuals, or year Books of the Law, but sure we
see that many Students are already more addicted to the Study of the new than
of the old year Books, The peril, that Students desire to read the new and to
omit the old Books of our Law.
wherein seeking to save pains some may fortune to find in the end, that to
offer to go a nearer way than is to be found, is (as the proverb is) but the
next way about; for though it be true that the last Judged Cases are most in
force, and the former many times abrogated, or altered, yet the old Cases give
grounds of Law unto the new, and by perusing both, the differences of Reasons
which make the one firm and the other to fail are best discerned.

So that surely there is no humane No Study requires more the reading of old
and new Authors, than does our Law.
science which requires more the revolution of old and new, the conference of
Precedent and Subsequent matters, and in conclusion, that exacteth more the
Study of the whole body of that science, than does the entire Study of the
whole volumes of our Law, to make a man to be a perfect Lawyer: therefore
whether this Compendious digesting our Law into Method, be profitable,
necessary, or hurtful to the Students thereof; though, I must confess, I do
much affect Method (as holding it a principal light of Learning) yet, as I said
before, I must leave the Censure thereof unto the Oracles of the Law. But if
any man will be desirous to follow a method in the Study of the Law, or a
method for his Memory when he has studied it; he might, by distinguishing
aright such Alphabetical Distinguishing of Alphabetical Titles, a help only for
Memory.
Titles as are dispersed in Fitzherbert, Brook and Statham, their Abridgments,
find, for his private studies and use, a far more orderly and profitable form,
than the reading of these Books according to A B C, do admit. Yet this, as the
rest, is spoken under correction of better Judgment.

Under this head of want of Method, Another objection under this head against
our Laws.
is comprehended another objection which some make, and find fault withal;
That our Pleaders use no Method, Eloquence, or Art in their Pleadings. If they
mean the Pleadings which are entered in the Rolls, had they once tried some
tickle points of exception (as perchance others have done to their charge and
peril) they would be of another opinion, and it may be then they would complain
of the contrary; that in the rules and directions for Defenses, Pleadings in
Rolls and at the Bar, not Ciceronian, but distinct and significant enough.
Traverses, Confessions and Avoidances, there are too nice differences and
distinctions sometimes exacted. If they intend the Pleading and Arguments at
the Bar; it is true, that for Form they use neither Ciceronian Orations, nor
Syllogistical Arguments in Mood and Figure; but yet, for matter, they do smell
(as Phocion objected to Demosthenes Orations) of the Candle, most commonly, in
savouring of great pains taken, with exact quotation of Books and Judgments.
Neither should there be expected Eloquent invectives or insinuations not fit
for the pleaders of Law.
in such Arguments elegant Forms of Speech, such as should tend to the
commending or dispraising of the parties (as the old Orators, Isocrates and his
successors were wont;) And if any use this, as some do, a little of this
Eloquence is too much. For Syllogisms, indeed they use them not, neither are
they needful in this Art, or kind of Arguing, but as they are fittest for the
Schools and Universities, so if there were need of them, there is no doubt but
most of their Arguments or Pleadings at the Bar, might by Scholars be reduced
into Syllogisms, though then perchance Syllogisms fittest for the Universities
and Schools.
the concurring reasons of the Law might be made more intricate, and as hard to
be understood as Aristotle's Acromantica, especially of such as are not
Logicians.

Now to the last objection against The last objection against our Laws.
our Laws, that they have not fundamental Maxims which are universally true,
and that the Judges private opinions do usually alter the Laws, and so leave it
always in uncertainty: For the first, concerning Maxims, or certain
Foundations, which they suppose are not in our Laws; They which read and
understand the Law shall find, that there are many received Many rules received
in our Law without any contradiction.
opinions and Rules in the Law, whereof scarce any contradiction has been of
Opinion, much less of Judgment; as amongst the rest, these of Inheritances.

That no land can by Inheritance

That the Heirs of the part of the

That of Inheritances descended by

With many other such Rules infallible and unchangeable in the Law, whereof
diverse are collected by Saint German in his first book.

And the grounds or maxims are so certain concerning some of the noblest parts
of the Law; (viz. about the Inheritances and Escheats) that the Lord Chief
Justice Coke affirms (who is best able to prove his assertion) he found not
in all the time he studied the Law: Ne duas quidem adverti quaestiones, de jure
hereditatum, de terrarum ligitima confiscatione, sive (ut loquantur) escaeta,
aliisque consimilibus. But howsoever this opinion stands, It is most sure, that
there are infinite other Rules and Positions in the Law, which admit no
alteration or question. To which it is usually replied; It is true, that there
are many such Rules and Positions in the Common Law, which remain still firm,
and are not contradicted, yet they are not Maxims, nor That the positive rules
of our law may be in some sort reckoned as Maxims.
deserve not that title, as other Arts have, and are allowed them. The answer
is, that these positive Rules which are certainly set down and determined for
infallible, may, without any great error, be entitled Maxims of the Law, or at
least, held in the nature of them (for authority, if not for method.) For in
any Art, (as to instance in Geometry) let a proposition or theoreme be once
infallibly demonstrated by principles; the Mathematician who made this
demonstration, upon infallible tokens of truth, may not unfitly call his
demonstration a Maxim, or Principle, in respect of authority, though not of
method, as was spoken before: the like may be said of our infallible positions
and demonstrations in the Common Law, whereof there are very many, howsoever
some conceive the contrary.

To shape some answer unto the last most usual and effectual objection made
against our Laws; that is, that the Judges private opinions and reason do
usually alter the Laws: and so it is left always in a Labyrinth of
uncertainty. Although my judgment in the Laws being so slender, is not
sufficient to answer so important an objection, tending so much to the disgrace
of our Laws, and indeed to the great scandal of the Justice of this Realm (the
execution whereof depends most on these Judgments supposed to be so
uncertain) yet I will be bold to speak what I conceive, leaving the more full
answer hereof to them that are much more deeply learned in our Laws.

Where they say that the alteration How the Judges opinions may alter the Law.
of the Laws does depend on the Judges particular opinions and reason, whereby
it is so much subject to mutability; sure this is not altogether true, in such
sense as it is spoken; for it is not the private opinion of one Judge that
alters the Law, but it is the concurring opinion of more than one, and that
not only concurring in their private reason and sense as it is said, but their
reasons are always conferred with former Judgments, and either thereby
strengthened, or if differing from the same, they must show reason also
stronger or different from the former to ground their Judgments upon. And in
this sort that latter Judgments should reverse former, is not unusual in other
Laws, nor peculiar only to this of ours, for says the Civil Law, Non est novum
ut priores leges That the Civil Law does allow the alteration of Laws and of
Judgments.
ad posteriores trahantur. The Civil Law has the like rule in another place,
and the same has a great Philosopher, and a Learned Politician, Non possunt
omnes articuli singulatim aut legibus, aut Senatus consultis comprehendi, sed
cum in aliqua causa sententia eorum manifesta est, is qui jurisdictioni
praeest, ad similia procedere atque ita jus dicere debet. In like manner
concludes a learned, The opinion of a learned Father of the Church concerning
the alteration of Laws.
and an ancient Ecclesiastical Writer, concerning the alteration of Laws upon
good grounds of reason; He says, Ideo quia antiquiores leges ad posteriores
trahi usitatum est; semper quasi hoc legibus inesse credi oportet; ut ad eas
quoque personas pertineant quae quandoque similes sunt. But some will say,
these are indeed rules for the alteration of Laws, upon different opinions and
grounds of Reason; but have you any precedent that the Judges in other Laws do
differ so much in their opinions, and do leave their Laws so uncertain? Yes
surely, for in the Civil Law there are many Cases of great consequence, wherein
the Doctors do differ in opinion, and In the Civil Law the Doctors do much
differ in Opinion.
show each of them several reasons and authorities to uphold their sides and
opinions, for they differ much upon the exposition of the Rules of their Law,
which are drawn, extended and restrained according to their several Opinions
and Judgments; the reason is rendered, because it is a very hard matter to
express all particulars by comprehension under a general head. But where it is
said, that the Law depends upon the variable reasons of the Judges, that
Reason should be the ground both of the Law it self, and of their Judgments
upon the Law, is neither strange nor unfit: for we confess that the Law is
grounded upon tried and well-examined Reason, which considers what is
convenient, and what is inconvenient; what is for the general good, and what
for the particular; what does concur with the rigor of Justice, and what with
the moderation of Equity; with many other considerable circumstances, which
Reason does deliver, as well to the Lawmakers, as to the Judge in expounding
the Law. But yet the Judges do not wholly and only rely on the rules of Reason
in delivering the Law (as the sole prop and pillar thereof) although our Laws,
as even the Laws of Nations, and all other particular and municipal Laws, are
deduced from it: for ratio est regula aequitatis. And although the praise of
the Law is, that the rules thereof are approved with reason (as the Touchstone
to try whether the remedy of an Inconvenience be good and sound;) yet Reason in
our Law is accompanied with other consorts, and our Judges have other aids to
support and strengthen their Judgments: being those helps (which, as the
Philosopher says) Reason does use as her handmaids, for the Invention and
Knowledge of other Sciences and Arts, as Sense, Observation, Experience and
Induction: Of Sense, to single out Notions; of Observation, to keep many
Notions together; of Experience, to confer these Notions which are necessary,
and which not; and by Induction of many particulars concurring, to frame under
few heads many general Conclusions. As other Sciences, and the perfect
Professors of them have these helps, so have our Law makers the same in
Ordaining, and our Judges in Expounding of the Laws. The first, which is Sense,
is common to all men, (even in all Mechanical Arts;) but the latter (as
Observation, Experience and Induction) are chief instruments used and applied
by our Judges in the interpretation and expounding of our Laws: for after long
study and practice of our Laws, after What grounds the Judges do lay the
Judgments upon.
the reading and revolving of former Judgments, and of other studious labors;
they come to Experience and Observation, out of which they frame conclusions
for future Judgments, which must be still like Judgments in like Cases; for
they may not, nor do not, so swerve from former Judgments, that they may
contrary them, without there appear some manifest difference of Reason, which
their reading concurring with Observation, and Experience, can best inform them
of; and then upon different reasons, (wherein the latter may correct some slips
of the former) to give different Judgments, is neither strange in our Law,
unusual in other Laws, or inconvenient in either. Therefore they which frame
these objections of contrariety and uncertainty in the Judgments of our Common
Law (perchance for the most part) do not conceive the Reason of those things
which they condemn so much: and in this they are not much to be believed, nor
over much to be blamed, if Ignorance, and not Malice, be the Motive; when they
speak as they think, not as they know.

And for that many think (who The accusation of our Laws, because they are not
all written, nor certainly set down.
think not much amiss) that the chiefest defect of our Law is, because it is
not all written, or that it is not so written, that it is certain or sure not
to be changed. For the first, there is no other answer, as far as I can see, to
be given, but that which was said by a Writer of our Laws about three hundred
years since: Si ob scripturae solummodo defectum, leges minime censentur;
majoris proculdubio robur authoritatis, ipsis legibus videntur accommodare
scripturae, quam vel ratio statuentis vel decernentis aequitas. Leges vero and
jura regni, scripto universaliter concludi nostris temporibus, omnino quidem
impossible est, cum propter scribentium ignorantiam, tum propter earum
multitudinem confusam. It is confessed therefore, that they are not all
Impossible that all the Law should be written.
written, and acknowledged, that it is impossible they should be all written.
And herein have we, for that part of the Common Law (which is generally called
by that name) imitated the ancient Druides of this Land (but yet gone farther
than they) who, following the Pythagoreans did not commit their Learning to
Writing, or rather the Lacedaemonians, who, by the institution of Licurgus, held
all Law not written, who, as Plutarch reports, exiguos illos and pecuniarios
contractus, quique propter usum vitae subinde immutantur, praestare censebat
scriptis legibus non comprehendi, neque immobilibus consuetudinibus illigari:
sed permittendum ut pro ratione temporis augerentur, diminuerenturve, secundum
probe institutorum hominum arbitrium, yet our Law does not give so much
liberty to the Judges. But yet not only Politicians and Moralists, but also
the Civil lawyers do permit that in a Commonwealth the constitutions of Princes
are to be interpreted according to the Judgment of Magistrates and Judges,
sometimes mitigated, and, according to incident diversities, interpreted, which
cannot be always committed to writing: for it cannot be always the same, and
this were rather to be wished than to be hoped for in our Laws: and I would
that he which finds this fault, could find a remedy and prescribe the
reformation. Controversies and ambiguities are so frequent not only in this,
but in all sciences, arts and professions, that every day new particulars New
particulars breed new questions.
are subjects of new questions, especially in the Laws, which spring out of the
intricate forms of new Conveyances, and such like invention of men. And so long
as man sees but in aenigmate and per speculum (as the Divines say of the
Knowledge How uncertain man's knowledge is in Divine things and in other sciences.
of God) and so long as by the rules of the perspectives, that which is seen by
reflection, or refraction, is never seen in, or according to, his true place;
so long and in such sort we must look for controversies and ambiguities in all
professions, which are indeed not so much, or so sensibly felt, in any art as
in the Law; because none other goes so near men's Nothing goes so near to men's
thoughts as their loss of estate.
inward thoughts and conceits as such do whereon their estates and
possessions are adventured, therefore losers may have leave to speak, but not
untruth.

CHAP. V. Of the Books written of the Laws of England, whereby the Knowledge
thereof is chiefly obtained.
THE chief Knowledge (by study) Three sorts of writers of our Law.
of our Law does consist in the Works of them which have written of the Law,
and they are of 3 sorts.

1. The first whereof sets down the Art and Rules of the same in a certain
method, such as is, Glanvill, Bracton and Britton, who are ancient Authors,
wrote in Latin and did endeavor to reduce those Rules according to the titles
of the Civil-lawes, but most especially Bracton: though these are ancient
Authors, yet they are now cited rather for ornament than for authority.

2. Others have written of the Writers of the Nature and Precedents of Writs.
Precedents, Rules and Natures of Writs, which do lay the ground of every
Action to procure judgment and execution thereon, as the books of Entries with
the Register, and the two books grounded thereupon. In this Fitz-herbert has
deserved specially well.

3. A third sort of Writers of our Reporters of former Judged Cases.
Law there are, which be those who write the particular and summary Cases that
have received Determination and Sentence in the King's jucicial Courts, showing
how the Rules of Law were applied to those Cases, or rather how these Cases
were reduced to the Rules of Law both by the Counselors that argued the same
on both sides, with probable Reasons confirming their opinions with authorities
of former Judgments, and also the Judges concluding their Sentences upon the
same by the common square of Reason and Rules they have learned of the
foregoing learned Judges. Of this It is not known who compiled the first
Annals and ancient Year-books.
latter sort of Writers called Reporters, who they were that compiled the first
and most ancient Books of Reports is not certain, for we have not their Names,
but since the time of King Edward the third, there are some Works and Reports
written of every King's Reign: for before his time we have not any Volume at
large now left, and if any such were, they are consumed through the injury
Diverse ancient Year-books wanting.
of times, or neglect, or malice, of such in whose custody they remained: yet
it should seem, that in the reign of King Henry the 8. there were some more
ancient Books or Reports of the Law Cases extant reported in the times of King
Henry the 3. and Edward the first, and Edw. the second; for that Fitz-herbert
Some Cases abridged of the Books now not extant.
who did reduce all the Cases of the Reports that were extant in his time under
certain general Heads, and Brook likewise, who a little after him, did set
forth another Abridgement of the Law, and Cases extant in his time, (adding
more general Heads than Fitz-herbert had done) yet both of them under diverse of
their titles abridge the pith of sundry Cases argued, and most of them adjudged
in those Kings raigns. Howbeit the Volumes at large are not We have now E. 2.
and R. 2. What Year-books are yet extant.
now extant.

But of the Cases which were adjudged in the time of King Edw. the third, there
are four Volumes now extant. Of King Richard the second his time, there are not
any Volumes, but many Cases abridged as aforesaid. Of the times of King Henry
Long quinto.
the fourth and King Henry the fifth there is no Volume. Of King Henry the sixth
there are two great Volumes. Of King Edw. the fourth one Volume. One Volume of
King Henry the seventh, in the later end of whose reign the Reports do
discontinue until the twelfth year of King Henry the eight. And then they were
recontinued until the nineteenth of Henry the eight, from thence again
discontinued till the twenty sixth of Henry the eight; at which time they were
held on for two years, that is, twenty sixth and twenty seventh of Henry the
eight: which are the last Reports which we have, save such as since have been
revived by three or four worthy men, whose private and voluntary diligence have
for the public good continued sundry Reports, such as Mr. Kellaway who
reported privately certain Cases in King Henry the seventh his time. This Book
and labor is now come to light by Mr. Justice Crook his Care and Charge. Also
Mr. Brook who did report diverse memorable Cases which happened when he was
making of his Abridgment in the time of King Henry the eighth, King Edward the
sixth, and Queen Mary, reported them under apt titles in his Abridgement.

Then, my Lord Dyer, who, when Of the late Reports of judged Cases.
he was a Student, a Practicioner and a Judge, observed many famous Cases which
were published since his death.

A little after him began Mr. Ploden, who reported the special Cases which
happened from the second of King Edw. the sixth until the fifteenth of Queen
Elizabeth; they are but few Cases, yet more fully reported than any before him.

Then, the voluntary Reporter is the late Lord Coke, who has set forth
thirteen Volumes of Reports. [Since that we have had Hobart, Bulstrod, Hutton,
and diverse others, especially Justice Croke, who continues his Reports till the
middle of the reign of King Charles the first.]

There are besides these Reporters Writers of Rules, and the application of
them to Cases.
some other Writers of the Common Law, whose Works are mixed partly of Rules and
partly of Application of them to certain Cases of their own knowledge and
collection: such is the Book called, The old Tenures; and another commonly
called Littleton's Tenures. This Book serves for an Introduction to the young
Students in the Common Law of England, as Justinian's Institutions does for the
beginners in the Civill-law. Mr. Perkins did likewise draw certain Rules and
Cases of some Titles of the Common law into a method, but not of equal, or
like, authority with Littleton's. It is alleged by Ploden, in his Epistle,
that in ancient time, (as he had upon credit heard) there were four Reporters
of our Cases Reporters of the Law in former times authorized 2nd allowed by the
King.
of Law which were chief men, and had a yearly Stipend for their travel
therein paid by the Kings of this Realm, and they conferred together at the
making and setting forth of the Reports. It were to be wished that there were
the like course still continued, and allowance given: So should we not have
been bereaved of so many worthy and unrecoverable Cases and Judgments which are
wanting, and no doubt either perished, or buried in silence, by which means the
Students are deprived of the Lights and Helps which they might have thereby.

CHAP. VI. Of Estates allowed by the Law of England.
HAving said somewhat of the Grounds of our Common Law of England, it should
seem proper in the next place, to show the Estates which the Common Law does
allow. And that briefly; for neither my Judgment in the Laws nor this place
will fitly allow such aperfect and exact Discourse as may pass without
exception of the Learned in our Laws, or fully satisfy such as are well
experienced in the same. Only that which shall be said is rather set down as a
general view, to consider the state and course of our Laws; than as a platform
and precise instruction thereof.

The Estates most absolute which Fee-simple of two sorts.
the law does allow, are either Fee-simple absolute of Land to a man and to his
heirs and assigns for ever: Estate of Fee-simple conditional now made an
Estate in Fee-taile.
or Fee-simple conditional, that is, to him and the heirs of his body general
or special, as it was at the Common Law which is accounted Fee-taile to his
Heirs males or females, according to the particular limitation.

This Estate of Fee-simple absolute How times have altered the state of
Fee-simple.
and general is as ancient as our Common Law, and perchance before the use of
our Common-laws as they are now in ure; for from the beginning there was giving
and granting of Lands, though not altogether in that exact and express form
which later times have required: because at the first if one man had given
Lands to was likewise (for the general practice thereof) introduced upon later
considerations, of which at the first there was no recovery left in the Giver,
nor remainder could be limited over (but after issue had, which was the
condition annexed) the Donee, or he to whom the Gift was made, had power to
aliene the whole Land and Estate.

But afterward this Estate in Fee-simple Edw. the first by a Statute made an
Estate in tail in the Donee, and a Reversion in the Donor or giver. And then
the Donee might not by any Act bar his issues, neither by forfeiture of
offense, as Treason, nor by conveiance, though never so strong, as Fine, etc.

Thus we see how the greatest and most beneficial Estate of Fee-simple, which
the Common Law does admit, has received his degrees, his limitation, and
alteration according as time, increase of knowledge in the Laws, and of
Conveyances and Assurances amongst men have thought it meet: the like
alterations we may find in other Estates of least extent, and benefit in the
Laws.

Where mention was first made of the state of Fee-simple to be very ancient,
though not always in one express form; It is true, with a several respect of
times in antiquity. For among the Saxons Fee-simple was, Fee-simple in use in
the Saxons time.
and that by the name of Land to a man and his heirs, as it appears in the
Saxon Laws of Alfred, where it is said, qui terram habuerit per scripturae
seriem (the Saxon word is boclande) sibi relictam ab haeredibus ad alios
alienandi potestas ei non esto, siquidem praesentibus cognatis coram rege aut
episcopo scriptura aut testimonio potentum, omni alienatione and interdixisse
illum qui prius concessit, talemque ei imposuisse legem cum primo dederit: out
of which may be noted, both the Fee-simple absolute and conditional were then
allowed, and in use. And also Fee-simple conditional also known in the Saxons
time.
a man may see that in ancient time how a gift to a man and his heirs and a
gift to a man for ever were all one. For when Earl Godwine came to the Bishop
of Canterbury to get the manor of Boseham in Sussex; he first jestingly said
to him (as Mr. Camden says out of Mapaeus) Da mihi Boseham. The Bishop (as it
should seem, scarcely knowing his meaning) answered him, Do tibi Boseham:
whereupon without any more livery, the Earl took and had possession thereof to
him and to his heirs; by which also we may see two things, that the word heirs,
was not then of absolute necessity in a grant to create a Fee-simple, and that
then such strict words and forms of Conveyances were not required, as of later
times, to pass Estates of Lands.

There are other Estates of inferior degree and dignity allowed by the
Common Law; whereof some are accounted Inheritances and Freehold; Others but
uncertain, and not for a prefixed season or term.

Of the first sort is an Estate for life, Estates for life twofold.
and that twofold, either created by the party, as by Lease, etc. or else
created by the Law, as Tenant by the Curtefie of England, (by having issue of a
wife Inheritrix;) or else an Estate in Dower limited to a wife in marriage, and
this reckoned Freehold, for that it is an Estate for life.

An Estate for years by grant of the Estates for years by grant.
party, is, when by Lease either in writing or word, called a Lease parol, or
by Will, such an Estate is granted.

An Estate for years by Law is diverse, Estates for years by the Law.
as that which the Lord or Guardian has till his Ward be of full age: the like
by Elegit grounded upon a Statute Ed. 1. upon a recovery of Debt, Trespass or
Acknowledgment of Debt in the Chancerie or before a Judge.

The like Estate for years by Law, is by the Statute merchant or staple. By
acknowledging a debt before the Major of the Staple of ancient Cities and some
special merchandising Towns.

The two last Estates for years created by the Law were ordained for the better
recovery and assurance of due debts; but whether they, or that of a Guardian,
be Estates for lives by Law some make question.

There are two other Estates whereof Tenant by Copy of Court-roll first
reckoned Tenants at will: But now not so.
the Holders are called Tenans at Will; but of them (although they be so
termed) the first is now allowed for a more ample Estate, by use and
Continuance, that is to say, Tenant by Copy of Court-roll, first called,
Tenant in Vilainage. But now according to the Custom of Manors, these Tenants
are not to be altered, but may renew their Estates by common course.

The other, which is the last, the Tenant at will the meanest Estate the Law
allows of.
least and meanest Estate that the Law allows, is called, Tenant at will, who
has no longer term than stands with the will and pleasure of the Landlord.

CHAP. VII. Of Assurances and Conveyances which grow out of these Estates by
the Common Law.
SInce we see that the Estates and Interests of Men cannot pass from one unto
another, but by Descent or by Conveyance; It were not amiss to manifest the
general course of Assurances which are usual, and admitted by the Common-laws
of this Realm. These Estates have for the most part their passages by
Feoffment, by Deed, by Fine and Release, by Common-recovery, by Wills and by
Uses.

Feoffment is by Liverie and Seisin, Feoffment.
that is, by deliverie of Possession upon the Land, by taking of turfe and
twigg (but in ancient time, as Bracton lib. 2. How it was executed in ancient
time.
shows, when there was no House on the Land, it was heretofore per fustim and
per baculum;) and this Livery, by Bracton, is called, Vestimentum donationis,
thereby putting the party to whom the Estate is granted in possession, or some
other to his use by Letter of Attorney. And though this be of the Possession
only; yet without Liverie and Seisin no Feoffment can receive life or force.

A Feoffment is proper to an Estate A Feoffment proper to an Estate for life at
the least.
for life at the least, and so upwards, or else by grant of the Reversion and
Attornament of the particular Tenant, which must be by Deed: because the
possession passes not by delivery only. This Conveyance was ancient and most
of Force, being notorious, of which the Country might take notice, and is much
used at this day.

Exchange of Land whereby one Exchang of lands.
parcel of Land is exchanged for an other of equal estate, heretofore much
used but not now.

Grants by Deeds written in paper Graunts by Deeds with Dedi and concessi
or parchment sealed and delivered with these words, Dedi and concessi, etc.
have been ancient and most usual, so is it yet used; but not so frequent,
especially in Estates of any value.

An other Assurance there is by Fine, which also is ancient: at the first it
was the agreement of parties upon Arbitrament or otherwise after a Controversy
arisen, when an Action is brought and hanging, for so is the ancient Law after
H. 3. his time, for before, and then, Fines were received of many such things
and in such sort as will not be now admitted. So was it set down betwixt them
in these words; Haec est finalis concordia, that is, That this is the final
agreement betwixt such and such persons. Therefore, as some say, it was called,
finis, quia finem imponit litibus, because it makes an end of strife. This
Conveyance is most ancient, as some hold it, before the Conquest; but now used
in the King's Court of Common pleas, and principally in some Courts of Record,
to make the Assurance more forcible and certain.

The same by a Statute made in the Fines strengthened by Statute.
18th year of Edw. 1. was strengthened; and by the same Statute every person of
full age, of sound mind, out of prison, and within the Realm, were bound and
concluded by a Fine, if they did not make Claim within a year and a day after
the Fine levied. But this Statute being thought too penal and prejudicial to
Men's rights was repelled by another Statute in the four and thirtieth year of
King Edward the third: And then men were at liberty, as before, to make their
Claim at any time.

But afterward this Satute of 34 Former Statutes concerning Fines repealed.
Edw. 3. was also repealed by a Statute in the fourth year of King H. 7. and
also by a Statute in the 32 H. 8. Fines were made so strong, that after the
Fine engrossed, and Proclamation made, all persons after 5 years Nonclaim were
bound, unless they were under age, lunatic, in prison, or out of the Land at
the time of the Fine levied.

And by this Statute of 32 H. 8. Tenant in tail may bar his issue, which
before he could not, by reason the Statute of 13 Edwardi 1. provided he should
not bind him by any act.

Another Conveyance there is now Common-recoverie an Undoer of former
Conveyances.
much in use, yet not very ancient, which may be called a Pick-lock or an
Undoer of former Assurances: This is called a Common-recovery, and was never
used till about the 12 year of Ed. the 4. it is not warranted by any Statute,
but an Invention first grounded upon a mere Conceit, now held the strongest
Conveyance.

The Invention was, that the Issue The fraudulent invention of
Common-recoveries.
in tail, or he in the Reversion or Remainder upon a tail should be barred of
his Right and Estate by a recovery against the Tenant in tail: wherein Tenant
in tail upon a supposed Warrantie did vouch an estranger, because the Issue or
he in the Reversion by this voucher was supposed to have a recompense in
satisfaction of his Estate, which being not so indeed, this is then but a mere
Collusion, and indeed the most injurious Conveyance that the Law does allow of
to cut off men's titles and possibilities without their privitie or
satisfaction. This Conveyance is used only to cut off the Reversion or
Remainder depending upon an Estate-tayle, and to destroy perpetuities which no
other Conveyance does, as a Fine is used to bar estrangers that pretend right
of Possession or Action, which no other Conveyance can do.

Conveyance of Land by Will or Conveyance of Land by Will, how it stood at
first.
last Testament in ancient time was only in such ancient Cities and Boroughs
which specially prescribed for the same, and that the Lands were devisable by
Custom. But the greatest part of the Land within this Realm was not subject to
this kind of Conveyance, unless the same Land were first granted over to Uses
or in Trust; and then the said Trust was devisable by Will, because it was a
matter in Conscience; and a Subpoena in Chancery was the only remedy.

But in the 27 year of King H. 8. all those Uses were transferred into
Possessions; so that by means thereof no Land, by any means was deviseable but
Customary-lands until the 32 and 34 years of King H. 8. when it was Enacted
that all Lands Farther liberty granted by statute to convey Lands by Will.
might be devised by Will, and if the same were held in Socage tenure, the
whole passes by Will. But if of the King in Chief or of a Subject by
Knight Service, two parts only do pass by Will, and the King, or Lord, of whom
it is holden, is to have a third part during the nonage of the Heir, and the
Heir the said third part afterward.

The Conveyance by Uses was in Conveyance by Uses, when and how it begun.
ancient time unknown, and began in the time of the Civil-warrs of Ed. 2.
against the Barons, and of Lancaster and York, bred and begotten by fear; for
the owners of Lands doubting lest themselves by partaking should be attainted
(and so their livings forfeited) did convey their Lands over to their Friends
in trust, but received the profits themselves: which perception or property by
Law was called Use. And the party who was Owner in Conscience was called Cestuy
a que use, or pernor of the profits. Also afterward Uses were invented by
fraud to deceive Creditors of their Debts, Purchasers of their Bargains, and
Men that had right of their Actions; all which was remedied by the Statute of
the 27 of H. 8. whereby the Possession of the parties trusted was transferred
to the Cestuy a que use, and the Use and Possession were incorporated and
united. But yet at this day Conveyance by Use is very common, and many kinds
of Conveyances are lately sprung up out of this Statute of 27 of H. 8. as
Bargains and Sales for money. But this must be enrolled within six months by
the Statute of 27 H. 8.

CHAP. VIII. Of Actions and of their Trials according to the Common-laws of
England.
IT is a saying both in the Civillaws and Common-laws of this Kingdom, that
Actions whereupon the Trials of Suits betwixt party and party do depend, are of
three sorts; either real, personal, or mixed. The Actions of 3 sorts.
first concerns the Title of man's Lands and Freeholds; the second of their
Goods and Chattells; and the third are in Rem and personam simul, as Waste,
Quare impedit, Ejectione, and the like.

Actions heretofore used for real Actions real.
matters were Assizes, Writts of Entry and Writts of Right for Fee-simple, and
as some hold for Fee-tail, confirmed by Precedents of experience, also Formedon
for Fee-taile, Cui in vita, for a Woman upon the discontinuance of her
Inheritance by her husband.

And for personal Matters and Actions personal.
Contracts it was, as at this day: which real Actions were so used, because the
party oftentimes was barred of his Entry by a descent, that if one did
disseise or unlawfully dispossess another of any Land, and the Disseisor or
Wrong-doer died thereof seized, the lawful Heir, or he that had the Right,
might not put the other out of possession or enter for his Right, but ought to
sue first for it.

But by the Statute of 32 of H. 8. The most usual Trial of Actions real at this
day.
no descent to take away an Entry may be without five years peaceable
possession. And therefore now to bring such Titles to trial, the use is either
to enter and bring an Action of trespass, and thereby to try the Title, or to
distrein some Cattle upon the ground, and upon a Replevin to avow a damage
Fesant, that by affirming the Cattle has trespassed his ground, the interest
thereof may thereby be tried; but the common course is to seal a Lease upon
the Land, and so to try it by an Action of Ejectione firmae. Few real Actions
now used, being full of delay.


At this day few real Actions are used, because they are more full of delay,
and also they are more peremptory and binding against the party: for a former
Recovery was a good Plea, but in these personal Actions it is not, for in them
the party may bring as many Actions as his purse will maintain.

Also Actions upon the Case for Actions upon the Case are common.
Words are very common.

CHAP. IX. Of Trials allowed by the Laws of England.
AS it is usual amongst men to commence Suits and Actions, so it is of
necessity that some certain Form should be prescribed, by which those
Variances, Suits and Actions should be brought to Conclusion: so has the Laws
of this Land, and Wisdom of the Lawmakers, found out two ways for the Trial
of Suits, Two ways for the Trial of Suits and Variances.
which is either by Jury upon the Oaths and Verdict of twelve Freeholders, or
else by Battle between the parties (but this is out of use) or their
Champions, or by the Oath of the defendant which is called, Ley Gager.

Some have conceitedly said, that A conceited opinion of Trials.
the Trials (except Battle) have confisted upon the number of twelve with a
triple distinction, as twelve Judges for matter in Law, twelve Jurors, and
twelve in Wager of Law, for so is the form.

There is a Trial also by the Certificate Trial by Certificate of the Bishop,
etc.
of the Bishop for Bastardy and Marriage; also of Infancy, by Inspection of the
Court; also of Villanage, by his Kinsfolks; also Death of the Husband by proofs
in Dower. But these (especially the latter of these) are not so much in use
though allowed by our Laws.

Of which Trials, although Trial by Trial by Battle not abolished, nor lately
used.
Battle being anciently used, and is not yet abolished by any Statute, yet by
reason of the unchristian and bloody proceedings thereof, (when the strongest
Hand and Heart may overcome the best Right, and loss of Living is determined
with loss of Life,) it is therefore obsoleted, and grown out of use. Such
Trial by Battle was appointed to be in Tuttle-Field in the 13 Eliz. where the
Champions, Lists, Judges, and all being prepared, the Demandant was non-suite,
and so that Trial ceased: And another was appointed in the same place about the
8 of King Charles 1. but it was taken up and so ended. This Trial was both in
civil and criminal Pleas. In civil Pleas it was only in a Writ of right by
Champions; in criminal Pleas it was in an appeal of Death by the parties.

Battle is also termed a Trial in A Trial termed Battle but by Writ.
a Writ of right, of Advouson and Rationabilibus divisis, and other Writs which
concern the Right only; as Fitz-herbert witnesses: and also in civil Causes
the Defendant might sometimes wage Battle himself, as Glanvil says, lib. 2.
Cap 3.

Trial by Oath is (as heretofore) Trials by Oath.
used by wager of Law upon Contracts without specialtie in an Action of Debt.

This trial about Edw. 3. and Edw. 2. time was used in Actions which began ex
maleficio: as in contracts ex stipulatione; for in Trespasses it has been
used, as diverse authorities are in the Year-books: But yet of late by reason
men's Consciences were found to be large and foul, whereby the Oath of a
perjured person for his own profit might much prejudice an honest Man, the
Trial by Oath is Trial by Oath is much prevented.
much prevented, by turning the formerly used Action of Debt into an Action
upon the Case, wherein no Wager of Law lies.

The most common and proper Trial by Jury most frequent and in force.
Trial of Suits in this Kingdom (heretofore and now in force) is by Jury, that
is, by Oath and Verdict of twelve Freeholders, both in Actions reals for Lands,
and Actions personals for Contracts and Trespasses. In this Trial, the Jury is
not tied only to the Evidence of two men or of more Witnesses, but may find
Veritatem facti upon Circumstances, or by Witnesses, or sometimes (especially
for want of manifest or probable Evidence) upon their own Knowledges: And in
Cases doubtful concerning points of Law the Judges are to deliver Veritatem
Juris.

If the Jury err in their Verdict, Attaint of a Jury erring.
an Attaint lies against them, wherein the matter must be tried by 24
sufficient and substantial Jurors, and that to be final. If it be found by them
that the former Jury has given a false Verdict and were forsworn, the party
wronged is to be restored to his Right, and the first Jury grievously punished
by the Common Law, which punishment is mitigated by the Statute of 23 H. 8.

If upon any Action or Suite commenced, Error of Judgment how reformed.
the Judges do err in Judgment in any Court of Record, or that the same be
supposed; A Writ of Error lies before other Judges superiors. If in the
Exchequer, it lies in the Exchequer Chamber by the Statute of 31 E. 3 Cap. 12.
If in the Common Pleas or Chancery in Latin proceedings it lies in the
King's Bench; If in the Kingsbench, heretofore it lay only in Parliament, but
now by the Statute of 27 Eliz. in the Exchequer-chamber before the Justices of
the Commonpleas and Barons of the Exchequer.

CHAP. X. Of some things in the Ministers and Proceedings of our Laws conceived
worthy to be reformed.
BEcause there are diverse who do complain much against our Laws, whereof I may
be bold to say that many (if not the most part) do not rightly distinguish
betwixt the Use and the Abuse of our Laws, The Use and Abuse of our Laws not
well distinguished by some.
or betwixt the Laws themselves, and the ill Practice and Proceedings of some
corrupt persons in the handling and trial of them; and for that I have formerly
made some Apology for our Laws in answer of these accusations: I hold it as
fit in plain and sincere dealing to deliver what defects, or other indirect
proceedings I do conceive there are practiced in the Trials of Suits, tending
to the delay, overburdening, and deluding of the Subjects in their Suits, or to
the defrauding of the Law it self The Authors intention.
in the withdrawing or declining of it from its natural pure and upright
Course: which I shall set down by way of supposition (only as far as I can
conceive) rather than of any peremptory position. And in the same sense have I
spoken all the rest; always submitting the same unto deeper Judgment of them
that are learned in our Laws.

The Defects whereof I spoke before Defects of 2 sorts, that is in Trials and
Proceedings of the Law.
are of two sorts, Defects in Trials, and Defects in the Proceedings of our
Law. The first whereof, as I conceive, proceeds specially from two causes,
want of understanding or indifferency in Jurors who try, want of Integrity in
Judges who direct Jurors much in matter of Fact and have the whole power in
deciding points of Law.

Touching the former, whereby in Want of understanding in Jurors.
course the Verdict of Juries, the Rights, Inheritances, and whole Estates of
most of the Subjects within the Kingdom are either tried or subject to be
tried; and yet in many places the Jurors (for the most part) are found to be
simple, of mean capacity, and of as small substance in Estate: for either no
better are impannelled, or if better be, they of best Ability and Judgment,
do absent themselves; presuming that either by some excuse made for them, or by
some other means, they may be dispensed withal, or, if this serve not, the
worst is but to pay some small Fine: So usually the Service is imposed on them
that are least able to discharge it: Sometimes to the no small prejudice of
men's Rights; wherein it were to be wished, that either by some farther Laws (or
at the least by better Execution of the former Laws) Sheriffs Sheriffs to be
compelled to impannell able men in Juries.
were compelled to impannell in Juries none but men able for Judgment and
Substance; And, that such being impannell'd, a more strict No dispensation with
Jury men to be permitted.
Course were taken by the Justices for their better appearance and attendance
without any kind of dispensation or connivence. Care has been taken to remedy
this by the Statute made 16 and 17 Car. 2. 3.

Also another abuse there is concerning the impannelling of Jurors worthy of
reformation, which is, That the Jurors of the principal panel seldom
appearing full, it is found an usual practice for the Plaintiff to request
Freeholders (his friends) to Freeholders desired to stand in view that they
may be returned of the Jury.
stand ready within view of the Court, to be put into the Tales; therefore to
avoid this mischief it were necessary to have a special Oath always administered
unto the Jurors, thus added, That they are not requested by either party or
labored by any for them. It should seem that the like Oath were needful to be
given unto the Sheriff or some severe penalty appointed against the
impannelling of Jurors at the nomination of the parties or their friends,
whereby many men have received great hurt and prejudice. Also it The Sheriff
and the Jury to have a more special Oath.
may be held as requisite that the Jurors had a more special and particular
Oath when they are summoned, and do appear (but before they are sworn of the
Jurie,) to know whether they have been forestalled by Informations or
Persuasions, as well as that they will give their Verdict without any
particular respects to either side; for it is like they will make more
conscience, being examined upon their Oath before they come to the Trial than
after, when they have suddenly swallowed the Oath without public examination
of the Justices upon Oath, or particular and private of their own Consciences
by this Oath: And although there is good provision already taken by our Law,
that exception and challenge may be taken upon reasonable and just causes
allowed by the Law, yet since this cannot be certainly known, who is labored
and dealt withal beforehand, but by the examination of a man's conscience upon
a man's own Oath; I am persuaded that this would prevent many corruptions in
Trials by Juries; whereunto the nature of man is subject to be drawn, by
solicitation of friends, promise of reward, or fear of displeasure. And it
would take away the scandal laid upon the Trial of Juries, which as it is
different from the course of other Laws, so being well looked to by these and
the like cautions, there is no doubt but it is a most excellent kind of Trial,
especially in matters of Fact whereunto it is principally applied; and being
thus exactly executed, I will be bold to say, that it excells the Trialls of
all other Laws, and is one of the worthiest parts of proceedings in our law,
whatsoever some Calumniators have said to the contrary, whereof he that shall
desire to be farther satisfied, may find it fully demonstrated in that noble
and learned Chancellor of England Fortescue his Book.

Touching the other point wherein there may be some prejudice in Touching the
Judges sincerity.
the Trials of Suits for want of sincerity in the Judges, although there are
at this time as reverend, upright, and learned Judges, as has been at any time
within this kingdom: yet that amongst them, there have been always some who
might be sometimes led by affection or by some other private respects, may not
be denied: unless we should think, that they all and every of them, had more
privilege of not crring, or of not affecting, liking or disliking, than either
any other Judges or men of any other profession in the world are induced
withal: Therefore as a great Prince was content (nay did command) that every
day one should come into his Chamber, and put him in mind of his estate, and to
tell him these words: Remember that thou art a mortal Man. In like sort it is a
thing fit to be considered, whether it were not convenient, that the Judges
every Term and at every Assise, or at An addition to the Judges Oath.
least once every year, should publicly in Court and in open audience of the
people take an Oath, That they have not received, nor will receive any gift or
reward, or promise of reward, for their favor, in any Cause heard or to be
heard before them; nor will for favor, fear, or affection, incline to either
party, otherwise than as the very truth of the matter shall move; nor shall
receive private Information, Messages, or Letters of Recommendation to draw
them aside from sincerity, or to show favor to any party: but that they shall
speedily make known the same in open Court: By which means the Judges shall be
less importuned by men of power, and shall keep their Consciences clear, and
unspotted. If the like Oath were given to the A means for the Judges to avoid
importunity, etc.
Masters of the Chancery, who in some Cases, and at some times, do sit as
Judges, and most commonly by their Reports do much guide and direct the Decrees
in that Court; it might perchance avoid much imputation to themselves and
prejudice to others. But against this there is no doubt but there will be many
Objections made. As first, That this Oath being new Objections against giving
the Oath to the Judges.
and so often taken would argue distrust in the uprightness of the Judges, and
that it will be a disgrace not only unto them but to the Place wherein they
sit, and consequently an imputation to the Justices of the Realm; that they
should not be trusted upon an Oath, (as Christians ought to be in other Cases.)
And next, that it will be an impeachment of reputation to all former Judgments,
and Judges, who were not tied with so strict a Band. And therefore if this were
now necessary, then were they in former times let go with too long raines of
liberty and of looseness.

That which may be answered to Answ. to these Objections.
these Objections is this: First, That this new, more strict and frequent Oath
does not so much argue distrust in the Judges as put them in mind of their
Duties; no more than the often calling of a Steward or other great Officer to a
strict and often Account does presuppose that his Faith is always doubted;
nay, it is the best means for his discharge (which most wise and honest men do
much desire:) and so in this Case it may be said, that this Oath, thus taken,
is the strongest Argument that may be to free the Judges from suspicion of
Corruption (whereto they may many times be subject causlesly:) for what man of
any charitable and reasonable consideration will conceive, but that he that is
more often and strictly sworn to do his duty will be more careful to
discharge it, than he who but once in his life receives that Oath? And for
some part of this Oath it is such, that no Judges of this Land have been
formerly sworn unto, and yet it is such as, by the opinion of some both wise
and learned, is held most necessary.

For the other Objections: That it will be a disgrace to their Places, and to
precedent Judges, and Judgments, that these are oftener and more strictly sworn
than were former Judges. Diverse do deem that neither of these consequents will
ensue. One reason is, That if this Oath be a disgrace to precedent or to
present Judges; then the like would ensue, That an Oath taken by a Bishop of
this Land (not long since) of his clearness from Simony, and from giving any
thing for his Bishopric, would be a disgrace to him or to his Predecessors,
who had not taken the like Oath before. Yet I think no man will conclude so,
but rather, that this is a worthy Precedent, fit to be followed and to be left
unto posterities. Also it may be said, the more multiplicitie of Suits that
does increase (as indeed they do daily) the more caution is to be used, and
the more care to be enjoined unto the Judges in the Trial of them. Secondly,
The former Judges followed the Oath which was given them, and therefore no
disgrace to them that their Successors have a more strict Oath; nor is it any
disgrace to them that receive it: because it belongs unto latter times, to
provide for that which former Ages have left undone. And in this new Oath, no
Judge is singled out, or made a mark by himself, which if he were, it might
indeed tend much to his disgrace, as a great argument of distrust in him. But
whether this Oath, or any part of it, and whether the latter, if not the
former, be to be used, or whether it be often or seldom to be administered; is a
matter which I submit wholly to the Censure of such as are most Judicial and
fit in the highest seats of Authority and Judgment.

To the second Point, spoken of before, which concerns the overburthening of
the Subjects by delays and by diverting the right Proceedings of the Law. This
is not to be attributed to the Laws themselves nor to the Judges thereof, but
to the corrupt ministers, officers, and practitioners of the Law, who do (as
most men in other Faculties are accustomed) prefer their own private profit
before the public utility: They from whom these faults do flow (which are
commonly but not justly imputed to the Laws) are, amongst others, these; that is
to say, Counselors at Law, Atturneys, Officers in Courts of Records Sheriffs
and their Bailiffes, etc.

For the first sort, which are the Counselors at Law and Barristers, as they
are called, the right Proceedings of the Law (in diverse particular men's Cases)
in Suits, is many times diverted, and sometimes overthrown by their multitude,
insufficiency, advice of delatory, or defective Pleas, by their taking of
excessive Fees, and by their absenting of themselves from the Bars, and places
appointed to plead for their Clients, after that they have taken Fees.

First, the multitude of Counselors Multitude of Counselors.
at Law and outer Barristers is so great, that many of them are not able to
maintain themselves, and some have few or no Clients at all, especially such of
the second sort as were named to be insufficient, who if any Suitors at Law
come unto them for Counsel by reason of their acquaintance, kindred, or other
private respects, they many times send them away unsatisfied, or if they rely
on such weak Counselors, sometimes their good Causes (for want of sound
Counsel) are overthrown. The reason of the multitude and insufficiency of many
of these Counselors The Insufficiency of diverse Counselors at Law.
at Law (as I conceive it) is, because diverse of them are admitted to the Bar
before they have read over half the Volumes of the Law, and before they have
with any good Commendation or allowance, performed the exercises at Mootes, and
at Readings, which is requisite for the place, and for the testimony of their
Profession and sufficiency: but having lived so long in one of the Inns of
Court, as is prescribed by the orders of that house wherein they are; although
they be (and are known to be) no profitable or painful students: yet, by
favor they find means to be called to the Bar, many times to their own
hindrance, and much to the hurt of such as have their Counsel. The second
Cause of this their insufficiency is, for that they have of late been permitted
to plead at Bar, and to put their hands unto Pleadings, as soon as they are
made Barristers: whereas in former times it was neither usual or allowed, that
they should either plead at Bar or put their hands to Pleadings till three
years after they were called: and in those times they were kept more hardly and
strictly to their Mootes and Pleadings in those houses wherein they continued.
The Inconveniencie of this general, untimely and promiscuous kind of Pleading
and counseling by all sorts of Lawyers in Rome (as well the unlearned as the
able and sufficient) was foreseen and in some sort prevented by Augustus the
Emperor in his time, who ordained Augustus his restraint of Lawyers in Rome.
that no Lawyer should practice without his royal assent and approbation first
had. If the King's Majesty did take this course with our Common Lawyers, or
else assigned some others of greatest authority and Judgment in the Law to
take good notice and assurance of their sufficiency before they should be
admitted to practice, there would not be such a deluge of insufficient
Counselors at Law within this Kingdom, by whose Ignorance and want of
knowledge many men's Inheritances and Estates are overthrown.

For their perilous advice of delays, The ill advice of Counselors given to
their clients.
and of other evasions to procure gain unto themselves, and less unto others:
it is sure that there are diverse Counselors at Law who study nothing more than
(as it may be truly termed) the Gall of the Law; how to seek evasions, and to
defeat the true meaning of the Law, and as well to draw some into danger of the
Law and to overthrow the Right of others by their own incircumspection, by
their Adversaries cunning, and by the advices of such wicked Counselors
against whom there should be some sharp Law made for their punishment: or if
not so, yet it should seem requisite that every Councellor at the Law, should
An Oath necessary to be given unto Counselors at Law.
(when he is called to the bar) take some special Oath for his upright dealing
in the advice of his Clients; to proceed according to Equity, and that he
should not lead them into any by paths of indirect and un-conscionable
evasions, contrary to the true meaning and upright course of Law, and of a good
Conscience. By this means (if they who take this Oath have any good Conscience
in them) the expense of much money in Law may be saved, and honest peaceable
men kept from the trouble of quarrelsome and unquiet Neighbors in Causless
Suits.

Another abuse there is offered by The excessive Fees that Counselors take.
the Counselors at Law in the taking of excessive Fees, which late Custom
their extreme covetousness, and the necessities of men's Estates in their Suites
have introduced: For of late years (and in the memory of many men yet living)
xx s. was a good Fee for a great Councellor, not only to move but to plead at
the Bar; and if a Sergeant at Law had x s. for to argue a Case, he thought
himself well rewarded. But now what Councellor of account and of good practice
is there, that will think xl s. a sufficient recompense if he do argue any man's
Case at the Bar? nay that Sergeant at Law who has but v l. given for such a
purpose, will go thither with an ill will, or else not come at all; besides
how often Many Fees every Term for one Cause.
they must be feed in one Case, even in one Term, although of the poorest
Client they have, (if they have occasion to come often unto them) common
experience, and many poor men's Purses, can too well tell. Therefore when it
pleased the King's Majesty at his first coming to this Crown of England
graciously to take notice of this enormity, and to make known his Pleasure that
indifferent and reasonable Fees should be taken by the Counselors at Law of
their Clients, some of them did restore (or at least offer to restore) part of
the Fees proffered unto them, which continued no longer with any of them than
the dread of punishment or of danger drew them thereto. But where it is
alleged by some, that the sufficiency of all Counselors is not alike, All
Lawyers not of like sufficiency or merit.
nor their pains and travel all alike, and therefore their Recompense cannot
be equally measured, no more than in other Faculties can the professors thereof
merit as much the one as the other.

To this I think it may be easily answered, That although the sufficiency and
pains of every one be not answerable unto the best, yet there should some
proportion be limited, what the best might deserve, and how much he should take
in such Some proportion of Fees to be limited.
and such particular Cases; by which also somewhat a correspondent Recompense
might be awarded to others of inferior degrees and sufficiency, though not to
be scanted by the penny yet at the least to be rated by the pound, whereby a
man of reasonable Estate (in a suite of reasonable value) might compass his
Right without his undoing: and although the Labourer be worthy of his hire, yet
is it hard, that the Labourer for his hire should have the value of the Land
whereon he labors or more, as many Lawyers have.

But chiefly diverse of the Counselors do offend and abuse their Clients
(sometimes to their utter undoing) when some of them do take round Fees against
a day of Hearing, and yet neither come to the place, or if they do they depart
before it be heard, and sometimes in the midst of the Argument being sent for
unto another Bar in another Cause, where perchance their Fee is greater or
their Client of more reputation or nearer unto them, whereby men depending on
them according to promise after Fees taken, receive much prejudice, and
sometimes the subversion of their Estates. In this Case many men have much
wished that either they were enjoined to plead at one Bar only, (according to
ancient order, so should they be certainly found, and their Clients not
frustrated of their help) or else if that were not thought fit, yet that some
severe punishment may be ordained and afflicted on such Counselors as take
Fees for several Courts in one day, and do break with their Clients.

The 2d sort of Ministers toward The Abuse of Attorneys.
the Law, who do mislead the people in their Suits, and sometimes make them
misspend their money in undertaking of unjust Suits, and setting on of men to
causeless quarrels, (for their own private commodity,) are the Attorneys at
Law, who do diverse ways offend, and many of them offer much wrong. First, for
their The Multitude of Attorneys.
Multitude; for they have increased to such a huge number of later years, that
they cannot choose but make much work for the Lawyers and Law in the parts
wherein they live; as in the Courts of Records at Westminster. First, to begin
with the Court of Common Pleas; Since this Attorneys of the Common Pleas.
Chief Justice of that Court came to his Place, he commanding an Enquiry to be
made by Jury, of the number and condition of Attorneys belonging to that Court;
it is said that there were no less than 800. of them found already by Jury: so
that the Complaint is common, that every Scrivener, and other men's Clerks, who
have desired that place, (paying a certain sum,) have been all thereto
admitted, to the no small hurt of the Subjects of this Kingdom. But if the Lord
chief Justice, who has begun this laudable course, do perfect it, with out
remission, to weed out both the excessive surplusage of their number, and
discharge all them that are ill conditioned, or not of sufficient understanding
and experience, (as no doubt but that there are diverse of that sort,) and no
question but he will do it, (especially if he be required thereto:) By this
good example, other Courts of Justice may be purged of their ill members, to
the general good of the whole Realm.

There is the like, though not so great an excess of Attorneys, in the
Attorneys in the Kings bench.
Kings Bench at Westminster, wherein there are estimated to be about 200, and
yet within the memory of some yet living, there were not above eight or twelve
at the most; for indeed they ought not to be other than the Prignatories Clerks
of that Court. But besides these (who only make out Writts) there are nine
parts of ten that are reckoned Attorneys Attorneys at large.
at large, as they call them, who neither take Oath, nor have any power to make
out Writts, but yet every one of them keeps a Clerk, and some two, to write
under them, who must be maintained by their Masters countenance, and sometimes
they maintain their Masters, by bringing Causes, and Clients unto them: these
swarming in so great numbers, cannot live, and grow rich (as many of them do)
without they hearten and increase Suits and stirs betwixt their neighbors,
which enormities might partly be reformed by the Statutes already made, if they
were put in execution and by some other provision; for it should seem Provision
made by former Laws against Attorneys.
that former times have had trial of their abuses, and care to reform them,
though there were not then such urgent cause to take a sharp course with them
as at this instant.

By the Statute of the 4 of Henry the 4. every Attornie should be sworn truly
to serve in their Offices, but now no Oath at all given unto many of them,
especially to deal justly and uprightly, other than for the profit of their
Court. By the same statute, if any Attornie were openly found in default, by
Record or otherwise, he should forswear the Court, and never after be allowed
to prosecute any Suite in any of the King's Courts.

By a late Statute made 3 Jacobi nuper Regis Angliae none should be henceforth
admitted Attorneys in any of the King's Courts of Record, but such as have been
brought up in the same Courts, or have been well practiced in soliciting of
Causes, and have been found of honest disposition; which Statute (so well and
lately made) is already set aside, and grown out of use.

By the same Statute no Attornie shall be allowed from his Client for any Fee
or for any Disbursement in charge of Law without a ticket subscribed with the
hands of them to whom the same is given or paid, and shall give a bill,
subscribed with his hand, of all such Charges concerning the said Suits. But
yet we see this Law no sooner made, but already altogether infringed by the
Attorneys and Solicitors: for it may be, that some of them do deliver a Bill of
the Charges, but who is there that brings a Ticket under the hands of the
Counselors and Officers to whom the same is paid? This is an abuse worthy to
be reformed, and this Statute very necessary to be executed.

In the 33 year of King Henry the 6. a Law was made that there should be but
six common Attorneys in Norffolk, six in Suffolk, and two in Norwich. If then
the Country were pestered with Attorneys, and that a Law must be made to
ascertain the A Law already made necessary to be executed for the admission of
Attorneys.
number (which likewise should be elected and admitted by the two chief
Justices,) how much more needful is it now to have the like Law of restraint
for all the Counties of this Kingdom, when we see how, even in those Shires
(then thus provided for) there are far greater numbers of Attorneys, and such
for the most part as they are specially noted (by them who know these
Countries) to be full of cunning, and many of them nourishers of contention,
and contenders themselves with their neighbors. These being commonly the
Conduits that convey Suits and Gain to covetous and unconscionable men desiring
Law, with the loss and impoverishment of many: there is therefore great need
that their numbers should be lessened, and their dispositions, who shall be
allowed to practice, well known to be good and honest.

A third sort there are of the ministers of our Law which do offer oppression
and wrong unto the subjects of this Kingdom in their Suits. And they are the
Officers of the Courts of Records and their Clerks, Abuse of Officers and their
Clerks in the Courts of Record.
whereof many do exact unreasonable and unlimited Fees, not (or very seldom)
vouchsafing to set down in a note under their hands what their Fees are, but
demanding so much, or else nothing must be done, or if it be first done they
will often detain it until their own demands be satisfied. So the Subject must
give whatsoever No certainty of Fees in most Courts
it pleases them to ask. Wherein it has been the hearty desire of such as
wish well unto their Country (without any private respect unto themselves) that
there might be a certainty of Fees set down for every Court, and the same to
remain in written Tables in open Court, subject to every man's view, whereby the
Subjects who have Suits in Law may not have so great cause of loss, and of
complaint as now they have. Of the same nature (and indeed a part of this
exaction) is the excessive Excessive Rates for the writing of Copies.
Rates taken for writing the Copies of all Bills, and Answers, Replications,
and Rejoinders, and of all other Records within the Court of Westminster and
the Offices belonging to the same: First for the foul and Wastfull Writing of
purpose.
wastfull Writing, next for the few numbers of Lines in every Sheet, and for
the smallness of the Paper wherein they write; they always demanding so much
for the sheet, how few soever of lines, letters or syllables there be in the
same; and always they strive to write the least they can, with great letters,
full of large dashes, to make the more distance, and very spacious lines for
their more Gain and the greater Charge of them who are forced to take out these
Copies, whereby they raise great sums of money out of the Subjects purses,
keep good houses, purchase much living, enrich themselves and impoverish many
Suitors at Law. If that some reasonable stint of this Writing and the certainty
of Fees withal might be set down and observed, it would without doubt yield
great contentment, prosit and ease unto the people of this Land, who, for the
most part, feel, and some sink under this burden.

Besides these before mentioned Abuses in the Ministers and Officers of our
Law, there are some other declinations and with-drawings from the right
Proceeding of Law by such as seek to pervert the same. As The Judges select
certain Lawyers, whom they hear most willingly and often.
first in every Court of Record in Westminster, the Judges have certain
selected men, on whom they are pleased to bestow their favors, in yielding
them ready hearing before others; which being perceived, they are the more
resorted to (and must have the more Fees.) This increases the charge of the
subjects, and yet many times disappointeth them of their expectation. And
although it be not unreasonable that the Judge should extend his favor more
unto some than unto the rest (by hearing them before others) yet considering
the inconveniency of this favor, it were far better forborne, and to be some
way else showed unto them that deserve it. There is also some Rules of the
Courts uncertain and unknown to the Judges.
defect in the Courts, concerning the Rules of the Courts, that sometimes the
Judges themselves are ignorant of the Rules of their Courts, touching the times
of Answer, Reply, Rejoinder, Imparlance, with the like circumstances, whereby
they are forced to ask the opinions of the antientest and best experienced
Attorneys and Officers of the Court, touching those Rules; where it were much
better that time were taken by the Judges to examine these Rules, wherein
perchance somewhat might be amended for the more speedy execution of Justice,
and the same set down in writing might be more certain and subject to all men's
knowledge, with less hindrance to Suitors and to their Causes.

There are also some Courts in Westminster, where the Judges (as for example
the Barons of the Exchequer) do alter upon new motions out of Court (as in the
Chequer Chamber or in other places) the Orders Alteration of Orders out of the
Court.
made in Court. And that which was publicly ordered by all the Barons in open
Court is often reversed by one of the Barons; when either the plaintiff or
defendant brings his Counsel, and upon some new information, gets the
former Order to be dissolved, which tends much to the Trouble, Charge and
Delay of many Suitors.

In the Kings Bench and somewhere else (as it is said) writing out of Record
must be twice or thrice unnecessarily copied, as upon a Prohibition Unnecessary
Copies to be taken out.
a copy of the Suggestion, then after Declaration, a new Copy, after issue or
Demurrer, a third Copy; whereas each of them sometimes cost three, four or five
pounds; and yet, with a little alteration, it is thought that one might serve
for all.

The incertainty and intricate ambiguity Incertainty and intricacy of Pleadings.
of Pleadings in the Courts of Records bring much damage and danger unto the
Subjects of this Kingdom, wherein many men (wishing well unto our Laws) have
exceedingly desired, That either some certain Forms of these Pleadings (if it
were possible to be performed) might be drawn by expert men, and the same
considered and corrected by the Judges, might stand for good: and those Forms
to be allowed as in Rome, at the first, the Forms of Actions were given to the
Actors of the Law by the Pretors:

Or if this may not be performed, Advantages of pleadings not to be so penal.
yet that some other Course were taken upon the advantage of a Pleading
mistaken than is in the Case betwixt the King and his Subject.

If also in Actions personal a shorter A shorter course to be taken in Actions
personal.
and more certain Course were taken than is by our Common Law, whereof somewhat
has been spoken before (as that which the Civil Law allows, or some other
such like) for speedy and direct Trial without evasion or circumvention; it
would yield no small profit unto the People that are forced to prosecute these
Suits.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of some Law Books printed for, and sold by, several Booksellers in
Fleetstreet and Holborn.
1. Rastell's Entries, fol. price 3li. 2. Pulton's Statutes continued to the
year 1670. price 50s. 3. Cook's Commentary on Littleton, price 18s. 4. Dalton's
Office of Sheriffs with very large Additions, printed in the year 1670. fol.
12s. 5. Townsend's Tables to most of the printed precedents, Writs and Returns
at Commom Law, fol. 12s. 6. The Law of Common Assurances touching Deeds in
General, viz. Feoffments, Gifts, Grants, Leases, with two Alphabetical Tables,
by W. Sheppard Esquire; fol. price 14s. 7. The Country Justice, containing the
practice of the Justices of the Peace as well in, as out of, Sessions, and with
Additions, by Michael Dalton, in fol. price. 8s. 8. A Collection of all the
Acts and Statutes made in the Raigns of King Charles the first and King Charles
the second, fol. price. 14s. 9. Lord Cook's eleven books of Reports in French,
fol. printed 1672. price 3li. 10. Lord Cook's Book of Entries, fol. price 3li.
11. Lord Hobart's Reports with Additions, in fol. price 10s. 12. Lord Dyer's
Reports with a new Table, fol. printed 1672. price 18s. 13. Complete Clerk, 4o.
price 12s. 14. An abridgement of all the Statutes in force and use from Magna
Charta to the year 1670. by Edmond Wingate, 8o. price 6s. 15. Fitz-herbert's
Natura Brevium Corrected and amended, 8o. price 5s. 16. Terms of the Law with
Additions, 8o. printed in the year 1670. price 4s. 17. Doctor and Student,
printed in 1673. price 2s. 18. The Complete Justice in 12o. price 2s. 19.
Briddal's view of the Laws of England, 8o. price 1s. 20. Littleton's Tenures
French and English, in 12o. price 2s. 6d. 21. Lord Cook's Complete Coppyholder,
with additions, 8o. price 1s. 6d. 22. Abridgement of the statutes that relate
to the knowledge and practice of the Common Law in 8o. price 1s. 23. Complete
Attorney, 8o. price 3s. 24. Fortescue of the Laws of England, 8o. price 3s. 25.
Placitae Latinae Redivivae, with Additions, printed Mich. Term 1673. 4o. price
6s. 26. The Transactions of the High Court of Chancery both by practice and
precedent, with the Fees thereunto belonging in 8o. by Will. Tothill Esquire; late
one of the six Clerks, printed 1673. price 1s. 6d.


