DIVINE POEMS.

BY EDMUND ELIS, Master of Arts, and Fellow of Baliol College in Oxford.

Epist. ad 1 Cor. C. 3. V. 18. (...). LONDON, Printed by T. Lock for the use of
the Author. MDCLIX.

TO THE READER.
READER,
DO not expect to have an account why I set forth these Poems again: If thou
shall like them, thou will not doubt but I had Reason sufficient to make them
as public as I could: If thou art one of those Vain Fellows that scorn and
deride them; to tell thee the reason I had for it, would be no other then to
talk of Colors to a Blind Man, or of Sounds to one that is Deaf. If any man
wonder that l thus incurr the Censures of People, let him know, That if my
Heart do not starngely deceive me, I would rather expose my self to the
continual Aspersions of the Foulest Mouths; or be in danger of Death it self,
then neglect any Opportunity of doing God such service, as J doubt not but I
shall by my further Publication of these my Vn-worldly, and most Retired
Imaginations; which, being composed in Meetre, will (I suppose) suit the better
with the Genius of some, and be the apter to insinuate, and work themselves
deep into the Memories of all that read them. And now Reader, if thou be a
CHRISTIAN indeed, I shall entreat thee by all the Love that thou owe to Him
that was CRUCIFIED for thy sake, that thou would Oppose with all thy Might,
that Vain Spirit of Foolish Talking and Writing, which is gone abroad into the
World to the great Dishonor of HIS Name; who has told us, that we shall give an
account of every idle word. And here I cannot but Exclaim aloud (to Thee and
all True CHRISTIANS) against some of Mr. COWLEY's Verses; particularly that
Part of his Book, which he entitles THE MISTRESS; in which there are several
Expressions so provoking to Speculative Lust and uncleanness, that I cannot
conceive how a CHRISTIAN, that casts his Eye on them, can think otherwise, then
that the Author did either Forget that There is a GOD, or that it is Sinful to
be Lascivious. What Profaneness also is this Author guilty of, who uses these
Sacred Words, HEAVEN, DEITY, DIVINE PRESENCE, FAITH, etc. to set forth his
Dissolute, Amorous Conceptions: Let any man of Common Reason judge whether the
Minds of any Readers Vitiously inclined, (and such surely are all those that
delight in those POEMS) be not as apt to be wholly Debauched, and Corrupted, by
a Work of this Nature, as those men's Bodies are to take Infection, when they
are amongst sick folk, who are already disposed to the Disease. Alas! alas!
Are not men apt enough of themselves to be Vain in their imaginations! Must the
Froath and Vanity of wanton Minds be wrought up, and increased by the Wit
and Studies of such Learned Persons; and those owning the Name of CHRISTIANS! O
Tempora! O Mores! I know very well what an Heavy Burden of Anger and Hatred J
am like to Undergo for VVriting thus against a Book so generally Applauded:
But, whilst J Depend upon GOD, as J hope J shall ever do, J shall not sink
under it. VVhenever J am Railed on, if J Hear not of it, it is Nothing to Me; if
J do, it is the Object of My Patience, the Exercise whereof is the Delight of My
Soul. As for such Censures as These, That I Envy Mr. COWLEY the Great Name He
has of a POET, etc. My Answer is, l am so far from endeavoring to Detract from
His Personal Reputation, that I shall openly confess, I should be more Impudent
indeed, then many Virulent Tongues have Pronounced me, if I should not
Acknowledge Him to be one of the most Learned, and Ingenious Persons, that ever
J knew to have Written an English Verse. For my part, I confess, I had never
the True Art of Poetry; I had once some Inclination toward it; which for want
of Use, I have now lost. As for those few Verses J have Printed, J have still
the same Opinion of most of them, that J had at first: but some EPIGRAMS (J
confess) J find upon serious Consideration to be such (as to the Matter, with
the Expression) that if any man Vpbraid me with them, J shall be ready to say,

-- Pudet haec opprobria nobis, etc.

Reader, Farewell: And Look narrowly into what thou read in these ensuing
Leaves; which if thou do, J doubt not but thou will find the Author such a
one, as neither Courts thy Applause, nor Fears thy Censures.

woodcut of laboring folkMan that is born of a Woman, is of few days, and full
of trouble, Job 14. 1.
1.
OUR Time's still Flying: and we all make have
To Live our last.
We Come into the World to See It; and then
Go out again.
We are born Crying, and we spend our Breath
In Sighs till Death.
Our Life is but a Toil: ere we can Try
What course of Life is best, it is time to Die.
2.
The Merchant wastes himself with fretting Cares;
With Hopes and Fears:
And when his Baggs are filled, his Last Day comes;
He leaves his Sums.
When he would joy in what his Pains have got*
Straight he is not.
By all the Care wherein his Life is spent,
Perhaps he gets a Costly Monument.
3.
The Scholar bends his Curious Thoughts to find
What is the Mind.
He studies to Know Good, but seldom Does
The Good he Knows.
Some winding up their wit to an High Strain,
Have cracked their Brain.
He that is most Learned, only comes to this,
To Know at last how Ignorant he is.
4.
The Ranting Gallant wears out Time and Clothes,
To learn New Oaths:
He scorns to take Affron's, but thinks it Brave
To be Hell's Slave.
The Coontrey Farmer's thinking night and day
Of Corn and Hay.
But Hawks and Hounds are for the better sort,
Who lose their Time in Seeking of their Sport.
5.
In every Action, whatsoever it is,
Something's amiss.
We never observe a Mean: we Run and Sweat,
Or cannot get Heat.
Some Bitterness still interrupts our Joys,
Or Too much Cloyes.
Our Choicest Comforts are inlay'd with Fears;
And all our Pleasures Sprinkled over with Tears.
6.
Amid'st this Trouble here is My Hope, that I
Shall shortly Die.
Our Time Ore-cast with Sorrow soon Decaies,
Like Winter-Dayes.
We Are Pilgrims here on Earth: This is our Way,
No Place of Stay.
The VVay's unpleasant: Come, Death, be My Friend;
And bring Me quickly to My Journey's-End.
Preparation to the H. Communion.
1.
FArewell Beloved Sins: I must be gone:
Nay, hold! I must!
Ah! how I Sigh, and Sob, and moan,
To leave each Lust!
I must not Live so Loose, as heretofore:
My Father Says that I shall Play no more.
2.
He that made Wint, and Corn, would have us Dine
With Him to day:
Where we shall See our Soul's SUN shine;
And hear Him Say,
Here take my Flesh and Blood; come Drink and Eat:
To get You BREAD what Drops once did I Sweat?
3.
But, oh Dear JESU, All my Raiment's torn,
I dare not Come.
My Feet I have defiled this Morn;
They Will Foul thy Room.
But Thee, LORD, I Will put on: So Thou shall be
The Wedding Garment, Bridegroom, Feast to Me.
That which I do, I allow not; for what I would, that do I not; but what I
hate, that do I, Romans 7. 15.
1.
MY Mind keeps out the Host of SIN,
Sense lets 'em in:
In The Phant'sie, as in the Trojan Horse,
They Hide their Force,
Till Opportunity they find
To Sally, and Subdue the Mind.
2.
My Childish Soul often Cries for what
It straight does Hate.
My Lusts, which Reason should Control,
War against my Soul;
And having got the Victory, Romans 7. 23*

Bring me into Captivity.
3.
My Love against My Will is hurled
Upon the World:
I See not in the Dark. I know
Not what I Do,
When Sin besets me; so befooled,
I hate to do even what I would.
4.
O when shall my lost Soul Obtain
Her Self again*
To Act Her own Hate, and Desire!
O Sacred FIRE!
Refine My Heart, and that it be
Kept Pure, O LORD, I give it Thee.
The SOUL's Lethargy, Or, No Sense of SIN.
1.
MY Soul Sin-smitten feels no Blow! Struck down
She Is in a Swoun!
Thus wronged, She cannot Complain!
She lies Astonished, cannot Call on
The GOD of Her Salvation,
To help her up again.
2.
I Am Sick because I have no Pain: My Sore,
That Is now Skinn'd ore,
Will Putrify, I fear:
My Soul has lost Her Vital Heat,
True Zeal: Her Pulse gives ore to Beat,
As if her Death were near.
3.
Mine Eyes are open to Weep, not See: My Mind
Untranc'd I find,
Pierced with a Fiery Dart!
Ah! now I am Awak't again,
My Sense serves but to feel my Pain:
Fresh Sorrow gripes my Heart.
4.
Lo! Gracious JESU! lo! How Sick am I!
How like to Die!
Maimed by the Host of Hell!
Let but the Prince of Darkness Fly
Before the Luster of Thine Eye;
I Will View Thee, and be well.
Her House is the way to Hell, leading down to the Chambers of Death, Prove. 7.
27.
HER House is the (next) way to Hell,
Satan's Strong-Hold: the Furies Cell.
There Is Venom in her Sweetest Breath:
Her Tempting Hair's the Snare of Death.
The Flaming Beauty of Her Eyes
Is but the Devil's Sacrifice.
Her looks are Gaudy, but not Fine:
Her Clearest Beauties Blaze, not Shine.
O go not after her! Refrain
From seeking that whose Loss is Gain.
Vain Joys, like Shades, Fly, when Embraced:
Such Paint, when Touched, is straight Defaced.
Such Sweets of Love let me Decline,
They are but Poison Drunk in Wine.
Lusts sparkling Flame, to Wildfire turns;
Such Boistrous Heat warms not, but Burns.
Beware the Siren when She Sings:
Bees full of Honey have their Stings.
CHRIST's Death.
1.
THis day Pressed with our Sins, the MOST HIGH Fell.
Least he should Feed on Us, Christ Satiates Death
With his own Blood: Quenching the Flames of Hell,
Enkindled by the Fire of's Fathers Wrath.
To make Atonement for our Sins GOD Dies:
Our Jesus is GOD, Priest, and Sacrifice.
2.
Lo, how the hasty Jews cry Crucify!
Lo, how they judge the Holy One to Death!
Whose Attribute is Immortality!
Lo, how they murder Him who gave them Breath:
The King of Glory suffers Shame; and He
That Made the World is Hanged upon a Tree.
3.
Lo, how they Nail unto the Cross His HANDS.
Who Spans the Heavens! how his Feet they Pierce,
Who over Hell and Death Triumphant stands:
Whose boundless Presence fills the Universe!
How the ALMIGHTY every Varlet scorns;
Lo, He by whom Kings Reign, is Crowned with Thorns.
4.
And now the Soldier with his Cruel Spear
Dares Pierce the Side of the blessed Prince of Peace:
His Torments are so great as Man can bear,
The Angry Godhead will not make them less:
When he thought that stood off, Grief filled his Heart:
Cursed Sin! for which GOD and CHRIST seemed to Part!
5.
He Bowed his head, on which so Heavy lay
The Sins of Adam, and all Adam's Seed;
Which by his Death He did Revive this Day;
To heal our wounded Souls his Limbs did Bleed.
Lord, I believe, let me partaker be
Of Thy Deaths Power, that I may Live to Thee.
CHRIST'S RESURRECTION.
1.
OUR LORD is Risen; and the Powerful Grave
Holds him no longer; He has made his way
Even through the Gates of Death, that He might save
His Heavenly Flesh from turning into Clay.
The Grave knew not whom he had taken; when
He saw who 'twas, he let Him out again.
2.
Upon this Day the SUN's Creator Rose,
And the Eternal LIFE came from the Dead:
He that made Ours, did His blessed Eyes Unclose,
And saw the Place where his own Corpse were laid.
Death Conquered thus, He laid his Grave-Cloaths by,
As Trophies of his Signal Victory.
3.
I know not whether may more strange be thought,
For GOD to Die, or MAN to Rise again:
Our Holy JESUS made both True: He Fought
The Lion Death even in the Grave, his Den.
And thus he Entered the Strong Bounds of Fate,
Not as Led Captive, but to Captivate.
4.
The King of Terrors now has lost his Power,
And is become a Servant unto all,
Who will but imitate their SAVIOR,
Who made a Triumph of his Funeral.
And now He Is up, me thinks I hear him Say
To all that Die in Him, Rise, come away.
Christ's ASCENSION.
1.
Who on the Water Walked, now Climbs the Air;
And without Dying, thus He goes to Heaven:
Although His Habitation now be there,
Yet we on Earth are not of Him bereaven.
He Is like those Lights which in the Skies appear,
Though there His Body be, His Rays are here.
2.
Now He Is Ascended up on high, lo, He
Gives us His Hand that we may get up too:
By Him our Strength, we Walk, our Light, we see:
He makes us Able, Shows us what to Do.
To Heaven He Is gone for us there to Provide.
Blessed they whose GOD's their Harbinger, and Guide.
3.
Look up, My Soul, (and with blessed STEPHEN) See
Thy JESUS Standing on th'right hand of God.
And then think Earth too mean a Place for thee,
Whom He Redeemed with his most precious Blood.
Sweet JESU, Thou vvast pleased to Buy me, Come,
(I Am not the World's but Thine) and Fetch Me Home.
The Loins of the Mind Girded: or An Holy Vow.
THere is a GOD! My Soul, how durst thou Stray!
Thou Wilt Meet His Vengeance if thou go this way!
Return! Return! lo, this Path seems too Broad:
Here Many go: the Way to Heaven's no Road.
My Soul, put on thy Garments: Gird them fast:
'Twill make thee Comely, thus to go Straight-lac't.
And now I am Resolved: in spite of Hell,
And my False Heart, I Will still strive to Do well.
In all my Warfare I Will Hold fast My SHIELD.
Then Satan Do thy worst, I Will win the Field.
Sinful Dreams.
1.
THE Prince of Darkness loves to Fight
Our Souls by Night.
That Black Old Serpent often Creeps
Ore one that Sleeps:
As Vipers often Crawle upon
Men Sleeping in the Shade at Noon.
2.
SIN (like a Thief) comes in by Day
Some secret way,
And Lurks (Hid from True Reasons' Eye)
In The Fantasy,
'Till Sleep makes Us secure and quiet,
Then breaks forth, and Commits the Riot.
Come, My Dear GOD, and Lodge thou in My Breast,
That when My Body Sleeps, My Soul may Rest.
The BACKSLIDERS Recantation; Or, A Farewell to the World.
1:
FAlse-hearted World farewell! go to* I find
Thee too unkind:
I took thee for a Friend, did love to Play
With thee all day:
But thou did cog the Dice: I (to my shame)
Lost every Game:
Thy Stakes were Pleasures, and deceitful Toys:
Mine were True-coine, full weight, large, Solid Joys.
2.
Now thou have got all that I had, I see,
Thou slightest me.
Thou wast wont to embrace me kindly; and
Give me thy Hand.
With many promises of Love, but Lo!
Thou art my Fo!
Though all my Serious Thoughts (good Company)
(Fool that I was!) I left to follow Thee.
3.
But I Will Return to Them again: I Will rome
No more from Home:
The Mind that Stays within shall never complain
Of Wind or Rain,
Of Care or Grief: for Storms shake only Breasts
That seek their Rests
Without doors, where is naught but Toil; as though
To be kept warm, they'de lie on Beds of Snow:
4.
Great God! I leave the World, and come To Thee:
Open to Me.
I Knock! O let me Find thy Throne of Grace,
I Seek thy Face!
I Will Dye to sin, put off My self, and then
Be Born again.
Christ's Blood shall be my Life. The WORD (that can
Call up the Dead) is Breath to the New Man.
I am a sinful Man!
1.
BAd Thoughts, like Swarms of Flies infest
My Corrupt Breast!
Each Opening of my heart lets in
Some Treacherous Sin!
My best Intents are Pale, and wan
Like the Old Man!
And thus my wretched Mind is still
Remiss to Good, or Bent to Ill.
2.
These are my Hidden Sins: but oh!
They quickly grow
To Outward Acts: Vain Words and Deeds
Spring from these Seeds.
With these Materia's Satan tries
To Build up Vice.
Which is the Storehouse of all Sin:
Our Adversaries Magazine.
3.
Pluck out the Serpent ere it Wind
Into thy Mind:
A Vicious Temper's Sin, all ore
A Putrid Sore;
From which, Streams of Corruption
Do daily Run;
Physician search my Heart, and see
What Kind of Sore thus troubles Me.
4.
All my Diseases, LORD, discry:
Thy Blessed Eye
Heals all thou Come to See; whose Beams
Will dry the Streams
Of these Ill Humors, and dispell
The Mists of Hell:
The Dark Fumes of all Fond Desires,
Smoke rising up from Lustful Fires.
5.
I must confess, I have long bin
The Slave of Sin.
But Righteous Judge, now set me Free,
And I Will Serve Thee:
I have Rebelled, I have withstood
My King my God!
But LORD that Bill, which Justice brings to thee,
Blot with the Blood which thou did shed for me.
A Foul Morning; or, The Young Converts Doubts, etc. Help thou mine Unbelief.
Mark 9. 24.
HElp Master of my Faith! I Am forced to Wink
At this Bright Truth! in these great Depths I Sink!
O! it is beyond my reach, I cannot Tread:
Nor can I Swim unless thou Hold my Head!
My Reason's at a stand! Thus are Thy Ways
Past finding out! How Dazzling are Thy Rays
(O SUN of RIGHTEOUSNESS) to Humane Sight?
Like Thy Great Convert, I cannot See for Light!
Thou Shin'dst about me, and I straight was Blind!
On Thee I thought, and straight I lost my Mind!
Stretched out to compass Thy Vast Truths, it broke!
My Hot Zeal Flash't, and so it turned to Smoke!
My Joys are changed to Doubts and Fears, which roll
Like stormy Billows in my Wavering Soul!
Shine forth my SUN* amidst these Showers of Tears,
Let thy Clear Beams pierce through these Clouds of Fears!
Show me Thy Hidden Manna! Angels Food!
I long to Taste and See that thou art Good?
I Am Come to See Thee LORD, though Vile, and Poor,
O let me in! I Will die else at thy Door!
Nemo repent fuit turpissimus.
ARs Magni Sceleris Gradus requirit:
Hujus nec cito fit Magister Artis.
Tarde provehitur Nefas, Malorum
Quicquid Ponderibus suis gravatur.
ANGUIST artarei Propage repit,
N^^ vellet rapidos movere gressus.
Ne Mentem vitio exci^et * Stupentem
Sic L^nte Sc^^eris Venena Peraunt
Humanas Animas: Premuntque laesas
Crudis Vulneribus, Lev^s dolores.
GReat Sins don't Leap, but Creep into the Heart:
No man can straight be Master of the Black Art.
Those Evils go on Slowly to their Height,
Which carry with them a more Pondrous weight,
The Old Serpent's offspring never use to Run,
Temptations come on Softly: Men would shun
Their Fierce Approach. Thus Vice Soul-poyson's known
Seldom to have quick Operation.
Thus as in Body, so in Mind it is true;
The Grief's but little, whilst the VVound is New.
Interioris Hominis Suspiria. Video aliam legem in Membris meis, etc.
ME Miserum? Variis torquentur Pectora Votis:]
Distrah^t Affectus Lex ea Dupla meos!
Sic Divisa capit geminum Men's aegra Dolorem
Lex poscit poenas utraque laesa suas!
Servulus infoelix Peccati Vapulo! Flagris
(Heu miser!) Infestis Oscula saepe dedi.
Sc(...)cet ingratum temere sinus accipit ANGUEM;
Auro splendenti nigra Venena bibo:
Deliciis Premo^ ipse meis: scelerisque nefandi
(Blandulus hic Ignis!) Lambit and Urit amor!
Eheu! Captivum mea me trahit usque voluptas!
Excruciant animum Gaudia prava meum!
Hostas and ipse mihi, Victus, Captusque Triumph^
Ingemit at spoliis men's mea sana suis!
Vulnera tot passus mea Vulnera respice JESU?
Ut mea sanentur, Tu Mihi read Tua!
Corda Tuo mundes proprio foedata Cruore!
Tu mihi da Pacem, Ms Deus, ipse tuam!
I see another Law in my members, warring against the Law of my mind, etc. Romans
7. 23.
Wretch that I am! My Wishes are my Pain,
Two Laws so different rend my Heart in twain!
My Heart Divided Bleeds in either part!
Offending either Law I Am sure to Smart!
Enslaved to sin I Am forced to bear this Yoke,
I Kiss the Rod even whilst I feel the stroke!
The ungrateful SERPENT in my breast I warm!
How I quaff Poison! and embrace my harm!
My Pleasure is my Trouble; and the Heat
Of Fond Desire what is it but a cold Sweat?
Alas! I Am taken with the baits of SIN!
Those corrupt joys but feed the Worm within!
I Triumph when my heart me Prisoner takes:
My mind is grieved thus at the spoil it makes!
O JESU! for me wounded, see My Wound!
Give me thy Bruises that I may be sound!
With thy Blood wash my Heart in Blood Imbrude!
Give me that Peace which may this War conclude!
Wherewithal shall a young man cleanse his way? By taking heed thereto
according to thy Word, Psalm. 119. 9
HArken young men, and here you may
Find out a clean and safer Way.
If you go there, Fall sure you will:
For Filthy ways are Slippery still.
Be but Schoold by God's Law, and then
You Will nere Run in the Dirt again:
You Will Wash your Garments in the Blood
Of The Prince of Peace, the Lamb of God.
Out of this Wilderness of Sin
These Crooked Ways, which now y' are in,
Gods Word, that Fiery Pillar can,
If Followed, lead to Canaan.
This is the Star, which in the Night
Of Sin and Death, will give you Light:
It Is only This, Young men, can tell
How to avoid the Gates of Hell.
Eye well this Lamp, this Leading Fire,
'Twill bring you quite out of the Mire:
If you go on, and wont beware,
You Will surely Sink, and Perish there.
BACKSLIDING. I have sinned!
THese Offerings of Uncleanness Foul
That Glorious IMAGE in my soul,
The Picture of my LORD, which he
(Lim'd in his Blood) once gave to Me!
These Works of Darkness do Benight
My Inward man, that walked in Light.
But now (alas!) I go astray!
It Is Dark: I cannot see the WAY!
The Comforts once I had, are gone;
As if the Holy DOVE were Flown.
She loves VVhite-houses; stays not in
A House of Clay, Defiled with Sin:
But sure she Hovers ore my Breast;
Like Birds that find a Snake in the Nest.
The DOVE will come again, no doubt,
VVhene're the SERPENT is thrown out.
O LORD, Restore to me thy Grace!
I hope Thou did but Hide thy Face.
O JESU! do but Look on Me,
Like Peter I Will VVeep bitterly!
By thy Bright Face show me my Stain,
I Will pour forth Tears to wash it clean.
I hope the DAY will come again anon:
The SUN of RIGHTEOUSNESS is Set, not Gone.
INCONSTANCY.
1.
AH me! how soon my Soul takes VVing and Flies
At every thing she spies,
Some Impress every Object makes upon
My Soft Affection.
Sometimes I Relish Heavenly Manna, then
I lose my Taste, and turn to Husks again.
2.
The Dainties of this World I Would fain enjoy,
But Tasted, straight they Cloy.
Sometimes Good Conscience bids me be a Guest
At her Continual Feast:
With her I find Content; but straight I Am gone,
Called out to Speak with some Temptation.
3.
Satan Bewtiches me: I cannot Stir,
Though I Am Uneasy here.
I know it is pleasant to do well, but still
I covet to do ill.
My Actions are Themselves the Pain they merit;
My Thoughts are all Vexation of Spirit.
O my BELOVED, that my soul might be
More Constant unto Thee*
O that my Breast had Vestal Flames! that I
Might love Continually:
Lord open thou mine Eyes, that I may see
Thy Glorious Face, I Will look on naught but Thee.
Peccatum Redivivum: Or, The Rebellion of a Conquered Lust.
THis Sore breaks out again! shall Death and Hell
Be still in hopes! And shall I never be well?
Thus some at their Uprising Die; some may
Like Judas, at Christ's Table Fall away.
O LORD, put forth thy Hand: O GOD, make have
To help me, or I shall Fall back at last.
Lo, JESU, how I bleed afresh! Lo, I,
Unless Thou Close my wounds, shall Faint, and Dyel*
My Sense begins to fail: my Heart is grown
So Cold (O Lord) as Ice, so Hard as Stone:
Which with a Coal from off thine Altar Thavv,
And Unbenumme, that it may Feel thy Law;
That by its Strokes I may be vvak't from Sin,
That now I may be grieved for what I Have bin.
Thus with thy Physic, Lord, recover me,
That I may have an Appetite to thee,
Who art the Bread of life. O let me cease
To long for that which feeds but the Disease.
It Is only Thou, my God, can make me whole!
It Is only Thou can cure my Dying Soul!
Refresh me (O let me not be denied!)
Even with that Water which came from thy Side.
A Dialogue between a Carnal Man, and a Penitent Sinner.
1.
COme, leave these Melancholy Fits:
They Will put thee quite out of thy Wits.
When thou art Old, thou may have leisure
To Grieve: now take thy fill of pleasure.
Let Bacchus, and sweet Venus too
With their Fresh Garlands Crown thy Brow.
That it may be kept Smooth and Fair,
That Sorrow make no Wrinkles there.
In Mirth pass all this time away:
Come don't make Winter of thy May.
Now whilst it is thy Ages Spring,
Thou should learn with the Birds to Sing:
Reserve thy Tears, and Sighs and Groans,
For Old dim Eyes, and Aching Bones.
2.
My Sadness is no Melancholy:
I Am then most Merry, when least Jolly.
My Pleasure is to Grieve for Sin:
Hence it is that I so soon begin.
Besides, My friend, we seldom see
A Crooked Plant, prove a straight Tree.
I Will not obey that Ranting God,
Which makes men Stutter, Reel, and Nod.
Fond Venus Bird (I dread such Love)
Looks like a Vulture, not a Dove.
If of Her Fire one Spark appear,
I Will Quench it with a Pious Tear.
Now is my Ages Spring I know;
Now is the Time for Grace to Grow.
When Age with Pain shall fill my Bones,
And turn my shortened Breath to Groans.
I Will think it but an Aching Head,
And straight I shall be called to Bed.
1. Go, Zelot: Christian Liberty
Allows us all to be more Free:
The way to Heaven is broader, then
It Is said to be by Pulpit-men.
Those Black Coats are mere Rocks, they tell
Strange Stories of the Devil and Hell,
They, say so many go astray,
'Cause they would be Hired to show the way:
Those Big-words which they throw about,
Are only fit to Scare the Rout.
I Will Care not what Precisians say,
But Swallow all the joys I may.
2. My Friend, True Christian Liberty
Will Not make us Loose, though it make us Free.
We are not bound with any Chain:
VV'are Girt for Ornament, not Pain.
We may Walk, but we must not Stray:
VV'are only Bound to keep our Way.
The Liberty, you boast, is none,
But to Run to Destruction.
Whilst you abhor to be Precise,
And Gallop in the Road of Vice,
You Laugh, like Mad men in your Pains:
And love the Chinking of your Chains.
Beware of speaking ill of Those,
Who Hidden Manna do disclose:
Who Handle the Two-Edged Sword,
Even the ALMIGHTY's Powerful Word;
Which if it Search not, to make Sound,
Will give you an Eternal Wound.
1. What Countrey-parson told thee so?
Why speakst thou what thou do not know?
Who knows but when our Bodies Die,
Our Souls Die too? therefore will I
The Pleasures of this World to VVin,
Nere stick at that, which Fools call Sin.
2. That is, Thou art Resolved to be
Thine own Soul's Mortal Enemy.
What thou callst Pleasure, is but Bait:
Thus thou love Death, and hug'st thy Fate.
Those Comforts, which in Sin we find,
At first Embrace, then Stab the Mind.
When Svvarmes of Thoughts buz in thy Brain,
When thy Head's full of Cares and Pain;
When thou lie Tossing on thy Bed,
Then think of Me, and what I Have said.
To All those that Name the Name of CHRIST.
Ah! Love that JESUS, who once Die'd for You:
And, if you Love Him, what He Bids You, Do.
Qui Vitam posuit pro Te, Tu Dilige CHRISTUM:
DILECTI semper Fac quoque Jussa Tui.
(...),
(...).
O that my ways were directed to keep thy statutes, Ps. 119. 5.
1.
O That I could stand firm at last;
And not be reeling to, and fro!
O that J could My GOD Hold Fast,
And never, never let Him go!
2.
How often do J go astray,
And leave my Rest, my wonted Bliss!
Like a Lost Sheep in the High Way,
Which Dangerous and Barren is.
3.
J have no Pleasure in my Sin,
And yet J Act it over and over!
J'me still the same that J have bin,
Though fain I would be so no more!
4.
J long to Keep the Law of GOD,
But still J Break it to my Pain!
My Stomach serves to take that Food,
But straight J cast it up again.
5.
My GOD! O take me unto Thee,
With Fire-Hot Zeal Melt Thou my Heart;
That now I may New-Moulded be,
And made sound in my Better Part.
6.
LORD, Lead me by thy Grace, that I
May never Wander from Thee more:
Thou art My LIFE, I cannot Die:
Thou art My All; I cannot be Poor.
FINIS.

