The Great MYSTERY OF Godliness Opened.

BEING AN EXPOSITION UPON The whole Ninth Chapter of the Epistle of Saint Paul
to the ROMANS, By the Late Pious and faithful servant of Jesus Christ, Mr.
EDWARD ELTON, Bachelor in Divinity, and sometimes Preacher of the Gospel at
Mary Magdalens Bermondsey near London.

Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I hated, Romans 9.13.

O the Depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God, Romans 11.33.

Great is the Mystery of Godliness, God manifested in the flesh, justified in
the Spirit, seen of Angels, preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the
world, and received up into glory, 1 Timothy 3.16.

Licensed, Entered, Printed, and Published, according to Order.

LONDON. Printed by J. L. for Christopher Meredith, and are to be sold at his
Shop at the sign of the Crane in Paul's Churchyard. 1653.

To the Courteous and Christian Reader.
Good Reader,
THis Book which the good hand of God has put into thy hand to read, is such
of which thou may justly say as Jacob did of his pretended venison, Genesis
27.19; 20.
the Lord has brought it to thy hand, rise up therefore and eat of this savory
meat, such as thy soul loves, or should do at least. It was the work of a most
Pious and skilful Scribe, excellently instructed to the Kingdom of God, Matthew.
13.52.
he was a burning and a shining light: Joh. 5.35.
burning with zeal for Gods glory, and shining as a light in that crooked
Generation wherein he lived, Phil. 2.15.
but he is now triumphing in heaven, and therefore stands not in need either
of thy prayers or my praises, who being dead yet speaks, Heb. 11.4.
so that his own works may justly praise him in the gates, Prove. 31.31.
Leaving therefore the Author (who is now at rest with the Lord) I come to the
book it self, wherein if thou do not meet with new Truths, yet thou shall find
old Truth confuting old and new Errors; sin sharply rebuked, holy Duties
earnestly and seasonably pressed, the power of Godliness advanced, and the
great Mystery of Godliness sweetly opened, evidences of Election clearly
discovered; here thou may know whether thy name be written in heaven, Luke
10.20.
only let me advise thee to follow the Authors method, who begins first
with the Complaint of a Sinner combating and conflicting; then comes to the
Christian Triumphing, and so comes to open the Great Mystery of Godliness; so
do thou read the first Treatise to learn to complain of thy corruption, and
then thou may be sure at last to Triumph with the true Christian, and so be
the fitter to look into the great Mystery of Godliness, for to such is the
promise made by our Savior, that to them it shall be given to know the
Mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven Matthew. 13.11.
; and again if any man be a doer of Gods will, he shall know of the doctrine
whether it be of God Joh. 7.17.
: so that he that is ready to embrace the power of Godliness, and is daily
conversant in the practice of it, is most likely to be skilful in the mystery
of it; get thy heart therefore stored with the graces of the Spirit that
accompany Salvation; add to thy Faith Virtue, and to thy Virtue Knowledge, and
to Knowledge Temperance, and that Patience, and to that Godliness, and to that
Brotherly kindness, etc. For so an entrance shall be made unto thee
abundantly, into the everlasting Kingdom of Jesus Christ 2 Pet. 1.5^; etc. 11.
: besides let me recommend unto thee a fit Treasure for a Christian, to be laid
up in heaven, where the Rust and Mothes cannot corrupt, nor Thieves break
through, nor steal Matthew. 6.20.
. In a word, let me advise thee to store up in thine heart, soundness of
Knowledge, strength of Faith, purity of Heart, clearness of Conscience,
holiness of Life, assurance of Gods favor, contempt of the world; many
sanctified Sabbaths, fervent prayers, holy Conferences, Heavenly Meditations,
days of Humiliation, sincere love of the Saints, righteous dealing with the
Brethren, a sincere love of Jesus Christ Ephesians. 6.24.
, an universal hatred of every known sin, and of all alse ways Psalm. 119.104.
, the true fear of God, and the power of Godliness 2 Timothy 3.5.
. This counsel observed and followed, will enable thee to live Christianly, and
to dye comfortably, with full assurance that when the earthly house of this
Tabernacle shall be dissolved thou shall have an house not made with hands,
eternal in the heavens 2 Cor. 5.17.
; where you shall be ever with Lord q, who sits at the right hand of his
Father, where there is fullness of joy, and pleasures that last for evermore
Psai. 16. ult.
; such as eye has not seen, nor ear has heard, nor has it entered into the
heart of man to conceive, the excellencies of those joys, that God has
prepared for them that love him 1 Cor. 29.
: let me earnestly entreat thee, and affectionatly beseech thee good Reader,
speedily to fall to work, and first seek the Kingdom of God and his
righteousness Matthew. 6.33.
, for herein delays are most dangerous; for the longer thou stayest, thou
shall find, that God grows more angry, Satan more strong, thy self more
unable to repent, sin more unconquerable, thy conversion more difficult, and
thy salvation more impossible; a ruinous house the longer delayed, the more
costly will the repairing be; the nail of sin, the more strokes are given to
it, by frequent acting, the more difficult to get out of that precious soul of
thine; oh then begin speedily because delays are so dangerous; and continue
constantly, having once begun in the spirit, do not make an end in the flesh,
lest you labor and suffer all in vain Gal. 3 3, 4.
, give me leave therefore to press thee effectually in the words of the
Apostle; that having such glorious hopes, and so many precious promises 2 Cor.
1.4.
; endeavor to cleanse thy self from all filthiness of the flesh and Spirit,
perfecting holiness in the fear of God 2 Cor. 7.1.
, always abounding in the work of the Lord, for as much as I can assure thee
that thy labor shall not be in vain in the Lord 1 Cor. 15.58.
, only be sure to fight a good fight and keep sound in the faith, till thou
finish thy course, and I can assure thee of an immortal crown which Jesus
Christ that righteous judge will be ready to set upon the head of all such as
love his appearing 2 Timothy 47, 8, 9.
, against whose glorious coming that thou may be the better prepared, let me
advise thee (once more) to a serious perusal of this and the two former
Treatises; in the reading whereof my hearty prayers shall be with and for thee
at the throne of grace, that hereby thy judgment may be rightly informed, thy
life and conversation thoroughly reformed, thy corruptions mortified, thy graces
increased, thy love and zeal inflamed, and thy soul at last eternally saved;
let me beg thy prayers, for my self in requital of my pains, and thy best
wishes at the throne of grace, in behalf of the Stationer for his labor, and
his honest care and cost bestowed herein; and herein forget not to go to God
for his blessing upon thy reading this work, and all our endeavors herein, that
all may tend to his glory. In hope whereof I commend thee to God and to the
word of his grace, and the book once more to thy serious reading and practice;
heartily taking leave I hasten to write my self.

Albourn, this present March 12 h. 1652. Thine in Christ Jesus William Harrison.

There is lately Printed Gods holy mind touching matters Moral, which himself
uttered in ten Words or ten Commandments; also Christ's Holy Mind touching
Prayer; which himself taught unto his Disciples, discovered by the light of his
own holy Writ, and delivered by Questions and Answers, by the late learned and
faithful Preacher of Gods word Mr Edward Elton, B. D. and Pastor of St. Mary
Magdalen Bar monsey near London.

A true Relation of the murders committed in the Parish of Clunne in the County
of Salop by Enoch ap Evan, upon the bodies of his Mother and Brother, with the
causes moving him thereunto, by Richard More Esquire. Printed by order of a
Committee of Parliament.

The great Mystery of Godliness opened: Or, an Exposition upon the ninth
Chapter of the Epistle to the ROMANS.
Romans 9. Verse 1. I say the truth in Christ, I lie not, my conscience also
bearing me witness in the the holy Ghost.

Verse 2. That I have great heaviness and continual sorrow in my heart.


THis excellent Epistle to the Romans written by that famous Apostle Paul, the
great Doctor of the Gentiles consists of these 3 parts in general.

1. A Proemium or Introduction. 2. An Institution of Christian Doctrine. 3. A
Percration, or conclusion.
Again, in the Institution of Christian doctrine, the Apostle proceeds in
this manner.

1. He handles the doctrine of Justification, in the 5 first Chapters of this
Epistle.

2. He insisteth in the doctrine of Sanctification, in the 6. and 7th. Chapters.

3. Matter of sweet consolation flowing from the two former, in Chapter the 8th.

4. He propounds and prosecuteth the doctrine of Predestination, in the 9th.
10th. and 11th. Chapters.

5. He proceeds to matter of Christian exhortation to sundry duties general
and special, Chapters 12.13. etc.

Now in this ninth Chapter, he begins the doctrine of Predestination, and
opens that great mystery of godliness concerning the rejection of the Jews,
and calling of the Gentiles, and herein we have 3 parts.

1. In the first place we have not only an insinuation of the Apostles dear
and deep affection, and a solemn and serious protestation of the truth of it;
but also a singular manifestation of his most admirable love to the nation of
the Jews; (notwithstanding the doctrine he was now about to deliver) and this
is amplified by sundry circumstances, as

1. By the particular passion or affection wherein he manifested his dear love
to them, and that is his grief and sorrow for their casting off.

2. The grief he here speaks of is further amplified by two further
circumstances, or adjuncts. viz. 1. The constancy of it. 2. The sincerity of
it.

3. This love of the Apostle to them is further illustrated by the great
measure or extent of it, viz. that he could wish himself accursed and separated
from Christ in order to procure their salvation.

4. Lastly, by the affectionate and honorable mention that he makes of the
Jewish nation, describing both fully and affectionately all their privileges
and prerogatives, showing what great cause he had to be so deeply affected with
their rejection; and thus he does in the 5 first verses of this Chapter.

The second part of the Chapter is touching a vindication of the stabilility
and constancy of the Lords promises, though the Jews were rejected, and the
defending of that promise of God for the stability of it, against all cavils
and all erring spirits, and all humane reasonings that may be brought to the
contrary, and that from the 6. verse to the 24. The third part is a declaration
of that wonderful and deep mystery held from the beginning of the world
concerning the calling of the Gentiles, and rejection of the Jews, which was a
thing foretold though men did not understand it, before Paul revealed it unto
them, which was foretold by the Prophets, so laid down from the 24. verse, to
the end of the Chapter: so you have the chief materials general in the
Chapter: of these in order, and first of the first.

The Apostle being about to propound that which he knew would be taken very
harsh and hard, and mavelous displeasing and offensive to the Jews to hear
of, he uses a very patheticall insinuation of his love unto the Jews, that he
speaks of love, expressing that love by his inward and hearty sorrow for their
present estate, and the care that he had for their good, thereby to gain their
good will, and not exasperate them against him. And the Apostle being to lay
down their rejection, uses a Preface unto it, that the thing he spoke was the
truth, and for the more force and efficacy of it, he puts down the contrary,
(and I lie not); and he confirms it further by an oath, he calls Christ to
witness (I speak the truth in Christ, I lie not.) And secondly, he proves it
by the witnesses and testimony of his own conscience, his own conscience
bearing witness with him; and this conscience renewed by the holy Ghost, (mine
own conscience bearing witness with me in the holy Ghost.) And then in the
second verse he delivers and puts down his sorrow, and his grief, and his
heaviness of heart; and thus he sets out, by the continuance and greatness
of it, it was a great sorrow, and a continual sorrow, and that in his heart
and soul, and not a dissembled, fained, or outside sorrow, but in his very
heart and soul: there he puts down the desire of their good in the third
verse. And he does express that by a wonderful strange speech, even by a wish
to be separated from Christ for their good, their calling and conversion:
Thereby implying their rejection, and not propounding it, for otherwise there
was no cause of such a wish to be wished, to be separated from Christ for their
sake if they were not rejected; and therefore he desires to be anathemated,
and accursed from Christ for their good; and then he sets down reasons, why
he so wished himself to be separated from Christ. First of all because they
were his brethren and kinsmen, according to the flesh. Secondly, a more
waightier reason then this, because they were the Israelites of God and Gods
people, and that he makes further manifest and plain unto us, by six
privileges vouchsafed unto them, as that unto them was vouchsafed, the
(adoption, the glory, the covenant, the giving of the Law, the service of God,
and the promises.) Thirdly, and lastly, he shows the reason and ground of his
wish, because of that people of Israel the fathers came, yea Christ Jesus
according to the flesh came of them, and was of their seed and line; of the
seed of Abraham, even the Lord Jesus, the Lord of life and glory, whom the
Apostle further describes that he is God over all, and blessed for ever, unto
whom the Apostle assenteth, Amen.

Now before we come to open these words, and to handle them particularly, I
hold it sit one general thing be observed, and that may be thus grounded; the
Apostle being about to speak of a thing which would be very harsh and hard, and
odious, to the Jews that they were rejected of God: In wisdom he uses as
you see, a patheticall insinuation of his love unto them, it was out of his
love, and not of hatred he would have them to know and to take notice of it,
that his speech was from the grief of his heart and soul, he had no pleasure in
it, but with a desire of their good; yea, he speaks it with a desire to be
severed from Christ, for their salvation. Now then herein appears the
wonderful wisdom of the Apostle, to be imitated of the ministers of the
Gospel, and the observation is this, That though Ministers of God must speak
such things as they have to speak, (that are hard, and harsh, and unpleasing,
and distasteful to the hearers, as just occasion is offered unto them,) yet it
must be with a signification of their love unto them, and so as their hearers
may discern, that those harsh and hard things delivered, are out of love, and
to do them good. Ministers of the Gospel, they must not be men pleasers, or
daubers, to daube with untempered mortar, and draw a fair skin over a foul
ulcer, and soothe up men in their sins, for if they so demean themselves, they
are not the servants of Christ, Gal. 1.10. says Paul, If I please men, I am no
true servant of Christ; but they must tell men plainly of their sins, and of
their miserable estate and condition which they are in, in regard of their
sins, yea they must set things close unto their hearts and souls; and speak
such things as be harsh and hard to their hearers, yet so as it be with an
insinuation of their love, and that their hearers may perceive that it comes
of love: We read in Luke 19.43, 44. Christ Jesus utters a very sharp
sentence, and heavy doom, that should befall the City of Jerusalem, he tells
them, that the time should come, when their enemies should cast a trench about
the City, and compass it on every side, and should lay the City even to the
ground, and all her children in her, and not leave a stone upon a stone, (a
heavy doom) yet withal, even in the pronouncing of this heavy doom, he spoke
these heavy things; how? the Evangelist says (in the 41. and 42 verses) he
spoke it with trickling tears in his eyes, and showed his pity, and compassion:
for, he wept for them, saying, Oh I wish that thou had known these things
that belong unto thy peace, but now they are hid from thine eyes. And in Gal.
3.1. The Apostle utters very hard and harsh things, he calls them fools,
and bewitched Galathians, that they would not obey the truth revealed unto
them: yet in the 15. verse he shows this was out of his love, he called them
brethren, which before he called fools and bewitched; and in Gal. 4.19. he
calls them little children with whom he traveled in birth, like a mother;
and thus are the Ministers of God to do, in dispencing of harsh and hard
things: they are to deal roundly with hearers, and to tell them of their sins,
and to speak unpleasing things to their hearers, as just occasion is offered,
yet so, as their hearers may discern that they love them, and that it comes
out of the love of the Minister, and out of the pity and compassion, and tender
care that they have of them; though they pronounce harshly.

Ministers must thus do, because their hearers being carnal,

This concerns us that are Ministers of the Gospel, must say, I am grieved at
the very soul for your miserable estate, oh that you had hearts to consider,
and eyes to see that your miserable estate and fearful condition, and the
Judgment of God against you; and to beseech them earnestly, that they would
labor to come out of that miserable estate and condition.



I say the truth in Christ, I lie not, my conscience bearing me witness in the
Holy Ghost, that I have continual sorrow in my heart, etc. I have given you the
annalysis of these words already; Come we now to the general meaning of them:
(I say the truth in Christ) The Greek proposition, is here a note of an oath;
the meaning is not, I speak in the name of Christ; as I am a Christian, or by
the authority of Christ, but by Christ; I call Christ to witness, (I speak the
truth, I lie not) These words the Apostle adds, both to signify the
sincerity of his heart, that he spoke the truth simply and plainly, with an
honest and sincere heart, without either mental reservation, or equivocation,
not speaking one thing, and meaning another; and secondly, to add weight to his
speech, to make it more ponderous, more weighty, more powerful, and more
prevailing, to those that hear it, after the manner of the Hebrews, who for
more weight and certainty of speech, put down the thing in the affirmative, and
then denied the contrary in the negative, as it is said in the 1 Samuel 3.18.
when Eli bad Samuel tell him what the Lord had said unto him, it is said, he
spoke every word, and he hid nothing: so in John 1.20. it is said of John, that
he confessed, and denied not, but said plainly, he was not the Christ: so this
is added for more weight, and ponderousness of speech; as first he spoke it
without any colloguing or equivocation and secondly, for the weightinesse of
his speech, my conscience bearing witness; here the Apostle does not swear by
his Conscience, as some would think, but shows, that his conscience was a
witness, and gave testimony to him, that he spoke without collogueing or
dissembling: or that his conscience did not smite him, nor touch him for it; in
the holy Ghost, that is, my conscience renewed, by the grace of the holy Spirit
of God; as if the Apostle had said, I speak the truth, my conscience bearing me
witness simply and plainly, and that conscience rectified and renewed by the
Spirit of God, so ordered and guided; it witnesses holily and truly: that I
have great heaviness and continual sorrow in my heart; These words are to be
taken in the literal sense, as they lie, only the word, sorrow, is a
Metaphorical, and is taken from a woman that is in travel with child, such
sorrow as she has that travelleth in childbearing, such was the sorrow in the
heart of the blessed Apostle; and for what his sorrow was, he leaves it to be
gathered, but it may be added, namely, for the rejection of the Jews: so then
the Apostles meaning is thus plainly, I say the truth, even by Christ Jesus I
speak it, simply and plainly, and with an honest and upright heart, without any
manner of doubling or dissembling, or lying, or any manner of untruth in my
speech, Christ is my witness, I lie not, and my own conscience bears me
witness also, and that conscience of mine rectified and rightly ordered by the
grace of Gods Spirit, my conscience bearing me witness and that holily, after
an holy manner, that I am possessed with continual sorrow, and that in my heart
and soul, for the rejection of the Jews, even as the sorrow of a woman
traveling with child.

Come we now to the Instruction, I say the truth in Christ, I lie not; The
Apostle showing his sorrow, does not here only say, that he speaks the truth,
and lies not, but swears by Christ Jesus, that he spoke the truth, for this
his particular sorrow, the point is thus,

That a Christian man sometimes may lawfully swear, and take an oath,

The Reason

First of all, this meets with the error of the Anabaptists, that deny Swear
not at all, but let your communication be yea, yea, and nay, nay; for
whatsoever is else comes of evil, of the Devil.

Answer,

This Truth serves for the just reproof of those that do take rash of thy soul
to the devil, for so thou do in rapping out thy rash oaths; and though
thou swear nothing but the truth, yet every truth is not to be confirmed by an
oath, no, it must be a truth of special weight and consequence, the
preservation of thy life, or such like great and weighty cause, and then it
must be with a good conscience, and therefore thy swearing in thy buying and
selling, (as to swear (by God) it cost me so much) thou sinnest against God
fearfully, and thou take the name of God in vain; and this thy ordinary
swearing is a sign of a graceless wretch, that thou have no dram of grace in
thy heart, that thy tongue is set on fire of hell, James 3.6. And know withal,
that as thy ordinary swearing has the devil for the Father of it, so without
repentance hell shall be the end of it, and of thee also; thou shall be plunged
body and soul into hell. In matters of great weight and consequence, we may
take an oath, for the glory of God, the salvation of a man's soul, the reducing
of men from Popery, all other Oaths, as to swear rashly, that is a fearful
provoking of God against thy soul: and remember that connection of the Lord,
which he has put to the Commandment, that the Lord will not hold him
guiltless that takes his Name in vain. And therefore in the name of God, let
us make conscience of swearing, and fly from an Oath, as from a Serpent; For
thy tongue is set on fire of the Devil, if thou swearest ordinarily, in thy
common conference; and those that use it, labor to repent of that sin, for it
is a fearful impiety, and a declaration that thou have no grace in thy heart,
but art a very Miscreant, and therefore in the fear of God, let thy
communication in thy usual speech be yea, yea, or nay, nay; for whatsoever is
more, Matthew. 5.34, 35.
comes of evil, of the Devil.

I say the truth in Christ, I lie not, my Conscience bearing me witness in the
Holy Ghost. In that the Apostle calls Christ to witness, and swears by his
name it is a sufficient evidence and proof of the Godhead of Christ: And hence
I might stand to prove the Godhead of Christ, that none can know the heart but
God; but we shall have more cause to speak of this in the last verse of the
context.

Thou shall swear by the name of the Lord thy God: and he repeateth the same
again, Deuteronomy. 10.20. Thou shall swear by the name of the Lord thy God: and in
Esaias 45.23. every tongue shall swear by me, says the Lord. Howsoever swearing
there may be taken for the whole worship of God, yet it may be applied to this;
that every one that swears, must swear by the holy Name of God. And indeed,
an oath lawfully taken, is a part of Gods worship, as appears in the two
places in Deuteronomy before alleged: it is a part of Gods Worship, thou shall
fear the Lord thy God, thou shall serve him, and swear by his name: yea
swearing, upon a lawful calling, and lawfully, in truth, in righteousness, and
in Judgment, it is a reverent use of the holy Name of God; it is so far from
dishonouring God, that it is a reverent use, and a glorifying of God: For it is
an acknowledgment of God to be the Searcher and Knower of the hearts of men,
and of their secret thoughts; and that God is a witness even unto those that
swear falsely and perjuriously, and a revenger on those that forswear
themselves: and that he testifies to the things that lie hid, and dark, in our
secrets from men, and therefore God must be called to witness the truth, when
any truth is witnessed by an oath.

As for the forms of speeches used in the Scripture, viz. As thy soul lives,
2 King. 2.4. and Verily, Verily, used by Christ, in John 3.5. they be earnest
asseverations, and they do strongly and vehemently affirm truth; and an oath,
or oaths taken and used as it ought to be, in a right manner, in truth, in
righteousness, and in Judgment, before a Magistrate, or in private with
reverence, it is a worshipping of God.

Hereby we are to take notice, Mary, by S. Anne, and by the abominable Idol the
Mass, and some that swear by mincing and detracting oaths, as by Mass, by
Making, and by Laking, gods so, and good lack, is not this common amongst us,
yea too too common in your mouths? Now by swearing thus, what do you but sin
fearfully? that which ought to be highly honored in the matter of an oath, you
dishonor God exceedingly; yea, take notice of it, you abuse the things you
swear by, and put them into the place and room of God, and give unto these
things what is to be attributed unto God, (as infinite Justice, infinite
Knowledge, infinite Power,) as if they were able, and of power and knowledge,
to know the thing we call them to witness, and as if so be they were able to
punish if you swear falsely; a fearful height of sin: will the Lord suffer such
a foul sin to escape his punishing hand? Will the Lord suffer you to place your
Faith and Troth in his room, to thrust him out of his Throne and Seat of
Majesty? and shall not his hand of vengeance light upon you for so great a
sin? yes surely, without repentance, the hand of the Lord will light fearfully
both upon body and soul, Jer. 5.7. says the Lord, How shall I spare thee for
this? as if he had said, I cannot spare thee for this: for what? thy children
have forsaken me: How? they have sworn by things that are not Gods: by their
faith and troths, which are not gods: and in Zephan. 1.5. The Lord threateneth
to cut off all, that swear by the Lord, and by Malcham: by Mass, or by Jesse,
or by Laking; it shows that they have no grace in their hearts, yea it
discovers the cursed corruptions of their hearts and souls; and therefore
thou that art guilty of this sin, think upon it: fot thou sinnest fearfully
against God, and be sure to cry to God for mercy, and for pardon of this sin;
for this sin, if thou had no more, were sufficient to throw thee down to
hell: Oh but those that swear by faith and troth, will say, they are no great
swearers, that swear by such like oaths: But I say these sins are weighty
enough to plunge thee headlong into hell, without repentance, for thou may
not swear at all, without a calling, and that either before a Magistrate, or in
private, and then it must be with reverence, and a good conscience, in truth,
in righteousness, and in Judgment, with deliberation, and a Serious
consideration of the Name of God, in such causes, as are lawful, namely, the
great and glorious Name of God, or such like particulars.

I say the truth in Christ, and I lie not.] The Apostle shows here the
sincerity of his heart, that he spoke the truth simply and plainly, and with an
honest and upright heart, without any manner of doubling or dissembling. I will
not here enter into the common place of lying, which is not here meant, but
take the thing naturally: and hence observe.

That truth in word, and simplicity of heart, must ever go together: man must
not speak the truth deceitfully, for so the Devil does speak the truth, with a
purpose to deceive the souls of men: and if men so do speak the truth falsely,
with a purpose to deceive, they lie in speaking the truth; the tongue and heart
must agree: it is a note of a Child of God, one that is a Member of the Church
Militant, and Triumphant, that he speaks the truth that is in his heart,
Psalm. 15.2. But to pass by this, only touching it in a word, That the same
truth must be in the tongue, as in the heart; there must be truth in the
tongue, and simplicity and sincerity in the heart, without equivocation, or
mental reservation.

My Conscience bearing me witness,] That is, my Conscience witnessing with me,
that I speak the truth. Hereby the Apostle puts down one special office and
act of the Conscience of man; that the act and office of the Conscience of man
is to bear witness, to give evidence and testimony: so that from hence it is
clear,

oftentimes thine own heart knows, that is, thy own conscience witnesses,
that thou have cursed others: do not regard every idle word, thine own
conscience witnesses, thou have cursed others: and in 2 Cor. 1.12. our
rejoicing is this, that we have the testimony of a good conscience, that in
simplicity, and godly pureness, we have had our conversation, etc. So that we
see by these places, God has placed the Conscience in the soul of man, as a
witness, of whatsoever man does think, or will, affect, like, or do.

The Reason Genesis 42.21. and in Genesis 50.15. their consciences do tell them, did
not we sin against our Brother? it is an observer and remembrancer unto them,
even of their thoughts, words and actions: we may see it in our own experience,
twenty or thirty years ago, do not our consciences tell us, and witness the
evil things done then by us. And in this respect the Conscience may be fitly
compared to a Recorder, or Register; That as he has his pen in his hand,
always ready to set down whatsoever is spoken or done; so is the Conscience a
register, to set down, remember, and record all our actions, and all our words
and thoughts many years agone; yea to witness when it is done, as the Register
turns over his book, and finds the act done many years agone; so is
conscience a witness to us.

of thy inward and secret motions of thy soul: now to whom does that bear
record? not to man, or Angels, they cannot take notice of them, but to him that
has an al-seeing eye, and that is God himself; and the witness of thy
conscience is mavelous secret, it is not known to any, but is a secret, and
that secret witness neither man nor Angels can hear, or receive; for neither
men nor Angels can tell what is in the heart or soul of man, but the secret
motion of the soul God only knows: for if it were not so, the witness of
the soul were to no purpose, unless there was one that knew the witness of
the conscience; for the conscience speaks not properly, but only by way of
allusion: we say it speaks, and therefore there is no other but God that
knows the secrets of the heart; and therefore let Atheists bark against it as
much as they can, the very Conscience that is placed in the heart of man; it is
a plain evidence that there is a God: and so let this suffice to stop their
mouths.

Is this so, that the conscience is thus placed in the soul of man, as a The
eye of the Adulterer waits for the twilight, and then disguiseth himself, and
says, none eye shall see him. Alas! though thou could hide thy sin from all
men and Devils, yet thou can not hide it from God, nor from thine own
conscience, that will one day come in as a witness against thee, and lay thee
open to the sight of men and Angels, unless God give thee repentance. The
Conscience of man is a tell-tale, it will lay it open, and witness against
thee: Indeed I confess, that the mouth of the conscience may be muzzeled, and
sometimes be choked, and fail in doing the office of it, to bear witness; or
a man may lay violent hands upon his own conscience, and as it were cut the
throat of it, for a time, his conscience being asleep, or benumbed, for custom
in sin takes away the feeling of the conscience for a time: and as One says
well, The light of the Conscience may be shadowed, because it is not good; but
quite extinguished it cannot be, because it comes from God, and is of him in
the heart: by the hand of God, it may be asleep; and benumbed, but it will
awake, either in the day of affliction, or in the hour of death, when the
Conscience will be raised, and awakened, and will then not spare to witness
against thee: or if it be so, that thou do dye without any sense or feeling
of sin, thou dyest like a senseless stone: as it is said of Nabal, his heart
dyed within him, so it may be, thy heart may be so hardened, as that in the
hour of death it has no touch of conscience at all: yet know this, though thou
dyest so, yet thy conscience dies not, it is a natural faculty of thy soul, it
cannot dye; and though it touch thee not in the hour of death, yet the day will
come; when the Judgment of the Lord comes, it will come and appear before
thee, and then it will speak and not spare; it will witness against thee the
sins that thou have done in hugger-mugger, and in secret, and thy dissembling,
and close dealing, either with God or man; thy Conscience will not then spare
to speak against thee: And therefore in the fear of God take notice of it, and
let this ground of truth teach us, to take heed of presuming to sin, because we
are in the dark; whether Usurers, or those that travel up and down from
Alehouses to Taverns in the night to commit sin, their consciences go with
them: And in this respect take we heed of dissembling, of hypocrisy, of double
dealing in the sight and presence of the Lord; thou may blear the eyes of
men, and deceive them, but thy own conscience will not be blinded; it will bear
witness even of thy bosom sins; and although it may be mute for a time, yet
it will speak, and that aloud too, before the Judge of all the world: Let this
therefore work inward soundness and truth in the heart, that our Consciences
may witness good before God of us, who knows the inwards of thy heart and
soul.

The Apostle adds further, That the Holy Ghost did testify with his
Conscience; My Conscience witnesses with me in the holy Ghost; that is, as it
is rectified and guided by the holy Spirit of God, to witness with me holily
and truly, as it is ordered by grace, and sanctified to that end and purpose:
so then the Conclusion is this,



to the unbelieving and defiled is nothing pure, but the mind and conscience is
defiled: even the conscience of a natural man witnesses impurely, unsound, and
uncomfortable; only the conscience regenerate and sanctified, that is purged
and purified by faith, Act. 15.9. faith purifieth the heart: and that
conscience so purged and purified, is only a true and a holy witness: and that
Conscience that is so regenerate, and sanctified by grace, it gives witness
and testimony of that righteousness which is called the righteousness of the
conscience, and is ever joined unto it, namely, it gives witness of a true,
and sound, and constant purpose in the heart, seconded with a holy endeavor
and careful use of all good means, not wittingly, nor willingly to sin against
God, in any thing, but to labor to please God in all things whatsoever; this
is the witness of a pure conscience, Heb. 13.18. We are assured that we have a
good conscience in all things, desiring to live honestly: and this was the
witness of the Conscience of the good King Hezekiah, that he was able (his
conscience being regenerate,) even upon his deathbed to say, Now Lord remember
how I have walked before thee-with an honest and a good heart, Esaias 38.3. he
had walked before God with a perfect heart, in the truth of his soul: here was
a regenerate heart that thus testified, how he endeavored not to sin against
God: but to please him in every thing; so that by this it appears to be a
truth. that the Conscience of man then does only witness holily and truly,
when it is rectified by grace, then is it a holy witness of our thoughts,
words, and actions.

and their Judgment is erroneous. But to draw near unto our selves; Thus
stands the case with all unregenerate persons, and such as be in their
natural estate; the consciences of unregenerate persons do many times witness
much good, in respect of the good things said or done by them: Their conscience
tells them, oh they have much good, and great comfort in hearing the Word,
especially if they live a civil honest life, and be free from gross sins, and
deal justly and truly with men, their consciences tells them that they are in
a mavelous good case, and you cannot drive them from it: for why? their
Conscience tells them so, that they are no Drunkards, no Thieves, no
Swearers, and God is well pleased with them, and they have much good and
comfort by the testimony of their consciences. But their Conscience does
witness falsely, so as the Prophet says, a deceitful heart has cousened them,
Esaias 44. and their Conscience cannot possibly truly witness any comfort to
them: For the good things they have done, be they the best works, or words, or
deeds done, that possibly can be spoken or done, their conscience cannot truly
witness, so long as they be unregenerate: and therefore to conclude this
point, If thou would have thy conscience to witness holily and truly and to
thy comfort, never rest until thou find that thy conscience is sprinkled with
the blessed blood of the Lord Jesus Christ, Heb. 9.14. which is able to purge
thy conscience, and that thy heart is purified by faith, and sanctified by
grace; and then thy Conscience will witness with thee in the Holy Ghost,
otherwise it is but a deceitful conscience, that makes men soothe up
themselves, and esteem themselves in a holy and good estate, without cause.

VERSE 2. That I have great heaviness, and continual sorrow in my heart.


NOw from hence in that the Apostle does set down his grief and sorrow for the
rejection of the Jews, I might stand to show, that Gods Children are not
stocks nor stones, free from natural affections; Gods Children have humane
affections, of joy, and sorrow, and love, which is common to the nature of man,
but those are rectified, and by grace guided to right objects, and that by due
measure and moderation, according to the nature of the object, to which they
are moved. The Apostle makes this a note of such that are given over to
unnatural senses, Romans 1.30. that they want natural affections: and doubtless
the more true and sincere grace is in the heart of Gods children, certainly the
more tender are the affections of that heart and soul, and the more effectual
apprehension of any true cause of matter, of sorrow, or grief: but to pass by
that, And to come to the main point; In that the Apostle does manifest, that he
had great heaviness and sorrow, and that for the rejection of the Jews; (that
was the object of his sorrow,) because the Jews were left in the blindness of
mind, and hardness of heart, and did not embrace the Gospel; this was matter
of great heaviness to the heart of the blessed Apostle: in the first place the
observation is this;

That we are to be grieved for the known miseries of others, with an high hand,
that they are led by the lusts of their own hearts, and according to the lust
of their vile hearts in security, and brutish lusts, this is that which must
stick close and wound us especially: Besides this evidence in the example of
the Apostle, we have testimony in other places of Scripture, in Ezekiel. 9.4. we
read of the godly who should be marked, and have a mark set on their forehead,
that they should not be destroyed in the common overthrow of Jerusalem, they
were such as cried and mourned for the abominations that were committed by
others in that City; their hearts bled not so much for the overthrow of the
City, as for the hardness of the hearts of men, such as did abominably: and in
Jer. 13.17. says the Prophet, when the people would not hear him, and yield
obedience to the voice of God in his Ministry, My eyes shall weep in secret,
(and why?) for the hardness of the hearts of the people, that they would not
take notice of the Word of God, and the Judgments of God denounced against them
for their sins: Oh, says the Prophet, I must needs grieve for your obstinacy:
and Psalm. 119.136. says David, my eyes gush out with rivers of water, (thereby
expressing the grief of his heart; why, because they were under any calamity?
no,) because men keep not the Law of God; even for the sins that lie upon the
souls of men, and the hardness of their hearts. And the Apostle witnesses of
that holy man just Lot, that his soul was vexed with the filthy lusts, and
unclean conversation of the filthy Sodomites, 1 Pet. 2.7. they vexed just Lot
from day to day with their filthy abominations: and it is witnessed of Christ
himself, in Mark 3.5. that he mourned for the hardness of the hearts of the
Pharisees; even the blessed soul and heart of the Lord Jesus mourned for the
hardness of their hearts, that they would not be humbled for their sins: and
in Luke 19.41.42. The Lord Jesus wept; for what? because Jerusalem should be
ruinated: not so simply, but also especially for the hardness of their hearts,
and that they would not take notice of those things that did belong to their
peace; the Lord had sent his Prophets, and his own Son, and yet they would not
hearken; so that we see it is a clear truth, that we are especially to be
grieved for the miseries and the known evils of the souls of others; those
that continue in their sins, and will go on with perseverance in swearing,
Sabbath-breaking, Drunkenness, and the like; for these we are especially to
mourn and to be grieved.

The Reason

our friends, and near and dear unto us, as we are bound unto by special
bonds: as our Father, Mother, wife, brother, or sister, or friends; or such
like, we can show forth a great deal of sorrow for them; but the miseries that
lie upon the souls of others, though they be never so near or dear unto us; few
there be that are touched and moved with this evil: to draw yet a little
nearer, thou can grieve if so be thou hear thy son, thy brother, or thy
friend, (near unto thee) prove a bankrupt, or an unthrift, and decay in worldly
things; or if thy child, or servant, or any other, be suddenly overtaken by
some accident, and some hand of God, as stricken blind, lame, or the like, thy
heart is full of sorrow for this: (and indeed so thou ought to be,) But let
thy brother, thy friend, thy own child, thy husband, or wife that lies in thy
bosom, be one that is given to sin, to live in ignorance, drunkenness,
swearing, and the like, thou art touched nothing at all with this, thou art
grieved for their bodies: but let thy husband be an ignorant person, or an
hard-hearted person, thou art not touched with it at all: we grieve not for the
miseries that lie upon their souls, and this shows the cursednesse of thy
heart, that thou art an hard-hearted person, and according to the cursednesse
of thine own heart, thou respectest not the hardness of the hearts of others;
and it is a plain evidence and demonstration of thy heart, that it is not right
in thee, it is an argument that thou art but a carnal person, and enlightened
only by the light of nature, and that thou have not in thee the life of true
grace, that ought to be in a Child of God: therefore in the fear of God, take
notice of this duty; and learn we to find this in our selves, that we be
grieved for the miseries that be upon the soul, especially those that we are
bound unto by special bond, as for the ignorance of thy father, or mother, thy
wife, thy child, or servant, that they will not be reformed, and for the evils
that lie upon their hearts and souls; we must shower down tears for them that
have the means of salvation, and yet will not turn unto God, yea thy heart and
soul must be pierced through with grief, for thy neighbors, even such as live
in thy own Land and Kingdom with thee: as the miseries that lie upon the souls
of poor men and women, that have not one that is able to teach them the Word of
God, we should cry to heaven, and send up sighs and tears for them, and
entreat the Lord to send forth Laborers into his harvest, they want it, they
live in darkness and blindness, and never touched in Conscience for the same,
but go on with an high hand in sin, and this should grieve our souls: We
should mourn in secret, and seek unto the Lord by prayer, with sighs and
groans, that the Lord would be pleased to send forth such as would labor
amongst them, and bring them out of the darkness they are in; thus we are to
mourn for the known evils that lie upon the souls of others: Happily the Lord may
threaten us with Judgment, and Dearth and Famine, which we may justly look for,
yea the Famine of the Word of God: For men that live in their sins without
touch of Conscience, this should grieve us exceedingly.

Now then to stir us up to the practice of this Duty, first of all, consider,

Secondly, it will be an evidence unto us, that we are truly sorrowful, weight
and burden of it, and they have the greatest grief in their hearts for the
sins of others.



And to shut up all in one word of Exhortation; If then we would have a good
evidence, that we are not such that have our eyes shut up like Balaam, but that
we have a true sight, and discerning of the nature of evils; and if we would
have good evidence, that we are truly touched and humbled for our own sins, and
have true faith and grace in our souls, and are truly zealous of the glory of
God, this will yield us true comfort both in life, and in death: Let us then
never rest until we be grieved for the miseries that lie on the bodies of
others, but especially for the evils on the souls of others, and such as do
appertain unto us, that we be not like stocks nor stones, but that we mourn for
the sins on the souls of others.

Now from these words the Apostle where he says, he grieveth for the rejection
of the Jews, some move this question, Whether the Apostle might lawfully be
grieved for the rejection of the Jews? it being according to the appointment of
the Lord.

But the question

Now to this I answer, The righteous shall rejoice when he sees the revenging
hand of God upon such; and men shall say, Verily there is a reward for the
righteous, doubtless there is a God that judges on the earth. God himself
desires not the death of any, (so he says) I delight not in the death of a
sinner: yet God was pleased with the punishment of the wicked, according to the
rule and course of his Justice; so we must not delight in the punishment of
any, as he is a creature of God, and bears the Image of God, like unto us;
but we are to look upon the glory of Gods Justice, and to magnify and to
glorify him in such persons, being destroyed, that seek the hurt of Gods
glory, Gods Church, or Gods Religion: For then we are to rejoice, but not in
their punishment as they are men of the like nature with us.

In the next place we are to mark, that the Apostle says not nakedly and
barely, that he was grieved and sorrowed for the rejection of the Jews, but
does affirm and say, that he had great heaviness and continual sorrow for the
rejection of the Jews, his heaviness and sorrow was not small, nor vanishing,
but it was great and heavy, such as is a woman's traveling with child, for so
the word sorrow, signifies a vehement, great, and heavy sorrow, for their
rejection. Now what was the cause the Apostle grieved for the rejection of the
Jews? because he loved them; for this was a manifestation of his love, his
sorrow and love held sympathy and proportion: hence the observation is thus,
That true love unto any person, the King said, What is the matter, Nehemiah,
why is thy countenance sad, seeing thou art not sick? Sure I perceive that this
is nothing else but sorrow of heart, Nehem. 2.2. In John 11.36. the Jews said,
when they saw Jesus weeping for Lazarus, Behold how he loved him; they could
thereby conjecture his love to him: so 2 Cor. 2.4. The Apostle says, in great
anguish of spirit he wrote to them, and in many tears, that they might perceive
his love unto them, his true and hearty love, and anguish of his soul went
together: so that the point is clear, That true love unto any person or thing,
causes the like sympathy of grief unto that person, or thing so loved.

The Reasons are; First, from the working and effects of true love: it if it go
well with the person or thing so loved, it causes joy; if it go ill, it
causes grief.





Now then, (to apply this to the time wherein we live) we hear, and have often
heard, that the Church and people of God, at this day, are in great distress
in foreign Nations, even our Neighbor Nations, in France and other Nations,
are in arms, and are forced to stand up for the defense of their own lives and
liberties, and their wives and children stand upon their guatd at home, or else
to lie in the field to defend their lives and liberties: and we have heard, and
do hear it daily, that many of Gods children are in great streights; that they
are besieged by their cruel and bloody enemies, even of such as desire nothing
but to suck their bloods; yea we hear daily, how the Saints and servants of
God, are Massacred, About this time was the Massacre of the poor Protestants in
the Valtoline, 1620, 1621.
and murdered, yea many of them in going from the assemblies, have had their
throats cut, and are knocked down, before they come home, yea we hear how that
Gods children are forced either to yield to the Pope and his Idolatry, or to
lose their lives: now we hear of this, are we touched with sorrow and grief
according to the measure of their afflictions? surely then we have good
evidence of our love to the people of God: but on the contrary, are our hearts
nothing at all touched with grief and with heaviness, upon the news of these
things? (which is I fear the case of many, to give themselves to jollity and
rejoicing, and are not touched with the afflictions of Joseph) do we hear of
these things as matter of news, and discourse of them as novelties: if so be it
be so, that now we give our selves to all manner of riot and excess, when you
should give your selves to prayer, certainly then you have no true love to the
people of God. So also for the glory of God, can thou hear the Name of God
blasphemed, and dishonored, by cursing, swearing, lying, rybaldry? and use all
manner of filthy speaking, and profaning the Sabbath: is not thy heart
smitten? is it not as a dagger in thy soul, and a sword in thy heart, when thou
hear men blaspheme, and fearfully abuse the holy name of God? assuredly then
thou have no true love to the glory of God: and so also for the truth of
Religion; can thou hear the holy Religion of God, destroyed and trampled
under foot? and that Popery, Idolatry, and Superstition, is like to be set up
in the room of it? and when thou hear of this, do thou not mourn? but art
a man indifferent, and carest not which end goes forward? either Popery, or
true Religion? it is a sure note, that thou have no true love to the Religion
of God: and thus I might proceed in other particulars, but let us learn now to
be grieved, according to the known just occasion of grief given unto us, for
the Church and Children of God, for the glory of God, and pure Religion of God;
if so be we find no grief at all in our hearts, when there is just occasion of
grief, let us not deceive our selves, assuredly we love them not as we ought to
do. We read in the 1 Samuel 4.18, 19. and so on to the end of the Chapter, that
old Eli was more affected when he heard news that the Ark of God was taken,
then with the loss of his two sons: and the wife of Phinees, the daughter in
law of Eli, was more affected with the loss of the Ark of God* then with the
loss of her own dear husband; for when she heard the Ark of God was taken, she
fell in travel, and dyed, and named her son, Jekabod, the glory is departed
from Israel: yea, she repeateth it again, the glory is departed from Israel,
for the Ark of God is taken: And when the women labored to comfort her, she
would have none, for the Ark of God was taken. Thus must we, when the Religion
of God is trodden down, we must be affected with it: A disgrace done to the
name of God, or a wrong done to the religion of God, must affect our hearts
with sorrow; if we would have evidence that we truly love the holy Israel of
God, we must find our hearts affected according to the known estate of it, if
we have not, we have not in us the Spirit, nor the Life, nor the grace of Gods
Children: in 2 Thessalonians. 2.10, 11. if we do not embrace the Religion of God, and
that with love and delight, and be more then formal professors of it, we are in
danger to be seduced of Antichrist, and to be led some one way, and some
another: we are in danger to be given up to strong delusions, and to believe
lies, because we receive not the truth, in love of the truth: For if we do
receive the truth out of love unto it, we shall find that our love unto the
truth, will be a strong preservative against the seducing of Antichrist, and
better arm us against the subtilties of our enemies, and their powerful
efficacy and working; though all the Devils in the world do assist them, and
this defend us better then all the learning in the world; we see great Doctors
are seduced, because though they have learning, yet have no love: And therefore
let thy heart be set upon the Church of God, and the holy Religion of God, that
we may be sure it is true and hearty love, as it ought to be, that we are able
to say with the Apostle, we have continual sorrow for the evils upon the
souls, or afflictions upon the bodies of Gods Church.

One thing farther, the Apostle puts down his sorrow with the subject of it
(in his heart,) hereby he points out thus much unto us, That we are to be
grieved for the miseries of others, even from the heart; we must not rest in an
outside sorrow, in a verbal sorrow, to say we are sorrowful, and grieved for
it; as St. John says, 1 John 3.18. our love must not be in tongue, but in
deed, and in truth. As also our pity must not be a verbal pity, to say, go thy
way, fill thy belly, James 2.15, 16. and yet supply nothing to their wants: so
that the miseries of others known unto us, must be indeed, and in truth, yea in
our very hearts and souls, especially for the known miseries of the Church and
people of God; we must express our grief to others, by sighs and groans, and
prayers and tears, as any just occasion is offered; and thereby manifest that
our grief is a grief of the heart and soul, when we so reach out our help unto
them: And know we, if so be our grief and sorrow be not in our hearts and
souls, but verbal, and outward, it is counterfeit; for nature can put on a
mourning semblance, and counterfeit grief, and there may be a glad heart under
a mourning gown; as a poor man, having a black gown, at a rich man's funeral,
mourns not but is glad that he has it to cover him; but we must have sorrow
in our heart for the Church of God: And again, God hates the sorrow, that is
not in the heart, Psalm. 51.6. the Lord loves truth and soundness in the
affections, when we have cause of joy, to rejoice heartily; and when we have
cause of sorrow, to be grieved heartily: Oh then in the fear of God look to
this, that thy sorrow and grief for the miseries of others, especially for the
Church of God, that it be as it ought to be, not in word only, verbal, but in
truth; look that our hearts be dissolved into sorrow, and that it show forth
the powerful working of it, in sighs, in groans, and in tears, for the poor
distressed members of the Church; to shed abundance of tears for them, that we
may say with the Apostle, I have sorrow in my heart for my brethren, in their
Afflictions.

VERSE 3. For I could wish my self to be separated from Christ, for my
brethren, that are my Kinsmen according to the flesh.


IN this Verse our Apostle puts down, as a fruit of his love to the Jews,
and as a manifestation thereof an earnest desire of their good; as before he
did manifest his sorrow for them, so here he does manifest his love unto them,
in an earnest desire of their good, expressing that, in wishing himself to be
separated and accursed from Christ, for their salvation, and conversion; then
he subjoyneth one special cause of this his earnest desire, and of this wish,
because they were his kinsmen, and beloved brethren according to the flesh: so
we see the generality of these words, come we now to the sense of them.

For I could wish] Or, I would wish it: he says not, I could wish another; but
he puts it down with an (ego ipse) I; I my self would wish it: to be
separated, or accursed; the Text original (anathema) is the same we read in the
1 Corinthians. 16.22. where the Apostle says, If any man love not the Lord Jesus
Christ, let him be (accursed, an execration,) Anathema Maranatha: yea I my
self, says the Apostle, could be Anathema. Touching this word, Expositors make
much ado, and make diverse expositions of it, not so pertinent to this place.
But this word, Anathema, in the general acceptance of it, signifies any thing
that is set apart from the common use of man, and is dedicated, consecrated,
and devoted, either unto God, as in Levit. 27.28, 29. They were to set apart
certain men and beasts, and devote them unto God; or it signifies things
dedicated and devoted unto the Devil; as those things that were consecrated and
devoted unto Idols among the heathen, that were devils indeed, and called
(...), and were hanged up in the Idols temples, and so called Anathema: or in
the third place, it signifies any person or thing that is set apart, and
devoted unto destruction; and hence comes the word (...), in Matthew. 26.74.
Peter begins to curse himself, and to wish himself to be destroyed if he
knew Christ, as many wicked persons say, would they might be destroyed body and
soul. Now in this third sense and signification, is the word here used by the
Apostle, not as a thing dedicated to God, or the Devil, but as a thing
dedicated and devoted to destruction; as appears, in that the Apostle wishes
to be anathematized, or separated from Christ: for to be separated, is to be
removed and set apart from salvation, purchased by Christ, and from all hope of
it: In a word, it signifies to perish, and to be utterly condemned; for out of
Christ there is no hope of salvation, that so he might perish in hell, and
utterly be damned there, and feel the pains of the damned in hell.

And for further Explanation of this phrase, some think that this wish of the
Apostle was absolute, and actual, without any condition at all: but others are
of another mind, to whom I rather incline; for it was not an absolute wish to
be severed from Christ, but it is to be understood with a Condition, namely, he
would thus wish to be separated from Christ, and damned in hell, if it were
possible, that he being damned, the Jews might be saved, and God and Christ
have the more glory: this speech, it is like unto that of David, in the 2 Samuel
18.33. where David says, Oh Absalon, my son, my son, would God I had dyed for
thee, Oh Absalon, my son my son: he wishes with a condition, (if it might be
possible) would I had dyed for thee: so the Apostle would wish himself to be
separated from Christ; for the Jews, if it were possible, that he being damned,
the Jews might be saved; that he going to hell, they might go to heaven, and
the greater glory thereby come to God and Christ: For without question, the
Apostle here in this speech of his, had not only respect to the salvation of
the Jews, but he had respect to the glory of God, and of Christ, that Gods
glory might be advanced, and his Kingdom amplified and enlarged: now it must
needs be, that the Apostle speaks with a condition; (if it were possible,)
For otherwise, the speech of the Apostle had been clean contrary, to the
purpose of God, (yea to that purpose which the Apostle was acquainted withal,)
that the Lord did purpose to save him, which is manifest in the two last Verses
of the former Chapter, where he says nothing should separate him; and yet now
does he wish separation absolutely? Romans 8.38, 39.
no sure, it is with condition; for my brethren, which are my kinsmen) an
usual phrase among the Hebrews, to call them brethren, that were of the same
blood, Genesis 13.8. Abraham said unto Lot, we are brethren, who was his nephew:
according to the flesh,] This the Apostle adds, to signify that they were
his kinsmen according to the flesh, not by the Spirit, because they were not
converted, though they were his brethren, by flesh and blood descended of the
same Parents, yet not by grace, or by the Spirit; and indeed the Apostle
means the Jews, which he sets out, that they were his kindred according
to the flesh: so then thus briefly conceive we the meaning of the Apostle, as
if he had said, Even I my self, and no other for me, could wish that I were
removed and even set apart from salvation purchased by Christ, and all hope
thereof; yea I could wish my self to be damned in hell, and to perish if it
might possibly be, provided that I being damned, the Jews might be saved; the
Jews who are my brethren, I mean my kinsmen according to the flesh, according
to the bond of flesh and blood, that they might come into the Faith of the
Gospel; I wish it, that the glory of God in their salvation might be increased:
So much for the meaning of the Apostle.

First of all, here comes a question viz. Whether the holy Apostle did well,
in thus wishing himself (if it had been possible,) to be accursed from Jesus
Christ? to go to hell for the salvation of the Jews? this seems a thing not
tolerable: For there is or ought to be, in every Child of God, a holy
self-love, and a sanctified self-love, whereby they are bound to love
themselves, above all others, and to use all good means for the good estate of
their own bodies, and souls, and that above the estate of any other; howsoever
as the Apostle John says, 1 John 3.16. That as Christ laid down his life for
us, so are we one for another: yet a Christian is not bound to deprive himself
of a temporal life, for the safety of the temporal life of another, no nor yet
to deprive himself of eternal life, for the eternal good estate of others; did
the Apostle then do well thus to wish?

Yes, the Apostle does well in this wishing, of the Jews, and their conversion,
but also to the glory of God, and of Christ, and he knew, that indeed the glory
of God, and the glory of Christ, would be wonderfully enlarged by the
conversion of the Jews, and the glory of God, and of Christ, ought to be
procured, (if it were possible) even with the eternal confusion of our souls,
though we be the Children of God.

anathema from Christ; May a man wish himself separated from Christ, and so an
enemy to Christ, and Christ an enemy to him, as the Devils and damned in hell
are?

I answer

Now in that the Apostle does here manifest his love to the Jews, in his
earnest desire of their good, expressing that in wishing himself to be
separated and accursed from Christ, for their conversion, and salvation, it
points out to us plainly thus much,

grace and peace from God the Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ, as Romans
1.7. 1 Cor. 1.3. 2 Cor. 1.2. Gal. 1.3. And so in other Epistles they wish the
same particular good things to the souls of them whom they writ to, not only
in effect, but in a manner word for word: and we find that the Apostles do
likewise usually give thanks to God, especially for good things bestowed on the
souls of those to whom they writ; as for their faith, their hope, their love
to God, and to the Saints, their patience and such like. And thereby also they
do give to us to understand, that we are especially to wish and desire the good
of the souls of those whom we love, and are bound to love, that they may have
saving grace in their souls, and an increase of it here in this life, and that
they may be eternally saved hereafter in heaven. And there is good reason for
it.

and gives it to none but to such as belong to Gods election: And it sweetens
all other good things of this life, and makes them truly comfortable, without
which, they are but accursed vanities, and vexations of spirit, Eccles. 2.11.
as the Preacher speaks; yea, saving grace in the soul yields comfort and
rejoicing of heart, when all other things in this life can yield none at all:
as in the midst of trouble, sorrow and perplexity, and in the hour of death.
And therefore doubtless, saving grace here in this life, and salvation
hereafter in heaven, are the things that we are especially to wish and desire,
in the behalf of those whom we love, and are bound to love.

But may some say, It may be that those whom we love,

I answer,

We see then a Duty that concerns us, laid before us,

Now then know it whosoever thou art, thou must especially wish and desire the
good of the souls of those whom thou love, and art bound to love, that they
may come to saving knowledge, saving faith, and saving repentance, and may come
truly to fear God: and thy desire must be true, sound, settled and constant,
seconded with the careful use of all good means, within the compass of thy
place and calling, that serve to work saving grace in them, as teaching and
instructing them, counselling them, comforting them, and praying for them, and
sending up thy wishes to heaven for them. And to help us forward in this duty,
consider we these two things.

First, If we make it the earnest desire of our hearts, and the chief wish of
our souls, that those whom we love, and are bound to love, may have saving
grace wrought in their souls; we are therein like to God himself, and we
follow his example: for thus does the Lord himself wish to his people, Deuteronomy.
5.29. Oh that there were such an heart in them, or who will give them such an
heart, as to fear me, and to keep all my Commandments always: as if he should
have said, It is the chief desire of my soul, that they had such an heart.

Secondly, If we earnestly and heartily wish saving grace to the souls of
those whom we love, and are bound to love, it is a good evidence that we have
true saving grace in our own souls, and that we feel the sweetness and
comfort of it in our own souls: For certainly, they that find the sweetness
of saving grace in their own souls, Act. 11.23, 24.
cannot but wish it to others, and delight to see it in others: they that truly
fear God themselves, cannot but wish that others did; as Paul said to Agrippa,
Act. 26.29. would to God, that not only thou, but also all that hear me to
day, were both almost, and altogether such as I am. If then we would be like to
God himself, (and a better example we cannot follow:) and if we would have good
evidence that we have true saving grace in our own souls, we must be mindful
of this duty, not only to wish good to the bodies of those whom we love and
are bound to love, but especially that they may have saving grace in their
souls here in this life, and salvation hereafter in heaven, and carefully use
all good means serving to that purpose.

Let us now go on to further matter offered to us from this Verse; For I could
wish my self to be separated from Christ, for my brethren, that are my kinsmen
according to the flesh.] We are further to consider, that the Apostle (as I
have showed) in this wish of his, ( to be separated, or accursed, from Christ,)
had respect not only to the conversion and salvation of the Jews, out of his
love to them, but he had also therein respect to the glory of God, and to the
glory of Christ. He could have wished himself (if it had been possible)
separated and cut off from salvation purchased by Christ, and from all hope of
it, and to have been damned for ever in hell, not only for the good of the
Jews, that they might have been converted and saved, but also for the greater
glory of God, and of Christ: That God and Christ might thereby have had the
greater honor and glory; whence we are given to understand thus much, and the
point further offered to us, from this wish of the Apostle, is this;

our power to come to it; and these examples do evidence to us, that thus it
ought to be with us, that we ought to esteem the glory of God, and the glory of
Christ most dear to us, and to prefer that before the best good thing we do
enjoy, or hope to enjoy, yea even before our own happiness and glory in
heaven; it ought to be dearer to us, then our own souls: and the Reasons and
grounds of it be these;

First, the glory of God, is the end of all the creatures of God, and for
Hallowed be thy Name, 1 Cor. 10.31.

And secondly, the glory of God is the chiefest good; it is better worth Holy,
holy, holy, Lord God Almighty, which was, which is, and which is to come,
Revel. 4.8. and therefore on these grounds it follows directly and
necessarily, that the glory of God, and the glory of Christ, ought to be most
dear to us, and we are to preserve that, before the best good things we do
enjoy, or hope to enjoy, yea even before our own happiness and glory in
heaven, and it ought to be dearer to us, then our own souls.

A duty, (to apply it and to lay it a little nearer to our consciences) a duty
I say wherein most of us come far short; for consider it, Solomon exhorts,
Prove. 3.9. honor God with thy riches,) they might employ their wealth to many
good uses, to the promotion of Gods glory, and to the furthering of the Gospel
of Christ. And do they not prefer the keeping of their wealth, after a base,
and sordid, and miserable manner, before the doing good with it, to the
advancement of the glory of God, and the glory of Christ? and do not some love
their ease, and the contentment of the flesh, so well, as they prefer that,
before the enduring of a little hardship, or a little pains, or a little
suffering for the name and glory of Christ Jesus? They will rather (as they
say) sleep in a whole skin, though it be with a breach, a wound and an hole in
their Conscience, then they will undergo any trouble, or hard measure, from the
hands of men, for doing such things as ought, and might bring glory to God, and
might advance the name of the Lord, and whereby Christ might be magnified, as
Philip. 1.20.

And so for the matter of vain credit, and good liking of men in the world: Be
there not many so poisoned with the love of that, as they prefer it before the
glory of God, and the glory of Christ? Are not many ashamed to profess the
name of Christ and to be sound and sincere in the profession of the Gospel,
because they shall be disgraced in the world, and be counted Puritanes? they
will not adorn the doctrine of the Gospel they profess, Tit. 2.10. they will
not endeavor to be blameless and pure, and the sons of God, without rebuke,
in the midst of a naughty and crooked nation, and to shine as lights in the
world, as the Apostle exhorts, Phil. 2.15. Though God and Christ might be
thereby much glorified, because then they shall be out of favor and credit
with men, yea happily with their best friends, (as they account them,) with those
on whom their preferment depends; yea are there not many in the world, and
amongst us, so far from accounting the glory of God, and the glory of Christ,
so dear to them, as they could be content, for that, to part with the best good
thing they do enjoy, or hope to enjoy; even to part with heaven for it, (if it
might be) as that indeed, they will not part with any one beloved sin, for the
glory of God, and for the glory of Christ. They will not, for the glory of God,
and for the honor of the Lord Jesus, part with their pride, their vanity, and
garishnesse in apparel, their drunkenness, their whoredom, their
covetousness, their usury, or with any other darling sin, no, though it be so,
that together with leaving of their sin, they might both glorify God, and also
enjoy comfort to themselves here, and happiness and glory hereafter in heaven,
yet they will not, for the glory of God, and for the glory of Christ, and for
obtaining of heaven too, forsake their pleasing sins.

We see then, if we duly examine our selves, how far short many of us are, from
that affection to the glory of God, and the glory of Christ, that ought to be
in us. I might lay forth our coming short in this, in many other particulars;
but take we notice of our failing, by that which has been spoken: and now take
we notice of our duty, how dear the glory of God, and the glory of Christ,
ought to be to us; and though (as I said) we cannot come to such a measure of
love and zeal to the glory of God, and the glory of Christ, that was in Moses,
and Paul, yet we must aim at it, and we must endeavor to come to it; and let
neither profit, nor ease, nor pleasure, nor honor, nor credit in the world,
nor the dearest thing we enjoy, or hope hereafter to enjoy, be dearer to us
then the glory of God, and the glory of Christ; if God call us to do, or to
suffer any thing for his name, and glory, and for the glory of Christ, Let us
be ready to prefer the doing or the suffering of it, before the best good thing
we enjoy in this world, yea before our dearest blood, and before our own lives.
And to that purpose consider we, that Gods glory is most dear to his own most
blessed Majesty, Esaias 48.11. (...) I will not give my glory unto another: And
hence it is, that the Lord ^^even jealous, of his glory, and he cannot abide it
should be any way touched, or impaired. Wicked Nebuchadnezzar was suffered to
go on in sin a long time, but when he thought by the Majesty of his person,
and Palace, as it were to outface God, he became a miserable and silly beast,
Dan. 4.27. And wicked Herod had a long time vexed the Church, and escaped
unpunished, but when he took to himself the glory of God, he was suddenly
smitten by the Angel of the Lord, and eaten up of worms, Act. 12.23.

that before the best good thing we do enjoy, or hope to enjoy; and to hold
that dearer to us, then our own souls.

Now the Apostle in this verse, subjoyns one cause moving him to wish himself
separated or accursed from Christ, for the conversion of the Jews, namely
this, because they were his brethren, his kinsmen according to the flesh: hence
note we thus much,

That we are to love our kindred in the flesh, and to respect them, thou shall
not abhor an Edomite, for he is thy brother: Luke 4.16. we find, that Christ
beginning to preach, he preached first at Nazareth, where he had been brought
up, because it had been the place of his education, in recompense of that, he
preached there first, 1. Tim. 5.4. the Apostle says, that children or nephews
must learn first, to show godliness toward their own house, and to recompense
their kindred; for that is an honest thing, and acceptable before God: and
verse 8. he says, he that provideth not for his own, and namely for them of
his household, he denies the faith, and is worse then an Infidel. So
doubtless, he that loves not his kindred, and those he is tied to by the bond
of nature, and does not wish them good, even spiritual good, saving grace here,
and salvation hereafter in heaven, because they are his kindred, he fails in
his duty, and there is good reason for it, namely this:

Nature it self, by the very light of it, teaches this duty, and binds to the
performance of it, to love our kindred, and to respect them,

But happily, some may object Henceforth know we no man after the flesh, yea
though we had known Christ after the flesh, yet now henceforth know we him no
more. Therefore it seems, we are not to respect our kindred in the flesh,
because they are our kindred.

I answer: circumcised, an Hebrew of the Hebrews, by the Law a Pharisee,
Philip. 3.5. but now he counted all these things loss, Philip. 3.8. and will
not now know Christ only according to the flesh, that is his meaning. And so
it makes not against this, That we are to love our kindred, and to respect
them, and to wish them good, because they are our kindred.

And to apply this, and be thou mindful of this duty, love thy kindred, respect
them, and wish good to them, because they are thy kindred: and labor that as
they are knit to thee, in the bond of flesh, so they may be knit to thee, and
thou to them, in the bond of the Spirit; That so, as thou have fellowship with
them in the flesh, thou may have fellowship with them in the Spirit, and that
there may be an eternal fellowship and communion between thee and them, in the
Kingdom of Heaven.

VERSE 4. Which are the Israelites, to whom pertains the adoption, and the
glory, and the Covenants, and the giving of the Law, and the service of God,
and the Promises.


IN this Verse, our Apostle puts down another reason, moving him to wish
himself separated, or accursed from Christ, for the conversion of the Jews,
namely this, Because they were the people of God, the Israelites; which he
further amplifies and makes manifest, by six privileges vouchsafed unto them;
as that to them did belong the Adoption, and the Glory, and the Covenants,
giving of the Law, the service of God, and the Promises: Which are the
Israelites, to whom pertains the adoption, and the glory, and the Covenants,
and the giving of the Law, and the service of God, and the Promises. I will
first lay forth the meaning of the several branches of this Verse, and then
descend to matter of observation and instruction hence offered.

Which are the Israelites] That is, which are the people that descended from
Jacob, their father, who was also called Israel, and of whom they had the name
of Israelites, and they rather took their name from Jacob, then from Abraham,
or Isaac, because Abraham and Isaac had sons, which belonged not to the people
of God; but all Jacobs sons were the fathers of the Lords people, and they
rather had their name from Jacobs name Israel, then from his name Jacob,
because it was a more excellent, and a more worthy name, it being given to
Jacob by God himself, upon a special occasion, as we read, Genesis 32.28. And it
being a name of special signification, it signifying, one prevailing with God;
as the Lord himself there says, thy name shall be called Jacob no more, but
Israel, because thou have prevailed with God, or had power with God: and hence
it was, that Jacob thought it an excellent blessing, to have Joseph's children
called by his name Israel, as we may see in his prayer, Genesis 48.16. Let my name
be named on them, on Ephraim and Manasseh.

To whom pertains the Adoption.] Or, whose is the adoption: by adoption here,
we are not to understand Adoption by grace in Christ, which is proper and
peculiar to Gods Elect, spoken of by the Apostle, Ephesians. 1.5. but an external
adoption, in that God did select and sever the seed of Jacob from all nations
and people in the World, to be accounted only his Church and People, and to be
a peculiar people to himself, in regard of which dignity, the Lord calls them
his Son, yea his first born, Exodus 4.22. yea his chief treasure above all
people, Exodus 19.5. yea his Lot, and his inheritance, Deuteronomy. 32.9.

And the glory] Some would have the word glory, here to be understood of
Miracles, and great Works, whereby the people of Israel became famous, and
glorious. And some, of Divine Visions and Apparitions; but it is better to be
understood, of the Ark of the Covenant, which was a token of Gods presence
amongst his people, where God heard the prayers and praises of his people, and
gave forth his Oracles to them; which is called glory, 1 Samuel 4.21, 22. and
hence is the Temple called the place where Gods honor dwells, Psalm. 26.8.

and the Covenants,] By Covenants, is not here meant the Covenant made with
Abraham, and often renewed, (as some think) that is comprehended under the word,
Promises, but rather by a metonymie, the two tables, in which God wrote the
Moral Law, which are called the Tables of the covenant, Deuteronomy. 9.11. and so also
termed Heb. 9.4. And so the Apostle here reckons three kinds of Laws, which
Israel had, the Moral Law, contained in the two Tables of the Law, here called
the Covenants: The Judicial Law, for the Common Wealth of the Jews, which was
an excellent Law, having God the Author of it, and being full of Equity, called
here (...), the giving of the Law: And the ceremonial law, consisting of the
Priesthood, and such outward rites and sacrifices, wherein God would be
lawfully served of the Jews, till the coming of Christ, here called the service
of God, or the Worship of God; for that is here meant by the service of God,
the ceremonial Law touching the outward Worship of God.

And the Promises.] That is, promises of Gods favor: as that promise made to
Abraham, Genesis 17.7. I will be a God to thee, and to thy seed afterward; often
renewed to him, and to his seed, comprehending under it, Promises both temporal,
as touching the inheritance of the Land of Canaan: And Spiritual, touching the
Messiah, and promises legal, touching life, on the condition of keeping the Law
of God perfectly. And Promises Evangelical, touching remission of sins, and
salvation to believers in Christ; as Peter said, Act. 2.39. The Promise is made
to you, and to your children, and to all that are afar off, even as many as the
Lord our God shall call. And so we see the particulars of this Verse explained;
and briefly thus conceive we the meaning of the Apostle in the words of this
Verse; as if he had said, I could wish my self to be separated from Christ, for
my brethren, which are my kinsmen according to the flesh, which are the people,
who descended from the Loins of Jacob their father, who was also called
Israel, a prevailer with God, of whom they had that* honorable name of
Israelites. Which people, God did select and sever from all the Nations and
people in the world; to be accounted only his Church and People, and to be a
peculiar people to himself, who had also the Ark of God, as a token of Gods
presence amongst them, and was their glory; who had also the Moral Law written
in two Tables, by the finger of God himself, called the tables of the Covenant.
And the Judicial Law, The Metaphrase.
for the government of their Common Wealth, which was an excellent Law, having
God the Author of it, and full of equity. And likewise the Ceremonial Law,
touching the outward worship of God, which was also an excellent Law,
distinguishing them from all other Nations, in the worship of God. And they had
also the Promises of God, touching Gods favor, and touching good things,
temporal and spiritual, and the promises Legal, and the promises Evangelical,
many sweet, gracious, and comfortable Promises.

Now thus understanding the words of this Verse, come we to such things as are
hence offered for our further instruction. And in that the Apostle makes this a
further ground of his wish, to be separated or accursed from Christ, for the
conversion of the Jews, because they were the Israelites, the ancient people of
God; I might stand to show, that the Jews are to be respected, and that we
ought to wish them good, spiritual good, even because they were the ancient
people of God: but of that we shall speak more fitly, when we come to the next
Verse.

We see the Jews are here set out by the Apostle, as a most honorable people,
endowed with many excellent and worthy privileges vouchsafed to them, and yet
all their privileges did nothing avail them, they did them no good at all, in
regard of Gods favor toward them, and of Gods acceptance of them, because
they did not embrace the Gospel, and believe in Christ; they rejected Christ,
and refused to embrace the faith of the Gospel, and so their excellent
privileges did nothing profit them, to commend them in the sight of God, and
to make them pleasing to God. And therefore the Apostle here wishes himself to
be separated, or accursed from Christ, that they might come to be converted,
and to believe in Christ, notwithstanding their great privileges: hence then
we are given to understand thus much;

if thou be a transgressour of the Law, thy circumcision is made
uncircumcision; thou art no more pleasing to God, then the Gentile: without
question, it was a great privilege to be of Christ his kindred, in respect of
the flesh: it was more then to be of the Blood Royal of the greatest Monarch in
the world; yet mark what the Lord Jesus himself speaks of it, Matthew. 12.48. Who
is my mother? and who are my brethren? as if he had said, What is it to be of
my kindred according to the flesh? is that the thing that makes any one more
pleasing to God? no, no, says he, behold my mother, and my brethren, (pointing
to his Disciples,) they are my mother, and my brethren, that do the Will of my
Father which is in heaven. Alliance in faith is nearer and dearer to me, then
that which is in the flesh. Who ever had greater honor then was vouchsafed to
the Virgin Mary, to be the Mother of the Lord Jesus, yet (as One says well.)
had not Mary her self carried him in her heart by faith, her conceiving, and
carrying him in her womb had nothing availed her, nor made her any thing at all
pleasing in Gods sight. And the Reason is this,





to it, as able to commend us in Gods sight, and to make us accepted with God,
we wanting faith, no not on the Word and Gospel, and holy Ordinances of God,
nor on our profession of Religion, nor on our good gifts, and qualifications,
as wit, memory, learning, and such like. It was the conceit of the people of
God, the Jews, that they were highly in Gods favor, because they had Gods
Temple, and his outward worship amongst them, Jer. 7.4. They cried out, The
Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord: and is it not the conceit of too
many in our days? do not many bless themselves, and think that they are
highly in Gods favor, only because they have been baptized, and they live in
the bosom of the Church, and enjoy the Ministry of the Word, and they have
good preaching amongst them, and they are made partakers of the holy Ordinances
of God, they come to the Church, and they partake in the holy things of God, in
the Word and Sacraments? Oh deceive not thy self, (whosoever thou art;) these
things are excellent privileges which thou enjoyest, and happily others want;
But alas, these things do not make thee pleasing to God, or nearer to heaven,
thou wanting faith in Christ, and saving grace in thy soul. No, thou may
enjoy these privileges, and yet perish and be damned; yea they may be to thee
seals of deeper condemnation. And indeed, know it for a certain truth, the
better means of salvation thou live under, the heavier shall be thy Judgment,
and the deeper thy condemnation in hell, thou not profiting by them, to the
working of faith, and saving grace in thy soul. It is not the having of the
Gospel, nor thy profession of Christianity, thy profession being severed from
faith and godliness, that will shelter thee from the anger of God, but rather
make way for his wrath, and cause his wrath to burst forth on thee more
fiercely, and increase his wrath and vengeance against thee. And therefore
deceive not thy self, think not that any privilege, or good thing thou
enjoyest, not the holy Religion of God it self, nor thy profession of it, makes
thee pleasing to God, and acceptable with God, thou wanting faith in Christ,
and saving grace in thine own heart; Labor thou, to get better assurance of
Gods favor toward thee, then the enjoyment, and outward use of the holy
Ordinances of God, even true faith in Christ, and saving grace in thy soul,
that is the thing that will yield thee good assurance, that thou art beloved of
God, and accepted of him in his beloved Christ Jesus.

In the next place observe we, that the Apostle does here freely acknowledge
the honor of the Jews, and the excellent privileges the Lord had vouchsafed
to them, though they were at that time when the Apostle writ this Epistle, (and
still are) enemies to Christ, and to his Gospel, yea though they were mortal
enemies to Paul himself, and did wickedly oppose him and the doctrine of the
Gospel, taught by him, as he says, 1 Thessalonians. 2.15. they both killed the Lord
Jesus, and their own Prophets, and persecuted him, and the other Apostles, yet
you see he conceales not their honor, and their excellency, but here freely
acknowledges, that, to them did belong the adoption, and the glory, and the
covenants, and the giving of the Law, and the service of God, and the Promises.
The point for our further instruction hence offered is this.

That the known excellency and eminency of others ought to be acknowledged, and
respected, whatsoever the persons be on whom it is bestowed, yet David
acknowledged him the Lords anointed, and had respect to him, as one advanced by
the hand of God, to the place of government, 1 Samuel 24.6. he said to his men,
the Lord keep me from doing any thing to my Master the Lords anointed, to lay
mine hand upon him, for he is the Lords anointed: he doubleth his
acknowledgment of it, that he was the Lords anointed: and so again, 1 Samuel
26.11, The Lord keep me from laying mine hand upon the Lords anointed: still
David acknowledges wicked Saul, his utter enemy, the Lords anointed; and thus
did the Apostle acknowledge and respect the eminency and preferment of the
heathen Emperors, though they were enemies to the Gospel, and cruel and bloody
persecutors, both of the Apostle, and of other Christians. Yea Paul enjoined
the Christians so far to respect wicked and cruel Nero, in regard of his
eminency in place of government, as to pray for him, 1 Timothy 2.1, 2. for Kings,
and for all that are in authority, and so for the cruel Emperor Nero. As
Jeremiah the Prophet enjoined the people to pray for wicked Nebuchadnezzar, by
whom they were carried away into captivity, Jer. 29.7. Philip. 1.18. we find,
that Paul acknowledged, and that with rejoicing, the good gifts of wicked
Preachers, and their sound preaching of Christ, for the matter of their
preaching, though corruptly for the manner, they preaching of envy, or of vain
glory, what then? says the Apostle; as if he had said, that they preach of
envy, or strife, what is that to me? I acknowledge their good gifts, and their
preaching soundly for the matter; and that Christ is preached all manner of
ways, whether it be under a pretense, or sincerely, I therein joy; yea and
will joy: a plain evidence and proof of the point in hand, that we are to
acknowledge, and to respect the known excellency and dignity, and preferment,
God has vouchsafed to others, be it in place, in gifts, or in good success in
the use of those gifts, whatsoever the persons be, on whom it is bestowed;
though they be rejected persons, yea though they be our mortal enemies: and
there is good reason for it.

A man can receive nothing, except it be given him from heaven: and it is the
stamp and image of God, set on those persons, and in it self it is good and
excellent, and cannot be stained, or polluted by the vileness or sins of the
persons on whom it is bestowed: and therefore doubtless, it is to be
acknowledged and respected, in whomsoever it is found, though the persons that
do enjoy it, be wicked, and though they be our mortal enemies.



The truth now delivered, meets with a common corruption amongst many men; it
is a usual thing with many men, through the strength of the corruption of their
own hearts, to dislike, yea sometimes lightly to esteem of that excellency, and
that eminency and preferment that others do enjoy, in place, in gifts, or in
good success in the use of those gifts; because the persons that do enjoy
them, are such as they distaste, and like not, for some by-respects: To
instance; does not the wife many times lightly esteem of her husband, because
happily he is a simple man, or he is a poor and mean person in the world, it may
be the poorest man in the place where he lives? does not a servant usually
cast off all due respect to his Master, because he is a man of mean place, and
of base condition? yea, is it not a common thing with many, to deny
acknowledgment and due respect to the Minister of Jesus Christ, because it may
be, they spy some infirmity in him, or because of the meannesse of his person,
he is but a poor man, and a threed-bare fellow, as the world disdainfully terms
him: and is it not a usual thing with men and women, out of the cursed
corruption of their nature, to envy the good gifts of others, and the good
success others have in the use of their gifts, because their persons dislike
them? what is more common, then for some to envy the good success that some
Ministers have in exercise of their gifts, in that they using their gifts
carefully, and conscionably, do gather or build up a people to God, and in that
they are in such credit, and such esteem in the Church, and have such great
authority in the hearts of Gods people? Oh this is an eyesore to some, and
they carp at it; and this they complain of, as John's Disciples complained to
him of Christ, Joh. 3.26. they came to John, and said to him, Rabbi, he that
was with thee, beyond Jordan to whom thou barest witness, behold he baptizeth,
and all men come unto him; all men follow him: a foul fault surely, and a sore
accusation: and just so, do some now in our days, they complain that many
flock to such and such Ministers, and they envy the good success those
Ministers have, in the execution of their Ministerial office, and the exercise
of their gifts, in that so much good is done by their Ministry. And why
forsooth? because they are Puritan Preachers, and their persons are such as
they cannot affect; all these, and many others, are justly to be taxed, as
sinning against this holy truth now delivered, that we ought to acknowledge and
to respect the known excellency, dignity, and preferment God has vouchsafed to
others, be it in place, in gifts, in the good success, in the use of those
gifts, whatsoever the persons be, that do enjoy it, though they be wicked
persons, yea our

We are to take notice of this duty, and learn we to mind it, as any just
occasion is given to us. Art thou a wife, learn then to acknowledge the dignity
and superiority God has vouchsafed to thine husband, as he is thine husband,
be he never so silly or simple a man, or never so wicked or vile a person, for
as he is thy husband, he has the stamp and image of God set on him in respect
of thee, and that in it self is good and excellent, and ought to be
acknowledged, and and respected wheresoever it is found. Art thou a servant?
then take thou notice of it, that thy Master bears the image of God before
thee, as he is thy Master, and thou art to acknowledge it, and with reverence
to respect it, be thy master never so poor, or of never so mean condition in
the world, Note.
or be his qualities never so vile.

And so, be persons that are in place over us never so vile, or wicked, yet we
must learn to acknowledge and to reverence and to respect their known eminency,
and their known lawful authority, that comes to them from heaven; yea learn we
not only, not to envy, but to love, reverence, and respect the good gifts of
others, and the good success they have in the use of those gifts, be the
persons never so mean, or base in our conceit. It may be, some are of meaner
parts then thy self, have in the same calling (wherein thou art) better
success in the use of their gifts, then thou have in the use of thy gifts;
what then? consider thou, that both men's gifts, and the success they have in
those gifts, comes to them from heaven, and it is measured out by the good hand
of God, and it may be, God sees just cause sometimes to grace with success,
lesser gifts above greater, because happily he sees greater sincerity and
faithfulness in the use of lesser gifts, then in the use of greater; and
therefore, do not thou envy or repine at the good success, others have in the
use of their gifts, because the persons to whom it is vouchsafed, are such as
thou can not affect, or because they are of meaner gifts then thy self; if
thou so do, surely thou pickest a quarrel with God himself, and he may say to
thee, as we have it, Matthew. 20.15. Is thine eye evil because I am good? do
thou repine and fret against my good hand, and against my disposing of my
gifts, and success in the use of my gifts? if thou so do, thou shall not
escape my punishing hand: Oh then take thou heed of this, whosoever thou art;
and learn we, to acknowledge and to respect the known true excellency and
dignity, and preferment, that God vouchsafes to any, be it in place, in gifts,
in good success in the use of gifts, vouchsafed unto them, though the persons
that do enjoy it, be base and mean, yea wicked and vile persons, and though
they be our mortal enemies, this is our duty, and it is to be thought on, and
remembered.

Now to proceed, I hold it not fit to stand on the worthy privileges belonging
to the Jews, here reckoned up by the Apostle severally, that would be a longer
course, and not so agreeable to the purpose of the holy Ghost in this place.
Only from the glory, which the Apostle here puts down as a privilege
vouchsafed to the people of God the Israelites, meaning thereby, as I showed
before, the Ark of Gods Covenant, which was a sign of Gods special presence
amongst them; I thought to have noted briefly, that which of late has been
largely and well handled in your hearing, namely this,

How beautiful upon the Mountains, are the feet of him that declares and
publishes peace? that declares good tidings, and publishes salvation, saying
unto Zion, Thy God reigns. And Gods Kingdom is stable, and firm, nothing is
able to overturn it. But I will not stand on this, it having been pointed at
before, in the opening of the words of this Verse; only by way of Use, this
ground of truth serves to discover to us.

no, it is not possible, let them say what they will to the contrary; they
pretend and say, they are as good subjects as the best, and would make the
world believe, that howsoever they differ from us in Religion, yet they wish as
well to the State; and they are as good friends to the King, and to the State,
as the best of us all; thus they prate, and thus they would make the world
believe; but their lying and equivocating is palpable: indeed and in truth
there is no such matter. They that hate Zion, as Psalm. 129.5. They that wish
ill to the holy Religion of God that is amongst us, and is our glory, our
happiness, our strength, and stability, say what they will, assuredly they
cannot possibly be rightly affected, and true friends to the good estate of our
Land and Kingdom. And we for our parts are to be earnest with the Lord, that
these enemies of the Gospel may not be too far trusted; yea we ought, (as the
Apostle exhorts, 2 Thessalonians. 3.1, 2.) to pray, and that earnestly, that the Gospel
may have free passage, and be glorified amongst us, and that we may be
delivered from these perverse and unreasonable men. And surely if they do in
any sort prevail against the Gospel, and the holy Religion we profess, we may
justly impute it to this, as one special cause that we are defective in this
duty.

VERSE 5. Of whom are the fathers, and of whom concerning the flesh, Christ
came, who is God over all, blessed for ever, Amen.


IN this Verse, the Apostle puts down a third cause and reason, moving him to
wish himself separated or accursed from Christ, for the conversion of the
Jews, namely this, because of them were the fathers, and of them Christ came,
according to the flesh, who is farther described to be God over all, and
Blessed for ever. To which the Apostle subscribes, and gives assent in the
word, Amen. Of whom are the fathers, and of whom concerning the flesh, Christ
came, who is God over all, blessed for ever, Amen. I will as briefly as I can,
open the sense and meaning of the words of this Verse.

Of whom are the fathers,] Or, whose are the fathers, that is, of which people
were the honorable and holy Patriarks, of whom they are descended, as of
honorable ancestors, and progenitors, whose praise is in the word, which also
had the promises of Gods mercy to them, and to their posterity, Genesis 17.4, 7.

and of whom concerning the flesh, Christ came,] Of which Israelites Christ
descended, according to his humane nature, and took his humane nature of their
stock, as we have it, Romans 1.3. he was made of the seed of David, according to
the flesh: and Hebrews 2.16. it is said, he took the seed of Abraham.

Who is God over all, blessed for ever. Some do alter and change the reading
of these words, and do thus read them, God who is over all, be blessed for
ever: and so they will not have this clause referred to Christ, but think, that
the Apostle does here conclude with a general doxology, in giving praise to
God; but this is a violence to the Text. It is plain, that the Apostle having
made mention of Christ his origin, and beginning according to the flesh, his
purpose was also to make mention of his Godhead, and that to the praise of the
Nation of the Jews, that of that nation Christ came, who is not only man but
God also, even true God, and very God; ((...),) God by Being or Nature ((...))
the Eternal. Over all, That is, over all persons; and over all things.

blessed for ever,] That is, God eternal, and for ever to be praised, in all
ages, and for ever; for this is a title attributed and given to God the
Creator, Romans 1.25.

Amen.] That is, So be it, or, let it be so. Thus then conceive we the meaning
of the words of this Verse; as if the Apostle had said, Of which people the
Israelites, were the honorable and holy Patriarks, of whom they are descended,
as of most honorable Ancestors and Progenitors, and of which Israelites,
Christ also descended, according to his humane nature, and took his flesh and
humane nature of their stock, The Metaphrase.
which Christ is not only Man, but God also, Even true God, and very God, by
nature, and God over all persons, and over all things, yea God eternal, to be
blessed, and praised in all ages, and for ever; To which I give my assent, and
say, So be it, or, Let it be so.

Having now the sense and meaning of the words, come we now to some matter of
doctrine, that this Verse will afford us. And first, we see it here put down by
the Apostle, as an honor to the Jews, and as a special privilege, that they
were the posterity of the holy Patriarchs. Whence note we briefly thus much,

Andronicus and Junia my cousens, verse. 11. Herodian my kinsman; verse. 21.
Lucius and Jason, and Sosipater my kinsmen: Colos. 4.10. the Apostle commends
Marcus to the Colossians, as a person worthy of respect, under this title, that
he was Barnabas sisters son: not to enlarge the point, the reason why it is an
honor and dignity to be of the race or kindred of such as have been the holy
servants of God, and to be the children of good and godly parents, is,

To show mercy unto thousands to them that love him. Psalm. 112.2. The
generation of the righteous shall be blessed; yea, they are his Jewels, Mal.
3.16.

Age is a crown of glory, when it is found in the way of righteousness: so to
be descended of good and godly parents, is a crown of glory, if it be set on
the head of such as are godly and religious, otherwise it is a dishonor to
them, and without Gods mercy, shall increase their condemnation: and on this
ground, let parents learn, how they may estate their children in that which may
be for their honor, and best good, namely thus, they are to labor, to bring
themselves within the Covenant of grace, and to become holy and religious
themselves, and then though they cannot derive their holiness to their
children, because they beget them not as they be holy men, but as men simply by
the power and strength of nature, yet by virtue of the Covenant, God will be
good to their children, Genesis 26. we read of many blessings promised to Isaac,
and why? because says the text, verse. 5. Abraham his father obeyed the voice
of the Lord. Holiness in the Parents, seals up Gods favor, not only to
themselves, but to their children also: This, cannot raking and scraping
together of wealth do: it is a common saying, but a wicked and cursed saying,
Happy is the child, whose father goes to the Devil. It is rather a comfort to
the children, when they can remember that their parents are or have been godly,
and in the favor of God, they may then say as Jacob said, Genesis 32.9. Lord,
thou have been, or thou art the God of my father, good and gracious to him,
show thou mercy to me his child, according to thine own sweet promise.

Last of all; Is it an honor and dignity to be of the race or kindred of

Now further, it is not to be passed by, without noting, that the Apostle here
says, the Jews who lived in his time, at the time when he writ this Epistle,
were the posterity of the holy Patriarks, and no doubt they were then able to
fetch their pedigree from those holy Fathers, and to prove themselves to be the
seed and children of Abraham, and to come of his line, as they allege for
themselves, and brag of it to Christ, Joh. 8.33. We be Abraham's seed; and
verse 39. Abraham is our father: yea doubtless, they could then show a
perpetual succession of their high Priests, from Aaron to the time of Christ;
yet for all this they were rejected, and were not the true Church of God: the
Jews now rejecting Christ, and refusing to embrace the faith and doctrine of
the Gospel, are not the true Church of God, though they be descended from
Abraham, and from the holy Patriarks, and though they can derive their pedigree
from them. See then (I note it to this purpose) the vanity and weakness of
that argument, that is used by our adversaries the Papists, that forsooth the
continual succession of Bishops, is an evident argument of the true visible
Church, and they will needs have their Romish Synagogue to be the only true
Church; because, as they say, their Pope is the successor of Peter, and they
have had a continual ordinary succession of Bishops, Pastors, and Doctors,
from the time of the Apostles; which indeed is a vain brag, and can never be
proved: it is questionable whether Peter ever sat as Bishop at Rome: And the
Popish Church has no succession from the Apostles for many hundred years
after Christ, at the least, for five or six hundred years. And admit they could
show a continued succession of their Bishops, from the time of the Apostles,
without interruption, yet that is but a sandy and a weak ground, to build the
truth of their Church on, unless they can also show a continual succession of
true doctrine, and that their Church has succeeded the Apostles, in truth of
doctrine; for indeed they cannot be said to succeed them, whose doctrine they
renounce: An outward succession of persons in any place, without succession of
true doctrine, from the Apostles, (which the Papists cannot show) is nothing
worth. It helps not the Bishop of Rome to have (as they say) Peter for their
predecessor, and that they are his successors, so long as they swerve from
the true Doctrine of Peter, and are become such gross Idolaters; that personal
succession (if they could prove it) can nothing avail them.

It follows, verse 5. and of whom concerning the flesh Christ came, that is,
of which Jews, Christ also descended, concerning the flesh, as touching his
humane nature: This is also added, as further matter of honor and dignity to
the Jews, that Christ came of them, concerning the flesh, as touching his
humane nature, that he that was the Son of God, and that from all eternity,
should have the same Ancestors and Progenitors with them: Whence we see then,

the Adoption, and the Glory, and the Covenants, the giving of the Law, and the
service of God, etc. that they were the seed of the Patriarks, and (which is
yet more) that Christ himself, as touching his humane nature, was descended
from them, doubtless a matter of great honor.

Go not into the way of the Gentiles, and into any city of the Samaritans,
enter ye not, says our Savior, in his first Commission granted to his
Disciples, Matthew. 10.5, 6. but go rather to the lost sheep of the house of
Israel; so that the Gospel was first preached to the Jews, as the Apostle
speaks, Act. 13.46. and from them it proceeded, and descended unto us
Gentiles, so that all believing Jews are to be honored and beloved of us, as
being our elder brethren, and the people of God; yea we are to wish them well,
that are yet uncalled and unconverted, and earnestly and heartily to pray for
their conversion.

Again, In that the Apostle adds this limitation, [concerning the flesh] or
according to the flesh. Hence we are plainly taught the truth of Christ's
Humanity, which is an article of our faith, and a fundamental truth of God,
which we are to embrace upon pain of damnation: and from hence the observation
is this,

the Word was made flesh, and dwelt amongst us; that is the eternal Word of the
Father, the second person in the Trinity; even he was made flesh, which plainly
shows the truth of his humane nature. So again, Romans 1.3. where the Apostle
speaking of Christ the Son of God, says, that he was made of the seed of David
concerning the flesh, or according to the flesh. And in Gal. 4.4. says the
Apostle, When the fullness of time was come, God sent forth his son, and that
son that is made of a woman, even that eternal son of God, made of a woman: a
plain demonstration of Christ's humanity: so in Phil. 2.7. The Apostle says,
that Christ was made like unto man, and found in shape as man: Now indeed some
(in ancient time) perverted this Scripture, and abused it, to say, that Christ
had a heavenly body, and imaginary body, (like unto man) he had a body of an
imaginary substance; but this is contrary to the meaning of the Text, as you
may gather by the context: for the meaning is, that Christ Jesus had the same
properties of a body and soul, as other men; as seeing, smelling, tasting,
feeling, hearing, and the like, and subject to the like properties and
infirmities as we are; as to hunger, thirst, anger, yea to death it self, as we
may see in Philip. 2.8. he became obedient to the death, even to the death of
the Cross: he did eat, and drink, and sleep, and was subject unto sorrow and
heaviness, yea even unto the death; so that that place rightly understood, is
a strong argument to prove the truth of Christ's humanity, that he was like unto
us, sin excepted.

It was needful that Christ Jesus the Son of God, should take flesh upon the
seed of the woman shall break the Serpents head: here is a Promise made, and
for the accomplishment of this promise, it was needful that the Son of God
should take flesh upon him.

Secondly, it is needful, that he might suffer for sin, in his body and

First, this being a truth, it serves to discover unto us an error; parcel of
their consecrated host, and yet not seen, nor felt, only the accident, of
bread, but the substance of Christ is there: what is this but to overthrow the
truth of Christ his body, and to make the body of Christ to be no true body,
but rather a spirit? and to make it infinite, to be in many places at one time;
for why? Christ Jesus took flesh upon him, he took our Nature upon him, the
body of man, even a true body, and therefore his body cannot possibly have such
properties as they fashion: Oh but (by your leave) say they, God can make it,
God is omnipotent, and he can make it so: what God can do, we do not question;
but what God will do, let them show it in the Will of God revealed, that God
will do it, or and if I should affirm it, that God cannot make the body of
Christ (it still remaining a true and perfect body,) in many places at one and
the same time, if I should affirm it, they cannot nor never were able to
disprove it; for this were to make the body of Christ to be no body, to be
circumscribed, and not circumscribed, which are contradictories, and
contradictories can never agree to the Nature of God, to make a body, to be a
body, and no body, at the same time, God cannot do, it is contrary to the
Nature of God, to make contradictories agree together; and therefore if I
should affirm it, they cannot disprove it.

Again, seeing Christ Jesus took our humane Nature upon him, the properties of
a body, and faculties of a soul, herein appears the infinite love of God unto
man, whose nature he assumed, and took in unity with his Godhead; herein
appears the advancement of man's Nature above all creatures in heaven and in
earth; yea above the Angels, being received into unity of person with the Son
of God, the second Person in the Trinity he did assume our Nature, and the
common infirmities of our nature: From hence Gods children, such as are true
believers, members of Christ, may gather much comfort: for why? the Lord Jesus
their Head and Savior will be pitiful and compassionate unto them, when they
lie under any distress of body, or mind: Christ has as it were his bowels
yearning toward them, he knows the infirmities common to the nature of man,
and that by experience; he has felt the anguish and the pain that appertain to
his members, in his blessed body and soul, and therefore he is touched with a
fellow-feeling of them, even a compassionate feeling of them: we know a man
that has been under any pain, or grief of body or mind, will be exceeding
pitiful to any that be under the like grief, and mavelous compassionate unto
them, saying, Oh I have felt it, I know what belongs unto it, I pity him.
Thus the Lord Jesus having the experience of the common nature of man, much
more will be compassionate to his poor members, in time of their Afflictions;
and to this purpose is that, in Heb. 2.17, 18. that in all things he became to
be made like unto his brethren, that he might be merciful, and pitiful, and
might have a fellow-feeling of their miseries: and in the 18. verse, For in
that he suffered, and was tempted, he is able to succor, and will succor, all
that are tempted: so also the Holy Ghost says, Heb. 4.15. For we have not an
high Priest, which cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities, but
in all things tempted and tried like unto us, yet without sin. Do thou then
(that art a believing member of Jesus Christ) lie under any affliction, or
trouble of mind? remember this to thy comfort, that the Lord Jesus thy Head and
Savior, having had experience of the common grief, he is compassionate, and
will put under his hand, and support thee in the time of trouble, and
affliction, and give thee ease in his due time; it may be thou being under some
great Cross, men will pity thee; do men pity thee? assuredly the Lord Jesus
does much more pity thee, that art a true believing member of his body;
therefore comfort thy self, and do not think (which may be some scruple in thy
mind,) that Christ's advancement into heaven, makes him forget his poor members
here on earth; no, he is touched with a fellow feeling of their misery; his
advancement cannot make him forget thee, no, the holy Ghost preventeth this
scruple, in Hebrews 4.14, 15. We have such an high Priest that is gone into
heaven: alas may some say, he is gone into heaven, far away out of my sight,
and as they say, out of sight, out of mind, he has no pity, nor compassion on
me; mark what the Holy Ghost says, he preventeth this, though this High Priest
be gone into heaven yet we have not such an high Priest, that cannot be touched
with the feeling of our infirmities, (but what?) in all things tried, only
without sin: though our high Priest be exalted to the highest glory in heaven,
yet this makes him not forget his poor members; his pity and compassion is
nothing at all diminished; though he be so great an high Priest, and lives in
bliss, and in glory, yet comfort thy self, he is still as compassionate as
ever he was; although the Lord does suffer the wicked to ride over their back,
and to triumph, yet he is the King of his Church, and will rise in Judgment, to
execute Justice: howsoever he may whip and scourge his children, yet he will
burn the rod, and deliver his: So that this may be a matter of excellent
comfort to Gods children, that Christ is true Man.

Who is God over all, blessed for ever, Amen.
THe Apostle now goes further on in a description of Christ, and having
affirmed, That Christ came of the Jews concerning the flesh, he presently
adds, that he is God over all, blessed for ever; that is, as I formerly
showed you, Who is true God, very God, God by nature, God by being, God over
all persons, and over all things, yea God eternal, to be blessed, praised, and
Magnified, and worshipped, and glorified of all things, and in all ages for
ever, Amen.

Here then we have a plain and pregnant proof of the Godhead of Christ Jesus,
which is also a fundamental truth, and such a truth as we must believe upon
pain of damnation: and from hence it is evident, that Christ is not only true
man, coming and having original from the Jews concerning the flesh, but God
also; the Doctrine is this,

That the Son of God, Christ Jesus, is true God, very God, By him were all
things created, visible, invisible, Thrones, Dominions, Principalities and
Powers. Secondly, he is said to be blessed for ever, which is also an epithet,
title and attribute of God; Romans 1.25. the Gentiles turned the truth of God
into a lie; and worshipped the creature, and forsook the Creator, blessed for
ever: and this holy truth of God has not only ground and footing here, but in
other places of Scripture, Joh. 1.1. In the beginning was the word, and the
word was with God, and that word was God: even before the world was, or had a
being, he was God; yea the Evangelist says, that by it all things were made,
and without it was made nothing that was made: he puts it down both
affirmatively, and negatively: and in Joh. 8.58. Christ says, Before Abraham
was, I am: a title and an attribute proper and peculiar to God alone, Exodus
3.14. I am has sent me unto you; not I was before Abraham, but I am. Philip.
2.6. the Apostle says, that Christ even before his incarnation, was in the
form of God, and he thought it no robbery to be equal with God: he knew it to
be no wrong nor usurpation, to be equal with God. It were no hard matter at
large to prove this truth as by the predictions and foretellings of the holy
Prophets of God, which are spoken of Jehovah in the Old Testament; and in the
New Testament we find applied to Christ; and also by the works that are proper
to God, and peculiarly appropriated to God, and cannot be, but of a Divine
Nature, these are given to Christ, as to make the world to know the hearts of
men, and forgive sins; yea by the many and wonderful Miracles that he wrought,
beyond the power of man; man was not able to perform the like, which his
enemies could not choose but acknowledge, that therein appeared a Divine power:
all this does demonstrate unto us, the truth of Christ's Godhead. Yet before I
come to make use of it, I hold it needful to answer some Cavils which are
brought even against this very text that now we have in hand: for some
wrangling spirits in the world, do stretch their wits to wrong this Text, and
say, that Christ's Divine Nature is not proved out of this Text; which to my
understanding, is as clear as any in the Book of God.

Cavil.
For thus they Reason, (say they) Not every one that is called God, (in
Scripture) is therefore the God of heaven and earth; for Magistrates are called
gods, Psalm. 82.1. God stands in the assembly of gods: and in the sixth verse,
I have said, Ye are gods. And again, in that it is ascribed unto Christ, to be
over all, that title belongs unto Christ, not by nature, but by donation, it
is a donative given him from his Father, in Phil. 2.9. where it is said, God
has highly exalted him, and given him a name over all names; so that blessed
for ever, is a title given him of his Father, and belongs to God the Father;
and they allege. Romans 1.25. and in 2 Cor. 1.3. and 11.31. where, blessed for
ever, is given to God the Father. And therefore this place is no clear evidence
and proof of the Godhead of Christ; thus they seek to put out the clear light
of the truth.

But they are easily answered:

Note.
And it is worth our marking, we shall find, that the name and title of God, is
never in Scripture given to any one singular person, to any one individual: I
have said* you are gods; but never said, I have said, thou art a god: or if it
be, it is with a limitation to a certain sense; as God says to Moses, I have
made thee a god; thou art a made god: In my place thou art a god, to Pharaoh.
Again, Magistrates (in Scripture) are never said to be God over all; but Christ
is here said to be God over all, which proves, that he is the great and mighty
God, the King of heaven and earth, he is God over all. Oh but they say this
title, over all, it belongs not to Christ by nature, but by donation, and
gift. They are deceived, and the ground they build upon is not a good
foundation: For in Philip. 2. you shall find there, that the Apostle speaks
of the exaltation of Christ, as he is the Mediator; so he has a name by
gift, he has a name given him over all names, according to his humane Nature,
but he is God over all by Nature, and that appears in Joh. 3.31. He that is
come from on high is above all; still the Evangelist says, he is above all,
and over all; so that he has that properly by nature.

Now touching the phrase, the last thing that they allege, blessed for ever,
which they say, is never given to any, but to God the Father: it is true, it is
usually in Scripture given to God the Father, yet not by way of exclusion, not
exclusively, not so, as that the Son, and Holy Ghost are shut, (to be blessed,)
for when it is given to God the Creator, as in Romans 1.25. it is not only to
God the Father, but even therein also is Christ included, because by him are
all things created, Joh. 1.3. Col. 1.16. For the work of Creation is a work of
the whole Trinity; so that notwithstanding this allegation, and Cavil, it is
still a truth, That Christ Jesus is God, true God, very God, God by nature, God
by being, God of himself, equal to his Father. Come we now to the Application.

I might bend the force of this truth, against the opinions of the Arians,

The Papists are so impudent and shameless, that they stick not to charge our
Doctrine, to be tainted with no less then the highest degree of Atheism, in
this respect, because we teach this holy truth of God, That Jesus Christ in
respect of his Godhead, is of himself, and is equal to his Father, even because
we teach this fundamental truth: they say it is the highest degree of Atheism,
and why? Because, say they, common sense teaches us, that he only is the
natural son of man, who by generation receives his nature and substance of his
father; now, say the Papists, Bellarminus in prefat. lib. 1. de Christo.
if Christ Jesus receive not his Godhead from his Father, but be God of
himself, as you teach, surely then say they, he is not the true Son of God the
Father, and consequently God the Father, is not a true Father; and so, say
they, by your Protestants doctrine, you overturn and cut down the Father and
the Son in the blessed Trinity; and in this respect your doctrine is
heretical, erroneous, and tainted with Atheism.

To this I answer, Here mark how absurd and gross they are, in chargeing this
upon us: Their foolish conjectures in a matter of great weight and consequence,
does plainly appear, to be most gross, and most absurd. In that in so great a
Mystery as this is, the unspeakable, and unconceiveable Sonship of the Son of
God, they would build it upon common sense, and make the generation of man to
be the pattern of it; that as it is in the natural generation of man, so it
must be in the generation of the Son of God, there being a greater difference
between these two, then there is between heaven and earth.

In the natural generation of men, we know, that the child begotten, comes
from the Father by propagation, but the eternal Son of God comes not by
propagation, but by communication of essence and substance; yea by
communication of his whole essence and substance: The eternal God begeteth his
Son, by communicating his whole essence and substance, so that the Father is in
the Son, and the Son is in the Father; and so it is not in the natural
generation, they are two distinct persons.

But to answer them more properly, and more fully, it seems, that these
Cavillers, they cannot, or they will not distinguish between the Godhead, and
the Sonship of Christ, we hold and teach, that the Godhead of Christ is of
himself, as well as his Father, because the Godhead of the Son is not begotten,
no more then the Godhead of the Father; but withal, we hold and teach, that
the Sonship comes from the Father, and Christ is from the Father, as he is the
second person in the Trinity: but as he is God, he is of himself, God of very
God, God coequal, God coessential, together with his Father; this we are to
hold and maintain: and the Popish Cavils are of none effect, nor nothing worth
being but an idle shift: to make application to our selves.

Is this a truth, that Christ Jesus is true God, very God, as we see it is,
uphold the Church of Rome, and advance it, in despite of all that say nay;
Even that Antichristian Whore of Babylon, and Synagogue of Rome, they will be
advanced again in this Land? see how fast they hold a lie, in their right hand,
What can they do against the Lord Jesus, the Head of his Church? who is true
God, very God, the mighty God, Esaias 9.6. they may oppose him and his Kingdom,
but can they parallel, and match his power? they bend their force against the
Church of Christ, but they shall not prevail, for the Church of Christ is knit
unto Christ, who is the eternal and everliving God, of infinite power, able
with the breath of his mouth, to blow all these enemies of the Church of God
into hell, in a moment; the Church of Christ is knit unto Christ, and lives in
the life of Christ, stands in the strength of Christ, it stands in the
strength of him that is the Creator of all the world, can then the enemies of
it prevail to the subversion of it? they wrestle against heaven, and the God of
heaven and earth; for with him has the Church combination: what then can they
do against this bond and knot of unanimity, who ever fought against him, and
prospered? did ever any man lift up his hand against heaven, and prosper? no
surely.

Again, this may not only yield matter of comfort to the Church of God in
general, but to every true member of it in particular; the consideration of
this, that Christ is true God, and very God, may yield matter of comfort to all
that in Christ: for why? they are knit to him, who is the ever springing
Fountain, the tree that blossometh comfort, who is able to take them out of his
hand? neither hell, death, nor the devil, with all his Instruments: And
further, this may cheer thee up with this comfort, that thou art one with him,
in whom is found all fullness and perfection, not only of power, but of grace,
and mercy, and favor, and meekness, and loving kindness, they are knit unto
him who is not only able to help them, but willing to help, and will never
suffer them to perish; it is the very argument of comfort which the Lord has
given unto us, Joh. 10.30. I and my Father are one: in the Verse before, says
he, none shall be able to pluck them out of my hand; then he subjoyneth, I and
my Father are one; one in substance, one in power, none shall be able to pluck
them out of my hand: And indeed it is no marvel, that the Papists, that teach
that desperate Doctrine, (of doubting of salvation, that a man cannot have any
certain hope of salvation, but must live in suspense of it,) it is no marvel
that they teach, that Christ Jesus is not God of himself, for these two things
do well suit and jump together; we must doubt of salvation, because Christ is
not true God of himself: a false assertion. But let us learn to know, that
Christ Jesus is very God, and it will yield us matter of comfort, both in life
and in death; we are knit unto him who is full of power able to defend us
against all oppositions, he will bring us to the possession or life and glory
in heaven, even to the same glory in heaven where he is, even at the end of the
world, when all creatures shall have their change, then will the Lord Jesus
show his glory, and bestow it upon those that are his true members, he will
suffer none of them to perish, so says the Apostle, 2 Timothy 1.12. I know whom I
have believed, and I am persuaded that he is able to keep that which I have
committed to him against that day. I have laid up my reward in the hands of him
that will never fail me, but surely preserve and keep it for me.

Who is God over all; blessed for ever, Amen.
HEre you see, (and it is clear,) that Jesus Christ is both true man, and true
God; Now then from hence, we are to take notice of the personal union of the
two Natures of Christ, into one person: and the observation arising hence is
this,

That Christ Jesus is God-man, or Man-God: the Word was made flesh, it became
flesh: and in 1 Timothy 3.16. the Apostle says, without question, or
controversy, great is the Mystery of godliness, and therein is God manifested
in the flesh; God, and flesh, a wonderful mystery indeed: thus it is in the
eternal Son of God, who took flesh upon him; so that the Manhood of Christ is
not a Person, but a Nature, and received with the Godhead of Christ, which we
all confess, he is God and Man in one Person. Come we to the Application.

First, this serves to inform our Judgments, Son of God: so that the personal
union of Christ is a ground of merit; for if Adam had stood in his innocence,
he could not have merited a better estate to himself, because he was but mere
man; so then these enemies of the truth, they must prove, (which they can never
do) that true believers are one with Christ, by personal union, before they can
conclude the merit of good works, and that because of that mystical union they
are meritorious: but to make application to our selves.

whom we have access to the throne of grace, with comfort, he is God and Man
in one person, and so we may approach with comfort; yea by this means, we
believing in Christ, we come to be partakers of the sufficiency and grace of
the merit of Christ, and they appertain unto us, yea we being one by faith,
with the Manhood of Christ, we come to be made one with the Godhead, and so to
have access unto God who is the fountain of all goodness: this is a matter of
excellent comfort.

Again, it is further to be observed, that the Apostle does not rest in
describing of Christ to be God over all, but adds further, blessed for ever,
he breaks out into an addition of praise and giving glory to the name of
Christ, and magnifying of him; that he is for ever, in all ages; and in all
times, to be blessed, praised, magnified, and glorified, and he subjoyneth to
this, the word Amen; thereby signifying the inward assent of his heart, Amen:
for the word, Amen, is not here (vox optantis) a word of wishing, but (vox
approbantis, et vox affirmantis,) a word of approving, and a word of affirming;
certainly he is so, Amen.

The Observation is this,

Cor. 2.8. the Apostle says, he is the Lord of life and glory: and in 1 Timothy
6.15. The Apostle speaking of Christ, says thus, he is blessed the Prince of
princes, King of kings, Lord of lords, blessed for ever: and in Heb. 1.2, 3.
the Author of the Epistle says, he is the heir of all things, the Lord and
Governor of heaven and earth, the brightness of his glory, the engraven image
of the Person of God, yea he has a more glorious name then the Angels: These
titles do point unto us the excellency of his name, and do manifest unto us,
that indeed, the name of Christ must be honorable unto us, and we must look
that we think and speak of it with reverence and honor. And there is good
Reason for it.

he has commanded his Covenant for ever, holy and fearful is his name: as he
is God, and in respect of his Manhood, surely he is more excellent then the
very Angels, and does exceed all of them, in wisdom, holiness, goodness,
power, Majesty, and glory: and as the humane Nature, the Manhood of Christ, is
received with his Godhead: it is to be adored and worshipped, with Divine and
religious worship, not apart by it self, but as it is considered, as united to
the second person, it is to be adored with the same worship wherewith we adore
God, Heb. 1.6. even then let all the Angels worship him; even when his Manhood
is received into unity with his Godhead, and therefore the name of the Lord
Jesus ought to be honorable and precious, and we are to give him praise and
glory due to his name.

Justly then are they to be taxed and reproved that do abuse, and abase

And in the second place, learn we every one of us, to acknowledge the blessed
for ever, assenting unto it, Amen.

And to this purpose consider, if so be the name of the Lord Jesus, (which is
precious and honorable in it self) if it be not honorable and precious to
every one of us, when we either think upon it, or have occasion to make mention
of it, that we have not our mouths opened in lauding and praising of it, it is
a sign that our hearts are not right within us, our hearts are rotten and
corrupt, we are not affected with the greatness of the holy Name of God as we
ought, we have not a lively sense and feeling of the comfort to be found in
Christ; the name of Christ to us is not a precious ointment poured out, Cant.
1.2. For without question every honest and good heart is ready, upon the
consideration of the comfort to be found in Christ, to break out in magnifying
and praising that holy Name; so if our eyes be opened, and we see the
sweetness found in Christ Jesus, to be the Fountain of all happiness, how can
we but bless him, and praise him, and give him the honor and glory due to his
blessed Name? all generations do call the Virgin Mary blessed, because she
found favor with God, so far as to bear in her womb the Lord Jesus; and those
whose hearts are truly affected unto Christ, cannot but praise and magnify the
Instruments of publishing the name of Christ, the very feet of such are
beautiful unto them, Esaias 52.7. How beautiful are the feet of them that bring
the glad tidings of peace, and of reconciliation, between God and man?

Now then if we would be sure of it, that our hearts are right within us, and
that indeed we are heavenly minded, and that we are such that have Jesus Christ
in a due admiration, and have a lively sense and feeling of the comforts in
Christ; then let us whenever we name Christ, do it honorably, and
reverently, and when we do speak of it, either in public or private, take heed
of abusing his name, but speak of it honorably: for if we do not love the name
of the Lord Jesus, let him be had in execration, let him be accursed, 1 Cor.
16.22. Therefore let us be stirred up to the practice of this duty, to praise
the name of the Lord Jesus, saying, Blessed, praised, magnified, and glorified
be his name for ever, in all ages, and all times, Amen.

VERSE 6. Not as though the Word of God has taken none effect, for they are
not all Israel, which are of Israel.


OUr Apostle having in the Verses foregoing, in the five Verses precedent,
expressed the grief and sorrow of his heart, for the Jews rejection, (who were
his brethren according to the flesh,) yet not expressing their rejection, but
only intimating of it, and leaving it to be concluded and gathered, in this
sixth Verse; he enters upon the second part of the Chapter, and herein he
falls upon a defense of Gods Promise, proving it to be firm and stable,
though the Jews be rejected: and he defends the stability of it, both
against the Objections of the Jews, and against the humane reasonings of flesh
and blood, that might be brought to the contrary, from the sixth verse to the
24. And first of all, the Apostle clears the Lord from inconstancy, from the
sixth verse to the 14. Secondly, he clears God from iniquity and injustice,
from the 14 verse to the 19. Thirdly, he clears God from cruelty, from the 19
verse, to the 24.

Now in this sixth Verse, first of all the Apostle puts down a prevention of
an Objection that the Jews might make, in the first words of the Verse; for
this they might object

If so be we, that are the sons of Abraham, be rejected and cast off, (as you
Paul seem to intimate, and imply in your complaining,) surely then the Word of
God unto Abraham, and unto his seed, should be void, and of none effect;

Now this our Apostle preventeth, and meets withal, by denying their
consequence, and showing that it makes not the Word of God void, and of none
effect, if the Jews (coming of Abraham) for the greatest part be rejected; no,
says the Apostle, this is no good consequence, though the Jews for the body
of them, and generality be rejected, to say that the promise of God is
frustrate: then to this denial of their consequent, he subjoyneth a reason of
it, why it is so, (that though the Jews be rejected, yet the Word of God is
not void,) because many of the Israelites, of the body of the Israelites, and
of the seed of Abraham, they are not such to whom the Promise belongs; why
so? because they are not true Israelites, they are not the Israel of God, they
are Israelites by the flesh, by carnal generation, they descended of the Loins
of Abraham, but they are not Gods chosen and elected seed of Abraham; and
therefore the Word of God is stable, notwithstanding: and this the Apostle
propounds in the latter end of the sixth verse, for they are not all true
Israelites, that are of Israel: and in the beginning of the seventh verse, all
they are not the children of God, because they are the seed of Abraham; and
this the Apostle amplifieth to the 14. Verse.

But come we to the opening of the sixth verse.

Notwithstanding] As if he had said, Howsoever the Jews do cavil and object,
that if they be rejected, Gods Word takes no effect, (it cannot be) it is
simply, and absolutely impossible, though they mutter against it.

that the word of God] By the Word of God here, we are to understand not the
legal Covenant, the word of the Law, the Apostle speaks not here of them, as
they sought salvation by the works of the Law, and the righteousness thereof
legal, they were so rejected in all times, even before this kind of rejection
did befall them, they were rejected by the legal Covenant, in all ages; and the
Apostle speaks of that in the next Chapter.

But by the Word of God, here, we are to understand the word of promise, Genesis
17.7. where God says, he would be Abraham's God, and the God of his seed. In
which promise, God does promise a perpetual being, with Abraham and his seed
for ever, and not only with temporal blessings, but with blessings belonging
unto life and salvation, namely the spiritual seed of Abraham, the children of
Abraham after a spiritual sense, meaning the chosen of God, them he would be
with, to guide and direct his elect seed, those that should believe in God, as
Abraham their Father did, whether Jews or Gentiles, for we may see in the
course and tenor of the Scripture, that all that came of Abraham were not
blessed with this heavenly blessing, as Ishmael, and Esau, but the elect of
God, to those the Promise was made.

should take no effect,] Or should fall to the ground, or fail of the end, for
which it is appointed; for then when a promise is made, and not performed, it
falls to the ground, it is unstable, and of none effect, it attaineth not the
appointed end.

for all they are not Israelites, that are of Israel.] By Israelites, (in the
first place,) we are to understand the true Israelites, Israelites indeed, and
not in name only, Joh. 1.47. such as was Nathaniel, behold a true Israelite,
one in whom there was no guile; so that by Israel, is meant the elect of God,
the true Israelites among the Jews: and by Israel, in the second place, we are
to understand Jacob, individually, who was the Father of the Patriarks, and was
called Israel, because of his prevailing with God, those that came of his race
and line, according to the flesh, and according to the course of Nature, that
is to be of Israel; then thus conceive we the Apostles meaning, Howsoever the
Jews mutter and murmur, and object against it, and seem to be much discontented
that they are rejected, and that if they be rejected, the Word of God unto
Abraham fails, and comes to no effect, yet, says the Apostle, it cannot be,
it is altogether impossible, and can never so be, that the Word of promise made
unto Abraham, and unto his seed, (wherein God did promise to bless Abraham,
perpetually, temporally, spiritually, and eternally,) that this word of
promise, made to the spiritual seed of Abraham, to the elect, should be
frustrate, and not performed, it is impossible, says the Apostle: For, says
he, I must tell you, that the Promise was not made unto all Israel, which came
of Israel, by natural generation, they are not all true Israelites, but to the
elect of God, true believers, those that believe in God, (as Abraham did) so
that though they be rejected, (for the body of them) yet the promise is
effectual.

Come we now to the Doctrines. And first of all, in that the Apostle says,
notwithstanding it cannot be, that the Word of God should be of no effect, it
is altogether impossible, that the Word of God should be void and of none
effect: Now then from hence the observation is this,

heaven and earth shall pass away, (they shall perish,) but not one jot or
tittle of the Law, shall escape unfulfilled, every tittle of the Word of God,
whether promise, mercy, threatening, or Judgment, and especially the Promises,
it shall not escape unfulfilled, and in 2 Samuel 2.28. we read, the Lord having
promised to David to build him a house, David does assuredly rest, upon the
accomplishment of it, and he groundeth his assurance thus: For why? thou are
God, and thou can not change, thou art most true: and Romans 3.3, 4. The
Apostle speaks thus of the Jews, Though some of the Jews do not believe,
shall their unbelief make the Word and Promise of God of none effect? God
forbid; Let God be true, and every man a liar; God is certainly true: and in
Josh. 23.15. says Joshua, Now all things are come unto you, which the Lord
your God has promised: so in Act. 13.32, 33. Paul says to the Jews, the
promise made unto the Fathers, God has fulfilled unto us their children:
evidence of Scripture might be plentifully brought for the clearing of this
truth, That all the Promises of God (touching good things of this life, or that
to come,) they cannot possibly be frustrate, but shall come to pass, in Gods
appointed time. The Reasons and grounds of it are these two:



In Christ Jesus all the promises are yea, and in him amen; they are ratified
and confirmed in him: now Christ Jesus is a most sure and firm foundation; all
the devils in hell cannot shake this foundation: and therefore doubtless upon
this ground we may resolve, that all the promises of God (concerning this life,
and the life to come) they are firm and stable, and shall certainly in Gods
appointed time be fulfilled.



things are fulfilled as they are propounded; they are propounded
conditionally, with the condition of obedience, and with the exception of a
Cross; if his children do fear, and obey him, or if otherwise the Lord see it
good, to exercise them with some cross, or some affliction, and therefore if
that many of the children of God do not enjoy the Promises, it is because the
Lord is pleased to chastise them for their sins, and he is pleased so to do
for their good; because the Lord sees it better, and fitter for them, to be
exercised with afflictions, and yet the promises of God are fulfilled,
according to the tenor that it is made, unto them; so they are fulfilled with
condition of obedience, and exception of the Cross, Psalm. 34.10. Gods Children
shall want nothing (that God has promised,) that he sees to be good,
concerning their temporal estate, or the good estate in the life to come, thou
shall want nothing: now for the Application of it.

First of all, this truth that you have here delivered, That the Promises I
will be with thee when thou walk through the water, and passest through the
fire, Esaias 43.2. in the time of their greatest distress, God will be with
them; they do not believe and trust this promise of God, that he will deliver
them in all danger; to uphold them, and assist them, he has made this promise,
and this they believe not, but withdraw their trust and affiance from this
promise of God, and so they greatly dishonor God: for he that rests upon the
bare promise of God, and stable word of God, when he has nothing else to rest
upon, he does assuredly honor God wonderfully; if we rest upon God, when we
see all things opposite to us, then to rest upon the stable promise of God,
hereby we show our zeal unto God; but he that withdraws his heart back from
trusting on God, dishonors God, and robs him of his truth, and makes God
no better then a liar; for if we trust not God, when means seem to be with us,
much less will we trust him when all things seem to be contrary unto us:
therefore we ought carefully to avoid this sin.

This truth, in the second place, (That all Gods Promises are certain,) the
comfortable promises of God, both of this life, and the life to come; and here
comes thy comfort, these Promises are most firm and stable; they are yea, and
Amen thou shall certainly be made partaker of it, in health and sickness, in
life and in death, be will be thy God, and the God of thy seed, and bless thee
with all heavenly things, and thou shall certainly attain to happiness and
salvation, if the promises of God were uncertain, and changeable, then thy
comfort were little or nothing; but know, that thou being called to faith and
holiness, the promises of God to thee are yea, and amen, and are as
unchangeable as God himself: Oh what comfort is this, that the Promises of God
are so unchangeable, as God, who cannot lie? Titus 1.2. James 1.17. with him
there is no shadow of changing or alteration; and it cannot be, that either thy
own sins, thy own failings, no nor yet Satan, nor all the power of hell, should
ever be able to make it void, and of none effect; this will be a special
comfort to thee, thou being one to whom the Promise belongs; look unto that,
that thou be one to whom this promise belongs, lay not foul hands upon it;
yea the consideration of this, the thinking and meditating upon this, that the
promises of God are firm and stable, being laid up in our hearts, it will keep
us from being swallowed up by the surges of the deepest, trials, and
temptations, even then when we are tempted by Satan to diffidence or distrust,
consider, the Lord has promised in his Gospel, Joh. 3.16. Whosoever believes
in Christ, shall not perish but be sure to have everlasting life: now this
promise of God is firm and stable, to him that believes in Christ Jesus, and
is able to uphold us from fainting in the midst of the greatest trials and
afflictions; for they are firm and stable, and cannot be shaken; a ground of
excellent comfort.

Notwithstanding it cannot be, that the Word of God of should take none effect,
for all they are not Israel, which are of Israel.
OBserve we here, that the Apostle does not barely affirm thus much, That
though the Jews might object, that if they were rejected, then the promise of
God were frustrate, and void, and of none effect; he does not only affirm it,
that this cannot possibly be, but he does further strengthen it with a reason,
why it cannot so be, namely thus; because all they are not Israel, which are of
Israel; because all they which came of Abraham, of Jacob, and of Israel, by
natural generation all they are not Gods Israel, the Israel of God, Abraham's
chosen seed, unto whom alone the Promise was made, so that the promise of God
is firm and stable; so then you see, it was from a misconceiving, and
misapplying of the promise, that the Jews thought that the promise of God was
void, which was made unto Abraham, if they were rejected, the Jews applying the
promise to the carnal seed of Abraham, unto the seed of Abraham according to
the flesh, and therefore they forced this false conclusion; but the Apostle
tells them plainly, that all they that came of Israel, by carnal generation,
they are not the true seed of Israel; so that their misapplying, was the cause
of their false collection: hence then note we thus much.



That the Word of God either promising mercy, or threatening judgment, or
teaching any duty, being misunderstood, and misapplyed, is not the true,
profitable, and comfortable Word of God, to those that so misunderstand it, and
mis-apply it: in 2 Timothy 2. we find, that the Apostle having exhorted Timothy to
a constant undergoing of the labor of the Ministry, and to a patient bearing
of the Crosses that came by reason of the execution of his office: then in the
seventh verse he concludes, Consider what I say, and the Lord give you
understanding in all things: as if he had said; Consider duly, what I stirred
and exhorted thee unto, and the Lord give thee, that thou may both rightly
understand, and rightly apply it: and so in 2 Pet. 3.16. The Apostle tells
us, that the holy Scriptures being wrested and perverted, and mis-applyed, they
are so far from being comfortable, that they tend to the destruction of them
that mis-understand and mis-apply them; they are so far from being comfortable,
when men do pervert them; and turn them which way they list; that they tend to
their own destruction.

And indeed, though the Scripture be in it self, the Will and Wisdom of God
revealed unto us, and though it be true, that God speaks unto us in and by
the same; yet the Word of God mis-understood and mis-applyed, it is not the
word of God, neither does God speak unto us; (and as One says well,) the word
of God foolishly perverted, and understood, it is not the word of God to him
that so understands it, and therefore cannot be truly profitable; and
comfortable unto him: for the Application.

It concerns us then, in the first place, that are Ministers and Messengers
God speaks in the Preacher. 1 Cor. 14.25. so must we deliver the mind and
word of God. And then only shall we find the blessing of God upon the Word, we
handle, and then we shall draw men to a holy course of life; or at least
convince them of their sins; if we deliver it so, as God may be said to speak
in us, or by us, then we may look for a blessing upon it, to the working of
grace; and to convert them to a holy life: for if it be not rightly grounded,
either upon the Word of God, or derived thence, surely take it for a truth, it
is not Gods Word: Though it be a sound Orthodox, and a true point of Divinity;
yet if it be not grounded upon the Word of God, we handle, or by necessary
consequence, it is man's word, and not Gods Word.

Again, this being so, That the word of God is not the true, profitable,

But here may some object

To this I answer, that is, be careful in frequenting, and using the ordinary
means of the word, the Ministry that God has set up in his Church, for thy
direction, Prove. 8.33. be thou careful to attend at the gates of wisdom; be
frequent in hearing the Word of God opened and expounded, and be sure to come
to the hearing, and reading of the Word of God, with an humble heart, that thy
heart be not lift up with a conceit of thy own understanding, but be emptied of
all self-conceit, and pride, in respect of the pregnancy of thy own wit, and to
this join earnest and hearty prayer unto the Lord, be attentive to the means
that serve to open the word, come to the hearing and reading of it with an
humble heart, and also be instant in invocation, and calling upon the name of
the Lord, that the Lord would open thine eyes and ears, and give thee the
Spirit of Revelation, of understanding: do as David did, Psalm. 119.18. Lord
open mine eyes, that I may behold the wonders of thy Law. It is a worthy saying
of an Ancient Divine, (says he) though there be many things in the Scripture,
hard to be understood, difficult to reach into the depth of them, yet
whatsoever is necessary and needful to be known to salvation, it is plainly set
forth in the Scripture, and easy to be understood to them that will read
diligently, mark attentively, pray heartily, and judge humbly; come without any
self-conceit of thine own wit, come even as a fool to the Word of God, in
comparison of the wisdom of God revealed in it, and then by this means we
shall come to a right application of the Word of God, and effectually
understand and apply it.

Come we now to the Apostles reason, all they are not Israel, that are of
Israel, that is, all they are not the true Israelites, and elect and chosen
seed of Abraham, that are descended of Israel according to the flesh: hence we
are plainly taught thus much,



they went out from us, because they were not of us; they did not truly believe
in Christ, and if they had been of us, they would have continued with us: but
by this it appears, that they were not of us, because they have made a
disjunction from us: now to apply this.

hold and teach, That the visible Church is the body of Christ Jesus, and all
the members of the visible Church, they are members of the mystical body of
Christ, they are partakers of the Spirit of Christ, of the life of Christ, and
the grace of Christ; Surely then it must needs follow, that all the members of
the visible Church are Gods children, and heirs of salvation, yea then Cain,
and Ishmael, and Esau, and Saul, and Judas, they were the children of God, and
have obtained salvation. If this were true, that all that are partakers of the
visible Church, are members of Christ, and heirs of salvation, it were easy
to prove, that these men were in the visible Church, and of the visible Church,
and therefore by this reason are saved: but how false it is, to think that
these men have obtained salvation, any man that has been exercised in the
truth may easily see it; they are mistaken in the Tenent, and the ground of
their error is this; Whatsoever they find in Scripture spoken of the invisible
Church, the Catholic Church, (seen by the eye of faith,) they apply to the
visible Church; as it is said, that the Church of God is a holy Nation, a
peculiar Priesthood, they apply it to the visible Church; and their definition
is a hoch poch, a mingling of the properties of the invisible Church, and the
visible Church together, and an appropriating of them to the visible Church;
this is common both in their Writings and Conferences.

But come we now to lay the truth delivered a little nearer to our selves; Is
it so, that all that live in the bosom of the Church, are not members of the
true Church of God? Upon this ground learn we to take heed of a strong
delusion, that deludeth thousands in the world: Many in the world have this
conceit, and are strongly possessed with it; that (because they have been bred
and born in the visible Church, they breathe in it, and join with it, and make
the same profession that we do, they partake in the holy Ordinances of God,
they come to the Ministry of the Word, they have been partakers of the holy
things of God, the Word, the Sacraments, they come to the Table of the Lord,)
therefore certainly they are true Members of the Church of God, they are
Christians, true Christians, and who shall say to the contrary? and yet we
shall find these men that thus believe their fantasies, they are ignorant of
God, and of the truth of God, and of the Word of God; yea many of them, though
they be old men and women, understand not the grounds of Catechism, nor the
Fundamental points of Religion; their hearts are full of unbelief, and of
Covetousness, and of disordered passions, of pride, of lust, of envy, and
anger, they perform good duties in public, carelessly both in public and in
private, never care to examine how they thrive in grace, and goodness; no not
so much as perform the duty of prayer; or if they do, they perform it
customarily, and with dull and dead hearts, they are asleep in hearing the
Word, and very untoward in performing of holy duties, and yet they hold
themselves to be in very good case, they are good Christians; why? do they not
come to the holy Word and Sacraments? and yet are ignorant of the grounds of
Catechism.

The truth now delivered, makes known unto you, that you are in the wrong,
yea, in the case of Judas and Saul, they were in as good case as thou art: men
may join themselves to the Church, even to the visible Church of God, and may
participate in all the holy Ordinances of God, and yet be no true members of
the Church of God; and therefore take we heed of deceiving our selves, and be
stirred up to labor not to rest in this formality; labor to find your selves
not only in the visible Church, and profess the same truth, but that we find
our selves to be true Christians, such as know God, and obey the Gospel of
Jesus Christ; for the Apostle tells us, 2 Thessal. 1.8. that Jesus Christ
shall come in flaming fire, rendering vengeance upon all that know not God, and
obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ: yea let us never rest until we
find we be such as Nathaniel was, Joh. 1.47. that we are true Israelites, in
whom there was no guile, no coverers, nor clokers of sins, but that we are
upright hearted, both in regard of good things, and also in regard of sin;
for herein we must show that we are upright and sound hearted, if that in doing
of good things we seek not the pleasing of men, or of our selves, to avoid the
danger of the Law, and such Sinister and by-respects; but in a simple obedience
unto God, because God commands them; and with a due respect to the glory of
God: And also in respect of sin, labor we to be sound hearted, that there be
no regarding of sin, Psalm. 66.18. If I regard wickedness in my heart, the
Lord will not hear me; if I cleave unto it: so that there must not be in us any
regarding of sin, and cleaving unto it, as by favoring of it either in our
selves, or in others, or by lessening and cloking of sin, or a little
extenuation of sin, oh we are guileful and deceitful hearted, if we do thus
extenuate and lessen, and cloak sin, account some sins little, and trifling,
but to resolve against it, accounting them to be vile, and odious, yea we
finding our selves to be guilty, to be forward in the acknowledgment of our
sin, without covering, and cloking of sin, with God, but soundly, and freely,
and thoroughly, acknowledging and confessing our sins, and with a resolution to
leave it, and to break it off, and confess it with grief of heart, if we be
thus upright hearted, we are true Christians, and true members of the Church of
God, without this we can have no assurance that we are in the favor of God, we
may have a conceit that our sins are done away, and that we are in the favor
of God, but we must labor to be sound hearted, therein stands the assurance
of the pardon of our sins, Psalm. 32.1, 2. says David, Blessed is the man whose
sins are forgiven, and whose wickedness is covered; and then he subjoyneth,
as a qualification, he is one that has no guile in his heart, Blessed is the
man to whom the Lord imputes not sin, and in whose spirit there is no guile;
whereby we may demonstrate, that we are in the number of those blessed people,
if there be no guile in our hearts.

Oh then labor we to perform holy duties, not to please men, or to please our
selves, but out of obedience to God, not to cloak and cover sin, and to say,
for breaking the Sabbath, what? is it so great a matter to set things in order
against the next day? On these are not sound hearted, therefore if we would
have comfort to our souls, labor to be true Members of the Church.

VERSE 7. Neither because they are the seed of Abraham, are they all children:
but in Isaac shall thy seed be called.


IN this Verse the Apostle makes a distinction of the seed of Abraham, and
having affirmed, that all they that are of the seed of Israel are not
Israelites; so here in this seventh Verse, he instanceth in Abraham's Family,
and here the Apostle affirms, how that not all they that came of Abraham by
natural generation, are the true seed of Abraham, to whom the promise
belongs; and this he does in the first part of the verse: Then in the second
place, the Apostle makes known (by way of opposition, and of particular
instance,) who were the true seed of Abraham, to whom the promise belongs,
namely Isaac, which the Apostle puts down in the words of Scripture,
alluding to that in Genesis 21.12. where we find the true seed of Abraham that
should inherit the promise, that God would call, it was Isaac; so that the
reasoning of the Apostle considered, with that place in Genesis, may be thus
illustrated; why? Ishmael was of Abraham, as well as Isaac, he was his son, yet
only Isaac was the true seed, and the true son of Abraham, therefore all that
are of Abraham's seed, by carnal generation, are not the true seed of Abraham,
children of God.

But now if any should object and say, If Ishmael was the seed of Abraham, then
Ishmael was his child. It is true, but how? according to the flesh, the child
of the flesh: verse the eighth; but Isaac only was the child of the promise;
this is also confirmed by a testimony of Scripture in the ninth verse; thus we
see then the Analysis of the verse: Come we now to the meaning of the words.

neither are they all children:] That is, neither are they all children of God,
children of Abraham, to whom God made the promise of life, and of salvation.

because they are the seed of Abraham,] Or, because they are the children of
Abraham, according to the flesh, by carnal generation, therefore they are not
children of Abraham, and so consequently of God.

But in Isaac shall thy seed be called.] This is a place of Scripture cited out
of Genesis 21.12. where God speaks unto Abraham to his comfort, against his
heaviness, because he was grieved exceedingly, that he should cast forth his
son Ishmael, and Hagar his mother; and these words carry this sense, Be not
grieved, Abraham, to cast out Ishmael, and his mother, but do as Sarah thy wife
would have thee, for I tell thee, that Ishmael thy son, shall not be thy son
and heir, but Isaac is the child in whom I will make good my promise,
concerning righteousness, life, and salvation; and therefore be not grieved to
cast out Ishmael, for Isaac is thine heir; So then thus briefly conceive we the
meaning of the Apostle, Neither are they all the children of God, or of
Abraham, to whom God has promised salvation, that come of Abraham, according
to the flesh; for I tell thee, (says the Apostle,) in the name of God, Ishmael
thy son shall not be thine heir, but Isaac is the son of the Promise, and in
him will I fulfill, says the Lord, the promise of grace, life, and salvation.

Come we now to the Observations. And first of all, in that the Apostle says,
all they are not Gods children, or the children of the promise, (to whom
salvation belongs,) that are of the race and lineage according to the flesh:
hence the observation is this,

think not to say within your selves, We have Abraham to our Father; do not
think that this is sufficient, to entitle you into grace and salvation, you are
his children but by nature; so in Joh. 8. The Jews boasting that they were
Abraham's seed, in the 33. verse of the Chapter, and that Abraham was their
Father, in the 39 verse, and that therefore God was their Father, in the 41
verse; yet Christ says, (that notwithstanding their coming from the loins of
Abraham) that they are of their father the devil, in the 44 verse, and the
lusts of their father they would do. And hence it is, we find both in the Book
or God, and by experience in our own times, that many graceless children have
descended from God, and godly, holy and religious parents: Ishmael came of
Abraham, Esau of Isaac; Manasses, of Hezekiah; that made Jerusalem to swim with
blood, and therefore this demonstrateth, that men are not Gods children, and
have not therefore promise to life and salvation, because they come of good and
godly parents, and are of true believers; for graceless children have come of
godly parents.









have said, they are pure, in opposition to the former sentence, (then they are
unclean.) And again, if the children coming from true believers, have inherent
holiness in themselves, then they belonged to Gods election, which they do not
(by reason of their birth, how are they then holy? they are holy, by virtue of
the covenant, by a holiness that comes from the Covenant vertually, they are
to be esteemed federally holy, and such as belong unto Gods election, coming
unto them from the covenant: For the covenant is of such a great reach, and so
far does extend, as that they that have right unto it, and true interest in the
Covenant, by true faith, they are thereby not only sanctified in themselves,
and in their own persons, but in their good actions, their eating, sleeping,
talking, and walking, yea the very creatures of God they enjoy, their meat, and
drink, gold, silver, and oxen, and sheep, they are sanctified unto their use,
and they may lawfully use them after a holy manner; much more then are their
children sanctified, by a holiness that comes by virtue of the covenant; so
speaks the Holy Ghost, they are to be accounted holy, and such as belong unto
Gods election, howsoever many of them belong not unto Gods election, yet they
are so to be esteemed in the judgment of charity.

This being a truth, that to come of good and godly parents is not sufficient

That which is born of the flesh, is flesh. And it may be with thy common
corruption thou have derived a particular infection, not always so, but it may
be thou have; therefore it concerns all good and godly parents to convey
better things then those they have received by generation and birth, to labor
to expel the folly in their hearts by nature, Prove. 22. labor to expel the
folly in their hearts by nature, the bundel of folly and vanity, by teaching,
by instructing, comforting, reproving, commending, and exhorting moderately, to
work the fear of God in their souls; labor to entitle them to the promise of
life and salvation, and be an Instrument of the promise of life and salvation,
and be an instrument of their eternal good.

Neither are they all children, because they are the seed of Abraham: but in
Isaac shall thy seed be called.
THe particular instance of the true seed of Abraham, comes now to be stood
upon, in that he says, in Isaac shall thy seed be called, which words are the
words of God to Ahraham, in Genesis 21.12. and that place of Genesis considered
with this of the Apostle, gives us to understand the meaning of the words to
be this,

Ishmael was Abraham's child as well as Isaac; Ishmael came of Abraham by course
of nature, and that as well as Isaac; yet God says, thy son Ishmael should not
be thy son and heir, but told him plainly and directly, that his son Isaac was
the child, in whom he would accomplish and make good his Promise, concerning
mercy, grace, righteousness, and salvation, in him shall thy seed come to
participate in the promise, in thy son Isaac.

Now then, the Lord in these words makes known, that Isaac was the chosen seed
of Abraham, that did belong unto Gods election, that he had rejected Ishmael
from all eternity, though he was the son of Abraham, and appointed Isaac to
life and salvation: And so this example of Isaac, and of Ishmael, does very
well fit the purpose of the Apostle, namely this, to show that though the Jews
come of Abraham, according to the course of Nature, and are his seed by carnal
generation, yet are not all such as belong unto Gods eternal election, and
though they be rejected, there is no breach of the promise of the Lord, of
which the Apostle treats in this Chapter.

Now we are to observe in the first place, touching these words, they being
considered, (as you heard) the words of God to Abraham, thus much; That God in
these words makes known unto Abraham, a great difference that was between his
two sons, Ishmael and Isaac; such a difference as Abraham did not think upon,
nor could not take notice of, until God did make it known: Abraham without
question, did judge both of his sons to be in the same estate; Ishmael, and
Isaac, to be in the same condition, and that both had right and title to that
Covenant, in Genesis 17.7. I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed. Thus
Abraham thought, and therefore Abraham circumcised both his children, yea
Ishmael in the first place, and instructed both, and brought them up both
alike; yet you see God puts a wide, and a large difference between them, his
sons, Ishmael and Isaac: Isaac was the chosen seed; Ishmael was not; Isaac
belonged to the election, Ishmael did not; Isaac was the child in whom God
would fulfill his promise, Ishmael was not: but Abraham respected both alike,
until the Lord did cast out Ishmael: hence we are to understand thus much,

That there is no manifest difference between Gods chosen and others,

Before the effectual calling of Gods chosen, they are in the same estate and
condition, with those that belong not unto Gods election, they are prone unto
evil as well as others, they are as vile in the practice of sin, as any
other, unless God do restrain them. No man can say, this is one that belongs
to Gods election, and this is not, until God do put a difference between them.
And this truth has not only ground here, but also plentiful evidence in many
places of Scripture, in 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. The Apostle having reckoned up many
gross sinners, and given them their doom, that they can never come to inherit
Gods Kingdom, as neither Fornicators, nor Adulterers, nor Wantons, nor
Buggerers, nor Thieves, nor Drunkards, nor Raylers, nor Extortioners, shall
never inherit Gods Kingdom, living, and dying so, he subjoyneth, verse. 11.
such were some of you, you were no better; but now you are washed, and
justified, and sanctified; now God has put a difference between you and
others, by the work of his grace, and power of his Spirit, you were as vile as
any debauched sinner, until you were cleansed: and in Ephesians. 2.1, 2, 3. The
Apostle says of the believing Ephesians, they were now believers, but in times
past they were dead in trespasses and in sins, yea they walked (before their
calling and conversion,) after the fashion of the world, and followed the
Prince that ruled in the air, that is, the Devil, that now works strongly in
the children of disobedience, you were dead, and you walked; (how could that
be?) you had the life of nature, and you walked after the Fashions of the
World, yea, I and other believing Jews, we had our conversation in the lusts
of the flesh, and were by nature children of wrath as well as others; there was
no difference until God put a difference: Thus the Apostle speaks of the
believing Romans, Romans 6.17. That they had been servants of sin, and slaves
thereunto, but ye now, God be thanked, through grace have obtained a form of
godliness, whereunto you are delivered: So likewise the Apostle speaks of
himself, and other true believers, in Titus 3.3, 4, 5. We our selves were in
times past, disobedient, deceived, servers of lusts and pleasures, hateful, and
hating one another. But when the bountifulness of God appeared through Christ,
Not by the works of righteousness that we have done, but of his mercy he saved
us, by the washing of the new birth, and by the renewing of the Holy Ghost; now
there is a difference, but before there was none: So that this does manifest
unto us, that there is no known difference between Gods chosen and others, in
regard of their spiritual estate and condition, until God put a difference
between them, by the work of his grace and Spirit.

The Reason of sin, as well as others, and Nature in them is as vile and
corrupt, as in the vilest sinner upon the face of the earth; yea, it is as
predominant, and powerful in them, as in any: so that we see, that Gods
Children have no manifest difference between them and others, till God put a
difference.



Abraham could not discern, that his son Ishmael was one, that had no right and
title to the Covenant of grace, till God says, I have cast him off. And there
is no manifest difference between Gods chosen, and others, touching their
spiritual estate, until God do difference them, by working upon the one, and
leaving the other unwrought upon; and therefore judge not of the future and
final estate of any man, by his present condition: we may lawfully judge a
carnal man, to be a carnal man, and in the way that leads to hell and
damnation, and if he do hold on in that way, and not repent, he shall be
damned; but to go beyond this, is to break into Gods several, and secret
counsel: what a carnal man may be, in after time, leave that unto Gods
determinate counsel.

post to destruction, (as if they meant to come thither with all speed,)
hasting to damnation: Oh then lift up thy heart in Serious contemplation upon
the free grace and goodness of God, in calling thee out of that number, and
electing thee to salvation.

Further, in that God says here unto Abraham, in Isaac shall thy seed be
called: Isaac being one that belonged unto Gods eternal election, I might here
stand to show, that God does effectually call none; but such as belong unto
Gods election; but I stood upon that in the 30 verse of the eight Chapter;
only one thing now that is this, We are to mark that God here says not unto
Abraham, in Isaac will I make good my Covenant, in Isaac will I make good my
promise; but he says, in Isaac shall thy seed be called; Isaac shall be called
and his seed, and so will I make good my Covenant in Isaacs calling: The
doctrine is this,

That Gods effectual calling of men, out of the state of nature, Effectual
calling is an evidence of a man's being in Covenant with God.
it is a sure evidence unto them that are so called; that they are in Covenant
with God, and God with them; that God is their good and gracious Father, yea it
does infallibly evidence unto them, that God has loved them from everlasting.
God now has set upon them a seal of his special love, and that now they have
right and title to the promises of God concerning righteousness, life and
salvation. 2 Pet. 1.10. says the Apostle, Give all diligence to make your
calling and election sure. You see he puts down calling, before election,
not that it is so in the order of nature, but if a man be called, he is
certainly elected; if we be sure of our calling, we may be sure of our
election, we may certainly and infallibly conclude, that we are in Covenant
with God, and have right and title to the promises of God; we may so conclude,
not doubtfully, or conjecturally, but certainly conclude, I have right and
title to the Promises of God.

Know then, what an excellent and sweet comfort may this be to them,

VERSE 8. That is, they that are the children of the flesh, are not the
children of God; but the children of the Promise are counted for the seed.


IN this Verse our Apostle does deliver by way of Explication, that which he
put down in the verse foregoing, and having in the seventh verse before
affirmed, that not all they that came of Abraham by the course of nature, are
the true seed of Abraham, because Ishmael was the seed of Abraham, but God
said, he should not inherit the promise, but in Isaac should the seed be
called, he should participate in the promise: now this being brought by the
Apostle, and set down in the verse foregoing; In this verse the Apostle
explaineth himself, and lays open his meaning a little further, showing what
he means by children, and by the seed of Abraham; here he explaineth his
meaning, Neither are they all children (in the verse before,) because they are
the seed of Abraham, but in Isaac shall thy seed be called; then he subjoyneth,
in this eighth verse, That is, they that are the children of the flesh, are not
the children of God; but the children of the Promise are counted for the seed.

And in this eighth verse we have laid before us, an opposition between the
children of the flesh, and the children of the promise: First of all, denying
them to be the children of God, who are the children of the flesh; and
secondly, affirming. that they only are accounted the true seed, who are the
children of the Promise. Now for the explication of this verse, less need it
to be stood upon, and spoken of, if so be some erring spirits did not wrest and
pervert it, and labor to draw it to a wrong sense; I will therefore endeavor
to lay open the true sense of it, viz.

That is, (my meaning is,) they which are the children of the flesh] The
Arminians and the Anabaptists join together hand in hand, and do understand by
children of the flesh, those that seek for righteousness and salvation by the
righteousness of the Law, and so seek for it by a carnal and fleshly course,
after the law and the flesh; and so such as are Justitiaries, and seek to be
justified by the Law, this (say they) is meant by children of the flesh; this
is their conceit. But this cannot be the true sense of the phrase, flesh;
though I grant indeed, by children of the flesh, we note out such as are
Justitiaries, in some places of Scripture, and such as seek for salvation by
their own righteousness, the righteousness of the Law, and that in and by the
Law; yet here in this place, the literal sense and the literal meaning is to be
taken; and by children of the flesh, we are to understand those that descended
of Abraham according to the course of nature, and by carnal generation, we are
not to take it in a Metaphorical sense, but in the very literal sense of it.

For (to confirm the Exposition) it is most evident and clear, that the thing
which made the Jews to stand upon, and to think themselves that they were
within the Covenant, and had right and title to it, which is made to Abraham,
the very cause they so thought; what was it? (the seeking of righteousness by
the Law?) no such matter, that he beats against in the next Chapter. But
because they were the Israelites, because they were of Abraham, in regard of
carnal generation, and were Abraham's seed according to the flesh, this they
vaunted and stood upon; what may we think to be meant by Abraham's seed, (which
the Apostle speaks of in the verse foregoing, and here does explain that
term,) but such as came of the seed of Abraham, and that by nature, not such as
sought righteousness by the Law, no, his meaning is no such matter, because
the matter they stood upon as a privilege and prerogative belonging unto them.

are not the children of God] That is, they are not such children as God bound
himself unto by a special promise, to do good unto in a special manner: as he
said unto Abraham, I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed, such as he had
bound himself unto in a Covenant.

but the children of the promise] For the understanding of this phrase; and
form of speech, we must know, that Isaac Abraham's son was a child of the
promise, (what is that?) why surely, such a child, as the promise gave birth
unto, Abraham begot Isaac, of his wife Sarah indeed according to the course of
Nature, but not by the force, strength, and virtue of nature, he was born
merely by a special promise made unto Abraham, and by virtue and strength of
that special promise, cited by the Apostle, made in Genesis 18.9. Sarah thy wife
shall have a son; and so though he was begotten by Abraham according to the
course of Nature, but not by the force of Nature: For when this promise was
made unto Abraham, Sarah thy wife shall have a son, Abraham and Sarah were old,
and both stricken in years, and not of ability by nature to have a child, so
that in regard of the force of nature, it was as impossible for Abraham to
beget, or Sarah to bear a Child, as for a stone to fly upward; so that he was
begotten by virtue of the Promise, for she was past childbearing, and Abraham
very old, so that the force and strength of Nature in Abraham, and Sarah was
not the cause of Isaac's birth, but by virtue of the promise; so that we are to
understand by children of the promise, such as after the manner of Isaac are
children of the promise, Gal. 4.28. Now we brethren, as Isaac was, are the
children of the Promise; That is, all such as by virtue of the promise of
grace, of life and salvation, are adopted and made the children of the Promise,
by the virtue and force of the promise; the Gospel being a quickening Gospel,
it being published, and they believing in it, they come to be the children of
the promise, and born anew, not by nature, but by the Promise.

The meaning of the Apostle is this, That is, or my meaning is, that not they
that are descended from Abraham, only by the course of Nature, and according
to the flesh, and by carnal generation; they are not such children as God has
bound himself unto by promise, in a special manner, that is to do good unto, by
a special promise, according to the speech unto Abraham, I will be thy God, and
the God of thy seed: But all such that belong unto Gods election in time to be
called, to be the sons and daughters of God, the promise being published unto
them, and are wrought upon by virtue of the Spirit, and the Promise, They
only, and none but they, are accounted and reputed for the true seed and
children of Abraham, to whom the promise of mercy, grace, righteousness, and
salvation belongs.

Come we now to the Doctrines. And here observe, That the Apostle does expound
himself, touching that, which is put down in the verse foregoing, and
delivers his mind more plainly, then in the seventh verse: the conclusion is
this;

That the holy Prophets, and the holy Apostles of God, it, I might insist on
diverse places of Scripture, but take these few, in Genesis 17.10. we read, that
circumcision is called the Covenant, and in the 11. verse he explaineth it, and
says it is the sign of the Covenant: so in Exodus 12.11. The Paschal Lamb, is
called the Lords Passover, that should be eaten in destroying the Egyptians;
then in the 27 verse, it is said to be the sacrifice of the Lords passover,
more plainly expounding it: so in 1 Cor. 10.4. Christ is called a rock, and by
and by he subjoyneth unto it, a spiritual rock; so that phrase used by Christ,
(which the Papists so much abuse, as the ground of their transubstantiation,
and would prove it, that the Body and Blood of Christ are really and corporally
in the Sacrament, under the form of Bread and Wine,) it is expounded by the
Holy Ghost, and by the Apostle in 1 Cor. 11.26. For as often as ye eat this
bread, and drink this Cup, ye do show the Lords death until he come: does not
this set out the meaning of that speech abused by the Papists? Take, eat this
is my body: For these are memorials, and visible signs, and representations of
the Body and Blood of Christ. I might further instance in diverse passages of
the Scripture, to show, that this is usual in the Scripture, to explain in one
place, what is difficult in another; the Reason is,

thou have known the Scriptures of a child, which are able to make thee wise
unto salvation,) to make thee to come to the understanding of it, at least so
much as is needful to be known unto salvation; this being the very end of God,
as appears, Joh. 20.31. says the Evangelist, Many other things Jesus did,
but these are written, that you might believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of
God, and by believing might have life (i.e, faith and salvation) through his
name; so that this is undoubtedly true, that the penmen of the Scripture have
thus explained it.



Scripture, is by Scripture it self; we commonly give thus much to a man, that
he is the best expounder of himself: so then learn we to apply and compare
Scripture with Scripture: and in that we do not apply Scripture with Scripture,
it is the reason why we do let slip other places that may help us in the true
Application of Scripture: it is a subtilty that Satan, or the Devil, (and our
hearts are ready to join with him,) that he makes men to hale and draw unto
themselves such places of Scripture as they think do favor them in their sin,
by their abuse of it, they lay hands upon those places that so seem, and
willingly and purposely forgetting other places, that do draw them back from
such conjecturing; as the Usurer, will draw such places as may countenance his
sin, (to his seeming) and neglect those that draw him to the contrary: Yea many
men they turn Gods grace unto wantonness, to go on in sin with an high hand,
and stiff neck, adding drunkenness to thirst; they are impenitent in their
sins, and will not be reformed, and yet for all this they persuade themselves
that they shall find mercy from the Lord: And why? whence comes this? The
Devil is ready to suggest unto them, and to furnish them with remembrance, of a
number of comfortable places of Scripture that set forth Gods mercy, as that in
Psalm. 103.8. The Lord is full of compassion and mercy, slow to anger, and of
great kindness: and in Psalm. 145.9. The mercy of the Lord is over all his
works; these the devil makes to entitle to themselves; yea, with a Psalm of
mercy, to carry them up to the highest pitch of presumption, and to lay violent
hands upon those places of Scripture that are full of comfort, and to say,
certainly God is merciful, and forgiveness is with the Lord; and though I go
on in sin, yet I shall find, mercy; purposely forgetting many other places of
Scripture, that show, God is a revenging God, and a consuming fire, that
punishes those that go on in sin, Psalm. 25.10. that mercy and truth go
together; God is merciful, but he is also true, true in his threatenings, as
well as in his promises; yea forgetting to apply these places full of comfort,
with the consideration of that which Moses says, Deuteronomy. 29.20 If any man go on
in the stubbornness of his own heart, and add Drunkenness to thirst, one sin
unto another; the Lord will not be merciful to that man. They never remember
this, the devil teaches them to forget, that God is just, and full of
judgment, and that his jealousy shall smoke against those that go on in their
sins, surely the Lord will render vengeance upon them: Oh therefore in the fear
of God, take notice of it, of this manner of expounding and applying of
Scripture, therefore learn we to compare Scriture with Scripture, and see what
qualification thou have, before thou lay hold on the promise of God, and learn
to compare Scripture with Scripture, that we may mitigate the comfort of it,
and draw us back from wresting and perverting of it, else we shall make that
which should be our life, our death, and that which should administer comfort
and sweetness unto us, to be a means to encourage us to sin, and to add
sin to sin, and so to rush upon our own ruin and destruction; In the fear
of God therefore consider it, and the Lord give you all understanding.

That is, they that are the children of the flesh, are not the children of God;
but the children of the Promise are accounted for the seed.
TOuching the Apostles Denial, that they that came of Abraham according to the
flesh are not the true seed, these words being an Exposition of the words
foregoing, the point hence offered, is the same which has been stood upon
before, which I think needless to stand upon: the Doctrine being, That the
coming or descending of good and godly parents is not sufficient to entitle us
to be heirs of the promise, and Gods children. I say the point hence arising
being the same, therefore I will not here meddle with it; But come to the
Apostles affirmation, leaving his negation, That they only are accounted the
true seed of Abraham, who are the children of the promise, that is, (as we
showed you in opening the Text,) they only that are after the manner of Isaac,
children of the promise, belonging unto Gods election, by the special grace of
God, and made Gods children, hy the virtue of Gods promise, they only are
reckoned and accounted for the true seed of Abraham, to whom grace and
salvation belongs.

Now from these words, thus understood, two things are offered unto our
consideration, (to be stood upon in particular,) the first is, the efficacy and
force of the words of Gods promise, the force, and strength, and virtue of it,
concerning mercy, grace, righteousness, life and salvation, to all that
believe in Christ, and repent of their sins. In a word, the efficacy and force
of the Word of the Gospel, which indeed is a word of promise, it propounds to
all true believers that are repentant for their sins, mercy, grace,
righteousness, life and salvation: the observation is this,

That the Word of Gods saving promise, the Word of the Gospel, is a most
powerful, and a most effectual Word; it is of a begetting nature, it is able
(as an Instrument) to beget children unto God, and it does (in Gods appointed
time) effectually work upon Gods chosen, and make them actually the Children of
God, so that they may be truly called the children of the promise; as that
special promise in Genesis 18. Sarah thy wife shall have a son, as that gave birth
and being to Isaac, (when there was no likelihood or possibility of his being
and birth from his parents, Abraham and Sarah,) so the Word of Gods saving
promise, the words of the Gospel, gives a spiritual being and birth to Gods
chosen, and make them actually the children of God, (in his appointed time)
when there is no likelihood nor possibility in nature; Yea, when their Nature
is in flat opposition, and contrariety unto it; then does the Word of the
Gospel make them actually the children of God. And to this purpose speaks
that holy and Evangelical Prophet, the Prophet Esaias, Esaias 11.6, 7, 8.9. the
holy Prophet shows, that in the days of Christ, such should be the force and
powerful working of the Gospel, that it should make men of Wolves to become
lambs, and of Leopards, as meek as kids, and men that were as Lions, (of a
Lionish nature) to be as meek as a fat beast, and as gentle, that children
should lead them, such as were of a wolvish and lionish Nature; (for so we are
by nature fierce, and cruel, and savage, to become meek and gentle,) and so he
goes on in setting forth the powerful working of the Gospel: so in Joh. 5.25.
says the Lord Jesus, Verily, verily, I say unto you, the hour comes, and now
is, when the dead shall hear the Word of God, and they that hear it shall live:
where by dead 'we shall understand, those that are spiritually dead, and not
corporally dead, for of those he speaks in the 28 verse; he says, that the
voice of the Spirit of God shall come to those that are in the graves, and they
shall arise; but hereby those that are dead in sins and trespasses, Ephesians. 2.1.
and such as are spiritually dead, to put the life of grace, and of faith, and
of holiness into their hearts and souls; in the 1. of James 18. says the
Apostle; (speaking of God,) of his own will begat he us with the Word of truth;
by an emphasis, or excellency, a begetting word, the word of the Gospel, and
not to add more places, this does sufficiently prove, that the Gospel of God
is an effectual Word, and does work upon Gods chosen, in time, and make them to
become Gods children actually; whereas before they were potentially, and may be
called the children of the Promise: The Reasons and grounds are these;

First of all, the Gospel it is the arm of the Lord; so says the Prophet, to
whom is the arm of the Lord revealed, that is, the word of the Gospel, yea it
is the power of God, so the Apostle says, Romans 1.16. 1 Cor. 1.18. it is the
arm of the Lord, and the power of God, it is a power far passing the power of
man, or of hell it self, and of all the devils, it is strong, powerful, and
prevailing, there is no opposition whatsoever is able to gainsay it, or
withstand it, but it is able to bear it down to the ground.

The word of the Gospel, it administreth to Gods chosen, Gods Spirit; What?
says he, Received ye the Spirit by the preaching of the Law, or rather by the
preaching of the doctrine of Faith? the doctrine of the Gospel, that is the
means of conveying unto you the Spirit, namely, the Gospel of God which
conveyeth it. Now the Spirit of God stirs up the unbelieving, (that are Gods
chosen,) and inableth them to believe, yea it does beget faith in their hearts,
and does certainly and infallibly (and that without resistance) actually
incline their hearts to believe in Christ, and so to become actually Gods
children; thus does the holy Spirit of God (given to Gods chosen,) bend and
bow their hearts inabling them to believe, and make them certainly and
infallibly Gods Children, such is the power of the Gospel.

This Doctrine (in the first place) does point out unto us one main difference
the Law is our Schoolmaster to drive us to Christ. But now the Gospel is of
force to work upon Gods chosen, effectually, it is able to confer, and to
administer unto Gods chosen, the Spirit of God, which Spirit does beget faith
in their hearts, and so they become actually the Children of God; this is the
efficacy and power of the Gospel.

Is this so, that the Word of Gods promise, (the Gospel) is so powerful, faith
in our hearts; Oh let us never rest, until we find this working. And consider,
the Gospel, it is the arm of God, it has made some men of wolves, to become as
lambs; of Lions, fat beast; it has beaten down the pride of their hearts, it
has hammered, their hard hearts, it has quelled and overmastered their
overruling and predominant corruptions: take only the example of the Apostle
Paul, that was changed by the voice of Christ from heaven, (and the voice of
the Gospel is as powerful,) from a bloody and tyrannical persecutor, to a
famous and renowned Preacher of the Gospel, Gal. 1.22. And we read not only in
the primitive stories of the Church, but have found also in our own time, that
the Gospel of God has been of such force, that it has made many to leave
their Fathers, their Mothers, wives, children, friends, their lands and
livings, and all their riches, and possessions, and to lose their lives by
fire, and sword, and faggot, and by cruel tortures, yea by as cruel torments,
as their tormentors could lay upon them. And is not the voice of the Gospel now
as powerful, is not the Gospel able to make thee now to lay aside thy profits,
or pleasures, as thy Carding, or Dicing? nay not to lay aside a cup of beer or
wine, not needful for thee, is not the Gospel able to make thee to lay aside a
needless new fangled attire on thy head? to make thee cut off thy long shag,
and ruffian-like hair? to make thee leave off thy covetousness, thy
Drunkenness, thy whoring thy common swearing by faith and troth? is it not
able to do this? is the power of the Gospel abated? can it not make thee leave
off thy darling sin? it was wont to do this in former time. And the Gospel is
as powerful now, and as able to throw down the strongest hold of sin and Satan
as ever, 2 Cor. 10.4. to throw down imaginations and strong holds of
corruption, if thou live under the Gospel, where the Gospel is truly and
faithfully preached, and assuredly either the Gospel has thus wrought in thee
to the purging out of corruptions, and those sins thou once delightedst in, or
it seals up unto thee a heavy and fearful conclusion; what is that, you will
say? Take it from the Apostle, not from me, in 2 Cor. 4.3. mark what he says,
The Apostle in the second verse of the Chapter shows, that he, and the rest
of the Apostles, handled the Word of God not deceitfully, but in the
declaration of the truth, in plain evidence of the Spirit, and of power, they
approved themselves to every man's conscience, then mark what he brings in by
way of inference, if the Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that perish; if the
Gospel that has been so plentifully and powerfully preached, and so painfully
delivered in the evidence and demonstration of the Spirit, work not in your
hearts and souls, It is to be feared you are in the way to destruction, and in
a fearful condition: Oh then let us look that we find the power of the Gospel
in our hearts and souls, and consider, it will nothing at all avail us to
know, that the Gospel is the power of God to salvation, though it were to
thousands, yea to all the world besides, if we find it is not so to us, to
commend the Gospel, and the Doctrine of the Gospel, and the comforts of it, and
to say it is a blessed Sermon, an excellent Sermon, the best sermon that ever I
heard; it may be worthy to be commended, but has it wrought upon thee? thou
finding it not powerful to thee, it will not be available to take notice of the
Gospel, to be a Word of power in the general, and in the abstract, and not find
it so in the particular to thy self, is the case of the Devil; he knows the
Gospel is a comfortable Word; but see what good have thou gotten by knowing it,
has it beat down thy pride, thy covetousness, thy earthly mindedness? happy
art thou; otherwise, it will not be available: therefore in the fear of God,
let us never rest till we find that we living under the sound preaching of the
Gospel, that has been effectual to our souls and hearts, and has beaten down
our pride, our earthly mindedness, and predominant corruptions, and has been
of force and efficacy to the conferring upon us the holy Spirit of God, and so
made us actually Gods Children, and heirs of grace, mercy, and salvation, then
happy art thou.

Now the second thing that we are to stand upon, is this,

That the children of the promise,

Because Christ himself concerning the flesh, came of Abraham,

Oh then what excellent comfort is this to them that are sure of it,

And therefore, in the fear of God, think upon it, whosoever thou art, that
find thy self wrought upon by the powerful Word of the Gospel, that it has
beaten down thy pride, thy covetousness, and has conferred unto thee the
Spirit, and that Spirit wrought faith in thy heart, thou art a child of
Abraham, and all the Promises of God touching this life, and the life to come,
thou have right and title to, as a child of Abraham.

VERSE 9. (For this is a word of promise, In the same time will I come, and
Sarah shall have a son.)


OUr Apostle having delivered this for a certain truth, in the seventh Verse,
that Isaac was the true and chosen seed of Abraham, in whom Abraham's seed
should be called, and to whom God intended to make his Covenant of grace,
mercy, righteousness, life and salvation; why? because he was the child of the
Promise, begotten not by strength of nature, but by the efficacy and power of
the promise. Then in the eighth verse our Apostle puts this down in the
general, That they only are the true children of Abraham, because they are the
children of the Promise. In this ninth Verse he confirms it by a testimony of
Scripture, that Isaac was a child of the promise, taken out of Genesis 18.10. I
will certainly come unto thee in the time appointed, and Sarah shall have a
son; this the Apostle affirms to be the Word of promise.

So then in this ninth verse, we have (for the general matter of it,) these two
things to be considered:

First, The speech of God to Abraham, in Genesis 18.10 and in the substance here
recorded by the Apostle, wherein God has set down the time when Sarah shall
have a son.

Secondly, the Apostles note upon this speech of God, what kind of speech this
was to Abraham, namely a promissory sentence, This is a word of promise, in the
same time will I come, and Sarah shall have a son.

Come we now to the opening of the words.

This is a word of promise,] That is, this testimony of Scripture, (which now I
allege) which is the speech of God to Abraham, it is a promissory sentence, a
word of promise, promising a special mercy, a special blessing, and a special
good thing to Abraham.

In the same time will I come,] Or, as it is in Genesis, I will come according
to the time of life, his meaning is, when this time of the year shall come and
revive, and come again, even in plain terms, this time twelve months, as in
Genesis 17. where God says, he will establish his Covenant, and Sarah thy wife
shall have a son, at this time the next year, the meaning is this time twelve
months.

Sarah thy wife shall have a son.] That is, she shall conceive and bear a son,
of her own body and bowels, and none other woman's child shall be for her: so
the meaning in general is this, This sentence that I allege which is the
speech of God to Abraham, Genesis 18.10. it is a promissory sentence, promising a
special blessing unto Abraham, wherein God says, when this time of the year
shall revive, even this time twelve months shall thy wise Sarah have a child
begotten and born of her own body.

Come we to the observations.

And in that the Apostle here alleging a sentence and place of Scripture, does
not barely deliver the words of Scripture, but he puts it out with this
note, this is a word of promise. In that he tells us plainly, that the speech
which God used to Abraham, (and here cited by himself,) is a promissory
sentence, which any man that looks upon the text, and is able to judge of it
aright, shall see it to be so, when God says, at such a time will I come, and
Sarah thy wife shall have a son. And yet the Apostle points it out, this is a
word of promise. Hence we learn,

That it is justifiable, the burden of the Lord: as the burden of the Lord
against Edom, the burden of the Lord against Jerusalem, and the like, as we
may see in the Prophet Esaias, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, and other Prophets.

But indeed it is thought by some, that are utter enemies to the plain teaching
of the Word, that this is needless: And they do find fault with this manner of
teaching, and deride it, and say, it is a base and contemptible manner of
preaching; why (say they) this is all one as if a man should draw the picture
of a man and paint it out in colors, and then to write in Capital letters by
him, this is his head, this his arms, this his nose, and the like; were not
this ridiculous, say they?

Thus you see these sons of Belial, these men, they deride that which is
warranted by the holy Prophets, and holy Apostles, and that which does most
good in all experience, 2 Timothy 3.16. The Scripture is given by inspiration, and
is profitable to teach, to correct, to improve; now may not the Scriptures be
applied to this end and purpose? and being so applied, may not the people be
told that this is matter of Doctrine, and that this is a word of comfort? or a
word of Instruction, or a word of Confutation, confuting the Papists, or other
enemies? doubtless they may, Because indeed by this means the people shall be
the better able to go along with the Preacher, and more distinctly to take
notice of the things delivered what serves for information of Judgment, in
matters of faith? what for reformation, of their hearts and lives in doing of
good, and avoiding of evil, and the building of them up in the ways of
holiness, therefore let others mock and scoff what they will, yet Ministers
of God, that make conscience of their duty, have no cause to be ashamed of it,
it is the most powerful and profitablest kind of preaching, and does build up
the people in faith, and encourage them in every good duty.

Again, the Apostle having said, This is a word of promise, he then subjoyneth
the promise of a temporal blessing, that Sarah should have a son.

Hence we see, that the Promises of God in Scripture are of two sorts,

Therefore deceive not thy self in any particular; yea and amen, 2 Cor. 1.20.
in Christ they are ratified and confirmed.

Come we now to the Promise itself, In the same time will I come, and Sarah
shall have a son, or at this time twelve months, shall thy wife Sarah have a
child: Here we see, that God does promise to Abraham, a temporal thing, and
limiteth and sets down a certain time, when he would accomplish his promise,
and the time set down he broke not the day with him, as appears in Genesis 21.2.
where the text says, that Sarah conceived and bare a son in her old age,
according to the very time of God that he had appointed, did Sarah conceive and
bear Abraham a son: hence the Doctrine is this,

Genesis 15.13, 14. God told Abraham, that his seed should be a stranger in a land
not theirs, and should be in bondage and thraldom for a long time, but when
that time shall come to an end, I will judge that nation, and they shall come
out with great riches; how was this fulfilled? read Exodus 12.41. when that the
very time was expired, in the same day, in the very self-same day all the power
of Pharaoh and Egypt could not hold them, but they were delivered, and Pharaoh
and his host destroyed: So the Lord threatened that Israel should be in Babylon
70 years, as we read Jer. 25.11, 12. they should be in thaldome there so long.
But when the time was come, and the very day, Daniel understanding it by books,
he goes unto God by prayer, Dan. 9.23. and in the very beginning of his
humiliation, and supplication unto God, did the decree come forth in the
peoples deliverance in the very day that the time was expired; and in Habbac.
2.3. says the Prophet, The Vision is for an appointed time, the time shall
come, and not lie, though it tarry long: and (not to heap up many places)
indeed all the Promises of God are of an appointed time, and when that time is
come, God does fulfill and make them good to his children; what is the ground of
this?



King, says Mordecai, breathing and deliverance shall come, but thou and thy
fathers house shall perish: Mordecai was sure deliverance should come, in his
appointed time.

Oh learn we then in time of trouble and distress, to carry the Lords leisure,
till the good hour be come; Gods good hour is not yet come, when he will send
deliverance to his people; certainly deliverance will come, and take heed that
thou do not limit the Lord, nor tie him to thy time, and find fault that God
has forgotten thee, and respects thee not, take heed of this, seek unto the
Lord earnestly by prayer, and if the Lord seem to deny thy prayer, and will not
hear thy prayer though thy throat be hoarse and dry, yet do thou believe that
God will fulfill his promise, Esaias 28.16. he that believes makes not haste; he
that believes not only the Promise in general, but the particular time, that
when the Lord sees it fit he will perform it. Oh this is an excellent comfort,
to consider that the Lord will make his Promise good, in his time, when we are
under Afflictions, to consider, oh Gods time is not yet, when his time is come
he will send ease, refreshing, and deliverance, and will not pass a minute of
his time.

VERSE 10, 11, 12, 13. And not only this, but when Rebekah also had conceived
by one, even by our father Isaac.

For the Children being not yet born, neither having done any good or evil,
(that the purpose of God according to Election might stand, not of works, but
of him that calls:)

It was said unto her, The elder shall serve the younger.

As it is written, Jacob have I loved, But Esau have I hated.


FRom the ninth verse, in that God says to Abraham, Sarah shall have a son;
Sarah, who was now 90 years old, past childbearing: A woman of fourscore and
and ten is past bearing of children. I might here stand to show, That nothing
is hard and impossible to God, he is the God of Nature, he is not tied to
nature, or the order of nature, he can give children, and power to one to bring
forth children, that have no natural power at all; God can bring things to
pass, when there is no probability in nature. But to pass by this, as not
intended by the Apostle here in this place.

Come we now then to the tenth Verse, and so to the verses following, to the 14
verse, for they all make but one context, neither only this, but Rebekah when
she had conceived by one, even our father Isaac, etc. In these words our
Apostle falls upon a new instance, and example, and he gives another
instance, and example, to prove, That all they were not true Israelites, the
true seed of Abraham, to whom grace, life and salvation belongs, that came of
Abraham by the course of nature; but only the elect seed of Abraham, the
chosen of God, that came of Abraham, they only were the persons to whom the
promise did belong. And the instance that he brings, it is of the children of
Isaac, and Rebekah, which were Jacob and Esau; and he shows, that only one
of these, namely Jacob, was the true chosen seed of Isaac, and the child to
whom the promise of mercy and grace, life and salvation belongs, and that
Esau was not: Though Esau came both of Isaac and Rebekah, as well as Jacob, by
natural generation, yet Jacob was the chosen seed, and Esau was not.

Now the Apostle adds this example to the former, for this Reason, as more
strongly proving that which he had in hand; For some exceptions, might be taken
by the Jews, against the former example, and instance of Isaac and Ishmael.



Now the Apostle preventeth this exception of theirs, in putting down this
example of Jacob and Esau, which were both of them of the same parents,
begotten by one; namely Isaac, conceived of one, namely Rebekah, is born both
at a birth, they were twins, and of the two, Esau the elder; for he came out
before his brother, and yet Jacob the younger is the chosen seed of God, and
elect vessel of God, and Esau is not; even these two born of the same Father
and Mother, and both at one time, and of the two Esau the elder, yet Jacob was
the true and chosen seed, and Esau is not; therefore this makes strongly for
the purpose of the Apostle, to prove, that the promise of God, of mercy, life,
grace and salvation, belongs not to those that are born of the same parents.

Now the general matter of these four Verses, (to take them all in one context)
may be thus Illustrated and laid forth unto us; In the tenth verse the Apostle
falls upon this example, this instance of Jacob and Esau, and he shows it
appears plainly, not only in the former example of Isaac and Ishmael, but in
these Children of Isaac and Rebekah, namely Jacob and Esau, that were begotten
of one and the same Father Isaac, and born of one and the same mother, Rebekah,
at one and the same time; yet the one is rejected, and the other received: so
that this is a strong conclusion, that grace, life and salvation, belongs not
to all that came of Abraham. Then unto this our Apostle yields a proof; he
proves it, and that from the voice of God himself, which is most sure and
certain, amplified by the circumstance of the time, namely that before these
two children were born, when they were in the womb, and had neither done good
nor evil, it was said, that the elder should serve the younger, even then, when
they were in her womb, she going to ask counsel of the Oracle of God, why the
children strove in the womb? Answer was made, the elder should serve the
younger; and then he sets forth the end and cause of this, why the elder
should serve the younger, namely, that all things might depend upon the
election and purpose of the Lord, and that not by works, but of him that freely
called; for before the children were born, when they had neither done good nor
evil, that the purpose of God might be fulfilled, not of works, still he
preventeth that, it was said, the elder should serve the younger; then this is
further proved unto us by the Prophecy of the Prophet Malachy, Mal. 1.2, 3. as
it is written, I have loved Jacob, and hated Esau; by which testimony of
Malachy, the Apostle expounds the 25. of Genesis, and shows the reason of
the difference between the two brothers; why God was pleased to put such a
spacious and wide difference between them; surely the reason of it was, because
God loved the one, and hated the other, loved Jacob, and hated Esau: why should
Jacob have the preeminence above his brother, being younger? God answers, I
have loved Jacob, and hated Esau; Jacobs dominion over Esau was from Gods love,
Esau's subjection unto Jacob, was from Gods hatred; this is the testimony, and
oracle of God himself: this is the cause of Jacobs domination, and Esau's
subjection. Come we now to stand upon them in particular.

And first of the tenth Verse; This verse it is diversely read; some read it
thus, neither he only, meaning Abraham, or Isaac: some, neither she only,
meaning Sarah. The words in the Original are, but not only, with a
reservation. Now these words having reference to the former example, they will
very well have this supply, neither only this. that is, neither only the
example of Abraham and Sarah, or Isaac and Ishmael; and so the meaning is, it
was not only proved in the former example, but in this of Rebekah's children,
in the instance and example of Jacob and Esau, who was begotten both by one
father, and born both by one mother, and born both at one birth, it appears
plainly, that Gods promise belongs not to all that come of Abraham; so we are
to understand the meaning of the Apostle in this tenth verse, Even Rebekah,
when she had conceived by one, even our father Isaac, from whom we came that
are Jews, one of her children was received, and the other rejected.

Come we now to the Instructions.

Observe we, the Apostle here brings an instance and example, stronger and
more free from exception, then the example of Isaac and Ishmael, out of which
they could not wind themselves though, if they would cavil, never so much,
namely of Jacob and Esau, whereby he proves, That Gods Promise, that he made
to Abraham, I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed, did not belong to all
that came of Abraham by the course of nature, which indeed the Jews held very
stiffly, and were very resolute in this opinion, out of their misconceit, and
they thought it strange, yea to this day they think it strange, that they that
came of Abraham by the course of nature, and were of his loins, and of his
seed, should not have part in the Promise made to Abraham; what? they rejected
that came of Abraham, by the course of nature, as the Apostle did seem to
intimate, and they thought they had ground for themselves, and their conceit,
from the promise of God, I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed. Now the
Apostle labors to beat them off from this misconceit, and false opinion of
theirs, and to that end he labors earnestly, and brings instance upon
instance, example upon example, of Isaac and Ishmael, and then a stronger of
Jacob and Esau: the conclusion following is this,

That it is a hard matter to draw men from a misconceit, From your selves shall
arise some that shall speak perverse things, to draw disciples after them; the
words are very weighty, and significant, and there is an emphasis in this, that
false teachers rising up in the Church of Ephesus, should speak perverse things
under the color of Scripture, pervert the Scriptures, and in time they shall
so far prevail with some, as they shall draw them after them as their
disciples, as a Dog follows his Master in a string, and shall be tied unto
them with a cord, and so swear unto their opinions, (Jurare in verba Magistri,)
swearing to the words of their Masters, and in time become wilfully obstinate
in holding of them, in the 2 Corinthians. 11. the Apostle puts out the dealing
of false teachers notably, and he blames the Corinthians, in the 20 verse,
says he, you are so foolish, that you suffer your selves, if a man bring you
into bondage, if a man devour you; where he makes it clear and manifest, that
where false teachers, and Corner-creepers are suffered, they bring men into
bondage, and do make them in a miserable slavery, and devour them, yea they
carry the simple and silly souls, even as a Bear, a Wolf, or a Lion, carries
away the silly Lamb, that cannot resist, or withstand: so they carry away the
simple ones under a color still, pretending truth and Scripture, so that the
simple cannot resist, and in time they make them obstinate and wilful: thus it
was with the Arians and Donatists, and thus it is in our times, as may be
proved at large.





And we find it by experience, when those Popish Cheaters, those Jesuits, and
Priests, do seize upon silly and simple souls, they do not only seize upon
their minds, corrupting them with error, but they seize upon their very souls
and wills, and make them wilful; so that deal with a silly man that is drawn to
Popery, deal with him, and bring many Arguments against him, though he seem to
be willing to yield to the truth, yet in the end he will not, their wills are
seized upon, so that instead of yielding to the Arguments you bring, this is
their excuse, if such an one were here he would answer you, I cannot; thus
obstinate they are, and thus it is with all sorts of errors, and therefore no
marvel though they that be carried aside to Papisme, Anabaptisme, Familisme,
Brownisme, and other separations, they will not turn, they have Scripture for
it, as they think, though falsely broached, as the Devil did against Christ, and
they will not be reclaimed, yea the false teachers hold them so under their
power, that they have not only bleared and blinded their minds, but seized on
their wills, they will not see, though they do see.

because he thinks he has Scripture. Labor therefore to be rightly informed
in the truth of God, and to know and affect the truth, to receive the truth in
the love of the truth.

Oh let us be stirred up, there be many deceivers, let us arm our selves, and
strengthen our selves with knowledge, and to be affected with the truth,
receiving it with good affection, not formally, and drowsily, but with love,
and affection, and good liking, and zeal unto it: For indeed because men
receive not the truth out of love unto it, 2 Thessalonians. 2.11. it comes to pass
that God gives them over to strong delusions, to believe lies, it may be they
come to some understanding of the truth, but they have no love unto it, and
therefore God sends them strong delusions, that is, such delusions as does
deceive them, and hold them fast when they are deluded; the Lord will not send
unto them only such errors that do prevail, but shall hold them and keep them,
and they think themselves in a very good case, and in the right way, when they
are most perverse, and so go on in a stubborn rebellion against the truth, and
their own salvation.

Therefore let us receive the truth, in love to the truth, and to testify our
love unto the truth, by hating all contrary errors, not only thinking
indifferently of them, and judging well of them, but hating of them; thus did
David, Psalm. 119.104. hate all ways of falsehood; and thus it ought to be with
us, not only to receive the truth after a slubbering manner, but to hate all
errors: and assuredly, it is a worthy speech of One to this purpose, Unless
we hate Atheism, and Irreligion, we do not love the truth of God, and his holy
Religion, nor God himself; so unless we hate Papisme, Anabaptisme, and
Familisme, and Brownisme, and other separations, we do not love the truth as we
ought to do: we see the Papists can well endure the Familists, and the
Familists well endure the Papists, they can live together quietly; Oh say the
Familists, what need you make such ado against the Papists, we can live amongst
them and not be tainted. I believe them; for they both hate the truth. But let
us testify our love unto the Gospel while it is amongst us, and be well
affected with every Sermon, every threatening, every comfort, every promise
published, and hate all Papisme, all Anabaptisme, all Familisme, all Brownisme,
all separations, though they say we are too hot against the separation; no, if
we love the truth, we hate all errors, and separations.

Neither only this, but when Rebekah also had conceived by one, even by our
father Isaac.
IN that the Apostle here brings an example and instance of Jacob and of
Esau, being an instance and an example more strong and free from all exception
and cavils, sufficient to answer the Cavils of the Jews, and to silence them,
they having nothing to say against it, touching their Objection, that all that
came of Abraham by natural generation, are heirs of salvation: Hence we may
note thus much,

That the Scripture has sufficient ground of truth in it self, God is revealed
in the Scripture, even that will in the Scripture, 2 Timothy 3.15. which is able
to make us wise unto salvation; it contains the perfect will of God that is
able to make us wise to our comfort here, and salvation hereafter; what can we
have more?



But further come we now to consider the example of Jacob and Esau,
particularly as it is here laid before us. And first of all the Apostle makes
known unto us in this tenth verse, they being understood as before, That Jacob
and Esau were the children of the same parents, they were begotten of the same
Father, and born of the same Mother, and at one and the same time, they were
twins; yet the holy Word of God does further make known unto us, that there was
a large and a wide difference between these two brethren, Jacob and Esau; he
makes known they were of different dispositions and qualities, and of a
different life and conversation, in other places of Scriptures, as that Jacob
was a plain man, Genesis 25.27. a simple, innocent, a harmless, a downright
honest man, a good man, a holy man, a man fearing God. But the Holy Ghost says
of Esau, and sets this black mark upon him, to be a profane person, a vile
man, one that sold his birthright for a portion of meat, Heb. 12.16. yea the
context says, Genesis 25.34.
that Esau contemned his birthright, which was a great honor and dignity, he
contemned it in respect of a portion of meat to satisfy his hunger for the
present: thus you see a large, wide difference between these two men, the one
holy, the other irreligious, so that children of the same parents, and born at
the same time, may differ one from another exceeding much: and the observation
arising hence is this,

Let there be none found amongst you, that regard times after the manner of the
heathen; who did think that the times had an overruling and an overswaying in
them of the manners, and lives of men, and the success of their business: Oh
says God, take heed, let there be none such; and in Jer. 10.2. the Lord says
expressly, you shall not learn the manner of the Heathen, and be not afraid of
the signs of heaven; as the heathen are: as if men's dispositions depended upon
them, and in Gal. 4.10. the Apostle blames the Galathians, for regarding of
days and times, I am afraid of you, (says the Apostle) you have made a
grievous revolt from the truth, you observe days and times; Observation of
times is either natural or civil.
yet there is a lawful observation of days and times, as when men do observe
them by the course of nature, as the night to follow the day, the day to
succeed the night, and to observe Summer, Winter, Harvest, and Spring, or else
the days, and times Civil, namely the observing of days and times for our
callings, and dispatch of our business in matters of the world; as of setting,
planting, grafting, and reaping, now neither of these did the Apostle reprove
in the Galathians; but he reproves them for doing of it as the Jews did,
putting of holiness in times, or the observing of them after a heathenish
manner, ascribing bad or good success unto them. Now the Lord forbidding this
marking of the constellations of the heavens, as if the success of men
depended upon the position of the stars and planets, it is a plain evidence,
and confirms unto us, that the coming of the same blood, and of the same
parents, and being born at the same time, under the same constellation of the
heavens, and stars, is not a thing that makes children of the same mind, and
like carriage, and behavior.

Because indeed the Lord has put no such power, nor virtue, nor force,

There is a good observation of the stars, for differing of times, but not for
the ordering of men and their affairs. No, the inclination of the will of man,
and the motion of man's mind, and the success of things, are only the works of
God, and do wholly and only depend upon the good hand and providence of God,
they depend not upon the influence of the heavens and stars, but things come to
pass as it pleases God to dispose, Prove. 16.9. says Solomon, the heart of
man purposes his way, but the Lord guides and directs his steps: man
purposes to guide his feet one way, but the Lord directs his steps as he
pleases, Jer. 10.23. the way of man is not in himself, neither is it in man
that walks to order and direct his steps: so that the success of things
depend not upon the position of the stars; and therefore doubtless children
coming of the same parents, and born under the same position of the heavens,
are not of the same mind, carriage, and behavior.

This serves to discover unto us the folly of Nativity-casters,
Figure-casters, let the Preacher of the Word tell them, that both they and
their children were born under the wrath of God, under the curse of God, and
firebrarnds of hell, so long as they continue in that estate, and are heirs of
damnation, they are little or nothing moved with it; herein they discover their
blindness, yea it is a fearful sign that God has given such persons over into
a reprobate sense, and then fearful is their condition, that so believe these
fortune tellers. We see here, two brethren born at the same time, and of the
same parents, and yet of a different nature and quality; so that
fortune tellers in taking upon them to foretell the manners, and dispositions
of men, from their Nativity, and birth, do cozen and deceive men; therefore
give not heed unto them, they are but dreams and dotages of idle persons, and
conjectures of fools, Esaias 44.25. and such as give heed unto them, they show
themselves to be fools, and wicked graceless persons, and they make themselves
odious in the sight of God: Oh mark it, you that do give heed to figure-casters
and fortune tellers, you make your selves abominable in the sight of God, Deuteronomy.
18.12. All that regard times, and observe times in this manner, after the
manner of the heathen, and those that consult with them, are abomination to the
Lord, and it is a foul shame for any to bear the name of a Christian, and to be
like unto a heathen, dare thou take the name of a Christian, and yet (like
the heathen) run to figure casters, and fortune tellers, and the like wise men,
and wise women, as they call them?

Consider, the wind blows where it lists, as in Joh. 3.8. the Lord works
by his Spirit where it pleases him, all the pains we can take notwithstanding,
the wind blows where it lists; and so they may rest in Gods counsel, which
may be hidden and secret, but assuredly never unjust, God is just in all his
providence, and administrations, all men may take notice of it, and though it
be harsh and hard, yet it is never unjust, and so rest contented in the good
will and pleasure of God.

VERSE 11, 12. (For the children being not yet born, and when they had neither
done good, nor evil, that the purpose of God might remain according to
election, not by works, but by him that calls.

It was said unto her, The elder shall serve the younger.


IN these two Verses our Apostle brings proof to that point and position, put
down in the verses foregoing, and the thing delivered was, that it appeared
plainly in the two children of Isaac and Rebekah, That the Promise of God
touching mercy, grace, righteousness, life and salvation, did not belong to all
that came of Abraham and Isaac, by the course of Nature: this was the
Conclusion which the Apostle proves in these two verses, and he proves it
from the voice of God himself; In that God says to Rebekah, that the Elder of
her children should serve the Younger, Genesis 25.23. she coming to consult with
the Oracle, It was told her, that two Nations strove in her womb, and the elder
should serve the younger. And this the Apostle amplifieth, by the circumstance
of the time, before the children were born, when they had neither done good nor
evil. And this is further enlarged by the end of it; to what end? namely, that
the purpose of God might remain and abide firm and stable, and unmovable,
according to election, and that not by works, but by him that called. Now this
being the general drift of these two Verses, Come we to the sense and meaning
of them, which are full of difficulty.

(For before the children were born,] It is most plain (by the context) that
the Apostle means Jacob and Esau, for they are specified in the context, were
born, that is, while these two children were in the womb of Rebekah their
Mother, and not yet brought forth.

and had done neither good nor evil,] That is, actually sinned; for here
Original corruption is not specified, for originally they were guilty before
the Lord, and in their typical consideration, Original corruption is excluded,
they being considered as types of the Elect, and of the Reprobate, and in that
consideration they are laid before us, as having done neither good, nor evil.

That the purpose of God might remain according to election,] Or rather thus,
That the purpose of God according to election might remain. So that by the
purpose of God in this place, we are to understand Gods eternal decree, that
which he purposed from everlasting within his own blessed Majesty, out of the
good pleasure of his Will, or according to the counsel of his Will, Ephesians.
1.11. that which God in himself from everlasting purposed, freely.

according to election,] Or, concerning election, that is, touching his free
choice of some to grace and glory, and his rejecting of others; for under
election, is included the contrary, namely reprobation, that purpose which was
touching free grace and glory, according to election, according to the act of
election, and reprobation.

that it might remain] Or rather might be firm and stable, and might abide
unshaken.

not by works, but by him that calls.] That is, say the Arminians and the
Anabaptists, (if you will believe them,) not by the works of the Law, but by
faith obeying him that calls; not by seeking righteousness and salvation by
the works of the Law, but by faith obeying him that calls. And upon this they
would ground their gross error, and false conclusion, that Esau was a type of
those that are rejected of God, because they seek righteousness and salvation
by the works of the Law, and Jacob was a type of such that are then chosen of
God, when God does see faith in them with perseverance, and are then chosen of
God actually, God purposes to choose them upon foreseen faith, and does
actually choose them, upon the faith that he sees in them with perseverance;
But this is a misconstruction; for consider, how could Esau be a type of such
as are rejected of God? Esau considered without works either good or evil, as
he was being in the womb, how could he be a type of such, that seek
righteousness by the works of the Law? Again, how could Jacob being considered
without faith, as he was when he was chosen, before he was born, how could he
be a type of those that are then chosen of God, when God sees faith in them
with perseverance? Can these things possibly agree and jump together, that are
contraries, unless they will have, that there is no analogy, no resemblance,
or proportion between types, and the things typified? how could Jacob be a type
of those that are chosen upon their faith with perseverance, he then having no
faith? or how could Esau be a type of those that seek salvation by the works of
the Law, he having no works, neither done good nor evil? this cannot be, there
must be an analogy between types, and the thing typified. But the meaning of
the word is, not by works, that is, not any thing depending upon the works of
these two brethren.

but upon him that calls.] That is, upon the free grace of God, calling his
elect in time effectually.

It was said unto her,] That is, it was said unto her by God himself, Genesis
25.23.

The elder shall serve the younger.] That is, the Elder shall be under the
Younger, shall be in subjection to the younger, and the younger shall rule over
the elder. Now this being the meaning of the words, we must consider, that this
is to be understood of Esau and Jacob; first personally, that this oracle of
God should be fulfilled in Jacob and Esau's persons, that Esau should be
subject to the person of Jacob. And also it is to be understood Historically,
in their posterity, the Edomites and Israelites, which were indeed the children
and offspring of Jacob and Esau; so that it is to be understood both
personally and historically.

two Nations are in thy womb, and two manner of people shall be divided out of
thy bowels, the one shall be mightier then the other, and the elder shall serve
the younger, therefore these words are only meant of their posterity and
offspring, and not of the persons of Esau and Jacob.

two Nations are in thy womb, two manner of people, shall proceed out of thy
bowels, it could not possibly be taken literally and in the proper sense, that
two Nations should be in her womb, then she were a Monster, but the meaning is,
that in her womb there were the Authors, and the Fathers of two Nations, Esau
the father of the Edomites, and Jacob the Father of the Israelites, and that
two Nations shall spring from them; so Rebekah her self did conceive of it,
that it was meant of her two children, and therefore she set her affection upon
Jacob, and not upon Esau, and she was mavelous industrious, that the blessing
should light upon the younger, and not upon the elder, Genesis 27.6. to the 14.
she causes her son to bring a Kid, and informs him what he shall do, and
Isaac affirms, in the 40 verse, that Esau should be his brothers servant,
Rebekah knowing it from the Oracle of God; yea the two brothers themselves
Jacob and Esau were even so persuaded, Jacob was persuaded that the blessing of
his father did belong to his person, and not his posterity only, and Esau was
enraged, because Jacob was made his lord, and he made a servant to him, and
therefore he threatened the death of Jacob: Oh says he, Isaac my father will
dye shortly, and then I will take away Jacobs life; he was not troubled with
his posterity, which came to pass in the time of David, so that this is to be
understood first personally, and afterward historically, in their posterity 750
years after: Then thus conceive we the meaning of the Apostle in these two
verses, When these two children which Rebekah conceived were in her womb, and
had done neither good nor evil, that the purpose of God which he had decreed
from everlasting, touching the free choice of some, and the rejection of
others, might be firm and stable, not depending upon any works of these two
brethren, Jacob and Esau, but his own free grace, calling his elect
effectually, even then was it said to Rebekah, by the Oracle, the elder shall
serve the younger, and the younger rule over the elder; and that was fulfilled
in their persons, and afterward in their posterity.

But yet further for the clearing of these words, (the elder shall serve the
younger,) do not prove this conclusion, that the one should be received to
salvation, and the other rejected to damnation; for why? a man may be in
poverty, may be poor, in bondage, and in miserable slavery, so as that the
Turks and others may be lords over them; does it thereupon follow, that the one
of them is elected, and the other a reprobate? therefore (it seems) this was
meant only of a temporal and outward servitude, and not of eternal election,
and, say the Anabaptists, the Apostle here does not write of eternal election
and reprobation, he treats of an outward servitude, that is, one may serve
another, and be in bondage to another, does it follow, the one is chosen, and
the other rejected?

Those words of God, the Elder shall serve the Younger; the elder shall serve
the younger.

Come we now to matter of observation. And from the general view of this text,
in that the Apostle here treats of eternal election and reprobation in
particular persons, in Jacob as the Elect, and Esau as the Reprobate: hence we
are given to understand thus much,

I am the good Shepherd, I know my sheep, and they know me, and others know me
not. Luke 10.20. Christ bids the seventy Disciples rejoice in this, that
their names were recorded in the Court Rolls of heaven. And hence it is, that
we read of the book of life, in Exodus 32.33. Psalm. 69.28. Rev. 20.12. wherein
the Holy Ghost does descend to the capacity of man, meaning that God has as it
were a remembrance, wherein he does write down the names of his children, they
stand upon Record; which does evidence unto us, that Gods eternal election is
of particular persons, and not of all generally.

who has predestined us to be adopted through Jesus Christ, according to the
good pleasure of his will, to the praise of the riches of the glory of his
grace.

gave himself to redeem us from all iniquity, that he might purge us to be a
peculiar people to himself: therefore if thou find not thy self purged from
sin, from the rottenness of thy heart, thou art not wrought upon by the Spirit
of God. Therefore rest not upon that ground, that Christ dyed for all.

For the Children being not yet born, neither having done any good or evil,
(that the purpose of God according to Election might stand, not of works, but
of him that calls:)

It was said unto her, The elder shall serve the younger.


COme we now to stand upon these two Verses more particularly; and in that the
Apostle here says, Before the children were born, when they had neither done
good, nor evil, it was said unto Rebekah, by God himself that cannot lie, from
his Oracle, it was said, the elder shall serve the younger; thereby implying,
(the words having respect to spiritual things) that the one of the children of
Rebekah which she had in her womb, was elected to life and salvation; and the
other rejected and refused: this being the implication of that speech, the
Apostle points out unto us thus much,

That Gods fore-appointing of some particular persons amongst men to life and
salvation, from everlasting, God has chosen us in Christ, before the
foundations of the world was; what? for any goodness or holiness that was in
us, or he foresaw would be in us? no, but that we should be holy, and without
blame. He has chosen us not for foreseen holiness, but that we should be
holy; this is the language of Canaan: then he subjoyneth in the fifth verse,
who has predestined us to be adopted through Jesus Christ himself, according
to the good pleasure of his will; without respect had to any thing in us, or
any thing done by us: so also in 2 Timothy 1.9. the Apostle speaking of God, says
thus, he has saved us and called us with an holy calling, not according to our
works, (still he renounces that) but according to his own promise and grace,
which was showed unto us through Jesus Christ (when?) before the world was;
before Jesus Christ was incarnate, yea before there was a world, and before we
had a being. And in Jude 4. verse we read, that the Apostle speaking of some
which were ordained of old; when was that? surely from everlasting, before the
world was, or they had a being; they were ordained of God to this condemnation;
these places does sufficiently evidence unto us the truth of the point, that
God from everlasting foreappointed some particulars amongst men to life and
salvation, and refused and rejected others, out of the mere good pleasure of
his will, without any thing in man, either good or bad quality, or any thing
done by man, either good or evil: No doubt God did foresee these things in man,
but not as a cause moving him thereunto, but his election is free. And indeed
it is an act of Gods sovereignty that he has over the creatures, which is
altogether independent, upon any thing in the creature, or done by the
creature, as the cause of it: as for example, In the first Creation of all
things, when God created the world, he first made the matter of all things a
confused Chaos, and out of that he made the distinction of several things, and
creatures in their several kinds. Now as in that first Creation, when that the
whole matter of it was alike, a confused heap, then there was reason, why one
part of that matter should become fire, another water, another the air, and
another earth; Because this was necessary, both for the beauty of the world,
and the use of the creatures, that they might be useful both to man and beast,
but why this or that part of the first matter should be fire, and not water,
why God would make that part water, and another part earth, a baser element, no
reason can be imagined of this, but only the will of the Sovereign Creator,
because it pleased God to make one part of that first matter, water, and
another fire, and another earth, and another air, he might have made that part
fire, which was water, but it pleased the Almighty Creator to make them so; So
in the general, there was Reason why the Lord would receive some to salvation,
and reject others to damnation, both for the manifestation of the glory of his
mercy, and justice, but why God would appoint this or that particular man or
woman to life and salvation, and not another man? why Peter, and not Judas? not
any reason can be imagined, rightly and truly, but the good will and pleasure
of God.



And likewise this truth now delivered, meets with the erroneous opinions of
the Arminians and Anabaptists, for they are near one to the other. The
Arminians hold and affirm, that God did decree the choice of some to life and
salvation, not actually choose them, but decree some to life and salvation, upon
the foresight of their faith, with perseverance; and so say the Anabaptists, it
was upon the foresight of their faith, and obedience to the Gospel, so that
they jump together in the matter, the one upon foreseen faith, and the other
upon foresight of obedience to the Gospel; the Lord did foresee that some would
embrace the Gospel, some would believe in Christ, some would seek salvation by
faith in Christ, upon the promises of God, and thereupon did he decree the
choice of some to life and salvation, or at least say they, (mincing the
matter) it was the rule which God did follow, in his choice; we will not (say
they) stand upon it, to be the cause, but it was the rule: A frivolous
distinction, to distinguish between cause, and rule, or cause, and reason: But
for the opinion, it is most false; for if so be the foresight of faith, and of
the obedience to the Gospel, was the cause working God to decree the choice of
some to life and salvation, then this will surely follow, that that which has
only a being in time, was the cause of that which was altogether before time,
then faith which has no being in nature, but in time, it shall be the cause
working God to decree the choice of some to life and salvation before all
times; a most gross and absurd thing, that the thing (in time) should
overruled the decree of God from everlasting. Again, if so be Gods
fore-appointing of some to life and salvation, had faith foreseen for the cause
of it; what need then had the Apostle, to bring that question, or make that
Objection that he does in the 14 verse of this Chapter, What shall we say then?
is there unrighteousness with God? there would be no show, nor semblance of
any injustice, or unrighteousness with God, if so be this were true, that Gods
fore-appointing of some to life and salvation, had faith foreseen, for the
cause, if any had moved this question, that it seems hard that before the
children were born, God should receive one, and reject the other, and so should
conclude, then God is unjust, and unrighteous. Then we might answer, speaking
in the language of the Arminians, God did foresee, long before, that Jacob
would believe, and Esau would not; and this would clear God from any suspicion
of injustice, and this cavil would be quite taken away; and so we should make
the Apostle to speak very absurdly, to move a question that needed not, and
make an objection needlessly, which were most wicked and blasphemous once to
suppose such a thing of the blessed Apostle, which was guided by the holy
Spirit of God infallibly, who had cause to move this question: so then let the
Arminians and Anabaptists pass away with their idle fictions of their idle
brains, contrary to the truth of God.

Is this so, that God has fore-appointed some to life and salvation, others,
thou had been in no better estate then Esau, or Judas, or Saul, or Jezebel,
or the vilest Reprobate that lives upon the face of the earth; Oh then be
stirred up to magnify the Lord, who out of his free mercy has elected thee,
and rejected others. In the 2 Samuel 6.21. we read that David danced and leaped,
and rejoiced in his spirit exceedingly before the Ark of God: what was in
David's mind? was he a madman, as Michael his wife told him? no, he considered
that God had chosen him, and rejected the house of Saul; so he says to
Michael, the Lord has chosen me, and my fathers house, and rejected thee, and
thy fathers house; Oh then how should we rejoice in Spirit, and bless and
magnify his mercy, that he has chosen us not to a Temporal Kingdom, but to an
eternal Kingdom in heaven: this should make us rejoice, from which he has
rejected many thousands as good as thy self: how can I be sufficiently thankful
unto God? if so be men of eminency and place should show us a common kindness
and courtesy, we little regard it; but if so be those eminent persons do admit
us unto their special favor, and do yield unto us such a kindness, as they
will not communicate to any but their dearest favorites and friends; then we
highly esteem of it: Oh then consider, the Lord has done us that favor,
wherein the greatest part of the world, and of mankind, have no share, no part
nor portion; how should this teach us to magnify, praise, laud, and bless the
holy name of God.

Oh holy, holy, holy, Lord God ever praised and magnified be thy great name,
who have set us apart to life and salvation, and rejected many others in the
world: Yea beloved, as God has put a difference between us and others, we
belonging to his election, so let us manifest and make it to appear, that there
is a difference between us and them in the course of our lives and
conversations, that we differ from the wicked manners of the world, for they
that follow the course and manners of the world, they believe not that God has
set them apart to life and salvation; if they had hearts to believe it, they
would manifest it, and make it appear in their lives and conversations, our
life must be a visible disallowing, and disavowing of their lives; we must
confront the wicked, we must shine as lights in the world, and carry our selves
as children of the light, and not follow the swaggering fashions of the world;
for as God has made a separation between us and them, and will make a final
separation at the day of Judgment; so now there should be a separation: I mean
not a separation from the Church, but from the cursed courses of the world;
even as Lot did in Sodom: Oh therefore in the fear of God, let us ever magnify
and bless the Name of God, for choosing us to salvation, and let us labor to
be answerable in some measure by our obedience unto him.

For the Children being not yet born neither having done any good or evil,
(that the purpose of God according to Election might stand, not of works, but
of him that calls:)

It was said unto her, The elder shall serve the younger.


THe next thing to be considered, is the Apostles amplification of the speech
of God unto Rebekah, and it is amplified by the end of it, It was said unto
Rebekah by God himself, The elder shall serve the younger; to what end? to this
end, that the whole matter might depend upon Gods election, touching his free
choice, not by works, but by him that calls: So then the next words to be
handled (in order of the Text,) are these, [that the purpose of God touching or
concerning election might remain, or abide,] that is, (as I showed you,) That
the eternal purpose and decree of God touching his free choice of electing some
to life and salvation, and his rejecting and refusing others might remain firm
and stable, immovable and unshaken; here then you see, we have a ground of the
infallible certainty and immutability of Gods decree; before we showed you the
freeness of it: here we have a certain ground of the infallible certainty and
immutability, and unchangeablenesse of his decree in choosing some, and
rejecting others: hence the observation is this,

That Gods eternal decree and purpose, There shall arise false Christ's, and
false prophets, and they shall show great signs and wonders, so that (says
Christ) if it were possible, they should deceive the very elect: As if he had
said, False Christ's, and false Prophets (arising in the Church of God,) shall
come with such powerful working, even with the working of Satan, and with all
power and lying wonders, as the Apostle describes Antichrist himself, his
followers, 2 Thessalonians. 2.9. that they shall come with such a powerful working,
with the lying wonders of Satan, that if it were possible, they should deceive
the very elect, but that cannot be, that they should be drawn aside finally
into any fundamental error, or wicked life, and so go on and perish
everlastingly, and come short of life and salvation, though they come with
great force, as the Imps of Satan, and followers of Antichrist do bear down
weak ones, yea (if it were possible) to deceive the very elect, yet they
cannot: in the 2 Timothy 2.19. The Apostle speaks expressly, that the foundation
of God stands sure, and has this seal, the Lord knows who are his: that is
Gods eternal decree in saving his chosen, upon which their election is built,
as upon a foundation, remains sure and certain, and unchangeable for ever.
And there is good Reason for it.

Because God is almighty, he is of infinite power, and he having from God has
decreed. Again, God is in his own nature unchangeable, yea, and in his love
which is essential, unchangeable, and therefore that purpose and decree in
saving some must needs be suitable to his nature, and answerable to his love,
which are essential in his holy Majesty, and therefore his decree is immutable
and unchangeable.

My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Matthew. 27.46. Did he thus suffer
the wrath of his Father, for the sins of Gods chosen? And yet did not the Lord
for all this determine, that any should be saved infallibly, but left that at
random to depend upon the will of man? that if man would embrace Christ, and
believe in him, thus suffering, he should be saved, if not, be damned? Can we
with reason judge this, or imagine this, that Christ should thus shed his blood
upon such uncertainty, that the whole fruit and benefit of his suffering should
depend upon the frail will of man? that if man would embrace it, he should be
saved; if not, he should be damned; no, the bitter sufferings of Christ do
strongly evince this, and do clearly manifest, that God has certainly
concluded the salvation of some, and the damnation of others; so that we may
conclude upon this, as a certain truth, that God having fore-appointed some
particular persons among men to life and salvation, they cannot miss of it,
but God will certainly and infallibly bring them to the possession of it.



To this I answer;



infallibly, but not whether they will or no, not by any enforcing of their
wills, not by any violence offered unto them, the will of man is free, no
violence can force it, but the Lord by the secret working of his holy Spirit,
does cause it to be willing, Ex nolentibus, facit Deus, volentes.
and does alter and change the course and motion, and work of the wills of men,
and makes them fit to receive grace; and this is that Christ speaks of, Joh.
6.44. None can come to me, except God the Father draw him; what? drawn by
force? no, there is an alteration, wrought by the inward work of the Spirit of
God, altering the motions of the will, making the will willing to receive
grace, and faith; and so when Gods elect do receive faith, they receive it
willingly; when they come actually to believe, the motion of their will is
turned another way: by nature they cannot but will and choose evil, but the
motions of their will is turned another way by the secret working of the holy
Spirit of God, and made willing; so that we may resolve upon this, that God
has from everlasting foreappointed some particular persons amongst men,
certainly and infallibly, and so as that they cannot miss of coming to life
and glory in heaven.

First of all, let this teach us to savor this truth aright, and to receive
without which no man shall see God, to his comfort; Heb. 12.14.
what a foolish thing is it for men then thus to reason? If I be appointed to
life and salvation, I shall be saved howsoever I live: men will not so reason
in the matters of the body; will a man having received a grievous and sore
wound in some part of his body, say why? if God has appointed this wound shall
be cured, and healed, it shall be healed, though I never apply means, salve, or
medicine to it: And if God has appointed me to live to such a time, I shall
live so long, though I never eat nor drink, nor use any thing for the
preservation of this life, were not this a madness and a folly? So what
madness and folly is it, for men to reason thus, in respect of their souls? I
am sure a child of God dare not so reason, the seed of grace that is in the
heart of a child of God, will not suffer him, and if thou so reason, surely it
is a fearful sign, that God never appointed thee to life and salvation, nay it
is more then a probable sign, (though I will not determine of thy final
estate,) that thou art a reprobate, and in the estate of reprobation, this is
the devils logic, and his manner of reasoning, and used indeed by none but
such as are irreligious and profane.

Is it so, that God has from everlasting fore-appointed, and foreordained,
saved; for God himself is sure, with him there is no variableness, nor shadow
of changing; Jam. 1.17.
and this ought to stir us up to labor to find our selves to be in that
number, in the number of Gods chosen, and to give all diligence to make our
election sure; 2 Pet. 1.10.
not sure in it self, for so it is already, but sure unto us, in our assured
knowledge of it, that we know it certainly and infallibly, that we appertain to
God: to give all diligence to this, this is a matter of weight; if we come near
to that assurance, that we are in the number of Gods chosen, happy are we then,
though trials, and troubles, and persecutions come, as we may justly expect,
for great troubles and persecutions are ready to break in upon us, they are at
the door, in evil and dangerous times we live, and we may justly look that the
fiery trial should come upon us in regard of our sins, to be bound at the
stake; now if we be out of the gunshot, in the state of grace, and in the
number of those that appertain to life and salvation, what need we fear it? no,
though our implacable enemies, (the blood-sucking Papists,) though they should
prevail so far, (which the Lord avert and turn away from us,) yet if they
should prevail, to take away our lives by fire and faggot, and most cruel
torments, we need not fear, if we be in the number of Gods chosen, then our
everlasting good, the good of our souls and bodies, comes to us, they cannot
hurt us, our everlasting good of soul and body stands upon a sure ground,
Gods foundation, not man's foundation, which is tottering and wavering, and
rotten; so says the Apostle, the foundation of the Lord remains sure, 2 Timothy
2.19.
and all the devils and powers in hell cannot shake that foundation.

hoc opus, hic labor, and that my estate is settled hereon, and that I am in
the number of Gods chosen?

Psalm. 16.2.
above all other men in the world, these be their darlings; try then if thou
find this effect in thy heart and soul, that thou do choose God to be thy
God, the Lord is thy lot and portion, and the delight of thy soul, Psalm. 16.5.
and thou do resolve to cleave fast unto God, and to keep fast unto the
truth, and profession of it, though all the world divert from it, and follow
Popery, and Antichristianisme, Josh. 24.17.
and to resolve even with good Joshua, I and my house will serve the Lord: Let
all the world run after Baal, after the Pope, and after whom they will, thou
art resolved rather to shed thy dearest blood, then to shrink from the sound
profession of the Gospel: yea (God assisting thee) in the very flames of fire
thou will embrace the profession of God, and God for thy portion; happy art
thou then: thou may certainly conclude thou art in the number of Gods chosen,
and though they rend and tear thy body in a thousand pieces, they cannot pull
thee from thy inheritance, that is firm and stable; therefore comfort thy self
upon this evidence.

Not by works, but by him that calls.
THese words show unto us, that the purpose of God touching Election, and
Reprobation, might not, nor did not depend upon the works of Jacob and Esau,
but upon the free grace of God, calling his elect in time, effectually. Here
then we see the Apostle makes an opposition and a contrariety, and a flat
Antithesis between these two things, grace, and works: hence the observation is
this,

That not the works of man (whatsoever they be,

First, it is taken for Gods free favor, which is of the nature of God, and
essential unto him, the places of Scripture are obvious and plain unto us.

Secondly, The grace of God in Scripture, it is taken for the working of grace,
so some Divines take it, for the operation, extending, and reaching out that
free favor unto others.

Thirdly, it is taken for the gifts of grace, whether those gifts be habitual,
or actual, as faith, love, joy, hope, peace, patience, and the like; these are
styled by the name of grace; now the proposition that we deliver is, That Gods
election is of his free grace, my meaning is, it is not the gifts of grace; but
by grace, we are to understand the free grace and favor of God, and the
reaching and extending of that grace in time; so that (this being premised) the
point is to be thus conceived, That Gods eternal election of some to life and
glory in heaven, it is of the free grace and favor of God, being extended and
reached out to his chosen, and not of the works of man, be they never so good
or excellent, though they be the works of grace; and for the proof of this, it
is manifest in Romans 11.5. The Apostle says, that at this very day, there is a
certain remnant of the Jews under the election of grace; then he subjoyneth in
the sixth verse, Now if it be of grace, then not of works, for then were grace
no grace; and if of works, then not of grace, for then were works no more
works: so that the Apostle makes a flat opposition, and a contrariety, between
works and grace, that the one of these being admitted, and granted, the other
cannot stand, but must fall; grace and works cannot stand together in the same
case: Ephesians. 2.8, 9. says the Apostle, by grace you are saved, through faith,
and that not of your selves, it is the gift of God; and then he subjoyneth, not
of works, lest any man should boast: 2 Timothy 1.9. The Apostle speaking of God,
says, he has saved us, and called us with an holy calling, not according to
our works, but according to his own eternal purpose and grace: and Titus 3.4,
5. When the bountifulness and love of God our Savior toward man appeared,
not by the righteousness that we had done, but of his own mere mercy he saved
us. These and many others, do sufficiently evidence unto us the truth of the
point, That Gods free grace and favor, is the cause of eternal election, and
not the works of men; which are but splendida peccatam, glittering sins.

Because God will have all the glory, of all the good that comes to his they
should pride, presume, and magnify themselves, in their own good works, and so
detract from the glory of God, and so man's mouth might be stopped.



ex congruo; but such as are done after calling, those they magnify, and say
they merit ex condigno, by a kind of dignity, equal to the works of glory, that
it is just with the Lord to give them salvation for it; yea the point now
delivered, meets directly with that Popish conceit, that grace and works do
concur, (say they) and so make a mingle mangle and hotch-potch, grace and works
do concur, and meet together in the justification, and salvation of a sinner,
they are good friends, and at amity, in flat opposition to the words of God,
which do teach, that in the matter of justification and salvation these two are
at odds: in matter of good life, faith and good works must be, but not in
matter of justification, or salvation, as they teach. Again, we find that
justification and salvation, they are by the Apostle derived, and fetched from
the very same beginning, and cause, namely the free grace, and eternal love of
God, as well as election and vocation, Romans 8.30. Whom he predestined, them
he called, whom he called, them he justified, whom he justified, them he also
glorified; so that election, vocation, justification, and glorification, come
all from the same grounds.





Faith is a work, and therefore works have some stroke in the Justification of
a sinner.

I answer, what shall we do, that we may do the works of God? Christ says,
believe in God, that is a work of all works, the best work: but we must know,
that faith does not justify as it is a work, no not by the worth and goodness
of faith, the very act of believing justifies not, for the virtue and
goodness of it, but it justifies relative, as an instrument or hand applying
and taking hold of the Lord Jesus Christ, and so does faith justify,
apprehending Christ as the matter of Justification.

Yet further they object, say the Papists, in the places alleged, where

To this I answer, by grace you are saved through faith, and that not of your
selves, it is the gift of God; then he subjoyneth, not of works, lest any man
should boast: of what works does the Apostle speak? of works of nature? no such
matter, but works done by the power of grace; how may that appear? in the tenth
verse he says, we are his workmanship created in Christ Jesus to good works,
plainly teaching us, that the works he speaks of, are works done by us,
framed anew in Christ Jesus by the power of his Spirit and grace, we being in
Christ made new creatures: so to leave the Papists.

Is it so, That Gods eternal election of his chosen before all time, and and
subtilty of Satan, if Satan cannot prevail with a man to be abominable and vile
in his life, to be a debauched creature, but that he will live civilly and
orderly, and will be doing good things, then he will temper with him, and
stir him up to be conceited of his goodness, and to rest upon it as the
ground of comfort; when a man does avoid the bloody-faced sins of the world,
then the devil makes him to think he is a right honest man, and make that the
ground of salvation, but this is as pleasing to the devil, as a lewd and a
wicked course of life; for assuredly the trust and ground of comfort in any
thing done by us, shall as soon bring a man to hell, as the most vile, and
debauched course of life: Oh then trust perfectly to the grace of God, (...).
1 Pet. 1.13. the word is very significant, and signifies soundly, holily, and
solidly, trust to the free grace of God, for if thou trust upon any thing else,
it will plunge thy soul into the bottomless pit of hell; yea if we rest upon
the grace of God, though the Lord do afflict, and bring us under in grievous
afflictions, yet happy are we, we are built upon the free grace of God, and he
will never take his grace and mercy from us, as he says to David, 2 Samuel 7.14,
15. if thy son sin against me, I will correct him with the rods of men, but my
mercy will I never take from thee; thou art in a blessed estate, that rests
upon the mercy of God.

VERSE 12. It was said unto her, The elder shall serve the younger.


IN this Verse our Apostle puts down the speech of God unto Rebekah, which
we read of in Genesis 25.23. the Holy Ghost in that Chapter, tells us that
Rebekah having conceived twins, two children in her womb, and feeling the
children to strive in her womb, she went to ask counsel of the Oracle of God,
touching that matter, and the text says, God gave her this Answer, two Nations
are in thy womb, Rebekah, two manner of people shall be divided out of thy
bowels, and the one people shall be mightier then the other, the elder shall
serve the younger, these were the very words of God. Now these words our
Apostle brings to prove, that Gods promise of mercy, grace, righteousness,
life and salvation, did not, nor does not, belong to all that came of Abraham
and Isaac by the course of Nature, and that all Gods promises appertained not
to the Israelites; for, says the Apostle, before those children, (which
Rebekah had conceived in her womb by Isaac our Father,) before they were born,
when they had neither done good nor evil, It was thus said unto Rebekah, The
elder of thy children shall serve the younger; therefore those promises of God
belong not to all that came of Abraham and Isaac by course of nature.

Now the words of this verse they are thus to be conceived, That it was said
unto Rebekah even by God himself, that the elder of her children should serve
the younger, and should be in subjection to the younger, and that the younger
should rule over the elder: And that this should be made good, both personally
in their persons, and also historically in the Idumeans, or Edomites which came
of Esau, and in the Israelites, which came of Jacob: yea I (withal) farther
showed you in laying open these words, that these words had not only a respect
to a temporal Dominion and servitude, the one should be a lord, and the other a
servant; but they had a spiritual meaning, and had respect to things concerning
salvation and damnation; and under these words, the elder shall serve the
younger, we must understand, that the one of Rebekahs children was chosen to
salvation, and the other refused and cast off to damnation, so that we are thus
to conceive the meaning of these words.

Now (to come to stand upon the verse more particularly) you see here, our
Apostle affirms it was thus said unto Rebekah, even by God himself who cannot
lie, the elder of thy children shall serve the younger. I will not curiously
stand here to search in what manner, or how the Lord made this known unto
Rebekah, touching the different estate of her children, whether by dream, by
vision, by Urim, or Prophet, a certain truth it is she received such an Oracle
from God, the Apostle affirms it, that it was thus revealed by God who cannot
lie, he did manifest and make known thus much unto Rebekah, when she was thus
with child with her two children, that the elder should serve the younger, and
that the one was received, and the other rejected; which thing (without
question) when Rebekah heard it, no doubt it troubled her much, she not being
without natural affection; for a woman having two children in her womb, and
receiving this Answer from God consulting with him, that the one was received
of God, and the other rejected and cast off, it would be a hard Answer: For a
woman to consider, surely one of my children is an elect child of God, and the
other a reprobate, so doubtless it was a very unwelcome, and a harsh and a
very unpleasing answer unto her; and yet we find, that this good woman did not
once mutter or reason against that Answer which was given unto her, we find not
one such thing in the Book of God: she might have thought, alas, what? one of
my children reprobated to be damned in hell; but she never uttered a word
against this Answer of God, but quieted her self in the good will of God
revealed unto her, and contented her self in the good will and pleasure of God
thus delivered unto her. Indeed we find, that afterward she set her love upon
Jacob chiefly, and used means, (though she failed in it,) as appears in Genesis
27.6. to the 14. she used means to get the special blessing, she took away her
chief love from Esau, and set it upon her son Jacob, her youngest son, that
should be lord over his brother, and therein she followed the good will of God,
yet we find she did not once open her mouth to mutter against the good will of
God for her son Esau's rejection.

Her example is imitable, it is to be imitated and followed of us; we are
according to the example of this holy woman Rebekah, to rest and to quiet our
selves in the good will of God made known unto us, touching the things that
concern our selves, or our children, or those that belong unto us; and not
answer, or open our mouths to mutter against this good will of God, though it
seem clean cross and contrary to our corrupt reason, but to quiet our selves
in God, and not to repine against him; for it is a bitter fruit of our cursed
corruption, for a man, or a woman to mutter and reason against the good Will of
God, in such things as are harsh and hard, and unpleasing unto us. As (to keep
to the point) if so be a Mother, looking upon her little Infant, lying in her
lap, born of her body, have thus thought, Alas my poor Babe, I make much of
thee, I tender thee, I nourish thee, I dandle thee, and yet it may be thou art
a reprobate, it may be thou art rejected of God, it may be thou shall one day
become a firebrand of hell; this is impious and monstrous, and not to be
thought on, for it is a secret, and secret things belong to the Lord, Deuteronomy.
29.29. (nay what do I propound this?) For some women there be, that have
discovered thus much; this has been their very thought: they have thought, I
nourish thee my child, and cherish and dandle thee, and yet it may be thou art
not a child of God, but a reprobate; this is wicked and impious, and this is to
go beyond our compass, to know whether the poor infant belongs unto God, or
no, for secret things belong unto God, Deuteronomy. 29.29. and we are not to meddle
with them: what if the Lord should say unto a mother, as he said unto Rebekah,
this little infant of thine that thou do make so much of, I have cast it
out, and have refused it, it is a reprobate, it is out of my love and favor,
we are then after the example of this woman Rebekah, to trust confidently in
this Will of God revealed, with contentation, and not to mutter, no not in our
very secret thoughts: for the Will and Counsel of God, though it be many times
secret, yet assuredly it is ever just, yea that that is revealed unto us in the
holy Word of God, concerning the matters of duty, or practice, or faith, or
whatsoever it is, we must rest upon it, and not mutter against it.

Come we now to stand upon the speech of God himself, the elder shall serve the
younger; these words being understood, (as before we have heard) they do afford
unto us two things of special good use and consequence; as first of all, it
being thus spoken to Rebekah, and that according to Gods eternal purpose, and
unchangeable Decree, even of him that cannot lie; the Doctrine hence is this,

The Lord makes poor, and makes rich, he brings low, and he exalts, he
lifts up the poor out of the mire, and raises the needy from the dunghill:
and hence it is Paul says he was an Apostle by the will of God, in Col. 1.1,
6. Paul an Apostle of Jesus Christ, by the will of God, and Gods eternal
counsel: And in Gal. 1.15. he says, God did separate him from the womb, and
set him apart to the office of Apostleship, yea from everlasting: and thus the
Lord Jesus was called from the womb, and set apart to be the Mediator of the
new Covenant, Esaias 49.1. and Joh. 6.27. conferred together, God the Father set
him apart from everlasting to the office of Mediatourship, and sealed him, and
Jer. 1.5. the Lord says, he sanctified Jeremiah from the very womb of his
mother, and ordained him in his decree before he came out of his Mothers belly
to be a Prophet unto the Nations: and in Genesis 45.5. it is said of Joseph, that
God sent him unto Egypt before to be the preserver of his Father and brethren,
you sold me (says he) indeed, but it was the Act of God that sent me to
relieve you. Dan. 5.21. says Daniel, the most high God of heaven and earth, he
appoints over the Kingdoms of men whomsoever he pleases, he sets up, and
pulls down: the Scripture is plentiful, to prove that the different estates
of men are ordered and changed by God himself.

of God thus to dispose them into a sweet harmony and agreement, without which
it would fail.

First of all, this may serve unto us, as a prop unto our faith, even to thou
did draw me out of the womb, thou gave me hope at the mothers breast. I
was cast upon thee from my mothers belly, therefore now do not fail me, when
troubles are at hand: thus may we pray unto God, and say, Lord, thou have sent
me, and severed me to this place and calling, I am a Magistrate, a Minister, of
this trade, or that calling, now Lord draw near unto me, and strengthen me, and
defend me in this my calling; this we may pray with much confidence and
assurance.

Upon this ground we must learn contentment, with the state and condition was
pinched with the frost by night, and burned with the Sun by day, and broke his
sleep, and Laban changed his wages ten times: it is Gods good will and
pleasure, thou should serve such a Master; Oh learn to lay aside all
muttering and murmuring, as to say, why should not I be made a Master, as well
as a servant? but remember it is Gods appointment of thee to that service.
Again, art thou poor in regard of the outward good things of this life, thou
have scarce from hand to mouth to feed thy body and belly withal; know, it is
the will of God thou should have but little, and thou art to be contented
with it, and be as thankful for this as thou would for a richer, and ever
rest contented; take heed of whining and repining, Oh I shall come to beggary,
I shall come to the alms of the Parish; but learn thy duty, to be contented
with the estate and portion that comes by the appointment of God, and withal
consider two things:

First the estate and condition of life in which thou art, being appointed unto
thee by the Lord, it is doubtless the best estate and best condition for thee,
be it poor or rich, thou being a child of God; for God willing thy eternal and
everlasting good, he does will that that is fitting for thee in this transitory
passage in the world.

Again, consider the good things of this life being no sure signs of Gods
favor; now then if thou be discontented with that part or portion of the good
thing thou enjoyest in the use of lawful means, and art ever whining and
repining, and say, I shall come to misery and beggary, I shall come to the
alms of the Parish, or such like, it is more then a probable sign thou art not
in the favor of God, nor a child of God, for together with the outward good
things of this life, God gives to his children contentedness of mind, he
gives unto them wealth without woe, and store without sore, yea in Psalm.
127.3. God gives his beloved rest and contentedness; learn we then every one
of us to be contented, and consider, thy dwelling here or there, in a fair
house, or in a foul, it is the will of God, thou should have it, and for thy
calling be it rich or poor, to be contented; do not leave thy station, or place
of calling, out of a discontentednesse, and run to Virginia, or New England,
and I know not whither, assuredly the hand of God will follow that man; he does
withdraw himself from the Lords protection, and the curse of God will follow
him; and whatsoever he puts his hand to, though he may remove to better his
estate, yet not out of discontentednesse, for this is a bitter fruit of our
cursed corruption, for the meanest thing we have is more then we deserve at
Gods hand; therefore learn to rely upon Gods providence and appointment in thy
lawful place and calling.

It was said unto her, The elder shall serve the younger.

As it is written, I have loved Jacob, and hated Esau.


COme we now to the second thing to be handled in these words. And in the
second place, it being thus spoken unto Rebekah by God himself, and that
according to Gods eternal and unchangeable decree, the elder shall serve the
younger, it further points out the efficacy and force of Gods eternal
election: and we may hence further take up this conclusion,

them from unbelief, to saving faith; and in Ephesians. 1.4. the Apostle says, God
has chosen us in Christ, before the foundation of the world, that we should be
holy, and without blame before him in love; plainly teaching us this very
point, that true knowledge, true faith, true holiness, they are fruits,
necessarily following upon Gods eternal election, God having chosen us to this
end, he is not frustrate of his end, but it comes to pass. And hence it is
the Apostle calls saving faith, the faith of Gods elect, as a thing properly
belonging to Gods elect, and a proper fruit of Gods eternal election, Titus
1.1. and in 1 Pet. 1.2. the Apostle tells those to whom he writes his
Epistle, that they were elect of God, according to the foreknowledge of God,
unto sanctification of the Spirit. Thus we see it evident and plain unto us,
that indeed, so powerful and so effectual, is Gods eternal election, as that it
alters the Law of Nature, and the corruption of nature, and in time it
brings forth in alteration and change in the soul of man, changing from the
state of ignorance and rebellion, to saving knowledge, and saving faith,
softness of heart, and holy obedience.

And it must needs be so,

First of all, this truth being duly considered, may serve (in the first place)

Again, Is this so, that Gods eternal election is so powerful, and so
effectual, as that it alters the corruption of nature in time? surely then
upon this ground it follows necessarily, that a man may come to know, and to
be assured of it, that he is one belonging to Gods election, and that he is in
particular in the number of Gods chosen: would any man know it? (no doubt every
man desires it,) would any man know he belongs to Gods election? surely a
man need not in this case, to climb up into heaven, and pry into the secret
closet of the Lord, and search the Court-Rolls of heaven, whether he be there
written, or no; no, he may take a shorter course, let him look into himself,
and dive into his own heart and soul, try and examine how the case and state
stands with him in respect of his own soul, and if in his own soul he find that
upon due trial and examination, this effect is wrought in him, that he is now
changed from what he was wont to be in his will, in his affection, in his mind,
and in the course of his life, now not a drunkard, or a proud person, as he was
wont to be, now he is set out of the state of Ignorance and unbelief, and
disobedience to the will of God, into the state of saving knowledge, saving
faith, softness and pliablenesse to the will of God; more particularly, if so
be now he find that he has a new light set up in his mind, his mind is
enlightened with A glorious light, by which he is able to understand the will
of God, and the ways of God, and the things of God, which the natural man
perceives not; and he finds his will disposed otherwise then it was,
heretofore he was stout and stubborn, and disobedient to the will of God
revealed in his Word; but now he finds in his heart plyableness, and yielding
to the Word of God; no sooner can the Lord command a duty to be done, but his
heart answers, Lord, this is my duty, I ought to do it, and I will certainly
do it: so when God forbids a sin, be it what it will be, pride,
covetousness, Sabbath-breaking, he answers, I confess it is my sin, and I
will forsake and leave it: when the Lord forbids his pride, his garishnesse
of apparel, and long shaggy hair, he will leave it off; and also he finds,
whereas it was odious and hateful for him to recapitulate and repeat the Word
of God after public exercises; now he finds it delightful to him, and is
made able in some measure (he being truly set at liberty,) to follow the holy
will of God, or whatsoever the Lord reveals in his Word, he will embrace the
duty, and omit and hate the sin, be it whatsoever it will be; here is a good
evidence, and upon this ground a man may certainly conclude, that he belongs
to Gods election, he yields obedience to all the Commandments of God, no
Commandment is hard unto him, but he entirely yields to the whole, though
imperfectly.





VERSE 13. As it is written, Jacob have I loved, But Esau have I hated.


OUr Apostle in this Verse makes known whence it was that there should be such
a great difference between these two brethren, Jacob and Esau; he gives this
reason of it, namely, that it was from the love of God to the one, and Gods
hatred of the other, the Apostle citing a Text of Scripture to this purpose,
Mal. 1.2, 3. so that in this verse our Apostle does explain and expound the
place of Genesis, the elder shall serve the younger, by this place of Malachy,
showing the reason of the difference, that it pleased God to put between these
two brethren, proceeding from Gods love, and hatred. In a word, in this
thirteenth verse, there be two things in general to be considered; First, the
Apostles citing of Scripture, As it is written; Secondly, the testimony of
Scripture, which he alleges in the words following, I have loved Jacob, and
hated Esau.

First, in that he alleges Scripture, As it is written, yet the Apostle does
not cite, either Book, Chapter, or Verse, but puts it down in the general:
whence I might stand to show, that we ought be so well acquainted with
Scripture, that when the text of Scripture is alleged, though the Book, the
Chapter, or Verse be not cited, we should be able to know it was Scripture; and
not to think as some ignorant persons do, that when a Poet is cited that it is
Scripture; but this was handled in the eighth Chapter, verse. 36.

But only one thing further, You see the Apostle here, whose Authority was
Divine, Apostolical, and infallibly guided by the Holy Spirit of God, who could
not err in what he taught and delivered to the Church and people of God, yet
for all this Divine and Apostolical, and infallible assistance, he follows
the rule of the written Word of God, and brings testimony of Scripture to
prove his Doctrine; this was an usual thing with the blessed Apostle, in other
places of Scripture, read Acts 26.22, 23. the Apostle there says, that he
witnessed to small and great, saying no other things, then those that Moses and
the Prophets did say should come to pass, That Christ should suffer death, and
be the first that should rise again from the dead, and show light to the
Gentiles. Romans 1.2. the Apostle affirms, that the Gospel which he preached,
was grounded upon the written Word of God, and (not to amplify the point,) the
Scripture is of sacred and divine authority, as it contains in it a Divine
and heavenly Doctrine, yea such a Doctrine that is not subject to the Church,
or any other thing in heaven or earth, but only unto God whose Will and Counsel
it is, touching things that concern the good of his Church and chosen.

This (for the use of it) serves to discover unto us the shameless impudence
Disciples, when the Spirit of truth should come which he would send, it should
lead them into all truth: Oh (say they) see, Christ promises his Spirit to
lead them into all truth, so that they cannot err in that which they teach:
But the Papists are mistaken, if so be we consider the place duly, and look
upon it and examine it, we shall find it will bear no such conclusion, that the
Church, and the Teachers of the Church, are so led, that they cannot err, in
whatsoever they teach, and that the Church has power, and the teachers of the
Church power, to judge of the Scripture, and the sense of Scripture, without
the help of it, for that place in John, it must (of necessity) be understood
with a restraint, when he says, it shall lead you into all truth, it has a
limitation and restraint, to that subject, of which it is spoken of all that
truth. For why? I hope the Papists will not deny, but easily confess and yield
unto it, that the time of Christ his second coming to Judgment, is a certain
truth of God, God has appointed and set it down, in Act. 17.31. a day wherein
he will judge the whole world in righteousness by Jesus Christ, yet the time
of his coming unto Judgment, is not revealed by the Spirit of God, to the
Church or Teachers of it; nay we are not to enquire into the time of his
coming, Christ forbids it, so that speech (of truth) must admit of a
limitation, not of all truth, for here is a particular truth not revealed, but
it is to be understood of all truths contained in the will of God, in the
Scripture, that the holy Spirit of God shall lead them into all that truth; how
may it appear? why read the place it self, John 16.13, 14. Howbeit when he is
come, which is the Spirit of truth, he will lead you into all truth; (there
they stay) but mark what follows, He shall not speak of himself, but
whatsoever he shall hear, shall he speak, and he will show unto you the things
to come, and shall glorify me. Now a special part of the glory of God, and
Christ, what is it but this; that the Holy Ghost reveals unto the people of
God the secrets of the Gospel, the things that eye of man cannot see, nor heart
conceive, does the Spirit of God reveal to Gods children, and does teach what
Christ is in himself, in his nature, in his offices, and in his person, only
these things he shall reveal, no new coined doctrine, or new devices of men's
brrains, not contained in the holy Scripture, but such as Christ, and the
Prophets, and Apostles have taught, these things shall be brought to the minds
of Gods chosen; therefore it is monstrous and shameless impudency for the
Papists thus to affirm, that they have power without, and besides Scripture.
But we are not to believe any without they can say, Scriptum est; it is
written, it is the infallible truth of God, grounded on Divine authority; thus
must all Ministers do, ground their doctrine on the truth of God.

As it is written, I have loved Jacob, and hated Esau.
COme we now to the testimony (of the Apostle) it self, I have loved Jacob, and
hated Esau. These words we find in Malachy, Mal. 1.2, 3. And they are here
brought to manifest and to show the reason of the difference that it pleased
God to put, between the two brethren, Jacob and Esau; Jacob advanced over Esau,
because God loved Jacob; Esau brought in subjection unto Jacob, because God
hated Esau.

Now that we may come to the handling of this testimony; Some there be that
say, this testimony of the Prophet (I have loved Jacob, and hated Esau,)
concerned only things appertaining to this life, things outward and temporal,
and not things eternal, the Prophet (say they) showing wherein Gods love did
consist unto Jacob, and wherein his hatred unto Esau did consist; he says Gods
love did consist in this, in giving unto Jacob a fruitful Land flowing with
milk and honey; and his hatred unto Esau, in making Esaus Mountain waste; and
in giving unto Esau's posterity the Idumeans, a barren and a dry Country, and a
Wilderness for Dragons, as the Prophet speaks; therefore (say they) the
Prophet thus speaking of things appertaining to this life, outward and
temporal, it cannot hence be concluded, that our blessed Apostle treats of
eternal election, and reprobation; (as you would make it, that this whole
Chapter concerns Predestination,) Now to this we answer easily; it is true
indeed, the Prophet in the place alleged in the 1. of Malachy, speaks of
things appertaining to this life, it cannot be denied; but yet he speaks not
of those things only; he speaks of those external things, but not only of
those things: For the drift of the Apostle in that place was, to reprove the
Jews for their unthankfulness to God; In that they did neither honor God, nor
fear him; for says God, Mal. 1.6. If I be a Father, where is mine honor? If I
be a Master, where is my fear? (who had indeed loved them effectually,) and
testified his love, in giving them a fruitful Land, even the Land of promise;
and in the sequel, he goes on in a further matter, and shows that God was
angry with Esau for ever, but he would be glorified, and magnified in Jacob,
and in the borders of Israel, as appears in the fourth and fifth Verses. And
therefore that testimony of the Prophet, is not to be so applied, only to
things outward and temporal; for the Lord says, he would be glorified in
Jacob, and he had hated Esau for ever: but it concerns the matter of eternal
election and reprobation, of which the Apostle in this Chapter treats. Come
we now to the particular unfolding of these words, I have loved Jacob, and
hated Esau. Gods love, it is essential in God, it is of the same Nature with
himself; God is love, says the Apostle, 1 John 4.16. and so Gods love it is
free, even as his own blessed Majesty, and it being extended and reached out
unto man, it is the free and eternal motion* (so I may describe it) the free
and eternal motion of Gods good will and pleasure; the free motion, and the
eternal motion of Gods good pleasure, touching the eternal and everlasting good
of man: God freely purposing and determining the everlasting good of man, out
of his good will and pleasure, as the Apostle says expressly in Ephesians. 1.5. we
are predestined, to be adopted through Christ, and that through the good
pleasure of his will: so then when God says, I have loved Jacob, what is his
meaning? I have freely, out of my own good will and pleasure, nothing moving me
thereunto, I have freely and voluntarily from everlasting, decreed the
everlasting good of Jacob, and his eternal salvation: And I have hated Esau,
says the text; Now here some stumble, and do think, that this was spoken, not
simply, but comparatively; not simply, I have hated Esau, but comparatively:
and for this they say, God indeed loved Jacob and Esau both, though he loved
not Esau with the same degree of love as he loved Jacob, but with a less love;
and therefore it is said, I have hated Esau: and they instance in Deuteronomy. 21.15.
where the Lord says by Moses, If a man has two wives, (as in the Old
Testament many of the Patriarks had) the one is loved, and the other hated;
this God speaks, not that a man that has two wives hates either, but that
he loves the one not so well as the other: as, Jacob had Rachel and Leah, he
loved Leah with a less love then he did Rachel, so that in comparison of Gods
love to Jacob, Gods love to Esau was a hatred. But beloved, these are
exceedingly deceived, for the Apostle calls those whom God hates, in the 22.
verse of this ninth Chapter of the Romans, vessels of the wrath of God, and his
vengeance, and therefore they are hated simply, being vessels of his wrath to
destruction. And if we look in that text of Malachy alleged, and duly consider
it, we shall find upon due examination, that it will easily appear, that God
hated Esau simply, Mal. 1.2. says the Lord, I have hated Esau; and he does
exemplify and make it appear that he hated Esau, in that he laid his Mountain
waste, and a Wilderness for Dragons; as if he had said, I have spoiled Esau of
all his goods, stripped him and turned him out naked, and I have given his fair
palaces, and goodly houses, for to be a den for Dragons; if there had been any
hope of Esau's coming to his habitation and palace, and ancient possession,
then it may happily seem, God did not hate Esau simply, but comparatively, but go
on with the text, Mal. 1.4. says God, Though Edom say, we are impoverished,
and cast out, and undone, but we will return and build the desolate places,
yet, says the Lord of hosts, they shall build, but I will destroy, and they
shall be called, The border of wickedness, and the people with whom the Lord
is angry for ever, that is, against whom he proceeds in wrath, and Judgment
for ever. Oh see, is this hatred but in comparison? (the Lord setting himself
so purposely and professedly against Esau,) no, it is simply.

Now for the simple meaning of the words, I have hated Esau, we must know,
hatred in Scripture, applied unto God, it is not a disordered, inveterate, and
distempered passion, as it is in us: but hatred, (applied unto God in
Scripture) it signifies three things,

First, It signifies a negation, a denial of Gods love, that God loves not,
and chooses not some to life and salvation; that is the first signification of
it.

Secondly, hatred in Scripture applied unto God, it signifies a just decreeing
of punishment for sin, and an inflicting of punishment for sin, yea he hates
the wicked themselves, Psalm. 5.5. thou hate all the workers of iniquity.

Thirdly, it signifies Gods utter abhorring and disliking of that which is
directly against Gods holy and righteous Law, and so God is said to hate
iniquity and sin, as the breach and transgression of his most holy law; so then
the meaning of God in these words is this; I have loved Jacob, and hated Esau,
as if the Lord had said, I have, and that out of my good will and pleasure
decreed, and from everlasting purposed, the eternal good of Jacob, and his
salvation; and I have not, out of that good will and pleasure of mine from
everlasting, so purposed and decreed Esau's eternal good; nay, I have before
the world was, in my secret counsel, rejected him, and have cast him off, and
refused him.

Come we now to such things as are observeable from hence: and first of all
observe, the Apostle here makes the ground of the advancement of Jacob over
his brother Esau, to be Gods love to Jacob, in that he was preferred before
Esau: hence we may gather this conclusion,

Israel, I have loved thee with ^ everlasting love, then presently he
subjoyneth, therefore with mercy have I drawn thee. And hence it is that the
Lord makes known, that the good things he has bestowed upon his chosen from
time to time, they have issued and sprung from that ever springing fountain of
the free love of God, Exodus 19.4. he carried his people upon Eagles wings, he
did favor and do them good from time to time, and so in Deuteronomy. 30.10. he chose
Jacob, and the seed of Jacob, and brought his seed out of Egypt by a mighty
power: and Deuteronomy. 4.37. he turned the curse of Balaam to a blessing. Numb. 23.5.
when Balaam thought to curse the people of God, God turned it to a blessing: so
I might instance in many particulars, how the Lord manifested his love unto his
people, one for all, Joh. 3.16. where Christ says, God so loved the world, or
his chosen in the world, that whosoever believed in him should not perish, but
have everlasting life: the free love of God was it that moved God to send his
Son to be a Savior unto them. Indeed I grant, that Gods chosen, now believing
in Christ, they have the pardon of their sins, and they have all good things
vouchsafed unto them, for Christ his sake; even for Christ his sake God is
pleased to vouchsafe unto them pardon of sin, and all other dependents thereon;
for we must know, that though God out of his free love decreed to make Christ a
means, and a Savior, by whom, and through whom, men should have pardon of
their sins conveyed unto them, that he should be the conduit and person, that
they should receive it by; yet the fountain, and chief ground is Gods eternal
love; so that the first cause, the first ground of all good things that come
unto Gods chosen here, and hereafter in heaven, it is Gods free love, and his
free good will and pleasure, though Christ be the means of conveyance.

Because God being most free, (as he is liberrimum agens,) he will not have

Because no good can be given above the good will and pleasure of God,

First of all, this Doctrine does put down a main difference, plain and

Is this so, that all good things in this life, and the life to come, do
proceed the merits of Christ to thy soul; for in Christ alone is the spiritual
right and title of all good things applied to Gods chosen. Secondly, having
gotten this, labor thou to find, that the outward good things of this life,
they do stir thee up and provoke thee forward to love God, to fear God, to
walk humbly before the Lord, and to be thankful unto his holy Majesty; the
outward good things of this life, thou have a true right and title unto them,
and are means to help thee forward in the ways of God, and to walk humbly
before the Lord, thy meat, thy drink, thy apparel, are means to help thee
forward to thy salvation, and to further thee in the way of salvation. And it
is not with thee after the manner of the men of the world, to abuse the good
things of this life, to vanity and pride, to set out their hearts, in pride of
apparel, garishnesse of attire, riot, and excess, (as some do) that a man may
say, and easily discern, there is a proud person; (however you will say, under
a russet coat may be a proud heart,) yet a man may say, where there is smoke,
there is fire: It breaks out in their foreheads, and foretops, and in their
long shag'd ruffian-like hair, and in their exterior parts, a man may say they
are clothed with cruelty, and pride hangs as a chain about their necks, Psalm.
73.6.
and their houses and lands are privileged places, for all manner of
abomination, impiety, and ungodliness, and no man may speak against them,
especially being men of place and authority, great men, their greatness does
privilege their places and houses, for all manner of impious and abominable
courses; Oh take heed thou use not thy wealth as they do, but the more
bountiful the Lord is, in pouring his blessings upon thee, the more humble thou
art, the more holy thou art, the more thy heart is enlarged with
righteousness, and in walking before God, and in all thankfulness, yea
thereby thou art made ready and fit for every good work, thy heart is not
locked up to choke the seed of the Word in thy heart, but they open thy heart
and thy hand, and make thee ready to every good work, to reflect upon the poor
members of Christ, the more thou have, the more abundant thou art in good
works, then certainly thou may conclude, that God has blessed thee with thy
wealth, and they are testimonies of Gods love to thee, and God has manifested
his love unto thee, which he bare before the world was, and thou may
certainly conclude God loves thee indeed.

As it is written, I have loved Jacob, and hated Esau.
LEt us now proceed unto farther matter offered unto us from this testimony of
the Prophet, I have loved Jacob, and hated Esau, here cited by the Apostle: and
here we see, that God did not only love Jacob for the time present, but also
loved him from everlasting: hence I observe thus much briefly,



uno intuitu, with one full sight,) so were his chosen,) as many as belonged to
his election) he loved them before the foundations of the world was: so that no
time can be given, wherein God began to love his chosen.

Ephesians. 2.3. that they were children of wrath; how can it be then, that no time
can be pointed out, when they were hated of God?

It is true indeed, the Scripture does note out this unto us,

Upon this ground it follows, that the Anabaptists, and other such

This being so, that no time can be given wherein God loved not his chosen,
whom he loves, he loves unto the end: so that this may be a ground of sweet
and excellent comfort to as many as find themselves wrought upon by the Spirit
of God, and find Gods love shed abroad in their hearts; that Gods love is
everlasting for the beginning and continuance of it.

Now proceed we further, I have loved Jacob, and hated Esau; here we see that
as Gods love to Jacob, was the cause of Jacobs advancement, and pre-eminence;
so Gods hatred to Esau, was the cause of Esau's servitude and subordination:
hence I might stand to show, that Gods hatred is the sovereign and chief cause
of all evils, of punishments that befall the wicked in this life, and
hereafter; though sin be the next and subordinate cause, yet the sovereign, the
main, the chief, the grand and Mother cause, is Gods hatred: but this I will
not stand upon, but rather note out the particular application of Gods hatred
against Esau; and observe we to that purpose, it is here said, God hated Esau,
that particular person Esau, which being understood as before expounded,
affords unto us this conclusion,

That God has from everlasting certainly decreed the rejection of some
particular persons, among men, even of Esau, and of such as Esau was: so has
he also decreed certainly the rejection and refusing of others, for even as he
loved the one, so he hates the other: And this ground of truth has evidence
and proof of it in other places of Scripture, in the 1 Thessalonians. 5.9. says the
Apostle, he has not appointed us to wrath, but that we should obtain salvation
by the means of Jesus Christ, thereby implying, that some are appointed of God
to wrath, and in his eternal counsel, God has appointed that some shall never
come to life and salvation; and in 1 Pet. 2.8. the Apostle affirms that some
there are that stumble at the Word of God; (which is indeed a common stumbling
block, Gods children walk evenly with an even foot, in the ways of God
according to the will of God,) but some there be that stumble, being
disobedient, unto which, before the world was, they were appointed and
ordained: so in Jude 4. verse, The Apostle speaks of some, that were of old
before the world was ordained to condemnation, denying the Lord Jesus, the Lord
of life and glory. Indeed the Scripture is not so plentiful, in this matter of
reprobation, as it is in the matter of election; and why so? surely because the
purpose of the Holy Ghost in the Scripture is principally to make known unto
Gods chosen, Gods eternal good will, and his eternal love, to manifest and to
signify Gods good will and good pleasure to his chosen, and the main and chief
drift of the Holy Ghost, in the written Word of God, is to bring Gods chosen to
certain hope of life and salvation, 1 Pet. 1.3. that they may be begotten to a
lively hope, yet though this be sparingly set down in the matter of rejection
and reprobation, yet it is set down plainly and sufficiently, that God has
certainly refused some, and cast them off for ever. And beloved, this being a
high mystery, that we may not misconceive, or misunderstand it, we must know
that there is a difference to be put, and a distinction to be made, between
Gods decree of rejecting of some, and the execution of his decree; God has
decreed absolutely from everlasting, and before the world was, without respect
to any thing in them, or any thing he did foresee would be in them, their
rejection: Now the execution of his Decree, is with the respect of sin, the
decree is absolute, but the execution is with respect had to sin; and for sin
does God execute his wrath in time, upon those that were rejected before time,
for their infidelity, and their sin foregoing, which is the proper cause of
damnation, and no man is damned but for sin.





Creator; we are creatures, silly worms, we must not take upon us to say, Oh it
is unjust, cruel, and hard for God so to do; for he is Justice it self, and
whatsoever we imagine or think to the contrary; yet Gods will makes the thing
willed, to be good, just, and holy, because it is willed of him, who cannot
will amiss, though it be hard and harsh to our corrupt reason, God has willed
the rejection of some: and this thing willed by God is good, for God cannot
will amiss.

This being a truth, Oh then it concerns us to look unto it, and to

But you will say,

Beloved, they are many; Two things which are never found in any Reprobate.
from evil to good: (as you heard not long since) Gods eternal election
brings forth an alteration; so the first thing must be this, a sound,
thorough, and true change wrought in the whole man, not in the memory, the
understanding, or the tongue only, but in the rest, and throughout; not as
many that have only left some sins, as the beastly adulterer, for want of
ability to follow it, but they are changed throughout, and have the power of
grace wrought in them by the means of grace, the Word, Prayer, and the
Sacraments, they have true grace wrought in every part of their body, and power
of the soul, by the use of the means; for howsoever God is not tied to means,
(he can work without means,) yet God does ordinarily work, where he vouchsafes
means: And they that live under the means, and have not grace, they are in a
fearful case.

The second thing that cannot be found in a Reprobate, Psalm. 38.3. Romans 7.24.
is a groaning under sin, and that because it is sin; not for fear, or shame,
or by-respects, and especially under such sins, as no eye of man can take
notice of, to see or know, but only God, and a man's own heart and conscience;
a groaning under inward and spiritual sins, a groaning under unbelief,
hardness of heart, deadness and dullness in performing holy duties, pride of
life, pride of heart, self-love, (which no man can discern,) a groaning unto
God in secret, to remove these things. Now then if thou find these things,
that thou have a true and thorough change, by the work of Gods Spirit, thou art
able to stand against thy best pleasing and darling sins; and the more grace
thou have, the more careful thou art to use the means: thou do not think
the time tedious, in hearing the Word, or repeating of Sermons; the more thy
love to the means increases, and the more thou groanest under such evils and
sins, as no eye of man can take notice of, no not the devil, and thou
accountest it thy greatest misery to bear the burden of sin, thou could
endure any torture in thy body, rather then sin, certainly thereupon thou
may conclude that thou art one belonging to Gods election, and have
outstripped and gone beyond a reprobate; Oh then hereby try and examine your
selves, labor to find this change wrought in thee by the power and means of
grace, and then this will yield thee sweet and heavenly comfort indeed.

VERSE 14. What shall we say then? is there unrighteousness with God? no, God
forbid.


COme we now unto the 14 Verse. Our Apostle having from the sixth verse of this
Chapter, hitherto cleared God from inconstancy, from being inconstant in his
Word and Promises, notwithstanding the rejection of the Jews, for the body and
greatest part of them, though they be the seed of Abraham and Isaac, and
descended of Jacob, who was called Israel, yet God was not inconstant; having
cleared God from that imputation, now he comes to clear God from iniquity, and
injustice, and in this argument he continues from this 14. verse, to the 19.
verse of this Chapter.

Now in this 14 verse, our Apostle preventeth a false inference, and a wrong
conclusion, that man's corrupt and carnal reason might infer and bring upon that
before delivered in the verses foregoing: For the Apostle having made known
thus much concerning these two brethren, that they being equal in birth, and
neither of them in better or worse estate in regard of nature, but both in
equal conditions, God hated the one, and loved the other; this may seem very
hard to flesh and blood, and the carnal humane reason of man at this might
stumble, and hereupon be offended, and rise up in a complaint against God, and
charge him with injustice and partiality, that therefore because he loved
Jacob, and hated Esau, the Lord is partial in his doings: Now this inference
and conclusion our Apostle preventeth and meets with, and shows it to be a
mere cavil of the flesh, and a false and wrong conclusion, drawn from the
premise unjustly, and that on this manner; this is his manner of proceeding:

First of all the Apostle knowing that that which he had delivered, was a
truth, and is confident and bold in it, and does provoke any one that does
cavil against him; to tell what they could say against him, or infer upon that
position, What shall we say therefore? Say what you can: he does provoke every
man, to tell him what they can say against this, God loved Jacob, and hated
Esau.

Then in the second place, (having made this challenge, what can we say and
infer against this holy position,) he delivers that conclusion, which in all
likelihood, flesh and blood was ready to make and bring in: And that by way of
interrogation, is there therefore unrighteousness with God? what can thou
say, is there unrighteousness with God? to this he answers Negatively, no,
and that not barely, but answers it by way of detestation and abhorring such
a conclusion, as gross and absurd, says he, God forbid: Shall we conclude,
God is unrighteous? no, and that he denies most emphatically, and powerfully,
and thereunto the Apostle subjoyneth a further and more special denial of that
gross conclusion, by a more special refutation, in the 15, 16, 17, and 18.
verses; but, to keep within the compass of this 14 verse, wherein is contained
the Apostles challenge, the particular conclusion, and the powerful denial: And
first of all briefly to open the sense of the words.

What shall we say then?] These words are to be understood, with reference;
What shall we say therefore? in the 13 verse, where the Apostle brings in
God speaking from the testimony of the Prophet; I have loved Jacob, and hated
Esau; and they are thus to be conceived, What shall we say therefore? see what
conclusion we shall infer.

Is there unrighteousness with God?] Shall we hereupon bring and infer this
conclusion? that therefore there is unrighteousness with God, because God did
from everlasting purpose and decree, out of his mere good will and pleasure;
Jacobs eternal salvation; and also before the world was; out of his free good
will and pleasure, (nothing moving him) Esau's rejection, that therefore God is
unjust, and unequal, because he so dealt with equal persons, in his Justice and
mercy?

God forbid.] Oh far be it from us, let us never entertain such a thought in
our hearts, that God should be so unequal, and so unjust, and that he dealt not
according to the rule of equity and Justice. So then thus briefly conceive we
the meaning of the Apostle, What shall we say? what conclusion shall we infer?
that God did love Jacob, and hate Esau, shall we thereupon make this conclusion
and inference, that therefore God is unjust, and unequal, and that God
proceeds not according to the rule of equity and justice, (God dealing so
unequally with persons that be equal,) out of his mere good will and pleasure?
Oh no, far be it from us to infer that, the Lord keep us from bringing in such
a conclusion, such an absurd inference, the Lord keep us from uttering of such
a thought.

Come we now to such things as may be observed out of the words of this verse,
and may be for our instruction. And first of all, note how confident the
Apostle is, and resolute upon the truth of it, that he provokes any, to tell
him what he would say against it; what shall we infer? what inference, or what
conclusion can any man bring upon this position, that God loved Jacob, and
hated Esau?

And beloved, not to stand upon this, Thus confident ought we to be, in
delivering the holy Word of God, and in preaching the truth of God; we are so
to deliver Gods truth, and (especially material and fundamental truths,) that
we may be able to avouch it against all gainsayers, and all that come against
us, we must be able to challenge and avouch it to any man, and say, this is the
holy and Divine truth of God; and to this purpose is that in 2 Timothy 2.15. That
every Minister must study to show himself a workman that needs not be ashamed,
dividing the Word of truth aright; and in Titus 1.9. He does affirm, that the
Preachers of the Word must hold fast the faithful Word, and let none wring it
out of their hands, and that according to doctrine, that he may be able to
instruct the people of God by wholesome doctrine, and also reprove them that
gainsay it, and refute them, whatsoever they be, that gainsay it; thus
confident ought every Minister of the Word to be.

This shows and discovers unto us,

In the next place, observe we, our Apostle having delivered this holy truth of
God, grounded upon the truth of God, (touching Jacob and Esau,) he knew that
some, out of their natural reason and understanding, would be ready to cavil
against it, and to make a wrong conclusion of it; he knew that some would
stagger at it, and wrest and pervert the truth of God, and would draw from it
this conclusion, (therefore God is unjust,) so that the Apostle is forced to
cry out, What shall we say then? is God unjust? hence the observation is this,

not knowing the Scripture: so in 2 Pet. 3.16. the Apostle says some did
pervert and wrong the Gospel to their own destruction; and in Esaias 52.6. the
Prophet speaks of the niggards, the niggard will speak like the niggard, and
in the middle of the verse he says, that he will speak falsely against the
Lord; he will labor to bring an untruth from the truth of God, that thereby he
might have some strength to his niggardliness, that he might make hungry the
weary soul, and cause the weak to fall. And (not to add further testimonies of
Scripture,) common experience does show the truth of it, for whence come error
and heresies, but out of this bitter root, that men do abuse and pervert the
Scripture, and make men believe, that God speaks that in his Word which he
speaks not; and make that the purpose of the Holy Ghost, which was never his
purpose; as Papists, Anabaptists, and Separatists, and other erring spirits do;
whence comes it, but that they fasten their errors upon the Word of God?
whence comes it that men go on boldly in their sins? but that they draw false
conclusions from the Word of God: as in that the Apostle says, 1 Timothy 5.8.
they that provide not for their own, are worse then Infidels: and therefore may
they upon this ground, practice the damnable sin of usury, and extortion, and
of covetousness, and of hoording up, and also use fraud, cosening and deceit,
and all unlawful means to enrich themselves; so again, some out of Exodus
22.25. where the Lord says, thou shall not oppress thy brother with usury, Oh
(say they) I may practice the sin of usury, if I do not oppress; mine is not a
biting, but a toothlesse usury; so that here is a wrong conclusion to imbolden
men in sin: so some hearing the speech of Christ, the Sabbath was made for man,
not man for the Sabbath, therefore (say they) we may upon the Sabbath use our
recreations, and sports, and pastimes, and we may walk to Tavernes, and
Alehouses: Oh what a gross conclusion is this, forced on the truth of God! so
I might instance in many more, to show how man's nature is ready to pervert the
truth of God.

and wrest wrong conclusions from it, yea draw such things as are not thence to
be drawn, and force such conclusions as we never thought upon: Neither are we
hereupon to shut our mouths, and resolve with Jeremiah, I will speak no more
in the name of the Lord, my words are wrested and perverted: But we must
remember, that the holy truth of God is subject to be perverted; yea it is an
argument that the truth we deliver is a sure truth of God, because the devil
and his instruments rage so much against it, and because carnal men, and
unsanctified hearts and souls, do wrangle against it, we must not therefore be
driven away from delivering the truth of God, but we must be comforted in the
truth.

Again, this being so, that the truth of God is subject to be perverted, the
good ground that receives seed, receives it with an honest and good heart:
and that thou may have it indeed, observe these two things.

First, labor to empty thy self of all pride, Directions how to hear
profitably. 1 Pet. 2.1, 2.
and self-conceit of thy own Judgment, of thy own will, and come to the hearing
and reading of the Word of God with an humble heart, with meekness of spirit,
lay aside pride, and swelling conceits, and lifting up of the mind, (that thou
can understand it better then the Preacher,) yea trembling at the holy Word
of God: for as the Prophet says, Esaias 66.2. To this man will I look to him
that trembles at my words; not to him that sits as a Judge; and in Psalm.
25.9. and the 14 verse, The secrets of the Lord shall be revealed to them that
stand in fear and reverence of his holy Majesty; Sequitur superbos ulter a
tergo Deus.
and for the want of this fear and reverence, and awe of this great Majesty of
God it is, that men do dare to be so bold, as to draw such conclusions from the
Word of God; for then are men only fit to hear and read the Word of God
aright, when the pride of their heart is brought down, and the swelling of
their reason is brought down and humbled, when carnal reason, and natural
affections are laid aside, and brought under by some afflictions: a man that is
under the hand of God, in some affliction, in some great distress, then he is
most tractable, and then he will hear you, when at another time he will kick
and spurn against you, in time of health, and scorn the Minister and the Word;
but in time of sickness, now send for the Minister, now call him, then they
are fitted to receive his counsel: therefore learn to lay aside all pride of
heart.

Secondly, Direct. 2.
we must come to the hearing and reading of the Word of God with a heart lift
up unto God in prayer; as we must come empty of pride, so also lifted up in
prayer; never touch the Book of God, but lift up thy heart unto God in prayer,
to give thee a right understanding of his Word, not as many do rush upon the
book of God carelessly, and never pray unto God to guide them in the truth of
it: for no man does know the will of God, unless God gives his Spirit; the
book of God is a sealed book, and a book locked up, impossible it is to
understand it, unless God by his Spirit open it, 1 Cor. 2.11. No man knows
the mind of man, but the spirit of man; so no man knows Gods spiritual mind,
but his Spirit: a man may be diligent in hearing and reading the Word of God,
and yet understand it grossly, because the Lord does not guide him, and because
he prays not unto God to be guided, and directed in the hearing of it;
remember to lift up thy heart unto God in prayer, for want of which, many hear
and read from time to time, and after much reading and hearing are never the
better. It may be thou art a man of great knowledge and wisdom in the world, yet
in comparison of Gods wisdom in his Word, thou art a fool, and must cast away
all conceit of thy own righteousness, and understanding, and come trembling to
the Word of God, and not read it (as many do) to jest and make themselves merry
at it: shall the Lion roar, and none of the beasts tremble? shall the Word of
God be read, and we jest at it for our merriment? Oh rather labor to come with
an humble heart, and hearty prayer unto God, and then thou shall be kept from
perverting the Word of God.

What shall we say then? is there unrighteousness with God? God forbid.
IN these words our Apostle stops the mouths of carnal Reasoners, What
shall we say then? is there unrighteousness with God? is therefore God unequal
and partial? is God therefore unjust in his dealing? no, says the Apostle, far
be it from us. You see then the Apostle does utterly disclaim that direful
conclusion, that because God hated Esau, and loved Jacob, and that freely,
without any respect to the one or the other, or any thing foreseen in them;
therefore God is unjust and partial, and unequal in his doings with men; this
the Apostle renounceth and disclaimeth. I will not here, as some would do, run
out into the common place of Gods Justice, to an extravagant discourse, and
stand to avouch, that God is just, holy, and righteous, and we are so to
acknowledge him; But keeping my self, as near as possibly I can, to the
Apostles meaning, and not to fly out to that which is not pertinent to the
text. And hence note we thus much,

Is it not lawful for me to do what I will with mine own? this is Gods
prerogative, and peculiarly belongs unto him; so in the 15 verse of this
Chapter, he will have mercy on whom he will have mercy: The will of God is the
sovereign cause of all righteousness, and the primary cause of all things
holy, just, and good, because God wills it; though it seem harsh and hard to
flesh and blood: The things amongst men, willed by men, must first be good and
just, and then willed of them; but what God wills, it is just, and holy, and
righteous, because he wills it, it is far otherwise with God then with men;
for the decree of God is absolute, free, and eternal decree, is holy, just, and
righteous, willed by God, because it is the decree and will of God, who cannot
decree unjustly, or will amiss.

And by this we must learn to acknowledge, What shall we say, Is there
unrighteousness with God? and then the matter of election, and reprobation,
would not seem so harsh and hard to flesh and blood. And so we should make the
Apostle by this kind of reasoning to fight with a shadow, and to combat with
the air, and to go about to prevent an objection, that no man of reason would
make. No beloved, we need not to make these conclusions, or to frame such a lie
for the Lord, Job 13.7. so to go about to make excuses to clear Gods Justice,
that God did decree to save such as should believe, and to damn such as should
not believe; But we may safely and boldly affirm it for certain truth, that
Gods eternal, free, and absolute decree, both of election and reprobation, it
is just, holy, and righteous; yea though God has from everlasting, and before
the world was, (not from the fall of Adam, as some imagine,) freely out of his
mere good will and pleasure, purposed and decreed the salvation of some, and
the rejection of others, and their casting off for ever; yet we need not seek
to find out starting holes to defend Gods Justice, for he is the sovereign
Lord, and may do with his own what he will, and no man can call him to account,
and say, Why do thou so? therefore let us still lay aside our carnal
reasonings, and humble our souls to the truth of God.

Observe.
Again, Observe we further, the Apostle having here said, Is God therefore
unrighteous? because he loved Jacob, and hated Esau, freely, nothing moving him
thereunto? I say, having delivered this, the Apostle presently subjoyneth a
flat denial, and he says, no, God is not herein unjust; and he does not deny
it barely, but his denial is with a detestation, with an abhorring of it,
(absit). God forbid: he does not say, Is there unrighteousness with God? no,
but he joyneth, God forbid. Oh far be it from us to infer such a conclusion, to
bring in such an absurd inference: hence then observe we thus much from the
Apostles manner of denial, viz.

abhor that which is evil; not only abstain from it, but abhor evil, that is,
evil in opinion, and also any moral evil whatsoever; yea the word (...), is
very significant and weighty, it is as much as if the Apostle had said, Let
error, evil in opinion, or any manner of evil whatsoever, be hateful and
odious to thee as hell it self, so ponderous is the word; and in Psalm. 119.113.
says David, I hate vain inventions, they are odious and hateful unto me: and
in verse 128. therefore I esteem all thy precepts to be right, and I hate every
false way: and in Psalm. 139.21. says David, Do not I hate them that hate thee,
O Lord? yea in the 22. verse he says, he hates them with a perfect, and
unfeigned hatred: so also in 2 Thessalonians. 2.10. Receive the truth with love unto
it; and by the rule of contraries, Detest errors with hatred to them,
especially those that are against some fundamental truth of God, hate them
unfeignedly

these six things does the Lord hate, yea seven does his soul abhor: yea it is
worth our marking, in the 17. and 18. verses, God does not only hate sin,
says Solomon, but he hates the very members of the body which are the
instruments of sin; as the haughty eye, and lying tongue; he does not only
hate the pride, and the lie, but the haughty eye, and the lying tongue, and the
heart of wickedness, and the feet running to mischief; so odious and hateful
is error and sin to God: therefore we must herein endeavor to be like our
heavenly Father, and not only disclaim error and sin, but hate it with a
loathing detestation, like unto God our Father, yea hate the members of sin.

if there were but a moderation, and a yielding of both sides; this is
abominable and odious to make this composition of Religion; for why? Against
Tolleration.
the Religion we hold and profess, it is grounded upon the holy truth of God,
revealed unto us out of the holy Scriptures: and the Popish Religion is
contrary unto it, and does overturn, and throw down, the truth of God, yea it
does overturn all the Articles of our Christian Religion, in their tenants, and
therefore in the 2 Corinthians. 6.14. says the Apostle, What fellowship is between
light, and darkness? What agreement between us and the Papists, in matter of
Religion? therefore we must hate their religion.

And to stir us up unto this duty, there being never more need then now,
wherein many men of unstable, and unsanctified hearts, begin to link and
incline to Popery; let us therefore know, that we do not truly disclaim and
hate Popish religion, unless we hate them, and account their Positions as
dangerous, and such as will destroy our souls, if we cleave unto them:
howsoever some say they cannot endure Popery, yet assuredly unless they hate
it with unfeigned hatred, they do not aright detest them: for when men begin to
speak favorably of Papistry, and of Anabaptisme, and of other errors, and say
they have some truth in them, and they begin to like of them; these men do not
as they ought to do, they do not hate and dislike errors and false doctrines,
but assuredly a thousand to one, in short time they will be ensnared, and
entangled with the position of Popery or Anabaptisme, as the holy Prophet said
to the people, 1 King. 18.21. how long will ye halt between two opinions? this
is not to go out in the right profession of the truth with unfeigned hearts,
assuredly, he that loves God, and good things, will hate evil; as, he that
loves chastity, will abhor uncleanness, and filthiness; he that loves just
dealing, will hate cosening: he that makes conscience of the Sabbath, cannot
endure the profanation of the Sabbath; so he that loves the truth, will
disclaim all errors, as Popery, and Anabaptisme, and such like foolish
opinions; as if a man see a Toad, a Serpent, or Snake, he will fly from it, it
being poysonful, and hurtful, and not receive that for his nutriment, which he
knows will procure his detriment.

And therefore let us never rest until we find a detestation in us of Popery
and all other errors, and then we shall be sure to stand fast in the true
Religion, in the midst of Popery: if Popery should come, (as God forbid it
should,) we might by our hatred of it, be kept from embracing it: therefore
labor to hate and detest it.

VERSE 15. For he said unto Moses, I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy:
And I will show compassion to whom I will show compassion.


THe blessed Apostle having in the Verses precedent given us a general denial
of that gross conclusion which some might infer upon his speech, (that because
God loved Jacob, and hated Esau, freely, without any respect had to any good in
Jacob, or evil in Esau, therefore God is partial, and unequal in his dealing,)
he having I say denied this most emphatically with an Absit, God forbid. Now
our Apostle subjoyneth a more special denial and confutation, and refutation of
that absurd and gross conclusion, in the 15, 16, 17, and 18. verses of this
Chapter. In the 15. and 16. verses, the Apostle shows, that God is not
unjust, in his free choice of some particular persons amongst men, to life and
salvation; and in the 17. and 18. verses, he shows God is not unjust in his
free and absolute rejection of others. In the 15. verse he clears God from
injustice by a testimony of Scripture; and in the 16. verse he does conclude
and determine that point. Now touching the testimony of Scripture in the 15.
verse, first, the Apostle makes known by whom, and to whom, it was uttered and
spoken. Then secondly, he puts down the words of the testimony, I will show
mercy to whom I will show mercy, and I will have compassion on whom I will have
compassion. This testimony of Scripture is here brought by the Apostle, as a
proof of this, that though God did freely, from everlasting, (out of his own
mere good pleasure, nothing else moving him thereunto,) choose some men to life
and salvation, and reject others, yet was he most just and righteous: and
herein lies the weight and force of his Argument, That God has free and
absolute power to show mercy unto whom he will, and to deny his mercy unto whom
he will; therefore he is not unjust and unrighteous in choosing some to
salvation, and rejecting others to damnation: And thus you see the scope of the
words, and general matter of this Verse.

Now the words of this 15. verse are somewhat to be examined, For he says to
Moses, (that is, God said unto Moses) I will have mercy on whom I will have
mercy, and show compassion to whom I will show compassion. These words, they
are the words of God to Moses, in Exodus 33.19. there we find these very words.
And the occasion of the uttering of these words to Moses, was, upon Moses
request unto God, that he might see Gods glory, in the 18. verse of that
Chapter. And God promised unto him, that he would show him his back-parts; and
so in part yielded unto his request: and then he subjoyneth these very words,
as a reason why he would show that favor to Moses, and to no other man; Not
for any merit, or any worthiness in Moses himself; but out of his own mercy, I
will have mercy on whom I will have mercy, I will show this kindness unto
thee, (to see the back parts of my glory,) because I will have mercy on whom I
will. Now by mercy, in this text of the Apostle, and the other of Moses, we are
to understand the act, the exercise, and work of mercy; and by compassion, the
act, the exercise, and work of compassion, and pity, or rather tender love; for
the word compassion, comes from a radix, Dilexit. (...)
that signifies to love with such a tender affection, as mothers do love their
children naturally, such love as the woman expressed to her child before Solomon.
And this mercy and pity being attributed, ascribed, and given to God, it
signifies either a propension, a readiness of his Divine will, to help those
that be in misery, (which is the essential, and natural property of mercy in
God,) Or else it signifies the act, and exercise, and the work of Gods mercy
extended, and reached out unto his people; and so we are to understand it here,
not the property of mercy which is natural and essential in God, but the extent
of it to the creature. And when the Lord says, I will have mercy and
compassion on whom I will, his meaning is, the act, and exercise, and work of
my mercy, and compassion, and tender love, it is ever by me extended, reached
out, and exercised, to those amongst men, to whom I will exercise, extend, and
reach it out, and that merely and only of my own free will, nothing in man, or
coming by man, moving me to do it: so then thus briefly conceive we the meaning
of the Apostle in this verse, God says unto Moses, in Exodus 33.19. upon Moses
request unto him, (God promising out of his favor to him to show him his back
parts,) that the act, and exercise, and work of my mercy, is ever by me
extended and reached out to those amongst men to whom I will extend and reach
it out, and that merely and only of my own good pleasure, nothing in man,
coming from man, moving me to reach it out, I will have mercy on whom I will.

Come we now to matter of Doctrine. And beloved I cannot pass it by, without
noting, that the Apostle here alleging a text of Scripture, uttered by Moses,
says God spoke it, so says God to Moses: whence it is clear,

That the Scripture, the Word of God, the written Word of God, God says unto
Moses. Indeed I grant, that God spoke all the words of the ten Commandments,
after a more special, and peculiar manner, Exodus 20. God spoke all these words,
and said: but yet the whole Scripture is Gods speaking Word, and Gods Oracle,
yea his lively Oracle, not a dead or dumb Oracle, as the Holy Ghost says, Heb.
4.12. the Word of God is lively, and mighty in operation, sharper then any two
edged sword; a quickening word, and a word of power: and hence it is the
Prophet Esaias sends the people of his time to enquire of God, Esaias 8.19, 20.
says he, should not a people enquire of their God? then presently he
adjoyneth, To the Law, and to the Testimony, there you shall hear God speak,
and know his mind.

Now if any do object that of the Apostle, in the 1 Cor. 7.12. (Reliquis autem
ego dico, non Dominus) and to the remnant I say, and not the Lord, It seems
therefore the Apostle speaks here, and not the Lord?

I answer, the meaning of the place is, (Et ipse Spiritum dei habeam,) and I
have the Spirit of God; I speak it in the name of the Lord: So then this is a
truth, that the Scripture is the speaking Word of God, it is Gods speaking
word, he utters his voice his Church in the Word.

Application; Wickedly therefore deal the Papists in this respect, or a general
Convention, or the Pope speaking Judicially out of his chair, setting him up as
a Judge in all matters of controversy, refusing the Scripture as insufficient,
and calling it dead Ink, and a dumb Judge. Thus they show themselves to be
utter enemies of the holy written Word of God, and seek to crush the authority
of it, and to set up the voice of a sinful man, the son of perdition, the limb
of the devil, over the Church, and to disclaim the voice of the living God
speaking to us in his holy Scripture. But we must learn to acknowledge and to
reverence the Scripture, as Gods speaking Word, and the written Word of God to
be that which God utters to his people; and not say as some ignorant people
do, Oh if God would speak unto us from heaven, in his own immediate voice, and
if Christ would come upon the earth and preach unto us, how attentive would we
be, we would not fall asleep then at Sermons. But if thou would know what
God says to his people, then come to the written Word of God. It is folly and
madness in the foolish Familists, (and others of that sect,) that they depend
upon Revelations besides the written Word of God: but (not to contend with
them) to apply it to our selves.

Against superstitious observation of days.
because men tell us such a day shall be such and such disasters, and such a
day such fearful signs and wonders, thunderings and lightenings, and such and
such direful wonders shall come to pass: yea, there is a day of special note
amongst ignorant people now at hand, namely St. Swithin's day, if it rain on
that day, it will rain more or less forty days after: these are dotages of
idle brains, and are suggested by a lying spirit, even by the spirit of the
devil; whereas the Lord says, Esaias 8.20. To the law, and to the testimony, if
men speak not according to that, there is no truth in them, they are lying
spirits; and I may justly say to such, as Abraham said to the rich man in hell,
Luke 16.29. thy friends have Moses and the Prophets, let them hear them: so we
have the writings and the words of the Apostles and holy Prophets of Jesus
Christ, and God speaks unto us therein; there is the Oracle of God, and we
must give leave and liking to them, and not upon the fancies of men, that say,
such and such a day shall be great disasters. Oh but (say some) these things
sometimes come to pass. It may be so in Judgment they come to pass, because
men give ear unto them: what says the Lord by Moses, Deuteronomy. 13.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
If a lying prophet, or a dreamer of dreams, do tell you of strange things, and
they come to pass, believe him not; for the Lord does it to try you, and it is
the just hand of God to bring it upon you, because we give ear, and liking to
them.

Again, observe we the Apostle brings these words of Moses, I will have mercy
on whom I will have mercy, to prove, that God was not unjust in loving Jacob,
and hating Esau; he having denied this with a God forbid, he subjoyneth
presently, (as a reason to prove it) For he says to Moses, I will have mercy
on whom I will have mercy. A man would think this were a strange kind of
clearing God from injustice, is not God therefore unjust, when he loves Jacob,
and hates Esau without cause? because he says, I will have mercy because I
will; has God no other reason to give? But we must learn to acknowledge, that
this is the sovereign power of the great God of heaven and earth, that his will
must be reason enough to rest upon; and this is the true obedience that is
acceptable and pleasing to his holy Majesty.

cannot comprehend the depth of it. And the reason and ground is,

Because it is the very nature of the Will of God; he does all things He has
predestined us to be adopted through Christ Jesus in himself, (nothing out of
himself) according to the good pleasure of his will.

Again secondly, the will of God is the square and rule of all goodness

How is the good will and pleasure of God just and holy in respect of sin; for
he does appoint it, else it could not be in the world?

It is true, sin could not be in the world, unless God did appoint it,
(peccatum) sin, but as it is a pupishment for some evil foregoing; and so he
makes it to serve for the manifestation of the glory of his Justice: in this
respect the being of sin is good, and so God, who is able to bring light out of
darkness, good out of evil, he does righteously and willingly permit evil.

Upon this ground we must learn to lay aside all reasonings of the flesh,

For he said to Moses, I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy. And I will
have compassion on whom I will have compassion.
I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy, A blasphemous Heretic did hold,
That mercy was not a natural property in God, but an act of the will of God;
Because that Moses brings in the Lord, saying, I will have mercy upon whom I
will. And thus he reasons, God does alwaie suse his natural properties, such
as be essential in God, they are in exercise, and he uses them continually;
but (says he) mercy whereby God does offer grace unto sinners, and pardon of
sin unto man, is not always exercised and showed forth, as namely, to all
sinners impenitent. And the Apostle affirms, that God has mercy upon whom he
will: And so the Apostle does limit, and restrain the mercy of God, to them to
whom the Lord vouchsafes mercy, and therefore mercy is not a natural property
in God.



Again, it is false, and utterly untrue, that this heretic affirms, that all
the natural properties of God are ever in use to us for justice, mercy,
goodness and power, and the like, be essential and natural in God, and yet God
does extend and reach them out to whom he pleases, according to his own
purpose, when he will, and where he will, and how it pleases him; so that it
is false and blasphemous to say, that mercy is not natural, and essential in
God, for the testimony of Scripture contradicts it; in Exodus 34.6. the Lord
there proclaims himself in this manner, The Lord, the Lord, strong, merciful,
gracious, and abundant in goodness, and in truth: yea, this might be
illustrated by many testimonies of Scripture, but I forbear it in so pregnant
and plain a truth.

And come we then to that which may be truly concluded from these words, I will
have mercy upon whom I will, And compassion upon whom I will: These words being
understood, (as heretofore I have explained them,) That the act, the exercise,
and the work of Gods mercy, and pity and compassion, it is ever by God extended
to them to whom he pleases: Hence then we are given to understand thus much,

Pater misericordiarum, the Father of mercies, showing, that God is the Father,
and begetter of mercy, and that mercy and love are as it were his children,
coming from him: and in Joh. 1.15. says the Evangelist, of him we receive
grace for grace, one grace to another. And Christ Jesus says, Luke 10.12.
Father, I confess, Lord of heaven and earth, thou have hid these things, (even
the things of thy Gospel,) from the wise and prudent, and revealed them unto
babes, even so because it pleased thee. It was so of thy good will and
pleasure, nothing moving thee thereunto, so that the reason, why the Lord does
vouchsafe mercy unto any, it is the free will and favor of God, nothing else
moving him.

But happily then some may say to me, It seems not to be true,

To this I answer; that these two things are subordinate, for this is the will
of him that sent me, that every one that sees the son, and believes in him,
should not perish, but have everlasting life.

Now if any do object that of the Prophet, Esaias 43.25. I am he that has put
away all thine iniquities for mine own sake: therefore it seems it is not for
Christ's sake, but for his own sake, as the Lord professes.

I answer,

This first meets with a false conclusion of Arminius, and of the Arminians,
contraria, and contraria, sine medio; That Gods will is the cause of his mercy
to man, and that God shows mercy because of their faith, virtue, and
qualification in good things, they are two opposites; but to leave them.

Farther, this being so, That Gods mere Will is the cause of his mercy of his
Spirit, and changed my Affections: whereas before I had no mind of heaven, no
desire of salvation, until he made me see what I have not; he has not dealt
thus with all: many thousands there be that go on without this touch of heart
and remorse of conscience, without this powerful work of grace, they go on in
their sins, though they hear the Word from Sabbath to Sabbath; what was I
better then they? surely nothing at all by Nature: Oh then how am I bound unto
God, nothing moving the Lord to show mercy unto me, but only his mere good
will and pleasure; how am I bound to magnify the goodness of God? And indeed,
this is that glory of the free mercy of God, which the Lord would have us to
yield unto him; he would have us to yield unto him this glory of his free
mercy: and how pleasing this is to God, and how the Lord esteems of this
magnifying of his mercy, may appear by that description, Exodus 34 6, 7. The
Lord, the Lord, strong, merciful, gracious, slow to anger, and abundant in
goodness and truth, Reserving mercy for thousands forgiving iniquity,
transgression and sin, etc. Thus the Lord does proclaim himself, for this is
that wherein the Lord does take delight, to have the glory of his free mercy
given unto him. And this is the name by which the Lord Jesus will be known to
his Elect, and chosen in all ages. I am a merciful God, this is the name by
which I will be magnified, and in which he delights that we should give him
the glory of his mercy, that we can say, when the Lord vouchsafes mercy unto
us, that it proceeds only from the Lords free will. And know, that it is not
more vile pride in a Beggar, to attribute the alms that is given unto him,
unto his own deserts, then it is for us to ascribe any the least mercy that God
vouchsafes unto us to our own worthiness: it is monstrous pride in a beggar,
to ascribe the alms that are given him, to his own deservings; But it is far
more for thee to ascribe and attribute that to thy self, which is freely given
of God: Let us therefore consider, that every rag we have, it is of the free
mercy of God: Oh did proud persons consider this, they would not so gorgiously
adorn themselves, and disgrace the holy profession of God: if they did consider
they have nothing but from the free Fountain of Gods mercy, nothing moving him,
they would not be such careless fellows in their careless bands, which
shows their carelessness, as they be.

quod scripsi, scripsi, what I have written, I have written; so may the Lord
say, I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy: Mal. 3.16. I am Jehovah, I
change not: Mercy is mine, and who shall take it from me? shall the devil? no,
nor all the powers in hell, can hinder or frustrate the will of God: Oh then
consider to thy comfort, God has reached out his mercy to thee, and he will
never take it from thee, for he has said, I will have mercy on whom I will.

VERSE 16. So then, it is not in him that wills, nor in him that runs, But
God that shows mercy.


THe Apostle in this Verse determines the point touching Gods Justice, in his
free choice of some particulars amongst men to life and salvation. In the Verse
foregoing, he proves it by the speech of God unto Moses, that God has free
liberty, and absolute power, to show mercy unto whom he will, and compassion to
whom he will, without respect had to any thing in them. Now the Lord having
thus described his showing of mercy merely to depend upon his good will and
pleasure; hereupon our Apostle in this 16. verse, does bring in a consectarie,
and infer this conclusion, that therefore Gods eternal election of some to life
and salvation, is not to be ascribed unto the will, or unto the works of any
man, but unto Gods free grace in showing of mercy, So then it is not in him
that wills, nor in him that runs, but in God that shows mercy.

In this 16. verse the general things are two; First, a removal of that which
is not the cause of Gods eternal election of some to life and salvation; and
what is that? man's willing, and man's running, it is not in him that wills,
nor in him that runs.

Secondly, the describing, and the assigning, of the only true and proper
cause of Gods choosing of some to salvation; and that is Gods showing of mercy,
but in him that shows mercy.

Now I will lay forth the sense and meaning of the words of this verse.

So then, (or So therefore) it is not in him that wills nor in him that
runs, (...).
] In the text Original, these words, it is, are not to be found, but they are
necessarily to be supplied, So then it is not in him that wills, nor in him
that runs; what is that that is not in him that wills, nor in him that
runs? surely that which the Apostle had spoken of, Gods eternal election of
some to life and salvation, that is not in him that wills nor runs: Some
do here understand Jacobs willing and running particularly, but by their favor
that is too narrow, and too strict; for the purpose of the Apostle is more
large, and general, these words being a conclusion of the verse foregoing, I
will have mercy on him, on whom I will. And this word him, must have as large a
sense, as the words in the verses foregoing, yet Jacob is not to be excluded,
but rather included; and so the meaning is, it is not in Jacob, or in any other
man, that wills or runs.

in him that wills,] That is, in him that wills, and desires good, and
endeavors after that which is good, and that by the power and strength of
his mind, will, and affections, or any part, or all the powers and faculties of
his soul.

nor in him that runs,] We are not to understand as some do, Esau's running
only, no nor yet Jacobs running to the fold, to fetch a Kid for his father,
Genesis 27. but the meaning is, it is not in him that works, as it is not in him
that wills, or desires good; so it is not in him that works any good
thing, as David says, Psalm. 119.32. I will run the way of thy Commandments,
when thou have set my heart at large; then when thou have set my heart free,
that is pend up by reason of corruption; I will do all that is required in thy
Laws and Commandments: so by running, we are to understand a working of good.

But in him that shows mercy.] That is, in Gods mere mercy, and will, in
vouchsafing and reaching out his gracious hand. So then thus briefly conceive
we the meaning of the Apostle, as if the Apostle had said,

So then, or So therefore, that which we have hitherto spoken of, and treated
on, touching Gods election of Jacob, or any particular person to life and
salvation in heaven. It is not either in Jacob, or in any other man, that
wills, or desires good, or endeavors after good, by the power and
strength of all the powers and faculties of his soul, of his mind, will, and
affections, and all the rest of his powers, neither is it in Jacob, or any
other man, working or doing good things, no not in any one's running the right
way of Gods Commandments and holiness, neither in him that wills, nor in
him that runs, but it is in Gods mere mercy, and free will, only out of
Gods reaching out his hand of mercy to any one; thus understand we the words.

Come we now to matter of observation. And first of all observe we, the Apostle
here brings in this sixteenth verse as a conclusion upon the fifteenth verse:
and the Apostle does here apply that which he had set down in the verse
foregoing, by way of consequence, by way of conclusion, and application, (So
therefore) having cited that testimony of Scripture of God unto Moses, I will
have mercy on whom I will: thereupon in this verse our Apostle draws out and
brings in a consequence to that purpose, So then it is not in him that
wills, nor in him that runs, but God that shows mercy; thus you see the
Apostles Application: so then the Observation is this,

Speak these things, and not only so, but exhort, and rebuke, with all long
patience and authority. And we find this has been the practice of the sound,
and faithful Preachers of God, in all ages, and times; yea we have the example
of God himself, as we may instance in Amos 4.12. you shall find in the verses
foregoing the Lord makes known this for a truth, that he would bring his hand
upon them, and a heavy Judgment to attach them: He teaches them that Doctrine,
that they shall have a mighty plague, he does not rest there, but he labors
to make Use and Application of that general truth, and to bring it home to
their hearts, and to stir them to repentance; Because, says the Lord, I will
do this, therefore prepare to meet thy God, O Israel.



so he is called, 2 Cor. 4.1. a steward of the house of God, 1 Cor. 4.2. And it
is required of these stewards, that they be faithful, 2 Timothy 2.15. he must
divide the Word of truth aright. And he must carry himself as a steward, and
divide to every one his portion, he hat power to point out the Word into
several shives, and not deliver it in a whole lump, but distribute unto every
one what is meet. As Instructions to the ignorant, Comfort to the afflicted
Conscience, sharp rebukes and reprehensions to the dead and senseless hearted
in their sins, and Denunciations of Judgments to such as are secure, and
slightly pass by the Word of God; so that it is a certain truth, that the
Preachers of the Word must not only deliver general doctrines, of the holy
Word of God, but they must apply it to the hearers particularly, by drawing
from them matter of Application, not forcing it in by head and shoulders, but
such as naturally and aptly it will bear: How far those Preachers are from this
duty that only rest in delivering the general truth, and hover aloft in the
clouds, and never come down to Application, to apply it to their hearers; A man
may discern with half an eye. And I might bend my force to reprove them; but I
pass them by, having none of them to speak unto.

And first of all, take we notice of this by way of Application to this he that
believes, shall be saved, The Minister says, Believe thou Richard, Thomas,
William,) or whatsoever thou art, and thou shall surely be saved. And this is
as much as if Christ himself did preach by his immediate voice from heaven: For
why? Christ has committed to us Preachers the delivery of his Word, as
appears, 2 Cor. 5.19, 20. And therefore upon the ground of believing the
general promises of the Gospel, that such shall be saved, they may assure
themselves, they shall be saved. And a man finding faith in his heart and soul,
which he may prove by the fruits and works of faith, may thereupon assure
himself that he is in the number of Gods chosen, and shall certainly be saved.
And thereupon we may see it is but a cavil, that these enemies of God affirm,
That the Minister knows not whether a man belong to Gods election, or no,
when the Minister assures him not upon that ground, but upon the ground of
believing.

Is this so, that the Minister of the Word must not only make known unto them,
particularly, by way of instruction, by way of exhortation, and by way of just
reproof, as occasion is offered. And (beloved) men must not start aside, and
fret and chafe, and take on, when that the truth of the word is brought home
unto them, and applied particularly unto their souls, for the discovery of
their particular sins: as their pride and vanity of apparel, or whatsoever it
is, no, they must willingly, cheerfully, and readily yield and submit
themselves unto it, and not begin to quarrel with the affection of the
Preacher, and say, now he speaks out of malice and spleen, and distemper; and
now he speaks against such a man, as if the man and the sin were one
substance: the Minister cannot speak against pride, garishness of apparel, long
shagged hair; but he speaks against the man, as if the sin were the man, and
the man and the sin all one: therefore take heed of being in a chafe when thy
sins are reproved; And know, that if thou thus do fret and chafe, it is not
only an Argument that thou art possessed with a spiritual pride, and a
spiritual frenzy and madness; but it is a sign of Gods heavy wrath and judgment
ready to break out upon the souls of those men that so fret and chafe, and take
on in impatiency; It is an immediate forerunner of Gods heavy wrath, when men
cannot abide to be touched, or to have the word of God applied particularly,
they are impatient of reproof, and must have the Preacher to speak pleasing
things, and to daube them up with untempered mortar; this brings upon them
the hand of God unto remediless and easless Destruction, Esaias 30.13, 14. of
says the Prophet, this is a foul sin, when men teach their Preachers what to
say, it is like the breaking of a high wall; that is sudden, or like a bump in
a wall, a swelling knob, that upon a sudden falls down to the ground, and is
broken all to pieces like a Potters Vessel, that is broken in shivers, and
there is not so much left as to hold fire or water; so it is with those that
repine at the particular application of the word, their destruction is sudden.
Again, further consider we, if so be we be willing, and ready to hear the word
of comfort applied unto us, though it belongs not unto us, and we can
accumulate the preaching of the Gospel, and yet put away from us the word of
reproof, we cannot endure that; surely the Lord will then punish us in the same
kind, he will deal with us proportionably, and accordingly, he will make his
word of comfort (that we so eagerly take hold on) an unprofitable word, and a
word that shall yield no comfort unto us, when we lie on our sick beds and in
the hour of death, because we receive the word of comfort that appertains not
unto us, and put away the word of reproof, therefore he will make the word of
comfort comfortless. Consider (to this purpose) the example of Herod, Mark
6.20. Herod heard, and did many things gladly that John Baptist taught, and
found much comfort in hearing of him; but when John came to touch him, and to
hit him on the bare, his beloved sore, and pleasing Dalilah, that it was
unlawful for him to have his Brothers Wife; then Herod showed what he was, he
carried then a splenative mind, and a grudge in his heart, and never left till
he had his head: what, touch my beloved Sin? And the Lord dealt with Herod
accordingly; for those comforts that he appropriated to himself from John's
preaching were fruitless: he went on in his sin, and perished fearfully in his
folly. Then learn we to hear the word, not cunningly for our instruction and
comfort, but in matter of exhortation and just reproof, to be taxed for our
sins. And when the Lord meets with us in his word, for our particular sins,
to say it is his Mercy and his blessing, and to thank God that we have
Ministers which do not daube us with untempered mortar, and to say as David
says in Psalm. 141.5. let the righteous smite me, it is a precious balm, this
is the affection of the godly; but if we do accumulate to our selves the
comforts that are promulgated in the Gospel, and cast away, the reproofs
denounced against our sins, God will then make his comforts comfortless, and
they shall do us no good.

So then, it is not of him that wills, nor of him that runs, but of God
that shows mercy.
HAving formerly handled the reference this verse has with precedent matter, I
now come to handle the matter of the verse it self. And first of all we see,
the Apostle in the first place, does deny Gods eternal election of some to life
and salvation, to be in him that wills good, or works good. And so the
observation is briefly this:

That nothing in man, or done by man, coming from him, when the bountifulness
and love of God appears: then in the fifth verse he subjoyneth, not according
to the works of righteousness which we have done, but of his own mere mercy he
saved us: so that the willing or working of good, is not the cause of any man's
election, or salvation.

The Reason is, Because the goodness which is in the will of man, God has
chosen us in Christ, before the foundation of the world was laid, that we
should be holy: so that holiness follows Gods eternal election. And
therefore the willing, or working of good, by regenerate persons, cannot
possibly be the cause of Gods eternal election, it being the effect: for it is
not possible that the same thing can be the cause of the same thing, and the
effect in one and the self-same thing.

For Application: First of all this meets with that opinion which to some
men, that is, of their own free will. A foul and a gross error, directly
contrary to the truth now handled, and delivered unto us, if it be so, that the
possibility of the salvation of man, becomes profitable, to some particular
persons amongst men, from the freedom of their own will; surely then it must
needs be from the goodness of their own will, and from their well-willing. And
then a believing soul, a soul that shall be saved, and now is in the state of
grace, and of salvation, has ground to boast of in himself; And may lift up
himself, even against God himself in ostentation, and may thus magnify
himself, and say unto God, Lord that there was any possibility for me to be
saved, it was of thee, I freely confess it, but that this possibility proves
not an impossibility to me, as it does to many thousands in the world, that was
my own doing, I did that of my self. That I could be saved, the thanks of that
belongs to thee Lord; but that I am now in the state of grace and salvation:
And that I am sure to be saved, the thanks of that belongs to me my self. For
thy love to me was no more, then to them that are damned, till my willingness
to receive grace, and faith, put a difference between me and them, till the
inclination of my soul made me thine. I might for all thy love have been damned
eternally; as well as Cain, Judas, Saul, or any other Reprobate, had not I out
of the righteousness, and freeness of the freedom of my own will, chosen
grace: it was not of thee, Lord, but of my self, that I chose grace: And
damnation had been mine, had I not of my own free and voluntary will chosen and
used grace: Oh beloved is not this intolerable, and monstrous pride and
ambition, thus in ostentation, for a man to lift up himself against God? Is
this a thought, to come into any Christians heart, no, it is to be renounced:
For this boasting and ostentation does naturally follow upon this their tenent,
that they teach, the possibility of salvation comes from God, but that that
possibility comes into Act, is of man's free will: And this ought by every
Christian to be abjured, renounced, and cast away, as blasphemous, erroneous,
and false.

performance of the good things God requires of them, so far forth as they are
able to perform them, what a madness is this in them, thus to contradict
themselves? And beloved, (to apply it to our selves) are there not many amongst
us as mad as the Papists? foolish ignorant sots, That thus reason, I know I
must love God, above all, and my neighbor as my self: And if I do my best
endeavor to do these things, I hope God will be merciful unto me, and I shall
go to heaven: what is this, but to make our own working of good, the ground of
our salvation, and to ground the hope and certainty of heaven, upon their own
well doing? Their conclusion is so simple, and so foolish, that upon loving
God, and their Neighbor, they shall come to heaven, makes that the ground of
their salvation. It is true indeed, that the willing, and working of good,
coming from a right radix, they be the fruits, and assurances of our salvation;
but if we build our salvation upon our best good works: yea upon saving and
justifying faith, or the best good thing we can perform, we delude and deceive
our selves, neither our well willing, nor well working, is not the cause, or
ground of our salvation. It is the rule of Christ himself, Luke 17.10. when we
have done all that we can do, and all that the Lord has commanded us to do, if
it were possible, yet we must say we are unprofitable servants. And we must say
so, not only for modesty sake, as the Papists do absurdly gloss upon that
text; for modesty and humilities sake, (say they) we must say so: why beloved,
the Lord Jesus does not teach us to lie; And to say that which is not true, for
modesty sake; no, but he teaches us to speak the truth; for indeed it is so,
that for all our well willing, and well doing, we are unprofitable servants;
yet we must take heed that we do not hereupon cast off all care, and endeavor
of well doing, no, we are carefully, and conscionably to do all that we can do,
that is good. And know, that working of good, coming from the root of saving
and sanctifying faith, it is profitable, and necessary to heaven: for it is the
beaten high way, to eternal life and salvation; it is a testimony of our
obedience, and thankfulness to God for his mercy. And it is a means to set
forth the glory of God, and makes much for the illustration of it. And it is a
proper mark of a true Christian, it is a fruit ever flowing from saving and
justifying faith; and it is a necessary antecedent, of the promises of eternal
glory in heaven: yet if we do advance this doing of good, beyond this strain,
to merit salvation, we do built it upon a rotten, and unsound foundation.

Now further observe we, the Apostle makes an opposition between man's willing
and running, and Gods showing mercy. Hence I might note these particulars:

First of all, that Gods mercy is the sole, and whole, and all-sufficient cause
of man's election, and not man's well willing, or working good, either foreseen,
(as the Arminians teach,) or the present act and being.

And secondly, that Gods free grace, and the merit or works of men, do not
concur and meet together, in man's salvation, as the Papists teach. But these
things I have handled before. And hence note we in a word thus much. In that
the Apostle says, that the eternal election and salvation of some amongst men,
is not in men themselves, but in God that shows mercy. Hence observe,

That the eternal salvation of men is laid up in the merciful, powerful, life
is bid with Christ in God. And hence God is said to be the Father of glory,
Ephesians. 1.17. because glory is as it were begotten of him. And in 1 Timothy 6.5.
the Apostle says, he only dwells in immortality. The Lord which has
eternal life and glory, he does give it to whom he will, and he will give it in
his due time, and therefore he will certainly give it to his chosen.



VERSE 17. For the Scripture says unto Pharaoh, Even for this same purpose,
have I raised thee up, that I might show my power in thee, And that my name
might be declared through all the earth.

Therefore has he mercy on whom he will have mercy; And whom he will he
hardens.


IN these two Verses the Lord shows by the Apostle, that he is just in
casting off some men, and rejecting of them. The Apostle having cleared God
from the imputation of injustice, in choosing some to life and salvation, and
passing over others, out of his own free will, though they were all one in
regard of nature: because the Lord has absolute power, and free liberty, to
show compassion to whom he will. Now the Apostle clears God from being
unjust, in rejecting of some particular persons of equal estate and condition
with the elect in regard of nature, every way equal unto them in themselves.
And the Apostle proves the Lord not to be unjust in so doing, by a testimony
of Scripture, fetching a particular example to that purpose, namely, the
example of Pharaoh; (The Scripture says to Pharaoh,) And thus our Apostle
reasons in this place, God dealt justly with Pharaoh, in withholding his
grace from him, in hardening his heart, thereby manifesting his Reprobation;
for God hardens none but Reprobates, and thereby manifesting his rejecting:
And why did the Lord deal justly, namely for the declaration of his own great
power, and of his own great name, throughout the whole world. The Lords
hardening of Pharaoh, tended to this end, to show, and to set forth the power
of God, and to set forth the great name of the Lord throughout all the world:
Pharaohs Reprobation tended to the glory of God, therefore it is not unjust
with God to reject any, and to leave them to their own wills: (his glory being
dear unto himself.) This is the sum and substance of this 17 verse.

Now the general things laid before us in this 17 verse, they are two: First, a
preface unto the testimony alleged by the Apostle, in these words, For the
Scripture says unto Pharaoh. Wherein we may consider the authority of the
testimony; a testimony written; the Scripture says it. The second general
thing is the testimony it self, the words of Scripture, applied by the Apostle,
That I might show my power in thee, and my name might be declared thooughout
all the world: In which consider two things: First, Gods act, his stirring, and
raising up Pharaoh. And then the end of that act, which is the manifestation of
Gods power in Pharaoh: And the declaration of the great and glorious name of
God, throughout all the world. Come we now to the sense and meaning of the
words.

For the Scripture says unto Pharaoh,] By Scripture, which is a general term,
we are to understand the holy Scripture, the written Word of God, Gods speaking
in the Scripture.

for this same purpose have I stirred thee up] raised, or appointed thee: for
so it is diversely translated, being all one in sense. These words we find in
Exodus 9.16. Now how the Lord stirred and raised up Pharaoh, there is the
difficulty. And there be different and diverse opinions touching the meaning of
this phrase and sentence. Some do understand it, of Pharaohs raising up, and
advancing to the Kingdom; For this cause have I raised thee up to the Kingdom.
And this is the Annotation of the Remists, upon this very text; but the Apostle
has a further reach then this: And some there be, that understand it of the
keeping, and preserving of Pharaoh alive in the midst of the ten plagues of
Egypt; that he might drown him into the bottom of the Sea: but this cannot be
the meaning of the text, because many other of the people besides Pharaoh, was
kept by God from those plagues. Diverse other opinions there be, touching this
phrase and form of speech here used by the Apostle, I will not trouble you with
the variety of them. But the best way to find out the right meaning of this
place, is arightly to consider that place, and the Circumstances of it, in the
ninth of Exodus, 13, 14, 15. verses. God bids Moses go unto Pharaoh, and to let
his people go, that they might serve him; and withal he bids him say unto
Pharaoh, that he would send upon him all his plagues, and all his punishments,
even upon thy very heart and soul; upon thy servants, thy people, that thou
may know there is no God like unto me, I will stretch out my hand, and smite
thee with my pestilence, and make thee to perish even from the face of the
earth.

And in the seventeenth verse of the same Chapter; Notwithstanding, these
threatenings of plagues brought against him, yet Pharaoh still exalted himself
against God and against his people, and he would not let them go. Now if we
mark (between these two things) between the threatenings of these plagues, and
the taxing of Pharaoh, for his exalting himself against God comes in this
sentence in the 16. verse. And indeed for this very cause have I stirred thee
up; I have sent Moses and threatened my plagues against thee, and yet thou will
not let my people go: Now these things being well considered; this coming
between the menacing of judgment, and the taxing of his exalting against God:
these two well compared yield unto us this signification for this cause, this
very purpose have I withheld my grace from thee; and I have hardened thy heart
as a fruit following thy rejection, and for this very cause have I cast thee
off, and made thee a flintie heart even for this very purpose have I caused
thee to rebel against my threatening denounced by my servant Moses, and have
made it come to pass, that thou shall not prosper nor profit by my plagues and
judgments; and this is the right sense and meaning of the words. Now beloved,
if any think it to harsh and hard to say that God does stir up the wicked heart
of Pharaoh, to rebel against God and against Moses sent unto him; and that God
made him not to profit by his plagues and judgments; Let that man that
thinks it too harsh to ascribe this unto God, consider, that God did not
infuse, or put any sinful motion to evil, into the heart of Pharaoh, but he
only inclined that heart of his to rebel, and that in his secret and just
will, James 1.13. God tempts no man unto evil, but in his secret and just
Judgment, did incline the heart of Pharaoh: And withal consider in the second
place, that the Lord did order that rebellious and treacherous will of Pharaoh;
to what end he himself had appointed, the Lord did incline it to rebel to the
glory of his own name, and to the setting forth of his power; so that this
being considered, that the Lord inclined his heart, so as that his Destruction
might be to the glory of his great name; and these things will not then be so
harsh, or hard: for the Lord infused no evil into him, but his heart being
corrupt of himself, he did incline and order it and dispose that wicked will of
Pharaoh, unto the end to which God had appointed; namely, to his destruction,
and Gods glory: as for example in Jer. 51.11. we read in that Text, that the
Lord raised up the spirit of the Medes, against Babel; and it is a certain
truth the King of the Medes sinned in that expedition, and in that action of
his against the King of Babel; yet it was done in the vengeance of the Lord.
And so this is to be understood, that I might show my power in thy destruction,
and the force of me and of my power might be expressed in thy destruction, both
of thee, and of thine, in the bottom of the Sea: And that others also might
see, and take notice of my power, Exodus 14.31. when the Egyptians were drowned
in the Sea, then Israel saw the mighty power of God. It was made apparent unto
Israel.

And that my name might be declared throughout all the earth.] That is, the
praise and glory of my power, and my Justice, appearing in the destruction of
thee so mighty a King, might be published, and might be spread abroad in every
part and corner of the world, and might be every where spoken of in every part
and corner of the world.

So then thus conceive the meaning of the Apostle in these words, as if he had
said;

For God said in his written Word, in his holy Scripture unto Pharaoh, Exodus
9.16. For this very cause, for this very purpose, have I withheld my grace and
hardened thy heart; (a fruit following the rejection of thee:) and I have
stirred up my messengers to come to deliver my judgments unto thee, and have
caused thee not to profit by my judgments and my messengers, and I have caused
thee to harden thy heart and to exalt thy self against me, that I might make
thee to see and feel the force of my hand, and of all my power in the bottom
of the Sea; and that all other my people and all in the world may see and take
notice of thy destruction, and my power, in destroying so mighty a king.

Come we now to matter of Observation and Doctrine; and first of all observe
the Apostle, here he speaks and alleges Scripture (as he had done
heretofore, and as he does frequently and often in this Chapter) to ground the
matter that he has in hand upon the Scriptures, hence follows this
conclusion.

Thou have known the holy Scriptures of a child, which are able to make thee
wise unto salvation, through the faith of Jesus Christ; For the whole Scripture
is given by inspiration, and is profitable to teach, to improve, to correct in
righteousness, and to make the man of God absolute and perfect in every good
work; it is able to make a man entire in godliness, I know the Cavil of the
Papists against this clear evidence of Scripture (for they seek to illude the
evidence of this Text in this manner. It is true indeed (say they) the Apostle
says, the Scripture is profitable, but where do you find he says it is
sufficient? A mere shift, and easily answered; for the Apostle says not
barely, that the Scripture is profitable (and there stay himself and go no
further) but he does point out unto us to what use it serves, it is
profitable; and it is profitable to to teach, to instruct, and to improve, and
to make a man absolute and entire in every good work: Is it not then
sufficient? (a foolish cavil) so in the 15 verse of the same Chapter, says
the Apostle, the Scripture is able to make a man wise unto salvation; Is not
the Scripture then sufficient? it is able to bring a man unto Heaven, and yet
(say the Papists) it is not sufficient, certainly it cannot be denied, but that
the whole Scripture contains all things, needful to life and salvation, and
to make a man to come to Heaven, would any man desire more sufficiency then
this? the reason is.

Because the written Word of God, it is the breath of the holy spirit of God,
so says the Apostle, it is given by inspiration; from whom? from the Devil?
No, from the holy Spirit of God, the holy Ghost; And in the Scripture, Gods
will is made known unto his chosen; and as I have often said, Gods Word is his
Epistle and love-letter sent unto his children to guide them in the way of
life, and salvation, Psalm 119.105. It is a lanthorn to their feet, and a light
unto their paths, to guide them in every step they tread as a lanthorn and
light does guide a man in dark and obscure places; so does Gods Word guide them
in the way of life and salvation: And has God bestowed upon his Church and
chosen a guide insufficient, that is not able to lead them to Life and
salvation, but to suffer them to wander into by paths of errors and sins? no,
it is blasphemous so to think; for the holy Scripture does contain all things
needful to be known and practiced both for life and manners.

Wickedly then deal the Papists in this, in that they join to the written

Is the Scripture, the written Word of God, sufficient to guide us in all





1. Namely these by the evidence of the holy Spirit of God appearing and
shining forth in every sentence, and in every word of the holy word of God.

2. By the purity and perfection of the Word.

3. By the Majesty of it in the plainness of speech, by the power it has over
the Conscience of Man, it is able to convert the soul of Man, it is clean
contrary to the nature of Man; it converteth the soul of Man, and does draw
the will of Man to yield obedience unto it: It is a Divine word, and his power
is Divine over the affections and hearts of Men, though it be contrary to man's
will, yet it captivateth it to its power.

4. By the rage of the Devil against it; the Devil he cannot endure the
publishing and the preaching of it.

5. By the constant suffering of the holy Martyrs, many millions that have shed
their blood for the Name of Christ, and for the Word of his Gospel.

6. And lastly, and above all, by feeling that spirit which appears in the
written Word of God to be effectual and powerful in our souls, if thou find the
power of the Word working upon thy soul, not only to thy illumination and
inlightning, but to the working of holiness and grace in thee. Surely though
all the men in the world deny Scripture to be Scripture, yet thy heart will
assent and consent unto it, and thy heart seasoned by grace will make thy mouth
to confess it, though all the world will deny it, yet thou confessest it, John
7.17. says Christ, If any man will try whether my Doctrine be of God or Men,
(he may do it thus) If any man do the will of my Father and be wrought upon
by this Doctrine, certainly that man knows that my Doctrine is of God, and
not of my self. Oh then labor we to find this persuasion in us, that Scripture
is Scripture upon those grounds, but especially by the efficacy of the Word,
and by the effectual work of it in our hearts and souls; and not to cavil
against it, or to yield to the falsehood of deceivers; No no, say with thy self
my heart has sealed to the eternal Truth of God. And thus doing, we shall find
it to be sufficient to guide us in all matters of godliness, and in all matters
of good life and manners, and also we shall find it able to bring us to
salvation.

For the Scripture said unto Pharaoh, even for this very end have I raised thee
up, that I might show my power in thee, and that my name might be declared
throughout the earth.
IN that the Apostle says, for the Scripture says unto Pharaoh, we see here a
strong confirmation of that which we noted out of the 15. verse, That the
written Word of God is a speaking Word: And God speaks to his Church and
people by his written Word; and therefore the Scripture is not a dead letter,
or dumb Judge, and senceless Juke as the Papists say, (but pass by that) Only
note the Apostle says, the Scripture speaks concerning Pharaoh, it speaks
touching the reprobation of Pharaoh, and touching the hardening of his heart,
which was a manifest sign of his reprobation, so that we see the Scripture
reveals unto us the point and matter of Reprobation. And we may hence take
notice of it, The Doctrine of Reprobation a Doctrine revealed in the written
Word.
that the Doctrine of Reprobation, is a Doctrine made known unto us in the
Scripture, and in the written Word of God; yea the Doctrine of the Reprobation
of some particular persons amongst men, it may, and it ought to be published in
the Church of God; It is a part of the holy Word of God, and a portion of
Scipture written and revealed in the Word: And we ought to take notice of it,
as Moses says in Deuteronomy. 29.29. Things revealed belong to us and to our
children, secret things belong to God; so that the Doctrine of Reprobation and
casting off of some particular persons amongst men, ought to be taught to the
Church and Children of God. Some there be that are of opinion, that the
Doctrine of Reprobation ought to be concealed and not to be published and made
known to the Church and people of God; And why? because of the danger of it say
they; for as they conceive and imagine, it drives some men from God, and it
makes some men to run into desperation; therefore say they, it is to be
concealed, and not made known to the Church of God: But these that thus think,
they are deceived. For the Alienation and the estranging of men's mind from God,
and desperation, are not the fruits properly following the Doctrine of
Reprobation, they do not proceed and come from, and by that Doctrine properly,
but they are accidental effects commonly following it, and are cursed fruits
coming from the hearts of men, and so the fault is in themselves and not in
the Doctrine of Reprobation, the Doctrine it self, is holy, good and
profitable, if men do rightly understand it, and savor it aright, it is of
excellent use, and very necessary; For the best Doctrine that is, the most
comfortable Doctrine that is, may be perverted and abused sometimes and become
savor of some to their utter destruction; as the Doctrine of saving faith in
Christ Jesus and his merits is savoured of some to their utter destruction, and
therefore ought it not to be published? It is a weak insufficient argument, to
prove that the Doctrine of Reprobation ought not to be made known because of
these accidental effects; because some through their own corruption are caused
to run into Alienation from God, and Desperation; whereas the Doctrine of
Reprobation is of necessary use; it serves much to commend and set forth the
mercies of God, and the riches of his mercy to his chosen children.

And it stirs up the Children of God to a great measure of thankfulness, for
the mercies of God bestowed upon them, when they consider that God has chosen
them, and refused and rejected others; this stirs them up to magnify the
mercy of God; and then does the soul of a child of God melt within him for
joy. When he considers the infinite love of God unto him in his election, it
makes his heart to break within him, and especially when he considers it
together with the rejection of others comparatively, that he poyseth his
salvation was so dear and precious to the Lord, that the Lord preferred him
before many thousands in the world, equal to him and every way comparable, and
in his saving mercy, vouchsafed to choose him to life and salvation, and
rejected others. Oh this makes the heart of a child of God to break within
him for joy: Oh the comfort of this Doctrine is wonderful great to consider it
arightly, it stirs up a child of God by all means possible to magnify the
great and unspeakable goodness of God, and therefore the Doctrine of
Reprobation, is not to be kept secret, but ought to be taught and published.

Again, The Scripture says unto Pharaoh, for this purpose have I stirred, or
raised thee up; That is, (as I showed you in opening the words,) for this same
purpose have I withheld my grace, and hardened thy heart, even in my just
Judgment hardened thy rebellious heart, and made thee not to profit by my
messages sent unto thee, by the mouth of my servant Moses, and by my Plagues
and Judgments. Now Gods hardening of Pharaoh, it was without question, a
manifest sign of Pharaohs Reprobation, that Pharaoh was a Reprobate, and a
castaway, and that God has rejected him: for observe it, and you shall never
find in all the Scripture, (read it from the beginning to the end,) never shall
you find Gods hardening applied unto any in Scripture, but unto Reprobates: so
then the observation hence is this,

If the Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that perish, to them that shall go
into hell and be damned, whom the god of this world, the devil, has blinded
their eyes, that they should not see the glorious Gospel undoubtedly; showing,
that such that are blinded by Satan, and are hardened by God, and are given
over to a Reprobate sense, they are such that shall perish and be damned.

Go and say to this people, you shall see, and not perceive; you shall hear,
and not understand; but your hearts shall be hardened: so this is the cause,
why the Lord does blind and harden, lest they should see, and understand, and
so become righteous to salvation, so that the Lord does harden none but
Reprobates, and whosoever the Lord does blind and harden, by the malice of the
devil, undoubtedly they are in the state of reprobation.

First of all, this being a truth, it discovers unto us the miserable and

And (take notice of it) the Lord does not now in this latter age of the world,
stand over men with his Judgments, and whips, and his sword of vengeance in
temporal plagues and punishments, but rather in spiritual plagues and Judgments
upon the souls of men, in hardness of heart, and blindness of mind; and the
nearer the general day of Judgment is at hand, wherein the Lord will render to
every man, according to his works, the more the Lord does surcease from
temporal Judgments and plagues, and lets them go on, filling the number of
their sins, and then he lays load upon them; so that the nearer the day
comes, the more the Lord surceaseth temporal punishments, and punishes with
blindness of mind, and hardness of heart: and therefore let none think that
they are well, and in good case, as many do, because they are free from
temporal plagues and punishments, nor sick, nor molested with these and these
troubles, and yet in their souls they lie under the heavy hand of God, in
blindness and hardness, in ignorance and obstinacy; for herein God has begun
to execute his Judgments already: God now sits in Judgment upon him, his
heavy hand of wrath and vengeance is now over him, and does now point and mark
him out for a castaway, and seal up unto him his own everlasting damnation,
the fearfullest and miserablest estate and condition that can befall a man.

Does God harden none but Reprobates, and such as are fitted for Reprobation?
Justice against them, and gives them over to blindness of mind, and to a
filthy life, and so to pass on to their own destruction.

And to press it a little nearer, take heed whosoever you be, that dare
justle with the threatening, and denunciations of the Word of God, that are
applied to your particular sins: as in particular, that are applied against
your pride, and vanity in apparel; you that are so shameless and so impudent,
that say we have no warrant to speak against it: no, have we no warrant? and if
we have no warrant we are false prophets, and deliver visions of our own
brains. Oh it grieveth my soul to think, that you of whom we should have
better hopes, do speak so wickedly, and so shamelesly: have we no warrant for
it? take heed, God is stronger then you, it will be to the confusion of your
souls, because you stand in defense of your pride; I will not go so far with
you, as to say, that you are already given over to blindness of mind, and
hardness of heart: but take this with you, you are at the very next door, and
near unto it, to be given over of God, and blindness of mind, and hardness of
heart, to go on with a full swing, and full wind and tide to hell: I grant you
the best of Gods children may sometimes through the corruption of their minds,
cast away wholesome admonition as David did, 2 Samuel 24. yea though he was
dutifully admonished by Joab, not to number the people, yet David through the
pride of his heart would do it; so the servants of God may refuse, reject, and
cast off, wholesome admonitions and counsels: but when men are come to that
height, that the Prophet speaks of, in Zach. 7.11, 12. that they will not
hearken, but they will have brazen faces, and whores foreheads, and they dare
stand to outface the Preacher, and they will not be reformed, they are
swearers, swaggerers, Usurers, Sabbath Breakers, and filthy persons, and they
will be so, they do then provoke the Lord to give them over to Reprobation, yea
to give it them under the great Seal of Heaven, thou art a Reprobate: which
indeed is a condition fearful and miserable, and to be considered with
trembling.

Oh cast me not away from thy presence, withold not thy Spirit from me, etc.
What do these prayers argue, but that he felt his heart rotten and corrupt, and
yielding unto lust, and some of his light gone? but yet God never blinds
their minds, and hardens their hearts altogether; for this is proper to
Reprobates, and such as belong not to God. It is the complaint of the dear
children of God sometimes, Alas, I feel such a deadness and dullness in my
heart and soul, that I doubt God has left me, forsaken me, and given me up to
hardness of heart, I can mourn and weep for other things, but I cannot mourn
and weep for my sins, that I fear I am given up to hardness of heart. Oh take
comfort in it, thou that fear the hardness of thy heart; it may be a
testimony thou art not altogether given to the hardness of heart, because thou
feel it: where there is feeling, there is life; Corruption feels not
corruption; grace feels corruption: and if there be a feeling of hardness of
heart, and a groaning and a sighing under it, thou art not altogether given up
to hardness of heart, and blindness of mind; therefore comfort thy self.

For the Scripture says unto Pharaoh, Even for this very end have I stirred
thee up, that I might show my power in thee, And that my name might be declared
throughout the earth.
ANd beloved it is not to be passed by without noting, that the Lord says, his
stirring and raising up of Pharaoh was to a certain end, and to peculiar and
particular purpose; for this very same purpose, and this very same end, (says
God unto Pharaoh,) have I raised and stirred thee up, the Lord does make known
unto us, that it was to a proper, and peculiar end: Hence note we thus much,

That God in every act of his, he has a special, and a particular end;

And come we now to the next thing, for this same end (says the Lord unto
Pharaoh) have I stirred thee up; you may remember I showed you, that these
words do carry this sense; For this same purpose, Pharaoh, have I withheld my
grace, hardened thy heart, left thee to thy self, so that still thou do exalt
thy self against my people, and do keep them in bondage, and wilt not let
them go; I have stirred thee up, hardened thy heart, and caused thee to rebel
against me and my people.

Here we see, that wicked Pharaoh, a cruel tyrant over the people of God, (as
he was in his time,) he did nothing against the people of God, but what God
appointed, and what the Lord stirred him up unto, the Lord withholding his
grace, leaving him to himself, and hardening his heart; although in the malice
of his heart, he raised up his forces against the people of God: yet he did
nothing but what the Lord had appointed him to do against them. Hence we may
observe this directly and plainly.

That wicked tyrants (such as Pharaoh was) enemies of the Church and people of
God, they do nothing against the Church, or against Gods people, tyranny was
decreed by the Lord himself, in Acts 2.23. the Apostle Peter says unto the
people of the Jews, Him have ye taken by the determinate council and hand of
God, and him have you crucified and slain. And in Acts 4.27, 28. says the
Apostle, For doubtless against thy holy Son Jesus, both Herod, Pontius Pilate
and the Jews were conspired and band together, to do whatsoever thy hand and
counsel has determined to be done.





I will go against my people, and Ashur shall tread them down as mire in the
streets: then he subjoyneth in the next verse, (but he thinks not so) he is not
of that mind, neither does he in his heart esteem it so, but he imagines to
destroy, and utterly cut off the people of God by wrong. Not immagining that he
is the rod of the wrath of God against his people, and that he comes by the
appointment of God, no, he comes not with such a thought, he comes only to
satisfy his own cruel and accursed humor, not as an actour of what God
determines: so that howsoever cruel tyrants do whatsoever God has appointed
to be done, and as God in his secret counsel has set it down, yet in that
regard they are not justifiable, they are not free from blame in so doing: But
they are wicked, damnable, and sinful, they intend not the will of the Lord,
but they intend the wicked humor of their hearts, and that expressly against
the Law of the Lord, therefore justifiable they are not.

still remains the child of perdition, and wicked enemies, persecutours of
the Church of God, they are but rods in the hand of God, as in Esaias 10.15. And
when the Lord has whipped his children for a time, then he throws the rod in
the fire of his wrath, and everlasting vengeance.

Again, do wicked enemies of the Church of God no more then God (Oh my People,
be not afraid of Ashur, for all this, for he shall but smite thee with the rod,
and lift up his staff after the manner of Egypt, and for a very little small
time, but he shall be consumed in my anger, and destroyed in my wrath;
howsoever they may scourge thee for a time, yet in my anger shall he be
destroyed. Thus the wicked enemies of the Church of God, do thus execute their
wrath upon the Church of God, yet they can go no further then God has
appointed; and when they have done Gods Will, then he will cast the rod into
the fire, 1 Pet. 4.17. the Apostle says, Though afflictions begin at the the
House of God, certainly it shall not rest nor abide there; but from thence it
shall be removed unto the enemies of the Church, and then the Lord does vouchsafe
ease and comfort, and delivery to his people; then from the rage of enemies,
then does God bring plagues and troubles, and vexations, upon the heads of the
enemies of the Church, Proverbs 11.8. The righteous escapes out of trouble,
and the wicked comes even in the place; they change places one with the other,
the righteous are taken out of the stocks, and they are put in the prison with
the wrath and vengeance of the Lord; yet let us know to our comfort, when the
rage and violence of the enemy is come to the full height, then is the ruin
of the enemy near at hand, and come to the full, and deliverance near to the
Church of God. See it in the estate of the people of God in Egypt, when
Pharaoh dealt with most cruelty, against them, and was in the greatest rage,
in Exodus 3 7, 8. says the Lord, I have seen the trouble and oppression of my
people, and now I will help them: So that if so be the Lord should suffer the
bloody minded Papists, that are our merciless and cruel enemies; if he should
suffer them to over top us, and to have a hand over us, (which God prevent) but
if that they should deal hardly with us, then take notice of it to our
comfort, they neither can nor shall do any thing but what God will have them
to do; no not a hairs breadth in the exercise of their cruelty, for when
their rage is most violent, and they most mad, then is their utter destruction
near, then Antichrist falls finally, and then is our deliverance near at
hand. And therefore let this be thought upon to our comfort, it will be a means
to strengthen us against all discouragement though they be fierce and cruel
against us; for when they are in their pride then destruction comes to them,
and ease and delivery to us.

For the Scripture says unto Pharaoh, For this cause have I stirred thee up,
that I might show my power in thee.
NOw proceed we to farther matter of this speech to Pharaoh: [For this cause
have I stirred thee up, that I might show my power in thee;] that is, as I
showed you, that I might make thee see and feel the force of my power in thy
utter destruction, and in thy utter ruin and overthrow in the bottom of the
Sea. The Lord still hardened the heart of Pharaoh, that he might show his power
in the utter destruction and overthrow of him; as we see in this Text, so that
from hence we may gather.



Have I any desire that the wicked should die? no, He rather wills that they
should live, if he return from his wickedness. And so in the last verse, Have
I any delight in the death of the wicked, says the Lord God? no, cause him to
return and live, I have no delight nor desire in his death. And again the name
(...) that is given in Scripture to God, it sounds forth nothing but Essence
and being, yea and everlasting being; He is called Jehovah, because he has his
being of himself, and the Nature of God is Essence and being, and he gives
Essence and being to all things. Now death and destruction make things cease to
be that already are, death in man utterly overthrowes, destroys and ruinates
life; how can it then be that God does purpose to destroy and extirpate any
man, seeing death and destruction come not from God?



And again, we must distinguish between the absolute will of God, and Gods
recompencing will, simply God does not will death, for death came by sin, as
Romans 5.12. But God does will death as a Just judgment for sin. As a Judge
simply wills not the death of an offender as he is a a man, but as he has
committed the fault and the offense, so God in his just Judgment does will the
death of a sinner as a recompense for their sin.

Again, it is true, that the Name of the Lord does send forth nothing but
essence and being, and an absolute subsistence: The Lord is life and being of
himself, and from him every thing has life and being; yet notwithstanding the
Lord can withdraw, and withhold life, and being, at his own good will and
pleasure, Psalm 104.28, 29. says David, If thou take away their breath they
perish and die, life is in thy hand, and man returns to dust again; but (to
pass from that.)

Again, For this purpose have I stirred thee up, that my name might be declared
throughout all the earth; That is, that the praise, and the glory of my
Justice, appearing in the ruin and Destruction of so mighty a King, rebelling
against me, might be propagated and spread abroad throughout all the Corners of
the world, and every where spoken of, getting my self a name in thy
destruction; the point hence is this,

That God will have glory in the confusion of wicked hard hearted, Consider
this you that hate to be reformed, (so he describes them) for says he in the
22. verse, he will tear you in pieces: he gives it them as a Caveat, and
forewarning, Consider this you that forget God, for he will tear you all to
pieces. Again in Romans 2.5. Thou (says the Apostle) after thy hardness, and
heart that cannot repent, heapeth unto thy self wrath against the day of wrath;
and the indignation of the just Judgment of God: As if the Apostle had said,
Thou hard-hearted wretch that go on, and continues in thy sins, thou do
but heap up wrath against the day of wrath, when the Lord will revenge himself
upon thee, and execute his wrath and vengeance to the full, thou whose heart is
(as it is said, in Jer. 5.) as hard as a stone, and as Adament, the Lord will
get himself glory by thee; and in Prove. 16.4. The Lord has made all things for
his own glory sake, yea even the wicked for the day of evil: as if he had said,
howsoever hard-hearted, and impenitent sinners do contemptuously rebel, and
refuse to yield glory to the Lord; yet even those wicked reprobates are made
for the glory of God, as well as others, and they are appointed to the day of
vengeance, the Lord will have his glory in their Destruction; they will not
glorify God in their lives, he will have glory in their confusion and
destruction: and good reason there is for it,

Because the good which God aymeth at in the doing of all his actions,

Oh then consider it, you that dare go on in your sins, and do continue Who is
the Lord? yet they kick against the holy Word of God, and they set light by the
threatenings of it, when they are denounced against their particular evils,
they make put a pish, and a tush of it, and so they live in open contempt of
the great honor and glory of God; and this is the lives of many amongst our
selves: they hate to be reformed, though they hear their sins beaten against,
and they told of them time after time, yet still they will continue in them,
and be reprobate to every good work, and go on in their sinful lives, the Lord
will not lose his glory by those persons, no not by the vilest wretch and
miscreant that lives upon the face of the earth, though they live in open
blasphemy against his holy name: think upon it then thou that art a drunkard, a
swearer, a proud person, a Sabbath-breaker, an Usurer, one that go on in thy
vile courses, and debauched sins, the Lord will have glory in thee, thou that
so go on; yea in thy destruction.

Consider this you that still go on in your pride and vain glory; assure thy
self, if thou so going on, do live and die in thy sins, (as commonly such
persons do) thou shall assuredly be damned, as God will be glorified, and it is
as impossible for thee to escape damnation, as for God to lose his glory, which
is impossible; and well were it for thee, if so be the Lord would vouchsafe so
much grace and mercy unto thee, as to make thee now to tremble, and to make thy
heart to ache within thee, and to humble thy soul for thine evil courses.

they that honor me, I will honor; and they that despise me, shall be
despised: Yea the Lord will not only honor us here, but give us salvation; he
will give us honor and glory in the hearts of those that hate us, and force
the wicked, that do hate and condemn us with their mouths, when they smite us
with their tongues, to honor us in their hearts: and we shall not only be
honored of him here, but when we cease to be, Prove. 10.7. the memorial of the
just is blessed; but the name of the wicked shall rot: when the body of the
righteous is raked up in the dust, then shall his name be sweet, and he
eternally blessed. Oh then the consideration of this should stir us up to
glorify the name of the Lord, and to prefer it before our own good, yea the
salvation of body and soul; for this is our Duty, the Lord will have his glory;
and therefore give it him willingly in this life.

VERSE. 18. Therefore has he mercy on whom he will have mercy; And whom he
will he hardens.


NOw come we to the 18. Verse, Therefore, says the Apostle, he has mercy on
whom he will, and whom he will he hardens. This Verse, beloved, is a
conclusion of the whole matter, handled by the Apostle in the three verses
foregoing. In the 15, 16, and 17. Verses our Apostle having made it clear, that
God has absolute power, and free liberty, of showing mercy to some, by the
speech of God unto Moses, I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy. And
having made it manifest, that God has the like absolute power and free liberty
in passing by some others, and rejecting them, to the glory of his own name;
and proving that by the example of Pharaoh, whom God hardened, as a manifest
sign of his reprobation: the Apostle having thus proved both these parts, upon
this premises, the Apostle in this verse brings in this Conclusion, that God
has free liberty, and absolute power, to show mercy on whom he will, and to
harden whom he will; and this is the relation of this verse to the foregoing
matter.

Now in this verse observe we a double act of God; the one is, Gods showing of
mercy unto some; and the other, Gods hardening of some others: and then from
whence this double act of God proceeds, namely from the mere good will and
pleasure of God; so that the double act of mercy, and hardening, proceeds
from one ground: Gods good will. Now a little to lay open the meaning of the
words.

Touching the phrase, and form of speech, that God has mercy, we had the same
phrase in the 15. verse; where I showed you, what we are to understand by
mercy, namely, not the properties of mercy which is essentially in God, but the
Act, the exercise and work of Gods mercy: God has mercy upon some; the act,
the exercise, and the works of God is extended and reached out unto some
particular persons, unto them to whomsoever he will, and on whomsoever he
pleases, merely out of his own free will, and absolute good pleasure; (and
whom he will he hardens,) that is, whomsoever pleases him out of the same
free and absolute will he hardens: and the word harden, here, is put in
opposition to Gods showing of mercy, before spoken of; for these two are
opposed, God has mercy, and he hardens: so then the meaning of it is,
whereas before is meant, the showing and extending of Gods mercy to some; so
here by hardening, is meant, that God does harden and withhold his mercy from
some, and in his just Judgment does leave them to themselves, and to their
natural hardness; for hardening must be understood, as a Judiciary act, and
act of Gods Justice, whereby God does inflict Judgment upon men, as a
manifestation of their reprobation, and rejection, called a Judiciary act: So
then briefly conceive we the meaning of the Apostle; as if he had said:

Therefore God does extend and reach out the act, the exercise, and the work of
his mercy, and of his grace, unto whomsoever it pleases him, even merely out
of his own free and absolute will, and out of his own good pleasure, and also
out of the same mere free will and absolute good pleasure, the same God does
deny his saving mercy, and withhold his grace and mercy from some, and leave
them in his just judgment in their natural hardness, as a manifest sign of
their reprobation; so thus God has mercy on whom he will, and whom he will he
hardenneth.

Come we now to matter of Observation and Doctrine: And first of all, from the
first act of God, that God has mercy on whom he will, the words being
understood of the extending and reaching out of Gods mercy; Here again the same
point is offered unto us, which before we handled in the 15. verse, namely.



if thou pour out thy soul to the hungry; mark this you that are fast fisted:
the Lord does not only require the pouring out of food, but of our very hearts
and souls, to feed the poor with the Affections of thy heart. And indeed it is
not an act of mercy pleasing to God, that the Lord delights in, that comes
either from our abundance, and superfluity, or else the importunity of those
that are in great want, and need, nor yet from the example of others, inviting
us thereunto, or for the desire of praise, and seeking of Commendations amongst
men, that we would be well thought on; no, these are not works of mercy
pleasing unto the Lord, nor yet a work of mercy that is forced from men, by
some torture, and torment, to stop the mouth of an accusing, and guilty
conscience: as for example, when wicked rich men, that are guilty to
themselves, how they have gotten their goods by evil means, and have hoarded
up abundance of wealth by the damnable sin of Usury, by griping, and oppressing
the poor, and such unlawful means. And when they lie upon their deathbed,
gasping for breath, then they are forced to bestow something to religious uses,
they give nothing before they dye; but when they lie upon their deathbed, and
their Consciences fly up in their faces, then they will give to an Hospital,
or an Almes-house, or to the poor, or Church, to stop the mouth of the
Conscience. But this is no better then Saul's sacrifice, of which we read, in 1 Samuel 15. when he had transgressed the Commandment of God, in reserving the
best sheep and oxen, he thought he would stop the mouth of the Lord with a
Sacrifice: so when men have gotten their goods by oppression and usury, then
when they are upon their deathbeds, then they will give unto the poor. But the
showing of mercy that is pleasing unto God, must come out of a tender and free
heart: as God is free in mercy, so we must be free in exercising the works of
mercy: the works of mercy must come from the tenderness of our hearts; and
without that surely all our showing of mercy, and doing of good, though we
build Hospitals, as it is, 1 Cor. 13.3. If I feed the poor with all my goods,
it is nothing, without the heart: the Lord looks rather at the inward
affections of the heart, then the outward actions and duties of love and mercy,
2 Cor. 9.7. every one as he is able must give, not grudgingly, because he is
compelled to do it, but the Lord loves a cheerful giver. And consider what
moved the Lord to have mercy upon me, or upon thee, or upon any? nothing: so
must we have mercy upon others, freely, and out of the tenderness of our
bowels, pitying and commiserating their estate, then thou art like unto God,
and this will yield thee true comfort; else thy showing of mercy is no better
then Saul's sacrifice, 1 Samuel 13.

Again, in that the Apostle faith, God will have mercy upon whom he will, The
Apostle shows plainly, that Gods showing of mercy is indeed limited and
reached out unto some, and not unto others, even to whomsoever it pleases him,
he has mercy upon whom he will, and not upon all; the Apostles speech implies
a limitation: the point hence lies plain before us, viz.

That Gods will it is, to extend and reach out his saving mercy, I thank thee.
(says Christ) O Father, God of heaven and earth; I thank thee that thou have
hid these things; what things? the saving comforts of the Gospel, to be called
to know thee through me; thou have hid these things from the wise, and revealed
them unto babes; thou have hid them from some, and revealed them unto others:
and he subjoyneth, even so it is O Father, because it so pleases thee: and in
2 Timothy 1.9. God has called in by an holy calling, according to his purpose and
grace. Romans 3.24. we are Justified freely, by the free grace of God, without
respect had to any thing in us; thus the Holy Ghost speaks in James 1.18. of
Sanctification, out of his own free will we are begotten, and sanctified, and
renewed. And touching Glorification, the consummation of all, Romans 6.24. it is
the special gift of God bestowed upon some, and not upon all, according to the
will of Christ, Joh. 17.24. Father, (says the Lord Jesus,) I will that those
whom thou have given me, be where I am, and behold my glory; and be everlasting
partakers of my glory: so then we see that the saving mercies of God, from the
beginning to the consummation, they are reached out according to the good will
and pleasure of God.

Hence it follows, in the first place; that they err grossly, who do hold
God, to depend upon the will of man, that if man will be saved God has chosen
him; but also this opinion of theirs cannot stand with the truth now delivered,
that God gives his saving mercy to whom he will.

I but say they, now they take hold of the Scripture, the Apostle in Romans
11.32, says that God has shut up all in unbelief, that he might have mercy
upon all; so in 1 Timothy 2.4. God wills that all shall be saved, and come to
the knowledge of his truth, therefore your doctrine is not true.

God has shut up all men in unbelief, that he might have mercy upon all: what?
all without exception of any? upon every man without exception? no, but upon
all that believe, upon all the faithful ones among the Jews and Gentiles; of
whom the Apostle speaks in this 11. Chapter, of whom he speaks, of the
estate of the Jews and Gentiles: I but (say they) this is a false
interpretation; mark then, and to this purpose read, a parallel place unto this,
in Gal. 3.22. where the Apostle says, The Scripture has concluded and shut up
all under sin, that the promise of God; what promise? the promise of mercy, and
faith in Christ Jesus, might be extended and reached out; (what to all without
exception?) no, says the Apostle, unto them that believe; so the Apostle does
there limit the universal particle (all) to all believers, and so the place is
to be taken.

Again, for the place in Timothy, that God will have all men to be saved.
First, to answer to it; the word all, in that place, is not taken Collective,
but Distributive, as they speak; not collective, and gathering all men in the
world; but distributive, by way of Distribution, some of all sorts, of all
states, conditions, and degrees, and calling in the world: and that this is a
truth, mark what the Apostle says in the first verse of this Chapter; I do
exhort that prayers and supplications be made for all men; what shall we
understand all mankind? no, he subjoyneth by way of distribution, for all men
in all callings, and conditions; for Kings, and Magistrates, he ranketh them
into their several degrees: so when God says, I will have mercy upon all, his
meaning is not all men shall be saved; but some of all sorts: and again, as One
says, God will have all men, salvos fieri, to be saved, but God will not
salvos facere, make all men to be saved, but he reaches out his mercy to some
of all sorts.





we have not received the Spirit of the world, but we have received the Spirit
which is of God, whereby we know the things that are given unto us of God; even
the love, and the mercy, and the favor of God unto us in Christ. And if we
have that Spirit of God, when we find and feel that Spirit in our hearts and
souls, working there, convincing us, and does check us in our hearts and
souls, and we are able to express and show forth the fruits of the Spirit in
our life and conversation, Gal. 5.22, 23. Whose effects be joy, peace, love,
meekness, long suffering, patience, and we are able to express it in our lives
and conversation; And hereby we may come to know that Gods good will, is
toward us in Jesus Christ, even by the work of Gods Spirit, which testifies
what God has Purchased; indeed if men live in their known sins, and fancy
unto themselves the Gospel and the saving mercies of God in Christ, they
deceive themselves, and it is a true saying, as one says, as they that have
the fruits of the Spirit against them is no Law, so they that have not the
fruits of the Spirit; there is no Gospel for them; therefore in the fear of God
labor we for this, for the Spirit of God, making known unto us the good will
of God what he has sealed unto us from everlasting convincing us of our known
sins, and showing forth the fruits in our lives and conversations, then we may
assure our selves that God will bestow upon us life and salvation, and has
conferred his graces unto us.

Therefore he has mercy upon whom he will, and whom he will he hardneth.
THe next thing observable and to be stood upon in this point of Gods
reprobation that God hardneth whom he will, the Lord out of his own good
pleasure, denies mercy and saving grace, and withholdeth it from some amongst
men, and leaves them unto themselves in their natural hardness, letting them
go on in their blindness of mind and hardness of heart as a manifest sign of
their reprobation; from hence then I will note briefly thus much; That Gods act
of hardening of some is a free act,

This point beloved I often have had occasion to note for the holy Ghost in
this Chapter often offers it unto us: And I still note it against the
Armenians; and the Anabaptists those pestilentious spirits who hold and affirm
that God does then only actually reject men (for they make a double rejection,
purpose and act) and they say God does then actually reject men, when men
reject Christ, and refuse the Gospel, then say they God rejects men; yea say
the Anabaptists, the Apostle in this Chapter bends his face against those
Jews that were zealous of the Law of God, and rejected Christ that sought
righteousness in the works of the Law, then God rejected, them, when they
rejected Christ, and sought salvation by the Law against those (say they) the
Apostle bends his face, and beats. Now this conceit of theirs cannot stand
with the plain evidence of this whole Chapter, and especially with the evidence
of this verse, the example of Pharaoh, makes directly against them; for
(consider it) was Pharaoh a a Jew, can Pharaoh be so considered as one zealous
of the Law of God, can this possibly be? see how absurd and gross they are in
their opinions, they cannot observe and mark that the Apostle brings not
only the example of Esaw a Jew, but the example of Pharaoh a Gentile, thereby
showing that the Lord has rejected some amongst men, as well Jews, as
Gentiles, so that you see the Apostle means, that God freely, and out of his
own good will and pleasure without respect had to any thing in men, has
rejected some amongst men both of Jews and Gentiles.

Again, in that the Apostle says God hardneth whom he will; here you see that
the Apostle does limit that Act of Gods hardening to some amongst men, so that
the observation is plain, viz.

the Lord did harden the heart of Pharaoh, as in the 7. chapter and 3. verse,
says God, I will harden Pharaohs heart, and in the 9. chapter and 12 verse,
and also in the 10. chapter and the 20. verse, The Lord hardened Pharaohs heart,
and so in diverse places; and also in Deuteronomy 2.30, Moses tells the people
of God, that the Lord their God hardened the heart of the King of Moab, that he
should not give passage to the people of Israel; God made him an obstinate
heart; and in Joshuah 11.20. Joshuah speaks thus, That it came of the Lord,
to harden the hearts of the wicked enemies of the Church of God; and in Psalm
81.12. the Psalmist says, That the people yielded not unto God, for he
hardened their hearts; this may sufficiently evidence unto us, that Gods will
is to harden some amongst men, and he is pleased to deny his saving mercy unto
them.

How God hardens the heart.
But happily here, some not so well conceiving this point, how God is said to
harden men, it being difficult to their capacity, may desire to be further
informed touching this point. And therefore for their satisfaction, know
beloved, that God is said to harden some men, not by infusing, or putting of
hardness in their hearts, or making some men's hearts hard, that were soft, (as
the Papists falsely charge us to affirm, no, nor yet by a bare permission, by a
bare permitting and suffering men so to be, as if the Lord were but a
Spectator, and a looker on in the hardening of their hearts and had no hand in
it, this is the dream and opinion of the Papists; but it is neither of these
ways, neither by infusing hardness, nor by a bare permission: But surely God
hardens some amongst men two ways.

First, by a spiritual disertion by forsaking of men, and not vouchsafing his
softning grace unto them; so that it is truly said, indurit quos, non emollit,
he hardens whom he softneth not.

Secondly, by punishing men for their former sins by greater sins, by
punishing their former hardness, by a further hardness, adding one hardness
to another; for it is a just thing with God to inflict sin for sin. And God
does this, either by leaving men to the power of the Devil, as Gods executioner
and tormenter, or the Lord leaves them over to the lusts of their own hearts,
and to their own corruptions, and so the point is thus to be conceived; That
Gods will is to harden some amongst the sons of men, by forsaking of them,
and not vouchsafing his softning grace, and that by spiritual disertion, and as
a just Judge, either giving them over to the power of the Devil, to be wrought
upon by him as Gods executioner, or giving them over to the lusts of their own
hearts.



God infflicted upon the souls of men, and so it is a good thing, and no sin in
him.

First of all, this being duly considered, that Gods will is to harden

Is this so, that Gods will is to harden some amongst the sons of men, and God
vouchsafed, (to such that God does cleanse and mollify,) even a flexible,
pliable, and yielding heart to the Word of God, and the means of grace, and of
salvation: Oh have thou such a heart? bless God for it: this is a special
mercy of God; for of all the plagues that befall men in this world, hardness
of heart is the worst, none worse then that, that is the most dreadful: so
softness of heart (assuredly) is a special blessing of God, and given to none
but those whom God loves. Oh then labor to have this bowing, bending,
yielding heart to the good hand of God; labor to cheer it up, and to have a
pliable heart, yielding, not stubborn; and to that end, use these means that
may mollify thee more and more, namely, be frequent, and often in hearing and
reading of the holy Word of God, and when thou have heard; and read it, second
it by meditation. Oh what enemies are they that hear the Word, and do not
respect, to call to mind what they have heard, but let it slip away: and
secondly, be often and frequent in thinking upon the sweet and comfortable
mercies of God in Jesus Christ; that will soften thy heart, and keep it soft:
the heart of the prodigal when it began to relent, to yield, and to be moved,
and to come to himself, and to consider the tenderness and love of his
gracious Father. Oh says he, I am a poor wretch here, and an outcast, but I
have a good father, ( I have sinned against heaven, and against thee, Luke
15.17, 18.) he will entertain and receive me again: so the consideration of the
tender mercies of Christ Jesus, to consider what the Lord has done for thee:
has he not vouchsafed his mercy in Christ Jesus? And last of all, be thou
earnest; (above all) be earnest with God in prayer, that he would be pleased to
vouchsafe unto thee the Spirit of grace, and of softening, and continue in thy
breast a soft heart: Oh Lord never suffer me to be given over to hardness of
heart; Lord keep this heart of mine soft, pliable, and yielding to the Word of
God: Thus we are to hear it, and to read it, and to meditate upon it, and to
pray unto God to keep the heart in us; for it is the greatest blessing of God
that can befall a man in this world; as hardness of heart is a great curse; so
softness is a great blessing; therefore labor for to get and increase it.

VERSE. 19. Thou will say then unto me, Why does he yet complain? Who has
resisted his Will?


OUr Apostle having cleared God from the imputation of inconstancy, and of
unfaithfulness in his promises, notwithstanding the rejection of the Jews for
the body of them, from the sixth verse of this Chapter, to the 14. verse: and
having proved from the 14 verse to the 19. verse, that God is not unjust, in
that he has out of his own absolute good will and pleasure, chosen some to
life and salvation, and has passed by and rejected others, and that without
respect had to any thing in them, or foreseen in them; having I say cleared God
from this slander, He now in this 19. verse, falls upon a new and a further
Cavil and reasoning of the flesh, namely, such a Cavil, as does charge God with
no less then cruelty, and with Tyrannical dealing with some men, and from this
the Apostle clears God also.

Now the occasion of this Cavil is from the verse foregoing, where the Apostle
says, God hardens whom he will; hereupon flesh and blood begins to cavil
against God, and to rise up and swell against him, and to charge him with no
less then cruelty, and extreme hard dealing, in that the Lord should harden
men, and then complain of the hardening of man. And this Cavil which might
happily be charged upon God, by humane Reason, he first propounds, and then
Answers unto it: he propounds it in this 19. verse, and answers unto it, in
the 20, 21, 22, and 23. Verses.

Now in propounding this Cavil, the Apostle makes way unto it, in the first
place, by putting down of the person of a Caviller, and by bringing the
Caviller speaking thus, (Thou will say then unto me,) and secondly he sets
down the matter of the Cavil, or Objection, and that by way of interrogation,
very emphatically, Why does he yet complain? And thus the Objection may be
framed; Reprobates and wicked men are hardened, because it is the Will of God
that they should be hardened; as you have taught us in the verse before; and
therefore God cannot justly blame, or punish them for their hardness, for it
is according to his will: For if God do blame and punish them for their
hardness, surely it seems to the Reason of flesh and blood, to be extreme
cruelty and rigor, God seems to be extremely rigorous, and a cruel God, in
punishing men for their hardness.

And this Cavil is further backed, by a proof, for who has resisted his will?
as if the Caviller had said; Why none can resist Gods will, his will is
irresistible, and it cannot be withstood; and therefore if God first of all
harden, and then complain, it is extreme rigor and cruelty; so that if wicked
men and Reprobates be hardened, it is according to the will of God, and so they
are hardened unavoidably, and of necessity; God has decreed their hardening,
and he will have it so, and none can gainsay his will: And therefore it is no
less then Tyranny in God, to blame and punish men for it. And thus much we are
to conceive of the generality of this 19. verse, first, the Cavilling person,
Thou will then say unto me; secondly, the Cavil, why does he yet complain? and
thirdly, the proof of the Cavil, for who has resisted his will?

Come we now to the sense and meaning of the words.

Thou will say then unto me,] Thou; who is this the Apostle means? that is,
thou, whosoever thou art, that art a carnal Reasoner, and reasons according
to carnal Reason, thou will say unto me, (why does he yet complain?) that is,
why does God complain of such as be hardened? why does God find fault with
them, and threaten such as are hardened? what cause has the Lord to complain,
threaten, or punish such as are hardened, they being hardened according to his
will? thus the carnal Caviller reasons: for says the Caviller, who has
resisted his will? that is, none was ever able to stand against, to frustrate,
or make void the will of God; the purpose of God was never resisted, none was
ever able to stand against his will, and to hinder it from taking place, and
being effected: Gods decree and purpose is irresistible, that none can
withstand it, therefore says the Carnal Reasoner, God has no just cause to
complain; so that the sense in brief is thus much, Thou that art a Carnal
Caviller art ready to except against my speech, in that I say, God hardens
whom he will; thou will say, if this be so, Paul, why does God threaten
Judgment, hell, and damnation, against those that are hardened? what cause is
there that God should complain, find fault, threaten, and punish them with hell
and damnation? for who ever resisted the will of the Lord? was there ever any
man that was able to stand against the will of the Lord? no, no man! and so
they are hardened of necessity, unavoidably, according to your own Doctrine,
Paul: so that this is the meaning of the Apostles speech.

Now come we to matter of Observation and Doctrine. And first of all observe
here, the Apostle brings in a Caviller, and a Carnal Reasoner, as it were
objecting, and inferring upon his former speech, that God hardens whom he
will; this Conclusion, the cause being so, God hardens whom he will, then God
has no just cause to complain of man's hardening: so that hence arises this
Conclusion,

That man's carnal reason, man's corrupt and carnal reason, commonly infer,
enforce, and bring erroneous and false Conclusions; it is a common thing with
man's reason: see this is manifest by farther places of Scripture, in Romans 3.
from the fifth verse to the ninth verse, The Apostle having delivered this
truth of God, that Gods goodness, and Gods truth are commended, and set out by
man's sin, (accidentally God brings good out of evil,) hereupon some Carnal
Reasoners are ready to except against this Doctrine; Oh say they, how can God
justly punish sin? this the Apostle speaks in the person of the Caviller, if
our unrighteousness set forth Gods righteousness, then God cannot justly
punish sin. So in the seventh verse of the same Chapter, If Godt glory has
abounded through my lie, why then am I punished? says the carnal man, God
cannot then justly punish me for my lying: so in Joh. 3.3. The Lord Jesus
having put this down as a certain truth, that except a man be born again he
cannot enter into the Kingdom of God. Nicodemus, hearing this after a carnal
manner, and resting in his own carnal reason; see what an absurd conclusion he
brings in upon this, then it seems that a man must enter into his mothers
womb and be born again. So in John 6.53, 54. Christ showing, that except a man
eat his flesh, and drink his blood, he has no life in him: Now some that heard
this, they heard it with great indignation, and stumbled at it, and they said,
This is a hard saying, who can bear it, must we eat this man's flesh, and drink
his blood? and they so conceiving carnally, concluded as the Papists do now in
their Doctrine of of Transubstantiation, that we must eat the body of Christ,
and drink his blood corporally, and after a carnal manner; yea, they so
stumbled at it, that they forsook him; insomuch that he said to his Disciples,
What will you be gone from me also, do you conceive of my words as the
Capernaits did, says Christ, My words are spirit and life, and you conceive of
them with carnal reason, and gather from my points false conclusions.

Because carnal reason

Hence then take we notice of it, whence it is that erring spirits do commonly

So again, some hearing this Holy Truth of God, that God has a hand in every
act of man that comes to pass, and in the act of every creature, that Gods
providence is in every thing that comes to pass in the world, then the carnal
reasoner brings in this false conclusion, that then God is the author of
sin, and he thinks in his judgment it follows necessarily that God is
the author of sin, because sin is an act. And (beloved) do not the Papists
deal thus in the matter of Justification of a sinner in the sight of God? They
hearing that a sinner is justified in the sight of God only by faith, then
(say the Papists) this Doctrine has a foul tail coming after it, for it does
dispossess man's heart from all care, and endeavor of good works, and hereupon
(slanderously) they give out this false report of us, that in this Doctrine
that men are justified only by Faith, they say we are utter enemies to God,
utter enemies to Gods Law, and utter enemies to all good works, this they think
they may lawfully charge upon us.

Thus these and many others do wrest false conclusions from the Holy Truth of
God; and why? Because they look upon them by the rule of natural reason, which
is the ground of all Atheistical conclusions, there catching and snatching, and
carping against the Divine Truths and mysteries of God, because they stick in
the rind, and dive not into the depth of them.

Again, beloved is this so, that carnal reason does wrest false conclusions,
God? Then this must teach every one of us our duty, to take heed that we
measure not divine Truths by the meatyard and rule of our own carnal reason,
especially such holy Truths of God as are of a high nature and strain, such as
are transcendent, such as go beyond and extend the compass of natural reason,
such truths as are matters of Faith, and above reason. Oh* take heed of
measuring these by the rule of natural reason.

For if we seek to bring these Truths, within the model, scantling, and rule of
our natural reason, we shall run into many bypath and erroneous conceits and
opinions, as he must needs lose his way, that knows not the way, and
follows blind guides. So (Fides est oculus animi) Faith is the eye of the
soul, and if we in matters of Divinity and high points of God, follow your own
blind reason, we shall assuredly run into many gross errors; yea beloved, let
me tell you, it is a dangerous thing to hear or read the Word of God with a
carnal understanding, and an unsanctified wit; for if we so do, we shall abuse
the holy word of God, and wrest from it such conclusions, as are not there to
be found: does yet experience show it to be true?

Are there not some, who looking upon that place of the Apostle, in 1 Timothy
5.8. where he says, He that provideth not for his own, and namely, for them of
his Family, is worse then an Infidel: do not some I say looking upon this with
a shut eye and carnal understanding, gather and conclude, that therefore they
may pinch, and spare, and scrape together by all means and live a base and
sordid life, and not part with a farthing token to the poor, or to any good
use but niggardly utter these words, they must provide for themselves, and they
may come to live by the alms of the Parish themselves, and will not spare a
penny more then by the Law they are enforced and compelled, and so pervert the
Scripture.

Again, some others looking upon that place in Ezekiel 16.11, 12, 13. verses,
where the Lord says, He decked Jerusalem with Ornaments, with Bracelets, with
goodly Jewels, with golden Crowns, and with Gold and silver, and Imbroydered
works; Do not some hereupon gather, that therefore they may be vain in their
Apparel, and may follow every new fashion, and may go like ruffians in their
long hair and foretop: and think this is their warrant; whereas they are
deceived, for the Lord there speaks by way of similitude, tropically that the
Lord had blessed them with all good things, and so expresses it after that
manner figuratively, and they would have him speak properly, and so they draw a
false conclusion from the holy word of God.

Thus I might instance in many particulars, that it is a dangerous thing to
hear or read the Word of God with a carnal eye; yea, I dare boldly affirm that
we shall never rightly conclude from any part of the Word of God, whether
touching manners, or touching heavenly things, if we consult with flesh and
blood, unless our eyes be anointed with the eye salve of the spirit of God.
Therefore to conclude, learn we in reading the word of God to lay aside our own
reasons to come with the eyes of the mind shut, and to look with the eye of
Faith and of the Spirit of God, lay aside thy own reason, yea, thy own
wisdom; for the wisdom of man is enmity to God, Romans 8.7, Yea, the best
act and exercise of the mind of man not sanctified, it is enmity to the will
of God; therefore let us yield our selves to be guided only by the will of
God; and then we shall certainly tread the paths that lead to true happiness
and salvation.

Thou will say then unto me, Why does he yet complain? Who has resisted his
Will?
IN these words, Why does he yet complain? is something to be observed
generally: For they being considered as an Objection of carnal persons, they
make directly against that opinion of the Arminians, who hold, that God did
decree to reject some amongst men, upon a foresight of their wilful obstinacy
in sin, and their wilful rebellion against him. Now, beloved, if this were a
true Position, and a truth of God, then God justly complains of such as were
hardened, and that in the Reason of man; for though God did decree their
rejection, and consequently their hardening, yet the reason, and the cause of
Gods decree, was his foresight of their wilful obstinacy and rebellion in a
course of evil and sin; and this being so, then what can carnal reason say
against it; the prophanest wretch hearing this, that God did decree to reject
some out of foresight, they would continue obstinate and rebellious in their
wilful sins, and then to harden them, surely the prophanest wretch in the world
must needs be silent, and glorify the Justice of God, in leaving of such
persons to themselves, and so to harden them, even man's reason can go thus far,
that then there was just cause why God should complain, and no cause of this
Objection, even in the sense, reason, and understanding of man, because if man
will be wilful in sin, it is just with God to harden them. And so they put
aside the absolute decree of God, and make it to depend upon the obstinacy of
man: so that we see they quite cut away this Cavil, and leave no place for it,
and so they pervert and quite overthrow the purpose of this text; but this
which they allege is false, for this is that which reason does stumble at, and
cannot conceive that God should harden men's hearts. and then complain of their
hardening; that God out of his own mere will and pleasure hardens them, and
then punishes them for hardening, this cannot possibly but be unjust; this is
the stumbling block of the carnal reasoning of man, this is that which makes
carnal reason to rise up and insult against God; why does God complain, when he
does of purpose harden men? so that the Arminians reasoning, and this Objection
cannot stand together.

Come we now to stand upon this carnal Objection more particularly; why does he
yet complain? That is, (as I showed you in the opening of the Text,) does God
harden whom he will? why does God then blame, threaten, and punish them? what
reason has the Lord so to do; seeing they are hardened according to his will,
and so the fault and blame lies upon the will of God. Here we see how ready
man's carnal reason is, to put off the blame from themselves, and to lay it
where it ought not to lie, and so consequently we may hence note thus much.

God himself; for he says, Genesis 3.12. The woman which thou gave me, gave it
me; and when he came to the woman, she put it on the Serpent; so that here is a
putting and posting off of the blame from one to another, Adam to his wife, yea
to God himself, and she to the Serpent: and we, beloved, have sucked the same
milk, and drawn out the same poison, and this corruption we have naturally;
every one by nature will seek to shift off the blame of their sins from
themselves. As to appeal to our own experience, common experience shows it;
Do not some when they are convinced of sin, lay the blame upon the times which
they live in, saying, Oh we live in a hard time, and we must do according to
the time; some again on their callings and conditions of life; Oh they are of
such and such a calling and vocation, that they cannot keep a good conscience,
they must lie, and swear, and deceive as others do, or else they cannot
possibly keep open shop, some upon the provocation of others they were provoked
to it, and some upon the Command and example of others, such and such a one did
the like, and his example led me to it, or such a one commanded me; as if a
Master command his servant to lie, he is excusable, because his Master commanded
him. And some lay the fault upon their destiny, it was my chance, my lot, my
evil fortune, I was ordained to such a sin. And some lay the blame upon the
Devil, and say they had not become guilty of Whoredom, Adultery, Murder, and
the like, but that the devil owed them a spite, and now he has paid them home:
and thus they seem to post off their sin upon others, either upon the time,
their callings, the provocation, example, and command of others, or upon their
evil fortune, and the devil himself, they care not where, so they may draw
their own neck out of the collar; yea sometimes Gods own children are hardly
brought to this, to lay the fault of their sin where it ought to lie; they will
say, Oh I was too blame, wretch that I was, I was drawn unto it by such and
such a man's company; and so they seek to extenuate, and to lessen their sins,
and to put off the blame from themselves.

But beloved take we notice of it,

Again further, this Cavil and this reasoning of the flesh, it is farther to be
considered, together with the proof of it, in the words following, for who has
resisted his will? As if the carnal Reasoner should say thus; That men are
hardened it is the will of God it should be so, God hardens whom he will, and
Gods will cannot be resisted, none can stand against his will; and so men that
are hardened, they are hardened unavoidably, out of necessity, for they must be
hardened whom God will harden; and therefore they cannot justly be blamed, or
taxed. Now then from hence arises this Question to be discussed.

Whether men are excusable and free from blame,

Now to answer this question, that men are excusable; And why? because though
Gods will and work, be in men's hardening, and in the sins that come from the
hardening of their hearts; yet does not Gods will enforce hardness upon them,
making their hearts hard, that were before soft, neither does Gods will compel
men, to the committing of those sins which they run into, there is no such
matter, Gods will does neither harden being soft, nor thrust their sins out
from them. But for the understanding of this, we must know, that our first
parents, they broke the Commandment of God, in eating the forbidden fruit
willingly, being not forced thereunto by Gods Decree, as the Arminians, and
Anabaptists hold, but they fell willingly, they had free will to stand or to
fall. And Adam and Eve, of their own accord, put out their hands, and did eat
of the forbidden fruit. And thereupon having broken Gods Commandment, they
brought upon themselves, and upon all their posterity, sin, and hardness of
heart; all that come from them by natural generation, have sucked the same
milk, and have natural hardness of heart: and now men being in their natural
hardness, the Lord is pleased to withhold his softening grace from some
amongst men, and to leave them in their natural hardness; the Lord in his just
Judgment does inflict farther hardness upon the hearts of men, as a just
Judgment of their hardness before, they themselves by nature being willing to
continue in their hardness; so that God does not thrust further hardness upon
the hearts of men unwillingly, whether they will be hardened or no.

And again, those sins that follow upon the hardness of their hearts, are
not drawn from men against their will whether they will or no, but they do
freely and willingly consent unto sin, they give their free voluntary
consent unto sin, they sin with a delight, they do according to their own
will, and according to the natural inclination thereof, the Lords will moving
their will as he moves the Heavens in a round Circle, according to the motion
of it; so he does move and order man's will according to the motion of it, being
evil, and so they freely and voluntarily commit sin, and so they sin of
necessity, but how? not of necessity of coaction or compulsion, as if they
were enforced to sin, but by the very necessity of man's nature, they are
naturally inclined to evil and ready to commit evil, Gods will bending them to
their own proper motion, and so they choose sin, and sin of necessity of
nature, and that will not excuse them, they have brought the necessity upon
themselves, and that will not free them from blame.

As for example, was Judas compelled to that sin for betraying his Master?
No, his will was inclined unto it, and the will of God together with his will
in that act inclined it as it were to betray the Lord Jesus: so that this will
not excuse men that they do sin of necessity.

As for example, the Devil himself can do nothing but evil, necessarily he
does evil, yet therefore he is not excusable, because he does evil necessarily
by the strength of his corrupt nature, that will not excuse him.

So then thus conceive we concerning this matter, that men are not excusable
nor free from blame, but the Lord may justly punish and plague them for their
hardness, and sins proceeding from their hardness, though it be so that Gods
will is that they are hardened, and Gods will is irresistible, because though
Gods will be in their hardening, and has a stroke in it, yet Gods will does
neither force hardness upon their hearts, nor cause them to sin, but the Lord
finding them naturally inclined to hardness, and that they are hardened by
nature, they being willing to continue in it; neither does the Lord force out
those sins that come from the hardness of men's hearts, but they do it freely,
out of their own free consent, for the Lord does neither take away the will of
man, nor the power of man's will, but the Lord does only order, govern, and
dispose their wills, and move it according to their own inclinations, they
freely consenting, being not thereunto forced, and therefore are justly to be
blamed.

And for the application of it, O Lord, I lay the fault upon my self, it was my
own wicked heart, I was born in iniquity, and in sin my mother conceived me.
And so the Apostle Paul, feeling there was a law in his members, resisting the
law in his mind, Romans 7.24. lays not the fault upon any thing else, but
himself, saying, O wretched man that I am* who shall deliver me from this body
of death! And thus those that will find mercy, must lay the fault and blame
upon themselves, and give glory to God, that is the only and right way to find
mercy; go unto God, lay open thy hard-heartednesse, crying for mercy, as a
prisoner ready to go to execution, and thou shall find mercy with God.

Thou will say then unto me, Why does he yet complain? for who has resisted
his will?
HEre is further matter offered unto us from this verse, In that the Carnal
Reasoner backeth his Argument thus, That if the will of God be so, that men
shall be hardened, then who has resisted his will? none can resist the will of
God: and this he does, to strengthen his Cavil, that the will of God cannot be
hindered from taking effect; thus he labors to fortify his conclusion. Now
this being a truth which the Carnal Reasoner puts down, the Apostle does not
confute him by gainsaying, or denying this, that Gods will is irresistible, but
he does answer the Caviller another way, as appears plainly in the verses
following; therefore hence this ground of truth lies plain before us,

That the will of God is irresistible, and cannot be withstood, O Lord God of
our Fathers, art not thou God in heaven? do not thou reign over all the
Nations and Kingdoms of the heathen? in thy hand is might and power, and none
is able to withstand it. None can resist thy will, it must needs take effect.
And to this purpose speaks Job, Job 9.4. who ever withstood the Lord, and
prospered? none was ever able to stand against the will of the Lord, and
prevail. And in Esaias 46.10, 11. the Lord speaks by his Prophet, that he does
whatsoever he will; as if he had said, What is he that can withstand my
purpose, and hinder me from effecting what I have purposed? Thus Nebuchadnezzar
after he had been cast out from the fellowship and society of men, and restored
to his understanding again, then confessed to the glory of God, that according
to his will he rules in heaven, and in earth, and none can stay thy hand in
any thing thou purposest to do, in Dan. 9. 32. And in Psalm. 33.11. The counsel
of the Lord stands for ever and ever. And thus we may see it made good, by
plentiful evidences, that neither men nor Angels, good nor bad, are able to
make the will of God void, and not to take effect.







This must therefore teach us to learn to be resolved upon this truth of God,
Lord; yea hereby they come to have restraining grace wrought in them; and to be
restrained from the outrage and extremity of sin, and to have an outward
external formality, and so they escape many fearful plagues, and many fearful
Judgments, that are poured out upon such as are contemners, and are rebellious
in their sins; take the example of Ahab; Ahab upon his hypocritical,
counterfeit, humiliation, brought a temporal blessing upon himself, that he
should escape the Judgments which God had denounced, 1 King. 21.28, 29. for as
he shall that walks in the sun, receive some change in the color of his
face, so for his counterfeit humiliation, the plagues should be brought in his
sons days; so also those that use the means of grace, shall have some
blessing, and thereby shall escape the Judgment that falls upon other wilful
rebellious persons; yea hereby they shall escape the greatest torture in hell,
they shall have no such great damnation as they that wilfully run on in sin,
they shall have some less torture, and some less pain then the other. And
therefore let us labor to use the means of salvation, and not refuse it,
saying, let God work his will, but use the means carefully.

Again, Is this so, that Gods will does determine and limit man's will? 1 Pet.
1.8.


VERSE 20. But O man, who art thou that replyest against God? Shall the thing
formed say to him that formed it, why have thou made me thus?


OUr Apostle now falls upon his Answer to the Cavil, and to the objection of
man's Reason, propounded in the Verse foregoing. And the answer unto it is
twofold, 1. Personally; and 2. Really: his personal answer to the Cavil, and
carnal Reasoner, is in the 20, and 21 Verses: his Real answer is in the two
verses following, in the 22, and 23. Verses.

First of all touching the personal answer, wherein he does check the
presumption of the Carnal Reasoner, and labors to take down his pride and
swelling, by bringing him to a consideration of his own baseness and nullity
to God; saying, O man, what art thou that reasonest against God? rebuking and
checking his insolency and pride, wherein we may observe the person reproving,
and the party reproved, noted unto us in these words, O man, etc. then he
amplifieth this reproof of his of the Carnal Reasoner, by a comparison, and a
similitude; and by that he shows what a Carnal Reasoner is. As if so be a
piece of wood, framed by the Carpenter, should rise up and quarrel with the
Carpenter, for framing of him to this, or that purpose; or the Iron rise up and
quarrel with the Smith, why he did beat him to this or that fashion; were not
this insolency and pride in the creature? Hereby implying, that man being
framed of God, ought not to question, and to dispute with God, and say, Why
have thou made me hard-hearted.

Then hereupon the Apostle directs a particular instance, adding weight and
force unto this similitude and comparison, namely, upon the power of the Potter
over the clay, shall the clay rise up against the Potter, has not the Potter
power over the clay, to make one vessel to honor, and another to dishonor?
And thus stands the Reason, as the clay may not reason the cause with the
potter, for making out of the same lump one vessel to one use, and another to
the other; for the potter has full power and authority over the clay, to frame
of it what vessel he thinks fit: so man is not to question God; man is not to
quarrel with God, or to call him to account for framing of him thus, or thus,
for the Lord has absolute power to dispose of man, even at his own good will
and pleasure, some to honor, and some to dishonor. So that in the 21. verse
God is compared to a potter, and man to the clay that is wrought upon by the
potter; and as it is lawful for the potter to frame out of the same lump of
clay, one vessel for better use and service at the Table, and another for baser
use in the Chamber, you know what I mean: so, and much more is it lawful for
the Lord to frame out of the same lump of earth, one man for salvation, and
another for damnation, and dishonor; so stands the Apostles reason: and so
much for the general matter of these two Verses, the 20. and 21. verses.

Now to enter upon these two verses more particularly, something is needful to
be spoken, touching the sense and meaning of these words; and first of the 20.
verse, O man, says the Apostle, who art thou that speak against God? O man!
here the Apostle speaks mavelous emphatically; he puts it down with a
great emphasis, and hereby he calls man to a consideration of his own
baseness; as if he had said, O thou man, what art thou? or who art thou?
consider with thy self, thou man, thou carnal Reasoner, that take upon thee
to quarrel with God; why? thou art a vile base wretch, a lump of earth, a piece
of clay, a worm, less then a worm, nothing in comparison of the great Majesty
of God: Dare thou quarrel against the will and counsel of the Lord? art thou
so malapert, so saucie, so shameless, so far past all shame, as to call into
question the will and doings of the holy God? to call him to account, and to
bring him within the compass of thy carnal reason: O man full of impiety, do
but consider and premeditate what thou art, a base wretch; and what the Lord
is, the great God of heaven and earth, and then judge what a malapert
sauciness it is in thee. Shall the thing formed say to him that formed it, Why
have thou made me so? do but consider with thy self, were it not an unbeseeming
thing, that a piece of Wood, or some such like thing framed by the hand of some
cunning Artificer, should rise up and say, Why have thou made me thus? thou art
but a bungler: were it not preposterous, and a monstrous thing in Nature? And
what is it but as absurd and gross for thee to argue and reason the cause with
God, thy Creator, thy Maker, touching his disposing of thee according to his
will, and say, O Lord, why have thou made me thus, or thus, herein thou have
showed thy self a bad workman: So that we may easily conceive the meaning of
the Apostle, in this verse, to be thus; as if the Apostle had said,

But O thou carnal Reasoner, what art thou, a man? and therein consider who
thou art being a man, and thou shall find thy self to be a base man, a vile
man, a worm, and less then a man, nothing in comparison of the great God; and
dare thou then question God, and cavil against the holy will of the Lord? art
thou so audacious, so bold, so malapert, as to quarrel with him? dare thou
that art but a silly worm, make thy carnal arguments against God? do but think
with thy self, were it a meet thing in nature, for a piece of wood, to rise up
against him that has formed it, and to say to the Mechanical Artificer, why
have thou made me of this base fashion, thou art but a bungler, it is much more
gross for thee to reason, and to argue the case with God, for disposing of
thee according to his will.

Come we now to matter of Observation and Doctrine. Observe.
And first of all observe we, that our Apostle making answer to the carnal
Reasoner, labors to bring him to a consideration of his own vileness,
thereby checking his presumption, in taking upon him to quarrel with the Lord;
O man, says he, who art thou, a profane wretch, a worthless thing, a worm,
less then a worm, nothing in comparison of God. Hence then the observation is
plain before us.

That the due consideration of what we are, Behold I have begun to speak unto
my Lord, and I am but dust and ashes: he breaks out into this perturbation,
acknowledging he is but dust and ashes; who am I that I should open my mouth to
the great, holy, and glorious God? even as nothing in comparison of him; as it
is said of all Nations in the world, that that in respect of God they are
vanity, and less then nothing, Esaias 40.15, 17. the drop of a bucket, vanity,
and less then nothing. And to the same purpose we find the servants of God
have been wonderfully troubled, cast down, and affrighted, and brought to a
great astonishment in consideration of their own baseness, and vileness, yea
they have even trembled and shaken, when they have had but a glympse of him.
Thus did Manoah, Judges 13.22. who having seen but an Angel of God, cried out,
alas, we shall surely dye, we have seen God. And the Prophet says, Esaias 6.5.
VVoe is me, I am undone, I am undone, (why what is the matter?) I am a man of
polluted lips, and I dwell among a people of polluted lips, and mine eyes have
seen the King the Lord of hosts; I have seen the great God of heaven and earth:
so that we see this has been made good unto us by evidence and testimony of
Scripture; that the due consideration of our vileness, together with Gods
mightiness, is the only means to work humility in us.

Because as the due consideration of our own meannesse and baseness, Who am
I? or what is my fathers house, the least of all the Tribes of Israel, in the 1 Samuel 18.18. Then to argue, a minore ad majus, we considering the baseness of
us in regard of the mightiness of God, of his greatness, and his glory,
should be a means to beat down the pride of our hearts; hereby we come to see
our own vileness and nothingnesse more clearly; Contraria juxta se posita
magis illucescunt.
which is in direct opposition and contrariety unto it: According to the ground
of Logic, (Contraries opposed one against the other, makes them appear more
clearly in their true natures.



Learn of me; for I am meek and lowly; and therefore we must get into our
selves an humble conceit of our selves; and to this end we must often think
upon, and enter into a serious consideration of our own baseness, vileness,
and nothingnesse in comparison of God, walk with God, draw near unto God,
compare your baseness and vileness to the glory of God; and this we are to
do, especially when we come near unto God, as when we either think, or speak of
God, or when we hear his name mentioned, or when we draw near to God in his
holy Ordinances, in hearing his Word, in prayer, in performing holy duties; for
when we come to the holy Ordinance of God, we come into the Chamber of the
presence of God, and we draw near unto God, and then consider, what am I? or
who are we? and what is the Lord? who do we come before? and hereupon we shall
be kept from our pride, in coming to the house of God, and then we shall be
kept from gaping and staring (when we come to the house of God,) at this or
that man's apparel, or at this or that woman's attire, and never give attention
to the Word of God, this is for want of considering what we are, and what God
is: Oh then learn we in the fear of God, in drawing near unto God either in
public or in private, to consider what a dreadful and great Majesty he is, and
to hear him with trembling and fear, and then we shall find comfort, as the
Psalmist says, Psalm. 25.17. the Lord teaches the humble, but he resists the
proud, James 4.6. 1 Pet. 5.5. he does profess himself to be an ((...)) enemy
to those that are proud, but he is a friend to the humble. Oh then labor we to
humble our selves before God, if we mean to gain comfort from God.

But O man, who art thou that replyest against God? Shall the thing formed say
to him that formed it, Why have thou made me thus?
IT is not here to be passed by, that the Apostle here deals roundly against
the Caviller, and takes him up sharply; he says not unto him, Observe.
thou ought not thus to reason against God, and to cavil with him, or thou
do not well in so doing, or be better advised, he uses not these gentle
speeches, but he takes him up roundly, and says, O man, what art thou? thou
less then a worm, that take upon thee to reply against God. Note. The
Ministers ought to put on a holy boldness against all cavillers and carnal
reasoners.
Thus may, and thus ought the Preachers of the Gospel to deal with Cavillers
and carnal Reasoners, and such as quarrel against the holy truth of God, the
Ministers and Preachers of the Word ought to put upon them the Spirit of the
Apostles, even a holy boldness to stand out against the holy faces of all that
contradict, and quarrel against the holy truth of God, which they have
delivered: They are to deal roundly with wrangling spirits, not to adulate and
flatter, but to tell them their own; so it be without any personal bitterness,
they may say as the Apostle says, who art thou that pleadest against God, and
do contradict the holy truth of God, so as they be not bitter against their
persons: but (not to stand upon this,)

Again, observe we in the next place, what is the fault, Observe.
that the carnal reasoner is reproved for by the Apostle, surely it is this,
viz. Cavilling and pleading against God, here is the fault in that he does
plead and reply against the Lord; and it is as if the Apostle had said, how
dare thou question the Lord, oh man? To argue with him, and to call the will
of the Lord into question? Dare thou be so impudent and so bold as to examine
the will of the Lord, by the rule of thy blind and carnal reason? Is not this
a sauciness and an impudent boldness in thee? art thou not ashamed of it? so
that from this speech of the Apostle arises this conclusion, viz.

That it is great impudency, and wicked boldness for men to question

And to this purpose we find that Job (though he were a holy man, one that had
Gods letters testimonial for his pious integrity.) Yet having herein gone too
far in the time of his great afflictions, he having gone too far in
reprehending of him; See how the Lord takes him up in Job 39.35. Is this to
learn to strive with the Almighty, do thou profess thy self to be my
scholar; and yet do thou reprehend the Lord? He that does reprove the Lord,
let him answer it.

Then he cries out, Ecce peccavi, behold I have offended, what shall I say
unto thee, thou great Lord of Heaven and Earth. I have been too bold to
question thee: And in Esaias 6.2. We read of the Seraphins, That they cover
their faces before the Throne of God, (in a vision which the Prophet saw) They
hide their faces, as not daring once to peep or look upon the holy and great
Majesty of God. The holy Saints, the holy Angels, the Cherubins and Seraphins
dare not once look thorough their wings to look upon the Majesty of God,
thereby to teach us modesty that we are not once to seek to pry into the
secrets of God, or to bring it within the compass of our base, weak and
beggarly reason and understanding, and if we so do, we are bold, impudent, and
saucy, and the reasons are two.

1. Because as Moses says, Deuter. 29, 29. Secret things belong unto God,
secret things are Gods several and peculiar, he has hedged and kept them
severally unto himself they are his enclosure and God has kept them in, so as
we may not leap over the pale, and thrust our selves into the searching of
secrets by our blind and sordid reason.

Man knows not, man cannot find out the works that are wrought under the
Sun, No though he be a man of the best wit and understanding, he cannot find
even the things that fall out in the course of this life; as the same Preacher
says in Eccles. 11.5. Oh man, thou know not how the bones do grow in the
womb of a woman with child, thou art not able to conceive the reason of such
an ordinary thing, as falls out in the ordinary course of the procreation of
man in the world, how much less then can we comprehend the secret counsel of
the Lord.

No beloved, the more we labor to find out the secrets of God by the dint of
our wit, and the strength of our reason, the more are we confounded in our
selves, and overwhelmed running over head and ears before we are aware, yea, we
are wrapped up in such encumbrances, as we cannot find the way out; yea, into
such a labyrint of doubts and difficulties that we are past recovery again, and
the deeper we think to go in searching of them, the further off are we from
finding of them; and therefore we may resolve it is great impudency and wicked
boldness for men to question and to cavil with the Lord, and to seek to bring
the hidden things of God within the compass of their base will and reason;
both because secret things belong unto God, and also in regard there is no
comparison between Gods will and our reason.

Applic.
This in the first place discovers unto us, that such persons are exceeding
Gods secret Counsel, those things that God never revealed.

As they do that question. why the Lord made the world no sooner? What God did
before he made the world? Why the Lord would not appoint all men to be saved?
Why the Lord suffered Adam to fall when he had power to keep him from sinning?
What hell is, and where it is? What are the parts of hell? Whether the fire in
hell be material or not? with diverse other curious questions.

Alas, these do little imagine that they provoke the Lord to wrath, to anger
and displeasure against their souls: We read in 1 Samuel 6.19. That the Lord
slew fifty thousand threescore and ten men of the Bethshemites for looking
into the Ark of God. And will the Lord suffer such curious persons (as these
are) to pry into his secrets unpunished; no surely, he is able by the breath
of his nostrils, to throw these curious questionists into the pit of hell: we
know that even an earthly King will not endure it, that every base peasant and
mean subject should meddle with the weighty affairs of his Kingdom, and
question him about the ponderous things that are of importance; and will the
King of Heaven and Earth suffer base silly and simple men to question his
unsearchable ways, and to seek to find out those things that God has kept
close to himself? assuredly no, he will not suffer them so to do without
punishment if they repent not.

Again, is this so that it is a great impudency and wicked boldness for which
the Lord has kept and enclosed to himself, and which God has not revealed,
and if we take upon us to search into them, to and question God about them, we
rush upon the Lords right, and it is a fearful impudency, and shameless
boldness for us so to do; as for example, not to hover in the general.

The Lord suffered the Gentiles to walk in the darkness of their minds and in
the vanity of the flesh, Acts 14.16. and that about the space of two thousand
years together, and then the Lord revealed unto them his Gospel, may we then
question God touching this particular, and demand the reason of it why the Lord
did suffer them so long to live without the light of his Gospel? why would the
Lord suffer our Parents and Ancestors the Gentiles, of whom we came, to live in
darkness, and reveal his will unto us? no, no, it is a secret, and we are not
to question God about it. So again, touching infants, shall we ask the reason
why those infants that die before they come to years of discretion, are not
all saved, but some go to Heaven, and some to Hell, some belong to Gods
Election, and some do not; some are saved, some are not; Shall we question and
say, Oh Lord, why would thou have it so that poor infants shall be damned?
No, no, the reason is hid from us; though it be true, that some infants are
saved, and some are not; yet the cause of it is kept close from us; and
therefore we are not to seek into the secret Counsel of the Lord, we see in the
world many things fall out wonderful strangely; yea we see, as Solomon says he
did see, in Eccle. 7.17. I have seen a just man perish in his justice, and I
have seen a wicked man prosper a long time in his malice; and we may see it
goes ill with the good, and well with the bad; yea many times it goes ill
with the good, and that because they are good, and it goes well with the bad,
because they are bad; therefore they are countenanced; and things seem to go
quite contrary, as if God had no providence over man, and we see many strange
judgments and afflictions to befall other men, what then? Shall we hereupon
dispute with God, arguing the case with the Lord? and take upon us to demand of
him the reason why these things come to pass, that it goes ill with the good,
and well with the bad, and these things seem to go out of order, as if God had
no care of them? No, no, for if we so do, it is most monstrous boldness; and
we run into the just censure of the Apostle in this place: What and who art
thou, Oh Man, will thou take upon thee to demand the reason of God? Indeed, I
confess some of the dear and holy servants of God, have stumbled and taken a
fall at this stone, as the Prophet Jeremiah, in the 12. Chapter and 1. Verse
says, O Lord, if I dispute with thee, thou art righteous, yet Lord let me
talk with thee about thy judgments, why is it that the way of the wicked
prosper? and they are in wealth that rebel and transgress thy Law? And at the
same stone David stumbled, in Psalm 73.2. His foot was almost gone when he
saw it to go well with the wicked: This was the weakness and infirmity of
the holy Saints and servants of God; we must learn both to think and to speak
with reverence, of the secret ways and judgments of God, and to adore them,
not to cavil against them; but to acknowledge them to be just, though the cause
be secret: And that indeed in the midst of the confusions and disorders that
be in this world; when we see all things turned topsie turvie as it were; there
is one that sits at the stern, even the Lord of Heaven, and Earth, he
sits guiding the stern, and he will in his due time set things straight, and
bring them into order and square; thus we are not to reason, but to reverence
the secrets of the Lord. Indeed we are not to pass by the strange works of
God, and the strange things we see or hear of in the world, without a due and
serious consideration of them, that is senseless blockishnesse, and the fault
of many men, that they pass over the works of the Lord, and never think of
them, nor make use of them to see the wonderful power and greatness of the
Lord.

But we must take heed of being too quick sighted and eagle eied to search into
the cause of things that fall out upon such and such people and persons. Men
account it a degree of sharpness of wit, that they are able to find out the
cause of hidden things; But the Apostle calls this mere dotage, in the 1 of
Timothy, the 6. and the 4. If any man consent not unto the Doctrine of
godliness, he doteth about questions, and is a mere questionist; As the common
Proverb is, [One fool may propound more questions in an hour then a thousand
wise men can answer truly in a year;] So that these questionists are dolts
and mere fools.

Let us therefore labor to be quick sighted in searching unto those things that
concern faith and a good Conscience, leaving the matters of needless and
curious questions touching the secret things of God, as some do; saying, Why
am I thus or thus? and why are these times harder then the former? Oh says
Solomon, Thou art a fool in so doing, thou do not inquire wisely concerning
this.

But if we will be quick-sighted and searching, let us be so in regard of our
sins and the corruption of our hearts; for who can understand his faults,
Psalm 19.12. The heart of Man is deceitful, who can know it? Be curious in
searching out thy sins and hidden corruptions, and in searching out the
subtle devices of the Devil; here is a matter of just search and inquiry, and
by this thou shall gain comfort, but by diving into the secrets of God, nothing
but terror and danger is to be found.

But oh man (says the Apostle) Who art thou?
BEfore I leave this Verse it is needful to remove an imputation and slander
laid upon us by the Church of Rome; the Papists upon that which we have now
delivered, bend the face of this truth, and seem to beat the edge of it against
us in this manner. An impudent cavil of the Papists answered.
If this be so, that men are to be held and accounted impudent and shameless,
and wickedly bold, that dare seek into Gods secrets, is this your Doctrine,
that men are not to pry into those things that God has not revealed, then
(say they) you your selves may be justly charged to be such impudent and
shameless persons, you cannot avoid the same; it falls flat upon your heads
and does convince you of wicked boldness; Because (say they) you take upon you
to know it, and that infallibly that you are in the number of Gods chosen, and
of them that shall be saved, not by conjecture, or hope, but to know it
infallibly.

Now say they, this is a bold presumption for you to pry into Gods secret
closet, and to step up into Heaven, and to make your selves of the privy
Council of God, to affirm and aver that you are in the number of Gods chosen,
for you have no Word, nor special Revelation to that purpose as Paul had, and
some other holy servants of God; and therefore the blessed Apostle Paul, may
say as he said in Romans 8.38, 39. I am sure that neither Principalities, nor
Powers, Angels, nor things to come, shall remove him from Christ. But where is
your special Revelation and special Word, to this purpose, that you shall
certainly be saved, and therefore say they, you are wicked, impudent,
shameless and bold in so doing.

God in Scripture do not say unto thee in particular, believe thou John, or
Thomas, or any other particular name, and thou shall be saved in particular,
yet the Word of God puts down a general promise, and the Word says John 3.16.
He that believes in the Son of God shall never perish, but shall have
everlasting life. Who is so simple he knows not, but that the general
comprehends a special, and especially where there is a word of Commandment
joined unto it, to apply the promise particularly, and where the Minister
stands in the place of Christ, 2 Corinthians 5.20. As his Ambassador to
assure as many as believe the promise, and repent of their sins, that they in
particular shall be saved, even thou, whatsoever thy name is, thou believing in
Christ, shall certainly be saved.

Oh but say they, the Minister may miss the mark, and mistake, and he may
assure a man that he belongs to God, and shall certainly be saved, when there
is no such matter.

Answ. It is true indeed, if so be the Minister take upon him to speak
absolutely, that this particular man or woman shall be saved; But if he speak
upon the condition of faith and repentance, he cannot mistake, he may say to
this or that particular man, Thou John, or Thomas, believe thou in Christ, and
repent truly and unfeignedly of thy sins, and thou shall certainly be saved:
upon this ground he may assure him of salvation. Its no boldness to search
into that we are commanded so to do, 2 Cor. 3.10.
Therefore it is not any matter of boldness to search into it; yea we are
bound to search whether we be in the number of Gods chosen, or no; nay, we may,
and we ought to search into that matter, whether we be in the number of Gods
chosen, or no, so as we do it by ordinary, and direct means, by diving and
searching into our own hearts, and there laboring to find the witness of the
Spirit, and the fruits of true saving faith answerable to the Spirit; for by
this means we may, and we ought to search and try into it, whether we be in the
estate of faith, and of salvation, or no: nay we have the warrant of the
Apostle, 2 Cor. 13.5. prove your selves whether you are in the faith, or no;
know you not your selves, that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be reprobates?
Therefore it is a mere imputation laid upon us by the enemies of the holy
truths of God.

Come we now to the Apostles Amplification of it in the reproof of the Carnal
Reasoner, replying against God, The Apostles Amplification.
Shall the thing formed say to him that formed it, Why have thou made me thus?
in which the Apostle says open the absurdity, and the grossness of the
Carnal Reasoner, in pleading against God, and that by a Comparison and
similitude; and it is as if so be a piece of Wood, or Iron, wrought by some
Artificer, a Smith or Carpenter, should say unto him, thou art a bungler, why
have thou made me of this fashion; which were a Monster in Nature. And hereby
our Apostle implies, that it is as absurd and gross, for men to quarrel with
the Lord, and to argue and reason the case with God, that is the Creator and
Maker, why he made them to this or that end, or in this or that manner? Now
this being the drift of the Apostle in this Amplification, to show the
absurdity of it; hence arises this Conclusion,

That it is a most unmeet thing, and a thing odious and hateful, monstrous,
Wherefore has the Lord done this, to bring us to this Land, to fall upon the
sword? Is it not better for us to return into Egypt, and to make a Captain over
us? the Lord has mistook himself to bring us hither, to fall by our enemies,
he has took a wrong aim; and so they thought themselves wiser then God. And we
shall find, that Joshua calls this rebellion, in the ninth verse, O my
brethren, says he, how long will ye rebel against the Lord? And this sin of
theirs made them hateful and odious to God; so that we see, that it is a thing
odious, monstrous, and abominable, for men to find fault with God, touching his
will in making and disposing of them, and this is also proved by two Reasons.







But you will say, Is there any one so wicked, to find fault with God in making
of them this way, or that way, so wicked, so shameless, so impudent?

Yes, there be many in the world; what else do they but even find fault with
God, touching his will in making and framing of them to this or that fashion?
in that they take upon them to mend Gods work, and to make themselves better
then ever God did make them, taking upon them to mend the work of God, as they
do, that color their hair, and paint their faces, and disguise themselves in
antic, disguised, and new fangled attire, they will make themselves peacock
like in their top and top gallants, that bring their hips up to their
shoulders, surely such persons they are monsters amongst men, and such as are
to be wondered at; and as they are now so proud, that they know not themselves,
they may justly fear, that when the Lord comes to Judgment, the Lord will not
know, nor acknowledge them, without speedy repentance, but will say unto them,
Away, hence, who gave you this colored hair, this complexion on your painted
cheeks, this antic disguised body? did I? no, you would mend my work, and
therefore away, i will none of you, begone into utter destruction, depart from me
ye workers of iniquity, I know you not, Matthew. 7.22.

Again in like sort, is it not a common thing (beloved) with some to dislike
the works of God upon themselves, and to find fault with Gods disposing of
them, and a casting of them into this or that estate and condition of life? as
they being poor, lame, weak, feeble, and deformed in their bodies, do not they
sometimes utter these words? Oh it were better for me that I had been made a
rich Merchant, a Noble man, a strong man, or a fair man, and not as I am; what
is this but to fly in Gods face, and to pick a quarrel with him that has
formed them? this is for man, a silly creature, a worm less then a worm, to
turn against God; and as a worm being trod upon, does turn again; so does man
bring upon himself a curse and a woe, pronounced in Esaias 45.9. he that does
quarrel with his Creator, does even dash himself upon the rock of Gods heavy
wrath, and upon his furious vengeance, and so runs into a dangerous estate.

Again, this being so, learn we our duty, to hold our selves contented in

And to help us herein, consider first of all, that the chiefest thing that the
Devil aymeth at, when we lie under distress, is to make us fly in Gods face,
and to quarrel with God, and to find fault with him, Job 1.11. says Satan unto
God, Do but touch him, and he will fly in thy face.

Again secondly, consider we, that the will of God is the rule of all his
actions, and his goodness is the rule of his will, and his will is ever holy,
and just, and good, and we being in the number of his children, he is most
merciful in disposing of our estate, and our present estate though it be harsh
and hard, it is the best estate to us, whether it be poverty, or prosperity,
because God our Father sees it so to be, and he is most holy, wise, just, and
good, and we are to give him the glory of his goodness, justice, wisdom, and
mercy, in what estate soever we be: Oh learn we then to rest contented in all
estates and conditions of life, and to submit our selves to the good will of
God the Creator in disposing of us, remembering we are his creatures, he the
Creator; we are the formed, he the former; he is our Maker, and it is our duty
to be contented.

VERSE 21. Has not the Potter power over the clay, of the same lump, to make
one vessel unto honor, and another unto dishonor.


IN this Verse our Apostle goes on in his personal Answer to the Caviller and
Carnal Reasoner, and having in the verse foregoing, brought a general
comparison, to prove the grossness and absurdity of the Reasoners argument;
now here in this 21. verse, the Apostle subjoyneth a particular instance,
adding weight and force to his former similitude; as if he had said, Doubtless
it is a most absurd thing for men to quarrel with God; as for example, it is as
if a piece of clay in the hand of the Potter, should rise up and find fault
with the potter, for making one vessel to a better use, and another to a baser
use; why? because the Potter has full power and authority over the clay, to
make what he will.

Now the particular implication of this verse, that which is herein employed, is
thus, God is the Potter, and man is the clay, and as it is lawful for the
Potter to make of the clay one vessel for service at the Table, and another for
baser service in the kitchen, or Chamber; so much more is it lawful for God, to
make of man one for honor, and another for dishonor, the Apostles reasoning
is, a minore ad majus, from the lesser, to the greater; and if the Potter, who
is but a creature, has power over the clay which is a creature also, to make
one vessel to an excellent use, and the other to a baser use, surely then the
authority of God over all and every creature is far greater; the Lord has
absolute power to dispose of all, as it pleases him this way, or that way,
that is the general drift and purpose of the Apostle.

Now the words of this verse being taken as the first part of the Comparison,
of the Potter and the clay, there is no hardness in them for the sense and
meaning of them, Sir. (...).

An non habet potestatem figulus Luti? Explication of the words of verse 21.
(...) ( Syriac (...)) Ex eadem massa.

Diverse opinions concerning the sense and meaning of these words


only they are put down by way of interrogation which is of greater force, and
not by way of position; and the affirmation of this Interrogation is thus much:
That the Potter has power and lawful authority over the clay; for so the
word in the Original signifies. But being taken in the Application, as that
which they do imply, as namely, implying God to be the Potter, and man to be
the Clay, then there is something in them very needful to be explained, and
there is difficulty in them, (Has not the Potter power over the Clay?) That
is in the implication of them; Has not God power and lawful authority over
Man, as the Potter has over his Clay? Yea, much more has the Lord power over
Man, to make, to ordain, and to appoint (of the same lump:) Some do understand
of the same lump to be meant the sin of Idolatry, in which the Children of
Israel were in Egypt: That the Lord out of that same lump of Idolatry in which
the Children of Israel were with the Egyptians, saved the Israelites, and
destroyed the Egyptians; but this is too scantie, too narrow, and not large
enough for to express the Apostles meaning; for the Apostles drift is not here
of inflicting of punishment for that man can give a reason of, but the Apostle
speaks of Gods ordaining, and appointing.

And again, some Divines do by this word lump understand the mass of
corruption, man's fall, man's corrupting by Adams transgression, Adam being
wrapped in sin.

Alludens (inquit) ad Adami creationem humanum genus umdum conditum, nisi in
opificis mente, comparat massae Luti, ex qua Deus postea, prout ab aeterno
decreverat, condiderit, and quotidie condat tum eligendos, tum reprobandos, qui
etiam declarat verbum faciendi, (...), etc. Objection of the Anabaptiste
propounded and answered.
But though this be the opinion of many reverent Divines, yet it cannot be the
Apostles meaning, because as says Reverend Beza, in this sense the Lord cannot
be said to make men vessels of dishonor, but to find men already in their
estate vessels of dishonor. Again, the comparison it self seems to exclude and
shut out all respect to corruption, that there is no respect had to the
corruption of man from everlasting; for you see here God is compared to a
Potter that takes a piece of clay not stained with any pollution, corruption,
spot or tincture, for then the Potter might have some excuse to make a base
vessel of it; because it was a spotted, and tainted piece of Clay, so God
takes man, as in himself not corrupted, for then there was some cause why the
Lord should cast away this man, and not that man; therefore we are here to
understand not man corrupted, but mankind generally taken, (One vessel to
honor, and another to dishonor;) that is to make one vessel to his Glory to
honor everlasting, and another to be vessels of wrath to shame and confusion.

I know what the Anabaptists object against this, for they say it is very
impious, gross and absurd thus to expound this comparison, this makes God to
have no wisdom. For what Potter is so foolish to make his pots to break them,
and to throw them away purposely, shall we say then, God made man to destroy
him, to throw him to utter confusion, so that say they this is a very impious
Exposition of the comparisons; But herein they show their foolishness and
weakness.

I answer, we affirm no such matter either of the Potter, or of God, that God
makes man to destroy him; for what is it for God to destroy a man? It is when
he confounds, and turns man to nothing, when he does annihilate and dissolve
him to nothing; but for God to find a man in his corruption, to throw him into
Reprobation, this is no destroying of a man.

Again (beloved) the Potter is a Creature, and has received a Law from God his
Creator, that he must carry himself toward his workmanship according to his
Law, that he may prove profitable, either to the Church, or to the
Commonwealth.

Now this he does not if he make his Pots with a purpose to break them; then he
lives idly and is a vain foolish fellow: But God the great Lord of Heaven
and Earth, who has made the world, he is not bound to any such law will the
Anabaptists in their foolerie bring God under a Law? he is King of Kings, and
Lord of Lords, and he has the Prerogative Royal, and he is bound to no Law, no
more to preserve them being made, then to make them of nothing when they were
not; will they bring God under their girdle, and under their law? therefore
notwithstanding their cavil, the meaning remains a truth, and it is as if the
Apostle had said, Sense and meaning of the words.
Has not God power, and absolute lawful authority over man; and as the Potter
has over the Clay, even out of the same lump and mass of mankind, taken
generally to appoint, and to ordain, one man to be his vessel of mercy in life
and glory in Heaven, and to another to be a vessel of his wrath in the
destruction of hell: And thus much for the Apostles meaning.

Come we now to stand upon the words in particular, Ministers in preaching of
the Word must bring similitudes of things known to their hearers, not of
strange, uncouth and far fetched, it may be of such things as never were in the
world, or at the least never know^ to their hearers.
and first of all in regard of the comparison, which is brought from a thing
that is easy and ordinary, obvious things, the potter and the pots before a
man's eyes ordinarily. And this we shall find has been usual with the holy
Messengers and Ministers of God, in preaching and publishing the word they have
brought examples and similitudes not rare and far fetched, but things that are
known to the people; Thus did the Lord Jesus in Matthew. 13. He compared the
Kingdom of Heaven to many obvious things well known; To seed sown in the
ground, to a grain of Mustardseed, to a Leaven hid in three pecks of meal,
which every common huswife knows.

And this therefore may be reprofe to such Preachers, that do in preaching to
a common populous Auditorie, they fetch comparisons from things beyond the
Moon, from Celestial bodies and orbs Centrivals and Concentrivals I know not
what, and also from things beyond sea, from Histories out of Pliny, beasts aad
creatures that vulgar people know not,

Again, We see man is compared to an earthen vessel, and a pot of clay, here we
are put in mind of our framing and making, and what we are in respect of our
matter and substance; and hence the observation is this.

That man is as an earthen vessel, as a pot of clay; Man was made of the dust
of the ground; and in Genesis 3.19. The Lord says unto man after his fall, Dust
thou art, and to dust thou shall return; Thou art immortal in respect of thy
first making, but now thou art but dust, Genesis 18.27. Abraham acknowledges
himself to be but dust and ashes; A man of excellent parts and endowments. And
in the 2 Cor. 5.1. The Apostle calls our bodies, Earthly houses, tents and
tabernacles made of earth and clay. The Scripture is plain and plentiful in
expressing this to be a Truth, that man, yea the strongest man is but an
earthen vessel, and a compound of clay; and we may see this to be a truth in
common experience, the soul being removed from the body by death the body
falls flat upon the ground, it rots, putrifies, and is soon dissolved to the
Elements, and materials of which it was made, and lies like a stinking carrion
if not buried, and turns to the earth of which it was, Eccle. 12.7. Dust
returns to the earth as it was.

For the Application, the consideration of this truth that our bodies are
trimming up a pot of clay, an earthen vessel. But grant this to be true, that
thou excellest others in beauty, and in comely proportion, yet remember thy
making, thy metal whereof thou art made, of the same earth with others, and
for all thy beauty and comely proportion, a little cold, a little sickness, a
fit of an ague, or fever will shake thee, and make the shrink, and go shaking
and quaking, and as David says, Psalm 39.11. When God rebukes and chasticeth
man for his sin, his beauty consumes and turns to nothing, the red
cheeks, beauty and comely propotion, at one blast of sickness comes to
nothing.

And consider, we are but potsheards, and a potsheard is but a potsheard
overlaid with silver, clay is but clay gilded with gold, and if thou have these
endowments of thy body above others, it comes not from thy body which is but
clay, but it is put upon thy body by the good hand of thy God, and therefore be
not proud of it, but learn we to be humble, and to walk humbly before the Lord
of Heaven and Earth, we are but earthen vessels before the Lord, he may even
quash us, and beat us in pieces; yea as the Psalmist says in Psalm 2.9. The
Lord has a rod of Iron; and we know the stroke of an Iron rod upon an earthen
pot shattereth it all to pieces; The Lord has an Iron rod to smite the men of
the world, that go on in their sins of riot and excess, especially now at
this time of the year; If they did but consider, that the Lord has an Iron
rod and can break them in pieces in the very midst of their mirth; we see it
sometimes in many merry meetings the body is thrown on the ground, and the
breath taken from it, for can the earthen pot endure the stroke of the Iron
rod? no, it dasheth it all to pieces, not so much as a sheard left, to take
fire out of the earth, and can many a poor silly earthen vessel, endure the
stroke of the Iron rod of God; therefore learn we to walk humbly before the
sight of the great and glorious God, remember thy making whereof thou art made.



As we know the Potter, he knows that his pot of earth cannot endure a hard
knock and stroke, and therefore he handles them very nicely, and gently, and
according to the tenderness of it; so deals the gracious God of Heaven and
Earth with his own Children, he knows whereof they are made, he knows they
are but dust, Psalm 103.13, 14. He is a pitiful Father, and has compassion
of his Children, because he knows whereof they are made, and that they are
but dust and ashes; as the Prophet Esaias says, Esaias 27.16. of the Lord, I will
not be always angry with my People, for then the Spirit would fail before me,
I will not always strive and contend with them, lest they should be destroyed;
so that this may be a comfort to Gods Children, that the Lord esteems of them
as they are dust and ashes, and so pittieth them.

Has not the Potter power over the clay, of the same lump, to make one vessel
unto honor, and another unto dishonor.
IN the next place consider we, God is here compared to a Potter, in respect of
the Potters power over his clay, that as the potter has lawful power over his
clay, and may lawfully make of his clay what he will, even several vessels, to
several uses, even such power and such authority, or rather greater power, and
greater authority has God over mankind, to make and appoint men to several
ends, even some to honor, and some to dishonor. You see then this being the
ground of the comparison, that man has lawful power over the clay, to make of
the same lump different vessels to diverse uses; so Gods power is far greater to
make out of mankind, some to honor, and some to dishonor: the Observation
from this implication, is thus much,

That God has lawful power and authority over man, to ordain, and O house of
Israel, cannot I do with you, as the Potter does with his clay; as the clay is
in the hand of the Potter, so are you in my hand, O house of Israel. As the
Potter may do with his clay what he will, so may I with you; and in Luke 12.6.
The Lord Jesus forewarning of us whom we ought to fear, as namely God only; he
describes, that God, to have power to cast into hell fire, fear not him that
can kill the body, but fear him that can kill both body and soul: and the same
word is used there, (...).
which signifies lawful power, as is here, thereby showing, that God has
lawful power, not only to take away the life of the body, but to cast it into
hell. And it must needs be so, that God has greater power and authority then
the Potter, to appoint and ordain men to several ends, then he has to make
vessels of the same lump of clay to several uses; why?

The Reason is, because the Pottter he is but a creature himself, The Lord has
made us, and not we our selves; and in this respect the Lord has Sovereign
power and authority over all men, yea his right over all men is absolute, yea
such, and so absolute is the right of God over all men, as that the Lord might
have made man, and he might not have made man; and the Lord now having made man
of nothing, so he may at his pleasure bring him to nothing suddenly, the
Creator out of the liberty of his will, and absoluteness of his power, may do
with his creature what he will; which power the potter has not, because he is
but a creature, and the clay is a creature also, it is made to his hand.

This serves as one special ground, to clear God of injustice and wrong doing,
that he has appointed some men to life and glory in heaven, God, as the
Arminians and Anabaptists, say they, herein you do go about to prove God a
tyrant, and that he does deal tyrannically with men, in destroying of them. But
they are deceived; for why? we know tyrants they do their own will, either with
men, or against them, only because their pleasure is so, they respect neither
law, nor equity, nor Conscience, so he may do his will, and have his pleasure;
this is the manner of a Tyrant: Now God he ordains men to several ends, not
only according to his own good pleasure, but according to the lawfulness of
his good pleasure, as he may lawfully do, and as he has lawful power and
authority; whereas the Tyrant cares not, whether it be right or wrong, he will
break through all the bounds of truth and law; there is no such matter with the
Lord, but the Lord he does it according to his lawful power, and lawful
authority to dispose of men, to do with them as he will; the tyrant has not so.

And again, there is a large and wide difference between God and a Tyrant, both
in respect of their wills, and also in regard of their ends: As first of all,
the will of Tyrants, what is it? according to their own lusts, and their own
pleasure; and they being wicked and sinful, make their wills as wicked and
sinful: but the Will of God, (God being most holy,) it is according to his
nature, and his nature being holy and pure, his Will is most holy and pure.

Again, Tyrants respect wicked ends, in dealing hardly with their subjects, in
taking away their lives, and their liberties, and that is to satisfy their own
cruel and bloody minds. But now the purpose of God in dealing with men,
respects the praise of his glory, and of his mercy; which two ends are ever
holy and good: the ends of Tyrants are according to their Tyranny, but the end
of the Lord, in ordaining some to shame, and some to honor, is the glory of
his Justice and mercy: and therefore it does not follow from hence, that we
make God cruel, and Tyrannical, because we affirm, that God has out of his
mere good will and pleasure appointed some to shame, and some to honor,
because the Lord has power so to do.

And this should teach us to be so far from charging God with Tyranny, and
indeed to drive this further, we are not suffer once such a thought to arise in
our hearts, that God deals hardly with us in any thing whatsoever, no not
when thy estate seems unto flesh and blood to be most desperate; nay we are
to be far from this, to think that God deals hardly with us, nay when we are
under the hand of God, in some great and grievous distress, let us then
remember thus much, and think with our selves, the Lord has lawful authority,
to appoint men to everlasting destruction: now if the Lord has not thus dealt
with us, but given us a better and everlasting estate to life and glory; Oh how
can we think that God deals hardly with us in any thing, he having evidenced
his love unto us in Christ Jesus; no, though our distresses be but at the
height, and we in the deepest mire of misery, We are to be thankful unto God in
our deepest distresses, and to give him the glory of his mercy and Justice.

In massa pura non corrupta.


we are then to be thankful unto God, even when we are plunged into the deepest
Afflictions we can think of; we are (though it seem harsh and hard) to bless
God, and to consider in the time of our afflictions, O Lord, if thou should
deal with us as we have deserved, we had been long since in hell: now if the
Lord do mitigate our Judgments, and has appointed us to salvation, we are to
magnify his mercy, considering his lawful authority over us to do what he will
with us.

Again, we considering, that the lump of clay is here to be considered
untainted, free from tincture, and pollution; so we are to conceive of mankind,
in the making of him free from corruption.

That Gods will in appointing men to their several and final ends, is absolute,
Gods will is dependent on nothing out of God.
Ephesians, 1.5. and in the 11. verse he says, God works all things after the
counsel of his own will; not unadvisedly, but with counsel.

Because the Will of the Lord is the highest cause of all things, and when we
are come to that, we are not to search any further; nor to reason

This being a truth,

I but may some say, the Apostle says, if any man purge himself from evil, he
shall be made a vessel of honor: so that it depends not upon Gods will, but
upon our purging of our selves, and our purifying of our hearts and lives.

To this I answer, The Apostle in that place alleged,

VERSE 22. What if God willing to show his wrath, and to make his power known,
endured with much long-suffering the vessels of wrath fitted to destruction.


IN these two Verses our Apostle he makes a real Answer to the Caviller, and
Carnal Reasoner; the Caviller reasons thus, (from the words of the Apostle)
that some men are hardened, it is the will of God, so says the Apostle, he
hardens whom he will: what reason is there then that God should complain of
such men that are hatdened? the will of God is irresistible, it cannot be
withstood, and you teach us, God hardens whom he will: what then (says the
Caviller) has God to complain of? Now herein first our Apostle does check the
Cavillers sauciness and malapertnesse in the 20. verse, Who art thou, O man?
showing the absurdity of the reasoning against God; and it is as if the formed
thing should say to the former, why have thou made me thus? amplifying that, by
a similitude of the Potter; whereby the Apostle implies, that as the Potter
may lawfully do with his clay what he will, and frame out of it several
vessels, to several uses; so may the Lord ordain some men to life and glory*
and some to shame and confusion.

Now the Apostle having thus made way to the Real Answer, now he comes to it,
and shows, that God may lawfully punish Reprobates for their hardness. And
that God is just in threatening and punishing men for their hardness of heart;
this he proves by the Lords manner of dealing with Reprobates, because (says
he) the Lord suffers them with long patience; as if he had said, though the
Lord had decreed their rejection and casting off for ever; yet before the Lord
has executed any degree of his punishment, he suffers them with long
patience to continue, that he may the better declare his just wrath and
Judgment upon them, and his power in them, and may make known the riches of his
mercy toward his chosen.

Now more particularly we have in these two Verses (the 22. and 23.) two things
laid before us; First of all, a description both of Reprobates, and of Gods
Elect. And secondly, that which the Apostle affirms, and puts down
concerning Reprobates; these be the main general things; Reprobates are thus
described by the Apostle, vessels of wrath, and those prepared to destruction;
Gods Elect are thus described, vessels of mercy prepared unto glory; both
vessels, but the one of wrath, and the other of mercy; one prepared to
destruction, the other prepared to life and glory.

Now the thing which the Apostle puts down concerning Reprobates, is, that
God suffers them, with long, and much patience, and that out of his own mere
will and good pleasure, (what if God would suffer the vessels of wrath?) then
the Apostle amplifieth this long-suffering of God to Reprobates, by the ends of
Gods long-suffering and patience, namely, in respect of Reprobates themselves,
to declare and manifest his just wrath and vengeance upon them, for the
Manifestation and Declaration of his just power in punishing of them, then in
respect of Gods Elect, that thereby he might show forth the riches of his
glorious mercy to the Elect, in the 23. verse, that he might declare the riches
of his mercy unto them that are prepared for glory: so we have the general
things of these two Verses.

Come we now to the opening of the sense of these two verses; Explication of
the words.
and first of all of the 22. verse.

What if God would,] What if God being willing, or it being his good pleasure;
and here something must be supplied, to make it a perfect sentence, something
must be conceived as a Consequent, what if it be the good will and pleasure of
the Lord to suffer the vessels of wrath to go to destruction, with long
patience? what if God will so do? what is that to thee: (this makes it a
perfect sentence,) what can thou accuse God of in this particular?

to show his wrath,] By wrath, is here meant both Gods displeasure for and
against sin, and Gods vengeance for the same: and God is said to manifest and
show his wrath, when he conceives just displeasure against men for their sins,
and does inflict just Judgment, and just punishment upon them for the same.

and to make his power known] Or, as it is in the Original, (...), to make it
possible; to make it appear, that it is possible and easy unto God, that God
has power to confront and bear down the Reprobates, be they never so mighty,
with a stroke of his hand, and to send them soul and body to destruction; as it
is, 1 Samuel 2.10. all the adversaries of the Lord shall perish, they shall be
destroyed and confounded.

suffer with long patience] Or, with long-suffering; for the word is the very
same, as in Romans 2.4. where the Apostle says, despisest thou the patience and
long-suffering of the Lord? now Gods long sufferance is his slownesse to anger,
Exodus 34.6. where the Lord is described to be slow to anger; and Gods long
sufferance, and slownesse to anger is, when he bears with them a long time,
and keeps back his wrath; suffering them to go on; and to add sin unto sin,
he spares them a long time when he might strike, and suddenly send them to
hell.

vessels of wrath] The Apostle still is in the comparison of a Potter, and
compares man to a vessel, a vessel of wrath; and though by vessel, may be
understood any instrument or utensel, used about a house; yet hereby is meant
such a vessel, which by reason of his concavity and hollownesse, is fit to
receive, and contain, either things liquid or dry: so the Reprobates being
vessels, they have this concavity, this hollownesse in them, they are fit
receptacles, and vessels to receive the wrath of God, and the arrows of his
vengeance: yet (for the better understanding of this,) we must put here a
difference between a vessel of wrath, and a child of wrath, these are not both
one. Now a child of wrath for the present estate, Difference between a vessel
of wrath, and a Child of wrath.
may be a vessel of mercy, so was Paul, so were the Elect Ephesians, Ephesians.
2.3. we were by nature children of wrath, as well as others; but a vessel of
wrath cannot become a vessel of mercy; and of those speaks our Apostle here.

prepared to Destruction.] Expositors in this place do make a very curious
distinction, between these terms, prepared to destruction, and prepared to
glory; the one (say they) is spoken in the passive, prepared to destruction;
the other in the active, he prepares them to glory: but this is a needless
distinction; for this is to be expounded by some other places of Scripture; as
that in 1 Thessalonians. 5.9. where vessels of wrath are said to be prepared and
ordained of God; the Lord having in his eternal decree, ordained and appointed
them to everlasting shame and confusion, as a potter makes a vessel to receive
excrements; so these are appointed to destruction, not as it is a misery of the
creature, but as it is a manifestation of his glory who is the Creator, which
he will have made known to all the world.

So then thus conceive we the meaning of the Apostle, in this 22. verse; Sense
and meaning of the words of the 22. verse.
What if God be willing, out of his good pleasure, that he might conceive just
wrath, and inflict and execute just Judgment, and that he might make it appear,
that he is a God of power, and able to confront the Reprobate, and to bring
them to destruction; What if God willing, to keep back his wrath, even with
long patience, suffering such as are fit receptacles to receive his vengeance,
as any vessel by reason of concavity to receive water, I mean Reprobates, such
as God has eternally decreed to destruction, not as it is the misery of the
creature, but as it makes way for the manifestation and declaration of the
Justice of God? but if the Lord will so do, what is that to thee? what can
thou say against it, if the Lord will so do?

Observe.
Come we now to the Observation: You see here in the general, that both Gods
Elect, and Reprobates are compared to vessels framed by the hand of God the
heavenly Potter, hence note we thus much:



They are both made of the same lump, by the same Potter, but they differ in
the use; he uses the one as vessels of mercy, the others as vessels of wrath;
Gods Elect, they are vessels fit to receive grace, goodness, holiness,
sanctification, all good things are poured into their hearts and souls, but
the other they are fit to receive nothing but the sink of sin, and all
manner of uncleanness it tumbleth down into them. Hence it is that the Lord
Jesus in Acts 9.15. speaking of Saul afterward called Paul, says unto
Ananias, that his purpose was to send him unto the Gentiles, and he calls him
a chosen vessel, a vessel fit to receive grace, and to bear the Name of Christ
to all Nations.

And of the reprobate Heathen, the Apostle says in Romans 1.29. God gave them
up to a reprobate sense, to receive the fullness of all uncleanness, when the
Lord did pour out the tokens of his wrath, they were full of all uncleanness.
And also the Apostle speaks of the reprobate Jews in 1 Thessalonians. 2.15, 16. That
they killed the Lord Jesus, and their own Prophets, persecuted us, and they
are contrary to all men, and they forbid us to preach to the Gentiles, and
they fill up the measure of their sins, because the wrath of God is come upon
them unto the uttermost.

Vessels of mercy how known?
This being so, that Gods Elect are Vessels fit to receive mercy, and the
reprobate vessels to reeeive all manner of filthiness and uncleanness, then
learn we to try our selves, whether we be the vessels of mercy or no; I
conceive well of you, and every one conceives well of himself, then try
whether we be in the number of Gods vessels of mercy or no, look to thy own
heart and soul; If thou find the Heavenly liquour, the Heavenly moisture of
Faith, Repentance, Love to God, love to his Children, a care to please God, a
desire to fear God, Humility, Patience, and all other adorning Graces; here
then is comfort: but if thou find thou art an ignorant person, ignorant of the
ways of God, hard hearted; thou art full of Pride, Hypocrisy, self love, a
desire of earthly things; thou art a vessel of wrath, and fitted to
destruction, and if thou go on and remain unreclaimed, though I will not
determine of thy final estate, if thou so live, and die, thou art appointed
unto everlasting destruction; try then thy self which of these thou art, deal
truly with thy self, and by that which flows from thee thou may know it;
as a bottle of sweet water sends forth a sweet savor; so if thou have this
heavenly moisture of grace, and of sanctification in thee, it sends forth
holy and gracious words, thou can speak comfort to those that are sick, it
sends forth sweet Actions of love to God, mercy and justice to men, thou art
ready to every good work.

Now then to conclude. If we have these sweet graces in our hearts, it shall
spring up to everlasting life; as in John 4.14. It will ever be ejaculating and
casting up, and springing unto life, and as a stream of water will rise as high
as the fountains, so will grace; now the head of this fountain where is it in
Heaven, thither will thy grace climb, and thou shall certainly be saved, but
if otherwise, woe be unto thee, thou art in a miserable estate.

What if God willing to show his wrath, and to make his power known, endured
with long suffering the vessels of wrath fitted to destruction.
COme we now to the proposition, What if God willing to suffer the wicked for a
long time to escape his punishing hand, and thus forbearing toward men, what
if the Lord be thus patient when he might strike them suddenly down, and send
them unto Hell. Now then this propoposition laid down thus before us by way of
interrogation, What if the Lord would thus spare them? does note unto us this
position or conclusion. viz.

That God is very patient toward sinners, yea even toward the Reprobates, Was
of that evil one the Devil, that slew his brother, yet he having done this vile
act and villainy in shedding of innocent blood, the Lord was patient with him,
and suffered him still to live, the Lord suffered him to grow rich and wealthy
to beget children, and to be the father of a great Nation; thus patient was the
Lord with him, and thus patient was the Lord with Saul, to Judas, to Herod,
though they were branded and marked for Reprobates, the Lord suffered them to
live a long time, and as we have it in Acts 14.16. says the Lord, he suffered
the Gentiles to walk in their own ways, and that for many thousand years
together; and yet the Lord was patient with them in their gross idolatry, and
did suffer them many thousand years to continue in their sins, and in Acts
13.18. Paul says, that the Lord suffered the evil manners of the people of
Israel forty years in the Wilderness together. And beloved, the Lord does
not only forbear to punish wicked and ungodly persons, and reprobates, whilst
they are sinning against him, and provoking him, but so abundant in mercy and
goodness is the Lord, that he suffers them to enjoy many outward good
things, as we see in Esau, the Lord permitted him to enjoy many outward good
things, yea he was the father of many sons, of many Dukes, many great and
mighty men in the world, yea, wicked Ahab, who sold himself to work
wickedness in the fight of the Lord, 1 Kings 21. Of whom the Text says in 1
Kings 16.30. He did worse then all that were before him; and in the 33. verse,
it is said, he provoked the Lord God of Israel more to anger then all the Kings
of the people that had been before him, he sold himself to work wickedness,
yet the Lord suffered him to enjoy a flourishing Kingdom for a long time; in
the 29. verse. He was the King of Israel two and twenty years together: yea
come but to our own experience, and we may see it, many wicked, vile,
abominable sinners, are advanced to high dignity and worldly promotion, and
the Lord powered upon them an overflowing cup of worldly glory; and they have
good success in every thing they put their hands unto, and they enjoy an
overflowing cup, though they be graceless and wicked persons; and the reason
why the Lord is thus pleased so to do is this:

Because that so they might have both space and time of repentance given unto
them,



Oh sons of Men, when will you turn unto God? For though the Lord is not
bound together with the means of grace, to give grace, and to make the means
effectual for the conversion of Reprobates, yet thereby the Lord does manifest
and make it to appear, that he does approve of the work of Conversion, and of
Repentance in all men; yea, the Lord does approve of the work of Conversion in
Reprobates as a good thing in it self; and hence it is in 2 Peter 3.9. it is
said, God will have all men to come to repentance; Has God decreed some to
destruction, and yet will have all men to come to repentance in his will
approving, and it is not in vain that God calls for it, thereby approving of
the work of Conversion in Reprobates, as a good thing in it self, and thereby
he leaves them without excuse.

God denying his grace unto them, what can any man do? They cannot but
continue hard hearted and obstinate; If God deny his grace they cannot do
otherwise, but continue hard hearted and obstinate.

To this I answer, God does reprobates no manner of wrong at all, in calling
upon them, and approving of that work in them he is not to be taxed, because in
the beginning (before man was created) God was not bound to create man in
holiness in the estate of Innocence, which he made them; and much less is
the Lord bound to restore these things unto them, they having lost them, they
having forfeited the bond, they having wilfully and rebelliously deprived
themselves of these things, having wilfully broke the Covenant, and made a
defection, and a falling away from God; so that God is still clear and does
them no wrong at all.

God is so patient toward wicked sinners and such as are appointed to
everlasting destruction, that he forbears them, and of a long time, they
provoking him to anger every minute of an hour, when he might throw them down
to Hell?

Oh then let men and women whosoever they be that go on in their sins, let them
not think that they are in no danger of the wrath of God, and punishing hand
of God, because God bears with them, and does not speedily execute his
vengeance upon them, and cast down his thunderbolt upon them. Oh let them not
think that therefore they are free from the wrath of God, though beloved it is
a common Conceit of wicked and ungodly persons, (even of such as go on in the
practice of known sins of drunkenness, of uncleanness;) to imagine within
themselves that they are in no such danger as the Preacher will make them
believe; no, says a wicked and graceless wretch, let the Preacher speak his
pleasure, and threaten me with the curse and the vengeance of God to light upon
my soul and body, and threaten me with damnation, What need I fear? Why, for
all this I am sure I thrive, I go on and I prosper, I have good success in
the world, he tells me of the curse of God because I break the Sabbath, yet I
thrive, I go forward, I have good success in my business: Oh let them take
heed, you are only under Gods long patience, and Gods long suffering, and
there is but a step between thee and Hell; if death come you must to hell
without repentance, there is but a hairs breadth between you and hell; It is a
common saying, forbearance is no acquittance, you are but spared as the
Amorites, Genesis 15.16. Until your sins be at the full, and you fill up the
daily measure of your sins, and then comes the hand of God, down upon you
in a fearful manner, and the longer that God is a striking the more fearful is
his blow and the more deadly, after long forbearance, as Solomon says, Eccles.
8.12, 13. Though a sinner do evil an hundred times many times together, yet it
shall not be well with him in the end; howsoever he may thrive and grow great
and prosper in the world, and have blessings powered upon him abundantly, yet it
will not go well with him in the end.

Nay, I beseech you remember, Gods patience abused, it turns into fury and
into rage, and Gods mercy despised and neglected, Patientia lasa fit furor.
not leading to repentance becomes judgment merciless: Now is the day of
grace, and mercy is offered unto thee while the Lord gives thee means of
grace and of mercy, but there will come a day of wrath and of vengeance upon
thee; it will come certainly and without mercy, and without pity; now is the
time of patience and of long forbearing: Now is his voice calling upon you, if
you make a pish and a tush at it, the time will come when the Lord will rise up
in wrath and vengeance and bring woe unto your souls.

Again for a second use, this being so, that God is so exceeding patient as the
elect of God, Holy and beloved, put on meekness, humbleness, tender bowels,
tender mercy, long suffering, as a special part of the glorious vesture of the
soul; Do you profess your selves to be new men, put on this as a special
ornament and abiliment of your souls; the world accounts it a matter of
disgrace unto them to put up an injury and a wrong done unto them, nay a
matter of folly. What say they shall we be made fools, and so doing they think
to avoid the name of fools, and yet practice the works of fools? for revenge
rests in the bosom of fools says the wise man Eccles. 7.11. Hasty anger and
sudden passions upon every turn of the hand, rests in the bosom of fools;
Oh then labor we to put on this part of the holy garment, and godly Saint-like
ornament of the soul; long-suffering, howsoever the world accounts it a matter
of folly, yet it is a note of wisdom to be slow to anger; and howsoever the
world accounts it a note of disgrace of a coward, of a milksop, to put up
wrong, yet the holy Ghost says it is a note of valor, and of great fortitude,
Prove. 16.32. where the Holy Ghost says, He that is slow to anger, is better
then a mighty man; and he that rules his own passion and spirit, better then a
man that overcomes a City. And remember this withal, long-suffering makes us
like unto God our heavenly Father, and it brings unto our souls exceeding
comfort, never did any man repent himself of his long patience, and long
suffering, but many have repented of their swift anger and wrath, and that
exceedingly and justly too.

Last of all, is God patient to wicked men? then much more is God patient to
his own children: is he patient to those that are fit fuel for the fire of
hell, such as run on in their filthiness? and will he be stirred up to anger
against his own children? does the Lord suffer them to run on with an high hand
against him in their sins? and will he be soon provoked against thee, that
art his child? will he be patient to impenitent persons, and punish thee that
art penitent? will he suffer them to prosper that make no bones of any sin, but
run headlong into all manner of sins? and punish thee that art grieved for
thy sins, and tremblest at the Word of God? assuredly no; take it to thy
comfort, he that is long-suffering to the wicked, his enemies, will much more
be so to thee that art his Child.

What if God willing to show his wrath, and to make his power known, endured
with much long-suffering the vessels of wrath fitted to Destruction.
IN the next place is to be considered, the end of Gods long patience, and long
suffering to Reprobates, The end of Gods long suffering and patience to the
Reprobates, is to manifest the power of his wrath.
and that is to make his power known. God suffers Reprobates a long time,
that there may be a Manifestation of his power and wrath in punishing of them;
which are holy, and good ends. Here we might stand to show, that the Lord will
be known to be a God of power; not only of infinite power of mercy, but he
will be known to be a God of just anger, and of punishment, on wicked persons;
and therefore the Lord has appointed some to everlasting destruction, for the
setting forth of his power; for if all were to be saved, then he were only a
God of mercy; but the Lord will be known to be a just God in his punishing of
them, and to be a God of infinite power. Now if it be so as the Anabaptists
hold, that he has ordained all to salvation, he were then a God of mercy, and
not of Justice.

Let us consider these two ends, 1. to show his wrath. 2. to make his power
known.

And first of the end, to show his wrath: What if God willing to show his
wrath? God suffers wicked persons, that he might conceive just displeasure
against them, and might inflict punishment upon them, and might justly be angry
with them; to this end is he patient and forbears them: Now then from this we
may gather this Conclusion,

That God is justly offended with such persons that do abuse his patience, 4,
5. where the Apostle threateneth Judgment to fall upon as do abuse the bounty,
gentleness, kindness, and patience of God, and are not bettered by it, but
rather worse; Oh, says the Apostle, thou that suffer thy self to go on in
sin, and art not led to repentance by the long suffering of God, what do
thou? thou do heap up to thy self wrath, and heavy vengeance against the day
of wrath: In Prove. 1.22. the Wisdom of God cries out to wicked and ungodly
persons in this manner, O you foolish people, how long will you be so foolish?
how long will the scornful take pleasure and delight in scorning? Oh you wicked
and ungodly persons, you that go on in sin without repentance, will you still
spend your time, and years, and days in vanity? will you not make use and
profit of the means of grace? then she threateneth them for their contempt of
grace, in the 24, 25, and 26. verses, O you fools, how long will ye love
foolishness? Seeing I have called, and you have refused; I have wooed you, I
have sought unto you, and sent my Messengers, and Ministers time after time,
and you have refused my Correction, and my Counsel; therefore, says the Lord,
I will laugh at your destruction, and mock when your fear comes. You still
going on, Gods laughter is more to be feared then his anger.
and casting my words at your heels, therefore I shall mock when your fear
comes; when I see you wallow and tumble in your destruction, I will laugh, it
shall rejoice my heart: where the Holy Ghost does plainly teach us, that the
Lord does thus deal with those that abuse his patience.

Because the abusing of the long-suffering of God, it is a resisting of God,
God; as it is said of the Jews, Abusing the patience of God, and not making a
holy use of the means of grace, is resisting of God.
Act. 7.51. that they being a people of hard hearts, and not bettered by the
Apostles preaching, what are they? he describes them, that they confront the
Lord, and resisted the Holy Ghost: Oh you of uncircumcised hearts, you have
always resisted the Holy Ghost; and though the Lord be a God of long patience,
yet he will not suffer them long to resist; he will have the better in the end,
he will show himself to be a revenging God to those that abuse his patience.

Again, continuance in sin without repentance, and going on wilfully in sins
Not sinning, but continuance in sin, that brings the wrath of God upon the
bodies and souls of men.
that brings the wrath of God; though God may justly condemn for one sin, yet
it is not that, but it is long continuing in sin, without repentance, that is
the thing, and the only thing that brings the wrath of God: when men abuse
the patience of God, and long-suffering of God, and go on continuing in sin,
even then the wrath of the Lord falls upon them; so that though the Lord
spare for a long time, yet at the last he will punish them.

Therefore hence take we notice of the fearful estate of those that God
suffers to thrive in sin; such persons as live in foul scandalous sins, The
miserable estate of such as continue in sin.
and the Lord is patient toward them, and does not strike with a visible
plague, or outward punishment, but they go on, and are hardened in them; surely
they do treasure up the just wrath and vengeance of God upon them against the
day of wrath: they go on without rub, or without disturbance, they follow their
sins with a full swing, they heap up the vengeance of God against the day of
wrath: And know it for a certain truth, that they are in the worst case of all
others, that do abound in the plenty of outward good things; and withal, God
suffers them to thrive by usury, and by unlawful means; unless they repent,
they are in the heaviest case of all men, for they being not led by the
long-suffering and patience of God to repentance, surely they provoke God to
inflict most heavy and fearful vengeance upon them: Oh then consider it, thou
that art a most vile and gross sinner, an usurer, or whatsoever thou art, if
thou art so far from being bettered by the outward blessings of God, as that
thou go on in thy sin with an high hand, thou art in a miserable estate and
condition, thou do provoke God to most just anger and wrath* And the longer
the Lord does forbear and suffer thee to go on in the practice of any sin, the
deeper will be thy condemnation and Judgment; yea beloved, to abuse the
patience of God, and turn it to a license to sin, what is it? it is a mark of a
Reprobate, and it is more then a probable sign thou art in the state of
Reprobation; for it is the abuse of Gods long sufferance, that brings us to
destruction.

Let us take heed how we abuse not Gods patience, by wilfulness and obstinacy
in sin.
he is a patient God, he calls and cries unto us, Come out of your pride,
your drunkenness and filthiness, come to the house of God, receive the Word
of God: Oh take heed then of abusing the patience of God; The Lord offers
unto us the means of grace for our reformation, we must be bettered by every
Sermon we hear; and take heed of obstinacy and rebellion in sin, it is the
heaviest hand of God upon our souls that can befall us. Take we heed of
custom in sin.
And to this end take we heed of yielding unto sin time after time; many
persons that are not hardened in sin, if they yield unto them time after time,
grow hardened; yea we shall find, if we observe it, that men harden their own
hearts, before God hardens them; they live and continue in sin, and care not
for profiting by the means of grace, and then the Lord gives them over in his
just Judgment to hardness of heart; therefore take heed of wittingly and
willingly continuing in any known sin whatsoever, resisting the grace of God,
and make your selves liable to the vengeance of God.

The phrase and form of speech observable.
Again mark we further, the Apostle does express Gods vengeance on Reprobates,
by this term, to show his wrath: hence note we thus much,

That Gods punishing hand wheresoever he lets it fall, it falls heavy; Gods
punishment and Judgment lighting upon ungodly persons, they are God in showing
of wrath, does after the manner of men that are furious.
Anger, and wrath, are not properly in God, but they are given unto him by way
of Metaphor, for our capacity; the Lord will show himself a God of rage and
fury unto those that abuse his long-suffering: and hence it is that the wrath
and fury of God is compared to the breaking out of fire; as we say, fire and
water have no mercy, Psalm. 2.12. Kiss the Son lest he be angry, and so his
wrath be kindled, and break out, and burn suddenly: so in Deuteronomy. 29.20. if you
follow after the stubbornness of your heart, and add drunkenness to thirst,
the wrath of the Lord shall burn against that man.

Go ye cursed; they say, if they can escape so long, let them alone. In Prove.
19.12. it is said, the anger of a King is like the roaring of a Lion; if it be
so, then the wrath of the Lord is more to be feared then hell it self; Gods
wrath more to be feared then hell it self: yea it is Hell.
for the apprehension of Gods wrath is hell: and we see it by experience, that
the Anger and wrath of God apprehended by a wounded Conscience, it is a burden
unsupportable, it makes men to hang and drown themselves, and to cut their own
throats, it makes them mad to be eased of it, a wounded conscience who can
bear? therefore learn to consider the wrath of Gods punishing hand, in Nahum,
1.5. and 6. verses, says the Prophet, before his face when he is angry, the
Mountains fly away, the rocks cleave in sunder, and turn into dust and powder:
what hearts have we then, Job 33.21.
that can consider the wrath of God against sin, and not tremble at it?
Therefore in the fear of God consider it, and do not mock and scoff at it,
lest the wrath and vengeance of God break out upon thee to thy utter
Destruction.

What and if God would to show his wrath, and to make his power known suffer
with long patience the vessels of wrath prepared to destruction.
COme we now to the second end of Gods long suffering and patience to wicked
men, and that is not only to show his wrath, The second end to make his Power
known.
but to make his Power known. The Lord is patient and long suffering to
reprobates to this end, that (they abusing his patience being obstinate and not
being bettered) he may at the length make it appear that he is a God of Power,
He makes it appear that he is a God of Power able to pull down the stoutest
sinner in the world.
(how soever he may seem to wink at it) able to beat down the most stubborn
hearted wretch that is living upon the face of the earth, and able to bring
upon them utter ruin and destruction, to the praise and glory of his own
Power: Now then from hence we may easily gather this conclusion.

That God will one day show forth his Power in punishing of wicked and ungodly
persons, such as go on wilfully in their known sins, That when once he
takes hold of his sword of vengeance, he will pay them home; As if he had
said, though I may suffer vile and obstinate sinners to escape my Power a long
time; yet at the length, I will whet my glittering sword and take hold on
judgment; then will I show forth my Power in executing vengeance upon the
wicked and obstinate sinners. In the 50. Psalm, the Psalmist in the 16. verse
brings the Lord reckoning up the sins of the people of Israel; and in the
21. verse He shuts up all in a word, These things have thou done and I did
forbear thee; and because I did forbear thee, therefore thou did think that
thy course of life was pleasing unto me; but says the Lord, The time will
come, that I will call thee to account, and set thy sins in order: (And then
mark that which my speech aims at) in the 22. verse there is added a very
pithie and powerful speech by way of Exhortation; [Consider this you that
forget God, the great God of Heaven and Earth, least he will tear you in
pieces, and there shall be none to deliver you;] which is very emphatical,
wherein we see the Lord compares himself to an hungerie Lion, that having
gotten his prey, rendeth and teareth it in pieces, and none can rescue or take
it off from the paw of the Lion; so will the Lord one day rise up in judgment
against those that are wicked, obstinate and rebellious sinners, and then he
will show himself even as an angry Lion that crusheth the bones of a poor
sheep between his teeth; so he will manifest his Power in punishing wicked
sinners, and none can be able to free them from his punishing hand: And in
Revelation 11.17. We find that the Saints gave God thanks and praise in this
manner, [VVe thank thee, O Lord God Almighty, that art from everlasting, and
shall continue for ever, etc.] Then in the latter end of the verse, they render
a reason of this their thanksgiving unto God in these words and terms, [For
thou have received thy great might, and thou have obtaind thy Kingdom.] Why is
God stronger then, then he is now? No, but the meaning is, [That though God be
a great God in respect of Power, and always retains fullness of Power and
Might, and shall not at the day of judgment receive any greater power or might
then now he has, yet at the day of judgment shall exercise and show forth his
Power in the utter overthrow of his enemies, and deliverance of his Church; and
therefore he is said to receive his mighty Power, and then shall the 24.
Elders sing their song, Now is thy Might and Power come.] So that we see,
though God do for a long time suffer the wicked to go on in their sins, yet
he will show forth his Power in punishing of them, and it must needs be so for
these Reasons;



That he will execute his Power in bringing destruction upon the wicked
rebellious sinners; though the Lord suffer them to go on in their sins for a
long time, yet he will one day make it apparent that he is a God of Power in
their just punishment, howsoever he seems to see, as if he saw it not, yet he
will one day make his all-seeing Power known.

That Christ Jesus at his coming unto judgment, shall come in flaming fire,
and rendering vengeance to punish the wicked in everlasting perdition from the
presence of his Power. So that we see the Apostle says he will separate the
wicked from his Power, they shall have nothing to do with it; how is this
answered?

God has a saving Power, and a destroying Power.
his glorious Power; James 4.12. There is one Lawgiver, even God, who can save
and destroy; so that they shall be severed from the saving power of God, but
not from the destroying power that shall fall upon them heavily and fearfully.

Vana sine viribus ira, anger without power is in vain; for a man to be angry
and have no power to execute his anger is nothing worth; but this God he is a
God of Power, and he will one day show his strength and his power in punishing
of them, and in executing wrath and vengeance upon them.

Oh then, who is able to bear the punishing hand of God and the stroke of his
arm? can a wicked sinner endure it, when God strikes with the strength of his
arm? Psalm 90.7. Oh then consider it whosoever thou art, a wicked and
rebellious sinner, that has been told of thy particular sins, thy
drunkenness, thy whoredom, thy usurie, thy Sabbath breaking and the like;
Thou that persistest and go on in thy sin, a drunkard yesterday, and still
the same; an Usurer yesterday, and still the same; thou art obdurate in thy
sin: Consider the Lord is angry with thee and justly offended, and he is
not only justly offended, but he is a God of infinite power able to execute
his wrath: yea consider further, that God is not only a God of Power, able to
do it, but he is also a God that will do it, he will execute his power and
his wrath, Who is able to stand against the Lords revenging power
and when he so does, What shall become of the drunkard? What shall become of
the usurer? and what shall become of the Sabbath-breaker, and the whoremonger,
and the blasphemer of the Name of God? when the Lord shall execute his wrath,
and put forth his vengeance, Oh consider it and tremble.

We know it be experience amongst men; Men that are of a revenging spirit,
given to seek the hurt and ruin of those they are offended withal, nothing
will satisfy them but their very heart blood. And according to the might and
power of those men so revengeful, the more mighty and powerful is the evil and
hurt that they inflict upon those, The greater their might, the heavier their
stroke.
against whom they are enraged: Oh then consider, Is this so with men of
revengefull spirits? Oh then the Lord is a sin revenging God, and he being
provoked unto anger by thy wilful, obstinate, and rebellious sins, he will
punish thee; consider then, whom have thou provoked? a God of infinite power,
and he will make it appear in thy just destruction, and in thy just punishment;
the heart of man is not able to conceive, or imagine the fearful punishment
that will befall thee.

Oh that those that are obstinate and rebellious sinners, would consider this,
that God is so offended with them for their rebellious sins! it would make
them to tremble, and affright them, and make their bones shake in their skins,
and their hearts ache in their bodies; but this is one, and a chief part of
their misery, Hab. 3.
that they never think nor consider it in their hearts: and so we may conclude,
that they are in a fearful estate and condition.

Again, this being so, that God is such a revenging God against obstinate God,
and know this, that we cannot desire a greater vengeance to light upon them,
then the Lord will inflict upon them: and consider, if our spiteful enemies do
continue seeking to do us wrong, the Lord will one day take thy cause in hand,
and punish them according to the greatness of his power. Alas, what is our
power? if we had the might of all the men in the world, it is nothing to the
power of the Lord: if the Lord should give our enemies into our hands, and
should say; Do with him what thou will; could we be avenged so as the Lord will
for our sakes, if we be patient, and commit the cause unto the Lord; for the
Lord will be avenged on them; if they continue, and live and dye in their
spite and envy.

And to conclude in one word, let us when we are wronged and hardly dealt
withal, by malicious and spightful enemies, that are full of rancor and malice,
commit our cause unto the Lord, and without question, his punishment will be
greater, then the bitterest stroke that we can wish to fall upon our enemies;
and therefore we ought to comfort our selves with this when we are wronged,
that the Lord will revenge our cause, and he will show forth his vengeance upon
them in their Destruction, and that according to the greatness of his power.

What if God willing to show his wrath, and to make his power known, endured
with much long-suffering the vessels of wrath fitted to destruction.

And that he might make known the riches of his glory, on the vessels of mercy,
which he had before prepared unto glory?


THere is one thing yet remains to be further observed, from this 22. verse.
The Apostle says, that God will one day show his wrath upon Reprobates, the
vessels of wrath, and he will also exercise his power; he will make it
apparent, manifest, and evident, that he is a God of power in their just
punishments: so that these two things are here coupled, and put together, as
the ends of Gods long patience and forbearance toward the Reprobates, namely
the manifestation of his just wrath, and his power in punishing of them: hence
then take we notice of this Observation which lies plain before us, viz.

Gods Justice, and of Gods power, which here are coupled and put together, in
their destruction: The destruction of the Reprobates is indeed the nearest end
in respect of Reprobates themselves; but God respects it no further then as
it makes and tends to the manifestation and declaration of the glory of his
Justice, and power: The highest end which the Lord aymeth at in the punishment
and destruction of the Wicked, what is it? it is nothing else but that he might
have his Justice and Power glorified; the Lord aymeth not at their destruction,
though it be the nearest end to them, yet farthest off in Gods intention, for
he aymeth at his own Justice and Powers glorification. And to this purpose
speaks Solomon expressly, Prove. 16.4. The Lord has made all things for his
own sake, yea the very wicked for the day of evil: he has made them for the
day of destruction, aiming therein at the manifestation of his Justice, and the
glory of his power: this is the main end the Lord aymeth at. In Romans 11. The
Apostle having largely discussed and stood upon the rejection of the Gentiles,
in the 36. verse he concludes the point with this Doxology, for of him, and
through him, and for him, are all things, to him be praise, and to him be glory
for ever, Amen. And it must needs be so, for these Reasons,





and ordained some to everlasting destruction, then also this will follow, that
God has ordained and appointed the means that tend to that end, and that is
sin. Now to this we may easily answer, that as the Lord has not ordained any
to everlasting destruction, simply, (as it is their destruction) but as it
makes for the glory of his Justice and power; so God has not ordained sin
simply as it is sin and evil, but he has either ordained such sins as are
punishments of foregoing sins; for as sins following are punishments of sins
foregoing, so they are a Moral good thing, and agree with his Justice; or else
the Lord has ordained to suffer, and permit the being of some other sins,
which are not punishments, not simply as they are sins, but as they concur and
make way to the highest end of all, and that is the manifestation and
declaration of his Justice and power; and so we see, how we may safely hold, as
a warranted truth of God, that God has from everlasting fore-appointed, and
foreordained, some men to everlasting damnation, (it being rightly understood)
namely not as it is their destruction, but as it is the manifestation and
declaration of the glory of his Justice, and of his power.

Again, this being so, that the highest end the Lord aymeth at in men's non
(...), non gaudia ex aliena calamitate, be they never so wicked or vile, but
rather to pity them as they be the creatures of God, but as we discern them to
be the enemies of the Lord, and enemies of the truth; and it is apparent, that
the just hand of God is now upon them, and his Justice lighted upon them, we
are to rejoice, and we ought to magnify and to glorify the Justice of God in
their just punishment. To this purpose speaks the Psalmist, in Psalm. 58.11,
and 12. verses, The righteous shall rejoice when he sees the vengeance of God
upon the wicked, and he shall wash his feet in the blood of the ungodly, and
men shall say, verily there is fruit for the righteous, doubtless there is a
God that judges the earth. Men shall thus magnify the just hand of God in his
Judgments upon wicked persons: so that we see we may rejoice, when we see the
hand of God upon wicked persons, and such as are enemies to God and his Truth.
Come we now to the 23. Verse.

VERSE 23. And that he might declare the riches of his glory upon the vessels
of mercy, which he has prepared unto glory.


IN this Verse our Apostle amplifieth the Manifestation of Gods glory and
power, in manifesting his patience to the wicked, by the end of their
punishment, in respect of Gods Elect, and that is to declare the riches of his
glory upon the vessels of mercy prepared to glory. Now the general things
considerable in this verse, are two; First, the end which we have spoken of,
propounded and laid before us, that he might declare the riches of his glory.
And secondly, the persons unto whom, and that is the Elect, who are described
to be vessels of mercy, and those prepared unto glory; And that he might
declare the riches of his glory unto the vessels of mercy which he has
prepared unto glory.

Now come we to the opening of the words,

And that he might declare] Or in like sort, that he might make known to all
the world, men, and Angels, the riches of his glory. The word, glory, here,
signifies that whereby God is glorious, in particular, it signifies the glory
of the grace and mercy of God; whereby God shows himself to be most glorious:
and hence it is the Apostle puts glory as an Epithet of Gods grace, in
Ephesians. 1.6. to the praise of the glory of his grace; and thus the word glory,
is used, in Ephesians. 3.16. That he might grant you according to the riches of his
glory, what is that? the riches of his grace, and of his mercy; and the word
riches, (as it does often in Scripture,) signifies plenty, and abundance; as
the Apostle calls it, the bountifulness of God, Romans 2.4. the superabundant
bountifulness of God; so that his meaning is, that he might declare his
abundant grace and mercy upon the vessels of mercy: vessels of mercy are here
opposed unto vessels of wrath, spoken of in the verse before, and thereby we
are to understand Gods Elect, who are called vessels of mercy, because they are
created of God, fit to receive mercy, even as vessels are fit to receive water
by reason of their concavity, so they are vessels of mercy prepared unto glory,
that is, which the Lord has from everlasting ordained, and fore-appointed to
everlasting happiness and glory in heaven, 1 Thessalonians. 5.9. God has not
appointed us unto wrath, but he has appointed us to obtain salvation by the
means of our Lord Jesus Christ.

So then thus conceive we the meaning of the Apostle; as if he had said,

And in like sort that God might make it known to all the world, both to men
and Angels, his exceeding great and abundant grace and mercy toward, and upon
his Elect, who are vessels as capable of mercy, as any vessel to receive water,
the Lord having from everlasting ordained and appointed them to the Kingdom of
glory.

Now the words being thus understood, I will only point at one thing briefly:
We see here the Apostle makes it apparent, and known, that God shows his
Justice, and makes his power known upon the Reprobates; thereby to amplify,
and to set forth the greatness of his mercy toward his chosen, and make known
the riches of his mercy upon the vessels of mercy; This is the ground of the
Observation. And the Doctrine hence arising is this, viz.

upon the wicked: The riches and the greatness of Gods mercy toward any of his
children, is more evident, more apparent, and more conspicuous, and the better
discerned, by comparing it with his just punishing hand, that he lays upon
others. And to this purpose we have many evidences of Scripture, the mercy of
God in saving Noah and his Family in the Ark; when the flood was upon the
earth; being considered with the Lords wrath and vengeance upon the whole world
besides; it made the mercy of God to be more conspicuous; and better discerned
of Noah. So the freedom that the people of Israel had in the Land of Goshen,
in Egypt, from the plagues of Egypt, when the heavy hand of God was upon the
Egyptians, being considered with those heavy plagues, did exceedingly set forth
the riches of Gods mercy to his Children, that they should be saved, and the
other punished in the same land; and in Exodus 14.30, 31. the Text says of the
Israelites, they saw the Egyptians dead upon the bank, and saw their final
overthrow; and no doubt that Gods Justice in their overthrow made the mercy of
the Lord in their deliverance appear the better, and thereupon they were
stirred up to praise God after an extraordinary manner, for an extraordinary
blessing, in the 15. Chapter. And to these places I might add many more, all
expressing, that the mercy of God vouchsafed to his Children, feels sweeter,
and the more comfortable; Considered together with Gods wrath in punishing the
wicked and reprobate; yea it does ravish the soul of a Child of God, and makes
it more comfortable.

The Reason Contra juxta se posita, etc. Contraries set in opposition, makes
them the better to appear; black and white set together, it makes white more
resplendant, and appear the clearer; so Gods mercy, opposed to Gods Justice,
makes his mercy appear more conspicuous.

And for the Application,

And that he might make known the riches of his glory on the vessels of mercy
which he had before prepared unto glory.
ANd in the next place observe that the Apostle here says not barely, God will
extend and reach out his abundant mercy toward his Children, or that he might
show his mercy upon them abundantly, but mark the manner of his speech, he
puts down his mind and meaning in these terms, that God might declare the
riches of his glory upon his Chil? dren, every word is very emphatical and
full of weight, and the meaning is that God might make known to all the world,
to men, and Angels his exceeding great and abundant grace and mercy upon his
Elect, and toward his Children. Hence then we may easily gather this conclusion.

Then giving unto his Children liberty to approach and come near unto his holy
presence with comfort and thankesgiving, then beautifying their souls with
many excellent gifts of his Spirit, with Faith, with Zeal, and with Humility;
so that God is exceeding great and abundantly merciful unto his Chosen: yet let
me tell you that his abundant grace and mercy to his Elect is not so apparent
to the eyes of men. It lies hid and obscured either under that excellent grace
of Humility, or under their afflictions, so as that the world sees it not,
yet the time shall come that (howsoever it is now darkened) it shall appear to
men and Angels, yea, men and Angels shall admire at the wonderful mercy of God
to his Chosen; and to this purpose is that of the Apostle in the 2
Thessalonians 1.10. where the Apostle says, that Christ Jesus at the day of
judgment he will come to be glorified in his Saints, and to be made marvelous
and wonderful in all that believe; He will invest his Saints then with heavenly
glory, and manifest his rich grace and abundant mercy upon them, and that to
the admiration and astonishment of all the world that shall look upon him, and
be eyewitness of it; in 1 John 3.2. Dearly beloved says the Apostle, We are
now the Sons of God, yet it does not appear, what we shall be is not now
apparent nor evident to the eye of the world, but the time shall come, when it
shall be apparent and manifest; and that shall be when Christ shall come in
glory unto judgment then the Saints of God, then the true believers, and the
Chosen of God shall be made like unto him in fullness of grace, and in fullness
of glory not equal unto him, but like unto him, a plain Text evidencing and
confirming this Truth, That God will one day manifest his exceeding greatness
and mercy to his chosen, and make it appear to all the world, to men and
Angels, that he is a merciful God to the confusion of the wicked, and the
admiration of the Angels.

Now beloved, if so be we desire to be further informed touching this, what
shall make men and Angels to admire the wonderful mercy of God to his Chosen:
Beloved, it shall be not only in respect of the abundant greatness of Gods
mercy to his Chosen, but also in respect of the freeness of Gods grace, and of
Gods glory, that God bestows abundance of grace and of mercy and that freely;
for when as the wicked and reprobates shall at that day have justly (according
as they have deserved) inflicted upon them, even everlasting wrath and
vengeance, so on the other side God has revealed the greatness of his mercy
upon his chosen, not for any merits, or deserts of theirs, and herein appears
the wonderful admiration of Gods mercy in that he gives it not in respect of
any merit or desert of theirs, for they have deserved the same wrath with the
Reprobates; but only of his free mercy; this shall make men, and Angels to
wonder at it, that God vouchsafes such a weight of glory, which they have not
deserved freely out of his own mercy, and it must needs be so for these
Reasons.

Because the glory of his mercy is as dear unto him as the glory of his

Because God having promised grace unto his Chosen, yea fullness of

The due consideration of this yields matter of sweet and excellent comfort
to Gods Children two ways.

First, in respect of the cause and estate of Gods Children as it stands with
them when they are under some great and grievous affliction, or under some
strong temptation and violent assaults by Satan; in that he feels such a
weight of sin, and such a burden of corruptions, lying and pressing down his
heart and soul; as for the present he has no apprehension of the special love
of God unto him; nay, he concludes the Contrary even against himself, as that
God has forgotten him and left him, though there be no such matter, but God is
pleased to exercise his Faith, and to try the soundness of his grace, and he
will have him to know that his faith and grace is even as pure gold tried in
the furnace, 1 Peter 1.7. That the trrial of your Faith is much more precious
then gold. Now in this case a Child of God may call to mind in this miserable
estate (he thinks himself) may call to mind what comfort and what mercy
the Lord has vouchsafed upon me, and what pledges of his saving goodness the
Lord has vouchsafed, and then he may consider, that though the saving mercy of
God be now hid from him for a time, and that he can find no comfort, yet he
having had experience of his saving grace formerly, he may resolve that he will
again return and manifest his mercy unto him; for consider to reason thus,
Will God one day make it apparent to all the world that he is a merciful and
gracious God to his Children, and will not the same God make it manifest and
apparent to thy soul here in this life at one time or other, it cannot possibly
be, thou having had love tokens of his favor, though they seem to be lost, yet
the Lord will come with abundance of grace and goodness, Romans 15.13. Yea the
Lord one day so expressed his grace as that the Child of God shall himself
wonder and magnify the grace of God, unto his own soul, yea he shall be
ravished with the wonderful mercy of God unto his Chosen in general, and to
himself in particular: For though when the Devil opposes the godly by
temptations, they feel not the mercy of God to them, yet the time shall come,
when it shall be manifest to all the world much more then to themselvess and
to, their own souls.

Again, will God one day manifest his abundant mercy unto his Chosen Gods
Children. The men of the world seeing Gods Children, walk humbly before the
Lord, and looking upon their humble and low carriage and behavior which they
account baseness, they presently shoot out their fools bolt, that they are the
Reprobates, they look upon the outside and see not what is within, they are not
able to, see what mercy the Lord vouchsafes unto his Children even in this
world, in that he gives them assurance of his love unto them in Jesus Christ,
and a feeling of the sweetness of his grace and of mercy, and the pardon of
their sins, this they are not able to see through the darkness of affliction,
and the cloud of their misery.

Now this is to be remembered, and to be thought upon for our comfort that are
Gods Children in respect of this censure, that howsoever the grace and the
mercy of God be obscured, and they cannot see it, yet comfort thy self, the
time shall come that God-wil make it appear to men and Angels, that he is a
gracious God, and that he is rich in mercy unto them, and that the love of God
is spread abroad in thy heart; yea the time shall come that men and Angels shall
se thee Crowned with a Crown of glory, and a Crown of mercy, that they shall be
driven to an admiration of it, and then they shall befool themselves, and say,
we fools thought these men's lives to to be madness, yea we accounted them
contemptible and base fellows; but now behold the riches of Gods mercy, that
he is wonderfully gracious and merciful unto his Children, they shall befool
themselves to see the greatness of Gods mercy unto his Chosen, which shall be
so great that they shall admire at it, yea the very Angels shall wonder at it;
Angels that are able to understand more then all the men in the world, they
shall be amazed and wonder at the riches of Gods mercy unto his chosen.
Therefore let the calumny and the slander of the wicked pass by unregarded,
for the Lord will one day manifest his mercy to the admiration of Men, and
Angels.

And that he might declare the riches of his glory unto the vessels of mercy
prepared unto glory.
AGain, observe we here the Apostle puts glory for mercy, and makes them
both tending to one end: from hence the Doctrine is this, viz.

God says the Apostle, He has Predestined us to be Adopted through Jesus
Christ in himself, (nothing moving him thereunto out of his own blessed
Majesty) according to the good pleasure of his Will; to what end? To the
praise of the glory of his grace, of his rich and abundant grace and mercy.
And as glorifying of the riches of his grace and mercy is that which the Lord
delights in, so he aims at it as the supreme and highest end in showing of
mercy: And the Lord may safely seek his own glory and praise without any danger
of pride in it, as it is in man, for they looking at their own praise and
estimation among men; they are tainted with pride, but it is not so with the
Lord, because indeed he is the highest, and there is none above him. And hence
it was in Exodus 34.6, 7. when the Lord showed himself unto Moses, he magnified
his mercy above all other attributes, and he proclaims his mercy by many
several titles and passages, The Lord, the Lord, strong, merciful and gracious,
slow to anger, abundant in goodness, and in truth, reserving mercy unto
thousands, forgiving iniquities, transgressions and sins: there is mention of
Gods power in a word very sparingly; but there is nothing sufficient to extol
the glory of his mercy, explicating that in variety of expressions, and setting
it out to the full.

Now this being a truth, first of all this serves to stir us up to give God
God to be out of our mouths, this is that he delights in; and therefore we
must have his mercy in our mouths, especially we professing our selves to be
his children and servants; for consider, I beseech you, how will those servants
that belong and appertain to bountiful Lords and Masters, how will they be ever
setting forth and extolling the bounty, and beneficence of their Masters in
what company soever they are, commending their frank Housekeeping, and good
hospitality, in being beneficial to the poor, and good to their followers. And
so indeed they are not the children of God, that do not thus magnify the
riches of Gods mercy unto them, and have them in their hearts and mouths
continually, crying out, Oh the mercy of God to us is large; else they are
bastards, and not the children of God, for such as belong unto Gods grace, God
gives them grace unto this end, that his grace and mercy might be known and
magnified, that they may say, Oh what has God done for my soul; this is the
practice of a holy servant of God; therefore we are to be stirred up for any
mercy the Lord has vouchsafed in any kind, not only for health restored, or
for any such things that are temporal, but also for things that are spiritual;
or for any mercy that he has bestowed upon us, we are to be thankful, and
especially we are to give praise and thanks unto God, for his great and
wonderful mercy bestowed upon us in Christ Jesus, in that he gave Christ Jesus
to be a Savior for our souls; this we ought to be thankful unto God for above
all other mercies.

Again, is this so, that Gods showing of mercy unto his chosen, it tends God
should send a man to hell, and condemn a man, out of his revenging Justice, and
saving mercy, at the same time; as that God should give a man mercy and
salvation out of his hand of Justice, and of mercy: it is as possible that God
should be merciful to a man that he sends to hell; as to be just to a man
that he gives salvation unto, these two can never stand together, revenging
Justice, and saving mercy; for the Lord vouchsafes salvation, that his mercy
may be glorified, and not his justice; so that mercy comes not from the hand
of Justice, but of mercy.

Again, in that the Apostle says, that God declares the riches of his mercy
to the Elect; hence I might note; That Gods grace and mercy vouchsafed unto his
chosen, it is full and perfect, fullness of mercy, and perfect mercy; when God
forgiveth the sins of his chosen, he forgiveth them not in part, or by the
halves, as the Papists teach, that God forgiveth the sins of his chosen, in
respect of the eternal punishment, but he leaves the Temporal punishment for
them to do penance for in the time of Lent: whereas God does give unto his
children full and perfect remission, full and perfect Justification, full and
perfect glorification, Heb. 7.25. He is able perfectly to save all that come
unto him, says the Author to the Hebrews; not to give a half salvation, but a
full salvation; but to pass from that.

And in the last place observe we, that the Apostle affirms it of Gods
chosen, that they are vessels of mercy prepared unto glory, that is, God in his
eternal decree has ordained them to everlasting glory: so that hence I might
show, that some particular persons amongst men are appointed of God to
salvation in heaven; but that I have often met withal, and therefore pass by
it: but hence we may truly take up this Observation,

That life and glory, and happiness in heaven, it comes unto Gods chosen in
time, Come you blessed, inherit a Kingdom prepared for you before the world
was, or from the beginning of the world, says our Savior; and this truth the
Scripture says in Ephesians. 2.8. by grace yau are saved, and that not of your
selves, it is the gift of God: and in Titus 3.5. Not according to the works of
righteousness that we have done, but according to his mercy he has saved us:
still running upon the free grace and mercy of God; in Luke 12.32. Fear not
little flock, says Christ, it is your Fathers pleasure to give you a Kingdom;
it is the free gift of your Father, without any of your deserts. And also in
Romans 6.23. the Apostle having said, the wages of sin is death, then presently
he subjoyneth unto it, not as the sequel of the Text does require (as the
Remists themselves do confess in their Annotations,) he says not, the wages
of sin is death, and the wages of holiness is salvation; but he changes the
term, (says he) the wages of sin is death, but the gift of God is eternal
life; thereby evidencing, that the eternal life and salvation of the godly in
heaven, it comes freely, without any merit or deserts of theirs at all: and
hence it is that eternal life in heaven, it is called in Scripture an
inheritance, in Coloss. 1.12. giving thanks that he has provided for us an
inheritance: 1 Pet. 1.4. an inheritance immortal, and undefiled: Now who
knows not this, that an inheritance comes to a child from the father, out of
the mere love of the father, when the child it may be is not born, and cannot
do any thing to merit it; so the inheritance of heaven being prepared for the
godly, and they for it, it must needs come from the grace of God.

And the Reason you are saved by grace through faith, not of works, lest any
man should boast; (and brag of it, that he brought something to his salvation.)

Now this being so, it meets directly with the opinion of our adversaries the
Papists; error in the ground of it, supposing a twofold Justification in the
sight of God, (which can never be proved in the Book of God,) when God
justifies, he justifies once for all; besides this error in the ground, it
cannot stand with the truth of God now delivered; for if so be life and glory
come unto Gods chosen in time most freely then not for their deserts, for free
gift and due debt cannot stand together, with relation to the same subject.

But (say the Papists) life and glory in heaven, it is called a reward;
therefore merited.

To this I answer, The Holy Ghost has taught us to distinguish of reward, as
twofold, in Romans 4.4. and that is either of favor, or of debt; now eternal
life is a reward indeed, not of debt, but of favor. But whereas the Papists
further reply, Christ has merited that the good works of his Chosen, should be
meritorious to life and salvation; A mere idle shift; we find in the Book of
God, that Christ has merited for his chosen, and died for their sins, but we
never find he died for their good works, to make them meritorious; no, it is a
thing altogether impossible; that the best works of Gods chosen should have in
them the true and whole nature of merit, because they be imperfect, and they
are stained with sin; the best work that a man can do, when he has striven to
do his best, he must go to God to crave pardon for his imbecility; now these
two cannot possibly stand together, to stand in need of mercy, and yet be
meritorious.

Yea let me tell you, we must take heed we do not abuse this Doctrine of

And now because every one will be ready to sooth up himself, and to say, I
hope I shall come to heaven* and I am thankful for it; every one will say so,
we are therefore to look unto it, that we be thankful unto him indeed: how
shall we know that? we may know it by this, if so be we find that we are truly
thankful unto God for his mercy unto us in outward good things: and thereby we
are moved to walk humbly before the Lord; and the more the Lord opens his
hand, and gives good things unto us, the more we do prove thankful unto him,
and walk before him humbly, Mich. 6.8. and then we may assure our selves we are
truly thankful. But on the contrary part, if so be we find that we are not
thankful unto God for the things of this life, but (after the manner of the
world) the more the Lord does open his hand unto us, and give them riches, the
more they increase in pride, in vanity, in scorn, in disdain and contempt of
others, because we are richer then others, therefore we will be prouder then
others, and disdain and scorn our brethren; let us pretend what we will, we can
never make it good, that we are thankful unto God, as David, in 2 Samuel 7.18.
considering the mercy of God in advancing him to the Kingdom, says, O what am
I, that the Lord should vouchsafe such a mercy unto me? so where that spirit is
that was in David, it will cause thee to be thankful unto God for every bit of
bread, and not to be proud and scornful, considering it comes from the free
mercy of God; so that this doctrine is not a doctrine of liberty, but it is a
special means of thankfulness, to stir us up to be truly thankful unto God.

VERSE 24. Even us whom he has called, not of the Jews only, but also of the
Gentiles.


OUr Apostle in this Verse enters upon the third and last part of this
Chapter; and the sum and substance of this part is a declaration of that great
work of calling the Gentiles, and refusing and rejecting the Jews, which was
foretold by the Prophets; and this from the 24 verse, to the end of the
Chapter: and the Apostle falls upon this matter, upon occasion of that which
he put down in the Verse foregoing, that the vessels of mercy are prepared of
God unto glory; now he descends from the general, to the particular; and that
which he had before spoken in (...), in the general, he applies in (...), in
the particular; and he shows who they are, that he had ordained to mercy, and
they are the called of God, the elect of God, calling being an effect of Gods
predestination, and a fruit and effect of Gods eternal election: and the
Apostle does appropriate this to the particulars, Even us whom he has called;
and he reduces it to the subjects of it, Jews and Gentiles, and he puts
down that distribution touching the subjects of Gods calling, not barely, but
(if you mark it) very cautelously, and very warily, that his distribution might
be free from all manner of exception, for he says, not us whom he has called,
Jews, and Gentiles, but even us whom he has called, not of the Jews only,
but also of the Gentiles: and now because Gods calling of the Gentiles, it was
a thing odious and hateful to the Jews, a thing seeming very absurd and
incredible; the calling of such as were dogs, and without, therefore the
Apostle dwells upon this point, and confirms it by a double testimony out
of the Prophet Hosea, in the 25. and 26. verses; and then after this the
Apostle does further amplify the calling of the Gentiles, by an Antithesis, by
the rejection of the Jews, and that not of the body of the Jews, but a
remnant of the Jews only; and this our Apostle also confirms by a double
Testimony out of the Prophet Isaiah, in the 27, 28, and 29. verses. And last of
all, the Apostle makes a Collection, and he puts it down by way of Answer
to an Objection that might be made touching the calling of the Gentiles, and
rejection of the Jews, from the 30. verse, to the end of the Chapter.

Now then to come to the particular handling of the 24. verse. In this verse
for the general matter contained in it, we may observe two things:

First, an instance given by the Apostle, touching the persons that are vessels
of mercy prepared of God unto glory, he instanceth in himself, and others, who
are called, even us.

And secondly, a distribution of the subjects of this calling, Jews and
Gentiles, the Apostle ranging the subjects of Gods calling into these two
sorts, Jews, and Gentiles, and he puts it down so warily, and so
cautelously, that no Objection might be made against it, not of the Jews
only, but also of the Gentiles.

There is no great difficulty in the words, Even us whom he has called] Or,
according to the text Original, those whom he has called, namely us, whom he
has called, that is, whom God has called; now Gods calling it is an act of
his eternal love, whereby he does please to call and invite men to salvation,
this is the definition of Gods calling in the notion and generality: For when
men are called by the preaching of the Word, and the Ministry thereof, and they
hear it only with the ears of their body, that is, the external and outward
calling, they are called to come to hear and obey, and they hear it, and answer
not as Christ speaks, Matthew. 16.20. many are called, but few are chosen; or
else Gods calling is inward, and effectual, namely this, when men are called by
the voice of God, and the preaching of it, and they answer to it, their hearts
answer, they are called effectually by the working of the holy Spirit, which
brings them from Ignorance and unbelief to true knowledge and faith in
Christ, and they are called out of darkness into a mavelous light, 1 Pet.
2.9. the holy Spirit of God does bend their hearts to yield to the call of the
Lord, to receive the promise of mercy offered unto them, and he does cause them
to yield to the will of God revealed in their hearts and lives; this is Gods
effectual calling, and this is the calling here meant.

not of the Jews only,] That is, not those only who are descended of the
line of Abraham, of Jacob, and of Israel.

but of the Gentiles also.] Which was indeed a hard thing for the Jews to
believe, that is, even us, who are descended of another line, and come of
another nation of the world, and are termed Gentiles, and are aliens from the
Common wealth of Israel, even us who are strangers from God, Ephesians. 1.12. so
that we may easily conceive the purpose of the Apostle here to be this, viz.

Even us whom God has called effectually, and by the work of his Spirit
brought from ignorance and unbelief, even us whom he has wrought upon by the
preaching of his Word, and made it effectual for our calling to believe in him,
even us, not only us who have descended according to the line, and from the
loins of Abraham, and of Jacob, but us whosoever we be that have come of other
Nations and People of the World, and are called Gentiles, and aliens, and
strangers, even us has he called.

Now then come we to such things as hence are offered unto us for our
Instruction: And beloved, it is worth our marking (in the first place) that the
Apostle puts himself in the number of those that are called of God, and does
aver himself to be a vessel of mercy whom God has called, even us; you, and
I, We that are effectually called, are the vessels of mercy. I as well as you,
and you as well as I are in that number; Now then from hence it follows
directly.

That the Apostle Paul was assured of his own salvation, Gods Chosen, and
should one day come to eternal salvation in Heaven.

Admit this and grant it to be true, which the enemies of Gods Truth do contend
about, that he had a special and Divine Revelation from Heaven, which declared
to him that he was a chosen vessel, yet he knew it not by special Revelation
only but also by his effectual calling here affirmed: This Text is clear; but
he knew it also by his effectual calling, and his effectual calling was an
evidence that Heaven was prepared for him, and he prepared for Heaven; so that
this is clear unless they will deny the evidence of the text.

And as this blessed Apostle was assured of his own salvation by his effectual
calling, so doubtless they that are true Christians, that are effectually
called, they come to have a particular assurance of their own salvation that
they are in the number of Gods Chosen; for the Apostle (if you mark it) does
join others with himself; he does not only say, I, but you also, speaking in
the judgment of Charity; therefore we are to abhor and detest that same
damnable Doctrine of the Church of Rome. who teach, that a particular
persuasion of a man's own salvation is presumption, it is an illusion and deceit
of the devil, and (say they) you mock the people, and are blind leaders; but
this is a damnable doctrine of theirs: for beloved, take away all assurance of
a man's salvation, and you leave a Christian in a miserable case, we strip him
of all ground of joy, and true comfort and rejoicing, yea we take from him all
ground of hearty thankfulness, and encouragements of going on in a good course
of life; for how can a man truly and soundly rejoice in the apprehension of the
joys of heaven, when he is uncertain altogether whether he shall enjoy them
yea or no; how can a man be thankful for that thing that he is altogether
uncertain whether he shall enjoy it, yea or no? And how can a man go on
constantly in a holy and good course of life, when he cannot tell whether it
will bring him to heaven, or to hell, yea, or no? as the Papists Doctrine does
say, Oh it is a most uncomfortable position, a position of Desperation that
those enemies of Gods grace do hold and teach, that a special persuasion of
Gods mercy, and of a man's salvation, it is presumption, and a false illusion of
the devil; for this is a Position directly contrary to the evidence of this
Text.

Again, we see that the Apostle having spoken of Gods vessels of mercy, that
they are such as are prepared unto glory, he does adjoyn a particular instance,
who they are that are prepared unto glory, even such as are called of God, I,
and you, that are effectually called: hence arises this Conclusion, viz.

Whom he Predestined, them also he called; where we see Gods effectual
calling it is a fruit following necessarily upon Gods Predestination as the
effect the cause, in Acts 13.48. As many as were ordained to eternal Life
believed; they that belonged to Election, they were wrought upon effectually to
believe in Christ and the Gospel, and through their Faith and effectual
Calling, they were made known to be such as were appointed to life and glory
in Heaven, in John 10.16. says Christ, Other sheep I have that are not of this
fold; they also must be called, and they shall answer my calling and voice, and
be effectually to their Calling, and shall know of what fold they are of, they
shall receive my mark, and know my voice, and answer my call in 2 Thessalonians. 2.13.
The Apostle having said, That the believing Thessalonians were from the
beginning chosen to salvation, he presently subjoyneth in the 14. verse.
whereunto he has called you by the preaching of his Gospel, that you might
obtain salvation, thereby signifying that their effectual calling was an
evidence of their election, and to these many more might be added, all proving
that effectual Calling is a certain evidence of Election, and it must needs be
so for this Reason.

Because God in time does call all those whom he has before all time from
everlasting, foreordained, and set apart to life and glory in Heaven; and
therefore effectual calling it is proper and peculiar only unto Gods Elect,
others are called outwardly, but Gods effectual calling is proper and peculiar
to Gods Childeren, and all those shall in Gods due time be effectually called
that are appointed to salvation in Heaven; so that it follows necessarily,
that Gods effectual Calling is unto men a sure evidence of Gods Election of
them unto salvation.

Now this point is of excellent use, saved, a matter of great weight, and a
thing indeed wherein many do err and go astray in this one point: as those
are strongly deluded by the Devil, who think, (as many do) that if men do
live a civil and orderly life, (whatsover they be, though they be Papists,
Familists, Anabaptists, or whatsoever) yet if they lead a Civil and orderly
life and carriage in the World, they shall certainly be saved; but these are
deceived; for it is not a Civil and orderly living in the World, (as Conscience
does enlighten them) that will bring to Life and Salvation; no Familist, or
Anabaptist, can have any assurance that they shall have Salvation.

But if we would have assured Evidence, (that cannot deceive us) we must seek
for the proof of it in our hearts and souls, in our effectual Calling, see
here what evidence of grace we have, then we need not in this case to climb up
unto Heaven, to search the Court-Rols of Heaven; but we may take a shorter cut,
look into thy own Charter drawn out with the blood of Christ in thy heart,
and therein look to Gods effectual Calling; to the Evidence of grace in thine
own soul, and that will Evidence thee of thy Election, and that thou art in the
number of those that are Gods Chosen and herein I desire that every one will
deal truly with his own heart and soul.

Haste thou answered the voice of God? God calls upon thee in his Word, to
come out of thy Ignorance and thy unbelief, and other known sins, tell me,
and deal faithfully, Art thou wrought upon by the Word of God? Do thou come
out of thy ignorance, and thy blindness of mind? by a through change from
evil to good, is the course of thy sins broken off? thy pride, thy
drunkenness, thy usurie. Have thou thus answered the Call of God, and has the
Word had a kindly workeing upon thy soul, Romans 6.17. Do thou find
sweetness in the Consolations of the Word of God, and do thou yield
obedience to it in all things; in one thing, as well as in another? Not only
in some things, but in all things that God requires? yea, in those things that
do most of all cross thy own humor? Do thou find that the lusts of thy
own heart are curbed and ordered, and do thot find that thou art now
brought to love God, to love his Children, to love his Messengers, to love the
instrument of thy Calling? If thou have these things in thee, thou art
effectually called; and being effectually called, thou art a man or a woman,
that shall certainly be saved; my soul for thine, thou shall come to Heaven,
all the Devils in Hell cannot deprive thee of it. Oh then let every one try
above all things their effectual Calling which will assure them of salvation;
and be an infallible Evidence for their Election.

Even us whom he has called, not of the Jews only, but also of the Gentiles.


He shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost, and with fire; and it is compared to
the blowing of the wind, Joh 3.8. The wind blows where it lists, etc. So
are all that be born of the Spirit; thereby giving us to understand, that as
sensibly as a living man may perceive the burning of the fire, and feel the
blowing of the wind, so sensibly may a Child of God perceive in himself the
working of the holy Spirit of God. And indeed it is the very office of the
Spirit of God to teach Gods Children to know the things of God; so says the
Apostle expressly, 1 Cor. 2.12. We, says the Apostle, have not received the
spirit of the world, but we have received the Spirit of God, whereby we know
the good things that are given us of God; He teaches us to know our Hope, our
Faith, and a good life, it is the office of the Spirit, and he will certainly
perform his Office.

And beloved, did not the Apostle know on whom he had believed, 1. Tim. 2.12. I
know on whom I have believed; and cannot a Child of God know assuredly that he
truly believes in Christ by the works and fruits of his faith purifying his
heart, working in him a love to God and his Children, Gal. 5.6. because they
bear his Image, may not he certainly conclude true faith works by love?



God that lays aside all earthly pleasures, and denies himself and stands
for Christ and his Gospel to the shedding of his blood, and yet not know
whether he loves God or no? surely then Christ did ask of Peter a very idle
and frivolous question which were blasphemy to think; in John 21.15. Peter
love thou me? Peter might have said, Lord, thou know no man can tell
whether he love thee, or no, but Peter says, Lord, thou know that I love
thee; so that a man may truly know whether he loves God or no, and so be
assured of his effectual calling.

I but (say the Papists) grant this, sc. he cannot be sure of his salvation,
unless he hold out unto the end.

And herein they contradict the plain evidence of the truth of God, He that
believes in the Son of God; has everlasting life: He has one foot within
the gates of Heaven already: For indeed the life, grace and holiness in this
life shall be made perfect in Heaven, and the life of the godly here in this
world, and of the Saints in Heaven is all one in substance, differing only in
degree; theirs is perfect, ours is imperfect; and the Apostle says, in Romans
8.1. There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus; so that the
faith and grace of Gods Children is permanent and lasts for ever, and this
Doctrine of theirs is a mere Antithesis or contrariety to God and his Word, 1
Peter 1.5. Gods Children are kept by the power of grace unto salvation;
doubtless Gods Children shall continue unto the end, Gods grace shall never
depart from them, for he has made many gracious promises to that end, as
namely these, that God will put his fear in their hearts, that shall never
depart from me, Jeremie 32.40. And that he having begun the work of grace will
perfect it in Philippians 1.6. And that Christ Jesus is not only the Author,
but the Consummator and finisher of our Faith, Hebrews 12.2. Let then the
enemies of Gods Grace, Papists, or Anabaptists belch out their blasphemies,
they shall never be able to drive a Child of God from this comfort, that
comes by his effectual calling, that he shall certainly be saved.

And I might further add this as a third use, Faith comes by hearing, and
therefore miserable is the case of all Recusants, Papists, Anabaptists, and
Familists that refuse to hear the Word, and also all profane Atheists that
despise the preaching of the Word, and also Carnal Gospellers that are weary
of the preaching of the Word, it is a burden unto them: but to pass by this.

Again further, observe we in the next place, that the Apostle he rangeth the
calling of God into these two sorts, not only Jews who came of Jacob, which
was no strange thing, because they had many excellent privileges, but also
even us that are Gentiles; of another Nation and People, heathen Pagans, such
as were without the Covenant, without God, aliens from the Commonwealth of
Israel, dogs, such as were not worthy of the name of a reasonable creature;
hence then the Conclusion is this.

That Gods effectual Calling of men out of the estate of nature into the estate
of grace respects not men's persons, it respects not any station, calls some
high, some low, some rich, some poor, some masters, some servants: yea, it is
worth our marking, that the Lord called some few among the Gentiles before
Christ's incarnation, as Jethro Moses his father in Law, Job, Ruth, and others,
that might be named in 1 Cor. 7.21. Art thou called being a servant, thereby
implying that the servants may be called as well as care not for it, and in 1 Timothy 6.2. The Apostle speaks of believing masters, so that some of all sorts
and conditions are called, and the ground is this.

effectual calling respects not the qualification of men: for if it were tied
to the qualification of men, then in all likelihood those persons should be
called of God sooner then others who are of best disposition, of best wit and
understanding, and best towardness, those that are most civil in their
carriage, and most unblameable in their lives; but it is not so, for the
Apostle says the contrary in 1 Cor. 1.26. God has refused the rich and wise
of the world, and revealed his secrets to babes, not to noble and great, and
learned men; yea, we find in the days of Christ, that Publicans and harlots
were made to know the good things of God, when the Philosophers among the
Gentiles, and the Scribes and Pharisees, and Doctors among the Jews were passed
by, and passed over, so that God respects not persons, nor stations, nor
qualifications.

effectual calling of men, it is given unto men whom God sees fit to receive
it, and able to use it; If this were so then there should be a natural
correspondencie in men answerable to the supernatural Will of God; then there
should be a power in nature to use the grace of God, which indeed is an old
rotten Pelagian heresy, long agone rooted out of the Church of God.

Who so is simple, let him come to me, and those that are destitute of
wisdom and understanding, let him eat of my bread, and drink of my wine.
And the Lord Jesus rejoiced in his Spirit, when he considered that his Heavenly
Father had hid (the things that concerned his Kingdom) from the wise and
prudent, and revealed them unto babes. So then for to conclude, art thou one
that art a mean person, and of simple understanding, be not discouraged, for
Gods effectual calling is not revealed to rich and great men only, but
whosoever attends to the voice and call of God, and to the Ministry and
preaching of his Word among the Gentiles; As Solomon speaks, Proverbs 8.33.
That does beat the thresholds, and trample in Gods House, and be diligent, and
frequent in hearing the will of God; assuredly shall in Gods due time be
wrought upon and effectually called, and be made a Member of the mystical Body
of Christ Jesus: Therefore do not thou absent thy self from Gods Word, but
come cheerfully to it, and hear upon all occasions.

VERSE 25, 26. As he says in Hoseah, I will call them my People, which were
not my people, and her beloved, which was not beloved, etc.


IN these two Verses our Apostle proves the calling of the Gentiles into the
estate of grace and salvation, and that by the Testimony of the Prophet Hoseah;
by his predictions, and foretellings of their calling many years before; and
because the calling of the Gentiles was a thing harsh and hard to the Jews;
they could not endure to hear of it; what? dogs, base people called? as you may
see in Act. 11.28. The text says, that they of the Circumcision, the Jews,
wrangled with the Apostle; and were angry, because he went to the Gentiles, to
Dogs, therefore the Apostle takes the more pains, and confirms it by a
double Testimony of the Prophet, though with some alteration of the words; The
Apostle setting that in the last place; which is in the first place. The first
Testimony is out of Hosea 2.23. and the second Testimony out of Hosea 1.10. and
he does alter the words of the Prophet, both for brevity sake, and the better
to fit his purpose, and yet the Apostle keeps the sense of the Prophet entire
and whole, without any alteration or change. And the general matter of the
Apostle citing these two Testimonies, in this he proves, that that which he
had said, was nothing else but that which God himself had spoken by his Prophet
Hosea, should come to pass, recorded in holy Writ, (as he says also) I have
showed you God calls some among the Gentiles; and what is that a new
invention? no such matter, He also says it in Hosea.

Now in these words in this 25. and 26. verses, we may observe two general
things.

First of all, a bringing in of the Lord speaking a speech; being recorded by
the holy Prophet, and cited by the Apostle.

Secondly, the words that the Lord uttered, I will call them my people, which
were not my people, etc.) And in these words thus uttered, we may obseve a
double description of the Gentiles, for of them the Apostle and Prophet
speaks; first, a describing of them by their estate before their conversion,
they were then not beloved, not pitied; and secondly, a description of their
estate after their calling, then they were the people of God, the beloved, his
Children: a great alteration, from no people, to be a people; from not beloved,
to be beloved; from no children, to be children; and this their estate is
amplified by three things, First, by the free mercy of God toward them, in
their calling. Secondly, by the place where it is said, they are not my people.
Thirdly, their excellent dignity being called, they shall be styled, the
children of the living God; which epithet and title is given, to distinguish
him from the Heathen gods, who were dead and dumb Idols.

Now come we to the Exposition.

As he says also] You may easily conceive the person here meant to be God, As
God says also; the word also, is not a word that is idly, and superfluously
put down, but a word of special force, and great emphasis; as if the Apostle
had said, That which I say of the Gentiles, it is no fained thing, but it is
the same thing that the Prophet has spoken, and that the Lord himself
delivered to his Prophet.

I will call them my people, which were not my people, and her beloved, which
was not beloved.] These are the words of the Prophet here cited by the Apostle,
and here is a difficulty to be unfolded; for he makes here his application to
the Gentiles: But if you look in Hosea 1.10. and the 2.23. you shall find them
spoken directly to the Jews, for their comfort, after their dispersing and
scattering abroad, they should be called again; so the context does plainly
express to the Comfort of the Jews, how then can the Apostle apply these
words to the calling of the Gentiles? for the clearing of this doubt, we must
consider, that the Apostle Paul had the infallible assistance and guidance of
the Spirit of God, he did what he did by the guiding of the Spirit, so that he
could not err, either in his allegation; or application of Scripture.

And again, though this be directed to the Jews that were now scattered abroad
for their sins, and tells them to their comfort, that the time shall come,
when they shall be gathered together again, and that the Lord would restore the
Elect among the Jews, (meaning spiritually, by the preaching, voice, and call
of the Gospel,) in the Kingdom of the Messiah; though this be directed to the
Jews, yet under these terms are also the Gentiles signified and understood;
and indeed the Gentiles were properly not the people of God, it was never
properly spoken to the Jews, but to the Gentiles; (they were not the people of
God properly,) so that these words are properly spoken to the Gentiles, and
accidentally to the Jews, by reason of their impiety and Idolatry. And we
shall find it a mavelous usual thing, that when the Prophets do speak of the
defection of the Jews, and their dejection and falling from God, then they make
a transition, a passage from that to the Kingdom of the Messiah. And they
promise; that under the coming of the Messiah, a greater number of the people
should be aggregated and joined to the Jews, and so concopulated, and made one
body, Ephesians. 2.16. Now you are made one body through Jesus Christ; God has
made one body, both of the Jews and Gentiles.

Come we now to the Explication, and I will call them my people, which were not
my people, and her beloved which was not beloved. I will only descant upon
these words, and the meaning is thus; Those that were strangers from the
Covenant of grace, those that were in their natural estate and condition; and
are none of my people, that have not me for a God and Father to them, even
those that were aliens from the Common wealth of Israel, these will I call
effectually, and through the preaching of the Word and Gospel, bring them to
the state of faith and grace in Jesus Christ, and within the compass of my
special love and favor, and mercy, and I will make them to be within the
number of my peculiar people, and I will be a living and gracious Father unto
them. A parallel place unto this we have in 1 Pet. 2.10. where the Apostle
speaks thus, which in times past had not obtained mercy, but now have
obtained mercy, which is an expressing of what is meant by being called the
people of God.

And in the place where it is said, that they were not my people,] By place, is
meant the Countries, the Nations, the Kingdoms of the Gentiles, which were
without the pale of Jewry, the Precincts and limits of Canaan; now says the
Lord, them will I call also my children, even those that are without, in those
places will I cause men to know me, to worship me, and to fear me, as in Mal.
1. and they shall be called and styled by that worthy title the Children of
God, the living God, who is the Author and giver of all life. I will not stand
to draw them into a narrower compass, for you may easily conceive them.

Come we now to matter of Instruction, and first of all from these words, in
the 25. verse, As he says also, that is, as God says also; from hence note we
first,

That God spoke by his Prophets and Apostles. The holy Prophets of God, and the
holy Apostles, they were but Gods mouth to deliver his mind and message to his
people; they were not the inventers of it, but only the Writers, Penmen, and
Revealers of it; The text is clear to this purpose, 2 Pet. 1.20, 21. The
Apostle says, that no interpretation of Scripture is of any private invention
of man, but prophecy in old time, it came not by the will of man, but by the
Holy Ghost, they spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost: and in Gal. 1.11.
Brethren, the Gospel that I preach, it was not after the manner of men, neither
received I it from men, but by the immediate Revelation of Jesus Christ from
heaven. The Prophets and Apostles, in the execution of their Ministry, it was
no invention of man, but it was the holy mind and holy will of God, which it
pleases him to open unto him, that they might dispense it to his people.

And therefore the words of the Prophets and Apostles are so to be received as
the mind and will of God; and (to apply this to another purpose,) the words of
the holy Prophets and Apostles, they are to be spoken of, and to be reverently
handled by those that take upon them to handle the words of God, as the word of
God, not as man's word, they are to be handled as the Apostle says, in 1 Pet.
4.11. If any man speak, let him speak as the word of God; if any man in the
public Ministry speak the Word of God, let him see that he speak not only the
word of God, but as the word of God, which indeed are holy, and pure, and
powerful, and are so to be spoken, and so to be uttered, by those that do take
upon them to dispense it to Gods people; it is not sufficient for them to utter
the bare words, but to utter them with power and authority, and as the Apostle
says, in 1 Cor. 2.4. they are to be delivered in the demonstration and
evidence of the Spirit of God, yea they are so to be handled with such evidence
of the Spirit and power, that men may discern the power and Majesty of it, 1
Cor. 4.25. and may say, without question, God is in that Preacher, now the
everliving God speaks.

And do they thus, that do handle the words of the holy Prophets and Apostle,
loosly, carelessly, and after a carnal manner, in the enticing words of man's
wisdom, in frothy, idle, and ink-horn terms, such as are humane eloquence,
or those that mingle the holy word of God, and the holy Prophets; with their
own inventions, and their own devices, with the sayings of such a Poet, such a
Philosopher, do these deliver it purely? Jer. 23.28. He that has my words, let
him speak my words faithfully: what do those then that come into the Pulpit,
and do speak idly, and foolishly, and do take the name of God in vain? do these
speak it in the demonstration of the Spirit? No, a Preacher that speaks unto
the people must consider, now am I to speak, not only Gods Word, but Gods Word
after a holy manner; and if God were here, would God speak thus vainly? thus
idly and frivolously, and feed the people with chafe instead of Wheat? they
must remember they are in the place of God; yea whosoever they be, that do
draw such Conclusions from the Word of God, that are not there found; though
they be sound and Orthodoxal, if they are not agreeable to the will of God in
that place, they are not Gods word, but the words of man, howsoever they may
say, men will not hear the word of God, yet they are not the words of God,
though sound and good, if they be not natural from the place, and so by this
means the Word of God does work just nothing upon the hearers; therefore it is
no easy matter to handle the words of the Prophets and Apostles, as they ought
to be handled, it requires great study, great prayer, great meditation, even
watching and striving, studying and praying, to deliver that which is agreeable
to the Word: it is an easy matter to hear the Word formally, but the hardest
thing in the world to preach it soundly.

Now observe we further from this preface, As he says also, that is, that
which I deliver touching the calling of the Gentiles, it is no strange thing
newly invented, but it is the very same that God himself delivers and
forespeaketh long since, and now it is fulfilled and accomplished, the Gentiles
are called, and that is no new thing, neither ought you to stumble at it,
because it is the voice of God; hence note we,

God, though they be hard and harsh to flesh and blood, we are to be so far
from stumbling at them, that they ought to strengthen our faith the more;
touching the truth of the word of God, the event and coming to pass of things,
though they be very grievous to carnal Reason, yet they ought to strengthen our
faith, and make us more certainly to believe the Word of God, Joh. 16.1. These
things have I told you, that you be not offended; (what are those things?) they
are very harsh, viz. the time shall come, when they shall excommunicate you,
and cast you out; and he that kills you, shall think he does God good
service. These things have I told you, that when you see these predictions come
to pass, you may be strengthened, Remembering I told you.

God, Anabaptistical opinions and others, that they that belong unto God may be
tried: so also many there are that stand amazed to see some, that have made a
great profession of the Gospel, eminent persons, to fall away; and embrace the
world; but the Apostle says, 1 Timothy 4.1. that in the latter days there should
be a departing from the faith, and giving heed to the spirit of errors, and
doctrines of Devils, that men shall be mockers and scoffers: and hence it is,
that the Apostle brings in the Atheist, in 2 Pet. 3.3. saying, Where is the
day of his coming? and that men should be mockers, disobedient, such as make a
show of godliness, but deny the power thereof, 2 Timothy 3.1, 5.

Now, when we see these things, we should subscribe unto the truth of God in
our hearts, and be confirmed in it. Matthew. 24.6. says Christ, When you hear of
Wars, and Combustions, and Rumors in the world, wonder not, nor be not
amazed; forr these things must come to pass, and be fulfilled. And it argues
a true, and a sound faith, to see through the thick mists of error, and
iniquity, and abundance of evil; the bright resplendant shining beams of the
Majesty, and purity of the Word of God.

And therefore we are to be so far from being offended at the Combustions and
Uproares of the world, as that we should be strengthened so much the more, and
settled and grounded in the holy Word of God, seeing God has Revealed it in
his Word, and foretold it long before.

As he says in Hosea, I will call them my people which were not my people, and
her beloved which was not beloved, etc.
COme we now to the words of the Testimony it self, in these two verses. And
herein the Apostle does invert the Order of the words of the Prophet, putting
that which is first, last; yea the Apostle does something alter and change the
words of the Prophet, and keeps not strictly, and precisely to the very words
of the Prophet, citing word for word, yet he keeps the scope, sense and
meaning of the Prophet, sound and entire without any alteration, or change,
hence then note we thus much;

That it is not always necessary that the very words of the Scripture,

The Preachers of the Word must look unto it, that they neither deprave nor
corrupt the places of Scripture, that they do not cut them off, and leave out
something needful; this was the sin of the Devil in Matthew 4.6. He shall
give his Angels charge over thee, and leaves out (to keep thee in all thy
ways;) Nor that they do not wrest and wring the places of Scripture to a
wrong sense and wrong purpose, and make them as a nose of wax, and draw them
to a wrong purpose, and vex the Holy Word of God, which is the dealing of all
heretics, and especially such as do turn the places of Scripture, and the
plain Stories of the Bible into Allegories; and so wrong the sense of the
Scripture: yet Ministers of the Word; they may allege and cite places of
Scripture with some alteration, so they keep the sense safe, sound and entire,
John 7.38. He that believes in me, as says the Scripture, out of his belly
shall flow rivers of water. Where does the Scripture say so? Surely in no place
that we find in the Old Testament expressly, and totidem verbis, in the very
same words; yet for the matter and substance of these words they may be
collected and gathered out of the holy Prophets, as out of Esaias 44.3. and
49.10. Joel 3.18. in all which places mention is made of pouring water upon the
dry and thirsty ground, and of diving into the Waters of Life, and of a
fountain that should issue out from the house of the Lord. Now the Lord Jesus
does apply these words of the Prophets (having respect to Christ who is the
Fountain of Life, and of all Spiritual graces) he does apply them to all those
that truly believe in him, that though they were dry and barren, yet out of
them shall flow the rivers of water of Life; so that though he does not set
down the words of the Prophets expressly, yet he keeps the sense, and meaning
of the words.

So that it concerns the Preachers of the Word to be very well acquainted
with the scope and drift of the Scriptures, that howsoever they may miss of
the words, yet they must keep the sense entire, and see that they do not
swerve from the intent and purpose of the Holy Spirit of God in the Text.

And as they must be careful that the places of Scripture be fit and pertinent
to the purpose they have in hand, so also that the places they do allege be
truly understood, and rightly applied according to the meaning of the Word,
and then they are the true Word of God, and are a notable means to beat down
the strong holds of sin, and of Satan; (to pass by that.)

Come we now to the Testimony it self recorded by the Prophet, and here
alleged by the Apostle [I will call them my people which were not my people,
and her beloved, which was not beloved.] These words are a plain Text, and do
evidence unto us the vocation and calling of the Gentiles, which was long ago
foretold, and now fulfilled, the Gentiles are called, the Gentiles embrace the
faith of Christ, which is one of the great mysteries of the Gospel, and of
Religion. 1 Timothy 3.16. Without controversy great is the mystery of
godliness; what was that? God manifested in the flesh, seen of Angels,
justified in the Spirit, preached to the Gentiles; a high and excellent
mystery. Now touching this mystery of calling the Gentiles observe the Lord
says, [I will call them my People, which were not my people, and her beloved,
which was not beloved.] Hence appears the free mercy; and the free grace of
God in calling the Gentiles out of the estate of ignorance and unbelief into
the estate of true knowledge and faith in Jesus Christ, into the estate of
grace, hence then arises this point, viz.

calls men effectually out of their natural estate, into the estate of grace,
and does work grace in them effectually by the power of his Spirit through the
preaching of the Word, out of his mere good will and free mercy, nothing moving
him thereunto, but only his free mercy, the Lord he is pleased to reveal the
Gospel to none but to those who out of his mere good will he pleases to cause
to understand it, and the light of the Gospel, though it shine most clearly and
resplendantly, yet it does enlighten none, nor work upon none, but only such
as it pleased God to illuminate and enlighten by the preaching of the Word,
though it fall upon their eyes, and sound in their ears, and shine about them,
yet the hearts are shut up of all such, unless those whom God does illuminate,
Ephesians. 1.9. The Apostle speaking of himself and other true believers, says
expresiy, God has opened unto us the mystery of his Word, the secrets of his
Gospel according to his own good pleasure. And in the same Chapter, the 17.
verse, He prays that the Ephesians might have the Spirit of Revelation, and
the Spirit of Wisdom. Oh Lord open the eyes of their understanding that they
may clearly see the riches of his calling, and the sweet comforts of the
Gospel. And hence it was that the Apostle says, in 2 Cor. 4.6. That God by the
same Almighty power, whereby he brought light out of darkness, causes them to
see the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ; yea, the Lord does afford the
outward sound and preaching of the Word out of his free mercy where it
pleases him; He appoints the drops of rain to fall in this place, and not in
that, so he does cause the dew of his Word to fall upon the clay the Gentiles,
in Matthew. 10.6. into the Cities of the Samaritans enter not; and in Acts 16.6,
7: we find that Paul and Timothy they were forbidden of the holy Ghost to
preach the Word in Asia. Yea, when they had a mind to go to Bythinia, the
Spirit of God would not suffer them, but sent them to Macedonia, Acts 16.9.
Come over into Macedonia and help us; so that the outward preaching of the Word
it is vouchsafed to some, and not to others, as when Christ lived upon the face
of the earth, the bodily eyes of all men were not opened, but only some, and
others remain blind, some blind persons were left in their blindness; And the
dead bodies of all were not raised, though some were, at the death of Christ;
so deals the Lord with the minds and souls of men, he only out of his
gracious pleasure does open the minds of some men, and make them to see, know,
and understand and believe by the preaching of the Word, according to his
gracious pleasure; therefore we may resolve upon it (as a certain truth,) that
God does call men out of the estate of nature, into the estate of grace
effectually out of his free grace and mercy.

God does call men effectually, and does work upon them powerfully by his
Spirit; that is the error of the Papists, they hold indeed that the election of
God, and consequently the revelation of the truth of God, it is upon their
merit foreseen, because God does foresee some worthiness in them; we are to
renounce this as a gross Popish error, yea the truth now made known unto us,
being duly considered and thought upon, it bears strongly against that
position that is held by some, that redemption wrought by Christ is universal,
that Christ died for all men universally without any exception of any. Now not
to stand upon this erroneous position, which is a dangerous error in the
ground of it, it making the sin of men the sins of the world; death and hell,
to be stronger then Christ, that Christ should die for all men, and yet some of
those men go to hell, a fowl and a gross error: besides this, it cannot stand
with the truth now delivered, that Christ died effectually for all men, without
exception of any; for if so be Christ did die for all men generally, and
universally, then doubtless all are acquainted with it, savingly as a benefit
belonging to themselves such as are redeemed, assuredly God does bring them to
the saving knowledge of their redemption. Now this is not so; the preaching of
the Word, and plain experience does tell the contrary; for God out of his mere
good will and pleasure does call none effectually, but such as are redeemed by
Christ, and so all men are not, for then they should savingly be brought to the
knowledge of their redemption, but all are not so, for as in the time of Christ
all men that were blind had not their eyes opened, so all have not their minds
enlightened, and therefore universal redemption wrought by Christ is a mere
fancy of the brain of man forged in hell, and there is no truth in it; to say
that Christ died for all, and if we rest upon this; we shall find a deceiving
ground of comfort. Howsoever some will say, how shall we comfort a poor soul, a
prisoner that is to be executed but by telling him Christ died for all, upon
what ground? No Christ died not for all.

Again, is it so that God works freely upon the minds and souls of men out of
his free grace and mercy; Oh then such as find themselves to be in God and
thoroughly wrought upon by the power of the preaching of the Word, that are
brought to the saving knowledge of God in Christ, they are bound to acknowledge
the riches of his free grace and mercy, and be thankful unto God for the same.
Consider it thou that have good evidence of thy effectual calling that art
transformed and changed and brought into a new mold and fashion; consider with
thy self that many are left in their natural ignorance and unbelief; yea many
are given over to Popish superstitions, many living in the same place,
frequenting the same means, hearing the same sermons, sitting in the same seat
with thee, they remain ignorant in their blindness of mind, and hardness of
heart, but God has given thee not only his Word and Gospel preached, but a
heart enlightened to receive it; therefore thou have cause to magnify the mercy
of God for this blessing of all blessings: And learn thou to break out and say,
[Lord, what am I, that thou should vouchsafe unto me such a mercy, I see
thousands in their natural estate and ignorance, I was born and brought forth
in sin like other men, and have increased and multiplied my sins
exceedingly, my unthankefulnesse is great, and my unworthiness greater, and
yet thou have vouchsafed mercy unto me above many thousands, Lord thou art
gracious and merciful unto me.]

Thus we ought to be stirred up our selves to magnify the mercy of God, in
that many thousands are given to Popish superstition, and God has given thee a
flexible heart to his Word: Oh thou can not be sufficiently thankful for so
great a favor.

As he says also in Hosea, I will call them my people, which were not my
people, and her beloved, which was not beloved.
COme we now to the very words of the text, to enter into the bowels of it. In
these words (as I have showed you) we have a double description of the
Gentiles; First, of their estate before their calling, when they were not the
people of God by nature. Secondly, of their condition after their Calling, that
they were now become the people of God, and beloved of the Lord; hence then
first of all appears the estate of man by nature, as yet unconverted, and not
wrought upon by the Spirit of God, through the preaching of the Word and
Gospel: hence the Doctrine is this,

God, nor beloved of God, so says the Text; and we find, that that the
Scripture sets out the miserable estate and condition of men in their
natural estate, by many notable speeches, in Romans 5.6.8. it is said, that they
were sinners in a high degree, ungodly, yea enemies unto God, and unto Christ;
such as are in their natural estate, they are enemies unto God, and there is
open defiance between God and them, and they may look that the Lord shall deal
with them as a professed enemy: and in Ephesians. 2.3. the Apostle does notably
describe the estate of the Gentiles before their calling, that they are without
Christ, aliens and strangers from the Commonwealth of Israel, without God in
the world; no better then Atheists, enemies to God, standing subject to the
whole wrath of God, both in this life, and for ever, Acts 26.18. and therefore
they are in a woeful estate and condition. And it must needs be so.



Gods wrath, 2 Timothy 2.26. taken in the snare of the devil, held of him at his
pleasure, and led wheresoever he pleases; and therefore we may resolve upon
this as a certain truth, That men not effectually called, they are in a
miserable estate and condition, subject to Gods wrath and hell torments; and
how miserable that is, you may easily judge.



To this I answer, God loves them only with that degree of his love that is
proper to his chosen uncalled, as being in the number of his elect, in time to
be called; but he loves them not with that degree of his love to his chosen
called; for howsoever Gods love does not admit of more or less, yet Gods love
(extended and reached out to the chosen of God,) in respect of them has
different degrees, he loves them uncalled, not with that degree of his love as
he does the called, then when they are uncalled; he loves them with an act of
his love, but when they are called effectually, he loves them with a greater
degree of his love; whereas before, their best works are displeasing to God,
being out of Christ, who is the Root and Fountain of all acceptance, and in
and through him he is the head of the Covenant, and so he loves them to the
acceptance of their persons; for as the Apostle says, in Romans 8.8. They that
are in the flesh, (natural men, chosen or unchosen, elected, or not elected of
God) they cannot please God. And being in their natural estate, they have no
assured evidence to themselves, that they are in the number of Gods chosen; no,
the love of God is a secret thing to them unknown, and they have no evidence of
it, until they be effectually called; so that it still remains a truth, that
men in their natural estate and condition, not wrought upon by the preaching of
the Word, certainly they are in a miserable condition.

This truth being thus cleared, first of all, it meets with the conceit of
(ex congruo) by a kind of congruity, convenience, and fitness, it is fit and
convenient, that they should be accepted, and that God should reward them for
their good works done; A most gross and absurd opinion; for what worth can
come from such persons as are not yet beloved of God, to the acceptance of
their persons? for the person must first of all be beloved of God, before any
thing done by him can be pleasing to God: now what can be done pleasing unto
God, or worthy of Gods acceptance, of those whose persons are not pleasing to
him?

This discovers unto us, that many in the world are in a most miserable
(splendida peccata) glittering sins, a heap of dung painted over with gold,
they are no better: And being not beloved of God, the creatures of God, and
every thing fights and conspireth against thee, all the Judgments of God hang
over thee, and thou lie subject to all plagues and Judgments in this life,
and to eternal confusion in the life to come; yea thou can not go to God by
prayer, as thy Father, which is in heaven, but as a God ready to pour out his
wrath and vengeance, clothed with Justice and Judgment, yea thou can not
hear the voice of God against thee. Oh that Civil honest persons would but
consider this their miserable estate and condition, thou would be so far
from being pleased with thy self, in respect of thy estate, and so far from
blessing thy self therein, that thou would fall a bewailing of thy miserable
estate and condition, in considering thy case is miserable and damnable.

Again, in that the Apostle says, I will call them my people which were not my
people, and her beloved which was not beloved, hence we may observe thus much,
viz.

they are made near unto God; whereas before God was an angry Judge, now they
are at peace with God, yea at peace with all the creatures of God; yea the very
stones in the streets, and beasts in the field are at peace with them, yea such
as are in the estate of grace, they may have access to the Throne of grace, to
see the face and favor of God with boldness, they may come into the house of
God with comfort, and joy, and rejoicing; they may eat bread at the Lords
Table, and feed on the Gospel, yea they may praise God for assurance of
happiness hereafter; yea the Scripture makes known, that they are dear unto
the Lord of heaven, and he makes special account and reckoning of them, they
are a royal Priesthood, a holy Nation, a peculiar people, 1 Pet. 2.9. yea they
are the sheep of his pasture, the Saints of God, and of his Family, they are of
Gods Household, Ephesians. 2.19. they are dear and tender to him as the apple of his
eye, he that touches them, touches the very apple of his eye, Zach 2.8. yea
they are the Lords own proper inheritance, Deuteronomy. 32.9. all the world is the
Lords, but his people are his inheritance.

God to the acceptance of our persons, our good works, and services, yea our
weak and imperfect service are pleasing unto God through Christ; yea we are in
such a blessed estate and condition, that nothing can make us miserable: how
should this affect our hearts? for if a child of God were in hell, and within
the compass of Gods love, he were in a blessed estate: whereas otherwise
though they were in heaven, and yet not beloved of God, thy case would be
miserable: Oh what a blessed condition is a Child of God in! And as the Heathen
man says, If thou did see the beauty of virtue, thou would desire it
above all; so if thou did but see the beauty and luster of Gods love, it
would make thee admire it, and to labor to get out of the estate of nature,
into the estate of grace, and then happy art thou; for thou have right and
title to everlasting happiness, and assured possession of heaven.

As he says also in Hosea, I will call them my people which were not my
people, and her beloved which was not beloved. And it shall come to pass, in
the place where it was said unto them, You are not my people, There shall they
be called the Children of the living God.
WE are now to come to stand upon the last of these two verses, the 26. verse,
where we see the Apostle does double his testimony, and does bring two places
both of them to one and the same purpose; one of them had been sufficient, but
he brings two; and indeed doubling of speeches in Scripture is not idle, nor
superfluous, but it is of excellent use and purpose; it serves both for more
certainty, and for more plainness; and perspicuity, in Genesis 41.32. Joseph said
unto Pharaoh, his dream was doubled; and why? because the thing should
certainly come to pass; so likewise it makes things more evident, plain, and
perspicuous, as in Phil. 3.1. The Apostle says, It grieveth not me to write
unto you the same things again, for they are sure and certain.

The point needs not to be enlarged; only I note it to teach us, that we must
double our regard and our respect of things that are often repeated, and often
beaten upon in the holy Scripture; God having a mouth to speak, we must have an
ear to hear, a mind to attend, and a heart to yield obedience unto him; and the
Lord doubling his speech, and repeating the same things again, we must double
our hearing, double our apprehension, and double our care, to profit by it, and
make use accordingly. As in particular, Does the Lord double his threats
against thy sins? have thou often heard of thy particular sins, thy
drunkenness, thy whoredom, thy pride, thy Sabbath-breaking, thy Usury? have
thou heard of it again and again? has the Lord directed his Ministers, to
denounce his Judgments often against thee for thy sins? Oh then it behooves
thee to double thy care and respect in reforming of thy sins; has the Lord
often threatened thee for thy pride, thy garishnesse in apparel? and is it not
amended? certainly the Lord will deal with thee proportionably, thou resistest
the holy Spirit of God, that has doubled his threatenings against thee for thy
sins, and thou not amending, but going on, he will certainly one day double
his plagues and Judgments upon thee, without reformation.

Now touching the matter of the Apostles speech, And it shall be in the place
where it was said, they are not my people, there they shall be called my
people: Here we see, the Lord does set forth the Calling of the Gentiles by the
circumstance of the place, the meaning is, as if the Lord had said, In those
Nations, those Kingdoms, those Countries of the world, where I have none that
do fear, nor worship me, nor are called by the name of my people, but are
Heathen, and Pagans, there will I raise up some to call upon me, and to offer
unto me. So that we may see, that Gods calling of men to the estate of grace,
it respects no place, but in any place, in any Country of the World, the
Lord will call them in due time: but this point for the substance we have
formerly handled. But hence we may gather briefly thus much, viz.

That distinction of place, in regard of holiness, 16.) there was a place
whither the Tribes of Israel should resort three times in a year, and come to
worship God publicly in that place, and that was the City of Jerusalem,
Matthew 4.5. Called Sancta Vrbs, the Holy City, and the whole Land must go
to worstip there. But now in the time of the New Testament, all places are
alike Holy, and men may offer up a pure Offering to the Name of God in any
place; so says the Apostle, in 1 Timothy 2.8. I will that men lift up pure
hands unto God in every place, even pray in every place. And this was foretold
by the Prophet in Zephaniah 2.11. That in every place men should worship the
Lord of Hosts, yea in all the Isles of the Heathen; and all the Nations of the
world not to be tied to Jerusalem.

So then upon this ground appears the folly and absurdity of Popish
Pilgrimages, and in particular their going a Pilgrimage to the Holy Land of
Jude, aand City of Jerusalem; why? Holiness is not inherent in the ground,
or in the walls of Jerusalem, no, Jerusalem was a Holy City, in regard of
the pure and true worship of God; but now (that failing, and taken away and
given to other people) that is no more holy then other places of the world;
therefore it is absurd for them to go to the Holy City in Pilgrimage: but to
leave them.

There be many amongst our selves that are justly to be blamed, who either out
of their gross ignorance, or blind and Popish superstition, ascribed Holiness
more to one place then to another, and tie the presence of God more to one
certain place, then to another as in the Church the places of public
Assemblies.

Oh they think those places are far holier then other places, and thereupon
if they have occasion to go through Paul's or other Churches when there is no
public service, yet they drop down upon their knees to a pillar, and there
pour out their prayers, this is gross and blind superstition; for distinction
of place is now gone, a man may as well pour out his prayers with Divine
thoughts and pure hands, as well in the market, and in the field, as in the
Church.

I confess, the places, of public meeting the Churches, are more convenient
for comeliness and Orders sake, for public worship, but they pour out their
private prayers in a public place, out of the time of public worship;
Holiness is not in the place, but in the company and the worship there
performed, but the place is not holy in the time, nor out of the time of
exercise, no more then any other place.

Again, we see further, the Lord here sets out the calling of the Gentiles
to the estate of grace, by the excellent dignity and worthiness of it; What
are they being called? why, in all places, and in all Nations, the Children of
the Living God: an excellent dignity; so then the point from hence is this;

As many as received him, (meaning Christ) to them he gave power, (or rather
privilege and prerogative) to be the sons of God, not power signifying power
and strength of free will to be made Gods Children, as the Rhemists note upon
that place, but the privilege, honor and prerogative that they have being the
Children of God, there is no service to the service of the King of Heaven, it
was as much as the Prodigal desired, Luke 15.19. (Father I am not worthy to be
called thy son, make me one of thy hired servants.) Yea God has no need of
the service of men, he has thousands; yea ten thousand thousands of holy and
glorious Angels to wait and attend upon him, and to be at his beck, Daniel
7.10. But for men to be made not only the servants of God, but to be made his
Children by Adoption, and Grace, it is an advancement exceeding great and
wonderful; Moses was a faithful servant in the House of God, yet nothing
comparable unto Christ, who ruled in the House of God as his son, Hebrews
3.5, 6. What was Abraham's eldest servant Eleazar, to his youngest son?
nothing. And what was Joab the servant of David, though a man of great place
and authority, in comparison of Solomon the son of David? No, Solomon
reckons of it as a special honor, Proverbs 1.1. ( Solomon the son of
David, so that it is a greater honor to be the Son of God, and it must needs
be so.

Because men who are made the Children of God, what are they of themselves? God
who makes them his Children, what is he? Surely he is a most Holy, Glorious,
and highest Majesty, and according to the Dignity of the Person of the
Father, so is the honor of the Child, the Child of a Prince or Noble man is
more respected then the Child of a baser man, and that worthily; and hence
David being moved by his fellow servants to become the son in Law of Saul, 1
Samuel 18.23. says, (Seems it a small thing unto you for me to be son in
law to a King?) Did holy David (a man worthily deserving at the hands of Saul)
think it a great matter to enter into aliance with Saul; and shall not we think
it a wonderful honor for us that are base and vile men, to be made the sons and
daughters to the great God of Heaven and Earth?

Men being made the Children of God, they are the heirs of God, every (If we
Children, we are also Heirs,) yea they are made joynt-heires and co-heires
with the Son of God, and they shall one day share with him in Life and Glory;
Therefore it follows undeniably, that it is a great honor and dignity to be
a Child of God, yea a greater honor and dignity, then if they were advanced
to be the heirs of the greatest Monarch in the world.

We see then upon this ground, the vain and blind conceit of the world,

Alas, they are blind and cannot see and discern their miserable estate; for
all the honor that great and mighty men have, it is nothing in comparison of
a Child of God: No though their excellency did mount up to Heaven, and touch
the sky with their heads, and make their nests among the Stars, yet being not
in the estate of grace, they are in a base condition, and shall be tumbled
down, and trodden down as the dung under their feet; therefore they are
deceived that magnify them, and honor them so much.

Haste thou then good evidence that thou art a Child of God, and in Because
thou art precious and honorable in my sight; yea, thou art honorable in the
sight of all the holy Angels of God, yea of the Saints of God: And howsoever
the world do seek to blemish thee, and to cast dirt in thy face, and say thou
art a Schismaticke, a Puritan, an Hypocrite, yet they cannot possibly disgrace
thee; for the honor that is put upon thy head, is put by the hand of God, and
it will make thee honorable and glorious in the sight of men and Angels; Alas
the honor of the world conferred upon men, it has many interruptions and
breakings off, and if it continue as long as they live, yet then it leaves
them, and they leave a rotten and stinking name behind them, but the honor
conferred upon thee, is holy and heavenly Honor, and continues after death:
Yea consider, that thou being a Child of God, thou art the Child of him that
lives for ever, thy Father never dies; and assuredly thy Father never dying,
there is no end of his days and glory; so he will make thee glorious also, and
crown thee with Eternal happiness; and therefore thou art an honorable person.

VERSE 27, 28, 29. Esaias also cries concerning Israel, Though the number of
the Children of Israel be as the sand of the sea, a remnant shall be saved.

For he will finish the work, and cut it short in righteousness: because a
short work will the Lord make upon the earth.

And as Esaias said before, Except the Lord of Sabbath had left us a seed, we
had been as Sodoma, and been made like unto Gomorrah.


IN these three verses our Apostle affirms, and further amplifieth the
vocation and calling of the Gentiles, by an Antithesis; namely, by the
rejection and casting off of the Jews, for the body of them, and the greatest
part and number of them; the Lord only calling a few, and a remnant, and a seed
of them. And this our Apostle confirms by two Testimonies from the Prophet
Esaias.

The first as you may read in Esaias 10.21. and 22. verse, which is here laid
down in the 27. and 28. verses.

The second Testimony is in Esaias 1.8. and here put down in the 29. verse; Now
in these two Testimonies tending both to one and the same purpose, there are in
general two things considerable.

First of all the thing witnessed, and secondly, the amplification of the thing
witnessed: The thing witnessed is, that a very small number of the people of the
Jews, (in comparison of the multitude) shall be saved, expressed under the term
remnant in the 27. verse, and seed in the 29. verse; and the amplification of
the thing witessed, is in 5 particulars.

First of all the person witnessing the Prophet Esaias.

Secondly, the manner of his giving Testimony, that is, with crying.

Thirdly, the confession of a grant made by the Prophet, (and here cited by the
Apostle;) That though the number of the Children of Israel were exceeding
great, (set out by a comparison of the sand of the Sea) yet but a remnant shall
be saved.

Fourthly, the Reason and ground of this, why but a remnant shall be saved, and
that is Gods purpose, and Gods will, (which is amplyfied by the execution of it
in righteousness, in the 28. verse.)

Fifthly, a magnifying of Gods mercy in saving a few, and a small number of the
people of the Jews, which is set out by a comparison taken from Sodom and
Gomorrah, and also by a Title given unto God, who is called the Lord of Hosts.
Thus we see the general matter of the Holy Ghost in these three verses: Now
come we to handle them particularly, and first of the 27. and 28. verses; for
these verses are very difficult and hard to be understood.

As Esaias also cries;] Crying does import a loud, a plain, a bold, and an
earnest speaking, not an ordinary speech, but a speaking with an extension,
and lifting up of the voice, and he cries concerning the people of Israel,
what does he cry?

That though the people of Israel were as the sand on the sea,] That is, though
they were a numberless multitude; even as sands upon the Sea shore.

Yet but a remnant shall be saved;] The word remnant is taken from tradesmen
Metaphorically, who use to cut out a whole piece of cloth into parcels until a
little be left, and that they call a remnant or remainder; so a remnant, a very
small number of the Jews shall be saved.

Shall Be saved,] Now the Prophet he says, not a remnant shall be saved, but shall
return, in Esaias 10.22. meaning historically they shall return from the
Captivity of Babylon, yet we must know that the Prophet under the title of
return, does intend a further matter, namely a spiritual returning a returning
to God, as he says, in the 21. verse of that Chapter, (The remnant of Jacob, to
the mighty God shall return,) that is, they shall repent of their sins and be
saved; so the Apostle and the Prophet do well agree;

For he will make his account draw near, and bring it to a short sum in
righteousness.] Not to trouble you with variety of Expositions, with which
this verse is exceedingly vexed, and does much pusle Interpreters; but the
words of the Prophet Esayias are these, (The consumption decreed shall overflow
with righteousness;) and here the Apostle says; (for he will make his account,
and draw it to a short sum in righteousness.) And for the understanding of
this, we must know, that the thing intended, and signified both by the Prophet
and Apostle is this, as we may easily gather from the context; That God has
purposed and ordained to bring the sinful and unthankful people of the Jews,
to a small number, and a short sum, and that justly for their unthankfulness
and sins, which the Prophet expresses in these terms: (The consumption
decreed shall overflow with righteousness,) because the Prophet knowing that
the Lord would bring these people to a small number; He decrees that this
consumption which God has determined, he will bring upon them for their
sins, shall overflow them, and they shall be as unable to stand against them,
as a poor thin weak bridge is unable to stand against a stiff stream, and
a strong running swelling water, it shall overthrow them, as a river overflowing
the banks does bear all things before it. Now the Apostle, following the
Translation of the Septuagint, with which the Romans were best acquainted,
expresses it in these words;

That hc will make up his account, and draw it to a short sum in
righteousness;] that is, by making account, and drawing it to a short sum,
we are to understand that the Lord would bring that consumption which he had
decreed, and that speedily, and make a short work, and a short business of
the matter; for the word [Logon] may as well signify a short work, as a short
word, for he will make a short work of the business: and we are also here to
consider the extent of this consumption, that as it shall be speedy and swift,
and they shall be soon wasted, so that few of them should be left, that they
should be as trees in a grove, which a Child may tell, Esaias 10.19. For the
Lord will make a short account in the earth; hereby we are to understand, that
the Lord would bring this consumption, and finish this work in the very midst
of the earth, in the very bowels, and chiefest part of the Kingdom, Esaias
10.25. Now then thus receive we briefly the meaning of the words of these two
verses.

Esaias the Prophet, he also speaks plainly and boldly concerning the people
of Israel in this manner; that though the Number of the Children of Israel,
were an exceeding great Number, a Numberless Multitude, yet but a few of them
should return from the Captivity of Babylon, and return to God, and repent of
their sins, and be saved eternally; (for so says the Prophet) The Lore he
has purposed and decreed, and appointed, to bring that sinful Nation of the
Jews, to a very small remnant, and Number. Yea, finishing the great work of
their Consumption speedily, and extending it so far, as that a small Number
shall be left, for the Lord will finish his work in the very heart, and midst
and principal part of the Land, thus we are to conceive the meaning of the
Prophet scited by the Apostle; Come we now to instructions.

First of all observe we, that the Apostle here brings in the Prophet
Esayias, speaking not barely of the rejection of the Jews, but also crying of
it, speaking with the extension of his voice; he speaks boldly, plainly, and
to the purpose, proclaiming it to the purpose; that though their number were
never so great, even as the sand upon the Sea shore, he would destroy them;
though doubtless this was a very harsh and unpleasing message: yea, the
delivering of it, was like to bring many about his ears, what Esaias shall few
of us be saved, yet we see the Prophet Esaias utters it boldly without fear
or fainting.

I tell you to your faces, that though your number were as the Sea shore, yet
but a few of you shall be saved; see how bold and plain the Prophet is in
delivering this message so harsh and hard: Hence we may observe this
instruction, viz.

Cry aloud (says the Lord) spare not, lift up thy voice like a Trumpet, tell
my people of their transgressions, and the House of Israel their sins.

See how earnest the Lord is, Be thou bold, cry out, and tell my people of
their transgressions, and the danger which they are in by reason of their
sins, though they be never so much incensed. And in Matthew 3. from the
seventh to the thirteenth, you shall find that John the Baptist dealt thus
roundly with the people. Oh generation of Vipers, a viperous brood, how will ye
escape the damnation of Hell, and fly from the danger to come? And he tells
them, unless they did repent, and bring forth fruits worthy amendment of
their lives, and had better footing and ground for their comfort then this,
that they were the Children of Abraham by Nature, he tells them that they
should be as rotten and fruitless trees, and should be hewn down with the Axe
of Gods vengeance, and thrown into the fire.

Nay, they should be as chafe burnt with unquenchable fire; thus also dealt
the Apostle Peter with Simon Magus, Acts 8.22, 23. Simon Magus would by the
power of conferring the Holy Ghost upon others with money, but Peter says unto
him, Oh repent of this, and pray God if it be possible that the very thoughts
of thy heart may be forgiven thee, for I say thou art in the gall of
bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity, and thy case is fearful and
damnable, and thou have neither part nor fellowship in this work; and thus
Ministers of the Word are to do (in their preaching of the Word) with their
hearers and people, and to tell them plainly and boldly, the estate and danger
in which they discern them to be, upon good ground, though their hearers be
incensed and enraged against them.

Because God requires it, and the Office of the Ministry it self calls O Son
of man, I have made thee a watchman, thou shall receive the word at my mouth,
and admonish my people. And if I say unto a wicked man, O wicked man, thou
shall dye the death, and if the watchman do not give him warning, and admonish
him of the danger, he shall dye in his iniquity, but his blood shall be
required at thy hands.

Because plain and bold dealing in the preaching of the Word, is of excellent
use; it stirs up, and quickens men's attention, it helps the understanding,
and makes them the sooner understand, and the better perceive; yea (with the
blessing of God) this plain and bold dealing, it hammereth the heart, and
works upon the Conscience, it does leave a wonderful deep impression in the
souls of men, and it stops the mouths of men, that they have nothing to
say for themselves; so that it is the duty of Ministers to be plain and bold in
preaching the Word: for Application,

How far short then are those Ministers and Preachers of the Word,

As for example, Do not not some Ministers and Preachers of the Word, tell men
they need not be so strict in observing and keeping the Sabbath, as from
Morning to Evening, and after that repetition; what need all this ado, to be
so strict, and so nice in their ordinary Communication, as not to swear by
faith and troth; what? these are nice things, they themselves will do this;
and (say they) there is no such danger, as these foolish, fantastical, and
puritanical Preachers will make you believe; they will tell you, you are in
danger of hell fire for breaking the Sabbath, and swearing by Faith and Troth,
but there is no such matter.

These are they whom the Lord complains of, in Jer. 6.15. They lead the
daughters of my people with sweet words, and say peace, peace, all is well,
when there is no such matter, when they are ready to be swallowed up of the
devil. And as the same Prophet says in Jer. 14.13. When the true Prophets did
come and threaten sword and famine upon the people, the false Prophets come and
tell them they shall have no such thing; such Ministers and Preachers are
odious and hateful in the sight of God, Jer. 23.14. These daubing and soothing
Preachers, the Lord says he will feed them with Wormwood, and they shall drink
of the water of gall; yea (if the Lord do not give them repentance,) they
shall one day drink of the deep Cup of his vengeance, in the pit of
Destruction, in hell.

But (to pass by that) if we that are Ministers of the Word must thus tell our
people of their sins, Then our Hearers must be content to be plainly dealt
withal, and to be told of their danger; they must have their lives ripped up, and
their sins displayed, and their Consciences ransacked and rifled, and their
danger laid open, and men must not rage, nor fly in the faces of their
Minister; Drunkards, Whoremongers, uncivil shag-hair'd, and Civil honest
persons, they must be told of their estate, and that (so long as they remain
therein) they are in danger of hell and destruction; and unless they repent,
the Lord will one day come against them in vengeance, and they shall be as
thorns bound up in a bundle, and as Drunkards in their drunkenness, and as
stubble ready dried for the fire, Nahum 1.10. For while they be folden together
as thorns, and while they are drunken as drunkards, they shall be devoured as
stubble fully dry. And thou must not be offended, if a man should come and tell
thee that fire has took hold of thy house, and unless thou make speed to
quench it, it will burn thy house to the ground, will thou be angry with him?
And shall the Ministers and Preachers of Gods Word; stand, and cry, Fire, fire,
fire, yea the fire of Gods wrath and vengeance, (which is kindled with the
breath of the Lord, as a river of brimstone;) shall he, I say, thus cry out,
The fire of hell is ready to burn thy soul and body? and will thou be angry
with him? Oh consider, with whom art thou offended? surely with God, for God
speaks it, and art thou offended and angry with God? whence comes it? it
comes from thy own vile Corruptions, helped forward by the Devil.

Oh then (to conclude) learn then whatsoever thou art, with patience to hear
the Word of just reproof, and to hear thy faults reprehended; for it is the
best good that a Preacher can do to thy soul, to bring thee out of the snare of
the devil, unto amendment of life, that thy soul may be saved eternally in the
day of the Lord Jesus.

Esayas also cries concerning Israel, Though the number of the Children of
Israel be as the sand on the Sea, a remnant shall be saved.

For he will finish the work, and cut it short in righteousness: because a
short work will the Lord make upon the earth, etc.


THe next thing here to be considered, is the persons against whom the Prophet
cries, and the thing he cries; The persons are the Children of Israel; and
the thing, that though their Number were as great as the sand on the Sea, yet
but a remnant shall be saved. Now what were the Children of Israel? they were
the seed of Abraham, descended of the holy Patriarks, a very honorable people,
yea they were Gods people, his peculiar people, they had the Law, the Temple,
the Sacrifices, the service of God amongst them, yet the Prophet tells these
people, that though their Number were as the sand on the Seashore, yet a
Remnant shall be saved; and this the Prophet does, to shake the hypocrites
amongst them, who going on in exceeding great impenitency, boasted themselves
that they were of the seed of Abraham, and that God had fulfilled his promise
in them, in making them a great multitude, and therefore the Lord loved them.
Now the Prophet he shows, that this was a vain brag, and notwithstanding
their great number, this will not help them, nor avail them in the case of
salvation; this was the general thing intended by the Apostle. Now from hence
arises two Propositions to be observed; the first is this,

That a great Number of people may bear the name of Gods people,

Because the Spirit says, Matthew. 20.16. Many are called, but few are many have
the outward calling, but only Gods Elect are effectually called; and hence it
is that Christ says his flock is a little flock, Luke 12.32. indeed the elect
of God ara a little flock in comparison of the multitudes of the Reprobates,
though they be numberless in themselves.



How absurd and gross is it then, for the Papist to stand so much as they do
upon their number and multitude, for the grounding of their Religion:
Multitudes, say they, follow our Religion, therefore it is the true Religion;
this is but a weak, and an unsound ground, for men to build Religion upon
Multitudes; yea in all Societies, in all Fellowships and Families, for the most
part, the greatest number is the worst number; and therefore to say their
Church is the true Church, because multitudes flock unto it, is a mere shadow
without substance; but to leave them.

Lord, are there few that shall be saved? the Lord Jesus answered him not
directly to his curious question; but in the 24. verse, Strive to enter in at
the strait gate; that will yield thee true comfort. So, if so be repentant
persons, such as are in the state of grace, be but few, when there are heaps,
and troops, and multitudes of such as only bear the name of Gods people,
labor thou then to be of that small number: what will it avail us to say, we
have born a part with thousands in hearing the Word, prayer, and performing
holy duties? what will it avail us to say we have been at a Sermon with
thousands, and yet continue in ignorance, and in hardness of heart? No, Christ
tells us, Luke 13.24. that many shall say, Lord, we have eaten and drunk at
thy Table, we have preached in thy name, and flocked to hear thy Word, with
troops and thousands, and will thou reject us, being a great multitude: but
then in the 27. verse, Christ shall say, Depart from me, ye workers of
iniquity, I know ye not; and then they shall be shut out of heaven with a
multitude: so that it is but a shallow and sandy ground, for us to say we come
to the hearing of the Word with thousands, unless we labor to be of the
number of repentant sinners.

with the matter of Usury, yea many Preachers do warrant it, yea many
professors make no bones of wantonness, of lasciviousness, and of dancing;
yea they teach their children to dance, as Job says, Job 21.11. their sons
and their daughters dance; yea many professors go beyond the bounds of modesty
and sobriety in the matter of meat and drink, both in regard of excess and
curiosity, wonderful excessive, and exceeding curious; none so curious as the
professors, yea many professors ordinarily, and usually follow the fashions,
every idle fashion, they have their foretops, and locks, and careless ruffes,
and their short wastes up to the armpits, and broad brim'd hats, with garters
hanging to the ancles, and their Roses, and ^et these persons have the name,
and account of holy men, and holy women. Do thou think that this plea will
bear thee out? either in the Court of Conscience; when thy Conscience is
grapling and conflicting with sin; or when thou stand before the Judge of all
the world; no, if so be thou so think, thou deceivest thy self, for I tell
thee, such professors as thou speak of, may hang their profession upon the
hedge, as a rotten rag, for any soundness there is in them, although they bear
the name of professors, and would be thought to be some body, and to give them
their due, they are tongue-Christians, excellent in their words, and can speak
of the matters of God, and of salvation to good purpose; and yet follow every
new fangled fashion, and if thou follow them, thou shall but discover the vile
unsoundnesse and rottenness of thy own heart, but a few of them are true
repenting sinners, and go labor thou to get into the number of those that are
mortified Christians, for those are the only sound Christians; Labor thou to
be in the number of those that are sincere, and keep themselves unspotted of
the world, and do even hate the garment spotted by the flesh; if any thing
savor of the flesh, they dare not use it, but away with it to the dunghill;
and what though they say thou art a mopish fool, and a precise fellow, yet
know, that it were better for thee to go to heaven with a few in the narrow
gate, then with many to the broad way to destruction, Matthew. 7.13.

FINIS.
A Table for the Ninth Chapter of the Epistle to the Romans.
A
Abraham's true seed who they are, page 69 Acts of God have special and
particular ends, page 143 Adoption external, what it signifies, page 26
Anabaptists confuted, page 37, 86 Anabaptists and Familists confuted, page 137
Anathema, what it is, page 18 Arminians confuted concerning Election and
Universal Redemption, page 84, 86 Astrology judicial censured, page 78, 79, 80.
Assurance of Salvation how attained, page 206, etc.
B
BLame of sin apt to be laid from our selves, page 160 Blindness of mind the
misery of it, page 141 Blindness of 'the world in misjugding of the state and
condition of Gods children, page 225 Bring born under the same position of the
stars preventeth not difference of disposition, page 78
C
CAlled some at one hour, some at another, page 101 Calling effectual an
evidence and token of one in Covenant with God, page 61 Calling effectual a
ground of good assurance of Salvation, page 205 -- A special evidence of
Election, page 206 -- without respect of persons or qualification, page 209
Calling wrought by the word and Spirit of God, page 216 Called ones have a
special work of the word upon their Souls, page 222 Cavil against the Godhead
of Christ answered, page 40 Censuring of any rashly, especially to be
Reprobates, taxed and reproved, page 60 Children of God their honorable
estate, page 35, use 2. Children of Godly Parents are not therefore Gods
children, page 56 Children of such how said to be holy, page 56, 57 --
admonition to such page 57 Children of the flesh and of promise, page 62, 63
Christ incarnate and and became true man, and why, page 36, 37 Christ brought
not his body from Heaven, page 37 Christ's incarnation comfortable to his, page
38 Christ true God proved, 39 use of it, page 41 Christ both God and man in one
person, page 43 Christ to be thought and spoken of with reverence due to his
name, page 44 Christians described, page 53, 54. Christians their spiritual
duty, page 60 Comparing our selves with God is useful and beneficial, page 167,
168 Chosen ones of God differ not from others till God distinguish them, page
59 Conscience, why placed in the soul of man, viz. to be witness and register,
page 8, 9 Conscience not right till sanctified, page 10 -- erroneous and
unsanctified taxed, page 11 Contentment one special ground, of it, page 99 -- a
necessary Christian duty, page 175 Continuance in sin dangerous, page 189
Covenants what they are, page 27 Churches enemies can do nothing but what God
has appointed, page 143 Curiosity the danger of it; page 170
D
David's respect to Saul though wicked, page 30 Days their superstitious
observation reproved, page 123 Decrees of God concerning Election and
reprobation most just, page 116 Drawn to Christ how men are, page 91 Different
estates of men in the world, ordered by Gods decree and appointment, page 98.
Dignity of Gods children discovered, page 224, etc.
E
ELection is the choosing of a certain number to salvation and not of all, page
84 Election reprobation* depend merely upon the good pleasure of God, and not
of man, page 85 Election daependeth not upon good works or upon faith foreseen,
page 93 Comfort to such as are assured of their Election, page 87, 91 Election
of God is sure and unchangeable page 89 -- The doctrine of Election must be
rightly applied, but not abused, page 91 Election a sure and true note of it,
page 92 Election the Decree of it most effectual, page 100 Election, assurance
of it possible to be atttained, page 101 -- assurance of Election, how
attained, page 101, 102 Elected ones special Characters of them, page 111 --
their condition whilst remaining in their natural estate, page 220 Enemies of
the Church can do nothing against it but by Gods permission and appointment,
page 144 and yet are justly blamed and punished, and why, ibid.
Erroneous opinions justly to be abhorred, page 118 -- proceed chiefly from
carnal Reason, page 158 Excellencies in others, are duly to be acknowledged and
reverenced, page 29 Final estate of any not rashly to be judged, page 101
Freewill the doctrine of it confuted, page 131, 132
G
GLory and happiness of the Saints in heaven is wholly of Gods free mercy,
page 202 -- assurance of interest in it how attained, page 203 Glory of God
ought to be dearer to us then our own salvation; and why, page 22, 23 God, the
title of it never given to any one man in Scripture; Magistrates how called
gods, page 40 God in every act of his has a particular end, page 143 God has
lawful power over man to dispose of him at his pleasure, as the potter over the
clay, page 179 God no tyrant, nor unrighteous, ibid, and page 180 Gods Infinite
power against sin and sinners will be one day manifested, page 192 -- Reasons
and uses of it showed page 191 Gods power, saving and destroying, ibid. Gods
revenging power irresistible, page 192 Grief; Christians ought to grieve for
the misery of others, especially of their souls, page 11, 12 Grief, whether
lawful for such as suffer justly by the Magistrates for evil doing, page 34
H
HAtred, how God hated Esau, showed, page 106 Hardness of heart a most
grievous judgment, page 141 -- God must not be provoked to inflict it, ibid.
-- Gods children shall not be given up to it, page 142 Hardening of some a free
act of God, page 153 Hardening of some according to Gods will, page 154 How God
hardens the heart, ibid. Whether Gods Hardening do justly excuse hardened
sinners yea or no, page 163 Hearers of the word, their special duty, page 129,
130 -- Directions for profitable hearing of the Word of God, page 115 Heart
hard a grievous judgment, see hardness. Heart soft and melting a special
mercy, page 155 Heart so qualified, how attained, page 155, 156 Jerusalem, how
and in what respect an holy City, page 224 -- folly of Popish Pilgrimages
thither, ibid. Hope of salvation where to be placed, page 132 Humility one
special ground of it, page 177
I
IMpudency of some discovered, page 170 Indifferency in matters of Religion not
good, page 118 Inferiors ought to be obedient to supeirours, page 30, 31
Israelites all are not, that are so called, page 52 Israelites indeed righly
described, page 26, 47 Jewish people most honorable and why, page 36 -- our
duty towrds them, ibid. Justice of God (in case of Election, etc.) vindicated,
page 179 Justice of God (in destroying the wicked) is to be magnified, page 195
K
KIndred in the flesh our duty toward them, page 25 -- especially to seek and
endeavor their salvation, ibid. -- neglecters of their kindred reproved, page
26 Kindred and race of Gods servants honorable, page 34
L
LOve, if true, begets grief for the party beloved, page 15 Love to the
people of God, the trial of it, page 16 Love whether due to the none Elected,
page 21 Love wishes well to the souls of the beloved, page 21, 22 Love of the
father in sending of Christ, page 38 -- How God loved Jacob expounded, page 105
Love of God eternal cause of all good to his, page 106 Love of God to us how it
differs from our love unto others, page 107 He should endeavor to see the
love of God in all that we enjoy, ibid. Love of God to his, Eternal, 1^8, and
how, page 109 -- how God loves his Elect when enemies, ibid. Lump, expounded,
page 176
M
O MAn, what is meant by it, page 166 Mary the blessed Virgin saved not by
bearing Christ in her womb, but in heart by faith, page 28 Merit of works the
doctrine of it confuted, page 94 -- see more, 201, 2. use, 202, 1. use. Mercy
of God toward his chosen, depends only on the good pleasure of his will,
page 124, 125 Mercy of God to his then sweeeest, when compared with his wrath
on thewicked, page 196 Mercy of God to his Elect and Chosen, shall be one day
manifested, page 198 -- the special uses of that point, page 199 Mercy of God
to his Elect and Chosen, is directed to his own glory, page 200 Mercy of God is
to be magnified, page 201 Mercy of God the ground of our happiness in heaven,
page 202 Ministers of God are to manifest both love and wisdom when they
deliver harsh things to the hearers, p. 3. Ministers must yet take heed of
daubing or man pleasing, ibid. Ministers must take care to apply the word of
God to the hearers aright, page 51, 128 -- How they assure men of salvation,
page 129, use 1. Ministers of the word must use to deal plainly with the
hearers, page 228
N
NAtural estate a miserable condition, page 220 Natural estate of the Elect
considered, ibid. Necessity is twofold showed, page 110 Nicodemus his carnal
reasoning, page 158
O
OBservation of times lawful and unlawful, page 79 -- superstitious Observation
of days reproved, page 122 Opinions false and erroneous drawn from misconceit,
are very hardly left, page 71 Opinions false and Erroneous to be disclaimed and
utterly abhorred, page 118 Opinions Erroneous arise chiefly from fleshly and
carnal Reasoning, page 158
P
Painting of faces abominable, and why, page 174 Patinece of God toward the
wicked, and Reprobate showed, and the reason of it. page 185, 186 -- the end
and use of Gods patience therein, page 187, 18 Patience of God abused, very
offensive to him, page 188 -- Motives not to abuse the patience of God, page
190 Papists can be no true friends to Protestant States, page 32, use Papists
overthrow the truth of Christ's humane natures, page 37 Popish slander answered
and confuted, page 41, 78 Popish doctrine confuted, page 94, 132, 133 Popish
practice observed and reproved, page 103 Papists abuse the written word, and
how, page 121, 137 Papists impudent cavil answered, page 172 Popish Pilgrimages
censured and reproved, page 224 Peter, whether ever Bishop of Rome,
questionable, page 35 Piety, the great force and power of it noted, page 34 --
of Parents beneficial to children, page 35 Places distinction, taken away under
the new Testament, page 223 Pharaoh King of Egypt, why raised up of God, page
135 -- How God is said to harden his heart, page 136 Preachers in applying the
word may fitly and lawfully say, this is a word of comfort, etc. page 71
Preachers must apply general truths of God to particular cases and
concernments, page 128 Presumption how best beaten down in us, page 167 Pride
one special ground of it discovered. Privilege none whatsoever outward can
make graceless persons accepted of God, page 28 No outward Privilege to be
rested in, no not outward profession of Religion, ibid. Promises misapplyed are
not comfortable, page 50 Promises, Romans 9. what meant by them, page 27 Promises
of God firm and stable, page 48, 49 -- comfort to such as are interested in
them, ibid. Promises of two sorts, page 71 Promises made good, all the sorts of
them, page 72 Profane Proverb reproved, page 35 Man fitly compared to Potters
vessel, with the use of it, page 177, 178
Q
Quarrelling with Gods will very abominable, page 173. Questioning the will of
God, great impudency, page 169 -- not tolerable to do it, page 171 Questioning
of God, a weakness in the Saints, ibid.
R
REason carnal apt to gather false conclusions from true principles. page 157
-- the ground of Erroneous Opinions, page 158 Carnal Reason apt to abuse
Scripture, page 159 Religion the glory of a Nation, page 32 Reprobation, the
decree of it from Eternity, page 109, etc. Reprobates how they sin of
necessity, page 110 -- what things cannot be found in them, page 111
Reprobation, the doctrine of it revealed in Scripture, page 139 Reprobates,
hardened by God, and how, page 140 -- Gods highest end in their destruction,
page 194 Revelation besides, or against Scripture to be rejected, page 137
Revenge not to be sought by Christians, and why, page 193
S
Sadness of Gods children reproved, page 49 use Salvation of man wholly in
Gods hand, page 133 Stars, their position not to be observed, page 78, 79
Separatists reproved and confuted, page 52, 53 Similitudes in Preaching must be
of things known, page 177 Scripture, if obscure in one place, is usually
explained and made plain in another, page 63 Scripture best expounder of it
self, page 65 Scripture sufficient to resolve all doubts, page 77, 136 -- used
by the Apostles to prove doctrines, page 103 Scripture, sufficient in
fundamentals, and why? page 137 -- how known to be the word of God. page 138
Scripture, express words not always necessary to be used in preaching,
proved, page 215 Scripture apt to be perverted by wicked men, page 65 -- but
ought not to be abused, page 215 Successions of persons, without truth and
piety, nothing, page 35 Swearing lawful, p. 5. but vain reproved, ibid.
Swearing must be by the true God only, p. 6, 7
T
TRuths of God how to be delivered, page 113 -- subject to be perverted, page
114 Truth in word and heart go together, p. 7
V
VIrginity, whether justly to be preferred before Marriage yea or no, page 28
Vessel of clay is man even the strongest, page 177, 178 Vessel of wrath
explained, page 183 Vessel of wrath and child of wrath differ, page 183 Elect
and Reprobate both Vessels, page 184 Vessels of mercy how known, ibid.
W
Weakness of Saints discovered, page 171 Wilful sinners dangerous condition,
page 193 Will of God (in Predestination) Independent, page 180 -- Will of God
irresistible, page 163 Will of God ever backed by his power, page 164 -- the
right use of it, ibid. Will of God in all things just and holy, page 122 -- not
to be opposed by carnal reason, page 123 Will of God overthrows not the
freedom of man's will, page 164 Will of God not to be questioned, page 169 --
not to be quarrelled against, page 172 Quarrellers against Gods will noted,
page 174 Wish of the Apostle, Romans 9.3. lawful, page 19 -- the extent of that
wish weighed, page 20 Wishing the welfare of Souls, necessary, ibid. Witness
none can sin without it, p. 9. use, 2 Wrath of God furious more to be feared
then hell, page 190 Word written, a speaking word, page 121 -- abused by
Papists, ibid. Word of God misapplyed, not his word, page 50. 51 -- must be
rightly applied by all, page 51 Word of the Gospel an effectual word, page 66
-- power of it not to be withstood, page 68 -- how profitably heard, page 115
Word of God not to be cavilled against, page 142 -- why some are not softened by
it, page 155 Word of Gods predictions should not offend us when fulfulling,
page 214 Word of God subject to be wrested and perverted, page 114
The Table of the Texts of Scripture opened on the 9th Chapter of the Epistle
of St. Paul to the Romans.
Books Chap. Verse. Page Genesis 3 12 160 3 15 37 17 7 27 18 22, 27 166 24 3
expound. 5 27 6 82 37 34 15 42 21 6 Exodus 7 3 154 14 30, 31 197 32 32 22 34 6,
7 201 Deuteronomy. 2 30 154 5 29 21 23 7 25 Joshuah 11 20 154 1 Samuel 2 30 24 6 19 170
18 12 140 20 34 15 24 6 30 26 11 30 26 42 5 2 Samuel 7 18 203 1 King. 16 30, 33,
185 18 21 119 2 Chronicles. 20 6 163 Nehem. 1 6 15 2 2 ibid. Job 24 15 9 Psalm. 50
21, 22 191 58 10, 11 14, 195 66 18 54 81 12 154 103 13, 14 178 Psalm. 119 105
137 119 136 12 Prove. 1 22 189 16 31 34 16 32 188 19 12 191 Eccles. 7 17 171 7
12 8 Isa. 6 5 167 6 9, 10 140 10 6 143, etc. 38 3 11 43 2 49 43 4 225 58 1 228
Jer. 7 4 29 12 1 171 13 17 12 18 6 196 23 28 213 29 7 30 Ezech. 6 4 12 16 11,
12, 13 159 36 25, 26 155 Dan. 4 27 24 Zach. 7 11 142 Malachy 1 2, 3 104, etc.
Matthew. 3 9 56 5 18 48 5 34, 35 5 10 5, 6 36 12 48 28 20 3, 4, 5 101 24 24 89
Mark 3 5 Luke 4 16 25 12 6 179 19 41, 42 12 19 43, 44 3 John 1 1 39 1 12 224 1
47 35 3 3 158 3 27 30 4 14 184 6 44 91 6 51, 54 158 7 17 138 8 58 39 8 39 56 11
36 15 Act. 2 39 27 4 27 144 12 23 24 13 46 36 15 9 10 16 9 216 20 30 75 26 29
22 Romans 1 3 37 1 21, 26 140 2 15 8 2 25 28 3 5 to 9 158 5 6, 8 220 8 30 206 16
7, 11, 21 34 1 Cor. 6 11 59 7 14 56 2 Cor. 1 12 8 2 4 15 2 19 85 4 3 68, 140 10
4 68 Gal. 1 10 3 4 45 36 Ephesians. 1 5 200 1 9 216 2 1, 2, 3 59, 220 Phil. 1 16 30 2
7, 8 37 Col. 3 12 181 4 10 34 1 These. 5 9 110 2 Thessalonians. 1 8, 9 192 1 10 198 2 10
140 2 13 206 3 1, 2 33 1 Timothy 2 1, 2 30 2 8 124 5 8 114, 159 5 4 25 6 6 172 2 Timothy 2 12 42 2 7 51 2 21 181 3 16 136 4 2 12^ Titus 15 15 11 3 3, 4, 5 59 Heb.
13 16 1 Pet. 4 11 213 2 Pet. 1 20 213 2 8 110 1 John 3 2 198 3 12 186 Jude 0 4
110

The Names of several Books, Printed for, and sold by Christopher Meredith, at
the Crane in Paul's Churchyard, viz.
Dr. WIlliams Right way to the best Religion, wherein at large is explained the
Sum and principal heads of the Gospel. Sr. H. Spelmans Councils. Dr. Jermin on
the Proverbs. Stock on Malachy. Sr. Fr. Bacons History of Henry the 7th. Briggs
Trigonometria Britanica. The Assemblies Answer to the Dissenting Brethren. Dr.
Arrowsmiths Covenant avenging Sword, on Levit. 26.25. Dr. Barlow's Guide to
glory, on Psalm. 73.34. Mr. Bodius Alarm to War against Babylon, Rev. 18.6.
Mr. Bridges Joabs Counsel, on 2 Ram. 19.5, 6, 7, 8. Brinslys Calendar
Reformation. Dr. Burges, on Jer. 50.5.
-- on Psalm. 76.10. -- Two Sermons on Jer. 4.14. -- Examination of 9. Reasons
against Bishops. Bains Sermons on Romans 3.23.24. Joh. 3.16. Rvel. 2.2.4, 5.
Sermons by M. Edmund Calamy.
1. Englands Antidote, on Acts 17.20. 2. Englands Looking-glass, on Jer. 18.7,
8, 9, 10. 3. Gods free mercy to England, on Ezekiel. 36.32. 4. Noble man's Pattern,
on Josh. 24.15. 5. An Indictment against England, on Matthew. 12.25. 6. The Door
of Truth opened. In Answer to Mr. Henry Burton. 7. A just and necessary
Apology. In Answer to Mr. Henry Burton. 8. The great danger of
Covenant-refusing, and breaking, on 2 Timothy 3 3. Calvin on Jeremiah in English.
Mr. Caryls David's prayer for Solomon. Psalm. 72.1, 2, 3. Mr. Carters Isreal's
Peace, on Judge. 20.26, 27, 28. Mr. Conants Woe and Weal, on Jer. 30.7. Mr.
Colemans Christians course and Complaint, Jer. 8.20. -- The hearts Engagement,
on Jer. 30.11. -- Gods unusual Answer, on Psalm. 65.5. -- Hopes deferred and
dashed, Job 11.2. Mr. Cook against the Anabaptists. Tho. Carres Treatise of
subjection to the present Powers, on Romans 13.12. Cawdry of the Inconsistency of
the Independent way with Scripture and it self. And his Sober Answer to a
serious Question, in answer to Mr. G. Firmin. Dod on the Commandments. Anatomy
of the English Nunnery at Lisbon. D. Edes, Three Sermons, Ephesians. 2:19, 20, 21,
22. Ephesians. 5.15, 16. Psalm. 37.35, 36, 37. Mr. Ellis sole-path, on Micah 5.5.
Mr. Elmestones Essay for the discovering and discouraging of a new sprunge
Schism, raised and maintained by Simon Henden of Bennenden in Kent. Singing of
Psalms, the Duty of Christians under the New Testament, by Tho. Ford, Minister
in Exon. Man's active obedience, or a Treatise of Faith, worthily called
precious Faith, as being in it self a most rare Jewel that excels in worth
the highest price, by Willaim Negus late of Lee in Essex. Mr. Colliers
Vindiciae Theseum de Sabbato, in answer to Edw. Fisher Esquire his book called the
Christians Caveat, etc. Galeni Opuscula cum Annnotat. D. Gulstoni. Geree
against Episcopacy, and concerning the Kings Coronation Oath. -- Character of
an old English Puritan. -- against Anabaptists, and his Catechism. Mr.
Gattakers Thanksgiving for 88. Psalm 48.7, 8. Mr. Goods public Spirit, on
Act. 13.36. Mr. Gips on Psalm. 46.1. Mr. Hardwick's Difficulty of Sions
deliverance, Psalm 126.5.6. Mr. Hicks Glory and Beauty, on Isa. 28.5, 6.
-- The Life and death of David, on Act. 13.3, 6. -- Advantage of Afflictions,
Hos. 5.15. Mr. Hookers Faithful Covenanter, on Deuteronomy. 25, 24, 25. Hudsons
Essence and unity of the Church-Catholick. Vindication of it, in answer to Mr.
Hooker, M. Cotton, and others.
History of the Anabaptists of Germany. Mr. Jenkins Self-seeking discovered, on
Philip. 20, 21. -- Reformations Remora, on Hag. 1.1, 2. -- Sleeping-sicknesse,
on Isa. 29.10. -- Busy Bishop. both in answer to John Goodwin. -- The blind
Guide. both in answer to John Goodwin. M. Ley's Fury of War, on Jer. 4.21,
22. -- Monitor of Mortality, first part on Jam. 4.14. Second part, on Genesis
44.3. -- Answer to M. Saltmarsh's Query about the Presbyterial Government. --
Light for Smoke, a Reply to M. Saltmarsh. -- An After-reckoning with M.
Saltmarsh. M. Mockets Churches Troubles, Several Sermons, on Genesis 22.14. --
Covenanters Looking-glass, on Deuter. 29.9. -- Gospel-Duty and Dignity, on
Matthew. 13.46. -- and his Catechism. M. Mewes spoiling of Jacob and Israel, on
Isa. 42.24, 25. Moulins Buckler of Faith against Popery 4o. M. Newcomens craft
and cruelty of the Churches adversaries, Neh. 4.11. -- Jerusalems Watchmen,
Isa. 62.6, 7. -- Use of disasters, Josh. 7.10, 11. -- Against Toleration, Phil.
1.27. -- All-seeing eye of God, on Heb. 4.13. Popes deadly wound, tending to
resolve all men, in the chief and principal Points now in controversy between
the Papists and us, by J. Burges of Sutton-coldfield in Warwick shire. Dr.
Potter of the Number 666. Parkers Altar Dispute. Bewailing of the Peace of
Germany and Prague. M. Profits Englands Impenitency, on Isaiah 9.14. M. Reyners
Babylons Earthquake, on Haggai 2.6, 7. Randal on the 8th of the Romans, with
other Sermons. Rutherford of Church-Goverment and excomunication. M. Salwaies
halting stigmatized, 1 Kings 18.21. Dr. Stantons Rupes Israelis, Deuteronomy: 32, 31.
-- Phinehas Zeal, Psalm. 106.30. Dr. Smith, Psalm. 107.6. Stalham against the
Anabaptists. -- against General Redemption. -- his Catechism. Dr. Sclater on
Malachy. -- on the 4th to the Romans. Mr. Thorowgood Moderation justified,
Phil. 4.5. M. Vdall's Good of Peace, and Ill of War. Psalm. 29.11. Udal on the
Lamentations of Jeremiah. Vindication of the Presbyterial Government and
Ministry by the London Ministers. Mr. Wards God judging among the gods, Psalm
82.1. -- Good will of him that dwelt in the bush. Mr. Woodcocks Christ's
warning, Rev. 16.15. -- Lex Talionis, 1 Samuel 2.30. -- Joseph paralleled, Genesis
49.23, 24. Mr. Whittaker, Christ the Settlement, on Haggai, 2.7. D. Wilkinsons
Babylons ruin, on Zech. 1.18, 19, 20, 21.
-- Gainful Cost, 1 Chronicles. 21.24. -- Miranda stupenda, Number. 23.23. Whatelys New
Birth. Woodward on the Covenant.
8o Large.
M. Abbot against Brownists: wherein is justified against them that the Church
of England. 1. Is a true Church. 2. Has a true Ministry. 3. Has a true
worship. Bruens holy Life and happy Death. Cholmlys Vindication of Bishop Hall
against Burton. Herodians History. Gr. Lat. with Paraeus Notes. Mastersons
Arithmetic. Wingates Arithmetic. -- Logarithmes. Mr. Hierons Manuel of
Meditations on most of the Heads of Divinity.
8o and 12o.
M. Robert Abbots 5. Sermons. Angiers Help to better Hearts for better Times,
removing hindrances in the instant worshipping of God. Belks Scripture
Enquiry; or Helps for memory in Duties of Piety. Bakers Arithmetic. Bifields
Principles. Bayns Christian Letters. -- Directions for a Godly life. Browns
Catechism. Catelyns Catechism. Cottons None but Christ. Dents Pastime for
Parents. Gregorius Magnus de cura Pastorali. Dr. James Index Generalis, viz.
Sanctorum patrum. Lawson for the Sabbath. Jemmats settled Heart in unsettled
Times. Moulins Christian Combat. Moors Relation of Enoch ap Evan. Rogers
Catechism. Saltmarshes Practice of Christian Policy. Major Genesis Skippons
Treatise of the Promises. -- of Vows of Obedience to God. -- Observations,
Advises, and Resolutions. Sweet Posie for Gods Saints. Spira's Life and death.
Teppings Eternity, and the fathers Counsel to his son. Elegies on the Lord
Veere by sundry Scholars. Votiers Catechism. Ward de Magnete. Welwood of the
Sea-Laws. Willis Meditations, serving for a daily practice of the life of
Faith. Yarrows Comforts for a troubled Conscience.
School Books.
Pueriles Confabulatiunculae, translated by Brinsley. Dux Grammaticus.
Farnabies Phrases. -- on Martials Epigrams. -- on Senecacs Tragedies. -- on
Juvenal and Persius. -- on Ovids Metamorphosis. -- Select Epigrams, Gr. Lat. --
Index Poeticus. -- Latin Syntaxis. -- Greek Table. Geers Rhetoric. Scickards
Hebrew Grammar Stockwoods Disputations. Vicars, Manuductio ad artem Rhetoricam.
Four necessary Cases of Conscience of daily use, resolved by Mr. Thomas
Shepherd of New England, viz. First, how a man may be rid of an Earthly Carnal
heart, sold to the contentment of the Creature. Secondly, of a proud heart
which is unwilling to seek after, to wait upon, or to stoop unto the commands
of God. Thirdy, of a self-seeking heart, that eyes it self especially in the
best of Duties. Fourthly, of a slighty heart under Gods hand in mercies and
judgments. The state of the Saints departed; Gods Cordial to comfort the
Saints remaining alive, in a Sermon Preached at the Funeral of Mrs. Smithee
Harlakenden, late wife of William Harlakenden Esquire; by R. Josselin. The Angel of
the Church of Ephesus, no Bishop of Ephesus, distinguished in order, from, and
superior in power to a Presbyter, as it was lately delivered in a Collation
before the Reverend Assembly of Divines; by Constant. Jessop Minister of the
word. Twenty nine Lectures of the Church very necessary for the Consolation and
support of Gods Church, especially in these times wherein is handled. First in
general concerning, First the Name. Secondly, the Titles. Thirdly, the Nature.
Fourthly, the Division of the Church. Secondly, of the visible Church. First,
the Definition. Secondly, the Causes. Thirdly, the Members. Fourthly, the Marks
and Notes. Fifthly, the Government. Sixthly, the Privileges. Seventhly, the
adversaries. Eighthly, the Authority. And Lastly, the Application of it to all
Churches in the world, so far as they are known to us; by John Randal B. D.
late Pastor of Andrews Hubbart in little East cheap, London. Paralipomena
Orthographiae, Etymologiae, Prosodiae, una cum Scholiis ad Canones de genere
substantivorum de Anomalis, praeterito and supinis verborum, Syntaxi, Carminum
ratione and figuris, ex optimis authoribus and Grammaticorum Coryphaeis
Collecta and asserta, in 4. Libros distributa, studiis and industria Joannis
Danesii. Gods holy mind touching matters Moral, which himself uttered in ten
Words or ten Commandments; also Christ's Holy Mind touching Prayer; delivered
in that most holy prayer which himself taught unto his Disciples, discovered by
the light of his own holy Writ, and delivered by Questions and Answers, by the
late learned and faithful Preacher of Gods word Mr. Edward Elton, B. D. and
Pastor of St. Mary Magdalen Barmonsey near London. -- Also, An explanation of
the whole seventh, eight, and ninth Chapters of the Epistle of Paul to the
Romans. The Christian conflict, a Treatise showing the Difficulties and Duties
of this Conflict, with the Armor and special graces to be exercised by
Christian Soldiers, particularly applied to Magistrates, Ministers, Husbands,
Wives, Parents, Children, Masters, Servants, by Joseph Bentham. A Remonstrance
of the state of the Kingdom. An Attestation to the Testimony of our Reverend
Brethren of the Province of London to the truth of Jesus Christ, and to our
solemn League and Covenant; as also against the Errors, Heresies, and
Blasphemies of these Times, and the Toleration of them; subscribed by 59 of the
Ministers of Cheshire. Some Observations and Annotations upon the Apologetical
Narration, humbly submitted to the Honorable Houses of Parliament, by the most
Reverend and Learned Divines of the Assembly, and all the Protestant Churches,
here in this Island, and abroad, by Adam Stuart, D. D. Wholesome Severity,
reconciled with Christian Liberty, or a true resolution of a present
Controversy concerning Liberty of Conscience, by George Gillespy. Consolations
for troubled Consciences of Repentant sinners, by M. William Perkins. The
English Presbyterian and Independent reconciled, setting forth the small ground
of difference betwixt them both, therein clearing the misunderstanding between
the English and the Scots, as which Nation has broken the Covenant, each with
other, setting forth withal on which side the offensive War betwixt us and
them, on which side the defensive is, and how it came to be waged, by John
Stafford Esquire;. The Deaf man cured, wherein three things are handled. First,
Christian Charity. 2. Humane misery. 3. The Divine Power and Mercy of Christ,
upon Mar. 7.32, 33, 34, 35. by Tobias Higgins. The strife of Brethren, and a
Treaty for Peace, in two Sermons on Genesis 13.8. and Ier. 9 2. by M. John
Fathers. Divine Meditations and Contemplations upon several heads of Divinity,
by G. Raleigh. The Signs, or an Essay concerning the assurance of Gods love and
man's salvation, gathered out of the holy Scriptures, by Nicholas Byfield. --
The spiritual Touchstone, or the signs of a godly man, drawn in so plain and
profitable a manner, as all sorts of Christians may try themselves thereby;
together with directions how the weak Christian by the use of these signs may
establish his assurance. -- The Sum of the Principles or a Collection of those
Priciples of Religion, which are set down in the little Treatise called the
Principles or Pattern of wholesome words, where they are at large explained,
proved, and applied. Luthers forerunners, or a Cloud of Witnesses deposing for
the Protestant faith, gathered together in the History of Waldensis, who for
diverse hundred years; before Luther successively opposed Popery, professed the
truth of the Gospel, and sealed it with their blood, being most grievously
persecuted, and many thousands of them Martyred by the man of sin, and his
superstitious adherents and cruel instruments, translated out of French by
Sampson Lennard. Canaans Calamity; Jerusalems Misery, and Englands Mirror. The
Doctrine of the Sabbath, wherein these five things are contained. First, that
the fourth Commandment is given to the Servant, and not to the Master only.
Secondly, that the fourth Commandment is Moral. Thirdly, that our own light
works, as well as gainful and toylsome, are forbidden on the Sabbath. Fourthly,
that the Lords day is of Divine Institution. Fifthly, that the Sabbath was
instituted from the beginning, by Richard Byfield. -- The light of Faith and
way of holiness showing what to believe, and for what to strive, together
earnestly contend and suffer for in this contending Age, and how to live in all
estates, conditions, and degrees of relation, according to this faith. Altar
Christianum, or the dead Vicars Plea, wherein the Vicar of Gr. being dead yet
speaks, and pleads out of Antiquity against him that has broken down his
Altar, by John Pocklington. Dr. D. Ashes General Tables to the Common Laws of
England, being a complete and large Dictionary thereof, etc. The Doctrine and
Conversation of John Baptist, delivered in a Sermon at a Visitation on John
5.35. by Henry Den. A Sermon in Commemoration of the Lady Danvers, late wife
of Sir John Danvers, by John Done Dean of Paul's, together with her son G.
Herberts Commemorations of her. A Meditation meet for a Christian every day, or
an Epitome of Promises for the Saints support in times of trouble. The Hunting
of the Fox, an excellent discourse against flattery by Henry Hartflete.
Articles of Religion agreed upon by the Archbishops, Bishops, and the rest of
the Clergy of Ireland, in the Convocation, holden at Dublin 1615. Constitutions
and Canons Ecclesiastical, treated upon by the Archbishops of Canterbury and
York, etc. Hidden works of darkneknesse brought to Public light, or a
necessary Introduction to the History of the Archbishop of Canterburies trial
by William Prinne Esquire;. The Book of Martyrs, by Mr. John Fox, lately Printed in
three Volumes in large Folio, where unto is annexed certain additions of the
like Persecutions which have happened in these latter times. Psalterium Davidis
Latino-Saxonicum vetus, A Iohanne Spelmanno D. Hen. fill. editum H.
vetustissimo, exemplari Ms. Bibliotheca ipsius Henrici, and cum tribus aliis
non multo minus, Vetustis Collatum, 40. A Register or a General Almanac for
every year, containing an introduction to the knowledge of yearly Almanacks, by
J. Pont. M. Abbots holiness of Christian Churches, or a Sermon prepaced to be
Preached at the Consecration of the Chapel of Sir John Baker of Sussingherst
at Cranbrook in Kent, Baronet, upon 1 Cor. 11.2 2. A taste of the truth as it
is in Jesus, consisting of ten Questions and Answers, and a brief exposition
upon the same, together with ten General Directions how private Christians and
Governers of Families are to serve God in all the parts of Gods worship. The
Reformed Spaniards, or motives against Popery in French. 12o. Sir Ben. Rudyards
speech for augmentations of Ministers Livings. The Cure of hurtful Cares and
Fears, by Thomas Pierson, on Phil. 4.6. -- with Mr. Christopher Harveys
Conditions of Christianity, or the terms on which Christ will be followed, on
Luke 9.23. Samuel Hartlibs Legacy, or an enlargement of the discourse of
Husbandry, used in Brabant and Flanders wherein are bequeathed to the
Commonwealth of England, more Outlandish and Domestic Experiences and Secrets
in reference to universal Husbandry. Antidotum Lincolniense, or an answer to a
book entitled the holy Table, Name, and Thing, etc. said to be written long
ago by a Minister in Lincolnshire, by Peter Heylin. Mr. Harveys Synagogue, in
imitation of M. Herberts Temple. An Explanation of those Principles of
Christian Religion, expressed and employed in the Catechism of our Church of
England, set down in the book of Common Prayer, useful for House-holders, that
desire heaven in earnest, and are willing to discharge their duty in
examination of their charge, by William Crompton. A Brief Treatise of
Testaments and Wills, very profitable to be understoood of all the subjects of
this Realm of England, desirious, to know whether, whereof, and how they may
make their testaments, and by what means the same may be effected or hindered,
and no less acceptable, as well for the rareness of the work, as for the
easiness of the style and method, Collected by Henry Swinburne, sometimes Judge
of the Prerogative Court at York. The Bible of the last Translation in the
Largest Volume that ever was Printed, appointed to be used in all Churches. --
The Bible in Folio of the Largest and fairest Roman Letter, now Printed, with
the Concordance added to it. Vindiciae Gratiae Potestatis ac providentiae Dei
hoc est Libelli Perkinsiarii, de predestinationis modo and ordine, institutum a
Iacobo Arminio, Responsio Scholastica, III. Libris absoluta Authore Guilielmo
Twisso, D. D. The sum and substance of the Conference which it pleased his
Majesty to have with the Lords, Bishops, and others of his Clergy concerning
Religion, contracted by William Barlow, D. D. Cononel Robert Monro, his
Epeditions and Observations, being an Abridgement of Exercise for the younger
Soldier, his better instruction, ending with the Soudiers Meditations going in
service. Cyprianus de bono patientiae -- De Vnitate Ecclaesiae Collatus cum M.
S. Oxoniensibus. A Treatise of Love, written by M. John Rogers, late of Dedham
in Essex. Run from Rome, or a Treatise showing the necessity of separating from
the Church of Rome, disputed in these terms; every man is bound upon pain of
Damnation to refuse the faith of the Church of Rome, by Anthony Wotton, B. D.
Reformatio Legum Ecclesiasticarum ex Authoritate primum Regis Henrici 8.
inchoata, deinde per Regem Edvardum 6. provecta adductaque in hunc modum atque
nunc ad pleniorem ipsarum Reformationem in Lucem edita. Danica Literatura
antiquissima Vulgo Gotica Dicta Luci Reddita opera Olai Wormii D. Medicinae in
Academia Hasniensi profess. P. cui accessit de prisca Danorum Poesi
dissertatio.
FINIS.

