THE QVIET SOUL OR The Peace, and Tranquillity OF A CHRISTIANS ESTATE Set
Forth in TWO SERMONS.

BY EDMUND ELYS Master of Arts, and Fellow of Baliol-Colledg in OXFORD.

Qui non appetit hominibus placere, nec timet displicere, Multa perfruetur pace.

TH. a KEMPIS. OXFORD, Printed by H. H. for Tho: Robinson, 1659.

To the truly Virtuous and Excellent LADY Mris HESTER NOYE.
Madam,
THose deep Discourses, which I have so often heard from you, upon the Subject
of this Small Book, gave me the Occasion of Composing it: and therefore I
thought it my Duty to Dedicate it unto You. In perusing it, you may Conceit,
that these few Good Thoughts of mine return to You, as small brooks and
rivulets, to the OCEAN, from whence they came: for seriously Madam, I shall
ever Acknowledge that one of the best ways I have found out to improve my
Understanding in Spiritual Things, has been, the Contemplation of that truly
Noble, and Christian Disposition, which the Giver of every Good, and Perfect
Gift has Bestowed on You. Certainly those Virtuous Persons, who have the
happiness to be Acquainted with You, if they peruse this Discourse, will
imagine it to be no other then Your CHARACTER: Considering what a rare thing
that Temper of Mind is, which here I Describe (I Fancy) they would have thought
me to have had love Acquaintance with You, though I had not Prefixed Your Name.
You, Madam, are one of those very few in the world, who, by the strength of
true, Sanctified Reason, are able to Apprehend firmly, and constantly these
most important Truths (which escape the Notice of the generality of men) That
the things of the World are in themselves altogether Vanity, That GOD is All in
All, etc. The Sun of Righteousness thus Shining into Your Soul, giving you a
Clear, and full demonstration of these Truths, Scatters those Mists, and
Clouds of False Hopes, and Fears, Anxious Desires, and Foolish Imaginations,
etc. which continually hang over the Souls of those Persons, (which are by
far the greatest part of the World) that are Earthly, and Sensual; Showing
you that the only way to Set your heart at rest, is, to Acquiesce in the
Enjoyment of GOD, which you have in part here; and in the Hopes of the
fullness, and Consummation of it, which you shall have in Heaven hereafter. If
I have put you to a Blush (for I know your Nature is such, that you still
endeavor to Fly the Praises, your Actions (all for) I shall entreat you to
consider that by what I have here spoken I did not Principally intend to Praise
You, but to Glorify your MAKER: for, what have you that you have not received?
You know what Use you are to make of being well spoken of: To Thank GOD for
the Grace he has given you, and to Pray unto him for more. It may be you will
wonder to see me in Print again, etc. contrary to the Advice of so many of my
honored Friends: but, seriously, Madam, to speak freely, I have weighed all the
Reasons, that have been, or (I think) can be produced to dissvvade me, and I
find them too light to Overballance my Resolution in this Design: wherein I
am sure I can do no man any, harm: but in all probability shall do some good,
in the Service of HIM, whose Favor is the only thing I would Absolutely
Desire; whose Displeasure is the only thing I would Absolutely Avoid: neither
shall I ever charge my self, as Guilty of Indiscretion, (which is the great
Bugbear, which some men would Fright me withal from such Undertakings) but
when I find that, through the Blindness of my Understanding, or the Violence,
and Praecipitancy of my Affections, I have Fallen into the one, or have Missed
the other. I shall not hold you with any longer discourse Farewell: And may the
GOD of all Comfort Love and Embrace you; and wipe off all Tears from your
Eyes: may You and I, and all those, whom we are Bound to Pray for, Rest from
our Labors, from all doubts, and fears, all trouble, and anguish, and
disturbance of Spirit, in the Bosom of the Father, through our LORD JESUS
CHRIST.

To the READER.
Reader,
MEthinks I hear thee say, as I have often heard others upon the like
occasion. What need more Books on this Subject? have not such and such Learned
men written on it already? and does this man think himself wiser, then any of
them? To this I Answer, that I conceive the Use of such Books may not only be
to make us Know what we ought to Do, but to Excite us to Do according to our
Knowledge: to beget in the mind of the Reader New Acts of Understanding such
truths, as he has already Received; that if his former Notions, (being Weak,
and remiss, and suddenly broken off by Vain thoughts and Passions) have never
had any Powerful, and Effectual Influence upon his Will (to engage him to a
steadfast Resolution, and Constancy of Acting according to those Truths) his
latter may. To speak more closely: I suppose thou may have read several
Treatises on this Subject, which I Treat of in these following Leaves Penned
(it may be) by men of more Learning then I shall ever attain unto, though I
should Live more Lustres, then yet I have seen Years: and yet it is very
possible that thou may gain more good to thy Soul by these Lines of mine,
then ever thou did by theirs. (Suspend thy Judgment a little: and do not
presently pass thy Censure upon me, as Proud, and selfe-conceited) Two Reasons
for this my Opinion (others I have which I shall not divulge) are these. First,
It Is very possible that when thou read this Discourse thy Mind may be more
Disposed, and Fitted to receive the matter therein delivered, then it was when
thou did read the discourses of other men upon the same Subject. Secondly,
Through the whole Course of the Observations I have made (according to the time
I have had to Exercise my Reason) of My self, and others; I have found that
Practical Truths are more, or less taking according to the Expressions
wherein they are set forth: As Persons are esteemed more, or less Handsome
according to the Dresses, they go in* I do not here imply that my Expressions
are Better, then others, but that, being not the same possibly they may be
Better to Thee, that is, they may be more Suitable to thy Genius, and temper of
Mind, and so the apter to insinuate into Thee, the matter they carry in the^. I
have no more to say to thee the^ only to advise thee, that if thou intendest to
peruse this short Discourse, thou would allow thy self more time for it, then
the small Bulk thereof may seem to require. They that read such Discourses, as
this, loosely, and cursorily, usually miss of the greatest part of the
Practical Sense, and meaning of the Words: which does, as it were, run beside,
whilst they endeavor toe fast to Pour it into their minds. Such kind of
writings, which are intended for the Cure of our Sinful Habits, the Sores, and
Ulcers of the Soul, are not only to be Read over, but to be Fixed in our
Hearts by Serious Meditation otherwise they will become Useless unto us, and
of none effect: As we are wont not only to Lay Plasters to our Bodily Sores,
but also to Bind them on, otherwise they would soon slip off from the Places
Affected. If thou be one of those Envious, Malicious, Uncharitable men,
(whereof the World is so full) who hate any one that is not of the same Humor
with themselves; and are ready always to brand those with the name of
Hypocrites, and Vainglorious Persons, that venture to be thus Public: I
assure thee, whosoever thou art, I am confide^t through the Grace of God, that
I shall not be any otherwise Troubled with the apprehension of thy ill opinion
of me (if it come to my knowledge) then only for this, that thy heart, being by
Prejudice Hardened against me, will be the less capable (for thy good) to
receive any Impression from what I have written. What kind of man soever thou
art, thou can not be Injured by My Writings, or I by Thy Censures. Farewell:
and if thou be a Scholar, and conceitest thy self (as justly thou may)
to Know more, then I can Teach thee, Remember that saying of SENECA. Stude; non
ut plus aliquid scias, sed ut melius.

SERMON I.
Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me, for I am meek, and lowly in heart,
and ye shall find rest unto your souls. Mat. 11.29.
I Shall first Explain the Expressions in my Text, and then I shall raise the
Doctrine, which I shall Insist upon as the Principal subject of my Discourse.
Take my yoke upon you: that is, Do the Commands I have imposed upon you: do
the will of your Heavenly Father, which I came to discover unto you. And learn
of me: i. e. And that you may know how to do it, take me for your Example.
For I am meek, and lowly in heart: i. e. For I am, as you ought to be, loving
and kind to MEN, and truly Humble, and submissive to GOD, And you shall find
rest unto your souls. i. e. And in doing the Will of your God, which is Holy,
Just, and Good; you shall find true Comfort, and satisfaction, and Complacencie
of Mind: you shall cease from all that Labor and Travel, which hitherto you
have continually endured in seeking, and by wicked means endeavoring after
True Contentment in the things of this World, which are all vanity and Vexation
of Spirit. Eccl. 1.14.


From the Words thus opened unto you I shall draw forth this Doctrine: that
True Faith in Christ (through which Christians are enabled by God to take
Christ's Yoke upon them, etc. (I say) true Faith in Christ cures a Man of all
Spiritual Distempers, and gives him Ease: frees him from all Anguish, and
Sorrow, and Tribulation of Mind, and furnishes him with a never failing stock
of Pleasure, and Contentment. To be more strict and Logical; I shall lay down
the sense of my Doctrine in these words: True Faith enables a man to draw,
true, solid Comfort (strong consolation) from all the Objects of his Thoughts:
whatsoever a Wise man, a Faithful, sincere Christian thinks of, he finds in
it cause to Rejoice. Whithersoever His Soul has occasion to Go, (if I may so
express my self) she finds the Way beset, as it were, with Beds of Roses,
very Pleasant, and Delightsome unto Her* according to that of Solomon, Prove.
3.17.
The ways of wisdom are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are peace.
Before I come to a punctual demonstration of the Truth of my Doctrine, to show
you, that Rest and quiet of Mind, which a Good man, a True Believer continually
enjoyes, I shall premise some discourse of that Trouble and anguish, wherewith
the Minds of Wicked, Unregenerate men are so grievously afflicted. You will
have a more exact apprehension of the Rest of the GODLY, when you hear of the
Labors of the WICKED.

There is no peace, says my God, to the wicked. Isa. 58.21.
A wicked man can never have any peace, any rest in his Soul. How can he have
Peace, who is His own Enemy. HIEROCLES says truly, (...): A Good man is only
a Friend to Himself. The Mind of a wicked man is his Torment: His Thoughts Gnaw
him, as worms the Bowels. Which way soever He looks upon himself, he Sees
nothing but Grief and Horror. When He looks back upon his Life Past, and
considers what He has been, his Conscience presently Vexes and Upbraids him;
showing him the Vanity of the Pleasures he has enjoyed, and the wickedness of
the Actions he has committed. When he considers the state and condition he is
in at present, there suddenly arises in him a great deal of anguish and
vexation of spirit from an apprehension of the emptiness, and dissatisfaction
of all his Enjoyments. When he considers what he would be, and sends out his
thoughts in the search of the best Means to accomplish his Desires, he is
miserably distracted, and Divided against Himself: his Conscience striving
against his Affections, or his Affections one against another: one while his
Lusts, his vile Affections furiously impell him to such and such a Course,
because it is Pleasant, whilst his Conscience deters him from it because it is
Wicked. Another while, having broke the Bonds of Conscience, he is again
Restrained by some Passion (or inordinate Affection) contrary to that by which
his Soul was first Moved. Thus how often does it happen, that a man is
vehemently Inclined by his sensual Desires to do those things, from which the
Fear of Shame, or of Temporal Punishment etc keeps him back? Thus how often does
it happen, that a man's Ambition urges him to those Dangers from which his
Cowardice deters him; or his Pride and rash desire to be accounted Magnificent,
or the like, to those Expenses from which his Covetousness powerfully
disswades him. This or the like Distraction and Incomposednesse of Mind is the
Lot of all the Wicked: whose Miserable Condition we may in short describe thus.
The things which They so eagerly pursue and follow after, can never afford them
any of that Satisfaction and Contentment, which they expect from them: and they
miss the greatest part even of that Outward, Sensible Pleasure, which the
Nature of their Enjoyments might afford; by reason of that Trouble and
Dissatisfaction which they bring to some of their Affections, whilst they
Gratify others; or by reason of the Troubles they receive from their
Displeased Consciences: which, if they cannot Restrain Them from Rushing into
SIN, Pursue them (as it were) and Overtake them in the Act, and deprive them of
the greatest part of the Pleasure of it. I Will appeal to the Heart of any man
here, that is Conscious to himself, that he is to be numbered among the Wicked,
that he lives in any course of Known Sin, gives way to his Lusts and sensual
Inclinations; I Will Appeal, I say, to the Heart of any such man, and be Tried
by Him, whether I do not speak Truth: surely he knows it by Woeful
Experience. Whenever thou have Offended Thy GOD, to satisfy the Importunity of
any of thy Impetuous Lusts, has not thy Conscience Dampt thy Flaming Spirit,
Cooled thy Courage, (as we use to speak) telling thee, that thou have done
Foolishly, telling thee of HELL and DEATH: and so Mixing thy Wine with
Wormwood, turning thy Delight into Vexation of Spirit.

Having thus briefly discovered unto you the Black and Dismal Condition of the
Souls of the Wicked, which Sit in Darkness, and in the Shadow of Death: I
shall now endeavor to discover unto you the Pleasant and Comfortable Estate of
those that are truly GODLY, who have the Day Star arising in their Hearts, who
through Faith in CHRIST, walk in the Light of GODS Countenance, enjoy his
Favor, who is KING of KINGS, and LORD of LORDS, The Father of Mercies, and GOD
of all Comfort. That I may give you a more clear and manifest Discovery of this
Happiness of a True CHRISTIAN; I shall Point (as it were) (as those men use to
do, that Show you some Excellent Sight, to make your Notice the more accurate)
at the Principal Parts of it, Opening, and Demonstrating unto you this
Proposition or Doctrine: [True Faith enables a man, etc.] in these three
Particulars. First, True Faith in CHRIST inables a man to draw Comfort 1 From
the Remembrance of what he has been, of the Condition he has formerly been
in. 2. From the Apprehension of that which He is in at present. 3. From the
Expectation of what He may be in for the future.


Now these Three things, What a man has been, What he is, and What he expects
to be, are the Principal, and most Usual Objects of our Thoughts: therefore
if I shall be able to show you, how a True, Faithful CHRISTIAN may draw Matter
of Comfort from all These, I suppose, you will easily apprehend how He may
Comfort himself also in the Notice he takes of other things, as of all the
Works of PROVIDENCE, which he Sees in the Affairs of the World, or the like:
therefore I shall not extend my Discourse to any of them.

Each of the Particulars which I have propounded unto my self to be insisted
upon, as the Subject and Groundwork of my Discourse, consists of Two Parts,
our Condition being Twofold, viz. of the Inner, and Outward Man: or (as the
common words are) Spiritual and Temporal* At present I shall speak only of
the Temper and Disposition of a CHRISTIANS Spirit in reference to his
Spiritual Condition, Past, Present, and to Come. As for his Temporal
Condition, or the Estate of his Outward Man, I shall defer my Discourse of
That, 'till some other Opportunity.

The First thing that I am to Show you is, That a True CHRISTIAN, one that has
taken CHRIST's Yoke upon him etc. can take Comfort, Find Rest unto his Soul,
in the Remembrance of his Life Past, whether it have been Sinful or Holy. But
here probably some of you may presently Object within your selves against what
I say, thus: How! Can a True CHRISTIAN take Comfort in the Remembrance of his
Sinful Estate? why? what then is meant by Poenitence, or Godly Sorrow? is not
that the Sorrow which we conceive by the Remembrance of our Sins? In removing
this Objection, I doubt not, but (by Gods Assistance) I shall give you a full
discovery of this Truth; That a CHRISTIAN can Comfort Himself (through the
Help of GODS Spirit) even in the Remembrance of his Sinful Estate. We grant,
that when He thinks of His Sinful Estate, as Sinful, to wit, as it relates to
GOD, as that Course of Life, wherein He did so often Dishonor the Name of the
GOD that Made him; of JESUS, that Redeemed him; and Grieved the HOLY SPIRIT OF
GOD, that Now Sanctifies Him: I say my Brethren, when a CHRISTIAN does This way
look back upon his Sinful Life, He cannot choose through Indignation against
Himself, but Rent his Heart, vex his Spirit, cherish and foment his own
Sorrow, saying with David: Psa: 38.18.
I will be sorry for my Sin. But let us Observe, that This kind of Sorrowing is
but as the taking of Physic, it is not any Disease, or Settled Distemper of the
Soul: I say, when We are thus Pricked with the Sharp sense and feeling of our
SINS, we are not Wounded, but Let Blood: and this Spiritual Phlebotomy is
that, which Cures us of our present, and Prevents future Maladies. To speak
more plainly; This Godly Sorrow (as the 2 Cor: 7.10.
Apostle says) works Repentance: (...), works a Change of the Mind: Alters
the Temper and Constitution of the Inward Man; Confirms a man in Holiness,
which is the Health and Strength of the Soul, that has formerly been Wicked,
that is to say, that has abounded with all manner of Infirmities, with all
manner of Lusts, and Burnings, and inordinate Affections, which are (as it
were) the Fevers, and Agues, and Swellings, and Tumors of the Soul. And
thus, My Brethren, though the Sorrow, which a True Christian, a Faithful
Servant of the Living GOD, conceives by the Remembrance of his Sinful Life
Past, be in it self very Painful and Grievous, yet it works for him the
greatest Ease and Comfort. It only Roots out of the Heart all Carnal Joy, all
False, Fading, worldly Comfort, to Plant in it Joy Unspeakable, and The Comfort
of the Holy Ghost. To fix this Truth in your minds, to Confirm you in the
Apprehension of it, I shall recite unto you that Saying of Our SAVIOR: Matt.
5.4.
Blessed are they that Mourn, for they shall be Comforted. All that I have here
said may be briefly summed up thus: the Thoughts, which a GODLY Man has, in the
Remembrance of His Unregenerate Estate (though they do not Directly, yet they
do) By Consequent Continually Afford Him abundance of Comfort: to wit (as in
effect I said but now) by Fitting, and Preparing His Heart to Entertain the
Holy Ghost, the only True COMFORTER. The more a man Sorrows after a Godly sort
(as the 2 Cor. 7.11.
Apostles expression is) the more Entertainment He gives to the Spirit of GOD,
and receives the more Comfort from Him: As often this way, as a CHRISTIANS
Spitits fail him, GOD gives him a Cordial, to Revive, and to Delight his
Soul.

Having thus spoken of the Temper, and Disposition of a CHRISTIANS Spirit in
the Remembrance of His Sinful Estate; in relation to GOD, that is, as that
Course of Life, wherein He did so often Dishonor the Name of the GOD that Made
Him: etc. I shall now show you how His Spirit is Affected, what kind of
thoughts He has, in the Remembrance of it, as it relates to Himself, as an
Estate of Trouble of which he is Eased, and of Danger which he has Escaped.
Now my Brethren, that a Sinful Estate is Troublesome, and Unquiet, I have
shown you from these words, There is no peace, etc. that it is also a Dangerous
Estate, SINNERS being every moment in Danger of HEL-FIRE I presume there is
none here but will readily grant: And I suppose This also, That men Rejoice in
the Remembrance of the Troubles, and Dangers, they have Past, is so Obvious to
every ones Apprehension, that to go about accurately, and Logically to Prove
unto you, that a CHRISTIAN may draw Comfort, and Matter of Rejoying continually
from the Remembrance of His Sinful Condition, as Troublesome, and Dangerous,
would be but to Mis-spend so much time, being a vain, and mere formal Labor.
Therefore I shall not Show you this Truth so, as if you had never Seen it
before (if I may so speak) but that you might View it again, and take more
exact Notice of it: I shall so speak of it that I shall not seem, to Bring
the Truth to you, but only, to make you Turn the eyes of your understanding
toward It, being Habitually in your minds already, though probably, the
greatest part of you did never in any measure so firmly Apprehend it, so
thoroughly Think of it, as you ought to do. And here I cannot but make a
farther digression, to speak a word against the Folly of some men, who
Pretending much to Polite Reason, and Learning, account it a vain thing for
Scholars to discourse of such Truths, as are so Commonly Confes'd: As if those
waters of Life, Spiritual, and Practical Truths, might not lie many years
together in a Carnal man's Head, thoroughly Frozen as it were, and useless,
'till by the Hearing of some more Powerful, Zealous, Experimental Expressions
of the same Truth's, his Affections be so Inflamed, as to Thaw, and dissolve
them (if I may so speak) that they may Flow down continually upon the Heart,
to Purge and Cleanse it from all Filthiness, and Pollution; as that River did
AUGEAS his Stable. I do not speak This for the Allusion's sake, as a strained
conceit, but as That which I think Suitable to the Experimental Notions of
GODLY Men.

And now I come to speak of the Comfort, a Christian has when He reflects
upon His Unregenerate Estate, as Troublesome and Dangerous: and this I shall do
as briefly and pithily as I can.

You know it is a common saying: Fessum Quies plurimumjuvat. What a Comfortable
thing is it for one that has Traveled hard to Repose himself, for one that
is Weary to Ly down, and take his Rest? How does He Rejoice, and Hug himself
(as they say) in the Apprehension of His present Health, that has been
Recovered of a Long, and Grievous Sickness? Why, thus it is with a Sincere
Convert, when He considers his Former Condition: His thoughts Representing unto
him the Spiritual Evils: which formerly he Labored under, and opposing them
to that Good and Pleasant Condition, which now He is in, make him the more
Sensible of it, more to Rejoice in it. The like Comfort we may conceive to be
in the Heart of a true Believer, when he Looks back upon the Danger of his
Sinful Estate. When He considers that he was once in the Highway to HELL,
that Broad Way, etc. that He was once like to Perish for ever; His Soul does
Magnify the LORD, and his Spirit does rejoice in God his Savior. How does He
delight himself upon This Consideration, in Acting his FAITH, in the
Contemplation of The things that are not seen: HELL which he has Escaped; and
HEAVEN, which shortly He shall Inherit? through the strong Apprehensions he
has, that His SINS are Forgiven him, etc? With what alacrity and cheerfulness
does He Embrace the GOD, that Loved Him, the Physician that Cured Him, the LORD
that Saved Him? Such as these are the usual thoughts of one that is truly
Converted, when he calls to mind the Sinfulness of his Life Past:

As in Hot and Sunshine Days, Swine are wont to Wallow in the Mire to Avoid
the extremity of the Heat: So how long did I accustom my self to Wallow in
all manner of Uncleanness, (Filthiness of the Flesh, and Spirit) wherein I
never found any True Comfort, did only for the present Allay the Scorching
Heat, and Violence of my inordinate Affections; being continually Troubled
either with the Solicitation and Urgency of them, or with some Reflection upon
the Base and filthy Ways I took to Satisfy them? How long did I accustom my
self to Drink Poisonous Waters to Quench my Thirst: to do that which I knew
to be Evil, to Satisfiie the Importunity of my irregular Desires? Thus Missing
my Way to True Happiness, the more Have I made toward it, the Farther still I
went from it: The oftener I Accomplished my Desires, the more Discontented I
found My self, still Vexing My Spirit, to Please My Lusts. But Now, How Happy
am I! Now GOD is my Portion: And what can I Desire more, having Him who is All
in All? HIM I do Enjoy in some measure Here, and shall Enjoy HIM Fully and
Perfectly hereafter in HEAVEN. Yea methinkes I am in HEAVEN already: I find My
self Above the World: I am Free from those Earthly Affections, wherein
formerly I Engaged My Soul. I Envy no man's Honor: or Covet his Estate: or
Hate his Person: or Fear his Power: All that I would Avoid is SIN, All that I
Desire is God: For ever Blessed be His SPIRIT, which has thus Reformed Me. I
can say unto God with DAVID, Psalm. 73.25.
Whom have I in Heaven, but Thee? And there is None upon Earth, that I Desire
besides Thee.

And now I am come to this Point: That a CHRISTIAN exceedingly Rejoices in the
Remembrance of His Life Past, if he have been Sanctified from the Womb, if He
have been Godly all his Days. Here I shall not Use many words: the Subject I
suppose to be so Plain, that your Thoughts would Run on in it (that I may so
speak) without any Interruption: if I should but show Them the Way, should but
Mention it. I shall only endeavor to set forth this Truth, That the
Remembrance of Time Spent in the Service of God is most Comfortable, and
Pleasant, by This Similitude: As one that has been Delivered out of many
Dangers, Relieved in many Distresses, and made Rich and Great by some Eminent
and Noble Person, Pleases Himself in the thoughts of these Benefits, not
only, as Enjoyed by himself, but as Received from such a Person, whose Love
is no less Honorable, then such Obligations, as I mentioned, the Evidences of
it Bountiful: So one that has been Godly from his Youth, when he remembers
those many Spiritual Troubles, and Dangers, from which his God, who is King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords, has continually preserved him, those many straits
and distresses in which he has relieved him: and how He has made him Rich in
Grace, etc. How exceedingly does he Rejoice in the God of his Salvation,
filling himself with Confidence, that he who has continued his Loving
kindness so long time, will be still unto him Psalm. 46.1.
A very present help in Trouble. Suitable to the thoughts of such a man we may
find many Expressions, in the Book of Psalms. Psalm. 74.12.
God is my King of Old. Psalm. 119.52.
I remembered thy Jugements of Old, O Lord, and have comforted my self. Psalm.
22.10.
I was cast upon thee from the Womb: Thou art my GOD from my mothers Belly.
All that may be said upon this Subject may be Summed up, and concluded in this*
That for any one who has been Godly all his days to Remember his life past,
is, to call to mind the mercies of God, to reflect upon those Gifts and Graces,
which God has bestowed on him from time to time; to meditate on those Sacred
Truths, which have been continually Held forth unto him by the Spirit of
Wisdom, as a Light to direct him in all the Dark and Slippery passages of his
life. And what is this but to Look on the Tokens, and Read over the Letters,
which have been sent him from his dearest and best Friend his Father, his God?
And what delight and satisfaction think you, does he take in this? surely they
only can rightly imagine that have had some Experience of it. Thus my Brethren,
when a man calls to mind the time he has spent in the Service of God, he does,
as it were, live over again his Holy, and Righteous, and therefore most Happy
life.

Vivere Bis, Vita posse Priore Frui.
Mart.
Now come we to show you that a true Christian can take Comfort in the
apprehension of his Present Condition, as to his Inward man, whether he be
Weak, or strong in Faith. If he be weak, and his Iniquities often prevail
against him: then it is true, when he ruflects upon himself, and sees the
Fiery darts of Satan sticking in his sides, his thoughts do not Directly bring
him any Comfort, but (as I said but now upon another occasion) by consequent
they do: that is to say, when he considers the Weakness of his Faith, he
cannot but be grieved* but when he reflects upon this consideration, considers
that he does consider his Spiritual Weakness, and is thereupon Applying
himself for help unto Christ, whose Grace is Sufficient for him, who would
support him still, and keep him from Falling away totally, and finally, though
his Faith should be ten thousand times Weaker then it is; in this he takes
Comfort: And is ready to say with Saint Paul, 2 Cor. 12.9.
Most gladly will I glory in my Infirmities, that the Power of Christ may rest
upon Me. Thus a Christian Comforts himself even in his Weak Faith; not that
he is Weak, but that Christ's strength is made perfect, that is, manifests its
sufficiciency, and perfection, in his Weakness: not, that he is of himself so
ready to Fall: but that through his own Vanity, and Unsteadinesse, he
discernes the power of Christ, by which he Stands.

Now let us consider a Christian strong in Faith, in whom there is scarce any
Lust, that can make the least resistance against the Soul, who can say with
holy David, Ps. 119.113.
I hate vain Thoughts, but thy Law do I Love. Oh how comfortable are the
thoughts of such a man unto him, when he considers his Estate? how Unspeakable
is his Joy, when he reflects upon himself, and sees the Image of God, the
Beauty of Holiness in his own Soul? When he considers that God has granted
him, that he has so often prayed for: A Clean Heart: That through Christ
enabling him, he has overcome all those temptations to Sin, and
Uncleanness, which he sees to have Power over the Generality of Men: ( The
whole World, says the Apostle, lies in Wickedness. 1 John. 5.19.
) Upon such considerations as these, the Soul of a Christian delights herself
in Running unto God, as Little Children are wont to do to their Fathers to Hug,
and Embrace him, and express all manner of Affection unto him, in such an Holy
Passion as David was in, when he Ps: 116.1
said, I love the LORD, because he has Heard my Voice, and my Supplications. I
Ps: 18.1.
will Love Thee, O LORD, my Strength.

Thus you see how a Christians Meditations concerning the State of his Inward
Man, Work Comfort for him continually, either by Discovering the Evils and
perturbations of his Soul, that they may be Removed: or by Representing those
things, that are Good, and Excellent to Please and Delight him.

And now I come to the last thing that I propounded to my self, to speak of
at this time. That a Christian takes Comfort in the Expectation of any thing
that may befall him for the future, as to his Inward Man: and that I shall
briefly Demonstrate thus: Either he expects that he shall Fall into many
Temptations, many Spiritual Straits, and Distresses: if so he Rejoices in the
God of his Life, who is Able Heb: 7.25.
to Save him to the Uttermost, and 1 Cor: 10.13.
will with the Temptation also make a way to escape: Or else he expects that
God will Lead him in a Plain Path (as the Ps: 27.11.
Psalmists expression is) that he shall have no more such Temptations; and
Stops in His Christian Course, as hitherto he has had: that those Lusts, which
war against the Soul, shall no more rise up against him: if so, he Sings his
(...), and Triumphs over Sin and Death, saying with Saint Paul, Thanks be to
God who gives us the Victory through our LORD JESUS CHRIST.

In a word: True Faith Roots all Fear out of a Christians Heart, and turns
all his expectation, into Hope (which is you know, the Comfortable Foresight of
some future Good) even through the Strength of this Persuasion, that as Saint
Paul says) Rom: 8.28
All things work together for GOOD, to them that Love GOD: And also that
Himself is One of Them.

SERMON II.
Take my yoke upon you, etc. Mat. 11.29.
IN my Last Sermon I told you that a true Christian through Faith takes Comfort
in the Remembrance of what he has been: and in the Apprehension of What He is:
and in the Expectation of What He may be for the future, as to his Inward man:
I shall now prove the same of him, as to his Outward man. And here I shall
Insist longest upon the middle Proposition: to wit, That a Christian takes
Comfort in the Apprehension of the Temporal Condition he is in, what ever it
be. I suppose the particular Notions employed in the Two other Propositions will
be easily discovered from the Explication of This: Remembrance, and Expectation
being nothing else (as all Scholars will soon grant) but a kind of
Apprehe^sio^: by the Former we Take back the Species, and Impresses of Things
Past: by the Latter we Anticipate, and Take them beforehand.

As for the First Proposition that I am to Handle, to wit, That a Christian
takes Comfort in the Remembrance of what he has been: I shall briefly
demonstrate it; by Showing you the Original and Spring of that Comfort, which
is, the Observation of the Love of GOD, Manifested unto him in a Way Suitable
to the condition he has been in: If he have been in Adversity; he considers,
how by that GOD has been pleased to make the WORID Bitter unto him, to
Heighten his Appetite to Spiritual Delights, to make him Long more earnestly
to Taste, and See the Goodness of GOD: or to make him Meek and Humble: or
some other way to Advance his Soul toward Perfection, in Piety, and Virtue by
the Low Estate of his Outward Man. If he have been in Prosperity, he considers
how by that God has been pleased to Provoke him to Christian Magnanimity, and
Magnificence, to make him Isntrumental for His Glory, in some Great and
Eminent Acts of Charity, or to save him from Despondency, and Faintness of
Spirit, and such like Infirmities, which He knows most Incident to men in
Adversity: Still Sanctifying unto him all (...)
Outward things, as Poverty, or Riches, Honors, or Disgraces, Health or
Sickness, to the Use of his Soul: before Conversion, to Put Him out of the
way to HELL: and after, to Bring Him on in the way to HEAVEN, And may we not
here say with Holy DAVID Ps. 107.43.
Who so is wise, and will Observe these things: even they shall Understand the
Loveing-kindness of the LORD. All that can be said in this place, may be
briefly Summed up thus: All things work together for Good to those that Love
GOD: And the Observation that a CHRISTIAN takes of that Real, Spiritual Good,
that GOD has Wrought for Him by His Temporal Condition, whatever it has been,
Affords Him infinitely more Comfort and Satisfaction, then any man can Declare
or Conceive, but He that Knows it by Experience.

I am now come to the Second Proposition, that I intended to Handle in This
Discourse: A CHRISTIAN takes Comfort in the Sense, and Apprehension of the
Present Condition of His Outward Man, whether it be Prosperity, or Adversity:
By Prosperity* I Understand that Estate, wherein He has the Enjoyment of His
Health, of abundance of Riches, and Great Possessions, and is in Honor, and
Reputation amongst all those, with whom He has to do. Adversity is the Want of
These Things: if we Want All of Them, we are Wholly; if but some, Partly
Miserable (I speak as to the Outward man.) That Christians take Comfort in
their Prosperous Condition, I suppose to be a truth so plain and obvious, that
I need not spend much time in the Demonstration of it. I shall only show you
one principal Reason of the Comfort They take in their Outward Enjoyments: (
Health, Goods, Good Name.) They look upon them as the means of performing in
Deed, what every true Christian constantly Wills, That special Duty, Mat: 5.16.
which Christ enjoynes us; Let your light so shine before men, that they may
see your good Works, and Glorify your Father which is in Heaven. This truth
will be most evide^t, if we consider that the body is the Instrument of the
Soul: That, whereby we perform the Outward Operations of all our Faculties,
whereby we Act before men, as Writing, or Talking, or Performing any other
Action, whereby we discover to the World, what Temper and Disposition we are
of: Now Health is the Firmness, and Soundness of this Instrument: and
without it we cannot so well Perform any Outward act of Virtue: and if we do
enjoy our Health, without Riches and Honors, There are many Virtues, which we
cannot so well Discover: for instance; How can a man show himself Liberal,
that has nothing to Give to those that Need? How can a man discover his
Humility, that has no Honor, and Reputation in the World; that is so Low
already, that he cannot show any Condescension. Here then let us Observe, that
it is the duty of every Christian to use all means possible, (in a Right way)
that are truly Honest, to gain such Riches, and Honors as he knows himself
able to Manage. And in the pursuit of them, never to be deterred by any Fear
of being accounted Covet^^^ or Proud: whilst his own Conscience tells him,
that he does not endeavor after these Outward Things, that he may enjoy them,
but God in them, using them to His Glory.

And now I shall show you (by Gods assistance) that a true Faithful Christian
takes Comfort also in his Adversity, when ever it pleases God to put him into
such a Condition.

That you may have a more clear, and distinct Notion of this Truth, I shall
show you particularly, what Comfort and Satisfaction he takes in Poverty,
Sickness, Disgrace, or the loss of his Reputation. All Temporal evils, or
Afflictions being comprehended under one of these three Heads.

As for the first, the main ground, and principle of that Comfort, which a
Christians Heart is possessed of, when he reflects upon his Poverty, is, the
thought of that safety which he enjoyes from those Spiritual Dangers, and
Perplexities which Rich men are entangled in, by reason of those manifold
Opportunities to enjoy the Pleasures of Sin, and allurements thereunto, which
the abundance of their Worldly Possessions continually presents unto them. You
know who said: It Is Mat. 19.24.
easier for a Camel to go through the eye of a needle, the^ for a Rich man to
enter into the Kingdom of GOD. Here we may observe how the Great Ones of the
World deceive themselves, in thinking they deserve to be admired, and had in
such high Esteem for their Mistake me not I do not speak against the Use of
these things* but against those Persons, who are so Madd as to set their Hearts
on them.
Brave Clothes, Stately Houses, Rattling Coaches, etc. a true Christian that
goes in Rags (though he gives them that outward respect which is due unto them
by the Laws, and Constitution of the Commonwealth wherein he lives) in his
Heart pitties them, and dispises their Worldly Height, and Glory: as That,
which in his Baptism he Vowed to Forsake: to slight and contemn the Pomps and
Vanities of this wicked World. He sees himself by the Eye of Faith, to be in a
Condition infinitely more High, and Noble, then theirs: though those Earthly
Creatures, Carnal minded Men: (whose discourse is only of Lands, and Livings,
Dogs and Horses, Coaches and Howses, Fine Clothes, and Banquets, etc.) are no
more able to Discern it, then a Mole to Behold the Sun. To conclude this
point: A Poor man, that is truly Gracious, whose Heart is Rich toward GOD,
looks upon himself, as one of Those that have an interest in that Blessing,
which Our Savior gave his Disciples: Luke 6 20.
Blessed be ye Poor, for yours is the Kingdom of GOD: And in all those other
large Promises, which the GOD of Truth has made to Believers; which most
commonly the Hearts of Christians Cleave unto so much the more closely, by how
much the less they have of the Good Things of this Life to Allure, and Draw
off their Thoughts. Now, my Brethren, how such Sweet, and Comfortable Words
from Our Almighty Father, as the Holy Scriptures abound with all, being Applied
by Faith, will relieve the heart of any true Christian, whilst he labors
under the heaviest sense of Outward Poverty; What Comfort, I say, what
Spiritual delight and Sweetness a Poor CHRISTIAN (Driven into Himself by the
Storms without: (if I may so express my self) Necessitated, as it were, to
set his Faith on Work to procure Comfort for him, whilst Without he finds
nothing but Poverty, and Distress: what Spiritual Delight and Sweetness such
a man) may Suck out of these Breasts of Consolations (as the Scripture
expression is) think you, who are true Believers: Joy in the Holy Ghost: (in
which (as in effect I said but now) commonly those Christians most abound, who
possess least of the Things of the World.) No man can ever fully express; and
none but such as you, can in any measure rightly conceive.

I come now to show you, that Sickness also affords matter of Comfort to any
true Believer: This truth I might easily make appear unto you many ways: but
(because I shall hasten to the Application, wherein I shall spend more time,
then ordinary) I shall only mention one Reason of it. Sickness, you know,
naturally puts a man in mind of Death; and what can be more Comfortable to a
Sincere Christian then the thoughts of that? What can be more Comfortable to a
Child of GOD, then the thoughts of that happy time, when he shall Go Home to
his Father; when he shall fully enjoy his Maker, and his Redeemer? To speak
more at large: A Sincere Christian (whose thoughts (his Heart being as it were,
Set on Fire with Love to God) continually Fly upward, as Sparks toward
Heaven.) Usually when he Feels any Pain, presently considers the Natural
Frailty and Mortality of his Body, and thereupon his Soul Rejoices in this
Hope, that shortly, when a Few Job. 14.1.
Days are past, She shall cast it off from her; as that, which so Clogs and
Hinders her, and deprives her of that Vigor, and Quickness, which she
desires, in her Spiritual Operations, in the Service of her Maker, which she
is mainly, yea wholly intent upon.

Now, Beloved, if Death be so Desirable to a true Christian; Judge ye what
Comfort his Sickness affords him, which continually supplies him with fresh
thoughts, and strong Apprehensions of Mortality.

And thus I have briefly demonstrated unto you, that a Christians Faith is able
to extract Comfort out of those two things which are so terrible to the
generality of Men: Poverty and Sickness. I am now to show you how this
Victorious Grace, by which we Overcome the World, softens unto us also that
other Hard Thing, 1 John 5.4.
DISGRACE, or the Loss of our Good-Name, and Esteem amongst men, making the
Sowernesse of the Worlds carriage toward us, serve us, as it were for Sauce at
the Feast of our Good Conscience.

The heavyest Disgrace, or Infamy, which in this life a Child of GOD lies
under, is occasioned by these, or the like means: A Report that he has been
guilty of some notorious Baseness, and Impiety: or a Misconceit of his good
Actions, which proceeding from such Principles, as Carnal men (who are by
far the greatest part of the World) are in no wise able to Apprehend, cannot
but be Misconstrued: Hence it is that they Nickname all his Virtues: and
endeavor to render him most Odious and Contemptible for those Actions, by
which he knows himself chiefly to deserve Love, and Respect from all those
that are truly Noble, and Heavenly-minded: Thus when a Christian shows
himself Humble, how do the men of the World mistake him for a Sneaking,
mean-spirited fellow? when Magnanimous for Proud, and selfe-conceited? If the
Infamy a Christian suffers be occasioned by such a Report, as I mentioned but
now, if it be true, he Comforts himself in it upon this account: that it is
unto him a continual Memento to Repent, and Bemoane himself for the
Commission of that Sin; and to Rejoice in GOD, by whose Spirit he is persuaded
that his Sins are forgiven him: If the Report be false, the Abused Christian
greatly Rejoices in the Thoughts of that Grace which Restrained him from that
Action, of which he is supposed to be Guilty, into which, if he had been left
to himself, he might have Rushed, Ier: 8.6.
As the Horse Rusheth into the Battle, being Naturally prone to every thing
that is Evil.

Another Ground of the Comfort a Godly man takes in such a Case is, that he
finds himself often Stirred up to Pray unto GOD, saying with Holy DAVID, Hold
up my goings in thy paths, Ps. 17.5.
that my Footsteps slip not, upon this consideration, that there are so many
that would Rejoice over him if he should but Fall. These and a thousand other
occasions of Comfort do the Godly apprehend to Lighten their hearts, to delight
their Souls, whenever they reflect upon those heavy Censures, Calumnies, and
Revilings, with which they are continually Laden. The more the World hates
them, the stronger apprehensions they have of the Favor of GOD. He is their
Isaiah 4.6.
Covert from storm and from rain: In him they Rest secure from the Stormy
Wind of all those Ill Reports, Calumnies, and Reproaches, they hear
continually raised against them; with such a kind of Delight, as a man has,
when he lies Warm in his Bed, and hearkens to a Tempest. But now as for that
Misconceit, which all the World has of the Good Actions of Pious men; as for
that Shame, which they must expect, as they are Christians constantly to
suffer; for discovering their Zeal for GOD, and their Fiery indignation
against any Allowed wickedness amongst those with whom they converse, being
usually accounted Phreneticke, Hotheaded fellows; for contemning the things
of the World, Childish, and Imprudent; for Disdaining to be guided by mere
Example in any Course they take, Proud and Haughty; for separating themselves
from Vain Conversation, Singular, and Self-conceited. As for this, I say, it
is so far from troubling those that are Christians indeed, that they
exceedingly Rejoice in it: Remembering those words of their Savior: Mat.
5.11.12.
Blessed are ye when men shall revile you, and persecute you, and shall say
all manner of evil against you falsely for my sake. Rejoice and be exceeding
glad; for great is your reward in Heaven: for so persecuted they the Prophets
which were before you. I shall now conclude this point: that a true Christian
takes Comfort in the Apprehension of his Present Estate, showing you (to
confirm you in the Apprehension of this most Useful Truth) the General
Cause, and Wellhead of all those streams of Consolation, which continually
flow into his Soul, whenever he reflects upon the condition he is in: here
it is: he is assured through Faith, that The Great GOD, the Author and Disposer
of all things, Loves him, and will love him for ever: and hereupon he assumes
this confidence, that the condition he is in is that which at This Time is Best
for Him.

As for the last Proposition that I promised to demonstrate unto you, that a
true Christian through Faith takes Comfort in the Expectation of any condition
he may be in for the Future: I shall not need to spend many words on it, it
appears so plain in what has been already delivered: Expectation being a
kind of Apprehension (as I said in the beginning of my Discourse.) All that may
be said to manifest this truth unto you, may be comprehended in those few Lines
with which I concluded my former Sermon on this Text:

True Faith Roots all Fear out of a Christians Heart, and turns all his
Expectation into Hope, even through the strength of this Persuasion: that All
things work together for Good to them that love GOD: and also that Himself is
One of Them.

I have now Finished the Doctrine I raised from this Text. That Faith enables a
man to draw Comfort from all the objects of his Thoughts: Having shown you
Particularly, how the Faithful take Comfort in all things that concern
themselves: from whence (as I said in the beginning of my Former Sermon) you
may easily apprehend how they may also Comfort themselves in the Notice they
take of other things, as of all those Works of Providence, which they see in
the Affairs of the World etc. therefore I shall not extend my Discourse to any
of them, but proceed to application. And here I shall speak first to the
Faithful, those that have taken CHRIST'S Yoke upon them, utterly renouncing
the 2 Pet. 2.7.
Filthy Conversation of the Wicked, those, who Mind Earthly things; absolutely
resolving to Walk with GOD, in true Holiness, and Righteousness all their
days: And if at any time (being Overborne by some sudden and impetuous
Temptations, as the Best of Christians often are) they Fall back into any
Uncleanness, not (like Swine in the mire) to Wallow in it, but to Repent, and
to Cry unto God, their Father, to help them up, to Acts. 15.9.
Purify their hearts by Faith, to wash, and Cleanse them by his Spirit, in the
1 John 1.7.
Blood of JESUS CHRIST His Son. Then I shall speak to those that Go on in
the Ways of the Ungodly, those that Ps: 66.18.
Regard Iniquity in their Heart, those that do not absolutely resolve never to
Allow themselves in any One Known Sin; Praying continually that God would so
strengthen them by his Grace, that their Iniquities may not Prevail against
them, that if they have been Drunkards, they may be Drunk no more; if they
have been Wantons, they may be Wanton no more; if they have been Gal. 5.26.
Desirous of Vain Glory, provoking, envying their Brethren, they may be such
no more; if they have delighted themselves in Foolish Talking, or Jesting, Ephesians:
5.4^
or that Elaborate Scurrility, and Witty malice, in which some men of Parts and
Learning Exercise their Invention, (then which what can be more Opposite to The
Gal: 6.1.
Spirit of meekness, to the Calm, and Sweet Nature of the LAMB, and the
DOVE?) that they may do so no more: Briefly (to speak in the Titus 2.12.
Apostles words) that Denying ungodliness and worldly Lusts, they may live
soberly, righteously, and godlily. Those that have not taken such a resolution
(and such I fear are some of you) I must reckon amongst the Wicked. If
therefore any of you are conscious to your selves, that you are such, as here I
have Described, Apply to your selves I beseech you, for the good of your
Immortal Souls, what I shall speak in the second place: but first (as I said
but now) I shall speak to the Faithful, etc.

Beloved Brethren, You know by Experience the truth I have spoken. E're since
you took CHRIST'S Yoke upon you, have you not found Rest unto your Souls? E're
since you Bare that Easy yoke, since your Hearts stood in Ps. 119.101.
awe of GOD's Word: Have you not found your selves most Sweetly and Gently, and
yet most Powerfully Restrained from Following the Track of your Lusts, and
Extravagant Affections, from Breaking over the Enclosures of a strict and holy
Conversation, to 1 Pet. 44.
Run with the men of the world to the same excess of Riot. In a word; have you
not found all your Christian thoughts in what Subject soever you have employed
them, to Work Comfort for your souls? Surely you have. good thoughts, are the
Beams of the SUN's OF RIGHTEOUSNESS, which Stream forth continually upon the
Hearts of Christians to warm and Comfort them, and to cherish and to make to
Grow, the Fruits of the Spirit. Well my Brethren, has the Holy one of Israel,
the Great and Glorious GOD, Shown himself so Gracious to you Sinful
Creatures, Dust and Ashes, worms and no men, as to send his Beloved SON into
the World to Dye for you: by Faith in whose Blood, you Rejoice in some measure,
even in this Vale of Tears, this miserable life; and shall shortly, even when
a few days are past, be inhabitants of Heaven, see the Face of GOD, Psalm.
16.11.
In whose presence there is fullness of joy, and at whose right hand there are
pleasures for evermore. Well, my Brethren has GOD Dealt so Bountifully with
you, and will you not love him? will you not with all the Powers of your Soul
War against your Lusts, that you may be no more (as formerly you have been)
what ever Temptations befall you) Lovers of Pleasures, more then Lovers of God.

I beseech you, Brethren, by the Mercies of GOD, by all that Sweetness, Love,
and Favor of His toward you, that your Souls have ever Tasted, That you
would This Day, Renew your Vows; Resolve afresh To Love the LORD, your God
with All your Heart, That You may no more Judge of Things, as the Vulgar do
(amongst whom give me leave to reckon most of those that are commonly Accounted
Great Scholars, or Fine Gentlemen) that you may not Esteem any Action Wise,
Prudent, Noble, or any way Praiseworthy, and becoming a Generous Spirit, but
what is done To the Glory of God, 1 Cor. 10.31. in Defiance of the Wicked
WORLD* And, on the other side, That you may Account nothing Base, Sordid, and
Degenerous but what is Done (in Compliance with your own Lusts, or the Vain
Humors of other men) contrary to the Commands of that All-Glorious Majesty; to
whom we Owe Homage for the Air we Breath, In Him we Live, and move, and have
our being, Acts 17.28.

And as for those Absurd Fellows, who own the Name of CHRISTIANS, and yet
Delight in scorning You, and call you Puritanes, and I know not what. You must
be so far from being Fierce, and Raging against Them, from thinking of
Revenge, etc. that you must from the heart Pity them (as it may be they say,
they Pity you, for your Weakness, and imprudence, as they term your Wisdom,
and Spiritual Understanding) you must, I say, heartily Pity such men, and Pray
for Them, as Your Fellow Creatures, yea, as Your Brethren (in ADAM) who
miserably expose Themselves to the Utmost Danger of Everlasting Destruction.
Ah, Poor Souls! What Madness, and Folly has possessed Them! Do They say,
they Believe, that there is an HEAVEN, and an HELL; and yet esteem those for a
Ridiculous sort of people, Who, by what they Write, Talk, or Do for the most
part plainly Discover that their Mind is wholly Bent upon This, that They may
Enter into the Kingdom of GOD: Poor Souls; Simple Ones indeed! Do They say
They Believe that the SON of the Living God? that Glorious Person, Shed His
most precious Blood for You, and Them; and yet will not suffer You to Love Him,
to talk of Him, and upon all Occasions, to Discover Your Zeal for the Honor
of his Name, without Taunts, and Flouts, Calumnies, and Reproaches! I shall
only speak a word or two more to heighten your Commiseration of these foolish
men, miserable Creatures; and then I shall proceed to the other Part of my
Application. Dearly Beloved: when ever any of these Fantastical Things, that
walk in the vanity of their Minds, and Delight in nothing more then in Foolish
Jesting, etc. Continually Scoffing or Railing at any one, in whom They Discover
the Power of Godliness, The true Light of CHRISTIANITY whilst They no more
Understand it, being so Rare, and strange in these Days of Sin and Darkness,
then a Dog does the Light of the Moon, which he Barks at; as they at this: I
say my Brethren, when ever any of these men (If Things so Irrational may be
called Men) Rail on you, and give out False Reports of you, or to your face
scorn and deride you, let your Hearts Pity them considering that the time
draws on apace when Their laughter shall be turned to mourning and their joy
to heaviness. He that sits in the Heavens shall laugh, the Lord shall have
Them in derision, Psalm. 2.4.

And what now remains but that I Exhort you, in the words of the Apostle, To
rejoice evermore, 1 These. 5.16. Be Glad in the LORD, and Rejoice ye Righteous,
and shout for Joy all ye that are upright in Heart.

And now I shall speak to you, who are Conscious to your selves, that you have
not taken Christ's Yoke upon you, that you still Do Wickedly, and Talk Vanity.
That the things you have, or aim at, are Vexation of Spirit, vain and
Dissatisfactory, to your Immortal souls, sure I am you will hardly deny. Nay
(if you have but an Historical Belief of the word of God, as I presume you
have) you cannot deny it when ever you reflect on your vain Conversation, and
Consider your Designs, mean and Low, being such as These; To make your selves
acceptable to some Merry Companions, Such it may be as have acquired, some
civil Accomplishments, and Humane Learning.) that you may gain from them, the
Name of Ingenious Men, etc. or to Jeare and Grin at those, whom you Malign and
Envy or to Drink and Droll with your Cronies: or (and this you think most
Prudent and Manly) To Get a great Estate in the World, that you may Wear Brave
Clothes, and keep Company with the Best (as they say) (not to name your more
Abominable Intentions, which are themselves Anxiety, and Labor; and the
Effects of them Horror, and Anguish) I say Sirs when you Consider the things
you enjoy, or Aim at (pitiful mean things at best) are you not filled with
Vexation of Spirit? do you not Abhor, as it were, and Loath your selves, for
the Guilt and Filth of your SINS, which you resolve still to wallow in? Base
and Degenerate Creatures, who being Made after the Image of God, have made your
selves Earthly, and Sensual! Well Sirs, you see that Sins are Troubles, and
Sinners of all men most Miserable: even whilst They are in their proper
Element; (that I may so speak) in this present World; but what will become of
them (Wretches) when this Life is ended? (and sure I am our Last Hour draws on
apace) Could I but express the thousandth part of those everlasting Pains,
They shall then begin to Feel (in HELL) it would make the most Stif-necked
Sinner in the world, to Bow, if he should Hear me. Ah! Sirs, is This true
indeed, that if you take not CHRIST'S Yoke upon you, that is, if you do not
strongly and sincerely Resolve to Break off from every Known Sin: you shall
never find any Rest unto your Souls. You shall be Everlastingly Miserable. Is
this true I say, and will ye acknowledge it so to be, (as you must needs do, If
you have so much as an Historical Belief of the Word of GOD, as I said but
now,) And yet not Resolve no more to Allow your selves in any Way of
Wickedness, etc. no more to Deride those, who having their Hearts possessed with
the thoughts of Eternity, can in no wise suit themselves to your worldly
Conversation: But having once found Rest in CHRIST; will no more return to
that Labor and Toil, which the Generality of Men, Continually Undergo in the
Pursuit of that They call Happiness? Now Sirs if you are no whit moved at
what has been spoke; but Stick close to your Beloved Sins: though our Lord
and Savior JESUS CHRIST (who is Over all, God blessed for ever) so lovingly
invites you to Come over unto him, assuring you that The ways of wisdom are
ways of pleasantness and all her paths are peace, assuring you that if you
take HIS YOKE upon you, it will not Gall your Necks, and be Troublesome unto
you, but only Restrain you (that you may Find rest to your Souls) from
Breaking over His Enclosures, the Bounds of True Reason, and Holiness, To Follow
your Lusts, and exorbitant Affections, If you be not Moved at this, but Stand
fast in the Way of Sinners, and will for ever remain Lovers of pleasures more
then Lovers of GOD, of GOD, that made you, of GOD, who for your sakes sent his
BELOVED son into the world, to be Mocked, Scourged, Crucified; AH Srs, If you
are not Moved at This, nor ever will be, I must tell you in the Name of GOD you
shall never find Rest unto your Souls, you shall never Taste one Dram of True
Comfort, and Sweetness of Spirit all your days; And when your Days on the
Earth which (as David says) are as a Shadow, shall Vanish away, you shall
Certainly be Tormented with the Devil and his Angels; Yea, perhaps within a
Week or two (for how many Young Men have your selves known in this place,
that have been Healthy, and Dead within the compass of far less Time then
that) I say Srs, within a Week or two, you may be seized on, by some Disease
or other, the Small Pox: or a Fever, or a Surfeite, or the like, and be Cut
off from the Land of the Living, and be turned into Hell, Consider this you
that forget God: you that talk vanity. But now if any of you find your selves
Moved, at what you have Heard; (and what manner of Men are you if you do not,)
if you find your Hard Hearts in the least measure Softened, I beseech you Srs,
for your Souls sakes for the GOD OF LOVES sake, Pray earnestly that the LORD
would Perfect the Good work He has Begun in you, that he would Continually
Warm and Soften you, and Supple your hearts with the BLOOD OF JESUS CHRIST,
that they may be Pliable to his will in All things, (to speak more plainly)
that He would make you so Tenderly and Affectionately to Apprehend His
Everlasting Kindness toward you, that you may forever LOVE Him, and Keep His
Commandments, that you may Live Precisely, Walk with GOD, all your Days,
Despising the shame of the Wicked world, not fearing the Reproaches and
Revilings of this Base and Filthy Generation. I shall hold you with no longer
Discourse. If ye Do these things HAPPY are ye.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 3. lin. 13. for A Good man is only a Friend to Himself read A good man
only is etc.

Page 4. l. 16. for rash read vain. p. 15. l. 18. add Hoc est p. 32. l. 13.
for SVN's read SUN. As for the false Points the intelligent Reader may Correct
them himself.


