AN ABSTRACT OF SOME LETTERS TO AN Eminent Learned PERSON, Concerning the
EXCELLENCY Of the BOOK of COMMON PRAYER, etc.

(...)

1 Cor. 8.1. LONDON, Printed for William Crook, at the Green Dragon without
Temple Bar, 1679.

SIR,
I Humbly entreat you to tell me whether you do not Judge it Sinful to stay at
home on the Lords Day, rather then go to Church only to hear the Common Prayer.
Preaching doubtless is in no wise to be Neglected, but this I must say, that I
cannot apprehend that that person has any Actings of that Faith which works
by Love (without which All the Knowledge we gain by Hearing Sermons does not
Edify, but only Puff up the Mind) who when he comes to the Place of God's
public Worship, knowing that he may not expect a Sermon there, is not
Confident that he shall be as much Edified by the Prayers, and Chapters etc. as
he should be by never so good a Sermon. But however, by reason of the Rarity of
the Habit of True Christian Faith (even in that part of the World, which we
call Christendom) and the frequency of the long Interruptions of its Actings,
where it is, Various, and fresh Expressions of Saving Truths (which are apt to
Excite the Minds of the Vnsanctifyed by the Fantasy to give heed to the Sense
they import) are very Necessary. But This is most evident, that People are
exceeding apt to take the Sensible Workings of their Soul stirred up by the
Novelty of Expressions in Sermons, and the Emphatical Pronunciation of the
Preacher etc. for Fervency of SPIRIT; which Sensible Motions I presume you will
grant are of no value, otherwise than as they are Subservient to Rational
Abhorrence of all Sin, of all Inordinate Affection to Finite Objects; or to a
Rational, or Spiritual Inclination to the ONE INFINITE GOOD through JESUS
CHRIST OUR LORD, the Effectual Notices of which INFINITE GOOD how is it
possible but we should be continually stirred up unto in the Hearing of the
Common Prayer, if we would Apprehend the Free Offers of the Spirit of Truth,
which the Father of Our Lord Jesus Christ makes unto us in an Unlimited
Abundance in the Use of all such Means of Grace, as He calls us unto. Here I
could Run out with much Fervor of Indignation against the Despisers of these
Means of Grace, and Strong Guards from those Accursed Errors, Socinianism etc.
which whilst I lived in Oxford, seemed to me to be coming in like a Mighty
Torrent upon this Distracted Kingdom, whilst the Frequent Professions of Belief
of the TRINITY, Gloria patri, and the Three Creeds were cast out of Our
Churches. If it be said, what Reformation have we now? etc. I Reply, that one
Reason of his Kingdom's Miscarriages, I might say Abominations, is, that some
of those that are syncerely Learned, and Pious have not such an Esteem of our
Liturgy, as they Ought to have; And hundreds of those that are thought by the
Vulgar to be so, do themselves Despise it, or Countenance others in so doing.

You give me not any punctual Answer to my Question, whether you do not Judge
it Sinful to stay at home (though to read Good Books etc.) on the Lords Day,
rather than come to Church when nothing is to be heard there, but the Common
Prayer. You say you are more against spending the Lords Day in Idleness or in
any thing which is worse, than in Hearing that alone. I thank God I was never
so Mad, as to make a question of This: I have nothing to say to it but that I
dislike these words, worse than the Common Prayer, which seem to insinuate that
It is not Good. I am not guilty of slighting Preaching (as it is taken in
contradistinction to Reading etc.) as you seem to Conceit.

I Affirm, that to Suit, or Proportion our Expectations of Grace, in the Use of
All Means whereunto we are Called, to the Apprehensions of INFINITE Bounty,
etc. is a Property of Saving Faith.

But, say you, GOD who appoints several Means, does usually work according to
them; and when he withdraws them it is a Judgment, which it were not, if he
had promised as much Grace without them as with them.

I grant, that God who appoints several Means, does usually work according to
them. But I utterly Deny, that when he withdraws any Particular Means of
Grace it is a Judgment to Him who is in the Act of sincere Love to the Blessed
Jesus; for such a one is at All Times, and in All Places Under the Gracious
Influences of the INFINITY of Light and Love, directing him how (by Submission
to the Divine Will withdrawing any Particular Means of Grace, and by the
Renewing his Resolutions to make a Right Use of all such Means as God shall at
any time call him unto, etc.) He may Receive of the Fullness of Christ, in as
great Measures, as he could have done in the Use of the Means withdrawn from
him. The LORD give us both Understanding in all Things.

Now I have found the way by your Letter to discover your Thoughts concerning
the Common Prayer, in your Printed Papers; I shall not trouble you with any
more Post-Letters on that Subject: but shall stick to the Defense of this Great
Truth, that the withdrawing of any particular Means of Grace is not a Judgment
to him that is in the Act of Divine Love -- Against which you Argue thus: That
which tends to hinder his continuance in that Act of Love is a Judgment, but
such is the withdrawing of some Means of Grace. I Answer, the withdrawing etc.
is so far from being Directly, and in its own Nature that which tends to
hinder etc. that, as It is in its own Nature, viz. the work of the Infinitely
Good GOD, It is the Means of Grace, and he takes it for Such that is in the Act
of Divine Love, as I endeavored to show you in my last. We question not, say
you, Gods bounty, but his Will: show us a Promise that when a man is deprived
of the Preaching of the Gospel, the Communion of the Church, the Company of all
good men, and cast amongst impious deceivers, and haereticks, he shall have his
love continued, and increased as much as if he had better Means. I Answer, This
Promise of Our Savior, Whatsoever ye shall Ask the Father in my Name he will
give it you (John 16.27.) would Engage the Heart of any one in the Act of
Divine Love, if God should put him into such a Condition, as you express, to
expect from GOD through Our LORD JESUS, as much Grace or Improvement of his
Divine Temper under that Dispensation of Providence, as he knows he could have
grounds to Expect in the Use of those Means of Grace which the Only Wise GOD
has thought fit to Withdraw from him. But I am ready to say with you, If God
should take away the Bible, and Preaching from the Land, I would take it for a
Judgment, though the Common Prayer were lest us: neither did I ever say any
thing to the contrary: but I have said implicitly, and shall upon all
occasions say expressly, that nothing retains the Nature of a Judgment, or Sign
of the Wrath of God, to him that is in the Act of Divine Love, which
Essentially implies Rational Complacence in Every thing that proceeds from the
Will of the Infinitely Good GOD, I do not Grant (as you may gather from what I
have said) that any Particular Means of Grace are Better, or more Spiritually
advantageous, than the being Deprived of them, will certainly be to him that
Complies with the Divine Will in that Dispensation, Doing whatsoever is his
Duty to do in Relation thereunto. If in saying we question not Gods Bounty, but
his Will: and Gods bounty gives Grace according to his Liberty of Will, you
imply this Proposition (which I find asserted by a very Ingenious Person E. W.
in his NO PRAEEXISTENCE p. 13.) that the Will of God sometimes Obstructs the
effluxes of his Goodness; your meaning is False, as I shall Demonstrate, if you
shall call me thereto. 'Twould be Absurd indeed to say that Gods Bounty gives
Grace per modum naturae, quantum in se, but Gods Offers of Grace (as I have
formerly expressed my self) are in an unlimited Abundance. Grace is Received by
the Faithful Ad modum Recipientis: it is only the Measure, or Non-Vltra of the
Recipients Expectancy that Stints its Influence.

I shall not give you, and my self the trouble of writing unto you any of my
Reflections on the former part of your Letter, supposing that whatsoever is in
it Opposite to my Assertion will be fully Refuted in my Reply to your Direct
Answer to my last, beginning thus: But you have a Promise that whatsoever we
ask shall be given. Ans. yes; whatsoever you ask according to Gods Will: but it
may be his will to punish a cold Love, and other Sins consistent with Love, and
not to remove the punishment upon our asking; and indeed why should any man ask
it that is of your opinion? But you describe him to be one that wholly
complieth with the Divine Will, doing whatsoever is his Duty. You do not well
to leave out these words of mine in that Dispensation and in Relation
thereunto, for by them I signified the praying conditionally for the
Restoration of the Lost Means of Grace, and the using of all possile means for
the Recovery of them, because it is our Duty so to do; not but that we may have
sufficient grounds to Expect from God, in case he Judged fit not to Restore
them, the same Grace we should Expect by the Restoration of them. This is a
full Answer to those words of yours: one part of his Duty is to lament the
Judgment of the removal of the Means, and to pray for the restoration (so that
here you are self-contradictory) and to these words, why should any man ask it
that is of your opinion? By an Act of Divine Love I understand such an Act of
the Will, or Tendency of the Heart to God, as implies an Aversion from all
Finite Objects, unless as they stand in Relation to Him, or (to speak more
Accurately) As they are in Him. He that is in this Act has all things that are
of God, actually Good unto him. And whatsoever he Asks being Actually in this
Divine Temper of Mind (which implies that Faith which Punishes the Heart) is
certainly According to the Will of God, which is Our Sanctification (as the
Apostle speaks) which certainly implies thus much; that God would have us to
Ask nothing of him Principally and Absolutely but that we may be HOLY as He is
HOLY. And that when we ask in Syncerity for Grace or Holiness in the Name of
Jesus, It is always the Will of God to supply the Defect of any Particular
Means of Grace. But if you mean, say you, that as long as a man is perfect, and
never sins no want of Means hurts him, etc. I mean, as I have often said,
that when a man is in the Act of Divine Love (as I have described it) no want
of Means hurts him, but it does not follow but it is Our Duty, as earnestly
to Desire any particular Means of Grace when we are Deprived of them, as to
make use of them when we have them, but this Desire, as of all things else but
Grace, or Holiness, is but Conditional, or with Exception (...) (as the Royal
Philosopher speaks) the Use of the Truth I Assert in this, and my other
Letters, is to cure the Souls of men of this most dangerous Disease, viz. the
Conceit that any thing can be Directly, and in its own Nature the Hindrance of
our Attainment to further Degrees of Grace, or Holiness, save only the
Naughtiness of Our own Hearts. From hence also it is manifest to those that
understand that the Common Prayer is Agreeable to the Scriptures, that no man
can be a Loser (as your word is in one of your Letters) by coming to the Place
of Gods Public Worship to Hear those Prayers when there is no Preaching there,
unless by the Perverseness of his own Heart. I do not speak this to derogate
from frequent Preaching; I know it is very Necessary, especially for
Vnsanctifyed people. I do not apprehend my self concerned in what you bid me to
demonstrate: but this proposition, Gods Will is the Same with Infinite
Goodness, is a Demonstration of the Falseness of this, that Gods Will sometimes
obstructs the Effluxes of his Goodness. I say further, that it is Essential to
God being Infinite in Goodness, to Fill the Capacities of his Creatures
According to His Infinite Wisdom. Though the Almighty may not be said to give
Grace per modum naturae, quantum in se, yet he may rightly be said to do it
Secundum Naturam Bonitatis Infinitae. You do well to join Wisdom with
Free Will, for All that the ALMIGHTY Does is According to the Council, i. e.
the Wisdom of his own Will, which imports the Communicativeness of his Goodness
to all the Capacities of his Creatures. In Answer to my Saying that Gods Offers
of Grace are in an unlimited Abundance, you write thus: Say you so? who made
thee to differ? does God do no more for any but offer them Grace? is the
Recipient's Expectancy none of his Gift? can God make no man better than he is?
nor take the Heart out of any man, otherwise than by offer? is not faith
whereby we accept that offer, the Gift of God? does a clod, or stone so stint
Gods Influence that he could not make it an Angel, if he pleased? nor make any
creature nobler, or other than it is? Does God give as much Grace to all the
Infidel Heathen World, as to Christians? or do they so stint his Influence that
he can give them no more? Woe to us, if we have no more than the general Offers
of Grace, and yet I believe not that this offer is unlimited, or equal to all
the World. Good Sir, Be not so hasty, do not run on in a conceit that my words
import that we make our selves to Differ from the Unsanctified. Does God do no
more, say you, for any, but offer them Grace? I answer; that Gods Offering of
Grace is the making of men presently Capable of Doing his Will, by the
Assistance of his Good Spirit; So that All the Acts or Inclinations to Act, of
Gracious Souls, as such, are the Gift of God. The Recipient's Expectancy is the
Gift of God, but the Non-Vltra, or Desiciency of it, is of himself. Can God
make no man better than he is? To this, I Answer; Any man's being Better than he
is, is not the Object either of Gods Volition, or Nolition: Not of the former,
for then (you know) His Will would be Resisted: Not of the latter, for then he
would be the Direct Cause of the Creatures not Doing what He has Commanded him
to Do: the only Cause then that any man is not what he Ought to be, is the
Perverseness of his own Will. As to the words following, Nor take, etc. If you
think sit to continue this Dispute, and express what you mean by them in a
plain way of Opposition to any thing that I have said, I shall give you an
Answer. Does a Clod or Stone, etc. I Answer; Any such Creature may be
Annihilated, and another Angel Created, but that It should be made an Angel (if
we speak in sensu rigoroso) implies a Contradiction. Every Creature is in its
own Nature Res OPTIMA, though some Creatures are Better to Us than others,
because they do more Exhibit to us the Notice of the Divine Goodness; and some
Creatures are better to themselves than others, because they do more Enjoy It,
which is ALL in them All. God knows, I do not Affect Obscurity of Expression,
but such Deep Things cannot be set forth in Vulgar Phrase. To what you say of
the Heathen World, I shall make no other Reply but this, that Gods Judgments
are Unsearchable, and his Ways past finding out.

But though we cannot show How Many Truths concerning his Boundless Goodness
etc. do comport with what we apprehend of His Ways in many Instances of His
Dealings with the Sons of Men, it does not follow, that we should thereupon in
the least Scruple at these Truths.

That Gods Offers of Grace are in an Unlimited Abundance (which you say you do
not believe) I prove thus: If God cannot be the Direct Cause of Stinting the
Influences of His Grace or Goodness into the Hearts of Men, Then his Offers of
Grace are in an Unlimited abundance: But God cannot be the Direct Cause, etc.
The Minor is evident in this, That the Essence of God is Infinite Goodness.

I shall in this Paper give you my Reflections but on some part of your last
Letter, wherein there are many things so pertinently Expressed in Opposition to
what I have written to you, that my Reflections, or rather Animadversions
thereon, are exceeding Advantageous unto me, for the Improvement of my most
Satisfactory Speculations concerning the Divine Goodness, whose Infinity we
must be ever Careful that we do not derogate from, upon any Pretenses of
Preserving the Liberty of the Divine Will. Liberty of Will (so far as it
implies Perfection, must of necessity be implied in the Notion of the Infinity
of Being. I declare This to be the Root of all my Apprehensions in Theological
Matters, EST VNVM SIMPLICITER INFINITVM.

I shall now betake my self to the Consideration of what you say in your last
Letter. I think I need not give any other Reply to that you say, No man does
use all possible Means for the Recovery, etc. but only to tell you, that by all
possible Means, I understand All things which we Know to be such Means, being
also Assured that it is possible for us to use them as such. On my Explication
of what I understand by an Act of Divine Love, your Animadversion is this: How
easy had it been for you to have told me, whether you mean a perfect Love, or
an Imperfect culpably, and a perfect Aversion, etc. or a culpably Imperfect? I
must confess, I have observed so many Learned men needlessly Entangling
themselves in the hardest Knots of Controversy by reason of these words,
Perfection, and Imperfection Attributed to the workings of men's Hearts, that I
have thought it my Duty to do what I can do to avoid the use of them; but since
you Urge me to it, I shall Tell you that the Motion, or Tendency of the Heart,
which I call an Act of Divine Love, does not imply, or include in its Nature
any culpable Imperfection, but is as contrary to all Love of Creatures, or
Finite Objects (unless only such as arises from their Relation to the First
Being) as Light is to Darkness.

To my saying that he who is in the Act of Divine Love has All things that are
of God, Actually Good unto him, you Answer thus: While he is sinfully imperfect
in this Act, he has not the perfection which he wants, nor that complacential
acceptance with God, nor that perfect freedom from castigatory Penalities
internal, or external, nor that Glory which would be good to him; and all this
is of God. I Answer; As to Castigatory Penalties, so far as they import nothing
but what may be imputed unto God, as the Author thereof, they are Actually good
to Him, viz. they All ork together for his Good, whilst he is in the Act of
Divine Love, and all his Reflections thereon are the Rejoicing of his Heart. The
Perfections he wants etc. are not, but only in GOD, the Fullness of All that he
Wants: and certainly it is actually Good for him, That there is in God
whatsoever is Wanting unto him. By being Actually in this Divine Temper, I mean
the exerting of an Act of Divine Love, or Adhaerence of the Heart unto God, in
which Act there is nothing Culpable, though there may remain Dispositions in
the Heart very contrary thereunto, from which it often comes to pass, that many
of us who are in some measure Sanctified Sink deep into such Impurities of
Heart, and Mind, as we sometimes Fancy our selves Elevated so far Above, that
there is no Danger of Falling into them. But I can far more easily Describe what
it is to be Holy, i. e. to be in the Light, than Discourse accurately, and
Clearly of the Works of Darkness. He cannot Ask any thing not Agreeable to the
Divine Will, who Desires nothing, but This, or in Subordination thereunto, that
his Will may be Conformable to the Divine Will in All things. Whether he Pray
Directly, and Expressly for Things Temporal, or Spiritual, he Actuates his Heart
in a way of Conformity to the Will of God, who Prays, as he Ought, viz. Asking
in Faith, which works by Love. I suppose by what I have already said, you
will perceive, that in Asking for Holiness we Virtually Ask for Justification,
or Pardon, and the continuance of being etc. And when we expressly Ask for these
According to the Mind of Christ, We Virtually Ask for Holiness, or Purity of
Heart. The Consummation whereof is the Fullness of Life, and Glory. All Desires
of Holiness are Acts of Holiness Consider's with Respect to their Efficacy to
make way for furhter Act, or Tendencies of Heart unto God. The Free Mercy of
GOD in JESUS CHRIST OUR LORD is the Root, and Principle of all that Good which
grows in Us, or (if you will) in which We Grow: the Sense of which is employed
in all Motions of the Heart acceptable unto God. By Absolutely, I mean but what
we are to understand by First in the Gospel, where Our Savior says, Seek ye
First the Kingdom of God, etc. i. e. Chiefly, and Principally, so as to Ask
nothing else but in Subordin ation thereunto, and upon Condition, if it conduce
to our furtherance in the Ways of Holiness, which Lead unto Everlasting Glory.
I do still most confidently Averr, that this is a most Dangerous Disease of the
Soul, to Conceit that any thing can be Directly, and in its own Nature, the
Hind'rance of Our Attainment to farther Degrees of Grace, save only the
Naughtiness of Our own Hearts. But, say you, Must we not carefully avoid that
which Indirectly hinders also? I Answer, We must Avoid, or Set our Heart
against nothing but what we find to be the Will of God, Revealed in his Word,
that we should Loath, or be Averse from. Any thing, which for ought we know,
God will bring to pass, as to the Depriving us of any particular Means of
Grace, we must endeavor to prevent by all ways of Duty to God, and Man, which
we Apprehend probable to prove Successful for the Prevention thereof. But we
must have a Care that our Heart be Moved against this, which for ought we know
God will effect for the Glory of His Name, (...), with Exception, as I spoke in
my last.

You say the penal withholding of the Operations of the Spirit is a Direct
Hindrance, and in its own Nature.

If it be True that whatsoever God is the Author of, can never be in any wise
Evil to us, but only by our Wrong, or Perverse apprehensions of it, then I
suppose you will grant that this Proposition of yours bears no Force against
me. And whether this be a Truth or no, I shall referr you to Consider by taking
a Review of what I have already Written of the Divine Goodness. And by your
most Serious, and unprejudiced Judgment of what I shall say hereafter in
giving my Reflections on your Animadversions, on my saying that Gods Will is the
Same with Infinite Goodness, etc.

The Good Lord Lift up the Light of His Countenance upon Us, that we may at
length attain to the Full Enjoyment of the Way, the Truth, and the Life.

I shall here present you some more of my Apprehensions of the IMMENSE
Influence of the Divine Goodness upon All, and Every Part of the Creation. I am
Conscious to my self of the smalness of my Abilities to Express such a Truth in
any way answerable to the Excellency, and Importance thereof. But some
Sparklings of that Light, viz. the Notion I have of the IMMENSITY of the Divine
Goodness, which from my Youth up has given me far greater Satisfactions than I
should ever have had in all the Learning in the World without it, some
Sparklings, I trust, you will perceive in these following Lines.

You say to these words of mine, Gods Will is the Same with infinite Goodness,
Very true: but the Question is, what that Goodness is? I say it is not a Will
to communicate to Creatures as much Good, as he can; For then the World had
been Eternal etc. I Answer that the Goodness of God is Himself, the INFINITY of
Goodness, Wisdom, Power, of all Excellency, and Perfection. 'Twas not Essential
to Him to Create, i. e. not necessary for the INFINITY of Being to Produce out
of Himself these Finite Essences, But they being Produced by His Power,
according to His Wisdom i. e. the Council of His INFINITELY Good Will, it is
Essential, or Necessary to His being INFINITE, to be ALL in them All. The
Divine Power being INFINITE, such Expressions as these, as many Creatures as
God can make etc. can in no wise import any Reality to the Understanding. To
your saying that All Saints, and Angels would have the same Degree of Glory, I
Answer, that there is no Want in Heaven, no Absence, or Privative Not-Being of
any Degree of Glory, or Communicated Divine Goodness; there is nothing but
Refulgency of the GLORIOUS DIVINE NATVRE. That one Creature should be better to
It self, and to other Creatures, is most Rational to conceive, it being no way
Inconsistent with the Notion of the One Infinite Goodness. As for Damnation,
this I say, So far as it imports nothing else but what is of God; It is in its
own Nature altogether Good: It becomes Evil only to those to whom the Infinity
of Love is a Consuming Fire. There Is nothing Absolutely, and in its own Nature
Evil but SIN. But of all Instances, you say, there is non that confutes me more
than the permission of Sin. To this I Answer, that by Permission of Sin we must
not conceive any thing of which we may say It is of God, but only His making
such Creatures, whose Nature implies a Possibility of Sinning, and the
continuing them in Being after they have Sinned.

There is, say you, an Higher thing in God, which is his Goodness, even his
Infinite Perfection, and Love to himself, which is to be communicated according
to his Wisdom and Free Will, and not as a natural necessary emanation from his
Essence to the utmost of his absolute Power. To this I Answer, first, that
Utmost Power is in no wise to be spoken of God, whose Power is INFINITE.
Secondly, I do conceive that your Notion here is not Contrary to mine, though
it come somewhat short of it. I think your Meaning is not Opposite to what I
Understand by the Diffusiveness of the Divine Goodness, but only to any Conceit
of the Limitation of the Divine Power, which no Creature is Able to Resist.
There can be no Impediment to It ab extra etc. but I add neither ab Intra, call
it Negative, or Self-Limiting, or what you please. Therefore I say again, it is
Essential to Infinite Goodness to fill the Capacities of His Creatures etc.
which, I think, I shall clearly Demonstrate thus: That which does not Fill all
Created Capacities is not Infinite, Therefore etc. But perhaps you will say is
not a Sinner Capable of being Sanctified. I Answer, that Sin is the Creatures
making It self Incapable for the present of the Divine Goodness through a false
Conceit that the Creator is not All in All. For I hold, yea I know, and am
perfectly Assured, that this Conceit is Virtually, if not Formally employed in
all Sin, or Aversion of the Heart fro Our HOLY ONE. My using these words
Secundum Naturam Bonitatis Infinitae, was not (as you say) to hide the Sense,
but to prevent your Opinion that I should hold such an Absurdity as this, that
God Acts any thing ad ultimum Posse, which words can in no wise be spoken of
God: but it seems I had not my Aim. For in the Close of your Letter you tell me
that you think my work is to Prove, that God communicates Good Naturally to
the utmost of his absolute Power, as the Sun does its influence of Light, Heat
and Motion. God Forbid that I should undertake to Prove that God acts like a
Finite Agent, as Finite, as having any Utmost, or Limited Power. Whether I
misunderstand Goodness (which is another Passage in your Letter) I shall
entreat you to Consider, by what I shall say of it in my present Reflections
upon these words of yours. His Goodness, even his infinite Perfection, and Love
to Himself. This is GOD Himself, He is His own infinite Joy, and Life, and
Glory. He is All in all Things, and events, Sin only excepted, Enjoying Himself
in these small Creatures, which are so contemptible in the Sight of Men, no
less than in the most Glorious of the Heavenly Hosts. And the more we Partake
of the Divine Nature the more we Delight Ourselves in all the Works both of
Creation, and Providence.

Here I cannot but tell you, that I Hate as the Gates of Hell the Folly and
Madness of some of the Adversaries of Our Liturgy, which prompted them to
speak contemptuously (under Pretense forsooth of Zeal for the Pure Service of
God) of that Excellent Hymn.

O all ye Works of the Lord, Bless ye the Lord, Praise him, and Magnify Him
for Ever.

O all ye Angels of the Lord, Bless ye the Lord etc.

There is, say you, a Negative Limitation which is not in Gods Power, and you
seem to grant it to be in his Wisdom, which you truly call the Council of his
Will. But what Wisdom does, it does as the Guide of the Will, and therefore as
Wisdom is the reason of it [I suppose you mean of a man's not being Actually
better than he is; for you say in the next Page, that our want of Goodness is
the consequence of a mere Non Velle] negatione Directionis, so the Will must
needs be the cause of it negatione Volitionis. To this I Answer, that the cause
that any man is not better than he is, is not that God cannot make him Better,
i. e. that there is any Defect of Power in God: neither can it be rightly said,
that God can make him Better than he is, For I understand those words, as you
rightly conjecture in sensu composito. But perhaps you will say God could have
made him Better than he is. To this I Answer, that the making him better than
he is was never the Object of the Divine Power, of which there can be no other
Object ad Extra, but what is judged fit to be brought to pass by that Wisdom
which is Essentially the Same with Infinite Goodness. This deep thing (let me
presume to tell you in all Humility) requires your Utmost Attention. Neither
are these Negations (if we may put a Periphrasis of Nothing in the Plural
number) of Wisdom to Direct, of Will to Execute the Cause, etc. For of mere
Negation there is No Issue, or Consequence. All that you say, Reflecting upon
my words concerning the Object of Gods Volition or Nolition, etc. I do most
Affectionately Approve, as importing very much of the same Truth, for want of
which Dr. Twisse (whom you mention) seems to me in many Passages of his
Controversial Writings, to Rave (and Talk indeed like a Scholar, but like one
out of his Right Wits) rather than to Dispute. But you seem to Faulter very
much, when you come to say, that our want of Goodness is the Consequence of
mere Non Velle. For (as I said but now) of a mere Negation, or Nullity, i. e.
of Nothing, there is no Issue or Consequence at all. I think, say you, that it
is not true, that Volitio qua Talis efficit ad Extra, sed tantum quatenus per
Potentiam Operatur. To this I Answer, Volitio Divina ad Extra, qua Talis,
Divina inquam, Efficit ad Extra, nam Essentialitr includit Sapientiam, and
Potentiam Infinitam. To these words, Omnis Volitio non est Efficiens (for God
wills himself) much less omnis Nolitio, I Answer thus: Gods Willing of
Himself may not properly be termed Efficient, but it is Effectual, or to the
Purpose; that is, which He Wills to Be: And every Object of His Volition ad
Extra, Is or Shall be, Through the Efficacy of His Power, set on work by the
Infinite Goodness of the Council of his Will. As for the Divine Nolition, this
I say: By it we mean not the Negative of Volition, but an Adverse Act of the
Will, which Essentially implying Infinite Wisdom and Power, can never be
Frustrated, but always Effects the Opposite to that, to which it is Adverse:
So that if any man's being Actually Better than he is, were the Object of
Divine Nolition it must needs follow that God would be the Direct Cause of the
Opposite thereof, viz. that the man is Actually so Bad, as he is. What then is
the Cause etc? I say again, Only the Preverseness of his own Will: Sin only
can be the Cause of Sin. What Cause than had the first Sin? why (as in effect I
have said already) none at all. Man's own Perverseness of Will, say you, was
not the Cause of his First Perverting, or Sin. When we speak of Perverseness of
Will with Reference to the First Sin, we mean nothing but the First Sin under
that Notion, not that this Perverseness of Will is Really Distinct from the
First Act of the Will Perverted. I cannot translate OPTIMA into any English, so
suitable to my Conceptions, as these words FVLL of Goodness. I did not retire
into Silence (as you speak) at the Instance of the Heathens, but Told you this
Certain Truth, That we Ought not to Deny our Assent to such Evident
Propositions, as this, that It Is Essential to Infinite Goodness to Fill the
Capacities of all Creatures; so that properly, and in the strictest sense there
is no Evil, but the Aversion of the Will of the Creature from the Will of the
Infinitely Good, and Wise, and Powerful Creator: To this, I say, we ought not
to Deny our Assent, because we cannot give an account of some Particular Ways
of Providence i. e. of the Modes, or several Kinds of the Influence of Infinite
Goodness upon some Parts of the Creation. Modes etc. we Attribute only ab
Extrinseco to the Divine Providence, they being only in the Creatures. The
Reason, or Proof of this Consequence, if God cannot be the Direct cause of
Stainting etc. is this, because if He cannot be the Direct Cause of Stinting
his Influence etc. It is on His Part Vnstinted, that is to say, in an Unlimited
Abundance. But, say you, God may Non Agere without any Stinting Cause: what
restrained him from making the World from Eternity? To this I Answer, though
God may Non Agere without a Cause in such a Sense as you Instance in, yet there
is always some Cause of his Not-Giving Grace to any man to Do what He Commands
him; not that there can be any Impediment put upon God, but that He is ab
Extrinseco Denominated Not-Giving Grace for that the Creature does not Receive
it from him, the Cause of which Non-Reception is only the Perverseness of his
own Will, which indeed is nothing else, but his Aversion from the Divine
Goodness.

To your Objection against my Description of Gods Offering of Grace. viz.
Offering is less than making, and making is more than offering etc. I Answer
thus: Every Real Offer must needs imply the Presenting of the Object of
Reception: wherever there is an Object of Reception, there is a Capacity or
Power to Receive: There can be no Power to Receive that which is Good, but only
from GOD: Therefore I do again most Confidently averr, that Gods Offering of
Grace is the making of men Presently Capable of Doing His Will, or (as we may
speak) of receiving His Commands, By the Assistance of His Holy Spirit.

From my Description of Gods Offering of Grace there may be an Objection raised
against what has been so Earnestly insisted on, viz. that the Divine Goodness
fills all the Capacities of His Creatures etc. But the Answer is Easy. viz.
that the Present Capacity of Doing the Will of God is Filled, i. e. the Will of
God is Done According to that Capacity, where the Capacity is not Instantly
Nullifyed by the Creatures Sinning, or Averting itself from the Divine
Goodness. The Sense whereof that I may more vigorously Excite in the Mind of
the Learned and Pious Reader I shall here give him my Latin Translation
(together with the Original) of an Excellent Prayer composed in English Verse
by the Incomparable Mrs. K. P. The Same Sense in two Languages seems to me to
Condense the Thoughts of the Reader, and to give the greater Strength to their
Influence upon His Affections.

ETernal Reason, Glorious Majesty,
In cujus Essentiae comparatione Esse nostrum non Esse est. S. GREG. Mor. 16.
c. 16.
Compared to whom what can be said to be?
Whose Attributes are Thee, who art alone,
Cause of all various things, and yet but One?
Whose Essence can no more be searched by man,
Then Heaven thy Throne, be grasped with a Span.
Yet if this great Creation was designed,
To sey'ral ends fitted for every kind;
Sure Man (the Worlds Epitome) must be
Formed to the best, that is, to Study Tree.
And as our Dignity it is Duty too
Which is summed up in this, to Know, and Do.
These comely Rows of Creatures spell thy Name.
Whereby we grope to find from whence they Came;
By thy own Chain of Causes brought to think
There must be one, then find the Highest Link.
Thus all Created Excellence we see
Is a Resemblance faint, and dark of Thee.
Such Shadows are produced by the Moon-Beams
Of Trees, or Houses in the running Streams,
Yet by Impressions born with us we find
How good, great, just Thou art, how unconfined
Here we are swallowed up, and gladly dwell,
Safely Adoring what we cannot Tell.
All we know is, Thou art Supreamly Good,
And do Delight to be so understood:
A spicy Mountain on the Universe
On which thy Richest Odours do disperse.
But as the Sea to fill a Vessel heaves
More greedily than any Cask receives
Besieging round to find some gap in it,
Which will a new Infusion admit;
So do Thou covet how Thou may dispense
Upon the empty World thy Influence,
Love to disburst thyself in Kindness: thus
The King of Kings Waits to be Gracious.
On this account, O Lord enlarge my Heart
To entertain what Thou would fain impart.
Nor let that Soul by several Titles Thine,
And most Capacious formed for things Divine,
(So nobly meant that when it most does miss
It Is in mistaken pantings after Bliss)
Degrade it self, in sordid things delight,
Or by prophaner mixtures lose its right.
O, that with fixed, unbroken thoughts it may
Admire the Light which does Obscure the Day.
And since it is Angels Work it has to do,
May its Composure be like Angels too.
When shall these clods of Sense, and Phantsy break,
That I may hear the God within me speak?
When with a silent, and retired Art
Shall I with all this empty hurry part?
To the Still Voice Above my Soul advance
My Light, and Joy placed in his Countenance,
By whose dispense my Soul to such frame brought
May tame each treacherous, fix each wandering Thought,
With such distinctions all things here behold,
And so to separate each dross from Gold,
That nothing my free Soul may Satisfy
But to imitate, enjoy, and Study Thee.
Oration Omnipotens, Majestas, Gloria Summa,
Cui si In cujus Essentiae comparatione Esse nostrum non Esse est. S. GREG.
Mor. 16. c. 16.
Confertur Quicquam Non Esse probatur,
Cui Quod inest, est Tu, Qui cunctis Rebus habere
Esse suum Varium das Vnus Semper, and Idem;
Cujus non magis Explorari Essentia possit
Humano Ingenio, quam Summi Culmina Coeli
Comprendi Palmo. At fuerint si Cuncta per Orbem
In certos generis diversi condita Fines,
Ipsum Hominem, Quo Maxima Spiret
Nasci constat, id est, Quo se Tibi, MAXIM, Reddat.
Hoc Nostrum Officium est, haec Nostra est Gloria, Scire
Et Facere usque, Jubet quicquid Divina Voluntas.
Condita quaeque Tuum, quasi Sculpta Vocabula Nomen
Designant: Fontem hinc pervestigamus eorum:
Scilicet ostendit Causarum longa Catena
Esse Vnam Summam, a Qua Pendent Singula, Causam.
Naturae quicquid Praeclarae lumina spargit
Hoc levis IMMENSI perhibetur LVMINIS Vmbra.
Quales in Fluviis Tectorum, aut Arboris Vmbras
Producit tenni splendescens Cynthia Cornu.
Ideis tamen Innatis BONITAS Manifesta est
Illa Tua, and nullis Te clausum Finibus esse,
Hic Alto Absorptos nos LVX IMMENSA recondit
Tuto Admirantes Non Enarrabile Verum.
Novimus hoc solum de Te, BONITATE SVPREMA
Gaudentem, Titulo Te Velle Agnoscier Isto.
Mons es Aromaticus: Jucundos Suavis Odores
Divite profluvio totum diffundis in Orbem.
Vt coit Vnda aliquod Vas impletura receptum
In Mare, scrutando Rimas, quibus Influat usque
Prosiliens, plus quam possit Vas accipere urgens:
Vt, Pater Alme, Tua possit Bonitate repleri
Sic urges Vacuum Foecundo Numine Mundum.
Ipse Benignus Amas Te Dispensare: Favorem
Exhibet Indignis, condonat Crimina gratis
Rex Regum. Amplifica DEVS O Ter Maxim nostrum
Cor: Avide Arripiat, quod Tu Largiris Amanter.
O, Anima haec Titulis Tibi soli Debita multis
Magna, Tuique Capax (tam purum, nobile cui sit
Ingenium, ut Sitiat Verum, quod Devia linquit)
Ne se Deliciis Pravis illapsa, Minorem
Quam Quae Facta fuit, Faciat, revoluta deorsum,
Jus adeo Antiquum potiundi Numine perdens.
O utinam certis immotae viribus Ipsa
Mentis in Augustum sit Sacro Rapta Stupore
Lumen, quo victi vel lucida Tela Diei
In Tenebras abeunt. Quam fungi Munere Oportet
Angelico, Angelicam tandem, Pater OPTIME, reddat
Illi Temperiem. Quando ista Repagula, Sensus,
Claudentes Animum, penitus Rumpentur, ut Intus
Alloquio DEVS ipse Suo me Personet? Art
Quando Ego Tranquilla, Cura semota Metuque
Despiciam stolidi Bacchantia Gaudia Mundi?
Tu Rape sursum Animam: Lenem super Aethera Vocem
Audiat: inque Tuo semper Mea Gaudia Vultu
Ponantur. Nostras Te Disponente Medullas
Ne Superet Fallax, Agitet nec Mobile Coenum;
Clarius ut valeam rerum cognoscere causas,
Atque Auro caute Scoriam distinguere vilem,
Vt ruptis tandem Men's evolet Ignea Vinclis,
Et Tibi se jungens Aeterna Pace Quiescat.
FINIS.
Page 7. of the Letters, line 12. for Punishes read Purifies.

Books Newly Printed this Year, 1678. for William Crook.
1. THe Wonders of the Peak in Darby-shire, commonly called, the Devils Arse of
Peak. 2. Reflections upon Ancient and Modern Philosophy, Moral and Natural;
treating of the Philosophers of all Countries and Ages. 80. 3. Melpomene, or
the Muses Delight; being New Poems and Songs, written by several of the great
Wits of the present Age. 4. Decameron Physologicum, or ten Dialogues of Natural
Philosophy. By Tho. Hobbs of Malmsbury. 80. 5. Tunbridge Wells, or a Days
Court-ship; a Comedy Acted at the Dukes Theater. 6. The Man of New Market, a
Comedy, Acted at the Theater Royal. 7. A Discourse, Whether it be lawful to
take Use for Money; Written by Sir Rob. Filmer, and published by Sir Roger
Twisden. 120. 8. The School of Righteousness: A Sermon Preached before the King
by Dr. Sandcroft, Archbishop of Canterbury. 40. 9. Praxis Curiae Admiralitatis
Angliae.

