^^^ETICKS, SECTARIES, and Schismatics, ^vered to be the Antichrist yet
^ining, and the great Enemies of the Peace of this Kingdom.

^ Question rightly stated and debated. ^paration to the great day of
Humili^ation on March 10. next ensuing.

^ a Hint about Ordination, and the Covenant.

^ them that call evil good, and good evil, that ^esse for light, and light
for darkness,

Isay ^ ^e good, but if the Salt has left its Savor, where^e salted, it is
good for nothing but to be cas^ ^oden underfoot of men.

Matthew. 5. 13. with ^4. 34. LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1647.

To the right Honorable the High Court of Parliament.
NOble Princes and Patriots, remember in all your Laws and Ordinances, that as
Jesus Christ Rev. 1. 5.
(who is the faithful witness, and will be one day for his truth and People)
is the Prince of the Kings of the Earth, and has* made the Saints who are his
Anointed ones ( 1 John 2* 27.) Kings and Priest to God and his Father, so is he
the one only Law giver, who is able Rev 1. 6. Iam. 4*
to ^ee^ and destroy, and has commanded the Kings of the Earth, i(...)ch his
Anointed, nor do his Prophets harm, for he reproves Psalm. 105. 14* 15.
even Kings for their sak^^* If He have made them first and Prophets, who
shall hinder them to offer up spiritual Sacrifices to God* ^ Pet. 2. 5* And as
good Stewards of the manifold Grace of God to minister the gift one to another*
as every w(...)e received it: 1 Pet. 4. 10. For every Scribe who is in(...)ted
unto the Kingdom of Heaven, brings out of his treasury things new and old,
Matthew. 13. 52. If the Saints as bottles be filled with new ^ine of the Spirit,
they cannot but pour it forth (...)e their friends, that which they have seen
and heard, and in (...)ns souls have tasted of the word of life they cannot
but declare and speak, 1 John 1. 2. 3. compared with Acts 4. 20. John 7. 38.

Have an eye therefore I beseech you, to the designs of such men who would
engage you to cast up banks, that you might stop the (...)ng of these waters,
for these floods will carry all before him, and who ever persuades you to it,
I tell you even weeping* (...) of the Lord (...) and (...) to give (...) to
Antichrist, and the Image of the (...) that as many as will not worship the
Image of the Beast (...) killed notwithstanding the dreadful do^m^ (...)
himself* Revel. 14 9. 10 11. If any man do (...) Beast and his Image, and
receive his mark in his for the (...) his hand, the same shall drink of the
wrath of God, and they shall have ^o rest day nor night etc. Be wise now
therefore, Oy^^ Princes, be instructed ye Iudes of our Earth, Kiss the Son
least he be angry and ^ee perish in the way, though ye have already steered
our weather beaten ship, through many angry waves, and billows, and think you
are come near to the fair Havens of peace and happiness as yet if instead of
honoring Jesus Christ, and submitting to his Royal (...) you shall be either
flattered or threatened to set your (...) under any ^otin^ or pretense
whatsoever against the Saints, and to kick against the pricks, you will yet
miscarry and split upon this Rock, and in all your debates and consultations
shall be dash't in p^ices like a Potters Vessel, for whosoever shall full on
that Stone shall be broken Grave Senators, consider the Holy Spirit. Zach. 12.
3. has foretold that in the day of the Gospel, the Lord will make Jerusalem,
(viz. the Saints) a burden some stone to all people, all that burden
themselves with it shall be out it pieces though all the people of the Earth be
gathered together against it^: Those men who stickle most against the Saints
under the name of Heretics and Schismatics shall be discovered to be such
themselves, but as our Savior said, they are wise in their Generations, and
they dealt with you herein as the crafty and ingenious Horse Courser, with his
untaimed and (...)ly pranser, speaks ^^ire, streak^^ and scratches him, whilst
he be mounted into the saddle, and then he strikes, and spurs, and gallops,
till he have broken him to his will: They be speak you as having a great power
in the worship of God, over the consciences, of men, but I beseech you receive
no honor from these men who thus cry up your power and authority that they may
be honored by you, and derive power and authority, from you again to be
unrighteous Judges both ^ver your selves and other men, as their Reverend
Fathers the Bishops were, they seek their own things and not the thing of
Jesus Christ, but it concerne^ their interest, by this craft they have their
livings: and they know that if permission be once given to the Saints freely to
make known the (...) of the Spirit, which ^ath wrought so mightily in them,
their (...) of natural reason, though decked and ad^rned with systems (...)
Philosophy, and School divinity, will not be able to (...) in competion with
it, greater is he that is in the Saints, then (...) that is in the world, the
teachings of the spirit, shall be more (...) full and effectual to take h^ld
of the hearts of men, then all (...) works and writings of their* Postillers
and Commentators can ^^ these cannot speak so to the consciences of poor
Christians as the Spirit (...) And the feet of such as can bring glad tidings
of (...) to such poor souls are exceeding beautiful, and will be, (...) the
opposition of these men.

Most honored worthies, pray observe with me, how Babylon the Mother of
Harlots, Fornications, and Abominations of the (...) (which are chiefly
spiritual and do concern our worship) (...) this name written in her fore
head MYSTERY, her workings are and have been still MYSTERIOUS, hardly to ^^
found out and traced, But I have endeavored as a blood* hound to pursue her,
for by those Characters of bloodinesse you shall be (...) to know her, the
beast whereon she sits is bloody colored, her garments are dyed in blood,
Revel. 17. 5. 3. 4 6. in her habitation is found the blood of Prophets and of
Saints. cap. 18 24. her drink where with she makes her self drunk, is blood
of the Saints, and the Kings, and Inhabitants of the Earth, have been (...)
drunks with her wine; England, Oh England has for^^^ly pl^id the beast with
her, if not the beast under her on which has sitten, and for this cause we
have had of late, blood given ^^ to drink, for we were worthy; let it, oh let
it be so no more let not England again make war with the Lamb, for (...) the
Lord of Lords, and King of Kings, Revel. 17 14. Suppose grave Senators those
men so much miscalled were indeed such as they are represented to be, and their
Presbyterian adversaries (...) their Churches without crime or Error (which is
most (...)) and so might justly cast them out t^ yet since our Savior Christ
has commanded, that the tares and the wheat should grow together till the
barvest, what cruelty is this toward such men, (...) live peaceably among men,
unblameable in their conversation, pay you tax and tribute, and in a word, do
in all things which the Apostle Paul exercise themselves to keep faith and a
good conscience toward God and men, what cruelty I say is it, that the Cit^
Magistrate should be incensed against them and should by all ways be
solicited, not to give them a toleration that it, not to suffer them when they
have so faithfully engaged for them: The field in the Parable must have some
interpretation, it must have reference to Church or State, Christ would have
them suffered some where, but their adversaries who pretend so much for Christ,
are indeed in this particular as in many other things Antichrist, i. e. against
Christ, he says let them grow together, these men say nay, let them be pulled
up, lamentable will the condition of many people in this Kingdom, and other
places be, if many choice young men and others, who are ordained by Jesus
Christ to eternal life and glory, and have received a large portion of the
spirit of Jesus Christ (the only teacher of his people) whereby they may edify
and build others up in the most holy faith, if the mouths of these must be
stopped for want of that empty and fruitless (as is conceived) Ceremony of
Ordination, which the doctrine (peradventure) of the Presbytery of Scotland
has tought, their consciences to startle at and deny: for in the I. book of
the Discipline of the Kirk of Scotland commanded to be practiced in the same
Kirks. Anno Dom. 1641. under the head of Admission, this they teach. page 31.
Other Ceremony then the public Approbation of the people, and Declaration of
the chief Minister, that the person there presented is appointed to serve the
Church. We cannot approve, son all be it, the Apostles used Imposition of
Hands, yet seeing the miracle is ceased, the using of the Ceremony, we judge
not necessary.

If any gift were conveyed who would deny, nay, who would not rejoice to be
partaker of it but whilst men see that this is but a vain Imitation of that
primitive Apostolical Presbytety, who had received from Jesus Christ and could
convey to others such gifts of the Spirit for the Ministry of the Gospel as
have been lost whilst we have been under the power of Antichrist, and such as
none of the Sons of men have received at this day, and therefore cannot bestow
on others, they are exceedingly troubled in their Spirits, and can judge the
ceremony at the least but a taking of Gods name in vain: Let my counsel then
(wise Counselors) be acceptable touching these men, that as in all your
Declarations whilst you had any need of them either in their Persons or
Estates, (...) have engaged to be tender toward them; which Tenderness they
could conceive to be no less then a continued liberty in (...) several ways
of worship, which they then enjoyed, and not after the less of many of their
lives, and a parting with a good part of there lively. hoods for your
preservation, an imprisoning of their persons, and a wasting of the remainder,
by Attendance, Suites, Fees, Fines, and such other charges as necessarily
attend such a condition.

And all this for the practice of those very things you seemed then to allow in
them, when you thus time after time declared Tenderness toward them, oh do
not, do not thus keep promise with them, let not this ^e the recompense you
give them for all the labor of love they have showed unto you, do not for the
gratification of a few men, who from Sion College either vent their
considerations contrary to your Ordinances, when they like them not, or send
you Votes, Orders and Ordinances (though Sub^illy and mediately by the
Assembly) at their pleasures, which you must confirm or be rayled at in every
Pulpit in the City, and have the (...) against you* and sent crying (...) you
for (...) such things, as I dare say not one of a thousand of them knows or
understands, having a strong influence also by their Emissaries upon the
adjacent Counties that they may concur with them in their destructive ways and
actions, if these men can (...) you thus already, before they have any power in
there hands, consider I pray what they would do, if power should be given them
according to their desire, we have too lately bought repentance from their
predicessors the Bishops at too dear arate al which I lay before you, and if
you please to peruse this tract, you shall see these men proved the greatest
Heretics and Schismatics in the Kingdom at this day: And as touching these
men who are so much reproached by them, you shall find them to be according to
what they understand, pure in religion, having not the form, but the power of
godliness in their public and private meetings, daily praying the Lord for
you, innocent in their lives, inoffensive in their conversations, peaceable in
the places where they live, and obedient to your just power. Our Lord Jesus
Christ in all his goings out with them in th^se few last years, not only
opening their purses, buts their very bowels and hearts, making them ready and
willing to spend and to be spent for you, has given both to your selves and all the world in all ages to come, a sufficient demonstration of their
harmlessenesse, integrity and faithfulness unto you, and if you will not
believe these speaking out on their behalf, neither would ye, if an Angel
from heaven should come and witness for them. Now the God of wisdom give you
to dis^erne betwixt truth, and error betwixt good and evil, friends and
enemies, Saints and Heretics: and to hearken to the wise counsel of Gameliel,
a great Statist concerning the Sectaries of those times: Acts 5. 35. 38. 39.
with which I shall conclude, take heed to your selves what you intend to do at
touching these men, refrain from these men, and let them alone; for if this
counsel or work be of men it will come to naught, but if it be of God; ye
cannot overthrow it, least happily ye be even found fighters against God.

I verily thought I ought to do many things against the name of Acts 26. 9.
10. 11.
Jesus.

And many of the Saints did I shut up in prison, I punished them often, and
compelled them to blaspheme, and I persecuted them even to strange Cities.


To every Reader.
I Have endeavored in this discourse so far as the present opportunity and
time would give me leave to undeceive thee: however to hint out Truth and a way
to others, who have more leisure for prosecution: the style is without
quaintness, plain and familiar, that I might not speak to the meanest (for
whom I mainly did intend it) as a Barbarian: If you please to cast your eye
upon this word of distinction following, it may give you some light for the
better understanding of the whole discourse, and being kept in memory will in
some measure enable thee (if thou have any knowledge of the things of Christ)
to judge of truth and Error in reference to the several parties it makes
mention of.

A Church or an Assembly may be said to be true or false in respect
1. Of their Foundation. 2. Of their Members. 4. Of their Ministry. 4 of their
Doctrine. 5. of their Institutions or Ordinances. 6. of their placing and
exercise of power.
Such Assemblies or Churches who have not God in Christ for the foundation or
object of their worship, can in no sense be called true or Christian Churches,
as the Turks who worship Mahomet, etc. And such as do lay this foundation
may, in some sense be called true or Christian Churches.

But then as they depart from the truth of Scripture either in their members,
ministry, doctrines, institutions or Ordinances, right placing or exercise of
power or Administration of Discipline, (if you please so to call it in any, some
or all of those, so may they be) said to be more or less false or
Antichristian, which is a building wood, hay, and stubble upon the foundation,
as by the book of the Revelation, it appears Antichrist has done in all Ages;
all which must be destroyed with fire, I shall make no farther applycation:
consider what is said, and the Lord give thee understanding in all things.

THE wisest of mere men has said it, That there Eccle. 1. 9.
is no new thing under the Sun, but that which has been is at this day, and
what is now shall be afterward, if God prevent not: under base and odious
names, Persecution has in all Ages been the Saints portion. The Scribes and
Mat. 23.
Pharisees in our Saviors time, boasted, that had they lived in the days of
their fathers they would not have been partakers with them in the blood of the
Prophets; yet these very men cruelly persecuted (and put to death some of) the
Apostles, and Crucified Jesus Christ, who was the Lord, not only of the
Prophets, but of life and glory too; though he himself did forewarn them of it,
and so brought upon their own heads all the bloodshed upon earth, from
righteous Abel to Zacharias: And I fear that all these things are coming upon
this Generation; else, what may be the reason, that whilst those that are
called, and faithful, and chosen in the Ier. 17. 14.
land, who have been with the Lamb, and who have through the power of the Lamb
overcome that part of the Beast, ( viz.) that Antichristian and Malignant
power, that has risen up against them at this time, in this Nation; whilst
these I say, after all their travel and sorrow, in expense of blood and
estate, are thinking upon the sweet fruit of their long endured hardships, and
hazards, and peace, others have whet their tongues sharper then any two edged
sword, and have dipped their Pens in the blackness, yea, and darkness of Hell
it self, continually sending forth most railing and bitter speeches, and are
thus afresh preparing war against them: If new troubles be not creating for
these men; what mean those daily invective Alarms, (by such who are called the
Ministers of Jesus Christ too) which from Press and Pulpit, are ratled in the
ears of our most worthy Senators, and other subordinate Magistrates in the
Kingdom, incensing, and provoking them, contrary to their own judgments and
reason, against such, who by Gods even miraculous blessing upon their weak
endeavors, have been theirs, and the Kingdoms Saviors: Sometimes dashing Hell
fire in the faces of their consciences to fright them (if possible) into the
same persecution and condemnation with themselves; and then otherwhile,
beseeching them, as they tender the Blessings, Peace, and prosperity of the
Nation, that they would rise up in indignation against these Heretics,
Sectaries, and Schismatics (for so they call them) the Seducers, and deceivers
of the people to their utter extirpation; the old way of Satan, the great
Seducer of the Nations, and all such who cleave to this present world, to
besmear the faithful and godly of the land in all ages with names of ignominy
and reproach, and so to fall upon them to their ruin and destruction: Witnesses
of which Truth, have the prophets been in all Ages, yea, Christ himself and his
Apostles, with all the faithful Martyrs to this yery day; whose accusations
still were, these men are pestilent fellows, movers of sedition, ring leaders
of Sects, broachers of strange Doctrines, teaching things contrary to the Law,
Seducers, stirrers up of the people, drawing disciples after them, speaking
against Caesar, troublers of the State, and the like; but the Saints are in
expectation, that these men who thus resist the people of God, as sometimes
Jannes and Iambres withstood Moses, shall not proceed much farther, and that
their folly shall be made manifest to all: For this wicked one, and all such as
act from him and for him, shall the Lord consume shortly by the Spirit of his
mouth, and destroy with the brightness of his coming, as has in some measure
been fulfilled already in our days, and shall be more and more, till Babylon
be Revel. 18. 20.
wholly fallen, as a millstone to the bottom of the Sea, never to rise again any
more, and till the Beast be taken, and with him the false Prophets, and be cast
alive into the Lake of fire Revel. 19. 20.
burning with Brimston. If new Gives and Fetters be not contriving for the
Saints; why are the poor, misled, and ungrateful Citizens, so constantly
hurried on with most troublesome and unwearied pains to remonstrate, Petition
upon Petition, and act contrary to the Privileges of Parliament, their own
interests, and the Kingdoms; little dreaming what a foundation they are laying
for their own destruction, if affairs be transacted after their desires,
numerously, and tumultuously, and now formally attending day after day at
Westminster, as if they intended to force the Parliament to some unjust Laws or
Ordinances against other men, for satisfaction of their own carnal lusts, and
others who continually instigate and solicit them to this service: Saying in
their hearts, we will not have this man to reign over us, Come let us kill him
and the inheritance shall be ours: Let us traduce these men, Petition against
them, and every way make them vile and odious to the Magistrates and the
People: That now they have subdued the Enemy for us, we may divide the places
of Honor and Profit amongst our selves; passionately, and with uncivil
language, every where complaining of them, as Heretics, Sectaries and
Schismatics, and such, who though they have ventured lives and estates for
their preservations, yet because they differ, but (it may be) in some petty
circumstance, or opinion from them, must be thought unfit to breath in the same
common air with them, and to enjoy the common privileges and liberties of
Native Subjects; though if any, they have most right unto them, as by birth
claiming the same interests with others, and having redeemed them well nigh
lost, by their own prowess and valor in the field.

But to stop the rage of these unstable waters; For the waters upon which the
Whore sits, are multitudes and people; and to still this out cry (if possible)
let us consider who these people are, and whether or no indeed and truth, any
such persons may be found amongst us, who are so called?



any error either in judgment or practice, that the rest of the Christians in
the Kingdom, who join not themselves to them, cannot truly and properly be
termed Schismatics for this.

Zion, which cannot be removed, and from which if we turn aside, we cannot but
be shaken into dust, being built upon the quick-sand of every unstable man's
fancy, of whom the holy Ghost has said, Psalm. 30. 5. Verily man, yea, every
man at his estate, his best estate is vanity, nay altogether vanity, and that
to be laid in the balance, he is lighter then vanity; nay plainly, he is a lie:
Beware then of men, especially such men (woe be to them) who shut up the Kingdom
of Heaven against men, Who love the uppermost seats at feasts, Who tithe Mint,
and Anise, and Comin, and pass over judgment, mercy, faith and the love Mat.
24. Iuke 11.
of God; our too much doting upon men has forced this expression: to return
then,

Heresy is a Greek word, having its derivation from (...) which signifies to
choose, so that it holds forth in the general no more then the choice of any
opinion, either good or bad: So it was used amongst the Heathens, Vt non sum in
eadem Tu^^ie.
tecum haresi, i e. opinione, I am not in the same opinion with thee: Learned
Passor says, its used in a good sense, Act. 24. 14. After the way which men
call Heresy, so worship I the God of my Fathers: the Religion of the Apostles
appointed by our Lord Jesus Christ, was then called by those who were the
strictest professors of that time, the great Rabbis, and Doctors of the
People, (but blind leaders of the blind) Heresy, or a Sect; I wish that now,
that which comes nearest to Christ's Institution, and his Apostles, were not so
judged by the most of men, and those who think themselves the wisest too: but
the world by wisdom knows not God, and this wisdom is no better then
foolishness with God: You see briefly, what the name Heretic Imports; the
choice of an opinion not generally received; Though sometimes it falls out to
be the truth, even the truth it self, the Way, the Truth, and the Life, even
Christ himself.

The next word, which is Sect, whence comes the common name Sectaries, a word
now so much in use; and this is no other, then the Latin of the former Greek
word, made into English, as you may see, Acts 5. 17. Chap. 15. 5. And
elsewhere, where you find mention made of the Sects of the Saduces and
Pharisees; and the Original word is still (...) the Heresy of the Saduces and
Pharisees, and so in the place fore quoted, Acts 24 14. the choice of Christ,
and the true christian Religion is called a Heresy; so that these two words
signify but one and the same thing, only one is the Greek Word, and the other
is the Latin of it, as you may see further in the 1 Cor. 11. 18, 19. Which
place I allege, that we may find out fully the meaning of the last word
which is Schism, and has its Etymology from the Greek word (...), Findo, to
cleave, or rent asunder, as you may find it used in Matthew. 9. 16. Chap. 27.
51. Luke 5. 26. and many other places, so that Schism is properly a separation
or division in a body, whose parts were before united, and in Scripture
signification holds forth a division, or discention in Judgment, or opinion
from others in what was before received and maintained together with them;
there must be a Union or Conjunction before this parting and division,
according to the true and proper sense of the word, or else it cannot be a
Schism; the full understanding of the word you may have in John 7 43. and 10.
19. compared with 1 Cor. 11. 18 19. the two first texts tells us there was a
division among the people: and in the last the terms Heresy, Sect, and
Schism, are used promiscuously, and seem to signify but the same thing, as in
ver. 18. I hear there are Schisms among you* and I partly believe it; and in
the 19. the Apostle renders the reason of this belief; for there must be
Heresies, or Sects; or it must be so, for this cause, that those that are
approved may be made manifest: So here you have all together, and hold out but
the very same to us, or at most, that one is the cause, and the other the
effect; because the choice of an opinion differing from others, is often, and
has been an occasion to those that entertain that opinion, to divde from
others in their practice: also thus, Heresy has usually in the ordinary
sense of men, referred to the Judgment, and Schism to the practice.

And because the Churches of the New Testament were every way true and sound,
both in respect of their Foundation, Members, Ministry, Doctrines,
Institutions, and Censures, in their primitive Apostolical planting, therefore
those that were once joined to them, and then chose out any opinion to
themselves, differing from them, and upon that opinion made a division and
separation in their practice, were in the true genuine signification of the
words, truly and properly Heretics and Schismatics so called* but because the
Churches of Jesus Christ straight after, and even in the Apostles time, begun
to decline from their first purity, and every way, and to wax worse and worse,
till the man of sin, mentioned, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 3. 6. came fully to be revealed,
which has now been for many hundred of years, therefore such could not be
Heretics and Schismatics: who after the Apostles time, and in succeeding ages
took up opinions, which were contrary both to the Doctrine and Practice of
those declining Churches; which were now no longer the true Churches of Jesus
Christ, according to their original Institution and Plantation, but the falfe
and feigned Churches of Antichrist, which were to succeed and come in the room
and stead of the true ones, as is clear by the whole book of the Revelations,
which is mainly a prophetical History, and Narrative of the Rise, Reign, and
Ruin of Antichrist; where you may see how large his Territories are, and how
far his power reaches, especially in that I ext of Rev. 13. where it it said
ver. 3. that all the world wondered after the Beast; and ver. 8. All that dwell
on the earth shall worship him, whose names are not written in the Lambs book
of life. And behold these names are the men who in all ages have been accounted
the Heretics, Sectaries, and Schismatics of the times; And these names are
they, who are so esteemed at this very day; as is most evident to such; whose
eyes are anointed with the eye salve of the spirit of God, to discern of things
that differ, in reference to the present age wherein they live, which is
confirmed every day by those who do come after them; so were the Waldenses
reckoned in their times; the Wicklevites, our own country men in their
generation; the Hussites, and the Jerman Lutherans in theirs, all esteemed, and
Nicknamed Heretics and Schismatics by the people of that age in which they
lived, but have been even ever Justified by the succeeding generations more and
more; as being such who have been enlightened to depart from the errors of
those times, and have revived, and uncovered some remnants and sparks of divine
Light and truth, which had been raked up in the Ashes of the filthy
Abominations, Superstitions, and Traditions of that Antichrist, the Church of
Rome: and here by the way observe who they are, and whose Poison it is* even of
the Devil and Antichrist, that men blasphemers, truly so called, spit out
daily against New Light, not that it is indeed New, but the old Light and Truth
newly discovered again, and cleared from those foggs and mists, which arose out
of the bottomless Pit; happy is it for those Rev. 9. 2.
men, if they sin of weakness, it may be forgiven; but if of Malice or
Wilfulness; let them remember, that all sin and Blasphemy shall be forgiven,
but the blasphemy against the Spirit (the Spirit of Light and Truth, by which
Christ enlighteneth every one that comes into the world) shall never be
forgiven neither in this life, nor that to come: i. e. not at all: Dear
countrymen, consider that the Mystery of iniquity was not at his full height
presently, nor did the man of sin grow up to his full age in a little time:
neither was Material nor Antichristian Rome built in one day (as it is in the
Proverb.)

It was the work of many generations to establish the throne of Antichrist; and
it will require no small time to unthrone him again; the stones of this Babell
must be pulled down, not all together, but one after another there are 7.
several Angels who have their 7. several Vialls to power out for the
destruction of the Beast Rev. 16. and these all have their several times
wherein to effect their works: and as diverse ages before us, have had their
Chair in this service; we also in our generation must have ours, and that not
the least, though probably it may be the last, else most (if not all) who have
labored to unfold this Mystery, have been deceived, though very much of it be
yet undiscovered to the most: now if we look at the manner of his destruction,
the Apostle tells us, 2 Thessalonians 2. It shall be by the spirit of the mouth of
Christ, and the brightness of his coming: the Spirit and the Light are all
together Instruments in the hand of Christ, to bring to pass this great
destruction; and whoever speaks against the one must blaspheme the other: Let
those men then, who boast of the Spirit, beware how they reproach the Light,
least they grieve the holy spirit of God in others, and quench it in
themselves; which is believed to be done in some of them already, their
abilities being blasted, in regard of what they have been heretofore: I have
insisted awhile in opening of these Names, that men may see how improbable (if
not impossible) it is, that those men who were but a few years since the
greatest Champions, against Bishops, Cross, Surplisse, and Altar-worship, and
such things as are now generally sworn against, as Antichristian, and after
this day the highest opposers of Antichrist in this Kingdom, in the remainders
of him, those that were formerly looked on as the great Puritans, and non
Conformists, the terms of reproach then in use; how unlikely I say is it,
that these very men should be now turned Heretics, Sectaries, and
Schismatics, any other then what they then were, after they have so faithfully
served the Parliament in this great cause of Religion and Liberty, with the
loss of blood and estate: they are indeed such Heretics etc. as they before
mentioned, who have in all ages* opposed the ways of the man of sin in his
Erroneous Doctrines and practices of Idolatry, and Superstitions, and no other,
which shall be further manifested in the ensuing discourse; yet before I pass
to the second thing* give me leave to answer an Objection, which may be framed
thus:

etc. be no other then such as have opposed Antichrist in all ages then you
seem to confound our Churches, with that of the Church of Rome, and how weak
this assertion is, who sees not, when we are so long since departed from her,
and are therefore hated by her, and are our selves deemed to be Heretics and
Schismatics for this, in her account.

Rome, wherein she is erroneous, and amongst them England has had a share, but
there are yet many things wherein she agrees with her, the extirpation of some
of which has too lately cost her dear; and she will be sooner or later at
farther expense, and charge in the same kind; for the casting out of those
other things that remain amongst us, if Jesus Christ by the wisdom and
tenderness of this Parliament, or otherwise find not out some expedient for
prevention.



Solomen tells you its better not to vow, then (having vowed) not to perform*
remember the invocations and attestations of the great God, as the searcher of
all hearts for your performance, and for your help herein; and for Answer of
this Question, I shall insist only in one particular, which as a fountain, if
you will follow, will run out into many streams, and does in a manner contain
in it all the rest; and it is this, a Spirit and principle of persecution,
contrary to the great command of Jesus Christ, which he calls the Royal Law of
love, and to the great duty of Christians, love, which is termed the fulfilling
of the Law, by this says Christ, shall men know ye are my disciples: i. e.
Real Christians, if ye love one another, this is the duty which in Scripture
is every where pressed, and was slighted and neglected generally by all before
our troubles and sorrows came upon us; the want of this was the true cause of
that bitter and cruel persecution of the godly, in regard of their
consciences, by the Bishops and their adherents in their Popish and
Antichristian Courts of High Commission, Commissaries, and Chancellors; and the
want of this love, was the cause too of our oppressions in our estates in the
other Courts of the Kingdom, (both legal and illegal) so that all these were
turned into gall and wormwood, and our Laws by wresting of them, were instead
of remedies, no better then nets and snares unto us, and the further men went
this way commonly, the more were they ensnared, and entangled.

But you will say, these Courts are now removed with their judges, there is now
no more fear of these, these yokes are taken from off our necks, wherefore do
you yet complain?

I answer, Though we have fought, and sworn down Archbishops, Bishops, with all
their rabble and dependents, and so are likely to receive no further damage by
them, and these yokes which they created for us are castaway; yet if the same
Spirit and principle remain within us and amongst us, it will act the same
things, though in another form and shape, and Persecutions, Fines, and
Imprisonments, to the utter ruin of Families, shall yet be the portion of the
Saints in this Kingdom, the beginnings whereof, as they are felt by some
already, so are they feared almost by all, and are too visible to every
discerning eye: And if you yet further demand of me what this Spirit and
Principle is, which will thus manifest it self to the persecution and
destruction of the innocent and faithful in this Kingdom;

I answer, It is that very spirit of Satan and Antichrist most contrary to the
Gospel spirit of love, which is described by the Apostle in 2. These. 2.4. which
is yet remaining amongst us, even this, that some of the sons of men, sit as
God in the Temple of God, exalting themselves above all that is called God, or
is worshipped: Every Saint is a Temple of the living God, 2 Cor. 6.10. Whoever
then, whether a particular person, or a collective body in this temple exalts
himself above God, or that which is worshipped, which is nothing else but God,
for God only is to be worshipped; this is the Antichrist: the meaning is, when
God has given Commands, Rules, and Directions in his word to those that are
his in Jesus Christ for his worship and service, and Jesus Christ has sent his
spirit into their hearts to persuade them of the force of these commands, and
of the manner of this worship, (For his sheep Ioh. 10. 45.
hear his voice, and will not follow a stranger;) if there be any man, sort, or
rank of men whatever, that take upon them to judge of these commands, and to
interpret these rules for others, so as to enforce obedience from others to
their interpretations: this I conceive is the Antichrist, who sits as God in
the Temple of God, (the Spirits and consciences of men) 2 These. 24.
and so exalts himself above all that is called God, or worshipped, i. e. will
be obeyed in the place, and stead of God, and above him, God commanding one
thing to the conscience, and He another. This is Popery, and the very top of
all Popery, the very life, blood, and spirit, that runs through the whole body
of it: for what makes the Pope but this, that he takes upon himself, to be the
infallible Interpreter, and judge of the Scriptures, and all the Papists that
do not acknowledge him so to be, yet place this Infallability some where,
either in the Church, or in a General Counsel, and when that cannot be had,
the Pope with his Consistory, are in the place of it, so that the Papists do
all of them, profess an infallibility of judgment, and interpretation of the
Scriptures, and this makes them to impose upon men according to their own
pleasure, yet with some show of truth and reason.

But for other men amongst us, who do in their own words deny this
infallibility of interpretation, and yet to impose upon others what they do
interpret, as if they were infallible; as it is in it self ridiculous, so is it
in my thoughts an aggravation of the crime, and makes it more Antichristian in
them, then in the Pope himself; who peradventure acts in this according to what
he holds, but these, just contrary to what themselves believe, and profess.

I could tell you of a people, who deny themselves infallible, yet use to
determine all their Ecclesiastical controversies, and they are very large (for
In Ordine ad Spiritualia, i. e. in reference to the Church they can take in
much) by a National Assembly, and in a vacancy of that, by a Committee or
Commissioners chosen from amongst them, with a Chairman, or a Consistory
rather, answering that of the Cardinals with the Pope, to whom if obedience be
not yielded, process is made to Excommunication, and after that to
confiscation, banishment, and death; whether this copy do not answer the
original pattern at Rome, you that know, judge, and tell me, if it be not as
like it, as ovum ovo, and one apple to another: Now if this be that Reformation
which men so earnestly pursue, that which is the very spirit, life, and soul of
Popery, which has given denomination and being to it, by which it has grown
up, and come to his full height and strength, by which it is upheld to this
very day, whereby it brought into the world all its Heretical and hellish
doctrines, all its damnable and Paganish idolatries, all its apish and childish
Fopperies, Ceremonies, and Superstitions, and from which it acted all its cruel
burnings, hangings imprisonings, murders, massacres, Rebellions, Treasons,
Powder-plots, and what ever men can call detestable and Devilish. If I say this
spirit must yet be kept amongst us, put it into what form or beautiful shape
you please, call it by what name you will, let it act out under what notion of
Religion, or Reformation you can imagine, it is the same Antichrist still, and
no other: And now fellow Covenanters, I think it is time for us to lay our
hands upon our hearts, and consider where we are, what we are doing and whether
we are going, if instead of having our faces Sion ward, we be not posting back
again to Rome, though not in the old road. If it be so (as alas, it is too
true) be not deceived, God is not mocked; its not crying, the Ier. 7.4.
Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, Reformation, Government,
suppressing Sects and Heresies, these vain words will not save us, whilst we
foment this spirit of Antichrist, this principle of hatred, persecution, and
division in one another, that some of us must judge for our selves, and others
too in the things of Christ, that we must interpret the Word, as if we were
infallible, (when we acknowledge we are not so) and must impose our own
fullible senses, and interpretations upon others; and in case of
Nonconformity, must force obedience from them: whilst we thus bite, and
devour one another, let us take heed that we be not devoured one of another,
this Reformation is not after the Gospel; God is love, and he that dwells in
love, dwells in God, and God in him; and Christ so loved us, as to lay down his
life for us, leaving us an example, that we also ought to lay down our lives
for the brethren, and not to take away the lives of the brethren because they
differ from us; our Lord Jesus Christ and his Ministers are of another mind
all the New Testament over; the weapons of our 2 Cor. 10. 4
warfare, says St. Paul are not carnal, but mighty through God, and not
through the arm of flesh: So 2 Timothy 2. 24, 25. the servants of the Lord must
not strive but be gentle unto all men, patient, with meekness instructing them
that oppose themselves, if God peradventure will give them repentance: And Tit.
3. 2. showing all meekness to all men; look also into the 14. chap. of the
Romans; and you shall see of what different judgment and practices the Saints
were there, as they held contradictions, so did they practice them too, one
would eat, another would not eat; one would regard a day, and he did this to
the Lord, i. e. Because he was persuaded the Lord had so Commanded, another
would not regard a day, and he did this to the Lord too, being persuaded the
Lord required no such observations; friends here were contradictions amongst
Saints, in things of the highest nature in point of Worship; most of the old
Puritans, and non-Conformists of this Kingdom, know well what it is to keep or
regard a day; they can tell you that the most spiritual worship, and the
highest and chiefest service of Jesus Christ, was concerned in it, and was
meant by it; It was surely no indifferent thing, as we have been persuaded to
believe, matters of religious cognizance were contained in it, the Apostle
speaking of it, as done unto the Lord, men observing, or not observing, as
conscious of that duty, which the Lord had enjoined them, or of that liberty
wherewith Jesus Christ had made them free; Now what is the Apostles council in
this controversy, does he advise to censuring, condemning, fining,
Imprisoning, or killing one another; no such thing, but the contrary: let not
the weak Judge the strong, and let not the strong despise the weak, Chap 14.
ver. 3. which he confirms with several reasons, every man stands or falls to
his own master, ver. 4. according to that of our Savior Christ, Math 23. 8.
call no man Rabbi, for one is your master, and all ye are brethren; and ver.
10. we shall all stand before the Judgment Seat of Christ; and then ver. 12.
every one shall give an account of himself to God; and Chap. 15. 1. The strong
ought to bear the infirmities of the weak, and not please themselves; and ver.
2. let every one please his neighbor, for good to edification, which he backs
with this enforcing reason, ver. 3. for even Christ pleased not himself, and
the conclusion of the whole matter is this, ver. 7. Wherefore receive you one
another, as Christ also received us to the glory of his Father; if Christ love,
receive, and embrace you, although of differing Judgments and practices; go ye
and do likewise, do ye love, receive, and embrace each other. These Scriptures
are full, and if opened, would spin the thread of my discourse longer then I
intended; but there is very much in them, if the Lord would give us an
understanding that we might believe them Friends, they are our Gospel, and I
shall leave them with you; as those which shall one day rise up in Judgment
against such as have embraced them, and yet walk contrary to what they report
unto us. Undoubtedly the means that Christ has appointed to propagate his
Gospel, and to advance his Kingdom, is the sword of the Spirit, and not the
sword of St^^le; by this it is that Antichrist has so enlarged his dominions,
as you may see, Revel. 13. 7. and therefore hear his Doom, which shall surely
be accomplished on him, and all such too, as in this kind take part with him,
ver. 10. ht that leads into Captivity, must go into Captivity; and he that
kills with the sword, must be killed with the sword; here is the patience and
faith of the Saints, according to that of our Savior, Matthew. 26. 52. they that
take the sword, shall perish by the sword; and before I shall pass from this,
I beseech you, as you tender the coming of Jesus Christ his Kingdom, which you
daily pray for; and the peace and welfare of this your own native Kingdom
where you live, that you would seriously consider with your selves, whether
this usurpation of power over the bodies of the Saints, in respect of
spiritual things, (as Antichrist himself has done in all ages) may not be the
true and adequate cause, why the Lord has suffered the sword to bathe it self
in blood, and to make it self drunk with the blood of the slain in these parts
for diverse past, and for many more in the parts beyond the seas; so Rev. 16. 6.
They have shed the blood of Saints and Prophets, and thou have given them blood
to drink, for they are worthy: and what improbability is there of Peace amongst
us, whilst this devilish spirit of hatred and persecution (for the devil was
a murderer from the beginning) which has given Antichrist his denomination,
life, and being, does yet abide, Rev. 9. 2
is nourished and maintained by us?

And so I come to the second Point, wherein I shall be brief, which is:

That though the Presbyterian Churches were truly constituted 2. Point.
and ordered according to the rule of the word (as indeed they are not) yet
maintaining any error either in judgment, or practice, that the rest of the
Christians in the Kingdom, who join not themselves to them, cannot truly and
properly be termed Schismatics for this.

I have told you formerly in this discourse, whilst I opened the several
words, that according to the true nature of the word, Schism signifies a
disunion, division, or cleaving asunder of parts, which were before united in
a solid body: Let us apply this to the business in hand, and Schism is
nothing else but a division* or separation in judgment and practice of persons
from some Church or body, to which they were before united: and when I pray was
it that those who are now called Heretics, Sectaries, and Schismatics, were
joined together in a body with those who are termed Presbyterians, and who put
these names upon them? Who can with any face affirm that ever these men were
members of any Presbyterian Churches in this Kingdom of England, or ever had
union or communion with them as such? how can they then be said to make a
Schism or separation, to part away, or divide asunder from them; who knows
not, that they are but of yesterday, if so they may be said to have yet any
being to this day, some few it may be shuffled together after a fashion here in
this great City, but few or none else, throughout the Kingdom, and who knows
not also, that many of these men, who are thus reproached by them, were such as
they are in their opinion and practices long before there was any noise, hope,
or expectation of any Presbyterian Government or Churches to be erected in this
Kingdom.

Object. Neither will it help them to say they were Members of the Church of
England in the Bishops times, and the Church consists of the same Members still.

Ans. But its notoriously known, that many of them were I.
not so, having long before discovered filthiness in her skirts, and if upon
the common abjuration of those Officers, Offices, and ways, the same
filthiness, Tyranny, Superstition, etc. being generally by Discourses,
Conferences, Arguments, Debates, Laws, Ordinances, and Oaths made known to many
more, there have according to their Protestations, and Covenants forsaken those
ways, and are come up farther in a Reformation then the common light of the
State will yet reach to, who shall lay this as a crime unto their charge, when
as
the higher powers, through a special hand of Providence engaging men in a
solemn Covenant for Reformation, have necessarily forced them hereunto?



That to leave the Church, and to leave the external Communion of a
Presbyterian Church, is not one and the same, but two distinct things: the
first is done by ceasing to be a Member of the Church, i. e. by ceasing to have
those requisites which make and constitute a man a Member of it, ( viz.) Faith
and obedience: the second by refusing to communicate with such a Church in her
public worship and service of God: I affirm this as a certain and undoubted
truth* that there is no necessity of communicating with true Believers in evil
actions; when men are Convinced, know, and believe they are so; nay, I assert
farther, there is a necessity herein of separation from them: and men may
without scruple, forsake and renounce the receiving and practice of some
opinions and observances, the which your Churches hold, and in which they do
communicate, but I maintain, that this is done without Heresy or Schism;
because they have cause to do so, and no man can have cause to be a Heretic or
Schismatic; and so I pass to the third Position, which is:

That in case the name of Sectaries and Schismatics be truly applicable 3.
Point.
to any persons in this Nation, that themselves and no others can so properly
deserve that name; and that they only make the rent and division that is
amongst us; my reason is, because these men endeavor to force and compel
others to the opinion and practice of such tenants, as themselves maintain for
true, when others are convinced they are false; a thing themselves did laetly
much complain against, and which was hateful and detestable in the old
Episcopacy, but is of a sudden grown very laudable, and lovely in our new
Presbytery; I shall hold forth this truth in these two Assertions, which I
shall place as Bul-warks, to defend these poor harmless Sectaries, from all
the force the Presbyterian enemy can raise against them.

1. That not every separation, but only a causlesse or needless separation
from the external Communion of any Church is the sin of Schism.

If this Position be not sound, there can be no justification of the
Protestants separation from the Church of Rome, nor of those eminent Saints,
who have in all Ages born witness against the errors of that Church.

2. That Antichristian spirit and principle of persecution, which makes some
men to impose on others, under penalties, a necessity of professing known
errors, and practicing known corruptions, is a sufficient, just, and necessary
cause of separation, and that this is the cause which Protestants allege, to
justify their separation from the Church of Rome: now that diverse things
practiced by the Presbyterian Churches are errors, known so to be to those that
depart from them: None without the highest breach of charity can deny, nor with
less impudency affirm they endeavor not that others should believe the same,
or suffer.

All that men forsake in them is only the belief, practice, and profession of
their errors: And for men not to forsake the belief of their errors, having
discovered them so to be, is impossible, and not to forsake the practice and
profession of them, is damnable hypocrisy. Let them free their Churches from
requiring the belief, practice, or profession of any error, or whether they
will or no, they must free such as depart from them, from being Schismatics:
for Schism there cannot be in leaving their communion: unless men were obliged
to continue in it: And man cannot be obliged by man, but to what either
formally or virtually he is obliged by God: For all just power is from God* God
the eternal Truth, neither can nor will oblige us to believe the least, and
the most innocent falsehood, to be a truth, that is, to erre^ nor to profess a
known error, which is to lie: Thus you see that whilst they require the
belief, practice or profession of any error amongst the conditions of their
Communion, the obligation of men's communicating with them cease, and so the
imputation of Schism, and the names of Horsticks and Secta its vanish into
nothing, but lie heavy upon themselves for making men's separation, just and
necessary, by requiring unnecessary, and unlawful conditions of their
Communion; either let them prove then, that they err not at all, or forbear
those odious names, or at least apply them rightly (as they ought) to
themselves.

If men would be themselves, and would be content that others should be so in
the choice of their Religion, the servants of God, and not of men; if they
would allow that the way to Heaven is no narrower now, then Christ left it; if
all men that believe the Scriptures, would free themselves from prejudice, and
passion, and sincerely endeavor to find out the true sense of them, live
according to them, and require no more of others, but to do so: who does not
see (since all necessary truths are plainly and evidently set down in Scripture)
there would of necessity be amongst all men, in all things necessary, unity of
opinion, unity of love, and a spirit of mutual toleration: By which means all
Schism and Heresy would be banished the world, and those wretched
contentions, which now rend and tear in pieces, not the coat, but the Members
and Bowels of Christ (which mutual Pride and Tyranny, cursing, killing, and
damning, would fain make mortal) should speedily receive a most blessed
conclusion: By this means indeed, should the Lord be one, and his name one in
the Nations, which oneness is not meant of any outward form, but of the
oneness of love, and affection in the spirit: Doubtless, at this day, the
most vehement Accusers, are the greatest Schismatics, and those who talk of
Uniformity, do drive at Tyranny, and will have peace with none, but their
slaves and vassals.

By a late learned Antagonist of the Church of Rome, (and that whilst the
Prelates were in their pride) it was truly said, Nothing is more against
Religion, then to force Religion, Humane violence may make men counterfeit, but
cannot make them believe, and is good for nothing, but to breed form without,
and Atheism within. Besides if this means of bringing men to embrace any
Religion, were generally used, as if it may be justly used in any place by
those that have power, and think they have Truth: Certainly, it cannot with
reason be denied, but that it may be used in every place, by those that have
power as well as they, and think they have truth as well as they, what could
follow but the maintenance perhaps of truth, but perhaps only of the profession
of it in one place, and the oppression of it in a thousand; what will follow,
but the preservation perhaps of unity, but perhaps only of uniformity in
particular States, but the Imortalizing of the great and lamentable division of
Christendom and the world. Therefore what can follow from it, but perhaps in
the judgment of carnal policy, the Temporal benefit and tranquillity of
temporal States and Kingdoms, but certainly the infinite prejudice, if not the
desolation of the Kingdom of Christ, and therefore it well becomes them who
have their portions in this life, and serve no higher State then that of
England, Scotland, or Ireland, (nor this neither no farther then they may serve
themselves by its) to maintain by Worldly power and violence their State
inframent Religion: But they that the indeed lovers of Christ, of Truth, of the
Church. of mankinds, ought with all courage to oppose themselves against it as
Antichristian, and a Common enemy to all these.

They that know there is a King of Kings, by whose will and pleasure Kingdoms
stand and fall, they know, that to no King, or State, any thing can be
profitable, which is unjust: (our experiment is too near us at this day; The
desolations of our State are witnesses hereof,) and that nothing can be more
evidently unjust, then to force weak men by the profession of a Religion, which
they believe not, to loose their own eternal happiness, least they loose
their temporal Estates and quietness, there being no danger to any state from
any man's opinion: unless such, by which disobedience to authority, or impiety
is taught: unless this bloody Doctrine be joined with it, that it is lawful
for the Magistrate by humane violence, to enforce men to his own Religion: Oh
let not our Magistrates in this, take part with the scarlet Whore, who for
these many Ages has daily sacrificed thousands of poor innocent Christians,
under the name of Heretics, Sectaries, and Schismatics: Doubtless, if our
Lord Jesus Christ himself would have submitted to the expositions and
interpretations which the Priests and Doctors had at that time given out upon
the Scriptures, they had never crucified him, and put him to such open shame:
But because, that he and his apostles after him would according to that new
light, which they had received, endeavor to set up a Reformation (all which
was yet no other then a clearer, and fuller Declaration of what the Scriptures
did hold forth) above and beyond the light and understanding of these men, who
were no other, then the Divine Presbytery of those times, therefore received
they such hard measure from them, and suffered as Blasphemers and Heretics
under them, and by their censure; We have a law, and by this law, he ought to
die, Joh. 14. 7. Pilate (though the supreme Magistrate) was no other but their
Executioner then, as the Civil powers have been in all Generations since to
this sort of men, who under a pretense of holiness, have daily embrewed their
hands in innocent-blood.

Before I end, there are some Texts of Scriptures, which seem repugnant to what
has been asserted, and would be answered, as,

Tit. 3. 10. Him that is an Heretic, after the first and second admonition,
reject; this Text places a power somewhere, both of judging Heretics, and
proceeding against them.

discerning of spirits, 1 Cor. 12. 10. but this gift amongst others in the
Apostasy, and falling away of the Churches (which was foretold by the Apostle,
2 These. 2. 3. and 1 Ioh. 4. 3. where the holy Ghost says expressly, that
instead of the Spirit of Christ, the spirit of Antichrist should come, and was
already) was lost; and because of the want hereof, the Saints, whom God has
stirred up to bear witness to the truth in their several Ages, ever since
have unrighteously suffered, been persecuted and put to death, under this
notion and name of Heretics.

belongs to the Church as their portion, and not to the civil Magistrate, as a
Magistrate; and what censure or punishment soever this rejection was, it was to
be executed by the Ecclesiastical, and not by the Civil power; so that to
apply such texts as this to the power of the Magistrate, is one of the most
gross, and palpable wrestings of Scripture that can be, and yet is too common
amongst the Gentlemen of the Jus Divinum Tribe in their discourses, printed,
and unprinted, as I my self not long since (before the House of Commons at a
Public Fast) heard that of Rev. 2. 20. Because thou suffer that woman
Iezabel, etc. which was written to the Angel of the Church of Thyatira, either
weakly or wilfully alleged, to justify their power ( viz. the Magistrates) in
spiritual things, by which you may take a scantling of that gift among them.

with this gift of discerning, and so this power among them, yet can it not be
lawful for them to proceed against men who hold Heresies (nor indeed can they
be properly so called) unless they have acknowledged, and professed the contrary
thereunto before, and so have departed from that truth, which in their
Communion they maintained; which appears from this next verse, to that we have
in hand, Tit 3. 11. where the Apostle says, that a Heretic is self condemned;
(...) i. e. that light which he had formerly received, does now judge him and
condemn him; as it was in Julian the Apostat, who was forced to confess at
last vicisti Galilee: I conceive men, who never made any more profession of
Christian Religion, then what they have been passive in from their forced
Baptism, and education, having at no time attained to any thing, which has
been so much as like a New birth, or change in them, and so were never
reckoned, or esteemed by Saints among the number of Saints, or admitted into
their fellowship, or communion; such men (what Tenets, or Errors soever they
take up) are rather to be accounted profane persons, or Atheists, then
Heretics: As it were improper to call either a Jew, or Turk a Heretic in
Scripture-sense, though they deny Christ to be the Son of God: which I confirm
from that place of 2 Pet. 2. 1. where the Apostle mentioning false Teachers,
which should being in damnable Heresies; he says, they were such as did deny
the Lord that bought them, i. e. though their Consciences had received such
Convictions from the spirit that Jesus Christ was the Lord and Savior of the
world, and so had given themselves up to him as such, yet they afterward
brought in those Doctrines which denied this again.

Romans 13. 4. where the Magistrate is said to be a Minister of God for wrath
upon him that does evil. Now if you add to this, Gal. 5. 10. it appears that
Heresy is an evil work, being there reckoned among the deeds of the flesh, and
so punishable by the civil power.

Gal. 5. 20, 21. several other works of the flesh numbered up together with
Heresies, which yet I conceive, the Civil power cannot possibly take
cognifance of, as hatred, emulations, envyings, and the Civil Magistrate can
no more draw his sword against the One, then against the Other, no more against
Heresy, then against hatred, emulation, and envy.

Romans, it was a Scripture written to the Christians, living under heathen
Magistrates; th^se surely had no cognizance of the several controversies, or
opinions, which might fall in amongst the Christians, in the profession of
their Religion, which the Heathens so much hated, and therefore Heresy cannot
fall under the power of the sword, there mentioned; and if so, let all men
judge, how truly and properly these men apply the word; and whether this be not
a wringing of the Scripture like a nose of wax and a perverting of it to their
own, and other men's destruction: I should have spoken more fully to this point,
but that I find my self prevented by Mr. John Goodwin, in his late book called
Hag^^mastix, from page 58. to pa^. 66. A piece worthy the sight of such men,
who enquire after Truth.

One great question yet remains, to which I shall speak a word or two, and so
end.

Q. If Heresy and Schism be of such a doubtful nature, and so hard to be
found out; if Heretics and Schismatics prove to be such, whom we least
suspected; if that gift of discerning, whereby they should be known, be lost in
the Apostasy of the Churches; if the imposing our own fallible thoughts, and
expositions upon the consciences of other men be Antichristianisme, and a
setting up of the man of fin; what shall 2 These. 2. 4.
be done in regard of our Solemn League and Covenant, whereby we are engaged to
endeavor the extirpation of H^r^sta and Schism, and to bring the Churches in
the three kingdoms to a Uniformity, etc.?

Answ. I say concerning the Covenant, in reference to the Presbyterians, as
they sometimes spoke of the Church, in reference Smect. Sect. 17.
to the Prelates, they dazzle the eyes, and astonish the senses of poor people,
with the glorious name of the Covenant: This is the Gorgans head, that has
enchanted them, and held them in bondage to their Presbyterian Errors; All
their speech is of the Covenant, the Covenant, neglecting in the mean time, God
and the Scriptures. It matters not for other things in the Covenant, as you may
see in the next answer, so as men will but walk according to the same (in their
interpretation) in an outward uniformity of Religion, and in a visible form of
Church Government, and worship, then which nothing can be more against the
power of godliness, which consists in an invisible, and internal breathing,
panting, working, and acting of the soul toward God, for God is a spirit, and
they that worship him, must worship him in spirit and in truth: All Ioh. 4. 21.
outward Forms imposed, do but ordinarily, and commonly breed Atheism and
hypocrisy: It were well therefore that the Civil powers would be careful,
how they engage carnal men in Religious Covenants, and about spiritual things.

for extirpation of that which is neither in our cognizance nor power, and for
profaneness, and such things as are against the power of godliness, which in the
same clause we covenant against, and against which the laws of God and men are
in force; and which are certainly and undoubtedly in the cognizance of the
civil power, and for which he must give an account to God; how does every one
cry out upon the neglect of these? whose eyes, and ears are not full of the
Reelings, Railings, Belchings, Vomitings, Swearings Cursings, Lyings,
Stealings, Brawlings, and Fightings of Drunkards, Liars, Adulterers, Whoors,
Profane, Graceless, Godless persons? and yet these are altogether, or in a
great measure unpunished, due execution of Laws against these were a right
Reformation indeed, acceptable to God, and all good men: Sin, open, gross,
palpable sin, does so abound every where, that no just man can walk up and
down, without vexing his righteous soul, for the unclean conversation of the
wicked: Remember who those men are (reproved by our Savior, Matthew. 23. 24)
that thus strain at a gnat, and swallow a camel.

Art. 2.) now God calls us out against these men, (in case we could discern
them infallibly) not with a sword of steel, but the sword of the spirit, the
word of God, which is mighty through God, to convince gainsayers, and the
servant of the Lord must strive no otherwise then thus, as I showed before; If
men will but truly and faithfully (as they have opportunity,) hold forth that
light they have, to others, to turn them from their errors, and in other
things walk as Christians; I dare say, they have done all that God requires of
them in this case, so as they may boldly look God in the face, at the great day
of appearing: and the Covenant (Sano sensu) can have no other interpretation
then this.

To shut up all, I doubt not, but I have at least wise opened Conclus.
a way to let in truth amongst us as concerning this particular, and to engage
others, who may have a greater portion; both of time and strength to vindicate,
and maintain what has been asserted; and if these things which are written, be
not yet convincingly satisfactory to each ingenuous, and non-pre-engaged
Reader; Let there be for all parties, Independents, Brownists, Anabaptists, an
equal liberty, of Debate, Conference, Discourse, and Press with the
Presbyterians, if each of them be not able to prove from Scripture, their own
way and practice to come nearer to the pattern of Truth, then the Presbyterian,
(though I suppose none of them to be exactly according to the Rule, for its
reserved for the glory of the new Jerusalem Rev. 21. 27
to have nothing that defiles, or is a lie to enter into it) I am confident
they will desire no Toleration; and if they do, then you must necessarily
conclude with me, it is most equal, and that the Presbyterians are the
greatest Heretics (as being in the choice of their opinions further off from
the truth of Scripture then the rest) and the greatest Schismatics (as
practicing according to those opinions) that are at this day in this Nation.

A Question for a Kingdom to Answer.
A Kingdom has three parties into which it is divided, and these three are
distinguished by three notions, Prelaticall, Presbyteriall, Independent, two of
these grew into one, against the other one Party, which was more great and
considerable then these two, and overcame it; And then these two, that (as one)
overcame the third, resolve back into two again: And one of these two endeavor
now to overcome the other: Upon this, let it be considered, whether that one
party, which was at first, overcome by two in one: (Now since one of these two
are dissolving, and suppressing the other, that made one with it) Be not likely
to be the overcomer, and prevailing party over both these?

A Question for a Church to Answer.
A National Church was once Episcopal, and seeks for extirpation, and
suppression of a few that were called Heretics, and Schismatics, and
non-Conformists to it, by Imprisonments, Banishments, etc. and yet these few,
and inconsiderable Party, increases, and prevails against all this power, and
National Government.

Upon this, let it be considered, Whether a new National Government, armed
with a like power, and proceeding against a far more numerous party, called
Heretics, Schisma^icks, and non-Conformists to it; be able to extinguish
these, upon the experience, of the insufficiency, and unsuccesfulnesse, and
weakness of the same power, and force, exercised to the same end, and design
as before.

FINIS.
REVEL. 16. Because thou art lukewarm, and neither cold nor hot, I will spew
thee out of my mouth.


Verse 17. Thou say I am rich, and increased with goods, and have need of
nothing: and know not that thou art wretched, and miserable, and poor, and
blind, and naked.



