A SERMON Preached before the SOCIETIES FOR Reformation of Manners IN DUBLIN:
October the 4 th, School. By Tho. Emlyn. Published at the desire of the said
SOCIETIES.

DVBLIN: Printed by Andrew Crook, Printer to the Kings Most Excellent Majesty,
for Math. Gunne at the Sign of the Bible and Crown in Essex-street, and Josiah
Shaw at Russel's Coffeehouse on Cork-Hill, Booksellers. M DC XC VIII.

1. Sam. 2. v. 30. Them that honor me, I will honor; and they that despise me
shall be lightly esteemed.


AS it is easy to apprehend the Important Consequences of that Excellent Work,
for the furtherance of which, we are here met, viz. The endeavoring an
effectual restraint, upon the Open Indecencies of a Lewd Age: So I doubt not,
but the Trial which some of you have made herein, has convinced you, more than
ever, that not a few Discouragements, are like to attend, the promotion of so
Pious a Design: That the Strong man armed, after so long and quiet a
possession, is not to be turned out but with conflict and violence; That those
Sons of Belial, who if let alone, will surely prove as Thorns in your sides, by
provoking the Anger of Heaven against us, are when you thrust them away as
Thorns in your hands, so that as David speaks, He that touches them, 2 Samuel
23.6.7.
had need be fenced with Iron and the staff of ^ Spear:

Since therefore it is now my part, to strengthen your hands, that they may
never hang down, in the pursuit of so sacred ^n Attempt, I have judged it
requisite to lay before you some M^ti^es, that may be proportionable, both to
the greatness of your Task, and the Variety of your Discouragements.

And I think there is enough contained in the Text, to answer my end; for it
intimates your Work to be honorable in God's account, and that it shall
redound to your own immortal honor in the issue.

Humane Nature never acts with more violence and force, than when it feels the
power of Aspiring Ambition after great Renown, and though, my Brethren, I hope
the fading honor of this World is contemptible in your Eye, as Sounding Brass,
^r a Tinkling Cymbal; yet honor from God is a great thing, all ambition is
just, but none too great, nor any contention too warm where this is the Prize.

How suitable an Application to the present occasion, my Text will admit of,
may better be seen, after a little enquiry into the Context. It Is part of a sad
Message from God, and for the greater solemnity sent by a Man of God to Eli,
who was over the Tribes of Israel a Judge; and over the House of God the
High Priest; how he came by the latter Dignity is not evident; both from
Scripture and Josephus it appears, that he was not of the Elder Line of Aaron's
Family by Eleazer, but of the younger, from Ithamar, and consequently not the
legal Heir to that Honor; but sometime, during the Rule of the Judges over
Israel, the High Priesthood was translated to the younger Line, for what cause
is not known: A very Learned Author, Dr. Ligb. 2 ^. Vol. p. 1218.
in the Jewish History, supposes it might be, because of the miscarriage of the
High Priest, in permitting Iephthah to Sacrifice his Daughter, when he should
have counseled him better, out of the Law of God; and this supposition of his,
may find some countenance from that Relation of some of the Jewish Doctors
which I meet with elsewhere they say, D. Tail. Duct dub. p. 579.
That Iephthah disdained to go to the High Priest for a Commutation, or release
from his Vow; and he would not go to Iephthah, because he did not ask his help;
therefore say they, Iephthah was smitten with the Palsy, and the HighPriest
was deprived of the Spirit of God; And if so much b^ true, the other is no
unlikely Supposition. By this it seems, Eli^ in his possession of that Office,
carried a memorial of God'^ displeasure against the Neglecters of his Honor,
and yet himself incurs it the same way: Not by any positive presumptio^^ crime
of his own, but by remissness in checking the Profaness of others.

The Iniquity of his Sons was come to an unsufferable and daring height, they
prostituted their Sacred Function t^ their Sensuallity and Lust, as it is set
down from Verse 12, (...) verse 18, such was their contempt of God, that tho
the T^bernacle was his House, and they were only his Guard an^ Attendance, and
the Sacrifices, his Provisions, yet they wou^^ be served first, and would carve
for their own bellys, before it went to God's Table, I mean before the fat was
burned (...) (...) A^t^^. And being thus highly fed, like Horses they neigh
(...) their Neighbors Wife, Ier. 5.8. They lay with the ^om^n at the door of
the Tabernacle, ver. 22. as if they would ^ffront God to his face, putting
their filth under his very Nose; thus his House was now made a Den of Harlots
and Adulterers, that afterward was so of Thieves and Robbers; insomuch that
men abhorred the Offering of the Lord, v. 17. It cannot but grieve
Conscientious Worshippers, to see the Sacred Solemnities of Religion, pass
through Unhallowed hands, that reap indeed the benefit of others Reverence for
God, while themselves show none.

But, what is this to Eli? that he must suffer for other men's ^ins; It was,
because he restrained them not, Chap. 3. v. 13. He did indeed reprove them,
Chap. 2. v. 24. He dealt gently with the Young Men; but Impudent Sinners
require sharper Corrections, than Friendly Rebukes; like the unruly Leviathan,
they laugh at the shaking of that Spear, and those Arrows will not make them
flee, Job, 41.28, 29. So that when better Remedies are in our power, a bare
Reproof of bold Sinners, is no sufficient discharge of our Duty; God counts
this for nothing in Eli; He as a Magistrate should have made 'em Public
Examples, for a warning to others: For neglecting this, God sends him a severe
Message, upbraiding him with Ingratitude for past Favors, so ill requited;
charging him with honoring his Sons above his God, to fave their Reputation,
he let God's sink and fall; and then recanting all his former thoughts of
Kindness, all his Conditional Promises, he threatens him and his Family with
Utter Ruin to the Generations to come. The reason and equity of which
procedure in this and like Cases, he expresses in the words of the Text, Be it
far from me, for them that honor me, I will honor. As if he had said, after
the manner of men, I had once a great Kindness for thee and thy House, and
had thou but concerned thy self to vindicate my Name, by suppressing and
punishing the wick^^dness of those Vile Wretches, thou had lost no honor by
^t, I would have advanced thee to great Dignity; but now (...) be it from me,
to honor such a scornful despiser of his God, no; it is farthest from my
thoughts, thy name shall pe^ish, thy memory rot, thy Family sink, and thy
posterity shall continue, only to be, by their poverty, (...) the Monuments of
thy Sin, and my Indignation; (...) my Favors for them that shall do me the
Service which the refusedst: And that you may not think this proceeding to
(...) any singular Instance with Eli only, God lays it down as ^ general Rule,
Them that honor me, etc.

Having led you thus, to a right view of the words, I suppose I shall do no
violence to them, by deducing from the^ this Proposition, viz.

Doct. That they who honor God, by endeavoring to suppress an^ punish the
scandalous Crimes of Profane Sinners, shall have their Zeal repayed with
eminent returns of Honor from God; while they that are unconcerned for his
Glory in that matter, shall be the objects of contempt and disdain.

The latter Branch may serve to enforce the former, which I will prosecute
under these General Heads. First, I will endeavor to show that such as are
sincerely engaged in this Design, do honor God in it. Secondly, That God will
repay their Zeal, by honoring them. Thirdly, I shall apply the whole to
excite, and encourage you that are, or may be engaged in this happy affair.

I. They who endeavor to suppress the Scandalous Crimes of the Age, do greatly
honor God: He who is the best Judge of his own honor, plainly owns it here,
in that he charges Eli with failing to honor him, by neglecting this work.

And here I must consider first what it is to honor God, And then how we may
apply it to such persons. As for honoring God in general, it is not like his
honoring us, which is by conferring some Excellency or Dignity upon us, to
make us greater than we were before: It Is God's honor that he is not capable
of such as this; he cannot be a more Glorious, Exalted Being, than he is. We
can therefore honor God only such ways as these, either Internally, by high
and lofty conceptions of his Being and Perfections, by being filled with
adoring, admiring Apprehensions of his Infinite Majesty, Wisdom, Power and
Goodness; making him the Object of our Chief Esteem, and Superlative Love. Or
Externally, by some sensible Manifestation of this; of which open, visible
honor, I am principally to speak; and it is to be given one of these two Ways
in general.

I. Wh^^ we wip^ off any dishonor or reproach cast upon God ^ preventing or
removing what may tend to disparage his perfections, to weaken his Authority
with men, to abate of his due reverence, or to render him cheap and mean in the
Eyes of any; this is to preserve his Honor.

II. When we do any thing that represents him great and glorious to others,
when we express our own high thoughts of God, so as to give occasion to them to
raise their esteem of him, whether it be by Words or Actions, and these either
of Worship or other obedience, so praise glorifies God, Ps. 50. ^lt. it
declares his Excellency, and raises admiration; any thing that greatens God in
the sense of men, is honor done to him.

Now I come to apply it, by showing that they do thus honor God, who labor to
suppress open profaness: And this will fully appear if we consider.

1. That open profaness is a great dishonor to God, from the reproach of
which, these persons seek to rescue his Name. Though the Eyes of God are so very
pure, that the least Mote of Sin offends them, as truly as the greatest Beam,
yet not in the same measure: God is dishonored, and his Law affronted by every
indulged Sin, be it never so well covered under the Vail of Secrecy, or
disguised by the Arts of Hypocrisy; but then it is but like a private affront,
which puts not half that disgrace upon a man, as some open abuse. Some
reverence for God is yet preserved among men, when the Sons of Belial do in
outward behavior imitate the Sons of God, when the Devil dares not appear in
his own colors, but as of old, in Readiness time, shrouds himself under the
Prophets Mantle. But when men declare their Sin as Sodom, when their Crimes are
of the first Magnitude, and in open view; when they Swear in the Market place,
Reel in the Streets, and Assemble themselves by Troops in Harlots Houses; then
the Honor of God receives a deep Wound, and the highest contempt is poured on
that Being of infinite Majesty, as though he were a Being of no Authority, whose
will they dare at any time contradict, whose Indignation they Challenge, and
his Threatenings they treat with Mockery and Scorn. Such things as these, sink
the esteem of God in the World, and make him contemptibly sp^^en of, (...)
2.23, (...) are tempted hereby to say, that he has (...), and minds not what
is done there, E^^k. 9.9. Others, that God is like themselves, not so much an
Enemy to their Crimes, as some pretend, Psalm. 50.21. And if such men go on
without check in this manner; What will become of the Honor of God at present?
How will his Authority and Worship be upheld, or his Memorial be preserved
among men? Now from this grievous contempt, the friends of God would gladly see
his name Vindicated; which must be either by Reclaiming such vile Offenders, of
which there is almost no hope, Ier. 13.23.
for can the Ethiopian change his Skin, or the Leopard his Spots? then may such
long accustomed overgrown Sinners learn to do well: Or by Punishing them with
marks of public Disgrace, this may prove a means of Reforming them, who having
no feeling in their feared Consciences, are in vain attacked with serious
Counsel and Arguments, but it may be will learn, when taught, as the men of
Succoth were by Gideon, with Briars and Thorns; or as Manasseh by Fetters and
Bonds: However, such public punishments will deter others from an imitation,
and will be an open Testimony, that the Community disowns such persons with
Shame and Indignation, and cannot with Patience bear their insolent affronts of
the great God; these methods will very much prevent the common contempt of God,
they teach the people to look upon such Sins with horror, as base and criminal
Acts; and thus in a good measure the Honor of God is maintained and salved, by
suppressing and punishing open Immorality in the general.

And among all the Works of Darkness that are common, I think there are none,
against which the wounded Honor of God more requires your zealous help, than
against those enormities, which you of these Societies have taken special
cognizance of, viz. Profane Swearing and Cursing, breaking the Sabbath, and
abominable Uncleanness; Crimes so heinous, that one can hardly say, as God to
the Prophet, Son of man, I will show thee yet greater abominations than these.
As for profane Oaths and Curses, the monstrous Sins of our Age, in which for a
long time, Oaths have vyed with words for number, and the Studied Eloquence of
the times has seen how to Swear, in the most thundering and terrifying dialect;
can any thing express more scorn of the Sacred and Tremendous name of God, than
to make it the wanton byword of our common talk, and the mention of it the
usual fruit of our Madness and Fury? that men, when angry at their fellow
Creatures should take their revenge upon God, by tearing and rending his
dreadful name! That God and the Devil should both be regarded alike by them!
For either word serves the turn, that which first comes in their way, and
usually where God's name is at the beginning of a Sentence, in an horrid Oath,
the Devil's is at the end of it, in an hellish Curse, and they seem to have an
equal respect for both.

As for the breach of the Holy Sabbath, since nothing has a more direct aspect
upon the Honor of God, than the Reverence and Solemnities of his public
Worship, in United Assemblies; and since he has intimated his will, that this
be on one day in Seven, it must needs be a bold stroke at his Honor, in them
that needlessly refuse to contribute openly to it. It was a Sacrilegious
thieving from God's Alter, that was part of the heavy charge against Eli's
Sons, they would have God's Portion, and force him to change without his
consent, Chapter 2. v 15, 16. And is not the Sacrilege as great in defrauding him
of his time, and the homage belonging to it? John 2.15, 16.
We find an universal ^lame of Zeal in our Saviors Breast, upon an irreverent
profanation of that holy Temple where God visibly dwelt; and will not his day
deserve as zealous a vindication as his house? Since they are two circumstances
of one rank, can any one tell me, why Hallowed time should not be as sacred as
an Hallowed place? Oh how dishonorable then to God is their Crime, who
prostitute his sacred time to Secular Uses! One is Journying, another
Physicking, and a third taking his Pleasure; and thus the Lord's Day is made
the very Dunghill-day, on which ungodly men, throw all the refuse-business of
an idle or misspent Week; and many of these are under Self-condemnation, while
at other times they can stand up in the solemn Assemblies, to profess an
Obligation on their Consciences, to observe the Fourth Commandment; but alas
their hearts are not yet inclined to keep that Law!

As for the shameless violations of the Laws of Chastity they have been both by
God, and many Pagan Nations, numbered among the blackest Crimes, insomuch, that
God has peculiar reserves of vengeance for those that commit them; Heb. 13.4.
Whoremongers and Adulterers God will judge. It Is such an awful and terrefying
word, which dropped from the Wiseman, that it may astonish us to think how any
man's Conscience can get over it, Pro. 22.14.
without agonies of dread; The mouth of a strange Woman is a deep pit, he that
is abhorred of the Lord, falls therein. And this was another of the so
scandalous and punishable faults of Eli's Sons.

Now these things show, what mighty Service you will do for the Glory of God,
if you can cover his Name from these affronts of scornful men; either by
suppressing their Vices, or making them shameful and costly to such as will
give them harbor. Oh how honorable would the name of God be, if we could but
see the day, when none should dare to use it but with solemnity and reverence!
When none shall take an Oath, but as a part of the serious, awful Worship he
owes to the omniscient Ruler of the World; when an universal silence on the
Sabbath Day, from the noise of Secular business, shall help to Proclaim our
prosound veneration for God, while he is in his holy Habitation.

2. Such persons do directly honor God, in their sincere attempts of this
kind, as they plainly manifest their own great esteem of God, and reverence for
his Laws: What greater representation can men give of God, than that he is a
Being whose reproach they cannot bear, one so great, so good, so loved by his
Servants, that they are content to vindicate his Honor with the most expensive
zeal? Sure it is to the Glory of God when the World shall see, he has some
friends who dare espouse his Quarrel, some who are open Advocates for his
despised Authority; that in a degenerate age, there are some to protest against
the Usurpation of Satan; so that if he be not honored in the Resormation of
the Public, yet in as much as you have vigorously contended for it, I may say
as the Apostle; 1 Pet. 4.14.
On your part he is glorified, though on theirs he is evil spoken of.
II. The next General Head, is, to show how God will (...) them that show such
tenderness of his Honor.

First, He will honor them by his own esteem and approbation of them they may
be the World's dross, but they shall be God's Jewels; the men of Sodom scoffed
at Lot for reproving them, 2 Pet. 28.
but God honored him as a Righteous Soul. The Profane Crew may cry out upon
you, Act. 22.22.
as they against Paul, Away with such fellows, they are not fit to live. But
God will say rather, Of you the world was not worthy. And I hope God's good
word is more to you, Heb. 11.38.
than the applauses of all the world.

Secondly, He may probably place visible marks of Honor upon them in this
Life. Our good Name is in God's keeping, who has many ways to advance our
esteem, and when he pleases our rankest enemies shall contribute to it, as
Mordecai found; all promotion has its rise in the Court of Heaven, Ps. 75.6.7.
so that he permits or hinders it as he pleases; he can bless your Substance
unto abundance, and put you into the common road of Honor.

Or he may honor you another way, viz. by giving you great success in your
worthy attempts; and verily that will be no small Renown, to be such Blessings
in your places; to be Conquerors over the Vices of the Age; to hide a multitude
of Sins, and to save a Nation from ruin, such a good Name will be a precious
Ointment of Everlasting Savor.

And verily Sirs, God has in part thus honored you; it is to your Glory, that
not only at home, but abroad in the neighboring Kingdom, some of us have heard
the same of your Zeal. I may say to you, as Paul to the Thessalonians (only
putting your Zeal instead of their Faith) That it is every where spoken of, 1 Thessalonians. ^.9.
they needed not that we should tell them, for themselves show us concerning
you: They can tell that Dubli^ is no safe Harbor for the Profane and Lewd to
come to; that in it are Magistrates and People, that profess themselves a
Terror to Evildoers.

Thirdly, God will not fail to Honor them eminently in another World, and
there great things shall be done to the man whom the King of Heaven shall
delight to Honor: There doubtless, they who have labored to turn many from
Unrighteousness, Dan. 12.3.
as well as they that have turned many to Righteousness shall shine, not with
the common and faint glimmering of the F^rmament, but with the more bright
^ustre of the Start; yea they shall differ from other Stars in Glory.

The APPLICATION.
I. Use. Is God so highly Honored by such Endeavors? Then let us all be
concerned for his Honor, in this way: The Text suggests to you the Weightiest
Argument in the World, viz. That you should do it for God's sake, and the most
Sensible Argument, do it for your own sake; it is the Cause of God's Honor, and
the Interest of your own: But methinks nothing should more move us, than the
just, but terrible interpretation, God will put upon our neglect to promote
this Work, even that we despise him; as tho he were some Contemptible Being,
whose Glory we think not worthy our Contending for. Dare we lie under so heavy
a Charge? Certainly, My Brethren, we serve a God, whose Honor well deserves
our pains to uphold it; nay, can we make him the great Object of our Solemn
Adoration, and daily Homage? Can we think him meet, at whose Feet to cast our
selves down, in a Rever^nt Prostration, and yet at the same time, not judge his
Honor worth maintaining? This would reproach our selves, with the grossest
Stupidity, for Worshipping one with awful dread, whom we are content, should be
made contemptible with others. Ah, baso Creature, that have such a God; of such
Infinite Majesty, Wisdom and Goodness, and yet refusest to plead for him! A
dumb and useless Idol might servve thy turn, since thou carest not how mean and
vile, the Object of thy Worship is.

But I would rather hope of you, that hear me now, That you are rather
inquisitive, how you may contribute to God's Honor in this Affair; probably
you will say, from such a man as Eli, God might expect it, he being an Eminent
Magistrate, had power to do what private persons cannot, had we the (...) of
Justice, we would surely draw it in God's Quarrel and Defense; but what can we
do now?

Ans^^. First, It Is indeed most true, that Magistrates have more Eminent
Advantages for Honoring God this way, which they should by no means lose. They
are the Life of every Honorable Enterprise, giving credit to it by their
Example, and Security, by the shelter of their Authority, they are the
Principal Wheel in all Regular Public Motions, if they stop, or move heavily
and unwillingly, the whole Affair halts; tho inferior persons should be never
so zealous, yet without them, they may sit down and lament, that the Children
are come to the birth, but there is no strength to bring forth.

For this reason it might be that Reforming Work, was not pursued in the two
late Reigns, tho the same persons were then living, that with such Pious
Resolution, began it since in the Metropolis of the neighbor Kingdom; they
were then, formed, tho more secretly, into a Religious Society; but there was
so much Wickedness, at that time, in High places, that such a Design could find
no Countenance: But now that Public Authority, as a Monument of Gratitude, for
our late Deliverance, has declared War against those Domestic Enemies, I
mean, our Scandalous Impiety's. Now that our King has Decreed this Justice,
and our Parliaments have Voted down Profaness, now that Wholesome Laws are
Enacted (may they be as Irreversible as the Laws of the Medes and Persians) we
see, there wants not a number who are ready to run to that Banner which is
displayed for the Honor of God; so great is the Magistrates Influence in this
matter; yea, and that of Subordinate ones too, that the cause of God's passing
Sentence upon Jerusalem was this; they could not find one that would Execute
Judgment, not a Magistrate would appear to Countenance what was good, Ier. 5.1.
so that such may be said to be entrusted with Ten Talents, when private
persons have but One or T^^.

What Conscience then should they make of such a great Prize in their hands?
since this is the very express end, which God, who gives them their Power (and
will shortly ask an account of the use of it) has assigned it to, viz. to be a
Term to Evil doers. Romans 13.4.
Were I to be their Monitor, it should be in David's words, Be wise O ye
Rulers, be instructed O ye Judges of the Land, Ps. 2.10.11.
serve the Lord with fear: Kiss the Son least he be angry. I would humbly ask
whose Superscription do you bear* and since the Truth, as well as a regard to
your own Honor, allows you to say, God's; Oh then render to him, the things
that are his! You would not incur the suspicion of Disloyalty to your Prince,
by conniving at public Affronts to his Name or Person; It would be with you a
strong Argument which they used to Pilate, If thou let this man go, thou art
not Caesar's friend. It touched him so to the quick, John. 19.12.13.
that he durst show no more favor to our Blessed Lord: Why should it not be a
stronger Argument, to tell you that you are not God's friends if you let
Profligate Offenders escape? In a word, Magistrates should be like the Heavenly
Orbs, not barely to roll over the peoples heads in a Lordly Dominion, but also
to afford a Benign Aspect upon the Commonweal.

Secondly, Yet as every Common Soldier, without leaving his Rank, may do good
Service in the Battle, as well as his Commander, so may all of you cast some
Mites into this Treasury of God's Honor; in such Instances as these. -- 1. You
may serve his Honor in this matter, by laying the Impieties of the Profane
before the Magistrate, in order to punishment. Be not ashamed to come in as
witness for the Great King of Heaven; Eli found many Informers against his own
Sons, this aggravated his Crime, in not Restraining them; If Magistrates will
not execute Justice, the Guilt lies at their door, but if you do not carry it
thither, I fear it will lie at your own: We often speak of bearing a Testimony
against National Sins; The best Testimony that I know of, is that before a
Magistrate in order to their being punished. I truly think no Customary, bold
Sinner, that openly Offends, should be spared, tho he were our Companion.
Remember Eli suffered for sparing the Offspring of his own Bowels; when God
upon the Scornful Language of a Degenerate Age, cries out Who is on my side?
Who dares but Offer himself? And as all should do their part in general, so it
were to be wished, That some who are most capable of prudent, active service,
would join themselves to those Societies, which are well enough known in this
City, to bear part of the Burden, in this both Necessary and legal design,
Prove. 21, 28.
as Sinners join hand in hand to escape punishment, so should you join to
prevent them: Let me ^ell you, in this Case more than ordinary concern should
be shown, that passage of Austin being applicable here; Non ^^at, qui non
zelat. He is hardly a Friend of God, that is not warm and earnest in this
important Service. 2. Many of you may honor God in this work with your
Substance: Pro. 39.
You know the precept is general, but when you come to put it in practice, it
must be in some particular instance, and I know no occasion to which I may more
properly apply it, than this in hand, being an affair that necessarily involves
in it, considerable expenses, of which the occasions are Just and Honorable;
much may be said to commend such liberality; let it be considered that it
excels ordinary Charity to the poor, which yet Christ will take eminent notice
of, in the day of Judgment, and to which so many remarkable promises are made
by him. The great advantage of which is, that God will allow it to have an
ultimate reference to himself, in as much as ye have done it to these, M^^.
25.40.
you did it to me. But in this Case, what we give, is more directly and
immediately done to God, without the benefit of such a favorable construction
as that. Besides, that such occasions do not offer themselves so frequently as
those for common Charity, you are always encompassed with Objects of that
Nature, but you have not always such noble designs on Foot for the honor of
God, to require your aid; so that I may very properly here, apply Christ's
words on something a like occasion; M^^. 26.11.
The poor you always have with you, but me ye have not always. Take therefore
the present opportunity.

3. You should all further this blessed Work, by giving it countenance and
approbation. There is no doubt, but while immorality has so many Patrons, this
way will be every where spoken against, and they that attempt the restraint of
lewd men, though in the most regular way, will incur the ill Word and ill Will of
such, as either feel, or fear the just punishment of their Crimes; and
especially if they be necessitated to use what may seem less generous methods,
though very lawful, for the more effectual promotion of their designed end, as
well as for their own safety, ^^ if there (...) be the least imprudent step
taken; but do you rather (...) their defects than agravate them; it is no wonder
if when (...) filthy a house is sweeping, some offensive dust should fly ^
bout, which is to be born in order to cleansing. There (...) enough, to
animadvert and censure, take not their part; (...) Baal plead for himself, let
Profaness be its own Advocate, (...) not you so much the Friends of Publicans
and Sinners. 4. Let all favor, and further it with their earnest prayers to
God for success. It Is an important conflict between God Kingdom and the Devils:
Oh, hold up your hands in ferven^ request while the dispute lasts. Favor O
Lord their righteous Cause; prosper thou the work of their hands. Arise^ and
let thy Enemies be scattered; and turn away transgression from our Jacob, that
iniquity may fall, and never rise more should be every one's Supplication, that
wishes Gods honour^


II. Use, Since God will honor them that honor him, let this greatly
encourage those that are engaged already in this honorable design; God will
honor you. This consideration should make you renew your courage, and it will
especially serve to counter-ballance any scornful reproaches, that may be cast
upon you for your forwardness in this matter: It Is perhaps not the least of
Satan's artifices, to make an odious representation of a good Work, and by the
fear of oblique, to affrighten us from pursuing it, it will be but his usual
way if he say I will go forth, and be a slandring, lying Spirit in the mouths
of many, against them that are active against his Kingdom of Darkness.

It will therefore be no wonder, if such invidious suggestions as these should
be heard, 1 King. 18.16.
viz. That you are the ^^^blers of Israel, as Elijah was slandered by Ahab, for
the like reason, that you are base Hypocrites, who would be counted Saints. but
will cheat and lie, and do any secret evil; and that you make a gain of this
work, and the like* you know what sort of men they be, from whom such venom
may come, (...) that are in the Service of the Father of L^ts, must be allowed
to make use of a little of his Art. But under all these Calumnies, Isa. 51.7, 8.
I say to you in God's own words: Fear not the reproaches of men, neither be
afraid of their (...), for the (...) (...) like a garment; they will come to
naught so ^^g as they are without a Foundation: However in the (...) time, you
have this to oppose, God will honor you, (...) therefore in contempt of all
their reproaches go on with ^^^^ution, Ps. 109.28.
saying with David, in the like case; Let them ^^^se, but Bless them.

Yea, whatever other difficulties may occur, let them only ^^ve to make the
Triumph of our Zeal, more conspicuous; remember that you are Soldiers of Jesus
Christ, and therefore for shame, must not flee for a little danger, you are
bound to ^^dure some hardship, 2 Timothy 2:3.
else you in effect say, that you will be Soldiers for any thing, but Fighting;
you will give him any proof of your valor, except by exposing your selves to
ha^^rd: How ridiculous a profession would this be in a Christian, in these
express terms? It Is more becoming you to mount the Breach, and to stand in the
Gap.

My Brethren, you have hitherto run well; Oh that nothing may now hinder you,
it would be very uncomfortable to Thousands of them that love God, if your Zeal
should now decline, or if out of a regard to your own ease, you should seek a
discharge from this warfare, when at most, ^is but the height of the conflict.
To prevent which, I shall offer you some serious Motives, showing you the evil
consequences of such an unseasonable declension.

Motive I. You will loose the happiest opportunity imaginable for public
Reformation. There are some great Engines which to put in motion, is the
greatest difficulty; and to begin well, is the hardest part of some
enterprises; such a business is public Reformation, which is very happily
begun among us. The Enemy, viz. All manner of iniquity, did come in as a Flood,
but the Spirit of the Lord has lift up a Standard against (...), Isa. 59.19.
unto which you and many others have repaired, who have marched up to the face
of that bold Enemy, so that he has already made an halt; In and about this
City, you have had the cordial assistance of Magistrates, to whom we may truly
bear this Testimony; Ier. 48.10. In the Margin.
that they have not done the work of the Lord negligently, in witholding the
Sword from just punishment, as fearing the Carfe of God denounced against them,
who do. Your Names have in great part been covered from reproach, by their
Secrecy, or by their Checks of such as (...) and reproach you for your Duty;
many of different (...) sions, have United in the Bands of Love for this work,
(...) some of Rank and Eminency both in Church and State, so (...) now the work
is become both Easy and Honorable, yea (...) safe too in comparison of what
it has been; you have gai^ with some labor and pains, so much ground, that
it is pity ^ should be lost again; after several thousand Convictions ^ Swearers
and Cursers, we can observe a sensible alteration ^ men's dialect; Romans 3.13,14.
those Throats that lately were as open Sep^ chres, sending forth a loathsome
stench, are now, though ^ painted Sepulchers (by assuming any great appearance of
Piety yet, closed and shut; and so do not give that public offenc^ nor are
such a common nuisance as formerly. How great ^ Encouragement is this to proceed?

If we compare these things with the circumstances, which as to these matters
we were, not many years since, may tempt us to use Balaam's Expression of
Astonishment What has God wrought? Number. 23.2^.
What a strange turn is here in (...) affairs of our Israel? And doubtless if
you go on with you^ wonted Zeal, and especially if the Bulk of serious
Christian^ who wish you success, will promote it by their concurrent ^deavours,
we may hope for a more general Triumph over the Kingdom of darkness: And can
you think of loosing such ^ opportunity as this, with any peace of mind?
Verily, Sir I tell you, many have desired to see these things which yo^ see,
and could not see them; many Mourners are gone off the Stage, that would with
all their Hearts and Souls, have p^ their Hands to this blessed Work; had there
been but suc^ Laws, such Magistrates, and such other encouragements ^ you meet
with; but God did not honor them with su^ advantages, you are they whom he
has chosen to trust the^ choice Talents with; should you now after all, lose
this Se^ son, as great would be the guilt of neglecting such a price ^ your
hands, so, there would remain no hope of ever seei^ such another; for when once
Laws of this nature, are l^^ asleep by disuse, they are seldom awakned to
purpose.

Besides that your Zeal in this City, has this singular a^ vantage attending
it, that it is likely to be influential upon (...) whole Kingdom, for as all
the Blood in man's body cir(...) th^^ the heart, and is there envigorated, so
most of ^^ Kingdom by turns have recourse to their Metropolis, where they who
are slack in this work, may by your Zeal be provoked to an imitation, and they
who are, I fear, too secure from punishment in the Country, may meet with it
here; it may be to their good, and Amendment: So that upon all accounts, you
especially are bound at this time, to bestir your ^^lves. 2 Chronicles. 29.11.
And I may bespeak you as Hezekiah did the Levites (in a work of Reformation
too) My Sons be not you now negligent, for you has the Lord chosen to serve
him.

Secondly, We may justly fear that Profaness would be more ^^pant than ever,
after this little Check given to it; I doubt we should find that the short
contradiction it has found from the late Laws, will have had but the same
effect, as Paul says, God's Law once had upon him, that is only to irritrate
their lusts, Romans 7. So that they will not only be as the dog in returning to
their Vomit, but also as the dog let loose, who is much the fiercer, for having
been chained: If once Evil men burst these bonds, and defeat these present
attempts, who can but tremble to think, with what improved insolence, recovered
Wickedness will Triumph and Insult, when once it knows the smallness of your
strength to oppose it. I may therefore allude to that of St. Peter, 2 Epist. 2
Chapter 21 v. and adventure to say, It had been better for you never to have begun
than now to decline, better not to have fought, than to give Iniquity the
advantage of a Victory, by an untimely retreat.

Thirdly, Such a declension of your Zeal, will betray an unfoundness in the
Principles by which you have already been acted; You know that some are apt to
say your Zeal is not Fire kindled from Heaven, but either from some Personal
Quarrel, or an hypocritical affectation of Esteem, or at best, but a Childish
fondness for a Novel business, which lasts while it looks like a Wonder, and
then it becomes a weariness; Now should you indeed desist in your present
circumstances, it would increase the presumption. I hope that you are acted by
the most No^^e Springs, Ps 119.136.
from an awful tenderness for the Honor of God, grieved because Men keep not
his Law, and from a compassio^^^^ concern both for Sinners personal, and the
Nations common good, which you have the sagacit^ to appreh^^ approaching ruin
of, if Iniquity go uncontrolled; But (...) have been your reasons, they will
yet be of force with (...) Is not the name of God, and the Public Good, as
pr^^ now as a few Years since, or have not such flagicious (...) the same
hurtful influence and aspect upon both still? (...) ware that you cast not a
reproach upon all that you have (...) hitherto, by a voluntary desertion of
that Cause, which (...) you seemed so warm for, Gal. 4.18
remember that a right and just Z^^ has this Character, that it is always, and
not only for a time*

Fourthly, The unconquered obstinacy of Wicked men (...) shame and reproach
you; 'twas the Glory of Our Lord (...) that when He and the Devil, had such a
stated Conflict im^^ Wilderness, Mat. 4.11.
the Devil after many vain assaults, retreated, (...) Our Savior kept the
Field as Conqueror: But it will be (...) great Reproach, if in the struggle of
this day between (...) Servants of these two Chieftans, you that are on
Christ's (...) should first faint and flee, especially when you have so m^^ the
advantage every way; the Flagicious Sinner has God (...) his own Conscience to
contend with, as well as with you, (...) has both future and present dangers
to discourage him, (...) that upon the whole, it will be strange indeed if he
think (...) Sins will bear his Charges, or quit costs, through disgra^^ and
penalties here, and through the Horrors of an en^^ Night of darkness
hereafter. But you have all things to (...) courage you, God and Conscience,
the Civil Authority, (...) Joyful Prospects of Eternal Rewards, so that greater
is y^^ assistance, greater your encouragement, every way, greater (...) he that
is in you, than he that is in them, and shall they (...) out, and you languish,
You have that have every way the (...) vantage of them, except you should want
it in your (...) solution.

Fifthly, Consider the great danger that will follow, if (...) your neglect,
the Work of Reformation should not be acc^^ plish'd: What a Train of Calamities
did Eli's remissness (...) punishing his Vile Sons, bring upon the Public and
(...) on himself and his posterity after him? The (...) in (...) habitation,
the Ark taken Captive, and Thirty thousand (...) Israel slain, is the next news
we hear concerning the Pub^^ Chapter 4. Then Eli himself dies the death of an
unredeemed Ass, breaks his neck with a fall, after that evil tidings had broken
^is heart, his Two wicked Sons are slain in the Battle, his Daughter in Law
expires in her anguish and grief, and all his posterity is left under the Curse
and Sentence of Rejection, which after the Reign of Saul and David, Kin. 2.27.
was executed by Solomon* the Vengeance of God follows him after death it self,
in the Generations to come; and all this for the Iniquity he knows of, Chapter 3.1^*
for that Emphatical, that heavy Sin, of not punishing Scandalous Offenders: Oh
what an awful warning should this be to Magistrates and People that they incur
not the Guilt of it* That they do not through negligence, or sloth, or a
foolish Tenderness, omit to vindicate the Honor of God, from the scorn of
Profligate Sinners; we would hope to see shortly that Universal Restraint of
such, as shall be both the Safety and Ornament of our Land, but if you, and
others, if Magistrates or People, have no heart to do so much for God, who
knows how soon the Glory may depart from us, and we be forced to write I-Chabod
on all our Comforts, when the weight of some Additional Curse also may fall on
them who had special advantages for doing their Duty, but did it not. Nay yours
after you may feel it, and the Frowns of God be entailed on your posterity, so
provoking a Sin is it, not to rise up for God against Evil doers, when he
sounds an Alarm to the Conflict.

Nay, let me tell you this thing further, that your own personal Piety in other
relations, may be no security to you, against Temporal Judgments; Eli had,
himself, a mighty Reverence for God, with what humble submission does he adore
the Justice of his Threatenings, 1 Samuel ^.18.
It Is the Lord, let him do what seems good in his sight. His heart was set upon
the Ark of God; Chapter 4.18.
That Word, the Ark of God is taken, knocked him down dead; yet for all this,
God's Anger was not turned away, but his hand was stretched out still. -- No,
far be it from me to let thee or thine continue in Honor, on thee shall be all
that contempt and shame, which thou should have poured upon those Lewd
Wretches, and because thou have let them escape, thou shall not.

Sixthly, But then, if on the other hand, you are (...) in these endeavors,
how sweet and comfortable will the (...) of it be, at death and for ever! It Is
but a poor Inch of (...) we have, in which to do our God such Service as this,
in (...) ven are no conflicts between Saints and Sinners; there is (...)
Warfare, all is Triumph and Peace, no trial of your Co^^ and Patient
Resolution; it is in this present Life if ever, we (...) Honor God in this
kind; and sure when you are going (...) the Stage, Conscience will enquire what
has been done (...) God and his Interest? And the more of Self-denial, the m^^
pains, hazards and discouragements you have gone throug^^ to serve his Honor,
the sweeter will your Reflections on (...) be, and with greater confidence will
you hope and pray fo^^ his Salvation. Of this, you may see an Instance upon
Reco^^ in David, Ps. 26.24. compared with v. 9. I have not sat wi^^ vain
persons, I have hated the Congr egation of Evil doers: O ga^^ there not, thou,
my Soul with Sinners, etc. Qu. d. Thou Lord* that art the Omniscient Witness,
and shortly wilt be the Final. Judge of all my ways, know that I never loved
either the^ ways, or the company of profane Sinners; I have always appeared
against them; I have checked, and discountenanced them, they have been a grief
to me, and I have been an awe and restraint upon them; now therefore I pray let
not me when I dye, go with them, with whom I could not endure to live; we were
never delightful Associates in the world, O never let me be their sorrowful
Companion in the next; and how certain accomplishment must such requests, so
reasonable and so suitable have? You shall go, not to such as you grieved at
and abhorred, but to such as you have loved, where none shall either offend
God, or grieve you by their Sin and Folly, where shall be no more reforming
wor^ to do; because no more Sin or Blemish, no more confl ict, because no
Enemies of God; no more danger or hazard in God's Service, because none to
oppose: Where all your difficulties and discouragements shall be left behind,
to poor mortals that shall follow after you, complaining and groaning, through
these Black Tents of Kedar, when you are free from the woes and vexations
thereof.

And then my Brethren, then will come the Crowns and Thrones, the Robes and
Palms of Victory, to adorn them who have with greatest zeal and labor, striven
against Sin and Satan, for God and Holiness: Oh who would want these
comfortable thoughts upon a dying Bed! How much better is this, than have
Conscience chase thee out of this world into Eternity, with such upbraiding
clamours, as Go, thou slothful unprofitable Servant, thou unsavory Salt, thou
Cumberer of the ground, thou despised Vessel, in which thy God had no pleasure,
to make any use of!

But then that you may reflect thus comfortably upon your endeavors, you must
be directed by such Rules as these.

1. Beware that none of you be Guilty of wounding the Honor of God your
selves, while you pretend to repair the Injuries it receives from others; let
no man think to compound for any Indulged Crimes of his own, by being severe
upon those of others; you have many Observers, let it be your care to
disappoint them that watch for your halting; the wicked Cham's of the Age will
be glad to see the Noah's, the promoters of Righteousness, Drunk; remember that
they who reprove the Works of Darkness, Ephesians. ^.11.
must have no fellowship with them. You will much more freely throw the first
stone at others, when you are without such Sins your selves. 2. See that God's
Honor, be the end directly designed by you; go not along with others, merely
for company, when you think not why, that it may not be said of you, as of him
whom God Ordained to be the Rod of his Anger to a sinful Nation, that you
indeed have done what greatly honors God, Isa. 10.7.
howbeit you mean it not so, an explicit vigorous intention to serve your
Makers glory, is an essential part of such more immediate Service. 3. Show your
selves satisfied with God's honor, for your Reward, being ^ar from a proud
affectation of human applause, or any nauseous discovery of Self-esteem; would
it not be a sad exchange, if God should say, they have their reward? To lose
the approbation and favor of Heaven, for the mistaken good opinion of poor
Worms. Let then the most unaffected humility show that you love not the praise
of Men, so much as the praise of God. Let no man have occasion, (...) to
Interpret your carriage, as if the Language of it, were like that of
vainglorious Iehu, Come see my Zeal for the Lord. It Is then an happy case
indeed, when a man's Face shines as Moses's, with the luster of eminent
perfections, and himself knows it not, or ar least covers them with a Vail of
Modesty; while you endeavor to be as the lights of the World, be like the
bright flaming Taper, which at once casts a splendid light before others, and
yet an obscure shade about it self.

4. See that the methods you use in this work, be as suited to the honor of
God as the matter of your Zeal is, I take this for granted, that you are acting
in the safest Cause in the World, you are not prosecuting any for differences
of Judgment in Religion, or matters of Conscience, in such a case, men's
misguided Zeal, often makes those woeful mistakes (spoken of by Christ, John
16.2.) that I should fear to wish you God speed. But yours is the most
unexceptionable cause, viz. To expose to punishment those profane practices,
which no Conscience was ever so perverse, as seriously to espouse; Who ever
heard any cry out in bitter agonies, that they had not Sworn, or Whor'd, or
contemned the Sabbath more?
Now take care that your means be as warrantable, for the discovery of such
Offenders; you know ^tis spoken to God's honor, ^im. 1.13.
that he Tempts no man to Evil, neither let any say that he was tempted of you,
as I doubt not but you count it a wicked thing to provoke a man to passion, in
hopes that he will Swear and Curse, so should you in other cases, be afraid to
lead any into Temptation, it is not honorable to kindle those impure flames,
which you would quench, and which cannot burn the least while, without offense
to God, nor is it safe to give poison, in hopes of an Antidote; besides that it
may prove a dangerous temptation to your selves, and you fall into the snare
you hid for others, or at least may bring you under the reproach and suspicion
of an evil design, by such as shall refuse your bait, and so you get a blot not
easily to be wiped out.

Lastly, Be greatly concerned that you can honor him no more in this matter,
especially if your endeavors should not i^ the main prove successful: Oh
grieve under it, for God's (...), that his great name must yet suffer contempt,
his worship be despised, and his Laws trampled under feet, and you cannot help
him; for the Nations sake, that when God would purge them, they would not be
purged; Mourn over a people that hate to be reformed, for whom what will remain
but utter destruction, of which Incorrigibleness in Sin, is a desperate Omen,
it is said of these Sons of Eli, that they would not harken to their Fathers
reproof, because the Lord would destroy them; and for your own sakes, that God
will not honor you with success in so noble service.

But to conclude, if on the other hand you do prevail (as I would by no means
despair of it) then will it be God's Glory, to have his name held reverend, and
his Law made honorable; 'twill be the Glory of our Land, to be called an
Habitation of Holiness; the Glory of our City, that it is a Faithful City, Isa.
1.21.
full of Judgment, in which Righteousness lodges; yea, the Glory of our Prince,
that in his days we were delivered, not only from Popery and Slavery, but from
a terrible contagion of open Profaness, and that in His time, Righteousness and
Peace kiss each other.

And it will be the Glory of all you, who have been active Instruments of all
this, for having honored God, you he will honor: And the Shame shall be to
none, but them, who deserve no better, and for whom the most cha^itable Prayer
we can put up, Psalm. 83.16.
is that of David; Fill thou their Faces with shame, that they may seek thy
Name O Lord.

FINIS.

