AN ENCOMIUM On the REVEREND and VALIANT Mr. George Walker.
10. Sept: 1689:
THOU glorious Guide in Honor's roughest ways,
Whose vast Deserts exceeds our greatest Praise;
Whilst clamorous throngs of the admiring Crowd,
Their Joy, and thy Deserts proclaim aloud;
Whilst sucking Babes are taught to lisp thy Name,
Permit I Echo the loud Voice of Fame;
Whose Golden Wings shall bear thy Name on high,
And mounting Plumes shall beat the distant Sky.
The Constant, Valiant, Loyal Walker's Name,
His Countrey's glory, but the Rebels shame:
The glorious Trophies of his Loyal Sword,
Immortal Annals ever shall record;
Successive times shall long with wonder hear,
Love and admire, and hold his memory dear:
Propose his Pattern as the utmost bound
Virtue can reach, or may in Man be found:
The Roman Valor must by his decline,
Which like the Sun does lesser Stars outshine.
Virtue in him exalted does appear,
Secure by being Good, free both from Guilt and Fear;
Who bravely for his dear Religion stood,
The Kingdoms glory, and the Nations good:
The Gown-mens Mirror when he speaks the Word,
The Soldiers Pattern when he takes the Sword.
When Popish Legions close Besieged the Town,
And proudly bragged, Their Lives and all is our own;
The thoughts but on his Dangers chills my Blood,
I shake to think how he undaunted stood;
And Deaths grim Terrors at his awful sight,
Grown fearful to his numerous Foes, took flight;
Like as a Fire suppressed in hollow Cave,
Disdains its Prison, and does murmuring rave;
At last breaks forth, mounts to its native seat,
Devouring all with flames and rapid heat:
So mighty Walker sallied on his Foes;
Still crowned with Victory whensoe're he goes;
With few and weak, whole Legions put to flight,
Honor by greatest Dangers shows most bright.
His noble Mind exiled all sordid Fear,
A Soul so great and brave could not despair.
As when a troop of thrifty Swains cut down
With Sythes Earth's ripn'd Riches from the ground,
Whole sheaves of Corn lie strewn upon the Plain,
So by his Arms were Irish Rebels slain;
Yet than all these an Enemy more fell,
Within the City Walls did Famine dwell:
Famine that never shuns the worst of Meat,
Famine that never did a Parlee beat,
Famine that never sounded a retreat;
Famine, by which their Brave and Valiant died,
This they encountered, and its power defied.
He when the ghastly Emperor of Graves
(Which bravest Men of all their force bereaves)
Star'd in his Face, loud threatening all to kill,
No fear of Death could force him to do ill:
He knew the Quarrel happy was, and good,
For Countries Cause to spend his dearest Blood.
Like Staremberg that bravely did support
By his great Fortiude the Imperial Court;
So Reverend Walker for three Nations good,
Against Number, Sickness, Death and Famine stood;
No Dangers or Rewards could make him yield,
Faithful in the Town, and Valiant in the Field:
Fame, Queen of Immortality, shall give
Him Balm when dead, and Honor whilst alive.
May from his Lips, Just, Loyal Sermons flow,
Whilst lawrel'd Miters court his Reverend Brown.
Danger has Honor, great Designs their Fame,
And Resolution's Honors fairest aim.
Let all brave Souls so venture for the Prize,
They make their Fortune that are Stout and Wise.
LICENSED,

September 6. 1689. J. Frasier.

LONDON, Printed for J. Green, near Temple-Barr. 1689.


