THREE LETTERS To the Author of a BOOK, Entitled The Lord's Day Vindicated,
OR, The First Day of the Week the Christian SABBATH. TOGETHER WITH
ANIMADVERSIONS On a Railing PAMPHLET, Entitled The Sauciness of a Seducer
Rebuked, OR, The Pride and Folly of an Ignorant Scribler made Manifest.

BY Edmund Elys, a Servant of JESUS CHRIST.

1 John, 1. 5. This is the Message, which we have heard of Him, and Declare
unto you; that GOD IS LIGHT, and in Him is no Darkness at all.

LONDON, Printed for T. Northcott, in George-Yard, near Lombard Street. 1694.

Three LETTERS, etc.
SIR,
THE Love of Christ constrains me, to Admonish you to give Satisfaction to the
World, for the Vast Scandal you have given, in Publishing such an Impious
Conceit, viz. That JESUS CHRIST did Not Make the World. This you could never
have done, if you had not Fallen from the Profession of the Faith of the Church
of England; I Believe in one Lord JESUS CHRIST, By Whom All things were made.
Does not our Blessed Lord JESUS CHRIST say, Before Abraham was, I AM? He IS
Before Abraham, He IS Before All Worlds.

I pray God to give you Understanding in All things.

October. 27. -- 92. Your most hearty Well-wisher, F. F.


SIR,
I Shall not say one word in Answer to your Personal Reflections. Our Dispute
may be Reduced to a very Narrow Compass. If these words, JESUS CHRIST,
According to the Holy Scriptures, do not Signify the HVMANE NATURE ALONE, but
THE ETERNAL PERSON of Our Blessed Savior; Then it must needs be Impious to
Say, That JESUS CHRIST did Not Make the World. But these words do not Signify
the Humane Nature Alone, etc. I am

Your Sincere Well-wisher, E. E.


SIR,
I Deny that these words, JESUS CHRIST, in all places in the Holy Scripture,
Signify Both Natures Hypostatically United: they always Signify the Eternal
Person that has Assumed the Humane Nature; but sometimes they Signify this
Blessed Person, as Praexistent to His Incarnation. Which I Prove by these Texts
of Scripture: 1 Cor. 10. 4, 9. 1 Timothy 1. 15. You may say, if you please, that
it is Nonsense to say that Jesus Christ, as Such, viz. as the words Signify
Both Natures Hypostatically United, Created the World: But yet I say still you
are Guilty of a Great Fault, (and I Hope in time your own Conscience will
Testify the same to you,) in saying, that The Lord Christ did Not Make the
World: For HE, or that Person, whom the Holy Scripture calls Christ, As The
Lord, Created All things in Heaven, and in Earth. I syncerely Wish you All
Happiness, and remain,

Your Servant in the Demonstration of the Truth, E. F.


Animadversions, etc.
THE Sauciness of a Seducer Rebuked, Page 6. J. N. And therefore I desire thee,
Reader, to keep thy Mind near to the Light of Jesus Christ, in thy own Heart,
and Conscience; that so thou may understand what thou read. Anonymus.
After a small Blunder, the for thee, out comes the rare Catholicon, with which
these Q^^^ks do greater wonders, than ever did Puntaeus with his Balsam, or
Ointment, and that is the Light Within. Reader, if thou can but get Joseph
Not, to spare thee a few Ounces of this choice Medicine, called Light Within,
prize it above Aurum potabile, or the Philosophers Stone. But if he will not
part with any of it, follow my Directions and thou may obtain it thy self.
Strip thy self of Lace, Ribbons, and all other Babylonish-Garments, etc.

I shall say little of This, but that I Abhor it, as Open Blasphemy: For most
certainly there is no Other GOD, but He who is The Light Within. To Scoff thus
at The Light within, plainly shows that the Scoffer is under the Power of
Darkness; that He most Shamefully, and Dangerously Errs, not Knowing the
Scriptures, nor the POWER of God. The Light Within is Indeed the Only True
Catholicon: If Our Self-Will do not Hinder its Operation, It will most
certainly Cure All our Diseases, and make us at length Fully, and Perfectly to
Partake of the only True, and Eternal Felicity.

Page 12. It seems convenient, that I should Animadvert upon what I find in
this Page, before I say any thing of what I Observe in some of the precedent
Pages.: Rare edifying Discourse, says the Man in the Dark, Christ is the only
Rule. The Gift of God's Spirit in our Hearts is the Rule. And the Light of
Jesus is the Rule. And all these are one, and the same Rule. There is no
difference (if you believe these acute, and subtle Doctors) between Christ, and
the Light Within. Christ, and the Spirit, are one, and are in every Man's
Heart: and yet they pretend to own the Doctrine of the Trinity. Answ. They hold
indeed, that Christ, and the Spirit, or the Holy Ghost, are One in Essence, and
are in Every Man's Heart, Converting, or Convincing him in order to his
Conversion; or, (in proportion to the Repugnancy he makes against the Divine
Illumination) Tormenting him, etc. as I have said in a Letter to a very Learned
Man of Our own Communion. What does the man mean, by saying, And yet they
pretend to own the Doctrine of the Trinity? Would he have us Believe, that the
Doctrine of the Trinity is Inconsistent with this Assertion, that Christ and the
Spirit are One, and are in Every Man's Heart? If The Father, The Son, and The
Holy Ghost, be The Only True God, is not Christ and the Spirit One? If GOD be
The ONE ABSOLUTELY INFINITE, He Is In All Creatures, and in a Peculiar Manner
in All Rational Souls. When we say, CHRIST is the Rule; our Meaning is, that He
is the Grand Exemplar, or Pattern; that by the Idea, Image, or Manifestation,
which He Gives us of The Only True GOD, The ONE Infinite in All Perfection; we
are to Form All our Notions or Conceptions in Reference to our Duty both
toward GOD, and toward Men: and to Order, and Regulate our Wills, and All our
Affections. I shall leave it to any Sincere Christian, to Judge, whether this
Anonymus be not Guilty of much Profaneness, in producing these Serious, and
Truly Christian Expressions, in such a way of Scorn and Derision.

Page 7. J. N. For the great Mystery, which has been hid from Ages, and from
Generations, is Christ Within, the Hope of Glory. Col. 1. 26, 27.

Anonymus. In these Verses, (which Joseph Not, for reasons best known to
himself, has altered and curtailed, etc. Answ. Joseph Nott's words are not by
him pretended to be a Text of Scripture, but are produced as an Evangelical
Assertion, Grounded on Col. 1. 26, 27. The next Clause, says Anonymus, (...)
being, as Saint Peter says of some things in Saint Paul's Epistles, hard to be
understood; this Prefacer being unlearned, and unstable, has wrested it, as he
does also other Scriptures, to uphold his Error. Being Ignorant of the
Original, he thinks which refers to Mystery; whereas (...) being of the
Masculine Gender, has (...), and not (...) for his Antecedent. Answ. This is
not one of those things hard to be understood, that St. Peter speaks of: For
it is Easy to be Understood by All those that will not Shut the Eyes of their
Understanding against the Sense of what the Holy Ghost in the Scripture
Declares concerning Our Blessed Lord, viz. that He Is The True Light; and
concerning Sin, that it is Darkness, etc. Can our Souls be Saved from Darkness,
but only By The Light Within? As Christ is Within, Purifying our Hearts by the
Operation of His Holy Spirit, so He is the Hope of Glory; that is to say, His
PERSON being the Brightness of the Glory of the Father of Lights, is the
Supreme or Principal Object of Our Hope; since we Believe, that in the Full
Enjoyment of Him, we shall Enjoy (to the Utmost of our Capacity) the Fullness of
All Wisdom, Power, and Glory. But, says Anonymus, (...) Being of the Masculine
Gender, has (...), and not (...) for his Antecedent. Answ. This is a silly
Cavil: For it is Evident, that by the Riches of the Glory of this Mystery, we
are to understand this Mystery that abounds in the Riches of Glory. Without
Controversy, says this same Apostle, Great is the Mystery of Godliness: God
was manifest in the Flesh, etc. God manifest in the Fesh, is CHRIST; who, as He
is In Us, Englihtning our Minds with his Truth, and Enflaming our Hearts with
his Love, is the Hope of Glory. Page 8. J. N. Therefore to the Spirit of God in
thine own Heart, I do recommend thee, as unto that which will give a true
discerning, and right understanding of the things of God, as it is hearkened
unto, and obeyed. Anonymus. But I advise thee, Joseph, and as many of thy
Friends as shall read these Lines, to Search the Scriptures, and not to Trust
your own Hearts, until you have examined them by the Light of Gods Word. Answ.
We must not Trust our own Hearts, either before or after Examination: we must
only Trust the Spirit of God in our own Hearts. That Word, says he, meaning the
Holy Scripture, if hearkened unto, and obeyed, will discover to you what the
Spirit is, which you are under the conduct and influence of. Answ. The Spirit
of God in our Hearts, if Hearkened unto, and Obeyed, will Teach us how to make a
Right Use of the Holy Scriptures, the Words which the Same Spirit Suggested to
the Holy Prophets, and Apostles. It cannot be properly said, that we are to
Obey Writings, but the Holy GOD, by the Dictates of whose Infinitely-Wise
Spirit those Writings were composed, to Reveal the Will of GOD. I am Sure, that
Joseph Not will concur with Me in this Assertion, That the Only way to Know,
as we Ought to Know, any Truth Contained in the Holy Scriptures, is to Comply
with the SPIRIT of Truth in our own Hearts, Inclining us to a Sincere and
Effectual Abhorrence of All KNOWN Sin, and to the Performance of All KNOWN Duty
both toward God, and toward Men. Sect. 3. The Anonymus Slanders J. N. in
these words: Joseph Nott' s Scurvy Commendation of Holy Scripture. I Challenge
any man living, to Invalidate any of Joseph Nott's Scripture-Testimonies, that
Our Lord Jesus Christ Made the World. Page 17. The Divine Nature of our
Redeemer Made the World. Answ. The Divine Nature, as Abstract from the Person
of Jesus Christ, did not Make the World; but the Person, who had the Divine
Nature from Everlasting, and in Time Took on Him the Humane Nature: this
Ever-Blessed and Glorious Person Made the World. Jesus Christ does not Signify
the Human Nature Alone, but the Eternal Person, with Reference to His
Assumption of The Human Nature, either Actual, or in the Divine Decree: In
respect of which the Spirit of Truth calls Him the Lamb Slain from the
Foundation of the World. So that to Say, that Jesus Christ did not Make the
World, is Contrary to the Christian Faith: And I do most heartily Congratulate
to this Honest-meaning Quaker (as they call him) J. N. the Zeal he has shown,
in Publishing His Detestation, and Disproof of it.

Page 14. He was not Actually Jesus, 'till After His Incarnation. Answ. From
hence it would follow, That None were Saved Before His Incarnation; or else,
That they had Another Savior.

Page 19.Consult thy self, and thou shall see,
Noll's Porter had more Light than thee.
I shall make no farther Reflection on this Pamphlet for the present, but only
this, That the Author of it Shall give an Account of His Railing, His Heresy,
and His Blasphemy, to Him that is Ready to Judge the Quick and the Dead. As for
those words in the Title Page of this Malicious Pamphlet, to which Doctor H.
More's Name is Subscribed, I must give this Testimony to the World, in Justice
to the People called Quakers: That Dr. More (my most Dear and Honored Friend)
Declared to Me so Tender an Affection for Them in the Year 1679, that I doubt
not but if He were now Living, He would fully Accord with Me in what I Write in
their Defense. I desire the Learned Reader to peruse Page 748. of Tom. II. of
His Philosophical Writings, where he shall find these words: G. P. quidem (that
is, Guilielmus Penn) in libro suo qui inscribitur, Nulla Crux, Nulla Corona,
Argumentum de Vita Futura, Beataque Animae Immortalitate ita urget, ut vix in
ullum Authorem incidas qui eam rem majori cum Zelo, animique vehementia
inculcet.

What I have here Written, I have Written, as in the Sight of Our Blessed LORD,
who Searches the Heart, and Tries the Reins; and shall bring every Work into
Judgment, with every Secret thing, whether it be Good, or whether it be Evil.

(...).
This Divine Song, which I made in the Year 1666, I now Publish, as a Testimony
of my Peculiar Affection to All persons throughout the World, who do not hold
the Truth in Unrighteousness; but firmly and steadfastly Resolve, by the Grace
of Almighty God, to Lay down their Lives, rather than incurr the Guilt of any
KNOWN Sin of Commission, or Omission.

I.
O Foolish Mortals, what is it ye Love!
There Is naught Without you should your Spirit Move:
That Glorious Spark should Evermore Incline
To that Great LIGHT, which Ev'ry-where does Shine.
II.
In Every Creature that ye See, or Hear,
Ye may Perceive this Boundless LIGHT Appear:
But it is most Seen in each Immortal Soul;
For there this SUN, as in its Orb, does roll.
III.
Those empty things which subtle Fools Acquire,
Do but Enlarge their Souls Tormenting Fire:
Fame, Wealth, and Pleasure, never can Relieve
Those who for Want of Real Good do Grieve.
IV.
O then, my Soul, Be sure Thou still Despise
Whatever does not Extend Beyond the Skies:
For Thou art Great, and naught can ever prove
Thy True Delight, but Boundless LIGHT, and LOVE.
FINIS.

