A TRVE DESCRIPTION OF THE POT-COMPANION POET: WHO Is the Founder of all the
Base and Libellous Pamphlets lately spread abroad.

ALSO* A Character of the Swil-bole Cook.

LONDON, Printed for R. W. 1642.

A TRVE DESCRIPTION OF THE Pot-Companion Poet.
THe Pot-Companion Poet is the Dregs of wit, yet mingled with good Drink, may
have some Relish, his inspirations are more real then others, for they do but
feign a God, but he has his by him, his verses run like the Tap, and his
inventions as the Barrel, ebbs and flows at the mercy of the Spiggot, in Thin
drink he aspires not above a Ballad, but a cup of Sack inflames him, and sets
his muse and nose a fire together; the Press is his mint, and stamps him now
and then a sixpence or two, in regard of the baser coin his Pamphlet, his
works would scarce sell for three half pence, though they are oftentimes given
for three shillings, but only for the pretty title that allures the Country
Gentlemen, and for which the Printer maintains him in Ale a whole fortnight,
his verses are like his clothes, miserable Centos and Patches; yet their pace
is not altogether so hobling as an Almanac. The death of a great man, or the
burning of a house does furnish him with an Argument, and the 9. muses are out
straight in mourning Gowns, and Melpomine cries fire, fire; his other Poems are
but brief in ryme, and like the poor Greeks Collections, to redeem him from
captivity; he is a man now much employed in commendations of our Navy, and a
bitter inveigher against the Spanyard; his frequents works go out in single
sheets, and are fomed in every part of the City, and then chanted from Market
to Market, to a vile tune, and a worse throat, while the poor Country wench
melts like her butter to hear them, and these are the stories of Sam men of
Tyburn, or some strange Monster, or a notorious lie out of Germany, or sitting
in a Baudy-house: he writes Gods Judgments, and ends at the last in some
obscure painted cloth, to which himself made the verses, and his life is like a
Can too full, spills upon the bench. But in conclusion, leaves twenty shillings
on the score, which my Hostess must lose.

A CHARACTER Of the Swill-Bole Cook.
THe Kitchen is his Hell, and he the Devil in it; where his meat and he fryes
together, his Revenues are showered down from the fat of the Land, and he
interlards his own grease among it to help the dripping, Choleric he is, not
by Nature so much as by Art; and it is a shred temptation, his Chopping-knife
lies so near him; his offensive weapons are a mess of hot Broth, or scalding
water: and woe be to him that comes in his way. In the Kitchen he domineers and
rules the Roast, in spite of who says nay, and Curses is the very dialect of
his calling; his labor is mere blustering and fury, and his Speech like that
of Saylors in a storm, a thousand businesses at once, yet in all this tumult he
does not love combustion, but will be the first man that will go and quench it;
he is never good Christian till a hissing pot of ale has shakt him like water
cast on a firebrand, and for that time he is tame and dispossessed, his cunning
is not small in Architecture; for he builds strange Fabrics in Paste, Towers,
and Castles, which are offered to the assault of valiant Teeth, and like Darius
his Palace, in one Banquet demolisht. He is a pitiless murder of Innocents,
and mangles poor souls with unheard of Tortures, and it is thought the Martyrs
Persecution were devised from hence? Sure, we are St. Laurence his Grid-iron,
came out of his Kitchen; his best faculty is at the Dresser, where he seems to
have great skill in the Tracticks, ranging his Dishes in Order Military, and
placing with great discretion in the forefront meats more strange and hardy,
and the more cold and cowardly in the Rear; As quaking Tarts, and quavering
Custards, and such milksop Dishes, which escape many times the fury of the
Encounter. But now the second course is gone up, and he down into the Cellar,
where he drinks and sleeps till four a clock in the Afternoon, and then returns
again to his Regiment.

FINIS.

