C R

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
At the Court at WHITEHALL This Seventh day of November 1683.
Present The Kings most Excellent Majesty, Lord President Lord Privy Seal Duke
of Beaufort Earl of Huntingdon Earl of Bridgewater Earl of Chesterfield Earl of
Sunderland Earl of Clarendon Earl of Bathe Earl of Craven Earl of Ailesbury
Earl of Rochester Earl of Nottingham Lord Bishop of London Mr. Secretary
Jenkins Mr. Chancellor of the Exchequer Mr. Chancellor of the Duchy Mr.
Godolphin.


Whereas Complaint was this day made to His Majesty in Council, That his
Excellency the Sieur Citters, Ambassador residing here from the States General
of the United Provinces of the Netherlands, was on the Fifth day of this
instant November, Riotously Assaulted in his Coach, several Squibs, Stones, and
Firebrands being thrown, whereby his Lady who was with him, was dangerously
wounded.

His Majesty highly resenting this great Insolence offered to the said
Ambassador, and for the Preventing all Disorders that may be occasioned by
throwing of Squibs, and making of Bon-Fires for the future, was this day
pleased to Order in Council, That no person or persons whatsoever, do presume
to throw any Squibs, or other Fireworks in the Streets of London and
Westminster, or the Suburbs thereof, or any Parishes or Places within the Bills
of Mortality, or gather or assemble themselves together upon the pretense of
making any Bon-fires, or throwing any Squibs, or Fireworks, at, or upon any
Festival day, or at any other time or times whatsoever.

And His Majesty is likewise further pleased to Order, That the Right
Honorable the Lord Mayor, and the Aldermen of the City of London, and the
Justices of the Peace in their several and respective Liberties, do from time
to time give their particular Orders to their inferior Officers to be diligent
and careful in Suppressing all such Riotous and Tumultuous Meetings, and the
Seizing all such who are guilty thereof, that they may be Prosecuted with the
utmost Severity of the Law.

Francis Gwyn.

LONDON, Printed by the Assighs of John Bill Deceased: And by Henry Hills, and
Thomas Newcomb, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1683.


