C R
DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE English royal blazon, surmounted
by a crown and flanked by the English lion and Scottish unicorn
At the COURT at WHITEHAL, The Fifteenth Day of May, 1672.
PRESENT, The KINGS Most Excellent MAJESTY, Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, Lord
Keeper, Duke of Lauderdale, Marquess of Worcester, Earl of Bridgewater, Earl of
Essex, Earl of Anglesey. Earl of Bathe, Earl of Craven, Earl of Arlington, Earl
of Shaftsbury, Lord Newport, Lord Holles, Lord Clifford, Mr. Vice-Chamberlain,
Mr. Secretary Trevor, Sir John Duncombe, Mr. Chancellor of the Duchy,
Sir Thomas Osborne.
IT is Ordered by His MAJESTY in Council, that the ensuing Rules and Directions
be pursued and put in Execution in manner following.

I. That no Colliers Ship shall have Protection against Impressing their Men
until the Master and Owners have subscribed an Obligation to pay here in the
Port of London to such Person or Persons as the Court of Aldermen shall
appoint, Twelve pence per Chaldron, or Tun, toward the Charge of a Convoy; and
also, that all other Ships Trading from any Ports of the Northern Coast that
shall desire Protection from such Convoy which apply to any other Ports then
London, shall pay Six pence per Tun, and such as come to London shall pay
Twelve pence per Tun; according to the Burden of their Ships.

II. That no Master of any Colliers Ship shall presume to Sail to, or from the
Ports of London, Newcastle, or Sunderland, without a Sea-Brief from the
Commander of the Convoy: and that no Commander shall give such Sea-Brief to any
Master of any Colliers Ship, until he has seen a Certificate, that the Master
of such Colliers Ship has given security for the payment of the Convoy-Mony;
which Sea-Brief and Certificate shall be delivered gratis.

III. That no Colliers Ship shall have his Dispatch Outward from the
Custom-House, until the Master shall exhibit to the Commissioners a Certificate
that he has paid to the Person or Persons to be appointed by the Court of
Aldermen as aforesaid, Twelve pence per Chaldron for Convoy.

IV. His Majesty is Graciously pleased to declare, That if Occasion require, He
will Furnish the said Ships appointed for Convoy to the Colliers, with Guns for
their Defense; to be returned in case the Ships which shall be Furnished with
such Guns be not either Taken or Lost.

V. That such Commanders of the said Convoyers as the Court of Aldermen shall
nominate, shall be Commissioned as Men of War, and have a competent number of
Men protected; and the said Commanders shall from time to time be under the
Direction of the said Court of Aldermen, in reference to the Convoying and
Defending the Fleets of Colliers. But if it shall happen that any of the
Convoyers shall without prejudice or neglect of their said Service meet with,
and take any Prize Ships, they are to deliver the same, in the same manner as
any other of his Majesty's Men of War are to do, and shall have such benefit in
proportion as other Men of War have, or ought to have: Whereof the Lords
Commissioners for Prizes are to take notice, and give Directions accordingly.

EDW. WALKER.

Waterman blazon of the City of London Mayor.
Cur special tent' die Jovis post merid' sexto die Junii, 1672. Annoque Regni
Regis CAROLI Secundi, Angliae, etc. vicesimo quarto.
WHEREAS His Majesty has been graciously pleased, of his abundant Princely
Prudence and Care of His Subjects, to condescend to the Expedients provided by
His Royal Authority in Council, expressed in the precedent Order for the
Protection and Support of the Coal-Trade: It is therefore Ordered by this
Court, That the same be forthwith Printed and Published, that so all Persons
that find themselves concerned in the said Trade, may apply themselves to the
Lord Mayor or this Court, who will give their best Assistance to put them into
Possession of the Effects of His Majesty's said Gracious Intention.

WAGSTAFFE.

Printed by Andrew Clark, Printer to the Honorable City of LONDON, at his
House in Aldersgatestreet, MDCLXXII.


