A Collection of such Statutes as are now in force, and made in the Reigns of
K. Ed. 6. Queen Eliz. K. James 1st. and K. Charles the 1st. Which enjoin the
Observation of LENT, And other Fish days throughout the Year, with the Reasons
for enjoining the same.
AND be it further enacted by the Authority The Reason^ for the keeping of Lent
expressed in the Stat. 5. Eliz. cap. 5.
aforesaid, for the benefit and Commodity of this Realm to grow, as well in
maintenance of the Navy; as in spairing and increase of Flesh Victual of this
Realm.

It shall not be lawful for any Person within The forfeiture of him that eats
Flesh upon Fish days, and the forfeiture of him in whose house it is eaten.
this Realm to eat any Flesh upon any days now usually observed as Fish days
(upon pain to forfeit Twenty Shillings for every time he shall offend, or else
suffer one Months close Imprisonment without Bail or Main-prise. (35 Eliz. 7.)
And every Person within whose house any such offense shall be done: and being
privy and knowing thereof, and not effectually punished, and disclousing the
same unto some public Officer, having Authority to punish the same for every
such offense, shall forfeit Thirteen Shillings and four pence (35 Eliz. 7) All
which forfeitures for not abstaining from Meats shall be divided into three
equal parts: That is, one part to the use of the Queen, the other 't^ the
Informer, the third to the Common use of the Parish where the offense shall be
committed, and to be levied by the Churchwardens after any Conviction in that
behalf. (5 Eliz. 5.)

But this Act concerning eating of Flesh shall not extend to any Persons having
special Condition upon License, and what shall be given to the Poor upon each
License.
Licenses upon causes contained in the same, and grounded according to the Laws
of this Realm; every of which Licenses shall be void, unless the same contain
these conditions. viz. Every License made to any Person of the degree of a Lord
of the Parliament, and his Wife, shall be upon condition that they shall pay to
the Poor Men's Box, within the Parish where they remain, etc. In the Feast of
the Purification of our Lady, or within six days after, Twenty Six Shillings
Eight Pence, and to be paid within one Month next after the same Feast, upon
pain of forfeiture of the same License. A Knight and his Wife shall pay Yearly
Thirteen Shillings Four Pence. Every Person under the said degree shall pay
Yearly Six Sshillings Eight Pence to the said use at the aforesaid time, and
upon the aforesaid Condition. 5 Eliz. 5.

All Persons which by notorious sickness Who may have License and who may give
License to eat Flesh upon Fish days, and the Fee.
shall be enforced for the Recovery of their Health to eat Flesh for the time
of their sickness, shall be Licensed by the Bishop of the Diocese, or by the
Parson, Vicar, or Curate, of such Parish where such Person is sick, or of one
of the next Parish adjoining, (if there be no Curate, etc. In the same Parish,
or if he be wilful, which License shall be signed by the Bishop, Parson, etc.
And endure no longer then the time of sickness. And if the sikness continue
above Eight days after the License granted, it shall be Registered in the Church
Book, with the knowledge of one of the Churchwardens, and the party Licensed,
shall give to the Curate Four Pence for every entry, and it shall endure no
longer but for his sickness, and if any License by any Parson, Vicar, or
Curate, be granted to any Person, other then such as Evidently appear to have
need thereof, by reason of their sickness, not only every such License shall be
void, but also every such Parson, Curate, or Vicar, shall forfeit for every
such License, otherwise granted, Five Marks. (5 Eliz. 5.)

Such Persons as have upon good Considerations, Such as have License to eat
Flesh upon Fish days. must have one dish of Sea Fish.
any Lawful License to eat Flesh upon any Fish days, be bound to have for every
one Dish of Flesh served to be eaten at their Table, one usual Dish of Sea
Fish, fresh or salt, to be likewise served at the same Table and to be eaten,
or spent, without fraud, or covin as the like kind is, or shall be, usually
eaten on, or spent on Saturdays, (except such Persons as for sickness, shall
for that time be Licenced by the Bishop, Curate, etc. Or by reason of Age, or
other Impediment allowed heretofore, by the Ecclesiastical Laws of this Realm,)
upon the pain aforesaid. (5 Eliz. 5. 1 Jac. 25.)

No Butcher or other Person, whether he be Licenced or not Licenced to Kill
Flesh, Flesh not to be Killed in Lent.
shall from henceforth at any time, in the time of Lent, kill or dress to the
intent to put to Sale any Ox or Oxen, Beve or Beves, Hogs, Calves, Rams, Ewes,
or Wethers, except Oxen or Beves for Victualling of Ships into Foreign Parts,
and except all Flesh to be Killed three days before Easter Yearly, upon pain to
forfeit and loose the same Oxen, Beves, etc. So Killed, and dressed contrary to
this Statute, or the value of them. 1 Jac. 29.

All Justices of the Peace, Mayors, Bailiffs, Officers searching for Flesh
Killed in Lent.
head Officers, and Constables as well of Cities and Towns Corporate as in
every County of this Realm, shall have full Authority Yearly in time of Lent,
to enter into all Houses of Victuallers and Common Victualling Houses within
their Jurisdiction where such offenses shall be suspected to be committed, and
finding any such Oxen, Beves, etc. So Killed or Dressed, or any part of parcel
of the same, contrary to this Statute, shall take and seize the same as
forfeited, and shall give and distribute the same to Prisoners, and other poor
folks by their discretion. 1 Jac 29.

Every Taverner, Innkeeper, keeper of Victuallers dressing of Flesh.
every common Tabling-house, Common Tipler, Common Cook, or Ale-house-keeper,
Offending at any time hereafter in the dressing of any Flesh Victual contrary
to the Statute of Anno 5. Eliz. Or contrary to this Statute, shall not only
forfeitall the Flesh* but so desired also the penalty imposed by the said
Statute of 5. Eliz. for every Offense to be committed, the one half of all
which forfeitures, except such forfeitures as shall be found, and taken by the
Justices of Peace, Mayors, Baylifs, Head-Officers and Constables according to
the Tenor of this Act shall be to the KING, and the other half to such Person
or Persons, as shall sue or inform in any Court of Record for the same, by
Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint, or Information, wherein no Essoine, Protection,
or Wager of Law shall be allowed, etc. 1 Jac. 29. To continue till the end of
the first Session of the next Parliament.

A Clause in an Act. 3 Car. 1. 4. And so Continuance of the former Statute.
much of an Act made the 5th Year of the Reign of the late Queen Eliz.
Entitled, An Act touching certain politic Constitutions made for the
maintenance of the Navy, as it is not repealed by any Statute, nor does concern
the eating of Flesh, or using of Fish upon the Wednesday, etc. together,
withal, and every other additions, Explanations, and alterations made,
theteunto, or thereof or of any part thereof by any Statute, or Statutes made
since the making of the last mentioned Act. And in force the last day of the
S^ssion of Parliament that was in the 25th. Year of the Reign of the late KING
JAMES, etc. Shall continue in force until the end of the next Session of
Parliament. Made Perpetual.


By a Clause in an Act of 17. Car. 1. Cap. 4. The aforesaid Statute is made
Perpetual, see the Abridgments of the late Statutes, Title Continuance:

Note, that all the time of Lent, and every Vigil (or Holy-day-eve) and every
Friday, and Saturday, except Christmas Day falls thereon) and the Ember days
throughout the whole Year, were usually observed by the Laws and Customs of the
Realm, as Fishdays, which is proved by the preamble of the Statute. 2. and 3.
Edw. 6. Cap. 19. whereby also it is Enacted, that in those time^ such
abstinence should be used, and the Stat* 5. and 6. Edw. 6. Cap. 3. Appoints
wha^ days shall be kept Holy, the Eves of which are only to be observed for
Fish days.

And by the Stat. 5 Eliz. 5. Every Wednesday in the Year, (which shall not
happen to fal^ in Christmas or Easter week) is limited (...) be observed as a
Fish day on which day (...) manner of Person shall eat Flesh, otherwis^ then
ought to be on the Common Saturday.

FINIS:
By T. H. Gent.
LONDON, Printed by H. Hills Jun. For R. Tailor near Statione^^ Hall. 1685.


