At the Court at Whitehall, January the Seventeenth, 1678/9.
Present, The Kings most Excellent Majesty His Highness Prince Rupert Lord
Chancellor Lord Treasurer Lord Privy Seal Duke of Monmouth Lord Chamberlain
Earl of Oxford Earl of Salisbury Earl of Bridgwater Earl of Peterborow Earl of
Sunderland Earl of Clarendon Earl of Bathe Earl of Craven Earl of Ailesbury
Earl of Carbery Lord Viscount Fauconberg Lord Bishop of London Lord Bishop of
Durham Lord Berkeley Lord Maynard Mr. Secretary Coventry Mr. Secretary
Williamson Mr. Chancellor of the Exchequer Master of the Ordnance Mr. Speaker


THere having been lately presented by the Justices of the Peace, Sir Queries
to His Majesty in Council, viz.

I. WHether Foreigners (Popish Recusants) that are, and have long been here
settled Housekeepers, and are Tradesmen, viz. Surgeons, Tailors,
Perriwig-makers, or ordinary Shopkeepers, following Employments for their own
advantage, but not otherwise Merchants, but are certified to be
Merchant-Strangers, shall be excused from taking the Oaths, or finding
Sureties, or either of them?

II. Whether such Foreigner(...)ing C(...)d by Ambassadors, or other Foreign
Ministers, to be their Servants at this time, shall be ex^^^ed.

III. Whether Foreigners (Popish Recusants) settled here Housekeepers, but
neither are Tradesmen, Travelers, or Foreign Ministers Servants, shall be
excused?

IV. Whether Native Subjects of Our Sovereign Lord, that are Menial Servants of
Foreign Ministers, shall be excused?

V. Whether Married Women, being Popish Recusants, but their Husbands
Protestants, shall be excused?

VI. Whether Popish Recusants that have taken the Oaths, found Sureties, have
appeared, and are Convict, shall find new Sureties, or be continued over?

And his Majesty having from the Judges to whom the same were Referred,
received Answer in Writing in the words following,

May it please your Majesty,
We have met, and Considered of the Questions proposed to Us, and do hereby
humbly return Our Opinions.

To the First We are of Opinion,

I. THat Foreigners (being Popish Recusants) and Exercising ordinary Trades,
(but not Merchants) are not excused from taking the Oaths, or finding
Securities.

II. To the Second, That Foreigners, though Certified by Ambassadors to be
their Servants, except they are their Menial Servants, are not excused.

III. To the Third, That Foreigners, though settled Housekeepers, being no
Travelers, or Foreign Ministers Servants, are not excused.

IV. To the Fourth, That the Kings Native Subjects are not excused from taking
the Oaths by being Menial Servants to Foreign Ministers.

V. To the Fifth, We find no Law that excuses a Feme Covert, being a Papist,
from taking the Oaths, though her Husband be a Protestant.

VI. To the Sixth, That a Popish Recusant having taken the Oaths, is not bound
to find new Sureties, unless upon a new tender of the Oaths, he shall refuse to
take them.

All which with great Humility we submit to Your Majesty's Judgment. Will.
Scroggs Fra. North W. Mountagu W. VVylde Tim. Littleton Hugh VVyndham Robert
Atkyns V. Bertie Fr. Bramston Tho. Jones VV. Dolben.



HIs Majesty is Graciously pleased to Approve the said Report and Opinion of
His Judges, and did this day Order, as it is hereby Ordered accordingly, That
the Justices of the Peace in their respective Precincts, do, in Execution of
their Duties touching the Particulars there mentioned, take notice of the same,
and conform themselves thereunto. And this Order is to be sent to the Custos
Rotulorum of each County, that he may give Information of the same.

ROBERT SOUTHWELL.

LONDON, Printed by John Bill, Christopher Barker, Thomas Newcomb, and Henry
Hills, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1678/9.


