W R

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
29. May. 1697. By the Lords Justices, A PROCLAMATION. For Enforcing ye Act
past ye last Sessions for ye increase and Incouragemt of Seamen.
Tho. Cantuar. J. Summers C. Devonshire, Sunderland, Romney.


WHereas there was an Act made the last Session of Parliament, Entitled, An
Act to Enforce the Act for the Increase and Encouragement of Seamen; To the end
therefore that all Seamen and other Persons concerned in the said Act may be
Informed of the Matters therein Contained, We have thought fit, by the Advice
of His Majesty's Privy Council to Issue this Proclamation, hereby giving
Notice, that in the said Act, it is (amongst other things) Enacted, That such
Registered Seamen, who by Age, Wounds, or other Accidents, shall be Disabled for
future Service at Sea, and the Widows and Children of such Seamen, as by Virtue
of an Act made at a Session of Parliament held in the Seventh and Eighth Years
of His Majesty's Reign, Entitled, An Act for the Increase and Encouragement of
Seamen, may Claim the Relief of Greenwich hospital, shall, for the avoiding of
all Partiality and Favor, from time to time, in Succession one after another,
be Admitted into the said Hospital in Order and due Course, according to their
Number on the Register Book. Also for the Ease of Seamen desirous to be
Registered, they shall be obliged to bring or cause to be brought to the
Register Officer* Certificates of the Place of their Abode, or Removal from
their Habitation, under the Hands of only One or more Justices of the Peace of
the Place or County where they Dwell. And that for the better Levying and
Collecting the Duties of Six Pence per Mensem, Granted by the said last Recited
Act, for the Revenues and Support of the Hospital Charities, and Bounties
therein mentioned, the Officers appointed for the Registring Seamen, or their
Deputies, may by Warrant under their Hands, Summon to Appear before them all
Masters of any Ships, and Vessels which are not in His Majesty's Service, and
Examine them upon Oath concerning their Seamens Wages, and time of Service; And
if such Masters shall Refuse to Appear on the said Summons, or shall Appear and
Refuse to give the said Accounts upon Oath, of their Seamens Wages, and time of
Service, then such Offender shall for every such Offense Forfeit Ten Pounds,
for the Use of the said Hospital, to the Recovered with Charges of Suit in any
of His Majesty's Courts of Record, as is mentioned in the said Act, excepting
Quakers or Reputed Quakers, who are thereby Required to give in the said
Accounts on their Solemn Affirmation and Declaration, in such manner as by an
Act made at a Session of Parliament held in the Seventh and Eighth Years of His
Majesty's Reign, Entitled, An Act that the Solemn Affirmation and Declaration
of the People called Quakers shall be Accepted instead of an Oath in the usual
Form, is directed, and on their Refusal so to do, to be liable to the aforesaid
Penalties. And that such Registered Seamen as shall Lend or Dispose of their
Certificates to any other Persons to Protect them from being Impressed into His
Majesty's Service, shall be struck out of the Register, and be Obliged to Serve
His Majesty at Sea for the space of Six Months without any Pay or Wages, as in
Case of Registered Men not Appearing on Summons to Serve in His Majesty's
Service, according to the said last Recited Act; And such Men as shall Procure,
Keep, or Use the said Certificates for the said Purpose, shall forfeit Twenty
Pounds, or Serve His Majesty in Sea Service Six Months, without any Pay or
Wages. And also that the Mayors, Deputy Mayors, Bailiffs, or Deputy Bailiffs of
any of the Towns within the Jurisdiction of the Cinque Ports, where no Justice
of the Peace shall be Residing or Inhabiting within Three Miles of such Port or
Place, may Certify the Abode of Persons to be Registered, instead of the said
Justice of the Peace.

Given at the Court at Whitehall the Twenty seventh Day of May, 1697. In the
Ninth Year of His Majesty's Reign.
London, Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb,
deceased, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1697.


