THE Earl of Exeter with diverse other Lords and Gentlemen are Proprietors and
Owners in possession, and Commoners by undoubted The Case and Title.
right and Title in the Law, by several and respective decents, and purchases
of 36000 Acres of Fen and Meadow ground, lying between the Rivers of Glenn, and
Kyme Eay, in the County of Lincoln, and of several Manors, and Lordships
adjoining thereunto: And wherein the said Lords, and Owners, their Farmers and
Tenants, have Common appendent to their Lands adjoining, and particularly the
said Earl of Exeter is there seized of the Manors of Bourne, Morton, and
Byker; and of the Soil and Royalty of Brovage, for about 14 miles together in
the said Fen, and Meadow-ground.

The Lords and Owners being estated and possessed as aforesaid, the now
pretended Dreyners (Anno 1635) by color of a Contract with certain The
grievances committed by the Dreyners.
Commissioners of Sewers (themselves being the chief in Commission) entered into
and upon the said Level, and without consent of the Owners, without Inquiry by
Jury, against an express Verdict whereby the said Level was found not
surrounded, and consequently not at the disposal of the Commissioners of
Sewers: And also notwithstanding the Exceptions, Suits public and private,
Complaints of the Owners and Commoners, endeavored to possess themselves of
14000 Acres thereof, encompassed the same with Banks and new Dreyns, stopped the
old ones, whereby at length such inundations fell upon the Neighboring Towns,
they were constrained (the Dreyners refusing to appear and justify their
proceedings upon Actions of Law brought against them, for the preservation of
their Lives and Goods, being authorized in that behalf by Commissioners of
Sewers) to open the old Dreyns, since which the said Level has been and now is
peaceably enjoyed by the Lords, Owners and Commoners as the same has been from
time, whereof the Memory of man is not to the contrary.

These Dreyners now desire to be Estated in the aforesaid 14000 Acres by Act of
Parliament, upon pretense of their Improvement and former The present Question.
possession thereof.

The Lords Owners and Commoners pray that they may not be stripped of their
Estates upon such pretenses, the Premises are a true state of the Case, Title,
and Question in difference; and deny diverse Pretenses and Allegations, in the
Proposals and Narrative of the Dreyners contained to be true; That is to say,

Dreyners false Pretenses.
1. They deny, That the said Dreyners were ever in a just, lawful or quiet
possession of 14000 Acres of the said Level, For The said Possession (such as
the same was) was obtained illegally only by Color of a Commission of Sewers,
but without due proceedings thereupon, and not warrantable by Law, Statute or
Precedent.
2. The possession was interrupted by Clayms, Entryes, Distresses, and Actions
brought by the Owners and Commoners, as appears by diverse Records, and other
Testimonies. 2. They deny that a Contract was made with the Dreyners to give
them 24000 Acres by approbation of many thousand Commoners, For No such thing
was ever yet proved, and the ensuing Complaints, Suits, and Actions of the
Owners and Commoners evidence the contrary.
3. They deny that the undertaking to Dreyn the Level was ever performed, For,
The Level in general (the 14000 Acres intended for the Dreyners themselves
excepted) was not bettered by the pretended Dreyning, nor the new Dreyns so
effectual and useful as the old Dreyns, which the Dreyns had stopped.
4. They deny that the Dreyners by their dreyning improved the 14000 Acres to a
Mark an Acre annual value, For The same was of as great yearly value and profit
40 and 50 years before, as we are ready to prove.
5. They deny that the Title or Contract, under which these Dreyners claim, is
the same with Lovels Level, Bedford Level, and other former undertakings, For
1. Lovels Dreyning was by general consent after the awarding of a Writ of ad
quod damnum. 2. Bedford Level was by verdict found to be surrounded ground and
of no value, Lyndsey Level was by verdict found not surrounded, and proved of a
good yearly Value. 3. Bedford Level was contracted for with the Owners and
Country at Lynn 6 Car. primi, and after Dreyned; Lyndsey Level never contracted
for with the Owners and Country, but rested from them by Power and Force. The
undertaking in Bedford Level was begun, and pursued legally, and finished, and
continued to the Honor and Profit of the Undertakers and Country. The
undertaking in Lyndsey Level was most illegally begun, violently and
injuriously pursued, and never finished to this day, proving only vexatious and
mischievous both to the undertakers and Country.
6. They deny that the Lords and Owners (who continually offered and still
offer to defend their Right by Law) either committed or abetted any Riot, or
the pulling down the Dreyners Houses or Plantations, but what their oppressions
constrained poor people to do, or may constrain them unto in the future, the
said Lords and Owners know not: but have heard what ever Riot was, the same was
occasioned by one Hull, Servant to the late Earl of Lindsey, who is supposed to
be still living to give account thereof, and the said Lords, and Owners, are
unjustly Scandaled therewith, not being concerned in Suit or in Law to excuse
or answer it. 7. They say the question is mis-stated to be now between the
Riotters and Dreyners, but between the Dreyners and Owners, which shall be
preferred to improve these Lands.
Their Proposals Answered.
The Dreyners Proposals, which are but three in number, are conceived by the
said Lords and Owners unjust and unreasonable, being as follows:

1. Proposal. That the Dreyners should have 14000 Acres of the Level, with help
to repair the Works by them erected. 1. AnswerThese Owners conceive it unjust
and unreasonable that 14000 Acres of Land should be demanded from the Owners
thereof without Right and without Price for the same, and without Crime or
pretense other than the scandal of a Riot. 2. The Lords and Owners conceive it
most unjust and unreasonable, the Dreyners should both divide and choose not
only so much in quantity but the best Land in quality, their 14000 Acres being
the heart and middle of the Level, secured by Banks and Dreyns from the
Upland-waters, unto which the rest is left liable. 3. They are ready to prove
that 14000 Acres are more by some Thousands of Acres than the pretended
Dreyners can claim by their own pretended contract made by and with themselves.
4. The Lords and Owners conceive it most unjust and unreasonable that they
should be required to contribute to the repairs of those Works, by which
themselves and the Country sustained such mischief, and which were erected
without leave to excuse them, or Law to justify them: And they conceive this
Proposal designed purposely to prevent the demand of Satisfaction for the
aforesaid injuries sustained by the Country.
2. Proposal. That the Dreyners when estated by Act of Parliament in 14000
Acres will be contented to Sell them to the Country for their Money disbursed
with Interest. Answer 1. This were to abuse the Justice and Authority of
Parliament, to divest men of their Estates, to the end they may be put to buy
them again. 2. The Lords and Owners having undoubted right in the Premises by
Purchases already made and paid for, 'twere unjust and unreasonable they should
Re-purchase their own Lands. 3. If these Dreyners (as probably it may be) by
their projects in improving other men's Lands, have spent more than the Lands
are worth, it is not reasonable they should be reimbursed out of their purses
whom they have wronged.
3. Proposal. That the Dreyners will accept of the Interest of the Lords and
Owners, and be obliged to double every man's Profit in the Level. Answer 1. If
this offer should Entitle the pretended Dreyners to this Level, they may in
like manner Entitle themselves to all the Common and Wast-ground in England;
not that they mean or can improve the Nature of the Soil by Dreyning, but by
altering the manner of Enjoyment from Common to Enclosure, when they have the
whole to themselves, the Commoners excluded: by which means, if the same were
lawful for the Owners to do (as the same is not) but expressly against the
Letter of diverse Statutes, they could themselves treble every man's Profit. 2.
Commons are not to be valued according to the single profit made thereof, but
as they Benefit and Maintain arable Land to which they belong, and which cannot
consist without them: therefore, 3. The Policy of this Proposal to get the
whole Level under the specious pretense of doubling each man's profit, would (to
compass the Dreyners design) destroy Forty Neighboring Townships consisting in
Tillage, which cannot be maintained without Common. Upon Consideration whereof,

It is Humbly desired on the behalf of the Lords, Owners and Commoners, that
they may be protected and defended in their Rights and Inheritances, according
to the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, and quieted against such unreasonable
Proposals as aforesaid, being but endeavors (under the specious pretense of
Improvement) to get other men's Lands, without Title, Consideration, Consent,
Verdict or Legal Eviction.


