Instructions to be observed by the several Justices of Peace in the several
Counties within this Commonwealth, for the better prevention of Robberies,
Burglaries and other Outrages.
Whereas great Robberies, Burglaries and other Outrages are daily committed,
to the exceeding great damage and danger of the Commonwealth, It is therefore,
in pursuance of the special Order of Parliament to us directed, Ordered for the
future, That the ensuing Directions be forthwith put in execution by all
Justices of Peace in their several Counties; viz.

I. YOu are to cause all Laws in force against Rogues, Vagabonds and sturdy
Beggars, to be duly and effectually executed.

II. You are to cause sufficient Watch and Ward to be kept by persons able in
body, with Bills, Guns, or other weapons, in all fit places and Towns adjoining
to any great Road; and that you give Order to the Constables of every such
Town, That Posts, Rails and Gates be set up in every such place and Town, to
the end to examine all Passengers, as also thereby to stop the speedy flight of
all Thieves and Robbers.

III. And in order to their more speedy apprehension, you shall give Order,
That they have in readiness in every such Town, an expert person and an able
Horse, to be a Guide to such as at any time shall be in pursuit of Thieves and
Robbers.

IV. You shall give Order, That as they shall meet with, or apprehend any such,
or any whatever suspicious persons, that they forthwith carry them before the
next Justice of the Peace, to be by him proceeded withal according to Law.

V. You shall take care effectually to suppress all unlicensed Alehouses, and
all such Alehouses and houses whatsoever, usually entertaining Travelers and
Strangers, which do stand in blind Corners out of the view of Towns or houses.

VI. That to all such as shall necessarily be continued, and all and every the
Innholders within their Counties, You shall give Order to give in writing every
night, viz. by six of the clock in Winter, and by eight of the clock in Summer,
to the Justices of the Peace, or to such other as shall be by them deputed, of
the number of all Travelers lodging within their respective houses, and
whither they are traveling: with a full description of their Apparel, of their
Horses, Geldings and Mares: And in case of default herein by any Innholder or
Alehousekeeper, he or they so offending are to be suppressed, and not suffered
after to hold or keep any Inn or Alehouse: And you are to give Order to the
several Constables, to return you a weekly account of their proceedings herein:
And you are every Month to give an account of your proceedings to this Council.

Signed in the Name, and by Order of the Council of State appointed by
Authority of Parliament.


