CR
DIEV^ET^MON DROIT^

HONI^SOIT^QVI^MAL^Y^PENSE


At the Court at Whitehall, The Twenty eighth of November, 1677.
Present,

The Kings Most Excellent Majesty, Lord Chancellor Lord Treasurer Lord Privy
Seal Earl of Bathe Earl of Carlisle Earl of Craven Earl of Carbery Viscount
Faulconberg Lord Bishop of London Lord Bishop of Durham Lord Maynard Mr
Vice-Chamberlain Mr Secretary Coventry Mr Secretary Williamson Mr Montagu Mr
Chancellor of the Duchy.
WHereas his Excellency the Here Van Beuninghen Ambassador Extraordinary from
the States General of the United Netherlands having by his Memorial to His
Majesty of the 22th of September last, made Complaint of his being highly
Affronted by some Persons who presumed to Cite him by virtue of Two several
Orders of His Majesty in Council, to appear at the Council Table the 10th of
October then following, and afterward caused to be Printed, with the said
Orders, a False and Scandalous Memorandum, highly reflecting upon the Person
and Character of the said Ambassador, which were not only Publicly
Dispersed, but Affixed at the Exchange, and other places within the City of
London: And therefore demanding that Public Satisfaction might be made, as
well to the States his Masters, as to himself, for the said Indignities, His
Majesty was pleased to Direct this Matter to be forthwith Examined; And it
thereupon appearing, That George Carew Esquire (one of the Petitioners
mentioned in the said Orders of Council) was the Person that caused the said
Ambassador to be Cited, as also the said Orders with the Memorandum annexed,
to be Printed. His Majesty did thereupon Order the said George Carew to be
Committed Prisoner to the Ga^^^^use Westminster, for the said Offenses, until
he should have made his humble submission to the said Ambassador. And the said
George Carew having this day attended His Majesty in Council, with his
Submission, which he there Read and Signed, as follows, Viz.

To his Excellency Monsieur Van Beuninghen, Ambassador Extraordinary from the
States General of the United Netherlands.
The humble Address and Submission of George Carew Esquire, Prisoner in the
Gatehouse,
Shows,
THat he being Committed into Custody upon your Excellencies Complaint, for
causing your Excellency to be Cited upon Two Orders of the Council Board: He
most humbly asks Pardon for such his Offense.

And does further acknowledge himself to be Guilty of causing a False and
Scandalous Paper to be Printed: For which, and for the Offense thereby given to
your Excellency, He does again most humbly beg your Excellencies Pardon.

George Carew.
And having afterward presented the same to the said Ambassador, humbly
asking His Excellencies Pardon, the said Ambassador declared that he freely
forgave him. Which being Reported to His Majesty, His Majesty was thereupon
pleased to Order, That the said George Carew should be discharged from his
Imprisonment.

But His Majesty out of a just Resentment of the said Affronts and Indignities,
and to testify his tender Care for Vindicating the Rights and Privileges due
to the Persons and Characters of Ambassadors and Public Ministers, Has
thought fit to Direct and Command, That this Order be forthwith Printed, and
Affixed upon the Royal Exchange London, at the usual Hour of Merchants meeting
there, and at the Court Gate, by one of the Messengers of His Majesty's Chamber
in Ordinary, to the end that the Reparation might be as Public as the
Indignities offered to the said Ambassador.

JOHN NICHOLAS.
LONDON Printed by John Bill, Christopher Barker, Thomas Newcomb, and Henry
Hills, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1677.


