By the Lords Justices of England, A PROCLAMATION.
Tho. Cantuar. J. Summers CS. Pembroke C.P.S. Devonshire. Shrewsbury. Dorset.
Godolphin.
WHereas We have Received Information from the Governor and Company of
Merchants of London Trading to the East Indies, That one Henry Every Commander
of the Ship called the Fancy, of Forty six Guns, and One hundred and thirty
Men, has, under English Colors, acted as a Common Pirate and Robber upon the
High Seas, and has presumed under such Colors to Commit several Acts of
Piracy upon the Seas of India or Persia, which may occasion great Damage to the
Merchants of England, Trading into those Parts; We have therefore thought fit
(by the Advice of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council) to Issue this
Proclamation, hereby Declaring, That the said Henry Every, together with diverse
other English Men and Foreigners, to the Number of about One hundred and
thirty, did Steal and Run away with the said Ship then called the Charles, from
the Port of Corona in Spain; And that the said Henry Every has not any
Commission or Authority from His Majesty to Command the Ship or the Men
therein, but that the said Henry Every, and such as are with him in the said
Ship, are Pirates, and Common Robbers upon the High Seas. And We do hereby
Charge and Command all His Majesty's Admirals, Captains, and other Officers at
Sea, and all His Majesty's Governors and Commanders of any Forts, Castles, or
other Places in His Majesty's Plantations, or otherwise, to Seize and Take the
said Henry Every, and such as are with him in the said Ship, and cause them to
be punished as Pirates upon the High Seas, and in case of Resistance to Sink
and Destroy the said Ship. And We do hereby further Declare, That in case any
of the Persons who are in the said Ship with the said Henry Every, shall
Discover the said Henry Every, so as that the said Henry Every, or the said
Ship may be Seized or Taken, or shall be otherwise Instrumental in Seizing the
said Henry Every, or the said Ship, he or they making such Discovery or
Seizure, shall have His Majesty's Gracious Pardon for their Offenses: And that
such Person or Persons, or any other Person or Persons who shall Discover the
said Henry Every, so as the said Henry Every, or the said Ship may be Seized or
Taken, or shall be otherwise Instrumental in Seizing the said Henry Every, or
the said Ship, he or they making such Discovery or Seizure, shall have a Reward
of Five hundred Pounds, which said Sum of Five hundred Pounds the Lords
Commissioners of His Majesty's Treasury are hereby Required and Directed to Pay
accordingly.

Given at the Council Chamber at Whitehall, the Seventeenth Day of July, 1696.
In the Eighth Year of His Majesty's Reign. God save the King.
LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb,
deceased; Printers to the Kings


