THE EARL OF STRAFFORD Characterized In a LETTER sent to a friend in the
Country. 1641.

Anno Dom. 1641.

The Earl of STRAFFORD CHARACTRIZED In a Letter sent to a friend in the
Country, 1641.
Noble Sir;
I Am enforced to complain of your impetuous commands, and the tax you impose
on me (above all the rest of your vassals) but especially of this of my Lord of
Straffords; as though I alone were inspired with an illumination beyond the
wisdom of the Parliament, which on so long consultation has not yet
determined the articulate point of your question, yet thus much I shall
possitively deliver as a part of my belief: That howsoever my Lord of Strafford
be cried up for a most incomparable and accomplished instrument of State, yet
he is humane, and subject to such infirmities as were incident to our first
Progenitors, and this is a particular of my faith, not of my opinion.

But if it may satisfy your curiosity to be informed of the general
conceptions, I shall then present you with as various a collection of votes and
censures, as there are fancies in the several fuctions daily raised by the
work of Art and Time which qualifieth poison, molifieth flints, and changes
the fuce of all things from their first beings and appearances which have much
befriended my Lord of Strafford.

But whether his Lordship be guilty of high treason, I cannot determine.

Sure it is many foul things stick upon him by manifest proofs, which neither
his finenesse of wit, nor all the fig leaves in Paradise can cover.

True it is the House of Commons stand stiff to make good their first charges,
which are now enforced and prosecuted to the last Article this very day, which
should it not prove Treason on joint rehearsal of the House, and so adjudged
by the Lords, it would then seem to me to be a strain of popular fury, rather
than the legitimate issue of a Court of Parliament.

True it is, that before the quarter-part of the accusations were charged on
him, he was by way of prejudication acquitted by many of both Sexes, and
favored not of a few of both Houses, and some of his Majesty's Council, and
the Papisticall party his friends and followers, and generally by Ladies.

The first reasons are best known unto themselves.

By the second, for respects due to their Patron.

By the third, for interests and obligations of dependancie.

By the fourth, (if well considered) for many feminine and affected
considerations. As the natural pity and consideration of women simpathizing
with his afflictions, with sadness of his aspect, their facility with his
complacences, their lenity with his patheticall oratorie.

On the other side, there is a rigid strong and inflexible party, that say if
he be not found a Traitor, the Parliament must make him so for the Interest of
the Public.

And so I shall present you with the inclinations of another party, and of no
despicable number of Account, which pretend to have a more soliditie of
judgment then to be carried away with private interest, partial respects
which seem to be touched with the Kings and the Commons safety, and to be
sensible of the Commons sufferance.

And these commonly rip up his life and conversation together, with the
progress of his estate and fortunes, and all concluding for hs descent and
Family to be of the noblest and highest rank of Gentry under the degree of
Barronage, his Patromy so plentiful, as that it equalizes, most of the Barons
of the Land, his education noble, and to these of his own acquisition of strong
and able natural parts.

And (if the addage be true that multa ex vultu dinoscuntur,) and though they
mark him for a wise and promising face, yet they unhappily observe in him a
dark and promiscuous countenance, clouded, unlovely, and presaging an envious
and cruel disposition. And this general Quaere is made of him.

What was that which he would have had who (suspicion excepted) might have
been a King at home, hand not restless ambition (habituated in his nature)
interrupted the course of his repose, and disordered the many helps he had to
have lived in plenty, and dyed in felicity.

But disquited (as all ambition is turbulent) in his cogitations and in his
first exposition (agitated by the blasts of his own aspirings) it is said of
him that in his own Country he was transported by the violence of his will to
carry all before him (and come what would of it) to overthrow all that
withstood him.

Of such predominant a pitch he was in his own Constellation and propension
which could not rest there, but must break out into a wider extent, for his
thoughts soared so high; (as men who knew him well affirmed) that he held
himself injuried by the State, that he came no sooner to the Helm.

Whither to come, he journyed through a Wilderness of popular acclamations, and
affected the dangerous name of Fame of being Sovereign Protector of the
Commonwealth.

For which he so much pretended that in all Parliaments he became an other
Iacques the Ortinell. And they aver it for truth, that in those times his
intimate friends and associntes thought it wisdom to shun his conversation,
so forward he was in taxing the motions of the King and State.

And (as it is said) not without a malignant humor, and a repugnant spirit,
always withstood the Kings profit, and stinted the Parliamentary
Contributions at his own will and pleasure, crossing the designs of State, and
infusing, by his stubborn example, a spirit of Contradiction in the Assemblies
of these times, which how fatal they have been to ours, I leave to your
judgment, and which has ever since bred an aversion in his Majesty toward
his people and his Parliaments.

An office wherein they say he did far more mischief than in this for which
he stands now arraigned for his life.

And this is the Description or Abstract of the first part of his life, as he
was the Minion of the people, which (they say) he esteems as the folly of his
youth.

May you now be pleased to receive something of his second Act, as he was a
Minister of the Kings, into whose service, as they say, and I think not
untruely, to have purchased and and bought from the affections of the people at
a higher price than all the Pr^vadoes of Ed: the second, and Richard the
second: For that this only man has cost and lost the King and the Kingdom
more treasure and loyalty than Pierce, Gaveston, and the two Spencers, and the
Marquess of Dublin, did ever cost, their being all put together.

And sure I am, it is the common opinion of the Kingdoms that should be taken
out of the hands of Justice, and the revenge of the public made frustrate, and
the expectations of the three Kingdoms disappointed (who has invaded the whole
by the power of his Counsels, and the parties by the grievous oppressions of
his Majesty's good people, wheresoever he had to do, they say that his
Majesty's Dominions* stand in greater danger and hazard, than even; and (as it
may fall out) to be of a more lamentable Consequence than is fit to be
expressed.

How fatal may one man's ambition be, and his exorbitant humor work toward
the distraction of a State, which they do thus demonstrate by way of suspicion.

First admitting the Kings affections may be disposed together with the great
party which he has in the upper House to acquit him and others.

And that thereby the House of Commons should hold themselves bound by the
interest committed unto them by their Countries to make protestations against
the Lords.

What then may be of a divided body: Secondly it is questioned whether any
future Subsidies will be granted, Customs and Impositions be paid the King
without any Insurrection.

Thirdly, whether the Scots will depart the Kingdom; and if they should,
whether on good cause they may not return, when they shall see a division to
tend to a fatal confusion, both in the heart of the State, and in the body of
the Kingdom, rather than they will give opportunity to the Papists and
Libertines to come in for a share.

Wherefore it is generally concluded by the best and most impartial
judgments, That there is no proportion between the riddance of a few
menstruous and exorbitant members and the general safety of the King and his
Kingdoms.

That there is a necessitated policy of my Lord of Strafford, the Bishop, and
some others, should be given up as just sacrifice, to appease the people, and
to make a compensation for the injury done to them and the public.

And thus have you the second Act of the great Vice Royes progress, with the
opinion of all and the best judgments here about the Town, which I find to be
suitable to yours in the Country.

FINIS

