C R

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
At the COURT at WHITE HALL the 22th of March, 1664.
Present The Kings most excellent Majesty. His Royal Highness the Duke of York.
His Highness Prince Rupert. Lord Archbishop of Canterbury. Lord Chancellor.
Lord Treasurer. Lord Privy Seal. Duke of Albemarle. Duke of Ormond. Marquis of
Dorchester. Earl of St. Alban. Earl of Sandwich. Earl of Anglesey. Earl of
Bathe. Earl of Carlisle. Earl of Lauderdail. Earl of Middleton. Earl of
Carbery. Lord Arlington. Lord Berkley. Lord Ashley. Mr. Treasurer. Mr.
Vice-Chamberlain. Mr Secretary Morice. M.Chancellor of the Duchy. Sir Edward
Nicholas.


WHereas His Majesty by and with the Advice of His Privy Council has dispensed
for some time with certain Clauses of several Acts, concerning Trade, Shipping
and Navigation, by an Order of this Board of the sixth instant: Which Order in
several Clauses thereof extends, but was not intended to extend to Ireland: His
Majesty this day in Council has thought fit by the Advice of the Board, to
direct the revoking the Word Ireland in the said Order, and thereprinting the
same so amended.

John Nicholas.

HIs Majesty, by and with the Advice of His Privy Council, is pleased to
Declare and Order, That an Act of Parliament made in the Parliament begun at
Westminster the Five and twentieth day of April in the Twelfth year of His
Majesty's Reign, and confirmed by the Parliament begun at Westminster the
eighth day of May, in the Thirteenth year of His Majesty's Reign, entitled,
[An Act for encouraging and increasing of Shipping and Navigation] and all the
proceedings therein or thereby directed, Be totally suspended in all the
matters and things therein contained, concerning or relating to any Ships or
Vessels, their Masters or Mariners, their Guns, Furniture, Tackle, Ammunition
and Apparel, or to any Goods or Commodities imported, or exported to, or from
Norway, or the Baltique Sea.

And His Majesty does further Order, That the said Act, and all the proceedings
therein, or thereby directed, be totally suspended in all the matters and
things therein contained, concerning or relating to any Ships, or Vessels,
their Masters or Mariners, their Guns, Furniture, Tackle, Ammunition and
Apparel, or to any Goods or Commodities imported or exported to, or from any
parts of Germany, Flanders or France, whereof the Merchants and Owners shall be
His Majesty's natural born Subjects.

And His Majesty is graciously pleased to declare and grant, That not only His
Majesty's natural born Subjects, but all Merchants of any Nation in Amity with
His Majesty, may import from any parts whatsoever, Hemp, Pitch, Tar, Masts,
Saltpeter, and Copper; and upon importation thereof shall be liable to pay
only such Duties, as by the Act of Tonnage and Poundage are imposed upon His
Majesty's natural born Subjects, and no other; Any thing in the said Act to the
contrary notwithstanding.

And His Majesty does further Order, That notwithstanding the said Act for
Encouraging and increasing of Shipping and Navigation, and one other Act made
in the said Parliament begun at Westminster the eighth day of May in the
thirteenth year of His Majesty's Reign, entitled [An Act for the Encouragement
of Trade] or either of them, or any Clause or Clauses in them, or either of
them to the contrary, It shall and may be lawful for any English Merchants, and
they are hereby authorized, freely and without interruption, to make use of,
and employ any Foreign Ships or Vessels whatsoever, Navigated by Mariners or
Seamen of any Nation in Amity with His Majesty, for importing or exporting of
Goods and Commodities, to or from any Port in England or Wales, to or from any
of His Majesty's Plantations.

Provided, That no Goods or Commodities whatsoever, be by them imported into
any of His Majesty's said Plantations, but what shall be without fraud, Laden
and Shipped in England or Wales and thence directly carried, and from no other
place to His Majesty's said Plantations.

Provided also, That such Goods and Commodities as shall be by them laden or
taken on Board at His Majesty's said Plantations, or any of them, be brought
directly from thence to some of His Majesty's said Ports in England or Wales,
And all Governors, and Officers of the Customs are hereby charged and
required, strictly to observe all Rules, Directions and Orders for taking of
Bonds or other Securities, and exacting all Forfeitures, and Penalties by the
said Acts or either of them required or enjoined: save only in the Two Clauses
concerning English Ships or English Mariners herein before dispensed with.

And lastly, His Majesty does declare, That this shall continue and be in force
during His Majesty's pleasure: And when His Majesty shall think fit to
determine the Dispensation hereby granted, He will by His Royal Proclamation
give six months notice thereof, To the end no Merchant or other person herein
concerned, may be surprised,

Signed Buckingham. Albemarle. Ormond. Lindsey. St. Alban. Anglesey. Bathe.
Carlisle. Lauderdail. Middleton. Carbery. Humph. London. Berkeley. Ashley.
Will. Morice. Hen. Bennet. John Nicholas.


London, Printed by John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers to the Kings
most Excellent Majesty, 1664.


