A Summary Account OF ALL THE STATUTE-LAWS OF THIS KINGDOM Now in Force, Made
against JESUITS, Seminary Priests, AND Popish Recusants: Drawn up for the
Benefit of all PROTESTANTS.

Done by a Protestant, to inform such of his Fellow Subjects, that are ignorant
of these Laws, and would be willing to do their Duties, where, and when the
Laws enjoin them.

LONDON, Printed in the year 1666. And Reprinted with Additions, 1673.

A Summary Account of all the Statute-Laws of this Kingdom, made against all
Jesuits, Seminary Priests, and Popish Recusants.
1. Eliz. cap. 1, u Foreign Potentate not to exercise power in the Queens
Dominions.
1. BY the Statute of 1. Eliz. cap. 1.

No Foreign Potentate, or other Person, shall exercise any Ecclesiastical Power
in the Queens Dominions, but She and Her Successors may by Letters Pattents
authorize any Subject born to exercise the same.

Officers Temporal and Ecclesiastical.
2. For the better observance of this Act, every Ecclesiastical and Temporal
OFFICER, and such as take Degrees in the University, and all the Queens
Servants, are enjoined to take the Oath of Supremacy, recited, in haec Verba,
in this Statute, to which, because it is long, you are referred.

Refusing the Oath.
3. He that refuses this Oath, if he be in any Office, shall forfeit such
Spiritual or Temporal Office or Promotion during his life; or if he be to be
admitted to any such Office, he shall take the aforesaid Oath before he be
admitted; and if he refuse it, he shall be adjudged incapable of it.

Oath.
4. If any have a Temporal Office of Inheritance, and at first refuse this
Oath, but afterward shall take it, he shall be restored.

5. Penalty of maintaining any Foreign Potentates power, etc.
None shall maintain the jurisdiction of any Foreign Prelate or Potentate in
the Queens Dominions, upon pain of forfeiting all his Goods and Chattels; and
if he be not worth twenty pounds at the time of his Conviction, he shall
forfeit all he has, and suffer a years Imprisonment without Bayl; and for the
second offense, Praemunire is to be put out of the Kings protection, and to
forfeit all his Goods and Chattels, and all Lands in Fee. Co. 1. Justit. f.
229. b. 130. a.
incur a Praemunire; and for the third offense, be guilty of high Treason,
which offense must be prosecuted within one year after it is committed; but if
the offense be by Preaching, Teaching, or Words only; Prosecution by Indictment
must be within six Months, else the Offender to be set at liberty.

Conviction.
6. A Clergy man Beneficed upon the first Conviction, for such offense, shall
lose his Spiritual Promotion.

Peer.
7. A Peer of the Realm, guilty of such offense, is to be tried by his Peers.

Witnesses.
8. No Persons to be Indicted or Arraigned for the aforesaid offenses, but by
two or more sufficient Witnesses produced viva voce; and none shall be
questioned for relieving, aiding or comforting any such offender, as is before
mentioned, unless it be proved by two Witnesses at least, that at the time of
such relief, aid, etc. he had notice of the offense committed.

5. Eliz. cap. 1.
1. By this Statute of 5. Eliz. None shall maintain the jurisdiction of the
Bishop or See of Rome, within any of the Queens Dominions, upon pain that they
and their Accessaries shall incur a Praemunire.

Who may have Oyer and Terminer of these Offenses.
2. Justices of Assize, Justices of the Peace in Sessions, or any two of them
(whereof one of the Quorum) have power to hear and determine this offense, and
to certify the presentiments into the Kings Bench, within a time limited in the
Statute on pain of an 100. l. and Justices of Assize have power as well upon
such Certificate, as also before themselves to hear and determine such offenses.

Persons that must take the Oath of Supremacy.
3. All Persons appointed by the Statute of 1. Eliz. cap. 1. to take the Oath of
Supremacy, and all other Persons taking Orders, preferred to any Degree in the
Universities, all Schoolmasters public and private; all that take degrees of
Learning, in the Laws, in the Inns of Court, or in Chancery; all Attorneys,
Protonotaries, Philizers, Escheators, etc. All Persons admitted to any Ministry
or Office belonging to the Common Law, or other Law or Laws; and all Officers
and Ministers of every Court, shall take the said Oath before their admittance
to the exercise of any such Offices or Profession.

Praemunire.
4. He that is thus compettable to take the said Oath, if he refuse it, incurs a
Praemunire, if his default be presented, and he Indicted within a year after
the default.

Who have power to give the Oath.
5. Archbishops and Bishops have power in their proper Diocesses to minister
this Oath; and the Lord Chancellor or Keeper (without further Warrant) may
grant Commission to tender it.

Certificate of refusal.
6. All Persons empowered to tender this Oath, are to certify the Refusals of
those Recusants that will not take it, under their hands and seals, into the
Kings Bench, within a limited time in the Statute, on pain of 100. l. See the
Statute at large, as to the time.

Second offense.
7. Those that refuse this Oath upon second Tender, or were formerly convicted
of maintaining the Jurisdiction of the Pope or See of Rome, and do commit the
like offense the second time, both they and their Accessaries shall suffer as
in case of high Treason, except in case of corruption of Blood, disinherison of
Heirs, forfeiting of Dower, or prejudice to others beside the Offender, etc.
But none shall be punished as accessory, for giving Alms without fraud to the
Offender.

Alms.
8. This Act is to be published at every Quarter Sessions, at every Leet, and
every Term in open Hall in the Inns of Court and Chancery, by the Persons
appointed thereto.

Members of the Com. House.
9. Every Member of the Commons House, is to take this Oath before he sit in
Parliament, before the Lord Steward or his Deputy.

Barons and Peers.
10. None of, or above the degree of a Baron is compellable to take this Oath;
but a Peer offending herein, is only triable by his Peers.

Second tender of the Oath.
11. No Papist is compellable to take this Oath upon second tender, or be in
danger (by refusal thereof) to incur high Treason, but only Clergymen,
Officers of Ecclesiastical Courts, such as shall not observe the Rites of the
Church of England, etc. or do say or hear Private Mass. Mass.


13 Eliz. cap. 2. Bulls from Rome.
1. By this Statute, All that obtain or put in ure any Bull of Absolution or
Reconciliation from the Church of Rome, or absolve, or be absolved thereby,
both they and their Accessaries before the fact, shall be adjudged guilty of
high Treason.

Comforters, Maintainers, Concealers
2. Their Comforters and Maintainers shall incur a Praemunire; and their
Concealers misprision of Treason, unless within six weeks they discover them to
some Privy Counselor, etc.

Agnus Dei. Crosses, etc.
3. If any bring into the Queens Dominion any Agnus Dei, Crosses, Pictures,
Beads, or any such vain and superstitious thing, or deliver or offer the same
to any Person to be used; the Person so doing, and the Person receiving the
same, shall incur a Praemunire; but if the Person to whom the render is made,
apprehend the Person tendering it, and bring him before a Justice of Peace; or
being unable so to do, shall within three days disclose his name, and abode, or
resort unto the Ordinary, or some Justice of Peace within the same, County; or
having received the same, do within three days deliver it to some Justice of
Peace, he shall incur no prejudice by this Act.

Justices of the Peace, Privy Council.
4. The Justice of Peace shall disclose the offenses, aforesaid, to the Privy
Counsel, within fourteen days after notice to him, upon pain of Praeminure.

23 Eliz. cap. 1 Withdrawing the Subj. from their obedience.
1. By this Statute, it is high Treason to have, or pretend to have power, or
to put in practice, to absolve, persuade, or withdraw any Person within the
Queens Dominions, from their natural Obedience to the Queen and her Successors,
or to withdraw them, for the intent, from the Religion now established, to the
Romish Religion; and they also, who shall be so withdrawn willingly, together
with their Procurers and Counselors, shall be guilty of the same offense.

Aiders and Maintainers.
2. Their Aiders and Maintainers, who discover them not within ten days, to
some Justice of Peace, or higher Officer, shall be adjudged guilty of
Misprision of Treason.

Saying Mass.
3. None shall say or sing Mass, on pain of two hundred Marks, and suffer one
years Imprisonment, and not to be enlarged till the Fine be paid. Hearing Mass.
And none shall hear Mass, on pain of a years Imprisonment, and an hundred
Marks.

Forfeitures.
4. There shall be a third part of these forfeitures to the Queen, a third part
to the poor of the Parish where the offense is committed, and a third part to
the Prosecutor.

Covenous Grants.
5. All covenous grants to avoid the Queens Interest, or other persons that may
claim by this Act, or 13. Eliz. cap. 2. shall be adjudged void.

27. Eliz. cap. 2.
1. By this Statute, all Jesuits, Seminary Priests, or any Ecclesiastical
persons born within the Queens Dominions, and ordained or made such, by the
pretended Jurisdiction of the Sea of Rome, which come into, or remain in, any
of the said Queens Dominions, shall be adjudged guilty of high Treason,
Jesuits, etc. The receivers, aiders, etc.
and their receivers, aiders, and maintainers (knowing them to be such, and at
liberty) shall be adjudged Fellons, without benefit of Clergy.

Persons brought up in Seminaries beyond Sea.
2. All others brought up in Seminaries beyond Sea, and not as yet in Orders, as
aforesaid, which do not within six Months after Proclamation made in London (in
that behalf) return into this Realm; and within two days after their return,
before the Bishop of the Diocese, or two Justices of the Peace, of the County
where they arrive, submit themselves to the Queen, and her Laws, and take the
Oath of Supremacy, they shall be adjudged guilty of high Treason.

Sending relief to such Seminaries.
3. They who give or send relief to any such Ecclesiastical Person or Seminary,
or to any brought up there, as aforesaid, shall incur a Praemunire.

Where the Offenses are punishable.
4. These Offenses are to be heard and determined in the King's Bench, or in the
County where they shall be committed, or the Offender taken.

Submission.
5. This Act not to extend to any Jesuit, etc. as aforesaid, who within three
days after his arrival, shall submit himself to some Archbishop, or Justice of
Peace of the County where he lands, and there takes the Oath of Supremacy; and
under his hand, acknowledges to continue in obedience to her Majesty's Laws.

The penalty of knowing a Jesuit or Priest, and concealing ^^m.
6. He that knows a Jesuit, or Priest, to remain within any the Queens
Dominions, and does not within twelve days discover the same to some Justice of
the Peace, shall be fined, and suffer Imprisonment during pleasure; and the
Justice of Peace that does not within twenty eight days after, disclose it to
some of the Privy Council, etc. shall forfeit two hundred Marks.

Oaths, Submissions, etc. to be certified.
7. All Oaths and Submissions, etc. as aforesaid, shall be certified into
Chancery, by the party before whom they are taken, within three months, on pain
of an hundred pounds.

Those that submit not to come to Court within ten years, or within ten miles
of it.
8. None submitting, as aforesaid, shall within ten years after come within ten
miles of the Court, on pain to lose the benefit of his submission.

29. Eliz. cap. 6. Grants of Papists.
1. By this Statute, the Grants and Encumbrances, or limitation to uses made by
Papists not coming to Church, according to the 23. Eliz. cap. 1. and which are
revocable by the Offenders, intended for his maintenance, or in consideration
whereof he and his Family are to be kept, shall be void against the Queen, etc.
to hinder her for the forfeiture of their not coming to Church, or saying,
hearing or being at Mass; but this Act is not to extend to Grants, made Bona
Fide, nor to continue the seizure after the death of the Offender, etc.

Two parts of the Goods, and third part of the Lands of Papists.
2. The Queen may seize two parts of the Goods, and two third parts of the Lands
of such Popish Offenders as shall not, after their Conviction, pay into the
Exchequer twenty pounds a month.

35. Eliz. cap. 2. Papists after Conviction, to repair to their dwellings.
1. By this Act, all Popish Recusants above sixteen years Old, shall within
forty days after their Conviction, repair to their usual dwelling, and not
remove above five miles from thence, on pain to forfeit all their Goods, and
Lands, and Annuities during life; and if they have no certain abode, they are
to repair where they were born or where their Fathers and Mothers dwell; and
within twenty days after their arrival there, to give in their Names to the
Constables; Headboroughs, and Minister; and the Minister is to keep a Book of
their names, and he, and the said Constables, and Headborroughs, to certify
the same to the quarter Sessions, etc.

Copyholder Papist.
2. A Copyholder, in this case, shall forfeit his Estate for life (if it
continue so long) to the Lord of the Manor, (if no Recusant, Convict, or
seized, possessed to the use of a Recusant) but if so, then the Queen, etc.
shall have it.

Those that after Convection will not repair to their dwelings, etc. shall
abjure the Realm.
3. A Popish Recusant (being no feme Covert, nor having Lands worth twenty
marks per annum, or goods worth forty Pounds, which within the time
above-limited, does not repair to the place of his abode, or does depart above
five miles thence, or within three months after his arrival, there does not
make the submission following hereafter (being required so to do by the Bishop,
a Justice of Peace, or the Minister there) shall before two Justices of the
Peace, or the Coronor, abjure the Kingdom, which abjuration they are to
certify to the next Assizes, or Jail-delivery.

If he depart not, he shall be a Fellon without Clergy.
4. If the Popish Recusant depart not the Realm, within the time limited, by
the said Justices or Coronor, or return without the Queens License, he shall be
adjudged a Fellon, without benefit of Clergy.

Jesuit refusing to answer. This Act not to extend to those that are urged by
process of Law, etc.
5. A Jesuit, or Priest, refusing to answer, shall be committed to Prison till
he answer, etc. and this Act is not to restrain any Recusant (urged by process
of Law, without fraud) to travel without the said limits of five miles, so that
he return in convenient time; nor shall it restrain him that is compelled by
Law, to render his body to the Sheriff.

The effect of the submission
6. The effect of the submission, whereby they may avoid these penalties, is,
That the Recusant submitting, do acknowledge, and testify in his Conscience,
that the Bishop, and See of Rome, has not, nor ought to have, any power or
authority over her Majesty, within any of her Dominions, etc. But the Reader is
referred to the Statute, to see the submission at large.

Minister of the Parish is to enter submissions in a book.
7. The Minister of the Parish where the submission is taken, shall presently
enter it into a book, and within ten days certify it to the Bishop of the
Diocese; and if the Offenders after such submission, shall fall to a relaps, he
shall have no benefit of his submission.

Married Women.
8. Every married Woman shall be bound by this Act, save only in the case of
Abjuration.

1 Jac. cap. 4.
1. By this Statute, all the former Statutes of Queen Elizabeth, are confirmed,
and appointed to be put in due execution.

The Ancestor dying a Papist, the Heir being none, etc.
2. Where the Ancestor dies a Recusant, the Heir being none, or confirming
himself, and taking the Oath of Supremacy before the Archbishop, etc. he shall
be freed from all the penalties in the aforesaid Statute; but if the Heir,
after the age of sixteen years, shall continue to be a Recusant, he shall not
be freed till conformity, and taking the said Oath: And the King shall have two
parts of his Lands to answer the Arrearages of twenty pound a month, according
to the Statute of 23. Eliz. cap. 1.

Children or others sent beyond Sea to be trained in Popery.
3. None shall send any Child, or other person under their Government, beyond
Sea, to be instructed in the Popish Religion, upon pain of an hundred pound,
and they which are so sent, shall be incapable (as to themselves only) of any
Grant or Inheritance due to them or others to their use.

Who may pass beyond Sea, etc.
4. No Child, or Woman, under 21 years of age (except Saylors, Ship-boys,
Merchants-Factors, or Apprentices) shall be suffered, by Officers of Ports, to
pass beyond Sea without the Kings License, or Warrant of six Privy Counselors
under their hands, upon pain of the said Officers forfeiting their Offices,
etc. And the forfeitures by this Act, are to be divided between the King and
the Prosecutor; See the Statute of 3. Jacobi, cap. 5. Touching Soldiers and
Mariners passing beyond Sea, vide infra.

3 Jac. cap. 4.
1. By this Act, the Recusant, that conforms, must within one year after his
conformity, and so once every year (at least) receive the Sacrament, Sacrament.
on pain, to forfeit for the first offense twenty pounds, for the second forty
pounds, etc.

Forfeitures.
2. These forfeitures to be recovered before Justices of Peace in their
Sessions, or in any Court of Record; and to be divided between the King and
Prosecutors.

Presentiments to be of the monthly absence of Papists from Church.
3. The Churchwardens and Constables of every Parish, or one of them, or (if
there be none such) then the high Constable of the Hundred shall present once
every year at the general Sessions of the Peace, the monthly absence from
Church of every Popish Recusant and their Children, (being above the age of
nine years) and their Servants, together with the age of their Children, as
well as they can be known, on pain respectively to forfeit 20 s. for every
default; and this presentment to be entered by the Clerk of the Peace, or
Town Clerk, on Record, without Fee, on pain of 40 s. for every defalt.

Officers Fees for presenting Recusants.
4. If the Recusant be convicted upon such presentment, the Officer presenting
him shall have 40 s. out of the said Recusants Estate, by order of the Justices
of Peace.

Who have power to punish Recusants.
5. Justices of Assize, Jail-delivery, and of the Peace, have power of hearing
and determining the Offenses of such Popish Recusants, as well for their not
taking the Sacrament, as for not coming to the Church, according to this and
former Laws and Statutes; and to make Proclamation that they shall tender
themselves to the Sheriff or Bailiff of the Liberty where they are, before the
next Assize, Jail-delivery, or Sessions respectively: Which if they shall not
do, that default is to Recorded, and it shall be a sufficient Conviction of
them, as well as a trial by Verdict.

Recusants forfeitures after first Conviction for not coming to Church.
6. Every such Offender, after the first Conviction for not coming Church,
shall pay into the Exchequer in the Terms of Easter and Michaelmas, next
happening after their Conviction, their forfeitures then due at the rate of 20
l. per month, and yearly after that in the same Terms, at the rate of 20 l. per
month, unless the King shall please to take two thirds of their Lands and
Leases, or that they shall conform.

Conviction to be certified into the Exchequer.
7. Every Conviction is before the end of the Term next following, to be
certified into the Exchequer, and the Court is to issue process of seizure
thereupon, against the Offenders Goods, and two parts of his Lands, Leases, etc.

Twenty pounds a month, or two thirds of Recusants lands, except the Mansion
house, etc.
8. The King may refuse the twenty pounds a month, and take the two parts of
the Lands, as aforesaid, (excepting the Recusants Mansion House) and the King
may not demise those two parts to a Recusant, or to any other, for the
Recusants use; and the Kings Lessee of the said two parts, is to give security
not to commit waste.

Oath of Allegiance.
9. The Bishop of the Diocese, or two Justices of the Peace (one being of the
Quorum) may out of Sessions tender the Oath of Allegiance (mentioned in haec
verba, in this Act (to which the Reader is referred) to any person, being
eighteen years of age (except Noblemen, and Noble-Women) which stand Convicted
or Indicted of Recusancy, etc. (or passing through the Country, and examined
on Oath, confesses) or (at least) denies not, that he or she is a Recusant,
and the Bishop or Justices are to certify the Premises, and the name and abode
of the party to the next Sessions, where the Clerk of the Peace or Town Clerk
are to record the same: And if they refuse to take the Oath, or to answer upon
Oath, they are to bind them to the next Sessions; and if they refuse here to
take it again, Praemunire.
they incur a Praemunire, Women Covert.
(except Women Covert) who in that case are to suffer Imprisonment till they
take it.

Names to be subscribed. Indictment not to be reversed for want of form.
10. If they take the Oath, they are to subscribe their Names or Marks, and no
Indictment against such as are Recusants, shall be reversed for lack of form,
but only by direct Traverse: But if they conform, they may be admitted to
traverse or discharge it.

Who shall go out of the Realm to serve a Foreign Prince.
11. None shall go out of the Realm to serve any Foreign Prince or State,
without taking the said Oath (of Allegiance) and if he have born Office as a
Soldier, he shall enter into Bond to the Kings use, with condition as in this
Act is at large expressed in haec Verba, (to which the Reader is referred) or
else to be adjudged a Fellon.

Customers and Comptrollers of Ports to take Bonds.
12. The Customers or Comptrollers of Ports only, and their Deputies, may take
such Bonds, and minister the said Oath in this case, which they are every year
to certify into the Exchequer, Bond.
the Bond, on pain of five pounds, and the Oath, on pain of twenty shillings.

Withdrawing Kings Subjects from their obedience.
13. To absolve or withdraw the Kings Subjects from their Natural Obedience, to
reconcile them to the Sea of Rome, or to move them to promise it, etc. or to be
absolved, withdrawn, reconciled, or make promise, as aforesaid, High Treason.
is high Treason.

Reconciliation.
14. This Clause of Reconcilement (as to the point of reconcilement only) shall
not extend to any, that shall return into the Realm, and within six weeks
after, shall before the Bishop, etc. submit himself to the King, and his Laws,
and take the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance.

Excommunicate Recusants.
15. The Sheriff, upon a lawful Writ, may justify to break a house for taking
an Excommunicate Recusant.

Action against a Officer for doing his duty, etc.
16. If an Action be brought against an Officer, for execution of this Act, he
may plead the General Issue, and give the special matter in evidence.

Wives Offense.
17. None shall be punished for his Wives offense, nor shall a married Woman be
chargeable with any penalty or forfeiture by force of this Act.

Oath of Allegiance.
18. Six of the Privy Counsel (whereof the Chancellor, Treasurer, or Principal
Secretary to be one) may minister the Oath of Allegiance Noble men, and Noble
Women.
to any Noble Man, or Noble Woman (unmarried) of, or above eighteen years of
age, and if they refuse it, they incur a Praemunire.

Warden of Cinque Ports.
19. The Warden of the Cinque Ports, or some by his appointment, shall take the
Bond, and minister the Oath, aforesaid, to any person passing beyond Sea out of
them, i. e. the Cinque Ports, or any of their Members.

3. Jac. cap. 5.
By this Statute, He that within three days notice, discovers to a Justice of
Peace, Entertaining a Popish Priest.
any that entertains a Popish Priest, or any that have heard or said Mass, Mass.
shall have a third part of the forfeiture due for the said offenses, if the
whole exceed not an hundred and fifty, then only fifty pounds thereof to be
paid him by the Sheriff, who shall leavy the same.

Convicted Recusants not to come to Court, on pain of an 100 l.
2. No Convicted Recusant shall come into Court without command from the King,
or Warrant from the Privy Counsel, under their hands, on pain of an hundred
pounds, one moiety to the King, the other to the Discoverer.

Convict Recusants not to be in London, or ten miles of it, unless he be a
Tradesman, on pain of 100. l.
3. A Popish Recusant, Convict, or Indicted for not coming to Church for three
months together, and remaining in London, or within ten miles distance, shall
within ten days after such Conviction or Indictment depart thence, and shall
deliver their names (if in London) to the Lord Mayor there, and (if in the
Country) to the next Justice of the Peace, on pain of an hundred pounds, to be
divided between the King and the Prosecutor; but this is not to extend to
Tradesmen that have no other habitation in, or within ten miles of London.

License must be procured by a Recusant, to go about his occasions, etc.
4. A Recusant may go about his own occasions, by License from the King, or
three Privy Counselors under their hands, or four Justices of Peace under
their hands and Seals, with the assent in writing of the Bishop, Lieutenant, or
Deputy Lieutenant of the same County, notwithstanding the Statute of 35. Eliz.
cap. 2. which License is not to be granted by the said Justices, till the party
make Oath of the true reason of his Journey, and that he will make no needless
stay.

No Convict Recusant may practice Law, Physic, etc. or bear Office in any
Castle, etc.
5; No convicted Recusant shall practice the Common Law, Civil Law, Physic, or
the Art of the Apothecary; or be an Officer of or in any Court; or bear any
Office among Soldiers, or in a Ship Castle, or Fortress, on pain of an hundred
pound, to be divided between the King and the Persecutor.

Popish Recusant Convict. or whose Wefe is such, may not bear Office, etc.
6. No Popish Recusant Convict, or whose Wife is a Popish Recusant Convict,
shall exercise any public Office in the Cnmmon Wealth by himself, or his
Deputy, unless he bring up his Children in the true Religion; and together with
his Children and Servants, repair to the Church, and receive the Sacraments, as
the Law requires.

What a married Woman, being a Recusant Convict, shall forfeit.
7. A married Woman, being a Popish Recusant Convict, (her Husband being none)
that does not conform her self, as aforesaid, by the space of one whole year
before her Husbands death, shall forfeit two Thirds of her Dower or Joynter,
and shall be incapable of being Executrix, or Administratrix to her Husband, or
enjoying any part of his Goods.

A Popish Recusant Convict, shall be an Excommunicate to all intents, till he
conform.
8. A Popish Recusant, after conviction, shall be (to all intents) reputed as a
person Excommunicate, until he conform and take the Oath of Obedience or
Allegiance, ordained by 3. Jac. 4. Yet he may sue for his Interest, in Lands
not seized into the Kings hands.

Popish Recucusant Convict. must be married by a lawful Minister, in open
Church, on pain of 120. l.
9. A Popish Recusant Convict, married otherwise then in open Church, by a
lawful Minister, according to the Church of England, shall not be Tenant by the
Courtesy, A Woman also (in this case) shall lose her Dower, Jointure, Widows
Estate, and all her Husbands Goods; and where a Man cannot be Tenant by the
Courtesy, he shall forfeit an hundred pounds, to be divided between the King
and Prosecutor.

Their Children to be Baptized by a lawful Minister, on pain of an 100. l.
10. Every Popish Recusant, within a Month after the Birth of his Child, shall
cause it to be Baptized by a lawful Minister, on pain of an hundred pounds, if
he outlive the Month, if not, his Wife is to pay the forfeiture; the King to
have one third part, the Persecutor another, and the poor of the Parish the
third.

They must be buried in the Church, or in the Churchyard on pain of 20. l. Who
may go beyond Sea, and upon what License, etc.
11. Every Popish Recusant is to be Buried in the Church, or Churchyard,
according to the Church Laws of this Realm, on pain that his Executor,
Administrator, or the party that causes him to be otherwise buried, pay twenty
pounds to be divided as next aforesaid.

12 A Child (being no Soldier, Mariner, Merchant, or Apprentice, or Factor to
a Merchant) shall not be sent, or go beyond Sea, without the Kings License, or
Six of the Privy Council, (the Principal Secretary being one) on pain thereby
to be incapable to enjoy any Lands or Goods, by Descent or Grant, until (being
eighteen years of Age, or above) he take the Oath of Obedience before some
Justice of Peace of the County, where his Parents do or did dwell. The
penalties of going beyond Sea, etc. without License.
And in the mean time the next of Kin being no Papist) shall enjoy his Lands
and Goods; but shall be accomptable to the other, in case he afterward conform
as aforesaid; and he that so goes out of the Realm, shall forfeit an hundred
pounds to be divided, as aforesaid.

Chancellor, etc. of both Universities, shall present to the Benifice of a
Recusant Convict. Convict Papist, may not be Executor, etc.
13. A Popish Recusant Convict, shall be disabled to present to a Benefice, but
in his stead, the Chancellor and Scholars of the Universities of Cambridge and
Oxford, shall present, within several Counties respectively, as by this Act is
at large set forth,

14. A Popish Recusants Convict, shall not be an Executor, Administrator or
Guardian.

None may bring from beyond Sea, or Print, or Sell Popish Books, etc.
15. None shall bring from beyond Sea, Print Sell or Buy any Popish Primmars,
Ladies Psalters, Manuals, Rosaries, Portals, Legends, or Lives of Saints in
what Language soever they shall be Printed or Written, nor any other
Superstitious Books, written in the English Tongue, on pain to forfeit forty
shillings for every such Book, to be divided as aforesaid.

16. Two Justices of Peace, and all Mayors, Bailiffs, and Head Officers, have
power to search the Houses and Lodgings of Popish Recusants Convict, and of
every Person, Power to search Convict Papists, Lodgings for Popish Books and
Relics.
whose Wife is a Popish Recusant Convict, for Popish Books and Relics, and to
burn and deface such as they shall find in their custody; but such as are of
value, in open Sessions, and afterward restored to the Owner.

The Armor of Recusants Convict to be secured; and those that refuse to
deliver them to be punished, etc.
17. All the Armor, Gunpowder, and Ammunition of a Popish Recusant Convict,
shall be taken from him, by Warrant from four Justices of the Peace, at the
General Sessions, (other then such Weapons as shall be allowed him by the said
Justices, for defense of his house against Thieves, etc.) which Armor, etc.
shall be kept at the costs of such Recusant, in such places as the said
Justices shall appoint, and showed at every Muster, as his Arms, together with
his Horse, which he shall buy, provide, and maintain for that purpose,
according to his ability, as other Subjects do; and the Recusant that refuses
to declare what Armor and Ammunition he has, and deliver it to such Persons
as shall have power to seize it, he shall forfeit the same to the King; and by
Warrant from any Justice of Peace of that County, be imprisoned for three
Months without Bail.

7. Jac. Cap. 6. Oath of Obedience.
1. By this Statute is set forth, who shall give, and who shall take the Oath
of Allegiance, and within what time, and before whom, a Barron or Barroness, of
or about eighteen years old, shall take it. See the Statute at large.

Barrons and Barronesses convicted of Recusancy; who may tender this Oath to
them. Who to a common person.
2. If a Barron or Barroness stand Presented, Indicted, or Convicted of
Recusancy, three of the Privy Council (whereof the Lord Chancellor, Treasurer,
Privy Seal, or Principal Secretary to be one shall ^ minister to them the said
Oath, but if he be a convicted person under those degrees; or if the Minister,
petty Constables, or Churchwardens of any Parish, or any two of them, shall
complain to any Justice of the Peace, of any person suspected of Recusancy then
the said Justice may in either of the said Cases minister the said Oath, and
upon refusal commit the party to Prison, there to remain until the next Assizes
or Sessions, where if he or she again refuse to take it, they shall incur a
Praemunire, Praemunire.
(except Women Covert, who shall only be Imprisoned in this Case) and there
remain without Bayl, until they take the said Oath.

The Penalty of refusing the Oath.
3. None refusing the said Oath shall be capable of any Office of Judicature,
or other Office (being no office of Inheritance or Ministerial Function)
Lawyers, etc. refusing it.
or to practice the Common Law, Physic, Chyrurgery, the Art of Apothecary, or
any liberal Science for Gain.

A married woman convicted of Recusancy, her penalty.
4. If a Married Woman be a convicted Recusant, and do not conform within three
Months after conviction, she shall be committed to Prison, by a Privy
Counselor, or the Bishop of the Diocese if she be a Barroness, but if of a
lower degree, then she shall be committed by two Justices of Peace (whereof one
of the Quorum) and there remain until she conform, unless the Husband shall pay
to the King for his Wives Offense, ten pounds for every month, or yield a third
part of all his Lands; at the choice of such Husbands.

The penalty of going beyond Sea, or sending any thither to be trained in
Popery, or sending relief to them.
5. None shall go himself, or send any other person whatsoever beyond Sea, to be
trained up in Popery, nor give any maintenance or relief to the party so sent,
or to any School, or Religious house there, (on pain after conviction thereof)
to be made unable to prosecute any Suit in any Court of Equity, to be Committee
of any Ward, Executor or Administrator, and to be incapable of any Legacy, or
Deed of Gift, or bearing Office within this Realm. And besides, to forfeit all
his Goods and Chattels, and his Lands also, during life; but if he or she
conform within six weeks after his or her return, according to the Statutes of
this Realm, they shall not incur the said Penalties.

3. Car. I. Cap. 2.
1. By this Statute, the Statute of 1. Jac. Cap. ^. is to be put in due
Execution.

The like Penalty as in the next preceding Statute for sending or going beyond
Sea to be trained in Popery, etc.
2. None of the Kings Subjects shall pass or go, or shall convey or send, or
cause to be conveyed or sent, any Children or other person, out of any the
Kings Dominions, into any parts beyond the Seas, out of the Kings obedience, to
the intent to be resident and trained up in any Popish Society, School or
Family, or instructed in the Popish Religion, in a sort to profess the same;
Neither shall any convey, or cause to be conveyed any money, or other thing,
toward the maintenance of any such Children, or Person already gone or sent,
or to go, or to be sent and trained, and instructed, as aforesaid, or (under
the name of Charity) toward the relief of any such Society or Religious House,
on pain, after conviction, in the aforesaid cases, to be disabled to sue, or
use any Action, Bill, Plaint, or Information in Law, or Prosecute any Suit in
Equity, etc. As in the next precedent Statute here abstracted and abridged.

25. Carol. ^
All Persons that shall bear any Office, Civil or Military, or receive any Pay,
Sallary, Fee, or Wages, by reason of any Patent or Grant from his Majesty, or
shall have Command or Place of Trust, from or under his Majesty, or from any of
his Predecessors, or by his or their Authority, or by Authority derived from
him or them, or shall be of the Household, or in the Service or Employment of
His Majesty, or the Duke of York, who shall inhabit, reside, or be in, or
within thirty miles of London, or Westminster, at any time during Easter Term,
1673. shall before the end of that Term, or Trinity Term following, appear in
the Court of Chancery, or Kings Bench, and there in open Court, between Nine
and Twelve in the Forenoon, take the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance; and all
the said Persons not having taken the said Oaths in the said Courts shall on or
before August 1. 1673. at the Quarter Sessions for that County or Place where
he or they shall be inhabit, or reside, on May 20. take the said Oaths in like
manner.

And the said Officers shall receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper,
according to the usage of the Church of England, at or before August 1. 1673.
in some Parish Church upon some Lords day immediately after Divine Service and
Sermon.

All Persons that shall be admitted into any such Office, etc. or shall receive
any Pay, etc. or have Command, or be admitted into Service or Employment in the
Households, etc. after the first day of Easter Term aforesaid, and shall
inhabit, be, or reside, when so admitted in or within thirty miles of London or
Westminster, shall take the said Oaths, in the said respective Courts, in the
manner aforesaid, the next Term after such their admittance. And all such
Persons to be admitted after the said first day of Easter Term, not having
taken the Oaths in the Courts aforesaid, shall take then at the Quarter
Sessions for the County or Place where they shall reside next after such
admittance. And all Persons so to be admitted as aforesaid, shall receive the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper in the manner aforesaid, within three months
after their admittance.

And every of the Persons in the Court where he takes the Oaths, shall first
deliver a Certificate of such his receiving the said Sacrament, as aforesaid,
under the hands of the Minister and Churchwardens, and shall then make proof
of the truth thereof by two credible Witnesses at the least upon Oath. All
which shall be inquired of, and put upon Record in the Respective Courts, to
take the said Oaths and Sacrament, upon penalty that the Offices and
Employments of all Persons neglecting or refusing, be and are adjudged void,
and the Persons ipso facto adjudged incapable to have or enjoy the same, or any
profit thereto appertaining. And further, if they shall execute the Offices or
Employments after the time wherein they ought to have taken them, and being
thereupon lawfully convicted, shall be disabled to sue in Law or Equity, or to
be a Guardian, Executor, or Administrator, or to be capable of any Legacy or
Deed of Gift, or to bear any Office; and shall forfeit 500. l. to be recovered
by the Prosecutor.

Persons not bred up by their Parents in the Popish Religion, and professing
themselves to be Popish Recusants, that shall breed up, or suffer their
Children to be educated in the Popish Religion, upon conviction shall be
disabled to bear any Office or Place of Trust or Profit, and the said Children
likewise disabled, till they shall be reconciled and converted to the Church of
England, etc.

At the same time the Persons concerned shall take the said Oaths, they shall
make and subscribe a Declaration (in the Act specified) against
Transubstantiation, under the same Penalties and Forfeitures.

Proviso's for the Peerage, and other Privileges and Profits of Peers; for
Pensions granted upon valuable considerations; for Estates of Inheritance
granted; for Pensions granted to Persons instrumental in the King's
preservation after the Battle at Worcester, for Offices of Inheritance; for
Infants, Feme-coverts; Persons beyond Sea, and non compus mentis; for
Constables, and such inferior Officers.

This is the sum and substance of all the Statute-Laws against Jesuits,
Priests, and Popish Recusants; which for the benefit of my Country men, I have
abstracted out of the large Volume of the Statute-Books, and here brought them
to this narrow compass; but read them at large for thy better satisfaction.
Farewell.
FINIS.

