An Abridgment; OR, A Summary Account of all the Statute Laws of this Kingdom
made against Jesuits, Seminary Priests, and Popish Recusants; drawn up for the
benefit of my dear Protestant Country men, and specially of the Juries of
England; who, in pursuance of his Majesty's Proclamation, published at the
request and desire of the two Houses of Parliament, are to Present and Indict
all Jesuits, Priests, and Popish Recusants, according to the tenor and effect
of the said Statute Laws, and of the said Proclamation. Done by a Protestant,
to inform such of his fellow Subjects, that are ignorant of these Laws, and
would be willing to do their duties, where and when the Laws enjoin them
thereto.

Principiis obsta. Sero medicina paratur,
Cum mala, per longas, convaluere, moras,
Sero Sapiunt Phryges. London, Printed in the Year, 1666.

Protestant Reader,
THou have here an Abridgment of our Parliamentary Laws against Jesuits,
Priests, and Popish Recusants; (a people unquiet always where they have not
their Wills, or rather the will of their Romish Prelate, and his under-fry of
Popish Priests, etc.) for a common Papist is nothing else but Pars animata
Domini Papae; And as it is a true Rule in the Civil Law, touching Servants or
Children, Velle non creditur, qui obsequitur imperio patris vel Domini. So it
is most true touching most Papists, their Souls are acted by, and tacked to the
Dictates and will of their Supreme Priest or false Prophet; else why should his
Canon Lawyers so sordidly affirm as they do, and have long ago done in Print,
Omnia Jura sunt in scrinio pectoris Papae, and Papa in omnibus juribus humanis
dispensare potest, and in quibusdam Divinis? But I shall not trouble the Reader
with such dirty Assertions as his Canonists and other Writers, touching his
pretended Authority, do and have made public. As for my saying, That they are
unquiet, it is too true, the Raigns of Queen Elizabeth, King James, and King
Charles the first, all testify it; and his present Majesty, in His Royal
Proclamation, calls them [ Insolent;] I wish they were not so for their own
sakes as well as us Protestants. But I will travel no further into this Coast,
only I desire the Reader to observe these two things in reading this
Abridgment.

1. That he take this Paper as an Abridgment of the Statute, and not the whole
Statutes; and therefore let him resort to the Statutes themselves for fuller
information, though here he has the substance of every of the Statutes against
Recusants.

2. That he be not offended with the Abridger for the Repetitions of things in
later Statutes, that are mentioned in former Statutes; it pleased the
Parliament to do so, and why may not the Abridger do so too? And besides, where
such Repetitions are, the latter Statutes, for the most part, enlarge the
former Laws, either in the preceptive or penal part of them.

I have no more to say to thee, but to desire thee to take my pains in good
part, for it is for my Countries good I have done it, what ever the Romish
party may think on the contrary side, Farewell.

J. R.

TO THE Popish Readers.
GENTLEMEN,
IT is not your prejudice that is designed by this Paper, but the Protestants
safety and security; Yea, the security of our King, our Parliaments, our
Religion, and the whole Kingdom. Experience has dearly taught England that
there was little safety to it, or security to Protestant Professors, when your
Religion Triumphed. Our Histories are too full of your cruelties, to those that
were contrary minded to you, touching the pretended Authority of your Pope.
Matthew Paris an Historian of your own Religion, and many others since, have
given us an account of the many Usurpations of the Papal Chairs over the Kings
of England.

Object. But for all this, I yet expect you will Object, Why should we be thus
severely punished for our Consciences? No man ought to be punished for his
Conscience.

Answ. 1. To this Objection, I shall give you these answers for the present. 1.
This was your Predecessors complaint ever since the beginning of the
Reformation in Queen Elizabeth's time, even then, when your Predecessors were
plotting and endeavoring to take away her life, witness Doctor Parry, Parsons,
and many others designs against her, by the directions and countenance of your
Romish Prelate, as our Histories tells us. Is this Conscience? No rational man
can affirm it.

2. If you will take the pains to look into a Book called the Cabbala, or
Secrets of State; Cabbala, or the Secrets of State.
(being a Book published in the late troublesome times) you will there find a
Letter from Walsingham, Secretary to Queen Elizabeth, to Mounsieur Le Croy,
then Secretary of France, in answer to the like Objection or Question of the
said Secretary, on behalf of the Papists of those times, viz. Why should the
Romish Catholics of England be so severely handled, as they then were by her
Laws, for their Consciences? Walsingham answers him to this effect, as far as
my memory serves me to remember, for I have not the Book by me.

1. That the Queen punished none of the Papists for their Consciences, for this
was a Rule with her, That Conscience is not to be forced, but to be rectifyed
and reduced by the help of all good means and instructions, and by the aid of
time.

2. Another Rule that she also observed, was to this effect, That if men, who
pretended Conscience, did grow Seditious, and disturb the Government, then it
was no more Conscience, but the Civil Magistrate might punish such people
notwithstanding their pretended Conciences; and shows him the many disturbances
the Papists attempted against the Queens government, and designs against her
person, which was the cause of her making so severe Laws: and I think none of
you can deny the truth and wholesomness of these Rules against your pretended
Consciences.

3. But to add one answer more to these of VValfinghams against your pretended
Conscience, Do you not all hold it as a certain principle, that the Pope is
superior to all the Kings in the World in Spirituals, even in their own
Kingdoms? And so (by consequence) to the King of England; And do you not hold
that in ordine ad Spiritualia, he may cause Insurrections to be raised in any
Kings Dominions, and Excommunicate and depose Kings? etc. And are not you bound
to do what ever he commands you in order to Spirituals? Nay, have not your
Ancestors by their practices verified these things? Every understanding man
that knows ought of your Religion, and practice of your Ancestors, knows this
to be true; Is this Conscience? Is not this high Treason by the Laws of most
Princes in the World, who make Laws but according to mere Reason? Is it not
most certain, that no other sort of Professions or Religions in the known world
holds this wicked Principle but your selves? and will you alone call this
Conscience? away with such pretentions; take but the Oath of Supremacy, and you
will clear us of the great and certain fears had by all the Parliaments of
England, and all sober men, for above fourscore years last past: That you are
more faithful to the Pope, then to our English Kings and Government; Else you
must let us still believe, you are Factious and not Conscientious.

Do therefore but conform to the English Laws and Government, and you will
quickly be in the same liberty and security with the rest of his Majesty's
Subjects, Farewell.

J. R.

An Abridgement, or Summary account of all the Statute-Laws of this Kingdom;
made against all Jesuits, Seminary Priests, and Popish Recusants, drawn up for
the benefit of my Country men, and of the Juries of England; who in pursuance
of his Majesty's Proclamation, published at the Request of the two Houses of
Parliament, are to Present and Indict all Jesuits, Priests, and Popish
Recusants, according to the Tenor and effect of the said Statutes and
Proclamation.
1. BY the Statute of 1o. Eliz. cap. 1. 1 Eliz. cap. 1. Foreign Potentate not
to exercise power in the Queens Dominions.
No Foreign Potentate, or other person, shall exercise any Ecclesiastical
Power in the Queens Dominions, but she and her Successors may by Letters
Pattents authorize any Subject born to exercise the same.

2. For the better observance of this Act, Officers Temporal and Ecclesiastical.
every Ecclesiastical and Temporal OFFICER, and such as take Degrees in the
University; and all the Queens Servants are enjoined to take the Oath of
Supremacy, recited, in haec Verba, in this Statute, to which, because it is
long, you are referred.

3. He that refuses this Oath, if he be in any Office, Refusing the Oath.
shall forfeit such Spiritual or Temporal Office or Promotion during his life;
or if he be to be admitted to any such Office, he shall take the aforesaid Oath
before he be admitted, and if he refuse it, he shall be adjudged incapable of
it.

4. If any have a Temporal Office of Inheritance, Oath.
and at first refuse this Oath, but afterward shall take it, he shall be
restored.

5. None shall maintain the jurisdiction of any Foreign Prelate or Potentate
in the Queens Dominions, Penalty of maintaining any Forregn Potentates power,
etc.
upon pain of forfeiting all his Goods and Chattels; and if he be not worth
twenty pounds at the time of his Conviction, Praemunire is to be put out of the
Kings protection, and to forfeit all his Goods and Chattels, and all lands in
Fee. Co. 1. Justit. f. 129. b. 130. a.
he shall forfeit all he has, and suffer a years imprisonment without Bayl;
and for the second offense, incur a Praemunire; and for the third offense, be
guilty of high Treason, which offense must be prosecuted within one year after
it is committed; but if the offense be by Preaching, Teaching, or Words only;
Prosecution by Indictment must be within six months, else the Offender to be
set at liberty.

Conviction.
6. A Clergy man beneficed upon the first Conviction, for such offense, shall
loose his Spiritual promotion.

Peer.
7. A Peer of the Realm, guilty of such offense, is to be tried by his Peers.

8. No persons to be Indicted or Arraigned for the aforesaid offenses,
Witnesses.
but by two or more sufficient witnesses produced viva voce, and none shall be
questioned for relieving, ayding or comforting any such offender as is before
mentioned, unless it be proved by two witnesses at least, that at the time of
such relief, aid, etc. he had notice of the offense committed.

5. Eliz. cap. 1.
1. By this Statute of 5to. Eliz. None shall maintain the Jurisdiction of the
Bishop or Sea of Rome, within any of the Queens Dominions, upon pain that they
and their Accessaries shall incur a Praemunire.

Who may have Oyer and Terminer of these Offenses.
2. Justices of Assize, Justices of the Peace in Sessions, or any two of them
(whereof on of the Quorum) have power to hear and determine this offense, and
to certify the presentiments into the Kings Bench, within a time limited in the
Statute on pain of a hundred pound, and Justices of Assize have power as well
upon such Certificate, as also before themselves to hear and determine such
Offenses.

Persons that must take the Oath of Supremacy.
3. All persons appointed by the Statute of 1. Eliz. cap. 1. to take the Oath of
Supremacy, and all other persons taking Orders, preferred to any Degree in the
Universities, all Schoolmasters public and private; all that take degrees of
Learning, in the Laws, in the Inns of Court, or Chancery; all Attournies,
Protonotaries, Philizers, Escheators, etc. All persons admitted to any Ministry
or Office belonging to the Common Law, or other Law or Laws; and all Officers
and Ministers of every Court, shall take the said Oath before their admittance
to the exercise of any such Offices or Profession.

Praemunire.
4. He that is thus compettable to take the said Oath, if he refuse it, incurs a
Praemunire, if his default be presented, and he Indicted within a year after
the default.

5. Who have power to give the Oath.
Archbishops and Bishops have power in their proper Diocesses to minister this
Oath; and the Lord Chancellor or Keeper (without further Warrant) may grant
Commission to tender it.

6. All persons empowered to tender this Oath, Certificate of refusal.
are to certify the Refusals of those Recusants that will not take it, under
their hands and seals, into the King's Bench, within a limited time in the
Statute, on pain of 100 l. See the Statute at large, as to the Time.

7. Those that refuse this Oath upon second Tender, Second offense.
or were formerly convicted of maintaining the Jurisdiction of the Pope or See
of Rome, and do commit the like Offense the second time, both they and their
Accessaries shall suffer as in case of high Treason, except in case of
corruption of Blood, disinherison of Heirs, forfeiture of Dower, or prejudice
to others beside the Offender, etc. Alms.
But none shall be punished as accessory, for giving Alms without fraud to the
Offender.

8. This Act is to be published at every Quarter Sessions, When this Act is to
be published, and where?
at every Leet, and every Term in open Hall in the Innes of Court and Chancery,
by the persons appointed thereto.

9. Every Member of the Commons House, Members of the Com. House.
is to take this Oath before he sit in Parliament, before the Lord Steward or
his Deputy.

10. None of, or above the degree of a Baron is compellable to take this Oath;
but a Peer offending herein, Barons and Peers.
is only triable by his Peers.

11. Second tender of the Oath.
No Papist is compellable to take this Oath upon second tender, or be in danger
(by refusal thereof) to incur high Treason, but only Clergymen, Officers of
Ecclesiastical Courts, such as shall not observe the Rites of the Church of
England, etc. Mass.
or do say or hear Private Mass.

1. By this Statute, All that obtain or put in ure any Bull of Absolution or
Reconciliation from the Church of Rome, or absolve, 13 Eliz. cap. 2. Bulls from
Rome.
or be absolved thereby, both they and their Accessaries before the fact, shall
be adjudged guilty of high Treason.

2. Their Comforters and Maintainers shall incur a Praemunire; Comforters,
Maintainers, Concealers.
and their Concealers, misprision of Treason, unless within six weeks they
discover them to some Privy Counselor, etc.

3. If any bring into the Queens Dominions any Agnus Dei, Agnus Dei, Crosses,
etc.
Crosses, Pictures, Beads, or any such vain and superstitious thing, or deliver
or offer the same to any person to be used; the Person so doing, and the Person
receiving the same, shall incur a Praemunire; but if the person to whom the
tender is made, apprehend the person tendering it, and bring him before a
Justice of Peace; or being unable so to do, shall within three days disclose
his name, and abode, or resort unto the Ordinary, or some Justice of Peace
within the same County; or having received the same, do within three days
deliver it to some Justice of Peace, he shall incur no prejudice by this Act.

Justices of Peace, Privy Counsel.
4. The Justice of Peace shall disclose the Offenses, aforesaid, to the Privy
Counsel, within fourteen days after notice to him, upon pain of Praemunire.

23. Eliz. cap. 3 Withdrawing the Subjects from their obedience.
1. By this Statute, it is high Treason to have, or pretend to have power, or to
put in practice, to absolve, persuade, or withdraw any person within the Queens
Dominions, from their natural Obedience to the Queen and her Successors, or to
withdraw them, for that intent, from the Religion now established, to the
Romish Religion; and they also, who shall be so withdrawn wilingly, together
with their Procurers and Counselors, shall be guilty of the same offense.

Aiders and maintainers.
2. Their aiders, and maintainers, who discover them not within ten days, to
some Justice of Peace, or higher Officer, shall be adjudged guilty of
Misprision of Treason.

Saying Mass.
3. None shall say or sing Mass, on pain of two hundred Marks, and suffer one
years Imprisonment, and not to be enlarged till the fine be paid. Hearing Mass
And none shall hear Mass, on pain of a years Imprisonment, and an hundred
Marks.

Forfeitures.
4. There shall be a third part of these forfeitures to the Queen, a third part
to the poor of the Parish where the offense is committed, and a third part to
the Prosecutor.

Covenous Grants.
5. All covenous grants to avoid the Queens Interest, or other persons that may
claim by this Act, or 13. Eliz. cap. 2. shall be adjudged void.

27. Eliz. cap. 2
1. By this Statute, all Jesuits, Seminary Priests, or any Ecclesiastical
persons born within the Queens Dominions, and ordained or made such, by the
pretended Jurisdiction of the Sea of Rome, which come into, Jesuits, etc. The
receivers, aiders, etc.
or remain in, any of the said Queens Dominions, shall be adjudged guilty of
high Treason, and their receivers, aiders, and maintainers (knowing them to be
such, and at liberty) shall be adjudged Fellons, without benefit of Clergy.

Persons brought up in Seminaries beyond Sea.
2. All others brought up in Seminaries beyond Sea, and not as yet in Orders, as
aforesaid, which do not within six months after Proclamation made in London (in
that behalf) return into this Realm; and within two days after their return,
before the Bishop of the Diocese, or two Justices of the Peace, of the County
where they arrive, submit themselves to the Queen, and her Laws, and take the
Oath of Supremacy, they shall be adjudged guilty of high Treason.

3. They who give or send relief to any such Ecclesiastical Person or Seminary,
or to any brought up there, as aforesaid, Sending relief to such Seminaries.
shall incur a Praemunire.

4. Where the Offenses are punishable.
These Offenses are to be heard and determined in the Kings Bench, or in the
County where they shall be committed, or the Offender taken.

5. This Act not to extend to any Jesuit, etc. as aforesaid, Submission.
who within three days after his arrival, shall submit himself to some
Archbishop, or Justice of Peace of the County where he lands, and there takes
the Oath of Supremacy; and under his hand, acknowledges to continue in
obedience to her Majesty's Laws.

6. He that knows a Jesuit, or Priest, The penalty of knowing a Jesuit or
Priest, and concealing him.
to remain within any the Queens Dominions, and does not within twelve days
discover the same to some Justice of the Peace, shall be fined, and suffer
Imprisonment during pleasure; and the Justice of Peace that does not within
twenty eight days after, disclose it to some of the Privy Council, etc. shall
forfeit two hundred Marks.

7. All Oaths and Submissions, etc. as aforesaid, Oaths, Submissions, etc. to
be certified.
shall be certified into Chancery, by the party before whom they are taken,
within three months, on pain of an hundred pounds.

8. None submitting, as aforesaid, Those that submit not to come to Court
within ten years, or within ten miles of it. 29. Eliz. cap. 6 Grants of Papists.
shall within ten years after come within ten miles of the Court, on pain to
lose the benefit of his submission.

1. By this Statute, the Grants and Encumbrances, or limitation to uses made by
Papists not coming to Church, according to the 23. Eliz. cap. 1. and which are
revocable by the Offenders, intended for his maintenance, or in consideration
whereof he and his Family are to be kept, shall be void against the Queen, etc.
to hinder her for the forfeiture of their not coming to Church, or saying,
hearing or being at Mass; but this Act is not to extend to Grants, made Bona
Fide, nor to continue the seizure after the death of the Offender, etc.

2. The Queen may seize two parts of the Goods, Two parts of the Goods, and
third part of the Lands of Papists.

35. Eliz. cap. 2 Papists after Conviction, to repair to their dwellings.


and two third parts of the Lands of such Popish Offenders as shall not, after
their Conviction, pay into the Exchequer twenty pounds a month.

1. By this Act, all Popish Recusants above sixteen years Old, shall within
forty days after their Conviction, repair to their usual dwelling, and not
remove above five miles from thence, on pain to forfeit all their Goods, and
Lands, and Annuities during life; and if they have no certain abode, they are
to repair where they were born, or where their Fathers and Mothers dwell; and
within twenty days after their arrival there, to give in their Names to the
Constables, Headborroughs, and Minister; and the Minister is to keep a Book of
their names, and he, and the said Constables, and Headborroughs, to certify
the same to the quarter Sessions, etc.

Coppy-holder Papist.
2. A Coppy-holder, in this case, shall forfeit his Estate for life (if it
continue so long) to the Lord of the Manor, (if no Recusant, Convict, or
seized, or possessed to the use of a Recusant) but if so, then the Queen, etc.
shall have it.

Those that after Conviction will not repair to their dwellings, etc. shall
abjure the Realm.
3. A Popish Recusant (being no feme Covert, nor having Lands worth twenty marks
per annum. or goods worth forty pounds, which within the time above limited,
does not repair to the place of his abode, or does depart above five miles
thence, or within three months after his arrival, there does not make the
submission following hereafter (being required so to do by the Bishop, a
Justice of Peace, or the Minister there) shall before two Justices of the
Peace, or the Coronor, abjure the Kingdom, which abjuration they are to
certify to the next Assizes, or Jail-delivery.

If he depart not, he shall be a Fellon without Clergy.
4. If the Popish Recusant depart not the Realm, within the time limited, by the
said Justices or Coronor, or return without the Queens License, he shall be
adjudged a Fellon, without benefit of Clergy.

Jesuit refusing to answer.

This Act not to extend to those that are urged by process of Law, etc.


5. A Jesuit, or Priest, refusing to answer, shall be committed to Prison till
he answer, etc. and this Act is not to restrain any Recusant (urged by process
of Law, without fraud) to travel without the said limits of five miles, so that
he return in convenient time; nor shall it restrain him that is compelled by
Law, to tender his body to the Sheriff.

The effect of the submission
5. The effect of the submission, whereby they may avoid these penalties, is,
That the Popish Recusant submitting, do acknowledge, and testify in his
Conscience, that the Bishop, and Sea of Rome, has not, nor ought to have, any
power or authority over her Majesty, within any of her Dominions, etc. But the
Reader is referred to the Statute, to see the submission at large.

Minister of the Parish is to enter submissions in a Book.
6. The Minister of the Parish where the submission is taken, shall presently
enter it into a Book, and within ten days certify it to the Bishop of the
Diocese; and if the Offender, after such submission, shall fall to a relaps, he
shall have no benefit of his submission.

Married Women.
7. Evety married Woman shall be bound by this Act, save only in the case of
Abjuration.

1. Jac. cap. 1:
1. By this Statute, all the former Statutes of Queen Elizabeth, are confirmed,
and appointed, to be put in due execution.

2. Where the Ancestor dies a Recusant, the Heir being none, The Ancestor dying
a Papist, the Heir being none, etc.
or conforming himself, and taking the Oath of Supremacy, before the
Archbishop, etc. he shall be freed from all the penalties in the aforesaid
Statutes; but if the Heir, after the age of sixteen years, shall continue to be
a Recusant, he shall not be freed till conformity, and taking the said Oath:
And the King shall have two parts of his Lands to answer the Arrearages of
twenty pound a month, according to the Statute of 23. Eliz. cap. 1.

3. None shall send any Child, Children or others sent beyond Sea to be trained
in Popery.
or other person under their Government, beyond Sea, to be instructed in the
Popish Religion, upon pain of an hundred pound; and they which are so sent,
shall be incapable (as to themselves only) of any Grant or Inheritance due to
them or others to their use.

4. No Child, or Woman, under 21. Who may pass beyond Sea, etc.
years of age (except Saylors, Ship-boys, Merchants-Factors, or Apprentices)
shall be suffered, by Officers of Ports, to pass beyond Sea without the Kings
License, or Warrant of six Privy Counselors under their hands, upon pain of
the said Officers forfeiting their Offices, etc. And the forfeitures by this
Act, are to be divided between the King and the Prosecutor; See the Statute of
3. Jacobi, cap. 5. Touching Soldiers and Mariners passing beyond Sea, vide
infra.

1. By this Act, The Recusant, that conforms, 3. Jac. cap. 4.
must within one year after his conformity, and so once every year (at least)
receive the Sacrament, on pain, to forfeit for the first offense twenty pounds,
Sacrament.
for the second forty pounds, etc.

2. These forfeitures to be recovered before Justices of Peace in their
Sessions, or in any Court of Record; Forfeitures.
and to be divided between the King and Prosecutors.

The Churchwardens and Constables of every Parish, or one of them, or (if
there be none such, Presentiments to be of the monthly absence of Papists from
Church.
) then the high Constable of the Hundred shall present once every year at the
general Sessions of the Peace, the monthly absence from Church of every Popish
Recusant and their Children, (being above the age of nine years) and their
Servants, together with the age of their Children, as well as they can be
known, on pain respectively to forfeit 20 s. for every default; and this
presentment to be entered by the Clerk of the Peace or Town Clerk, on Record,
without Fee, on pain of 40 s. for every default.

4. If the Recusant be convicted upon such presentment, Officers Fees for
presenting Recusants.
the Officer presenting him shall have 40 s. out of the said Recusants Estate,
by order of the Justices of Peace.

Who have power to punish Recusants
5. Justices of Assize, Jail-delivery, and of the Peace, have power of hearing
and determining the Offenses of such Popish Recusants, as well for their not
taking the Sacrament, as for not coming to Church, according to this and former
Laws and Statutes; and to make Proclamation that they shall tender themselves
to the Sheriff or Bailiff of the Liberty where they are, before the next
Assize, Goal Delivery, or Sessions respectively: Which if they shall not do,
that default is to be recorded, and it shall be a sufficient Conviction of
them, as well as a trial by Verdict.

Recusants forfeitures after first Conviction for not coming to Church.
6. Every such Offender after the first Conviction for not coming to Church,
shall pay into the Exchequer in the Terms of Easter and Michaelmas, next
happening after their Conviction, their forfeitures then due at the rate of 20
l. per month, and yearly after that in the same Terms, at the rate of 20 l. per
month, unless the King shall please to take two thirds of their Lands and
Leases, or that they shall conform.

Conviction to be certified into the Exchequer.
7. Every Conviction is before the end of the Term next following, to be
certified into the Exchequer, and the Court is to issue process of seizure
thereupon, against the Offenders Goods, and two parts of his Lands, Leases, etc.

Twenty pounds a month, or two thirds of Recusants lands, except the Mansion
house, etc.
8. The King may refuse the twenty pounds a month, and take the two parts of the
Lands, as aforesaid, (excepting the Recusants Mansion House) and the King may
not demise those two parts to a Recusant, or to any other, for the Recusants
use; and the Kings Lessee of the said two parts, is to give security not to
commit waste.

9. The Bishop of the Diocese, or two Justices of the Peace (one being of the
Quorum) may out of Sessions tender the Oath of Allegiance (mentioned in haec
verba, Oath of Allegiance.
in this Act (to which the Reader is referred) to any person, being eighteen
years of age (except Noblemen,
and Noble-women) which stand Convicted or Indicted of Recusancy, etc. (or
passing through the Country, and examined on Oath, confesses) or (at least)
denies not, that he or she is a Recusant, and the Bishop or Justices are to
certify the Premises, and the name and abode of the party to the next
Sessions, where the Clerk of the Peace or Town Clerk are to record the same:
And if they refuse to take the Oath, or to answer upon Oath, they are to bind
them to the next Sessions; and if they refuse there to take it again, they
incur a Premunirae, Praemunire. Women Covert
(except Women Covert) who in that case are to suffer Imprisonment till they
take it.

Names to be subscribed.
10. If they take the Oath, they are to subscribe their Names or Marks, and no
Indictment against such as are Recusants, shall be reversed for lack of form,
but only by direct Traverse: Indictment not to be reversed for want of form.

Who shall go out of the Realm to serve a Foreign Prince.


But if they conform, they may be admitted to traverse or discharge it.

11. None shall go out of the Realm to serve any Foreign Prince or State,
without taking the said Oath (of Allegiance) and if he have born Office as a
Soldier, he shall also enter into Bond to the Kings use, with condition as in
this Act is at large expressed in haec Verba, (to which the Reader is referred)
or else to be adjudged a Fellon. Bond.


12. The Customers or Comptrollers of Ports only, Customers and Comptrollers
of Ports to take Bonds.
and their Deputies, may take such Bonds, and minister the said Oath in this
case, which they are every year to certify into the Exchequer, the Bond, on
pain of five pounds, and the Oath, on pain of twenty shillings.

13. Withdrawing Kings Subjects from their obedien^e, High Treason
To absolve or withdraw the Kings Subjects from their Natural Obedience, to
reconcile them to the Sea of Rome, or to move them to promise it, etc. or to be
absolved, withdrawn, reconciled, or make promise, as aforesaid, is high Treason.

14. This Clause of Reconcilement (as to the point of reconcilement only) shall
not extend to any, that shall return into the Realm, Reconciliation
and within six weeks after, shall before the Bishop, etc. submit himself to
the King, and his Laws, and take the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance.

15. The Sheriff, upon a lawful Writ, Excommunicate Recusants Action against an
Officer for doing his duty, etc.
may justify to break a house for taking an Excommunicate Recusant.

16. If an Action be brought against an Officer, for execution of this Act, he
may plead the General Issue, and give the special matter in evidence.

17. None shall be punished for his Wives offense, Wives Offense.
nor shall a married Woman be chargeable with any penalty or forfeiture by
force of this Act.

18. Six of the Privy Counsel (whereof the Chancellor, Oath of Allegiance.

Noble men, and Noble Women.


Treasurer, or Principal Secretary to be one) may minister the Oath of
Allegiance to any Noble Man, or Noble Woman (unmarried) of, or above eighteen
years of age, and if they refuse it, they incur a Praemunire.

19. The Warden of the Cinque Ports, or some by his appointment, shall take the
Bond, and minister the Oath, aforesaid, Warden of Cinque Ports.
to any person passing beyond Sea out of them, i. e. the Cinque Ports, or any
of their Members.

1. By this Statute, He that within three days notice, discovers to a Justice
of Peace, any that entertains a Popish Priest, 3. Jac. cap. 5.
or any that have heard or said Mass, Entertaining a Popish Priest.

Mass.


shall have a third part of the forfeiture due for the said offenses, if the
whole exceed not an hundred and and fifty, then only fifty pounds thereof to
be paid him by the Sheriff, who shall leavy the same.

Convicted Recusants not to come to Court, on pain of an 100. l.

Convict Recusants not to be in London, or ten miles of it, unless he be a
Tradesman, on pain of 100. l.


2. No Convicted Recusant shall come into Court without command from the King,
or Warrant from the Privy Counsel, under their hands, on pain of an hundred
pounds, one moiety to the King, the other to the Discoverer.

3. A Popish Recusant, Convict or Indicted for not coming to Church for three
months together, and remaining in London, or within ten miles distance, shall
within ten days after such Conviction or Indictment depart thence, and shall
deliver their names (if in London) to the Lord Mayor there, and (if in the
Country) to the next Justice of the Peace, on pain of an hundred pounds, to be
divided between the King and the Prosecutor; but this is not to extend to
Tradesmen that have no other habitation in, or within ten miles of London.

License must be procured by a Recusant, to go about his occasions, etc.
4. A Recusant may go about his own occasions, by License from the King, or
three Privy Counselors under their hands, or four Justices of Peace under
their hands and Seals, with the assent in writing of the Bishop, Lieutenant, or
Deputy Lieutenant of the same County, notwithstanding the Statute of 35. Eliz.
cap. 2. which License is not to be granted by the said Justices, till the party
makes Oath of the true reason of his Journey, and that he will make no needless
stay.

No Convict Recusant may practice Law, Physic, etc. or bear Office in any
Castle, etc.
5. No Convicted Recusant shall practice the Common Law, Civil Law, Physic, or
the Art of the Apothecary; or be an Officer of or in any Court; or bear any
Office among Soldiers, or in a Ship, Castle, or Fortress, on pain of an
hundred pound, to be divided between the King and the Prosecutor.

Popish Recusant Convict, or whose Wife is such, may not bear Office, etc.
6. No Popish Recusant Convict, or whose Wife is a Popish Recusant Convict,
shall exercise any public Office in the Common Wealth by himself, or his
Deputy, unless he bring up his Children in the true Religion; and together with
his Children and Servants, repair to the Church, and receive the Sacraments, as
the Law requires.

What a married Woman, being a Recusant Convict, shall forfeit.
7. A married Woman, being a Popish Recusant Convict, (her Husband being none)
that does not conform her self, as aforesaid, by the space of one whole year
before her Husbands death, shall forfeit two thirds of her Dower or Joynter,
and shall be incapable of being Executrix, or Administratrix to her Husband, or
enjoying any part of his Goods.

8. A Popish Recusant, after Conviction, A Popish Recusant Convict, shall be an
Excommunicate Person to all intents, till he conform.
shall be (to all intents) reputed as a person Excommunicate, until he conform
and take the Oath of Obedience or Allegiance, ordained by 3. Jac. 4. Yet he may
sue for his Interest, in Lands not seized into the Kings hands.

9. A Popish Recusant Convict, Popish Recusant Convict, must be married by a
lawful Minister, in open Church, on pain of 100 l.
married otherwise then in open Church, by a lawful Minister, according to the
Church of England, shall not be Tenant by the Courtesy. A Woman also (in this
case) shall lose her Dower, Jointure, Widows Estate, and all her Husbands
Goods; and where a Man cannot be Tenant by the Courtesy, he shall forfeit an
hundred pounds, to be divided between the King and Prosecutor.

10. Every Popish Recusant, Their Children to be Baptized by a lawful Minister,
on pain of an 100 l.
within a month after the Birth of his Child, shall cause it to be Baptized by
a lawful Minister, on pain of an hundred pounds, if he outlive the month, if
not, his Wife is to pay the forfeiture; the King to have one third part, the
Prosecutor another, and the poor of the Parish the third.

11. Every Popish Recusant is to be Buried in the Church, They must be buried
in the Church, or in the Churchyard, on pain of 20 l.
or Churchyard, according to the Church-Laws of this Realm, on pain that his
Executor, Administrator, or the party that causes him to be otherwise buried,
pay twenty pounds to be divided as next aforesaid.

12. A Child (being no Soldier, Mariner, Merchant, Who may go beyond Sea, and
upon what License, etc.
or Apprentice, or Factor to a Merchant) shall not be sent, or go beyond Sea,
without the Kings License, or six of the Privy Council, (the principal
Secretary being one) on pain thereby to be incapable to enjoy any Lands, or
Goods, by Descent or Grant, until (being eighteen years of age, or above) he
take the Oath of Obedience before some Justice of Peace of the County, The
penalties of going beyond Sea, etc. without License.
where his Parents do or did dwell. And in the mean time, the next of Kin
(being no Papist) shall enjoy his Lands and Goods, but shall be accomptable to
the other, in case he afterward conform, as aforesaid; and he that so goes out
of the Realm, shall forfeit an hundred pounds to be divided, as aforesaid.

13. A Popish Recusant Convict, Chancellor, etc. of both Universities, shall
present to the benefice of a Recusant Convict.
shall be disabled to present to a Benefice, but in his stead, the Chancellor
and Scholars of the Universities of Cambridge and Oxford, shall present,
within several Counties respectively, as by this Act is at large set forth.

14. A Popish Recusant Convict, shall not be an Executor, Convict Papist, may
not be Executor, etc.
Administrator, or Guardian.

None may bring from beyond Sea, or Print, or Sell Popish Books, etc.
15. None shall bring from beyond Sea, Print, Sell or Buy any Popish Primmars,
Ladies Psalters, Manuals, Rosaries, Portals, Legends, or Lives of Saints in
what Language soever they shall be Printed or Written, nor any other
Superstitious Books written in the English Tongue, one pain to forfeit forty
shillings for every such book, to be divided as aforesaid.

16. Two Justices of Peace, and all Mayors, Bailiffs, and Head-Officers, have
power to search the Houses and Lodgings of Popish Recusants Convict, and of
every person, whose Wife is a Popish Recusant Convict, Power to search Convict
Papists Lodgings for Popish Books and Relics.
for Popish Books and Relics, and to lurn and deface such as they shall find
in their custody; but such as are of value, in open Sessions, and afterward
restored to the Owner.

The Armor of Recusants Convict to be secured; and those that refuse to
deliver them to be punished, etc.
17. All the Armor, Gunpowder and Ammunition of a Popish Recusant Convict,
shall be taken from him, by Warrant from four Justices of the Peace, at the
General Sessions (other then such Weapons as shall be allowed him by the said
Justices, for defense of his house against Thieves, etc.) which Armor, etc.
shall be kept at the costs of such Recusant, in such places as the said
Justices shall appoint, and showed at every Muster, as his Arms, together with
his Horse, which he shall buy, provide, and maintain for that purpose,
according to his ability, as other Subjects do; and the Recusant that refuses
to declare what Armor and Ammunition he has, and deliver it to such persons as
shall have power to seize it, he shall forfeit the same to the King; and by
Warrant from any Justice of Peace of that County, be imprisoned for three
months without Bail.

^. Jac. cap. 6. Oath of Obedidience.
1. By this Statute is set forth, who shall give, and who shall take the Oath of
Allegiance, and within what time, and before whom, a Barron or Barronness, of
or about eighteen years old, shall take it. See the Statute at large.

Barrons and Barronesses convicted of Recusancy; who may tender this Oath to
them
2. If a Barron or Barronness stand Presented, Indicted, or Convicted of
Recusancy, three of the Privy Council (whereof the Lord Chancellor, Treasurer,
Privy Seal, or Principal Secretary to be one) shall minister to them the said
Oath, but if he be a convicted person under those degrees; or if the Minister,
petty Constables, Who to a common person.
or Churchwardens of any Parish, or any two of them, shall complain to any
Justice of the Peace, of any person suspected of Recusancy, then the said
Justice may in either of the said cases, minister the said Oath, and upon
refusal commit the party to Prison, there to remain until the next Assizes or
Sessions, where if he or she again refuse to take it, Praemunire.
they shall incur a Praemunire, (except Women Covert, who shall only be
Imprisoned in this case) and there remain without Bayl, until they take the
said Oath.

3. None refusing, the said Oath, The penalty of refusing the Oath:
shall be capable of any Office of Judicature, or other Office (being no Office
of Inheritance or Ministerial Function) or to practice the Common Law, Physic,
Lawyers, etc. refusing it.
Chyrurgery, the Art of Apothecary, or any liberal Science for Gain.

4. If a Married Woman be a convicted Recusant, A married woman convicted of
Recusancy, her penalty.
and do not conform within three months after conviction, she shall be
committed to Prison, by a Privy Counselor; or the Bishop of the Diocese, if
she be a Baroness; but if of a lower degree, then she shall be committed by two
Justices of Peace (whereof one of the Quorum) and there remain until she
conform, unless the Husband shall pay to the King for his Wives offense, ten
pounds for every month, or yield a third part of all his Lands: at the choice
of such Husbands.

5. None shall go himself, The penalty of going beyond Sea, or sending any
thither to be trained in Popery, or sending relief to them.
or send any other person whatsoever beyond Sea, to be trained up in Popery,
nor give any maintenance or relief to the party so sent, or to any School, or
Relious house there, (on pain after conviction thereof) to be made unable to
prosecute any Suit in any Court of Equity, to be Committee of any Ward,
Executor or Administrator, and to be incapable of any Legacy, or Deed of Gift,
or bearing Office within this Realm. And besides, to forfeit all his Goods and
Chattels, and his Lands also, during life; but if he or she conform within six
weeks after his or her return, according to the Statutes of this Realm, they
shall not incur the said Penalties.

1. By this Statute, the Statute of 1. Jac. cap. 1. 3. Car. l. cap. 2.
is to be put in due execution.

2. None of the Kings Subjects shall pass, or go, The like penalty as in the
next preceding Statute for sending or going beyond Sea to be trained in Popery,
etc.
or shall convey or send, or cause to be conveyed or sent, any Children, or
other person, out of any the Kings Dominions, into any parts beyond the Seas,
out of the Kings obedience, to the intent to be resident and trained up in any
Popish Society, School or Family, or instructed in the Popish Religion, in any
sort to profess the same; Neither shall any convey, or cause to be conveyed any
money, or other thing, toward the maintenance of any such Children, or person
already gone or sent, or to go, or to be sent, and trained and instructed, as
aforesaid, or (under the name of Charity) toward the relief of any such
Society or Religious House, on pain, after conviction, in the aforesaid cases,
to be disabled to Sue, or use any Action, Bill, Plant, or Information in Law,
or Prosecute any Suit in Equity, etc. As in the next precedent Statute here
abstracted and abridged.

This is the Sum and substance of all the Statute-Laws against Jesuits,
Priests, and Popish Recusants; which for the benefit of my Country men, I have
abstracted out of the large Volumn of the Statute-Books, and here brought them
to this narrow compass; but read them at large for thy better satisfaction.
Farewell.

FINIS.

