W R

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
By the Lords Justices,
A PROCLAMATION. For ye apphending seveal persons for robbing sr John Banks
Park in Kent.
Tho. Cantuar. J. Summers C. Sunderland, Romney, Orford.

18. Sept. 1697.
WHereas We have Received Information that great Number of Persons have
frequently of late Assembled themselves together, and committed great Outrages
and Riots in the County of Kent, by coming with Arms, and with Open Violence
Breaking into and Robbing the Parks of several Gentlemen in the said County,
and particularly that on the Eighteenth day of August last, several Horsemen,
to the Number of Forty or more, Armed with Guns, Swords and other Weapons, as
also with Toyls and Dogs, did in a Riotous and Violent Manner in the Night
time, Enter into the Park of Sir John Banks Baronet, at Aylesford near
Maidstone in the said County of Kent, and there killed and carried away several
Deer, broke up and threw down great part of the Park Pales, and committed
diverse other Acts of Violence, to the great Disturbance of the Public Peace,
and contrary to the known Laws of this Kingdom: We therefore being desirous
that such Offenders should be discovered and brought to condign Punishment for
their Offenses, have, with the Advice of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy
Council, thought fit to Issue this Proclamation, hereby Commanding all His
Majesty's Loving Subjects to Discover, Take and Apprehend the Persons concerned
in the aforesaid Riot and Robbery of Sir John Banks his Park where ever they or
any of them may be found, and to carry them before One of His Majesty's
Principal Secretaries of State, or before the Chief Justice of the Court of
Kings Bench, or before some Justice of the Peace or Chief Magistrate; which
Justice of the Peace or Chief Magistrate, in case any of the said Offenders
shall be brought before him, is hereby Required to Commit him to the next Goal,
there to Remain until they shall give Sufficient Bail to Appear the next Term
in the Court of Kings Bench, and thereof give Notice to One of the Principal
Secretaries of State, or to the Chief Justice of the Kings Bench. And We do
hereby Publish and Declare, That whosoever shall Conceal any of the said
Persons, shall be Proceeded against with the utmost Severity according to Law.
And whosoever shall Discover and Apprehend the said Persons, or any of them, at
any time within the space of Two Months next ensuing, and bring them before any
of His Majesty's Principal Secretaries of State, or before the Chief Justice of
the Court of Kings Bench, or before some Justice of Peace, or Chief Magistrate,
shall receive, as a Reward, One hundred Pounds; which said Sum of One hundred
Pounds the Lords Commissioners of His Majesty's Treasury are hereby directed to
pay. And We do hereby further Promise, That if any Person concerned in the said
Riot shall at any time within Two Months next Ensuing, and before he is
Discovered and Apprehended, Discover and Apprehend any the Persons concerned in
the said Riot, and Robbery, and Carry them before One of His Majesty's
Principal Secretaries of State, or before the Chief Justice of the Court of
Kings Bench, or before such Justice of Peace, or Chief Magistrate, as
aforesaid, such Person shall not only have and receive the said Reward of One
hundred Pounds, but shall also have His Majesty's Gracious Pardon for such his
Offense.

Given at the Court at Whitehall the Seventeenth Day of September, 1697. In the
Ninth Year of His Majesty's Reign.
LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb,
deceased, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1697.


