C R

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
At the Court at Whitehall, This Sixth day of December, 1678.
Present, The Kings Most Excellent Majesty. Lord Chancellor. Lord Treasurer.
Lord Privy Seal. Duke of Lauderdale. Marquess of Worcester. Lord Chamberlain.
Earl of Bridgwater. Earl of Northampton. Earl of Peterborough. Earl of Essex.
Earl of Craven. Earl of Ailesbury. Earl of Carbery. Viscount Fauconberg.
Viscount Newport. Lord Bishop of London. Lord Bishop of Durham. Lord Berkeley.
Lord Maynard. Mr. Secretary Coventry. Mr. Secretary Williamson. Mr. Chancellor
of the Exchequer. Master of the Ordnance. Mr. Speaker.


WHereas His Majesty and this Board are Informed of the Bold and Open Repair
made to several places, and especially to Her Majesty's Chapel at
Somerset House, and the Houses of Foreign Ambassadors, Agents, and other
Public Ministers, for the hearing of Mass, and other Worship and Service of
the Romish Church; And that the said Ambassadors, Agents, and Ministers, do
Permit and Suffer both daily Masses to be said, and other Worship and Service
to be performed in their Houses in a Public manner, by English, Scottish, and
Irish Priests, and also Sermons in English to be Preached in their said Houses
and Chapels, which the Laws and Statutes of this Kingdom do expressly forbid
His Subjects to frequent or do; His Majesty taking the same into serious
Consideration, and being sensible thereof, as a matter highly tending to the
Violation of the Laws of the Realm, and the Scandal of Religion and Government,
and breach of good Order, and in His Princely Wisdom weighing the Consequence
thereof, is Resolved to take strict Order for the Stopping this Evil before it
spread any further.

His Majesty therefore, by the Advice of His Council, does hereby forbid any of
His said Subjects hereafter to offend in the like kind, at their utmost perils;
And straightly Commands, That no others presume to resort to Her Majesty's
Chapel, but such as are Her Majesty's Allowed Servants. And to the end this
Provision and Order may be more effectual, His Majesty does Command, That
forasmuch as concerns the Repair to the Houses of Foreign Ambassadors,
Agents, and Ministers, at the time of Mass, or other Romish Worship or Service,
some Messengers of the Chamber, or other Officers or Persons fit for that
Service, be appointed to watch at the several Passages to their Houses, and
without entering into the said Houses, or invading the Freedom and Privileges
belonging unto them, observe such persons as go thither at such times, without
Stopping or Questioning any as they go thither; but at their coming from
thence, they are to apprehend and bring the said persons before some Justice,
or Justices of the Peace, to have the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy
tendered to them; and such as they cannot apprehend, to bring their Names to
this Board. And that the Ambassadors and other Foreign Ministers may have no
cause to complain for this Proceeding, as if there were any intention to wrong
or disrespect them, His Majesty does likewise Order, for the preventing of any
such mistaking and sinister interpretation, That His Principal Secretaries of
State, (according unto His Majesty's express Commands now given unto them)
should be hereby authorized and required forthwith to certify the said
Ambassadors, Agents, and other Foreign Ministers, His Majesty's Pleasure
concerning the same; And that as his Majesty is careful not to have any of the
just Privileges and Immunities of the said Ambassadors, Agents, or Ministers,
to be in any degree infringed or violated, so in the aforesaid Particulars of
permitting Masses or other Service to be said by any of the said Priests, or
Sermons to be preached in English in their Houses or Chapels (things not heard
of in the Times of His Majesty's Predecessors) or in suffering His Subjects to
resort unto them, His Majesty is no less careful of preserving His Laws, and
continuing His Subjects in their obedience to the same; And does therefore
expect the said Ambassadors, Agents, and Ministers compliance accordingly. And
hereof His Majesty thinks fit that Notice shall be first given to the said
Public Ministers (the rather to testify His respects unto them) before the
stricter Course His Majesty has resolved be taken with His own Subjects, by a
vigorous Prosecution and Infliction of Penalties and Punishments for the
Preventing and Repressing the like hereafter.

And it is likewise Ordered, That the Messengers of the Chamber, or others to
be employed in the Service before specified, shall be appointed, and receive
their Charge from the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, the Lord Bishop of
London, and the said Secretaries, or some of them, who are to take special care
to see this put in due and effectual Execution.

THOMAS DOLMAN.

LONDON, Printed by John Bill, Christopher Barker, Thomas Newcomb, and Henry
Hills, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1678.


