By the Lords and other His Majesty's Commissioners.
An Order for the observance and Execution of the Statute made for the Reliese
and ordering of Persons Infected with the Plague.
WHEREAS by an Act of Parliament in the first year of the Reign of Our late
Sovereign Lord King James, several good and necessary Provisions were made
and Ordained, touching those that be or shall be infected with the Plague: by
which Act, power is given to Justices of Peace of Counties, Majors, Bayliffes,
HeadOfficers, or Justices of Peace in Cities, Borroughes, Towns Corporate, and
places Privileged, and to the Vice Chancellor of either of the Universities,
and to the Bishop and Deane of every Cathedral Church respectively, within
their several and respective Precincts and Jurisdictions, to tax and assesse
all Inhabitants, and all Houses of Habitation, Lands, Tenements, and
Hereditaments, at such reasonable Taxes and payments as they shall think fit
for the reasonable relief of Persons infected, and to levy the same of the
Goods of such as shall refuse or neglect to pay, and in default thereof, to
commit them to the Goal without Bail or Mainprize until payment; And also to
appoint Searchers, Watchmen, Examiners, Keepers, and Buriers, for the Persons
and places Infected, and to minister Oaths unto them for the performing of
their Offices, and to give them other directions as shall seem good unto them
in their discretions, for the present necessity. And it is thereby farther
Provided and Enacted, That if any person or persons Infected, or being, or
dwelli^g in any Houses Infected, shall be commanded or appointed to keep his or
their House, for avoiding of farther Infection, and shall notwithstanding
wilfully and contemptuously disobey such direction and appointment, offering or
attempting to break or go abroad, and to resist such Keepers or Watchmen, as
shall be appointed to see them kept in: that then it shall be lawful for such
Watchmen with violence to enforce them to keep their Houses: And if any hurt
come thereby, that the Keepers, Watchmen, and their assistants shall not be
impeached therefore; And farther, That if any Infected persons being commanded
to keep House, shall notwithstanding wilfully and contemptuously go abroad,
and converse with company, having any Infectious sore about him uncured, such
person shall be taken and adjudged as a Felon, and suffer death as in case of
Felony: but if they shall have no sore found about them, nevertheless for such
offense, they shall be punished as Vagabonds in all respects, and also be bound
to his or their good behavior for one whole year, as by the said Act may more
fully appear. The Lords and others entrusted and authorized by His Majesty, by
His Commission under His Great Seal of England, for and concerning the safety,
preservation, and well Ordering of this University and City of Oxford, and the
County of Oxford, and other Counties and places adjoining, in His Majesty's
absence, taking into their Consideration, that the due observance and execution
of the said Law, may (by Gods blessing) be a good means to prevent the farther
spreading of this present Infection, and that the neglect of the observance of
the same Law, has been, and may be, in probability, an occasion of the
increase thereof, do therefore hereby in His Majesty's Name, by virtue of His
Majesty's said Commission, straightly Charge and Require, the Vice Chancellor of
this University, and the Major, Justices of Peace, Bayliffes, and other
Officers of this City of Oxford, and the Justices of Peace of the County of
Oxford, and all others whom it may concern, That with all possible care and
diligence, they cause the said Law to be duly and effectually put in
execution, as well for the help and relief, as for the governing and keeping
in of Infected persons, as they will answer their neglect and remissness
therein at their perils. And they do likewise in His Majesty's Name, straightly
Charge and Command all persons whatsoever, as well Soldiers as others, upon
whom it has pleased, or shall please God to lay this his Visitation, that they
submit and yield obedience to the said Law, letting them know, that a strict
and severe proceeding shall be had, for punishing of all such as shall wilfully
or contemptuously offend against the same, to the endangering of others: And
that a very strict account will be required of all, who are, or shall be any
way concerned in this just and necessary Command, tending so much to the health
and preservation of this University and City, and all that are resident
therein, or resort thereunto.

Dated at Oxford, the 12th day of May, in the One and Twentieth Year of His
Majesty's Reign. 1645. Ed. Littleton C. S. Cottington. Hertford. Dorchester.
Dorset. Hen. Dover. Chichester. F. Seymour. Edw. Nicholas.


Printed at Oxford, by Leonard Lichfield Printer to the University. 1645.


