Order of their Excellencies the Lords Justices in Council, confirming several
Acts and Laws of the Province of the Massachusetts Bay, made in the years,
1694, 1695, 1696, 1697.
AT THE Council Chamber At Whitehall, ^he 24. of November, School.
Present, Their Excellencies the Lords Justices. Lord Arch Bishop of
Canterbury. Lord Chancellor. Lord Privy Seal. Lord Steward. Earl of
Marlborough. Earl of Romney. Mr. Montague. Earl of Bridgwater. Earl of
Manchester. Earl of Stamford. Earl of Berkley. Earl of M^^^ague. Earl of
Br^^ford. Earl of Ranelagh. Lord Wharton. Mr. Vice Chamberlain. Mr. Secretary
Vernon. Lord Chief Justice Holt. Sir. Henry Goodrick. Mr. Smith.


WHEREAS by Powers granted under the great Seal of England, the Governor,
Council and Assembly of the Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New England,
are Authorized and Empowered to constitute and ordain Laws, which are to
continue and be in force, unless His Majesty's pleasure be signified to the
contrary. And Whereas in pursuance of the said powers, several Laws have been
made by the Governor, Council and Assembly of the said Province, in the years
One thousand six hundred ninety four, One thousand six hundred ninety five, One
thousand six hundred ninety six, One thousand six hundred ninety seven.

That is to say, An Act, For reviving of Actions and Process lately depending
in the Superior Court of Judicature, Court of Assize and General Goal delivery
within the County of Essex, and discontinued by the not holding of the said
Court at Salem, upon the Second Tuesday in November, 1694. An Act, For the more
effectual Suppressing of Drunkenness, and putting in Execution the Laws against
such as shall presume to Sell strong Drink without License. An Act, For
preventing of Men's Sons or Servants absenting themselves from their Parents or
Masters Service without leave. An Act, For Grand Jurors Serving at the Quarter
Sessions of the Peace, and punishing defaults of Jurors attendace. An Act, For
supplying the defects in the Act, Entitled, An Act, For encouraging the
ki^ling of Wolves. An Act, For preventing Incestuous Marriages. An Act, For
regulating the Assize of Shingles. An Act, For the better Settlement of the
Islands, of Marthas Vineyard, and Islands adjacent. An Act, In further Addition
to the Act entitled, An Act, For the Settlement and Support of Ministers. An
Act, For the better discovery and more effectual Suppressing of Unlicensed
Houses. An Act, For taking of Affidavits out of Court. An Act, For the
Encouragement of making Salt within this Province. An Act, Against Piracy and
robbing upon the Sea. An Act, For the equal distribution of Insolvent Estates.
An Act, For the due Assize of Bread An Act, For making of Lands and Tenements
liable to the payment of Debts. An Act, To prevent the Destroying and Murdering
of Bastard Children. An Act, Against high Treason. An Act, In Addition to the
Act for preventing of Common Nusances, arising by Slaughter Houses, Still
Houses, etc. An Act, In Addition to the Act for regulating Ferries. An Act, To
supply the De^^^ in the Law referring to the choice and power of Tythingmen,
Enacted at the Sess^^^s of the General Court in February Anno. 1693. An Act,
Relating to Town Rates or Assessments. An Act, For the further continuing of
the Act for Writts and Processes. An Act, Impowring Justices of the Peace to
decide differences not exceeding Forty Shillings. An Act, For ascertaining the
value of Co^^^ current within this Province. An Act, Against Murder. An Act,
Against Ravishment or Rape. An Act, For the Punishment of Buggery. An Act,
Against Atheism and Blasphemy. An Act, For registring of Deeds and
Conveyances. An Act, Of Limitation for quieting of Possessions.


Which said Laws having upon perusal of the Right Honorable the Council of
Trade and Plantations, been presented for the Approbation of their Excellencies
the Lords Justices of England. Their Excellencies, with the Advice of His
Majesty's Privy Council, have declared their Approbation of the same. And
pursuant to their Excellencies pleasure thereupon expressed, the said Laws are
hereby confirmed finally Enacted and ratified accordingly.

John Povey.

Published at Boston, April 27th. 1699.

Order of their Excellencies the Lords Justices in Council, Repealing several
Acts of the Province of the Massachusetts Bay, made in the years, 1695, 1696
and 1697.
AT THE Council Chamber At Whitehall the 24. day November, School.
Present, Their Excellencies the Lords Justices. Lord Arch Bishop of
Canterbury. Lord Chancellor. Lord Privy Seal. Lord Steward Earl of Marlborough.
Earl of Romney. Mr. Montague. Earl of Bridgewater. Earl of Manchester. Earl of
Stamford. Earl of Berkley. Earl of Montague. Earl of Bradford. Earl of
Ranelagh. Lord Wharton. Mr. Vice Chamberlain. Mr. Secretary Vernon. Lord Chief
Justice Holt. Sir. Henry Goodrick. Mr. Smith.


WHEREAS by Powers granted under the great Seal of England, the Governor,
Council and Assembly of the Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New England,
are Authorized and Empowered to constitute and ordain Laws, which are to
continue and be in force, unless His Majesty's pleasure shall be signified to
the contrary. And Whereas in pursuance of the said Powers, several Laws have
been made by the Governor, Council and Assembly of the said Province in the
years One thousand six hundred ninety five, One thousand six hundred ninety
six, and One thousand six hundred ninety seven.

That is to say, An Act, Of Supplement, and Addition to several Acts therein
mentioned. An Act, That all persons not being Freeholders or settled
Inhabitants Commenceing Suit, shall give Security before Process be granted. An
Act, For continuing of several Acts therein after mentioned that are near
Expiring. An Act, For the reviving and establishing of Judicatories and Courts
of Justice, and the Forms of Writts and Processes. An Act, For Establishing of
Courts. An Act, For incorporating Harvard College at Cambridge, in New England.


Which said Laws having upon perusal of the Right Honorable the Council of
Trade and Plantations, been presented to their Excellencies, the Lords Justices
of England. Their Excellencies by Advice of His Majesty's Privy Council, have
thought fit to signify their Disapprobation and Disallowance of the same: and
accordingly the said Laws are hereby Repealed and declared void and of none
effect.

John Povey.

Published at Boston, April 27th. 1699.

Boston in New England, Printed by Bartholomew Green, and John Allen, Printers
to the Governor and Council. 1699.


