THE TROVBLERS TROVBLED, OR ACHAN CONDEMNED, AND EXECVTED.

A SERMON, Preached before sundry of the Honorable House of Commons. at
Westminster, April, 4. 1641.

By Samuel Fairecloth, Pastor of the Congregation of Ketton in Suffolk.

GAL. 5. 12. I would to God they were even cut off which trouble you.

LONDON. Printed by R. Cotes, for Henry Overton, and are to be sold at his Shop
at the entrance into Popes-head-Alley, out of Lumbard street. 1641.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL AND His much honored PATRON, Sr. Nathaniel
Barnardiston, one of the Knights of the Shire for the County of Suffolk.
SIR,
SO remarkable, and conspicuous, in the view of all the neighboring parts of
our Country, are the expressions of your noble patronage, and support, both of
my self, and ministry, that each eye (almost) observes it; and more tongues
speak of it; yet every pious heart, that ever reaped any profit from my poor,
and unworthy labors (next under the free grace of God) acknowledge your self
the chief and grand instrument of the same; They are all also assured, as well
as my self, that it was by your worships favor alone, that a person so
obscure, and undeserving as I know my self to be, had the honor to be called
to this so honorable a service; I mean to deliver any part of Gods truth, to
any part of your so honorable an assembly; but by whose means these rude
notes I then delivered, here come to the Press, neither they nor my self as
yet do truly understand; only by a Letter the last week, from a friend that
I am sure had no hand in it, I was informed of it; with intimation, that (if I
pleased I might present it to what person I would; and that (though I refused
yet) that the Press had proceeded so far, as it could not be reversed: in
all which proceedings, nothing at all pleased me, but this only, that (what
insufficiencies and failings soever were by the publishing of these notes,
discovered in my self yet) I should have an opportunity hereby offered, to
make public confession how much both my self, and all the Angle where you
live, are obliged to your self, and Family, for planting and supporting the
ministry of the word and power of the Gospel amongst us; and to stir them
up still to join with me, in making your worships life, safety, prosperity
and honor of your family, the subject of our prayers and praises: which
opportunity had I let slip, your worship had not more voices for you (in your
so honorable election by your Country) to that service wherein you are
entrusted, then I should have had against me for neglecting upon this occasion
of publishing Joshua his practice against Achan, to declare to the world that
by your countenancing and encouraging the virtuous and opposing the profane and
vicious, you have approved your self to the whole Corner in general, and my
self above all in particular, against all the Achans and troublers of our
peace and liberty, a true Joshua; which shall ever be acknowledged by

Your Worships most obliged SA: FAIRECLOTH.

The Troublers Troubled, Or ACHAN Condemned, AND EXECVTED.
JOSHUA, 7. 25. And Joshua said, Why have thou troubled us? the Lord shall
trouble thee this day.


THe just judgment of God upon Achan by Joshua, for bringing judgment upon
Israel, in offending in the cursed things, is the sum of the Text.

Where, in Joshua's practice, as in a mirror is, presented a concurrence of all
graces, a contexture of all virtues necessary to be observed, in the execution
of penal Justice, upon public offenders. For whatsoever, by way of
direction, concerning the Inquisition, examination, conviction, sentencing, or
execution of public malefactors is elsewhere in the Scripture, in Thesi, or
the rule, is here in Hypothesi, the subject, and practice. For all that can be
desired of a Magistrate, in this respect, is comprehended under those two
heads, which Solomon in his Prayer, 1. Kings 3. 2. Chron. 1. 10. begs of his
God, to wit understanding, to discern between good, and bad; and wisdom to
go out and in before the people, in judging them accordingly.

The former notes a good head, the latter a good heart; a good head, to know
what is to be done; a good heart to do what is known: all that Solomon prays
for there, Joshua practices here, the first in the form of a legal
inquisition, and accusation, Why have thou troubled us? The second in the form
of a judicial sentence and peremptory verdict, The Lord shall trouble thee
this Day. In which accusation and sentence, we will consider, first the
particulars, secondly the relation of those particulars either to other.

The particulars are these.

First, two troublers. Secondly, two troubles. Thirdly, two troubled. and
Fourthly, two times of trouble.

The two troublers are first Achan, secondly, the Lord. Why have thou troubled
us? the Lord shall trouble thee.

The two troubles: First is Achans, and that is a trouble of pollution and
infection.

The second, is Gods troubling of Achan, and that is a trouble of perdition and
destruction.

The two troubled, are first Israel, the Church and Commonwealth, Thou have
troubled us.

The second is Achan, troubled by the Lord; the Lord shall trouble thee.

Lastly, the two times of trouble, first Achans time of troubling of Israel,
past, Thou have troubled us, secondly, the Lords time to trouble Achan, is to
come, but very speedily without any procrastination, the Lord shall trouble
thee to day: The relation of these particulars either to other, is of the cause
to the effect, the four particulars in the accusation being the cause of those
four in the conclusion, and the four in the conclusion the effect of these in
the accusation, because Achan is a troubler, therefore God troubles; and
because Achan troubled Israel, therefore God troubles Achan; and because Achan
troubled Israel by infection, God troubles him by destruction; and because he
had done it in time past, God will do it certainly for time to come, and that
very speedily; the Lord shall trouble thee to day. In the four particulars in
the accusation, we are to learn the cause and means whereby a flourishing
Kingdom is overthrown and troubled:

In the four particulars in the conclusion, the means and remedy, whereby a
rent and distrubed Commonwealth is cured, and repaired; and now

First, of the particulars in the accusation, and Israel is troubled.

The troubler is Achan, so his very name proclames him, who is here considered
not according to his Birth, so is he the Son of Labdie verse 1. of the tribe
of Judab, the tribe royal, etc. nor as a subject confessing his fault, so is
he the Son of Joshua, verse 29. but as one that offended in the accursed
thing, verse 21. so is he the Son of Beliall, an Achan, a troubler of Israel,
and the cause of Gods troubling him, from whence this position is deduced.



Behold Achan of the tribe of Judah by his fingering the Babylonish Garment,
and the Wedge of Gold, which God had execrated, the armies of Israel, flesht
with late victories, are weakened, Joshua their Prince and Captain dejected,
the Elders discouraged, enemies exalted, three thousand put to rout, thirty
fix slaughtered, the hearts of all the rest wounded, and melted like Water,
true therefore is the accusation by Joshua, Thou have troubled us, and as true
the position that is thence deduced, That those in a Nation etc.

Before I proceed to further confirmation of this truth, let me premise some
things by way of explication, of two terms in it.

First what is meant by the accursed thing.

Secondly, what it is to offend in it.

1. (...)
For the first, cherem translated execrable or accursed note properly two
things.

First, such a thing which God has destinated to final destruction, and
total abolishment, so the Canaanites Idols, Temples, Altars and Images were
cherem Deuteronomy. 7. 5. to be taken away from under Heaven, and so fitly translated
accurfed.

Secondly, it notes any thing for ever devoted and consecrated to God without
any liberty of alienating it from him by Redemption: so the vows, dedicated
things, and persons that were so reserved to Gods use, that they might not be
redeemed or impropriated from it, Leviticus 27. 28. are called cherem, in a
true sense fitly rendered, excommunicated from common uses. The Greek renders
both the senses fitly in one word anathema, which is any thing set apart either
sursum, or seorsum: first sursum from us to God by Devotion, so the goodly
gifts dedicated to the Temple, are by Luke 21. 5. called anathemata; or seorsum
from us, and God, also by final destruction, so Paul called the man accursed
Romans 16. 22. that is ever to be separated from God.

Thus you see what is the accursed thing, viz. any thing finally separated from
man, and devoted to God; or secondly any thing destinated to utter abolishment
by God: now to offend in this is done two ways, either by impropriation or
appropriation.

First by impropriating from God what he has especially reserved.

Secondly, by appropriating to our selves any thing which he has appointed to
be fully destroyed. Achan offended both ways, but for the first he
impropriated from God the Wedge of Gold, which the Lord had peculiarly reserved
to himself, chap. 6. v. 19. and secondly appropriated to himself the Baby
lonish garment which God had appointed to be burnt and abolished. chap. 6.
verse 18.

These things thus premised by way of explication, I proceed to the
confirmation to demonstrate that those in a Nation that offend in either of
these ways in that which God has execrated are the persons by whom the
Commonwealth is disturbed; which would be most evident to those that in the
sacred Chronicles of the Scripture, shall observe the Lords just proceeding
against Achans, under what government soever they lived, whether Patriarchs,
Judges, or Monarchs, in all which those that did offend in that which God had
execrated were the persons, etc.

Primo Adami there was a government instituted by God immediately, of
universal peace, civil, national, domestical, spiritual, corporal peace,
nothing but peace, peace; yet Adam and Eve there, as Achan here, took but one
bit of the excommunicated thing, that God had specially reserved, and thereby
became Achans, troublers of all the peace public, so that he made himself
and all the world anathema, an accursed thing thereby. After, when peace begun
to be restored, and religion repaired in the Familee of Seth, the sons of God
offended in the execrable thing in marrying the Daughters of excommunicate
Caine, and so not only disturbed, but brought ruin and destruction upon the
whole World, Genesis 6. v. 2, 7. When that great Lawgiver Moses, with Laws
judicial, moral and also Ceremonial, to tally divine, had settled the glory
and peace of the Church, and Commonwealth of Israel, the people offending in
the accursed thing of the Golden Calfe, so disturbed all that notwithstanding
Law and Government also, they were like to be consumed as one man and wholly
extirpated, Exodus 32. Saul was a Monarch anointed of God himself, 2. Sam. 1.
15. elected by the vehement desire of all the subjects, yet offending in the
execrable thing of Agag, reserving but one person which God had destinated to
uter destruction, utterly ruinated his Government, and posterity. Solomon the
Prince of peace, that had a Patent of peace, 1. Kings. 11. 11. and such skill
in Governments as never any Monarch before him, or after him shall attain, yet
by offending in the execrable thing of Chemosh and Milcome disturbed the peace
public, and made such a rent in his Kingdom, as could never after be
repaired.

Machiavill himself in his Book De Repub: gives us one ground for this,
whilst persuading Kings, above all things, if they mean to maintain obedience
of their subjects to themselves, and peace one with another, to possess them
with reverence of divine things, and fear of divine vengeance, as well as
terror of humane penalty: for, says he, whosoever makes no scruples, to
neglect or offend against these, will make much less, when occasion is
offered, to plot sedition, to accommodate themselves to changes, to practice
Treason, though to the utter overthrow of the whole Government. And surely he
that is so loose conscienced, and desperate, that he fears not with Achan to
offend in the Babylonish Garment, though he does thereby incur, and expose
himself to the curse of the King of Heaven, has no banks, or bonds to
restrain him when occasion is offered, to ruin others, to disturb and
trouble Church and Commonwealth, and to turn Traitor to the best established
Government, or Governors on the Earth.

But to leave the Atheist, ask Joshua in the Text where those that offend in
the things that God has execrated etc. he tells you because that by offending
in things accursed, they drive away the fountain of all peace from it, even
God the sole Author and giver of all public peace, and tranquillity: so says
God himself to Joshua, v. 12. Except you take away the accursed thing from
among you, I will be with you no more: and woe unto any State when God departs
from them, and will come no more at them in peace, but wrath. Which also every
Achan offending in the execrable thing causes God to do, even to trouble the
people with all adversity, and bring forth his wrath against them, utterly to
destroy them: so says the text, verse 1. of this Chapter, The anger of the
Lord was kindled against Israel, because Achan trespassed in the abominable
thing. Seeing therefore these Achans by their offending in this kind, drive
away the Lord as a Friend, and bring him against the State as an Enemy, it must
needs follow that such are the persons, etc.

This lesson God taught Joshua, verse the 12. and this lesson Joshua has
taught us in the words of the text, in calling Achan the troubler of Israel.

Joshua say that Achans offending in these things are troublers of the
Commonwealth, how strongly is our great master Aristot'e and his Scholars
confuted that defend that wicked men may be good Commonwealths men, an Achan
be a Joshua, a troubler, a savior of it. I confess if by good, they
understand good accidentally, such good as God, and the State in which they
live, may make good use of, I deny it not in that sense, so may God and his
people make good use of Plague, Famine, or the Sword, yet are they not formally
good, but destructive to the Commonwealth; even so all offenders in the
accursed thing are formally as great evils to the Church and Commonwealth
where they live, as these evils are, for they cause God to send these and many
more, and also turn away his favor from it. Could Achan have spoken as well
as Turtullus; had he known the Law as well as Moses; had he kept as great a
House in his Country, and spent as much provision, as Soloman did in
Jerusalem, yet had not the Wedge of Gold in his tent, and the Babylonish
Garment on his back, been greater evils to the State, then the other good
things could have recompensed? so though a man be a deep Scholar, an eloquent
speaker, skillful in the Laws of his Country, a bountiful Housekeeper, yet
himself an Achan, a Blasphemer, an enemy to the power of Religion, a friend or
a better to wickedness* or have the accursed Wedge of Gold, by oppression,
simony, extortion, or bribery in his Tent, he is no good Commonwealths man, but
an Achan, and a troubler of it.

Joshuahs; men in place, and Authority, whose love to their Countries welfare
have both formerly, and of late laid them with Joshua upon their faces, before
the Lord, in fasting and prayer, in seeking the welfare, and peace of the
Church, to these this position speaks, as the Lord to Joshua, why lie you on
your faces? rise, and search, Israel has sinned, there is an Achan; him must
you seek out among your Tents, if you will have your prayers prevalent for the
peace of Israel; upon which intelligence Joshua searches narrowly, and warily,
for Achan.

First narrowly, so that though but one in all the Tents of Israel, and he hid,
yet he finds him out.

Secondly, warily, taking no other rule for discovery but the lot of God; let
us also therefore to our supplications, join our narrow inquisition, in
searching out throughout all our Tribes, and Tents of Israel, to discover this
execrable person, that fights against our peace, and welfare, look if there be
never* a Babylonish Garment in our Tents, and Families* this narrow search God
enjoyneth Joshua, and Israel after their Prayer; and this search and
information have both God, and our honorable Assembly of Joshuabs required of
all persons, by their late order, requiring, and inciting us to be active, in
our inquisition and information: wherein that our diligence and narrow search
for Achans may not be fruitles, nor miscarry, let us observe Joshuahs rules of
discovery as well as our diligence of inquiry, to wit, with the lot of God,
the direction of Gods word in our hands, let him only whom God by his word,
not men by their malice shall call Achans, troublers of the peace of the
Church, be so accounted; Ask Ahab who troubled Israel, and he oversees all
Baa's Priests in his Family, and tells you it is banished Eliah that is the
Achan: if you ask Amaziah the high Priest of Bethell, he tells you that Amos
the prophet is an Achan, and conspirator against the King, and therefore to be
banished from the Kings Chapel: if you ask Haman the favorite with the Kings
Seal on his hand, he tells you that all the Jews are Achans, People that will
not pay toll or Custom, but are rebellious and refractory to all Laws tending
to the Kings Profit: if you ask Tertullus the advocate and lawyer, he tells
you that Paul is an Achan, a sectarie and mover of sedition: if you inquire of
the rest of the Priests, Scribes, and Pharisees, they tell you that Christ
himself is an Achan, and an enemy to Caesar his temporal jurisdiction,
because he desires to whip out the Buyers and Sellers in the Temple; and to
erect the spiritual Kingdom and Government of his Father in their
consciences: but if you enquire of the oracle of God, it will tell you that
none of these, but every one of their accusers were Achans, and that all these
may retort upon their adversaries as Elijah to Ahab. We have not troubled
Israel, but thou and thy Idolatry are the cursed Wedges and Babylonish Garment
that have brought all disturbance upon us.

By this lot then expressly the Tridentine Papist, the Froggs and Locusts of
Rome, croaking over the Land are anathema accursed things, troublers of our
Israel, as appears by Paul's sentence in express words against 1. Gal. 1.
whilst he affirms, if either he or an Angel from Heaven, should Preach any
other doctrine then Justification by grace, they were to be held an anathema,
and accursed things. If therefore Angels from Heaven for Preaching an other
doctrine are anathematized, how much more the Jesuits, and Seminaries from
Rome, that Preach clean contrary Doctrines among us, and that of purpose to
trouble and overthrow our peace, who have not only brought Babylonish Garments,
Babylonish Masses, Crucifixes; Images, Indulgences, among us, but Babylonians
also to ware them, thereby hoping also to build up Babel it self at last among
us?

And as by this light the Idolatrous Romanist is discovered to be an Achan, so
also by the same ground the impious prophaner of the Sabbath, the blasphemous
abuser of Oaths, the Simoniacall patron, the Sacrilegious Pluralist, and
unconscionable non-Residents are discovered to be Achans, and troublers of
Israel also, which will be very manifest to every Judicious hearer, that shall
with Chrysostom of old, and Drusius of late, observe that it is only a
peremptory, universal and inhibition from God, and the annexing of a public
commination and national punishment, in case any one did not obey it, that
made the Wedge of Gold, and the Babylonish Garment, the accursed things, as is
most evident from the 17. 18. verses of the former chap. from which grounds we
conclude who ever offends in any thing so inhibited with penalty of national
punishment is an Achan still; both which and all before spoken do plainly
declare those before named to be all Achans and troublers of the peace, etc.

First of all, does not the impious profanation of the Sabbath impropriate
from God that which he has ever reserved to himself, without any redemption
by appropriating it to unnecessary journeys, hellish and lascivious revellings,
wicked sports, and recreations? has not God inhibited it peremptorily, above a
hundred times in express Scripture? has he not annexed a commination of
public vengeance for* it, Amos, 8. even to set fire on the Gates of our chief
City therefore? Jerem. 17. has not this of late troubled most of the Lords
Hosts, made the hearts of the Elders melt like Water, slaughtered more then
twice thirty six, in respect of their livelihood, and calling? who then can
doubt that a prophaner of the Sabbath is an Achan and troubler of Israel?

Secondly, does not the blasphemous abuser of Oaths impropriate from God and
appropriate to common uses, that which is more dear to God then all the Wedges
of Gold in the World, I mean the due reverence to his name? has he not
peremptorily and universally forbidden it, Thou shall not take my name in
vain, Above all things swear not? has he not annexed a public commination,
when he says because of Oaths the whole Land shall mourn, and if we fear not
that glorious name he will make our Plagues wonderful? Levit. 26. Did not
Jonathan say truly of his own Father Saul, that he had troubled the Land, by
impos ng an unnecessary Oath whereby the honey was trodden under foot, the eyes
of the people blinded, and the best of the Soldiers weakened for want of it?
Surely therefore the irreligious abuser of Oaths, is an accursed thing; which
how lightly censured from men, shall be heavily punished by God, even till the
whole Land mourn for the trouble it brings upon them, which must of necessity
follow, that the toleration of that execrable swearing and Blasphemy that we
hear belthed out in the the Streets as we pass along in City and Country, in
Court and University, must needs be execrable things, and above all such Oaths
as are imposed of purpose, and particular intentions, to ensnare and and bring
into trouble, the most peaceful spirits of the Land; a blasphemous abuser of
Gods name is an Achan.

Thirdly, does not the Simoniacall, and irreligious patron also offend, in the
accursed thing, both by impropriation and appropriation?

First, impropriating from Gods Temples, and people, their power and liberty
that God has reserved to them, in choosing and consenting to the choice of
their spiritual guides? I will not now dispute de jure patronatus, nor de
facto in general of all; for I know many have to their own everlasting praise,
and to the profit of Gods people, discharged their consciences and their trust
therein; but in particular I affirm when a patron, popish, profane,
blasphemous, and happily a stranger and enemy to all that are good in the
place, by virtue of humane Title shall impose against consent, and sound
reason, given unto him, a superstitious, unlearned, idle person, over them, he
offends in the execrable thing and is an Achan: Nor only an Achan for
impropriating the choice, but appropriating the Wedge reserved also. Here I
directly fall not upon impropriations that are tolerated by Law, yet give them
the Lawyers watchword, Caveat emptor, but the appropriating that to himself
which still both by the Law, and conscience, yea and Oath also is fully
reserved to the Church, is offending in the execrable thing, when a patron
shall before or after the presentation, reserve the Wedge of his own, Ti^hs
from the incumbent, and then send Si^^^ to the Bishop to begin the first part
of his office to the people, by perjury before God, does he not offend in the
execrable thing? is he not also an Achan?

I know what these patrons would retort against thee, soule-murthering and
unconscionable Pluralist and non-Resident: what is it not as fit for a patron
to impropriate a Wedge, as for the incumbent to impropriate himself from the
people? are we greater Achans for taking one or two years profit from the
incumbent, then he for taking all the rest from the Curate? may not a Patron
present an unworthy Parson, or Vicar, as well as the Parson an insufficient
Curate? Quis tulerit Gracchos etc. who is able to hear, much more to answer
these tart obliquies against these Soulemurdering Priests as they call
themselves? for my part if I could I had rather hide, then uncover the
nakedness of our Fathers; but yet since we are in inquisition for Achans, I
dare not conceal them; only as naked as I found them, so naked do I leave
them, or at least with nothing but a Babylonish Garment to cover them: even a
Wedge of Gold, wrapped in a Babylonish Garment, is an unconscionable
non-resident and a troubler of Israel. Having thus far proceeded in
discovering of these five sorts of Achans by this light of God his word, suffer
me now to cast the lot into the laps of the Honorable House, and deliver the
light to your judgments, further to discover more Achans by it, humbly desiring
your resolution to these few quaeries, I shall from my text propound unto you.
First, concerning the Babylonish Garment. Secondly, the Wedge of Gold. Thirdly,
Joshua. Fourthly, Achan; Concerning the Babylonish Garment this is my quaery,
whether you conceive not the setting forth, and publishing of Babylonish
Doctrines, Babylonish gestures, Pictures, and Altars, in Gods house, be not as
an accursed thing as to hide a Babylonish Garment in a private tent of an
Israelite?

Aarons Bells, the Silver Trumpets, the Golden Shelves, and Golden
Candlestickes, I mean the precious gifts and labors of Gods faithful
Ministers, as for Achan to steal a material Wedge, devoted to the Temple out
of the spoil of the Canaanites?

Joshua this is my quaery, whether Joshua had not offended as well as Achan, if
after he had burnt Achan for stealing the Garment, and Wedge, he had not also
burnt the Garment as well as Achan, and restored the Wedge to the Temple again
from whence it was taken by him, if God had required it of them, as he does the
restoring of our faithful Ministers, to their place again?

Achan this is my quaery, whether if Achan, beside taking the Garment, and
Wedge himself, had compelled the rest of his Tribe, to have taken the Wedge,
and Garment also, by punishing the refusal with the loss of their own Wedges
and Garments, had not such a one been among Achans, as Beelzebub among the
Devils, the Prince and chief of them? Consider, consult, and give your
sentence, and I doubt not but you will conclude by this search that for one
Achans in a whole host of Israel we have whole hosts of Achans in our Tents;
every one of which may not only bring trouble upon themselves, persons, and
places, and families, thereby, but upon all our familier also, yea and upon all
the Kingdom as well as Achan* the consideration whereof leads me from the
troubler and trouble to the troubled in the accusation even the troubled host
of Israel. (Thou have troubled us.)

The persons by this one Achan troubled, are the whole congregation of the
Children of Israel, as is clear from the 1 verse to the 7. of this chap. not
only Achans own Family, Sons and Daughters, but Ioshus and the people are
troubled by it; whence observe,

Achan in particular; none stole but Achan, none of all Israel had the Garment
but Achan, yet God says verse 1. the Children of Israel committed a trespass,
for Achan took the accursed thing, and Joshua here, Why have thou troubled us?

This point is so difficult to be received, that Numb. 16. 22. it made Moses
begin to expostulate with God, upon his knees, Shall one man finne and will thou be wrath with the whole congregation? yet is it of most undoubted truth
and verity, as appears in the Scripture which shows us, that God imputed the
sin of one man in particular not only to a whole nation present, when the
sin was committed, but to a future Generation, living long after the offender
was departed: for the present, witness the whole congregation of God, Joshua 22.
who collecting this very lesson that we noted from these words, adds two other
instances for further confirmation of it, Did not Achan the son of Zerah
offend? and that man perished not alone in his iniquity; again, Is the
iniquity of Peor too little for us from whence we are not cleansed unto this
day, though wrath came upon all the congregation? and ye sin to day and to
morrow the Lord will be wroth with all the house of Israel. Suitable to which
is that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 5. affirming that the execrable accursed thing
of incest in one of the members, had infected the whole iumpe of the Church and
every member of it.

And for the future you may see, 2 Samuel 27. when Saul was long dead, the Famine
came upon all the congregation of Israel in David's time; and when David
enquired of God wherefore the Famine was, God told him, it was for Saul, and
his bloody house, because he slew the Gibeonites, yea after Josiahs time, the
Lord punished the people for the sin of Manasses, 2 Kings 24. 3. yea for
sin committed since they came out of Egypt, 2 Kings 27. 15.



First accessarily, secondly occasionally, thirdly politically.

For the first, many may be guilty of the sin acted by one accessarily, when
the actor is furthered in his sin, by the consent, and privity of another,
and that either a part ante, or a part post.

First ante three ways.

Either by commanding it; so David killed Vriah the Hittite, with the Sword of
the Children of Ammon, 2 Samuel 12. because he commanded Joab to set him in the
forefront:

Secondly by counselling; so the high Priests are said with cruel hands to
kill the Lord of glory, because they counseled the people to cry, crucify
him, crucify him, Acts 4.

Thirdly by provoking or enticing, and so Eve was in the transgression and not
Adam, because she incited him thereto, Genesis 3.

Secondly a part post, though he had no notice of it before; and that,

First, by consenting after the fact is done, so Ahab is said to kill Naboth,
because, after Iesaball had done it without his knowledge, he consented by
taking possession of his Estate.

Secondly, by defending it, so the Benjamites, Judges 20. are guilty and
punished for the rape of Gibeah, though they knew not of it before, because
they defended them against the execution of justice, after it was committed.

Thirdly, by conniving, and that either by not reproving, if we have place to
do it; so the Minister is guilty of his peoples fins, Ezekiel. 3. If thou reprove
him not, his blood will I require at thy hands; or not sorrowing for it, if no
place of reproof, so all the Corinthians were leavened, because the Apostle
tells them they ought to have sorrowed, and did not; all these ways may a whole
Nation be guilty of the sin of one man, and yet none of these ways was
Israel guilty of Achans sin.

David was guilty of the Blasphemy of Gods Enemies, occasioned by his fall;
Thou have given occasion, says God, to the enemies of God to Blaspheme, 2 Samuel
12. This occasional guilt is either culpable, or inculpable: inculpable, when
the sin of another rises from that which in it self is both materially and
formally good: so God deferring of sentence against wicked ones, Eccles. 8. is
said to be the cause of their going on in their sin, yet inculpable because
materially and formally good.

Secondly, Culpable occasional guilt, is when another is furthered in his
sin, by that which is materially or formally evil in us, which culpable guilt
is either by not restraining, or furthering of it occasionally.

First, we are guilty occasionally for not restraining sin, so Eli of his
Sons sins, 1 Samuel 3. because they run themselves into a slander, and he
restrained them not: and that,

First, when we neglect to restrain it by Authority: so when the people in
Nebemiahs time bore burdens on the Sabbath, Nehemiah says to the rulers, What
thing is this that you do in breaking the Sabbath in bearing burdens? because
they restrained not the porters therefrom.

Secondly, by neglecting of vigilance in watching to keep each other from it;
and so I conceive all Israel was guilty of Achans finne, for not watching over
him, and restraining him from the same; I know other reasons are given, but
this seems to be the best grounded from the text.

Both because God tells them beforehand chap. 6. verse 18. that though all but
one abstained, yet if any one did offend he would punish them all for it.

Secondly, the precept is not only Cavete, take heed, but Custodite, set a
watch about others; which had they done, it had been impossible, but some one
in such a company had discovered Achan in his theevery.

And as a whole nation may be guilty of the sin of one man by not restraining
it, so likewise by doing that which shall occasionally further it, and that
first by example; thus Peter is guilty of the Jews and Gentiles conformity to
the abolished Ceremonies by his example and is said to constrain them, Gal. 2.

Secondly, by giving opportunity to sin, as negligence makes thieves. Judas
is said to purchase the field, Acts. 1. because he threw down the money, which
gave occasion to the Jews to purchase it.

Thirdly, by Imitation of men in their sins; thus the Scribes and Pharisees
in the 23. Matthew. are said to be guilty of all the blood of the Prophets, that
went before them, by imitating their malice; and exercising it against the Lord
Jesus, the head of Prophets, that then was with them.

These many ways way a whole Nation be guilty of the offense of one
occasionally; yet neither of these ways were the infants of Achans Family
guilty of the sin of Achan, and therefore the Scripture tells us of another
guilt, which is a political guilt, merely passive and no ways active, not of
the sin at all, not punishment eternal, but temporal, and external, which
arises from the linkes and bonds, of politic, and civil society, whereby as
members of the same body they are made partakers of the good, and evil
belonging to either of them, in politic things, as in the title which Lawyers
call Frank pledges, wherein the Tenants are jointly, and severally bound to
their Lord, and one to another, so that if one forfeit their estate, all
forfeit with them* even so in political guilt it comes to pass, as we see in
the death of Infants for their Parents, Subjects for Kings sin and
transgressions. I know some go about to vindicate Gods justice, by affirming
that God found just matter in the most innocent, to justify his rod. Which
though it be true, yet under correction, it suits not with the Scripture
phrase, for it says, That the Famine in David's time, was for Saul's bloody
house, not their own sin: and therefore it is by political guilt; wherein
yet the equity of Gods justice, and dispensation may be cleared from this, that
as innocent persons, by virtue of political ties and bonds, partake of many
temporal rodds by occasion of wicked men's sins: so do they also receive many
temporal commodities from their services; the very Children of Achan, had
formally received that life from him, which now they lose by him.

Achan may do in a tent, a Family, a Country, or Kingdom, nay in a world,
he may do a whole world hurt, as Romans 5. By one man sin entered into the
world, and death by sin; especially if he be in place of power and authority
in Church or Commonwealth, or both; oh how much mischief may such a one do
accessarily, by commanding, counselling, and inciting, others to that he dares
not do himself, and after by consenting, defending, and conniving, either
occasionally by not restraining by authority or vigilancie, or by furthering by
his example, imitation or giving opportunity.

Achans sin lie in their own bosom, either occasionally or accessarily, by
furthering or not restraining of them.

Joshua in person, may be guilty with Achan by relation; if God himself
therefore should free thee from actual guilt by his lot, rest not until by
repentance, and execution of justice thou have freed thy self from occasional
and accessory guilt also, otherwise he that cleeres thee from the act in thy
self, will correct with deadly blows for conniving and consenting with
others, let me therefore say with the Apostle to Titus 1. Be not partakers of
others men's sins. Alas then how vainly do many private persons bless
themselves in casting off the blame and danger of the sins of the times upon
great men in places, because they think it is not their duties to reform
these things, but those that have power and authority in their hands to
suppress them, which seeing they themselves want, it belongs not to them to be
grieved for them? but oh deceive not your selves herein, though God has not
given thee a hand to suppress them, yet he has given thee a heart to hate
them* though God has not given thee means or power to punish them, yet has
he given thee a tongue to protest and pray against them; and for sailing in
these, thou may be accessarily and occasionally as guilty for thy part, as
they in neglecting their power and place in their part.

And how vainly do many of our Magistrates with Pilate wash their hands from
the sins of their divisions in Towns and Families by saying, We have nothing
to do in these sins of the times, we join not in the practice of drunkards,
swearers, and incest, etc. when yet they accessarily and occasionally are
guilty of all those which by their counsel, power, and authority they might
have restrained: the day will one day come, when all their inferiors under
them shall lay the burden of their sins to their charge, when such shall say
as Caine, not only my sins are greater then I can bear, but my neighbors
sins, my people and Servants sins, are greater then I can, and yet must
bear them, God charges them upon me; when they shall say as Joshua to Achan,
thou Achan troublest us, so these, thou Idolater, Papist, swearer, unclean
person troublest me, for I have been accessory to your sins, and must now
answer for them. I knew once an Alehouse keeper taking notice of this truth,
went home to his house, crying all the way he went, Oh if I must answer for all
the sins I have been accessory unto, how many thousand wicked and
intemperate practices, oaths, lies, vain words have I seen and heard in my
house, by them that are now dead, and dyed in the guilt of those sins, which
I occasioned? what shall now become of me? And lest we should think it were
his folly, or weakness, Augustine himself professes it was a thing very
hideous to him to think of a Woman with whom in his young time he had been
wanton, which after he thought dyed in her impenitency, and now, says he, for
ought I know, she is in Hellfire for that sin I drew her unto, and also
blasphemes God that I am not there with her. Oh may not the same thoughts be
like burning coals in many a man's bosom? but I will spare you: only for time
to come, say to Achan we have sins enough of our own to suffer for, we
will not bear your burden, you shall not sin at our Souls cost and
charges, but if we be innocent actually, we will also endeavor our selves to
be so occasionally and accessarily, so that no Achans offense may bring trouble
upon us. And if you ask how this is to be done, what remedy we are to use in
this case, Joshua and the Lord tells you in the latter clause of the text, the
sentence and conclusion against Achan, The Lord shall trouble you: And thus I
slide from the Troubler, Trouble and troubled in the accusation, to the
troubles and troubled in the conclusion, The Lord shall trouble thee; which
remedy that it may be fully discerned what it is that is the Soule-cure of the
troubles of a Commonwealth by Achans disturbed, observe the matter out of
which it must be wrought, the troubled; which is not only Achan alone, nor the
Wedge and Babylonish Garment alone, in which he had offended, but Achan and all
his appurtenances, that unto him belonged, his Children, his Cattle, to a
hoose, yea the very tent in which they and the Babylonish Garment were kept and
hid, every thing in all the world that belonged to Achan.

Secondly, observe the troubles, what must be done with them that Israel may be
cured; not Achan to be imprisoned, or banished alone, not to be fined for the
Wedge and Babylonish Garment, his Horses not to be curtald, seized and
confiscated, his house, and tent, to be removed and altered: but he and all his
Followers stoned, Tents, and Garments, and Wedge utterly to be consumed, and
burnt to ashes, in a word all that he has to be wholly extirpated, and
annihilated.

Thirdly, observe the troubler, the Author and actor that ordaines this cure;
not passion or revenge in the people troubled, nor humane policy, whose equity
and moderation might have been questioned, but the Lord who is wisdom, love,
and goodness himself, he prescribes it, yea and not only prescribes it, but
also ownes the execution of it, The Lord shall trouble thee.

As if in this cure he would be known to be both the prescriber and administer
of the remedy, to all disturbed Churches. I read not (I confess) that the Lord
did immediately throw stones from Heaven upon Achan, as he did upon the
Canaanites, Joshua 7. nay I read the contrary, that the Magistrate Joshua and
the rest of the people by Ioshuahs appointment, did immediately both burn and
stone them, and yet the Lord ownes this act, and will have the cure fathered
upon none but himself, teaching us,

Achans endangered, is that those that have authority under God, do totally
abolish and extirpate all the cursed things whereby it was disturbed.

The rather I observe this note from the text, because besides the description
of God before opened, the elegant phrase which the Spirit of God uses in
setting down the remedy does strongly persuade it was principally intended,
while the name of the offender, and the name of the offense, and the name of
the punishment, and the name of the place of the execution, is expressed by the
same Radix in Hebrew (...) as if it were thus pend, Achan for aconizing is
acanized in the valley of Achan, or Englished thus, the troubler that troubles
a Commonwealth like Achan, is to be troubled for the same as Achan, in the
like place of Achans trouble* which the Lord himself does affirm in express
words in the following words, in ascribing the whole success of Isreal's safety
to Achans total abolishment, Then the anger of God was turned from Israel: I
call it therefure a divine policy,

First for the prescription, secondly the practice.

First, the prescription of God is not only evident here, but in all other of
the like nature, Exodus 32. the execrable thing of the golden Calfe troubled the
whole Church so far that for it the Tables are broken, the people abhorred,
God departed, the whole congregation except Moses to be totally consumed: how
is this to be remedied? Moses fell on his face there, as Joshua here, and makes
God cry out Let me alone, etc. will this cure it? is this all? no. Moses sees
for all Prayers Israel will not be cured, though spared, without a full, and
total extirpation of all the accursed things and persons also.

First, the accursed thing the Calfe must be abolished, stamped, ground to
powder, burnt to ashes and drunk, there is the total extirpation of the
thing; and verse 25. God says by Moses his mouth, that had prayed for them,
Goethrough all the Camp from Tent to Tent, and Gate to Gate, and slay every
man his Neighbor, Friend, Brother and Son, that the Lord may bestow his
blessing upon you, as if no blessing without a full extirpation of persons, as
well as things, verse 26. 30. The like is seen in the course of that great
trouble which was brought upon the Church by the accursed things of Baal Peor,
for which wrath came upon the whole congregation of Israel, for besides the
zeal of Phineas in staying and mitigating the wrath of God by the speedy
cutting off of two principal offenders, the Lord to show that a perfect cure
could not be without a total extirpation, prescribes it for this end to Moses,
and all the Judges in their circuits, and divisions. Moses (says the Lord)
hang up every head of the people that were joined to Baal Pecor that the wrath
of God may be turned away, and then that all the Judges and people may slay
every man that had defiled themselves in the execrable things, Number. 25. 5. And
this total extirpation to be divine prescription to settle and establish a
Commonwealth distempered in peace and tranquillity, is most evident in the
frequent injunction and inculcation of it to Moses, and the people of Israel
when they came into Canaan, to abolish and put down all accursed things and
persons from under Heaven, and by their terrible ruins for their partial
extirpation of them.

Neither is this prescription more divine, then the practice in this
particular, witness the immediate practice of God himself, in repairing the
ruined Churches and Commonwealth of the old world, by taking away the
execrable things and persons that then overthrew it; what was done? God brings
an universal deluge, total confusion and extirpation of them all, as if God
himself could do it by no other means but this. Suitable to which is that
declaration of his, in the whole book of the Prophets, and the explication of
them in the Revelation, where the Lord setting down, and foretelling the
reparation and restoration of the Church upon earth again, like new Heavens
and new Earth where righteousness should dwell, and be purged from old
troubles and abominations, shows it shall be brought to pass by the full
extirpation of all execrable persons and things, Beasts, false Prophets,
Thrones of the Beasts, Froggs, and Locusts, name of the Beast, and the number
of his name. As in the days of Noah also, and in the days of Lot: so also now
shall the world be cured, by a full extirpation: Does not the practice of
Nehemiah in repairing the Church warrant it? did he content himself only to
purge the Temple of all rubish, the Commonwealth of all Ashdods wives and
their accursed issues, or thrusting the great enemy Tobiah from the house of
the Lord? no, but Tobiah and all his household stuff also must out, Nehe. 13.
7. showing this to be the divine policy, etc.

Does Mordecay think it sufficient for the Jews safety to prevail with the
King for the cutting off of the Favorite Haman, or his next court adherents, or
the extirpation of all the Churches enemies, in the Palace to the number of
500. except all the adversaries in all the Kings 127. Provinces be rooted out
and totally cut off? The Lord reproving, and blemishing the practices of the
best of the Kings of Israel for want of full extirpation, in leaving any of the
high places untaken away: the Lord rending the Kingdom from Saul and his
posterity for sparing one Agag and a few accursed things, for sacrifice, the
fatted beasts of Amaleck; and and in declaring that as for want of this
thorough exextirpation of all these accursed things, he lost both thanks for
what he had done, and Kingdom also; so if he had utterly consumed Amaleck, he
had thereby for ever settled the Kingdom upon himself and his posterity,
shows that it is a divivine policy, both of divine prescription and practice
to cure a Commonwealth by Achans endangered, etc.

Achans and accursed things in troubling our Commonwealth, must be expected
and looked for; even from the valley of Achor; the valley of Achor is the only
door of this hope, it is not our victory with Saul, our prayers with Moses,
could we pray as strongly as he, our good laws if as good as those that God
wrote in the Tables with his own hand, nor Parliamentary assemblies, nor
partial reformation and execution of Justice upon some offenders, with as much
zeal as Phineas against Cosbie and Zimry, that will afford help, except that
those that are in authority under God extirpate all the Achans, and Idolatrous
things among us, that all our Idolatrous Achans, the Jesuits, the impious
Achans, the blasphemous Achans, the sacrilegious Achans with their Babylonish
Garments, Babylonish Orders, Ceremonies, and Gestures, their Cattle and Tents,
be rooted out from among us: this is the divine policy to counterplot all the
plots of our adversaries, to turn Gods wrath from us and to move him to bestow
his blessing upon us, to cut off these Achans, not with a Sith to lop off the
overtopping branches and vast extending boughs alone, but to go to them with
a Plough, root out both body and root, and all the sprigs and feeders of them
in the Earth where they grow: a meditation never more suitable then at this
time, nor more necessary for Joshua and Israel in those days, then for us in
our days, who for one Achan in the whole host then, may find a whole host of
Achans and execrable things in one City now; who have as many Babylonish
Garments among us, as there were threads or shreads in that one of Achans the
removal of which, in respect of the multitude, and power, seems so unpossible
to many, that with those faint hearted Israelites in Jeremiah, their hearts
faint and are ready to say there is no hope; as good with Issachar be asses and
bear our burdens, as with Israel in Egypt by seeking to ease our selves of
the number of our brick and taskmakers, to procure our burdens doubled, and
increased. But what ever these said, yet God and Joshua shows in the text,
that the valley of Achor will be the door of this hope: let me say therefore
unto you as good Shechaniah to Ezra, c. 10. 2. We have indeed trespassed in the
accursed thing, and Achans have done wickedly and troubled us, but yet there is
hope in Israel concerning this, the Lord shall trouble them, that God that
caused Ahasuerus to hang up Haman, that caused Samuel to hew Agag in pieces,
that caused Joshua to extirpate Achan, will enable our Ioshuahs to root out
ours also: which that it may be accomplished, suffer me to proceed with the
same Shechaniah to Ezra, to you of the honorable House: Up, for the matter
belongs to you, we also will be with you; we, even all the godly Ministers of
the Country as Aaron and Hur with Moses and Joshua will be with you, stand and
fast and pray to strengthen your hands, steady to the work; all the loyal and
godly Commons and people in the Country at your lawful commands, be ready to
join with you in casting stones against these Achans; but the matter belongs
to you, you must do the deed, you are they that must cure us by the total
extirpation of all Achans and Babylonish Garments among us.

Let me therefore in the name of the Kingdom that is now endangered by Achans,
in the name of religion corrupted by Achans, in the name of all faithful
teachers opposed by Achans, in the name of all Israel from Dan even to
Beersheba who are now disturbed by Achans, present this supplication to all of
you in general, and to every of you in particular, to think of in your
walks, in your private Chambers, in your sittings, and Committees, to save
them and theirs from all trouble by them, by your troubling of them as Joshua
troubled Achan, to wit, a thorough abolishment and extirpation of them.

Do not, we beseech you, conceive that one new piece of Christ's robes put to
a Babylonish Garment will make the rent the less, for surely such patching
will make the breach the wider; nor think that any part of a Babylonish
Garment will better agree to Christ's spouse, then the dirty feet of clay in
Nebuchadnezars Image could temper with his iron Legs or Head of Gold: what
communion has Christ with Belial, or the Temple of God with Idols? but rather
as that reformation, that saves our Souls from the Achans of Hell, speak,
Behold all old things must pass, all things become new: so in this
restoration that cures our Church and Commonwealth from the Achans on Earth,
let all accursed things pass away, and all things become new, according to the
pattern in the Mount; do in this case as Darius his General, that having
order from his King to revenge wrongs done to his Subjects by his adversaries
the Athenians, caused his Servants every dish of Meat brought to his Table, to
cry, Sir remember the Athenians: So that Joshua's counsel may every meal and
meeting, etc. report this in your thoughts, Sir remember the Achans. The East
wind did no sooner cure Egypt of the Frogs of Nilus, then this course would
England of all the Achans and Frogs of Tiber. Little do Magistrates know the
Majesty and authority God has graven in their foreheads, to daunt and chase
away these wicked Achans, by their frowns, and verbal discouragements, to
them; Curtes reports that it was some ease to the poor Indians in their death
to hear one another rail on the Spaniards cruelty; but sure I am, the verbal
opposition, and admirable speeches of our Joshua's in the House against Achans
of the times, together with their votes in extirpating of them does
marvellously not only case, but rejoice the hearts of the poor troubled
Israel in the Country: but now to this verbal opposition, add but a real
execution and a total extirpation of them, and then have we all we crave of
God, or can expect from men.

Thus to oppose and abolish Achans, and Babylonish Garments, is better done
then said, but much sooner said then done, else how comes it to pass that so
many Achans at our Country Sessions, and Assizes, etc. are discovered, and so
few suppressed? even because when some bend themselves wholly to save their
Country and Conscience by legal punishment of them, others bend their heads
and studies to invent evasions, and to coin excuses, and apologies for them:
so that now the proverb is, good Ale and the tap houses seldom want a friend
in the bench; do not we sometimes see that even in the Tents of those that
should be our Joshua's, Magistrates, and in the Towns of their own residence,
more execrable and accursed things are practiced under their shelters then
elsewhere? If the Babylonish Garment lie safe in their own Tents, how can they
persecute the search of it in an Alehouse or elsewhere? Black-smiths that
hear continual knocking within their shops, seldom look out at the noise in
the Streets. But where go I? mibi accusatio etiam vera displicet contra
magistratum; I am not now at a petty Sessions or country Assizes, but before
all the Joshua's in Israel assembled together for this end to restore the Peace
of the Kingdom, to the Church and Commonwealth; loath would I be to cast the
least aspersion or suspicion of any such thing among you; only let me suggest
thus much unto you, that this Joshua in my text, that did here inquire for the
Babylonish Garment in Achans Tent, did also before all Israel enter into
covenant for his own Tent and House, I and my house will serve the Lord. (...);
says the Philosopher from Plato: how shall Lawmakers hope their Laws will be
observed by others afterward, when they are no sooner made, then broken in the
Tents and hands of those that first made them? Thou art inexcusable oh man that
thus judge or make law, for in that thou judge another and do the same
thing, thou condemnest thy self. For the avoiding of this, and satisfying the
contrary expectation from you, I beseech you remember now the loud exclamations
of all the Freeholders in the Country in your Countries election, do now
with the same vehemency require and cry out unto you to give out your votes
for the full extirpation of all the accursed things among us.

The text besides the duty affords three motives unto you, first hereby you
shall be true Joshua's, true Saviors of your Country. I have read in
Marrulius of a Duke of Bavaria that each morning before he went to his diet
would call his Servants to bring him Water in a Basin, in whose bottom Cato
Majors picture was stamped in Gold, so that he might cause the impression of his
Image to be fixed in his mind, the imitation of whose virtues he propounded
for his practice: and how happy should I count my self if instead of Cato his
Picture I might with his servant so present Joshua his practice before you,
that the impression thereof might ever after abide in your thoughts? Disdain
not the pattern, for he was the most happy and succesfull governor that ever
the Lord of the spirits of all flesh set over the congregation of Israel; I
know what I say, if Moses were a greater Lawgiver, yet was Joshua a more
succesfull Governor: if Solomon were more profound for Theory, yet was he more
unhappy in practice of equity; never was the Church of Israel so happy as in
Joshua's days; consider the manner of his education, his call and Election,
his incorrupt conversation, his valor and victories abroad, his care for
piety, his hatred of Idolatry, his excellent care in household government at
home: and then it will be far from being a disparagement for the best to
become his followers; but on the other side his example will be a strong
inducement to all pious Magistrates to labor to equal him, especially seeing
the Lord himself propounds his practice to be the pattern of all Magistrates
that should succeed him: this the Lord gives a strong hint of, Nehemiah 9. 27.
where speaking of all the good Magistrates that did succeed Joshua, he calls
them all (...) more Joshua's, as it is translated, more Saviors: teaching us
that a good Magistrate is nothing else but Joshua metamorphosed, the mind of
Joshua in another person, or rather the virtues of Joshua in another mind; and
of all Joshua's practices and virtues, there was none wherein he deserved more
the name of a Savior then in that which we have observed from his practice in
the text propounded from him for your imitation, to wit a thorough extirpation
of all Achans, whether among Canaanites or Israelites.

The Lord shall trouble thee, as if he had said you shall not only herein
resemble Joshua, but God himself also, and have his title ascribed to you. I
have read that the greatest honor the heathen could invent to incite their
Governors to be faithful for the weal public, was to Canonize them for
Gods, and therefore they called Indigetes, men for their desert worthy to be
Gods: but in bending your whole power received from God, to extirpate these
Achans, you shall be Gods in the Canon of Scripture, Psalm 86. I have said you
are Gods. because Proverbs 8. 15. by him Judges decree justice, and for him is
the judgment, as Hezekiah tells the Judges, Ye judge not for men, but for God:
therefore he honors the executioners of it with his own title. When Satan
persuaded Adam and Eve to eat of the execrable things, it was by this motive,
You shall be like Gods, and yet that made them like Devils; but by excelling
and extirpating these Achans, you shall be like Gods indeed, not Physice. In
nature, and essence, but Ethice and Politice, in virtue and glory. First in
virtue, there being no other virtue wherein man resembles the Lord more lively,
or b^ares his Image so perfectly, as in executing of justice against execrable
persons, especially, if while he executes Justice upon offenders, he provides
withal for the salvation and felicity of the righteous; but now in the
extirpation of these Achans, you shall do both: cut off the wicked and procure
the felicity of Gods chosen, as well for their Souls as Bodies: Alas how many
millions of Souls in this Kingdom lie under the Altars of these Achans crying
with tears from their eyes, and bitterness of grief in their hearts, How long
Lord how long will it be, ere thou revenge the loss of our ordinances,
Sabbaths, Sacraments? how long shall it be ere the blood of Souls shed by
idle, scandalous, negligent ministers, by their ignorance, errors,
superstition, be regarded by our Joshua? how long will it be ere thou put soul
pitying spirits into their pious hearts, to ease us of these execrable Achans?
oh let your spirits observe the complaints and petitions brought unto you from
all parts of the Kingdom, by the sheep of Christ, that have no Shepherd, but
only Achans, troubling Wolves to destroy, and with the Lord Jesus Christ that
great Ioshuah have compassion upon them, and send laborers to them, so shall
you save their souls from death, and be both Ioshuah and God, and Savior
Ethice in virtue and piety toward them, and being so, God will also make you
like himself in honor and dignity. I confess the man that shall neglect to
oppose these Achans among you, much more he that shall go about to patronize
any execrable thing, shall be rather an Abaddyon, an Apollon a destroyer then a
Ioshuah or a Savior; yea rather a Satan then God, or if a God a God that rules
in this World, in and for the Children of Belial the Achans: but for that
Magistrate that shall now take up this resolution, to the uttermost of his
power with Ioshuah, to extirpate all Idolaters, impious blasphemers,
sacrilegious Achans, and Babylonish Garments, oh what honor would they
purchase at the hands of this age, oh what a blessing would he bring upon his
posterity, oh what peace and joy to his own soul here, oh what a crown of
glory to reign with Christ for ever in Heaven? Certainly I verily persuade my
self, all the faithful people of God in the whole land out of unfeigned
good will to them, would spend whole days and nights in praises and prayers to
God for them, and if it were fitting fall down at their very feet and worship
them, ring their Bells and clap their hands, make burne-fires at the very
report of their names, joy to see them, prosecute them and their posterity and
their houses with praise, and all manner of excellent acknowledgments, that as
Moses to Aaron, so these unto their Country should be like God himself to
them.

Ioshuah, there is a third in the text from our selves. Even because they
trouble us, thou have troubled us says Ioshuah. If therefore neither
prescription of God, practice of Saints, peace of the Church, prosperity of the
Commonwealth, supplication of inferiors, exaltation of your own honors do
not move you, yet let that which moved the unrighteous judge, that neither
regarded God nor Men, to revenge the poor Widow of her adversary, move you,
namely because she troubled him; what troubles these Achans have brought upon
our royal Sovereign, State, Church, and Commonwealth already, you better
know then I, from the general complaints and petitions presented unto you
every day; but what trouble they will bring upon us, for time to come, if they
be not now cut off neither you, nor I can conjecture; only the Lord knows,
but all may see that an universal destruction, extirpation of us, our
Religion, Peace, and Laws, was intended by them traitorously and unjustly; and
shall not Joshua justly extirpate Achans, for Achans unjust extirpation of
Israel? Eye for Eye, Tooth for Tooth, that justice may measure them the measure
they would have measured to us, is not only equal but necessary, nam quid
adempta juvat spinis de pluribus una* what profits us, if of a hundred Achans
and Babylonish Garments to take away one and leave ninety and nine behind*
whereas if ninety nine were gone and but one remaining he would trouble us all?
especially now when God has discovered them unto you, and given direction from
his word by his lot, that except they be taken away, he will be no more with
us, but against us. Had Joshua spared Achan after his discovery, and
conviction, would not the Lord have told Joshua, Thy life shall go for his;
what thou should have done to him and did not, I will assuredly lay upon
thy self for neglecting it: The application I leave to your own consciences,
and make have to show you the speed that Joshua and Israel used in executing
this sentence, for Isreal's preservation in Achans total extirpation.

This expedition is to be observed from the last two particulars in the text,
to wit, the two times of trouble, the first is the time of Achans troubling
Israel, and that time was past: Achan had taken his own time to steal the
Wedge, and thereby to trouble Israel; and Joshua, he had taken Gods time, for
inquisition, and examination, and given Achan sufficient time to answer for
himself before his sentence, and then being convicted by evidence of
witnesses, and his own confession, comes Gods time to be considered which the
Lord takes to trouble Achan in executing the sentence against him for troubling
Israel, and that was that very day the sentence was pronounced, with all speed
and expedition, without one days procrastination, or unnecessary delays, The
Lord shall trouble thee this day: whose practice and precept to Joshua affords
us and our Joshua's this further lesson and direction.



That I be not mistaken in the proposition let it be remembered, first that I
understand it not of comminations or threatening of justice, but peremptory
sentences after due deliberation; for I know the Lords own practice, in
himself and will to his servants, is repent of the evil, and to put great
distance between the commination of judgment and execution of it, but never to
vary or repent from the time of peremptory sentence, of a judgment and its
execution in commination and prediction, he intends reformation and remission,
or at least trial of the same, as in the 120 years forbearance with the old
world; 40 days prediction of judgment to Nineve; of all which it is true as
the Apostle affirms, 2. Peter. 3. The Lord is not sl^ck as men are by sluggish
delays and unnecessary demurres, but is patient that men might repent and be
saved* but in peremptory sentences he intends personal satisfaction to
justice; therefore then after due trial and examination executes it without
any delay, as Genesis 19* After God came down and saw the wickedness of Sodom,
he executed his wrath the same day; after Adam was thoroughly examined that day
he began to die the death, both in being expelled from Paradise, and in
inflicting vengeance upon him.

and judgment brought upon a people by Achans: for where the offense is
immediate against God, none injured by it but himself, he takes liberty to
delay, yea sometimes to revoke it; but in such offenses where besides the
offense against himself, in Heaven, the Church and Commonwealth also are
troubled, by accursed things, as in Achans case, then does he not pardon or
remit execution upon any repentance, of confession whatsoever, but proceed to
seek satisfaction of Justice, in the execution of the delinquent,
notwithstanding their repentance: is seen in that one example, 2 Samuel 21. 3.
Where nothing could make the atonement for the Land by Saul's offending in the
execrable thing of perjury against the Gibeonites, but the real and speedy
execution and extirpation of all his seed, notwithstanding David's tears and
prayers: and that sentences of this nature are to be executed with speed and
without procrastination is that I aim now to prove to be the will of God,
which I might do without any further search then in desiring you to look back
to those instances wherein you have heard the Lord to prescribe the cure of a
disturbed State by a sentence of total extirpation of the offenders, and
therein you shall read this truth annexed, and twisted with the other, yea as
plainly expressed as the other, that the execution of them be not only certain,
but speedy without delay. For this of Achan, there is nothing more clear in
all this passage of the Scripture then the expedition of the execution of his
sentence; first in the Lords speedy prescribing it, as verse 13. Sanctify your
selves against to morrow, delay not one day, no not one part of the day,
defer not till the afternoon, 1 verse 14 early in the morning come according
to all your Tribes: And as in Gods prescription, so in the whole peoples
practice and obedience, who showed,

morning and brought all the people by the Tribes before the Lord, verse 16.

Joshua sent messengers to search his Tent, who it is said hasted and run to
the same.

The Lord shall trouble thee to day: neither is this expedition peculiar to
this instance of Achan, but also most expressly declared to be the will of God
in all the other;

Extirpation of the execrable thing of the Golden Calfe and idolatry, Exodus 32.
is expressly commanded to be executed without any delay, verse 30. Consecrate
your selves to day unto the Lord; in the speedy execution of which sentence how
many things might carnal reason have objected against it as both rash and
cruel?



Moses, slay every man his Brother and his Son.

Moses, speedily consecrate your selves this day without any delay.

But surely it was a cruel minded man that was greedy of blood* nay Moses the
meekest man on the Earth, and one that would rather have died himself then
they; if that would have satisfied God, he had tendered his life before.

Moses and the Levites might be too hasty, and make more have then God would
have given them thanks for: nay says Moses, this pleased God so well that it
was a consecrating themselves unto the Lord hereby, and God bestows a blessing
on them therefore, Consecrate your selves, etc. this sacrifice of these men's
bloods so pleased the Lord that they shall be the persons that for ever after
shall offer the sacrifice of his people to him. Again, that by a threefold
witness this truth might be established in the extirpation and sentence, and
the execution against the execrable thing of Baal Peor, Number. 15. 4. it is
expressly commanded that it be executed without the delay of one day, so says
the text, Hang up all the heads and Princes of the people, Coram isto sole as
Junius renders it, before this Sun go down, procrastinate not at all, which
they also obeyed, for in the 1 Cor. 10. 5. it is said, There fell in one day,
three and twenty thousand, and one thousand Nobles besides: and I conceive the
reason why the staying of the Plague was attributed especially to Phineas
execution, rather then the others, because he was more zealous, which appeared
in his more speedy execution, for verse 7. when Phineas saw he rose up from the
midst of his more lukewarm and stupid Companions instantly following, and
speedily executed judgment, whereby the Plague was speedily stayed. And upon
the knowledge of this part of Gods will, it is that David, Psalm 101. 1.
resolving so to execute mercy and justice that the faithful in his days be
preferred, concludes to extirpate the wicked out of his Kingdom, I will cut
off, says he, all the wicked from the City of God. But when shall this be
done? even without all procrastination, betimes, says he, will I destroy, or
as the original bears it, in the morning early; showing it should be his
first mornings work to execute the will of God in procuring the peace of the
Kingdom by the speedy execution of justice against the troublers of it.

some of the house of Z^^dy Achans Brethren possibly may object the practice of
that illustrious preserver of the peace of his Country, Fabius Maximus qui
cunctando restituit rem, that is, by delay and using long p^wses in going
against the troublers and enemies of his Country did use to weary them, and
wear them out by little and little rather then by speed and celeritie to
vanquish them, and for it is called cunctator, pater patriae, scutum populi,
the preserver of his Country, the shield of the Commonwealth.

Fabius delays was not in executing justice against domesticke enemies, Achans
at home, but in going against torraine and politic enemies abroad, both which
may well stand together in the same man, to wit, delay in going against
foreign enemies in a military way, and expedition in extirpating domesticke
enemies in a judicial way, as is seen in the same Fabius who was so speedy in
executing death against the legions of his own, that revolted to Hannibal;
that he took the very course that Joshua here does, cast lots to set out the
persons to be executed, and then beheaded them with his own sword, not staying
for the coming of the executioner to do it.

Hanniballs plots and counsels that Fabius delays, and not his own
resolutions: which policy in delaying and crossing the counsel and plots of
Achans against the State, is the speediest and soonest way to put in execution
the State counsel against these Achans: this I shall by a digression clear
unto you in the instance of Hushai and David's practice, in defeating the
counsel of Achitophell against him and the State.

Achan or Traitor better headed, and principled to contrive the ruin of the
State and government then Achitophel, chief man in David's council, one for
policy like the oracle of God, so that David prized more his judgment then all
the rest of his board.

Achitophel bend his brains and exercise the quiotessence of his traiterous
wit, and policy more, then in seeking the overthrow of the Kingdom and
government under David, in his Treason with Absolon, whether you respect the
contrivance of the plot, or managing of it: for the contrivance it was,

Absolon.

David employed in the work, and withal to promise and possess them with
better proceedings, if things might come to Absolon hand.

Absolon has vows to pay and these must not be paid at Jerusalem, in
accommodating himself to that pure worship, which God had instituted, but he
must abuse the Kings favor, and draw the people with him to Hebron, there to
join with them in a way of sacrifice, that was over and above Jerusalems
worship, whereby he drew most of the Subjects not well grounded, to follow him
in conforming to his Hebron worship; and then to side with him against
government established: thus deep was Achitophells contrivance, nor was
Achitophells practice inferior to his contrivance, for

between the King and them, by causing Absolon to go in to his Fathers Wives
in the sight of all Israel, that so he might be made so odious to his Father,
that there might be no hope of a reconciliation between them; and thereby also
the hearts of the people made strong and resolute in siding with them, when
they should see no hope of any peace to follow between them.

David, and all the faithful Subjects in the Land, wherein he offers himself
to be the leader and General, that as he had been president of the Council
in peace, so that now he might feed his ambitious humor in making himself
General of the forces in War, Let me choose ten thousand, says he.



David and his men being weary and weak handed.



Achan or enemy of the world could bring more trouble upon a Commonwealth then
Achitophell intended: now see that no policy to secure the Kingdom and bring
speedy ruin upon Achitophell, is more prevalent, then delaying his counsel in
his military way, which will appear,

F

Hushais practice.



Hushai to defeat his plot with Absolon: and then Hushai, first in taking off
Achitophells counsel, and then in propounding his own contrary to it: he
takes of Achitophells counsel by declaring that though Achitophell deserved
the name of a wise man, yet at this time he missed: for whereas he had said
that David and his men were weary handed, he tells them now that they were like
Bears robbed of their Whelps: and for taking of David alone there was no
probability, for David being a skillful Warrier, would not lodge with his
people all night; and for the time of going the night would be worst of all,
for David would be hid in a Cave, and then how should they find him in the
dark? and again being in the night, in a wood, the assailants would have the
disadvantage and the defendants the gain, at least to kill some which in the
night being heard, would discourage the rest and make them all run away.
Having taken of Achitophells counsel he propounds his own.

Israel be gathered; for company he would have all Israel come together, from
Dan to Beersheba; for the General not Achitophell, but the King himself in
his person; all which counsel was for no other end but to delay and
procrastinate the counsel of Achitophell, thereby to bring speedy ruin upon
them, both which also came to pass; for Achitophell seeing his counsel was
not taken, considers if the King was overcome, he was but a dead man; if he
were not overcome, yet the honor of the victory would fall upon Hushai, whose
counsel was followed when his was rejected, and therefore hanged himself that
night: and the next is Absolon hanged in the Tree by his neck. By which
instance, you see that expedition of our own counsels and procrastinating the
plots of adversaries in military ways well agree together, to bring speedy
deliverance and cure to a troubled Church and State.

Achans among us, affords us all just occasion and matter of a twofold duty.
First of Praise. Secondly of Prayer.





For the former, if expedition in execution of justice be the will of God, for
our preservation, then let all the Kingdom and several Shires of the Land
fing praise to our God, and give due honor to his instruments, by whose
indefatigable labors, and incessant diligence in examining and convincing our
Achans, so great a stay of Idolatry, injustice, molestation, in the Church and
Commonwealth, is already attained; so deep a foundation of purity in the
Church, of peace and tranquillity in the whole Kingdom, in so short a time, in
so few months is so deeply laid Compare the complexion of our Kingdom,
Judicatures, Oratories, etc. at this present, with the countenance they have
carried for many bygone years, and you will say more have been done for our
peace, and against Achans, within five months last past, then in fifty years
before, if all see it not, it is because they are blind or consider not that it
is in great bodies and public businesses of State, as in the motions of the
Heavens, which are most speedy in their course, yet not sensibly perceived, but
by their effects, when we discern those Stars that were aloft overnight,
are under feet in the morning, though we saw not their motion, yet we
conclude the speed of their course: even so when we see blazing Comets and
boystering clouds scattered, our dark Star elevated; when we see Hushais
counsel entertained, and Achitophells rejected; when we see a War as
furiously persecuted, and bent to as great hazard to our Kingdom, as Absolons
was against Israel, by our Joshuahs, and Hushais delayed, now turned to a
glorious peace, a Triennall Parliament concluded, Achitophell hanged, we
cannot choose but say as David to Abigail, Blessed be the Lord that sent* you,
and blessed be you and your counsel, that has thus ^oon^ made our B^achim the
place of our weeping, become our Beracha, and turned our tears into Songs; ye
have made this year the year of Jubilee unto us, wherein so many exiled and
banished from Gods house, from their own houses, and places, and Kingdoms, as
at the death of the high Priest have returned to their own inheritance again,
and with Ezra, chap. 7. 27. Blessed be the Lord which has put such a thing as
this into the Kings heart; give unto the Lord you mighty, give unto Lord glory
due unto his name, for he has loosed the collars of Princes, and made the
Judges veins bless ye the Lord ye house of Aaron, for he is now your help
and shield: yea let all the Saints be joyful with glory to our God, and fing
aloud upon their beds, for God has put into their hearts both power, and
readiness, to execute vengeance on Achans and correction among the people, to
bind their great ones in chains, and their Princes in fetters of Iron, to
execute speedily the judgment that is written: this honor have all his Saints,
Praise ye the Lord.

Achans, is the will of God, then let us pray God to convey his will into your
wills still, and make you more willing to make speed to save us, and have to
help us; suffer us to pray God to remove all blocks, and impediments out of
your ways, and from your own hearts, and spirits, that what Achan soever
shall by due examination be convinced to be a troubler and disturber of the
laws of God and the Kings, as in Ezra 7. 26. Judgment may be executed upon
him, and that speedily whether it be unto death, or banishment, or confiscation
of goods or imprisonment; suffer me in the name of God and his poor Church to
pray you that if God stir up the hearts of some to be forward, there may none
be found that may retard or delay the same serendo moras from self-love,
favor, fear, or carnal reason; but that still Justice against these Achans
may run down in the straightest way and the shortest course, and not in the
winding banks of unnecessary delays. Consecrate your selves to day unto the
Lord, and if all Achans could be hanged up, Coram isto sole, let none remain
until tomorrow how ever, in exercising mercy and justice betimes in cutting
off all the wicked, from the City of God: think not that our prayer of
expedition arises from distrust or suspicion of your wisdom and diligence;
for although he that believes in God himself, does not make have, by way of
diffidence, yet does he pray, God make have to help us, oh Lord make speed to
save us, out of confidence; and if the God of Heaven give us leave to incite
him with our arguments, and quicken him by our prayers, I hope I shall without
offense pray this honorable House that they would quicken themselves, by the
consideration of these incitements following, tending to speedy execution.

Achan has sinned, in offending in the execrable thing, sets out his judgments
and wrath after him, and the Kingdom also where he dwells: if Joshua's
execution overtake Achan before Gods, then they spare, and save themselves as
in the cause of the Gibeonites is evident; when David's judgment overtakes him*
the Lord forbeares; but if not, he goes on still: Oh what danger is there then
in one days delay, when if our speed in execution be not sooner then Gods, we
come too la^e? Think Right Honorable, in your pursuing of these Achans, that
the Lord is pursuing you both, with his threatened wrath, if you execute not
vengeance on them betimes; and if you delay one day, think God that comes on
Eagles Wings, and is a swift witness against Achans, will come in the day you
begin to be slack, and so surprise you before them: oh therefore make no
delay, when have only saves. I read in the 1 Samuel 25. when Abigail heard
that David was offended, and coming to destroy her Family, for Nabals fault,
that she hasted to take two hundred Cakes to prevent David, verse 18. and
commanded her servants, verse 19. to make more have then her self could, But
go ye before me and I will follow after: and when she saw David, verse 21*
she hasted and lighted off her Ass, and anne to meet him, and fell at his
feet; but what need all this have? even the have that David made to revenge
himself on Nabal and all his Family, he would not delay nor procrastinate
till the dawning of the day; God do so to me and more also if I leave ought
of Nabal alive till the dawning of the day, says David. Therefore not her
Cakes not confession, but have saved her and her Family, as David tells her in
terminis, verse 30. As the Lord of hosts lives* except thou had hasted and
met moe^* I had not left any thing alive by the breaking of the day. Ch(...)
name, the cause is ours, our Achans Nabal^ have provoked David's God against us,
more then David against Nabal; his poor servants come tell you, evil will
come upon us therefore; you are ou^ Abigails, have, for as the Lord lives
except you have we may fear little will be left in a few days, and the
rather because God is in view, and therefore stay not while his wrath overtake
us; stay not while our Kingdom be destroyed.

Achans haste effect it, for the more days Achans are permitted to stay, after
discovery; the more do they infect us; is the iniquity of Peor too little for
us says the people, but we must have more? so say I, is it not sufficient
that their sins have troubled us, but their continuance must infect us, and
destroy us, Deuteronomy. 21. there is a law made, that the dead body of an executed
malefactor should not be suffered to hang on the tree till to morrow Junius out
of Epiphanius gives the reason, because the fight of them above the earth was
execrable to the Lord: till they were wholly abolished they would infect; now,
if the bodies of our Achans infect spiritual as well as corporal, why should
they stay above the ground till to morrow; which much like as is said of the
Bafilisk, spectando, and dum spectantur, both by our seeing them, and their
seeing of us, they slay us.



spectando while they live do they actually hurt, when they are questioned and
condemned, the Law of Man against these Achans does as the reviving of the Law
of God in the consciences of wicked men, make them desperately evil, m^^e then
before, (...) pere^^te, ^^at mundus, says Achan, o^ that seeing I must die or
Israel, that I might destroy Israel before I die. Baalam when he cannot curse
from his Alt^t^, undoeth Israel by his secret counsels to the King Balacke
against Israel; had not Absolon been spared, he had never driven his Father
out of his Kingdom, this David and all the faithful of Israel have got, by
hearing the Woman of Tekoah for his reprievall; I may say of all Achans as our
Savior of Judas, it had been good for them and the Kingdom where they live,
they had never been borne, but that they had perished before they had done
either good or evil; but having done so much evil and mischief to the lives
and welfare of whole Kingdoms, why should life be further granted to them
whose very life brings death to all about them*

Belial live, the Kingdoms peace and comfort cannot be established, only when
these are cast down, will the Church lift up its head, and say exaltation, and
shouting. Oh what joy was in Israel when Moses, Aaron, and Miriam saw the
Egyptians dead upon the shore, then they sung and danced, when Debora and B^^ck
saw Sisera beheaded, then all but Meros that did not help the Lord, rejoiced:
when Mordecai and Hester saw Haman hanged, then they kept the feast and days
of Vrin^; and when England shall see these Achans executed, then shall they
rejoice in the Lord, and in the return of his presence into his Temple,
ordinances, and judicatures; hi gandia nostra morantur: while these Froggs and
Jesuits of Rome be extirpated, we shall not sing the song of Moses and the
Lamb. Oh therefore have their ruin, and your own triumph; though Rome were
not built in one day, yet may it be, nay it shall be destre^d in a day, Revel.
18. 8. her pangs shall come in one day, nay in one hour, verse 10. in one
hour is thy judgment finished; our Church has long time been in travail to
be delivered of these Vipers, and long travails are perilous, especially if so;
and that the spirit and strength of pregnant begin to wast: the Dragon and
false Prophet, labors with all their might to make the birth abortive, or
destroy the issue in the Womb, oh do you afford such help that shall be quick
and lively, and be delivered before such Midwives come at her, then shall she
forget all her sorrow, and immediately shall follow the Church Hallalajah, even
the day that others have desired to see and could not, but by your expedition,
in Achans destruction, your eyes shall immediately behold truth, and peace in
your days, and joy in all the Israel of God.

Moses, to the sons of Levi, that God may bestow a blessing upon you; teaching
us, the blessing that God will reward this service withal, should quicken
their endeavors therein. Never any service that you shall do unto God, or
your Kingdom, shall be better rewarded, then this shall. Levi did all the
services of the Temple, yet for his speedy extirpation of the abominable things
had he the blessing; by this Levi got off the temporal guilt of the
She^bonites blood; by this their scattering in Israel was turned to a blessing,
the temporal blessings of God assured, the blessing of immunitie from the
sins of the Land obtained, the acceptance of the sacrifice of the people of
Israel from their hands promised, as their hereditary blessing: so shall you by
this work of expedition of Achans judgment free your selves from the sins of
all Achans of the times, as Joshua here, turn away the wrath of God from your
selves, and others, as Phineas elsewhere; you shall be sure that God that
awarded Jeh^es extirpation of (...) idolatry, with reward of a Kingdom, in the
fourth Generation, though done in hypocrisy, will not be forgetful of this
your labor, to recompense it fourfold more then to Iehu, if you do it
speedily and in sincerity: and that God of blessing, that blessed Phineas and
all his posterity, saying, I impute his zeal, his speedy cutting off two
execrable persons, for righteousness, and give him therefore the covenant of
peace, and he shall have it, and his Sons after him from Generation to
Generation, will certainly impute your speedy extirpation of many Achans, for
righteousness, unto you and your Sons and heirs, thereby in^ouled in a
Covenant of peace, and they shall have it from Generation to Generation when
you are dead and gone.

Achans is the end and perfection of all other your pains, and labor spent,
in the inquisition, examination, conviction, and sentencing, of Achans. All
these are wholly directed to this, as to their end and scope, without which it
is in vain to rise up early and sit up late, and spend whole Weeks; and
Months from your houses and families, to discover and bring them to light; to
what end is this waste, if being found out, sentence is not executed, execution
being the end and perfection of all censures and incorrupt judgments? how can
it appear that the grounds, intentions, and rules of your sentences were pure,
and incorrupt, except after they be pronounced they haste more then ever to the
in execution? for this is the difference between natural, and violent
motions, violent, the further they go the fainter they grow; but natural,
make so much the more haste, by how much they draw nearer to their end and
center; therefore that it may appear to all the world, that this Assemblies
aim^^ was the peace of the Kingdom, and remove all of unjustice and
unrighteousness from it, and was carried thereto by the rules of wisdom and
natural affection to truth and holiness, being now so near the end, make
haste to the center, to wit, execution of Achans, without unnecessary delays,
and needless procrastrations.

Thus have you seen and heard the end and means of the ruin of the Church,
in Achans accusation, and the notes and means of the recovery of a Church in
Joshua's sentence, and execution.

What now remains; but as Musicians report, that a Lute or other well tuned
instrument, hanging by, on a Wall, will resound the notes and choice strains,
and touches, which another played on before it, by a skillful hand may seem to
dictate unto it, and that whersoever it fails, in answering its pattern, yet
it is most observant of the closes in the end, and keeping time with them; so
Joshua is the instrument by whom the Lord has presented these notes and
lessons of heavenly melody unto your ears, concerning Church purging, and
state reforming policy, in the valley of Achor; as therefore to the honor of
God and the joy of his Church, you have hitherto observed all the former notes
of this heavenly music, by your harmony, and sweet consent, examining and
sentencing these Achans: So God grant you may most carefully keep time also
with them, in the close; not ending in a Large, or a Long procrassination of
executing Justice, but in a Brief, quick, and speedy extirpation of them with
Joshua, to trouble them all, and that this day.

FINIS.

