THE CATALOGUE of Most of the Memorable Tombs, Grave-stones, Plates,
Escutcheons, or Achievements in the Demolisht or yet Extant Churches of LONDON
from St Katharines beyond the Tower, to Temple-Barre. The Out-Parishes being
included A WORK OF GREAT WEIGHT, AND CONSEQVENTLY to be indulged and
Countenanced by such who are gratefully ambitious of Preserving the Memory of
their ancestors.

By P. Fisher sometimes Serjant Major of Foot.

LONDON Printed Anno. MDCLXVIII.

The Catalogue of the most Memorable persons who had visible Tombs, plated
Grave-stones, Escutcheons or Hatchments in the City of London before the last
dreadful Fire.
SIR Philip Sydney one of the most noble ancestors of the Right honorable
Robert Earl of Leicester now living. Sir Francis Walsingham Knight, principal
Secretary of state to Q. Elizabeth. Sir Christopher Hatton Knight, one of the
noble ancestors of the Right honorable the Lord Hatton now living. Richard
Clifford Bishop of London, a branch of those Heroique and brave Martial
Cliffords late Earls of Cumberland. Michael de Northburgh Bishop of London.
Eustachius de Fauconberg Bishop of London one of the noble ancestors of the
Right honorable Thomas Lord Bellasis, viscount Fauconberg now living
Laurentius de Allerthorp Treasurer. William Worsley Dean of S. Paul's, a branch
of that flourishing and knightly Family of the Worsleys in the Isle of Wight,
of which Sir Robert Worsley Baronet now living is chief. Roger Brabazon Doctor
of the Civil Laws. Sir Thomas Baskervile Knight, General of the English
forces in Picardy, of the noble Line and Family of the Baskerviles in the
County of Hereford. Henricus a Wengham Lord Chancellor of England. Erkenwaldus
the 3. Bishop of London after the coming in of the Saxons. Sebba King of the
last Saxons. Etheldred King of England. Sir John Poultney four times Major of
London ancestor to Sir William Poultney Knight now living. William Hewit Esquire;
one of the ancestors of the flourishing and Knightly Family of the Hewits in
Hartfordshire and else where John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster. Robertus Hare
Treasurer of St. Paul's, one of the ancestors of the Right honorable Lord Henry
Hare Baron of Colrain now living. Thomas Creek Doctor of the Civil Law. Sir
William Cockain Knight, Lo. Mayor of London one of the worthy ancestors of the
Right honorable of the Lord Cockain viscount Cullen now living. Sir William
Detrick King at Arms. Sir William Detrick his Son, Knight, and likewise King
at Arms. Gulielmus the Norman, Bishop of London in the time of William the
Conqueror. Sir Edward Barkham his Memorial of gratitude in commemoration of
the said Bishop. Thomas Raymond Archdeacon of St. Albans. William Bonham Son
of Thomas Bonham of Essex Esquire; and both of them ancestors to the Bonhams of
Hantshire, whence Mr. Thomas Bonham of westmean in the said County is
primogenially descended. Sir John Northbury or Norbery Knight, keeper of the
Garderobe in the Tower of London, and ancestor to the late John Norbery Esquire;
Judge of South wales and father of George and John Norbery now living. John
Owen the Epigrammatist. Sir Paganus de Roet father in Law to John of Gaunt Duke
of Lancaster. Gulielmus Green Doctor of Divinity. Gabriel Done Doctor of
Divinity. John Done Dean of St. Paul's. Alexander Nowel Dean of St. Paul's very
anciently of Lan. and one of the branches of the Right honorable Baptist Lord
Nowell viscount Cambden of Cambden now living. Sir Simon Burley Knight of the
Garter Warden of the Cinque ports. Rogerus surnamed Niger Bishop of London.
Thomas de Eure Dean of St. Paul's a branch of the Right honorable Lord Eure of
Malton. Sir Simon Baskervile Knight M.D. Sir John Wolley Knight, Secratary of
state to Queen Eliz. Sir Francis Wolley Knight his only son. John Collet Deane
of St. Paul's son of Sir Henry Collet Knight, Lord Mayor of London. John Acton
of Acton in the County of Salop Esquire; Father in law to the worthy Sir Reginald
Foster Knight now living. Thomas Ockford vicar of St. Faiths. Simon Edolph of
the County of Flint Esquire; William Rythen Rector of St. Faiths. Valantine Carry
Dean of St. Paul's and Bishop of Exon. John Newcourt Dean of the Collegiat
Church of Aukland. Ricardus Litchfield Archdeacon of Middlesex. Johannes Boys
of the County of Essex. Esquire; Nicholas Rickdel Esquire; Izabella wife of them both.
Petrus Gildenstern Baron of Bistrup one of the Danish nobility. Johannes
Tomkins Batchelour of Music one of the ancient and Knightly Family of the
Tomkins in Herefordshire, whereof the worthy Sir Thomas Tomkins of Monington
upon Wye Knight. is Principal. Sir John Beuchamp Knight of the Garter. William
Earl of Pembrook, one of the most Noble ancestors of the Right honorable
Philip Earl of Pembrook, now living. Sir Nicholas Bacon Knight, keeper of the
Privy Seal, one of the ancestors of that Knightly and spreading Family of the
Bacons in Suffolk, whence the late Nathaniel and Francis Bacon late of Grayes
Inn were lineally descended. Robertus Benne de Newport Cranly, Gentleman. Sir
Thomas Heneage Knight a most memorable Person in the Reign and Court of Qu.
Eliz. Thomas Linacre M.D. Physician to Henry the eighth. Gulielmus Lilly first
Master of St. Paul's school. Thomas VVinterburne Dean of St, Paul's. William Mey
or May Dean of St. Paul's. Richard Chateslehant Cannon of St. Paul's. Gulielmus
Harrington one of the Cannon Residentaries of St. Paul's. Fulco Basset Bishop of
London, one of that noble Family of the Bassets in the County of Devon John
Nevil Lord Latimer one of the ancestors of the noble Lord of Abergavanny first
Baron of England. Henry Lacy Earl of Lincoln. Richard de Gravesend Bishop of
London. Hammon de Chickwell six times Mayor of London. Johannes Cheshall Bishop
of London. Reymundus Pelegrim Cannon of St. Paul's. Robert Munden Cannon of St.
Paul's. John Munden Cannon of St. Paul's. Richard Fletcher Bishop of London,
Father of the late Mr. Fletcher that famous Drammatique Poet. William Welford
Arch Deacon of Colchester. Richard de Placito Arch Deacon of Colchester.
Richardus Newport Bishop of London. Rodolphus Baldock or Balduck Bishop of
London. Johannes Stocksley Bishop of London. Bobert Breybrook Bishop of London
and Chancellor of England. John Elmot Bishop of London. Fulco Lovell Arch
deacon of Colchester. John King Bishop of London, Father to the Right Reverend
and eminently learned John King Lord Bishop of Chichester of a long standing,
descending from a very ancient family in Devonshire. Robertus Fitzhugh Bishop
of London. Dame Margaret Countess of Shrewsbury. Sir Edward Boxhall Knight of
the Garter. A very ancient Tomb without any name, only some fragments of the
inscription are visible. Sir William Awbrey vicar Genesis to the Arch Bishop of
Canterbury one of the Progenitors of the honorable and ancient Family of the
Awbreys in Wales, and great Grandfather to ths Lady Mary Montague, daughter of
the late Sir John Awbrey Knight, and wife of the truly honorable William
Montague Attorney General to the Qu. of England, and brother to the Right
honorable Edward Baron of Boughton. The Duchess of Bedford sister to Philip
Duke of Burgondy. Sir Ralph de Hengham Lo. chief Justice of both Benches, one
of the long-lind ancestors of the Henghams, or Heveningham in Norfolk, Knights
from many generations, whence is lineally descended William Heveningham (Son
and Heir of the late Sir Ralph) now living Sir John Putney Knight Mayor of
London. Richard de Plesseys Sir John Crofts Scout Master general of Ireland,
and one of that ancient and truly honorable Family of the Crofts in the County
of Hereford and Suffolk Thomas Kempe Bishop of London. Sir Edward Stanhop
Knight vicar Genesis to the Archbishop of Canterbury, and one of that noble
family of the Earl of Chesterfield now living. Thomas Ravis Bishop of London.
Richardus Vaughan Bishop of London. Richardus Periton Arch Deacon of
Colchester. Brian Walton Bishop of Chester, and husband of Madam Anne Walton
now living. John Barwick Dean of St. Paul's, and Brother to the worthy Doctor
Peter Barwick M.D C.L, now living. Marcus Franck Arch Deacon of St. Albans.
Dame Katharine third daughter of the late Edward Lord Nevil baron of
Abergavanny. Thomas Isles Esquire; public notary, one of the ancestors to Mr.
William Isles one of the principal attendants to the right Reverend George now
Lord Bishop of Winton. John Abney Reginae Camerarius. David Clapham Genesis one of
the Proctors of the arches. John Cawood Stationer and Printer to Qu. Elizabeth.
John Mollins Arch Deacon of London. Dame Elizabeth wife of the late Lord
Schandols John Brewster Cannon of St. Paul's. Margaret wife of Christopher
Robinson. John and Francis Astely Sonns of Sir John Astely Knight and Master of
the Revells. William West one of the Petty Cannons of St. Paul's. Thomas
Dockwray Notary, and one of the Proctors of the Arches. Richard Waterson
Stationer of London. Simon Waterson Stationer of London. Francis Coldock Master
of the Company of Stationers, all three the Progenitors of Mr. Simon Waterson
bookseller late of St. Paul's Church yard yet living. Richard Ironside Stationer
of London. William Norton Esquire; sometime Stationer of London his Nephew. Bonham
Norton of Church-stretton of the County of Salop Esquire; all three ancestors to
Arthur NortonEsq; Roger Norton Esquire; and John Norton of Lincolnes Inn Esquire; now
living. Petrus Osborne Esquire; remembrancer of the Exchequer father of the late
Sir Peter Osborne Knight. Thomas Mind of Salop Esquire; George Whitgift Esquire; William
Lamb Esquire; servant to King Henry the 8. John Good one of the Petty Cannons of
St. Paul's. William Babham and Alice Burton. Elizabeth wife of Robert Freeman.
James Trussel Esquire; grandchild of Sir Alured Trussel of the County of Warwick
Knight, and Father of the much honored Colonel Edward Trussel late of Pater
Noster Row, sometimes High Sheriff of Hamshire, which Colonel Edward is now
living Richard Higginson Esquire; Alderman of London. Lodowick Nichols of
Northampton. Robert Johnston one of the Proctors of the Arches. Alice Johnston
wife of the said Robert. Roger Hunt one of the Proctors of the Arches. David
Dolben Bishop of Bangor, of that ancient Family of the Dolbens in Denbighshire,
from whence the Right Reverend Doctor John Dolben Dean of Westminster, and
Bishop of Rochester is Lineally descended. Christophorus Visivicus Almoner to
Henry the 7. Henry Thorsby of Thorsby in the County of York Esquire; Sir Thomas
Row Knight, Lord Mayor of London. Sir Henry Row Knight, Son of Sir Thomas.
John Nevill Lord Latimer. Richard Hanley Esquire; John Bannister Esquire; Sheriff and
Alderman of London. Lady Anne Bulstrode widow of the said John Bannister.
Henry Daniel Mary Daniel Anne Daniel
Brothers and Sisters. Dame Katharine Reynolds wife of Sir James Reynolds of
Castlecomps in the County of Cambridge. William Egmunton Rector of Hackney.
John Mounson Esquire; third Son of Sir John Mounson of South-Carleton in the
County of Lincoln Knight. Thomas Harvey anciently of Foulkston in the County of
Kent Esquire; and one of the Progenitors of the honorable Sir Daniel Harvey
Knight, Bishop of Comb park in the County of Surrey Knight and Baronet, now
living. Thomas Carew de Haccomb in the County of Devon, Esquire; Richardus Forde
Genesis George Viner second Son of the honorable Sir George Viner Knight and
Baronet. Lady Etheldred Reynell daughter and coheir of Sir George Peacock of
Finchly Knight, and wife of the late Sir George Reynell Knight, Marshal of the
Kings Bench. James Lord Egerton viscount Brackley. Charles Lord Egerton
viscount Brackley. Lady Cecilia Egerton, all three the children of the Right
honorable John Lord Ellesmere viscount Brackley, Earl of Bridgwater, and the
Right honorable the Lady Frances his Countess, daughter, and one of the
coheirs of the Right honorable Ferdinando Earl of Derby. Mrs. Katharine
Currance wife of Mr. Allan Currance, ancestors to the truly worthy John
Currance Esquire; now living. Mrs. Dorothy Sewell wife of Robert Sewell Esquire; Draper
of Lonndon. Sir Martin Nowell Knight, descended from that ancient and
honorable Family of the Nowels in Lancashire, and father to the truly honored
Sir Martin Nowel Knight B. now living. Thomas Lord Coventry Keeper of the great
Seal of England ancestor to the flourishing and honorable Family of the
Coventries now living. Sir Alan Apsly Knight, Leivetenant of the Tower, Father
of the worthily honored Sir Alan Apsly Knight etc. Comptroler to his most
illustrious Highness James Duke of York. Henry Howard Earl of Arundell and
Surrey one of the ancestors to the illustrious Family of the Duke of Norfolk,
now living. Lord Thomas Darcy of the North one of the ancestors to the
honorable Sir William Darcy and Edward Darcy now living. Lord John Paslay
son of the Earl of Abercrome, husband of the honorable Lady Katharine
Lenthall one of the daughters of Sir John Lenthall Knight. stylo veteri, and
Marshall of the Kings Bench. Lord Thomas Egerton Baron of Ellesmere Lord high
Chancellor of England, ancestour to the Right honorable the Earl of
Bridgwater now living. William Lord Compton his arms one of the ancestors of
the Right honorable the Earl of Northampton now living. Edward Lord Bruce
Baron of Kinlosse, one of the Princely Progenitors of the Right honorable and
eminently noble Edward Earl of Alisbury and Earl of Elgin now living. Robert
Radcliff Earl of Sussex one of the ancestors to the Right honorable the Earl
of Sussex now living. Dame Elizabeth late Countess Dowager of Exeter, buried in
St. James Clarkenwel. Lord Bishop q Fotherby buried in Alhallows Lumbardstreet
with a magnificent Tomb over him. Dom. Johannes Episcopus Bathoniae and Wellen.
William Marshal Earl of Pembroke. William Marshal his son, Earl of Salisbury.
Lionel Cranfeild Earl of Middlesex, ancestor to the Right honorable Earl of
Middlesex now living. Margareta Comitissa de Salop. Dame Catharine Nevil
Countess of Rutland. Lord Thomas Millington Baron of Weemes. Dame Grizald
Windsor, sole daughter of the L. Windsor. Lady Elizabeth Bruges, wife of the
Lord Chandois. Dame Ma. Countess of Huntington. The Countess of Worcester, in
Garlick-hithe-Church. John Holland Duke of Exeter. Dame Anne Stafford Duchess
of Exeter Dame Anne Mountague Duchess of Exeter. Dame Constance Holland,
sister of the said Duke of Exeter. Lord Francis Butler, or Boteler. Randulphus
Brownrigge Episc. Exon Land. Sir Michael Blount lieut. of the Tower. Sir
Richard Blount Knight, lieut. of the Tower. Sir Allen Apsley Knight, lieut. of
the Tower, ancestor to Sir Allen Apsley Knight, etc. Sir William Parkhurst
Knight, Comptroller of the Mint. Sir Edw. Devereux Knight. Sir Nicholas Carew
Knight of the Garter, and ancestor to the now sir Nicholas Carew of Beddington.
Sir John Pelham Knight. Sir Edw. Darcy son of the Lo. Darcy. Sir John Deddham
Knight. Sir Edward Barkham Knight, Lo. M. ancestor to the now sir Robert and
sir Edward Barkham Baronets. Sir Paul Pindar Knight, and ancestor to Matthew
Pindar Esquire; one of the fix Clerks. Dame Anne Gib, wife to the late sir Henry
Gib of Scotland Baronet, and daughter of the yet living sir Ralph Gibbs of
Honnington in Warwickshire. Sir Ambrose Charcam Knight Dame Cardina Schoder,
wife of sir Richard Schoder Knight. Sir John Crosby Knight, Lord Mayor, builder and
first owner of Crosby house. Sir Tho. Gresham Knight, Lord Mayor. Sir Nicholas
Rainton Knight, Lord Mayor. Sir William Pickering Knight. Sir William Pickering
Knight, both ancestors to sir Gilbert Pickering of Northampt. and of sir Henry
Pickering of Cambridge-shire, both Baronets, etc. Sir John Spencer Knight, Lord
Mayor. Sir William Holles Knight, Lo. Mayor, ancestor to the three last
successive Earls of Clare. Sir Julius Caesar Knight, Master of the Rolls,
ancestor to sir Henry Caesar of the county of Hertf. Sir John Langham Knight
and Baronet, father of the eminently learned sir James Langham Knight, his
Vault. Sir George VVhitmore Knight, Lord Mayor, father of William Whitmore of
B. Esquire;. Sir John Milburne Knight, Lo. Mayor. Sir William Chester Knight. Sir
John Branch Knight, Lord Mayor. Dame Hellena Branch his wife. Sir Stephen
Slanie Knight, Lo. Mayor. Sir John Heart Knight, Lord Mayor. Sir George Bolles
Knight, Lord Mayor, ancestor to the now sir John Bolles of Scampton, Baronet.
Sir Ralph Jocelyn Knight, Lord Mayor. Sir John Rivers Knight, Lord Mayor. Sir
Robert Chichely Knight, Lord Mayor. Sir Rowland Hill Knight, Lo. Mayor. Sir
Thomas Leigh Knight, Lord Mayor, ancestor to Edward Leigh of Gloucester Esquire;
Sir Stephen Cavendish Knight, Lord Mayor. Sir Thomas Baldry Knight, Lo. Mayor.
Sir Thomas Bennet Knight, Lo. Mayor, ancestor to sir Thomas Bennet of Babraham
in the county of Cambridge, Baronet; and sir Humphry Bennet of Hants, Knight
and Colonel. Sir Edward Shaw Knight, Lo. Mayor. Sir William Lock Knight, etc.
Sir John Aleyn Knight, Lord Mayor, one of the Privy Council to Hen. 8.
ancestor to the now sir George Aleyn of Essex, and sir Thomas Aleyn of London,
Knight and Baronet. Sir Thomas Pope Knight, Treasurer of the Augmentations. Sir
George Bond Knight, Lord Mayor. Sir Godfrey Bullen, or Bollen, ancestor to Anne
Bullen, mother of Queen Elizabeth of famous memory. Sir Samuel Mico his
Hatchment. Sir Edward Aker Knight, Lo. Mayor. Sir Ralph Warren Knight, Lo.
Mayor. Sir John Lions Knight, Lord Mayor. Sir Thomas Iken Knight. Sir Martin
Bows Knight, Lord Mayor. Sir Thomas Ramsey Knight, Lord Mayor. Dame Alice
Ramsey, his Lady. Dame Mary Ramsey, his Lady. Sir Simon Airs Knight, Lord
Mayor. Sir Hugh Brice Knight, Lord Mayor. Sir John Arundel Knight of the Bath,
and Knight-Banneret. Sir John Percival Knight, Lo. Mayor. Dame Thomasin
Percival, his Lady. Sir Richard Pain Knight. Sir Thomas Brugge, or Bruges, of
Dimmock in Gloucestershire, Knight. Sir George Stanley Knight of the Garter,
son of the Lord Strange, ancestors of the now Earl of Derby. Sir Roger Jones
Knight, Lord Mayor. Sir William Gore Knight, Lord Mayor, ancestor to that
Knightly family of the Gores in the county of Herts. Sir John Gore Knight, Lord
Mayor. Dame Mary Brook, daughter to the Lord Brook, one of the Barons of the
Exchequer. Lady Catharine Killigrew, one of that most ancient and honorable
family of the Killigrews in Cornwall. Sir John Gizors Knight, Lord Mayor. Sir
Ralph Astry Knight, Lord Mayor, ancestor to the Astries of Woodend in the
county of Bedf. Sir Cutbert Hacket Knight, Lo. Mayor. Sir Stephen Spilman
Knight, Sheriff and Chamberlain of London, one of the branches of that
long-flourishing family of the Spilmans in Norfolk. Sir Rich. Whittington
Knight, Lord Mayor. Sir Richard Marlow Knight, Lord Mayor. Sir William Bailey
Knight, Lo. Mayor. Sir Thomas Lodge Knight, Lo. Mayor. Sir William Laxton
Knight, Lord Mayor. Sir Richard Maddox Knight. Sir Henry Kybel, or Kyble,
knight, etc. Sir Roger Martin Knight, Lo. Mayor. Sir Thomas Knowles Knight,
Lord Mayor. Sir William Craven Knight, Lord Mayor, ancestor to the Right
honorable and truly Noble Lord William Craven, Baron of Hemsted, and Earl of
Craven. Sir Nich. Farringdon Knight, Lord Mayor, from whom Farringdon-Ward took
its denomination. Sir John Munde Goldsmith, Knight, Lord Mayor. Sir Alexander
Avenon Knight, Lord Mayor. Sir Christopher Askew, or Ascough, Knight, Lord
Mayor. Sir Henry Fitz-alwin Knight, Mayor, and Mayor intermissively four and
twenty years together. Sir William Bowyer Knight, Lord Mayor. Sir John
Hubblethorne Knight, Lord Mayor. Sir Stephen Jennings Knight, Lord Mayor. Sir
Ralph Freeman Knight, Lord Mayor. Sir William Capel Knight, Lo. Mayor, one of
the ancestors to the now Earl of Essex. Dame Anne Awnsham, Lady of the late sir
Gideon Awnsham Knight. Sir Walter Knight of Canterbury. Sir William Garway
Knight, Lord Mayor, ancestor to Hen Garway of Ford in Sussex Esquire; Sir Nicholas
Gold Baronet, late husband to the Lady Gold, now wife of Thomas Neal of
Warmford Esquire; Sir Rowland Heyward Knight, twice Lord Mayor. Sir William Glover
Knight, Lord Mayor. Sir William Daniel Knight, one of the Judges of the C.P.
Sir Hugh Wyche Knight, Lord Mayor. Dame Grizald Tuke, wife of sir Brian Tuke
Knight, etc. and one of the ancestors of sir Samuel Tuke knight and Colonel.
Sir Thomas Leigh knight. Sir Edmund Bacon knight. Sir Thomas Hayes knight, Lo.
Mayor. Sir John Swinnerton knight, Lord Mayor. Sir William Stone knight, Lo.
Mayor. Sir John Cheke, (most anciently Cheque) tutor to Edward the sixth. Sir
Thomas Cheke knight, his Granchild; both ancestors to Robert Cheke of Pergoe in
Essex Esquire; etc. and Thomas Cheke his brother, one of the Esquires of his
Majesty's body, and one of the Captains of his Majesty's Guard. Sir Henry
VVeever, or Weaver, knight. Sir John Woodcock Knight, Lord Mayor. Sir Simon
d'Ewes of Gelderland, knight. Sir James Yerford Knight, Lo. Mayor. Sir Robert
Ducy knight, Lord Mayor, one of the ancestors to that learned man, and great
lover of learned men, sir William Ducy of Froster in the County of Gloucester
Knight-Baronet, and of sir Hugh Ducie knight of the Bath. Sir John Gresham
knight, Lo. Mayor. Sir John Aliffe knight, ancestor to sir Benjamin Aliffe in
the county of Essex. Sir VVolstan Dixy knight, Lo. Mayor, ancestor to sir
Woolstan Dixy of Market-Bosworth in the county of Leicester, Knight-Baronet.
Sir John Darcy knight, son of the Lord Darcy. Dame Grizald Windsour, daughter
to the Lord Windsour. Lady Rumny. Sir Humphry Weld Knight, Lo. Mayor, one of
the ancestors to Humphry Weld of Lulworth-Castle, Esquire; and sir John Weld
Knight, his younger brother. Sir Thomas Cambel Knight, Lord Mayor. Robert
Cambel his son, Alderman. Sir James Cambel Knight, Lo. Mayor, Grandchild of the
sair sir Thomas. Sir Thomas Hewit Knight, Lo. Mayor, Bachelor. Sir Thomas
Wroth of Petherly-Park in the county of Somerset, Knight. Sir Martin Nowel
knight. Sir Henry Anderson Knight, Lord Mayor. Sir Richard Gurney Knight, Lord
Mayor. Sir Michael Dormer Knight, Lord Mayor, ancestor to the late sir Robert
Dormer of Dourton in the county of Buckingham, knight. Sir Humphry Starkey
knight, Baron of the Exchequer. Dame Margaret Erlington, daughter and heir of
Thomas Lord Itchingham. Sir Edward Mulshew knight. Sir William Oldhall knight.
Lady K. Kyme. Sir Heir Tank, or Haretancleux, an Almain, Knight of the Garter.
Sir John Cootes knight, Mayor. Sir John Finknel knight. Sir James Hawes knight,
Lord Mayor. Sir Richard Morgan knight, Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas.
Sir John Mitchel knight, Lo. Mayor. Sir John Poultney knight, Lord Mayor. Sir
John Poultney knight, Lo. Mayor, from whom S. Lawrence Poultney's Church took
her denomination. Guil. Booth, eldest son of sir George, now Lord Booth Baron
of Delamere. Sir Jo. Thorowgood of Hodesden in the county of Hertf. Knight. Sir
George Strode, knight, long since Colonel, and father of sir Nicholas Strode of
Kent knight and Baronet, and of Colonel Strode Governor of Dover. Dame Elizab.
Bercklay, wife of the late sir Maurice Bercklay, Knight. Lady Isabella
Sackvile, Prioress of Clerkenwel. Sir William Weston Knight, Prior of S. John's
of Jerusalem. Sir Walter Manny, or de Meynie, Knight. Dame Elizabeth Ascough.
Sir Henry Gray, son of the late George Earl of Kent. Lady Anne Strange. Sir
Thomas Hawly Knight, Clarencieux, and ancestor to James Hawly of Brainford,
Esquire; etc. Lady Constance Lucy of Charlecot in the County of Warwick. Sir John
Wriothesly Knight, King at Arms, and ancestor to the late Thomas Earl or
Southampton. Dame Elizabeth Richardson, wife of the now sir Thomas Lord
Richardson. Lady Anne Packington. Sir George Dalston of Dalston in the county
of Cumberland, Baronet, father of the now sir William Dalston Baronet of the
same Lordship. Lady Catharine Beaumont. Lady Catharine Mountague. Lady
Elizabeth Puckering, daughter of sir John Morley of Suff. Knight. Sir George
Curson Knight, and father-in-law to the late Edward Earl of Dorset. Dame
Frances Trevors, wife of sir Thomas Trevors. Lady Prudence Trevor. Sir Edward
Philips Knight, Master of the Rolls, his arms in that Chapel; ancestor to
Edward Philips of the county of Somerset Esquire; Knight of the shire; and Col.
Robert Philips of the Bedchamber. Sir Harbottle Grimston of (...) in the
county of Essex, Knight-Baronet, Master of the Rolls; whose arms are in the
window. Sir Thomas Viner Knight, Lo. Mayor, ancestor to the now sir George
Viner Knight. Sir Christoph. Clithero Knight, Lord Mayor, ancestor to James
Clithero, and Henry Clithero, Esquires. Sir Christopher Minns Knight, one of
the great Commanders at sea. Sir Anthony Sentleger Knight. Dame Ellinor
Sentleger, wife of sir Anthony. Sir John Ashburnham Knight, one of the
ancientest families in the kingdom, and one of the ancestors to the honorable
Colonel John Ashburnham; both of his late and present Majesty's Bedchamber.
Sir Richard Hutton Knight, one of the Justices, etc. Sir Walter Mildmay Knight,
Privy Counselor to Queen Eliz. and one of the ancestors, etc. Sir William
Eastfield knight of the Bath, Lord Mayor, who built the Conduit in Fleetstreet.
Dame Margaret North, wife of Edward Lord North. Sir William Row Knight, Lo.
Mayor. Lady Alice Avenon. Sir Baptist Hicks Knight, Lo. Mayor, ancestor to the
Lord Viscount Campden. Sir Jeoffry Feilding Knight, Lord Mayor, ancestor to the
now Earl of Denbigh and Desmond. Sir Godfrey Bullen, or Bollen; one of the sons
of Sir Godfrey, buried in Mercers Chapel. Dame Anne Bromely, wife of sir John
Bromely Knight. Dame Elizab. Jhones, wife of sir Francis Jhones Knight. Dame
Mary Swift, wife of sir Francis Swift of Nasing in the county of Essex, knight,
and daughter of Fra. Waterhouse Esquire; and Bridget his wife, both the father and
mother of the now Edward Waterhouse of Greenford in the county of Middlesex,
Esquire; Sir Bartholoew Read Knight, Lord Mayor. Sir Edmund Wright Knight, Lord
Mayor, father to the Lady Harrington wife of sir James; and the Lady Piggot,
etc. Sir John Cordel Knight, Lord Mayor, ancestor to sir Robert Cordel of Long
Melford in the county of Norfolk, Baronet. Sir Thomas Burgoine Knight, ancestor
to the Knightly family of the Burgoines in the county of Bedford. Sir Nicholas
Twiford Knight, Lord Mayor. Sir James Pemberton Knight, Lord Mayor. Sir James
Drax Knight. Sir James Drax Knight, his son, father and brother of Henry Drax
Esquire;. Lady Jane Thorpe, wife of sir Thomas Thorpe Knight, Baron of the
Exchequer. Sir Walter Blount Knight of the Garter. Lady Margaret Ramsey, that
most munificent Benefactress. Lady Venetia Digby, wife of the late honorable
sir Kenelm Digby, Knight, etc. Sir John Philpot, or Philipot, Knight, Lord
Mayor, ancestor to the worthy and Knightly family of the Philipots in the
county of Hants. Sir Allen Chenie Knight. Sir Christopher Edmonds Knight. Privy
Counselor to Queen Elizabeth. Lady Eliz. Edmonds, his wife. Lady Gurney, wife
of Rob. South, Goldsmith, etc. Sir Edward Mansfield Baronet. Sir Stephen Foster
Knight, Lo. Mayor. Sir Henry Baynton Knight, Treasurer to the Chamber of Hen.
8. and one of the ancestors of that anciently Knightly and opulent family of
the Bayntons of Bromhal in the county of Wilts. Sir Thomas Ridley knight,
Doctor of the Civil law, Chancellor of Winton, and Vicar General to the then
Archbishop of Canterbury, father to the late Anne Bosvile, and Elizabeth, wife
of Mark Cottel Esquire;. Sir Ambrose Nichols Knight, q. if not Lord Mayor. Sir John
Chadworth, or Shadworth, Knight, Lord Mayor. Sir Cutbert Barnes Knight, Lo.
Mayor. Sir Nicholas Crispe Knight-Baronet and Colonel, and father to the now
sir Nicholas Crispe of Hammersmith, Baronet, etc. Sir Thomas Pargiter Knight,
Lord Mayor, ancestor to that worthy family of the Pargiters in
Northamptonshire, whence Mr. Pargiter, Goldsmith, is lineally descended. Sir
Robert Chichly knight, Lo. Mayor. Sir John Allot Knight, Lord Mayor. Sir John
Olyffe Knight, Sheriff. Sir Allen Cotton Knight, Lord Mayor. Sir William Hewit
Knight, Lo. Mayor. Sir William Walworth Knight, Lord Mayor. John Lovekin, four
times Mayor, and Master of sir William Walworth. Sir Henry Amcots Knight, Lo.
Mayor. Sir John Leman Knight, Lord Mayor, ancestor to sir William Leman of
Northal in the county of Herts, Knight and Baronet. Sir William Dormer knight,
Lord Mayor, one of the ancestors to the now Charles Earl of Carnarvon. Sir
Robert Denny knight. Sir Hugh Hammersly knight, Lord Mayor. Sir Thomas Offley
knight, Lord Mayor, ancestor to that worthy family of the Offleys in
Staffordshire. Dame Elizabeth Whitmore, Lady-mother to the now sir William
Whitmore of Shropshire Baronet, and his brother sir Thomas, knight of the Bath.
Sir Nicholas Throckmorton knight. several times Ambassador from Queen Elizabeth.
Sir John Geere knight, ancestor to the now sir Robert Geere Knight-Ba. Sir
Samuel Owfeild, or Ouldfield, knight. Sir Thomas Flemming knight. Sir John
Hawkins knight, the famous Sea-commander in Queen Elizabeth's Reign. Sir
Bartholomew James knight, Lord Mayor. Sir Christopher Draper knight, Lord
Mayor. Sir William Web knight, Lord Mayor. Lady Bennet, daughter of sir
Christopher Draper. Sir Richard Champion knight, Lord Mayor. Sir John Lawson
knight, etc. four of his children. Sir Thomas Blanck knight, Lo. Mayor. Dame
Margaret Blanck, his wife. Sir Cutbert Buckle knight, ancestor to sir
Christopher Buckle knight; and both to Lieut. Col. Buckle of Borough near
Bamsted-downs. Sir Robert Hampson knight. Sir William Curteene knight. Sir
Richard Tate Knight, and an Ambassador from King Hen. 8. Sir John Test, knight
of the holy Sepulcher. Sir Henry Billingsley knight, Lord Mayor. Lady Elizabeth
Billingsley his wife. Sir David Doeringck knight. Lady Mary Heigham, daughter
of sir John Colt. Sir Arthur Savage knight, General of Queen Eliz. her forces
for France. Sir Tho. Mellington Knight. Sir Richard Rice Knight, beheaded on
Tower Hill. Sir John Skevington Knight. Sir Thomas Asseldy Knight, sub-Marshal
of England. Dame Anne Clarke, wife of the now sir Francis Clarke late of
Exeter. Dame Stanly, wife of sir Thomas Stanly, daughter of sir Roger Appleton
Knight-Baronet. Sir James Deane Knight, Lord Mayor. Sir John Radclyffe Knight,
son of the late Robert Earl of Sussex. Dame Anne, wife of sir John Radclyffe.
Sir Richard Haddon Knight, Lord Mayor. Lady Catharine, wife of Alderman
Stoakes. Sir John Lenthal Knight, Knight-Marshal of the Kings Bench; a fair
Table for him and his near relations. Dame Etheldred Reynell, wife of sir
George Reynel, Knight-Marshal, and daughter of Sir Edw. Peacock of Finchly
Knight. Sir Thomas Manners Knight. Sir Thomas Seymour Knight. Sir Thomas Leigh
Knight. Dame Margaret St. John, wife of sir Alexander St. John of Bletsoe. Sir
Thomas Lovel knight of the Garter. Sir John Erlington Knight. Sir George
Hastings Knight, son of the late Lord Hastings. Sir Edmond Osborne Knight, Lord
Mayor. Sir William Portman Knight, Lord Chief Justice of England, one of the
long-lin'd ancestors of the now sir William Portman of Orchard, Baronet, etc.
Sir John Coventry Knight, Lord Mayor. Dame Joane Dethick. Dame Margaret,
daughter of sir Ralph Chenie. Sir Matthew Boynton Baronet. Sir Thomas Blackwel
knight. Sir Matthew Carew of Cornwall Knight, one of the ancestors to George
Carew of Richmond Esquire; and one of his Majesty's Privy Chamber. Sir Roger
Cholmely knight. Sir Ralph Winwood Knight, Secretary of Estate to King James,
and one of the ancestors of Ralph Winwood of Quainton in Buckingham-shire,
Esquire;. Dame Anne Bodily, wife of the late sir Thomas Bodily. Sir Christopher
Wandesford, one of the ancestors to that worthy family of the Wandesfords in
Yorkshire. Sir Richard Mallory Knight, Lord Mayor. Sir William Gerrard, or
Garrard, Knight, Lord Mayor. Sir John Garrard, sir Williams grandchilde. Lady
M. Slanies arms in a window. Sir Thomas Middleton Knight, Lord Mayor. Sir John
Barceter knight. Sir Robert Chamberlain, alias Tankevile, knight of the Bath,
ancestor of that knightly family of the Chamberlains, alias Tankeviles in the
county of Oxford. Dame Anne Littleton, wife of the late sir Edw. Littleton. The
Lady Brown, late wife of the now sir Richard Brown, Knight and Baronet, and
Major General of all the Militia of London. Lady Margaret Talbot. Sir Thomas
Malefant Knight, one of the Barons of the Exchequer. The Lady Adams, wife of
the learned, and true lover of learning, the honorable sir Thomas Adams,
Knight-Baronet, and father of the City, Sir Jasper Cleyton knight, Sheriff,
very anciently of Oakenshaw in the county of York; father of the worthily
honored Sir John Cleyton Knight, and Mr. George Cleyton Mercer of London. Sir
George Garret, Knight and Alderman. Sir John Adler Knight, buried at S.
Gregory's. Sir J. Rumny Knight, buried in S. Magnus Church. Sir Hugh Brawne
knight, etc. Sir Thomas Fowler knight, etc. Sir Thomas Fisher Baronet, ancestor
to the now sir Thomas Fisher of Islington Knight-Baronet. Sir Nicholas Kempe
knight, etc. Lady Sarah Kempe, his wife. Sir Robert Holbourne knight, etc.
Thomas Collins Gent. William Pope Gent. John Pexall Esquire;. Mris Anne Jones. John
Friend. Christopher Rawson. William Collins. Elizabeth Bloss. Nathaniel Snape
Esquire; father of Grays Inn Esquire;. Christopher Gold Esquire;, Peter Wentworth Esquire;
ancestor to Sir Peter Wentworth of Oxfordshire; an ancient Knight of the Bath.
Samuel Payler Esquire;. Mary Payler, his wife. James Ascough Gent. John Agges, one
of the Warders of the Tower. Agnes Bond, wife of the late William Bond, Esquire;.
Mris Anne Andrews. Jacobus Zambone, Agent for the Repub. of Venice. Henry
Polsted Esquire;. Barba Thornix. Hieronymus Benalius. William Armorer of Northumb.
Esquire; Governor to the Pages of Honor of Hen. 8. and ancestor to Sir William and
Sir Nicholas Armorer, Knights, and near kinsmen, Radulphus Darling. Baldwine
Hamey Esquire; M.D. chief Physician to the great Duke of Muscovia, and father to
the most eminently learned, and exemplarily liberal, Dr. Baldwin Hamey M.D.
C.L. Roger Hatton Esquire; Alderman. Frances Goldsmith, daughter of Sir Francis
Appleton Knight and Baronet. Nicholas Bremisgrave Armig. Francis Covell Gent.
Catharine Covell his wife. Thomas Vyrby. William Roberts. Tho. Catayii.
Johannes Bacon. John Burnel. Mary Burnel. Elizabeth Denham, wife of William
Denham, Merchant of the Staple. George Snayth Esquire;. William Thin Esquire;.
Johannes Tull. Roger Jones. Francis Cherry. Philip Dennis Esquire;. William
Tilling. William Robinson Alderman. Mris Jane Russel, of the Privy Chamber to
Queen Elizabeth. Mris Constance Lucie. Jar. Martun Gent. Henricus Nowellus.
Mris Judith Megges, wife of William Meggs, Esquire;. William Meggs Esquire; father of
William Meggs of London Esquire; and Dr. James Meggs Doctor of Divinity, etc.
Constance Alford. Mary Evans, wife to Phil. Evans. John Rosse Draper. John
Hassal Gent son of the late Dr. Hassal, Chaplain to the Queen of Bohemia.
Abigail Jones. John Carre. Samuel Saunders. John Kant. Susanna Duke. Susan
Bennet, wife of Roger Bennet. Rob. Tailor de Sylverdail, Esquire;. David Belgay, or
Balgay, Esquire;. Alice Carpenter. Robert Dove Esquire;. Richard Belliniam of
Erringham, Esquire;. John Tiril Esquire;. Henry Tutchin Esquire; Deputy of his Ward. Hugo
Wickstead. Hester Essington, daughter of Mr. William Essington, Merchant.
Robert Cocks Citizen. Johannes Redman, Rector of S. Botolphs Bishops-gate.
Georgius Brigges Armig. Capitaneus. William Bond Esquire, Sheriff and Alderman
of London. Captain Martin Bond his son; both immediate ancestors to the most
obliging William Bond Esquire; and Alderman of London, now living. Thomas Gresham
Esquire; son of the famous Sir Thomas Gresham Knight. Adam Lawrence Gent. Merchant,
Nephew to the honorable Sir John Lawrence, Knight and Baronet, etc. Joane de
Bovehii. Edward Martin. Gulielmus Bently. Abrahamus Aurelius. Johannes
Wartenis. William Kerwin Citizen. Valentine Moretoft Esquire;. John Suzan. Walter
Briggin. John Robinson Merchant. Christian Robinson his wife. Cornelius
Linckebeck a Dutch Merchant. Owen Saimpeire. Richard Staper Esquire; Alderman, and
a memorable Merchant. Captain Lewis Roberts. Johannes Dreux, Doctor of
Divinity. Clemence Langley, wife of Richard Langley. Robert Pincen, Draper. Mr.
William Vincent his children. Christopher Tolderney, Armig. John Graffan,
Grocer. Mr Hawes. Mris Rebecca Crispe, wife of the late Sir Nicholas Crispe,
etc. Thomas Walker, Vintner. Elizaheth Thomas. Mris Caecilia Ashford, of the
county of Devon. Nathaniel Temnes, Esquire; Alderman. Richard Nordell. John Shute,
Architect. Mr. (...) Hawes, Watchmaker. Robert Montague, Esquire;. Gilbert Melites.
Christian Melites. Francis Barneham Esquire; Sheriff. Benedict Barneham, Esquire;
ancestor to the now Sir Robert Barneham of Boughton in Kent, Baronet, etc.
Randal Manning, Esquire;. Eartholomew Barnes, Esquire;. Walter Plummer, Esquire;. Johannes
Rogers. Thomas Southwel, Esquire;. Rogerus Fenton, Armig. Johannes Dunstable, idem.
Edoardus Lupton, idem. Oliver Style, Esquire; Alderman, of that spreading and
Knightly family of the Styles in Kent. John Kirby, Gent. John Scot of Hawlden
in Kent, Esquire;. John Ailworth, Grocer. Johannes Saxton. Thomas Iken, Armig.
Susan Lewen. John Kirby. John Norton, Esquire;. William Cavendish, Esquire; Sheriff.
Humphry Baskervile, Esquire; Sheriff. John Rich, Esquire; son of Richard Rich, both
Sheriffs and Aldermen. Brown and Fishbourne. John Barnes, Mercer and Mayor.
John Hawley, Mercer and Mayor. James Huish, Gent. Mary Muffet, his wife. Anne
Nevet, wife of Mr. Ed. Nevet of Cony-hatch in the County of Middlesex, Gent.
Edward Hall of Grays Inn, Esquire; that compiled the Chronicle, etc. Anne Farrar,
daughter of William Shephard of great Rowbright. Mris Catharine Prettiman. Mris
Catherine Philips, the great Sappho of our age. John Gloucester, Esquire; Alderman.
Richard Randal. Johannes Sugar Piscenarius. Bernard Randolph, Esquire;
City-Sergeant. Herbert Randolph, Esquire; Gulielmus Drury, Doctor of Laws, and
Judge of the Prerogative-court. Margaret Snell. Captain Halsey, etc. George
Coleman, Armig. Alice Coleman, his wife, and daughter of George Gainsford, Esquire;
son of Sir John Gainsford of Crowhurst, Knight. R. Wilcox, Esquire;. Richard
Woodroffe, Merchant-Taylor. Mary Sandys, wife of Thomas Sandys, Esquire;. Johannes
de Rothing, a great Benefactor to, if not Builder of Queenhithe. Walter Neale,
Esquire; Sheriff anno 1352. Richard de Lion, Armig. Sheriff. Richard Plat, Esquire;
Sheriff, ancestor to that worthy family of the Plats now living. Edmund
Chapman, Esquire; servant to Queen Elizabeth. Jasper Draper, Esquire; Alderman. Gerrard
Gore, Esquire;. Judge Philip Jermin Susanna le Porce. John Foy. Thomas Cornwallis
Esquire; Sheriff. Petrus de la Genebra. William Stokesby. John Micolt, or Mico,
Gent. Radolphus Astry, Esquire;. Henry Wilson, Master of the Bridge-house. Henry
Billidge, Silk-dyer. Richardus Hill, Master of the Wine-cellar to H 8. Richard
Farrington, or Farringdon, Alderman. Dr John Dove, Doctor of Divinity,
sometimes Rector of S. Mary Aldermanbury, and ancestor to the much worthy John
Dove of Grays Inn, I.C. now living. Ralph Holland Esquire;. Sheriff. John Narberry
Esquire; Judge of South Wales, father to Mr George and Mr John Norberry, etc.
Richard Chaucer, Vintner, father to Sir Geoffry Chaucer. Dr William Harvey,
M.D. the famous Physician of his time. William Tailor Esquire; Sheriff. John
Pluckenett, Merchant-Taylor. John Wells, a memorable Citizen. Symond Street.
William Dauntsey Esquire; Alderman, one of the ancestors of Sir John Dauntsey of
Laverstock in the County of Wilts. Ade de Buck. Richard Lambert. Humphry
Walcot, Esquire; ancestor to the flourishing family of the Walcots of Walcot in the
County of Salop. Philemon Holland, of the same family as Dr Philemon Holland of
Coventry, M.D. Robert Blanckworth. Edmond Crich, Esquire;. Edmond Crich, filius.
Edward Allen, Esquire; Sheriff, Alderman, one of the ancestors of the honorable
Sir Thomas Allen of Finchly, Knight; and one of the Knights of the Shire for
the County of Middlesex. Augustine Hind, Esquire;. Henry Prannel, Esquire; Sheriff.
William Alkin. Gilbert Errington, Armig. Edward Cropley Esquire; Alderman, and
ancestor of the honorable Sir John Cropley, Knight and Baronet. John Banks,
Esquire; Alderman, Deputy of Basing-Hall-Ward. John Dogget, Esquire; Sheriff, Alderman.
William de Avenger. Lancelot Bathurst Esquire; Alderman, and ancestor to Edward
Bathurst, Esquire; and Alderman, now living. John West, Esquire;. Francis Bowyer of
Chichester, Esquire; Alderman. John Hall, Draper. Carolus Hawkins, Armig. Mris
Elizabeth Hussy. Johannes Cooper, Armig. Thomas Marks. William Mess. Thomas
Westrop, or Westrow. Mris Judith Fowler. John Tailor, Draper. Alexander
Evering. Francis Bennenson. Mary Caldwel. Hugh Dawset. Robert Barnes. Thomas
Roberts. John Trygon, Esquire; Merchant. John Kendrick, a most memorable Citizen.
Thomas Pike, Alderman. Richard Crashaw, Goldsmith. William Drew. John Lemot,
Esquire; Alderman. Dr Thomas Harriot, Doctor of Divinity. Peter Tryon, Esquire;
ancestor to Sir Peter Tryon of South-Halsted in the county of Essex, Knight-B.
Henry Beecher Esquire; Alderman, one of the ancestors to that worthy family of the
Beechers in the County of Bedford. Margaret Hill, wife of Dr Hill, Doctor of
Divinity. Walter Knight of Canterbury, Gent. John Lucas of S. John's near
Colchester, Esquire; one of the ancestors of the Lord Lucas. William Cockaine, Esquire;
one of the ancestors to the now Lord Cockaine. Mris Mary Harvie, wife of the
late Eliab Harvie, Esquire; and both father and mother of the now Sir Eliab Harvie,
Knight-B. Henricus Brown, a memorable Merchant. Dr Rich. Holdsworth, Dean of
Worcester, his Tomb rebuilt by that great lover of religious and learned men,
the honorable Sir Thomas Rich of Berks, Knight and Baronet. Robert VVadeson,
Armig. Edmond Hammond, Esquire;. Mris Anne Loker. Humphry VValcot, Esquire;. Thomas
Calvert, Citizen and Merchant-Taylor. William Chapman, Citizen and Merchant.
Willielmus Philips. James Dagger. Dr James Halsey, Doctor of Divinity.
Christopher St. German, Doctor and Student in Divinity. William Edwards,
servant to three memorable Princes, and father of the now Mr Will. Edwards,
servant likewise to Charles 2. the grand Successor of those three Princes.
Anthony Messenger. Barn Roberts, Esquire; ancestor to the late Sir William
Roberts; and both to the worthily honored Sir William Roberts, very anciently
of Wilsden in the County of Middlesex, Baronet, etc. John Tailor, Esquire; a
memorable person in his time. Philippus Pasque, Esquire; one of the ancestors of
the most eminently learned, the late Dr Pasque. George Golding, Esquire;. Lady Anne
White. George Skevington, Esquire;. Agnes Dart. Samuel Aldersey. John Lupsel. John
Dimmock, Esquire;. Christian Towerson. Nicholas Style, Alderman, of the family of
the Styles's in Kent. Serjeant-Major Killigrew. Robertus Jermin de Rushbrook
Armig. Robert Offley, son of Hugh Offley, Alderman. Thomas Digges, Esquire;. Thomas
Digges, Esquire; both of the ancestors of that very ancient and Knightly family of
the Digges's in Kent. John Constantine, Esquire; ancestor to William Constantine of
Dorset, Esquire; and one of the Benchers of the Middle Temple. Ralph Woodcock,
Alderman of London. Mary Brigges. David Brigges, Esquire; Sheriff, ancestor to
William Brigges of Rickmersworth, Esquire;. Gerrard Gore, Esquire; Alderman. Thomas
Henshaw, Esquire; Captain, ancestor to the much accomplished Thomas Henshaw of
Kensington, Esquire;. Thomas a Kelsy, ancestor to the late Colonel Kelsy, sometimes
Governor of Dover. Osbert Moundford, or Mountfort. Robert Moundford, or
Mountfort, ancestor by the maternal line to Sir John Brampston, Knight of the
Bath; and Sir Mountford Brampston, one of the Masters of Chancery. Mris
Francisca Rudierd, of that ancient family of the Rudierds in the County of
Hants. Mary Collet, of the family of Sir Henry Collet, Knight. Francis
Waterhouse, Esquire; and Bridget his wife; father and mother of the worthily
honored Edward Waterhouse of Greenford in the County of Middlesex, Esquire;. Mary
Waterhouse, wife of the last Edward Waterhouse of Greenford in the county of
Middlesex, Esquire;. Hugh Waterhouse and Edward, their sons. Dame Mary Swift, wife
of Sir Francis Swift of Nasing in the county of Essex, Knight; daughter of the
abovesaid Francis Waterhouse, Esquire; and Bridget his wife. William Dunthorne,
Town Clerk of London. Thomas Shelly, Esquire; one of that honorable family of Sir
Charles Shelly in the County of Sussex. Lauwrence Gibson, Esquire;. Anne Gibson,
his wife. John Blount, Citizen. Nicholas Warren, Genesis William Harvie, Genesis
Robert Harvie, Comptroller of the Custom-house. Johannes Burton, Armig.
Richardus Wilbraham, Esquire; Common Sergeant of the City of London, and ancestor
to that worthy family of the Wilbrahams in Cheshire. Richard Sarich, Doctor of
Divinity. Gulielmus Christmas, Armig. and Alderman, ancestor to the worthy
William Christmas Esquire; now living. John Bannister, Esquire; of the late Sir Ed.
Bannisters family. Rebecca King, wife of Mr. William King, late Rector of S.
Olave Silver-street, etc. CHARLES the First, of most blessed memory, his
Epitaph. George Tapsfeild, Gent. John Elliot. Ellinor Clarke. Randal Pickering.
John Slanie, and Humphry Slanie, their arms in the window of S. Martins
Ironmonger-lane. Lady Rumny, wife of Sir J. Rumny, Knight. Richardus
Chamberlayne, Generosus. Robertus Large, idem. Robertus Cambel, Esquire; Alderman,
son of Sir Thomas, father of the late Sir James Cambel. Robert Bowyer, Esquire;
Alderman, very anciently of Knipersly; ancestor to Sir William Bowyer of Denham
in the County of Buckingham, Knight, and of Sir Edmund Bowyer originally of
Sussex, now of Camberwel in the County of Surrey, Knight-Baronet, and Knight of
the Shire. Thomas Morstead, Esquire; Sheriff. Richard Piot, Esquire; Alderman, ancestor
to that well-reputed family of the Piots in Hertfordshire. Guliel. Haliday,
Esquire; Alderman. Mris Anne Barker. Lady Elizabeth Ingram, wife of Sir Arthur
Ingram Knight, and Merchant of London. Rowland Wilson, Esquire; Alderman. Sir John
VVatts, Knight, one of the ancestors of the honorable Sir John Wats in the
county of Hertf. Knight and Colonel, etc. Edmund White, a memorable Citizen.
Thomas Dalby, Mercer. John Fox, Citizen and Goldsmith. Cecilia Cleyton.
Frances Waller, daughter of the late Thomas Waller of Beconsfeild, Esquire; and
wife of the late Dr. William Boswel, Doctor of Divinity. Thomas Lekimpton,
Esquire;. John Herenden, Esquire;. Edmund Herenden, Esquire;. Edmund Herenden, Gent.
Stephen Brackenberry, Gent. Johannes Pemberton, Genesis Francis Spencer, idem.
Johannes Bill, Armig. father to Sergeant-Major Bill of Cainwood, etc. Gideon de
Lawne, Esquire; ancestor of the now Sir Gideon de Lawne. Dr William Gouge, S.T.D.
a most memorable Divine, father of Mr Thomas Gouge late Rector of S.
Sepulchers, and Dr Gouge, Physician. Mr Morehead, Genesis Edmund Symes, eldest son
of Edmund Symes. Col. Charles Fleetwood's Ladies Funeral-Scutcheons. Thomas
Adys, Goldsmith. John Sutton, Esquire; Alderman. Johannes Hewit of London, Armig.
John Greenwood, Painter-Stainer. Thomas Randolph, Genesis Johannes Francis. Drugo
Barantine. William Midgely of Staple-Inne, Genesis Clerk of the Judgments under
the worthily honored Thomas Robinson, Esquire; and chief Prothonotary of the
Common Pleas, etc. Edward Franck, Esquire;. William Franck, Esquire;. Johannes
Nowellus, Arm. M.D. Jerimoth Drax, Joseph Drax, Mary Drax, Bamfeild Drax,
Alexander Drax,
Children of the late old Sir James Drax, Knight, etc. Mary Drax, Niece of old
Sir James Drax, and wife of Hugh Frankland of Staple-Inne, Gent. of the ancient
family of the Franklands of Oldwark in the County of York. Peter Strelly, Civis
and Aurifaber. Mris Mary Charleton. Nicholas Beaumont, Esquire;. Johannes Clapham,
Generos. Johannes Clapham, filius. Walterus Haddon, Master of the Requests to
Qu. Eliz. Mr (...) Waddington, Schoolmaster of Christ-Church. Mr. (...) Haynes,
Schoolmaster of Christ-Church. Robert Rogers, Gent. Ralph Smith. Ludovicus
Williams Venedocus. William Drew. Gamaliel Pie, Esquire; ancestor to the now Sir
Edmond Pie, Knight. Margaret Hussy. Dr Samuel Price, S.T.D. John Tredway. Mris
Jone Goldsmith. Radolphus Widdrington. Anne Phillis Faldo. Humphry Barret. John
Langham, Esquire;. Robert Marsh. Dr William Fuller, Dean of Durham, and father of
the now Lady Jane Walton, widow of the famous Brian Walton, late Bishop of
Chester. Martha Prescot, late wife of Alexander Prescot, Alderman. John Brown,
Serjeant-Painter to Hen. 8. and Alderman of London. Robert South, Esquire; and
Goldsmith, etc. Johannes Longstone, or Langston. William Milburne, Sheriff and
Alderman of London. Agnes Milburne, his wife. Mris Jodosa Frankland, a good
Benefactress to Brazennose-Colledge, and a near ally to Mr Frankland, one of
the senior Fellows of Brazen-nose, and late Proctor of the University of
Oxford. Robertus Trappes, Arm. Robert Bursted. Christopher Wase, Goldsmith, one
of the ancestors to that eminently learned Mr Christopher Wase, S.T.B. and
Schoolmaster of the Free School of Tunbridge. Edward Kinnaston, Esquire;. Robert
Tichbourne, Esquire; father of the now Robert Tichbourne, late Sheriff, Alderman,
and Lord Mayor of London. William Dilkes, Citizen, and Nephew to William Dilks,
servant to the Duke of Buckingham. Johannes Battle. Robert Brett. Edward Wiat,
Armig. Richardus Warner. Richardus Coxe. Dr John Barwick, Dean of S. Paul's. Dr
Mark Frank, Archdeacon of S. Albans. Petrus Osborne, Armig. (...) Berkenhead,
Esquire;. Thomas Bedding field, Esquire; son and heir of Sir Thomas Beddingfeild,
Knight. Arthur Medlycot of Salop, Esquire; ancestor to Tho. Medlycot of the Middle
Temple, Esquire; and Edmond Medlycot of White Hall, his brother, etc. Mris Alicia
Primerose. Thomas Redman, Proctor of the Arches. Arthur Blackmore,
Painter-Stainer, or Arms-Painter, son of Capt. Ralph Blackmore Mercer, and
sometimes Pro-Governour of Berwick. Mris Eliz. Sewil, wife of Robert Sewil of
London, Esquire;. Col. Thomas Nevil his Lady, and other near relations. Peter
Bradshaw, Esquire; ancestor to Mr Francis Bradshaw, late Draper of London, etc.
Guliel. Huse, Armig. Antonius Huse, Armig. Florence Caldwel, Esquire;. Eliz.
Mennel, of that ancient family of the Mennels in the County of Derby, daughter
of Mr Menel, and niece of Alderman Mennel, etc. Thomas Cook. William Yeardly.
Jasper Cholmely. Thomas Antrobus. Amy Adlyn, or Edlyn. Dr Gouldston de
Wymondham, M.D. a memorable Physician. John Ley, Esquire;. Johannes Barnard. Helias
Jones. Hen. Long, Esquire;. William Nicholson, Esquire;. Dom. de Hatfeild. Maria
Martin. Anthony Jocelyn, Esquire; and Christopher Marsh, Esquire; both menial servants
to the Right honorable the Lady Dowager of Dorset and Pembroke. David Smith,
Esquire; Embroyderer to Qu. Eliz. William Smith, Esquire; Alderman, his son. James
Austin, Esquire; ancestor to William Austin, formerly of Lincolns Inn, Esquire; and
both ancestors to Sir James Austin of the County of Surrey, Knight, etc.
Ignatius Jones, Esquire;. John Askough, Citizen and Grocer, husband to Mris Alice
Askough now living. Edward Norgate, Esquire;. Ellis Hilton, Esquire;. Mr Sampson,
Embroyderer. John Parce, Genesis Griffith Lloyd, Doctor of the Civil Law. John
Philipot, Esquire; Somerset-Herald, and father of that learned Antiquary, Scholar
and Herald, Tho. Philipot Esquire;. now living. Thomas Clivelod. Ellis Crispe, wife
of the late Ellis Crispe, Alderman; father and mother to the honorable Sir
Nich. Chispe deceased. Roger Ford. John Ireland, Esquire;. Richard Stock, a most
memorable Divine, and long Rector of Alhallows Breadstreet. William Robson,
Salter, a worthy Benefactor to the Poor. Henry Suckly; Esquire; Sheriff of London;
ancestor of Ralph Suckly Esquire; one of the Proctors of the high Court of
Admiralty. William Albany, Esquire;. Thomas Beaumond, or Beanmont. Robert Mellish.
Robert Hulston. John Dunstarre. Lieutenant Colonel John Lane Armig. father of
John Lane whole-sale-Grocer. Leonard Smith. Dorothy Harby. William Sandhill.
Thomas Haslefoot, Vintner. Mr. Capwood. Mr. Mosely. Robert Bows. Henry
Wellens. Richardus Sturges. Henry Blitheman. Alderman Lewen. Agnes Lewen, his
wife. Thomas Burton. Walter Timberlack. Elizabeth Timberlack. Elizabeth Acton.
Robert Chichely, Esquire; one of the ancestors of the worthily honored Henry
Chichely, Esquire; etc. Richard Randal. Anthony Cage. Gaius Newman, father of (...)
Anne Middleton. John Pert. Metcalf Allington. William Dane, Alderman and
Sheriff, ancestor to (...) Alice Daniel. John Harper. William Robinson, of the
county of Gloucester, Esquire; father-in-law to the Lady Mico now living. William
Beswick, Alderman. Sir John Poultney, Esquire; Sheriff, Alderman, and one of the
founders of S. Lawrence Poultney's Church. Hester Mountney. Daniel Harvie of
Folkston in the county of Kent, Esquire; father of the honorable Sir Daniel Harvie
of Surry, Knight and Baronet, etc. John Nelson, son of John Nelson, Merchant.
William Cromer. Robert Cosyn, Esquire;. Wilburgis Gretsyin. R. Moore, Esquire;. John
Franck, Esquire;. Johannes Shaw, Armig. Robert VVithins, Armig. Alderman and
Sheriff. Francis VVithins, Esquire; his son. Richard Gurney, Armig. VVilielmus
Litchfeild. Johannes Brickles. Francis Goldsmith. John Chamberlayne. Humphry
Clark, Esquire; Deputy of Alhallows Ward, and father of Humphry Clark of the M.
Temple. John Coulson. Deputy Green. Dr. Reginald West, S.T.D. Thomas Gelson.
Robert Holt, Esquire; Alderman of London. Alexander Holt, Esquire; Alderman of London;
both of them very anciently of that memorable family of the Holts of
Grizlehurst in the county of Lancaster; and both ancestors to Alexander Holt,
Esquire; and Alderman, yet living. Richard Glover. Richard Cambden, Genesis Eliz.
Freeman. Robert Cheslyn, Alderman. Robert Cheslyn, a Divine, his son. Johannes
a Moore. Jane Abraham. Anna Saris. Theophilus Biddolph, son of Sir Theophilus
Biddolph Knight and Baronet. William Rainwel. John Rainwel. Mris Chatterton,
wife of Mr. Chatterton of Pater-nosterrow. George Clint. Antonius Abdy, Armig
ancestor to Sir Robert Abdy, and Sir Thomas Abdy, both of Essex, Knights Ba.
Humphry Turner. Margaret Turner. Nicholas de Na le. John Stow, the Cities
Chronologer. Simon Burton. Alice Coldock, or Bing. James Hills. Dr Henry Man,
Doctor of Divinity. Joane Cartwright. Mris Dorothy Greswold. Edward Warner,
Esquire;. Philip Malpas Esquire;. Sheriff of London. Hugh Offley, Esquire; and Sheriff. Mr.
John Smith. Johannes Tovie. Bartholomew Ettenor. Thomas Viner, Esquire; son of the
late Sir Thomas, and brother of Sir George Viner, Knight, etc. Frances Cook,
wife of Paulus Ambrosius Cook. Roger Marshal, Esquire;. Alice Gilbourne.
Christophorus Newman. Edward Jackman, Esquire; Sheriff of London. Lady Eliz.
Ingram, wife of Sir Arthur Ingram, Knight, and Merchant of London. Mris Anne
Horton, wife of Mr Thomas Horton. Mris Gunston, sister of Serjeant-Major
Gunston. Robert Middleton, Esquire;. Robert Bateman Esquire; Chamberlain of London, and
ancestor to Richard Bateman, Esquire; Sir Anthony, Sir William Bateman, Knights;
and Sir Thomas Bateman, Baronet; all four brothers. Bernard Hide of Boreplace
in the county of Kent, Esquire; ancestor to the worthily honored Sir Bernard Hide
of Kent, Knight-B. Hester Hide, wife of the said Bernard. James Young, Esquire; an
eminent Eastland Merchant. James Keyte, Armig. ancestor to the worthily
honored Sir Jonathan Keyte of the County of Hertf. Knight-B. Henry Hewit,
Esquire;. Mr. Woodroffe, Gent. Thomas Russel, Esquire; husband of the Lady Waterman,
now wife of Sir George Waterman, Knight-B. Henry Heardsman, Alderman. James
Bacon, Alderman. Samuel Reynolds. Mris Sarah Forth, wife of the worthy Mr. Hugh
Forth, Merchant, etc. Margaret Bailey, or Reynolds. Richard Wyche. William Page,
Apothecary, a person very memorable. Richard Hackney, Sheriff. Robert VVood,
Esquire; Deputy of Billings-gate Ward, father of William Wood, Esquire; now living.
Mris Alicia Farwell, wife of Philip Farwell. Mris Bewly, wife of Thomas Bewly of
Hall-place in the county of Kent, Gent. Mr Thomas Bewly, late of Grays Inn,
their son. Em. Charleton. John Munne, Merchant. Christopher Holt, Esquire;. Thomas
Chamberlayne, M.D. Mary Moss. John Element, Merchant-taylor. Sarah Manning.
Eliz. Clarke, wife of Henry Clark, Draper. Brian Vere. Henry Web, Esquire;
Gentlemanusher to H. 8. Lucius Lucas, an eminent Merchant. Robertus Thacker.
Jonas a Weely of Amsterdam. Charity Cotton, wife of Geo. Cotton, Esquire;. Mris
Barnes, a great Benefactress. Georgius Christophorus Osterhausen. Richard
Isaacson, Esquire;. Thomas Derham, son of Thomas Derham of Derham-Grange. Jane
Hartly. William Greensmith. Capt. James Birkdel. George Smithes. Lionel
Mellington, son of Sir Robert Mellington. Tho. Curtesius, Armig. Emanuel de
Meteren. Katherine Woodward, widow. John Hewit. Mris Ingram. Dr Peter Turner,
M.D. James Stoddard, Esquire; ancestor of George Stoddard, Esquire; father of the late
Sir Nicholas Stoddard of Kent, Knight, etc. Philippus Wylander. John Highlord,
Esquire; Alderman. Thomas Beckenham, Esquire;. Ferdinando Alvarez, Mercator eminens.
George Watts. Tho. Burnel. Richard Cely. Johannes Goure, Prince of Poets in his
time, and ancestor to that most ancient and eminent family of the Goures of
Stitinham in the county of York. Johannes Mourton. William Austin, Esquire; father
of Sir James Austin of Surrey, Knight; and William Austin of Grays Inn, Esquire;.
Peter Humble, Gent. Tho. Cure, Esquire; Great grandfather to A. Cure of the Inner
Temple, Esquire;. John Bingham, Esquire;. John Symons, Citizen. John Trehearne,
Gentlemanporter to King James. Mris Margaret Maynard. Mary Fisher, wife of
Pain Fisher, and daughter of Sir Tho. Neale, and the Lady Eliz. Freke; mother
of Major Pain Fisher now living, Author of this Collection. Richardus
Benefield, Esquire;. William Emmerson. Samuel Popular. Anne Warcup. Mary Bareford,
with several children of Mr Jonathan Bareford. Dorothea Howard. Mark Proudfoot.
Richard Wood. Jeremy Smith. John Gawen. Samuel Win. John Cook. John Hayman.
Joseph Collier. George Buggins. Robert Chilcot. John Garrard. John Sturton,
Esquire;. William Ward. Richard Drawer. Edw. Ball. Robert Benson. Thomas Malledge.
Johannes Thomas. John Eston, Esquire;. Robert Fairford. Richard Philip. John
Nichols. Barbara Thomasin. Capt. Thomas Sparling. Col. Thomson's Ladies
Escutcheon. George Rooks. Matthew Clark. William Evans. James Savage. Johannes
Jones, Armig. William Hobson, son of Doctor William Hobson. Susanna Jones.
Francis Rudierd. Margaret Derham. Elizabeth Boyd. William Aldridge. Captain
Randal Moulton, husband of Rebecca Moulton, third son of the famous Captain
Robert Moulton, Sometimes Vice Admiral of England, etc. and younger brother of
the yet-living and valiant Captain Robert Moulton, now in his Majesty's
service. Thomas Austen, Esquire; a memorable Citizen. John Austen, Esquire; Thomas
Austen, Esquire; his sons; two hopeful Gentlemen, lately of Lincolns Inn. Mris
Jane Hansly. Georgius Gippe, Esquire; one of the Judges in the Sheriffs Court. Sir
Thomas Seymour, Knight, Lord Mayor. Sir Humphry Starky, Knight, Lord Chief
Baron of the Exchequer. Sir Rivet Eldred, Knight, a memorable Merchant, and
husband of that nobly virtuous Dame Anne Eldred, daughter of Mr John Blackwel
of Hornidge in the county of Salop William Cavendish, Esquire; one of the ancestors
of the Illustrious William Cavendish, Duke, Marquis, and Earl of Newcastle. Sir
Richard Fen, Knight, Lord Mayor, Grandfather to the worthy Richard Fen of
Hallplace (in Hurly-parish) in the county of Berks, Esquire;. Sir Richard Gurney,
Knight, Lord Mayor, whose two daughters (Coheirs) were married to the Right
Honorable the Lord Richardson, and Sir John Pettus, etc. Sir William Bailey,
Knight, Lord Mayor. Sir Stephen Peacock, Knight, Lord Mayor, ancestor to the
Knightly family of the Peacocks in Middlesex, whereof Richard Peacock of that
delicate seat of Finchly, Esquire; is present proprietor. Mris Anne Leighe.
Katharine Lively. Theodosia Vavesour. Mr John Weaver, that writ the Acts and
Monuments. Mr Justice Long. William Knightly, Esquire;. Mris Frances White. Mris
Anne Blount. William Dallison, Esquire;. Mr Edward Vaughan. Rogerus Wood, Sergeant
at Arms. Francis Butler. John Palmer of Clerkenwel, Esquire;. Dudly Palmer of Grays
Inn, Esquire; his Grandchilde. Elizabeth Crofts. William Wandesford of Pickhill in
the county of York, Esquire;. Edward Cropley, Esquire; son of the honorable Sir John
Cropley, Knight-Baronet. Jorden Briset, Founder of Clerkenwel-Priory. Elizabeth
Trotman, wife of Samuel Trotman of the Inner Temple, Esquire;. Edward Vaughan,
Master of Arts, etc. Thomas Sutton, Esquire; Founder of that famous Society of the
Charter House. John Laws, Esquire; Executor of Thomas Sutton. Francis Beaumont,
Esquire; sometimes Governor of the Charter House. James Bunce, Esquire; father of the
honorable Sir James Bunce, Knight and Baronet, etc. John Raynie, Esquire; ancestor
of the now Sir John Raynie of Wrothan in the County of Kent, Baronet. Henry
Den, Esquire;. Mris Jane Adams, wife of Thomas Adams of Batersea, Esquire;. Ambrose
Jennings, Ironmonger. Johannes de Coggeshal, a most famous Citizen. Mr Sybals,
son of the learned and much-obliging Dr Sybals, D.D. late of Clerkenwel.
Johannes Dogget, Sheriff. Christophorus Southouse, Registarrius Curiae Cant.
ancestor to the Southouses of Kent. Vrsula Besiney, daughter of Nicholas
Bestney, Esquire;. Henry Weldon, second son of Ralph Weldon of Swanscomb in Kent,
Esquire;. Eliz. Fasselts, widow. Mr. Lamb, founder of S. James Chapel in the Wall,
etc. Robert Glover, Armig. Somerset-Herald, Grandfather by the mothers side to
Thomas Philipot of Southend in Kent, Esquire;. Thomas Busby, Citizen, and a good
Benefactor. George Chute, Esquire; Standardbearer to H. 8. at Bulloigne, and
ancestor to that Knightly family of the Chutes in Kent. Richard Roper. Edward
Harvist, Genesis Charles Langley, idem. Matthew Palmer senior, Esquire;. Matthew
Palmer, his Grandchilde, Esquire;. Sarah Gooderick, daughter to Sir William
Bodenham, Knight. Constance Whitney, daughter of Sir Robert Whitney of Whitney
in the county of Hertford, Knight, etc. Johannes Fox, Martyrologus Anglicanus.
Richard Western. Katherine Bennet. Captain Biller's two daughters. Colonel
John Dove, father of John Dove of Sarum, Esquire;. Richard Bullen, or Bollen. Henry
Gifford, Genesis Robert Crowly, Vicar of Cripple-gate. Johannes Speed,
Chronologer, Grandfather of Mr Samuel Speed of Fleetstreet, Bookseller. Susanna
Speed, wife of the said John Speed. William Stapley, Armig. Mris Eliz. Smith,
wife of that religious and learned man, and lover of religious and learned men,
Mr Richard Smith of Moor-fields, Genesis and sometimes Secondary of the
Poultry-Counter. Johannes Hawly, Armig. Mr Hen. Colbron. Robertus Cage, Armig.
Mris Rose Hitchings. Mris Jane Smith, wife of John Smith of Bunhill, Esquire; etc.
Mris Ellen Monyns, Mris Frances Monyns;
Daughters of Sir William Monyns of Kent, Baronet. Thomas Ravenscroft, Gent.
Margaret Lucie, daughter of Sir Thomas Lucie of Charlecot, Knight. Mris
Elizabeth Ashton. James Glasbrook, Esquire;. Anne Branch. Richard Downs. Johannes
Buckley. John Milson. Mris Margaret Litchervet. William Purde. Peter Swift.
Johannes Cotton, Armig. Johannes Southerton, Armig. Thomas Gillet, Gent.
Francis Smith. Mris Jane Duck, daughter of the late Dr Duck. Maria Wotton, of
the noble family of the Wottons of Kent. Guil. Mill, Armig. Johannes Mill,
filius. Pearce Edgecombe of Mount-Edgecombe, Esquire;. Michael Crud, Theologus.
Mris Elizabeth Westfeild, wife of Dr Thomas Westfeild, Bishop of Bristol.
Barbara Bradberry. Christophorus Tameworth, Esquire; Percival Smalpace, Esquire;.
Johannes Morley, Esquire;. Elizabeth Wotton. Francis Southerton. Thomas Goodwine.
Thomas Greek. Thomas Neale, son of Sir Thomas Neale, Knight, etc. Susanna Lion.
Judith Plat, daughter of Sir Hugh Plat, Knight. Thomas Sparrow, Esquire;. Mris
Sarah Stirrup, wife of Nathaniel Stirrup, Esquire;. Sir Clement Scudamour, Knight. Lord
Mayor; a branch of that flourishing and noble family of the Scudamours in the
County of Hereford. James Kinnon. Edward Stephens. Serjeant-Major Alsop. John
Trevor, Esquire;. Randolph Trevor, Esquire;. R. Trussel, Gent. one of the ancestors of
the honorable Colonel Trussel, sometimes of Paternoster Row. Richard
Alington, Esquire; Master of the Rolls. Dr John Young, Dean of York, Master of the
Rolls. Dom. Rahere, first founder and Prior of great S. Bartholomews. Captain
John Millet, Mariner. Antonius Low, Esquire;. Eilis Young, Esquire;. Edward Cook,
Esquire;. Percilanus Smalpace, Armig. Dr Francis Antony, M.D. Eliz. Freshwale. John
Orme. Nicholas Orme. Abigal Colt. Mris Mary Pit. James Rivers, Esquire;. William
Boulton, the last Prior of great S. Bartholomews. Guil. Hone. William Baker.
Robert Balthorp, Esquire;. John Shirly, Esquire;. Petrus Toutevile, Armig. Anne
VVestwick. Francis Eagles field. Richardus Ley. Johannes Dury. Walter Insham.
Ellinor Insham. Richard Shipley. Johannes Pindar. Mary Peisly. Sir Robert
Peake, Knight and Colonel, sometimes Governor of Basing-house, buried lately
in S. Sepulchers, contiguous to, or else in the selfsame grave of Jasper
Churchill, Gent. descended from that ancient family of the Churchills in the
West, and father of the worthily honored John Churchill of Churchill, Esquire; one
of the Seniors of Lincolns Inn; and also of Mr Jasper Churchill, Goldsmith,
with his brother Thomas. John Frampton, Esquire; of that ancient family of the
Framptons of Upway in the county of Dorset; and ancestor to Mr John Frampton of
S. Martins lane in the fields. Richard Sturgeon. William Marks. John Randal,
City-Plummer. Samuel Cartwright. Guil. Freshwater. Lawrence Dalton, Esquire;
Jurisconsultus. Cutbert Fetherston, one of the ancestors of the worthily
honored Sir Heneage Fetherston, Baronet, etc. now living. Nicholas Hare, Esquire;
originally from France, brother to the Right Honorable Hugh Hare, Baron of
Colerain, etc. Thomas Brook, Esquire;. Rosamond Nevil. John Lingham, Esquire;.
Richardus Mardon. Laurentius Bartlet. Guil. Morecroft, Esquire;. John Horspool.
John Pope of Cliffords Inn. Gerrard Leigh, Esquire;. Rosamond Wright. William
Crouch. Edward Cordwel. Thomas Valence, Esquire; J.C. of Lincolns Inn. Stephen
Poule, Esquire;. Robert Whitchcot, Esquire; son of Thomas Whitchcot, Esquire; both
ancestors to the honorable Sir Jerome Whitchcot, Knight-B. and Colonel, etc. and
also of the most learned Dr Whitchcot, late of Cambridge. Mris Mary Prescot.
Robert Daugges, son of William Daugges of Newgatstreet in the county of
Hertford, Esquire;. Mary Barker. Henry Dacres, Esquire; ancestor to the worthily
honored Sir Thomas Dacres of Chestenham in the county of Hertford, Knight, of
a very ancient standing. Elizabeth North, Generosa. Reginald Green, Genesis Mris
Mary Davis. Guil. Chapman. David Davison, Esquire;. Elizabeth Davison, daughter of
Thomas Founes of Plymouth, Esquire;. Alexander Eaton. Valentine Elsing. Thomas
Pope, Armig. Henricus Bernard inter. Temp. Armig. Katherine Jones, daughter of
Rowland Morgan. Thomas Gate, unus Baronum Scaccarii. John White, Esquire;. Charles
Potts, Esquire; one of the Benchers of the Middle Temple. John Goldsborough, of the
Middle Temple, Armig. one of the Prothonotaries of the Common Pleas. Edmond
Plowden, Esquire; etc. John Roope, son of John Roope of Dartmouth, Esquire;. Gregory
Cole, of Buckish in the county of Devon, Armig. Tobias Newcourt, of Pickwel in
the county of Devon, Armig. Thomas Heyhoe, Armig. Mris Marston Weely. Ed.
Turnor, of Parrington in the county of Essex, Esquire;. father of the honorable
Sir Edward Turnor, Knight, etc. and Arthur Turnor, Sergeant at Law, second son
of the said Edmund, etc. Daniel Cudmore of Loxborne in the county of Devon,
Esquire;. Johannes de la Bearne, Med. Temp. Socius. Richard Norden int. Templ.
Esquire;. Henricus Beaumont, int. Temp. Armig. Edward Osborne, Esquire; int. Temp. J.C.
Dom. Richardus Lempster, Capellanus. David Guinne of the county of Brecknock,
Esquire;. Henry Charton of Wolverington in the county of Salop, Armig. Clement Coke
of Langford in the county of Derby, Armig. John French Esquire; Bencher of the
Inner Temple. Thomas Williams, Venedocus, Genesis Charles Heath, Esquire;. Rudolphus
Quarterman, Genesis Thomas Nash, Esquire;. John Den, very anciently of Kent, Esquire;.
Johannes Portman, Esquire; one of the Benchers of the Temple, etc. Daniel Lisle,
Esquire; one of the younger sons of Sir William Lisle, Knight, etc. Dom. Martinus,
Jurisconsultus eminens. Edward Littleton, Esquire; son of Sir Thomas Littleton,
Knight, etc. Johannes Seldom, Esquire;. Rowlandus Jewks, Esquire;. Edvardus Vaughan,
Esquire;. Rogerus Bishop, Genesis Edvardus Hide, Esquire; son of the Right Honorable
Edward Earl of Clarendon, and Lord Chancellor of England, etc. Guil. Langston
de Hanly-Castle. Mark Blackmoore, J.C. Edvardus Bernard, Armig. Margaret
Hutchinson, wife of Ralph Hutchinson. Lady Katharine Beaumont. Nathaniel
Stirrup, Esquire;. John Lambert, Gent. Richard Bradley, Citizen. Henry Burnefold,
Citizen, with his wife. Susanna Treswel, wife of Robert Treswel, Pursuivant at
Arms. Sir Bartholomew Read, Knight, Lord Mayor. Sir Thomas Williamson, of great
Markham in the county of Nottingham, Knight and Baronet. Dame Elizabeth
Puckering, wife of Sir Thomas Puckering, Knight and Baronet. The Lord William
Fitz-Warren, and Isabel his wife, sometimes Queen of the Isle of Man. Dominicus
ab Heila, Nobilis. Thomas Roberts, a memorable Citizen. Robert Thorn, an
eminent Benefactor. Henry Beecher, Esquire; Sheriff and Alderman, the improver of
that worthy family of the Becchers in the county of Bedford. Adam Bamme, Mayor
of London, 1397. Richard Bamme, his son, of Gilingham in the County of Kent,
Esquire;. John Walton, Gent. buried anno Dom. 1401. William Combs,
Stockfishmonger, Sheriff of London 1452 a great Benefactor to his
Parish Church. Richard Dryland, Esquire;. Henry Yevele, Free-Mason to Edw. 3. etc.
John Long of Bedford-shire, Esquire;. William Jawdrell, Merchant-Taylor. Sir John
Olney, Knight, Lord Mayor. Sir John Young, Knight, and Lord Mayor. William
Russel, Esquire; Sollicitor-General to Queen Elizabeth. George Holman, Gent.
Ancestor to the Knightly family of the Holmans in the county of Northampton.
Sir Ralph Freeman, Knight, Lord Mayor, a most memorable person, and Uncle to
the worthily honored Ralph Freeman in the County of Herts, Esquire;. Sir Thomas
Low, Knight, Lo. Mayor. Edward Murrell, Grocer, and Martha Murrell. Colonel
Barriff, his Ensigns hanging over him. John Matchell, Esquire; and Alderman of
London. Henry Cantelaw, Mercer, and Merchant of the Staple of Calice. William
Champion, Citizen and Grocer. James Brown, son of Humphry Brown, Merchant.
Simon Betach, son of Robert Betach, Esquire;. Simon Edmonds, Esquire; Alderman,
Sheriff, and Lo. Mayor elect of London; one of the ancestors of the worthy
family of Edmonds of Kings Langley in the county of Herts, Esquire;. Sir Hugh
Wyche, Knight, Lo. Mayor, one of the ancestors of the much honored Sir Cyril
Wyche, and Sir Peter Wyche, both brothers, etc. Sir Thomas Leighe, Knight
buried in the Church of S. Leonard Shoreditch. Sir Ralph Warren, Knight
Alderman, and twice Lord Mayor. Dr Mark Frank, S.T.D. and Archdeacon of S.
Albans. J. Pennyfather, Esquire; having fined for Sheriff and Alderman. Robert
South, Esquire; Citizen and Goldsmith of London. The Lady Gurney, wife of the said
Robert South, and Grandmother of Madam Mary Montague, wife of the honorable Mr
Montague the Queens Attorney, and daughter of Sir John Aubery of Wales. Mris
Margaret Withy, late wife of Mr. John Withy, Gent. and Painter-Stainer of
London. Mris Alice Talbot, late wife of Thomas Talbot of Great-Ealing in the
county of Middlesex, Esquire; and sometimes Captain of Foot; very anciently of
Yorkshire. Robert Say, son of William Say, Gent. John Hele, Esquire; son and heir
of Sir John Hele of Wenbury, Knight, etc. Richard Aldworth, Esquire; with Elizabeth
his wife. Radulphus Rookeby, Hosp. Lincoln. J.C. Gulielmus Horsnel, Genesis very
anciently of Horsnel-crouch (or Horsnel-cross) in Kent, and father of John and
George Horsnel, etc. William Evering of Grays Inn, Esquire;. Mris Frances
Beversham, wife of William Beversham of Grays Inn, Esquire;. Mris Sarah Jay, only
daughter of Mr George Jay, etc. Mris Ellinour Tilus, second wife of Mr Silias
Titus, father of Silias Titus of his Majesty's Bedchamber, etc. Thomas Sayer,
Stationer. William Gerrard, son of Philip Gerrard of Grays Inn, Esquire;. Richard
Gerrard, late of Grays Inn, Esquire;. Elizabeth Ade, wife of John Ade. Mris
Elizabeth Bretton, etc. Christopher Sherland, Esquire;. Dr Raphiel Throckmorton,
S.T.D. Archdeacon of Line. Clement Plannard. R. Marston, Esquire;. Thomas Thorney,
a memorable Surgeon. Henry Heneage, Esquire; son of Sir Tho. Heneage, Knight.
Mris Ellinor Harecourt, wife of George Harecourt, Esquire;. Matthew Bull. John
Mallory. Roger Carlisle. Mris Eliz. Bispham, late wife of Dr William Bispham,
Prebend of Westchester. Mris Eliz. Hodges. Philippus Kempe. Reginaldus Biens,
Armig. Ruth Rhetoric. Roger Williams of Grays Inn, Armig. Henry Stapylton de
Wighill com. Ebor. Esquire;. Mris Margaret Ludlowe. Edwardus Scarisbrick, Armig.
Johannes Collet. Matthaeus Bust. William Tipper, Esquire of the body to the
late King James. Michael Lewis de Colyweston, Esquire;. Jo. Topham. Robert Marles.
Robert Bennet, Esquire; son and heir of Sir Robert Bennet of Broadwinsor, Knight.
Matthias St. George, daughter of of Sir Richard St. George Knight. Rob. Cook
de Mileham commit. Norf. Esquire;. Richard Worsely of the Isle of Wight, Esquire;. Mris
Katharine Air. John Wyburne, Esquire;. Jane Carpenter. Eliz. Wall, wife of John
Wall. Tho. Vavasour, Gent. Elizabeth Acton, daughter of Hen. Acton. Walter
Timberlack. Mris Anne Peers, wife of Edmond Peers, very anciently of
Shropshire, late Citizen and Grocer of London. Sir Kobert Houghton, Knight, one
of the Justices of the Common Pleas. Lady Margaret Talbot. Anne Horton, wife of
Thomas Horton. Sir Henry Calthorp, Knight, descended from Sir Henry Calthorp,
Knight, temp. Hen. 7. Roger Drake, Esquire; father of Dr Drake, S.T.D. and Chaplain
in Ordinary to his Majesty; and of Dr Roger Drake, M.D. his brother. George
Miller of London, Genesis and Printer, father to Simon Miller of St Paul's
Churchyard, Bookseller. Edmund Symes, eldest son of Edmund Symes. Mr Morehead.
Mr Evans. Dr William Gouge, Doctor of Divinity, and father of Mr. Thomas Gouge
many years of St Sepulchers, and of Dr Gouge the Physician his brother. Sir
Nicholas Kempe, Knight, one of the High-Commission-Court. The Lady Sarah Kempe.
Thomas Fowler, Esquire; father of Sir Thomas Fowler, Knight-Baronet. Anne Chetwind,
wife of Henry Chetwind, Esquire;. Henricus Grimston, Esquire; third son of the
honorable Sir Harbottle Grimston of the county of Essex, Baronet, and Master
of the Rolls, etc. Gabriel Panel of London, Leatherseller. John Markham, Esquire;
Serjeaht at Arms to King James. Hugo, Dash field, servant to the late Lord
Coventry. Edmuad Pott of Pott in the County of Chester, Gent. Dr William
Langham, one of the Prebends of Lichfield, etc. William Fyboll, Esquire; son and
heir of Sir William Fyboll of Woodland in the county of Dorset, Knight.
Henricus Wilks, Rector Ecclesiae Sancti Nicolai Olave. Richard Hill, Esquire;
Master of the Wine-cellar to King H. 8. Ellinor, daughter of J. Wilkes of
Michel-Grove in the county of Sussex, Esquire;. Sir Richard Merlow, Lord Mayor of
London. William Porter, Esquire; Clerk of the Crown. Alexander Carlisle, Vintner.
Johannes Rayning, Genesis Agnes Chenie, wife of William Chenie, Esquire;. Johannes
Glanvile, Armig. Sir William Bailey, Knight, and Lord Mayor of London. Thomas
Woodfald, Esquire; Alderman of London. Mr Stockton, Fishmonger, a memorable
Citizen. Mris Joane Coppinger, widow of William Coppinger, Esquire;. Thomas
Paynard, alias Thomas Aylwood, Secretary to the Lord Cromwell, Chancellor of
England, etc. Johannes Ingram, Civis and Piscenarius. Roger Huming, Fishmonger,
and Purveyor to King H. 8. Tho Nichols, Citizen and Fishmonger. Nicholaus
Wolbergh, Civis and Piscenarius. John Orange, Gent. with Agnes his wife. Guil.
Elgaston, Civis and Piscenarius. Guil. Coggeshal, Civis and Piscenarius.
Richard Fearnefold, Citizen and Fishmonger. Thomas Paddington, Citizen and
Fishmonger. Richard Story, Citizen and Fishmonger. Edward Warner, Esquire; son of
Sir Ed. Warner, Knight. Henry Warner, Esquire; son of Sir Ed. Warner, Knight. John
Gerbridge, Mercer, and Merchant adventurer. Thomas Muschamp, Esquire;. Gulielmus
Morecroft, Armig. John Brewster, Esquire; one of the ancestors to John Brewster of
Grays Inn, Esquire; and also of Mr Edward Brewster of St Paul's Churchyard, Citizen
and Book seller. Anne Barret, wife of Henry Barret; with ten of her children.
Susanna King, wife of Daniel King. John Christmas, Stone-cutter, and
Common-council-man. Edward Reave, Citizen and Wax-chandler. Elizabeth, wife of
Tho. Billingsly, Esquire;. William Tickhill, Gent. and Philip his wife. Mr John
Giffard, Gent. Thomas Brocas, Gent. servant to the late Earl of Surrey. Francis
Barrantine de Hasely Com. Oxf. Esquire;. Arthur Dacres, son and heir of the late
Lord Dacres. John Blundel, Citizen and Fruiterer of London. John Ravening,
Citizen and Salter. William Claytwel, Citizen and Fruiterer. Sir Henry Collet,
Knight, twice Lord Mayor of London. Sir Philip Boil, a valiant Knight of
Arragon, whose Ancestors were Founders of Abbey, or Abbats Boil in Ireland;
which Sir Philip was one of the ancient Progenitors of the Right Honorable
Richard Boil, Earl of Burlington, and Earl Corck; and of his two noble
Brothers, the right honorable Roger Earl of Orery, and the right honorable
Robert Boil, his younger Brother, etc. William Dawtry, of Lincolns Inn, Esquire;.
Lady Deborah Gerbier, wife of Sir Balthazar Gerbier Knight. Elizabeth Warcop,
(or War cup) eldest Daughter of Rodolph Warcup of English, in the County of
Oxford, Esquire;. Captain William Bushel. Bobert Clark, Esquire; son of Roger Clark,
Esquire;. Jane Nevel, alias Jane Detnick. Jane Husbands, wife to Captain William
Husbands. Col. Humphry Higginson. Henry Hodgkins, Churchwarden of Stepny, etc.
Sir Thomas Pert, Knight, and Sir Peter Garensers Knight, anciently of Normandy,
and one of the longlind Progenitors of the learned Doct. Theophilus Garensers,
of Clarken-well, M.D. from which family he is lineally descended. Charles
Gerbier, son of Sir Balthazar Gerbier. Edvardus Blomley, Armig. heir of that
ancient family of the Blomleys in Chesheir, whence Laurence Blomely of the
Inner Temple Esquire; and Counselor at Law, of a good standing, is original
descended. Avis Gybson, and afterward dame Avis Knevet, builder af the
Free School of Ratcliffe, where the ingenious Mr Speed Master of Arts, is the
incumbent Master. William Morley, and Ralph Morley, sons of the late Sir Thomas
Morley Knight, one of the Longlind Ancestors, of these two long Knightly and
ancient Families of the Morleys in Sussex. Ralph Leventhorp, of Albury-Hall,
commit. Hartf. Esquire; one of the Ancestors to the noble Sir Tho. Leventhorp, com.
praed. Knight and Bar. ronet, etc. Sir Theodore Mayerne, Knight, Physician to
the late King. Sir Am. Poulet, Knight sometimes Governor of Jersey. John
Lumley, eldest son of the right honorable the Lord Visc. Richard Lumley of
Stanstead. Captain Barrow, the fourth son of Col. Barrow of Dullin. Anthony
Berkley, Esquire;, of the noble family of the Bercleys of Berckly Castle, com.
Glocest. of which the truly right honorable the Lord George Barckley, is the
longlind Progenitor. Charles Mercer, son of Sir John Mercer, Knight. Edward
Reynolds, Esquire; Clark of his Majesty's Privy Seal. Sir John Corvet, of
Sprowston, com. norf. Baronet. Dame Margaret, Countess of Richmond, Mother of
Henry the seventh. Tho. Russel, Esquire; son an heir of Sir William Russel of
Strensham, in the County of Worcest. Knight Bar. Matthew Crutchfield, of an
ancient family of that name, in the com. of Oxford, a worthy Citizen and Draper
of London. Alan Broderick, son of Sir Thomas Broderick Knight, etc. Sir Henry
Saintjohns, Knight, and Garter king at Arms, a branch of that most ancient, and
long knighly family of the Saint john's of Lyddiard, in the County of Wilts, of
which Sir Walter Saintjohns Baronet, stilo veteri, is the chief. Ambross
Randolph, Esquire;. James Medlicoat, Esquire; father of Thomas Medlycoat of the middle
Temple, Esquire; and Counselor at Law; and also of his brother Mr Edmond
Medlycoat, an Officer of and in the Court. Lady Merrick, wife of Sir William
Merrick Knight, L.L.D. and Judge of the high Court of Admiralty. Elizabeth
Philipps, daughter of the late Sir Henry Prat, Baronet, and sister of the now
Sir George Prat of Colsil Baronet, and wife of Francis Philipps, Esquire; one of
the seniores and readers of the illustrious society of the Inner Temple, etc.
James Howel, late Historiagrapher to his present Majesty. Sir Peter Lemair,
Knight, a memorable Benefector. Mr Skearn, of Yorkshire, a good Benefactor.
Charles Sanford, son of John Sandford, Esquire; one of the Heralds at Arms, now
living. Sir William Sherrington, of Sherrington-hall, and Cranworth, Knight; of
the self same line of that truly noble family of the Sherringtons in
Lancashire, from whence that highly heroic Colonel William Sherrington, an
eminent and succesful Commander, in the Venetian service; and also his very
near and worthy Kinsman Willi-Sherrington the Turkey Merchant (with others of
that renowned race) are originally descended. Coll. William Underwood, father
of George Underwood, of Kensington, Esquire;. John Nelson, son of Mr John Nelson,
Gent. and Merchant of London. Susanna Lydcot, wife of Colonel Leonard Lydcot,
and daughter of Sir John Lenthal Knight, and Marshal of the Kings Bench. John
Reynolds, Esquire;. Alexander Purpoint. James Palmer, Bachelor of Divinity. Blanch
Perry, chief Gentlewoman to Q. Elizabeth's privy chamber. James Tomkins, second
son of James Tomkins of Monington, in the C. of Hereford, Esquire; Alexander
Tomkins, the fifth son of Richard Tomkins of Monington, Esquire; both of them the
very near Allies of the now Sir Thomas Tomkins of Monington, Knight, a member
of Parliament, and ever an active servant to, and passive sufferer for their
Majesty's. Sir Francis Edgeoak, of Edgeoak C. Worst. Knight. Mary Edgerion,
only daughter of Sir Thomas Edgerton, Knight Baronet, baron of Elsmere, and
Lord high Chancellor of England, etc. Edward Birkhead, Esquire; brother to Major
Birkhead of Holborn, Citizen and Goldsmith of London. Lady Dorothy Stafford,
wife and widow to Sir William Stafford, Knight, daughter to Henry Lord
Stafford, the only son and heir of Edward the last Duke of Buckingham, of that
most noble and princly name. Alexander Davis, of Ebury, in the C. of Middlesex,
Esquire; brother to Sir Thomas Davis, Knight and Sheriff of London. Edmund Hammond,
Esquire;. Ann Loker, daughter of William Loker of Oaking, in the County of Surry,
Esquire;. John Arundel, of Guarnick, com corn. Esquire;. Richard Laurence, Merchant.
Margaret Chute, daughter of Sir George Chute of Stock-wel, Knight, etc.
Christopher Wood, Esquire;. Hannah Barrow, daughter of Mr Giles Barrow,
Wollendraper. William Bestone, Esquire;. Richard Brigham, Esquire; Controuler to George
and William, Archbishops of Canterbury. Richard Bancraft, bishop first of
London, and next Archbishop of Canterbury. Robert Scot, Esquire; descended from the
ancient barons of Bawery in Scotland. Thomas Thirleby, bishop of Ely. Charles
Mason, Gent. Robert Harlow, Esquire; a branch of that ancient and knightly family
of the Harlows in Hereford-shire, from whence Sir Edward Harlow Knight of the
bath, and Colonel Sir Rober Harlow his brother, are lineally descended. Henry
Skipwith, Esquire; son of Sir Richard Skipwith, Knight. descended from the Skipwiths in
Yorkshire, from Hugh, son of Baldrick, one of the ancientest barons of the
Realm. Sir George Paul, Knight. Ann Roberts, wife of Ralph Roberts of Bristol,
a memorable Citizen, etc. James Bayles, of the middle Temple Esquire; very
anciently of Potters Newton, in the County of York Esquires; one of the
Pregenitors of John Bayles of Wilby, in the County of Suffolk, Esquire; now living;
and of his brother Thomas Bayles one of the benchers of the middle Temple Esquire;
and Counselor at Law; who with his young son and heir Oneale Bayles, (there
also admitted) compleateth seven defcents of that name and family which
have-been members of that Illustrious society. Lucy Evans, wife of George Evans
of the County of Glocest. anciently Gentleman, and daughter of Mrs Framces
Forsbrook, wife of the late Richard Forsbrook, anciently of the County of
Northampton, Esquires and Gentlemen. William Cremer, Esquire; and Alderman of
London, anciently of Leton in Norfolk; from whence the now Sir John Cremer of
Sechee, in the same County, knight, and late High Sheriff thereof together with
his Nephew Charles Cremer of Snetisham, Esquire; and Counselor at Law, in the
Illustrious society of Grays Inn, are originally descended. Adam Poultney, a
most memorable Patriot, the builder of that fair Church of S. Laurence
Poultney, born of a worthy family of that name of Misterton in Leicestershire;
from which longlin'd and knightly family for many generations, Sir William
Poultney of S. James, knight and Justice of Peace, etc. is originally and
uninterruptedly descended, with others elsewhere mentioned. Doct. William
Drury, Judge of the Prerogative Court; a branch of that ancient and once
flourishing family of the Druries in Norfolk, and elsewhere. Thomas Busby, a
memorable Patriot, one of the ancestors of Sir John Busby of Buckinghamshire,
and of the most eminently learned and exemplarily obliging Doctor Richard
Busby, Prebendary of Westminster, and many years the most happy Master of that
so famous Freeschool. Dudley Palmer, of Grays Inn Esquire; son and heir of Sir
Anthony Palmer, knight of the bath. George Humble, Esquire; father of Sir William
Humble of Stratford-Langton, com. Ess. Knight and Baronet, now living. Ann
Dryden, wife of John Dryden, of the County of Northampton, Esquire;. Sir William
Dry field, Knight, Lord Mayor of London. Sir William Talmage, (or Talamach)
knight, one of the longlin'd Ancestors of Sir Lionel Talmage, of the County of
Suffolk. Sir Thomas Courtney, knight, son of the then Earl of Devonshire; which
Earls of Devonshire, were the noble Progenitors of that Illustrious and
Princely Familyof the Courtneys, time out of mind, in that County; from whom
the now living Sir William Courtney is lineally descended. Lord John Vere, Earl
of Oxford. Lord Awbery Vere, son and heir of the said John Earl of Oxford, and
both of them (with many other Peers of that name) the highborn Progenitors of
the Right Honorable and truly heroic Lord Awbery Vere, the Earl of Oxford now
living. Thomas Lord Rutherford, Baron of Hunthil, and Husband of the right
honorable Bridget Baroness Rutherford, and daughter of Sir Alexander Urquhart
knight, and one of the ancientest families in the kingdom of Scotland. Sir Job
Harby, knight, father of the late Sir Job Harby knight, and both Grandfather,
and Father of Sir Erasmus Harby of Hartfordshire, now living. Sir Thomas Cook,
knight of the Bath, Lord Mayor of London, 1462. descended from a good Family of
that name in Norfolk, and one of the Ancestors of that worthy family of the
Cooks of Hindham-Hall near Gloucester, from whence William Cook Esquire; and
Lieutenant Colonel in that County, and Colonel Edward Cook his brother (both
son of the late Sir Robert Cook, and Nephews of the living Colonel Thomas Cook)
are lineally descended. Sir Thomas Wroth, of Petherly Park Com. Summers. of the
same Family of those Wroths of Durance, in the County of Middlesex, and Sir
John Wroth, whose name and Family appears by the Authentic testimony of old
dateless Records, to be one of the ancientest in that County; of which seat of
Durance, Sir Henry Wroth now living, is the incombent Proprietor. Sir John
Scorisditch, a memorable, and exceeding ancient knight, sometimes the
Proprietor of Scorisdich, corruptly called, and vulgarly supposed Shoaresditch,
from Jane Shore there dying; the which Sir John Scorisditch (among other
goodly Manors) was the Proprietor of Ickenham, in the County of Middlesex,
which is still in the hands of Scorisditch Esquire; now there living. Matthew
Parker, Archbishop of Canterbury. Margret Parker, wife of the said Matthew.
Cristopher Wormeal, of Lambeth, Gent. Richard Turner, there also interred.
Elizabeth Friend, wife of Roger Friend. Frances From, wife of Mr John From,
Citizen. Elizabeth College, wife of Ralph College. Agnes Tydnam, wife first
of Thomas Marshal, next of John Manning. John Bayliffe, and Elizabeth his wife.
Elizabeth Bassock. Elizabeth Taverner. William Southes, Gent. William Juxton,
Bishop first of London, Lord Treasurer of England, Archbishop of Canterbury,
and Uncle to Sir William Juxton, anciently of Sussex; and the Reverend and
eminently learned D. Robert Poary, Residentiary Prebend of S. Paul's, etc. who
bestowed the said Archbishops Achievement, as an Ornament to Lambeth Church.
The Lord Caroone, Ambassador Leidger from the States of Holland, his
Achievement in the same Church. Doctor Daniel Featly, a most memorable Divine.
John Tredescant, the famous Collector and Conserver of antiquities. John Mason,
eldest son of Richard Mason, Yeoman of the Guard. Katharine Moore, daughter of
William and Margaret Moore, of Reading. Fredericus a Becker, a Gentleman of
Holland. Mary Tediman, wife of Christopher Tediman: she was eldest daughter of
Sir Thomas Tediman knight, etc. Peter Hills, one of the Assistants in the
Trinity-house. Rodger Tweedy, Esquire;. Thomasin Pasefield, wife of George
Pasefield, Esquire;. Brian, Richard, Mary, Alice, and Elizabeth, two sons and three
daughters of Richard Reynolds, Citizen and Goldsmith of London. Richard
Hubbart, Inhabitant of Redriff. Mary Packston, daughter of Rodger Packston.
John Wats, Inhabitant of Redriff. Jane Pepper, widow of Nicholas Pepper, and
daughter of Captain Henry Tediman. James Hocket, Mariner, Master of the
Trinity-house. John Marret. John Barter. John, William, and Elizabeth Price.
Elizabeth Whaley, wife of Roger Whaley of London, Salter. Ellen Hedgecock, wife
of Robert Hedgecock. Elle York, daughter of Edmond York. John Headly, Mariner.
John Croncar. Edmond Hudson. Millescent Willis, wife of Robert Willis. Thomas
Garret. Edward Patience, and Grace Gibson

