A REPLY TO A PAPER, ENTITLED, A True Account of the Unreasonableness of Mr.
Fitton' s Pretenses against the Earl of Macclesfield.
Whereas that Paper calls, Mr. Fitton a remote Kinsman; Observe, the Relation
stands thus, Sir Edw. Fitton, Treasurer of Ireland, had Issue Sir Edw. Fitton,
and Alexander; Sir Edward was Grandfather to the last Sir Edward, and
Alexander was Grandfather to the Petitioner.
IT is alleged in the Paper, That Mr. Fitton had been but Four Years in
Possession, and that before that time the Earl of Macclesfield was in
possession by virtue of the Will.

As to the Fitton's Possession, the Case stands thus: Sir Edward Fitton died in
1643. In 1647. William Fitton recovered the Possession of the Manor of Alford
and Gawsworth-Park, which was all the Estate that was not in Mortgage or
Jointure. In 1652. the Mortgage was redeemed by Mr. Fitton, and about 1655. the
Jointress died, and from that time he had possession of that part of the Estate
also.

As to the Earl's prior Possession, the Fact is thus: He, together with the
other Coheirs, upon the death of Sir Edward Fitton's Mother, did enter upon
Alford, and received his seventh part of the Profits, as one of the Coheirs,
till the Fittons recovered the Estate from them; which is so far from being a
Possession under the Will, that it is a demonstration he did not then believe
there was any such. And for many years in many Suits between the Coheirs and
the Fittons, as well when they were Plaintiffs as Defendants, the Earl was
joined with them.

The 2d Matter alleged is, That the Chancery did no wrong to Fitton, by not
suffering him to try the Title to the Will, because upon his Answer he never
contested it.

The falsity of this Allegation appears by the Words of the Answer; And these
Defendant say, That they nor either of them Know or Believe, that Sir Edw.
Fitton did make his Will in Writing, in the Bill mentioned, pretended to bear
date, etc. Which is a plain denial of it, and that the Earl took it to be so,
is as plain by his endeavoring to prove the Will in the Cause.

The 3d Allegation in the Paper is, A pretended Answer to that which ever was
and ever will be required in all Courts of Law and Equity, That the Plaintiff
must make out his own Title, before he be admitted to controvert the Title of
the Defendant, who is in possession. And therefore the Earl's Title being a
Title at Law under the Will, which was devised, he ought to have made out that
Title at Law, before he should have been admitted to controvert the Deed-Poll,
which was part of the Defendant's Title.

The next thing is, A cunning Insinuation, as if to assert the Deed-Poll were a
Reflection on the Judgments of the House of Lords, given upon the Earl's
complaint against Fitton and Granger about the Libel; which is a mere Fallacy,
for that Paper might be justly censured as a Libel, and the publishing of it as
a Crime, though every word of it was true, because it was not asserted in a legal
Course. And it is most true, that the Verdict was given upon Granger's
Evidence, and upon that of his Servants or Companions, who swore what Granger
told them.

In Answer to the pretended Circumstances, to prove the FORGERY;
1. There was no occasion to produce the Deed-Poll at any of the Trials, with
the Coheirs, because Fitton's Title was under the Settlement, which they never
pretended to be revoked. 2. There was no cause to produce it upon the
Marriage-Treaty, for Mr. Fitton's Wife's Relations looked on his Title as
undoubted, he being in possession upon three Judgments at Law, so that no Deeds
at all were produced, but the Marriage took effect upon Articles. 3. William
Jolliffe, Esquire a Gentleman of Quality and undoubted Reputation, and diverse
others, proved, That they saw the Deed-Poll some years before the time that
Granger swore he forged it. 4. As to the pretense, That Fitton's Father knew
nothing of the time, it is false, and affirmed without proof. 5. The Witnesses
to the Deed-Poll, Rich. Davenport, Esquire Tho. Smalwood, and Edw. Barwick, Gent.
were persons of such Credit, that the Earl never went about to impeach it.
They, upon their Examination in the Cause in Chancery, swore, That they were
present, and saw Sir Edw. Fitton Seal and Deliver, as his Act and Deed, the
said Deed then shown to them, and that their Names endorsed on the Deed was
their proper Handwriting. Now it is not probable, that Witnesses Names, who
were all living, and strangers to Fitton, should be put to a Deed, supposed to
be forged twenty years after the pretended Date. 6. It Is not at all strange,
that they should not on the sudden recollect the time and place of executing
the Deed, it being after 20 Years, and they having been Witnesses to diverse
Deeds sealed by Sir Edw. Fitton. 8. All the three Witnesses did afterward
recollect themselves, and frequently in their Lifetime, and severally on their
Deathbeds, declared, they perfectly remembered the Time and the precise Place
where the Deed was sealed, viz. In the Compass-Window in the Hall in Gawsworth-
house. Therefore let any Man that can believe that Mr. Davenport asked Pardon
for swearing that he was a Witness to the Executing the Deed, when he died
affirming it. 9. As to the nature of Granger's Evidence, If it were true, he
must be a great Villain, and guilty of Forgery, and it is considerable what
Credit he ought to have who swears himself at that instant to deserve none. And
Granger himself, from the time of that Trial till his Death, which was very
lately, owned, That he never saw Fitton till the Morning when the Trial was
had, and that one was then employed to show him Fitton, as he came into
Westminster Hall. And at his Death confessed, That of all the Villainies of his
Life, that which troubled him most was the wrong he had done Fitton, in
swearing he forged the Deed-Poll, of which there are many Witnesses beyond all
exception. And if Granger could deserve Credit, in behalf of the Earl, after he
had owned himself guilty of Forgery, he may be allowed to Deserve as much
Credit, in behalf of Fitton, after he had been guilty of Perjury; Especially
when the very persons concerned in suborning Granger, and who paid him for it,
confess their knowledge of the Fact. 10. As to what the Answer call an Evidence
from the nature of the thing that it was improbable Sir Edw. Fitton, who was
married, and in a possibility of having Children, should release his Power of
Revocation. It is to be observed, That Sir Edward continued Tenant in Tail
after the Release, and so might cut off the Remainders by a Recovery, if he had
Issue; but it is probable, it was done to prevent any sudden act he might be
prevailed upon to do, to the prejudice of his Heir-Male, by the Importunity of
his Sisters, who were his Heirs; and also to establish and strengthen his
Settlement, (the Times growing ill, and he being about to enter into the War)
which would have signified nothing, as to the saving his Estate in his Family,
if he had had a power to revoke it.
In Answer to the fifth Objection, it is plain, the Possession, and Deeds and
Account of the Profits, were Decreed before any Trial was had upon the Will,
and before the Trial which the Chancery it self thought fit to allow, which was
plainly before the Cause was Determined. It Is also evident, that the Deed was
at first sent with prejudice to be Tried, for it was called a pretended Deed.

Nothing can be more frivolous than the sixth Allegation, that the Right of
Inheritance was not touched, but only the Person bound by the Decree. For all
Deeds were taken from Mr. Fitton, together with the Possession, and the
Deed-Poll Cancelled, and he Decreed to have no farther Trial, and he that has
no Remedy, has no Right, or at least his Right can do him no good.

Whether the Court of Chancery has exceeded their Power, is now the Question
before the Lords; and therefore to draw Arguments from the Judgment of the Lord
Chancellor or Lord Keeper, is begging the Question, and is indeed to make an
Argument: Which if it have any force at all, will indifferently serve against
all Appeals to the Lords, the Jurisdiction of this Great Court being founded
upon a supposition that Chancellors and Keepers may mistake. Besides, the now
Lord Keeper, being prevented by a Plea and Demurrer, could never look into the
Proofs in the Cause.

That the Decree is larger than the Plaintiffs Petition will be obvious to any
Person who looks on both, nothing is prayed, but to set aside the Lease, and to
be at Liberty to examine Witnesses to the Will. But the Decree is for the
Possession, for an Account of Profits, for Delivering up and Vacating Deeds,
and does exclude the Defendant from Trying his Right at Law for the future.

The pretended Answer divides the Proofs of the Will into three Heads.

As to the first, which mentions Sir Edward's Intention, to settle his Estate
on the Earl of Macclesfield, Mr. Manwairing, the first Person named, had for
many Years together been in Suit; which Mr. Fitton, as one of the Coheirs of
Sir Edward, and therefore could not believe there was a Will. And Sir John
Trevor, Mr. Davenport, and other Persons of undoubted Credit, did fully prove
in the Cause, that Sir Edward did ever intend to keep the Estate in the Name,
and to settle it on William Fitton, and sent for him out of Ireland for that
purpose, and declared, that rather than a Fitton should not have it, he would
leave it to Ned Fitton the Bang-beggar. Nor could Sir Edward Fitton conceive
any prejudice against William Fitton, because he was engaged in the Irish or
English Rebellion, since'tis utterly false, that he was engaged in either,
being well known to be a Gentleman of very Loyal Principles. And Philip
Pritchard, Esquire Ralph Jamon and Thomas Cowley, William Sweetenham, Edmund
Barwick, Edward Gardener and John Snelson prove, that when Sir Edward Fitton,
upon his Deathbed, was solicited by Earl Rivers and Mr. Davenport, to settle
his Estate upon the Lord Gerrard, he absolutely refused it. And John Cowley and
another, proves, that when the Earl of Dorset, and Earl Rivers at Oxford, at
several times, about three Months before his Death, importuned Sir Edward
Fitton, to settle his Estate on the Lord Gerrard; he made answer, he could not
do it, having settled it before on the Fittons: Which is, in effect, a proof
that Sir Edward Fitton owned he had Released his Power of Revocation.

As to the second Head, the Witnesses, who spoke positively to the Will, were
two, Dr. Smallwood and Hollingshead.

Smallwood being Examined as a Witness, in a Cause in Chancery, between the
Coheirs and Mr. Fitton, did Depose, that he knew not of any Settlement made by
Sir Edward Fitton, by Deed, Will, or otherwise; which Oath of his must be
false, if he had at that time the Will in his Doublet, where he pretended to
have carried it seventeen Years.

2. Whereas (according to the Settlement) Edward, the Eldest Son of William
Fitton, at his Age of fourteen Years, tendered himself to marry the Lord
Brereton's Daughter; Smallwood being then his Domestic Chaplain, persuaded the
Lord Brereton to marry his Daughter to him, which he could not do, without the
basest Infidelity, if he knew the Estate was given away from the Fittons.

As to Hollingshead, he was the Person who treated a Marriage between Edward,
the Eldest Son of William Fitton, and the Daughter of William Jolliff, Esquire
(which was prevented by Edwards Death) and who after treated a Marriage between
the Petitioner and the Daughter of Thomas Jolliff, Esquire and upon both those
Treaties, he constantly affirmed the Title of the Fittons under the Settlement.

2. After the Marritge had taken effect, he pressed the Petitioner for a Lease
of a Farm, part of the Lands in question, and offered a considerable Fine for
such Lease, which he would not have done, if he knew the Petitioner had no
Title, and he often affirmed that he was present when Earl Rivers pressed Sir
Edward Fitton, to settle his Estate on the Plaintiff; which he refused.

He also advised others to renew their Leases from Mr. Fitton, which they did
thereupon.

And notwithstanding, it is alleged with so much assurance, that the Will was
clearly Proved at the Trial at Chester, Sir Job Charlton (before whom the Cause
was Tried) directed the Jury that they ought to have no regard to Hollinshead's
Testimony, as a Person not credible, and that the only Evidence for the Will
was Dr. Smallwood, if they did believe him.

As to the rest of the Witnesses, who speak to Hollingshead's Report, their
Testimony falls together with Hollingsheads.

It Is true, there was an Information of Perjury Exhibited against Smallwood and
Hollingshead, but Mr. Fittons most material Witnesses, being then beyond Sea,
when the Cause was to be Tried, and the Court refusing to put off the Trial, no
Evidence at all was given, and the Defendants acquitted of course.

As to that Objection, which may at first seem plausible, that it will be a
hardship upon the Earl, to come to a Trial after so long a time, if it be
examined, it will appear to have to weight in it. For the Question being upon
the reality of the Will, and the Earl's Witnesses, having been all Examined,
their Depositions remain for his advantage, and they cannot be cross-examined
by the Court, which they might have been, if they were yet alive, and that is
only to the disadvantage of Mr. Fitton.

There is no time of limitation fixed in case of an Appeal from an Erroneous
Decree. In this Case the Plaintiff and Defendant are still living: Mr. Fitton
has been Prisoner, almost ever since the Decree, but has made Entries and
Claims on Record from time to time, though under a disability, not only to
Prosecute this Suit, but another Suit upon a Mortgage of part of the Lands in
question, which he might have done, (if able) at a much less charge than bring
on this Cause.

The Trial had at Chester is much insisted on, but if the Fact were stated,
would have little weight with it.

Mr. Fitton was then a Prisoner, the Sessions appointed in Term-time, all the
Principal Council below retained by the Earl, and Mr. Fitton could get no
Council in London, to leave the Term to go to that Trial; nor could he prevail
with diverse of his material Witnesses to go down. All which appears, by several
Affidavits made in Chancery, before the Trial, and in order to put if off. And
at the Trial, he lost the use of several Witnesses who were dead, being not
suffered to read their Depositions, because the Bill and Answer in the Cause
were forgotten to be brought down, as appears by another Affidavit made in the
same Court for a new Trial.


