W R

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
By the Lords Justices,
A PROCLAMATION For a General FAST.
Tho. Cantuar. J. Summers C. S. Pembroke C. P. S. Devonshire, Shrewsbury.
Dorset. Godolphin.


WE taking into Our most serious Consideration the continued War, in which His
Majesty (Our Gracious Sovereign) together with most of the Princes and States
of Europe, are Engaged against the French King, and that upon the Success
thereof the Common Safety of His Majesty's Kingdom does, under God, wholly
depend, and putting Our trust in Almighty God, that he will Vouchsafe a Special
Blessing on His Majesty's Righteous Undertakings, and Consummate the
Deliverance of these Nations, by Settling the same in a firm and lasting State
of Peace, Security, and Prosperity, have thought fit to Appoint, and do (by and
with the Advice of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council) hereby Appoint
and Command a General and Public Fast, and Humiliation, to be Observed
throughout His Majesty's Realm of England, Dominion of Wales, and Town of
Berwick upon Tweed, in most Devout and Solemn Manner, for Supplicating Almighty
God for the Pardon of Our Sins, and for Imploring his Blessing and Protection
in the Preservation of His Majesty's Sacred Person, and Prosperity of His Arms
both at Land and Sea, on Friday the Twenty sixth Day of June. And for the more
orderly Solemnizing of the same, We have given Directions to the Right Reverend
the Bishops of this Kingdom, to Compose a Form of Prayer suitable to this
Occasion, to be used in all Churches and Chapels, and other Places of Public
Worship, and to take care for the timely Dispersing of the same through their
several Dioceses in the whole Kingdom. And We do strictly Charge and Command,
That the said Fastings and Prayers be Soberly, Reverently and Decently
performed by all His Majesty's Loving Subjects, as they tender the Favor of
Almighty God, and upon Pain of such Punishments as His Majesty can justly
inflict upon all such as shall Contemn or Neglect so Religious a Work.

Given at the Council Chamber at Whitehall, the Three and Twentieth Day of May,
1696. In the Eighth Year of His Majesty's Reign.
LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb,
deceased, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1696.


