Warlike Directions: OR THE SOVLDIERS PRACTICE. Set forth for the benefit of
all such as are, or will be Scholars of Martial DISCIPLINE.

But especially for all such Officers as are not yet settled, or rightly
grounded in the Art of WAR.

By a Practitioner in the same Art, T. F.

The second EDITION, corrected and amended.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Harper, and are to be sold at his House in Little
Britain, 1643.

THE PREFACE.
THese endeavors of mine which I have formerly learned, and practiced twenty
six years in the Low Countries: and having diverse years instructed and
exercised the trained Bands within the County of Kent, Do I present to all such
as are inclinable and willing to profit themselves in the Art of War. But
especially to all Officers of the selected Bands of this Kingdom, which do
yet fail in the delivering of the right words of command. My purpose is not in
this small Tract, to treat of the highest principles, or speculative part of
military discipline; but de^cend willingly to the lowest and meanest capacity:
thereby to instruct by short and evident rules in the point of practice and
obedience an unexperienced Soldier: and those Officers also who in a private
Band are not so well and fully satisfied as they themselves desire, and the
good and welfare of their Country necessarily requires. For whole better
satisfaction and instruction, I have also drawn some small Maps: for smaller
and greater bodies, as you may perceive at the end of the Book: that what I
have written may be the better conceived and fixed in their memories. Leaving
all strange and foreign discourses which other painful hands have excellently
and learnedly within these few years set forth, and well deciphered. Applying
my self wholly unto these modern times. Wishing that every one that loves his
King and Countries good, the furtherance of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, the
safeguard of himself, and all his, being able and fitting for this service,
would practice this noble Art, and to have some of those Books which have been
set forth upon this subject, to meditate on them at their best leisure. For the
Theoricke part is good, the Practicke better. But Theoricke and Practicke both
together is best of all. He that has neither Theoricke nor Practicke, cannot
be best, better, nor good. So with my best wishes for the furtherance of the
good desires of all such as love this Subject, I humbly take my leave:
remembering this old Proverb, In time of Peace provide for War: that Peace may
continue in these, and all other His Majesty's Dominions in our days, and for
ever, our most merciful God grant, Amen.

Tho. Fisher.

THE OFFICERS of a Company of SOLDIERS.
Captain. Lieutenant. Ensign. Sergeants. 2. Drummers -- 2. Corporals -- 3.
Masters of the Arms -- Corporal of the Gentl. 1 Clarke of the Band. Provost.
In a place of duty. Lansprezadoes -- 3.
Note that in Colonels Companies are more Serjants, and as many Drums.

Instructions for young Soldiers, agreeable to that discipline which is now
practiced within the Netherlands, under the command of the Prince of Orange.
I Will first begin with the several beats of the Drum, because every
soldier is bound of necessity to learn to know and observe them* for when the
Commanders voice cannot be heard unto the whole company, the Drum denounces
and expresses the same. The gathering of the company unto their colors: when
to Troop, March, Charge, Retreat; and such like. The beats or sounds which are
to be learned, are these that follow.

Instructions for the Drum.
A gathering. A Troop. A March. A Battalia. A Charge. A Retreat. A Relief. A
Battery. A Call for proclamation.
The gathering is the first which is to bring the company together to their
Colors, or place appointed by the superior Commander

A Troop.
A troop is, that when the company is come to the place appointed, the
Commander intending to keep them close in their order, which is three foot,
the readier with advanced Pikes to troop up to the Court of guard, or place
appointed for watch. Likewise to charge the enemy, or receive a charge, and is
as the voice of the Commander to all, to advance their Pikes, and shoulder
their muskets, if they be at any other posture.

A March.
A March is, if the company be at a stand or trooping, charging, or retiring,
as the voice of the Commander, to shoulder their arms, and march, if the march
be beaten in a longer distance of time then is usual; then they must open
their files and ranks to the next distance which is six foot, the body
marching very leasurely; out if the march be beaten swifter, then are they to
close their files and ranks, and to march with a quicker pace; so that a
skillful Commander instructing the Drummer by signs, may at his pleasure
march, troop, stand, retreat, charge, in front, in rear, in right or left
flank, in front and rear, or right and left at once, or every way at one time.

A Battalia.
Is the uniting of devisions in battle form. Likewise a preparation, the
enemy being in sight or at hand, giving notice to all to prepare themselves for
skirmish or for battle.

A Charge
Is when the body is come to push of pike, or near at hand, joining body to
body with the enemy, that no retiring be from the place, during the charge.

A Retreat
It a retiring backward leysurely without disorder, either to give way to other
battaliaes to relieve them, or for gayning some advantageous ground, or to draw
the enemy in an Ambush, or such like, which the superior Commander may
sometimes upon policy direct.

A Relief
Is a relieving of the watch, and dismissing of Sentinels from extraordinary
places in day light.

A Battery
Is most used in places of work, as in Trenches, Batteries, Halfe-moones,
Horneworkes, Redouts, Sconces, Counterskarls, and such like, that those therein
employed should be diligent in that employment.

A Call
Is only to proclaim the Commanders will concerning the well ordering of the
Army, and of such military Laws which ought to be kept, that all should give
ear unto that which the Drummer either reads or speaks.

For the beating of the March.
I have thought meet for the benefit of each Drummer which is not yet perfect
in the March, to prick down the old English March newly revived in the
plainest form I could invent. Wishing that all Drummers would leave off other
forms invented, either by themselves, or others herein unskilful, that there
may be an uniformitie in this Kingdom, as in all other Nations.

Within the March are 9. several lines, or ranks, which must be known, and
distinctly beaten dividing line from line, by a certain distance of time,
deciphered in short I. and long. in r. and half r.

Note that these 2. former letters short I. and long. stands for single
strokes: the long. for the right hand stroke; the short I. for the left hand
stroke. The next two letters, the whole r. for a full ruff, the half r. in
this manner, 2. for half a ruff.

Where the joins with the r. in this manner, r. the single stroke with the
ruff must be joined together. The r, and half in this manner r 2 is a ruff
and half ruff joined.

There is also a preparation to the March which is only to be beaten once, and
no more, at the beginning of the March.

The first is the preparation, the March follows.

The preparation.
rIIr. I^Ir. -- II. II. r Ir. rrr. rrIrI. IrIr. rrrr. rr2r2. IrIr.
I have insisted somewhat long in the office of the Drummer, for that I find a
great defect in that place, and would wish a more general reformation.

Instructions for those that are ignorant in arming and disarming themselves.
EAch Soldier having brought his Arms into the field, standing with them at
their first order as may be observed in the following notes of the postures and
motions. Then the Commander gives the Word.

Disarme, or Lay down your Arms.

First, lay down your Musket, stepping forward one pace with your right foot,
then recover your foot to its place: then receive your Match into your right
hand out of the left. Next lay down your Rest, stepping forward with your left
foot, recover your foot back again. Take your Match into your left hand,
betwixt the two lowermost fingers, as formerly: then lay down your Match with
your left foot stepping forward, on the right hand of your Rest recover your
foot as before. Afterward in upright form of body put off your Hat with your
left hand, and holding it by your left side, take off your Bandilie^rs with
your right hand laying it down betwixt your Musket and your Match, the charges
fromward you. Afterward retire three paces backward, that you may the more
gracefully come to the stand where you were, to arm your self.

The next word of command is.

Arm, or, Take up your Arms.

First, take up your Bandiliers, putting them on as you did take them off: then
your Match as formerly, then your Rest; last your Musket. Perform these
directions, and all other with a graceful and comely carriage of body.



The Word of command: Foot your Arms. The Arms being laid down, the Soldier
standing three paces back.



Armed, and standing at his first order.

Being armed, and standing at your first order, then follows the preparation to
the Postures.

The word of Command is,

Prepare.

Join your Musket with your Rest; open your pan, blow your pan, prime your
pan. Shut, Cast off, and so forward, as you may perceive by the following
notes, until you have shouldered and sloped: then begins your postures.

The first motion in the Postures is, Slip your Musket; the last motion is,
Give fire. Note, all the rest of the motions that follow after giving fire,
until you have sloped your Musket, are dependances unto the Postures, but more
especially to the first Posture.

Now follows the action of Soldiers being prepared, their Muskets being
charged, as all ought to be, the enemy being not far from them, only waiting
for the Word from the Commander, as you may observe in the next place.

The Postures and Motions of a Musketteere, the musket being charged, first
standing, then marching.
1 Hand your Arms, order your Musket, and Rest, even with your body in the
rank you stand in, which is called your first order. 2 Join your Musket with
your Rest. 3 Poyse your Musket, and breast it. 4 Shoulder your Musket. 5 Slope
your Musket. 6 Slip your Musket. 7 Poise your Musket. 8 Rest your Musket.
Falling back with your right foot observe in this and most of all your
Motions, to keep the mouth of your Musket high and strait over your Leaders
right shoulder.

9 Hand your Match. 10 Blow your Match. 11 Cock your Match. 12 Try your Match.
13 Guard your pan. 14 Blow your Coal. 15 Open your pan. 16 Present your Musket
breast, or rather middle high, removing back your left foot unto your right,
then your right foot slopewaies back, standing with a full and upright body,
your left knee bending, your right elbow even with your shoulder. 17 Give fire.
18 Recover your ground with your feet. 19 Return your Match. 20 Blow your pan.
21 Prime your pan. 22 Shut your pan. 23 Cast off your loose powder. 24 Recover
your Rest. 25 Blow off your loose powder. 26 Bear about your Musket unto your
left side, falling back with your left foot: trayle your Rest between your
Musket and body. 27 Hand your Charge, and open it. 28 Charge your Musket. 29
Draw out your skouring-sticke, and shorten it against your breast. 30 Ram
down your Bullet. 31 Return your stick. 32 Recover your Musket and Rest. 33
Poyse your Musket. 34 Rest your Musket with your left foot forward again. 35
Your saluting posture. 36 Your burial posture. 1 Your guard posture 2 Your
Order posture 3 Your sentinel posture 3.
These three last are in the number of the former, but remembered because they
are to be used upon several occasions.

Shoulder your Musket, and march with your Rest in your right hand.

Note that the three general postures do begin, the Musket, being charged and
shouldered.

The names of the 3 general postures are these that follow.

1 Make ready, 2 Present, 3 Give fire, which are to be ^erformed in 12 Motions.

If marching then gracefully with an eleven paces especially to the front.

Note that all the rest of the Motions which follow after giving fire, are
dependances unto the first Posture.

In the first Posture are 8 Motions, in the second 3, in the third 1 Motion.

The first Posture, Make ready. 8. Motions. Slip your Musket. Poyse your
Musket. Join your Musket with your Rest. Hand your Match. Blow your Match.
Cock your Match. Try your Match. Guard your pan.
The second Posture, Present. 3. Motions. Blow your Coal. Open your Pan.
Present breast high.
The third Posture, Give fire. 1 Motion. Give fire.

When you have given fire, winning or maintaining ground, recover your Rest
with your right foot stepping forward. But losing ground, recover your Rest
unto your foot, joining it with your Musket falling about into your file, and
rank, making ready again as you go.

If you observe 3 paces in the presenting Posture, as some Regiments do, then
to the Front or right Flank: begin your first Motion with your left foot
stepping forward but to the Rear or left Flank with your right foot pacing
first.

Note that there be many Regiments that observe but 2 paces in the presenting
Posture.

Note, when you give fire to the Rear, turn right about.

The Postures and Motions of a Pikeman, standing and marching.
1 Hand your pike. 2 Advance your pike. 3 Lay down your pike. 4 Take up your
pike. 5 Order your pike. 6 Shoulder you pike. 7 Levill your pike. 8 Slope your
pike. 9 Advance your pike. 10 Port your pike. 11 Comport your pike. 12 Cheek
your pike. 13 Trayle your pike. 14 Recover your pike. 15 Shoulder your pike.
Note, when you bear your pike shouldred it must be sloped; except you be
commanded to level it.

Observe when you charge at a stand, fall back with your right foot: if
marching, advance your self forward, your body upright, your left knee bending.

16 To the front charge 17 As you were. 18 To the right charge. 19 As you were.
20 To the left charge. 21 As you were. 22 The rear charge. 23 As you were. 24
To the front and rear charge. 25 As you were. 26 To the right and left charge.
27 As you were. 28 Every way charge square 29 As you were. 30 Quarters every
way charge. 31 As you were. 32 Advance your ground and charge to either hand at
discretion. Between every charge, march. 33 Retreat charging. 34 Your
breathing posture. 35 Advance forward again. 36 Stand, order your Pike. 37
Open order at foot. Now follows the charge against horse. 38 Close order at
foot. 39 Draw your sword over your left arm, join it close unto your Pike. 40
To the front charge at foot. 41 To the right charge. 42 To the right charge. 43
To the right charge. 44 To the right charge. 45 Right about charge. 46 Left
about charge. 47 To the right and left charge. 48 To the front and rear
charge. 49 Every way charge square, or quarters at discretion. 50 Stand, sheath
your sword. 51 Order your Pike. 52 Your burial posture.
Three general postures of the Pike, in thirteen great and small motions:
three standing, seven marching, three charging.
The first posture. 3 Standing. 1 Lay down your Pike. 2 Take up your Pike. 3
Order your Pike.
The second posture. 7 Marching. 4 Advance your Pike. 5 Shoulder your Pike. 6
Level your Pike. 7 Slope your Pike. 8 Comport your Pike. 9 Cheek your Pike. 10
Traile your Pike.
The third posture. 3 Charging. 11 Port your Pike. 12 Charge overhand. 14
Charge at foot.

All these postures and motions both of Musketteers and Pikemen in a body or
Battalia great or small, may be performed without words, by signs of the
Commander, and the beating of the Drum, the Drummer observing every motion
from the Commander.

Now follows the motions of Facing, Doubling, Countermarching, Wheeling, and
such like, in a gross body or Battalia.

Note and remember well that there are several sorts of distances to be
observ^d for several uses, upon variety of occasions: for Marching, for
Exercising, for Skirmishing, for battle, in front, in flank, in rear, which
every Commander does, or ought to know.

Close order: Order: Open order: Double distance: double double distance: the
first, one foot and an half: the second, three foot: the third, six foot: the
fourth, twelve foot: the fifth, twenty four foot.

Now to begin wi^h that which is first put in practice, which is open order,
six foot.

Open order six foot square: that is, six foot, file from file, and six foot,
rank from rank, which is the first distance that a Company is framed unto,
especially for exercise. Next there is order, three foot square both in file
and rank, for exercise, or for battle. Thirdly, there is closest, or close
order, which is one foot and an half, file from file, and is only used for the
Pikes when they come to the push* There is likewise a double distance, twelve
foot square, either in file or rank, and a double double distance, twenty
four foot, which two last are practiced, sometimes upon extraordinary
occasions. There is likewise a marching order, three foot file from file, and
six foot rank from rank, or to oppose an enemy only in front, and an open
order, six foot file from file: twelve foot rank from rank, which I leave to
the discretion of the Commander.

Now to make some use of part of these, I will only at this time set down the
plain and true words of command, with some few remembrances joined to them
wishing all Officers which yet fail in the right delivering of the words of
command, to observe and follow these directions: for if a Commander speak them
not right, as the Proverb is, setting the cart before the horse, the soldiers
although skillful, does act them many times wrong.

The company being come to the appointed place, neither yet in file nor rank,
the Commander gives the word as follows.

Leaders, lead forth your Files, join them into a body, or frame a body.

Note that a file is a number or sequence of men standing one behind another
at a certain distance, as you may read after more at large, being ten
deep, as most nations have in use: yet they may be eight* or six, or fewer,
or more, as the occasion offers. But before we frame our body or battalia,

Let all Soldiers observe, but especially all Officers, how a body or battalia
is distinguished or named in each several part as follows.

First, there are files and ranks, these files and ranks annexed or united
together* make a body or Battalia.

A file is a sequence of men standing one behind another, at a certain
distance, whose faces are directly placed one way, the back of the former, to
the face of the follower: subsisting commonly of ten in depth, according to
the modern use of the Netherlands, but may be brought to more or fewer as I
have said before.

This file is distinguished into a Leader, a bringer up, and two middle men,
with six other between. The first man of the file is called the Leader, the
last man a bringer up; the two that are in the middle of the file, are called
by the name of middle men, which are the leaders of the half files, when they
are to double on the other, and for other uses.

A Rank is a row, or a number of men above one, few or many stand one by
another, side by side, or pouldron to pouldron, their faces being directed all
one way. Of these Files and Ranks as I have set down before, being connexed
together, is framed a Battalia, by these names distinguished as follows.

The front, the rear, the right flank, or half ranks, the left flank, or
half ranks; the right wing, the left wing.

The front are the half files that are before, being ten deep, the foremost
five Ranks.

The rear are the half files that are behind.

The right flank are the half ranks on the right hand.

The left flank, are the half Ranks on the left hand.

The right and left wings are the devisions of Musketteers, which are on both
hands of the Pikes, but especially when they are to act their own part, being
appointed to move or to skirmish, in front, flank, or rear.

Stand at your open order square: mark your directions.

Silence.
Note, facing any way at a stand, remove your right foot, turning upon your
left toe.

To the right hand.

As you were.

To the left hand.

As you were.

Right about.

As you were.

Left about.

As you were.

Note that in all doublings, if you double to the right, fall off to the left
into your first place: if you double to the left, fall back to the right.

Ranks to the right hand double.

As you were.

Ranks to the left hand double.

As you were.

Files to the right hand double.

As you were.

Files to the left hand double.

As you were.

Half Files or middlemen to the right hand double your Front.

As you were.

Half files to the left hand double your front

As you were.

Bringers up to the right hand, double your Front.

As you were.

Bringers up to the left hand, double your Front.

As you were.

To the right hand Countermarch maintaining ground.

As you were, to the left Counter.

To the right hand Countermarch losing ground.

As you were, to the left Counter.

To the right hand Countermarch winning ground.

As you were, to the left Counter.

Now follows some things to be acted in a closer distance, namely, order, three
foot both Files and Ranks.

The Word of Command.

Files close, that is, to the middle, or to the right close, or left, at
discretion.

Ranks close forwards.

Half files or middle men to the right hand entire, double your Front.

As you were.

Half Files to the left hand entire, double your Front.

As you were.

Half Files to the right, and left by division, double your Front.

As you were.

The body, to the right hand wheel, moving on the right corner man.

To the left hand wheel moving on the left corner man.

To the right hand wheel, moving on the middle man, or men in Front, which are
Leaders, or wheel about, at discretion.

Now follow some things which are to be performed at a double distance, 12 foot
rank from rank, or double double distance 24 foot, agreeable to the number of
men that are in rank.

Ranks open to your double distance, keeping their files at their order.

Ranks to the right hand by conversion.

As you were.

Ranks to the left hand by conversion.

As you were.

Ranks to the right, and left by conversion.

As you were.

Ranks close.

These Motions which I have repeated, of Facing, Doubling, Countermarching, and
Wheeling, are commonly known, and practiced by the Officers and Companies in
the Netherlands, and in other places where the wars are: there are not many
that knows, or for some reasons teaches any more.

Now to satisfy those that desire to learn and understand more then common
things of this subject, I have joined with these some other, which are of great
importance in time of advantage, or disadvantage, to be practiced against a
skillful enemy. Therefore I will begin again, setting down the additions in
their places.

Where the word Note stands in the Margent there follows a change of that which
went before.

The Company being framed into a square open order as is set down before.

Not that all the Musketteers must be in one division on the right hand of the
pikes a double distance from the body of pikes.

The Commander standing at the head of the company before the middle file
Leaders, gives the word.

If it be the Captain, then the Lieutenant ought to be at the rear, the
Ensign at the head of the pikes, the Sergeants on both the Flanks, the Drums
even with the foremost rank, on both the Angles.

Facing

To the right hand.

As you were.

To the left hand.

As you were.

Right about.

As you were.

Left about

As you were.

To the right and left.

As you were.

To the Front and Rear.

As you were.

Every way square.

As you were.

Every way quarters.

As you were.

Ranks doubling.

Ranks to the right hand double.

As you were.

Ranks to the left double.

As you were.

Files doubling

Files to the right double.

As you were.

Files to the left double.

As you were.

Files to the right and left double.

As you were.

Files to the Center double.

As you were.

When middle men is named to double, it is the oldest used word of Command, for
the Rear to double the Front, which I do now follow: because when I name half
Files, it is to be understood that the half Files in the Front are to double
the half files in the Rear.

The Rear doubling the Front by Middlemen.

Middlemen to the right hand double your Front.

As you were.

Middlemen to the left double your Front.

As you were.

The rear doubling the Front by Bringers up.

Bringers up to the right double your front.

As you were.

Bringers up to the left double your front.

As you were.

Half files in the Front doubling the Rear by middlemen.

Half Files to the right hand double the Rear.

As you were.

Half files to the left double the Rear.

As you were.

The Front doubling the Rear by Leaders. Note.


Leaders to the right double the Rear.

As you were.

Leaders to the left double the Rear.

As you were.

Half ranks doubling the flank. Note. Doubling the flank.


Half ranks to the right double your flank.

As you were.

Half ranks to the left double your flank.

As you were.

Countermarching, Note. Countermarch.
maintaining, losing, and winning ground.

Countermarch to the right hand, and maintain ground Corian or modern.

As you were to the left.

Countermarch to the right, and lose ground, Macedonian.

As you were to the left.

Countermarch to the right, and win ground, Lacedemonian.

As you were to the left.

You may if need require countermarch your Leaders and bringers up into the
center, or your flanks, or angles, or wings, into the center, or midst of the
body, or exchange your angles, or double your wings, or flanks, by Countermarch.

Now follow some things which are to Note.
be performed in the second distance, namely, order; 3 foot.

Files close, that is, to the middle, or to the right or left, at discretion.

Ranks close forwards. Note. Entire doubling


Ranks to the right hand entire double.

As you were.

Ranks to the left entire double.

As you were.

Ranks to the right and left by division double.

As you were.

Files entire doubling. Note.


Files to the right hand entire double.

As you were.

Files to the left entire double.

As you were.

Files to the right and left entire double.

As you were.

Files advance to the right entire double. Note.


As you were.

Files advance to the left entire double.

As you were.

Files advance to the right and left entire double.

As you were.

The half files in the rear entire doubling the half files in the front. Note.


Middlemen to the right entire, double your front.

As you were.

Middlemen to the left entire, double your front.

As you were.

Middlemen to the right and left, by division, double your front.

As you were.

The half files in the front entire, doubling the rear. Note.


Half files to the right entire, double the rear.

As you were.

Half files to the left entire, double the rear.

As you were.

Half files to the right and left by division, double the rear.

As you were.

The half ranks entire doubling the flank. Note.


Half ranks to the right hand entire, double your flank.

As you were.

Half ranks to the left entire, double your flank.

As you were.

Half ranks by division, double your right flank.

As you were.

Half ranks by division, double your left flank.

As you were.

Right flank advance to the left entire, Note.
double your flank.

As you were.

Left flank advance to the right entire, double your flank.

As you were.

The body wheeling.
The body to the right wheel, Note.
moving on the right cornerman.

To the left wheel, Wheeling.
moving on the left corner man.

Even so right or left about.

To the right wheel, moving on the middle leader or leaders, or left, or about
at discretion.

The front or flanks wheeling into the center, Note.
or midst of the body.

Front wheel into the center, then face to the Leader or Commander: if need
require, wheel again the front into the center or midst of the body, then face
as before: the first wheeling brings all the Musketteers before the body of
Pikes: the second wheeling into the midst of the Pikes: the third wheeling
unto the rear of the Pikes: the fourth, wheeling on the flanks, as at first
they were.

The use of the manner of wheelings.
Suppose there were three or four files of Musketteers on each hand of the
Pikes, Note. The use of wheeling.
they could deliver but six or eight shot at once in the front. This first
wheeling, brings the Musketteers, that they may deliver twenty shot at once,
being ten deep. The second wheeling brings them into the midst: delivering
them from the violent charge of horse, charging in the flanks, especially when
their powder is spent, or upon some policy to cover the Musketteers from sight
of the Enemy. In like manner the rest of the wheelings are by a skillful
Commander put in practice at convenient time, as the occasion offers.

Likewise you may wheel the front to the right and left by division, to
receive the Enemy who is ready to charge both the flanks at once.

Now follow some forms of doublings, which must be performed at a wider
distance, six, twelve or twenty four foot, at the discretion of the Commander.

Remember always the manner and form of opening and closing of files and
ranks.

Being in open order, Note. F^les closing.
the word being given, files close, without naming any hand, is thus performed:
the two middle leaders close, unto the next distance, which is three foot, the
rest of the files likewise close toward the middle leaders, until they are at
the distance commanded.

If the word be files to the right close, then the right hand file moves not,
but stands fast; all the rest of the files close toward the right file, till
they are at their distance appointed.

If the word be files to the left close, then the left file stands fast; the
rest of the files close toward the left hand* until they come to the distance
commanded.

If the word be files* to the right and left close then the one half of the
files close to the right hand file, which stands fast, the other half to the
left, opening in the middle of the body, leaving a space betwixt the two half
bodies, which is done for some special use best known to the Commander.

Observe that at what distance soever the company stands in, Note.
if the word be Close, not naming any order, whether files or ranks, then they
must close to the next distance, being at twelve foot, they close to six foot,
being at six, they close to three foot: in the same manner; files opening, or
ranks opening.

Being in close order, Files opening.
if the words be files open, not naming any hand, then the middle leaders open
one from the other unto six foot both ways, the rest of the files on both
flanks take their distance from them.

If the word be, Files to the right hand open, Note.
then the left file or angle moves not; the next file to the left hand first
takes its distance, the rest of the files in like manner pressing upon their
right hand files, till the distance commanded be obtained in opening.

If the word be, Files to the left open, then the right file stands fast, the
rest of the files opening to the left hand, still pressing upon their left hand
files, till they be in the distance and order commanded.

Ranks closing.
If the word be, Note. Rank^s closing.
Ranks close, then the first rank moves not, namely, if they be at a stand,
all the rest of the ranks close forward, till they be at the distance appointed.

If need require, you may close your ranks backward, from the front to the
rear, with this word of command. Ranks close backward, then the last rank
moves not, all the rest of the ranks go backward toward the last rank,
taking their distance, rank by rank, from the rear or last rank.

You may likewise open your ranks from the leaders to the rear, Ranks opening.
or from the bringers up to the front: but

If the word be without any addition, as this that follows:

Ranks open.
Then the first rank moves not, the rest of the ranks fall back, till they
have gained that distance commanded: the second rank stands first, the rest
in like manner, one after another, till they have all performed it.

If the word be, Ranks open forwards,

Then all the body advances forward, except the last rank which stands
firm: the second to the last takes the distance first, then the rest, till
they have all performed it.

Files and Ranks close.
Sometimes it is convenient to close Files and Ranks both at once, Note.
Closing ^f Files and ranks.
then it is performed marching, being before at a wider distance, at a sudden
to give way unto horse or foot to pass, or to enter into a narrow passage, or
such like.

The body being at their close order, both files and ranks, and you would have
them open: the word of command.

Files and ranks open.

Which is from the same distance that they did close, Opening Files and Ranks.
do they open unto again, or unto any other distance commanded both together.
If they be at a stand, then the ranks open first, and then the files, and in
closing, the files close first, then the ranks.

If the word be Files and Ranks, close to the center.

Then the half files and ranks, Note.
close to the middle of the depth of the Body: the half files in the front
moving backward, the rear half ^iles forward, till they be at their distance
commanded.

So likewise opening from the center, which may be done in the like manner, as
is directed before.

If the Commander have occasion to bring all the ranks into one file, or into
two, the Body being at their order, three foot.

The word, Inversion.
Ranks open to 6 foot, 12. or more, as the number are in Rank, then Ranks to
the right hand file, or by inversion

As you were.

Ranks to the left by inversion.

As you were.

Ranks to the right and left by inversion.

As you were.

Ranks to the right by conversion.

As you were.

Ranks to the left by conversion.

As you were. Note. Conversion.


Ranks to the right and left by conversion.

As you were.

Now follows the closing of the ranks, and opening of the files: that which
the Ranks performed in File, may the Files perform in Ranks.

Ranks close, to your order.

Files open, Note.
to 6 foot, 12 foot or more, agreeable to the depth, always having in memory,
that 6 foot, is named open order, 12 foot double distance, 24 foot double
double distance.

Files to the right hand rank by conversion. Note. Files by conversion.


As you were.

Files to the left rank by conversion.

As you were.

Files to the right and left rank by conversion.

As you were.

Files close, to what distance the Commander judges fit or convenient.

If you would, ocasion being offered, draw out your Files in depth at a
passage, or such like, into one or two Files, or rank your Files, or rank
your Ranks. The word of Command.

Files to the right file on in sequence. Note. Sequence.


As you were.

Files to the left file on.

As you were.

Files to the right, and left file on.

As you were.

Files to the right rank, 2. 4. 7. or more.

As you were. Note. Files rank^


Files to the left rank, 3. or more.

As you were.

Files to the right and left Rank, 5. 6. or more, or fewer.

As you were.

Ranks to the right rank, Note. Rank* rank.
3, 5. or more.

As you were.

Ranks to the left rank, 2, 4.

As you were.

Ranks to the right and left rank, 3, 5, 6.

As you were.

The manner how to perform these last, and most of all those things which are
written before in this Book, which bear only the words of Command, and are not
there explained, may you find after in another place unfolded, and more at
large set forth for the manner of acting them.

Many other things of this subject might be added, but I suppose these are
sufficient for all such as are willing and inclinable to follow them, and for
any understanding Officer to work on, and make trial of their further skill:
wishing a happy issue unto their good endeavors.

As I have said before concerning the performance of the Postures and Motions
of Musketteers, Most things performed by signs.
and Pikemen particularly, by signs of the Commander, and the beating of the
Drum: So likewise may be performed the most of all other Motions, of Facings,
Doublings, Countermarches, and Wheelings, Opening, Closing, Marching fast, or
leasurely, Trooping, Charging, Retreating, and such like, by signs of the
Commander, and the beating of the Drum.

Here follows some short remembrances for the acting of these particulars,
concerning distance, and form.

First for facing.
Facing any way by command at a stand, Note. The manner of facing.
some teach to remove the same foot, as the hand is named; which is a very good
way, but for some respects, I follow the ancientest and known manner practiced
in most parts.

Which is at a stand to remove the right foot, either when you face to the
right, or left. Right about, or left about, turning upon the left toe, or heel:
but the toe is the best, the Pike at the order, the Musketteer his Musket
shouldered, Bearing of their Arms.
or rested, at the discretion of the Commander.

If the body be marching, Note.
then facing any way that foot which is furthest from the hand named ought
first to remove, the Pikes and Muskets shouldered.

The body trooping, the pikes advanced, the muskets shouldered.

For all Doublings.
Observe, Note.
that in all doublings, hand and foot ought to go together: although some do
teach that the contrary foot to the hand which is named should first remove:
but the best way is the same hand which the Commander names, the same foot
first remove: the right hand, the right foot: the left hand, the left foot.

Observe likewise, that in all movings, or doublings at a stand no above three
paces, the Pike at the order, the Musket rested, or shouldered; But if they
move above 3 paces, then the Pike ought to be advanced, the Musket shouldred,
ported, poised, or breasted, at discretion, the whole body moving, or any part
thereof. All those which are in the ranks, or files that move must observe
their Leaders, and bear their Arms as they do: the leaders, or foremost men,
receiving the word or sign from the Commander.

Observe, Note.
when you double to the right hand, you must return back to your place turning
to the left: If you double to the left, return back to the right.

When ranks, Note. Mov^ng al together.
middlemen, or bringersup are to double, each man in those ranks which are to
move, must observe the righthand man in that rank they stand in, moving with
him pace by pace, unto the place appointed, and so likewise back again unto
their own places if it be so commanded, neither going before, nor after one
another, but even altogether.

Doubling of files, half ranks, flanks, wings, or angles, each man in the
file he stands in, must observe his file-leader, and move even with him pace
by pace, the file-leader looking down his file, setting forth the same foot,
the hand is named, the rest of his file seeing him will do the like, although
they heard not the word of command.

To know by sign without words, the several Countermarches, Countermarch by
signs.
maintaining, losing, and winning of ground, that which follows will instruct
you.

Countermarching, Note.
main aining ground, is known by the Leaders turning upon the same foot as the
hand is named, neither pacing forwards nor backwards, till he be turned: then
marches down the file unto the rear, the Leaders observing the Commander, and
all the rest of the files moving together at their distance, turning at the
same place, where the Leaders turned, till the front be turned, and brought
into the same place where the rear was, and the rear where the front was.

Countermarching again to the contrary hand, in the same manner brings every
one in his first station.

Losing ground is known when the Leaders step forwards one pace, Note.
and turning to the hand named, then standing still, the second Rank with all
the rest that follow pass on their leaders right hand, if the right be named,
and place themselves behind their own Leaders at their distance.

Winning ground is known when the Leaders step backwards with the right foot,
if the right be named or signed by the Commander: and being two paces past the
second rank, then that second rank likewise steppeth back, following their
Leaders at their distance, and so subsequently all the rest, winning of ground
toward the enemy, who marches after them to charge their rear, or bringing
their front in the suddennest manner to follow the Enemy retiring, or to double
their own rear in the quickest form to receive the Enemy over winging them.

In all sorts of Countermarches, Note.
they may bear their Arms, Pikes advanced or comported, if shouldered: then at
the turning, they must advance, port, or charge, or arm their Pike with their
right hand aloft: being turned, shoulder again, the Muskets shouldered or
brested, at discretion.

There are other manner of ways to perform these Countermarches, either for
files or ranks. But these here set down, are the playnest, and as I suppose,
the best, which may suffice for this time.

Note that you must not countermarch, Note.
if the Enemy be near at hand, lest the Body be brought in disorder, and so
easily overthrown.

Wheeling.
When you are to wheel, if the Body be great, and stand at their open order,
the best way: is to close, both Files and Ranks, especially the Files to their
order: if the body be small, then double either Ranks or half files; the Pikes
advanced, the Muskets shouldered or breasted: the several forms of wheeling is
set down before, fol. 32. 33.

The difference in the acting of Inversion and Conversion.
Where you read Inversion, or Conversion, that you may the better understand
the meaning of them, and how they differ, in former times there has been made
no difference in the form, but only in the name; which was an error, they
differ as follows.

The Commander giving the word.
Ranks to the right file, or by Inversion.

Observe that the right file stands firm, and moves not: all the rest of
each rank turning their faces toward the right hand, move all till they
become into that file that stands still, placing themselves each man behind
his right hand man, and so become all one file. Note that all the whole rank
that moves, must place themselves betwixt their own right hand man that stood
still, and the next that stands after him: the first Rank between the leader
of the File that stands, and the second in that file: the second Rank
between the second and third in that File, and so the rest, an even distance
one from the other.

If the word be Ranks to the left by inversion; then the left file stands
fast, and moves not, the rest of every Rank moves, till they be come into
the left File, making one file, in the like manner as they did on the right
hand.

The Word.
Ranks to the right and left by inversion.

Then half the Ranks falls behind their Sidemen to the right, and half to the
left hand, making two files, marching with them in that form, over Bridges, or
through Woods, or narrow passages, or to deliver vollies against horse or foot,
facing inward or outward, as the Commander directs.

The Word.
Ranks to the right by conversion.

Then the whole Rank wheeleth toward the right hand, moving on the outmost
right hand man, in that Rank they stand in, till all the Ranks be come even
with the right File, whose faces being turned to the right hand, they all
become one rank, either to give a volley against horse or foot by a River,
Morase, or Wood side, and many other uses may these inverting or converting
afford us when occasion is offered.

Ranks to the left by conversion.

Then all the Ranks wheeleth to the left hand in the same manner as they did
to the right, on the outmost left hand man in their own rank: who facing
likewise to the left, become altogether one rank, and when they have performed
that which is commanded: As you were, brings every man in his own first
place.

Ranks to the right and left by Conversion.

Then half the Ranks wheel to the right, and half to the left hand: then
facing right and left, are become two Ranks; and so, as you were, when you have
performed what you intended.

As the Ranks are converted into one File or two, so may likewise the Files be
converted into one Rank or two, as the occasion offers.

Observing, when the Ranks are to file by conversion, or inversion, you must
open your ranks to such a distance agreeable to the number which are in the
rank, that they may have room to come into the file commanded.

When you would convert your Files into one rank or two, you must close your
Ranks, and open your Files to that distance as the File is in depth, they may
have sufficient room to come into the rank, and to use their Arms as they are
directed.

To give you some light how to perform it, because it is not commonly known,
neither has been practiced much in former times. It is thus performed as
follows.

The word of Command.
Files to the right handranke, or by Conversion.
The first man, or leader of the File, stands fast, the second man in the
file comes upon the right hand of his Leader; the third man in the file on the
right hand of the second; and so subsequently all the rest, each man on the
right hand of him that did stand in the same file next before himself, till
they be all in one rank: performing that which they were commanded; as you
were brings every man to his first place.

Files to the left hand rank, or by conversion.
Which is performed in the like manner as the other, the whole file coming up
and placing themselves on the left hand of their Leaders making one Rank.

Files to the right and left by Conversion.
The foremost rank as they did before, stands fast: the rest of the body
divides it self going up, placing themselves, the right half ranks on the
right hand of their leaders; the left half ranks on the left hand of their
leaders, leaving an open space in the midsts of the ranks, for Horse, Wagons,
Ordnance, and such like to pass through.

Likewise by converting one rank at once into file, you may march by a narrow
passage giving fire against the enemy rank after rank, when the rank alone is
converted into a file either by wheeling, or falling after one another, and
has given fire, marching forward, and being by the passage rank again as
they were.

This may be performed to the right, or left, or to both, by dividing the rank.

File in sequence.
The word of Command.
Files to the right file, on, or in sequence.
That is, to draw all your files into one file; if the right be named, then the
right file of the whole body, or of that whole division, advances first
forward, the second file follows the first; be third, the second; and all the
rest in that manner, one after another. One use amongst many is to pass over a
bridge, or to free themselves from great Ordnance playing at them, and the
like. When they are through that passage, they draw up their Files into one
even Front, making one entire body again.

Here follows another form either for a passage, or to free themselves from
danger of shot, or the like.

The Word.
Files rank 2. 4. 6. or more according to the breadth of the passage, if it be
to the right hand, then the right file advances first forward, and fall in
rank, the same number commanded, the first file being ended, the next file
does the like; advancing forward falling in rank after the former: the rest of
the Files perform the same order till they are all rankt.

If the word be to the left hand, then the left hand file first advances
forward, ranking as it is appointed. The rest of the Files observe the like
form, till it be finished as is commanded.

There is another form out of the ranks, to rank 3. 5. 7. or more, as need
requires.

The Word.
Ranks to the right rank 3. 5. 8. and the like.

If there be ten in rank, and they are commanded to rank three, those three
that stand in the first rank on the right hand advances forward making the
first rank; the next 3 in the same rank make the second rank; the next 3 the
third rank: the tenth man that is left in the first rank, takes his place
first after the right hand man in the third Rank; then the two right hand men
in the second Rank advance forward, ranking with him, making the fourth rank,
the rest of the ranks do the like, till they have all finished what was
enjoined.

If the left be named, then the left hand man with the other two next him
advance forward and make the first rank; and so the rest, as they did to the
right, till all have done it.

In the like manner what number soever is named may be performed.

Note, when the Company is at the appointed place to exercise, or else to be
joined with other Companies, place all your Musketteers in one division, as I
have set down before, on the right hand of the Pikes

If the Company be in number one hundred, or fewer, half Pikes, half
Musketteers, then you ought to march with all your Musketteers in one division
before the Pikes: the Files both of pikes and muskets being ten deep, as most
Nations have in use, or in case of necessity 8 deep. When you make a stand draw
up your Pikes on the left hand of the Muskets, till they be all even in front.

But if the number be greater, so that you can make six files of Musketteers or
more, then you may divide them. When you march half before the Pikes, and
half behind, you must at all times observe to keep the depth of the File, ten
or eight at the least, if you possible may, observe that you march not at any
time two in rank, if you can any otherwise choose: for it is no way convenient
nor comely in sight: but three, or more, when you come to a stand with the
first division of Musketteers, the rest of the body marches until the first
division of Pikes be even in front with the Musketteers that stand, then the
second division of Pikes if there be so many, fronts with the former that
stand, and last the rear division of Musketteers advances forward until they
be even in rank, and file with the former divisions.

Observe that all marching companies, or battaliaes great or small, when they
come to a stand or holt, order their Pikes, and rest their Muskets, standing
even in File and Rank.

When the Commander gives the word March*
Observe that all must shoulder their arms, both Pikes and Muskets, and bear
them sloped, except it be otherwise commanded.

In trooping the Pikes must be advanced.

In charging especially to the front, being ten or eight deep, the half Files
in the rear must bear their Pikes ported over the heads of the foremost half
Files, as may give them no offense, either in charging or retreating. Likewise
the Pikes are not so subject to be broken by the enemies shot, as when they are
advanced.

Observe likewise in going through any port or gate, the Pikes at the entrance
ought to be ported: if it be a small gate or door, the Musketteer is to join
his Musket with his Rest, and enter porting his musket. -- Being through the
passage to bear their Arms as they did before.

Now follows the uniting of many companies together.

When many Companies are brought together to be joined into one, two, or three,
or more bodies, or battaliaes.

The Colonel, or eldest Captains Company, takes the first place on the right
hand of all the rest. All the Musketteers of that company are to be placed on
the right hand of the body of Pikes, standing at their open order; the division
of Musketteers, a double distance from the Pikes. So likewise all the rest of
the Companies in that manner, according to the degree of the Captain. Every
Company twenty foot one from the other.

Then draw back all the Musketteers, fifty foot behind the rear of the
Pikes, dividing them into Manaples, or divisions of four files by themselves:
the files at their order, three foot, and each manaple from other six foot:
then join all your Pikes in one body, or two, or three, according to their
number, or at the discretion of the Sergeant Major, or superior command. The
Files of Pikes likewise at their order, then flank each body of Pikes with two
wings of Musketteers, having divided them as you did your Pikes, for one, two,
or three bodies.

When all the Officers have taken their places according to their antiquity, as
the Sergeant Major directs* then march either in hearse form, or in square
battalia, if there be three battaliaes. The first march, then the other two,
even with one another in front, but divided one from the other, as far
distant as the length of the first battalia is, so that the left File of the
second battalia which is on the right hand, must be direct after the right File
of the first battalia: and the right File or Angle of the third and last
battalia, direct after the left File of the first battalia: both these, second,
and third battalions, if the ground will permit, sixty paces after the first
battalia: when the first marches, all march, when the first stands, all stand:
they must all move together; march, wheel, or stand, by example of the first,
if not directed otherwise by the superior Commander.

Observe if there be but, one division of Musketteers on each hand of the body
of Pikes, then the right wing after they have given fire in front, wheels off
to the right hand into the rear of their own files.

In the like manner, the left division of Musketteers after they have given
fire, wheels off to the left hand into the rear of their own Files.

But if the body be greater, so that there be more divisions then one of
Musketteers, on each hand of the body of Pikes, then after they have given
fire, must all, both those on the left hand, as well as those on the right
hand, wheel off to the right, through the distances which are left open for
that purpose, between the divisions into the rear.

Observe when the battalia advances toward an enemy, being yet a Musket shot
off, the two first Ranks makes ready, advancing ten paces before the body
directed by a Sergeant, as the first Rank presents, two Ranks more marches
forward, making ready as they go, giving fire rank after rank: Wheeling off
to the right hand through the divisions unto the rear of their own Files,
making ready again as they go, and subsequently all the rest. But when the
Battaliaes come nearer ready to the push of pike, then the ranks give fire
even with the foremost rank of pikes: and being forced to give back, then all
the Musketteers makes ready together resting their Muskets, standing with
their pans guarded, giving fire rank after rank, and suddenly with all speed
falling off into the Rear.

Marching from an Enemy.
Observe, when you are to give fire to the Rear, two ranks after two, makes
ready, giving fire even with the last rank of pikes, as soon as the rank has
given fire, it wheeleth to the right hand marching a good round pace through
the divisions into the Front, placing themselves before their own Files, and so
in like manner the rest. This is to be performed when the Battalia marches
from an Enemy, the Enemy pursuing them.

Now follows the giving fire in Flank.

There are three severarall ways to give fire in Flank, the body marching:
the first is:

The body, or Batalia marching by a River side, or Moras, or Wood, or in plain
Champaine ground, either assaulted sometimes with horsemen, or with foot, if it
be on both the Flanks at once. Then the outmost File on each hand, that is on
both the Flanks make ready; the Commander gives the word, To the right, and
left present; then the outmost File on each hand turns at 3. motions to the
hand commanded, and presents, giving fire, stands fast, only turning their
faces as they were toward the Front, until such time as the second File, who
marched along with the Body, has given fire, in the same form as the first
did. Then the first File marches up even with the second, both standing fast,
till the third File has given fire, and so subsequently all the rest one after
another. A Sergeant must stand at the head of those files that have given fire:
or if the division be great, a superior Officer takes that place, gathering up
again that whole wing joining them in equal front with the pikes

The second form to give fire in Flank.
If it be on both Flanks, the outmost File on each Flank being ready, at the
word of Command, presents. Having given fire, faces again toward the Front,
standing fast, till the leader of that File which gave fire last, be free from
the marching Body, one pace behind the bringers up, then leads his File a
round pace up on the other side of that division of Musketteers next unto the
pikes, till he be equal in Front with the rest of the Leaders, his whole File
even in rank with the rest; in like manner all the rest of the Files must do
in all points, as the first did, Remembering that as soon as the File has
given fire, presently, prepares again, whether he be to stand or move.

The third form of giving fire in Flank.
The outtermost File next the Enemy being commanded to make ready, keeping
still along with the Body till such time as they be ready, and then at command
they turn to the hand directed, according to the sight of their enemy either
on the right or left Flank, or both together, and give fire all together. When
they have discharged, they stand nor still as they did the two former ways,
but speedily joining their rests unto their Muskets, turning their faces
toward the rear; the rear-man or bringer-up being then a leader, turning
short about the rear of that division of Musketteers, going a speedy pace, yet
orderly next unto the pikes up unto the Front, placing himself with the rest
of the leaders: so he that was the Leader before, is now the bringer up of the
File.

Observe always in every form of giving fire in Flank, that as the first
presents, the next file makes ready, keeping still along with the Body,
presenting not till they be free of the File that gave fire last.

Two times giving fire in this l^st form, the first leader with every man in
that File comes in his first place again.

In this manner of giving fire two hundred Musketteers may deliver as many shot
in as short a time, as three hundred any other way.

I could very much enlarge my self in this Subject, but I hope these will
content my friends for this time, who have honest hearts, and judge charitably:
and because I know that there have been many very excellent Books of military
Discipline set forth within these few years in this Kingdom, namely, the
Instructions for Musters and Arms by order from the Lords of his Majesty's
most Honorable Privy Council, and thirteen other, written by skillful and
painful Gentlemen Soldiers, as I have set down in my Preface.

If I had appointed me any command, with the horse-troops as I have with the
foot-companies, I should likewise set down some observations concerning the
exercising and imbattailing of them. But for this, and some other reasons at
this time I omit. Only remembering the Officers of the troops of Horse which are
yet unskilful, or not so skillful as they would desire to be, to observe the
form and manner of the exercising of the Foot-Companies which will in some
measure teach them their duties. For in the exercising of Horse and Foot, there
is not much difference.

Before I pass any further, let me remember the Ensign bearer in few words,
concerning his place and duty, and the displ^ying of the Colors.

The Ensign or Colors, is the honor and reputation of the Captain and
Soldiers: therefore the Ensigne-bearer ought not only to be a good soldier,
bold and valiant, but likewise discreet and wise in counsel, and in the
absence of the Captain and Livetenant, have the same authority the Captain
has.

Where the company is appointed to gather together, he ought to be one of the
first, and to be careful of his Colors: and at all times see that they be
well guarded, and be ready to do any thing to further the service.

Within these few years, a Supreme Commander in setting down the duty of
each Officer in his place, speaks of the Ensign these words following.

The Ensign shall never turn his face out of his order, start from any
danger, nor forsake his Ensign, upon pain of death.

In a march, he may bear his Colors flying, rested upon his shoulder, before
the head of the Pikes. And being in a batalia, his Colors sometimes advanced
and breasted, flying, in the midst of the Pikes, between the half Files.

In a troop, the Colors furld, or rold up.

In presence of the General, or supreme Commander, he must bear his Colors
flying, and passing by him, veil them, the point even with his knee, once and
no more for that time, without any other ceremonies.

But if he pass by the King or Prince, he shall likewise withal, bow somewhat
one of his knees.

The Soldiers ought not to forsake or leave their Colors, before they be
lodged, and then with leave of the Captain, may depart.

The postures of the Colors.
Note, that in those parts where the wars are, especially within the Leager, or
any Army in the field, the Ensign ought not to display his Colors, but only
to bear them flying, marching, skirmishing, or at a stand, or to veil them as
I have showed before.

But with the trained bands in those parts, and likewise within this kingdom,
the Ensign does use at their meetings or Musters, some more postures in
displaying his Colors.

The Ensign may perform most parr of the postures and motions with the Pikes,
except laying down, cheeking, and trayling: for which two last, he may use
comporting.

1 Hand your Colors. 2 Order your Colors. 3 Shoulder your Colors. 4 Advance
your Colors. 5 Port your Colors. 6 Comport your Colors. 7 Charge your
Colors. 8 Breast your Colors. 9 Veil your Colors.
Display your Colors.

1 The first posture from hand to hand. 2 The second, overhead, ps. with one
hand 3 The third, twice over-head, ps. changing hands. 4 The round over-head,
ps. 5 The back. ps. 6 The Cross, ps. 7 The retreating, ps. losing ground. 8
The advancing, ps. winning ground. 9 Furle, or roll up your Colors.
Now follows those small Maps which I promised in the Preface, of small and
greater bodies, that such things which I have written, may be the better
conceived, and fixed in the memory of all:

Observe these letters following, for each Officer, standing in their right
places, and for the Front, Rear, and Flanks.

C Captain. L Lieutenant. E Ensign. S Sergeant. D Drum. Fr. Front. Re.
Rear* Rf. Right flank. Lf. Left flank. P. Pikes. M. Musketteeres.
The Captain leading before the Front, into the field, or advancing toward
the enemy.

Out of the field, or skirmishing in the rear, or marching from the enemy, at
the rear, at all times nearest the enemy.

The Lieutenant his place is at the rear if the Captain be at the front, or
in the front, if the Captain be at the rear.

The Ensign before the head of the Pikes, and sometimes in a battalia between
the half Files of Pikes.

The Sergeants on the outside of the flanks, and in skirmish leading up the
Ranks or Files of Musketteers to give fire.

The Drums in a march, hearse form, betwixt the third and fourth Ranks. In a
battalia, on the corners, flanks, and in the midst with the Colors.

Observe, that in the Maps are plain squares, Oes and small pricks.

The plain squares are the Pikes, the Oes and small pricks the musketteers;
the Oes, leaders, bringers up, and middlemen.

Observe, when many companies are united or joined together, making an entire
body: the Sergeant Major directs every Officer what part of the body he shall
be at, to make good that place.

The Table at the end of this Book, directs unto all the special things
contained in this Book.

A Company of 100. marching, half Pikes, half Musketteers.

A Company of 200. marching.

The form of a Company Exercising, with all their Officers in their places.

A body standing in battle form, with all their Officers in their places.

A Battalia of 200. approaching toward the enemy, giving fire in front; the
first Rank having given fire, wheeleth off to the right and left hands into
the Rear.

A body marching from the Enemy giving fire in the rear, falling off to the
right and left, going up a round pace into the Front.

A Battalia marching, giving fire in both the flanks: the first File having
given fire, stands fast, only turning their faces again toward the front,
until the second File has given fire, then advances forward even with the
second, in its first place: in the like manner all the rest.

The second form of a body marching, giving fire in both flanks, the outermost
Files on both the Flanks having given fire, stand fast as they did before, till
the bringers up of that division be one pace past them, then marching up a good
round pace next the Pikes, till they be joined with the rest in File and Rank.

The third and best form of body marching giving fire in both the flanks, the
outmost Files having given fire, turn their faces to the rear, the bringers
up being then Leaders, leading their File up next unto the Pikes, joining
himself with the rest of the Leaders, the rest of that File standing right
behind him, even with the rest in Rank, two times giving fire, in this manner
every man comes in his first place.

A Battalia giving fire in front, with three files at once, having given fire,
face to the rear; the bringer up leads back the file into its own place
then facing to the front again.

A Battalia giving fire in front, with four Files at once.

A hollow body for a parle* or to march conveying treasure in the midst, and
for other uses.

A Sconfel battalia marching ready for all assaults, if the enemy should
suddenly assail them.

A Battalia giving fire in front and rear both at once, falling off to the
right and left, into the rear of their own half Files.

another form of giving fire in front and ^are, or on both the flanks at
once: having Even fire, wheel off to the right hand, be^inde their own half
Files, or else to flank the other half body of Pikes if need require.

A Battalia marching, prepared to receive an enemy, in Front, Rear, Right, and
Left at one time.

A Battalia fronting every way with all their Officers in their places prepared
for battle.

A Battalia fronting, every way giving fire under the Pikes against horse, with
a square of Pikes in the midst of the body to defend the Musketteers from the
horse, if they should enter at open places between the squares: having given
fire, fall off behind the Pikes from whence they came.

A Battalia divided into four squares, every division, of Pikes being flanked
with two wings of Musketteers, and fronting every way with a Diama^t of Pikes
in the midst to defend the open places.

A Battalia of 320. one of the strongest forms of that number, that may be
framed, noither for, to march, or for a stand, in the night or day, against
foot, horse, prepared with Musketteers in the front, rear, and flanks, to
receive a desperate enemy.

A Battalia of 500. with all their Officers in their places, giving fire in
front. The Ranks of Musketteers after they have given fire, as you may perceive
wheel off to the right hand, through the open distances betwixt the divisions
into the Rear.

A Battalia of 500. marching from the enemy, giving fire in the rear: having
given fire, turning all to the right hand through the open spaces between the
divisions, up into the front, placing themselves before their own Files.

These squares that you see on the other leaf, are 1000. divided into four
Battalions: in every Battalia you may perceive their number of figures placed
at such distance as they may best second on the other if need require, with
100. horse on both the flanks, with 100. firelocks in two parties, scouting
out before, for the approach of the enemy. The P. stands for Pikes, the M. for
Musketteers.

On the other side of the leaf, as you may observe a greater Army divided into
many Battalions with their number, in each square, with their horse on the
flanks, and their forlorn hopes before; and the distance as you may perceive
from one Battalia unto the other, standing removed one from the other, in the
best and surest manner for the relieving of one the other, or for any other
exploit when the superior Commander shall see fit occasion, with Ordnance and
Wagons.



The Table.
THE Officers of a foot company page 1 The use of the Drum 2 The names of all
the beats of the Drum ibid. For what use each several found is 3. 4, 5.
Instructions how to beat the March ibid The March 6 Instruction for the
unskilful in arming and disarming, in laying down and taking up of their
Arms 7. 8. 9. 10 The preparation unto the postures 11 The postures and motions
of a Musketteer, first standing, then marching, with the beginning and ending
of the postures, and their names. 12. 14 The marching postures divided with
some observations concerning giving of fire in front, flank and rear ibid. 15
The postures and motions of a Pikeman, standing and marching. ibid. 16. 17 The
postures of a Pike divided. The performing of all by the Drum and signs 18 The
several sorts of distances 19. 20 The words of command ought to be right
delivered. ibid. What Files and Ranks are 21 The body distinguished. ibid. 22
Of facing and doubling of Ranks, Files, half Files, and bringers up. 23. 24
Countermarches, half Files, entire doubling ibid. The body wheeling 25 Of
conversion ibid. The reason why some things are repeated again 26 Each
Officers place ibid. Of facing, and Ranks and Files doubling. 27 Why half
Files, and why middlemen are named 28 Middlemen and bringers up, doubling the
front ibid. Half Files and leaders, doubling the rear ibid. 29 Half ranks
doubling the flank ibid. Countermarches, maintaining, losing and winning
ground ibid. Ranks and Files entire doubling 30 Files advancing and doubling
ibid. Middlemen entire doubling the front 31 Half Files entire doubling the
Rear ibid. Half Ranks doubling the Flank ibid. Flank advancing entire
doubling 32 The body wheeling ibid. The use of wheeling the Front into the
Center. 33 Files and Ranks closing and opening 34 Ranks and Files by inversion
and conversion 38 Files in sequence, and Files and Ranks ranking. 39 Such
words of command as are not explained in one place, are in another unfolded. 40
In facing, what foot to remove 41 In facing, marching, standing, or trooping,
how to bear their Arms. ibid. Observations in all sorts of doublings 42 All
sorts of countermarches performed by signs 43 How to perform Ranks filing by
inversion and conversion. 45 Files ranking by conversion 48 Files filing in
sequence 50 Files ranking few or many ibid. Ranks ranking few or many 51 In
what form to march few or many 52 How to bear their Arms at special times.
53 The uniting of many Companies into one body. 54 How the Battalions should
march 55 Musketteers giving fire in Front, Rear, or Flanks, how to fall off 56
The Authors reason why he does not enlarge himself in this Subject, and the
cause why he writes nothing of the exercising of the troops of Horse 60 The
office and duty of the Ensigne-bearer, and the displaying of the Colors 61 The
reason why the Maps are placed at the end of the Book 64
A Table of the Maps of several forms of Bodies small and great, Marching,
Exercising, Skirmishing, and in Battle.
Letters for the Officers in their places 65 A company of 100 marching 67 A
company of 200 marching 68 A company exercising with all their Officers in
their places 69 A body standing in batt^ll form 70 A Battalia of 200.
approaching toward the enemy, giving fire in Front. 71 A Body marching from the
enemy, giving fire in the Rear. 72 A Body marching, giving fire in both the
Flanks 73 A second form of a Body marching, giving fire in both the flanks 74
A third form of a Body marching, giving fire in both flanks. 75 A Battalia
giving fire in front with three files at once 76 A Battalia giving fire in
front with four files at once 77 A hollow Body for several uses 78 A Sconce
battalia, ready for all assaults of the enemy 79 A Battalia giving fire in
front and rear both at once 80 Another form of giving fire in front and
rear, or on both the flanks at once 81 A Battalia marching, being prepared to
receive an enemy in front, rear, right and left at one time 82 A Battalia
fronting every way, prepared for battle 83 A Battalia fronting every way,
giving fire under the Pikes, the Pikes charging over their heads 84 A Battalia
fronting every way, each division of Pikes being on both hands flank with
Muketteers, with a diamant of Pikes in the midst 85 A very strong from of a
Battalia for night or day, against horse or foot, having Muskeeteers in the
front, flanks, and rear. 86 A Battalia of five companies in one body, all the
Officers in their right places giving fire in front 87 A Battalia of 500.
marching from the enemy, giving fire in the rear 88 Instructions for the
better understanding of the two following armies 89 A small army divided into
four Battalions, with their distances each from other, as you may perceive in
the figures between each Battalia, the number of paces, with horse on the
flanks, and fire-lockes before. Of this, read more, page 89 90 A great army
divided into many Battalions with their horse on the flanks, with firelockes,
forlorn hopes, Ordnance and Wagons, as you may read more of this, page. 89 90.
91.
ERRATA.
IN the preparation to the march, in the first rank of the March, if there be
an r, make it an i. In the second line or ra. k, where there is no r, make the
fourth i an r. Page the 10. the Ingravers error, placing the cock on the wrong
side of the Musket, and the Tr^cker too high. Page 68. the Ingravers error, the
Drummers place should be a rank forwarder. In the first division likewise, a
rank too many. The eldest S. between the division of Pikes.

FINIS.

