A TRUE DISCOVERY OF THE Irish Popish PLOT Made by Maurice Fitzgerald of
Killcowan in the County of Lymrick, Jan. the 20th. 1680.
By way of Quest.
Q. What do you know of Colonel Lacy?

A. I know noting but he is an Honest Gentleman's.

Q. Were there not great and frequent Meetings of Papists and Popish-Priests,
and Friars in his House?

A. Yis, and Protestants too, he will turn no man out, but is good, for Meat
and Drink to every Gentleman's wid in and wid out.

Q. Did not you know him, together with Sir John Fitzgerald to have consulted
and endeavored the bringing in of the French Power into Ireland?

A. Be my Shoul dey did never told me so.

Q. The reason why you discover it not, is because you have not yet your Pardon
which shall be granted you, if you make a full discovery.

A. By my Shoul I don't care for your Pardons, I did Steal no Cowes, nor
Horses, no Sheep, nor Rob upon de Great way, nor Little way, nor break
Prison, as Hetherington did to come over to be your Kings Evidence, so I don't
care for your Pardons.

Q. But in your Narrative there is a great Discovery, I suppose you will
confirm the Truth of that.

A. Po, po, de Parliaments did Vote an Irish Plot too upon my Narrative, and
dey did Vote it upon a Lie, for I never saw my Narraty till I came here; but
peoples makes Narratyes and Plots in London; and put it upon me Fait.

Q. Did you not know the Earl of Orrery?

A. Yis, I did know Old Roger and Young Roger too.

Q. Did you not hear of a Letter from him to Sir John Fitzgerald?

A. Yes, and see it too.

Q. What were the Contents of it?

A. It was to put de Plot upon de King and de Dukes.

Q. Do you know Hetherington?

A. Yis, but I did not know him here, he vas so Brave and Fine, and a Fite
Perwig, and Shilver Buttons, and Gold Laces upon his Coats.

Q. What did he say to you?

A. He will say, I am sorry to see you in such Bad Cloads; And I said, my
Cloads will be very good for me, and better then his when he vas in Ireland; He
say den, he vill give me Fine Cloads and Moneys.

Q. For what?

A. For no good Feat, only for Lying and Swearing.

Q. What did Mr. St. Ledger say to you?

A. He said, I will not vant while I will be in Town.

Q. Why was he so kind to you?

A. For noting but because I was de Kings Evidence to make a Plot.

Q. Are those your Holy Day Clothes?

A. Yis, and my Unholy-day too.

Q. Have you not better for Sundays?

A. I have but one Cloads always, I wear better Cloads in my own Country den
your Kings Evidence did.

Q. Who sent you hither as a Kings Evidence?

A. Why tree Justices da Peace in de County of Lamnagh sent vord to Lord
Lieutenant and Council, dat I know I Plot, dey take me out of my Beds from my
Vife and Childrens, and sent me to Dublin: Dear de D. of Ormond ask me did I
own dat Examination, so I look upon it, and say, I did not own it, den I say
I will not declare till I come to de King Your Majesty; now peoples vill be
giving me tings dat I should say, as dey did make Narraty for me.

Q. It seems you will or can discover nothing, you are proffered your Pardon if
you would.

A. By my Shoul, if you vill be giving Your Pardons and Your Moneys, you will
have a tousand Kings Evidence; don't you tink when Cow-stealers, Horse-stealers
and Murderers are to be Hanged, but to Shave demselves from de Gallows, dey
will come to London and be Your Kings Evidence; Fait Your Majesty did a tousand
pounds wort of good, you brought a great many Rogue to be Your Kings Evidence.

Q. They did a wise piece of work that sent you hither as a Kings Evidence.

A. I have a Vife and Childrens at home, and I would beg dat I may be sent back
to my Vife and my Childrens: I desire none of Your Pardons nor Your Moneys, but
as much as Vill bring me home, and dat vill be very little: And I have but one
ting more to beg of Your Majesty, dat is to send dese Gentlemen's to their own
Country; where dey are known, where Your Kings Evidence are known; den by my
Shoul you will see who is de Rogue.

Q. You shall go to Your Wife and Children, and they are Fools or Knaves that
sent you; These Gentlemen also shall be tried in their own Country, and now
declare your knowledge.

A. Fait I am ashamed to tell all, there is so much Rogury in the world, and by
my Shoul Sir Henry Ingoldsby know it, and Mr. St. Leiger, and Mr. Odell, and me
Shelf.

Q. Do you know Mortagh Downey?

A. Yes very well, he is my own Tennant Fait.

Q. How came he acquainted with Sir John Fitzgerald and Colonel Lacy?

A. Mortagh Downey did she him often, but was never in deir Companies in his
Life; for be my Fathers Shoul Mortagh Downey is better for a Kings Evidence for
deir Company.

Q. Prithee what do you think of all Plots?

A. Be my Shoul dear is many Plots, and many Rogue, and de Devil take them all
but my Shelf. Amen.

Maurice Fitzgerald.

London, Printed by N. Thompson for the Author, 1681.


