A LOVE-TOKEN FOR MOURNERS: TEACHING Spiritual Dumbness and Submission under
GODS Smarting ROD.

In two Funeral SERMONS.

By SAMUEL FISHER M. A. late Preacher at Brides London, now at Thornton in
Cheshire.

Unto which is added,

An ANTIDOTE against the Fear of DEATH, being the Meditations of the same
AUTHOR in a Time and Place of great Mortality.

LONDON, Printed by A. M. for T. Underhill at the Anchor in Paul's Churchyard,
16^^*

Spiritual Submission: IN TWO SERMONS: One at the Funeral of Mrs HOLGATE, the
other at the Funeral of Mrs BAKER.

By SAMUEL FISHER.

JOB 1. 21. The Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away, blessed be the Name of
the Lord. LEVIT. 10. 3. And Aaron held his Peace. MICAH 7. 9. I will bear the
Indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against him. LONDON,

TO MY VERY LOVING AND Much respected Friend Mr William Holgate Citizen and
Haberdasher of London.
S. F. wishes humble Submission to, and holy dependence upon God.
SIR,
IT pleased you upon the death of your dear Consort, to make choice of me (the
most unworthy) to preach at her Funeral. My affections to you were strong
obligations upon me, I was willing to perform any Service within my compass
for her that was dead, from whom I enjoyed so many real Respects when she was
alive. I was Debtor to you both for very much love, and therefore willing to
serve you both in doing this last Office for her, which was no other according
to Scripture language) then your self; Ephesians. 5. 28, 29.
When you engaged me to this work, my hands were full of troublesome business
about my removal into the Country, which though it did not take me off, yet
did much indispose me for this Service; But being engaged, I laid aside (as
much as I could) other thoughts, that I might be in my measure provided to
offer something which might be suitable to the present occasion, and useful to
those that should be my Auditors in that Solemnity. I intended no more then the
service of my Master, and the benefit of the hearers by the bare preaching of a
Sermon. Yet when it was done, whiles my affections were stirring, and before I
cooled, I was drawn contrary to my former inclinations, to promise you the
Notes of what I had preached* And since my promise, you have kept me warm with
your letters, that I might not recede. I confess I judge my self of rashness in
that promise, and I have smarted for it; for my own thoughts have been a press
to me, before my Notes come under the Press for you. I know mine own nakedness,
and have so much pride in me, that I can hardly be willing that others should
have occasion to take notice of that nakedness. But it may be God may stir up
some faithful friend to bestow some wholesome reproof upon me, and that may
repair my loss by some real advantage. I am resolved to trust the Lord.

Sir, what they were, when they were delivered, I have sent them to you without
any new clothes. You have called for them earnestly, I have only crowded for
time to transcribe them And now you have them much good may do you with them.
They teach a very weighty lesson under the Cross, viz. To be dumb, and not open
the mouth, because of Gods doing. A lesson for all that are trained up in the
School of affliction, but especially directed to you at this time, that you may
learn with humble silence to bear the smarting twigs of that Rod which lies
upon your back, in the loss of so great a Comfort, by the withdrawing of so
sweet, so good a Companion. I hope you have learned this lesson. Something I
think I saw before I left you, I shall be glad if yet they may contribute any
thing further toward your help, and the satisfaction of those dear Friends
that were in near relation to he^ that is with God, who in regard of the manner
of her death, seemed more dis-satisfied, and therefore as they have need, so
possibly they may gain some advantag^ by the reading o^ what they heard.

A part of these Notes were used at the Funeral of another Friend, the good
wife, of a very good man that lives in the Parish of Brides. I present the
whole that neither of you may complain of loss. My prayer shall be, that you,
and all that read them, may reap some good fruit by them, that God may have the
glory of an humble silent submission under the Cross, who has so much
dishonor by our sins that bring the Cross: And if this may be the issue of
these poor, weak, unpolished lines, he that prays shall have occasion to add
praises, and Thanksgivings for so rich a blessing to the God of his Mercies. To
whom, and to whose Mercies, he commends you, who is

Your Friend, that heartily desires to meet you and your dear Consort in Heaven
S. F.

TO THE READER.
Reader,
THOU have me now in Print, and it may be thou wonderest, and so do I. I
believe thou did not expect it, and I assure thee I did not intend it. My
Sun is now drawing ^pace toward the West, yet till this time I never durst
venture into so open an air, as now I must. I have not wanted strong
provocations from the (...) fretting pens of other men (who have endangered my
liberty, M. Studley and some others.
by traducing my Doctrine, wresting my words, and charging me (beyond what I
ever thought) with that which their own wicked hearts had forged, to appear
before this in mine own vindication; but believing a day of Judgment, and
knowing that God sits upon the Throne judging right, I thought it as a more
quiet, so a safer way to interest God in the quarrel, by committing my way to
him, then to take up the bucklers to defend my self: And I found this advantage
by my silence, though I did, yet God did not sit still, he raised up others to
appear for truth, and for his poor servant, who having more honor, and greater
abilities, have done that for both, which possibly through weakness might have
suffered in my hands. I tell thee this to beget thy favorable opinion, that
thou may not think me over forward in this undertaking.

This poor thing which is under thine eye, has nothing of Art to commend it to
thee. The Father himself is poor. But if thou be one exercised under
affliction, desirous to know and do thy duty, can embrace Truth naked, and
love it for it self. If thou will bring an holy and humble heart to the reading
of these lines, and wilt add some fervent requests for Gods blessing, possibly
thou may get some little g^od by the sober pains upon that which is here
offered thee by a weak and worthless Instrument, I take it for granted that
thine is within the common lot, amongst those that are subject to affliction;
And if thou be afflicted, this duty is incumbent upon thee as well as me, to be
dumb, and not open thy mouth under Gods hand. Now if thou be so perfectly
learned in this lesson of holy ^ilence, and humble submission, and have thy
heart at that command, that thou can presently silence any distempered motion
in the springing of it, without any more ado. I persuade thee not to bestow
either cost or pains upon this little piece, because it only treats of that
which it seems thou have no need of, and indeed contains nothing in it of that
Subject, but what is plain and common. But if thou be as I am (a man subject to
like passions with other poor Saints) that has need of all the helps that may
be to keep down unruly affections, when God strikes hard, the Rod smarts and
the flesh bleeds. And let me add, if thou be willing to learn at a petty
School, I hope I may say thou may find that which may be worth as much as
thy cost in buying, or pains in reading will amount to; If thou do get any good
by this poor traveller (which is the passionate desire of the Author) bestow
thy prayers upon him, that dares not send out this paper without prayers for
it, and thee, viz. that there may be a blessing in it, and that thou may
find it, with which I leave thee, and desire to be, whiles I am

Thornton Sept. 25. 1654. Thine, desirous to offer up fervent prayers for thine
everlasting good S. F.

Spiritual SUBMISSION.
PSALM. 39. 9. I was dumb, I opened not my mouth, because thou did it.
THis Psalm (as appears by the Title) had David for the subordinate Author of
it. Him (being a man to his heart) he did employ principally to be the Holy
Ghosts Penman to write this excellent piece of Scripture, this Book of Psalms.

It is directed to Jeduthun who was one of the three Praefects or Masters of
Music, appointed and ordered by David for the guiding of Song in the House of
the Lord, 1 Chronicles. 25. 1, 6, 7.

It was penned in Meeter, for it is (Mizmor of David) a Psalm of David which
notes Sermonem concisum, Ford super Psalm. 3. de modo orationis.
ab omni verborum, aut syllabarum superfluitate resectum, a short speech, that
has all superfluity of words or syllables lopped and pared off: Nor is it only
bound up by the measure and number of feet, Quemadmodum poetae carmina
componunt, but by the number of Syllables, that it may be rightly disposed and
fit for Song.

At what time, and upon what occasion this Psalm was written, is in the
judgment of the Learned very uncertain: Those that venture farthest give us
but their conjectures, and therefore I shall not follow them, unless they had a
Lanthorn. Leaving suppositions, that it might refer to Saul's persecution, to
Amnons Incest, to Absolons murder first, or treason after, or to any grievous
sickness, occasioned by his g^ief upon any or all of these: It is certain
David (notwithstanding his love to God, and Gods to him) was exercised with
^ariety of great and sore troubles; with afflictions repeated, and of long
continuance: And to such a season wherein he was thus exercised, it appears by
the scope and whole contexture of the Song he does refer. And further, it is
as clear from the Psalm it self, that those afflictions which carried his eye
to them in the writing of this, were such, and filled with so much bitterness,
that he had much ado to bridle his passion, nay though he did with strong
resolutions as with a bridle or muzrole constrain his lips, yet by reason of
the pressing weight of his sorrows, his passion like fire shut up, did eat out
its way, and transport him beyond the limits of religious sobriety. This I look
upon (and therein I follow that great and sound Expositor, who erres as seldom
as most do in giving the sense of Scripture, Mr Calvin) as the principal scope
of the Psalm, to make known to the Church of God, what David had the sad
experience of, viz. the great strength and power of passion under the
sharpness and bitterness of affliction Tenendum est Davidem hoc Psalmo non
praedicare virtutem suam quod vota ad pietatis regulam composita coram Deo
conceperit, sed potius infirmitatis suae vitium fateri, quod efferbuerit
immodico dolor, and impetu rap^us fuerit ad expostulandum. Grace it self is
many times hard ma^cht with corruption.
.

The Psalm consists of two parts. The first Exegeticall or Narrative. The
second Eucticall or Precative. A Narration and a prayer take up the whole. In
the former you have the Prophets disease laid open. In the later, the means of
cure, or remedy applied.

That which he declares in the first part was,

1. That he was sensible of his passion, under the sense of his affliction,
viz. that he had need of a bridle, when God used a spur. This is fairly
implied, v. 1.

2. His resolution to keep under his passion, when he felt it began to stir.
I said I will take heed, I will keep my mouth as with a bridle, or mousell. Or
as the Greek with a ward. B. Hall in locum.
As if he had said, I set down this constant resolut^on to mousell, and lock up
my lips, that I might not give my tongue leave to break out into any impatient
or unbeseeming speech, etc. By this is noted the untamednesse of the tongue,
which must by force and watchfulness be restrained, or else will get out of
doors, and kindle fire.

3. The success of this resolution and his endeavors for a time, the
suppression of his passionate distemper, v. 2. I was dumb, with silence I held
my peace, etc.

4. The power and prevalency of his passion afterward, Dolor meus turbatus
est, incaluit cor meum, In meditatione mea exarsit ignis, loquutus sum lingua;
my grief was stirred, my heart waxed hot within me, whiles I was musing the
fire burned, I spoke with my tongue. Though David had with great constancy
endeavored to subdue and keep under the risings of his heart, yet he tells us,
the fire was but smothered, not quenched, his passions were like fire
suppressed, which makes its way by degrees, and then breaks out with greater
violence. (...)
Calvin's note upon this is, By how much any man sets himself more diligently to
bring his heart to obedience, and strives to be patient under his trials, by so
much the more many times is he vexed with his passions; and he gives the
reason, because in such a case Satan puts forth his utmost, to oppose him in
his honest endeavors, who in the mean time lets them alone, and does not
trouble them, whom he finds senseless and careless under the hand of God. He
adds an encouraging persuasive to those that are troubled with such inordinate
inflammations, to remember David least we faint in our minds, and the
experience of our weakness should betray our hopes.

In the verses following he gives an account of the language which he uttered,
when his passions got vent, to v. 7. which though they carry truth in them, and
are an excellent description of the vanity of man's life, yet as they were
uttered, and timed, do clearly argue by the context that he was transported
vitioso excessu. And therefore says my former Author, Non sine stomacho and
indignatione dicit, Notum fac mihi Jehovah finem meum, etc. It was not without
stomach and passion that he says, Lord make me to know mine end.

In the later part you have the way of David's cure, or the means by which his
soul was reduced to a quiet temper:

1. Hope in God, v. 7.

2. Prayer to God, v. 8.

3. The serious consideration of Gods hand in the evils which he suffered; by
which he does correct himself for the breakings out of his passion before. As
if he had said, Oh my soul, do thou consider from whom thy afflictions come,
that thou thus complainest? Thou have to deal with God, not with man; What do
thou mean thus to lift up thy self? God has done it, and will thou call him to
account? This was of admirable use to stop his mouth, to call in his heat, to
temper his passion, I was dumb, I opened not my mouth, because thou did it.
Nihil ad compescendos doloris impetus aptius est quam ubi nobis in mentem
venit, non cum homine mortali, sed cum Deo esse negotium.

And thus I have brought you to my text, which is conveyed into David's prayer,
the second part of the Psalm.

The sense is plain, and therefore I will not seek a knot in a bu^rush: When
David says (...)
Obmutui, I was dumb, a word that signifies to bind, as well as to be mute and
dumb, because those that are dumb, whether by a natural necessity, Mat. 15.
^1. Mark ^. 32, 33, ^4, 35.
as were diverse of those whom Christ cured, Ezekiel. 3. ^6, 27.
or by a Divine restraint, as the Prophet Ezekiel was; or by a rational,
voluntary choice, as was this Prophet David both at this Ps. 38. 13
and at other times; they are as it were tongue-tied, they have their lips
stitcht and bound up; either they have not a faculty to use, or they do not use
the faculty they have. Thus bound up was our Prophet in the present case.
According to his purpose in the beginning of the Psalm, he had now got on his
mousell, whereby his lips were kept shut, and he restrained from speaking: And
the meaning reaches no further, but to his patient and humble silence under
Gods dispensation of the cross, viz. That upon the serious and well-weighed
consideration of Gods hand in the affliction, and smarting rods upon his back,
he laid a law upon his tongue that he might not then sin against God, when Gods
hand was upon him for his sin.

Now without any more travel about this little spot, I shall make some
observation upon these words, and carry them home in application, that if God
please we may come to reap something of our seed. And whereas it appears both
by the context, and the general scope of the Psalm, that David found a work on
it, to get and keep his heart in a quiet, silent frame: We shall in the
entrance offer this Consideration,

That the dear servants of God do find a great business on it, Doct.
and have much ado to keep under inordinate passions, when God keeps them under
sore afflictions, puts them upon sharp trials.

The weaknesses of the most eminent Saints do offer themselves for proof of
this. Moses though he were as even spun as most upon earth, yet he made some
snarles: he showed that he ^ould be provoked, if you read Numb. 11. ad 16. you
will find Moses himself too snappish with God, Wherefore have thou afflicted
thy servant, etc.

I shall leave you to look upon Eliah, 1 King. 19. 4. Job, Job 3. 20, 21, 22,
23. and 6. 8, 9. and 7. 15, 16. the Prophet Jeremiah, Jer. 20. 14, 15, 16, 17,
18. David, Psalm. 73. 2, 3. Jonah, Jon. 4. 1, 2, 3, 4, 8, 9. Rachel, Genesis 30. 1.

These were eminent Saints, yet they could not always keep the fire in the
chimny, even these were sometimes in danger of being scoreht and burnt by their
own passions: And no wonder, For

1. They were men, not Angels, Grace does not change the beings of creatures.

2. The most eminent Saints upon earth have passions, and are in some measure
subject to them, James 5. 17.

3. There is something of corruption in all the Saints passions; their
faculties are but in part renewed: Though something of inordinate affection be
mortified, yet there is something more to be mortified, Col. 3. 5.

4. Passions are quickly moved, easily stirred up, they have a great deal of
Gunpowder in them, and you know one spark will blow up a whole barrel of
that, oh how quickly did Jonah catch fire, Jonah 4.

5. The Saint is not always at home; the regenerate part does not ever play
its part, as one active and in arms to keep down the risings of those malapert
quicksilver inmates of the soul which will lie down no longer then they are
kept down; where was the Saint think you when Jonah told God to his face, He
did well to be angry, Jon. 4. when Jeremiah Cursed the day of his birth, Jer.
20. Both grace and reason too have their sleeping times in the Saints.

6. The enemy (and that is the devil) does watch to get advantage, and when
there is occasion he puts on and provokes exceedingly to unhinge the soul, to
work disorder, Job 1. 11. Besides, knowing his advantage, how weak, how
foolish, how brutish passion makes us, Psa. 73. 22. and how prepared for
temptation, he restlestly uses all his art to bring the soul into this rout
and confusion.

7. When the passions are broke loose and have got the reins it is a hard
matter even for grace it self to quiet and charm them again, if out of these
chains they will not be commanded; It is as easy to quench fire in the thatch
as to lay passion in the Soul; Jonah 4. 3, 4, 5, 9.
Both Job and David found it so.

To prevent mistakes, and to help your understanding take these Rules with this
Point.

1. Though good men have their passions, yet they are not wholly under the
power of their passions, in part they are renewed though but in part, Gal. 5. 24

2. The passions of good men are none of their virtues; though the men be good,
it is no part of their goodness to have their affections inordinate, but
sinful in them as well as in others, and more scandalous then in others; the
better the man the worse the fact, when he moves irregularly, Psa. 73. 22. Job
42.

3. The stronger any man's passions are, and the more inordinate, the less he
has of a Saint in him, Ecci. 7. 9. the more of a beast, Psa. 73

4. The more holy any man is, the more ashamed, the more weary, the more
humbled for the inordinatenesse of his passions, the more resolved, the more
watchful against them, that he be not^ brought under their power, Psalm. 73.
22. Job 42. 6. Psalm. 39. 1, 2.

5. It is most unbeseeming and unworthy of a Saint to be often and ordinarily
transported with inordinate passions. Not only in fore and breaking afflictions
to be moved to unquietness, but upon less, trivial, and but supposed
occasions, to put off the man to dispossess the soul of reason and patience,
is most unworthy.

To improve this, take these Consectaries by way of Information. Use 1. Inform.
It follows,

1. If the godly in affliction be subject to passion, and can hardly keep them
down, no wonder if other men utterly destitute of grace do grow drunk and mad
with passion in their affliction; Though they cannot be excused, there is no
better to be expected; Their passions are ridden without bridles; What wonder
is it to see Saul in a passion? 1 Samuel 20. 29, 30. When David a thousand times
the better man is scarce himself, 1 Samuel 25. 13, 21, 22.

2. Godly men, yea, those that are got highest mus^ have their grains and
allowances, though they be good metal yet they have some dross, and they
want something of their weight. Perfection is not to be looked for in any Saint
on this side heaven, Paul tells us he pressed after it, but he tells us also that
he did not reach it, Phil. 3. 12, 13, 14.

3. Though you take liberty to judge the weakness of a Saint, and do call
passion when it is inordinate an evil (for so it is) yet you ought not
presently to censure and conclude the man to be evil, because in affliction
thou see him abused by his passion. There is bitterness in affliction (which
I might have named as a reason) and no wonder if the bitterness of the Cross
do draw out the bitterness of the Patient. If you see a man under his passion
you see him in an ill time to make a judgment upon him, Who would have thought
Jonah to have been a Saint that should have seen no more of him then in his
passion? Jonah 4.

4. There is no ground for any man to pride himself or to be lift up, because
of his graces, as if in case of aff^iction he would not show so much weakness,
passion, impatience, as he sees some others do; It may be you would not, and
it is good to resolve against it; but yet do not say you will not, lest your
pride betray you, and you be (...) to your own weakness whatever you may
think^ you will do like other men unless denying your selves you get the
present supply of the Spirit of Christ, Phil 1. Peter resolved as well a^ thou
can do in another case, Mat. 26. 35. and David in this (I hope you will own
them for Saints) and yet both failed, Let him that thinks he stands, Romans 11.
19, 20. However I will neither hear nor believe any man that boasts of himself
till I see him in such a condition; He does not^ Know himself, nor can another
man know him till he come to trial.

5. They are eminent Saints, and the grace of God shines eminently in them, who
under sore and griping sorrows and afflictions, do yet possess their souls in
patience, have their spirits kept quiet and undistracted. It is a glorious
sight (and the Name of God is exalted by it) to see a child of God, keep his
ground, and st^^d unshaken when the winds are high, and the rough billows beat
upon him. I had the happiness to see such a sight, (and I bless God I saw it
with wonder and thankfulness) in that blessed and renowned Rock and Pillar of
the Church Mr Whitaker, in whom patience had the Conquest over the most
breaking torments that I have known lying upon any Saint in this Age. As of
Job, so it may well be said of him in aftertimes, Have you not heard of the
Patience of Whitaker? Jam. 5. 26
How illustrious did this grace of God make this Saint of God? How glorious was
God himself in that grace which was given to this Saint, by which he stood so
invincibly in his sharp encounters?

1. When you see a man that fear^ God under affliction, Use 2. Instruct.
especially if his afflictions be great, unusual, doubled, of long continuance,
put on your bowels, and go to your prayers; Be they what they will, (though the
excellent upon earth) you cannot miss your mark; If they be men, and on this
side Heaven, they may have need of them, and will thank you for them; Pity
them, they have not only afflictions to bear, but passions to subdue, by reason
of those afflictions, Job 6. 1. to the 14th ver. Pray for them that they may be
holden up by God, not lose their patience, whiles they bear their Cross, but
have their spiri^s sweetly calmed and meekned to submit to God^ ch^stisements,
not to make God suffer by their murmurings; This is a charitable work; Thou
do that man wrong whom thou think so strong, so patient, as not to need
thy prayers, and therefore sparest them upon that account.

2. Learn to know your selves, that you are men and women, subject to like
passions with other of your fellows. And therefore though you are naturally of
meek and quiet spirits, and by grace made more impassionate, yet do not flatter
your selves; You know not what your afflictions may be, what temptations may be
joined with your afflictions, and how both these may work upon your
disposition, and draw out your passion.

1. Be holily jealous o^ your selves, afraid least you should miscarry, walk
humbly in the sense of your own weakness; Romans 11, 20,
Those children have fewest falls that are most afraid of them. Consider Moses,
David, Job, Jeremiah, and do not presume.

2. Follow God earnestly before afflictions come, that you may be armed, and
prepared for them when they come. Make David's prayer your own, Psalm 17. 5.

3. Study the evil of being brought under your passions, and of discovering
that weakness in affliction, wherein Gods Honor, Religions Credit, your own
Peace and Comfort are like to suffer so much.

4. Make it your daily exercise to bridle these Colts^, to be mortifying your
inordinate passions beforehand. The sooner you begin with them, the better
able you will be to rule them: Inure them to subjection when they appear in
their weakest motions; and when you have broken them, and used them to the
yoke, you will be less troubled with them. This must be your work, Colos. 3. 5.

5. Acquaint your selves with the promises; improve faith upon them, and lay
them up against the day of affliction and temptation, Job 5. 17, 18, 19, 20,
etc. Isa. 43. 1, 2. Romans 8. The Promises will feed your faith, and your faith
will strengthen your souls.

Another Point that I must salute by the way, as implied, is,

Whatsoever afflictions or chastisements do lie upon the Saints, Obser. 2.
God is the Author of them. Though it be of our deserving, it is of God^ doing,
Thou did it, Job 1. 21. Hos. 6. 1.

This is true, 1. Whatsoever the affliction is in its kind, and wherever it
touches, whether outward or inward, whether upon the body or soul, or name, or
state, or family, it is the hand of God, Amos 3. 6. 2 Samuel 16. 11. Isa. 45. 7.
Hos. 6. 1.

2. Whatsoever it is in Circumstance, for the season, measure, manner,
duration, Instruments employed about it, and the manner of their acting, yet
the thing is of the Lord; Satan cannot touch Job, unless God first stretch
forth his hand against him, Job 1. 11.

To clear this, consider

1. That all the evils of affliction, were fore-laid in the eternal and wise
Counsel of God; Gods Counsel is comprehensive of all events, Isa. 14. 24, 25,
26. and 23. 8, 9. Jer. 4. 28, 29.

2. The Commission which is issued out in time, for the execution of the
Counsel, is signed under his own hand. He that has taken up the purpose, sees
to the accomplishment; when the date is expired the Counsel works: My Counsel
shall stand, Isaiah 46. 10.

3. In his Providence, he does direct, and order the execution to its end, Jer.
47. 6, 7.

Object. How can it be said to be Gods doing, when it comes not immediately
from him, but Instraments are employed about it, and the Instrument acts
crookedly, and lays the foundation of my affliction in his own wickedness?
For example, Some of David's Domestique afflictions, were 2 Samuel 13. 11, 12, 13,
14.
Tamars deflouring by Amnon, ver. 28.
the death of Amnon by Absalom; Incest and murder are committed to make up
David's cross; Shall this be said to be of Gods doing?

Answ. Those affliction^, wherein wicked men are Instrumen^s, and wherein the
Instrument acts most crookedly (as afflictions) are of Gods doing
notwithstanding. He himself owns all the evil of affliction, as the Author of
it, Amos 3. 6. Isa. 45. 7. and therefore we offer no injury to his Holiness,
when we ascribe it to him. Job made no scruple to say, when Sabeans and
Caldeans had plundered him of his substance (which was theft in them) That the
Lord had taken, Job 1.

Understand therefore,

1. That the affliction or punishment, under which any man suffers, is to be
distinguished from the sin of the Instruments that are used about the
affliction* The sin is theirs tha^ commit it, the affliction is Gods, though
God makes use of an Instrument to execute his purpose in the chastisement of
his Child, yet he puts no vitiosity into the Instrument that he makes use of.
Evil Instruments act crookedly, out of their own stock.

2. God is a free and unlimited Agent; He may use what Instrument he will to
serve his own purpose; and may suffer the Instrument to use its freedom about
the doing of his work, to bring about his end by the Instrument, as he did in
the crucifying of Christ, Acts 2. 23. God is not, cannot be the Author of
sin; but it must ever be acknowledged, that he is, and cannot but be, the
orderer and disposer of it, 1 King. 22. 22, 23, 24. It is his pleasure to
suffer sin to be in the world, and whiles it is in the world it is not strange,
if he order the sin of a wicked man, to correct and punish the sins of good
men, as is clear in the case between David and his children, if you look but
one Chapter back, 2 Samuel 12. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.

3. Though men cannot make use of other men's sins, to bring about their ends
without defiling themselves; (and therefore he that does not hinder is said to
command, rightly understood) yet God can, and does, by the sins of the worst
men, and contrary to their intentions, work out his own glory, and his peoples
good, without the least touch of pollution to himself, the least impeachment to
his Honor, Holiness, and Justice, Exodus 9. 12. and 17. These things
considered, viz. That God is not the Author of the Instruments sin, but the
wise orderer of it, and that he has skill, and does order the sins of men, in
punishing his people to serve his own glory, and their good, we need not be
afraid to say, That God is the Author of the affliction whatsoever it is,
where men that are the Instruments in the affliction, are Authors of the sin. I
shall apply this briefly.

It follows, Use 1. Job 5. 6.
as in Job 5. 6. That afflictions spring not out of the dust, neither do they
come by ^hance; which way soever they come, the most high God has a hand in
them.

2. It is folly much to eye the Instrument in afflictions, in cases where
Instruments are used. The Instrument is but Gods Rod, Psalm. 17 13, 14. and
could not act, if it were not let out, and ordered by the principal Agent.

3. Whatever the affliction is that we are any of us exercised with, it is duty
to look up above the Instrument (i. e.) to see the hand of God which guides the
Instrument, to own him in it, to fall down before him, to hear what he speaks,
and observe him carefully in all that befalls us. Thus did David in this Text,
and in the case of Shime^, 2 Samuel 16. 10. And so Job, Job 1. Well were it if we
could all do so, both in reference to the general and public ^alamities upon
the Nation; and in relation to our domestic and personal trials. We are apt to
dwell too much upon the second causes, and neglect the first.

4. It shows us whether to go for the moderating, removing, bearing,
sanctifying of our affliction (i. e.) to him whose hand is stretched out
against us in the affliction. Our way is to God by Repentance, Hos. 6. 1. and
14. and humble prayer, Hos. 14. 1, 2. Thus God teaches, Ps. 50. and the Saints
have learned, Ps. 116. 3, 4.

5. You may see upon whom you must trust, in the presence and use of all means,
when you are under affliction. You may make use of Physicians, Estates,
Friends, other Creatures to help. It is duty to use them, and mercy to have
them. But you must trust in none for your help in affliction, but in him that
has the command of the affliction. It was As^'s sin to trust in the
Physician, 2 Chronicles. 16. 12. It is the rich man's to trust in his wealth, Pro.
10. 15. None of these can help without God; He that breaks must bind up; He
that smites must heal. If God be the Author of the affliction, Hos. 6. 1.
it is too hard a work for any creature without God, to be the Author of the
Cure.

6. You may by this judge whether you must carry the glory, and to whom you
must pay the Tribute, for moderating, removing, sanctifying your afflictions;
Sure it must be to him that is both the Author of the affliction, and of this
Grace also, to moderate, remove, or sanctify. In all our afflictions, we may
take notice of something of mercy. And whatever we can take notice of in this
kind, it is Gods work that is the Author of the affliction: And if the mercy
be hi^, let not another have the glory, nor let him want it that so well
deserve^^ Our afflictions, whatsoever they be, are not so great, so long, so
sharp, so mischievous, as God could make them: And if he cut off any thing of
the time or measure, we have reason to acknowledge him, Lam. 3. 22. Ezr. 9. 3.

7. It is the great happiness of good men, that God is the Author of
affliction, though men that are wicked are sometimes employed as Instruments
about them: Though the Instrument be an enemy, and would devour and make an
end, Exodus 15. Yet he that is the Author, is a Father, Revel. 3. 19. Psalm.
103. And they may assure themselves, that the Author will not resign up his
Sovereignty to the Instrument; It shall not be as wicked men would have it,
Psalm. 76. 10. Nor is it possible that the afflictions of the Saints should hurt
them, because it is God that inflicts and orders them, Revel. 2. 10. Isa. 27.
7, 8. Despair not therefore because of Instruments, Men, Devils, because of
their number, power, rage, subtilty, vigilance; they are all bu^ Instruments;
God hat^ the managing of all, the command of all; He (...) able to rate his
dogs, to call them off, and tie them up when he will. This is ^ comfortable
consideration to the Church and to every Saint in their greatest tria^^ when to
sense they are ready to sink, viz. That they are in Gods hands; He that raises
the winde^^ lies himself in the ship that is tossed, can rebuke their noise
with his word, when they are too high to hear any body else.

8. Let wicked men consider under whose hands they lie, when affliction comes
upon them, when they are sick, impoverished, ^amed, defamed, when they suffer
in their Bodies, Names, Estates, Families, etc. It is God that does all this;
And therefore if they do not acknowledge him, humble themselves under his
mighty hand, turn from iniquity, make friendship with him, he is able to double
and treble what they now feel, and if that will not serve, can make them feel
that which they will not now believe, can crush, consume, and d^mn them at the
last, Heb. 10. 31. Luke 12. 5.

I come now to the main (...), and that which was first in mine eye.

That this consideration in any affliction, Observe.
(viz. that God has done it) has sufficient reason in it, and may be of
irresistible efficacy, to stop his mouth, and make him dumb who labors under
the affliction, if he make ^ right improvement of it, Job 1. 20, 21. and 2. 10.

I do not mean that th^^ consideration should make a man, especially a Christian

1. A Stoic, to be void of sense, or of the stirring of his affections under
Gods hand; Duty does not destroy Nature, Grace does rather perfect, the^
annihilate. It cannot be that a sensible creature should be void of sense, when
it is under suffering^ which is most the object of sense: There is pain, ^
burden, evil in affliction, Heb. 12. 11. And therefore there must needs be
sense; No man shall ever be charged by God for feeling of his burden, if he
neither faint, nor fret under what he feels.

2. Much less can we be supposed to mean that affliction should make him a
fool (i. e.) the wise man's fool, one that hardens himself under his Cross, and
does not lay to heart that which befalls him, that carries it so, as if there
were nothing to be done by him; when he suffers under the hand of God; This is
charged upon the Jews, as an aggravated sin, Isaiah 42. 25. We grant
therefore, that it is a sin for any man in his affliction,

1. Not to take notice of the hand of God in affliction; Affliction springs not
out of the dust. Job 5. 6. 2 Chronicles. 7. 14.
They are Gods pursevants, and he would have us know they are his, and that
when we are arrested, it is at his suit, we are in his hands, and at his mercy^
God is contemned in our affliction, if he be not owned.

2. Not to be affected with our sinn^, the cause of our sorrow, is to add more
sin to our sorrow, and the way to increase our sorrow by the addition of our
sin; That which every affliction speaks most plainly in ordinary, is the sin
of the patient, Lam. 3. 39. David understood this quickly when he had numbered
the people. And this God would have us all to understand, 2 Samuel 24. 10. 17.
he sends afflictions on purpose to tell us of our sins.

3. Nor yet can this dumbness intend that w^ should not be afflicted in our
affliction, either not to mourn for our sin, the cause of Gods disple^sure, or
for Gods displeasure the effect of our sin; This were to sin again, and to
sin more. Amo^ 3. 8
God looks that when he ro^rs we should tremble; when he strikes, that we
should stoop; when his hand is lifted up, that our hearts should be humbled,
and cast down. James 4. 7, 9, 10.
As our sins provoke God to judgment, Amos 4. Hos. 6. 1.
he expects his judgments should bring us to repentance. This is the voice of
the rod to repent, to return to God. If we do not this, we open his mouth to
complain, after we have made him stretch out his hand to correct. One of these
is enough.

4. Lastly, It cannot admit of this of all others, that either David did, or
that we should shut ou^ mouths, to restrain our prayers. Not to pray to God in
our affliction is so far from being our duty, that it receives a check from
Nature to neglect it. Jon. 1. 5, 6
The very Heathens in their afflictions do betake themselves to their
Idol-gods; we shall be shamed by them, if in like case we pray not to the true
God; Afflictions are to make dumb men speak in this sense, Ps. 50. 15.
not to make speaking men dumb, to abstain from prayer. God will take it very
ill from any man, Zeph. 1. 6.
if he strike, and they do not pray.

Qu. But What then is the meaning?

Answ. The meaning of the point is this, that if any thing, this consideration
(of Gods doing) will be effectual to make men dumb, to mousel their mouths, as
verse. 1 (viz.) to restrain them from distempered hea^^s, from passionate
distempers. He that considers that he has to do with God in his affliction,
may easily see he should have nothing to do with passion in his affliction.
David saw this, and endeavored it, v. 1.

But more particularly this Consideration (God has done it) should and will
where it is rightly improved keep a man,

1. From complaining at his Condition, or at the measure he has from the hands
of God. A Christian has no ground for complaint, when he is under any
affliction, though it be sharp and long. Be it what it will, yet Lam. 3. 39.
Why does a living man complain? The holy Ghost insinuates, That a living man
has no room for complaint. If he will complain, he must bring it home to
himself, and discharge God. If he say, God has done it; He stops his own
mouth; Therefore he should not complain, especially since he has Gods Answer,
A man for his sin. Though God have done it, sin has caused it. So much as
there is of complaint reflecting upon God, in our afflictions, so much is
wanting of Submission to God, by that complaint. This Consideration is good to
cut off complaining, a thing that we are all apt to do when we have little
cause.

2. If it will keep a man from complaining, which has something of discontent
in it, it will much less admit of disputing and reasoning with God, which has
too much of pride and sauciness in it. Man's reason cannot find a flaw in Gods
working; nor will he suffer it, that when he has done man should dispute. It
is his duty to believe that which is above his reason. He must not argue with
God, because he cannot find Gods reason in his dispensations, Romans 9. 20. Nay,
but O man, who art thou that reply against God? You may perhaps find some
good men that have ventured upon this in their affliction, but it was when
passion had got the upper hand of patience; Job, that went far, Job 13. 19
and 23. 3, 4.
did not dispute so long as his eye was kept clear upon this consideration, Job
1. 21, 22. And what he did afterward, upon temptation, and the stirring of
corruption, he was ashamed of it, when he had done. Humble Expostulations,
Psalm. 44. 23, 24, 25.
God has sometimes allowed, and the Saints practiced, when it has been to
express the vehemence of holy desires: but carnal reasonings, and proud
disputes, the expressions of discontent and maintenance of a quarrel, have no
place against Gods providence, God has done it, if it be improved, will take
off any man from chopping Logic with God.

3. If it have enough to keep a man from complaining and disputing, it cannot
want any thing to keep him from fretting and murmuring at his affliction. Shall
dust and ashes be angry with his Maker? or man that is a worm suffer his blood
to heat, his passions to boil up, if he consider that God has done it? Suppose
an affliction be sharp and long, Instruments used about it, be wicked, unjust,
cruel, yet if he consider, that he has to do with God, and that it is God
that has to do with him, that it is God that appoints and orders his
affliction, with all its adjuncts and circumstances, he will see little reason
to give vent to his passions, because of the bitterness of his afflictions. It
is weakness to be angry with the Instrument: (yea though it act crookedly, and
voluntarily) but it is madness to be angry and tetchy with God, that orders
and guides the Instrument to serve his purpose. Foolish man that suffer thy
self to be fired with thy Cross, do thou know at whom thou murmurest and
repinest? Sure thou neither know against whom thou quarrellest, nor what he
is, nor what thou art, nor what thou do; If thou did, thou would leap
into the water to cool thy self for fear, Ps. 1^. 7. 8
lest God should smoke with his nostrils, cause the fire of his jealousy to
break forth, and turn thy flames of lust into the flames of hell. We read of
one good man that once played the beast in this kind, but it lies as a brand of
infamy upon him, Jonah 4. 1, 8, 9. He stands in the Text as a pillar of Salt,
^or other men to be ashamed, and take heed of such folly. When thou art under
affliction, do but seriously consider, It is Gods doing, and I hope thou will
be afraid to say, Thou do well to be angry.

I suppose this Doctrine cannot want reason to convince any man that has
reason; it self is reason, and such as a Heathen (by his natural light) would
sit down and submit unto; for Nature it self teaches, That, what a God does,
cannot admit of that creatures contradiction, that does acknowledge subjection
to such a Deity. Reason will not suffer a man to make his dealings with his
fellow creatures, even with himself, a measure for his dealings with God, that
stands so much above him.

But let us see what Use may be made of this Doctrine. And it follows from
hence,

1. That one of the main and capital reasons of the non-submission, Use 1.
Inform.
impatience and discontent of men, under the Discipline of the Rod, is the
non-consideration, or want of the effectual improvement of this Consideration,
that their afflictions are ordered and disposed by God, that what is their
suffering is Gods doing. There is a great deal of weakness and sinful folly
discovered in the afflicted state of the children of men: And to speak truth
the godly themselves have not been all, nor always clear in this matter.

1. Sometimes we find some of them sullen and dogged under their afflictions,
and because they could not be free from trouble, therefore in a fit they would
die before their time. Some think this Psalm points at such a mood as this in
the Prophet that wrote it. But you are sure to find Jonah in such a fit, Jonah
4. 8.

2. Sometimes full of complaint under their burdens, Was ever sorrow like my
sorrow? Lam. 1. 12. Sometimes the kind of the affliction does not please them,
otherwhiles the season that God takes, suites not with them. Again, the smart,
bitterness, length, measure, manner of Gods dealing is matter of complaint, one
thing or other, we are apt to find fault with in Gods dispensation, rather
then set the saddle upon the right horse (i. e.) to find fault with our own
provocation.

3. Sometimes they accuse God, and accuse him falsely, as if he dealt hardly and
unjustly with them, Job 16. 11 to 19.
as if because he does chastise them, therefore he did not love them, or were
become their enemy, because he does not indulge their folly.

4. Sometimes you may find them in the Schools, Job 16. 21 and 13. 23, 24.
they will question Gods dispensations toward them. If they must suffer they
will dispute it, and know the reason why. Nay, they will climb up to the Bench,
and call God to the Bar, to give an account of his dealing. And thus in a sort
they make themselves the Gods, and God the creature. Such a thing is in it,
though me^ do not think on it.

5. Some men in their affl^ction, cast off their dependence, and will wait no
longer, 2 Kings 6. 33. They are in haste, and if God will not help them, they
will try somewhere else: A Witch, a Devil, any one shall be the Physician if he
will dispatch the Cure sooner then God does. 1 Samuel 28. 6, 7.


6. Sometimes they fall to fretting, they fume and chafe, and storm, and rage,
and fling, as if they would break all in pieces, and play the Samsons, to knap
in sunder the cords wherewith God binds them; Not that they can do any thing,
but to show that they are mad, Jonah 4.
and must be bound.

7. Sometimes they despond under their afflictions, and cast off their
confidence, 1 Samuel 27 1.
as if they doubted of the accomplishment of the promise, Psalm. 116. 11.
because hope is deferred, and they have not that in their hand^ which they
have in their eyes.

8. Sometimes they have so little wit, as with the dog to lie biting of the
stone; I mean, to fly upon the Instruments, which God uses in afflicting
them. They will not seem to quarrel with God, but they will pick an hundred
quarrels with the Rod ^ Chron. 18. 26.
that is in his hand. It is easy to interpret their meaning.

9. Sometimes Non-submission, is expressed by excessive and immoderate mourning
under their affliction. And thus it is with some (especially in the loss of
near Friends and relations) though they say little, yet they grieve much, their
eyes speak a great deal more then their tongues. But it is all one as if they
did speak with their tongues, God understands it; where there is too much of
grief, there is something of discontent. He does not submit aright to the hand
of God, that suffers himself to be overwhelmed with sorrow under Gods hand. The
Apostle supposes such a thing as this.

10. Sometimes it is expressed unhappily by the neglect or giving over duty, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 13.
and so it has been sometimes in pure contempt, Mal. 3. 14. Sometimes upon
surprisal. Sometimes in passion, Jer. 20. 8, 9. But what ever is the rise of
it, the thing is naught.

Now whence all this, and all the rest that breaks forth into a seab in men's
carriages under affliction? Is it not hence, that men do not in their
affliction consider that they are under the hand of God, that all that which
they are discontent at, and quarrel with, is Gods doing? Undoubtedly it is from
hence, at least this bears a part. If there were more of the one, there should
be less of the other, less passion if more serious consideration of this
truth: I appeal to any conscientious Christian, whether when they have lashed
out into any passionate discontents by reason of their sufferings, they do not
find upon reflection, that this consideration has lien asleep, at lest has
not been thoroughly improved; He that says he does seriously consider this, and
yet finds his heart to rise and quarrel with God, says also that his heart is
above measure proud and stout against God. Doubtless this is one, and a
prevailing ground of the distempers that are in the soul, for the afflictions
that are upon the man, not considering that God has done it.

2. Hence it will follow, That none but a gracious heart can carry it with holy
submission, quietly, and without distemper under affliction, especially when
afflictions are sharp and pinching: And the reason is, because none but a
gracious heart can make a right improvement of this Consideration. Where there
is not a distinct knowledge of God, of his Attributes, of his Ends, and the
fear of God to make the heart stand in awe of him; it is not possible this
Consideration should work up to such an effect, as appeared in the Prophet in
this place. I doubt not but a Heathen might be convinced of the reasonableness
of this, that what is done by his God, should not be contradicted by himself;
but it must be a higher principle that must enable him to practice, to make
such an improvement of his consideration, that it may balance his spirit, and
keep it even. There must be something more then reason, to keep under the
boylings of passion, when a man is scorched and pained with his affliction.
This is an excellent reason indeed to balance the spirit of a man: but if there
be not grace to husband and advance this reason, the pot will boil over
notwithstanding.

And this is a main reason of the different carriage between a godly man and a
wicked man in time of affliction, I mean, when each of them acts like himself,
and as such. Take a godly man, and a wicked man, and suppose their afflictions
equal, yet you shall ordinarily see a deal of difference in the temper, and
behavior of the men, in reference to their afflictions. As the men differ so
their carriage. As they differ in their principles, so you shall find them in
their practice. The one stoops, is quiet, dumb, silent, acknowledges the hand
of God, and blesses him, Job 1. 20, 21, Levit. 10. 3. 1 Samuel 3. 18. The other
frets; is impatient, discontent, cannot endure the yoke, and therefore labors
to shake it off, will do any thing, though never so unlawful, to get his leg
out of the stocks. Job 2. 9. You have a veryful instance in Saul, 1 Samuel 28. 5,
6, 7. There is in ordinary abundance of difference between good and bad men in
the carrying of the cross; And if it be examined, this will be found to have
an influence upon the better side, viz. the help of this consideration, That
God has done it, and grace to improve it.

Object. If it be said, Some wicked men lie as quietly under affliction, as any
men, not expressing any thing of impatience.

Answ. There may be something like patience, and submission to the hand of God,
discovered in a wicked man under affliction, which if examined, is but a
counterfeit; They are silent sometimes out of

1. A Stoical Apathy.

2. Or from natural courage.

3. Sometimes out of meerfullennesse.

4. Or from some impressions of Conscience working servile fear, or something
else like these, but none of these, no nor all of them together do amount to
that which we now treat of, viz. an holy, humble, silent submission under
affliction^, wrought out by the gracious improvement of Gods hand in the
affliction that lies upon them.

Object. But you give us some Instances of very holy men, who under affliction
have seemed to carry it as frowardly, and have expressed as much passion as the
worst.

Ans. It must be confessed, And this does so much the more confirm the Assertion
and Inference, That where Grace is ^^nting, an holy submission to Gods hand (as
the hand of God) must needs be wanting. It is hardly done where there is grace,
and therefore where it is not, it is not to be expected; Know then

1. That the Judgments of those that are gracious ones are right for this,
That when God strikes, they should be dumb and silent. Lam. 3. 26, 27.
They own it as good to do so, Romans 7. 14, 16.
though sometime they do not the good they own.

2. It is in their scope to be that in performance, which they are in
conscience, to practice as they judge. Every gracious heart resolves to keep
the Commandments of God, Psalm. 119. 115. And because the Command reaches their
tongues, therefore to bridle their lips when Gods rod is upon their backs, v.
1. I said I will.

3. It is in their endeavor, as well as in their purpose; They know it to be
their duty, and as duty they set upon what they know, v. ^. I was dumb, I held
my peace. They are fruitless and vain purposes that are not seconded with some
endeavors. Job, though surprised afterward, held in to a miracle the first and
second bouts that Satan had with him, Job 1: 21, 22. and 2. 10.

4. But the best of the Saints that is here in a bearing Condition has flesh
in him as well as Spirit. And hence it is, that the worser part is sometimes
the stronger by the advantage of temptation, and then passion gets the
upperhand of patience, as otherwhiles patience does of passion. A Christian is
but in the fight, not come to a perfect conquest, 1 Cor. 9. 26. And whiles he
is in fight, it may be his unhappiness to have his affections routed till he
rally again. He is sure he shall have the victory at the last, but not sure
that he shall get that victory without wounds. It is thus with the most eminent
Saints, often down and up again, as I have instanced. And therefore it can
hardly be expected of any that he should be altogether, and at all times so
impassionate, as he is at some.

5. If he be overcome, and do speak unadvisedly with his lips, or manifest
impatience under the rod, there is this to say for him to witness him a Saint,
to distinguish him from a fool.

1. That he does it not easily, much less upon choice. It is usually upon
surprisal, temptation, or in desertion, when he is not himself, when he has
not his arms about him, his graces ready. Job was beaten out of his possession,
Job 3. 2. but it was upon very strong assaults.

2. When he has lost any ground to the enemy, he is ashamed that the enemy
has got it, and he has lost it. It is not usual with him to justify himself
in his folly, as Jonah seemed to do, before he cooled, Jonah 4. But to mourn
for what he cannot help, and to abhor himself for what he has done against
his God. Job 42. 6.


3. Though he fall yet he does not lie, he gets up again; he never rests till
he have recovered his losses, till his wounds be cured. Thus David in this
Psalm. And when he is up, he watches more narrowly, and fights the next bout^,
better then he did the last.

3. Now it might be proper for us to examine our selves what we have been, Use.
Examin^
and what we have done, when we have been under affliction. There is no
question but we have all tasted of sorrow more or less, in one kind or other,
in our bodies, names, estates, relations, etc. It is common to all, Man is born
to trouble, Job 5. 7. But it is a very great Question, Whether we have been
like David in our afflictions? Whether we have been dumb, and not opened our
mouths? Or if we have, Whether it have been upon this Consideration, because
God has done it? Few can say they have been silent, but fewer, that it has
been upon this ground; Let us look into both.

1. Have you been silent: Can you say?

1. That you have used no impatient Complaints under affliction, as if your
sorrow had never been fellowed, nor any suffered as you have done. It is very
ordinary, Lam 1. 12
especially under pinching crosses, for a man to aggravate his own sufferings,
to think his own greatest, because he does not know what other men feel in
theirs. But certainly too much complaining argues too little patience, Lam. 3.

To complain excessively, to aggravate our griefs, is not to be dumb. It is a
sign we feel sin too little, when we complain of smart so much.

2. Have you not sometimes accused God, as dealing too severely with you. If
not in words, yet will conscience clear you for your thoughts, that you have
not condemned God, as too hard a master. Thinking is speaking with God; if we
have entertained such thoughts, and not shut them out when they have offered
themselves, we have not been dumb.

3. Have you never in the Confidence of your own Logic, challenged God to a
dispute, enquiring of him a reason of his matters, as if he should not chastize
his Creature, ^nlesse first he should give his Creature an account why he does
chastize. This I believe is more ordinary, then is ordinarily thought of. I
have known some that have ^sed strange boldness with God in this kind. But
that man that will have a reason from God of his dispensations toward him,
discovers plainly enough, that he is at present outed of his own. If they did
either know themselves what vermin they are, or did acknowledge God in the
greatness of his Sovereignty, they would quickly give that proud humor an
answer with rebuke.

4. When you have been under affliction, have you used no indirect means to
come to the end of your affliction, before your affliction has had its end on
you? When God has put you into the prison, have you staid there, till his
discharge has been your warrant? Oh how many good men miscarry in this case,
using false keys to open the doors, or bribing the keepers to connive at an
escape before they have obtained a d^scharge! Some in our times have ventured
the breaking of their necks, the wounding of their Consciences, to be ^ased of
their chains. 2 King. 6. 33.
Most of us are too basty, and by our pract^ce speak the language of that
wicked King of Israel in the siege of Samaria.

5. Have you not in despondence cast away your confidence, and laid aside your
hopes, as if because God does sometimes defer, therefore he would deny, and
that you should never have deliverance, because it comes not just when you look
for it. It is too ordinary in our afflictions, to give way to dejection, and so
to make our yokes heavJer while they are on, because God is not pleased so soon
as we would have him to take them off, 1 Samuel 27. 1.
What is the language? I shall perish, I shall be undone, I shall never break
over this affl^ction, This will make an end of me, there is no hopes, this is
not the voice of Mic. 7. ^
faith, but of discontent. Thou art not pleased with Gods dispensation, and
therefore through unbelief wilt forestall his compassion.

6. Though you durst not seem to make many words with God when you have been in
affliction, yet can you say, you have let the Instrument pass so quietly, as
it should have done, because an Instrument in Gods hand. This bewrayes many a
man's impatiency and discontent, that though he says nothing to God, yet he
speaks a great deal too much to the Rod that God uses. Few men will let him
that curses him pass, as David did Shimei, 2 Samuel 16. 10. Nay rather we say,
what God says, Say not (Prove. 20. 22.) Say not thou, I will recompense evil.
Let God say what he will, we many of us take liberty to say, and do what we
list, to requite what we call our injuries upon the Instrument: But he deceives
himself who thinks he is silent toward God, while he vents his passion against
the Rod that God lays upon his back; God will interpret we mean him by our
quarrelling with his messengers.

7. Have you moderated your passions, and not suffered the floods to overflow
the banks? when afflictions have been sharp, and perhaps renewed, have you not
suffered your selves to be drowned with sorrow, and your spirits to be
overwhelmed? Sometimes we suffer our sorrows to eat up all our comforts, and
because we cannot enjoy what we would, therefore will not take the benefit of
what we have. This is not dumbness, but discontent. It is peevishness in a
child, 2 Samuel 18. 33. and 19. 1. 4.
because he has been whipped for his fault, to refuse his meat. Certainly if
we give way to immoderate sorrow in our afflictions, so as to refuse to eat our
bread, to serve our relations, to neglect our duties either to God or man, in
our silence we speak a language, which God understands to be impatient. 1 These.
4. 13.
To sorrow without hope, is to sorrow without submission.

So much for bare silence, but we have another search to make.

Quest. Whether we have been silent upon this ground, because whatever be the
affliction, it has God for the Author, It is of his doing.

Answ. Sometimes men are dumb and silent under affliction, out of pure
Ignorance, they do not understand, are not sensible of the evil that lies upon
them, and the reason why they do not complain, is because they do not
understand: And this is not, Hos. 7. 9.
because its Gods doing.

2. Sometimes men are silent, because they are sullen, they restrain speech,
not to restrain passion, but to gratify pride, because they will enjoy an
humor, not because they will express their patience. This is not upon the
ground in the Text, because its Gods doing.

3. Some men are silent out of a stoicall Apathy, because they think they ought
not to be moved with any thing that befalls them, that it is altogether below a
man that has reason, to be affected with passion in any case, either to
rejoice in any good, or to mourn for any evil. This is Stoicism, not Christian
silence, much less upon this ground, because God has done it.

4. There may be silence out of a natural Astorgy, as being in a great measure
without natural affections. Though it be not common, nor in the power of any
man, by the strength of reason wholly to enervate, and lay asleep his
affections, according to the Stoical dream, Romans 1. 31.
yet it is natural to some men to be in a great measure without natural
affection, very unapt to be stirred or moved with any changes that do befall
them: yet this is not grace, but a natural indisposition to sense any thing
with vehemence of affection: One man burieth a wife, and the burial of the wife
is almost the death of the husband. He feels himself half dead, because the
Companion of his life is dead which was one half of himself. I do not excuse
this. Another buries a wife, and scarc^ knows what he buries (i. e.) is so
little affected with it, that one would think he buried that which he never
loved. This is a judgment, To
not a virtue.

5. There may be silence out of a natural Courage, raised by the study of
morality. In morals there are virtues called Magnanimity, Fortitude, to which
are opposed Cowardice, Pusillanimity, weakness of Spirit. The virtues are seen
in undertaking great difficulties without recoyling, bearing great trials
without shrinking. Now some men bear their burdens with a seeming
invinciblenesse (i. e.) they bear them with so much courage, that he that looks
on would think they did not bear them. The setting of a joint, the dismembring
of their bodies, the ripping up of the flesh, seems as little to them as to
another; the opening of a vein, the pulling out of a tooth; And what is all
this? Christian patience, holy submission, No, it may be nothing but natural
stoutnesse, heightened by principles of morality, because it speaks fortitude
and magnanimity to bear great things without the appearance of great passion.

6. It may possibly be upon strong Convictions of sin, and the workings of a
natural Conscience, laboring under guilt, and the fear of some greater evil.
He that is in the hands of an enemy, though he have, and do suffer much by him,
yet is silent under his present sufferings, because he knows he is still liable
to worse, that he that has plundered his pockets, and given him a cut in the
arm, has power when he will to let him blood in the throat, or in the heart,
and therefore he concludes it is best to take that patiently, that is done,
lest he bring some greater mischief upon himself by his impatiency. Thus I
believe it is with some natural men, when God lays his hand upon them by some
smarting affliction, Conscience flies in their faces, tells them now they are in
the hands of an enemy, that he that has arrested them is he, that they have
sinned against by oaths, perjuries, drunkenness, whoredom, blood, oppression;
that he that punishes with sickness, losses, etc. is able to punish with
flames; that now his body is not only in danger of death, but his soul of
Hell. This Alarm from Conscience makes him lie still: He dares not complain of
his present burden, because h^ sees he is within the reach of that which is a
thousand times worse.

Quest. But what then will argue our silence upon this Consideration that God
has done it?

Answ. 1. When the heart is sensible, that in the affliction it has to do with
God, and is more awed with the thoughts of him that is the Author of the
affliction, then with the affliction it self, of which he is the Author. Thus
it was certainly with Job, The Lord gives, and the Lord has taken away. Jo^.
1.
It is a very ill sign when only pain, sickness, loss* etc. do break our
spirits, but he that sends them is not considered. It is better a great deal to
remember the Author, though we should forget the affliction, then to be
affected with the affliction, and forget the Author.

2. If it be because God has done it, then the soul will be free to condemn it
self, and justify God in all his dispensations. The sanctified soul knows that
God can do nothing but that which is righteous toward his Creature, and
therefore it must needs justify him in that which he does. Dan. 9. 7, 14.
And this justifying of God in his affliction, 2 Chronicles. 12. 6.
is an argument that his eye is upon him whom he justifies, Lam. 1. 18
and that he sees it were an unreasonable thing to quarrel with him for the
doing of that which he cannot but clear him for in his own conscience, when it
is done.

3. He that has his heart quieted, and his mouth stopped, upon this ground,
because God has done it, will upon the same ground labor to be quiet, though
his burden increase, because he has the same reason lying still before him.
The increasing, multiplying, lengthening of afflictions is from the same hand.
Job 1. 21. When all came together, yet Job could say, The Lord has taken,
blessed be the Name of the Lord.
He is as really the Author of the weight and measure, as of the kind and
substance of any affliction. Indeed if this consideration be laid aside, there
may be a change. It cannot be expected of any plaster that it should operate,
except it be applied.

4. He that is silent upon this Consideration, Lam. 3. 26. ad 34.
will not make haste out of his affliction. Lam. 3. 33
He knows the wise God can do nothing without an end, and therefore he will be
contented to wait upon God till he have accomplished his end in afflicting him.
Because it is physic from the most skillful Physician, therefore he will
submit to the Judgment of his Physician, how long to continue in that course.
And because God delights not in afflicting, but strikes with bowels, he
concludes, that so much the longer his course, so much the greater his benefit.

5. He that is quiet upon this ground, Job 1. 21.
will upon the same ground, as well bless God in his affliction, as submit to
his afflicting hand. As you see it in Job, The Lord has given, and the Lord
has taken, Blessed be the Name of the Lord. He eyed God both in his safety and
sufferings. He saw both coming from the same hand, and therefore were both
worthy of the same acknowledgment. Since it was God that afflicted him, he must
needs be thankful, for he knew God could do nothing but what was worthy of
praise.

6. If it be because God has done it, then you will not hear of any thing from
any other hand that should raise up any prejudice in you against God: Your
souls will abhor any of these suggestions from whomsoever they come, that
shall seem to cast any blemish upon him, or tend to work the least discontent
in you. When Jobs wife (stirred up by the Devil no question) came to stir up
discontent in him against God, Do thou still retain thine Integrity? Job 2. 9.
Curse God and die: Observe with what Indignation he makes his return to her;
Thou speak as one of the foolish women speaks. And whence was it that he
fetched this sharp arrow, but from this quiver, What, shall we receive good at
the hands of God, and shall we not receive evil (i. e.) from the same hands? As
if he should have said; Woman, my afflictions come from God, as well as my
mercies, and would thou have me bless him for mercies, and quarrel with him
for afflictions? Thou speak foolishly.

7. If it be this Consideration that works to keep you quiet in affliction,
then this will make you humble your selves under Gods mighty hand, Jam. 4.
that he may lift you ^p. The same Consideration that makes you silent, will
make you humble, will put you upon it to search and try your ways, Lam. 3. 40.
to enquire into the cause of Gods displeasure, and return to him that s^ites,
Hos. 6. 1. and 14. 1, 2. And since you have made a breach by sin, to be
restless till you have made your peace by repentance. This will put you upon
it to seek God^ face by supplication, which seems at present to be clouded from
you by affliction. Ps. 51. 11, 12.
And that Faith which sends you to prayer in your affliction, will also comfort
you by the promise in that affliction: because he that bids you pray has
promised to hear, and given assurance, that if we answer the rod, Ps. 50. 15.
he will burn the rod, and answer our prayers.

Now let a word of Exhortation be suffered and accepted. Use. Exhort.
I beseech you let us labor each of us for such a frame of spirit, as David
with much striving attained to (i. e.) in all afflictions to sit down quietly,
to be dumb, and not open our mouths, because God has done it; whatsoever be
the affliction, let this be the practice. And now let it be yours, that are at
present called to this exercise. For this end consider

1. It is the will of God it should be so; when he strikes, he would have his
people submit, not quarrel or dispute, Luke 21. 19. Iam. 4. 7, 10.

2. The best Saints, when they have been themselves, and not outed their
possession, have done so. Aaron, Leviticus 10. 3. Eli, 1 Samuel 3. 18. Hezekiah,
2 King. 20. 19. Job, Job 1. 21. David, in this Psalm, and Psalm. 38. 13. The
Church, Micah 7. 9. The best Saints are best examples.

3. When they have been overtaken with passion, Job 42. 6.
they have been ashamed of their weakness; Ps. 73. 22.
We must not think to escape better then our betters. Shame and repentance is
the best that comes of passion and frowardness. And this (as good as it is)
were better prevented then born.

4. There is all the reason in the world for our silence under affliction,
because we create all our own grief; we sin before God-strikes: Lam. 3. 39.
Shall he that challenges the field complain of his wounds? And if we sin
against God, Shall we not be dumb when God afflicts us for our sin? Shall we
provoke God by sin, and yet quarrel with God, when we have provoked him?
Learn of the Church rather, I will bear, Mica. 7. 9.
etc.

5. It is very honorable for a Christian, and a pious thing to be silent and
quiet under Gods hand. God sets a Crown upon Jobs head for this, and forgets
his passion, because he had been acquainted with his patience, James 5. 11. Job
stands upon record for his submission.

6. It speeds well in the issue. No man loses by sparing his passion. Jobs
patience begat a very good end to all Jobs trials, Jam. 5. 11. Read the story,
and it will make you in love with patience, willing to wear a mousel, that you
may get such provender, Job 42. 10, 11. ad calcem.
1. This is the way to get good by an affliction. If the plaster lie on it
will work the better; They commonly do best that keep closest to the Physicians
rules. 2. It is a good way to pacify God when he is angry. If we be quiet
under Gods hand, we shall sooner make him quiet when his hand is upon us. The
childs crying adds to the mothers anger. 3. Its the way to get out of the
Stock^, God puts us in to humble us, and break our stomachs; And if we be
humbled and broken, God has his end; Levit. 26. 41
And when he has his end, 2 Chronicles. 7. 14.
he will make an end.


7. Besides that it is a very unworthy, brutish, wicked thing, to strive, to
quarrel, to dispute with God, Job 42. 6.
Psalm. 73. Job 2. 10. So it is a bootlesse and a fruitless thing, There is
nothing to be got by it. No man could ever wrangle God out of his way, till he
did leave them as men that were perditae spei, Isa. 1. 5.

1. It is a sign of a great deal of pride. It can be nothing below this that
makes a man ^hamper with God, wriggle in the yoke. 2. It renders the physic
ineffectuall; Physic cannot work, because it does not stay. And this is bad
enough to lose a Cure. 3. By impatiency God is provoked to come again, and to
give harder blows, because we do not couch at less. He must either cure us, or
kill us. A Physician that has an unruly patient, uses more force. A Master
that has a sturdy Scholar, uses more stripes. Joh. 5. 14.
This will God do, Levit. 26. 27, 28. What did Jonah get by his passion?
Consider the words of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 10. 22. Do ye provoke God to anger?
Job. 9. 4.
are ye stronger then he? Who ever hardened himself against God, and prospered?
Now one of the most approved ways to bring the heart to a quiet, silent
frame, is that which this Text and Doctrine offers, viz. this Consideration,
that God has done it. And therefore to make it serviceable to its end, turn it
and wind it in your thoughts: Say thus, Whatever my affliction is, God has
done it. And if God have done it,

First, He has done it, that might do it. God that has done it is Lord of the
Creature. And may not he dispose of the Creature that he is Lord of? He that
made Heaven and Earth according to his will, may not he do what he will in
Heaven and Earth? This Divinity the Heathen Emperor had learned in his
affliction, and what he had learned himself, he preaches to us, Dan. 4. 34,
35. He does according to his will in the army of Heaven, and among the
Inhabitants of the Earth. This is the Doctrine. And it is the Doctrine of Gods
Sovereignty, His dominion is an everlasting dominion, and his Kingdom from
generation to generation, and he does what he will, verse. 34. But what is the
use? It is that which I am now urging, Therefore he cannot be resisted;
therefore he may not be questioned. So it follows, And none can stay his hand.
None can force him to retreat, or say to him, What do thou? i. e. call him
to an account, for his providential dispensation. This is excellent in
reference to our times, and to public transactions. The potsherds of the earth
may strive and quarrel one with another, Isa. 45. 9.
but woe to him that striveth with his Maker. Shall the clay say to him that
fashioneth it, What make thou? We are all the work of his hands, Psa. 100.
And shall he be denied that liberty which his Creatures have, to dispose of his
own work? No, from hence we must argue thus, He is Lord of the Creature,
therefore he may chastise his Creature. And by his Sovereignty he is entitled
to this liberty,

1. To pick out whom he will. All his creatures are equally under his dominion.
He is as much Lord over Kings and Potentates, by what Names soever called, as
over peasants and potsherds. Those that deny it may be sent to grass, and then
they will learn it: Though whiles they flourish in their Kingdoms, they will
scarce own it. If any man that is afflicted say, Why me rather then another?
Answer thy self, Why not thee as well as any? since thou art as much Gods
Creature, as much under his Sovereignty as any other. He is as free to deal
with a Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 4. (...) with a Lazarus.

2. As to pick out whom he will, so to chasten and whip us with what Rod he
will. All afflictions are in his own choice, whether this or that. The Creature
that comes under discipline, must not prescribe to him that is his Lord. For
the most part we are most discontent with the present, and are ready to say, If
it had been any thing else we could have born it. But this is nothing but
pride, that we may not be our own carvers. The truth is, He that has not
learned to bear any thing that God inflicts, has yet learned to bear nothing
e^ nomine, because God inflicts it: A quatenus adomne.

3. To come when he will, and to stay his own time. Gods Sovereignty knows no
limits, but what himself puts. He is at as much liberty to take his own time,
as to choose his own Rod. We are apt to think, such an affliction came very
unseasonably, and carried too long. But we forget under whose hands we are. It
should satisfy us under any affliction, that the time when it comes, and the
time which it lasts is Gods time. He that did choose the man, and his Cross,
has also chosen the opportunity to afflict the man by his Cross. To find
fault with the time or length of affliction, is to find fault with the
Sovereignty of God, and his liberty to afflict.

This is one Consideration by which the Doctrine is improved. He has done it
that may do what he will^, will it not follow, that I must be silent toward
him that does it?

Secondly, Improve it thus, It is of the Lord, The Lord has given, the Lord
has taken; why the Lord is debtor to no man, has no dependence on any, can be
beholden to none; We have our whole dependence upon God for all we are, for all
we have, but he has none upon us. He was, and was infinitely happy in himself
before there were any other beings besides his own. And he would be happy in
himself, though there were no being but his own. The being of the Creature
shows forth something of his Excellency that made it, but adds nothing to the
perfection of his being. A man cannot be profitable to his maker, Job 22. 2.
as he may be to his neighbor. Job 35. 8.
If we be good, it is to our selves; and if we be bad we cannot hurt him. Argue
thus therefore, God has laid his hand upon my body by sickness, my health is
impaired, my life endangered: If I quarrel, dispute, complain, or grow sullen;
With whom is it that I am angry? with God? Why is God a debtor unto me? Of his
goodness he has preserved my health so long. I have enjoyed many comfortable
days. But is he bound, because he has done it to continue his course so long
as I please? and not to please himself when he will, by changing of his course?
What have I done, or what could I do to oblige him to that which he has done
for me? And if he have done it of his own will without an obligation, shall I
quarrel with him, if at length it please him not to do, that which he was never
bound to do when he did it? This Consideration will teach thee and me to be
thankful, that we have had so many days of health, which were given of grace,
not to wrangle at sickness when it comes, or lies upon us, it may be for his
end, to let us know that God is no debtor to us. In like manner when the
affliction is upon you in your relations, Say you be afflicted in a Husband, a
Wife, a Child, a Parent, a Brother, a Friend, a Comp^nion. Suppose any of
these is sick, weak, lame, melancholy, or distracted; (...) suppose God makes
a breach by taking away any of these relations. Put the case how you will,
Suppose the affliction never so pinching, and to the quick by reason of the
Circumstances that do aggravate, as that you have lost the best Father, the
best Mother, the best Husband, the best Wife, the best Friend, the best
Companion (we are apt to indulge our selves, and to think our comforts were
best when we have lost them, though it may be scarce content with them when we
had them.) But suppose it really so; Oh this stirs up passion! You can hardly
be ^ilent under such afflictions; Now you complain, Was ever any sorrow like my
sorrow? Did ever any woman lose such a Husband, so kind, so pitiful, so
bountiful, so helpful to soul and body? Did ever any Paren^ lose such a
child, so (...), so dutiful, so graci^^^, as I have done? And so on. Admit
this: But I pray who has done (...)? who has laid (...) them, and taken (...)
your Comfort in them, or taken them away, (...) thereby deprived your
expectations (...) you will say, (...) done it, and with Job, The Lord has
(...), Job 1. Well, and (...) you quarrel with him, or not be silent under his
hand? Will you complain, murmur, dispute, or pine away with sorrow, for what
God has done? You had them, and they were so good. I pray you who gave them or
made them such to you? You might have had worse, and been crossed in them, as
much as you were blessed, were they not the gifts and blessings of God? Did God
give them, and are you not content that you have had them so long (...) he was
pleased to spar^ them? Were they so good to you, and are they too good for God?
Did he dispense with his right to let you enjoy them, though they were his? And
will not you dispense with your supposed right to let him enjoy them after you
have used them? Who would lend a neighbor any utensill, that for the use would
alienate the property, and not let the owner have it to serve his turn, because
he was so good to his neighbor to lend it to serve his use? We deal thus with
God. It is a wonder he will lend us any thing. But I have not quite done my
expostulation; Could you challenge it of debt to have such relations? And yet
would you have God bound to perpetuate your relations, during your pleasure,
when you cannot challenge them? Must God have dependence on us? Or shall we
quit our dependence on him? Shall not he that is a free Agent have liberty to
act freely? Must he that gives us such good blessings be made our debtour by
the blessings which he gives? Oh be silent! He has taken away thy relations,
who was not bound to continue thy relations. Be thankful that they were so
good, and thine so long. (...) not imp^tient toward God, that they are now
taken from thee, and they can be thine no longer. You have had them longer then
you could challenge them. Take heed of challenging God, because you could no
longer keep them.

Thirdly, Romans 16. 27.
Think thus with your selves, I am in such an affliction, 1 Timothy 1. 17.
but God has done it, Ps. 147. 5.
surely it must needs be done with infinite Wisdom and Caution, Ps. 11^. 7.
which he does. He is the wise God, His Understanding is I^finite, All his
Works are done in Judgment. It is not possible that ^ither ignorance or
rashness should befall his work. Physicians cannot say, that all their Rules
are certain, much less that they act according to certain Rules. The Causes of
diseases, as to this or that particular subject, are often hid from them, and
therefore they are necessitated to make their applications by conjecture rather
then science. They have no windows to look into the bodies of men, and
therefore are subject to mistakes about men's bodies, and the diseases incident
to them. But there is no such thing befalls God. Ignorance and Error are
incompatible with his Nature and Glory. He can as well not be, as ^e can err
in any of his ways. When he does afflict his children, he does it as a
Physician, and he never misseth in the Physic which he gives. He knows all
things, and there is nothing hid from him. All Causes, Effects, Symptoms,
Operations, Circumstances of things, Joh. 21. 17
are open before him. Heb. 4. 13.
He knows by immediate vision, not by discourse, much less by report.

1. Wherever he lays an affliction, he knows the man, and knows him exactly
to whom he administers. Psalm. 94. 9.
He that has made all men, cannot but know all men that he has made. He
perfectly knows every man's temper, whether sweet or sour, hard or soft, easily
to be wrought upon, or more rugged and harsh, apt to make resistance, or
ductile and flexible. He knows what is in man, and needs not any one should
show him what he is, John 2. 24. And he knows man's need, as well as his temper,
what will serve to answer his necessity according to his temper.

2. As he knows the man, so he knows the disease, whether it be a disease in
the head, or a disease in the heart. Physicians many times mistake in this,
they cannot always find out the disease, and therefore sometimes they fall
short of the Cure; yea sometimes in stead of curing, kill the Patient, and that
when they do their best. But God knows perfectly what every man or woman are
sick of, to whom he administers, yea though the diseases lie lurking, and be
never so subtle, they cannot be too subtle for him. All our sins are before
him, Ps. 69, 5, and 90. 8.
and none of them hid from his sight. Ps. 50.
He is able to set them in order, though they lie on heaps, and seem to be
shuffled together. The heart lies as naked before him, Heb. 4. 12
as the body and outward man, 1 Chronicles. 28. 9. Revel. 2. 23. Whether it be
secret pride, or hypocrisy, or unbelief, or envy, or self-love, or an evil
thought, he knows it as fully as if it were drunkenness, swearing, murder,
evil speaking, adultery. He never mistakes to pun^sh any man for a sin that
he is not guilty of,

3. He knows the remedy exactly, and what is the best wa^ of cu^e for every
disease. Physicians many times differ about the way of curing diseases, even
where their Judgments accord about the diseases themselves, and their Causes;
One thinks such a way best; Another is of another mind. Doctors do differ. But
now God does know, and know absolutely, and unerringly, what is the most proper
way that is to be taken with every disease in relati^n to each partilar
subject; Whether they be Tumors and Tympanies, the swellings of pride and
vainglory, which David and Hezekiah seemed to be sick of; ^ Sam. 24 2.
or P^lsies and shakings of carnal fear, 2. Kin. 20. 12, 13
the disease of the Disciples. Or of the Stone, viz. hardness of heart, and
that brawninesse which makes men insensible of ^inne, Isa. 42. 24 25.
or the sad effects of it, Rev. 3. 2.
which the Isra^lites are charged with. Or a Lethargick distemper of spiritual
security, which makes men careless about their spiritual condition, and by
which they are in danger to die sleeping, as Sardis was. Whatever the disease
is, God knows the best way for cure, whether purging, vomiting, bloud-^etting,
bathing, sweating, exe^cise. He is never to seek for a remedy su^able to the
disease; nor does he ever make any application that is not proper to the
disease to which it is applied. So Revel. 2. 4, 5, 14, 15, 16. and Revel. 3.
15, 19, 17, 18, 19. If the disease be not cured it is not because of any
mistake in the Physician, nor any defect in the means, but usually from the
disorder of the patient, that either does not use, or misuse the means.

4. He is exact in the knowledge of the Nature of every potion, and its
operation. He knows to a draghme, to a scruple, what quantity may serve to work
to such an height as may fit both the quality of the disease, and the temper of
the subject: By reason of his perfect judgment, he always keep^ to a just
measu^e in all his administrations without either excess or defect, Isa. 27.
8. and 28. 27. Though he makes use of Instruments, yet he never suffers any
Instrument to act without a rule, and in order. He himself governs the
Instrument that he acts by, Revel. 2. 10. Job 1. 12. and 2. 6. It is not indeed
always to every one the same measure and proportion, but it is always a just
measure and proportion to every one. Job 34. 23
He never laid upon any man in his chastisements more then was meet. Lam. 3. 33
34.


5. He knows the season exactly, as well when physic is to be administered, as
what physic. That c^nnot be done without danger of life at one time, which in
the proper se^son is the best way for the saving of it. He is a wise man that
knows seasons. The missing of an hour is sometimes the losing of a Cure, the
losing of a life. It is ordinary for Physicians to complain of their Patients
for coming too late. Now God never stays our coming. He knows, if he should
never administer to us, till we come to him; he might lose his child by the
neglect of a potion. And therefore in the fit season he prescribes his Physic,
though we come not for it. ^ Kin 20* 14.
Never any man suffered prejudice in his affliction, by Gods mistaking the
season of his affliction. As for all other things, so for the Discipline of the
soul, Gods time is always the best. Whether he purge or bleed, he knows, and
does it with the opportunity.

Oh now make use of this Consideration when you are under affliction, would you
be dumb and silent under Gods hand? See what an Argument is here, to stop your
mouths, God has done it, the wise God has done it, he that is infinite in
wisdom, and with whom is counsel and judgment he has done it, and he has done
it with judgment: Shall we question whether that (...) well done, or quarrel
with it when it is done, which has had wisdom it self to manage and order it
in every circumstance in the doing of it? If when we are afflicted, we think
the affliction might have been spared, or some other had been more suitable, a
lesser measure might have served, or it might better have come at another time,
we play the fools. Do you know who has done it? Do you know that God has done
it? And is there any wiser then God? Shall the creature become wise, and direct
his Maker? Who has given him counsel, (...) 14.
or of whom has he learned understanding? He has seen folly in his Angels,
and do thou think to set up thy wisdom? Can there be a better way, or a
fitter^season then wisdom it self has found out? Oh let all flesh be silent
before the Lord, because he has done it, that could not err in what he does!
We never show our selves more fools, then when we pick quarrels with Gods
wisdom.

Fourthly, Improve it thus. Whatsoever the affliction is, God has done it, and
if God have done it there can be no room for complaint, because he has done
it, who in whatsoever he does with me, can do me no wrong in what he does. He
is the Judge of all the world, Genesis 18.
and shall not he do right? Ps. 97. 2.
He is righteousness it self, Dan. 9. 7.
and cannot do iniquity. This is one of those glorious Attributes which speak
his Essence, viz. his righteousness, Psalm. 7. 9. and 116. 5. Jer. 12. 1. Psalm.
145. 17. As he cannot clear the guilty, nor be Advocate for impenitent sinners,
Exo. 34. So he cannot condemn the innocent, Genesis 18. He is sometimes very angry
and severe in his dispensations with the children of men, but never unjust.
That severity which he used toward the old world in drowning it, Genesis 7. 10,
11, 21. Toward S^dome in burning it, Genesis ^9 24, 25. Toward Corah and his
Confede^ates in doing that new thing, to make the ground open its mouth to take
vengeance upon their rebellion, Number. 16. 30, 31, 32. was very dreadful, but
exceeding holy and equal. Nay, his proceedings towar^^ his own, Psalm. 73.
his beloved ones (which has been the so^est temptation) viz. the afflictions
of such as Jacob, Joseph, Job, David, Rachel, Hannah, Ruth, with all the rest
that are mentioned in sacred Writ; instances, that are able to match any case
that falls out in the Saints sufferings now, whether outward or inward. I say
these, though they were very sharp, yet were never chargeable with Injustice.
When Jeremiah had a mind to plead with God about his providentiall
dispensations, he is forced to make this concession to usher in his plea,
Righteous art thou, O Lord, Jer. 12. 1. There i^ no case in the world like
Jesus Christ's to ground ^ plea upon; he was absolutely free from sin in his
own person, 1 Pet. 2. 22, 23. and yet he was deepest in the sufferings that lay
upon his person, Isa. 53. 5, 6, 7, 8. And yet this Case will not bear a plea
against Gods Justice. And if the hand of God could be stretched out in such a
manner as it was against Christ, Isa. 53. Matthew. 26. and 27. without any
impeachment to his Justice; What shall we say when we come under his hand in
any of those chastisements that are laid upon us? Nothing can be unjust which
is inflicted upon us, since all was justice which was laid upon Christ. And how
shall we think it just, that Christ should suffer for others, who had no sin
of his own, and not be dumb, who have so much sin of our own, to justify Gods
proceedings in our sufferings? Let us therefore argue our selves into quietness,
with this consideration, that he that has afflicted us, has not wronged us;
he has done it, who does all in righteousness.

1. He knows how to do Justice exactly; for (as we said before) his
understanding is Infinite.

1. He knows the offender, and knows him perfectly, with whom he enters into
judgment, Hos. 5. 3. 2. He knows the offense, what is the ground of the
controversy, and why he enters into Judgment with his creature, Hos. 5. 3.
and 4. 1, 2. Ps. 50. 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21. 3. He knows all the rules of
Justice, and how to proportion and apply the Rule to the quality of the
offense* and to the necessity of the offender* He is Judge and Lawgiver, Isa.
33. 22.
And can you suppose that he that is so absolutely knowing in the course of
Justice, should do me, or you Injustice, contrary to his knowledge? Earthly
Judges even through Ignorance, do mistake in applying the Rule, but God cannot.

2. But secondly, he is upright as well as knowing; Earthly Judges some of them
understand well e^nough, but there is another thing which makes them err from
the Rule, and that is corruption. They are many times men of evil Consciences,
which will take a Byas, to draw them aside from the golden Rule, 1 (...) 8. 3.

And hence it is that Judgment is perve^ted, that the Innocen^ (...), and the
guilty many times acquitted, Isa. 10. 1, 2. Amos 5. 12. But now God has
nothing in him either of corruption or defect. His righteousness is without
mixture, 1. He has all righteousness in him. 2. He has no unrighousnesse in
him. 3. Nor any thing that might subject him to alteration.


There are no contrary principles in God. There are no qualities nor passions
in him. He has neither Covetousness nor Revenge. He has neither a bleered
eye, nor a crooked arm. He is not capable of being flattered with rewards,
because all is his own, Psalm. 50. 9, 10, 11. Nor of being feared with
greatness, because all are but worms besides himself. He is righteous, and he
loves righteousness: And no unrighteousnes shall dwell with him, much less
come from him.

And is not this a silencing Consideration, under any affliction, that the
affliction is righteous, and he is righteous that has measured ou^ the
affliction? God has done it, who shall implead him? Job 34. 17. Shall he that
hates right govern? or will you condemn him that is most just? Surely he will
not lay upon man mo^e then is right, that he should ent^r into Judgment with
God, ^. 2. 3.

It would be very tedious to enlarge all, more briefly therefore think

Fifthly, If God have done it, he that is Almighty has done it; one that can
do whatsoever he will, and therefore it is best to submit. It is to no purpose
for us to struggle with him, unless we were stronger. It is the Apostles
question, 2 Cor. 10. 21. Do you provoke the Lord to anger? Are ye stronger then
he? If we should rise up against him, 1. We cannot make him afraid of us, as
one man is afraid of another, Job 22. 4. 2. We cannot avoid him. If we seek to
escape from him, he can fetch us back again; he never lost any of his
prisoners, Psalm. 139. 7. Job 11. 20. Jer. 11. 11. 3. We cannot resist him, nor
grapple with him. If we come to handy gripes with God, we are crushed in pieces,
Job 40. 2. Isaiah 27. 4.


He is the Almighty God, What can thou do? He is able to master every man,
and if we refuse to be quiet, can make us quiet. When he m^ets with those that
are unruly, it is usual with him to hang on more bolts, and to plague them
seven times more, that walk contrary to him under what they feel: Think of
this: If we be not content to part with our endearments: He is able to make us
eat them. In our afflictions we are in his hands, that is able to bind Devils
that are stronger then we, Jude 6. Can drown or fire the universe, Genesis 7. 2
Pet. 3. yea if he will can fling into hell, as well as cast us on our beds. Oh
it is good to be silent before the Lord; He is Almighty, the strong God that
lays his hand upon us. There is nothing to be got with struggling, and
therefore it is best to make our yoke as ^asie as we can by submitting.

Sixthly, If God have done it, there is reason to be dumb and silent, because
so long as we are on this side perfect and complete destruction, we have a
great deal of mercy mixed with our sharpest trials, Lam 3. 22. It is of the
Lords mercies, etc. Though we think it much, and too much that God does, yet it
is certain he has not done so much as he might. If God have done (how bad
soever it seems to be) be assured it might have been much worse with us then it
is. If it be not so bad with you as it was with Job, Job 1. Job 2. As it was
with the people of God in Captivity, Lam. 1. and 2. and 5. as it is with the
damned in Hell, Luke 16. 26. Let us bless God, and be content, it is not yet
so bad with us, as it were easy with God to make it to us.

Seventhly, If God have done it, then for your q^ieting, and the keeping down
of thoughts and passions, let this prevail, that he does nothing in time, but
what was laid in his wise Counsel from Eternity. All issues and Events, with
all the Circumstances about them, were designed by God for his own Glory, Prove.
16. 4. Ioh. 11. 4. And when they do come to pass, are all ordered and
overruled to serve that design. If God cast us upon the bed of sickness, or
take away our dearest relations from us; it was determined it should be so; and
therefore of absolute necessity, it must be as it was determined. Let us
therefore put this question to our own hearts in all our sufferings; My soul,
which must give place to other? My will to the design, counsel and glory of
God, or Gods counsel and glory to my will?

Eighthly, I might add, and do you make advantage of it, that whatsoever God
does with his children, he does it all for the good of his children, yea for
their best good. If Saul persecute, 1 Samuel 18. 10. and 19. 9, 10. Absolem
rebel, 2 Samuel 15. Amnon play the beast, 2 Samuel 13. Shim^i curse, 2 Samuel 16. 5.
God intends, and will do David good by all this. David looked for it, 2 Samuel
16. 9, 10, 11, 12. And David found it, and confessed it afterward, Psalm, 119.
67, 71. God has promised that all things shall work for good, Romans 8.

And therefore he cannot but make our afflictions work for good according to
his promise. Ordinarily the sourest part of Gods providence, does yield the
sweetest effects for our spiritual advantage. This birche^ tree, the tree of
rods brings forth the quiet fruits of righteousness, to them that are exercised
thereby, Heb. 12. 11.

We do not read half so much of the good of outward prosperity, as we do of
divine chastisements and afflictions. If you do but think of this when you are
under the Rod, that whiles God is whipping, lancing, physicking of you, it is
all to do you good: You cannot but be dumb and quiet, and say, So that God will
do me good, let him do with me what he will. We bear with great patience our
parents, our Physicians, our Chyrur^eons, our Masters upon this account.

Ninthly, The Consideration of Gods doing, in all the evil that befalls us,
affords this allay, viz. that though God do afflict his children, yet at that
very instant when he does afflict, he loves his children, Heb. 126, 7. Yea that
he does afflict them, because he loves them, Revel. 3. 9.

Though the Rod may speak something of anger, Deuteronomy. 9. 20. Yet it never speaks
any thing of hatred or revenge to a Saint. Parents correct their children out
of love, Heb. 12. How much more does God love when he does correct?

And because he does love them when he does chastise them, he gives them
sufficient ground to be p^rswaded, that none of their sufferings shall separate
them from his love. Now who would not be silent under the Rod, which hears that
the Rod speaks so much love to him, that with silence bears it as a child?

Tenthly, If God have done it, it may be further improved to calm ou^ spirits,
and make us quietly submit, because he has done it, that has power over his
own work. It is a very great comfort to be under Gods hand in affliction,
because he is one that keeps his afflictions under command, Mat. 8. 8, 9. He
does not let them loose like Bears to destroy, but uses them as Leeches to let
blood, and take off at pleasure. He that lays on the Rod, can rebuke and break
the Rod when he pleases. If he send a plague, he can stop it in an instant, 2.
Sam. 24. He that wounds can heal; he that breaks can bind up; he that takes
away can give, Hos. 6. 1. And he can give better then he takes, either in the
same, or in some other kind, (i. e.) give spiritual, when he takes away
temporal blessings. Let us be very quiet under the Cross, because he has laid
it on, who in due time can take it off* who not only does his servants good by
sufferings, but is wont to do them good for their sufferings, especially if
they they be calm and quiet in the bearing of them. I do not mean in a Popish,
but in a Gospel sense, not for the merit of them, but for the promise to them.

Eleventhly, If God have done it, then let this come in for its share; that
whatsoever it is, it could not have been (...) then it is, Rebus sic stantibus,
i. e. as the Case is with the servants of God when he does chastise them.
Whatsoever God does, is therefore best done, because God does it. And
whatsoever we may (...), yet this is a truth, That it would have been worse, if
it had not been done, and so done, and at such a season. Gods work is best, and
his manner of working best, and his time is best. And thus we ought to think
and speak of his work, unless we think our selves wiser then God.

And if it be thus, why should I complain? If it be better for me to lose my
child, then to have it, to lose my wife then to have her, to lose my Name or
Estate then to have it? there is reason I should be content with that which is,
and not by discontent demonstrate my folly, that I affect that which is worse,
because I cannot be content with that which God does, who does every way that
which is best, if we could look the right way to see it; God that made the
world, is the best workman in the world. All his works are done in Judgment,
nor can any come after him to mend what he has done. There is abundance of
curiosity in the most abstruse, dark, cross, sour providence, which cannot be
found out presently.

Twelfthly, If God have done it, and thou find that it begins to work toward
any distemper, cast water upon the fire, consider God has done it. And have I
not reason to bear it from his hands, from whose hands I have received so much
good? As Job spoke to his wife, so let us speak to our souls, Job 2. Thou
speak foolishly, O my soul, shall we receive good at the hands of God, and
shall we not receive evil? Before you quarrel at any time with what you feel,
or lose, or want, sit down and reckon what you have.

These things should have been enlarged, and something more added, but I have
not time either to add or enlarge. You see the way, travel on, and do you
enlarge, and add by the improvement of your own thoughts. Farewell.

Soli Deo Gloria.
ALl that I have said has been (though not only) yet principally to you that
are most (...) concerned, I desire ^o take out my part in the lesson, who I am
sure have as great a part in the stroke, as anyone that stands at such a
distance. The loss of a true friend may very well be called an affliction;
such an one I am sure I have lost in her. God knows, my heart ^^icks close to
this place, and now he calls me another way: seeing my di^^emper, he has made
the breast bitter that I sucked upon, by the loss of diverse friends, which did
divide my spirit. The Lord teach me to be dumb and silent. And I hope you will
all recollect your selves, and give God the Glory of your quiet submission, now
he cal^ you to it by this sharp affliction. Do not keep the wound too long
open, le^^ you prejudice the Cure* It will be your glory to own the Sovereignty
Wisdom, Justice and Faithfulness of God i^ what he has done, so to give him
his glory.

Probably now it may be expected by some, tha^ I should raise a Pillar to
preserve her memory whom we have now ^^ought to her dust. But ^ do not use it,
and she ^oth not need it. God ^ath undert^ken to pre^erve the memory of the
^ust. And I think hers may very well be trusted with his undertaking. But ^f I
do say any thing, it ^ust be this, I have known her some years since she (...)
married, and been received into the room of a friend, which has given me
advantage to be better acquainted with her temper, disposition and beha^iour,
then some others were.

She was but young, yet of very considerable natural parts. She had a pregnant
and a ready wit, and in my opinion a good sobe^ judgment, which enable^ her to
distinguish of person^ and things, with commendable discretion.

She was of a cheerful^ disposition, but inoffensively pleasant for ought ^
ever saw. And this was a great advantage to her self, and to her relations,
both those that were below, and those that were above her. I think she seldom^
caused sadness or ^^quietnesse to any in the family by her ^ullennesse or
peevishness. For my part, I scarce ever saw her discontent; this is more I am
sure then a great many families can say, who labor sadly under the burden of
the wives or ^^stresses sting. There are ^o many houses where the (...) drops
through.

She was very affable and ^^tteous toward all sorts, (...) to those that were
(...) inferiors, as well as (...), and such as were (...) her degree, therein
^^serving the Apostles (...), Romans 12. 16. Conde^end to them that are of (...)
estate. Not only others abroad, ^ut her ^ervants enjoyed the benefit of this;
I have one in the family that will (...) his part, and I am confident will
sadly lament ^he loss. Though but a ^oman, yet she was (which ^ more then is
ordinarily ^ound in her Sex) a woman ^f a gallant spirit, that did not use to
quitch o^ grumble for a little, but would carry great burden with an high
Courage. Ordinary things she mad^ nothing of, and but a little of those that
were more then ordinary. She has been put upon that by reason of the
indisposition of her body, for ^ the birth of her conception, which I believe
few women have known. Three times with child, and her children brought to the
birth, bu^ never delivered by the ordinary helps that other women have; yet the
first did not discourage (...) for the second, nor the second for the last. I
believe her experience made her the more serious, but ^ think did not abate her
Courage; when she was under the sharpest of her ^^ins, I have not heard that
ever she was put beyond the glory of her p^tience. Her friends that were with
her were more dispirited with her sufferings, then she was that bore all the
pain of those sufferings, which did so shake her friends. And yet though she
suffered so much, she was not apt to talk of her sufferings, or boast of her
Courage, she was magnanimous, but modest with it.

For her relations, I have only known her since she was a wife, and therefore
cannot so well speak of what she was when she was under the tuition of her
Parents, yet I am sure I have heard him that survives, her Father, give her a
very good testimony, and I have often heard her express her self with a great
deal of reverence and affection toward her Parents.

But for her relation as a wife, she deserves to be a pattern to others. If she
erred not in the excess, ^ think few hu^bands do^ enjoy wives more full of love
and sweetness, then her husband did. I confess it was many times a pleasure
to me to see how fresh and green the affections of both parties did continue.
And certainly it was a perfume to the family, and kept all sweet.

I may not forget that she was of a charitable disposition toward the poor,
especially where she heard there was grace as well as poverty. I know one that
has for a long ^^me labored under weakness, of whom this dear friend of ours
has taken constant care since she heard of her, and to whom she has sent of
the best at her Table, and that usually before she put meat into her own mouth;
And yet I do not make this one the limit of her charity, it had (...)
dimensions. Not to hold you longer, though that which I have said was very
amiable in her, yet I hope I may say one thing more (through the Grace, and to
the Glory of God) and that is it, which is above all, and does set off all the
rest, viz. That she did give good Encouragement to my self, and those that knew
her, to judge her to have the truth of Grace in her soul, to b^ a living member
of Jesus Christ. She was of ^ sweet and tractable disposition, willing to
embrace Instruction, and her soul did cleave in affection to those that she had
more familiarity with, and were wont to afford her any lifts in her way to
heaven. I can speak it experimentally of some that lived not far from her,
who upon this ground, became very dear to her.

And though I never (...) reason enough to question it, yet of late, I think, I
have seen more reason to persuade me, that there was grace working with all
those other eminencies that I mentioned.

This last year I have observed her much more intense about the business of
Religion, and of her soul, then I had formerly observed, as if by a secret
Instinct God had put her on to prepare for this change. She was very much in
the M^^ket, and besides the Shep^erds Tents, I mean waiting upon the Ordinances
of Christ, and would not be kept off from Lectures and Fasts, when indeed her
Condition considered (being at length very great) her going into crowds, and
great Assemblies, did seem to threaten with some prejudice. I my self have
sometimes dissuaded her when she would not hear; though in another case I think
she would hardly have refused my Counsel, particularly, at the Funeral
Solemnities of that reverend and holy servant of Christ, of honored Memory Mr
Whitakers, she would not be kept away from hearing him whom she dearly loved,
thoug^ I think those that were present will say, it was a plac^ and time of as
much danger to a woman in her condition, as is usually seen. I believe God had
pointed her spirit heavenward, and she tasted somewhat more in the waters of
the Sanctuary, then she bad done, and this made her delight to sit down by
those fountains.

I am sure this is her, dear Husbands complaint, that he has lost her that was
tenderly careful of his soul, one that still called upon him to mind the
things of Eternity, as the greatest concernments to be looked after.

She is now gone, in the birth of her last child, she gave up the ghost. And
now I hope she with her three sons, which were all living souls till they came
to the birth, are magnifying and praising the God of their salvations, and
singing Halelujahs unto Je^us the Prince of the Kings of the Earth, who loved
them, and washed them in his blood.

And for my part I cannot but look upon it as an ^ffliction tempered with a
great deal of mercy, that God had thus disposed. Had she lived and conceived
Children every year (as she was likely) it is apparent she could never have
brought forth her birth: And how sad would it have been as to her self, so to
her friends to have been so often the witnesses of her misery without remedy!

I reckon it as the return of prayers. Since in nature it was rendered so
impossible to bear children, that God has taken her to himself, from the
possibility of conceiving* and the misery of bringing forth any more Children.
The Decree is accomplished, and now she and her Children, I hope, do sit and
sing together.

FINIS.
AN ANTIDOTE against the Fear of DEATH.

Being the MEDITATIONS OF SAMVEL FISHER in a Time and Place of great Mortality.

LONDON, Printed by A. M. for T. Underhill at the Anchor in Paul's Churchyard,
16^5.

TO THE READER.
Good Reader,
LEST thou should think thy bargain too hard in the former part, I do here
cast thee in a vantage to make thee a Saver. In that which thou have read I
have endeavored to show thee the Improvement of the Consideration (of Gods
doing) to make thee quiet under all Afflictions. In this which follows, I give
thee an account of mine own Practice, how I dealt with mine own Soul to
persuade it into good thoughts of Death. Death will come to thee and me, to
shut up all at last. It will be good for us now and then to talk with our own
Souls about it before it comes, that it may not be too great a stranger when it
comes. I have begun to thee, and if when thou have read these poor Thoughts
of mine, thou will suggest thine to me, they shall be welcome, I will bless
God, and give thee thanks. Two or three Friends that have seen these, have
desired me to print them: I am not like to trouble the Press again, and
therefore I pray thee bear the trouble of them here.

Thine in the Lord S. F.

AN ANTIDOTE against the Fear of DEATH.
Some Thoughts, which the Author used to flatter and allure his Soul to be
well-pleased with Death, when he with Reverend Mr Blake, In July and August,
1650
stayed in Shrewsbury (in the time of Gods last visitation of that place by the
Pestilence) to execute their Pastoral Office amongst their people that did
abide there in that doleful time where they were under the continual
expectation of arrest.
I. DEath is the common lot of all men. Every man must die once. There is no
discharge from that war. The best that lived have trod this path. When I die,
I shall go but the same way that other men have gone before me, far better
then my self; the same way that Adam, Noah, Abraham, David, Paul, yea that
Christ himself went. Shall I not be willing to follow when so many, and such
excellent ones, have gone before?

II. My times are in Gods hands; The term and date of my life is set, the way
and manner of my death determined. I cannot outlive that date, and nothing
shall shorten that date to prevent my life. Eccl. 3. 2.
Every thing is beautiful in its time, and so shall death be to me, when my
time is come. When corn is ripe, it is seasonable to cut it down. I shall not
be cut down, till it be seasonable. And how can I wish to stand any longer?

III. Death is that which I (as Job) have waited for all my days. Do I not
live with expectation to die? It should neither be strange nor unwelcome* when
it comes, which a man looks and waits for it before it comes.

IV. There is nothing but vanity under the Sun, nothing that a man can please
himself with, take comfort and contentment in, but it has a worm in it, like
Jonah's Gourd: A man (while^ he has it) is in danger either to be deprived of
it, or vexed with it. Why then should I be troubled at death, which will case
me of the trouble of ^^y life?

V. A man's life has very little that is desirable in it. It is a life (...) of
cares, troubles, temptations fears, (...), sicknesses, losses, and which is
worst of all, of sinful weaknesses, and inward perplexities. Not my body
only, but my soul, my darling labou^^ under sore burdens many times: My
thinks death should be sweet unto thee, O my soul, when life it self is so
troublesome.

VI. Jesus Christ has tried the strength of death, and conquered it. By ^ying,
he overcame death, and him that had the power of death, which is the Devil.
There Satan was out-shot in his own Bow, and caught in his own Snare. What has
he got by bringing Christ to the Cross, to the Grave? By getting, he has lost
the victory. A happy Paradox. Death shook the Lord Jesus with its sting, but
lost its ^^ing by striking of him. Oh death, where is thy sting? O grave, where
is thy victory? The sting of death is sin, the strength of sin is the Law.
But thanks be to God who has given us the v^ctory. See my Soul, Christ has
not only gotten the victory, but has given us the victo^y which he has
gotten. What? Shall a conquered enemy, disanimate the Conqueror?

VII. Nay, Jesus Christ has not only conquered death, and disarmed it, but
has blessed death, and sanctified it. He has made it not only Not an enemy, 1
Cor. 3. 22
but a friend, a privilege to believers. Come my soul and play with death by
faith. Esteem it as a privilege, be not ^fraid, be not troubled at (...), as
if it were still an (...).

VIII. Whiles I am (...) the body I am absent from the Lord, and so I ^ust be
till I die. Shall (...) not desire, at least be ^ontent to die, that I may
(...) present with the Lord? Oh my Soul! Love to Christ should constrain thee
to be willing to pass (...) gulf to come to thy beloved.

IX. When death comes (...) has only to do with ^y body, nothing to do with my
soul. And if it ^et my soul alone which (...) my better part, I would ^ot be
troubled for that which it can do at my, ^^esh, my body, which is but the
worser part.

X. For my body, though it be but the grosser part of the man, yet because it
is a friend of my soul and a piece of my (...) despise it not. Therefore I take
comfort, that though my body shall die, yet i^ shall not be lost. It shall be
united to Christ^in (...) grave, as my soul to Christ in Heaven. Death cannot
destroy the union betwixt Christ and the believer in any part of him. Though
worms destroy my flesh, or it be turned to dust, yet my dust shall be precious.
God shall bring all together after the many changes, raise up my body at the
last day, give it meeting with my soul, and then with these eyes (...) shall
see my Redeem^^.

XI. Though I shall die, yet I shall die but once. The second death shall (...)
no power over me. There is no condemnation (...) that are in Christ Jesus. He
has satisfied for me, and justified me by his blood, who shall condemn? Since
I must die once; what a mercy is it that it is not the worst, the second death!

XII. Death is the last enemy* that is to be destroyed (in that sense that a
believer may call it an enemy) when that is over all the worst of a believers
state is over. Oh my Soul, be willing to die, that thou may (...) back and
say, Thanks be (...) God, Now I am past (...) worst.

XIII. For the (...) death: Whether I (...) the Pestilence, of (...) other
disease, or by (...) hand of violence, there (...) no great difference. ^^thing
^^ll betall me, (...) that which is common (...) other Saints. All dea^^ are
much alike to a member of Christ: all (...) sting'd, all sanctified. (...)
Plague indeed shuts the man up from his friend^^ but it does not shut (...) out
from the man, and where God is he makes a Palace of a Pesthouse. However it is
but death. (The Plague cannot make it another thing) and deaths a friend.

XIV. For the pains of death, I should not be troubled, God can make death
easy. Some feel less in death, then in other diseases, and commonly more in
the sickness before death, then in death which follows the sickness. But
(...) the worst, though sharp, yet they are short, and not intolerable. All
the Saints have endured them, and therefore, O my Soul, do not give back for a
little pain. That God which has carried so many through this gulf, is able to
carry thee with faith and patience through. Say with the holy Singer, Though I
walk through the valley of the shadow of death, yet will I fear no ill, for thou
art with me. Lord be with thy servant in that hour, that I may not fear.

XV. There may be sore temptations, and on-sets of Satan at that time, when the
body is weakest. And indeed some precious Saints have been in great darkness
before their death, and it may be so with me. It is true, O my Soul, and thou
have deserved the withdrawings of God at such a time, because thou have not
improved his presence in former times. If thou fear this, let it be the
warning. Now take heed of grieving the Spirit. But consider, though some of the
faithful have been called out to such Conflicts before death, yet their
Conflicts have been crowned with Conquests; God has made their light break
forth of obscurity, and put them into Heaven, or rather Heaven into them,
whiles they have been yet upon earth. However, this is the comfort; Though
Satan may trouble the Saint, yet he shall not conquer him: And therefore trust
in the Lord, O my Soul. It lies upon Jesus Christ, the Captain of thy
Salvation, to keep all that which is committed to him of the Father. He would
never have sowed, if he had meant that Satan should go away with the harvest.
It cost him his blood to redeem thee. Do not think he will part with that
easily, which he has purchased at so dear a price. He never yet left any of
his Saints in death, I trust he will not make me the first.

XVI. Though death will make a separation betwixt soul and body, yet death
shall not separate from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus. This Paul was
persuaded of Romans 8. And so am I upon the same grounds. Gods love is not
changable in it self, nor conquerable by death. He loved thee, O my soul,
notwithstanding thy unworthiness, and therefore be assured, he will not
separate thee from his love, because of thine unworthiness. And now I see what
it cannot do^, Lord keep me from being dismayed at the utmost that it can do
against me.

XVII. If death take away some outward comforts from me, or rather me from
them, viz. Wife, Children, Friends, Possessions; This is my Comfort, God has
suffered me to enjoy them, whiles I had need of them, or could have benefit by
them; when I am taken from them, I shall then have no more need of them. And
why then should I care for not having what I do not want. It is a mercy to have
them, but speaks the imperfection of our state to need them. It is better be in
a state of perfection without them, then still to have them and be imperfect.

XVIII. It is true, death will strip me of some outward accomplishments, but it
shall do me as good a turn, to deliver me from all my troubles. And I would
have thee know, O my Soul, that the troubles of this life of sickness, pain,
loss, sorrow, fear, etc. may very well lie in the balance against all earthly
enjoyments: It is a saving match at least, to sell our outward contentments, to
be freed from our this life's miseries.

XIX. Though death take away some useless movables which have served my turn
whiles I had need, yet as a friend it leaves me my best Jewels. My Soul, thou
shall still enjoy thy precious graces, and glorious privileges, when death
has taken thee from thy cheaper and more troublesome luggage. Death will not,
cannot meddle with thy best treasure. And will thou not be content to part with
those, since it leaves thee these?

XX. What I leave of outward things when I die, I leave to others that stay
behind. There will still be use of them to those that live to use them. They
will not be lost, because I leave them. And when my turn is served, why should
I grudge that others should be served as well as I?

XXI. I shall know no more sensible pleasure and contentment here, but I am
well content, because I shall sin no more in the enjoyment of such pleasure.
I have paid dear enough for all that I have had, whiles I had it. The sin of
my pleasure, has devoured all the sweetness of my pleasure, that working me
more smart after my pleasure, then all my pleasure was worth, whiles I was
enjoying it. My Soul, be content to rejoice no more amongst the living, upon
this account, that death will free thee from sinning any more amongst them.

XXII. In death there will be no more remembrance of me: But it is no matter, I
hope when I am forgotten, my sin and shame will be forgotten also. I am content
the rest should be forgotten, so that my folly and weakness may be no more
remembered. And yet my Soul be not discouraged, The Scripture says: The memory
of the Just is blessed, Psa. 10. 7. And the righteous shall be in everlasting
remembrance, Psalm 11*2. 6. God has provided that our Names should live, when
our flesh consumes. The rotting of the Name is a curse entailed upon those that
are rotten in their lives.

XXIII. I shall lie in the pit, and not know what is done under the Sun.
Darkness will cover me in the grave: But if I lie in the pit I shall be safe;
No body will envy, No body will hurt me there. And though it be a dark place,
it is the better for a sleeping place. I tell thee, O my Soul, the recompense
of not knowing what is done under the Sun. Thou shall not know the
wickedness, the blasphemy, the oppression and violence that is done there.
Since thou can not know a little good, without the knowledge of so much evil
under the Sun, which is so great a burden, be contented to be eased of thy
burden by not knowing what is done.

XXIV. Worms may perhaps consume my body, but that is no great matter neither.
I shall not feel their gnawings of my flesh. What though my body cannot escape
those feeble creatures, when it is dead, yet blessed be God, that hellish worm
of an accusing Conscience, shall not be suffered to disrest my Soul. There is
more mercy in being freed from one worm, then from a thousand. The worms feed
upon my body: I remember David said, He was a worm. A King, and yet a worm.
Sure I must be something below a worm: But if a worm, let the worms feed upon
their fellows; I am glad that worms may be better for me when I die. It is my
grief that men have been so little better for me while^ I lived.

XXV. My treasure is in Heaven, my best goods are there; they were not sent
thither, laid up there for me to ^arry long behind. I must go from hence
before I can come thither. And I must tell thee, O my Soul, I like not to lose
my treasure by staying here.

XXVI. When death puts an end to this life, it will give an entrance into
eternal life. The ending of one is the beginning of the other: Who would not
be willing to be at the end of a worse, to be at the beginning of a better, of
a blessed life? Lord, make thy servant not only willing, but covetous of this.

XXVII. When I die, I go to rest, to rest from my labors. I shall be out of
the reach of care, trouble, sorrow, sickness, temptations, persecution. Here I
am, as other of my brethren, the But of Satan's rage, of the malice of wicked
men. I have not been free to speak or deliver my Masters Message without
danger. Men have laid wait to ensnare me in my own words, to make my tongue my
trap. These shall follow me but to my grave; There they will lose the Sent. O
my Soul, Thy grave is thy Burrow, in death thou shall be quiet.

XXVIII. As soon as breath goes out of my body, I trust my soul shall be
mounted upon the wings of Angels into Heaven, into Abraham's bosom; And this
will not be long in doing; Who would not ride on such a Chariot, to such a
place Great things are spoken of Heaven; And I have spoken as great as I could,
to make it an attractive, a powerful Argument to draw other men to the love of
Holiness. If I be not willing to go to Heaven, I betray my faith, I shame my
practice. Shall not he that preaches Heaven, be willing to die, that he may be
in Heaven? My Soul, thou would be loath to have all thy Heaven upon earth. And
therefore when Gods time comes, Will thou not be willing to part with ^arth,
that thou may enjoy thy Heaven where it is?

XXIX I have accounted sle^p a special blessing of God for the refreshing of
Nature; My sleep has been the image and similitude of my death. When I have
slept, I have been like to one that is dead for that time. Death is the truest
sleep: As when I slept I was as one that were dead, so when I die, I shall be
but as one that is asleep. And though I shall sleep longer in my grave, then in
my bed; yet as when I have slept, I awake and rise again, so after this sleep
of death, when it is off, I shall awake and rise again. O my Soul, when I am
weary of the day, I willingly lay me down t^ sleep. Thou art content the body
should have rest, I pray thee be as willing, when this wearisome day of thy
natural life is at an end, in the night of death to let thy body lie down to
sleep in its bed of earth, till the morning of its resurrection comes. To die
unto a Saint is but to undresse, and go to bed.

XXX. Whiles I am here in the world, I am but in a moveable condition, always
flitting and shifting, from one house to another, from one place to another.
And this has been very irksome. But I think God has wisely ordered it, that
by moving to many places, I might be in love with none. If I have liked my
house never so well, I have been forced to leave it, either because none of
mine, or because my work has been ended in the place where I have pitched. How
often have I been forcibly removed from people whom I have loved, from places
where I had thought to have rested! In Heaven I have an house of mine own, a
better house then any the world affords, not made with hands; an eternal house,
whose builder and maker is God. An house that wants no convenience. An house
that is ready and amply furnished. If thou were there, O my Soul, thou should
not need to flit, it is thine inheritance by gift, and he that gave it will not
put thee out. Shall I not be willing to live in mine own, rather then a
strangers, in an heavenly then in an earthly house; in an house of Gods
buildings then of man's; in an eternal, rather then in a falling ruinous
habitation? While I live here, I shall be put to shift, when I die I shall make
but one remove, and never flit again. Let me remove once, and do it cheerfully,
that I may remove no more.

XXXI. But what do I speak of an House, in Heaven? (my Soul) there is a
Kingdom, Not like the Kingdoms of this world, not a narrow, envied, divided,
shaken, sinful, temporal Kingdom. Not subject to wars, tumults, fire, famine,
pestilence, oppression, ruin, desolation, but a spiritual, heavenly, glorious,
u^shaken, large, united, undefiled, peaceable, everlasting Kingdom, Not subject
to any invasion, to any change, to any danger. Since therefore God has given
me a Kingdom, and the Kingdom is not of this world, which ^e has given me; Why
should I desire to continue in this world, and not go where my Kingdom is?
Would any man that is heir to a Kingdom desire to live any where but in the
Kingdom to which he is an heir? Especially, if his own be such, that in
comparison it shames all others that may be brought to make comparison. Lord,
since it pleases thee to give me a Kingdom, Help me to walk worthy of the
dignity, and hopes of a King, whiles I live, and let not this beggarly life,
nor any thing that belongs to it, keep me from being willing, nay desirous to
enjoy a Crown. If such a worm may speak such a word, To say he is a King; I
beseech thee make me willing, or else when the time comes, stay not for my
willingness, but set me upon the Throne, bring me to the Kingdom promised.
Put, oh put that pure Crown of Righteousness, that incorruptible Crown of
Glory upon my head. Its a glorious thing to be a King. Ambition makes graceless
men, whose portion is in this life, desperately daring to adventure their All
to get one of these poor Cottage Kingdoms. Oh my Soul, Shall not grace make
thee willing to put off thy natural life, to put on this living and
immarcessible Crown?

XXXII. The Scripture speaks admirable things of the glorified estate of the
Saints, what is reserved in Heaven for them, what they shall enjoy there. At
present it tells us we know but in part, and we know it tells us true by our
great ignorance. It calls all that we have on this side Heaven our tastes and
earnests of what we shall have. We are now the sons of God, but it does not yet
appear what we shall be, says St John. 1 John 3. 2.
And the Apostle says, Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither has it
entered into the heart of man, the things which God has prepared for them that
love him. 1 Cor. 2. 9.
Surely there are some stranger things reserved to be revealed and enjoyed in
Heaven, or else we should not have such high and farre-meaning expressions from
the holy Spirit. While^ thou art here (O my Soul) thou have but a poor
imperfect glimpse of that which lies wrapped up in the promise. Thou live by
faith not by sight. Thy happiness now lies pri^^^ipally in the hope of what
shall be thy happiness in Heaven. And therefore since this is not the place
for accomplishing thy happiness, be thou carried out with desire to be in that
place, where thy happiness may be accomplished, to die and be dissolved, that
thou may know and enjoy all that is spoken of the blessed state of the
blessed Saints in glory.

1. I desire to know experimentally, what it is to be in a state that is
absolutely free from trouble, fear, sorrow, sickness, temptations, enemies,
especily from ^inne: Oh what a thing is that? Here I know little else but sin
and sorrow. Lord, let me know what it is to be freed from these, what it is to
sin no more, to weep no more. It is in the promise, Rev* 1. 4. Oh let me have
it in performance.

2. The Scripture speaks of the spirits of just men made perfect. Those just
men are no where but in Heaven, and there they have their souls accomplished
with perfection. They have their natural faculties enlarged and filled, they
have the image of God, all their graces, that Divine Nature (as Peter calls it)
completed to the highest degree. It is now with them, as it was in the
beginning, they are like unto God himself, and in his perfect similitude,
according to the measure of creature-perfection. Oh my Soul, do thou not
desire experimentally to know and enjoy this happiness, to be absolutely and
completely sanctified, to have all thy graces shining in their luster and
glory? Oh me thinks thou should long to know what this is to be like unto God
that made thee, who when he made thee, made thee like himself.

3. I hear great things spoken of Heaven, what a glorious place it is, and how
far it excels all that is visible on this side. Art has raised many glorious
structures, which do very much catch the senses, ravish the beholders. But that
part of the visible Heavens which is the workmanship of God drawn over our
heads, the beautiful groundwork, and curious enamelling of the Sun, Moon
and Stars, does exceedingly shame all the invention and art of man. These I
have seen, and been sometimes much taken with them. But I have not seen what is
the glory of the highest Heavens, the Paradise of God. I have not seen the City
of the great King, the glorious high Throne on which Christ Jesus fits. Oh my
Soul, why do thou linger? Art thou not willing to leave this world, that thou
may know, behold, and live in that place of Glory, which so far transcend^
all that thou have seen, and which thou can not see until thou leave this
world? Would thou not fain see that mansion that Christ went to prepare for
thee?

4. My Soul, thou have very reverend thoughts of the Saints departed, of the
Fathers* that died in the faith long ago, and of the Saints and Martyrs of
Jesus that died in later ages, of Adam, Noah, Eno^h, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob,
Moses, Joshuah, Samuel, David, Solomon, Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezek^el, Daniel,
Peter, Paul, Calvin, Luther, Cranmer, Ridley, Latimer, Bradford. My Soul, thou
have only heard of these, thou have not seen them. But now, my Soul, when thou
go to Heaven, thou shall behold and know all these, with all the rest of
those glorified Saints that went before thee. Thou shall sit down with Abraham,
Isaac and Jacob in the Kingdom of Heaven; and those whom thou now so much
admirest, shall be thy Companions. If thou leave behind thee some precious
Saints, whom thou love, there will be no loss of Company, there thou shall
find others more worthy of thy love, in Heaven all is exchanged for better.
Thou know those already that are here. There thou shall be acqainted and
familiar with those thou never knew.

5. The Angels are excellent glorious Creatures, All Spirit, exceeding holy,
they wait upon God immediately, they pass up and down with incredible
ce^erity, are Instruments to do God great service; yea though we see them not,
yet are they ministering spirits unto the heirs of salvation. Doubtless they
now perform many good offices for us, which are not yet understood by us for
whom they are performed. My Soul, these glorious Creatures, whose feet a man
can hardly now behold and live, thou shall in Heaven have the full knowledge of
them, of their Natures, Office and Ministry. Thou shall converse with them
familiarly, and not be afraid of them. Here thou art but a Companion for men,
and many of those men amongst whom thou live have scorned to be thy
Companions; Let this make thee willing to leave this world, to go to Heaven,
where thou shall be a M^te for Angels, and shall not be scorned by them.

6. The Scripture says, Our light afflictions which are but for a moment, do
work for us a far more exceeding, 1 Cor. 4. 17.
and eternal weight of glory. My Soul, thou do not at present enjoy this;
nay, I am sure thou can not comprehend what lies in this expression. It is
spoken for thee to wonder at, Glory, a weight of Glory, an exceeding weight of
Glory, a nore exceeding weight of Glory, a far more exceeding weight of
Glory, a far more exceeding and eternal weight of Glory. My Soul, do thou
know what this means? Sure it is some wonderful thing, which the Apostle,
guided by the Spirit, heaps so many words upon, as if it were something that
did exceed the most exceeding expressions; Oh my Soul, though now thou do not
comprehend the expression, but admirest something which thou do not
understand, yet when thou come to Heaven, thou shall not only understand the
phrase, but possess the thing. Art thou not willing to take thy wings and fly
from hence, that thou may no^ only understand, but be laden with this blessed
burden, which the Spirit calls an exceeding weight of Glory? Who would need
Arguments to persuade, that might be assured by going to such a place to have
leave to carry away his lading of gold or precious treasure? Why, my Soul, if
thou will go to Heaven, all thy burden shall be thy glory: This Glory is ten
thousand times more precious then gold. And it has this advantage, though it
be a weight of Glory, yet it is no burden, shall never weary him that carries
it.

FINIS.

