A Brief of two TREATISES formerly Published concerning the making Seawater
Fresh, and of some Matters transacted since in relation to the same.
THE first Book Printed by the Patentees, dedicated and presented to his
Majesty, contains the Invention of a way to make Salt Water Fresh, and asserts
these Propositions.

1. That this Water can be made in sufficient quantities to serve the use of
any Ship at Sea, viz. About ninety Gallons may be made in twenty four hours, by
an Instrument of thirty three Inches Diameter. 2. That any ordinary Seaman, or
Ship boy, may be directed in one hours time how to attend this Instrument. 3.
That the Instrument is not at all subject to be out of order. 4. That it will
Work in almost any Weather. 5. That it is secure from causing danger to the
Ship by its Fire. 6. That the Instrument and Ingredients will be afforded at a
reasonable Rate. 7. That the Charges of Fuel will be very small, and require
little room in the Ship. 8. That the Ingredient is not bulky, since a Vessel
less than a Barrel will contain enough to employ the Engine a whole East India
Voyage, and as much as works off about ninety Gallons of Fresh Water will not
cost above fourteen pence. 9. That it is very wholesome, proved by these
Experiments. 1. That it is found lighter than most of the Waters about London.
2. That it is without Settlement, and very Transparent. 3. That it will Lather
with Wash-Ball or Soap better than any other Water. 4. That Sugar dissolveth in
it sooner than in most other Waters. 5. That it Evaporates sooner than other
Water. 6. It does not putrify by long keeping as other Waters do. 7. It makes
Gellies firm and good as any other Water. 8. It boils Pease tender, and all
other Victuals very well. 9. It has no ill Taste, and boils in Milk without
curdling. 10. Flowers, Plants, and Vegetables grow in it, as in other Waters.
11. Small Animals live and grow in it.

And lastly, The wholsomness has been experimented by several who have drank
thereof very often; and is approved by the College of Physicians of London, as
appears by their Testimony, signed by the President, and several of the
Society, whose Names ensue.

Dr. Cox, President, Sir C. Scarborough, Knt. Dr. Daniel Whistler, Dr.
Weatherly. Dr. Will. Denton. Sir T. Millington, Knt. Dr. Walter Needham, Dr.
Thomas Short, Dr. Thomas Allen, Dr. Edmund Dickingson, Dr. William Croone, Dr.
Richard Lower, Dr. John Windebank, Dr. Daniel Cox, Dr. James Rufine, Dr.
Charles Conquest, Dr. Edmund King, Dr. Willoughby, Dr. Tho. Sydenham, Dr.
Edward Tyson, Dr. Nehemiah Grew, Dr. David Abercromby, Dr. Andrew Creagh.
Then are contained in this Treatise the Heads of the Advantages which this Art
will afford to Navigation, and also to the Inhabitants of Places to which
Nature affords only Brackish Waters.

To this is added, First, A Letter written by the Eminent Mr. Boil, by which he
asserts the Sweetness and Wholsomness of this Water; and that it kept above
four Months in his custody without stinking.

Secondly, The said Mr. Boyl's Experiment made before the King, whereby he
could discover in any Water if there was but one thousandth part of Salt in it,
and yet in this Water could not find any.

Thirdly, A Letter of the Third of November 1683. from on Board the Greyhound
Friggot, near the Coast of Spain, wherein the Captain writes, that he kept of
the Patentees Water, some that was given him, in his Ships Hold, from his
leaving England, to the day before the Date, being four Months; and then,
having several Officers on board him, gave them a taste of it, pretending it to
be of the Spring near Sally, where he had watered, and they drank of it as
such, till he discovered what it was, and then they approved of it to be as
good Water as could be drank.

The second Treatise, written by Doctor Nehemiah Grew, likewise Dedicated to
His Majesty, demonstrates three Propositions.
FIrst, That Seawater may easily, safely, commodiously, and in sufficient
Quantities, be made Fresh for all common Uses at Sea.

Secondly, The Water so made fresh, is as wholesome to be drunk, and used about
Diet, as any other Water now in Use at Sea.

To prove which, is showed, that all the signs, which either Physicians or
common Experience have given of the best Water, are found in this, viz. 1.
Clearness, 2. Thinness. 3. Sweetness. 4. Softness to the Touch. 5. Lightness.
6. Durableness. 7. Purity and Simplicity.

In all which Qualities it equals, if not exceeds the best Waters about London,
as was found by nice Trials made thereof.

In the last place, besides all these signs, the wholesomness is proved from
the Use of this Water which has been often drunk by Persons of Quality and
Judgment, with Approbation.

Thirdly, The third Proposition shows the Advantages of making Seawater fresh
are great, both as to Profit and Health. 1. As to Profit, by saving of Stowage,
which is very considerable in long Voyages. 2. By saving of Water Casks. 3. By
preventing Wear and Tear, and other Damage of Vessels and Boats in watering.
2. As to Health, most Water in long Voyages stinking, even Thames-Water, tho it
recovers again; and being drank when it stinks, or is in its Fermentation,
disposes the Bodies of Men to Calentures, Fevers, Dropsies, and other Diseases.


But this Water may always be made fresh, or will always keep so, and secures
from scarcity, or want of fresh Water; the first of which is dangerous to Men's
Health, the last mortal. This Water being to be made with ease and plenty, will
serve to freshen the salt Meats, by watering the Beef or Pork in it after
soaking in Salt Water, as also will mend the Diet at Sea; for with fresh Water
good Meat may be made with Biscuit, Wheat, or Rice, and a little Sugar or
Butter; which may prevent Scurvies, Dropsies, and diverse other Diseases, which
a continual salt Diet causes.

Since the publishing the said Treatises,
His Majesty hearing that a rich East India Ship called the President, was lost
by the weakness of the Men for want of fresh Water; and that several other
Ships of his Subjects had been in great distress upon the same account, was
pleased to command the Patentees to make their Art publicly known. Since which
time they have set up their Engines at their Office in Lothbury; where the
Engines and Ingredients may be had at so easy rates that the Water will stand
in about one farthing a Gallon.

The said Instruments and Water have been seen and examined by most of the
public Ministers of Foreign Princes residing in London, and by them
recommended to their respective Princes and States.

By several Seamen, Owners of Ships, and Merchants who have bought of the
Engines for Voyages to the East Indies, to the West Indies, to the Streights;
and lying in the Downs several Weeks in very stormy Weather, made use of them,
and found them effectual.

His Majesty upon good Testimonies thereof, has directed Provisions to be made
of the said Engines and Ingredients for his Navy-Royal, and Forts near the Sea,
wanting fresh Water. And has ordered the following Certificate to be published,
to remove all Scruples concerning this Invention, viz.

We whose Names are underwritten, having viewed, and duly considered the
Patentees Engine for making Salt Water fresh; are of Opinion, that the said
Engine may be commodiously placed on Ship board, without Inconveniency or
Danger of Fire.

Signed by Sam. Chamblet, Deputy-Master of Trinity House. Sir Richard Haddock,
Knt. Sir John Narbrough, Knt. Sir M ath. Andrews, Knt. Sir John Godwin, Knt.
Sir P. Colleton, Knt. Sir Benjamin Newland, Knt. Hen. Johnson. Geo. Churchill.
Tho. Pitts. Jeffery Nightingale. Will. Hussy. Will. Talbot. John Gregory. D.
Lloyd. Chr. Gunman. J. Vespreut. James Bunell. James Daniel. Will. Goodlad.
Robert Castle. John Shish. Charles Price.

Sir Charles Scarborough, Dr. Sydenham, Dr. Lower, Dr. King, and several other
eminent Physicians have so well approved of this prepared Water; that they have
directed the use thereof in Diet-drinks, Coffee, Chocolet and Tea, instead of
Fountain Water.

FINIS.

