The Honor of Marriage: OR, THE Institution, Necessity, Advantages, Comforts,
and Usefulness of a Married Life: Set forth in a SERMON JANUARY 27. 1694. AT
SEVEN-OAK in KENT.

By JOSEPH FISHER, Master of Arts, and Fellow of Queens College in Oxon.

LONDON: Printed for Brabazon Aylmer at the Three Pigeons over against the
Royal Exchange in Cornhill.

1695.

To his much Esteemed Friend Mr. THOMAS LAMBARD.
THAT this Sermon was first Composed, then Preached, and now Published, I must
plainly tell you without a Compliment, is not so much to be attributed to Your
Request, as to that great Respect and Kindness I have for You. In which, that I
might not leave the Text I had pitched upon, and the Bible too, or spend upon
the Subject a mere Flourish of Words and pure Invention: I have confined my
Thoughts and Meditations to the Word of God, or rather fetched them from it;
because it is that only Rule which should regulate our Opinions and Practices
in the weighty concerns of our Life and Salvation, and which ought to give an
Authority, Life, and Pungency to all Pulpit-Discourses. A Rule this is which
God has given us, and which every Christian especially must consider and study
with Fear and Veneration. I know there are, and have been some Men in the
World, (witness the Theologo-Political, Leviathan, Theory, Critical History,
Annotation and History-of-Religion-Writers) who by the Power of Criticisms and
Vpstart Notions of Philosophy, either of their own, and some other men's
Invention, i. e. in my Judgment, by the Infatuation of the Devil, and the Pride
of their Hearts, all conspire to ruin and undermine it. Many Books of this kind
have appeared in the World, which if the Genius of the Age had not disposed men
to receive, and even to gape for, had been comdemned to flames, of which they
are worthy; and their Authors censured, as becomes the Civil and Ecclesiastical
Laws of the place they live in. Curiosity knows no Bound, either of Modesty or
Satisfaction; and therefore, tho it has been my misfortune to look into such
Books (of which I desire You to beware, and not to follow the Wondering and
Silly World, if Ten thousand such should again appear in it) and in some
measure to consider the Subject Matter and Tendecy of them; yet I thank God
they have no more influence upon my Mind to destroy my Faith, or lessen my
Veneration for the Holy Bible, than Debauched Morals, or Ingenious Discourses
upon the Praises of Vice, shall by the Grace of God move me to approve them in
my Judgment, or in my practice to follow them. I look upon an Unsanctified,
Proud, and Aspiring Head, to be as dangerous, as an Ungodly Heart; nay, far
more; because the issues of this run in open Contradiction to the general
Reason of Mankind: Whereas a Learned Rabbi, or one who pretends to be so, is
beyond the Sphere of Ordinary Intellectuals; which is the sole Reason why he is
admired so much, even then, when he preys upon the Ignorance of Men, and
spreads loose Principles, Irreligion and Atheism in the World. Now some such
Men as these have been trying their Skill on the Subject of my Sermon, and have
endeavored from the Armoury of their Learning, some indulged Practices of
former Ages, and unwary Expressions of Ancient and Modern Authors, to overthrow
the Laws of God and Man for no other end at all, than to let the Reins loose to
Lasciviousness, and in a manner to Brutalize the World. I have in the following
Discourse, as I said before, confined my Thought; to the Word of God, and next
to that, the Laws of Men; which are nothing less than the Mature Deliberations,
Decisions, and Responses of the Wisest and most Authoritative Persons of former
Ages. For by these are we to frame our Notions and Opinions, and to solve all
Doubts concerning Marriage, which is a Subject, perhaps, that affords as many
Necessary, Useful, and Nice Enquiries, as any falls under Humane Cognizance.
The only end I aimed at, was to show the Institution and Design of it, that You
may know what State and Condition of Life You are now entered upon, and
therefore I offer it to Your serious perusal. For I am persuaded, if we would
but consider what God expects of us in every Stage and Station of our Life, we
would soon live as becomes Reasonable Men and Christians. Be pleased then to
accept this as a Testimony of my Kindness; and God in Heaven bless You and the
Excellent and Virtuous Lady, which is now your Wife, with his Spiritual and
Temporal Blessings, and give you Grace to do his Will; that so you may fulfill
the Desires of Your most Loving and Tender Parents, and the good Wishes of all
your Friends; that you may attain those ends for which God has given you
Excellent Endowments of Mind, Body, and Fortune, and answer the Expectation of
your Country; that you may follow the Example of your Great Grandfather, of
whose Learning and Charity, the Books he writ, and the College he Erected at
Greenwich, are lasting Monuments; And lastly, that you may not frustrate the
earnest Prayers for your Temporal Prosperity and Eternal Happiness, of

SIR, Your Quondam-Tutor and ever Affectionate and Unfeigned Friend, JOSEPH
FISHER.
From Broad-Street, London, Febr. 2.
THE Honor of Marriage, etc.
HEB. XIII. 4. Marriage is honorable in all, and the bed undefiled; but
whoremongers and adulterers God will judge.


IN this Profane and Profligate Age, wherein Men generally, either from the
Pride and Folly of their Wit and Learning, or from the Open and Impudent
Debauchery of their Lives, clamor against the Holy Institutions of God, as
things either above, or below, or contrary to their Reason, or rather as
Appointments to curb that Licentiousness they give themselves up unto; I hope
it will not be amiss, especially for Persons of my Function, to endeavor all
they can, as becomes them to put a stop to such spreading Impiety as now
abounds every where, but more notoriously in the most populous Places. And for
this end, I think there can hardly be taken a more effectual Course, than to
demonstrate to men's Reason, That Revealed Religion, as to the Moral and
Preceptive part of it, injoyns no Duty but what is in the very nature of the
thing agreeable to the unprejudiced Voice, and promotive of the Common Good of
Mankind. Wickedness may cloud men's Understanding, and somewhat Stifle the
Natural Dictates of Reason, but it can never wholly exstinguish them; and
therefore Divines may have this comfortable prospect for all their pains which
they shall take in this matter, that they may force the most Loose and
Unreasonable to an inward Self-accusation, although their Arguments and
Dealings with them may not prove Efficacious enough entirely to reform them.

It is our Duty to labor in the Ways and Truths of God, and to leave the
success of our Industry to his All powerful Blessing. For as there are Seasons
wherein he Isaiah 55. 11.
makes his word to prosper in the thing for which he sent it; So are there
times of Judicial Blindness, in which, what Prophets or Preachers soever God
raises up amongst them, men's hearts are hardened, and Isaiah 6. 9, 10. Matthew.
13. 14, 15. Romans 11. 8.
in seeing they see not; and in hearing, hear not; neither will they
understand. Thus we know it was twice, if not oftener with that Nation which God
made choice of to be his Peculiar People and Church; and if ever the like
Judgment seize and harden any other Nation, we have the greatest reason to
think it is then, when the Word of God has no effect upon it. For then Men seem
to be cursed with an hardened Heart, with an obstinate and rebellious Temper,
and to be given up to a Spirit of Delusion, which will infatuate and confound
them more and more, till they are ripe for Vengeance. God in his Mercy avert
this sad Judgment from us of England, which has been heretofore peculiarly
remarkable for a Religious Disposition. And therefore why should that Complaint
be as just against us, as it was once against Israel? Jer. 1. 21.
How is the faithful city become an Harlot! it was full of judgment,
righteousness lodged in it, but now murderers.

I am very sensible such a Preface as this, is too large for that Discourse,
which the Nature and Design of the Words I have read, lead me to. Be it so; yet
I am fully convinced, it is not wholly impertinent. For is it not that same
Profaneness from which men deride, much more refuse to practice the Sacred
Laws of God, and the Aweful Establishments of his Will, that prompts them now
to revile that Sacred and Necessary Institution and State of Life I am to speak
of; which one would think needed not any thing like a positive Law from Heaven
at first to ratify it? If we can see any thing in the World without a borrowed
Light, we may see the necessity of this. And when the Laws of God, and the
Verdict of Reason meet together in the same thing, what greater evidence can we
have either of the Sacredness or Obligation of it? There is no curing by mere
Natural Means that Blindess and Boldness which dare rise up against such an
Institution; and therefore when the will and Sanction of God are made manifest
to the Consciences of Men; if wicked Wretches will still open their Mouths
against them, it is because they are judicially blinded and given up to Romans 1.
26. 1 Peter 2. 11. Ephesians. 4. 19.
vile affections, to filthy and fleshly lusts, and unto lasciviousness, to work
all uncleanness with greediness.

I have said thus much before hand, because I am sensible that Marriage has
been decried and reviled of late by those, who abstain from it, not for their
Virtues or Religion sake, that they may with the more freedom of mind 1 Cor. 7.
34.
care for the things of the Lord; but rather that they may feed those Vices,
and take their Pastime in those abominable Sins; for the prevention of which,
it was in a great measure appointed and permitted to all Men, and Christians;
some of whom perhaps might otherwise with more Ease and Undisturbedness in
their Functions have lived without it. He must be a Man of strange Reservedness
and Solitary Life, who knows not this to be a common Subject to break Jests
upon, and then to give Entertainment for Mirth and Laughter, when the
Unfaithfulness of either Married Party, or the Violation of those Religious and
Solemn Vows which they made to each other, is either truly or falsely talked of.
But believe me, it is a very dangerous thing to jest upon the Iniquities of
Men. This is to meddle with edged Tools, Prove. 14. 9.
to make a mock of sin, and to be pleased with that which should make us all
both Fear and Tremble. Let therefore men say what they list (for that wicked
Men will do in spite of every thing that is Sacred) it is the Duty of all
Conscientious Persons to regard the Word of God, and to frame Notions of
things, and to have a Veneration for them according to that Sacredness they
derive from his Will and Appointment. Now after this manner I intend at present
to consider Marriage, from these Words of the Divine Author.

Marriage is honorable in all, and the bed undefiled, etc. And for this end, I
design to premise a brief Explication of them. Marriage is honorable. (...).
The Words may be rendered either by way of command, Let Marriage be honorable,
and so those that follow, Let the bed be undefiled; or of Assertion, as we do;
but whether Form of Speech be taken, the sense is still the same as to the
genuine Signification of the Words themselves. And by the term Honorable, we
may not only understand that Marriage is lawful in Opposition to some
Encratites, Saturninus, etc.
Madmen (for no better I can call them) the Epiph Haer. 3. Sect. 2. and Seq.
and Haer 47. Sect. 1, 2. Iren. l. 1. c. 22.
Haeresiologists, Eusebius. 4, 28, 29.
Historians, and other Cl. Alex. lib. 3. Tert. contr. Marc. lib. 1. Vid. 1.
Tim. 4. 3. and ibi Commentatores.
Writers of the Primitive Church mention and confute; but also, that it is
highly Expedient, Necessary, and Commendable in its self. Or thus, Marriage is
that State of Life, which is and ought to be much approved and reverenced in
all Civilized Nations; It Ham. in loc. lit. a.
gains Respect and Privileges amongst them. Nature, Religion, and the
Propagation of Mankind require it; and therefore for the good it produces, for
the Original Institution and Design of it, it should be looked upon with Esteem
and Honor. This Author adds, (...).
in All, Marriage is honorable in all, that is, in all Men; it is not unlawful
for any, naturally considered. No man, much less any Society of Men, are by the
natural or positive Law of God debarred from it. So that it is in it self as
honorable in All as Any; or the Words, in all, may signify, Omnino atque
perfect; Omnibus modis, or omni ex part, or the like, i. e. altogether as
some Estius.
interpret them, or as in the Aethiopick Version (...) in every place, in all
Nations, Religions, and Professions. The Arabic Interpreter, thus renders
(...), that is, as I understand it, in all States or Conditions of Men; whether
they be High or Low, Noble or Ignoble, Rich or Poor, Old or Young; in all these
a Married Life does justly challenge a worthy Esteem. It follows in the Text,
(...).
And the Bed undefiled. By which we may first understand a pure Virginal or
Chaste Life, which every one that is acquainted with the Primitive Writers knows
to have been highly 1 Cor. 7. 34. Chrysostom. de Virgin. c. 15, 16. Eus. prop.
Evang. 1. 9. Grot. in 1 Cor. 7. 34.
valued and extolled by the first Christians; in respect of which Marriage its
self was accounted somewhat polluted, and much inferior in degree of Purity and
Chastity. Or Secondly, By these Words may be noted a Bed kept free from the
deadly and crying Sins of Fornication, Adultery, Uncleanness, and all manner of
Lasciviousness, whether in Married or Unmarried Persons. If the first Sense be
taken, then the term Honorable is again to be repeated, (...), as Rhetoricians
speak, after this manner; And the bed undefil^d is honorable: So that both the
Conjugal and Virginal Life are to be esteemed. Both of them are in themselves
lawful, in their ends useful, and sometimes with respect to the several
Conditions of Men necessary. And therefore Marriage is honorable, and a
Virginal single Life is honorable when they are undertaken upon good Accounts,
and Prudently and Christianly managed for the attainment of them. But if these
Words be taken, as I think they ought to be, in Opposition to all Uncleanness
and Unlawful Beds, then their meaning is, that Marriage only makes the
Cohabitation and Mutual Knowledge of Man and Woman lawful. To every one besides
the Married, the Bed is defiled either by Fornication or Adultery, which are
Sins of a very heinous and dreadful Nature; for (...).
whoremongers and adulterers God will judge. I take the word (...) in this
place to signify Fornicators, properly so called, Grotius.
as a Learned Man does. And therefore in this last Clause of the Verse, is
contained a dreadful Threatening or Tremendous Judgment on all the Unchaste,
whether Married, or Single Persons. God will severely punish such Sinners;
their Sins are of a polluted and damning Nature; they proceed from the most
vile Thoughts, unreasonable Appetites, ungov^rned Passions, and filthy Lusts:
And consequently the God of all Holiness and Purity must needs hate and abhor
them; and pursuant to that Detestation and Aversion he has for them, will his
Judgments be.

Whoremongers and adulterers God will judge. Having thus far premised an
Explication of my Text, which might naturally offer these Subjects to be
treated on;

1. Upon what account Marriage is honorable. 2. The Excellence and Design of a
Monastic and Single Life, and how serviceable it may be to the Holy Offices of
Religion. 3. A Comparison betwixt the Married and Unmarried Life, with respect
to God's Service and Christian Piety. 4. The horrid Sinfulness of Whoredom and
Adultery, and what dreadful Punishments God has provided for them.
I shall in a manner wave all the Three last, and pitch upon the first, as it
is represented to our Consideration from the first Words of it, Marriage is
honorable. And that I may speak of it sutably to this Sacred Penman's Design
or Assertion, I intend to show wherein the Honor of Marriage consists, or for
what reasons such a State of Life is to be accounted Honorable, and purchase a
great Esteem in the World. And for the more clear and effectual Prosecution of
this Point, what I have to say shall be cast into these four following
Particulars.

1. I will consider the first Institution of Marriage. 2. The necessity of it
for the Propagation of the World, and the good of Mankind. 3. The Advantages,
Comforts, and happy Consequents of it. 4. I will consider it as it is an
Antidote against the most notorious and crying Sins.
1. I am to consider the first Institution of Marriage, as it was ordained, and
as I may say, solemnized Genesis 2. 22. C. 1. 27.
by God himself in the two first Progenitors of Mankind. For Revelation assures
us, That God did not only make them, but likewise that he made them with a
design to join them together in a Marriage-Union. He formed the Woman out of
one part of the Man; and as the Scripture says, Genesis 2. 21, etc.
brought her unto him; which Divine Act Adam interpreted to intimate the Solemn
Bond of Matrimony, whereby they were once more to be made the same Bone, and
the same Flesh. Vid. Hiedeg. Exercit. 1. Sect. 9. etc. J. Meyer. Uxor. Christ.
disler. prim. Sect. 1. cap. 3. p. 34, etc. c. 2. p. 19.
This I take with Learned Men to be that place of Scripture, whereon the
Solemnization of Marriage is first grounded; Matthew. 19. 3, 4, 5, 6.
and to this we know our Lord and Savior referred as to the Original Law of
Marriage in a Case concerning Divorce that was put to him. Now Marriage as
such, containing a Solemn Obligation of Man and Wife to each other, and
consiststing in the closest Bond of Union that can be betwixt two Individuals
of the same Nature ( Lomb. 4. d. 27. lit. b. Aq. Sup. Q. 44. Art. 1, 2. Greg.
de Val. Tom. 4, disp. 10. punct. 1. de Sponsal. c 27. Q. 2.
for by these I find both the Schoolmen and Canonists to define it from
Isidore) and both of them being plainly represented to us in this Matrimonial
Conjunction of the first Man and Woman; I shall offer these things as most
remarkable from this place of Genesis;

1. That God, by what Manisestation of himself I know not, was actually
interested in it. And that first of all by framing the Woman out of the Man,
which made her the more an affectionate and suitable Companion for him. She was
but a Part and Portion of himself, beautified and adorned to attract his Love,
to charm and win his Affections; so that she was but Eccl. 36. 24.
himself in his own likeness, being originally Bone of his Bone. And therefore
as the Apostle argues, as Ephesians. 5. 29.
no man ever yet hated his own flesh, but nourishes and cherishes it: So it
was impossible that Man should not be enamoured with a Creature that was framed
on purpose for his Society and Assistance. In which Act of God (although I will
not say, that Marriage is a Sacrament, yet I think it may be affirmed) there
was something Sacramental, implying that Mutual Love and Dearness, that
Familiarity, Society, and Oneness, there ought to be betwixt them. All this the
very Manner and Circumstances of the Woman's Creation seemed to presignify, and
was so understood by Adam, as appears in the Sequel of the Sacred Story.

2. See Bp. Patrick's Comment. Genesis 2. 22. Vid. Perer. in dissert. de
formatione Evae ex Adam. l. 4. p. 157, etc. in Genesis
And then Secondly, Whereas it is said, That God brought her to the Man; however
that matter of Fact was accomplished, I take the words to denote God's Intention
to make them One again in a Bond of Marriage. He offered her to him like a
Father amongst us; he as it were contracted them. and gave her unto him in
Wedlock. And on the other side, the Man approved and consented to this Act of
God, and received her to be his Wife at his hands; this is specified in the 23d
and 24th Verses of the Chapter.

3. And then lastly, in this Transaction may be considered that Bond and Union
which resulted from hence; even such an One as seemed to cancel, or at least,
Vid. Theoph. ad Aut^licum, l. 2. p. 104.
to take place of all other Obligations. Genesis 2. 24.
Therefore (says Adam) shall a man leave his Father, and his Mother, and shall
cleave unto his Wife; and they shall be one flesh.

Now from all this, Vid. Pro. 19. 14. and ibi inter Chald. and Syriac. item
Glossas Ab. Ezrae and L. Gersom. Waganscil. Sota, p. 66.
not to mention that peculiar hand of Providence, which is observed to be in
all Marriages; I shall infer these Three following Observations.

1. That Marriage is to be looked upon as a Religious Bond and Contract. It
depended at first upon a Solemn Institution of God, as to all the Essentials of
it. And surely, amongst all Men, either of Reason or Religion, for this Cause
it ought to be highly esteemed and honored. The Laws of God, you know, should
regulate every Act of ours that is governable by Reason; they should control
and direct our Natural Appetites, and keep them within those Bounds and Limits
which he has set them. And therefore, because whatever has any Character of
Religion stamped upon it, does as such proceed from God, and he is the Author of
it, and in our use thereof we should direct it to those ends which he has
appointed; we are to look upon Marriage as a Sacred Obligation, and to observe
the Institution and Design of God, whenever we enter upon it.

2. Whatever God has made lawful or unlawful in his written Word, with respect
to Marriage, we must own and acquiesce in, as such; for his positive Law, and
the Actual Revelation of his Will, is the Fundamental Director in this case. I
mean not that God should determine every thing that belongs to
Marriage-Solemnity; but that whatever he has determined at several times, and
upon several occasions, to be of perpetual practice, ought and must be
Religiously observed by them, who have and acknowledge his Revelation.

3. All that are Married, must look upon themselves as obliged to each other
under a Sacred Bond and Tie of Religion. They are to be faithful for fear of a
Curse from God, or of being Betrayers and Perverters of his Holy Institution.
They are to drive on no separate Interests; they must conscientiously discharge
those Duties which the ends of Marriage, their Union, and God himself, requires
of them. No man should act contrary to himself; and consequently, no Married
Persons should prejudice each other, for they are made One by Promise, by
Bargain, and by Vow.

II. The next thing I am to consider, is the Necessity of Marriage for the
Propagation of the World, and the good of Mankind. Indeed, if God had left Man
as undetermined, as he has done other Creatures, which multiply their several
kinds, then there would have been no such thing as Marriage; but having not
only framed Man, and made him fit to propagate his Species by multiplying
Individuals; but likewise determined him as to the Manner and Lawfulness of it
by a Solemn Matrimonial Contract, which he has done in no other Species besides
that I know of; it must needs be a Sin in any to break the Rules of this
Determination; because it is an open Violation of a perpetual Law, for which an
Account must be given in the Day of Judgment. And hence is it, that if Men
must contiune to the World's end, it is necessary that People marry; otherwise
they must Sin against God, and their Offspring will be unlawful. This I would
not have so understood, as that there is a necessity upon every one in
particular to Marry; but that Mankind ought not, and therefore cannot lawfully
be perpetuated in the World, save only by Wedlock. I know the Tal. Babyl. Tit.
Jeb. 65. 2. Shulcan Aruch. in Eben. Ezre. p. 3. N. 1. Sect. 1. and sic passim.
apud. alios.
Jewish Canonists and Civilians affirm, That all Men are obliged to Marry; and
they ground their Opinion on these words of Scripture; Genesis 1. 28.
Be fruitful and multiply and replenish the Earth, and subdue it. This is the
first Commandment according to their Account; and is by them from the words of
the Text, called (...), i. e. Lex ad procreationem and multiplicationem
liberorum obligans. But I think they mistake the Sense of the Text, which in my
Opinion is not so to be interpreted, as if it laid an Injunction upon every one
to Marry; for they themselves exempt from it, Vid. Ja^chi in Genesis 1. 28.
some the whole Female Sex Maim. Hal. (...). cap. 15. Sect. 1, 2. Vid. Buxt. de
Sons. p. 8, 9. Hottin. de Jur. Heb. p. 6. etc. Seld. de Jur. N. and Gent. 5. c.
3.
, others some Men either entirely, or till later years than the Obligation of
this Law according to their Decisions generally commenceth. And Genesis 1. 22.
again, the same words are spoken of other Creatures which are capable of no
such positive Law. And therefore I judge they denote, by a figurative Manner of
Speech, the inward Disposition, Frame, and Nature of Mankind for multiplying
themselves and peopling the World. God has so made and ordained Man, that he
is naturally apt and prone to propagate his own kind. Genesis 1. 27, 28.
God (says Moses) created Man in his own image, in the image of God created he
him; male and female created he them. And God blessed them, and God said unto
them, be fruitful and multiply and replenish the earth, and subdue it. Where
the Hebrew word, (...), which we translate, and he blessed them, seems to
intimate Gods furnishing Man in his very Nature with powers and willingness to
answer the end of his Creation, particularly that of perpetuating his Posterity
to the end of the World. This is an Observation ( Ex V. si Synopseos Authori
fides.
tho borrowed from another) of a Mr. Le Clerk.
Learned and Late Critic upon the 22 Verse of this Chapter: Whom with F. Simon.
another, that is ashamed very often of his Name, and therefore Vid. def. des
Sentemens, etc. lettre 1. p. 3.
goes under many other: I may justy call Audacious and Ungodly Dealers with the
Word of God. For they appear to me to labor on purpose by their Criticisms, of
which to unbridled Wits, there will never be an end, to undermine the
Scriptures (as others do by their Whimsical Notions of Modish Philosophy) and
to render them altogether useless for the ends of Piety and Religion, which God
designed them for. May he in his due time by ways best known to himself, and
agreeable to his Wisdom, blast such attempts upon his Sacred Oracles, which
these men look on as a good old Book they may Criticize upon, and not as it is
the Rule of our Faith and Manners. In short then, the forementioned Text
containing a Benediction founded in the Nature and Faculties of Men, the use
and exercise of them ought to be, and are, (as I have showed before) regulated
by the Law of God, as all our Powers governable by Reason must be.

And therefore, as God has ordained Marriage as the only means for the
Continuation of Men in the World, none can violate this method without sinning
most heinously against him. For whoever is such a Transgressor, turns the Sin
of his Soul into the Fruit of his Body; makes himself polluted and brutish;
propagates the Seed of Baseness, Reproach, and Corruption; lets his Lusts and
Vile Affections hurry him on to break the Laws of God, and he kindles and fans
that burning Flame which will destroy him in the lowest Hell. God has
restrained all licentiousness by a Maraiage Institution; and why then should
men transgress this Law which is so Sacred and Perpetual; hardly any Sins are
more provoking than Adultery, Fornication, and Uncleanness: God will avenge
such severely, he will punish them dreadfully, if we may believe his written
Word; and therefore those that are guilty of them, cannot escape Everlasting
Fire. Now, from all this, you see what an Honor is reflected on Marriage from
God; it makes the Bed undefiled; legitimates the World; makes Parents honest,
credits their Offspring, and derives a Blessing from Heaven. In fine, it gives
Being, Honor, Privileges, Rights, and Blessings to Children, amongst all
Civilized Nations.

III. Having thus far laid before you the Original and Necessity of a Married
Life, both of which proceed from the Natural and Positive Law of God, I shall
now in the next place consider the Blessings and Consolations of it: For it is
a State which has its present Comforts; and in the first Designation thereof,
was ordained for the attainment of them; and for this reason neither Sex can
complain that God has imposed a burden too heavy for them to bear. For,

1. First, Moses says, That after Man was created, Genesis 2. 18. Vid. Buxt. de
Spons. 132. M. Ben. Israel. Council. in Gen Q. 16.
The Lord God said it is not good that man should be alone; I will make him an
help meet for him. It is not good; that is to say, it is no way convenient or
comfortable, or agreeable to him or his condition in the world, and therefore
he created Ezet Cenegdo.
(...) a Help meet for him, as we interpret it: But the words are variously
translated by others, viz. Anxilium simile sibi, in the vulgar Latin, followed
by the Syriack Version, a Help like unto himself, i. e. one of the same Nature
and Constitution with him; one of equal Tenderness and Regard for him as he has
for himself, or one created on purpose to perform all those kind offices of
assistance which his condition in the world requires from her; in the
Septuagint, (...), an Assistant according to himself; that is, according to his
Vid. Lud. de Dieu in loc.
Nature and wants and wishes. In the Chaldaick Version of Onkelos, (...) in the
Samaritan, (...) a Help, a Support, a Prop, as before him; and in the Arabic,
(...) of the same meaning; so that in the sense of these three Translations,
wherein the Grammatical signification of the word (...) is expressed, and
therefore put in the Margin of our English Bibles, the whole Sentence implies,
that God created Vid. Fag. and Kimchi in Rad.
one that would be a present and perpetual aid to man; one that should be
always at hand, in his power, and helpful. The Jerusalem Targum is somewhat
obsure and paraphrastical, I will make him (...) a Yoke Fellow that may go out
with him. Vid. Buxt. loc. praed.
I shall pass by those extravagant Interpretations some Jews make on purpose to
countenance their Opinions concerning Divorce, and shall content my self with
Vid. Nold. conc. p. 1003. Number. 1381.
that Gloss of a Rabbi as I find him cited, because the Jews generally agree in
it, I will make an help (...) which shall be always with him, or at hand, to
minister unto, and to observe him. But what needs Criticism? the best way to
interpret words is to confider things, and to direct the meaning of those to
the nature and use of these; and therefore by the word (...) we may understand,
that the Woman was created, to perform all the Duties incumbent upon her
toward the Man, not excluding his toward her; and consequently she was not
ordained or given to him for the Gratification of his Lust, but for the Comfort
of his Life. And from hence you see for what God made such a Fellow creature;
It was not good for Man to be single and solitary, he wanted one to assist and
cherish him; to be his individual Companion; a Constant, a most Intimate
Familiar, and a Bosom-Friend.

We of all God's Creatures are born for Society; of which Husband and Wife are
the first two, a whole Family the next part, a City the third, and so on till
you come to the last Complement or Combination of it: And as all Society is
appointed for the good of every Individual of it, so is that of Man and Wife by
the express Command and Counsel of God who made them. Adam in a Reply to God,
calls her, Genesis 3. 12.
The woman whom tho gave to be with me. The Hebrew Words, (...), The woman
which thou gave with me Vid. Inter. Sir. Chald.
, i. e. to stand by me (as some seem to suppose) are thus rendered by the
Samaritan Version Nold. conc. p. 1059. Number. ^830.
, (...), The woman which thou broughtest to me, viz. which thou did betroth
unto me, give to be my Spouse or Wife, and join to me in the strictest Bond of
Union. So that from the sense of these two places, we fully learn what end God
aimed at in the Creation of the Woman, and the Donation of her to the Man;
namely, That they should mutually assist each other, and be one and the same
Person almost in every Condition of Life. They were to communicate in each
others Joys, alleviate their Griefs, assist by their Prudence their Labor and
Industry, and earnestly promote the welfare of one another. For thus, and thus
only could the necessities of their Nature be supplied, and their Infirmities
supported, which otherwise each of them must inevitably have labored under if
remaining Single. And if we will believe Inspired Writers, the Woman is not
only the Comfort, but the Ornament of a Man's Life. Prove. 12. 4. Prove. 31, 10,
11, 12.
A virtuous woman is a crown to her husband, Her price is for above rubies; the
heart of her husband does fully trust in her; she will do him good, and not
evil, all the days of her Life. To which I will add these words of Syracides,
Ecclus. 36. 24.
He that gets a Wife, begins a Possession; a help like unto himself, and 4
Pillar of rest.

2. That I may further show how joyous and comfortable such a Life as this is;
it may be sufficient to observe, That Love which sweetens every thing we
desire, or take in hand in this World, ought in Marriage to have a ruling
share, or at least a very large Proportion. For it is not only that thing which
may, but which must be the Bond of Matrimonial Union. It Is this which must move
the Heart and Affections of each Party, determine the Choice, gain Consent, (
Vid. decret. ^ Cans. 27. Q. 2. Matrimonium and Sufficiat.
which is the most Essential Part of the Espousals) and which will cast a
perpetual Joy and Delight upon the Happy Pair. Every one that considers the
State of Humane Nature, must know what an absolute Command this Passion has in
the Bravest and Wisest Hearts. It Is this that makes Men ruin themselves, or
promote their own welfare; for we often love what we should hate, and we hate
what we should love; and from hence is it that we are made Miserable. In truth,
it requires great Art, much Watchfulness, strength of Judgment, a controuling
Sway over our selves, a profound Fear of God, and Sense of Religion, to
regulate this Passion, and to keep it upon right Objects, and within bounds of
Moderation: But I may say, That in the Married State it can hardly have
exceedings: the dearer the Affection, the better it is; and the more entire,
the more pure, the more lasting that love is, it is the more commendable, and
makes Life more comfortable. Husbands Col. 3. 19.
(says St. Paul) love your wives, for this cements them together into One; it
mingles their Affections, gives them one Heart and one Soul; and whatever makes
a Separation, is either the bitterness of Death, or the more tormenting Flames
of Contention. He knows not what Love is, nor the Joys that follow it, i. e. he
has nothing at all of Humanity in him, who perceives not in his mind the many
Consolations which must arise from such united Hearts, from such a redoubled
force of Kindness and Affection.

3. Further, Thirdly, That which may recommend a Married Life to all but
Profane and Lascivious Wretches is this, that it engages Men to Industry and
Labor, to Honesty and Providence, and to be Religions and Useful in the World.
For what are all Men, and the Riches of the World, but so many Monuments of
Marriage Blessings? What is it else that maintains the Port, and carries on the
business of Humane Society? The Being and Well-being of Families and Kingdoms;
nay, the Cloister it self which contends for Pre-eminence, does wholly depend
upon it; dares therefore any be so bold and impudent as to think slightly, or
talk scurriously of that which has produced so much good in the World! And of
which he himself, unless he be Bise and Ignominious, is a Fruit and Production.

4. And lastly, When I have named Children, I have said enough upon this Head
of my Discourse. For these are the greatest Worldly Blessings that God can
bestow upon any; they are the Repositories where Parents bestow the Fruits of
their Industry and Labors; they are the Darlings of their Affections, which
ill Behavior and Undutifulness can never wholly extinguish. Experience teaches
us, and the young Part of Mankind may be glad of it, that nothing excites
greater Love or Care in Parents than Children; for which this reason may be
given, that Nature, whose Inclinations and Propensions are unconquerable, has
implanted in them a deep Tenderness and Love for their Offspring: whereas God
knows they have too too often very little cause to be kind and loving. Oh! how
do they rejoice at the blooming Hopes and Welfare of their Children! They think
no Pains too much, no Labor too tedious for a happy Provision for them: And
why should not Fathers do so? for their Children are nothing less than
themselves multiplied, their Names and Beings in a manner made Immortal in the
World, or continued down from Generation to Generation. This we find reckoned a
Blessing from God on the Pious Man.

Psalm 128. 1, 2, 3, 6.
Blessed is every one that fears the Lord: that walks in his ways. For thou
shall eat the labor of thy hands: happy shall thou be, and it shall be well
with thee. Thy wife shall be as a fruitful vine by the sides of thine house:
thy children like olive-plants round about thy table. They shall see thy
childrens children. Again, Psalm 127. 3, 4, 5.
Children are an heritage of the Lord: and the fruit of the womb is his reward.
As arrows are in the hand of mighty men: so are children of the youth. Happy is
the man that has his quiver full of them: they shall not be ashamed, but they
shall speak with the enemies in the gate.

IV. The last thing I proposed, was to consider Marriage as an Antidote against
the most notorio^s and crying Sins; and now what are these? Even the vilest
that man can be guilty of, and which God has severely threatened and censured
in his Revealed Word. They are such as neither Sex can commit till they have
cast off all Modesty, all Manners, and all Fear of God. The very naming of them
(and for brevity and haste, I will but just name them) is enough to make all
Men detest and dread them; they are Adultery, Fornication, and Acts of
Uneleanness; the horrid and damning Nature of which may be manifested, if we
consider,

1. That they are downright Violations of the Marriage Institution.

2. They bring an infamy upon Humane Nature; for they bastardize the Race of
Men, they entail a Disgrace upon Posterity, which is counted Ignominious and
Base both in the Laws of God and Men. And then,

3. Lastly, They are Sins against that Purity and Chastity both of Mind and
Body, which our Lord requires in every one of his Disciples. 1 Cor. 6. 18.
Flee fornication, says the Apostle, Every sin that a man does, is without the
body: but he that commits fornication, sins against his own body. Again,
Ibid. v. 9, 10.
Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of God? Be not
deceived: neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor effeminate,
or abusers of themselves with mankind, shall inherit the kingdom of God. O sad
and tremendous judgment! In short, Such Sins as these when indulged in, and not
punished as the Law requires, when the Actors of them are discoverd, are of
Infection enough to spread over and debauch Mankind, and of weight and guilt
enough to sink and condemn a Nation. For my Text tells us, Whoremongers and
adulterers God will judge.

I have now finished so far as the time would give me leave, the Four
Particulars I at first proposed, and shall hasten to a Conclusion. You find
from what has been said, from whence a Marriage had its Original, what are the
Benefits and Blessings of it, which are so many and so great, that to men who
consider what the World is, what the State and Condition of Humane Nature is,
it must both appear Necessary and Praiseworthy. God and Nature has made it an
Honorable State of Life; and where it is, there is Power, and a just and high
Respect is due unto it. So that every Married Man as such, Prove. 31. 23.
Should be known in the gates, when he fitteth amongst the elders of the Land.
To be a Father or a Mother, a Husband or a Wife, a Master or a Mistress, are
all of them Titles of Authority and Honor; and some of them are communicated
to the greatest Monarchs, as Names of Endearment and Veneration; for they are
Fathers to the Kingdoms they govern; and when they are such as that Name
imports, they then have Power, and they do deserve it. What now need I add more
to recommend this State of Life to the good Opinion of all Men, seeing that by
the Laws of God so much Honor is due to it? Yet, however, what I have said,
must not be so understood, as that I would seem to lay a Necessity, or an
Obligation in conscience upon all Men to Marry. No! I do not intend that, for I
dare not censure Celibacy so severely, Ber. Rabbah. par. 34. 21. 2. Ed. ven.
as the Jews do; and it is sufficiently known what the Opinions and Practices
of the Primitive Christians were with relation to the Unmarried and Married
Life. A great deal, I think, is to be allowed to the Prudence or Tempers of Men
in this case, and to their Circumstances in the World; and therefore, tho I
dare not condemn any for remaining Single, yet I think no reason can be so
excusable, or at least laudable for it, as when Men continue in it upon the
account of Religion, viz. when they may serve God the better in that, than the
Married Station. Certainly to abstain from Marriage, from a principle of
Looseness, a sordid and base Temper of Mind, from Sowreness, ill Nature, and
the like, is a thing very sinful.

To conclude all, I shall from a Consideration of what has been said upon the
Sacredness, Necessity, Consolations, Ends, and Usefulness of a Married Life,
shut up this Discourse with some Expressions of the wise Son of Syrach, whose
Rules of Life, Judgment of Things, and Elegance of Speech, animated with a
strain of Piety, show him to be a Man of an extraordinary Spirit. Eccl. 40. 23.
and 26. 1, 2, 3.
A friend and a companion never meet amiss; but above both, is a wife with her
husband. Blessed is the man that has a virtuous wife, for the number of his
days shall be double. A virtuous woman rejoices her husband, and he shall
fulfill the years of his life in peace. A good wife is a good portion, which
shall be given in the portion of them that fear the Lord.

FINIS.
MOnendas es B. L. quod ob defectum Typorum Aethiopicorum, Arabisorum, and
Samaritanorum, voces istarum linguarum quibus usi sumus Charactere Hebraico edi
curavimus, vale and boni consule.


