Die Sabathi 20 Novembris, 1680.
THis House being moved, That David Fitz Gerald Esquire; may have leave to Print
his Information given to this House, concerning the Horrid Plot and Conspiracy
in Ireland; It is Ordered by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament
Assembled, That the said David Fitz Gerald has hereby leave given him to Print
and publish the said Information.

Jo. Brown Cleric.
Parliamentorum.
ADVERTISEMENT.
WHereas there is one John Fitz Gerald, or at least goes under that name, who
is said to be formerly a Friar or Priest, upon whom there has been some
scandalous reflections, this is he who was seized in Bristol, going for Ireland
to search for Commissions in Old Wall; I would only beg of the Reader, not to
take me for this man.

David Fitz Gerald.

A NARRATIVE OF THE Irish Popish Plot, For the betraying that KINGDOM Into the
hands of the FRENCH, Massacring all ENGLISH PROTESTANTS there, And utter
Subversion of the GOVERNMENT AND Protestant-Religion; As the same was
successively carried on from the Year 1662.

Given in to both Houses of Parliament.

By DAVID FITZ GERALD Esquire;.

LONDON: Printed for Tho. Cockerill, at the Three-Legs in the Poultrey
over against the Stocks-Market, 1680.

A NARRATIVE OF THE Irish Popish Plot.
SInce we have manifestly found by woeful experience, That the Princely favors,
and tender proceedings of His late Majesty toward the Irish, proved altogether
ineffectual to contain them within the bounds of Loyalty and Duty, but still
they suffer themselves to be led blindfold into fatal Rebellions, by the
pernicious Counsels of their Priests, the World may easily believe (by their
proceedings in the last Rebellion) that their designs are always on foot, and
tending to no less than the utter subversion of the English Government in
Ireland, and establishing the Power in the hands of their own Natives and
Religion. For confirmation hereof, we need not look back so far as the
Testimony of that Franciscan Friar, one of their Council, who declared, That
the Session of Parliament held at Dublin, being Prorogued in Aug. 1641, and the
time drawing nigh for putting their designs of surprising Dublin-Castle, and
all other places in possession of the English, into execution, there was a
grand consult, or meeting of the Romish-Clergy, and principal Laymen of their
Faction, appointed to be at the Abbey of Multifarvan in the County of
Westmeath, where amongst other matters there debated, the Question was, what
course should be taken with the English, and all others that were found in the
whole Kingdom to be Protestants; and by their subsequent Practices it appeared,
that no less than a general Massacre was resolved on: Though the poor Friar had
no other Reward or Recompense for the Discovery, save only a Confinement: In
which restraint he continued, till the Romish party getting the upper hand,
found him in the Prison, and there most cruelly Murdered him.

It would be too tedious (and unnecessary, seeing they are so notoriously
known) to give an account of the several contrivances of the Popish Clergy of
Ireland, ever since the Conquest of that Kingdom, to shake off the English
Government; and the horrid and barbarous cruelties they have practiced in order
thereunto: Therefore I will confine my self to such particulars as have
happened since His Majesty's Restoration, taking notice only, That their
Ignorance produces so blind a superstition toward the Popish Religion, that
they will most willingly venture their lives (all that their many Rebellions
have left them, and those perhaps too much too, unless they make better use of
them) to further any thing, which they are made believe tends to the Honor of
Holy Church: As on the other side, their malice to the English (who are possessed
of their Estates) is so great, that they would be content to be in worse
bondage to a Foraigner, so they might but gratify their revenge so far, as to
have the English equal sufferers with them. Though they apprehend no danger of
that, taking themselves to be already such slaves, that they fancy their
condition cannot be worse by changing their Masters (especially for a Prince of
their own Faith) witness their late agreement with Spain, and their present one
with France, which these Papers set forth.

No man that has any insight into the affairs of Ireland, can be ignorant, that
the Romish Clergy of that Kingdom have publicly and privately the enjoyment
and exercise of their Religion according to the manner of the Church of Rome,
more freely since His Majesty's happy Restoration, than in several years
before, by the very great indulgence of the late Governors. They have their
Titular Primates, Archbishops, Bishops, Vicars General, Provincial
Consistories, Deans, Abbots, Priors, etc. who all live freely, though somewhat
covertly amongst them, without control, exercising Jurisdiction over the
people. They have also their Priests, Jesuits and Friars, who are of late years
exceedingly multiplied, and in great numbers returned out of Spain, Italy,
France, and other Foragin parts (where the Children of the Natives of Ireland,
that are devoted to that way, are usually sent to receive their education) much
to the damage and disadvantage of the Protestants in that Kingdom; and no less
to the Papists themselves, if they would but have the patience to consider what
miseries they have endured by the means of Ignorant Popish Priests, who value
no Religion so much, as the want of their Impropriations, Glebes and
Monasteries. But that which causes the greatest admiration in me, is, that
Noblemen, private Gentlemen, and others that are Roman Catholics, and enjoy
great part of their Estates, if not all, should be thus infatuated and misled
by such a parcel of designing Hypocrites, to act contrary, not only to their
Allegiance, but their Honor and Interest too; forgetting the Calamities, by
their means and wicked industry, brought upon that Kingdom of Ireland, to the
utter ruin and destruction not only of many Thousand English Families, but of
many of their own Nation and Relations, who were ignorant of their horrid
designs; yet did upon the same account perish, and in some sort suffered more
than the Conspirators themselves.

Within few years after His Majesty's happy Restoration, one John Mullowny a
mean man by birth, but now Titular Bishop of Killalow, and several others of
the Popish Clergy and Gentry of that Kingdom, united in a Conspiracy against
His Majesty's Government in Ireland: For the said Bishop Mullowny having,
whilst he was in France, received in Paris the sum of One hundred thousand
Lieures to promote a Rebellion in Ireland, did engage the ensuing persons to
carry on the said design (to wit) Colonel Miles Riley, Colonel Cullen,
Colonel Byrne, Colonel Mortagh O Bryan, and Colonel Dudley Costellow, the
last of whom failed not to perform his part thereof, as presently I shall
relate: But first, for its progress, the Reader must note, That after the last
Act of Settlement in Ireland, the Popish Clergy being void of all hopes of His
Majesty's favors, or any Toleration established by Law, employed several
Emissaries into all parts of Ireland, to give notice to all persons, whose
desperate fortunes (occasioned by their own or their Ancestors Rebellion) or
any hardships which they apprehended they endured had made discontented, of the
said designs, and to prepare and engage them therein, and used endeavors to
make all the interest in Garrisons and strong holds throughout the Kingdom that
possibly they could: And where they had no interest, appointed some of their
confederacy to be in readiness to surprise such places and holds. These
Emissaries were going about for a year and an half before this commotion began;
and then the said Colonel Costellow being forward to perform his part thereof,
before the rest were fully ready, and before he received his part of the Money
of Mullowny, rashly engaged himself; For making a party in Connaught, he fell
upon, and was sufficiently revenged upon the Lord Dillons Tenants and Estates
in that County, upon some former grudge he had against him. And afterward he
made his interest about Longford, and engaged in it a Gentleman of that
Country, whose name I shall omit, he being then in the English Army; yet by
the insinuation of the Popish Clergy, was trickt into the said Rebellion, by
which the people of Longford were then Murdered, and the whole Town Fired; and
in the Action the said Gentleman was shot dead, and his Head brought to Dublin
and set on the Gate; and Costellow himself suffered upon the same account, but
not at the same time. Colonel Mortagh O Brian was killed by one Reerden, who
was formerly a Lieutenant in his own Regiment. Colonel Byrne was some years
after in Restraint in Dublin, and which way he escaped is best known to those
that were accessory to it: and what became of the rest I cannot tell, but the
Conspiracy was very formidable, and had it gone on till full ripe, would have
had very dire effects. In the Relation of which I have been thus brief, because
my self was not engaged in it, and so cannot of my own knowledge say positively
how far the contrivance in particulars was carried on; but I can give a
sufficient account how I came to know what I have here set down, when ever I
shall be required.

And shall now address my self to speak of those things which fell within my
particular cognizance, and which I can affirm upon knowledge. As follows,

IN March 1673, or thereabout, several Officers out of France Landed in
Ireland, under the pretense of raising Recruits for Colonel Hamilton, then in
the French Service, to wit, Captain Daniel Macnamarra, Captain John Lacy,
Captain Con Oneale, one Macmahan, and Lieutenant Hurley, and several others;
many of the said Officers being my former acquaintance (before they were
employed in the French Service) upon their coming into Ireland, I met several
of them, and entering into communication with them (having formerly heard a
general Rumor of the French designing upon Ireland, and considering that the
said persons being employed, for some years before, in the French Service,
might be capable to give some particular account thereof) I enquired of Lacy,
whether there was any probability of the French's invading Ireland, or any such
matter intended? He answered, That if the Dutch were once subdued, he did not
question but the French would establish the Roman Catholic Religion in all the
Northern parts of Europe; and (as far as he could understand by Marshal Turene
who was then his General) that we should have the same Laws established in
Ireland that are in France; and when the French had completed what they had in
hand, that we should suddenly after see a great alteration both in Church and
State: The said Lacy then uttering more words then I shall mention here. He
likewise gave me an account of the Number of Irish that they had then Training
up in France, and that our welfare in Ireland did much rely on the success of
their Forces in France; and that he did admire that any persons of Quality,
that did understand the design of that War, should stand so much in their own
light as to slip so good an opportunity, and so just a Cause, being altogether
to destroy Heretics, and to abolish their Laws; and that he did not question,
with the Assistance of the French, but that it would be accomplished
notwithstanding all oppositions; and that such persons of Irish extraction as
did not engage themselves in the said Wars, would not in the future be
esteemed, especially such persons of quality as had no charge of Families. That
he did admire why they did not consider their own present Condition, and the
occasion of their last Ruin; saying, That it was rather for want of Conduct
than Courage; and that he did not doubt (if they were not wanting to
themselves) that their loss in the former Wars, would be retrieved in the next,
if they did prove true to their superiors (meaning thereby the Titular Popish
Bishops of the several Diocesses in Ireland) who were able, not only to
instruct them, but also to forward and enable them in the said Design; and that
he was confident that the French had that interest that would not receive such
a repulse as the Spaniards did in King sale; alleging, that the fault was
rather to be imputed to the Irish than to the Spaniards; That the Articles
betwixt Philip Osullevan on the behalf of the Irish were not duly performed
with the Spaniard; and if the Irish had been in Arms to unite themselves with
the said Spaniard, according to the said Contract, they might have been ever
since possessed of their Estates and Liberty of Religion. I made answer, that
the Irish, had been persuaded into so many Engagements and Rebellions, that the
name of an Irish man was become ridiculous and scandalous. The name of an Irish
man (said he) is only rediculous to such as enjoy their Estates; and it is
rather for their poverty, than for any other reason that we are contemptible,
and therefore it will concern us to remedy that fault by regaining all our
Estates.

After this Discourse was over, I told the said Lacy, that I had a desire to
Travel into France, and inquired of him, whether there was any probability that
I might procure a Commission under Count Hamilton? Who said, there was; and
that Captain Anthony Hamilton would be suddenly in the County of Limerick; and
as soon as he had notice thereof, he would give me an account whether the said
Hamilton had any Blank Commission left undisposed; but soon after, upon
information to the Lord Deputies of Ireland, there were special Orders to
secure the Officers, and stop the men, which barred their Voyage that time.

A little time after I met Captain Neal, This Captain O Neale, is Son to Ewen
Row O Neale, who was General to the Irish in 41.
and understood by him, that Count Hamilton's Regiment was divided, and in
factions, one party for Hamilton, and the other for Dungan, which gave me but
little encouragement to proceed; and acquainting the said Neal, that I did
resolve to Travel into France, the said Neale said, that he did prevail with a
great many young Gentlemen to venture their Fortunes abroad; and that he did
believe, if they did generally know in Vlster how the Game was playing for
them, that there would be hardly any left in the whole County, but would all
unanimously go for France; but added, that he did conceive it would be of
dangerous consequence to him to declare what his knowledge was of the affairs
abroad, and how likely they were to have good success in their undertakings, if
they did prove obedient to such as were entrusted to give them timely notice;
and that it was for want of good and prudent management, Viz. Costellows
the last design, so long in agitation, was discovered.

These Officers being crossed in their Voyage (and their men dispersed) went
back into France again, from whence, about a year after, the said Lieutenant
Hurly returned into Ireland, and resided in New Castle or thereabouts for half
a year or upwards, where it was credibly reported, that he did train up several
Gentlemen, by teaching them to Exercise Pike and Musket: And it was generally
affirmed then amongst the Papists, that in several parts of Ireland the like
method was used, in order to being in readiness, to receive Commands from such
as were appointed for the carrying on the said Conspiracy in the Kingdom of
Ireland.

About the year 1675, Captain John Lacy came out of France into Ireland, giving
an account of the affairs abroad to Bishop Mullowny and the rest of the Popish
Clergy in that Country, giving them full assurance, The Romish Religion in
Ireland established.
that all was working on for the better, chargeing and commanding them to be
very urgent with the people, and to omit no opportunity, and that they should
suddenly see their Religion better settled in Ireland than ever before, and that
they would be rid of that yoke of Heresy which they had so long suffered
under; and that now the minute was nigh at hand, on which their Fortune
depended, or their utter Destruction. These words he did utter in the presence
of several of the Clergy, as I have been told by the said Mullowny and others;
and the said Lacy declared the same in effect in my company.

About the said year, News came fresh into Ireland, That the King of England
was very ill; and the report sometime after was strong, that His Majesty was
dead; some affirming, that if he was not, that it was impossible for him ever
to recover, which gave great encouragement to their design The King fell ill,
which gave much encouragement to the said design.
: At which time there flocked great multitudes out of France into Ireland,
giving notice, That they would be in Arms, and such as had none, should use
their endeavors to procure some, and that the time was come on which they
would execute their designs. But His Majesty (by God's Mercy) recovering from
the said Distemper, gave them much discouragement for that time, instead of
their former hope His Majesty being well recovered from his sickness, gave much
discouragement to the party.
s; insomuch, That those desperate persons returned into England (as we in
Ireland supposed) and continued there some time before the Parliament
assembled, and then returned into Ireland with no less hopes of good success
than formerly; declaring to the people there, that there was great industy
used, in preparing a Bone to throw between both Houses of Parliament, which
gave the Malcontents there, The Officers gone out of Ireland.
hopes, that by means thereof they would bring their horrid designs, long in
agitation, to effect; That is to say, to abolish the Laws established, and the
Protestant Religion, and upon the Ruins thereof, to erect Popery, and
establish Arbitrary Government: Again returned with new hopes.
But coming short of their wicked expectations, they returned into France.

About the year 1676, I saw Doctor Creagh, otherwise called the Titular Bishop
of Cork, Bishop Creagh came out of France and Rome.
who (as I was told by one Doctor Stretch) was newly come from France and Rome;
afterward, in Limerick, happening to be in the company of the aforesaid Bishop
Mullowny (who was my former acquaintance, and knew that I was privy to several
passages and intrigues of this kind) he told me, that they had received further
intelligence concerning the said affairs, by Bishop Creagh, and several others
of the Popish Clergy, who were lately arrived in Ireland, and that they had
instructions to proceed, and authority from his Holiness the Pope, for to quit
and discharge the Roman Catholics of Ireland from their Allegiance to the King
of England, saying, That the King of England had no Right to Ireland, but what
he had from the Pope; and that the King being an Heretic, the same right
returned to the Pope again; and said, the French were not then in a condition
to perform what was formerly agreed upon; Bishop Mullowny This is the same
Mullowny that fomented the former Rebellion.
saying, That the Articles, in order to the carrying on of the said design, were
in the hands of the Titular Archbishop of Tuam, and did not question but every
point therein mentioned should be faithfully performed; adding, that there were
those in England appointed for to supply His Majesty's Wants, One Lynch.
and keep off Parliaments until this were accomplished.

It was a general rumor throughout Ireland, amongst the Popish Clergy and
Gentry for several years before, especially 1675 and 1676, That his Royal
Highness, in 1677 ensuing, at the furthest, should be King. As soon as I had
this intelligence from the said Mullowny and others, I acquainted John Piggott
Esquire;, a Justice of the Peace, Acquainted John Piggott Esquire; with the said
particulars.
with that in particular in the aforesaid years; who being examined before the
Lord Lieutenant and Council, in November 1679, did not only acknowledge the
same, but gave it in his Examinations under his Hand and Seal; and so far I
refer my self to the said Examinations, which are now in the custody of Sir
John Davis Secretary of State in the Kingdom of Ireland. How this and a French
design, and the Plot discovered against His Majesty's Life here in England does
agree, I will not take upon me to determine, but refer the inferences to the
Judicious Reader.

On or about the 2d of November 1677; Colonel Pierce Lacy invited me to go
with him to Limerick, he being then to treat about the said design with the
Lord Brittas, Mr. John Macnamarra of Crattellagh, and several others who were
engaged in carrying on the same, as I have been told by the said Lacy, Bishop
Mullowny, and many more of the Popish party.

About January 1677, The Lord Brittas, Captain Thomas Bourk, and several others
with them, came into the Barony of Conollue in the County of Limerick, where
they had several private Consultations, one whereof was at the House of one
John Hicks Innkeeper in Rathkeal in the said County of Limirick, there being at
the said meeting, in number Twenty, or more, who were accustomed to meet at
Night Twenty or more in number met at John Hickes in Rathkeale Innkeeper.
; but some English Gentlemen coming suddenly there, Gibius and Palms.
barred them of treating of the particulars at that time: Therefore they agreed
to have another meeting at the same place the week following, and another at
New Castle in the said County, where they met accordingly, but the particulars
they then concluded upon, I know not.

On or about the Fourteenth of February, in the same year, I met Mr. Eustace
White upon the Commons of Chrough Burgess in the County of Limerick, who told
me, that he had Two Letters to the Lord Brittas, one from Sir John Fitz Gerald,
the other from Mr. Hurly, or Mr. Poor; I enquired of the said White, what did
Sir John's Letter import? The said White answered, That they did understand the
Lord Brittas had received his Commission, and that Sir John Fitz Gerald did
expect to be his Lieutenant Colonel, White owned the same.
and that the said White did expect a Captains Command under the said Lord
Brittas. Sir John Fitz Gerald being examined before the Lord Lieutenant and
Council, in November 1679, did own to have sent such a Letter by the said
White, at the same time, to the Lord Brittas.

Many of the Irish which are well to live, Many who were not at the last
Rebellion at the least concerned, suffered more than the Actors.
and restored to part of their Estates, if not all, were very much discontented
at those proceedings, who though they knew not the particulars, had a general
notion of the Evil coming upon them, and did fear that their Innocence might
smart for the Nocency of others; several of Ireland, who were not only innocent
in themselves, but harbored and protected several English Families, having
smarted for the Rebellion of others, in a manner more than those that have been
Actors in the said Rebellion, as by woeful experience I can justify and
maintain.

The English likewise in those last years, The English had Forty-one in their
memory.
having Forty-one fresh in their memories, were much dismayed to see and hear
of those great multitudes meeting both publicly and privately; and mistrusting
that there was some evil or mischief intended them, commanded that strict
Watches be duly kept through the Country.

In the years 1676 and 1677, several Emissaries went to and fro, giving
intelligence of foraign affairs, and how managed abroad; likewise several
Letters were come down to the Country with feigned names to them, one whereof I
had in my hand, and perused it, it was directed to Capt. Edwards, and
subscribed by Capt. Jones, both feigned names, which said Letters were writ at
their grand Cabals in Dublin, The Gran Cabals in Dublin.
or thereabouts, as I did understand by Coll. Lacy and several others; and that
which I did read, he said was come from one Dr. Cusack near Dublin, whom I have
never seen nor known; the substance thereof I delivered to Sir John Davis
Secretary of State: These were the methods that were used in the said years,
for the better managing the said design.

On or about May 1678, an Agent being then appointed to go into France, by name
Dr. Hetherman, the Emissaries of the Jesuits, and the rest of the Clergy in
those parts that were the principal men, consulted together, and pitched upon
Coll. Lacy to be a fit person to go to Dublin to confer with Coll. Richard
Talbot, Coll. Lacy to Dublin in May 78.
and others there, and to bring what advice and instructions they had there, to
the said Agent that was bound for France, as soon as the said Lacy returned
from Dublin; Coll. Lacy being short of Money, borrowed 60 l. of Simon Eaton
Esquire;, under the pretense of discharging Rent and Arrears to Sir William Talbot
Agent to his Royal Highness in that Kingdom: The said Lacy, after the receipt
of the said Money, went to Dublin as aforesaid, and was away until August
following, Returned in August following.
then returned to his own House, being there but Three days or thereabouts,
when the Popish Clergy of that Diocese assembled together at the House of Dr.
James Streitch in Rakeal, Priest, Bp. Dowly, Father Creagh, Dr. White, etc.
assembled.
To wit, James Dowly Titular Bishop of Limerick, Dr. Hetherman Vicar General of
that Diocese, Dr. Creagh, Dr. White, Father Fox and several others, they and
Coll. Lacy being together, for a good while before I came there, I do not know
what the particulars of the said instructions given by the said Lacy to the
said Hetherman were, but being intimately acquainted with all the Company
except Hetherman (that being my first acquaintance with him) who conversed
altogether in French or in Latin, several circumstances in general terms were
treated of upon the former subject; after Dinner was over, Coll. Lacy and my
self walked abroad in the Street for an hour at least, and he told me how
forward they were in managing and carrying on the said design, and that Dr.
Hetherman (who was then Agent bound for France as aforesaid) was as fit a
person to manage the affairs in France and Rome as any in that Kingdom; the
said Lacy saying, that it was proper for me to renew my acquaintance with the
said Hetherman. After we returned into the House of the said Streitch, and
several discourses being treated in general terms about the said Design, the
said Hetherman and I walked abroad in the Garden of the said Streitch; the said
Hetherman was very earnest to learn of me what force or strength I conceived
the Protestants to be in that County; A Roll in Paper, with the number of
Papists and Protestants.
I made answer, that I never enquired into the particulars. He told me I was to
blame for it; whereupon he produces me a Roll in the nature of a Panel, but in
Paper, where he showed me each Parish in particular, and the number of the
Protestants and Papists in that County; the Papists by the return of the said
Hetherman, had in number amounted to Fifteen for each Protestant in the said
County, and that he had the like return from the County of Cork, County of
Clare, County of Kerry, etc. not mentioning the numbers of the said Counties
then to me. I asked him then, how came he to have such an exact return of the
Protestants and the Papists? He said it was not difficult to him, prescribing
the ensuing methods used in those affairs; saying, that every Parish Priest had
always an exact Catalogue of Protestants and Papists in their Parishes, and
returned the same twice a year to the Bishops, and likewise said, that he had a
List of the Nobility that were engaged in managing the said Design, but did not
show me the same; and did say, that he did trust in God that the Natives of
Ireland would not be long Subjects to Heretical Government; and for his part,
that he would use all the industry and interest he had to effect the said
Design; and that he did conjecture, that the County of Kerry might be the most
convenient Landing-place for an Army in Ireland, it being a remote County, and
convenient, having but few there to oppose them, being far from any assistance;
that he did not doubt, if the persons engaged in carrying on the said design
did perform their undertaking, that before the English Forces in Ireland had
full notice of the Army landed, there would be but few left to give opposition;
and pitching upon the Month of November following to be the time appointed for
their Landing, A Design to surprise Limerick, and many other strong holds in
Ireland to be delivered up to the French.
said, that some were desirous to have the said Army Land in the North of
Ireland, but that (upon consideration of the English and Scotch there, and
their strength and numbers in that Country) at the general Consultation of the
Popish Clergy about Dublin, it was agreed to begin in the Province of Munster,
and to secure all the Forts and strongholds there, and that there were persons
engaged in the said Design, that could, without much danger, deliver up several
Forts and Cities in the said Kingdom; and in such Cities and Forts where they
had not interest in the Officers within the said Cities, that they had persons
appointed throughout the Kingdom to surprise all such strongholds and Cities
aforesaid, saying, that if the said Design had miscarried, considering what
great assistance and friends they had both at home and abroad, that the Irish
should never expect but to live in misery, reflecting upon the miscarriages in
all former designs, blaming the undertakers, Much reflection upon the management
of all former Designs.
saying, that if the Irish did unanimously unite and rise in Arms when Coll.
Dudley Castellow first began the Insurrection in Connought, that they would by
that time have Ireland freed from Heresy; and now, that they had no other way
then to Rise all in a night, and to proceed in a general Massacre throughout
the said Kingdom, and to kill Man, Woman and Child, and not to leave a
Protestant living in the Kingdom of Ireland. The said Hetherman in three days
after the said meeting, went away for France; before the said Hetherman parted,
I acquainted Sir Thomas Southwell with all the particulars, and desired that he
would secure Hetherman and all his Papers, and likewise told him who the
Officers were that were appointed to carry on the design; but he did nothing
therein, but often promised that he would send to acquaint the Earl of Orory
with the Proceedings, but did not (as far as ever I could understand) and sent
to Colonel Lacy, and the rest, to acquaint them of such matters as I had
imparted to him about the said Design, as hereafter shall appear more at large.

On or about November. 1678, the French were expected to Land beyond Tarbutt, in
the River of Shanan, in the County of Kerry, in the said Kingdom; the persons
concerned to perform their parts of the Design in that Country, did often
Consult together in those days ( viz.) the Lord Baron of Brittas, Colonel
Pierce Lacy, and several others having continual Intelligence, that the time
was drawing nigh, the day being appointed on which the said Design was to be
effected, notice being thereof throughout the Kingdom, as far as I could learn;
the time for Landing being the 20th of November. 1678, They were afraid that the
French would not answer their expectation at the same time appointed.
as aforesaid, and to surprise Limerick the 23d; some were for surprising
thereof some days before the French had Landed; others opposed it, thinking
that if the French did not come at the time appointed, that it were of
dangerous consequence for them to hazard themselves in the undertaking, and so
concluded to make no noise or insurrection, till they had the assistance
assured unto them: But the said Lord Brittas, Colonel Lacy Macnamarra, and
several others made it their business for several years before to be free and
familiar with the Officers of Limerick, by treating and entertaining them, in
hopes thereby that their Design might be the easier carried on, sitting up
early and late with the said Officers, in Taverns, Inns, and all suchlike
places, that at last they brought them to that familiarity and acquaintance,
Names of the Officers that dyed, and those that went about naked.
that they might go out or come into the Gates at all hours of the night that
they pleased; and wrought so far upon the said Officers, that by excess of
Drinking, three of the said Officers of Limerick dyed. I could say more of
this, but I think this is sufficient.

The said Lord Brittas Macnamarra, Capt. Feine, Cap Ashburnham, Lieutenant
Damnell, and many more.
and the rest of that party run themselves deeply in Debt in treating the said
English Officers; and that as far as I could then understand, it was a Custom
at that time, used in most Garrisons of Ireland.

The persons concerned in the said Conspiracy (as the Lord Brittas, and others)
gave out, that they were to have Commissions sometimes to Raise men for
Holland, and other times for Tangier, that by the Rumors thereof, the less
notice might be taken of their public meetings and Treaties, and to avoid all
suspicion whilst they were managing the aformentioned Contrivance. The English
in those parts all this while imagining what the matter should be, were in
bodily fear, seeing so many great meetings as aforesaid, and likewise some of
the Irish who were abroad, and knew the Laws of France, and the rigor of
Arbitrary Government, being now possessed of some of their Estates, if not all,
were in much fear that the Popish Clergy of Ireland, by their contrivance,
would bring destruction upon the Innocent as well as the Nocent, the like
having happened often before in Ireland.

In March 1678, or thereabouts, Sir John Fitz Gerald visiting some Friends in
the County of Limerick, amongst the rest went to Coll. Pierce Lacy, who told
Sir John, that he was highly obliged to Sir Thomas Southwell, saying, that the
said Sir Thomas did send him word by Mr. John Hurly, that I should tell and
acquaint the said Sir Thomas, that Coll. Lacy, one Easmond, and others, were
engaged in the Conspiracy then on foot in Ireland; Sir John Fitz Gerald did ask
Coll. Lacy whether he did see me since he received that Message? Coll. Lacy
replying that he did very often, but never did tax me with it, desired the said
Sir Johu to say nothing of it at present; whereupon the said Sir John denied to
stay to drink with the said Lacy (as Sir John told me) and Rode straight to the
House of John Hicks Innkeeper in Rakeal, whither he sent for me, spoke these
ensuing words after we met, in the presence of Mr. Maurice Fitz Gerald, Capt.
William Fitz Gerald, and John Hicks the Innkeeper; Cousin, when will you take
as much care of me as I have done for you within this two hours? Then I asked
Sir John, if it were any private business of importance, to walk in the next
Room; he answered, that he would not, and where there was one, he wished there
were Twenty, Sir John Fitz Gerald reflecting upon Sir Thomas Southwell.
and that it was a business not to be smothered, repeating the said message
sent from Sir Thomas Southwell, by Mr. Hurly, to Coll. Lacy, and that if I did
tell Sir Thomas Southwell such a thing as Coll. Lacy said (meaning the
discovery of the Plot in Ireland to the said Sir Thomas Southwell) that he was
no better than a Traitor to his Country in betraying me; and that if I did not
repeat the same to the said Sir Thomas Southwell, that he was a Rascal for
abusing me; and then asked when I saw Mr. Hurly, Mr. Mackmechiny, Mr. John
Burk, Capt. Purdon, or Coll. Lacy? I told him lately. Then says he, did none of
your Friends and good Relations acquaint you with this business before? I told
him, not. Then says he, look to your self, and take it from me, as a special
Caveat, Sir John's Caveat to me for the future.
that for the future you avoid all their Companies; for I do assure you, that
they have an eye upon you, which for ought I know, may cost you your life,
except you have a special care of your person; saying, that as soon as he heard
it, he could not rest until he had given me a full account thereof.

The Lord Brittas being examined before the Lord Lieutenant and Council in
November 1679, under what pretenses he did give out, that he was to have a
Regiment of Horse? or under whose Command? or from whom was he to have his
Commission? He answered, that it was by the Earl of Orory's interest (who was
newly dead) who promised to procure him a Commission to raise a Regiment for
the Service of Holland, but could not prove that he had spoke with the Earl of
Orory in several years before, nor could produce the Messenger that brought him
that Message, nor a Line under the Earl of Orory's hand.

Coll. Lacy being also examined, Examined before the Lord Lieutenant and
Council.
owned to be at several Consultations aforesaid, and that at the same time
after his return from Dublin, to be at the meeting in Rakeal, where the Popish
Clergy of that Diocese Assembled together, and did confess, that Dr. Hetherman
was appointed Agent for France; and that at that time, from thence, he went
away for France; but said, he did not know what about.

Mr. Eustace White examined, Examined.
whether he received a Letter from Sir John Fitz Gerald, to carry to the Lord
Brittas, in February 1677, or thereabouts? owned that he did.

Mr. John Piggott being examined, Examined.
whether I told him the particulars aforementioned, in the year 1675, 1676,
1677 and 1678, who owned some of the particulars, and all the other part in
general terms, as by his Depositions does appear.

John Gilbert Clerk, being brought up to Dublin, to prove the meetings in
Nightime in Rakeal and other parts of the Country for several years before,
did own their private meetings, both of Clergy and Laity, and did conceive it
to be of dangerous consequence to the English, as by his Depositions does
appear.

John Hicks the Innkeeper, in whose House the designs upon that County were for
the most part contrived and discoursed of, Hicks Examined and proved a Rogue,
and did not declare what he knew, as shall hereafter appear.
did not own much thereof; But it will be proved by Three persons of Quality,
who are not yet brought to give their Evidence, that Hicks told them in the
year 1677, that he was sure, and did understand no less by the Company that
frequented his House, that there would be a sudden alteration, and several
other particulars to that purpose, which I am confident he would declare
otherwise than he did, had he not been dissuaded from it.

Sir John Fitz Gerald being examined before the Lord Lieutenant and Council in
Dublin, in November 1679, whether Coll. Lacy told him that Sir Thomas Southwell
did send him such a Message by Mr. Hurly, or whether Sir John did acquaint me
with the particulars aforesaid, in the year 1678, the said Sir John did
acknowledge the same, as by his Examinations given before the Lord Lieutenant
and Council will appear.

On or about the 26th of March in the year 1679, I went to the House of the
said Sir Thomas Southwell, to charge him with sending the said message to the
said Lacy, by the said Hurly; but not meeting him, met with his Son-in-Law, Mr.
Piggot, and discoursed the business with him, and acquainted him what Sir John
Fitzgerald told me. Whereupon the said Piggot was very angry with Sir Thomas
Southwell, and was very much concerned for me, considering the danger I was in;
The said Mr. Piggot would have me stay until Sir Thomas got out of bed, which I
refused to do. Then the said Piggot promised me that he would give me an
account of what Sir Thomas his Answer should be to him that afternoon; the said
Piggot seeming to be much concerned both for Sir Thomas and me, in regard that
he had Married Sir Thomas's Daughter, and his Sister had been my former Wife.
In the afternoon the said Piggot, and one Patrick Pepperd came with him to my
house, and brought me a Certificate from the said Sir Thomas Southwell, in
manner following.

THese are to certify all whom it may concern, The Certificate.
That Mr. David Fitzgerald did not reflect upon Col. Lacy, or any other
Gentleman, directly or indirectly in my hearing. Witness my hand the 26th of
March 1679.

Thomas Southwell.
Being present, John Piggot.

I Set down this Certificate here, to show that Sir Thomas Southwell's
Allegation before the Lord Lieutenant and Council in November. 1679, Observations
upon Sir Tho. Southwells Denial of the knowledge of the Conspiracy before Aug.
-- 79.
wherein he says, that it was upon the account of a Dispute between him and my
self the 26th of August 1679, that I made use of his Name, is false and
scandalous: But to avoid all such suspicions and false allegations, I thought
it convenient to mention the precedent particulars, and the said Certificate;
and I desire only such people that be apt to give their Censures of me
according to their Inclinations, or such as are desirous to know the truth of
the whole matter, Now Reader observe March 78, 79. and Aug. 79. and the said
Sir Tho. Deinal.
that they would consider the time that Sir John Fitzgerald first acquainted
me with the Message from Sir Thomas Southwell to Col. Lacy, being in March
1678, the date of the said Certificate, viz. the 26th of March 1679, and the
26th of August subsequent to the said Certificate in the said year, is the
first time that Sir Thomas alleges he and I had any discourse concerning a
Conspiracy in Ireland; and let any one but Sir Thomas judge, whether what he
pretends to cover so great a mis-behaviour (not to call it worse) be probable.

The next day after I had received the said Certificate, as aforesaid, from Mr.
Piggot; Sir Thomas Southwell sent one of his Servants to invite me to Dinner
that day; The Servant that came to invite me, was John Herbert.
and being in company with him, after Dinner, he prayed me to go to Col. Lacy,
and to tell him that I did not acquaint Sir Thomas with any such matters as
were formerly discoursed of; and for the better satisfaction of the said Lacy,
to show him Sir Thomas his Certificate. I asked Sir Thomas what he meant by the
said Certificate? He answered, That it may be a means to prevent me from
receiving any mischief from the said persons. Whereupon considering the Murder
of Sir Edmondbury Godfrey, The Names of those that were by when I spoke to Col.
Lacy, and showed him the said Certificate, was James Dowley. Titular Bishop of
Limerick, Mr. Pierce Lacy, and the Lady Comin.
and the nature of the people that I had to deal withal, and the dangerous
consequences that might upon that occasion happen, I complied with the said Sir
Thomas, and rode strait to Col. Lacy's, and did no less there, than what the
said Sir Thomas directed me to do, which I conceived with my self was requisite
for me to do, if I had not had his advice. Then after I parted with the said
Lacy, I returned back again to the said Sir Thomas, and met him at the house of
James Estreitch, Innkeeper in Rakeal, where he and I tarried until two of the
Clock at night; then he promised me faithfully to acquaint the Duke of Ormond,
or the Earl of Orory with the Design against the Government. Then I told the
said Sir Thomas Southwell, No safety for me after he betrayed me to the
Conspirators, but to appear openly. --
that seeing they brought my name upon the Stage; That if the said Sir Thomas
did not forthwith propose some way to bring the business to light, that I would
ride to Dublin and declare the whole matter before the Lord Lieutenant and
Council, and that I had no way to avoid being guilty of Misprision of Treason,
but to justify that I have from time to time acquainted the said Sir Thomas
with the aforementioned particulars, and general Design of the Conspirators
against the present Government; And told the said Sir Thomas, Requested Sir
Thomas to make a fair end.
that it would be convenient for him, Mr. Piggot, and me, to meet, and to find
out some way for to discharge and clear our selves from the knowledge of the
said Conspiracy, laying the Dangers before them, and telling him what danger I
was in my self by his means; and had I not conceived my self in much danger, in
regard the said Sir Thomas did me that private injury, I do declare before God
Almighty, that I would never have appeared upon the Stage in the nature of an
Informer, yet would have kept in with them, and destroyed all their wicked
designs privately; and they should never have known nor suspected who should be
the instrument thereof; for I would be content to be a preserver of peace and
quietness, and yet not glory in the Action; and I take very little pleasure in
being called the Kings Evidence; If it be gain and honor to others, it is loss,
and the greatest dishonor to me that ever I had, and never knew what trouble
was before, but now am experienced.
besides, my having formerly considered, and being very sensible what affronts
and abuses do always attend such persons, whose ill fortune it is to be
concerned in such affairs, (the truth thereof I have since found by several
lamentable experiences, and great inconveniences which I have met withal, as
hereafter shall appear, and be fully proved by such as are of Honor and
Quality) are not certainly prevailing Motives to encourage any one to undertake
the Employment purely out of love to it.

And to show how dangerous a thing it is to render my King and Country, that
faithful Service of Discovering a Horrd Conspiracy against the Life, Crown and
Dignity of the one; and Liberty of the other, I shall now proceed to acquaint
the World with the Usages that I have received upon the account of coming to be
concerned in giving my Testimony in the aforementioned matters of Treason. The
many inconveniences that I met withal upon the account.


In May 1679, or thereabouts, I went to the said Sir Thomas Southwell, and sat
with him a whole afternoon; who told me, that he did send private intelligence
of the particulars to the Earl of Orory, which afterward proved quite
contrary, as hereafter does appear.

In July following, having intelligence that his Grace the Duke of Ormond was
to be in Thomas Town in August following; I told the said Sir Thomas Southwell,
that I thought it convenient for me to wait upon his Grace, and give him an
account of the Designs in Agitation against the Government, and that I must
make use of the said Sir Thomas Southwell's name therein. Then the said Sir
Thomas told me, That if I did mention any thing of him, that he would have an
Action of 10000 l. against me; I told him I would try that, and so both
discontentedly parted.

In August following, being fully satisfied that his Grace the Duke of Ormond
was come to Captain Mathews, in the County of Tipperary, it being less than 30
miles distance from my house thither; The 26th of August aforesaid, I went
again to the said Sir Thomas Southwell, and told him, that I was resolved next
morning to set forth for Thomas-Town to wait upon the Duke, who I understood
was to be there. Then he was earnest with me to pass all by, and say no more
thereof; He finding that I would not comply, he pretended that I owed 5 l. for
a parcel of Land, containing forty Acres, which he held by Lease from
Brook-Bridges, Esquire; now here in London; which said Land lying convenient to my
concerns, I bought a Tenants interest therein, and possessed my self thereof,
and told him that I did not understand any Debt that was owing from me to him.
But if he could justly claim any, he should be immediately paid, and told him
that 5 l. would not break squares betwixt him and me: but he swore he would
have an Action of 10000 l. against me; and so parted. And whilst I was upon my
Examinations afterward in Dublin, to avoid all manner of suspicions, and false
pretensions of Debt or Debts to be due from me to any person or persons
whatsoever; I declared that I had renounced all manner of Protections that may
be granted to preserve me from my Creditors, and left my self open to the Law.
Thus far I refer my self to his Grace the Lord Duke of Ormond, the Right
Honorable Arthur, Lord Viscount Granard, Henry Lord Bishop of Mead, and the
rest of the Lords of that Honorable Privy Council.

Now to return to give a further account of what happened with me after I
parted with Sir Thomas Southwel: The 26 of August 1679. As aforesaid, I
returned home to my house; and that very night about twelve of the Clock a
great multitude of People assembled together about my house, In number 62,
Whose names ensue.

These are they who broke my House about 12 a clock at night.
John Barratt. Thomas Fisher. Thomas Fisher, Junior. Garrett Lao. John Pounsey.
Edmond Newland. Morris Ornane. Tobias Barrett. John Magynane. James Herbert.
Maurice Herbert. Humphry Farrell. Nicholas Halpin. Francis Halpin. James
Farrell. Daved Lewis. John Lewis. Robert Poor. Charles Cullanon. Henry
Gibbens. James Stretch. Nicholas Stretch. James Mc' Teigue O Coner. Morough
Madagane. Patrick Mc' Cook. Samuel Parker. Chill O Coner. John Wall. John
Bluet. Edmund O Daniel. Teige Shaughinssy. Michaell Noane. Donough Mc' T^ige.
James Bren. John Creagh. Richard Nash. Charles Harrison. Gerald Simkin. John
Spicer. James Mc' Nichas. Francis Tailor. John James. Maurice Rauleigh. Garret
Rauleigh. Hugh the Butcher. John Mc' Teigh. John Murfey. John Mortimer. Daniel
Cavanaugh. John. Mc' Teigh. Maurice Lewy. Michaell Honahan. Mortough Shea.
Teigh Mulkerin, etc. Others to the number above mentioned.
All the said persons were well armed, some with Swords naked, some with Axes,
Sledges, Pikes and Spades, and such like Arms, they broke down my Gate and the
Door of my Dwelling house all to pieces, and I had no other way to keep them
off, then by throwing Chairs Tables and such Rubbish in their way to bar them
from coming up Stairs; They all Unanimously crying out Kill the Rebel and Knock
him in the head before he goes any further, or brings Sir Thomas Southwel and
the Gentlemen to trouble: Those words they spoke in the hearing of twenty
sufficient People, who have already proved it, though to little purpose, they
being Countenanced and Favored by Judge Reynolds, rather then brought to
Condign Punishment; At last with much ado and with the assistance of one
Philip Glissane a Gunsmith who came with some work to my house that night,
Slipped down by one Philip Glissain out if a Window some two stories high for
to save my life about 1 a clock at night.
the said Glissane going up to a Garret where he was in bed; brought me down a
peace of Irish Frize, and got one end thereof bound under both my arms, and
twisted the other end about the Frame of a Table, and pulled down a Pane of the
Glass, and slipped me down out of the Window some two stories high, and by that
means I made my escape.

As soon as I got out at Liberty, I sent several of my Servants and Tenants
etc. Mr. Aylmers assistance to me to secure the said persons.
Into several parts about me, and went my self to Mr. Aylmer, a Justice of the
Peace, who did not only command the Constables, but several others to be aiding
and assisting to suppress and apprehend the said persons; so that after I
returned from Mr. Aylmer, being a mile and a half distance betwixt his house
and mine, in two hours time I got together about thirty men and apprehended ten
of them within my house, and twenty about it, the rest made their escape, and
two other persons that we apprehended made their escape likewise, and those
that were in Custody were brought before Mr. Aylmer; after examinations taken
the said Mr. Aylmer Writ a Mittimus to have the said Persons committed to
Limerick Goal: In the interim two of Sir Thomas Southwels Servants rode with
all speed after the said persons, The said Persons discharged by Sir Thomas
Southwels Supersedeas.
and produced Sir Thomas Southwels Supersedeas under his hand and Seal, and on
sight thereof the Constables, who had the said People in Custody, dismissed
them from being Prisoners, and so returned home again.

Mr. Aylmer, Sir Thomas Southwels request to the Sheriff.
and I continued together in an Inn all this while, and about an hour and a
halfes time or more after the said People were discharged, the high Sheriff of
the County of Limerick's man came to me in the presence of Mr. Aylmer, and told
me that the Sheriff would speak with me, I rode straight to the Sheriffs, being
two miles distance from that place, Apprehended upon an execution being bound
for a relati^n of mine
when he and I met, he told me that he was sorry that he could not avoid
apprehending me upon an execution granted the Assizes before, I being bound for
one David Fitzgerald a near relation of mine, to the Commissioners of His
Majesty's Revenue, he being Receivour of part of the said Revenue in the County
of Limerick, and not dischargeing his Accounts I was sued upon the Bond as
aforesaid, but says the Sheriff, A Letter from Sir Thomas Southwel,
Mr. Fitz Gerald I pray you not to be dissatisfied with me, and though I appear
against you, it is not my action, then produced me a Letter from Sir Thomas
Southwel to him, the Contents thereof importing that the said Sir Thomas
Southwel did understand that the said Sheriff had an execurion in his hands
against me upon the account aforesaid, and that I was then at the house of Mr.
Aylmer, and that if the Sheriff did not immediately execute his Office on me,
that the said Sir Thomas would send to the Commissioners to acquaint them
thereof, and that the Sheriff himself should become liable for the payment of
the said Debt, if the Sheriff did not perform what Sir Thomas requested as
aforesaid. That night I lay at the Sheriffs, and instead of close imprisonment,
I had my Liberty, and had one of the best Lodgings in the house, and very good
entertainment, and next day discharged my self thereof, being a Sunday, and
staying at Captain Odells, who was then Sheriff, till after Sermon and Dinner,
in the mean while comes one Henry Gibbins Servant to the said Sir Thomas
Southwel, The second letter from Sir Thomas Southwel.
and coming up to the Room, delivers a Letter from Sir Thomas Southwel to the
said Sheriff, after he perused the said Letter, he gets up from the Table, and
calls me into a Drawing Room, and showed me the said Letter, which imported,
the said Sir Thomas requesting the Sheriff for to keep me in Custody until he
had Clapped an action of 100^0. l. against me for making use of his name in the
Conspiracy. The Sheriff returned his answer that he knew his Office better then
to do Illegal things, and that he was sorry that Sir Thomas Southwel should
stand so much in his own light as to propose it.

That night I returned home to my own House, and was come no sooner thither
than I had notice that Sir Thomas Southwel sent Messengers to and fro to all
the Popish Gentry thereabouts, and that the said Sir Thomas, John Piggot, John
Purdon, John Bourke and several others were all the day before, until ten of
the Clock at night contriveing together which way they might prevent my
informing against them, or take away my life, their skill a little time after I
found out by experience, some of their own Company sending me a full account of
their proceedings from time to time, they having at last concluded to charge
me with high Treason (but God be praised they could not Impeach me of a meaner
Crime,) at the last there was an Instrument procured, who as I have been told
received five pound in money, a weather-beaten Perriwig, and a cast suite of
Clothes, and that the said Instrument by name Walter Huet a Glasier should
give his Information before Simon Eyton and John Piggot Esquires, and before no
others, one being my Father-in-Law, and the other being my Brother-in-law,
think-that they would for my sake Compound and Patch up the business and stifle
the Evidence of the said Huet, or Thwart me in the Prosecution of the
Conspiracy aforesaid, but finding nothing done in it that night, next morning
having some occasions to speak with the high Sheriff, I had ordered one of my
own Servants to meet me with Fresh Horses in the Road at a place called Bruree,
in order to go that night strait to the Duke of Ormond at Thomas Town, and
went then to the Sheriff, and after I had done with him, rid away, and met my
Servant at the place appointed, who told me that most of the Gentlemen of that
part of the County were in Rakeal, Nameing Colonel Eyton, Sir John
Fitzgerald, Major Fitz Gerald, Mr. Piggot, and at least twenty more, and that
it was reported that I Fled upon the the account of High Treason sworn against
me by Walter Huet, and that I was gone to the Duke of Ormonds, in hopes to
discharge my self thereof, and impeach them: Taking the thing Immediately into
consideration I did conceive my self in danger and returned back to the Sheriff
again, who did very well approve of my return; then I took Pen and Ink and
writ some part of depositions, and desired him to send an express to the Duke
of Ormond that night, which was done, and I went my self to this meeting in
Rakeal, in the Road I met Sir John Fitz Gerald Galloping toward me at a high
rate and Sir Thomas Southwels man, besides his own Servants with him; he told
me that he was very glad to meet me and that I saved him that Journey, and that
he had no other business but to follow me to the Duke of Ormond at the request
of Sir Thomas Southwel and several others, and told me that there was high
Treason sworn against me by Walter Huet, before Simon Eyton and John Piggot
Esquires: I told him I did not value what any man in the Kingdom could swear,
or say against me, Sir John saying then, that it was the desire of Sir Thomas
Southwel and the rest, that I should Omit proceeding any further in the said
design, and that they would prevail with Walter Huet to desist his prosecuting
me; I told him that I never did exceed the Limits of the Law, and did
understand the liberty of a Subject, and as long as I kept my self within the
bounds thereof, that I did not value any malicious contrivance or prosecution;
then the said Sir John returned into Town along with me, and I being fully
satisfied by what Sir John told me, Proffered Major Fitz Gerald Mr. John Hurly
securities.
and that the said Magistrates had received an Information against me of
Treason, I went to them where they were in the presence of Sir John
Fitzgerald, Major Fitzgerald, Mr. John Hurly, Mr. White and several others,
gave one of the said Magistrates my Sword, to another my Pistols, and submitted
my self to the Law, and asked them whether I was baileable. Whereupon they said
I was not, then the Information was repeated over by the said Huet in these
words.

WALTER HVET'S Information.
THat in March, 1677, he heard Mr. Fitzgerald say (meaning me) that he wished
for the King in France to be landed in Ireland with threescore or fourscore
thousand men, and that Mr. Fitz Gerald said that he himself would raise men and
help the French against our Majesty the King of England; Huers Information
against me.
and that he the said Huet did ask Mr. Fitzgerald what would maintain such a
great Army in Ireland, and that Mr. Fitzgerald told him, the King of Englands
Revenue; that then the said Huet should ask Mr. Fitzgerald what he would
avail by that, and that Mr. Fitzgerald said that thereby he could repossess
himself of his Estate, which he has been unjustly kept out of, this was on
Monday the 30th. of August. 1679.

Then I spoke to the Two Magistrates in this manner. Gentlemen you see what
Walter Huet swears against me, as well as you have been pleased to examine him
the particulars of what he had Sworn against me, I shall desire that you will
reexamine him to show reasons why he did not declare this since March, 1677,
before this time being August, 1679, They knowing that I seldom or never
missed one Assizes or Sessions in Limerick for several years before. The said
Huet being commanded to show his reasons why he did not prosecute me sooner,
said that he did conceive that I was a Resolute Gentleman, and that he was
afraid that I should runn him through or Pistol him; then I desired that he may
be questioned why he did not being once at the Assizes at Limerick and seeing
me there at the Bench, he said then that he thought I had too many Friends
there, and that he did suppose they would not take notice of him; then I
desired to know what Motives induced him now more than at any time past to come
before them Two Magistrates which he knew to be the nearest Friends that I had,
then said he I give no more reasons then I have, and so parted.

That night I had liberty of the Magistrates to go home to my own house without
any Guards, next day I returned to them, and desired that they should send
their Warrant with me to Limerick, and had a Guard to attend me thither of
thirty horse, the Assizes being just comeing on three days after, at which I
expected my Trial: after I got into Limerick and was received by the Marshal,
there all persons in the Counties of Limerick and Clare, admiring what my
Crimes should be, I had several of the best of them come to me there, to know
what the occasion should be.

In the mean while the Sheriff, having sent part of my Depositions to his Grace
the Duke of Ormond, as I formerly mentioned by express, his Grace upon perusal
thereof sent Special Orders to the said Sheriff, that he should on sight
thereof come along with me to Clonmel, where his Grace was then, the Judges
being then upon the Circuit, the said Sheriff having received the said Order,
at the bounds of that County, where he was to receive the Judges, all comeing
together to Limerick on Saturday night, the said Sheriff as soon as he came
thither, came to me to the Marshal sea, and showed me the said Order, which was
very welcome to me, because it would set me at Liberty (never having been a
minute in any restraint before those three nights).

Then the said Sheriff, and I got ready to go to the Duke, and did set forth
from Limerick about a elven of the Clock the said night, the night following
his Grace being told that we were come to Town, sent for me, and upon further
discourse of the said matters, after he had taken part of my depositions, asked
me whether I feared any thing of the Treason sworn against me in Limerick as
aforesaid, and if I did suppose that there would be any dainger, that his Grace
would give me a Pardon, I answered that for my knowledge in the said Conspiracy
against the Government that I would accept of his Majesty's gracious Pardon,
though I did not doubt to prove that I had discharged my self thereof, by
acquainting Magistrates from time to time, of my knowledge thereof, and for any
other Crime, excepting the same, that I renounced all manner of Pardons and
Protections, and that in Limerick, I would trust to a fair Trial, this I refer
to the Duke of Ormond.

Whereupon his Grace was pleased to order the Sheriff to return me my Arms, and
not to be used in the nature of a Prisoner, and then we returned to Limerick to
receive my Trial, the Assizes sitting then, the Grand Jury as I was informed
were unwilling to return Billa vera upon the Information of Walter Huet,
against me, I having notice thereof, used my interest in the said Grand Jury,
and desired that they might find the Bill against me, that the accusation might
be publicly known, and the occasion thereof, which was accordingly done, the
under named persons impannell'd for to try me.

The Names of the Jurors.
Sir George Inglesby, Knight. Ralph Wilson, Esquire David Wilson, Esquire George Ailmer,
Esquire Arthur Ormesby, Esquire John Croker, Esquire Nicholas Munckton, Esquire John Bury, Esquire
Hassard Powel, Esquire John Mansfeild Esquire George Evans, Esquire John Dixon, Gent.
Then they proceeded to the Trial, and after hearing of the Witnesses, who
contradicted each other very Materially, nor did either of their Tales agree
together, the matter appeared so frivolous or rather set up by Practice, that
the Jury without any Hesitation pronounced me not Guilty.

Then the Grand Jury returned Billa vera upon the Indictment against the
persons who broke my house; Sir Richard Reynolds would not admit the Trial at
the request of others, but dissmissed them.
then the Clerk of the Crown called them by their names upon their
Recognizance, the number of fourteen or fifteen did appear, Judge Reynolds
adjudging the Indictment to be Vexatious having 31 mentioned therein, but would
not have the patience to hear the Trial, being worked upon by others as I will
Justify, put me off, having at least twenty witnesses then in Court to prove
the matter of Fact, and ordered the said people to be dismissed, and addmitted
them not to their Trial; then I prayed his Lordship in open Court to do me
Justice, and to let the Trial of the said persons that did appear, proceed, but
all to no purpose.

Afterward I went up to Dublin, and petitioned to the Lord Lieutenant and
Council, and did set forth in the said petition the greivances and Injustice
done unto me by Sir Richard Reynolds as I conceived, by putting off the Trial
aforesaid; after the said Petition was read, I was called to appear before the
Lod Lieutenent and Council, the Lord Chief Justice Keating alleging before the
Lord Lieutenant and Council, that the people aforesaid were extra, But Sir
Richard Reynolds could not deny they were in Court: Keating, and Reynolds.
Which I will justify, maintain and prove by many good witnesses, but they
having no other way to smother the Illegal proceeding in Limerick, than to say
that the people did not appear.

The Lord Lieutenent and Council upon full consideration of my complaint did
grant the ensuing Commission to examine the matters aforesaid.

Ormond.
By the Lord Lieutenent and Council of Ireland.
WHereas David Fitzgerald of Rakeal, in the County of Limerick Esquire; has
exhibited an Information at this Board of several enormous Abuses done to him
to the Scandal of his Majesty's Government. We therefore appoint and Authorize
the High Sheriff of the County of Limerick, Sir William King Knight. Governor of
Limerick, The Commission from the Lord Lieuten.
Sir George Inglesby, Knight. Simon Eyton, George Ailmer, John Odel and Richard
Maguair, Esquires, or any four or more of them to examine the matters in the
Information hereunto annexed, and make speedy return of the truth thereof to
this Board by examination of Witnesses, or otherwise in Convenient time, that
such course may be taken therein as to Justice appertains,

Given at the Council Chamber in Dublin the 23th. of December, 1679. Michael
Armachanus, Chan. Johan. Dublin. Aran. Henry Midensy. Blessinton. Ranalaugh.
Robert Fitzgerald. Thomas Jones. John Davys, Secretary of State.


The said Commission was executed the third, fourth and fifth days of
February; 1679. By Garret Fitz Gerald, Esquire; high Sheriff of the County of
Limerick, Simon Eyton, George Ailmer and John Odel, Esquires, Upon the full
examination and hearing of ten sufficient witnesses, who proved the particulars
mentioned in the said Information as aforesaid, and finding twenty more ready
to aver the same, Returned the said Commission to the Lord Lieutenant and
Council with the depositions of the ten that swore positive to the names of
those that broke my house, and heard them say kill the Rebel and knock him in
the head before he goes any further; and the said Commissioners did Certify to
the Lord Lieuetenant and Council that there had been a great many more ready to
depose the same, as the ten did in their depositions aforesaid.

Whereupon several of the riotous persons aforesaid were again taken up, and
brought to Trial, and though the breaking my house in the night, and menacing
words before recited were fully sworn against them by diverse Witnesses, against
whom they had no color of Exception, yet such was the prevalency of the
Conspirators, and the Jury so prepared, that they would not find them Guilty.

After which I went to Dublin, and from thence came for England, to give in my
Testimony to His Majesty, as I had before done to His Grace the Lord
Lieutenent, and Council, from whom I had good encouragement to proceed, and
which I have herein before punctually published.

An Appendix in a Seasonable Address to his Countrymen, The Natives of Ireland.
Dear Countrymen!
MY Family and self having so severely suffered for their Loyalty, by the late
Rebellion in Ireland, and having the opportunity to discover another most
horrid Conspiracy against our Gracious Sovereign, for investing a Forreiner
with that Kingdom; and subverting his Majesty's Government there, I thought it
incumbent upon me as a Christian, and in duty obliged as a Loyal Subject to my
King, and in Charity and kindness to all you my dear (though many of you very
much misled) Countrymen! to bring the same to light, that so a vigilant eye
and strict hand being kept over the malcontents in that Kingdom, that they
may not be seduced by the ill arts and specious pretenses of their cruel
Priests, whereby the Blood and Confusions, the horrors, and desolations
necessarily attending such insurrections and desperate Rebellions, may be
obviated and prevented.

I confess my Education and course of life (more influenced by Mars than
Mercury) renders me very little skilled in the art of persuasion, and had not
this extraordinary occasion, and the command of Authority obliged me, I should
have been far enough from appearing in Print, but since I have so just and
necessary a call thereunto, I would gladly improve the opportunity to give a
few advertisements which well weighed and pursued might be of good use to you
and your posterity.

I know I make this address to you upon very disadvantagious Terms, for it is not
to be doubted but your crafty Priests (who make no Conscience of standering any
man's name (nay of Murdering his person, where it may either tend to conceal
their own Villainies, or advance their Divelish cause) have already filled you
with abundance of prejudice, and represented me to you as the worst of men, but
my satisfaction is, that as God and my own Conscience bear me witness that I
have declared nothing but what is most punctually true, so there are too many
of you (the Priests and Gentry especially) that know it to be so, and that how
loud and and causelessly soever, they may rail at me, yet at the same time their
own Souls give their Tongues the lie, and therefore my comfort is that how much
soever what I shall say to you may be against your present bigoted humor, yet
it is still most conducive both to your duty and your real Interest, which I
heartily wish you may not too late be sensible of, it being much better to
prevent than Repent.

Affliction, (says the wisest of men) makes people wise, and it is a Proverb
that Experience is the Mistress of Fools. How incorrigibly stupid then must you
be, whom such tedious (I am sorry I cannot say undeserved, nor unprovoked)
Afflictions, and so many repeated lamentable Experiments of the ill success and
fatal consequences of Intriguing with Forreiners, and Rebelling against your
Lawful Governors, has not yet been able to contain within bounds of Loyalty
and obedience; tell me seriously and in earnest, do you think that the blood of
two hundred thousand peaceable Protestants and Loyal Subjects by you most
Barbarously Butchered in the Rebellion begun, 23 October, 1641, does not yet
Cry loud for vengeance upon you, the persons, or at least defendants of those,
whose accursed hands were embrued in that detestable Massacre? And yet what did
you gain by it, though you had the Popes Blessing, and his Bulls of Pardon, and
his Nuncio to head you, and promises from Spain to assist you, and though you
started your Rebellion at a Juncture when Scotland, and presently after England
(by the arts of the same Jesuitical and Popish Incendiaries who blew you up
into a flame) were engaged in a Common Combustion, and consequently in the eye
of Reason unable to yield any assistance toward crushing the hellish designs,
yet do you not remember that Providence was pleased to defeat your Projects, to
blast your enterprises, to confound your Forces, to give you up to so total a
conquest, till at last you became the scorn of all the world, and there wanted
but little to render you as vagrant, as contemptible, as odious as Jews, and
root out the memory of the Irish Nation from off the face of the Earth.

And since by the Mercies of God and superabundant Indulgence of our Gracious
King, great numbers of you are returned from a desperate Exile, and reinstated
in your forlorn Possessions, (at least to a greater degree than most of you had
reason to hope for) what a most prodigious Ingratitude both to Heaven and your
Earthly Sovereign will it be for you again to to tempt the fates, and engage
your selves in new Rebellions? What can you expect from such undertakings
(equally foolish and wicked) but everlasting slavery and utter irretreivable
Ruin?

Wherefore since those attempts however gilded over with plausible pretentions
by your designing Clergymen (who having nothing themselves to lose, are like
the desperate fallen Angels, always tempting you to mischief, that they may
have the more numerous partners both in their Guilt and punishment) are in
themselves most nefarious and unjust, and tend to nothing but destruction; I
shall endeavor to lay before you the sandy foundations wherein all the hopes
are built, and demonstrate that you have as little Policy as right in such
black (and hitherto still blasted) endeavors.

As for your Army which you expect out of France, I am apt to think it is a
delusory medium drawn over your eyes by the Jesuitical party to deceive you;
and no Prince will give you any assistance, until you your selves first appear
in action, for till then, they cannot give any trust to you (as it happened in
the three Spanish Invasions) and after you are broken into action, you must
depend upon their Charity and discretion whither they will aid you or no, but
be assured their supplies will be but faint and small, as you have found before
(from the Spaniards) by sad experience: There is no confidence to be put in the
power of any Foreign Prince, but it will be your duty as well as wisdom to
rely upon the goodness of your own natural Prince, he having been so merciful
and indulgent unto you

Nor is it reasonably to be imagined that any Christian Prince, much less the
most Christian King should commit or countenance so horrid an act, as to raise
a Rebllion in the Territories of another Prince, who is the greatest and best
(I had almost said) the only friend he has in Europe; but I am not ignorant,
that it is a French Maxim, that a man ought not to be a slave to his word, that
Interest is Right, and all things Lawful that make for their Princes Glory and
Grandeur; suppose therefore he should permit some of his forces to go over into
Ireland, as he did unto Portugal contrary to the faith of the Pyrenaean treaty,
and the Irish Papists to join with them, it will assuredly prove the ruin and
confusion of them; if it be considered, that the English have all the strong
holds in that Kingdom at their command, and how easily an Army may be
transmitted out of England and Scotland into Ireland, and what an obstinate
defense the English there will make, before they will depart with these estates
they now enjoy, and which they have acquired with so much expense of blood; the
French have reason to understand and remember the English gallantry; if they
have forgot, let them enquire at Poiters, Agincourt or Cressey, and they will
tell them; But in case the French King should own the action, and vigorously
appear for them; without doubt there are some so highly concerned in point of
interest (considering the Situation of that Kingdom) that he will draw the
greatest Naval power of Europe against him, and of what pernicious consequence
it may be to his glory, its suitable to his great judgment to consider; except
he could post his Naval as he did his land forces, that they could not (as they
said) be attacqued; yet that imagination was confuted at the relief of Mons,
and in case the French King should transmit an Army into Ireland, the conquest
of it would not be like a Goal at football, in an instant, but a work of time,
and the more forces they send thither, the Irish for want of provision would
the sooner be undone, for a Famine has ever put a period to all invasions or
rebellions there; it cannot reasonably be conceived that the French should
relieve them by Sea, when they will have such a great power against them; for
if the French keep the Sea, they will be fought, and then let them consider the
consequence; if they keep in Breast, which is their only Port from whence they
can expect relief, they will be blocked up, or their Ships fired in the Port;
the Glory of that action of Blake, at the Canaries is worthy of their great
consideration, who entered their Port and fired all their Ships in Harbor,
though there were thirteen block houses, Castles, and works where an
innumerable multitude of Cannon were planted, and most furiously fired against
the English Ships; where there is a good wind and tide, and noble resolutions
(as I hope they will find there is in the English) they need not fear any
artillery whatsoever: Let the Irish remember their success when they were
encouraged by the Spaniard (and assisted by the Pope) to rebel, the Spaniard
being then the most potent Prince in Europe; And in case the most Christian
King should put an Army into his Fleet to land, except he were Prince of the
Air, and could command the Sea, and Tempests, he is not sure to land them; let
him think of the expedition of Charles the 5th. against Argiers, and the ill
and untimely fate which did attend it, however I am sure he cannot forget Goree.

Nor let the Irish who have Estates, and who differ from the English in point
of Religion, imagine that the communion of profession may exempt them more than
the English from the Ambition, and Covetousness of the French; what they may
expect from a Forraigner they may conjecture by the answer which the Duke of
Medina Sidonia gave in this case in Eighty Eight, that his Sword knew no
difference between a Catholic and a Heretic, but that he came to make way for
his Master And let them be assured that, that which the English have left them
of their Estates, the French will take from them, for though themselves be
Catholics, yet their Estates will be Heretics; It Is possible that some of the
meaner sort of Irish (if the French should prevail) may mend their conditions,
but those who have Estates will by their adhering to the French be assuredly
undone; For the French will not think them fitting to be entrusted with their
Estates, or to be faithful to him, who were rebellious to their own natural
King and Sovereign Lord.

For King Charles the second is your natural Prince, descended from your own
Blood Royal, he being lineally descended from Firgatins, Second Son of the then
Reigning King of Ireland, and first of Scotland, which was anciently peopled
from thence; So you ought to pay His Majesty the Allegiance due from natural
born Subjects, not from a conquered people, which now you can no more esteem
your selves.

There are about 10000 Irish born to Estates, and are partly disposseth these
for their losses, and others for restraint of, and in matters of Religion are
discontented, but they do not consider their own Rebellion caused their ruin;
by their murmurings I perceive let the sentence be never so just, it will not
hinder the condemned from rising against the Judge.

Though some Bravo's, Hadlanders, and Needemites may join with Foreign Forces,
I am apt to think the wise and considerate people (tho Papists) will not
forfeit their Allegiance to their natural Prince; for proof of which fidelity
in this kind you need go no further than the late Wars in the time of the Earl
of Tyrene; wherein they were assaulted with as powerful temptations to move
them from their Loyalty as possibly could be presented unto them, for at that
time not only the King of Spain did confederate himself with the Rebels and
landed his forces at Kinsale for their assistance, but the Bishop of Rome also,
with his Breves and Bulls solicited the Nobility and Gentry of Ireland, to
revolt from their obedience to the Queen, declaring that the English did fight
against the Catholic Religion, and ought to be opposed as much as the Turks,
promising the same favor to such as should set upon them, as he does unto such
as fight against Infidels; And yet for all these promises and threatenings of
the Pope, which was also seconded by a Declaration of the Divines of Salamanca
and Validolid, not only many of the Lords and Gentlemen did constantly adhere
in their Allegiance to the Queen, but were also encouraged so to do by the
English Priests within the Pale in the Connty of Wexford tho they were of
Popish profession.

I pray consider that horrid Massacre of the English by the Irish committed
after they had lived together for forty years in the greatest security and
happiness, how by the English they were so broken, that there were scarce an
Irish man through Ireland that durst hold up his hand against them; and the
Kingdom became so depopulated, that considering what vast numbers of people
were destroyed by those three great Judgments of Heaven the Sword, Famine and
Plague, it is thought that in the Conclusion of that war, there was not left
living the eighth part of all the Irish nation, the whole Country being wasted
and consumed; where for ten sometimes twenty or thirty miles, nay indeed almost
all the Kingdom over (except about the English Garrisons) one should nor
behold man, bird or beast appear, the very wild Fowls of the air, and the wild
beasts of the Fields, being either dead or having departed out of those
desolations, and thousands of the Irish were daily starving for want of Food,
who did in their extremity, ordinarily feed on the Soldiers Horses, for which
no satisfaction was at any time received but with the loss of their Lives, nay
the Famine at last grew to that height that they did not only feed upon Horses,
but upon dead Corpse taken out of the Graves. All which must be acknowledged a
just Judgment of God inflicted on them for their notorious Barbarism committed
in their Massacring of the English.

A sad Tragedy, and may it never be re-acted; but now His Majesty, having out
of his Princely goodness restored many Irish Papists (which did little deserve
so signal a favor) to their Estates, and to live where they please without any
restraint, and to enjoy all things in plenty; and the whole Kingdom beginning
to flourish and recover its glory; now to rebel against so gracious and
merciful a Prince, and to bring the same Calamities, and worse (if possible)
upon the Nation, and by betraying it into the hands of a Foreign power, are
Acts so full of horror and amazement, that no man I should think, (were I not
convinced from their own mouths to the contrary) could be so ungratefully
wicked.

You cannot rationally think, that France will ever give you any considerable
assistance, but may engage you in a Rebellion, and then leave you to shift for
your selves: And so by that means bring a ruin and extirpation upon your selves
and Posterities; consider the late, but never to be forgotten case of the
Messinesses, who cast off their Obedience to the King of Spain their Natural
Prince, and fled to the protection of the French; after they had by their Taxes
and Oppressions drained away all their Money, the French deserted them; and they
thereby became exposed to the displeasure of an enraged Prince, and to all the
Miseries and calamities imaginable: The Messinesses of all People on the
Mediterranean, being before the most flourishing, but since their Rebellion the
poorest and most miserable. Let this example be an Answer to all the French
Charms the Priests shall lay before you, and take time to consider, if you
shall be so imprudent and desperately wicked as to cast off your Obedience to
your Natural Prince, whether the same Fate and Calamities may not attend you.
Take it for a Maxim of Eternal Truth, and which you must understand by your
dear bought experience, that after a Rebellion is suppressed, the King is more
King, and the Subject more Subject; Many whose Ancestors were deep in the late
Rebellion, by his Majesty's Royal favor are now resetled in their Estates, if
not in all, yet in such a part as may give them a comfortable subsistence (and
I must tell you it is better to have a piece of Bread, then no Bread at all.)
Have you not a free exercise of your Religion throughout the whole Kingdom?
Have you not your titular Archbishops, Bishops, Vicar General, Provincial
Consistories, Deans, Abbots, Priors, etc. Who without control exercise a
voluntary jurisdiction over those of the Romish persuasion? Are the Penal Laws
put in execution against you? Have you not as great, if not greater freedom,
and indulgence than those of the Evangelical Communion? Certainly if all these
Princely Favors and tender proceedings of His Sacred Majesty toward the
Papists in that Kingdom cannot contain them within the due bounds of Loyalty
and Obedience, they deserve to be made standing Monuments of his Justice.

But imagine the worst, let it be granted that the French are Landed in
Ireland, and possessed of a Port or two there, and that many of the Natives
(for all it is like will not forfeit their Allegiance) revolt and resort unto
the French, yet I hope there is no such danger, as is vulgarly conceived in
losing that Kingdom, now that they have timely notice to prevent. For a Plot
discovered is more than half prevented, and if after such fair and frequent
warning we should suffer such an important place to be lost, we are sure the
most careless or infatuated People in the World.

For Ports gained must be maintained and supplied by Sea; which how uncertain
and difficult it is to effect, our Fleets being better then theirs, is
unanswerable: To attend the defense of them only would but multiply their
trouble and charges, and give the English there no other Harm then some
inconvenience; from the which, time will free them; for no tenable
Fortifications can ever hold out the Siege of a powerful Assailant, that is
Master of the Field, and so it must be granted the English will or may be.

An Invader whose Object is Conquest, must not contain himself in a Port, but
draw into Field; great Armies require a World of Horses for the draught of
Artillery, Ammunitions, Victuals, Utensils for the War, Tents, Baggage, etc.
Which cannot either be brought from France nor furnished by the Rebels. The
County of Kerry is the Place designed for their Landing, a very remote Part as
any in Ireland, yet furnished with a good Haven; but the English will be very
imprudent (wheresoever they shall Land) if they drive not the Country before
them, whereby they will fail both of Horses for draught, (without which they
cannot march) and of Victuals or any thing else, which may be useful unto them.

So did the French deal with Charles the Fifth Anno 1536. Who entered France by
way of Province, with an Army of 50000 Horse and Foot, they Commanded all the
Horse and Cattle in the County to be driven out of the Enemies reach, the Corn,
Straw, and what else might be food for Horses, and all other Movables to be
carried into Places of Safety.

The Ovens and Mills to be broken down, the Wines in Casks to be Staved, and
for corrupting of Waters cause Corn to be cast into the Wells, leaving the
Country like a vast Desert; whereby the Emperors Army within few days (almost
starved and diseased) was not 25000 strong.

If Charles could not upon a Continent, provide himself of Carriages sufficient
for the use of his Army, or Food for his hungry Soldiers in the plentiful
Country of Province, how much less shall an Invader by Sea be able to bring
them with him?

Province being thus used, and the Cities well guarded, the Invader for want of
Relief in the Country, must eat up his own Stores: And within short time (if
they be many) will be Consumed, if few will be Forced out.

In the number of Horses the strength of Armies principally consists, the
Transporting of 5000 Horse requires more Tonnage than 30000 Foot; and how they
will be able to Transport any number of Horse (without which they are of no
Power) the English Fleet being at Sea, I must confess I am to learn.

The way of Conquest is to provoke Battle, the advantage of the Defendant is to
avoid it, but upon appearance of an assured Victory, which the Masters of the
Field may do at Pleasure.

The lingering of time daily consumes the Invaders, both by Sickness, light
Skirmishes (which upon every days March, at Fords, Bridges, and Streights they
cannot avoid) and by other Casualties.

Their supply will be slow, and subject to peril, whilst wants of the English
(they having their Country to Friend) will easily be supplied.

But you will say the French can at their pleasure supply them, with Men,
Victuals, and all things necessary for their carrying on the War, by reason of
their great number of Ships.

I am apt to think this will prove a great mistake in you, they will find it
impossible to give any succors, when the English Fleet is at Sea, as you may
assure your selves it will be, when there is the least appearance of an
Invasion; and I must tell you its not the multitude of Ships that promise
Victory, a few good nimble Ships of War are a stronger Fleet, than any Fleet
can be composed of greater numbers, over pressed with heavy Luggage, they are
not only in themselves useless, but a cumber to those that should Fight, and
the losing of them is the apparent loss of the Enterprise.

There was never a more Magnificent Fleet swimming upon the Ocean, then that
which Philip the second brought upon the English Coast, a Navy so well Manned
and Ammunitioned, that the like till than was never seen, it was the Glory of
the Sea, yet it was defeated by her Majesty's own Fleet, built in her own
Realm, the Captains, Pilots, Master Gunners, and Sailors, all her natural
Subjects, nothing was borrowed from her Neighbors, whereby her Triumph was
more glorious; that famous Victory was not gotten by chance or by favor of
Winds, and Storms, but next unto God, by the goodness of the English Ships, the
Valor and Dexterity of their Gunners, and Saylors; and especially by the
conduct and direction of the Commanders: Why then should the French Fleet be
now more terrible than that was in Eighty eight, nay the English are to doubt
them less, since by the Providence of His Majesty the Royal Navy, and the
Merchants Ships are now more in number, better fitted for the War, and greater
of burden than they ever were.

If you begin a War (or rather a Rebellion, for so it is) consider all Home and
Foreign Commerce will cease, Justice falls to the ground, good men oppressed,
Innocence trodden under foot, Churches destroyed, your Country wasted,
Christians murdered, Women defloured, and the Laws contemned, what shall I
say, consider your own and Irelands late mournful and deplorable Condition. I
shall therefore ever put it into my Litany, from Heresies, Schism, Sedition and
Rebellion, Good Lord deliver us.

There are Five things which will secure Ireland against any Power whatsoever.

I. A Navy well Furnished, to cut off all their correspodence with any King or
State. II. An Army well paid to keep up Garrisons. III. Laws well executed to
alter their mischievous Constitutions. IV. A Ministry well settled to Civilize
and instruct them. V. And lastly, Strict care taken to punish all Priests, and
Jesuits, that are the Nurses of Rebellion, disturbers of States, Mortal Enemies
to all Protestant Governments, and indeed the Common Incendiaries of the
Kingdom of Irelnad.
But I shall not enlarge or presume to direct particularly on these necessary
Heads, but humbly leave them to the consideration of Authority.

Whilst to you my Beloved, (as long as you shall continue Loyal) Countrymen! I
apply my self, whatever ill Thoughts that you may have of me, all I shall
return in answer is, Am I your Enemy because I tell you the Truth? I have
represented to you the fatal Consequences of your past Rebellions, and shown
you the improbability of these present designs, which I certainly know, many
ill men are fomenting and carrying on amongst you. But besides all these Moral
and Politic discouragements, I would further have you take notice, that there
is a most just God in Heaven, who by his Providence and uncontrouble Power will
assuredly blast all your attempts; and Revenge the Blood of Innocents, and
punish Murder, and Rebellion, and Treachery; and support and preserve his true
Religion and Worship against all the most crafty, most plausible, and most
powerful devices whatsoever; therefore as you love your Peace, your Safety,
your Estates, your Lives, and your Souls, Study to be quiet: Hearken not to the
vain charmings of your Priests, who design only to make as much slaves of you
in Temporals as they already do in Spirituals; exert your Reasons, and suffer
not your selves to be led hoodwinkt into destruction, by a vain empty foolish
story of Tradition and ridiculous Customs and Notions; open your Eyes and give
your rational Faculties but leave, impartially to inquire and examine things,
and you will certainly find, that you have hitherto been befooled and Priest
ridden, and that what you call Catholic Religion, in all things wherein it
differs from what is believed, owned and enjoined to be practiced by the
Protestants, is nothing in the World but a cheat; contrived to support and
gratify either the Ambition or Covetousness of your self-designing Clergy.

This much however, (having this public opportunity to discharge my
Conscience, and express my sincere Affection to you) I thought fit to say,
protesting that in all that I have discovered and here written, I have had no
aim at Temporal advantage, private Revenge, or any other sinister design; but
that I have done it only and purely for the Glory of God, the Service of my
King, the Preservation of the Government, the Real good of you, my dear
Countrymen! and the disburthening of my own Soul. To which good ends I
Heartily wish these poor Papers (though never so inartificially dressed) may be
effectual: And with that satisfaction commit them, and my self, to the Worlds
Censure, and Gods Protection.

FINIS.

