The most excellent Oliver Cromwell Lord Genll: of Great Brittayne. Chancellor
of ye University of Oxford, and Ld: Chief Gove^r: of Ireland and ^


VENI; VIDI; VICI.

THE TRIUMPHS OF THE Most Excellent and Illustrious, OLIVER CROMWELL, etc.

Set forth in a Panegyricke.

Written Originally in Latin, and faithfully done into English Heroical
Verse, By T: M: Jun. Esquire

Whereto is added An Elegy upon the death of the late Lord Deputy of Ireland,
the much lamented, HENRY IRETON, etc.

LONDON, Printed for John Tey, at the White Lion in the Strand, near the New
Exchange, 1652.

TO THE Most Excellent, and Right Honorable, as well for his valourous
Achievements, as His Incomparable Virtues, His Excellency OLIVER CROMWELL,
Lord General of Great Britain, Chancellor of the famous University of
Oxford, Lord Chief Governor of Ireland: A Member of the Parliament of
England, and of the Right Honorable the Council of State.
IT is reported of Caesar, Right Honorable Lord, that he never rejoiced more
then when he heard his valiant exploits were spoken of in simple Cottages,
alleging this, that a bright Sun shines in every corner; which makes not the
beams worse, but the place better. My Lord, having seen the following
Panegyricke in Latin, a Language too high for the greatest part of our Nation
to understand: and considering that it was a jewel exposed only to the view,
not to the understandings of all, made me presume to render it into English,
that even the meanest of our Natives might be able in their hearts with joy and
thankfulness to confess the greatness of their Obligations to your Excellency;
by whose successful and divinely victorious hand the yoke is broken off their
necks, and their happy Liberty restored, that thereby, with that great
Macedonian Conqueror, there may not be so much as a Miller but both loves and
praises thee.

Neither durst I offer to any other hand what is only fit to be laid on thine
own Altars, least I might become presumptuously foolish, but that as the Acts
sung in the ensuing Panegyric were thine own, the honor of them thine own, so
thou only thy self were fit to be their Patron. Accept therefore, Most Noble
Sir, these weak endeavors, whose only aim has been to publish and make
known thy Virtues in our uttermost Borders, and that it may appear how
evidently the hand of God has gone along with thee in all thy Actions, and
carried thee with triumphall honors through the midst of so many dangers.

May the Great God of Heaven and Earth still carry you on that you may add
triumph to triumph, and be victorious on every side, till arrived at that
height of earthly happiness than which no man can enjoy more, you may at last
be crowned with eternal felicity; which is the humble desire, and hearty
Prayer of

Jan. 30. 1652. My Lord, Your Excellencies most devoted, in all duty and
observance, Tho. Manley Junior.

To my Honored Friend Mr. THOMAS MANLY on his accurate Translation, etc.
SEE how the Thespian Gyrles can dare those Fates
That threaten Kingdoms, and disorder States:
Ages to come, had never known the use
Of wily War, had Fishers Buskined Muse
Been silent; he does traitorously conspire,
Even to dis member the Maeonian Lyre;
His fancy like a flame her way does take,
Leaving no track for aftertimes to make
Progression; Is It not strange, see, here is no odds
Betwixt his worthies, and the Grecian Gods,
The frowns of Mars, and dire Bellonas rage
Drawn to the life, in each elaborate page
So that the Effigy of our Famous Nol
Rather then here, deserv's Romes Capitol,
But if such thanks to him be due, what praise,
What Heccatombs of Beev's, what Groves of Bays
Shall we design thy worth, who make his Song
To vail it is Bonnet, to our English tongue.
The Indulgent censure of succeeding times
Shall crown thee (Manly) for thy flowing Rhyme,
With the same Chaplet that wreathes Sands his brow,
This he predicts, who honors thee, I vow,
SAMUEL SHEPPARD.

Errata.
PAge 3. line. 4. for sat read state. p. 10. l. 14. bear, r. owe, p. 11. l.
13. dear, r. done, p. 12. l. 1. expect her, r. expects she, ibid. l. 12. brow,
r. brows, p. 23. l. 15. strayning, r. streaming, ibid. l. 17. bracked, r.
wracked, p. 31. l. 14. on, r. or, p. 33. l. 7. th^^e, r. them, p. 34. l. 6.
for, r. so, p. 38. l. 9. Muse, r. Muses, p. 52. l. 16. louring, r. lowing, p.
76. l. 17. laid, r. lay, p. 92. l. 1. the, r. Thou.

A GRATULATORY Song of PEACE: OR, Triumphall Canto for the Victories of the
Most Illustrious and Right Honble OLIVER CROMWELL, etc.

Dedicated to the Lord President BRADSHAVV, And the rest of the Right Honble
the Council of STATE, etc.

In the year of our Redemption, 1652; And of Englands Restored Liberty, 4
Translated into English out of Latin, BY T: M: Jun. Esquire

To the All-Worthy (The good hand of the great God so ordaining; And by the
choice of the Supreme Authority of ENGLAND) The Overseer of the Commonwealth,
and Re-gained Liberty, JOHN Lord BRADSHAVV, Sergeant at LAW, Chief Justice of
CHESTER, Chancellor of the Duchy and County Palatine of LANCASTER, LORD
HIGH-PRESIDENT OF THE Right Honble the Council of STATE:

AS ALSO, To the rest of those ever Renowned Patriots, Sitting Members of the
same Right Honble Council,

Lords Commissners of the great Seal of England. Bulstrode Whitlock, John
Lisle,
Lords Chief Justices of England. Oliver Saint-John, Henry Rolls,
Charles Fleetwood, Lievtenant-General of the ARMY. Knights and Baronets. Sir
Arthur Haslerigge, Sir Henry Vane, junior, Sir William Masham, Sir James
Harrington, Sir Gilbert Pickering,
Colonels. William Purefoy, Valentine Walton,
Richard Salloway. Esquire Thomas Challoner, Thomas Scot, John Gourdon, John Carew,
Nicholas Love, Dionys Bond.
Philip Earl of Pembrooke. Philip Sidney Viscount Lisle. Knights of the Bath.
Sir William Constable, Sir Peter Wentworth,
General Rob. Blake, Admiral of the Sea. Colonels. Alexander Popham, Anthony
Stapylton, Herbert Morley, John Downs, Henry Marten,
Esquire Robert Wallop, Cornelius Holland, Isaac Penington, Abraham Burwell, Henry
Nevell, William Masham, Henry Herbert, John Dixwell, William Heyes. John
Corbet, etc.



F. F.

Happiness, Victory, Triumphs, and ^
The Epistle Dedicatory.
Honored Lord, and you most eminent and worthy Patriots,
THat I should go unarmed into the field to meet the Muses, the wishes of a few
might easily persuade me, since my own affections drew me; by which Incitement
egged on as by Spurs, I recalled my now old-grown Genius from the Camp to the
Court, from the War to congratulate the return of the Lord-Chief-Generall. And
who in such ovations would not even be wrapped beyond himself? Who can contain
his joy within bounds at so solemn, so public a Triumph? That we may the
better perceive the effects of this rejoicing, we must first weigh the causes.
Cast your eyes then upon our conducting General, whose heroic acts (exceeding
even the utmost limits of belief) to the present age proclaim their own
triumph, and amazes succeeding generations with their greatness. Consider how
with more then Herculean strength he struck off the Head of those Hydraes of
superstition with his Conquering Sword! How many Centaures breathing forth
naught but slavery has he tamed! How many Troops of enraged enemies has he
overthrown, and offered them so humbled as so many satisfactory victims to the
public liberty! Hence it proceeds that war is banished from our borders: hence
is it that the serener beams of Concord have so clearly darted down upon us: O
the happiness of Britain grown even beyond expectation great! For who can but
admire so many the elaborate endeavors of the Parliament? Who will gaynsay you
the succeeding upholders of our State? Who but will confess the immediate
providence and Divine Finger of God to be seen even apparently in the
victorious, atcheivements of our General; In the acts of our Parliament, the
Supreme Authority; And in your own consultations and designs? That therefore
the happiness of our established Commonwealth may the more largely be notified
to all the world, weigh we but equally in the balance of our serious
consideration the tottering basis even of the most firmly seated thrones; but
if your enemies are yet so stubborn that they will not be convinced thereby,
let them peruse that excellent piece with a little seriousness that clearly
declares the Prerogative of Kings, and evidently defends the Privileges and
liberty of the people: but whereto tends this? I will not obtrude upon your
wisdoms trifling examples, or vain relations: for I have only mentioned these
few, that all your malicious enemies may know, and knowing confess, that God
alone is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, that he puts down Princes from their
Thrones, and disposes of the powers of the world after his own pleasure.

Away then you malicious enemies of order; and since ye acknowledge all powers
to come from God, obey the present as Gods stewards placed here by himself for
the governing of the Commonwealth. Me-think, even our public profession of
Religion should draw us to this, if our own security also did not whisper the
same; for it is somewhat an inhumane thing to resist our common, our public
Parents, and altogether repugnant to reason, to kick against the Pricks. But I
deviate from my first proposition; and humbly beg your pardon, most worthy
Fathers of the Commonwealth, hoping you will cherish these firstfruits of my
duty under the wings of your indulgent protection: Which have betaken
themselves with a blushing humility to the sanctuary of your Honors goodness.
An Olive is sometime brought in amongst the costlyest dainties and well
rellisht too; sometimes the Ivy does happily grow and increase among trees of a
greater tallness: And you, most Noble Heroes, suffer this low-growing Ivy to
creep forth among the Laureat Cypresses of your Eminencies. If you approve of
these my desires, and favor my present endeavors, you will infuse new life and
confidence into me, who may enterprise a greater work worthy acknowledgement,
perhaps both from your selves and future ages.

In the mean while, the All-great, the All-good God make you all unanimous even
for ever, that thereby his Church may be glorified, and the Common good and
liberty be inviolable to all the people, that the secure peace and quiet of a
flourishing Commonwealth may be reciprocal from you and yours to the
Commonwealth; that ye may be blessed here in earth with continuing happiness,
and in heaven with future eternity, which is, and shall be prayed for by

The most obliged to your Honors by all bonds of duty and obedience, F. F.

A Gratulatory Ode of Peace.
ALL hail great Patron of our English Isle!
Dreadful as lightning to the Irish vile,
Double triumpher over the Scottish crown,
Chief refuge of the godly when cast down,
Restorer of our liberty once lost!
All Hail! whose warlike actions every coast
Does Echo, and the world fill with the fame
Of the deserving virtues of his Name.
Rise now ye Muses, help ye Virgin Quire
Aeonian Nymphs, once all your skill inspire;
Favor my task, our Generals praise I Would sing,
From whose each act Honor and greatness spring.
And thou, who of the supreme Parliament,
Art (justice prop) the worthy President,
With the same calmness both of breast and eye
That you into much greater writings spy,
Deign but to look at ours, Thalia then
May happen somewhat stoop to grace my pen.
And you brave Heroes, whose grave counsels wait
Upon the high designments of the State;
And who skilled in the Laws do first amend,
And then the burden of their rule defend:
So that stout Atlas is not said more even
With a strong shoulder to prop up the heaven,
You steer the English, you the Pilots are,
You sit at prow and poope in peace and war,
While you do seek Charybdis sad to fly,
And would put off the Rocks of Monarchy,
With safe and gentle gales you change the Scene,
And make a Sat where Monarchy has been;
Thus free from danger at the last in health
Arrives in the port a happy Commonwealth.
Tell me ye Muses in your milder Vein
To sing these changes what must be my strain.
These joy'd retreates no verse can truly sing,
Cromwells return does naught but raptures bring.
Til now the earth groaned through the weight of war,
Scarce was the care of cattle, use of share;
The fields were barren and did uselessly,
Through the neglect of ceasing Husbandry.
Wisdom was out of date, had no regard,
Minerva and the Muses small reward,
The pious Prophets little leisure had,
With warlike tumults being made afraid.
Such and the like displeasures always are
Attendants on the rage of kindled war.
Cromwell but thou (thy Countries hope and care,
Pious in Peace and politic in war;
The present age their glory reads in him,
And the amazement of succeeding time)
Have shut up Janus place with treble gates,
And strongly called back Peace from lower shades,
Whence to the Rulers both and people brought
Shows better times to those that better sought.
Hence to us English springs up new bliss,
And just reward to learning promised is.
Parnassian Laurel will put forth new shoots,
The mourning Muses will retune their Lutes,
To sing new verses: no less does the State,
Arms being laid aside, grown moderate,
Revive and rise again even from her urne
At thy so wished, thy so joy'd return,
Feeling her changed reins she does implore,
That Tyrants never her may ravish more.
Religion saw thee come and hasted hither,
Mercy and Piety met thee together,
And here began to settle: Justice too
Came back from heaven, and here her self did show;
And banished from our English Coasts those jarres
Which breeding factions had commenced wars.
As the Sun entering the Agenorian sign,
The happy Planet does the earth refine,
And the celestial virtue quickening the earth
Begins new pledges for a tender birth:
So does blessed England flourish joy'd while she
Her General returning safe did see;
The dancers leaped, the Music sweetly playde,
The warlike Trumpet too rejoicing made,
No hostile clangor to blood-swelling veins,
But sweetly Warbles forth some gentler straynes.
The zealous vulgar this just joy resent,
Meeting therein City and Parliament;
The Soldier more safe rejoices now
With Olive wreathes on his triumphall brow;
He even his well-come General adores,
And out of's heart to heaven thanksgiving powers.
Thrice happy Brittans, whom the world so call,
Under the care of such a General!
As Children, Parents, England values thee,
Or as a Bride her Husband, so does she:
Whilst broke with Scottish tumults, growing harms,
And shook with cruel Mars his bloody arms,
Begins at last at least to hope to see
Her Treasure-blood-bought quiet under Thee.
But stay my Muse, rash Clio, whither away?
Thou know not how thy sails plow up the Sea;
Hold in, and lesser use the wind and Sail,
At the first setting out Oars best prevail.
It is enough for trial once to soar
Up to the highest top of glories store;
But if high flying now I shipwreck shall,
I shall arise much prouder by my fall;
For why? 'twould comfort both, and credit be
In such a gulf of virtues even to dye.
The league of peace so long since made was broke,
By the unfaithful Scot, who did provoke
The harmless English injurious harms,
To punish treachery with Victorious arms.
The Scottish truce thus broken, straight contempt,
A while was thrown on the English Parliament;
Deceits by little to increase begin,
At which report Bellona entering in,
Taking the Vizer off did soon produce
The horrid actions that were then in use.
As fire raked up in ashes does revive,
And by a gentle blast new heat receive;
First burning softly, with the hafle plays,
And like uneven shrubs, anon does blaze
More siercely, while still it burning moves,
And levels without number woods and groves;
Sparing nor knotty Beach, high Ash nor Pine,
So much renowned for that head of thine;
Thus rages Scotland in her war, her ire,
While every house brings fuel to the fire:
While every hand and age more arms do bring,
Scotland of naught but warlike troops did ring.
Such was the madness of the Priests, and such
The Presbyterian power, and so much
Besides the peoples dotings were so great,
Of that which heaven withstands, it is vain to treat.
A swift, a sure revenge, plagues, death, what not
Will persecute the Covenant Breaking Scot.
God will destroy them: Cromwell does appear
With his unconquered troops victorious there,
Removing hence, the war he there does start,
More cunning then the foe in his own art.
Thus the unhappy Scot is compast round
Within the limits of his proper ground,
And turned their sword on their own plotting pate,
By them for us intended with such hate:
Thus did Perillus in those torments dye
Wherein the others had designed to lie.
The General proceeds; the Common peace,
And common danger do his cares increase,
To waft his troops to Scottish ground in time;
Who meets a sickness cures it in its prime.
He undertook this journey, that he might
His countries honor and the people right:
Worthy revenger of unfaithful acts,
Whose virtue famous by so many facts,
Oppressed with so many treacheries,
Ennobled with so many victories,
Tried with so many sufferings; yet no art
Could make him waver, fear, give ground or start;
Learning at last that ridicle to know,
A Scottish battle is but wars mock-show.
So the fair Cypress having fixed his roots,
Boasting her high-top-growing, heaven-sent shootes
Does nothing fear winters tempestuous storms,
Nor Tyrant Aeolus his threatened harms.
Then go to Fame, paint out old Times best story,
We can no less then Roman Trophies glory;
Admire our Cromwell, fading Englands fort,
A sconse whereto the Britains may resort.
Not Italy to Fabius, nor Greece
So much does bear to her Themistocles,
Nor Carthage proud to her known Haraill,
As we to our renowned General:
Nor Trojan Hector, nor Aeneas just,
Penelopes Ulysses neither must,
Or Priam Equal him: though Fame their glory boast
Upon the confines of each several coast.
Blessed Hero, whose uprightness all commands,
Whose joy in virtue more then triumph stands,
Thou scorn'st the peoples suffrage, or their praise,
Those airy cracks cannot thy Trophies raise;
Thus do thou valiant Leader overthrow
Thine enemies, thy self thus conquer too.
While you curb passions sea, and wandering sense,
You show your self guarded with reasons fence,
As Castor is reported to restrain,
Those tamed yoke-bearers with Amyclean rain,
Well dear! thou care of heaven! the sole renown
Of future ages, Britains fort and crown,
Thy Country ownes thee as her Dearest Son,
Yet does to thee as to a Father run;
While showing hearty Love, she quits now free,
All former Ties at thy return for Thee.
Expect her peace I her reformation must
Have thee her refuge, her assured trust;
The fatal judgment seat does ask the same,
The Courts of Justice even adore thy name,
And in the fatal danger that they stand,
Implore the help of thy victorious hand.
But too much have is naught, stay, what do I
In this mean paper scrible things so high?
These are not things for our so humble quill,
Void or of worth, or confidence, or skill;
Nor Ivy dare I put among the boughs
Of conquering Cypress circling round your brow.
Why should I speak the rest? why should I blaze
The civil battles of our troubled days?
To count the conquered foes, the nobles slain,
This is a labor, this a work of pain;
Whose many funerals and herses stand,
So many Trophies of thy conquering hand.
Marston, and famous York will Pillars raise,
With large inscriptions for thy greater praise:
Naisby Triumphall Arches will compile,
Excelling far the Pyramides of Nile;
Though to the wandering stars the advance their head,
And in Fames book are the worlds wonders read.
This was no period, here no end as yet
To his atcheivement, or his praise was set;
England alone cannot circumscribe his fame,
The world it selfe's too narrow for his name:
While over the sea you waft your troops, and go
Implacably upon another foe,
Ogygian nets were laid; the Irish shore
Trembled at thy approach, though proud before.
Thus conqueror in England, you proceed
The Rebell-Irish to chastise with speed;
Over whom victorious too, at last you come
To scourge the Scot in his own hated home.
And broughtst their necks under a double chain,
Who were before impatient of the rain.
The glory is as great, the happiness,
Of conquering that people, is no less
Then from that feared watching Dragon fell,
By cunning stratagems the fleece to steal;
Or the half Bull, half man Chimaera tame,
Kept in the Cretane Labyrinth of fame.
Thus you proceed still happily, and do
As often fight, so often triumph too.
While for your Countries liberty and right,
While for Religions sake you truly fight;
Even God will help you, and the stars will stand,
Assistant to your troops in rear and van.
The heaven stays for thee, moving not a jot,
An ample Weight of glory have thou got.
To have the Thund'rer lead thee as it were,
And to have servants full of pious care,
Vulcan himself put on thy arms, and those
Sicilian Cyclops magazines compose,
Bron^es thy feared Crest and helmet made,
And Steropes tempered the active blade
Of thy all-threatning sword, Pyracmon yields
His best endeavors to thy massy shields;
Thy Huntingdon does still this favor crave,
Thee with her native brooks and springs to lave.
Tethys her self brought up thy horse, near whom
Arion, Thereon cannot for courage come,
Nor Cyllarus, nor Aethon can compare,
Made tame by Pollux hand the yoke to bear.
On Soldiers backs how well do corslets sit!
How well do martial hearts and brest-plates sit!
When once the Scottish Armies saw the fire
Diffuse it self, each minute growing higher,
When once they saw our so-increasing light,
And crests whose tops like diamonds shined bright,
There might thou in amazement see menstand,
Of fearful coward hearts, and trembling hand,
And trees were from their stations like to fall,
Such was the presence of our General.
As on the Lybian coasts, when weaker beasts
See a fierce Lion range those long-left wastes,
If they distrust their heels and fear to f^y,
Straight at his feet they lay them down to die.
So barbarous Scotland did thy entrance dread:
Magnanimous Cromwell, fear near made her dead;
The shadow of so great a name as Thine,
Made Caledonia tremble when but seen,
So did our standards fright those Scottish slaves,
They shunned our troops and sought them safer caves.
Lik Crows that hover over those fields, where Mars
Has glutted's fury in the heat of wars,
Sitting securely safe, while all is still;
Preying now here, now there with greedy bill;
But if a hasty hunts-man, or by chance
On that sad place a traveller do glance,
Affrighted straight their pitch-like-wings they take,
And with outstretched necks the same forsake.
Tell me ye Scots: how often were you defeat
By warlike Cromwell? Towns how strong and great,
With Forts and Castles has he overthrown?
In one years compass, how much has he done?
Go to, and call to mind that former fight,
When famous Cromwell with his very sight
Uanquish't your coward Armies, and did venture
The quitted garrison of Dunbur to enter.
Speak (if old griefs it is lawful to renew)
You that the co^fines of (once) Glads-more knew,
Relate those slaughters; when stout Lambert fought,
The great Montgomery, and to nothing brought
Both his and Naeirnyes troops; I say relate
When his small force on Hamilton did wait,
And in a hasty, yet well ordered fight,
Great-bragging Kerr and's fellows put to flight.
Lambert, what more should I of thee set down?
That art thy Countries both and Yorkes renown
Who draw'st the English with the cords of Love,
But make the Scots thy swords sharp edges prove,
While careless of thy blood, thou do increase
And to the English would establish Peace.
Who can recount the foes slain by thy hand?
What arms have been reduced by thy command?
For Maro's quill these things are only fit,
They only suite with Homers sharper wit.
Great Fleetwood! of our present age the glory,
Of future times the trust and faithful story,
It is not fit, nor can our humble string
The worthy praises of thy actions sing.
For why? such plenty cloyes, and I grow dry
Like Tantalus in midst of waters high.
Nor can I speak enough of what was done
By thy famed virtues gallant Harrison;
That by thy growing merits do augment,
Thy Countries honor: neither art thou spent
With stolen titles studying how to rise,
But lying vainer honors do despise,
Knowing that granted truth, that thou shall get
More noble glory, to be good then great.
Whaley, who truly can thy praise set forth?
Most noble Deane, what can describe thy worth,
Potent at sea and land, whose ready skill
Is fortunately met with active will?
Or who, brave Okey, can thy deeds rehearse
As they deserve in a sublimer verse?
Nor can I famous Lytcot pass thee by,
Or let M^nkes actions in oblivionly,
Under the first of whom my self begun
In Martial paths a ready course to run.
First when the Scots on English riches preyed,
Next when our troops the Irish did invade.
No more, it is enough, I must not pass
The appointed limits of my hourglass.
To you, brave Soldiers, I this little sing,
Summing great acts in compass of a ring;
The time perchance may come, (if once my Muse
Can take the boldness confidence to use)
That I may write such fields, such deeds, such wars,
More largely, by the help of favoring stars,
And to discover in a graver strain,
The many Triumphs of your Irish gain.
With such like Omens warlike Lambert still
Proceeds, and Scotland does with terror sill,
Which straight began with an inveterate hate
Some new seditions to meditate.
The villages lost peace; when Country Clownes,
And brawny neat-herds sled to fenced towns.
What rage and terror then was in the breast
Of Musleborow, spoiled of her rest,
To hear her neighboring Croziers crack, and see
Over all her bordering fields slain bodies lie?
Say, when our Leader did possess those hills
Of Penc-land, and their tops with footmen fills.
How was th'adjoyning Country moved, and how
Did murmurs through the villages creep now?
The sword and bullet knocking at the gate,
Red-house was opened to the soldiers straight,
And Collington seeing our lucky hap,
Yieldest thy self into the conquerors lap.
Relate that happy Omen of our war,
The famed wondrous battle of Dumbar,
Fit to be kept for ever holy, when
Cromwell, more strong in's virtue then in's men,
O'rethrew the headstrong impious rout of those,
Called the Kirk-party but the Churches foes.
What liberty was then, how cruel rage
Was acted by the sword on every age!
The bullets flew, over all the field were spread
Disheartened men that dying were, or dead;
Nor from the darkened sky does ever fall
So much, so great, so terrible a hail,
Even when the Sun his shining luster shrouds
Under the threatening veiles of sable clouds;
Or when thick mists the darkened air bedew,
Foreshewing rainy weather to ensue.
The ground infectious grew, with such a blast
Was laid as open all the woody wast;
The beeches fall, the husbandman does find
His broken corn lodged by this furious wind,
And nipt his blooming hopes even in their bud,
Which in his thoughts before as ripned stood;
Thus did Bellona proud of slaughter rage,
Boasting her self in funerals and strage
Fell Mars his work, while with the blood that is shed
The very hands of every man grew red.
Alas! what store of Scottish Commons fell,
What Priests, what clerks, what leaders? how did swel,
That great account by the vast multitude,
Of the unknown and name-less vulgar rude?
Tell me ye Muses, what loss did redound,
What damage to those Scottish vagabonds.
Flying dispersed over the scattering plain,
Unto the neighbor garrison, though vain.
Alas! the pastures did abound with woe,
Proceeding from that tragic overthrow;
The bodies of slain men lay scatt'red here,
Wounded and maimed in their members there,
Strayning their purple blood upon the grass,
Even moving pity in such foes as pass.
As in a ship bracked by stor my blasts,
Whose broken ribs, here, there, the Ocean casts
Now under water, now above again.
What discord grows there in the swelling main!
The decks cannot keep the sailors, now the mast,
Anon the Sail-yard 's in the waters cast.
Here the sails float far off, and there behold,
Both Pilots seat, and rowers loose their hold.
Such madness in that Scottish rout did reign,
So fell their Soldiers, so their youth was slain.
The horse forsake the foot; the unhappy foot
Turning the scale straight leave the hors-men to it.
But see! their coward leaders arms thrown by
Leave both forsaken, and most basely fly;
By providence thus Cromwell, still you bear
A Laurel in your hand as conqueror;
Thus with the sword the falling Scot you reach,
And the rewards of peace from war you fetch;
Extracting honey from that fatal juice,
Which all men else as poisonous refuse:
Let all posterity think how memorable
That fight to the English was and profitable!
Which we who find the profit must confess,
Then the great'st acts of former times no less.
For if we weigh the English few weak hands,
And note the foes so great, so many bands;
Marius himself gave not so great a blow,
Unto the Cimbriams in their overthrow:
Nor was that famed Persian defeat,
At Marathon so cruel or so great,
When stout Miltiades the fight made good,
Even till the field was buried in blood.
Thus happy Cromwell, daring greatest things,
Ads wounds to wounds, slaughters to slaughters brings;
Leaving the road, his sword new ways did hew
Through that base people, till a conquest grew.
Let fame forget each ancient Roman wighte,
And not Fabritius or Serranus cite:
Flaminius cease or Fabius to read,
That by delays his slaved Country freed;
Speak not of Pompey, nor the deeds enhance
Of Caesar, that to heaven their fame advance.
Neither let Greece in all her height of pride,
Brag of her Heroes that were Deify'd,
Nor her Ulysses of so sharp a wit,
Nor Jason that the golden fleece did get.
For why? the Virtues of our General
Equal the Trophies of these worthies all.
What said I equal? heaven will witness bear,
Our Mars his fame exceeds their want as far
As the tall Cypress, that so high does grow,
O're-tops the Ivy that but creepes below.
For if we may speak truth, but one great deed,
The ancient Heroes famous often decreed;
One Hector made Achilles famed, and one
Darius raised the name of Macedon.
But one Heraclian victory did create
Pyrrhus not only great but fortunate.
To Hanniball one Cannae gave a name,
Scipio from him did raise a latter fame.
One Mithridates heightened Pompeys praise,
Whose fall did Julius Caesar's Trophies raise;
So the Lernaean Lake one Hydra bred,
In the Arcadian woods one wild boar fed,
On the Nemean rock one Lion was,
One Geryon for Three bodies did surpass,
But one Antaeus of Gigantick frame,
Whom thou Alcides with thy club did tame.
But Cromwell's greater yet, whose frequent blows
Thousand Gigantike monsters overthrowes,
Taming proud Nobles with a fatal stroke,
Bringing their necks under a servile yoke;
Revenger of Scotch Tyranny, who will,
On the poor people better laws distill.
At last, report had carried near and far,
The news of this, the slaughter of Dumbar,
And the Kirk-party overthrown relates.
Thus forced by their neighbors evil fates,
And the quick fall of many castles strong,
To Istrome, Crawford, Godward that belong,
To reckon which would to a volum mount,
And it is unfit at present to recount:
They yield themselves, and to our mercy leave
Their empty walls, our Soldiers to receive.
As a free Lion ranging in the plain,
Does mock the barking of the dogs as vain,
And conscious of his strength, fears naught, but fiyes
Enraged on the Hunts-mens treacheries,
Chasing the dogs, and Hunts-men here and there,
Making a Vacuum where he does appear.
Whole herdes of beasts through terror stand as dumb,
And at his pleasure Vassals do become,
Being too few to tire the preying paw
Of wolves and bears or glut their greedy maw;
Choosing their death, they'de be one Lions food,
Rather then thousand dogs should suck their blood.
Tell me ye Muses (that do often relate
The greater actions of a rising state.)
Tell me I say, what horrors did arise,
In Edinburghs sad dwellers hearts and eyes,
When first our General did invest about
That City with his spreading armies stout?
Say, in thy streets how did the tumults roar,
When, Edinburgh, thy Natives greater store
Fled, and of comfort did themselves bereave,
And of their own accord their dwellings leave;
When both the Soldiers and Commanders runs
Sheltering themselves in High-land Garrisons?
Like birds by coming winter forced away
To warmer climats for a surer stay.
Such was that Cities terror, and so great.
But the more generous sons of Mars retreat
Into the Castle, that for building rare
And strength, with our best English may compare;
Then which in all the Caledonian land
(Sterling except) a rarer does not stand.
For this those other Castles does out-vye,
As a grand monastery built on High,
Those other creeping houses does out-go,
Which round about it placed are below.
Or as the Moon those lesser light excells
That in the sky are hidden as in cells.
Now Cromwells fame and labors did design
The Castle and defenders t'undermine.
Upon the towers they their standards place,
Part guard the walls, part are in other case
Loading with stones the upper battlement.
Nor did their rage stay here, but further went
Within, without their fury they display;
Here some the corn, there others cut down hay,
Cramming their bags to bursting, corn and all
That they can reach hoarding within their wall,
And what through fear they cannot import they burn,
Themselves chief foes unto their fruits and corn.
Alas poor wretched Citizens, whose fate
Is to become sadly unfortunate?
Whither, O whither do you think to fly
From a Provoked angry Deity?
Though you enclose your selves in rocks, and heap
Up strengths together liberty to keep;
Yet neither walls nor forts can force delay
On swift revenge, when in her hastened way
The strongest gates cannot resist her force;
No brazen walls withholds her in her course:
Nor can your Castle, (which such Columns bear
Though to the clouds it is lofty head it rear,)
Can from the scourge of Cromwells wrath secure
Your guilt, or to you liberty insure.
But now under the walls our General came
And of his coming overwent the fame,
(That they might never into question call,
The careful mercy of our General)
When drawing near, he first a summons sent,
That if they would be speedily content
To yield the Castle so besieged, he
Would give them quarter and fair liberty.
Such pious godly care we only find
Kept in the casket of a noble mind;
But they elated with vainglorious pride,
With boasting brags our clemency deride.
(Free from our Soldiers, in their Castle safe)
With jeering tannts they at our proffers laugh;
Straight they are alarmed, and the trumpers sound
To arms, each Scot takes his appointed ground.
And now with wrath the blood begins to boil,
The cruel sword, and fire begin the spoil,
The heaven even thunders with the noise of war,
The flying bullets dark the troubled air.
Nor do the Northern winds more loudly rage,
When Aeolus opening their close kept cage,
Lets there rush out, and calls back again
Orion with the winds that shower down rain.
On the other side did Cromwells army stand
Triumphing in their victory, not gained;
A squadron of old footmen pitched here,
Who for a famous death had quit all fear;
And with undaunted courage dare to run,
And meet the bullet from the thundering gun,
Dreadless receiving the swords direful stroke,
Even destiny it self they dare provoke.
The famous General bold on these straight calls
For warlike Engines to approach the walls.
Wherewith the strongest He can soon make weak,
And through the inmost rooms of Castles break.
Nor in the Cannon was his only hope,
Worse Instruments of death are now laid open;
A Mortar-peece was brought, whose very sight
Sufficient was the immured for to fright
(About the mouth it did appear more wide
In a great Circle raising up the side)
When it goes off, you sulphurous flames may note
Framed by the Cyclops, belching from his throat;
You would believe the heaven were darkness grown,
And that the Basis of the Earth made moan:
It did but make a noise, and straight there was
A Breach, whereby whole Troops of men might pass.
Hence by this thunder, with these frequent blows
Wearied at length, the Castle fearful grows,
And that walls best upholders, those same Bars
Which never danger knew in former wars,
Did now begin to shake, and doubt their strength,
Fearing their utter ruin at the length.
The besieged Citizens now in despair
Their courage lose, and it is their only care
That they together hand in hand may dye
In this so public a calamity.
All things their ruin fear, and to be brought
Or to their ancient Chaos, or to naught:
Now they believe the Stars inflamed may fall,
And that their eyes see the worlds Funeral.
Not much unlike a well-grown Heart (that does
In his fair horns equal the Beeches growth,
And in his flight the wind) ensnared at last
Stands at a bay, the Hunters about him cast
Into a Ring, seeing himself beset
By barking Hounds, entangled in a net,
Perceives their closing shoutings set a date
Unto his Life, and hasten on his Fate.
Sad Fate of Scotland! doubly full of woes;
Within by terrors, and without by foes.
And in these fractions doubtful what they will,
Whether to yield their strength or keep it still,
The issue proceeds from wavering desire.
On this side whispering hope does good inspire;
Standing on that side hurtful fear they find
With various fancies to disturb their mind:
But taught by greater evils of the wars,
And by the insluence of malignant Stars,
While they do weigh the strength of adverse Arms,
And see their Neighbors daily growing harms;
Fear overcame at last, and so decreed,
That to surrender there was fat all need.
Say; then what glory did our Troops receive,
When such a Foe did such a Castle leave;
And Cromwell, having gotten both the Place
And Magazines, did presently possess
The same with chosen soldiers of his own,
Making that Princely Fort his Garrison.
Thus Edenborough taken, all the rest
That were of smaller strength, themselves addressed
To Him in hope of mercy, learning wit,
To Cromwels sword with patience to submit.
At Paulus deaththe case with Rome thus stood,
When Cannae was o'reflown with Roman blood,
The Apulians, Brutians, Samnites, fell away,
With the unfaithful, though rich Capna,
Opening her Gates to conquering Hannibal,
Fearing his Force might be too Tragical.
What should I speak of Kelbright, Kinmore, Hume?
Or why of Black-nesse should I talk assume?
Kilkowbrey's gone, nor could Tantallon escape
Free from our swords most just though furious Rape:
Though spurred on by malice, madness, have,
With horrid flames he laid whole Townships wast.
It Is not my work to write each action,
Or name each Fort or Town, great Cromwell won,
That tedious Labor would be much more fit,
For an Historians accurater wit,
Who in large folio Chronicles indite,
Whose length great acts does rather hide then write;
Leith, Lithgoe, Rosband, I pass by and more,
To sing atcheivements, never done before.
Tell me ye Muse; how it came to pass,
That in our Troops such confidence there was;
And how beyond all common humane sense,
In all designs we had such confidence:
When our brave Leader did each day renew,
His horse the flying enemy to pursue,
In little boats he sent a thousand foot,
Over the Frith, to put the foe to rout.
Who did so well, that the astonished flood
Was purple colored with the enemies blood.
Great was that work; whose like was never found
Within the limits of all Scotlands ground.
Horatius Cocles, thy report be dumb,
And wonder at the dotage of old Rome.
Thus is the sea covered with ships and boats,
Caesar himself did not more safely float
Upon the Rhene, or tame the prouder course
Of Rhodanus proud waves by witty force;
Nor did Augustus teach Araxis so,
By joining banks, the yoke to undergo.
Nor did great Xerxes merit such a name,
When he the rouling waves did seek to tame
By casting fetters on them, and did threat
Irons to Neptunes self at his retreat.
Happy that voyage was, happy in both
Its end and entrance; the Pellaean youth
Did not more fame by his achievement win,
Nor with more happy Omens did begin,
(Feared by the Moors, and Indians) when he was
Conveyed over Ganges as a Common pass,
And all the dangerous hardships did o're-come
Of the Gigantike Po^us far from home.
Tell me, what rage or fury thence did flow,
What wrath in Iohns-town dwellers hearts did grow,
When our brave troops possessed the adverse shore,
And made Fife tremble with their coming over,
While yet we are hardly entered, and our scouts
The neighbor coasts were ranging round about.
What a new tempest bringing death did rage,
Dewing the moystned fields with blood and strage?
War made men mad, the fields were covered too
With growing tumults and with ensigns new.
Their army raged, as if all Scotland had
To ruin Cromwell a conjunction made:
But he resolved for all, does undergo
Meekly, the worst Fortune can put him to,
For the high glory of the English name,
And to protect Religion from shame.
Protected thus and guarded from above,
To adverse coasts he does more boldly move.
He does the sword and bullet fearless pass,
Standing against them as a wall of brass.
Like to a rock that lifts his towering head
Above the Sea by tempests furrowed;
When the angry winds lift up her waves so high,
That you would think they would reach the very sky:
Yet stands it firmly against the furious puffes
Of winds, and the Oceans furious Counter-buffes,
Rising triumpher from his watery bed,
Breaking the billows with his conquering head.
Speak (for ye know) how many captains great,
Were taken with their troops in that defeat?
How did death triumph in the fields of Fife,
That covered were with bodies void of life?
It was a fell-black-day, alas! how there
In various manners did grim death appear!
When Lesley fled well-hors'd, through cross by-waies*
And among others whom our troops did seize
As Captives, was unhappy Brown, who gave
Himself to Lamberts arms, his life to save.
Speak ye, whose souls are slow and dull as lead;
Is ancient virtue or retired or dead?
If that Book speak the truth; if we believe
What Is written there, or it as true receive,
Ye have been valiant, when your Armies stood,
And Rhenes and Isters streams died red with blood,
And when Count Tilly did affrighted stand,
To see the wonders acted by your hand.
All Germany looked on you as the Fort
Whereto the Dutchmen chiefly did resort.
Such was your honor then; alas! but now
Where is that former virtue? do you know
Only to show the Valor of your state
Abroad, and be at home degenerate?
Your spirits, like your soil, are poor and dry,
At home your hearts are in a Lethargy,;
Your Army else would not let us surprise
Calenders fenced house before their eyes:
In so great danger they like Cowards stand,
Fearful to lend their Mates a helping hand.
Thus Cromwell art thou Conqueror, thus do
Armies surrender up themselves to You.
Thy conquering sword thousands of foes does rule,
Whose habitation is the furthest Thule:
The valiant Scots and Picts, that did let fly
Their Ensigns through the lower Germany,
And those of other Lands that Conquerors be,
Magnanimous Cromwell, are subdued by Thee.
Thou do destroy the Caledonian Boar,
(Sooner than Meleager could before;)
Thou brok'st the bonds of tyrants now grown strong,
And kill'dst the Hydra while it yet was young;
Half-buri'd England, while you were her Head,
Raised up her self again as from the Dead;
By thee regayning strength she rises free,
Wasted before by Scottish treachery.
What should I speak of more, what words or wit
Can such high darings with expressions fit?
Or how can my so mean endeavors raise,
Trophies to equal your deserved praise?
Be it enough (since all my pains fall short)
To be amazed at the famed report
Of your great actions, and since all I write
In these mean papers does appear too light;
Seeming to do no more, when all is done
Then hold a candle to the shining Sun
Or add a drop unto the Ocean.
After our Leader had triumphing got,
Into the Fisian region of the Scot,
When both Saint Johnstons, and Burnt-I stand came,
And Torwood subjects to thy honored name:
And other towns did of their own accord,
Yield up themselves, and to our troops afford
Shelter; the half-dead Scots seeing affairs
Thus to go backward, falling in despair,
Suffering such woes in their polluted home,
Resolve from that accursed place to come,
In so great danger only hoping health,
(Though much deceived from the English Commonwealth:
Such was the confidence, and such the hopes
Springing among the Caledonian troops.
But that their hope was vain, the cure was worse
Then the disease and proved a greater curse:
Wretches ye headlong run, (changing the star)
Into the hazards of a sharper war.
So a poor Sayler tossed from shore to shore,
When in a storm the winds and waters roar,
To whom no glimmering star yields any light,
No Cynosura to direct him right
In that his unknown way, being struck with fear,
Not knowing to what place his course to steer,
Stands void of sense, and while he seeks to fly
The ro^ks, and barking Scylla to pass by,
And takes a care Synphlegades to shun,
Sad Fate does make him on Charybdis run.
"What reason, pray, had we to trust you so,
"That you to England a new guest would go;
"To take those dainties from us, which you knew
"Not being called were never prepared for you?
"Think thou the English looked for thee once more
"That Presbyterian fancies did adore,
"And on their slaved necks bore Calvin's yoke?
"Tell me ye mad men, what did thus provoke
"Your minds to this belief that you should have
"From the discording English, what you crave?
"Vain hope! Caerdigan cannot help you now,
"Nor are the Norfolk Rebels helpful, who
"Proud in their hopes of greater numbers grown,
"By Rich's smaller force were overthrown.
"Most honored Rich, that do advance thy fame,
"And by thy virtues raise thy budding name;
"Who after he had Norfolk quiet made,
"And those seditions by his Sword allay'de,
"He falls upon the Scots, who once again
"Invade us, but he made their journey vain:
"That they might learn by such mischances sad,
"Naught to the good is hard, safe to the bad.
"Keep back therefore, the Fates have all decreed,
"Ye must not, Brethren, pass the River Tweed.
"The way that leads to England is beset
"With thorns, and dismal shades of mountains great.
"Unlucky Birds did your first March attend,
"And will wait on you to the very end.)
"Poor greedy rout! you the sole wretches are
"That closely nursed our first Civil war;
"Then wicked thou thy just reward wilt have,
"And of a double tongue the loss receive,
"When those Troops slain by us thou shall bemoane,
"And in thy loss and nearer ruin groan.
"Oh! Nation base and treacherous! what lies
"Have you maintained as greatest verities
"Under a specious Vizor? Oh what Sects
"And swarms of Errors did your zeal protect?
"Who can relate, how wisely you did sow
"Such seeds of discord as you knew would grow?
"When thus your policy had gained the day,
"How on the entangled English did you prey?
"With thousands witcherafts you did them inchant
"Forcing at last a guilefull Covenant.
"Could love of gold, and like insatiate tricks
" "Saint you, and with us in our Border fix?
"Was this your zeal, your Covenant, to rise
"More rich and full by Englands miseries?
"Was this your care to Canaan, that so
"Your Thistle might in our sweet Gardens grow?
"And that your Tares might at the least oppose,
"If not quite choke the growing of our Rose?
"This was the Scots fully resolved scope,
"They thought them sure of this their wretched hope.
"But Heaven forbad the banes, and with the eyes
"Of pity, looking on our miseryes,
"Turning the scale quite blasted all their hopes,
"And in their Borders set our valiant Troops.
"Could the blind zeal of Priests such ills persuade
"To quiet peace, through Seas of blood to wade:
"Or that the sword was a fit instrument,
"Religion to establish with content?
"O damned impious crew! does your Kirk teach
"Her Clerks the very Gospel thus to preach?
"What godliness is that, with blood and spoil,
"And rage of War the Churches to defile?
"Away, and to your Country when you come,
"This Doctrine may be fit to teach at home:
"Let your mad Priests belch out these Tenets there,
"Your Scottish Kirks such things as these may bear;
"If in these lines you happily may meet
"Some barbarous names, (your pardons I entreat)
"For I was forced to use them, since but few
"Would well agree with such a cock-braine crew.
"But whither does this straying errorlead?
"If I go further, convoyes I shall need.
"Well! all this while I speak but to the wind,
"And cast a Pearl before a durty swine.
And now all things go back, for cruel Fate
Sent over the Scots our coasts to depraedate;
And since at home they suffered so much ill,
At last abroad their Fortunes try they will;
Not much unlike a cruel Wolf, whom blood
Of a young tender Lamb makes far more wood;
Leaving his empty Den, he does infest
Sheep-cotes with grinning mouth, and hateful breast,
Where he a bloody rendezvous does keep,
On the securer Neighbors harmless sheep.
So Scotland thou, forgetting ancient fame,
And having soyled thy once-better name,
Unmindfull of thy Covenant, do come
To spoil the guiltless English in their home;
Daring to hope, and in that hope you dare
Some Trophies from our English wreath to tear.
Oh foolish men, and too too credulous,
By hopes delusive to be guided thus!
Your sense is drowned in such a Lethargy,
Wherein the Hamiltonian troops did lie,
When happy Cromwell in Lancastrian Plains,
Did with a handful see his army slain!
That against heaven with hardened hearts did bowl,
Nor would b' admonished by proud Pharaohs fall!
For nor the cruel slaughter of that fight.
Nor loss of such a battle could you fright.
For Hydra-like one head cut off, you have
Not one but two in the place, more seeming brave,
With tongues extended mingling hisses great,
Wherewith you ruin to opposers threat.
Like to a bull taken from his wonted bait,
At last regathering strength does fiercely wait,
And whisking's fatted buttocks does invite,
Now with his foot, then with his horns, to fight,
And then again unto the skirmish cogs,
By his loud Louring the stout Mastive-Dogs.
So you poor Scots, like hunted beasts secure
Account your selves, till you your selves immure
In Worcester, there a gin and net
To catch your selves at unawares you set,
You build the Funeral Pile, whereon you will lie,
And do as 'twere appoint your day to dye.
Whom providence enraged does design
To ruin for their sin, it gives the line,
Until at last blind by security
They are the authors of their misery.
And now the Scottish Armies wearied are
With the cross chance of unsuccessefull war,
And with the toil of tedious Marches pressed,
Till Worcester did become their place of rest:
Nor was there any place whereto they might
Betake themselves more safely in that plight;
The tumult grew so great on every side,
That very clowns armed to the war did ride.
And gallant Cromwell daring greatest things
(Whose very name an equal terror brings
To Scottish hearts, and fear as dreadful works,
As Castriots did among the scourged Turks)
Him all the Scottish Nation fear, and sly
When with his Army he approaches nigh.
Like Chickens, who no sooner see a Kite
Stoop with his wing, but in a deadly fright
To the first place of safety they make have,
And soon get in, each fearing to be last.
Or as the Lybian Ostrich; if she spy
Over the sands by chance men passing by,
With her rich plumes straight hides both head and ey,
And by that means conceits her self unknown,
And now she sees not, thinks she is seen by none:
So too kind Worcesler did the Scots receive,
And like a mother all their wants relieve:
But oh sad offspring, thou most viperous brood,
Whom naught contents but such a Mothers blood!
For whose defense that City underwent
So many slaughters, has such detriment;
That if it would, it cannot but retain
Fresh in its mind the sadness of their gain.
Alas! unhappy, whither do thou flee?
That City will not Refuge stand for Thee,
Though with the Country you at first prevail,
And make your first met enemies to quail;
Yet Cromwels deadly scourge thou can not shun,
Such provocations are not Scot-free done.
Not much unlike a Ship that Pirates bears,
Preying on all, replete with stolen wares
Of daily spoiled Barks, but if at last
It Is on a ship of war adversely cast,
Alas, how soon it suffers! and must bear
That loss, for others which it did prepare!
Her Sails are torn, her Oars are broke, and now
Tossed by the winds, she does the Ocean plow,
Till now no longer able up to keep,
As she deserved, she is drenched in the Deep.
And now 'twas fully by the heavens decreed,
To give the Scots an overthrow indeed;
The Fates did press it, and the Furies were
With all their mischiefs summoned to be there.
The Sun foreseeing that so great defeat,
Under a cloud did make a sad retreat,
And to Olympus tremblingly he trips,
Making an unaccustomed Eclipse;
The standing Stars distilling waters power,
The Scottish woes ensuing to deplore.
Nor were they long delayed, All-conquering Fate
Within short time those things did perpetrate.
For the three fat all Sisters never know
Their furious wrath intended to foreslow.
Then ye triumphed, when Cromwells valiant Train,
With brave achievements Vpton-bridge did gain,
What trumpets sounded the alarm then?
How did the hoarser drums call out the men,
Hastening those troops that first were in a fright,
With promised hope of glory to the fight!
The slaughter with the horsemen does begin,
Unto whose help the enraged foot run in.
Arm, arm, they cry. And thus both parties meet,
And with their swords in hand each other greet,
And that no terrors wanting might appear,
The Gun re-ecchoing thunder doubles there
And by their sending show what they prepare.
The heaven was clouded with a dismal mist,
Which of thick smoke and bullets did consist;
The rattling noise of arms did make the ground
Tremble for fear, and yield a doleful sound.
Opening her very inmost bowels wide,
Seen through the open gapings on each side.
Sure no such noise in heaven and earth does rise,
When Jove commands out of his Treasuries
Whole showers of rain and hail, and brings again
Those Stars to sight, he did before restrain.
Nor do enclosed Aetna's flames, though blowed
By a strong blast of wind, roar half so loud;
The air grows dark with smoking fires, each stone
Scorcht by the fiery heat sends forth a groan.
How grew your rage so fierce! O how increast
Such cruel anger in your heated breast!
The Armies edg'ling fight, they mingled stand,
Swords meeting swords, and hand encountering hand.
Like to the Centaures, when with dreadful cries
Against each other they with fury rise:
Hylaeus pulls up rocks, and Hippason
With torn up Trees does lusty strokes lay on;
Abas with monstrous strength does Castles throw:
And Polyphemus coming from below
Out of his den, with some excessive weight
Exceeding all the rest the air does beat;
Raging Antaeus, Lapithus more fierce
Does through the sides of his mad brethren pierce;
Nylaeus rises, and whole woods do shake
Bistonian Rocks with terror struck do quake;
Othrys and Ossa tremble, and the rest
Fear by their doings to be quite suppressed.
The victory was doubtful, for the fight
Was full of various changes: now to flight
This side betook them, and anon they fly
On to other side: they must or run or dye.
Now with full hopes on Cromwels Troops she smiles,
And straight unto the Enemy recoyles;
Thus Fortune kept the triumph doubtful long,
None could decide who was more stout, more strong.
As when the Northwind with the Ocean strives,
And the then calmer waves to tempests drives,
The tottring ships do first on one side lean,
Then with the wind to the other turn again:
So many turns did in this fight appear,
Such many changes; and the chance of War,
Though it stood doubtful yet it did proclaim,
Bays for the Victor, to the conquered shame.
One wing of Cromwells seemed at first to yield,
And falling in it self, to leave the field:
But when the Royal Fort our General gayn'd,
And killed the valiant Scots that it maintained,
Immediately they on the enemies are
Quicker then lightning or a falling-star,
Being the first within the Cities wall.
And now the example of the General,
And his so warlike presence did increase
New strength in those where it began to cease.
The English Soldiers minds are now on fire,
And blown with angers bellows still grow higher:
So force increases from received wrong,
And Vengeance by delay grows twice as strong.
Nor was it enough for ours, in every street
The proudest of their enemies to meet,
And kill, but they search every Lane,
And every house has in it some one slain.
Where search they not? the sword no Church does pass,
But rages in the very market place.
Now a new storm arises, (such as Aeolus
He
Who keeps the blustering winds did never see,)
Which did the troubled Citizens assail,
And in the Cities very heart prevail.
What fury there? when strife, the sword and rage
Even in the Market acted hourly strage,
When heaps of dead, and those that stoutly stood
Filled every house with danger and with blood;
When both the childrens and the mothers cries
Did with their terror pierce the very skies?
Virtue and Honor in that fight appear
Closed in the breast of every High-lander.
Whom no attempts could break, no valor tame,
But with their swords, (til killed) they raised their fame.
The more they were oppressed, the more they raise
Their greater minds (to their eternal praise)
In death, not slight, they did their virtue show;
And from the slaughter rising up anew,
Like Wolves, they run upon the sword and spear,
Nor Bullets they, nor armed Legions fear.
You Would think them either desperate or mad,
When covered with their shields, themselves they add
Unto that place where Mars does reign as chief,
Scorning the title of a given life;
Slaughter to slaughter adding, still they go
First wounding, next they kill the wounded foe.
Like to a cruel Dragon, full of scales,
And therein dreadful, against whom naught prevails,
Whose brawny back fears no ensuing harms,
Nor can be pierced by the strongest Arms.
But if his Belly or more secret parts
Be once but touched by the meanest Darts,
How soon he falls, how soon his breath is fled!
See I how he cu^les his body (not yet dead)
In various circling forms! and at his death
With stretched out tongue, yield up his poisonous breath!
So the unhappy High-lander does try
All means for life, not knowing how to dye;
At last the Sword and Bullet makes a lane
Among their ranks, and so those Foot are slain.
Not much unlike a Husbandman, who goes
Through all his sields, and with his Sickle mows
The riper Corn, and the fit Grass for hay,
Where e're he comes making an open way,
And lays those Plants which did so glorious stand,
Like to dead stubble, on the mowed land:
So do those towering lightnings sadly clear
The place from Troops, and make a Vacuum there:
But they undaunted bear the greatest ill
Standing, their members fallen, and distill
Their utmost strength until they fall, and show
Their arms cut from the sinews where they grew.
Like to a happy Oak, whose Trunk so great
Is both to birds and beasts a safe retreat,
Which has endured the shocks of wind and weather
Untouched and free for a long time together;
Laid at, at last, with Axes does begin
His lofty head toward the earth to lean,
Falling with monstrous weight, does plow the ground,
Digging as 't were his grave with falling down.
So those brave Foot, who had the burden bore
Of that sad fight, all day and night before,
Seeing their loss, at last began to doubt,
And fail; their valor was quite wearied out.
For when the horse ingloriously were fled,
And left their Royal Squadron vanquished,
Then all went backwards with the Scots, then they
For their first treachery received the pay,
And the revenge due to them till that day.
Relate; how many carkases there were
Scattered about the City every where,
Which nor Eumenides nor Tisiphone could
Without a dismal horror but behold,
Which did increase the shambles, while of course
Whole herds of beasts died there without remorse.
So great a work it was to overthrow
And give the Scots so terrible a blow.
All things at last thus running back and gone,
And the whole Army being overthrown;
And when poor Charles neither by prayers nor force
Could to a new engagement bring the Horse,
He grows stark mad, (and trusting arms no more)
His wretched fortune sadly does deplore,
(Weighing His Royal Race, and Kingly Stem)
And blames the Stars, foes to that Diadem.
So without more delay, to horse He hies,
And much afflicted at his loss, he slies
Among his scattered Troops, to avoid the fate
Of Worcester bloody battle, though too late.
Thus with much labor and expense of blood,
(Mosley and others dying where they stood)
Stout Cromwell did the amazed City win,
And lead his toyled weary Legions in,
To take the plunder, due to their desert.
For a new conquered City must impart
Of force her Riches, and her captived Youth
Unto the Conquerors spoil and pleasure both:
Rich housholdstuffe one Soldier plunders there,
Another Princely Aras hanging here;
Entering this house he richer comes away,
Soon growing rich with such a royal prey.
But there were others, (whom not any love
Of spoil, but hate against the Scots did move)
Well horsed, who laying Clemency aside,
Did of the flying Scots pursuers ride.
Whom once o'retaken, strongly they assail,
Nor do their prayers or tears at all prevail;
They spread their hands in vain, for they must dye,
And in the dust their hated bodies lie.
Nor cease they here, still more and more they kill,
A cruel slaughter does continue still
In straggling ruins. that far scattered be,
As leaves in Winter fallen from the Tree.
Tempests so great as these are seldom seen,
Even when the Pleiades heve raging been,
And show their feared head, which showers beget
The Olenian Capricornus to make wet.
Nor, Congleton, was that revenge the least,
Which by the angered High-shooes was expressed.
Nor do thou, Samback, let the Scots proud horse
Pass free, but fallest on them with thy force;
Those Country Clowns, (which neither can nor will
Pardon, forget, or bear the smallest ill)
As Bees, fly in his face, whose anger drives
Them from the quiet of Hyblaean hives,
Sharpning their stings: so these run with delight,
And those known forces do provoke to fight:
Some armed with pitch-forkes, some with clubs, and some
Only with stones, unto the conflict come.
Nor without slaughter could they drive them thence,
Though they stood scarcely in their own defense.
So when a Troop of many shepherds have
With valiant Mastives slain a Lion brave,
Which long before the Moorish coasts did wast,
The Inhabitants, over-joyed, meet in have
On his despised feared trunk to stare,
Some pull him by the main, some by the hair
Of other parts, all fain would be before
His bared members fearing now no more.
The ancient mischiefs that he used to do
At the beginning, they remember now.
Nor otherwise rage they; what Muse can tell
Thy grateful anger, Samback, and how well
The madness of thy many-headed Rout
Became thee, as to skirmish they went out.
Nor was that slaughter less, which did succeed
In the Lancastrian fields by fate decreed,
When valiant Lilburne Darbyes forces met
Like Lightning, and the victory did get,
Breaking his strongest troops at their first charge.
But whither stray I? why do I enlarge
Or dwell on these? If I should strive to write
Each single battle, mention every fight,
The day would fail; And The Ocean hide the sun,
And stars would glimmer e're my task were done.
A glimpse of peace, brave Cromwell now we see,
Since Scotlands conquered, and overcome by thee.
Thus do you fight, and fighting overcome,
And overcoming triumph: fame be dumb;
What more can be? here sets he up his rest.
No, no, his triumphs make the English blessed,
Which way so ere you go, you still prevail,
Virtue attends you, Fortune fills your sail.
With what old Heroes may I thee compare,
Guardian of England, the renown of war?
For few of these by upright fame were crowned,
Unwearied zeal with few of these was found;
Some crimes their Virtue oftentimes did blot,
Their milky color often received a spot.
As when a cloud obscures that eye of Night,
The sun withdrawing his, she gives no light.
As Caesar's conquests did his honor raise,
And crown his temples with Imperial bays;
So did his treacherous dealing merit shame,
And mix dishonor with so great a fame.
Nay more then this, most horrid but to speak,
For gold the very temples he did break,
And stayn'd his sword with country men's dear blood,
If His unlawful pleasures they withstood.
Great Hannibal, Cannae thy fame does praise,
That battle honor to thy Name did raise;
That women's slights this Conqueror should spoil,
This, this alone does all thy honors soil.
The farthest Indie and Taprobane did sing,
The eternal fame of the Aemathian King:
But when he was enraged, to his disgrace,
Cruel he would fly into his Nobles face.
Even at his feasts of mirth, his cruel sword
With guiltless blood defiles his very Board.
But YOu Great Sir, Greater then Cas^r are,
The Empire of your Virtues reaches far,
And keeping Passion under, do restrain
Its insolences with the strongest rain.
No Avarice with it is destroying hooks
Inrolles thy Name in Fames infamous books;
At hopes of Lucre you unmoved stand,
No wretched gold thy spirit can command.
Nor does the Carthaginians pattern please,
By lying long in a continued eafe,
And too much pleasure to lose warlike State,
And grow unfit for Mars, effeminate:
For you a charging horse, and sword embrace
Before the witch-crafts of a woman's face,
And hating idle sloth, and sinful peace,
By constant warfare the English do increase.
Nor like the Macedoni an, drunk with wine,
Does passion sway you to a dire design:
For moderation rules you, not abuse
Of Life you love, but a more sober use.
If you be angry, Prudence does allay
Your milder temper; Clemency does sway,
And seat it self upon your calmer brow,
Not breaking any that it can make bow.
One Scipio there is, whose name no blot
Ever received, whose virtue never had spot,
With whom, thy Goodness admirably rare,
And pious zeal may make thee to compare.
You are both equal in the book of Fame,
Your equal love of justice says the same;
You both alike to maintain chastness move,
Both alike goodness, and Religion Love.
What do I sing thy deeds? alas! my verse
Neither thy praise nor battles can rehearse.
They do exceed the Muses faith, nor can
The quickest wit their true dimensions scan,
Unless he saw them and were present by
At the atcheived deeds, so done, so high;
Thou Patron of our peace, and of our war
The just revenger; you our helper are
You come a new Alcydes, and do bear
Those things upright, that er'st declining were.
The greatness of thy mind did still supply
Our wants, when losses made us gasping ly;
You did with succors always ready stand,
And save from common shipwreck with your hand:
You did that English-ruine-threatning war,
Unto the Scots, that plotted it, trans-fer,
Like Jove himself, who does his lightnings throw
On rocks and Pirates, careful lest a blow
Should shed our blood, his Thunderbolts does cast
Within the limits of some foreign wast.
Your merits ask, Great Sir, a larger store,
But you must Pardon, if I can no more;
'Twould be too great a Task; my skill surmount,
All the atcheivements of your hands to count.
Can I so many great Commanders name?
No, my weak Muse can never know the same.
Among whom come Gray of Grooby like the Sun,
His shining Virtue has the rest out-gone.
That is his Countries Father and delight,
And a true Guardian of oppressed right,
Whose faith in all the heat of war was try'de
Yet without moving constant did abide;
Whose constancy was lessened by no harms,
Was neither shaken nor removed by storms:
But like an anchor in this sea of blood,
To stay the wavering people firmly stood.
Most noble Gray, the rest I Will not repeat,
Nor speak thy care in Peace, and War how great:
How many great endeavors did thou blow
With fortunes bellows, till at last they grow,
To famous actions; and how great a light,
Of Virtue did thou show at Worcester fight.
My muse would longer dwell in such a field,
That she to Disbroughs better times might yield
Victorious Trophies, raising to the stars
His fame and acts of Valor in the wars.
But now to war I here must set an end,
And what remains to well-come Cromwell send.
Hail happy star! Sweet comfort bringing light;
Our Nations and this ages glory bright!
At whose return, black clouds no more appear,
Our calmer sky begins to shine more clear.
The Citizen, and Soldier both rejoice,
Showing their joy in their triumphall noise;
Pallas and Mars, arms laid aside, do meet,
And weekly guarded, at this triumph greet
Each other, while to laid aside they yield
The Gorgons head, the sword, and goat-skin shield.
Thrice happy day that do deserve a note
Of happiness never to be forgot,
Which brought thee safe from Scottish enemies,
And from the dangers of a dire disease,
Returning thee to our more safer shore
More strong and healthful than thou were before.
What grateful thanks do we acknowledge due
Goddard renowned for thy skill to you?
Which brought back Cromwell from the gates of death,
And when he gasp'd, as dying, gave new breath;
Renewing the intrals that before decayed,
And cured his sickness, which had all dismayed.
Thus Cromwell comes, whom false report had said
Of his disease so long and doubtful, dead.
As a kind mother does in mind embrace
Her dearest son in some remoter place,
Is so o'rejoyed, when once she sees the coast
Of her bewailed pledge so long since lost,
That words grown insufficient to express
The weight and greatness of her happiness,
(Filling her swelling heart and pleased eyes)
She melts to tears, and when embracing cries:
So England joys at Thy return, so she
Ambitious daily grows to honor thee;
And in the real wishes of her heart
Shows her sincerest Love to thy desert.
Cambridge confirmed by thy return, does boast
Thee for her Burgess, that her borders coast
Thy neighboring birthplace, now remembering those
Her ancient Honors, does again propose
Unto her Muses promised reward
From thy Paternall fatherly regard.
And Oxford does her happiness prefer.
Triumphing: under Thee her Chancellor.
And now at last, if it may lawful be,
Mixtures of small with so great things to see,
Even I my self moved by your virtues rage,
To sing your greatness in this narrow page.
As in a pleasant garden when we come
Plucking the flowers, here and there we rome,
Still plucking more, although in nothing rare,
But that by our own hand they pulled were;
And as we never count an evening clear,
Unless we number every chiefest star:
So with mv humble quill I thought to write
Only great acts, and famous to recite.
The time may come, wherein I may declare
At large the triumphs of your greater war,
And all your Soldiers famous actions show,
Laying them open to the public view.
If those most honored Nobles of the State
With their great President but animate
Kindly these first fruits of my zeal and toil,
A new design may grow from every smile.
What hitherto is done, Great Cromwell lies
Upon Thy Altars as a Sacrifice.
Now it becomes the Coll'nels names to show,
(And but to show them) and to tell those few
That fell in service, since you first did stand
As chief Commander in the British Land.
Of noble Sydney, Bingham, Heynes Id' speak,
But straight-lac'd time does my intentions break.
Who knows not Barksteads Regiments report,
The Citizens and Cities happy Fort,
For who declining were, or wholly broke,
Fearing their state, themselves to thee betook,
And turning soldiers under thee, they reach
To that whereto their Trade would never stretch.
Thus to thy men you are good, and they in thee,
And thou in them have a felicity;
(And at the supreme Parliaments desire,
While you brave Captain do at home retire
Your self from war, with a more watchful eye
The Army abroad you with Recruits supply.
And as the Sea, into whose bosom go
A thousand Rivers, does more fiercely slow,
Grown great with many waters, and expands
Her raging waves over all the neighbor sands:
Such is thy Regiment, which though you draine,
With fuller numbers still it swells again;
Now sending forces to the Irish coasts,
Anon transfunding into Scotland hosts.
Cobbet; what narrow verse can thee enclose?
Or who can Talbots worthy praise compose?
Who did his knowing skill in warfare show,
When the Kings Troops of horse he overthrew;
Innobled by thy birth, and in the field,
By thy true valor, thou to none do yield.
Nor can my Quill, O Hasilrige, set forth
Thy so excelling, so deserving worth.
Nor may I famous Constable report
Thy acts in brief, ^ast striving to be short
I grow obscure) and in the middle break
His gotten same, while I so little speak,
I pass by Mackworth, and it grieves me sore
That at the present I may speak no more:
As of his perseverance in the right
And wonted faith, which neither threats could fright,
Nor Kingly proffers win to baser slight.
Berry and Gosse, and famous Coxe I pass,
And many other names which ask a place,
Which I perchance may in a scrole set down,
With famous Moyle our judge of high renown,
That smiling fortune may my next part crown.
Brave Hacker, that have from the first drawn blood,
Immovable by art most sirmely stood,
Both Horse and Foot, and Drums thy praise proclaim,
And fierce Bellona does extol thy name.
Nor will I mention old and ancient acts,
But I will trace thee in those newer tracts,
Thy latter deeds, which Scotland will attest,
And Worcester felt thy scourging hand and breast;
(And which was first) i'^h' battle of Dumbarre
The enemy found thy arms were fit for war.
Nor can I ought of Gravener repeat,
In whom all gifts of mind and body meet;
Whose bloody hand, where ere it went, did show
With how much strength it could lay on a blow.
Of Bradshaw naught, whose Ancestors have been
In the Lancastrian fields some ages seen,
Of old deducted from the Saxon Race.
Neither for Brooks, nor Crexton have I place,
Nor have I time to set out Chesters worth,
Or tell how many Troops they have set forth.
Or say what Essex did: nor can I look
On Matthewes, Honney-wood, or famous Cook.
Nothing of Kenricke, Gibbons, may be said,
Both which in Kentish fertile fields were bred.
My Index would to a vast volume swell,
If I on every several head should dwell;
If Twisletons, or honored Birches fame
I with Fames shriller trumpet should proclaim;
I will not speak the gallantry of Pride,
Nor many others, which I pass beside:
As Tomlinson and Alred known of all,
Nor Downing the Scout-master General.
Beaumont, nor Benner, whom I only name,
Commanded briefeness does exact the same,
By whose victorious arms the English gained
A glimpse of concord, Tyranny restrained;
By these increased Liberty they have
Restored unto them from the very grave.
Whither does my rash error lead? do I
Only to Soldiers yield these praises high?
I do revoke those speeches, I recall
My slipping tongue from that unwilling fall;
For pious Zeal, the pulpits sacred Laws,
And our own prayers stood bull-warkes of our cause.
Some Ministers examples I Will unfold,
Whose godly precepts, and monitions bold,
Strengthened our war-prepared troops with might,
And made them often victorious in fight.
For Arms and Armies of no value be,
Where not conjoined with true piety,
And helped with an awful reverence
Of the divine all-ruling Providence:
Hence noble Deal and Lockyer you became
The Pulpits honor, and the Preachers fame.
And Stapleton in's predecessors great,
While with diviner virtues he is repleat;
Does grace the Pulpit on occasion fit,
With the rich dowries of thy ripest wit.
That honor in our Armies you have got,
What help your wisdom and your learning brought
Unto our forts, the good event does show,
And the got triumphs, which from thence did grow,
And Peter's (though thou scarce were known before,
Though thy report had hardly reached our shore.)
Thy virtuous courage, and thy zeal compile
Their own record, worthy the highest style;
Whether the minist eriall function You,
Or public civil charges look into.
Is there a man that in his place does know
A quicker wit, a readier hond to show?
Who in the Pulpit is so often and free,
Declaring Heavenly Oracles as He?
Nor does he teach like them, who credit win
By soothing up their Auditors in sin:
But mindful of the Gospel which you teach,
And of that saving health whereof you preach.
You soar more near to heaven, and with the word
Pierce nearer to the heart than with a sword;
Only to preach at home, contents not Thee,
The Utmost limits of the world you see:
And to the savage Indians where you came
The Gospel of salvation you proclaim;
Shining a happy star to guide aright
Those barbarous peoples feet into the light.
Nor can my little leisure spare to sing
From what most noble Ancestors you spring,
Nor what great deeds their honor made to swell,
Thy noble Lignage let thy Cornwall tell,
And show your late increased coat of arms,
How beautified from Hamiltonian harms.
Thy wondrous zeal the godly does befriend
A hand, to all that want or ask, you lend,
In thy admired virtue quick and wise,
Who on the common Altars sacrifice.
You to the afflicted, like Achates, prove,
To them, like Atlas, whom sad terrors move;
The falling English in the heat of war
Were kept upright by thy upholding care.
Nazeby, Wales, Ireland, Cornwall, Worcester too
Sooner or late have felt what you can do;
Thy frequent toil, thy dangers, thy great heart
Broke by no threatenings, let those men impart,
Who verst in war and Martial bloody strife,
Know what belong to a right-ruled life.
Thy travels both in body and in mind
Let their relation be to them assigned.
These common things, Peter's, I soly own
Thy self and deeds, being both to me unknown.
Pardon, I pray, I only mention this,
That the Priests worth the English may confess;
And that the peoples safety does not stand
Fortified only by the soldiers hand.
And You who of the Council of our State
Members at present are, or were of late,
Who by the supreme Senate are decreed
The first in changed courses to succeed.
GOD make you all unanimous, and bless
You with eternal growing happiness:
And, as Attendants, make the stars to wait
Upon your high achievements for the State;
That pure Religion undefiled may be
Increasing with revived piety,
Whose sweet perfnme will to the heavens arise
A grateful and accepted sacrifice.
Then peace and truth will kiss; and all that sink
Of horrid blasphemies to Hell will shrink.
Concord will grow, and all divisions ceafe,
And all things whisper to the Britains peace,
Then shall the Woolfe, that with a fatal eye
Did meditate before new treachery,
Against the lamb; his fierceness laid aside,
Henceforth together safely they reside,
And the safe flocks of kids need not to fear,
When they the roarings of the Leopard hear;
The Lions whelp and Calf, now void of dread,
Dare company together in one bed.
A little child these tamed beasts shall lead
Unto their pastures where content they feed.
The Cow does feed together with the Bear,
Their young ones are Companions void of fear,
The Lion leaves to prey; and the same. ficld
Both to the Ox and him does fodder yield.
All deadly poyson's taken from the Aspe,
The sucking child him in his hand may graspe,
Nor shall the Viper hurt the weaned child,
That sporteth with him, it is grown so mild.
These raging beasts shall act no future ill,
For God will seat his Chosen on a hill.
Even on Mount Sion: when he shall record
Over all the earth the knowledge of the Lord,
As do the raging waters of the deep
Overflow the earth in a tumultuous heap.
Go on grave Fathers therefore, and imprint
These secrets in the heart from sacred hint:
That the first honor of your counsels may
To God redound, the next that peace may sway
In all our Regions, while there is a day.
And thou most honored Bradshaw by consent
The parent of our State and President.
(Although thy innate modesty will not bear
All thy deserved praises but to hear;
And though with patience thou do hardly know
The burden of thy honor t'undergoe)
Yet give me leave, thy virtue and thy fame
Moves me a little to extol thy name.
The Vindicator of our Liberty,
And sharp revenger of our slavery;
When first thy stretched hand did strongly break
The cruel chains from off the Britains neck,
Like faithful Palinurus, without fear
You undertook a weighty task, to steer
A raging boystrous people, and procure
Through unknown swelling waves a haven sure.
You mindful of your Countries good, uphold
The Commonwealth, resembling Atlas bold:
Free from the cares of a dissembling breast,
The public you prefer to private rest.
Hence your unwearied pious zeal and pains
A glad remembrance to all Ages gains:
But if your actions here have no reward
Worthy their merits, it is not worth regard;
All earthly things thy virtue does surpass,
And will in heaven have their deserved place;
Mean while to heaven these are our daily prayers,
Methusalems or aged Nestors years,
That you may reach to make us English blessed,
And that at last freed from this worlds unrest,
With more content you may, as old in this
Praeside new Counsels in a State of Bliss.
FINIS.
An Animadversion.
IT was not my purpose to write an elaborate History, but only in brief in a
Panegyric, to point at the triumphall victories of our most excellent
General. Neither be troubled, Reader, that tying my self to such brevity, I
have either slenderly or not at all, touched every single Action, or Actor by
name, especially those truly worthy, and Honorable Men Monk and Overton,
whose famous acts rather challenge a volume then the narrow scantling of a
Page. Nevertheless I shall neither forget these nor those, when (God assisting
and by the favor of the Council of State) I shall set forth in their lively
Colors the whole series of all things done, (as far as Poesy can) to adorn a
second book, taking it is beginning from the rendition of S. Johnstown. In the
mean, while Gentle Reader.

If ought you know that may more worthy be,
Impart them, but if not, use these with me.
TO THE Most Excellent, The Lord General of Great Brittayne, OLIVER CROMWELL.
What force can drive, or what persuade
My wandering mind farther to wade?
Whence is it, sickle fancy mine
You bring me to my old design,
Thy virtue bright,
our losses do invite,
(Like harping Flaccus) me to be
An humble suppliant to thee,
Who in another cause deserved of late,
Though sadly crossed by decree of Fate.
Even providence your arms befriends,
It Is not blind Fortune that attends
Vicissitudes of men, and things:
But heaven it self such changes brings;
Who gives and takes
Esteem from things, and makes
The smallest things grow great, and can
Change the renown of any man;
Though on a Throne to day he sit on high,
Making his height upon the ground to lie.
The great disposer whose bare word,
Or grow'th or ruin will afford;
Turning man's heart, and firm intent,
Against their own accomplishment.
Thus am I come
At last unto your home,
A willing guest; drawn by the fame
Of your great deeds and honored name,
And spotless life; I humbly do appear
Thy glories trumpet, and Thy Honorer.
Unto the mighty as a rain,
Their tyrannizing to restrain;
To the unarmed as a shield;
Unto the Soldiers strength you yield,
The Cities light
Clear, shining, bright;
Chief Leader of the Epick Quire:
The drum, the trumpet, and the Lyre,
Together-with the sweeter Lute agree,
To sing thy praises in a Symphony.
The heaven assists you in your war;
Your high and wary counsels are
Thy Countries stay, the hoped health
Of the decaying Commonwealth.
A deadly strage
To this malignant age.
When the unhappy Kings ill luck
The State into a storm did pluck,
Thy Country found thee her desender then,
Thou were a Victor without blood of men.
Thou do with meekness happy Guide,
The greatness of thy chance abide.
When formerly the war did grow,
By doubtful causes hindered, slow,
Then there was need
of you, great Sir, to lead.
In dangers by your humble prayer,
You move the Deity to hear,
Beloved Guardian sent us from on high,
Thus do thou conquer even necessity.
The cunning Scot, the Irish wild,
And Wales with hills and mountains filled,
And all our Northern world confess,
Thy strength of hand, of head no less,
Forrayners next
Shall by thy sword be vexed,
If against the English they devise
Mischiefs by stop of merchandise;
Whether they quarrels pick not known before,
Or else pretend a greater, older score.
Rise up revenger of our harm;
Quickly prescribe a heavenly charm
To free our Church from sad debate,
And fix the Pillar of our State.
Let banished truth
From thee receive new growth;
Silence contentious Schisms, and stand
A safe protector of our Land;
Shine like a star in our Horizon, clear,
And both of heaven and men the joy appear.
Go, famous for thy acts, replete
With honors, happy, good, and great
Exult therein; may no annoy
Once interrupt thy calmer joy,
O do not stain,
With grief too much or vain,
His gallant funerals: though void of breath
This Hero lies, yet in his death
He triumphs in a never dying fame,
His virtue left him an eternal name.
Leave of to grieve, and cease to moan,
Let no sad sigh or fatal groan
Accompany his funeral:
Because he lived enough to all,
Himself, his friends
And Country; while he lends
To after ages a clear light
Arising from his virtues bright,
And having done what wit could not enlarge,
Quite wearied out he got a free discharge.
On God all humane changes tend,
He all things toward their end,
Close to true Piety you keep,
And thence deserved honor reap.
(Since now come back)
My Muse shall not be slack,
Thy praised Encomiums to sing,
Or grateful Panegyrtckes bring,
Others may praise thee in a verse more high;
But none so well, since not so soon as I.
Make me but happy by thy smile,
If thou with favor dain my toil,
By that thy favorable breath
We are (as 'twere) redeemed from death.
Thus raised by thee,
It shall our Triumph be,
In the eternal house of Fame
To register thy present name,
That future ages each succeeding hour
To thy blessed name may new Encomiums power.
Thy Coat of Arms, brave Cromwell fill,
And by thy acts add something still
To make it greater, look and see
The Commonwealths calamity,
And be a stay
To Religions decay;
So will thy Country thee reward
With more, with new, and fresh regard,
And Mars, and Pallas will, thy fame to spread,
With Bays, and Olive crown thy Pregnant head.
Thus do you sit exalted high,
Applauded by the joyful Cry
Of the pleased City; those who are
Truly religious send a prai^^
To heaven for thee;
(Poor Poets) so do we.
Now on a Dytherambicke Lyre
Anon in a Pindarick Quire,
Or else like Virgil we thy deeds rehearse,
And joy'd return in an heroike verse.
REader (if ought)
Come and be taught,
Why do you so
Look on a picture, or dumb show?
Would you unconquered Cromwell know? alas!
View not then a carved face,
But mark his virtues manifold,
Then Brass more lasting, more desired then gold.
Attentive be;
This, This is He,
Who, for the Public born, does Live
To that, for which Nature did Give
Him life; whose sharper wit
For all great counsels fit
His valor showed
So often abroad,
(Equally happy to his own,
And to the foe most fatal grown)
Unto his Country renders him to be
The fort and Patron of her Liberty.
Honor his Name,
This is the same;
Our freedoms strongest Hold,
Britains Alcides bold,
Th'unwearied Atlas of our State,
Keeping upright, what would precipitate,
Diverting all the spleen of fate.
Acknowledge this,
He, He, it is,
Englands new leading Ioshuah, (no less
Or in his cause or his success)
Guarded by heaven, to whom the helping stars,
Serve as inferior Officers.
Applauded by the righteous, while he fights
For the Republikes private rights
And common too --
A Deadly scourge of Tyranny
And superstitious Vanity.
Delighted be;
For this is He,
Who when the flood
Of late shed blood,
Began to ebb, and cease,
Brought back the Olive both, and Bays;
Who shutting all the passages of war,
And taking away cause of jar,
With the same sword that he before did cut
Open Ianus gates, again the same does shut.
Hence Readers go
And these things show,
Them to your Children yet to come proclaim,
And to their offspring let them do the same,
Both even amazed at our Generals fame;
Whose Monument (which does in triumph stand,
Ore enemies conquered by thy hand)
The world will soon confess without abuse
It Is the eighth wonder which she can produce.
And you (Great Sir) of honors full and days
To thy eternal praise
Added at length
To the nine former Heroes, make the TENTH.
TO THE Most accomplished Gentleman.
EDMUND LVDLOW The Most Noble Deputy Governor of Ireland, when he set forward
on his journey thither. An Ode wishing health.
NEptune make smooth the waves, lest in a throng
Justling together they grow high, and wrong
This new Commander. And thou Milford too,
When he thy neer-adjoyning waves shall plow,
See that there only be a gentle gale,
And that no tempest on the main prevail,
May the contentious wind abate it is pride,
And those their ancient strivings lay aside:
And when he goes, whisper a gentle blast
Into his sails, to countervail his have;
And you the Tritons who dominion have,
Although unhappy, on each Irish wave,
Compose their tumults when on high they rise,
As if their rage would reach the very skies,
Till your Vice-leader pass the dangerous sands,
And on the Ogygian coasts with safety stands.
And thou most famous Ireton, whose head
And hand, are always powerful indeed,
To whom the former nor the present time
Did ever yield an equal in our Clime,
Assist thy Ludlow with a free consent,
Since He this dangerous journey underwent,
That by conjoined arms he might relieve
That tedious war and fitting succors give.
Othou whose worthy memory's more sweet
Then all the best Companions I meet!
My fort and comfort! what heroic verse
Can thy great praises worthily rehearse!
How, where shall I begin? shall I record
The valor that thy younger years afford?
Or that thy Candor! what, a child, you showed
Of valor, while you never had been abroad,
Only at Blanford; how you did excel
Among three restlers! how you showed your skill
In turning bals: what man did better know
To throw the Bar, or give a stronger blow.
With such like trophies you did think no scorn
The first years of your active youth t'adorne;
But when a downy cheek makes you put on
An age more virile, straight these to^es are gone;
You wish to hear the Trumpet which does raise
The Horses courage to the Riders praise;
You loved to bound and curvet; hence it came,
That in your youth you did begin your fame
By your great virtue, when as yet your force
Was tied within a Century of Horse,
But not your courage, for with them you go
Through many Troops of a more potent Foe.
England will speak this of thee, and confess
The greatness of thy acts with joyfulness.
Sad Warder Caster, which long siege did tame,
Will speak thy labors, and confess the same;
Who, when her walls all broken did appear,
And all her buildings naught but ruins were,
Yet did remain valiantly faithful still,
A Conqueror by suffering so much ill.
A worthy act, which fame will ever sing,
Amazement to the present age to bring,
And future too: then Mayden-Bradley holds
Out to the world thy fame, renowned of old
From thy forefathers, known both wise and bold.
Next happy Wiltshire does triumphing stand,
So often saved by thy victorious hand,
When the destroying Enemy with boasts
Entered, and rage, into that Countries coasts.
Wiltshire relate the changes of that war,
When Ludlow followed the Enemy so far.
Speak Sarisbury Churchyard, which stood and gazed
Upon thy passage through the swords amazed;
Like to a Lion when he is beset,
Which fearelss runs and breaks the scorned net.
It Is a vain work thy praises all to bring
Within the compass of a narrow ring;
A little now shall serve; for that we know
We do unto thy praises much more ow.
Which we shall pay; if once our Muse can get
A little respite to refresh her wit.
In the mean while, brave Captain, go thou on
With happy Omens, as you have begun,
That by your Guard, famed Ireton may rise
Much more conspicuous in the public eyes.
While to each other force and arms you lend
The horrid bloody Irish war to end,
That once again her ruined houses may
Of their rebuilding see the happy day.
And that poor Ireland, wearied out with age
May yet grow young again, when freed from strage
By your most worthy hands; and that sweet peace
In her may settle first, and then increase.
TO THE Most Famous, as well for his Valor, as Virtues, HENRY IRETON, Late
Lord Deputy of Ireland, A Member of the Parliament of England; As also, Of the
Right Honorable, the Council of State.

At whose Tomb, and to whose Memory this Funeral Elegy is offered and Wept By
T. M. Junior.

An Elegy.
IS Ireton dead, and yet the heavens not bear
In such a public loss an equal share?
Can such a Patron of our Liberty
Without a grand Eclipse, or Comet dye?
Although not at his death, yet he will have
The Sun a mourner at his honored grave.
The Muses Fountain is too small, too dry,
My Quill with fit Encomiums to supply.
If all your raptures, all your sacred fits
Could be inspired into my working wits,
Could Aganippe by some secret vein
Be brought into the Cisternes of my brain,
Your fits would fail and that exhale in tears,
By this new Sun late placed in the spheres.
Let England speak his worth, Ireland proclaim
His Trophies, and proud Limrick keep his name
Ingrav'd in brass, that future times may see,
And speak his honor to Posterity.
Great Cromwell's Son! Oh speak not Titles, Fame,
"But tell his Virtues, give his Soul a name.
His Valor mixed with such meekeness rare,
That no old Hero might with him compare,
But only Moses: And straight called aside,
And Canaan seen in hopes, he gently died.
His VVisdome speak, his Temperance, his Zeal,
And strong endeavors for the Commonweal;
But that you cannot, the Dotes thereof was such,
That nor my tongue, nor Pen can say how much
Their Value was; but when that all is done,
If you would speak their worth, say Ireton,
Whom all rich graces round about beset,
And piety the Center where they met.
Hence then all smiles, come weeping, change we mirth
To mourning Dirges, lave the precious earth
Of this so honored Patron with our tears
(Fertile as them the cheek of April wears)
Let Angels sing his graces, who did call
His soul to heaven to its original;
And murmur not that loss, which here but lay
A pawn that might be called for every day.
But if upon our sorrow and thy fate
Poor Mortals could but set an equal rate;
The world would praise thee, while it did appear
With a full sorrow, in each eye a tear:
For where Art fails to yield us her relief,
Our will to praise thee we will express in grief.
FINIS.

