QUESTIONS PREPARATORY TO The better, free, and more Christian ADMINISTRATION
OF THE Lords Supper.

Jer. 5. ver. 29, 30, 31. Shall I not visit for these things says the LORD?
Shall not my soul be avenged on such a Nation as this? A wonderful and
horrible thing is committed in the land: The Prophets prophesy falsely, and the
Priests bear rule by their means, and my people love to have it so, and what
will ye do in the end thereof?

By E. F. Esquire.

LONDON, Printed for Edw: Blackmore at the Angel, and R. Lowndes at the
White-Lyon in S. Paul's Churchyard, 1655.

Questions preparatory to the better, free, and more Christian Administration
of the Lords Supper.
WHether this be a good reason; Because by GOD's command keep Lepers and
unclean persons out of the Temple; Levit. 13. v. 4. 46. and 2 Chronicles. 26. v. 20.
Therefore the Ministers under the Gospel, may without Christ's command keep and
suspend whom they themselves judge unworthy Receivers from the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper? Whether is such judgment of the Ministers infallible, and when
was it given them? And whether is the Institution, Function, Rule and Authority
of Ministers under the Gospel, or ought it to be, equal or like unto that of
the Priests under the Law?

Whether, when Christ by shedding His most precious Hebr. 7. v. 11, 12, 18. and
8. v. 13. and 9. v. 10.
it be not deceitful and unchristian to allege the practice of Levites and
Jewish Priests as a guide for us under the Gospel? And whether St Paul says
true, that he that submits to a part of the Law is bound to keep the whole
Law, renounceth the benefits of Chrict, and is fallen from grace? Galat. 5. v.
2, 3, 4.

Whether the power of binding and loosing was not Church, Matthew. 16. v. 18, 19.
compared with chapter 18. v. 17. 18.
and not to any particular person or Church Officer? And, whether Suspension
from the Sacrament be not a branch of that power? And if so; Then whether it be
not a sinful usurpation and an high presumption for any man under the
fictitious Title of Church Officer (of which Title we read not in the
Scripture) to take upon him the Churches Authority of binding and loosing?

Whether this be a good consequence; Because the Church of Corinth, the Church
of Ephesus, and other Churches did Excommunicate and cast out of their Churches
notorious scandalous Offenders and Heretics; 1 Cor. 1. v. 2. comp with chapter 5.
v. 1, 3, 4, 5. Rev. 2. v. 1, 2, 6.
Therefore the Minister may Suspend whom his conscience pleases from the Lords
Supper?

Whether in the 1 Corinthians. 11. v. 28. we should not Let every man examine
himself, and so let him go to the Minister and know of him whether he be fit to
eat of this bread, and drink of this cup? And if so; Then whether the Assembly
of Divines ought not to amend this Text?

Whether, if no example or precept of Scripture can be exercise authority over
their Brethren, which Christ has forbidden? Matthew. 20. v. 25, 26.

Whether it does reasonably follow; Because GOD's Joshua Josh. 5. v. 7.
, which Circumcision had been long before Instituted by GOD himself, Gen 17. v.
10.
was no Innovation in the Jewish Church; Therefore the bringing in of the
Ministers power of Suspension from the Sacrament, which power Christ never
ordained nor did the Churches of Christ ever approve or practice, is no
Innovation in the Christian Church?

Whether in Matthew. 7. v 6. Christ spoke not those to the people as well as to
his Disciples; Matthew 5. v 1, 2 and 7. v. 28, 29.
and therefore Ye in the Text must be understood as spoken to all Christians?
And whether those words are not thus to be expounded; Give ye not that which is
holy unto dogs, that is, Offer not, teach ye not my Gospel unto froward
obstinate men, who render themselves unworthy of so great salvation; Neither
cast ye your pearls before swine, that is, Neither declare ye my precious and
glorious Doctrines, Matthew. 13. v. 44, 35. comp. with v. 19.
which ye have received, unto sottish regardlesse men, who delight in their
iniquities; Lest they trample them under their feet, and turn again and rent
you, that is, Lest they despise my Doctrines, and set themselves to do you all
manner of mischief? Verbis and verberibus.
And if so; Then whether such Ministers as limit the word Ye unto themselves
only, contrary to the express Text; Matthew. 7. v. 28, 29.
and by that which is holy and your pearls will have meant the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper; and by Dogs and Swine, unworthy Receivers, without
Scripture-proofs and even contrary to reason, for that Sacrament was not
instituted till near two years after this Exhortation; Compare the time of
Christ's Sermon in the Mount, with John 6. v. 5. and 13. v. 1.
be not impudent Wresters of GOD's holy Word, false prophets, and deluders of
the people?

Whether, when three Evangelists, recording the Institution Christ then sat at
Table with his 12. Disciples, amongst whom particularly is named Judas
Iscariot; and that Christ gave the bread and cup to them all, and that they all
did eat of the bread and drink of the cup; Nay, when Christ himself says in
the very time and act of celebration, Behold, the hand of him that betrayeth me
is with me at the Table; Matthew. 26. v. 20, 25, 26, 27 Mark 14. v. 17, 18, 22,
23. Luke 22. v. 14. 19, 20, 21.
are they not unworthy to be accounted Christ's Ministers, who shall openly
question and deny the truth of Judas his being there and his partaking of the
Sacrament? Would not such Ministers for their own ends deny the whole
Scriptures?

Whether did not Christ three several times to His that one of them should
betray him: The First was, as they were eating the Passover; and is mentioned
by S. Matthew and S. Mark, when the Disciples one by one said unto Christ,
LORD, is it I? Unto which Christ replied in General terms, He it is that
dippeth his hand with Me in the dish: Matthew. 26. v. 21, 22, 23. Mark 14. v. 18,
19, ^0.
The Second time was, as they were celebrating His Supper; and is mentioned by
S. Luke, when the Disciples enquired only among themselves, which of them it
was that should do this thing? Luke 22. v. 21, 23.
The Third time was, after His Supper; and is mentioned by S. John, when (says
the Text) the Disciples looked one on another, doubting of whom He spoke, till
at length Peter beckned to John, and John thereupon said unto Christ, LORD, who
is it? Unto which Christ replied in Special terms, He it is to whom I shall
give a sop when I have dipped it; and when He had dipped the sop, He gave it to
Judas Iscariot. John 13. v. 2, 21, 22, 24, 25, 26.
And if so; Then whether such Expositors do not miserably confound as well the
Gospel as themselves, who distinguish not these times, Distingue tempora
tollitur dubium.
but make them all one; and without warrant of Scripture talk of Christ's
Institution of His Supper after the Sop given to Judas?

Whether to teach that the giving of the Sacrament unworthy Receiver is all one
as to put a knife into a man's hand to cut his own throat, be not to reproach
the Institution of Christ and to make themselves His Reformers? And whether to
teach that the unworthy Receiver eats and drinks the Ministers damnation,
be not repugnant to S. Paul, who says, that he that eats and drinks
unworthily, eats and drinks his own damnation? 1 Cor. 11. v. 29.

Whether to call and adjudge those to be Dogs, Swine, Hypocrites, Heathens, and
unworthy Receivers, who submit themselves to Christ's Doctrine and Ordinances,
who do openly witness to the world their true and earnest repentance of their
sins, their love and charity with their neighbors, and their intention to
lead a new life according to GOD's Commandments; be not a rash, vain,
uncharitable censure, neither agreeable to Scripture nor reason? And whether to
term Infants, Fools, and Madmen, Dogs, can be warranted by Scripture? And
whether to teach that Christ, as he was man, knew not that Judas was an
Hypocrite; yet that the Suspending Ministers may discern an Hypocrite, be not
to advance their knowledge above Christ's? And whether such doctrine be not
blasphemy?

Whether to call Ministers Fathers, Pastors, and Shepherds, Fathers and
Shepherds to Christ's Flock, who account His Children Dogs, and refuse to give
them the Food appointed by Christ?

Whether the Design of these Suspending Ministers in withal their power of
keeping the unworthy from it, be not the higher to advance their persons and
authority amongst the people? And whether the Ministers Authoritative
Examination of the Receiver, be not a Ground and Inlet to that
tyrannicall-unchristian yoke of Popish Private Confession?

Whether the Givers of the Sacrament ought not to be Receivers? And whether
they be fit Givers thereof, who apparently to the whole World are swollen up
ready to burst with avarice, pride, uncharitableness; Who make it a light
matter to wrest GOD's Holy Word, and (when they please) to deny it; Who reject
the testimony, practice, power and authority of the Holy Catholic Church, and
by consequence have renounced their very Creed; Who, if ancient, are
notoriously perjured in the manifold breach of their Ministerial Oaths; and if
Novices, they preach before they be sent, unless without President of
Scripture and contrary to the Practice of all Apostolic Churches, the
Ministers of six or eight Parishes, met together of their own heads, may lay on
hands and devoutly Ordain, whom and as many as their Wisdoms think fit? And by
the same reason, why may not the Constables of six Parishes meet together, and
there gravely elect a Constable for the seventh Parish, or for as many Parishes
as their Wisdoms please? Are Constables so elected Lawful Constables? And are
such Ministers as these Lawful Ministers? Whether are such Ministers as these
fit Givers of Christ's most Holy Sacrament? Let Conscience, let Reason, let even
Turks and Indians speak.

Halelu-Jah.

