The first Pinciples of the Doctrine of CHRIST; Together with stronger Meat for
them that are skilled in the Word of Righteousness.

OR The Doctrine of living unto God, wherein the Body of Divinity Is Briefly
and methodically handled by way of Question and Answer.

Published at the desire, and for the use of the Church of Christ in Norwich in
NEW ENGLAND.

By JAMES FITCH Pastor of that Church.

Psalm. 34. 11. Come ye Children, hearken unto me, I will teach you the fear of
the Lord.

2 Timothy 1. 13. Hold fast the form of sound words which thou have heard of me,
in Faith and Love which is in Christ Jesus.

Boston, Printed by John Foster. 1679.

To the Reader.
COncerning the Necessity and Antiquity of that great Ordinance of Catechizing,
(which is a plain laying down of the Principles of the Oracles of God) there
are many that have written. Nor was ever any man that had the Plane tibi
persuasum esse oportet, Ecclesiam Dei Catechesi carere non posse. Calvinus in
Epist. Protect. Angliae.
true fear of God planted in his heart, or that had a sense of the worth of
souls (if indeed the care of souls has been committed to him) altogether
neglective as to the practice of so great and necessary a duty. Abraham
Instructed those that were born in his house. The Lord commanded his People of
old that they should be diligent in teaching their Children, Deuteronomy. 6. 7. The
Hebrew word there used (as is v. Paraei Prolog. in Vrsini Catech.
commonly and truly observed) signifies to whet; so are the same precepts and
principles to be inculcated even over and over again, as the knife upon the
whetstone. Solomon speaks much concerning the advantage he received in that
he was well principled by his father in his tender years. And the Jews to this
Day, although they have lost the power of Religion for above these 1600 years,
yet keep up something of the form of it, being very careful to instruct their
Children in the Principles of the Jewish Religion. They have their Catechisms,
in special that of Hotting. de jure Hebraeor. Buxtorf. Synag. Iud Cap. 3.
R Levi, much commended by some Christian Writers. And Buxtorf (who as to the
Jewish Antiquities is esteemed the most learned Writer that the world has
known) gives us a particular account of these matters, how the Jews have been
wont to teach their children some select places of Scripture as soon as ever
they can speak, and by that time they are thirteen years of age, they are able
to give an account concerning their six hundred and thirteen precepts, which
comprehend the sum of the Mosaical Law. And shall Christians come short of
Jews, respecting diligence in a Religious Education of their Children? Those
six Principles mentioned by Paul, Heb. 6. 1, 2. are by some called Catechismus
Apostoli, the Magdeburgenses
Apostles Catechism, as supposing that the Apostles did reduce the Sum of the
Christian Religion to those six heads. I shall not subscribe to that Notion;
for I conceive (with due respect to Interpreters that have thought otherwise)
that the Principles of the Doctrine of Christ there mentioned, are such
Principles in Christianity Jacobus Cappellus in locum.
as are owned by the Jews in common with Christians, who believe there must be
Repentance from dead works, and Faith toward God, (albeit they deny Faith in
Christ) and they acknowledge the Resurrection from the dead, and eternal
Judgment, and also the Doctrine of Baptisms, and of the laying on of hands.
Nevertheless, it is certain that the Apostles did feed their hearers with Milk
as well as with strong meat. Egesippus relates that by virtue of Catechizing,
all the Kingdoms in the then known world; received an alteration as to their
heathenish Religion, within forty years after Christ's ascension. Nor were the
famous Teachers in the Christian Church, who flourished in the Ages near to the
Apostles, ashamed to be called Catechists. Optatus was a Catechist at Carthage;
Origin at Alexandria, Clemens Alexandrinus had his Paedagogus; Lactantius his
Institutions; and Austin his Tract de Catechizandis Rudibus. Eusebius reports
that of old one was set apart on purpose for this work, in the primitive
Churches, who did bear the name of The Catechist. It is true that those
Primitive Catechists did not (all of them) instruct their Auditors by way of
Question and Answer, only they caused the Truth respecting the main Kata and
echeo resono.
Principles in Religion to be often resounding and Ecchoing (according to the
Notation of the word Catechize) in the ears of those that were so instructed by
them, yet had they of old, a particular day appointed, when those that had been
instructed were examined concerning their proficiency. And that form of
procedure by way of Pelargus.
Question and Answer, was observed by Iunilius, who lived Anno 545. And it is a
course that does necessitate the Auditor to attend and profit. When Sermons are
preached, men are sinfully apt to sleep and wander, which under this way of
Catechizing they cannot easily do. This Ordinance Bucer de vera Eccles.
reconcil. Sr. Edw. Sandys. 88. and Dr Andrews.
was indeed in a manner lost (both name and thing,) as Bucer testifies, when
Popish Antichristian darkness covered the earth, but (as a worthy Person in his
Speculum Europae has well observed) the first Reformers by diligence in
Catechizing, caused the light of the Gospel to spread and prevail wonderfully.
Yea the Authors of the Tridentine Catechism complain that it was so. Whence the
Papists have in policy set up a course of instructing Children in the
destructive Principles in Praefat
of their Religion, as hoping thereby to out-doe the Protestants, who by their
Catechisms had gained so much ground above an hundred years ago. Moreover, by
diligence in this way, the Truth of the Gospel has been preserved as well as
propagated. Thus purity of Doctrine successively continued amongst the
Waldenses from Generation to Generation. When certain Jusuites were sent
amongst them with a design to corrupt their Children, they could not do it,
because they had received contrary Principles of Truth, from those, under whose
nurture and admonition they had been educated; so that the Jesuits returned
with amazement, professing that among the Waldenses Children of seven years old
understood more in the Scriptures, and in the matters of Religion, then could
be said of many of their learned men. And experience does sadly confirm the
truth of this, inasmuch as they that embrace Heresies of this or that kind,
have (many of them) been found woefully ignorant as to Fundamentals in the
Doctrine of Christ, so Principia sunt minima quantitate, maxima virtute.
that the reason of their being so seduced is, because they never thoroughly
learned and understood their Catechisms: of so great concernment is it to be
well grounded in Principles.

These last Ages have abounded in labors of this kind; one speaks of no less
then five hundred Catechisms extant: which of these is most elegible, I shall
leave unto others to determine. I suppose there is no particular Catechism, of
v. Mr. Philip Nigh Beams of former Light.
which it may be said, it is the best for every Family, or for every
Congregation. Nevertheless it must needs be acknowledged, that those Models of
Divinity (whether Catechistically composed or otherwise) wherein Scriptural
Definitions and Distributions, expressing the Sum of the only true Christian
Religion, are methodically disposed, according to the golden Rules of Art, have
a peculiar excellency and usefulness attending them. In this way that great and
famous Martyr of France, Peter Ramus held forth the light to others. After him
succeeded the profoundly learned and godly, Alexander Richardson, of whom Mr.
Hooker was wont to say, that the Lord would not suffer Richardson to live unto
old age, or to finish what was in his heart and head to do, for the same
reason that he would not permit more then three hundred Soldiers to go with
Gideon, even lest the English Nation should glory too much in their own
strength, because such a mighty man was once theirs. Mr. Yates his Model of
Divinity, Catechistically composed, (a very profitable Book) is as to the
method, definitions, and distributions, wholly Richardsons, and a great part of
his explications also, so far as they are solid and demonstrative. A judicious
Reader may easily perceive which are Richardsons and which Yates his Notions,
though in the Book it is not mentioned. About the same time the Lord raised up
that great Champion, Dr. Ames of whom one too truly complains, that there
might be written over his Grave as once over Scipio's, Ingrata Patria, ne ossa
mea quidem habes. Mr. Jeanes.
He in his Medulla Theologiae has improved Richardsons method and Principles
to great advantage. And truly I concur with that worthy Divine, who said, that
next to the Bible, he esteemed Dr. Ames his Marrow of Divinity as D. Thom.
Goodwin.
the best Book in the world.

These things considered, the Reader may expect, and will undoubtedly find,
that which will be well worth his serious perusal in the following Catechism.
As for the worthy Author, although the Lord has seen meet to fix his present
station not only in a wilderness, but in one of the obscurest places therein,
yet is his praise in the Gospel throughout all the Churches. And by what is
here presented, (as well as by other things formerly published) it does appear
that the Author is a Workman that needs not to be ashamed. For here is not
only Milk for Babes in respect of Principles, with much solid dexterity
asserted; but strong Meat in respect of rational explications, and
Demonstrations of those Principles, that the ablest men, who have their senses
exercised in discerning things of this nature, may be edified. Luther did
profess himself to be Discipulus Catechismi, a Learner of his Catechism, all
his days. The work then of a Catechist is not unbecoming or unsuitable to the
ablest Teachers. And if endeavors of this sort were more diligently attended,
it would be one good means to prevent Degeneracy in the succeeding Generation.

Now the Lord bless this faithful undertaking for that end, and grant that the
earth may be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the Sea.

Boston. 4. m. 23. d. 1679. INCREASE MATHER.

Q. WHat is Religion?
A. Religion is a Doctrine of living unto God, and consists of two parts, Faith
and Observance.

The thing defined is Religion, it may be called Divinity, as it comes from
God, and leads to God, and to a divine life, and some have thought it is
called Religion by occasion of man's fall, man at first was bound to God, but he
by his sin loosened himself, and by the Rule of Religion he is bound again;
Religion is a word compounded of re and ligo to bind again, Jam. 1. 26.

Religion is] for if there were no Religion none could be irreligious, if no
Law then no transgression, many seem to be Religious, few are indeed Religious,
Jam. 1. 26, 27.

Definition it self.
1. The general nature and Doctrine] Religion may be called an Art, as it
consists of Precepts, breathing the first and truest knowledge by which man is
guided to his end, but it is called a Doctrine, because none can learn it but
those who are taught of God.

1. None can learn it by the book of nature, for there are some lessons in
Religion which are not to be found in the book of Creation, (namely) man's
Apostasy and Anastasie, how man at first did fall, and how he is recovered by
Christ, and the book of nature is blurred by man's sin, the curse is fallen upon
the works of Creation, and thus this book is darkened.

2. This can not be learnt only by humane industry, for man by nature is void
of spiritual eyesight, Re. 3. 18. hence Religion is called a Doctrine as it is
taught of God.

1. By giving the Rule from Heaven, Deuteronomy. 32. 2. 2. By the illumination of the
Spirit of God, 1 Cor. 2 13, 14.
The special nature of Religion appears in the end and proper object of it.

Of living unto God,] to live unto God is the most excellent kind of life,
hence it is an act of the most noble faculty, upon the most excellent object,
in the most excellent manner, and therefore has religion, which is the most
excellent Rule to lead to this life.

It is not Reason, nor speech, nor quantity, nor nature, can be the proper
object of Religion, all these have their proper acts and Rules to guide them,
but it is goodness it self which is the proper Object and end of Divinity.

1. Man was made for God. 2. Hence he ought to live unto God. 3. Hence he ought
to be fitted for this end. 4. This is his goodness, and to this Religion leads
him, 1. Tim. 6. 3. 1. Pet. 4. 6.
[The parts of Religion are Faith and Observance.]

1. They are parts, for they have a common affection to the whole, and are
distinct one from another, he that is Religious has both these, and yet Faith
is not observance.

2. They are integral parts, give being to the whole, as Soul and body make up
the man, so Faith and Observance do make a man truly and sufficiently
Religious, for to live unto God is the end of Religion, and to this is
necessary first, a principle of life, and this is Faith:

2. The acting of that Principle in observance toward God.

3. Hence Faith and Observance differ in their natures, otherwise they could
not be parts, and in their precepts, otherwise they could not differ in their
natures and hence the Rule of Faith is not the Rule of observance, and hence
this Faith is not required in the Law, Psalm. 37. 3. 2 Timothy 1. 13. but
concerning this more fully in that which follows.

Q. What is Faith?
A. Faith is the first part of Religion, and is a trusting in God for life,
proceeding from a grounded knowledge of God, as he has made known himself in
his sufficiency, and in his efficiency.

1. This Faith is the first part of Religion, because to live unto God, a
principle of life, is firstly necessary, and this is Faith, Gal. 2. 20. 2. The
special nature of this appears.
1. A trusting in God] called a resting, Psalm. 37. 7. a staying upon God, Isai.
50. 10. a looking to God, Isa. 17. 7.

2. For life,] Deuteronomy. 30. 20. and thus this Faith is distinguished first from
Historical Faith, which is an assent to the Truth of the Word of God, -- 2dly,
from temporary Faith, which is a trusting for temporary things,

3. From miraculous Faith which is a trusting for a miraculous power, these do
not come to God for life, Joh. 5. 40. Proceeding from a grounded knowledge of
God] for there can be no desire of an unknown God, no believing on him whom we
do not know, Psalm. 9. 10. hence it follows.

1. This Faith is wrought by knowledge, 2. Hence it is not knowledge nor
properly any virtue of the understanding, life it self is its Object, hence
happiness and goodness it self, and this is properly the Object of the will,
3dly, Hence this Faith is seated in the will.

And thus this Faith is distinguished from Fait' -- in vocation, there we
consider the framing and making of it, here the general act and use of it,
2dly, Hence distinguished from Faith required in the Law, the first Command,
there Faith looks to God as the rewarder of them who do well and live unto
him, -- here it looks to God as the author of life, and of a principle of
well doing;

4. As God has made known himself in his sufficiency, and in his efficiency,]
for Faith apprehends in the way of Reason such a portion of the beams and
glimmerings of God as are sufficient to make a believer live unto God.

1. Faith apprehends in the way of Reason, for God has made man a reasonable
Creature, hence he understands in the way of Reason, -- hence Faith apprehends
by Reason, otherwise man should go without his guide, and see without his eye
sight, Isai. 1. 18. Job. 40. 7.

2. A portion of the beams of God, not the Sun it self, not as God is in
himself,, 1 Timothy 6. 16. Job. 26. 14.

3. So much as is sufficient to make a believer live unto God, Exodus 33. 19,
20. -- hence it follows,

1. The act of Faith is higher then the act of Reason, for Reason in man acts
upon and is conversant about, only that Reason which shines in divine Truth,
but Faith is taken up with looking upon the divine goodness in them.

2. Hence Reason in a believer is a means to let in a light and good beyond
Reason, that as the senses are means to present the Reason in things to the
Reason of man, although Reason is above Sense, so Reason is a means to present
a divine good unto Faith, though that divine good is above Reason, but as
Reason can use the Prattomenon of the Rule of Sense, (namely) that which is
effected by it, so Faith can use the Prattomenon of the Rule of Reason, that
which is effected by it, and yet these are distinct arts, and have distinct
Objects, and distinct lights

And that which God has made known of himself is in his sufficiency, and in
his efficiency, for more we cannot see and live, and more we need not see and
live, Romans 4. 21. Exodus 33. 19, 20.

Quest. What is the sufficiency of God?
Answ. The sufficiency of God is that whereby he has enough in himself, for
himself, and more then enough ^or us, which consists in his Essence, and
Subsistence.

1. He has enough] otherwise there would be a want in him, which can not be,
Psalm. 50. 12.

2. In himself, for himself,] otherwise he could not be happy in himself.

3. More then enough for us,] 2 Cor. 9. 8. Ephesians. 3. 20. he has enough for
himself, as he is an Infinite Being, and therefore more then enough for us who
are finite beings

His sufficiency consists in his Essence, and Subsistence,

1. His Essence, that is his Being absolutely considered.

2. His Subsistence, that is, his standing under some manner of Being, of these
two, Reason may conceive, but beyond these Reason can not imagine, of the
sufficiency of any thing, first, what belongs to the Essence and Being as such,
2dly, what belongs to the Essence besides its Being, 1 John 5. 7. Prove. 8. 30.

Quest. What is the Essence of God?
Answ. The Essence of God is that whereby God is absolutely the first Being,
and does not exsist of causes, nor consist of parts, and his Being is
absolutely pure without composition, and is made known to us by his divine
Attributes.

1. There is a Being, he that denies that, does deny his own Being, and makes
a nothing of his understanding. 2. Being is either first, or arising from the
first, so that there is a first Being, Isai. 43. 10, 11. 3. Absolutely the
first Being, therefore no causes of his Being
1. No efficient causes of his Being, hence
not created cannot be annihilated.
and hence
Independent and Supreme

2. No material cause of his being, hence invisible and impalpable. 3. No
formal cause of his Being, hence Ingenerable and Incorruptible. 4. No final
cause of his Being, hence no art to guide him to his end, and thus he does not
exsist of causes.
And hence it follows, he is not an integrum or entire thing made up of
members, nor part of any entire thing.

2. No genus or general nature exsisting in species, nor special kind of being,
for these imply matter and form, and thus he does not consist of parts. 2. And
hence he has not Accidents or Adjuncts, arising from matter or form, hence he
is first without quantity, and hence no augmentation, nor diminution. 2.
Without qualities arising from the form acting upon the matter, hence immutable
without passion, or suffering, and unresistible.
And thus he is far above all our Logic and Reason, Psalm. 139. 6.

4. He has made known himself by his divine Attributes, what ever is excellent
being attributed to him in an eminent and inconceivable manner, Romans 11. 35, 36.

Quest. What are the divine Attributes?
Answ. They are as they are in God that one most pure Essence, but diversely
appearing to us.

1. His Essence is pure without any composition, as we heard before. 2. Hence
whatever is in God is God himself, Exodus 3. 14. Isai. 44. 8. 3. Hence his
divine Attributes are God himself. 4. Hence he has these not by participation,
but he is every perfection it self, he is wisdom it self, holiness it self,
etc. 5. Hence he has these in the highest degree, they can not be augmented
nor diminished in him. 6. Hence they are equal as they are in him, not more of
one divine Attribute then of another, for they are God himself.
But these do diversely appear to us.

1. By different effects, as the same Sun softens some things, and hardens
other things, so God has mercy on some, and hardens others, Romans 9. 18. we
attribute to the Sun a softening and a hardening power, according to the
various effects it has upon things, so we attribute mercy or justice to God
according as he saves some, or punishes others.

2. By arguments in the glass of our Reason the divine Attributes appear
diverse, for we understand by Reason, and that ever implies, 1. That which
argues.

2. That which is argued. And thus we apprehend concerning God, as if he were
the Subject of his divine Attributes, and they as Adjuncts, and thus, as if
they were distinct from his Essence, and one from another, but this is
improper, and we ought to believe that the divine Attributes are one with the
Essence, and one with another.

Quest. How is God made known to us by his divine Attributes?
Answ. God is made known to us by his divine Attributes to be one Infinite and
Eternal Spirit, having life in and of himself, having most perfect
understanding and will, and is infinitely more glorious then any Spirit, and is
perfection and blessedness it self.

1. We ought to attribute the most excellent kind of being, and the most
excellent properties of Being unto God, in the most eminent manner.

1. The most excellent kind of Being.

1. A living Being is the most excellent, Attribute Life unto him, Deuteronomy. 32.
40. 2. A Spirit is the most excellent of living Beings, attribute that kind of
Being to him, Joh. 4. 24. 3. But we must attribute these to him in an eminent
manner.
1. Life of him, he is the Fountain of Life. 2. All kinds of life are of and in
him eminently, Ps. 84. 8, 9, 10. 3. His Life and Being are one, not first a
Being, and afterward a living Being, -- hence Infinitely more glorious then
any Spirit whatsoever.
We ought to attribute the most excellent Properties of Being to him.

1. The most excellent quantity, Deuteronomy. 32. 3. hence

1. Unity absolutely one, Deuteronomy. 6. 4. 2. Infiniteness, without limits of
Essence, Isai. 40. 12, hence, 1. Immense not measurable, Job. 11. 8. hence
2. Incomprehensible in place, not included nor excluded, Psalm. 139. 7, 8.

3. Eternity, without beginning or end. 1. No time to come with him, for then
he should be limited to time past and present. 2. No time past with him, for
then he should be limited to time present and to come.

3. Hence they are one with him, for he can not be more ancient, then himself,
and there can be no Succession in Eternity, where there is no beginning nor
end, Psalm. 40. 2.

2. Attribute the most excellent qualities to him

1. Most excellent faculties, understanding and will. 2. Most excellent
virtues, Intellectual and Moral.
And these to be attributed in the most eminent manner, hence, the Attributes
of greatness are to be attributed to the Attributes of Goodness, he is
Infinitely and eternally wise, holy, just, merciful, etc. Psalm. 147. 5. Isai.
6. 3.

And here shines his happiness, who by his perfect understanding does
comprehend the most sovereign Truth, and with a most perfect will imbraceth the
chiefest good, and is not only happy, but is perfection and happiness it self.

Quest. What is the Subsistence of God?
Answ. The Subsistence of God is that whereby the first Being reflecting upon
himself stands under diverse mutual respects, and distinct manners of Being,
which are only one, in respect of the Essence, and yet are distinct from the
Essence, and one from another,

1. The first Being reflecting upon himself] for God who is the first Being is
happy in himself. 2. Hence he is acquainted with his own happiness. 3. Hence
hereflects upon himself. 4. Hence he is reflected upon by himself.

2. He stands under diverse mutual respects, and distinct manners of Being] for
his reflecting upon himself, and his Being reflected upon by himself are mutual
respects, reflecting has respect to reflected, and reflected has respect to
reflecting, and thus they are mutual respects.

3. And these are distinct the manners of the Being of the first Being, under
which he stands, hence called Subsistence, Heb. 1. 3. the express Image of his
person, the word in the Original is Subsistence, (the Image of his Subsistence.)

4. These manners of Being are only one in respect of the Essence, and yet are
distinct from the Essence, and one from another,) this is explained in that
which follows.

Quest. How may this be more plainly understood?
Answ. God who is the first Being knows himself, and is known of himself, and
is breathed after by himself, all which mutual respects belong to the first
Being, and yet are distinct from him, and one from another.

1. God knows himself, otherwise he could not be happy in himself, Isai. 44. 8.
2. Hence he is known of himself. 3. Hence he is breathed after by himself as
the most adequate Object of his own perfect understanding and will.

2. All which are mutual respects, knowing, and being known, have a mutual
respect one to the other, and being breathed after by himself, has a mutual
respect to knowing, and being known by himself.

3. These mutual respects belong to the first Being, in which we may consider.
1. The Unity of the Subsistences. 2. Their diversity.

1. Their Unity, that whereby the Subsistences having one and the same Essence,
are all God, and one God.

1. There is but one first Being. 2. The Subsistences are the first being
reflecting upon himself. 3. Hence these are one in Essence, one God. Hence it
follows.

1. They are Co-Essential, having the Essence together, and wholly, as when the
same man is Teacher and Scholar, the Teacher has the whole man, and the
Scholar the whole man, being one and the same man, 1 John 5. 7.

2. Hence they are Coequal, for they are one God, Phil. 2. 6.

3. Hence the divine Attributes belong to them equally, what does belong to God
as God, does belong to the Subsistences equally, for they are all God and one
God, Isai. 9. 6.

4. Hence they are not God of God, for to be God is the absolute Being, and
this is not relative, and derivative, but is one and the same in all the
persons, the Son has his relative being of the Father as he is Son, but not
his absolute Being as God, but thus he is an Everlasting Father, and the mighty
God, Isai. 9. 6.

5. Hence the love they have one to another, and delight to glorify one
another, Joh. 5. 23.

2. Of the diversity of the Subsistences, this will appear in that which
follows.

Quest. How may the Subsistences be distinguished from the Essence, and one from
another?
Answ. The Subsistences may be distinguished from the Essence, as adjunct
manners belonging to the same Essence, and are distinguished one from another as
Relates, by relative properties, and are not improperly called persons, for a
divine person is the Godhead with a relative and individual property, and is
either Father, Son, or Holy Ghost.

1. The Subsistences are distinguished from the Essence, as adjunct manners
belonging to the same Essence, as the same hand opening and shutting, the beams
of the Sun reflecting and reflected, these are not the hand nor the Sun, but
adjunct manners of the Being of these.

2. Hence they differ from the Essence only in some respect, not as diverse
Essences, the same hand, the same Sun, so the same Godhead reflecting and
reflected.

3. Hence the Subsistences are not divine Attributes, which are one as they are
in God, but diversely appearing to us, but these are diverse whither we apprehend
them so or not.

4. They are not inherent qualities in the Essence, for there are none such in
the Essence, as we heard in the description of the Essence.

5. They are manners adhering and belonging to the Essence with it and by it,
Prove. 8. 30.

2. They are distinguished one from another, as Relates by their relative and
individual properties, as teaching and being taught, reflecting and being
reflected, hence follows.

1. They are coexsistent, as Relates, for they are mutual causes, therefore
exsist together, 1 John 1. Prove. 8. 30

2. Coinexistent one in another, for Being and existence is of, and in the
cause, and they are Relates, therefore mutual causes, and therefore one in
another, Joh 14. 10

3. They are coapparant, for knowledge ^s of the causes, and these are mutual
causes, hence he that knows the one, knows the other, Joh. 14. 9.

4. And yet one is not the other, for Relates are mutual causes, and differ as
cause and effect.

3. Hence they are not improperly called persons.

A person is a perfect and individual substance of a reasonable nature. 1. A
substance; For mere Accidents or Adjuncts are no person, as virtues are not
called persons individual, for mankind is not a person, because it is the genus,
but individual men are called persons. 3. Perfect, for the Soul alone is not a
person, because it is but a part of man, not a perfect man. 4. A reasonable
nature, creatures without Reason are not persons, and by way of eminency it is
attributed to men.

And the Godhead with a relative and individual property is a divine person,
and is either persons breathing or breathed, spirante or persons breathing, as
Father and Son, Spirit, or breathed, as the Holy Ghost.

Quest. Who is the Father?
Answ. The Father is the first person who begets his Son, God is happy in
himself. 2. Hence he knows himself. 3. Hence he conceivs the Image of himself.
4. Hence to conceive and beget, and this may be called active Generation, this
properly belongs to the Father, and he is first in order 1 Ioh. 18.

Quest. Who is the Son?
Answ. The Son is the second divine person begotten of the Father. 1. God is
happy in himself. 2. Hence is known and conceived of himself. 3. Hence to be
conceived and begotten, and this may be called passive generation, this
properly belongs to the Son, Heb. 1. 3. Joh. 1. 18. and he is the second in
order.

Quest. Who is the Spirit?
Answ. The Spirit is the third divine person proceeding from the Father and the
Son.

1. God is happy in himself. 2. Hence knows and is known of himself. 3. Hence
is breathed after by himself, and this may be called passive spiration, and is
the relative property of the Spirit, Joh. 16. 14.

And the Reason why active spiration does not constitute a person is, because
it does not nextly and immediately belong to the divine Essence, but to the
Father and the Son, for it is God conceiving, and having conceived the Image of
himself, does breath after himself, and thus active Spiration does nextly
proceed from the Relative properties of the Father, and the Son.

2. Active spiration belongs in common to the Father and the Son, and is no
individual property belonging only to one.

Quest. What is the Efficiency of God?
Answ. The Efficiency of God is that whereby he works all in all things
according to the counsel of his will, for his own glory, by his Omnipotency in
Creation and Providence, and which honor of working belongs to the three
persons, who work the same according to their distinct manner and order of
Subsistence.

1. It is that whereby he works all in all things] for he is the first Being,
hence the power of working is of him, and hence he is the first mover in all
other causes, and works all in all, Ephesians. 1. 11.

2. Hence appears his Omnipotency, if he does all, then he can do all, hence
all powerfulness belongs to him, he can do a work of power.

1. Not that which argues weakness. 1. Hence not that which is contrary to his
nature, 2 Timothy 2. 13. and

2. Hence not that which is contrary to the Rule of nature, for the Rule of
nature is a beam of his own wisdom. 3. He can do all possible things as to
raise Children out of stones, which is not to produce an effect without a
cause, that would be contrary to the Rule of nature and his wisdom, but he can
supply the place of the cause immediately, Math. 3. 9.

Attribute Omnipotency to him eminently, his power of acting and act is one in
him, otherwise a change in him, which can not be, but the creature is the
Subject of the change not God, the beams of the Sun are in power to warm or
shine upon this or that thing which they do not in act until that thing comes
under the beams of the Sun, and yet no change in the beams of the Sun, but in
the thing warmed by the same, so in respect of the power of God.

3. According to the counsel of his will) or his own glory, here appears the
decree of God, whereby he determines what shall be done.

1. He can do all things absolutely possible, this is his absolute power. 2. He
will do that only which may stand with his wisdom and good will this is his
ordinate power, that he will do only that which is conditionally and
respectively possible, Ephesians. 1. 11. he could have made more then one woman for
one man at first, in respect of his absolute power it was possible, Mal. 2. 15.
but in respect of its inconsistency with his wisdom it was respectively and
conditionally impossible.

3. Hence a decree to determine what shall be done and what shall not be done,
and to this decree belongs that which is Complemental and Essential. 1.
Complemental. 1. His truth, his words agree with his mind, Ier. 10. 10. 2. His
faithfulness, he does what he has said, and that as he has spoken, 1 Cor. 10.
13.

3. His constancy, -- his decree can not change, Isa. ^6. 10.

2. That which is Essential to his decree. 1. The final cause his own glory,
for if he intended ultimately any end besides himself, he should deny himself,
Ephesians. 1. 6.

2. The Efficient causes of his decree, his wisdom and good will. 1. His
wisdom, Psalm. 104. 24. 1. He acts well. 2. Hence according to Rule. 3. This
Rule is not of the creatures, but of him. 4. This Rule by which he acts is the
idea or pattern of well acting. 5. This Idea in God is the first cause of well
acting. 1. It borrows not. 2. Hence its merely imprinting, and that wisdom
in the creatures is imprinted, and is the impression or Image of it. 3. Hence
the Rules of Art as in God are eternal, but as in the frame of Creation they
are in time, if there had been a man from all Eternity he must have been
Animal, Rational, the definitions of things are eternal Truths, whatever
becomes of the things themselves.

2. The other Efficient cause of the decree is the will of God, to which we
ought to attribute the greatest liberty, for either he acts freely, or by
necessity, if by necessity, then either by outward necessity, that which is
called the necessity of coaction, as forced by an external power, but this can
not be, he does his pleasure: or inward necessity, the necessity of nature, as
fire burns, and as all natural causes act ad extremum potentiae, then he had
done all things absolutely possible, but he acted not as a cause by necessity,
nor by nature, but as a cause by counsel most freely, Romans 9. 18, 19.

2. The goodness of his will. 1. He wills himself, as the chiefest good. 2.
He wills what is agreeable to himself. 3. He sees it to be such, and wills
it as such otherwise he might will that which is contrary to himself. 4. Hence,
because he sees it to be agreeable to himself, and best, Consideratis
Considerandis, he wills it, Ephesians. 1. 5.

3. The Efficacy of his will. 1. He wills the Being and the manner of the
Being and acting of a creature, that it be such a creature, and so qualified.
2. Hence ^e wills some to be natural causes, and some to be contingent, and
act as causes by counsel. 3. Hence he wills that man shall act freely. 4.
Hence he does not put any necessity or constraint upon man's will, for then he
should act contrary to his own decree, Romans 9. 19. which can not be.

1. He wills what is agreeable to himself. 2. Hence his will presupposes a
good, and therefore wills.

3. But it presupposes none in the creature, but wills and works it.

4. The Independency of his will, it depends not upon any cause out of himself,
only distinguish between Eupraxie and well acting, as it leads to God, and is
agreeable to himself, and therefore wills it. And that the Creature may thus
act, he willing works it -- voluntas decreti, the will of Gods decree makes
a thing good, -- voluntas mandati the will of his Command enjoyneth the
practice of that which is good, hence his commanding will is the Rule of
obedience. And God is Omniscient and Omnipotent, but not Omnivolent, Dan. 4. 35.

The last particular in the description of the Efficiency of God is, that the
honor of Efficiency ought to be attributed to all the three divine persons.]

1. Efficiency belongs to God as God, therefore to all the three persons.

2. Hence a cooperation of the persons. 1. They work the same, Ioh. 5. 16, 17.
2. They are equal in their working. 3. Hence the causal power, a divine person
puts forth, is not of another, but of himself as God.

3. Yet a distinct manner of working, according to their distinct manner and
order of Subsistence, which order, 1. Is no order of dignity, for they are
coequal.

2. No order of time for they are Coeternal. 3. No order of Exsistence and
nature, for they are Relates and are coexsistent. 4. It is an order of
origination. or first in numeration, God works by knowing, and being of
himself, and breathed after by himself. Hence,

1. The Father works of himself by his Son and Spirit, and the origination of
things, and especially Creation is attributed to him.

2. The Son works from the Father by the Spirit, and thus the dispensation of
all things is attributed to him; and especially Redemption.

3. The Spirit works from the Father, and the Son, by himself, and thus the
consummation of things is attributed to him, and especially the work of
application, Joh. 16. 13. 15, 16, 17. the parts of Efficiency follows,
(namely) Creation and Providence.

Quest. What is Creation?
Answ. Creation is that whereby God made the World out of nothing, very good,
in six days; some Creatures were made Immediately out of nothing, as the third
Heavens, the Angels, and the first matter, and some mediately out of nothing,
as the Elements, and the Elementaries, and amongst those, last of all, man was
made.

1. Creation is that whereby God made the World;] for it was made, or not made;
if not made, then no causes of its Being, then no matter nor form, nor end,
which cannot be; and either God made it, or it made its self, then it was the
cause of its own Being, and should be before it was, which cannot be.

2. Out of nothing] or else out of some first, then out of himself, for there
was no other first Being, then of the same Essence with him, this cannot be,
therefore made out of nothing, or if the World had been Eternal then a
numberless company of days had been before this day, then this day had never
been, there is a Succession of things and times, therefore the World not
Eternal, a part post.

3. Very good] goodness is a fitness for the end. 1. Universal, in respect of
the last end to which all ought to serve, (namely) the glory of the Creator. 2.
Particular subordination of things and ends one to another, until it comes to
the last end, Genesis 1. ult.

4. In six dayes] Genesis 1. ult.

The parts of the World are Creatures made out of nothing, either Immediately,
or mediately. Immediately, and were perfect, or imperfect, perfect as the third
Heavens, and Angels, Genesis 1. 1. Job. 38. 7.

Hence these were not made out of any preexistent principles. 2. Hence their
matter and form stood together immediately out of nothing, and are constant
natures.

3. Hence not subject to generation nor corruption, cannot acquire nor lose
their form, because made and continued by Gods immediate hand, 4. Hence
everlasting. Math. 6. 20. and 22. 30. The third heavens is that most stately,
and glorious habitation where God is seen as it were face to face. 1. Cor. 13.
12. Math. 18. 10.

The Angels were Spirits made to praise God by being ministering Spirits. Hebr.
1. 7. 14.

2. That which was made immediately out of nothing, and was imperfect, was the
first matter; it was a first matter, for it was not of the Elements, nor of any
pre-existent principle. 2. Made out of nothing, as the third heavens and the
Angels, Genesis 1. 1, 2, 3. It was imperfect. 1. Without form. 2. Hence no special
nature. 3. Hence no qualityes. 4. Hence overspread with darkness, which was not
created, but is a mere privation of light. 5. Hence the first matter was merely
supported by the power of God, otherwise it would have fallen into nothing:
called Earth in respect of its deformity, inferiority and vileness.

Next follows the Creatures, mediately made out of nothing, Elements and
Elementaryes.

1. Elements made out of the first matter; but the first matter having no form,
could give no substantial form to the Elements. 2. Hence their Forms were
immediately out of nothing. 3. Hence in respect of their special natures not
subject to corruption, but eternal: and though they shall change accidentally
but not substantitially in respect of their forms and special natures; for the
heat of the fire shall not be extinguished, but remain for ever. 2. Pet. 3. 10.
Isai. 66. ult.

Elements are either the higher or lower,

The higher, as fire, Air. The Fire is the highest and hottest Element, and
being condensated it burns and shines: hence is light, and from light a
constitution of day and night.

1. The day is when the light turns downward, and overspreads our Hemisphere.

2. The night is when the light turns upward, and overspreads our Hemisphere,
hence follows a division of day and night, and this division is by Morning
and Evening properly taken.

1. Morning is the end of darkness, and beginning of light, and Evening is the
contrary.

And night and day considered together do make up one night-day, called a
natural day consisting of twenty four hours, the other called a Civil or
artificial day.

And the third Heavens, the Angels, the first matter, and the Element of fire
from which proceeded Light, was the work of the first day, Genesis 1. from the 1.
to the 5.

2. The Air which is a higher Element and most moist, and as it were the matter
of every sound.

1. It slides into the most intimate passages, where matter cannot. 2. It is
easily assimilated to the figure of another thing, and therefore is most moist,
called the Firmament, or Expanse, because it was spread as a Curtain, and was
the work of the second day, Genesis 1. 8.

The lower Elements are water and Earth, the water most cold, the Earth most
dry, and both make one Globe, but the water being next to the Air by order of
Creation, and therefore inclines to stand above the Earth, Psalm. 104. 6.

The Elementaries imperfectly mixed, or perfectly mixed. Imperfectly mixed,
whose parts are not so closely united as the meteors which arise from the fumes
of the Elements.

2. Elementaries perfectly mixed, which have either a body only, or not only a
body, but a quickening Spirit, a body only in the Minerals, and a body, and a
quickening Spirit, and have either a single life, or compound. A single life,
one kind of life only, either springing, or moving. A springing life as the
Plants, and the lower Elements the Meteors, the Minerals and Plants were the
work of the third day. Genesis 1. 13.

2. A moving life as the Lights, the greater, or lesser.

1. The greater as the Sun and Moon. 2. The lesser, the other Stars the work of
the fourth day, Genesis 1. 19.
Those which lead a compound life, more lives then one, and either less
compound or more compound. Less compound as Bruits, who are either remote from
man, or more nigh to man; remote from man, as Fishes and Fowls, the work of the
fifth day, Genesis 1. 23. or more nigh to man as the Beasts, made the sixth day
with man, Genesis 1. 26, 31.

The most compound life as the life of man.

Quest. How did God make man?
Answ. God did make man to consist of a body and a reasonable, and immortal
Soul, according to the Image of God, and gave him dominion over the Creatures,
and he was perfectly fitted to please God.

In the Creation of man we may consider his constitution and perfection.

1. His constitution or parts, as he consists of body and Soul. 1. His body,
which is a part of man made out of the Elements, especially out of the Earth,
and fitted with Organs for the Soul.

1. A part of man with the Soul, hence not his matter only. 2. Made of the
Elements for it is nourished by them. 3. Especially of the Earth, therefore
bears that Name, Genesis 2. 7. 4. Fitted with Organs for the Soul to be its
house or Tabernacle.
2. The Soul is a quickening Spirit, or spiritual substance, immortal, having
understanding and will, and fitted for union to the body.

1. A quickening Spirit, or spiritual substance, a Spirit therefore invisible.
2. A substance, therefore matter and form.

1. Matter, else it could not suffer, for to the matter belongs passive
principles. 2. Form, otherwise deformed, or boundless, for the Form limits the
thing.

2. Immortal, for it was made immediately out of nothing, and hence returns to
him that gave it, Eccl. 12. 7.

3. Understanding and will, hence a reasonable Creature, a cause by counsel.

4. Fitted for union to the body. 1. The Soul is at first united to the body.
2. Has a fitness for it. 3. When separated does affect this union, Rev. 6. 10.

2. The perfection of man at first, a fitness to please God, in which we may
consider the image of God in man, and his dominion.

1. The image of God imprinted on man, Genesis 1. 26.

1. In his understanding, he was able to see all the Rules which would lead to
God, Prove. 30. 2. 2. In his will, to choose them, Eccl. 7. 29. 3. In his
affections and body, with all the members thereof fitted to obey the commands
of sanctified Reason and will, Romans 6. 19.

2. Dominion, which was that Royalty of man whereby he had power to use the
Creatures for his end, Genesis 1. 26.

And the woman was joined with him as a Co-partner with him in this perfection,
and his Companion, Genesis 2. 22.

Thus of Creation, in which these wonders appear.

1. God made something out of nothing, his power being infinite.

2. The act of Creation in respect of God Eternal, otherwise he should change,
which cannot be, but passive Creation had a beginning, that is, in respect of
the World made.

3. Time and place began with the World, having no absolute being, but relative
respecting the Creatures hence no time nor place before the World.

4. Man the Microcosmos. 1. A being, as the Elements. 2. A body as the
Minerals. 3 A moving life as stars, a springing life as Plants. 4. A sensitive
life as Beasts, and 5. A rational life as Angels, and ought to lead a Godlike
life as God, acting his Image in imitation of him, and for him.

Quest. What is Providence?
Answ. It is that whereby God looks to his Creatures, either in an ordinary,
or extraordinary manner, and therefore preserves and governs them either by
his common government, and thus he overruleth all his Creatures, or by his
special government, and thus he rules Angels and men.

1. Providence is the Efficiency of God whereby he looks to his Creatures]
watches over them, Psalm. 145. 15, 16.

2. This is either an ordinary, or extraordinary manner. 1. In an ordinary
manner, that is according to the order set at first, Hos. 2. 22. 2. Or in an
extraordinary manner, not attending to that order, and then the change is not
in respect of the Rule, but in respect of the means, it is not to make an
effect without a cause, but to supply the place of the ordinary cause and means
by his own power immediately.

3. Providence is either Conservation or Government, Conservation which is that
whereby the Being and qualities of the Creatures are continued,] 1. The
Creatures have their Being from God. 2. Hence depend upon that same causal
power to continue their Being. 3. The cessation or withdrawing of that power
will be the dissolution of the Creature, Psalm. 104. 29.

2. Government which is the guiding of the acts of the Creatures to their ends.
1. They were made for some end, else in vain. 2. They must act, otherwise how
can they attain the end. 3. Some Rule to guide them, else not act well. 4.
Hence guided and governed, Dan. 4. 34, 35.

There are two sorts of causes which God governs causes by nature and by
Counsel. 1. Natural causes which he guides by the Law of nature to their
inferior ends. 1. They act by power, or principle arising out of nature, natura
est res nata ex principiis, as water cools and fire burns. 2. Hence
determined to one opposite, fire of it self burns only if condensated. 3.
Hence this cause acts to the uttermost of its power if not hindered by an
external power overruling. 4. Nature is in all Creatures, and God as a God of
nature over-ruleth them, therefore this is called a common government, Jer. 32.
19. Psalm. 19. 1, 2.

2. Causes by Counsel, whom God guides in a rational manner by special Rules to
the highest end, thus Angels and men. 1. They have Reason and liberty of will.
2. Hence are to be guided in a rational manner. 3. This manner is 1. By showing
his will. 1. Commanding, and to that annexing a Promise. 2. Prohibiting, and to
that annexing a Threatening, Mic. 6. 8. 2. Fullfilling his will, giving every
one his due, Jer. 32. 19

And thus the Lord rules Angels and Men. 1 Angels, 1. The rule given to them
was the moral law, for they were made holy and righteous. 2. The transgression
of this law was charged upon the fallen Angels as murder and lying: the event
of this was,

1. Some of the Angels obeyed and were rewarded

2. Some disobeyed and are miserable. 1. The time of their Fall was before men
fell, for they tempted him. 2. Their sin was Pride, they kept not their
station, but aspired higher, Jude. 6. v. 2. Their punishment not in the highest
degree inflicted until the last day, Matthew. 25. 11. Next of the Government of
God respecting Man.

Quest. What is the Government of God respecting Man?
Answ. The government of God respecting Man at first was that whereby God gave
man the moral Law and promised to reward him with life if he obeyed, and
threatened to punish him with everlasting death if he disobeyed. Concerning the
event of which we may consider Man's Apostasy and Anastacy.

1. The moral Law was given to Man at first to be the Rule of Obedience. 1. For
he was made holy and righteous. 2. And the transgression of this Law was
charged upon fallen man: hence the same rule with the Angels, only with these
distinctions, 1. Various deductions and applications of the moral Law
respecting the condition of man's life as he has a body, as the Sabbath, the
honoring of Parents, and such like rules were properly belonging to man. 2. As
man had senses, and was to be led by sensibles to spirituals; thus Sacraments
were appointed to him. 1. The Tree of life, to assure him of life if he obeyed.
2. The tree of knowledge of good and evil to be a seal of death if he
disobeyed. Genesis 2. 9.

2. Man acted not as every Angel, for himself only, but as a public person for
himself and his posterity: but more of this in the Apostasy of Man.

3. Hence arose a Covenant between God and his reasonable Creatures, Angels and
Men: That God promised happiness upon condition of Obedience, and threatened the
contrary upon disobedience.

And the event comes to be considered respecting man in man's Apostasy and
Anastacy.

Quest. What is the Apostasy of Man?
Answ. The Apostasy of man is that whereby man did fall from obedience to the
Rule of Gods government, in his disobeying by eating the forbidden fruit, the
Devil tempting him to it by abusing the Serpent and the woman as instruments,
and the Man abusing the liberty of his will, the effect of which was guilt and
punishment upon man and his posterity.

In the Apostasy of man we may consider his Transgression and the Propagation
of it.

1. The transgression it self in eating the forbidden fruit. 1. He had liberty
to eat any other. Genesis 2. 16. 2. It was against an express command. 3. An abuse
of the Sacrament; and thus a contempt of the whole Covenant. Genesis 2. 17.

And we may consider the causes of his sin, and the effects of it. The causes,
a blameable, and blameless, the blameable, adjuvant and principal, the adjuvant
or helping causes, the Devil abusing the Serpent and the woman. 1 The Devil
tempted. 1. Pretending a good. 2. Concealed, yea, denied the evil.

2. Abused the Serpent which had a natural subtlety which Satan abused, Genesis 3.
1, 2, 3, 4, 5. 3. Abused the woman, who being next to man might be most likely
to persuade man, Genesis 3. 6. 1 Timothy 2. 14. 2 Cor. 11. 3.

2. The principal, blameable cause was man's abusing the liberty of his will,
Genesis 3. 6. Eccl. 7. 29.

1. Man as a Creature was mutable, immutability is a property of the Creator,
and mutability is inseparable from the Creature, that is a possibility to
change, and this belonging to a Creature as a Creature, and not as a sinful
Creature, is no sinful defect.

2. As man was a cause by counsel he had reason and liberty of will, and that
liberty of indifferency, could choose and refuse, had no necessity upon his will.

3. Adam had the image of God, so he was able to have obeyed if he would. 1. He
had perfection. 2. This was not taken away before his fall; for then he had not
been perfect before his fall.

4. Hence his first sin did not arise,

1. From any sinful principle in him, for 1. He was perfect and had no such
principle. 2. The eating of the forbidden fruit was his first sin, but if it
had arose from any sinful principle in him, that disposition to sin had been
his first sin.

2. Hence first sin was not error in understanding, for either he had not
ability to discern, or he did not use it. Not the first, for he had perfection
of intellectual virtues; if the second, a neglect to use his ability, this was
not error in understanding, but rather of his will.

3. Hence his first sin was a consent of his will to Satan's Temptation. 1.
Satan presents a good. 2. Tempts to unlawful means, and man inordinately
chooses the one, and is overcome by the other,

4. Hence man put himself under the power of his mutability, and thus abuses
the liberty of his will, Eccl. 7. 29. that a glass is breakable is not a defect
to be complained of, but that man who was mutable would t^y whether by an
unlawful means he could not attain a good, and thus put himself under the power
of mutability, and thus this glass is broken and undone,

2. The blameless cause was the Law of God. 1. The Law forbids sin. 2. Man
opposes it. 3. The Law must yield, or man must be broken. 4. The Law cannot
yield, or give place, but is like a Rock against which a Ship runs, and
breaks it self in pieces, Romans 4. 15.

The Effect of this was, first guilt, 2dly, punishment.

1. Guilt, whereby a transgressor is bound to suffer punishment, or is liable
to it. Romans 3. 19. 2. Punishment, namely the evil inflicted upon a sinner for
his transgression, which is death it self, Genesis 2. 17.
Quest. What is the punishment of sin?
Answ. The punishment of sin is death, which is a privation of a happy life,
and being subject to the contrary misery, both the first death, the body
deprived of the comforts of this life, and at last severed from the Soul, and
the second death which is the death of the Soul.

1. Death is the punishment of sin, Genesis 2. 17.

2. It is a privation of a happy life] not merely a privation of life, for then
Being should cease, and the Subjects of misery be taken away, and so the
punishment ended, but it is a privation of a happy or comfortable life, hence
the parts of death are, 1. A privation of the good, and 2. The sense of the
contrary misery. 3. The kinds of death, the first death, the second death. The
first death, a corporeal death, the beginning of which is in a privation of the
comforts of this life in some degree, and the contrary miseries, poverty,
shame, sickness, 2 Cor. 7. 10. 2. The perfection of this is when Soul and body
are separated, and the body returns to the Elements, Eccl. 12. 7.

The second death, which is the death of the Soul.

Quest. What is the death of the Soul?
Answ. The death of the Soul is first a privation of that which is Essential to
spiritual life, as the principle of life, the Image of God, and the contrary
evil possessing (namely) a principle of Enmity in man's nature against God, and
a privation of the acts of life, and a swerving of man's actions from God, the
first may be called original sin, and the other actual sin.

In the death of the Soul we may consider it as it is a privation of that which
is Essential to spiritual life. 2. Of that which belongs to its well Being.

1. Of that which is Essential, as first, a privation of a principle of life,
and so of the Image of God, Ephesians. 4. 18. man opposing the Law, defaced the Image
of God, and spoiled himself. 2. Hence was subjected to a principle of Enmity
against God, and thus a swerving of his whole nature, Romans 8. 7. Genesis 6. 5. and
thus sin takes occasion by the Law, Romans 7. 8.

2. A privation of acts of life, and the contrary to this a swerving of the
actions from the Law, Romans 3. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17.

The first of these is called Original sin, as it is the beginning and spring
of the other, and the latter is called actual sin, as it is the acting of
vicious principles which are in man's nature, Math. 15. 18, 19.

Quest. What is the death of the soul in the second place?
Answ. The Death of the Soul in the second place is a privation of the favor
of God, and being possessed with fear and shame: a privation of the confirming
presence of God, and being subject to the power of Satan: and the consummation
of this death shall be when the Soul immediately after its departure out of the
body shall be cast into hell, and both soul and body after the day of Judgment.

In the former we hear of a privation of that which is essential to a spiritual
life, next of that which belongs to the well being and completing of that life.

1. A privation of the favor of God. Lam. 3. 43, 44. And the contrary to this,
possessed with fear and shame. Isai. 57. ult. Genesis 3. 7, 8.

2. A privation of the confirming presence of God: Man should have been
established in the way of life if he had obeyed; but he disobeying is deprived
of this: and the contrary to this is a being subject to the power of Satan the
tempter. Heb. 2. 14. Ephesians 2. 3.

3. The perfection of this death. 1. The Soul immediately after its departure
out of the body shall be cast into hell. 2. The Soul and Body after the day of
Judgment together cast into hell fire: Mat. 13. 50. Rev. 20. 14 15. Math. 16.
26.

Quest. What is the propagation of Adams sin unto his Posterity?
Answ. Adams Transgression is extended to all his posterity; for all mankind
was in him as the common root, and he acted as a public person, and therefore
his sin is imputed to all his posterity, and he has really communicated the
same sinful nature, that we are inclined to act as he did.

We may consider the union of Adams posterity to him, and their communion with
him.

1. The union, Natural, Moral. 1. Natural: all mankind was in him, as he was
the common root of all mankind. Act. 17. 26. Hence what he acted all Mankind
did act. 2. The moral union: He acted as a public person, if he had obeyed,
all his posterity had been happy; he disobeying all become miserable. Romans 5.
12.

2. Communion with him, by imputation, and real communication. 1. Imputation:
his sin is reckoned to his posterity as if they had done it, hence in respect
of the merit of it accounted theirs, hence guilt and punishment upon all. Romans
3. 19.

2. A real communication of the same sinful nature Original sin, Psalm. 51. 5.
Ephesians. 2. 3.] Thus it is natural, such as the Root such are the Branches,] 2. Sin
is conveyed either from God, or from the Parents, not from God, for he cannot
be the author of sin, hence the Soul as it comes out of his hand is not
positively holy, for then there might be a falling from grace, seeing many
Children appear to be wicked afterward, and yet the Soul as it comes out of
his hand is not positively vicious, for he cannot be the author of sin.

2. Hence sin comes to the Child nextly from the Parents, and that first, is
either immediately, but not so, for the Soul of a Child is not immediately
united to the Parents, therefore can have no such communion with them.

2. Or mediately, and that is either by the Body or the Spirits which unite
Soul and body, not from the body nextly, for that is united to the Soul by the
Spirits, hence it is by the deordination of those Spirits which unite Soul and
body, and these are conveyed from the Parents, and not under the power of
distemper and disorder, and Communion is by union, and union is by the uniting
means.

Qu. What Attributes shine forth in the Apostasy of man?
Answ. The holiness and Justice, and yet the mercy of God in gentleness and
bounty to fallen man do shine forth, in, or by occasion of man's Apostasy.

1. The holiness of God which is that whereby he cannot approve of any, but
those who do agree with him, to advance him as he is most glorious, hence he
distasted man, and abhorred man, Hab. 1. 13.

2. His Justice inclined to give every one his due. 1. Remunerative, in
rewarding him who does well, Romans 4. 4. 2. Vindictive, in punishing him who
does evil, Romans 2. 9. and the degrees of this. 1. The Sentence called
Judgment. 2. The Execution of it, Eccl. 8. 11. the degrees of this, first, if
more mild called anger, if more sharp called wrath and fury, Deuteronomy. 29. 23.

3. His mercy inclined to succor the undeserving, hence first, gentleness
inclined to spare a sinner in bearing, called patience, if long, his long
sufferance, 2 Chronicles. 11. 36. 15, 16. 2. His bounty inclined to afford supplies
to the undeserving, Romans 2. 4. Man suffers Gods displeasure for sin, but this
man through his weakness can not bear, and therefore breaks under it, and
cannot satisfy, and therefore it is just he should always suffer.

Quest. What is the Anastacy of Man?
Answ. The Anastacy of man is that whereby the mercy of God recovereth some
sinners out of a state of sin and death, into a state of grace and life by the
redemption of the Son of God, whose work it is to reconcile God and man as he
is Priest, and man to God as he is a Prophet and King, and by his Spirit sent
to apply this Redemption.

1. The Anastacy of man is his recovery out of a state of sin and death, into a
state of grace and life,] Ephesians. 2. 1.

2. This proceeds from the mercy of God, whereby he is inclined to succor the
miserable, and the undeserving, and therefore this is done for his own Names
sake, Isai. 43. 25.

The parts of this are, Redemption, Application. 1. Redemption, which is a
payment of a just price to divine Justice, and thereby satisfaction. 1. God
governs man as he is a reasonable creature. 2. Hence according to Justice. 3.
Hence if man had obeyed he should have been rewarded with life, but he having
disobeyed, he cannot live without just satisfaction made, Romans 5. 17.

Concerning Redemption we may consider the person and his work. 1. The person
who is the Redeemer, the Son of God. 1. God and man at variance, the Father in
special, the person offended, man by his sin having made a breach upon the work
of Creation, in which work the Fathers manner of working did shine forth, as we
heard in the Efficiency of God, hence it was not meet for him to mediate. 2.
This work is propounded to the Son of God, and he accepts it, and his manner of
working does especially shine forth in this, who is the second divine person,
and this is the second great work, and he works from the Father by the
Spirit, 1 Timothy 2. 6. Acts 4. 12.

2. His first work, to reconcile God to man, as a Priest, Heb. 2. 17. 2. To
reconcile man to God, first, as a Prophet making known the way of life, Luke 4.
18. 2. As a King, dispensing life with a Kingly Authority, Psalm. 110. 1, 2, 3.
And by his Spirit sent to apply this Redemption, Joh. 16. 8, 9, 10, 11. but of
this afterward. The first being the Sufficiency, the second the Efficiency of
man's Anastacy or recovery.

Quest. What in the first place ought to be considered concerning this work?
Answ. We ought in the first place to consider the fitness of Christ to be a
Redeemer, for his two natures being personally united, and yet remain the same
in Essence and Essential properties, and he was anointed, that is, called and
furnished to this great work of Redemption.

To the performing of the work of a Redeemer, we may consider, first, a fitness
of Christ to redeem. 2. The parts of Redemption. First, of his fitness to
redeem appearing in his Incarnation and Unction. First, his Incarnation, the
Son of God was made man in all things sin only excepted, and the manner of his
Subsistence. 1. He was like to us, Phil. 2. 7. 2. in all things, Heb. 2. 17. 3.
except sin, he was without sin, Heb. 4. 15. and the manner of the Subsistence
of his humane nature, for that subsists in his divine person, in which we may
consider the union of his natures, and their Communion. 1. Their union, which
is that whereby the Son of God assumed a humane nature, to subsist inseperably
in his own person.

1. The person assuming, was the Son of God, Gal. 4. 4. hence it was God
assumed a humane nature, and yet not as God, for then all the three persons had
assumed. 2. But the Son of God assumed mediately by his person.

2. That which is assumed is a humane nature, Soul and body, hence 1. a twofold
understanding, Mark 13. 32. 2. A twofold will, divine and humane, accompanied
with a natural desire of his safety, Math. 26. 39. 3. And a twofold presence,
Omnipresent as God, but not so as man

3. The assumption it self, his humane nature did not subsist by its self, for
then it had been a person, and then two persons mediating, but there is but one
Mediator, ^ Tim. 2. 5.

2. His humane nature subsisted in his person. 1. It was sustained by it from
the beginning of its Being, and thus was related to the divine nature as an
Effect, or an Adjunct. 2. It was filled with the divine nature, Col. 2. 9. and
thus the divine nature had a twofold respect of Subsistence, one in the Godhead
as he was the second person, this was from Eternity; another in the humane
nature in time, and yet but one Subsistence, for this works no change in the
divine nature, only a relation is added to it.

3. Subsisteth in it inseperably,] for if this union had been broken, then no
Mediator, not God-man in one person, hence when Soul and body were severed, yet
the divine nature preserved its union to both of them, Acts 2. 31.

4. Hence assuming was no act of Christ's Humiliation for, 1. It was an act of
his divine person, and that cannot suffer. 2. If it were an act of Humiliation,
it should be laid aside in the state of his Exaltation, then the union of
Christ's natures should cease in heaven, but this cannot be.

Thus of the union. Next of the Communion of Christ's natures: only we must
remember, 1. Their Communion. 2. But no Confusion.

1. Their Communion, which is personal, for such is their union.

1. Hence they cooperate to the same effect, if the divine nature does effect
that to which the humane nature does not concur, then no work of God-man, if
the humane nature did that in which the divine did not concur, then no act of
the Person; hence they cooperate to the same effect.

2. Its according to their properties and distinct manner of working: when the
humane nature was the Sacrifice, the divine nature was the Altar, which
sanctifies the Sacrifice: and as he was God and man he was the Priest, and
when his body was raised out of the grave this divine nature acted in that work
by virtue of its relation to the humane nature.

Hence what is proper to the Person is attributed to the humane nature by
reason of its relation, as to be in the beginning; and what belongs to one
nature is attributed to another, as God manifested in the flesh. etc.

And hence the humane nature is to be worshipped, not in respect of it self,
but as united to the divine nature. Heb. 1. 6.

And yet the distinction of his natures remain, that is they remain the same in
essence and essential properties.

1. In essence, his divine nature cannot be a humane nature, that cannot
change; his humane nature cannot be a divine nature, for finite cannot become
infinite.

2. Distinct in their essential properties, that although they do make use of
one another propertyes, yet the essence remaining distinct, their essential
properties are distinct; a divine and an humane understanding, will and
presence, as we said before.

Thus of the Incarnation, next of Christ's Unction, Call, Furniture.

1. His Call, his Father called him, that is 1. Chose him to this work, Isai.
42. 1, 2. 2. Gave him a Commission, Joh. 3. 17. 3. Promised to prosper and
reward him. Isa. 53. 10. 11. And Christ accepted of this work, Psalm. 40. 6, 7.
Hence a Covenant between the Father and the Son, and thus in this respect our
Mediator was eternal. Heb. 13. 8. and 7. 17.

2. His Furniture. 1. A fullness of grace, Joh. 1. 16. beyond measure, Joh. 3.
39. Isa. 42. 1, 2.

Hence all the three Persons have their hand in Redemption. 1. In making the
humane nature. 2. In uniting the humane nature to the divine nature; for these
belong to the efficiency of God as he is God. 3. But the second Person only
assumes it, he alone is the term of that Relation, their act terminates only on
and in him.

Quest. Why must Christ be God and Man?
Ans. Christ must be man that he might suffer for man and teach man familiarly,
and be of the same kind with his body; and he was God, that he might enable his
humane nature to suffer, and that he might be a most able Prophet, and be able
to su^^ly his body, and rule as King.

1. He was man that he might suffer for man; for man had sinned, and man must
suffer: and he was God to enable his humane nature to suffer. Heb. 9. 14.

2 He was man that he might teach man familiarly after the manner of man, and
he was God that he might be an able Prophet, 1. Cor. 2. 16.

3. He was man that he might be of the same kind with his body, the head and
the body must be of the same kind, and yet he must be God, that he might be
able to supply his body, and to rule as King, Ephesians. 1. 21, 22. Rev. 1. 17, 18.

Quest. What are the parts of Redemption?
Answ. The parts of Redemption are Christ's humiliation, and his Exaltion, 1.
His humiliation, whereby he satisfied for offenses, and merited life, humbling
himself in his life, and especially in his death.

The parts of Redemption are humiliation and Exaltation. 1. Christ's humiliation
whereby he satisfied for offenses. 1. Man had sinned. 2. Hence ought to suffer
punishment. 3. Christ as a Surety bears the punishment. 4. He satisfied for
offenses by his passive obedience, Gal. 4. 4.

2. Merited life. 1. If man had obeyed he should have been rewarded with life.
2. Hence no reward without doing well. 3. Christ does perform this. 4. Hence
Christ merited by his active obedience, Romans 5. 19. passive obedience did only
satisfy for the breach and wrong, but it was his active obedience which did
merit the reward, namely life and happiness.

3. Humbling himself in his life, and especially in his death, the
consideration of these follows.

Quest. What was the Humiliation of Christ in his life?
Answ. Christ's humiliation in his life was first in respect of his private
life, his body was born of the Seed of the Virgin Mary, and both Soul and body
having been made and sanctified by the holy Ghost, in his Infancy he was
Circumcised, and offered, and fled into Egypt, and become subject to his
Mother, and afterward labored with his hands, until he came to his public
life.

The humiliation of Christ in his life, private and public life. 1. Private
life, his admission into the World, commoration in it. 1. His admission, in
which his Conception and Nativity. 1. His Conception, his body was born of the
Seed of the Virgin Mary, both Soul and body made and sanctified by the holy
Ghost. 1. His body was of the Seed of the Virgin Mary as the passive principle,
Luke 1. 35. the holy thing born of her. 2. Thus he was of the Seed of the woman
according to the promise, Genesis 3. 15. 3. Mary was of the Seed of David, hence
Christ was king of the Jews by birth, being of the Seed of David, Math. 2. 2.

2. Both Soul and body were made and sanctified by the holy Ghost as the active
principle, Luke 1. 35. 1. His Soul made immediately out of nothing, created by
infusing, and infused by creating, as the Soul of man is. 2. His body formed by
the holy Ghost, hence though of the Seed of the woman, yet not of the Seed of
man. 2. Hence the course of Original sin was stopped, and he was called that holy
thing, Luke 1. 35. 2. Sanctified by the holy Ghost] Soul and body united and
raised to the highest perfection. 1. In respect of habitual perfection there
could be no addition. 2. In respect of actual perfection there might be, and
was a growth, Luke 2. 52. thus in respect of his humane nature he was a Son
without a Father, in respect of his divine nature, a Son without a Mother,
tipified by Melchizedech, Heb. 7. 3.

2. The Nativity of Christ, he was born of Mary, the wife of Joseph, before
they came together, after she had gone a full time, Math. 1. 25.

2. His Commoration in the World. 1. His private and public life, and 1. His
private life, 1. In his Infancy circumcised and offered, and thus performed the
Ceremonial Law, Luke 2. 21, 22. 2. Flight into Egypt, he was born to misery,
and yet was to deliver his people out of Egypt, Math 1. 21. 3. His subjection
to his Mother; thus fulfilled the Moral Law, Luke 2. 51. his dispute with the
Doctors when he was about twelve years of Age, to show that he needed not to be
taught of man, Luke 2. 42, 46, 47. and his laboring with his hands, and thus
did bear the curse of our labors. Genesis 3. 19.

Quest. What was the Humiliation of Christ in his public life.
Answ. Christ's Humiliation in his public life was that whereby he entered into
his public life, with baptism, and temptation, and his course in, it was a
going about doing good in poverty and much labor, preaching and working of
miracles: and toward the conclusion, prepared himself and his Disciples for
his death.

1. Christ entered into his public life with Baptism and Temptation.

1. By Baptism, Mat. 3. 15. showing himself to be the band of both the
Covenants, and that the Covenant of works and the covenant of grace were
performed in and by him.

2. By Temptation, Mat. 4. the beginning of that Chap. showing he was come upon
his trial, and should overcome and be able to succor the tempted.

2. His course in his public life in going about doing good. Act. 10. 38. 1.
in poverty. 2 Cor. 8. 9. 2. In much labor, 1. In preaching. Luke 4. 18. 2.
Working Miracles of all sorts, which was proper to Christ. Mat. 11. 5, 6

3. Toward the conclusion prepared himself and his Disciples for his death, by
his practice, and his speech.

1. His practice, 1. His Example in giving such an excellent pattern of
humility and love in washing his Disciples feet, Joh. 13. 1. to the 18. 2. More
especially in his Transfiguration, Mat. 17. 2. And his Celebration of the
Passover, and abolishing of that, thereby showing he was the lamb to be offered
up, and appointing his Supper in the place of it, Matthew. 26. 17. 26.

2. By his speech, 1. To God in prayer, Joh. 12. 27. his most solemn prayer in
Ioh. 17. 2. His speech to his disciples in the 14, 15, 16. Chapters of John.

Quest. What was the Death of Christ?
Answ. Christ's death was the extreme punishment he suffered, first before his
Crucifixion especially in his agony in the Garden, and his being arrested by a
band of men with Judas, and being arraigned, he suffered extreme ignominy by
derision and whipping, and the sentence of condemnation; but principally his
suffering the Crucifixion it self.

Christ's death was the extreme punishment he suffered before his Crucifixion,
especially in his Crucifixion.

1. Before his Crucifixion; 1. Before his arraignment, 1. His Soul trouble,
especially his Agony in the garden Luke 22. 44. 2. His being arrested by a band
of men with Judas, ver. 47, and 52.

2. His being arraigned before civil and ecclesiastical Tribunal. Luke 22. 54.
Thus Justice pursued our Surety. Isai. 53. 12.

3. Upon his arraignment followed, 1. His Extreme ignominy by derision and
scourging. Mat. 26. 67. A Sentence of condemnation, Mat. 26. 27. He was
reproached as a Deceiver, a false Prophet, a Blasphemer, and many other
horrible crimes, for he suffered for all sorts of sins, Isai. 53. 5.

Quest. What was Christ's Crucifixion?
Answ. Christ's Crucifixion was that whereby he was lifted up and hanged upon a
cross, and so being made a curse, languished to death, and suffering both a
bodily and spiritual death, gave up the Ghost, and his body continued in the
grave three days.

1. His Crucifixion is that whereby he was lifted up and hanged upon the cross,
Matthew. 27. 35. 2. And thus was made a curse and languished to death. Gal. 3.
13. hence the death he suffered was,
1. A cursed death, the hanging upon the cross being a Symbolum or sign of the
curse.

2. A most shameful death, hanged up between the heaven and the earth, as if
the heaven at present rejected him, and as if the earth would not bear him.

3. A most tormenting death in pain and languishing, especially considering the
perfection of his spirits and senses, and consequently the pam he felt was the
greater, being perfectly sensible of pain.

3. Suffering both a bodily and a spiritual death. 1 A spiritual death, wholly
deprived ^^ the sense of the sweetness of the love of the Father, and possessed
with the sense of the contrary bitterness, Mat. 27. 46. 2. Bodily death, He
gave up the Ghost, Mat. 27. 50.

1. He was a Surety for sinners. 2. Hence he was to suffer death. 3. Hence must
shed his heart blood. 4. Hence wholly deprived of the life of joy and comfort
in Soul and body. 5. But yet not left to sin, for that befalls man because he is
weak and breaks under the punishment of sin, but Christ was able to endure the
worst and extremity of the punishment.

The consequence of his death, his body continued in the grave three days; Luk
24. 7.

1. He had endured the punishment respecting sense, when he said it is
finished. 2. Yet continued in the state of death. 1. His body buried. 2. His
Soul separated from it, though not suffering pain. 3. The union of his Soul,
and likewise of his body continued unto his divine person, that although they
were severed one from another, yet they remain united to his divine person,
Acts 2. 31.

The second part of Redemption (namely) Christ's Exaltation.

Quest. What is Christ's Exaltation?
Answ. The Exaltation of Christ is his Triumph over his and our Enemies; the
degrees of which are his Resurrection from the dead, his ascension into Heaven,
his session at the right hand of the Father, and at the end of the World, his
return in glory to be the Judge of the World.

1. His Exaltation, that is his Triumph over his and our Enemies, Acts 2. 35,
36. Phil. 2. 8, 9.

2. The degrees of which Exaltation. 1. Before the end of the World. 2. At the
end of the world. 1. Before the end of the world. 1. His Resurrection, his body
raised, Soul and body reunited, and this done by his Godhead, Romans 1. 4. and
seen by his Disciples forty days, Acts 1. 3.

2. His Ascension. 1. His humane nature ascended into the highest Heavens by
the power of his Godhead, Ephesians. 4. 10, 11. his Disciples being witnesses, Acts
1. 10, 11

3. His session at the right hand of his Father, which holds forth 1. His
entertainment by his Father, Psalm. 110. 1. having accepted him, and put all
things under him, 1 Cor. 15. 21, 22, 27. 2. He well satisfied with his reward,
Psalm. 16. 11. 3. Hence his Intercession, he presents his merits, claims the
performance of what was promised him, respecting his glory and the good of his
people, Heb. 9. 24, 25.

2. At the end of the World, his return in glory to be the Judge of the World,
1 These. 4. 16, 17.

1. In Christ's humiliation the glory of Christ's divine nature was hidden, but
not diminished, in his Exaltation it is manifested, but not augmented.

2. His humane nature was really abased, and really exalted, enjoying the
actings of the glory of his divine nature according to its manner and measure.

3. When the day of Judgment is come and finished, he will deliver up his
Kingdom to his Father, as complete, and so to continue for ever, but not so as
to put an end to his Head-ship, and Mediator-ship, 1 Cor. 15. 24, 28.

4. The degrees of his Exaltation are according to the degrees of his
humiliation.

1. Christ dyed, and he rose again.

2. He descended into Hell, and he ascended into Heaven.

3. His body lay in the grave three days, that is, a part of all the three
days, and he sits now at the right hand of his Father, and shall come in great
glory to judge the World.

Next of Application. Quest. What is Application of Christ's Redemption?
Answ. Application of Christ's Redemption is the second part of man's recovery,
whereby that which Christ has done as a Mediator is applied to those whom the
Father has elected, and made theirs effectually by the Spirit, and gives
common gifts to others, in which let us consider.

1. What is applyed] that which Christ has done as a Mediator. 1. That which
he purchased by his humiliation. 2. And possesses in his Exaltation for his,
Ephesians. 1. 3. 7.

2. To whom is this Application of Redemption made, it is applied to those whom
the Father has elected. 1. The Father has intended the salvation of a certain
number of mankind, these are his by Election. 2. Those and those only he has
given to his Son, these are Christ's by donation from his Father, Joh. 6. 37. 3.
These Christ only intends to save, Joh. 17. 9, 10. 4. Hence no universal
Redemption, for either these elected he intends only to redeem, or others
besides them, then it should be uncertain to God who shall be saved, which
cannot be, Joh. 13. 1. and if it depends merely upon the liberty of man's will,
it should be uncertain whether any shall be saved, yea, it would be certain
then none could be saved, for none by nature is sincerely willing, Psalm. 110.
2. 3. but the Lords foundation remains sure, he knows his own, 2 Timothy 2. 19.

2. Yet it may be granted, that which Christ has done. 1. Is of universal
value] has worth enough in it for the salvation of all. 2. It is offered to
all. 3. Man not knowing who are excluded out of, or included in Election, we
ought to hope charitably, hence it follows.

Herein appears Predestination, (namely) the Decree of God concerning the
manifestation of his glory in the everlasting state of man, electing some, and
reprobating others. 1. Election. 1. He intends the glory of his mercy. 2. He
chooses some to be Vessels of his mercy, Romans 9. 23. 3. Hence wills the
means. 1. permits their fall. 2. Wills their recovery by Redemption, and
Application.

2. Reprobation. 1. The Lord intends the glory of his Justice. 1. Some
appointed for that end, Jude 4. Romans 9. 22. 2. Permitted them to sin, and to
continue hardened in sin to their destruction.

3. The Application it self, that which Christ has done is made theirs
effectually, for either it is made theirs by effectual Application to them, or
it may be theirs before it is applied to them, but that cannot be, for before
Redemption be applied to them, they are Children of wrath as others, Ephesians. 2. 3.
the wrath of God abides on them, Joh. 3. 36. they cannot be saved and damned
at the same time, hence Election works no change in the person, does not change
his state before effectual Application.

4. By whom is this Application made, it is by the Spirit sent from the Father
and the Son.

1. As it requires an almighty power, a divine power, so it is the work of all
the three persons.

2. As they cooperate according to their manner of Subsistence and order of
working, it is of the Father firstly by his Son and Spirit. 2. It is of the Son
as he works from the Father by the Spirit. 3. It is of the Spirit as he works
from the Father and the Son.

And hence salvation is of the Father intentionally in Election. 2. Of the Son
virtually, as he has purchased salvation. 3. Of the Spirit effectually, as he
is sent to apply this, Joh. 16. 9, 10. and gives common gifts to others for
the sake of his Elect, Psalm. 68. 18. Ephesians. 4. 8, 12.

Quest. What are the parts of Application and the manner of applying those
parts?
Answ. The parts of Application are union to Christ, that is Oneness in
relation to Christ, and Communion with Christ, that is having in common with
Christ, the blessings he has purchased, and the manner of Application of these
is either internal, and mystical, this is proper to true believers, or external
and visible, and this Hipocrites have in common with true believers.

Application may be considered either in the parts of it, or adjunct manners.
1. The parts of it, that is such parts as do constitute it, and of which it
does consist, union to Christ, Communion with Christ.

1. Union to Christ] that is an Oneness in relation to Christ, whereby they are
Christ's, and Christ is theirs.

1. Not an Essential Oneness, to be one in Essence with Christ, this is proper
to the three persons thus to be one.

2. Not a personal Oneness, this is proper to the humane nature of Christ to be
one with his divine nature to subsist inseperably in the same person.

3. Such a relative oneness, so that the Lord Christ owneth the Soul, and the
Soul owneth (...) and as truly one with Christ in a spiritual sense, as the
bridegroom and the bride. Cant. 6. 3. Revel. 22. 17, 20. Ephesians. 1. 11, 12, 13.

2. Communion with Christ, whereby we have in common with Christ the blessings
he has purchased. Ephesians. 1. 3. As a woman by marriage has the benefits of a
marriage relation in common with her husband.

2. This union to, and communion with Christ may be considered in respect of
the manners of it, in which we have the distribution of the subject from its
adjuncts, and those considered, as proper or common,

1. Proper to true Believers, and arises out of the special nature of
application, is that internal and mystical sincere union to, and communion with
Christ, which although it may be seen by him who has it, and may be seen by
others as to the Judgment of Charity, but cannot be seen by others as to the
Judgment of verity and infallibility, and therefore may be called inward and
mystical, Romans 2. 28. and this is proper to true believers.

2. Or that which is common (namely) an external and visible union to, and
Communion with Christ. 1. In words they speak as such. 2. In works outwardly
they practice as such, who have union to Christ and communion with him. 3. And
therefore to the Judgment of rational Charity appear to be such. 4. And have
really an external and visible union to Christ, as Christ is the head of his
visible Church. 5. But this is that which hipocrites have in common with true
believers, Romans 2. 28.

Let us begin with that which is internal and mystical union to Christ.

Quest. What is that internal and mystical union to Christ?
Answ. Internal and mystical union to Christ is that whereby the Spirit having
wrought Faith in the heart causes the soul to come to Christ for life, and is
joined to Christ as its spiritual head.

1. That whereby the spirit having wrought faith in the heart, 2. Cor. 4. 13.
Romans 6. 17. 2. Causes the soul to come to Christ, Cant. 1. 4. for life. Joh.
5. 40. 3. And is joined to Christ as its spiritual head. Ephesians. 1. 22. and this
is internal and mystical, none knows but he that has it, Rev. 2. 17.
Quest. In what manner does the Spirit work Faith?
Answ. The Spirit does work Faith by an unresistible power, he prepares the
heart by making it contrite and humble, and then infuseth Faith.

Concerning the working of Faith consider who works it, and how.

1. Who works it] It is wrought by the unresistible power of the Spirit. 1.
Those who are dead cannot of themselves move, so are all by nature, Ephesians. 2. 1.
2. By nature a mere resistance against the Spirit, Acts 7. 51. 3. Hence the
Soul at first is passive in this work, moves as moved. 4. The power at first
put forth by the Spirit is exceeding great, more then at Creation, for then as
there was nothing, so there was no resistance, but here is not a mere emptiness
and nothingness, but worse, a Spirit of resistance against the work of Faith,
Ephesians. 1. 19.

2. How he works it by preparation and infusion. 1. Preparation before the
infusion of Faith. 1. So long as there is a resisting, there can be no
receiving, consent and dissent cannot be in the same Subject, in the same part,
respect and time. 2. But to resist and not be subject is natural, Romans 8. 7. 3.
Hence the power of resistance must be taken away before an infusion of Faith, a
turning from sin and self, before there can be a turning unto Christ.

This preparation is in contrition and humiliation.

1. Contrition.

Quest. What is Contrition?
Answ. Contrition is that whereby a sinner being convinced of the evil of sin,
and feeling the bitterness of it, is broken under the burden of it, and broken
off from the same with a hatred, sorrow, abomination, and fear of sin as the
greatest evil.

Contrition consists of conviction and compunction.

1. Conviction, whereby a sinner is convicted of the evil of sin. Ioh. 16. 8.
Ier. 2. 19. 2. Compunction, a pricking of the heart, letting in a sense of the
bitterness of sin into the heart, Act. 6. 37. Zach. 12. 10.
The effect of this brokenness of heart, 1. Under the burden of sin as too
heavy to bear. 2. And off from sin as a most detestable so; and this appears.

1 In respect of sins past and present, 1. Hatred. 2. Sorrow. 3. Abomination. 2
Cor. 7. 11. 2 In respect of the future, a fear. Psalm. 51. 17.
Quest, What is Humiliation?
Answ. Humiliation is that whereby a sinner despairing of life in himself, and
of any ability of himself to go to Christ, is content to be at the dispose of
God, and is brought down to the foot of God, hence is poor in spirit and is cut
off from self confidence and self-soveraignty.

1. Humiliation is that whereby a sinner despaireth of life in himself] for he
sees himself to be naked and miserable. Rev. 3. 17, 18.

2. And of any ability in himself to go to Christ] that he is blind, maimed
and halt, Luke 14. 21.

3. Hence is content to be at the foot of God, at the Lords dispose] Act. 9. 6.
Isa. 41. 2. hence poor in spirit, Mat. 5. 3. And thus is cut from
self-confidence, and self-severaignty.

1. From self-confidence] he feels its in vain for him to lean upon any thing
that he has or can do.

2. From self-soveraignty, for he is weary of the yoke of sin, and he cannot
rule himself, he is weary of himself and heavy laden. Ioh. 7 20. Mat 11. 28, 29.

Quest. What is the infusion of Faith?
Answ. The infusion of Faith is the pouring into the heart a spirit of faith
whereby the soul is affected toward Christ as a giver of life, and by means of
the covenant of grace comes to Christ for life, and is joined to him as its
head.

1. This infusion of Faith is the pouring into the heart a spirit of Faith] a
disposition or spirit to believe. 2. Cor. 4. 13.

Hence follows, 1. The heart is affected toward Christ as the giver of life,
John 4. 10. 2. Comes to Christ for life, Ioh. 6. 37. and this is by means of
the covenant of grace which contains the promise of life to believers. The
Law is a means remotely to prepare for says, but the Gospel nextly as it
contains the covenant of grace. Gal. 3. 2.

3. And thus the soul is joined to Christ as its head] 1. Christ propounds
himself as a most suitable husband, and Match for the soul. 2, The soul
consents. 3. By consent is joined to Christ. 1 Cor. 11. 2. Revel. 22. 16. 1
Cor. 6. 17.

But con(...)ing the salvation of Infants we may consider.

1. Some Infants are saved, otherwise all that dye in their infancy are
destroyed, which would be a cruel conceit. Mar. 10. 15.

2. All that are saved must be saved by Christ, if one might be saved without
Christ, then not needful for any one whomesoever.

3. All who are saved by Christ, must be saved by union to Christ, otherwise
cannot have communion with him.

4. This union to Christ must be by faith, for there is no other union to
Christ revealed in the Gospel.

5. This Faith is wrought either mediately by means of the Gospel revealing the
Covenant of grace, or immediately without this Gospel revelation, but those
Infants whom Christ saves are not capable of hearing and understanding the
Gospel preached, and yet let it not be hard for us to believe they may be saved.

1. If the first Adam could convey of his sinful image, to his Seed, surely the
second Adam the Lord Jesus can communicate of his image.

2. Have Infants a union to the first Adam by natural generation or
propagation, and shall not some Infants have union to the second Adam in the
way of regeneration, surely Christ has as much power to save Infants as Adam
had to destroy them, Romans 5. 20.

Qu. What is Communion with Christ mystically considered?
Answ. Communion with Christ is that whereby Christ does communicate unto a
believer a state of life, and makes him partaker of life it self, and thus has
communion with Christ: not only relatively in Justification and Adoption, but
by real communication in sanctification and glorification.

1. A believer having union to Christ has communion with Christ, Ephesians. 1. 3.
Romans 8. 32. 2. Hence communion. 1. In respect of the state of life. 2. In life
itself, and thus is translated from death to life, 1 John 3. 14.
The first is communion relatively in Justification, Adoption.

1. He that was condemned is now absolved in Justification. 2. He that was a
stranger from God, yea, an Enemy, is become a friend, yea, a child of God in
Adoption.
The second is communion by way of real communication, and as the former
respects condition, so this respects disposition. And this is in sanctification
and glorification.

1. He that was filthy and under the power of sin is cleansed from filth, and
under the dominion of grace] sin mortified, and the Soul quickened to newness of
life, thus in sanctification.

2. He that was separated from God, and suffering the punishment of sin, does
enjoy God in a blessed manner, thus in glorification.] The Soul is matched and
joined to Christ in a holy marriage Covenant in vocation, acquitted from
Trespasses and debts in Justification, accepted into near relation to the King
of Kings in Adoption, clothed with royal apparel, the image of God in
sanctification, admitted to be in the gracious presence of God, to enjoy him in
glorification.

Quest. What is Justification?
Answ. Justification is that whereby the Righteousness of Christ being imputed
to a believer, and by Faith applied, God is reconciled to him, and he is
absolved from the guilt of sin, and pronounced righteous and worthy of eternal
life, in and for the sake of Christ.

1. By Justification the righteousness of Christ is imputed and applied; that
is, of God's part imputed to a believer, reckoned to him to be his own, Romans 4.
5. and applied to himself by faith. Romans 4. 2, 3, 4, 5. hence a believer is
justified by faith instrumentally, hence not justified before faith, hence not
justified from all eternity; for before faith the wrath of God abides upon him.
John 3. ult.

2. Christ's righteousness being imputed and applied to a believer, hence,

1. God is reconciled to him, so that he has

Peace with God, Isai. 27. 4 Peace with the creatures. Job. 5 23.
And he is absolved from guilt, and pronounced righteous, and worthy of life in
Christ. Romans 8. 33. 34. This Sentence of Justification is declared in the word
of God, whether the soul does see it or not, for his comfort* John. 3. ult.

Quest. What is Adoption?
Answ. Adoption is that whereby a believer is advanced to be a child of God,
and to the privileges of a Son.

1. He is advanced to be a child of God] 1. Ioh 3. 1.

2. Hence advanced to the privileges of a Son] 1. Hence related to the Father,
who has given him his Son and all other good things, an interest in a child's
portion. Romans 8. 32. 2. Hence related to the Son of God as a Brother, Heb. 2.
11, 12. hence a coheir, Romans 8. 17. hence a King, a Priest, a Prophet, Rev. 1.
6. And a right to the inheritance it self, the Kingdom of glory, and to
creatures in this life, and the ministration of Angels. Heb. 1. 14.

3. Hence related to the Holy Ghost, his assistance, which as its immutable, is
called a Seal, Ephesians. 1. 13, 14. 2. As its a pledge of more, its called an Earnest
of the inheritance, 3. As it resembles the Assistance of the Spirit which
Christ has, so its a kingly, priestly, and prophetical Spirit which a believer
enjoys, Rev. 1. 6. 4. As this Spirit does dispose a Believer to act in a
child-like, and filial manner is called a spirit of Adoption. Romans 815.

Quest. What is Sanctification?
Answ. Sanctification is that whereby a believer is fitted to live to God by
Christ's sanctifying his nature here in some degree, by mortifying vicious
dispositions which is the putting off the image of the first Adam; and by
ingenerating gracious principles which is the putting on the image of the
second Adam, and in the life to come wholly and perfectly sanctified.

1. A believer is fitted to live unto God, 2] Tim. 2. 21. called
sanctification, as it makes holy, a transformation, as it changes nature, not
in respect of the Essence of the Soul, or Faculties, for it remains the same
Soul and Faculties; otherwise, not the same person, but the change is in
respect of qualities, Romans 12. 2. called the image of Christ, 2 Cor. 3. ult. a
divine nature, as it inclines to imitate God, 2 Pet. 1. 4.

In this we may consider the parts and subject.

1. The parts. 1. A mortifying of vicious dispositions, called the putting off
the image of the first Adam, 1 Cor. 15, 49. and called mortification, Col. 3. 5.

2. An ingenerating gracious dispositions, called the putting on the image of
the second Adam, 1 Cor. 15. 49. and is vivification, Ephesians. 2. 1. in the first
the virtue of Christ's death is applied, in the second, the virtue of his
Resurrection, and both these by Faith, Romans 6. 8.

2. The subject of this, the whole man, not wholly.

1. The whole man. 1. The understanding fitted to discern rules which lead unto
God, hence principles of spiritual wisdom and sanctified reason, 2. Cor. 4, 5,
6. but yet this is only in part, and imperfect, 1 Cor. 13. 12. some abiding
ignorance and Atheism.

2. The will fitted to choose and close with God as the chiefest good, Psalm. 73.
25. hence a principle of love and life, and yet with some reluctance, not
perfectly willing, Joh. 21. 18, 19.

3. The affections, with the body and members of it fitted to obey the commands
of sanctified Reason and will, Romans 6. 13. and yet not perfectly, some
affections yet remain to be crucified, Gal. 5. 24.

1. Hence a perfection in parts, 1 These. 5. 23. that is, in all parts and
Faculties, every sanctifying grace.

1. Not a perfection in degrees, hence 1. Sin and grace in the same Faculty,
Gal. 5. 17. Spirit and flesh. 2. Hence the combat. 1. The Flesh warreth
against the Spirit, guarded by Satan and the World. 2, The Spirit warreth
against the Flesh, guarded. 1. By the Father, as he pitieth his infirm
children, Psalm. 103. 13. 2. By Christ Jesus, as he is touched with the sense of
infirmities of believers, Heb. ^. 15. 3. By the Spirit, as he helps their
infirmities, Romans 8. 26. causing believers daily to repent and convert, Math.
18. 3. and hence all the spiritual armor put on, but above all to be strong in
the Lord, and in the power of his might, Ephesians. 6. 11, 12.

Quest. What is glorification?
Answ. Glorification stands in the blessed vision and enjoyment of God himself,
and all things appertaining to a blessed life, of the beginnings of which a
believer partaketh in this life, and the perfection of it when the Soul is
departed out of the body, and ascended into Heaven, and Soul and body shall be
reunited and glorified together at the last day.

In glorification we may consider 1. The Essence of it. 2. The complement.

1. The Essence of it stands in blessed visions and enjoyment of God himself,
Psalm. 73. 25. Psalm. 27. 4. Psalm. 116. 7.

2. The complement of it, all good things belonging to a blessed life, Psalm.
84. 11. it is called glorification, as it makes believers glorious, Romans 8. 30.

The degrees of this, Inchoation and Perfection.

1. Inchoation, here some beginnings of it, 1. In direct actings upon God,
seeing him as in the glass of his word and Ordinances, 1 Cor. 13. 12. 2.
Reflect acts, a believer has discerning what God has done for him in working
in him repentance and says; hence an Assurance, that he was elected, and that
he was to be for ever happy, hence Joy, Rom ^. 3, 4, 5.

2. The Perfection, 1. Of the soul immediately after its departure out of the
body, Phil. 1. 23. 2. Of the soul and body both glorified at the day of
Judgment. Ephesians. 4 13. Phil. 3. 20. 21. Joh. 17. 23.

Hitherto of internal and mystical union to and communion with Christ, proper
to believers, now of external and visible union to and communion with Christ.

Quest. What is visible union to and communion with Christ?
Answ. Visible union to, and communion with Christ, is that whereby believers
do visibly profess the Faith, and subject to the visible government of Christ,
having visible communion with Christ in his ordinances, and thus the Church
considered as visible does, in which those who have only and nothing but a
visible union to and communion with Christ, are Hypocrites.

1. A visible professing of the faith] having and holding forth so much
knowledge of Christ as may let Christ into the soul, not grossly and sottishly
ignorant.

2. Do subject to the visible Government of Chirst in his Ordinances] Isai.
44. 5. 2 Chronicles. 30. 8. And thus to the judgment of rational charity are
visible Saints, they profess this in words, and their works do not deny it.
Tit. 1. 6.

And visible Saints may be considered in a segregative, or a congregative
manner.

1. Segregatively, as scattered sheep by themselves, as those certain disciples
scattered, Act. 19. 1.

2. Congregatively, as flocking together, and thus a Church as a visible body
does. But those who have only an external and visible union and communion with
Christ, but not internally, mystically and sincerely, these are Hypocrites.
Luke 8. 13. 1 Ioh. 2. 19. Ioh. 15. 2.

Quest. What is a visible Church?
Answ. A visible Church is a company of visible Saints joined in a visible
covenant with Christ and one with another, to walk together in the use of
Christ's Ordinances in a visible Church order.

1. That there is a visible Church is manifest, otherwise Christ has no
visible Body, no visible Officers, or they to officiate to them who are not
visible, 1 Cor. 12. 12.

2. The matter of a visible Church is visible Saints, for Christ's visible
Church is called his Body, 1 Cor. 12. 12. his Temple, Ephesians. 2. 21, 22.
therefore the matter of this ought not to be visible Rebels and Traitors.

3. The form of a visible Church is their covenanting, 1. There is such a
covenant, for the covenant so often mentioned with the Israelites. 1. It was
not the covenant of works, for that was made only with our first Parents, and
with us in Adam, but since man's fall who could engage in that. 2. Not the
covenant of grace strictly taken for believe and live, for many were in the
covenant spoken of made with the Church of the Jews, who were never in the
covenant of grace, but were graceless, Zach. 11. 10.

3. Yet this belongs to the covenant of grace as an Ordinance appointed by it,
and an outward means to administer it.

2. That this is a form of the visible Church appears*

1. They are a City and Corporation, therefore a covenant to make them such. 2.
They join in holy fellowship either without consent or with consent, if
without consent, then though a Church be unwilling, they cannot keep them out,
then they cannot cast them out, though they ought to keep out the unworthy, and
to cast out the obstinate offender.

If by consent, then it is either manifest or unknown consent, if an unknown
consent be sufficient to admission then an unknown dissent may be sufficient to
keep out, or cast out; and if a manifest consent be necessary to a joining in
Church fellowship, then a covenant, for what is a Church covenant, but a
manifest consent to walk with Christ, and one with another, according to the
rules of the Gospel in visible Church order.

Quest. How may a visible Church be considered?
Answ. A visible Church may be considered in respect of the time in which it
lived. 1. As it was confined to a Family from Adams time to Moses time, and
then they had Prophets to be extraordinary Rulers, and the Head of the Family
was the ordinary Ruler, and the rule of Religion was given by Tradition.

A visible Church may be considered either as totum homogeneum, or Integrale.

1. As totum homogeneum, and thus is distributed into individual Congregations
and Churches, as mankind into Individual men, and thus every individual Church
has the matter and form of a Church, and thus we read of the Churches of
Christ, 1 Cor. 11. 16.

2. Or as totum Integrale, or an individual man made up of his members, and so
every individual Church does consist of its members, and in this sense comes in
the consideration of a Church, as Organicum totum, as fitted for operations for
the good of the whole.

And hence Governors, and governed.

1. Governors, who exercise Authority over the church, having the
Ecclesiastical (...)s, doctrinal, Judicial. 1. Doctrinal dispensation of the
Word, as Church Officers, and of the Sacraments, Romans 11. 17. Ephesians. 4. 10, 11.
the administration of these committed to Church Officers.

2. Judicially by the Officers, with the consent of the Church. 1. In respect
of those without. 2. And within. 1. Without. 1. Some to be taken in by opening.
2. Some to be kept out by shutting the door of the Church.

2. In respect of those within, to bind, loosen. 1. To bind, the first degree
of which is admonition, the second degree is excommunication, Math. 18. 16, 17,
18.

The Ministerial Rulers of the Church, who act in the name of Christ the
supreme Ruler and Head of the Church, Col. 1. 18. these are extraordinary,
ordinary.

1. Extraordinary, called of God immediately, Gal. 1. 1. and had infallible
direction and inspiration from God, Gal. 1. 1, 2. 2 Pet. 1. ult.

2. Ordinary Rulers called of God mediately by the Church, Acts 3. 5. Acts 14.
23. hence Election and Ordination, 1 Timothy 5. 22. and these ought to rule
according to the Word given by the extraordinary Rulers, 2 Timothy 1. 13.

2. The governed is the Church, Heb. 13. 17. and may be considered in respect
of the time in which it lived. 1. In a Family, from Adams time to Moses time,
some Prophets were Rulers, 2 Pet. 2. 5. Jude 14. 2. The Head of the Family was
the ordinary Ruler, Genesis 18. 19. the eldest Son, Exodus 24. 5. Numb. 3. 12. 14.

And then the Rule of Religion was given by Tradition, it was not written until
Moses time.

Quest. How was it with the Church in Moses time?
Answ. The Church in Moses time and afterward was in and confined to the
people of Israel, who had their great congregation, and inferior congregations,
the Synagogue, and their extraordinary Rulers were Prophets, some of them wrote
the old Testament: and their ordinary Rulers were the high Priest, inferior
Priests and Levites, and the Rulers of the Synagogues, and of this Church
Christ came typed out in ceremonies.

1. In Moses time and afterward the Church was confined to the people of
Israel, Deuteronomy. 7. 6. in which we may consider their congregation, their
privilege.

1. Their congregation, their great one, Exodus 25. 8. Psalm. 40. 10. 2. Their
inferior Congregations, their Synagogues, Psalm. 79. 8. Acts 13. 5.
The Rulers, extraordinary, ordinary:

1. Extraordinary, and were Prophets, some of them wrote the old Testament,
Hos. 8. 12. 2 Pet. 1. ult. but the Apocrypha was not wrote by them, and
therefore is not canonical.

2. Their ordinary Governors, 1. Of their great congregation, the high Priest;
inferior, as Priests, Levites, Numb. 3. 3, 4. 2. Of their lesser
congregations, the Rulers of the Synagogues, Mar. 5. 22. 2 Chronicles. 19. 11. Numb.
3. 6.

2. The privileges of this Church, Christ came of this Church concerning the
flesh, Romans 9. 3, 4, 5. 2. He was promised to them by the Prophets, 3. Typed
out to them by diverse ceremonies, Heb. 10. 2. And this Church continued until
Christ the Messiah was slain, Zac 11. 10. Mat. 27. 50, 51.

Quest. How is it with the Church since Christ's coming?
Answ. The visible church is not consined to any one People, but is amongst
many since Christ's coming, and in its primitive time had the Apostles,
Evangelists and Prophets to be extraordinary Rulers, and some of these wrote
the New Testament; and since that time it has Pastors, Teachers, Ruling Elders
and Deacons to be the ordinary Officers, and has Christ to be the exalted
head, the holy Scriptures being perfected.

Concerning the Church since Christ's coming we may consider, their Government
and privileges.

1. Their Government, Extraordinary, Ordinary.

1. Extraordinary Rulers, 1. The Apostles, who were to preach to all nations,
Mat. 28. ult. And to plant churches, 1 Cor. 3. 6. and to be witnesses of
Christ's Resurrection, and Ascension, Act. 1. 8.

2. Evangelists, who were to assist the Apostles in preaching, and in
establishing the Churches according to their Doctrine. 1 Timothy 1. 3, 4. 2 Timothy
4. 5.

3. Prophets, who had singular gifts to interpret the scriptures, and to
foretell things to come, 1 Cor. 14. 24, 25. Acts 21. 8, 9, 10. And some of
these extraordinary Rulers wrote the New Testament. Joh. 20. 30. Rev. 1. 9.

2. Ordinary Officers are first Elders who are either only Ruling, or not only
so but Teaching as Pastors, Teachers. Ephesians. 11. 12. Romans 12. 8. Or inferior
Officers, the Deacons, Romans 12. 8. 1 Timothy 3. 8.

2. The Privileges of this Church,

1. They have Christ already exhibited, the good things typed out are extant,
Luke 1. 70. 2. Cor. 1. 20.

2. Hence the Members of this Church are evangelical believers. 1. Confessing
that Christ is the son of Mary, and the son of the living God, Mat. 16. 16, 17,
18, 19. Acts 8. 34, 35. 2. They do receive Christ as their exalted head, Act.
2. 35. Ephesians. 4. 9, 10.

3. This Church is no longer confined to one people, but amongst many, hence
universal and catholic, as gathered out of all nations, many Churches swarmed
out of that one church, and first church at Jerusalem. Act. 9. 31. and are
called churches, the catholic visible church does exist in these individual
churches.

4. This church has the holy Scriptures perfectly, Rev. 22. 19.

Quest. How do you prove the Holy Scriptures to be the Word of God?
Answ. The holy Scriptures are proved to be the word of God by the testimony of
the godly in all ages, and by divine testimony, the miracles wrought, and the
testimony of the Spirit of God in the Saints, and by many artificial arguments,
because they do reveal divine wisdom holiness, Justice, mercy, with most
perfect harmony and wonderful efficacy, containing a perfect rule of Faith and
obedience.

The Scriptures are proved to be the word of God by Arguments, inartificial,
artificial,

1. Inartificial, namely testimony, humane, divine.

1. Humane, the testimony of the godly in all ages, first in the primitive
times, their preachers expounded these, Act. 17. 2, 11. 2. Christians converted
by these, 3. Many suffered for the defense of these. 4. Their Opposers,
Romans, Jews, Pharisees, Sadduces, Heriticks, could not deny but that such
Doctrines were taught by the Apostles, 2 Timothy 3. 15, 16.

2. This Testimony is delivered down to us, witness 1. The many ancient Records
of many histories and councils. 2. The ancient Records of many Countries,
Nations, East, West, North, and South. 3. The many Christians in the several
Ages who have suffered for the defense of these, and the Heretics have pleaded
these Scriptures, although they have perverted them, let us consider the
validity of the former Testimony.

1. It has a moral certainty, as certain as man can be, that he was born of
such Parents, and has a right to such an Inheritance which depends upon humane
Testimony.

2. In some respect this Testimony has an infallible certainty. 1. Otherwise
these witnesses would have contradicted themselves, they living at so great a
distance one from another, and in several Ages could not meet together to
invent a delusion to deceive their Posterity. 2. Otherwise Adversaries would
have contradicted them as de facto, and have said, that no such doctrines were
taught by the Apostles, hence this humane Testimony as it is circumstanced is
binding, Exodus 10. 1, 2. Psalm. 78. 1, 2, 3, 4. Acts 1. 8. Acts 2. 32.

2. Divine Testimony external and internal.

1. External by Miracles, 2 Cor. 12. 12. called Gods witnesses, Heb. 2. 4. 2.
Inward Testimony, the Spirit of God in a believer witnessing, 1 John 5. 10.

2. Artificial Arguments. 1. They reveal wisdom above all the inventions of
men or Angels, the Mystery of the Trinity, and man's Recovery, and many other
Mysteries, 1 John 5. 7. 1 Timothy 3. 16. 2. Most beautiful holiness shining in
these Scriptures, Romans 1. 2. Psalm. 119. 140. 3. Justice giving to God and man
his due, Romans 13. 9. Romans 7. 12. 4. Most rich mercy, Romans 5. 20. 5. Most
perfect harmony, though wrote by diverse, in diverse places and diverse
languages, full of predictions and Prophecies, yet they all agree. 6. Their
duration, 1. Were before other Writings. 2. Do continue and shall to the end of
the World, Ier. 6. 16. Math. 28. ult. 7. The Efficacy of them, 1 These. 1. 5.
Isai 55. 11. 8. The perfection of them, they contain a perfect Rule of Faith
and observance, 1 John 4. 1, 2. 2 Timothy 1. 13. Romans 2. 16. Rev. 22. 19. Either
these Scriptures were invented by God or by some creature, not by some
creature, for if by some creature, it was either by some good or evil creature,
not by some good creature, for no good man or Angel would invent a thing, and
then say it was Gods invention, not by some evil creature, for the holy
Scriptures are contrary to the wicked, therefore it is apparent these
Scriptures are invented by God himself.

Hitherto of Faith, next concerning Observance.

Quest. What is Observance?
Answ. Observance is the second part of Religion, and stands in performance of
duty to God, by obeying his Law, which is a Platform of acting for God, and he
has made it known to us for that end.

1. Observance is a second part of Religion. 1. It is a part of Religion,
without which Religion is vain. 2. And a second part performed by Faith, Gal.
2. 10, 20.

2. It stands in performance of duty to God, as God is our Creator, Redeemer,
and Comforter, Math. 28. 20.

3. This performance of duty is by obeying his Law, Mic. 6. 8.

4. This Law of God is the Platform of well acting, and acting for God, Psalm.
19. 7. Psalm. 118. 15.

5. Hence made known for this end. 1. The first Edition of this was in the
heart of man at first, a fair inscription of it upon man at first, he being
made according to the Image of God in holiness and righteousness, Genesis 1. 26.
Eccles. 7. 29.

2. Some relics of it in fallen man, so much as may testify that man was
made to be Religious, Romans 2. 14, 15. hence Conscience witnessing in respect of
God, and a Judge in respect of man.

3. The Law was renewed to the Church of the Jews by a lively voice, Exodus 20.
and becomes useful. 1. To discover sin, and to drive the Soul to Christ, Gal.
3. 24. 2. After a believer is in Christ the Law is useful to him as a Rule of
obedience, Math. 5. 17. 3. But a believers obedience being imperfect it cannot
merit, Romans 4. 4. but is accepted for the sake of Christ, 1 Pet. 2. 5.

Quest. How is obedience distributed?
Answ. Obedience is distributed into love to God, and love to man, love to God
being a respect to God, nextly and directly as he is God, and may be called
worship.

1. Obedience may be divided into love to God and love to man, Math. 22. 37,
38, 39. 2. Love to God is a respect nextly and directly to God as he is God,
Romans 1. 21. and it is called worship, Joh. 4. 21.
Quest. What is that worship in the first Command required?
Answ. The worship in the first Command required is, to take the true God alone
to be our God, cleaving to him in understanding, will and affections, and the
expressions of the outward man, being suitable to that inward worship.

The Commandments of the first Table do enjoyne divine worship, in which we may
consider the kinds of worship, and the manners of it.

1. The kinds of worship. 1. Natural. 2. Instituted.

1. Natural worship, not that it is natural to corrupt nature to perform it,
but because the light of Reason and natural Conscience may convince us that
worship is due to God, namely, 1. That there is but one true God. 2. That we
ought to take him to be our God. 3. And therefore to cleave to him, and honor
him as God, Romans 1. 21 and this kind of worship is required in the first
Command.

1. To take the true God alone to be our God, 1 Chr. 28. 9. Math. 22. 37. 2.
Hence a cleaving to God. 1. In understanding, which is that whereby the
understanding having received the light of the knowledge of his glory is
satisfied with his wisdom, 2 Cor. 4. 6. Romans 11. 33. 2. Hence a cleaving of
the will to God, which is that whereby the will makes choice of God, and is
satisfied with him, and therefore acts from him and for him.

1. The will does choose God above all, Psalm. 73. 25. 2. Is satisfied in him as
its portion, Psalm. 16. 5. 3. acts from him and for him.

1. From him. 1. In staying upon him for all good, Psalm. 36. 9. Isai. 50. 10.
2. In pouring out the heart before God, Psalm. 62. 8. 2. acting for him. 1. In
subjecting to, being filled with, and acted by his will, Col. 4. 12. willing
his glory, and losing all our ends in his glory, Romans 11. 36.

3. Hence a cleaving of the affections to God, the will being affected with
love to God, and hates that which displeases him.

1. Love to God, Psalm. 18. 1. from this love flows. 1. Patient hope for God,
and desire after him, and a joy and delight in him.

1. A hoping for God, Psalm. 39. 7, 8. and that patiently, Psalm. 62. 1. 2. A
desire after him, Isai. 26. 8. 3. A joying in him, and that which it enjoyes of
God, Psalm. 32. 11.

2. Hates that which displeases him. From this hatred flows a fear and
abomination of sin and sorrow because of it, with holy anger. Rev. 2. 6.

1. A fear, Hos. 3. ult. 1. An abomination of the evil of sin, Ezekiel. 20. 43. 3.
A sorrow with an holy anger, 2 Cor. 7. 11. and thus of the inward worship
required in the first Command.

2. The expressions of the outward man ought to be suitable to this inward
worship, Lam. 3. 41. Ephesians. 3. 14, 15.

Quest. What is that worship required in the second Command?
Answ. The second Command does require instituted worship, (namely) an
attendance upon God in all his Ordinances, as in Prayer, hearing, reading his
Word, and celebration of Sacraments, and joining to a visible Church, where
Church discipline by Church Officers is exercised with the consent of the
Church.

The Worship required in the second Command is instituted Worship, that is, the
worship which without some revelation out of the Word of God, that God has
instituted it, we could not find it out, and otherwise our worship is vain,
Matthew. 15. 9. yea Devil-worship, 1 Cor. 10. 10.

These means of worship are either, Prime or first, or in order to those,

The Prime, 1. Hearing and reading the word of God, and to which also belongs
Repetition of the word, and Christian conference, Deuteronomy. 5. 1. 2. Celebration of
the Sacraments, Baptism Mat. 28. 19, 20. The Lords Supper, 1 Cor. 11. 24, 25.
3. Praying with all manner of Prayer, Ephesians. 6. 18.

2. Those Ordinances which are in order to the former. 1. A visible Church,
Math. 18. 17. 2. Church Officers, Ephesians, 4. 11, 12. 3. Church Discipline, Math.
18. 18, 20.

Quest, What does the third Command require?
Answ. A worshipping of God with all meet Reverence, respecting both the
Attributes of God and his Name, which he has put upon all his Ordinances, and
therefore to prepare for them, and to behave our selves reverently in the time
of the dispensation of them, and after the use of them to bring forth suitable
fruit.

The two former Commands respect the kinds of worship, next of the manners of
worship, most reverent, and solemn.

1. Reverent, this the third Command requires, Psalm. 89. 7.

The Name of God is that whereby God has made known himself, as his Attributes
and Ordinances.

1. His Attributes, Exodus 33. 19. and the Reverence respecting his Attributes
is that whereby we take heed of a vain mentioning his Attributes, or being too
frequent or familiar in using them, Eccles. 5. 2. and that we practically show
forth his praises and virtues, 1 Pet. 2. 9.

2. His divine Ordinances, upon which he has put his Name, Deuteronomy. 12. 5. and
the Reverence respecting these stands 1. In preparation for them, Eccles. 1. 2,
in the time of the dispensation of them to behave our selves reverently with a
reverent delight, Isai. 58. 13. and in a comely and orderly manner, 1 Cor. 14.
40. 3. And after the use of them that we retain the savor of them, and bring
forth the fruit of them, 1 These. 5. 21. Col 1. 6. Math. 21. 43.

Quest. What does the fourth Command require?
Answ. The fourth Command requires to sanctify a seventh part of the week,
which was the last of seven, from Creation until Christ's Resurrection, but
ought to be the first of seven from Christ's Resurrection, until the last day.

In this we may consider the sanctification ^t self, and the day to be
sanctified.

Quest. How ought we to sanctify the Sabbath?
Answ. We ought to sanctify the Sabbath by resting from our own works, that is
all such works as are neither works of mercy, nor necessity; nor have any
direct respect to the comely sanctifying of the day, and to sanctify the time
unto the Lord by attendance of divine worship in public, in the Family, and in
secret.

In sanctifying a Sabbath there ought to be a rest, and a sanctifying our rest.

1. A resting from our own works, Isai. 58. 13. hence to rest from such works
as are not works of mercy, nor necessity, Math. 12. 7. nor such works as have
no direct respect to the sanctifying of the day, Math. 12. 5.

2. A sanctifying our rest by attendance upon Gods worship in public, in
Family, and in secret, for they were to attend the daily offerings appointed
for every day, and besides the continual offerings, they were to bring the
Sabbath offering, Numb. 28. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. Ps. 92. 1. Acts 20. 7.

And hence we ought to prepare for the Sabbath by a timely calling off our
thoughts and actions from worldly occasions, and to call them in, and to go
forth and welcome the holy day approaching, Isai. 58. 13. and after the Sabbath
is ended, not greedily nor suddenly rush into worldly occasions, as if we were
weary of the Sabbath, and glad it were at an end.

Concerning the day to be sanctified let us consider,

Quest. How do you prove that we ought in these Gospel days to keep a weekly
Sabbath?
Answ. First because Christ taught his Disciples to pray, that their flight
might not be on the Sabbath, Mat. 24. 25. If no Sabbath then it was needless
for Christ's Disciples to pray that their flight might not be on the Sabbath,
but Christ saw it needful to leave this instruction with his Disciples,
because the Sabbath should as certainly continue as the winter, and as they
were to pray that their flight might not be in the winter, so likewise that it
might not be on the Sabbath day.

Quest. How do you prove this in the second place, that in Gospel days we
ought to keep a Sabbath?
Answ. Because Christ came not to destroy the moral Law, but to fulfill it.

If no Sabbath, then Christ has destroyed some part of the moral law, but this
cannot be. Mat. 5. 17.

Quest. How do you prove that we ought not to keep the seventh day of the week
a Christian Sabbath?
Answ. Because God's rest in the seventh day from the work's of Creation, was
spoiled by the sin of man, and another rest by Christ the Redeemer, and another
day came which does remain.

1. God rested in the seventh day from the works of Creation, Genesis 2. 1, 2. and
in the fourth Command it is expressed to be the Reason of sanctifying the seventh
day of the week.

2. This rest was spoiled by the sin of man, Genesis 6. 6, 7.

3. Another rest came from the work of Redemption, and another day of rest,
Psalm. 118. 24. Heb. 4. 4, 8.

Quest. How do you prove this in the second place that the seventh day since
Christ's Resurrection ought not to be kept for a Sabbath?
Answ. Because to keep the seventh day of the week was the doctrine of false
Teachers, and is contrary to the doctrine and practice of the Apostles of
Christ, who did advance the first day of the week above any other day.

In the Gal. 4. 10. The Apostle reproved the false Teachers for teaching the
Galatians to observe days, Months, and years, according to the Law of Moses,
by days is meant that which is less then Months, and therefore to be
understood of weekly Sabbaths, and yet not of the Christian Sabbath; for those
Teachers stood for that which is according to Moses his Ministry, and in Col.
2. 16. the Apostle condemns holy days, new Moons, and Sabbaths. Holy days are
mentioned as greater then new Moons, and therefore are meant of Annual
Sabbatical days, and Sabbath days as less then new Moons, and therefore to be
understood of the weekly Sabbaths the Jews kept.

And that the Apostles did advance the first day of the week to be the
Christian Sabbath, will appear in the next place.

Quest. How does it appear by the doctrine and practice of the Apostles that we
ought to keep the first day of the week a Christian Sabbath.
Answ. Because that day of the week which is honored above other days, by the
Name of the Lords day, as he is the Redeemer, this cannot be understood of the
seventh day which is God's day, as he was Creator, much less of other days,
but only of the first day of the week in which Christ had glorious rest.

1. One day is honored by the Name of the Lords day, Rev. 1. 10. for the scope
of the Apostle is set down, the particular time when he had that Vision.

2. It is called the Lord's day by that great Gospel Apostle John, who speaks
in a Gospel sense, and that in the same sense as the Lords Supper, and the
Lords Table, that which was sanctified by the institution of Christ the
Redeemer, 1 Cor. 10. 21. and as he was Lord of the Sabbath, Math. 12. 8.

3. This cannot be meant of the seventh day, for that is not the day of the
Lord as a Redeemer, but as Creator, Heb. 4. 4.

4. But is meant of the first day of the week, in which Christ rested from his
heavy and hard labor in the state of humiliation, and rose from the dead, Joh.
20. 1. and in which day he having received all power in Heaven and on Earth,
appeared to his Disciples, 19. ver. and in which day he communicated the holy
Ghost unto his Disciples, ver. 22. the day of the glorious rest.

Quest. How do you prove this in the second place?
Answ. Because the Apostle did command all the Churches on the first day of the
week to prepare their Collection for the Saints, a most eminent duty of the
Sabbath, and thus did advance the first day of the week above any other day,
not by humane Institution, that is unlawful, but by divine Institution, because
of the holiness of this day.

1. That the Apostle did command not only the Church at Corinth, but Churches
at Galatia to have in readiness their Collections for the Saints in the first
day of the week, is expressed in 1 Cor. 16. 1, 2.

2. That this is a most eminent duty of the Sabbath is manifest, Math. 12. 6,
7, 8.

3. The first day of the week was either a common and indifferent day, or a
special and holy day, if a common and indifferent day, then the Apostle ought
not to make that to be necessary by imposing an Injunction and Command upon it
which God has made indifferent, hence ought not to have ordered, and by order
commanded them to attend such a work of mercy in the first day of the week, if
that day were but a common and indifferent day, this would be to esteem one
common day above another, contrary to his own doctrine, Romans 14. 1, 5. and
therefore it was because the first day of the week was the holy day, a
Christian Sabbath by divine Institution.

Quest. How do you prove this in the third place?
Answ. Because it was the usual practice of the Apostles and Disciples, in the
primitive times, and of the Witnesses of Christ in all Ages since that time, to
assemble in the first day of the week for divine worship, and this was not
because it would be more expedient time, for them, but because it is the day of
the Christian Sabbath.

Thus we read in Acts 20. 7. 1. Of the assembling of the Disciples, not only
some few, but of the generality of them, it is spoken in the general.

2. They assembled to break bread, it is not meant of a love Feast, that was
unlawful in a public Church-meeting, 1 Cor. 11. 34. but is to be understood of
the Lords Supper, neither was it to hear Paul preach, but it is said, they came
together to break bread, and Paul preached, so that he took this season to
preach to them.

3. It was their usual practice to assemble for divine worship in this day, and
therefore it is said when they came together, and thus of Christians in all
Ages since the primitive time.

4. Their meeting in the first day of the week was either because it was a more
expedient time for them then some other day, or because it was a special day,
and the Christian Sabbath, not because it was more expedient for them, if the
seventh day was kept as a Sabbath, how could it be expedient or lawful to defer
administering the Sacrament on the seventh day, and to meet again the next day.

Quest. Does not the change of the Sabbath from the seventh day to the first
day abolish the fourth Command?
Answ. In no wise, for, the Reason of the seventh days being taken away, and a
Reason of the same kind, but of a greater degree: for the first day of the week
being come in the place of it, the fourth Command by this means in the scope of
it is established.

1. The Reason why the seventh day was sanctified was because God rested from
the works of Creation, but this rest was spoiled by the sin of man, and the
Lord repented that he had made man, and other Creatures cursed for the sin of
man, Genesis 6. 6, 7. consequently the reason for the Sabbath day was taken away.

2. A reason of the same kind, but of a greater degree, for the first day of
the week came in the place of the former, for Christ had wrought a new Creation
by his death, 2 Cor. 5. 15, 17. and as he is the first born of every Creature,
by whom all things consist; and that by the blood of his Cross he might
reconcile all things to himself, whether things in Earth, or in Heaven, 1 Col.
15, 16, 17. but this of a greater degree, for this new Creation is a greater
work then the first Creation; Christ's work as Redeemer is greater then the
work of Creation, Ephesians. 1. 20, 21. Rev. 4. 9, 10, 11.

3. The fourth Command by this means is established in the scope of it. for,

1. The change of the Sabbath from the seventh day of the week to the first day
stands upon the same ground and bottom upon which the seventh day was
sanctified, namely, because of the Lords resting from his works of Creation,
but behold he rests from the works of the new Creation, and by which a
restoration of that which was spoiled by man's sin.

2. The change of the Sabbath from the seventh to the first day, does most
admirably attain the end God intended in sanctifying a Sabbath. 1. God intended
his glory in the works of Creation; but by the Christian Sabbath, he has the
glory of his works of Creation and Redemption, a greater glory then the former.
2. God intended the good of man, Mark 2. 27, 28. 1. In respect of man's body,
Deuteronomy. 5. 14. that it may rest a seventh part of the week, this end is as well
attained in the first day of the week as on the seventh day. 2. In respect of
man's Soul, Exodus 31. 13. Ezekiel. 20. 12. that the Soul of man may have a solemn
time for the worship of God, but to do this in remembrance of the work of
Redemption, is more for the Soul's good of man then to do it in remembrance of
the work of Creation, so the sanctifying of the first day of the week for this
end, is more for the good of the Soul of man then to sanctify the seventh day.

3. Hence it is no abolishing of the fourth Command, but a fulfilling and
establishing it; as the second Command requires that the means of worship, and
those only which God appoints should be observed, he instituted to her means
of worship to the Jews then now in Gospel times, and other means of worship in
the Gospel days then before Christ's coming, yet both they and we by virtue of
the second Command were required to attend the means of worship, and the change
of means of worship from that which it was before Gospel times, does not cause
any change of the second Command: So the fourth Command requires to sanctify
that Sabbath which God appoints. When God required the seventh day it was to
be sanctified by virtue of the fourth Command, and since he has required the
first day day of the week, it ought to be kept by virtue of the fourth Command,
and yet no change of the fourth Command; Will any be so bold to say that God
himself could not change the day; seeing the Sabbath was appointed for man, and
the Son of man is Lord of the Sabbath, Mark 2. ult.

Hitherto of love to God, next of love to man. Quest. What is that love to man
the Law requires?
Answ. The Law requires to love thy Neighbor as thy self for the sake of God,
and this contains all the duties of the second Table, Math. 22. 39. Jam. 3. 9.

Quest. What does the fifth Command require?
Answ. The fifth Command requires to preserve the honor of thy Neighbor, and
therefore to behave thy self reverently to Superiors, honor being due to them
above thy self, respectively to equals, honor being due to them equal to thy
self, and not contemning thy inferiors, 1 Pet. 2. 17. 1 Timothy 5. 1, 2. Ephesians. 6.
1, 2. Isai. 3. 5. Phil. 2. 3. Luke 18. 9.

Quest. What does the sixth Command require?
Answ. The sixth Command requires to preserve the life of thy Neighbor, and
therefore to behave thy self meekly, patiently, peaceably, and merciful toward
him, Numb. 12. 3. Luke 21. 19. Col. 3. 13. Romans 15. 2. Romans 12. 18, 20, 21.

Quest. What does the seventh Command require?
Answ. The seventh Command requires Chastity, (that is) purity in all things
respecting the generating of mankind, and therefore to behave thy self modestly
and gravely, observing all things becoming purity, Ephesians. 5. 3, 4. 1 Timothy 2. 9. 1 Timothy 3. 11. Romans 13. 13.

Quest. What does the eighth Command require?
Answ. The eighth Command requires to preserve the goods of thy Neighbor, and
therefore to behave thy self justly and equally in seeking after, keeping and
using worldly goods Ephesians. 4. 28. Gol. 4. 1. Jer. 17. 11. Prove. 3. 27. 1 Cor. 7.
31.

Quest. What does the ninth Command require?
Answ. The ninth Command requires to preserve the Name of thy Neighbor, and
therefore to have (in your Assertions and Promises (a respect truly and
faithfully to the Truth, Psalm. 15. 2, 3, 4.

Quest. What does the tenth Command require?
Answ. The tenth Command requires to preserve the prosperity of thy Neighbor,
and therefore a contentation with thine own things, and not envying another, 3
Epist. Joh. 2. Heb. 13. 5. Gal. 5. ult.

Hitherto of Obedience, next concerning helps to Obedience.

Quest. What are special helps to Obedience
Answ. Prayer, and the Sacraments of the New Testament.

Quest. What is Prayer?
Answ. Prayer is a Religious presenting of our desires before God, by
Confession, Petition, and Thanksgiving, according to the will of God, sometimes
with others, and sometimes alone as in secret, and to Prayer belongs
Religious singing.

1. Prayer is a religious presenting our desires before God, called the pouring
out of the heart before God, Psalm. 62. 8. the showing him our trouble, Psalm.
142. 2. nextly and directly presented to God, therefore a religious presenting
our desires, Psalm. 57. 1, 2.

2. The parts of Prayer. 1. Confession of our sinful unworthiness, Dan. 9. 4.
2. Petitioning for mercy and grace in the Name of Christ, Dan. 9. 3. Joh. 16.
24. 3. Thanksgiving for mercy received, or that we hope to receive, Phil. 4. 6.

3. The Rule of Prayer, it is an asking according to the will of God revealed
in his Word, 1 John 5. 14. 1. According to his commanding will. 2. According to
his promising will, 2 Samuel 7. 27.

And Prayer ought to be, 1. Sometimes with others in public, 1 Cor. 14. 16. 2.
In the Family, Jer. 10. 25. and sometimes alone in secret, Math. 6. 6. Zach.
12. 13, 14. and to Prayer belongs religious singing of Psalms, Col. 3. 16. Ephesians.
5. 19.

Quest. What are the Sacraments of the New Testament?
Answ. The Sacraments of the New Testament are Baptism and the Lords Supper.
Baptism a Sacrament of entrance into Covenant with Christ, and his Church, and
the Lords Supper a Sacrament of our continuance in Covenant and Communion with
Christ, and his Church. The one comes in the place of Circumcision, and is a
Gospel Circumcision, Col. 2. 11, 12. The other comes in the place of the
Passover, and is our Gospel Passover, Math. 26. 17, 18, 24, 27. 1 Cor. 5. 7, 8.
Romans 6. 3. 1 Cor. 12, 13. 1 Cor. 20. 16, 17. 1 Cor. 11. 26, 27.

Quest. What follows hence, that Baptism is a sign and Seal of entrance
into Covenant with Christ, and his Church?
Answ. That all Church members ought to be baptized, and therefore the Infants
of Parents in Church state ought to be baptized, for they are in Covenant with
Christ, and members of his body, and therefore called his Disciples, and a holy
Seed.

1. All Church members ought to be baptized, because they are of the body,
therefore to be baptized, 1 Cor. 12. 13. if Church members, then the promises
visibly belong to them, and therefore the visible Seal of them, Acts 2. 38. 39.
the Covenant and the Seal are so closely conjoined by God, that the Seal is
called the Covenant, Genesis 17. 10.

2. The Infants of Parents in Church state are in Covenant with Christ, for God
has promised to circumcise their hearts, and the hearts of their Seed, Deuteronomy.
30. 6. and the promises belong to them, and to their Children, Acts 2. 39. and
an Infant whose Parents, either both of them, or one of them being in Church
state, that Infant is a Church member, called therefore a Disciple of Christ,
Acts 15. 10. those are called Disciples upon whom the false Teachers would have
imposed the yoke of Circumcision according to the Law of Moses, but these were
Infants, and these are called a holy Seed, 1 Cor. 7. 14.

Quest. What follows hence in the second place?
Answ. That Baptism ought to be administered by pouring of water, and so
washing, and not by dipping the body in the water, because it is a Sacrament of
entrance into Covenant, in which Christ by his Spirit does apply himself to us.

1. That the Sacrament of Baptism is a sign and Seal of entrance into
Covenant, is plain from the former Scriptures in the description of Baptism.

2. That Christ does in the Covenant of grace first apply himself to the Soul
is clear, Phil. 3. 12. he is first in loving us, and comes to us before we can
come to him.

3. Hence that means of administering of Baptism as i^ most suitable to the
thing signified ought to be attended, but the applying of water to the
baptized, this signifies Christ by his Spirit applying himself, Acts 1. 5.
baptized with water, and baptized with the holy Ghost, that is baptized by
water, and the holy Ghost poured out upon them, Acts 2. 33.

4. Hence the body ought not to be dipped into the water, for that would
signify that the baptized is first applied to Christ, and not Christ to him
firstly, Romans 6. 3. buried with Christ in Baptism. In burying the body there
is not a thrusting the body into the dust or earth, but a casting of earth upon
the body.

Quest. What follows hence, that the Lords Supper is a Sacrament of
continuance in covenant and communion with Christ?
Answ. That those only ought to be admitted to partake of the Lords Supper, who
do hold forth Repentance and Faith, with an ability to examine themselves and
discern the Lords body; for he that partaketh, before he does partake of the
Lords Supper, he ought to examine himself and discern the Lords body, 1 Cor.
15. 28. 29. Hence it follows,

1. He ought to have Faith and Repentance before he does partake; for the Lords
Supper is instituted, not for Regenaration, but for nourishment and
confirmation. 2. Repentance and Faith are the matter concerning which the
communicant ought to examine himself with a discerning into the Gospel sense
and mystery of the Lords Supper.

2. Hence he that partaketh must have this ability thus to examine himself,
otherwise he cannot perform these preparatory duties.

2. He ought to hold these forth, 1. To his own conscience, that his own
conscience may not condemn him for presumptuous partaking. 1 Cor. 11. 29. Romans
14. 23.

2. To hold these forth to the judgment of the charity, 1. Of the Church
Officers, that so the Minister in the judgment of charity may say, Take, eat,
this is the Body of our Lord Jesus given for you. 2. To the judgment of the
charity of the Church; for communicants do profess to have communion with
Christ and one with another, as one body in him. 1 Cor. 10. 15, 16, 17. And
it is the duty of the Church and Officers to put the difference between the
clean and the unclean, the holy and the profane, according to their respective
capacityes. Ezekiel. 44. 7, 8, 23.

And although Faith be weak and obedience imperfect, and prayers and
preparations far short of the perfection of Sanctuary Institutions, yet the
Lord will pardon and confirm his favor by the Lords Supper to the humble
believing Soul.

FINIS,
YOU do take God the only true God to be your God, the Lord Jesus to be your
Savior, your Prophet, Priest and King, and the holy Spirit to be your
Sanctifyer and Comforter.

Promising in his name and strength to cleave to him as your chiefest and only
good; and by the help of his Spirit and Grace, to walk before him in a
faithful discharge of Covenant duties: and in a regular subjection to, and
observation of, all the holy Ordinances and Institutions of Christ, of which
(at present) you are capable, as they shall be duly administered within this
Church and Congregation: and to refrain, (and what in you lies) to reform all
sin that is contrary hereto, especially the provoking and growing sins of this
time.

ERRATA
The Authors absence from the Press, and his Copy being difficult to read, has
occasioned many mistakes, which the Reader is desired thus to correct.

P. 1 l. 16 r. a Doctrine. P 2. l. 14. r. arts. l. 30. r. by Faith. p. 3. l 12
r. by Faith. l. 22 r. unknown good. p. 4 l. 17 r. Truths. p. 5 l. 2 r. for us.
l. 13 r. manners. p. 8 l. 2 r. Psalm. 99. l. 19 r. these are one. l. 22 r. Psa.
90. p. 12 l. 8 r. 2. Individual. l. 16 r. spirants. p. 14 l. 10 r. for his. p.
15 l. 8 r. rational. p. 19 l. 22 r. water. p. 23. l. 33. r man. p. 24 l. 22 r.
3. l. 25 r. 4. p 29 l. 32 r. act under. p. 30 l. 27 r. to man. p. 34 l. 16 r.
John 3. 34. p. 45 l. 29 r. Act. 2. p. 4^ l. 4 r. 2 Cor. p. 51 l. 9 r. 2. p. 54.
l. 25 r. as an Individual. p. 54 l. 32 r. Keys. p. 55. l. 15 r. Act. 6. p. 56.
l. 6 r. Psa. 74 p. 57 l. 13 r. Ephesians. 4. p. 60 l. 5 r. Psalm. 119. 152. p. 61 l. 3
r. Soul being. p. 62 l. 10 r. 2. Abomination. p. 69 l. 12 ^ seventh day. l. 21
r. seventh day. p. 70 l. 28 r. other means. p. 73. l. 32 r. 1 Cor. 10. p. 75 l.
1. r. that manner l. 22 r. 1 Cor. 11. l. 34. r. 3. He ought.


