(...), OR The Saints worthiness AND The worlds worthlesnesse, Both opened and
DECLARED IN A SERMON preached at the Funeral OF That Eminently Religious and
highly honored Knight Sr. NATHANIEL BARNARDISTON. Aug. 26. 1653.

By SAMUEL FAIRECLOUGH, Pastor of the congregation at KETTON.

Pro. 12.26. The righteous is more excellent then his neighbor:
But the way of the wicked shall deceive him.
1 John 5.19. We know we are of God: But the whole
World lies in wickedness.
Aug. Epist. 45. ad Arment. Laudandi sunt atque praedicandi, qui non sunt
dignati etiam cum mundo floren^e, florere.

London, Printed by R. D. for Tho. Newberry at the Three Lions in Cornhil, near
the Royal Exchange. 1653.

portrait of Nathaniel Barnardiston Qui obiit a 4 December. 1677 Aetatis 84.

F. H. Van Houe. Sculp:


To the right worshipful and truly honored Lady, the Lady JANE BARNARDISTON;
As also To the right worshipful S. Tho. Barnardiston Knight, Mr. Nathaniel
Barnardiston, and Mr. Samuel Barnardiston Merchants in London, Mr. Pelatia
Barnardiston, and Mr. William Barnardiston Merchants in TURKEY, Mr. Arthur
Barnardiston Merchant in LONDON;
Together with the most virtuous Ladies, the Lady Anne Barnardiston, the Lady
Anne Rolt, Mrs. Jane Brook, Mrs. Elizabeth Barnardiston, and Mrs. Thomasin
Barnardiston.
MADAM,
IF any one who is a stranger to your Family, shall (upon the sight of these
eleven Names subscribed under your own) inquire as Esau once did, when he
beheld the very same number following his brother Genesis 33. and shall ask with
him, who are these with thee?

Your Ladyship may answer either as Jacob then did, These are the children
which God of his grace has given me; they being all of them pledges of Gods
grace unto you, as also heirs of the covenant of grace by you, and many of them
approved vessels of grace in themselves, and patterns of grace to others: or
you may use the words of that incomparable Lady Cornelia, when she presented
her sons to the Commonwealth, and answer with her, Haec sunt mea Ornamenta,
These are my Jewels, these are my Ornaments; Gracious children being the Crown
of (...) rents, whilst like pure and pleasant streams they show the purity and
excellency of that fountain front whence they did arise and spring.

But if your self (Madam) shall inquire of me why I thus subscribed them, my
answer shall be this, That I was very sensible of that deep wound which the
Lord has at this time made in your sorrowful and mournful heart; and withal
I was convinced what great care and cautelousness was to be used in applying
comforts unto it, least ungentle handling thereof, in stead of a cure, should
cause it to bleed afresh. I also knew that cordialls can never be more tenderly
and acceptably presented to any parents bleeding heart, then when they are
brought by the gentle and officious hand of their dearest children. And for
this reason have I annexed their names to yours in this dedication, that with
one and the same cast of your eye you may discern the matter of your joy and
sorrow joined both together.

In this manner I observe the Lord himself comforting his Orphan Church, Psalm.
45.16. In stead of parents shall be thy children, whom thou may make princes
in all the earth. Thus likewise does the Lord Jesus comfort his disconsolate
and sorrowful Mother, Joh. 19.26. Woman behold thy son, speaking of the
beloved disciple. Yea so does the same son and disciple comfort his own heart,
in all his sufferings and afflictions, 3 John 4. I have no greater joy then
this, to see my sons walk in the truth.

Madam, you have the same cause of joy, and I doubt not but that if your
Ladyship would seriously consider of Gods love to you in this mercy of your
posterity, I doubt not but that as there is no joy so great, but the thought of
one gracious child does much exceed it; so there is no sorrow so bitter, but
that the consideration of so much piety and obedience as your Ladyship may
discern in so many of your children, would abundantly and sensibly sweeten and
allay it.

If you therefore, worthy Gentlemen, and virtuous Ladies, shall further demand
to what end your names are thus inserted, give me leave to answer you by
relating to you what I have read in Aristotle, that great Philosopher, who
tells us of Archilochus, who being desirous to give some prevalent and
effectual counsel and advice to Lycambes, whose father was dead, did while he
was writing his admonitions, by an elegant prosopopoeia bring in his Father,
and so put his pen into his Fathers hand, that Lycambes might receive those
instructions from one, who by his very relation, was much more probable to
prevail, then himself. I have also met the like passage in Cicero, that prince
of Oratory and eloquence, as the former was of Philosophy; that he being to
read a lecture of modesty and temperance to his friend Clodia, raised up her
father Appius Cajus from his grave, and in his name delivered his directions to
his daughter. Both of these in this practice of theirs intimating, that neither
the wisdom of the one, though the deepest Philosopher, nor the eloquence of
the other, though the choicest Orator, is so effectual in the hearts of
children, as the voice of a parent, which is much more persuasive and powerful
then any other argument or Rhetoric.

Upon this consideration it was that (being by all your earnest and conjoined
importunity overcome to give you a copy of that counsel and admonition, which
I delivered at your Fathers funeral) I have chosen first to present it to your
dearest Mothers hand, and thereby to reach and hand it unto you, that so it may
be entertained with authority and efficacy; that as in times past you obeyed
your Fathers instruction (according to the command of God Pro. 1.8.) so now for
all times to come, you may fear to forsake your Mothers teaching, being thus
conveyed unto you. Instructions that are only spoken with the tongue are
transient, and for the most part are terminated with the glass: but directions
that are written, are much more permanent, and many times, while thy receive
and take one Impression, they also make and leave another. Last of all, as to
my self, this conjoined dedication appears not at all arbitrarie, but
necessary: for as the incitation to publish them, was from the solicitation
of you all; so the end intended therein was the service of you all, and the
obligation necessitating my consent thereunto was the united love of you all.

For I must (and always shall) acknowledge, that that God of my mercies, who
granted me to find so great, and so large a portion of love and favor in the
heart of him whom the Lord has now taken into his own bosom, and also in the
heart of you his dearest Lady; has likewise inclined the spirits of all you
his children and posterity, to manifest a singular and extraordinary affection
unto me, which although I acknowledge my self altogether unworthy to receive,
and absolutely unable to requite, yet I hold my self for ever obliged to
embrace every opportunity that is offered, to make my acknowledgement thereof
unto each of you.

And therefore have I greedily laid hold on this occasion now offered to me,
least if I should have neglected this advantage, I might never have had the
like again, by reason of my declining age.

I cannot therefore but hereby give a public testimony before the world of my
serious apprehension, and deep sense of those engagements, which both you, most
honored Lady, and also every one of you, renowned Gentlemen and Ladies, have
laid upon me, and also declare my self so firmly obliged to this whole Family,
that I am extremely desirous to the uttermost of my power always to approve
my self,

Madam, your Ladyships and your posterities Most devoted, faithful servant in
the Lord JESUS, SAMUEL FAIRECLOUGH.

(...), Or The Saints worthiness And The worlds worthlesnesse.
A Funeral Sermon on Heb. 11.38. Of whom the world was not worthy.
THe light of Nature teaches every man this lesson, that due praise, and
public acknowledgement of true worth in virtuous agents, is a great
provocation and a strong inducement, with all ingenuous spirits, to imitate
those actions which are always attended with honor and admiration; according
to that of the Orator, Laudis studio trahimur omnes; we are all forceably
drawn by the desire of praise.

Morality proceeds further, and tells us that an honorable commemoration of
laudable actions, is not only a motive and an engagement to the performance of
the like by the attentive auditour but is also in great measure the very
Guerdon and reward it self, which is justly merited by the deserving actour:
for who knows not that Laus est virtutis praemium; honor is the reward of
virtue?

Divinity, and the Spirit of God in Scripture ascends higher, and imposes it
as a duty: leaving it not at our discretion, but making it a divine precept in
sacred Writ, to render to every man that praise and honor which belongs unto
him, according to that of the Apostle, Romans 13.7. (...): Render to every man
his due, honor to whom honor is due.

All which being considered. I conclude that it is barbarous inhumanity in
Nature injurious detraction in Morality, and wilful disobedience in Divinity,
to bury the memory and reputation of those in silence and obscurity, whom the
Lord, by the manifestation of his grace in them, has raised to eminency, and
exalted above the standard of the worlds worth and value.

That I might not be guilty of any of these at this time, I have upon this sad
occasion of the Lords removing out of the world a person of whom the world was
not worthy (that Worthy of Worthies Sir Nathaniel Barnardiston) chosen these
words, and made them the subject of my following discourse.

Wherein you have held forth to you at the first view, the Saints worthiness,
and the worlds worthlesnesse.

Both these are weighted, (as Beza notes upon the word (...)) in a pair of
Scales and Balances; (...) de iis dicitur quae appensa ejusdem ponderis
inveniuntur, Beza in Romans 8.18.
the standard and beam, at which they are tried, is the wisdom and valuation
of the Lord himself, who lays a Believer naked, or clothed only in a
sheeps-skin, and leathern coat verse 37. in one scale; and puts the world with
all its Glories in the other: and having most exactly pondered and tried the
worth of both of them, concludes positively for the believer against the world;
and openly declares that the worldis not worthy of him.

The words for the substance of them much resemble that handwriting on the wall
against Belshazzar, Dan. 5.25. Mean menetekel perez.

As if the Apostle had said; Mean, O world all thy perfections and excellencies
are numbered and finished: Tekel, they are weighed in the balance with a naked
believer, and found too light: Peers, and therefore the honor of all thy worth
and excellency is taken from thee, and given to the believer, of whom the world
is not worthy.

In the further interpretation of which words, although the narrow compass of
one hour allotted to this duty, forbids me to meddle with any discourse of the
Analysis, coherence, or dependence of the words, and you to expect any accurate
division, or prelix explication of them; yet before I come to propound that one
Observation out of them, on which I purpose to insist, I shall borrow so much
light from the precedent and subsequent words, and other Scriptures, as may
open the text in these three particulars.

1. What that world is that is so worthless. 2. Who are those persons that are
so worthy. 3. In what respects that world is so unworthy of these persons.
1. For the first, what world it is that is so worthless, The Text opened.
may clearly be understood by the opposition hinted in the text, viz. the
persons against whom it is weighed, which are believers; and therefore the
world affirmed to be so worthless, is the world of unbelievers. That world out
of which the Church is called, John 15.18. That world for which Christ does
refuse to pray, John 17.9. That world which cannot receive the Spirit, John
14.17. Together with the Trinity which that world worshippeth, pleasures,
profits, and honors; as it is described, 1 John 2.16. This is that world which
is here affirmed to be so worthless and unworthy.

2. The persons affirmed to be so worthy, are manifestly described in the words
before and after the text;

1. By their external gath and condition. 2. By their internal worth and
disposition.
For their external garb and condition it is very low, and mean: for they are
here brought forth in leathern coats, foodlesse, monilesse, easelesse,
destitute, afflicted and tormented; yea harbourlesse also, for they wander up
and down and lodge in demes and caves. This and no better is the outward
condition of these worthy persons, expressed in the verses before and after,
37.38. Their internal worth and disposition is set down verse the 39. All
these obtained good report for their faith. Famous for their precious faith,
which is much more precious then gold, wherein they excelled, and were thereby
dignified and honored, both whilst they lived, and also after their deaths.
These are the worthy persons.

3. We will consider in what respect the world is unworthy of these persons.
The world is unworthy of these persons in a threefold respect, according to a
threefold unworthiness mentioned in Scripture.

1. Indignitas dispositionis, an unworthiness of disposition, either by
privative undesert or positive contempt as the Jews. Acts 13.46. are said to be
unworthy of eternal life, and the rich blessings of the Gospel, for their
despising and contempt of it. Thus though the believer, like the Gospel, comes
with fullness of blessing, wheresoever he comes; being a blessing to the family
where he dwells, as Joseph to Patiphars; to the business wherein he is
employed, as Jacob to Labans; to the nation where he converses, and to whom he
relates, as Abraham to all the nations in the earth; blessing them 1. with his
prayer, as Abraham blessed Abimelech; 2. with his presence, as Lot the city of
Sodom; 3. with his example, shining amongst them to their conversion, as the
woman, 1 Pet. 3.1, 2. yet these blessings the world contemnes and despises,
and persecutes the bringers of them. And thus first the world is unworthy of
the Saints.

2. Indignit as proportionis, there is an unworthiness of proportion, by
un^etnesse and unsutablenesse, as 1 Cor..2. are ye unworthy to judge the
smallest matters? that is, unfit, unable for such a work: and 1 Cor. 11.29.
yeeat and drink unworthily, that is, unfitly, unsutably, otherwise then is
agreeable to the pure fellowship with Christ, in such holy mysteries. So the
world in this respect is unworthy of the Saints, altogether unfit, unsuitable
and indisposed to live and enjoy society and fellowship with them; light and
darkness being no more opposite, then the Believer to the Infidel, 2 Cor. 6.14.

3. Indignit as pratii, there is an unworthiness of price and valuation, as
Romans 8.18. I account not the sufferings of this life worthy of the glory to be
revealed, that is, not of equal and proportionable value, but of far
inferior worth and virtue, so as they deserved not to be named, not to be
compared together, in respect of their excellencies. And in this respect the
world is not worthy of the Saints, that is, it is of far inferior price,
virtue, and excellency: the righteous even in such a degree is more excellent
then his neighbor.

Which interpretation of the words shall be further verified in that
observation, which as the result of the whole text, thus opened, I shall now
propound.

The Spirit of God sets a far higher price, The Doctrine propounded.
and valuation upon the meanest believer, then the whole world besides; for of
him the world is not worthy.

The observation being so diametrically opposite to the judgment, practice,
and that good conceit which the world has of its own worth, and so perfectly
contrary to carnal reason, and its apprehension, will seem but a mere fiction
and chimera, at first hearsay and be accounted a strange paradox, impossible to
be proved or maintained, (notwithstanding the Lord has set his hand to the
truth of it in the Text, and also has given plentiful testimony to it in
other Scriptures.) I will therefore in the further prosecution of it, 1.
expound my meaning in it; and 2. demonstrate it, both from the testimony, and
the practice of God himself whose truth it is.

The meaning and sense of the Point is this: Expounded.
Take a man to whom God has given but as much true saving faith, as a grain of
mustardseed; and then strip him naked, or clothe him but in a sheep or
goat-skin; turn him out of house and home, to lodge with wild beasts in dens
and in caves of the earth; deprive him of money, food, and estate; leave him
under all the misery and torments that Satan and his instruments can afflict
him withal: and then set by him an unbelieving worldling, clothed (with Dives)
in purple, and all the bravery of the earth; put him in a palace as glorious as
great Babek for his habitation; let his table be daily furnished, for plenty of
delicacies and attendants, as the great king Ahasuerus his feast was, Hester 1.
put a world of such men together, and I affirm that, what ever high conceit
these men may have of themselves, and their own felicities, and how
contemptible soever the Saints condition, in comparison of theirs, is reputed
in this world; yet the Lord sets a far higher price and estimation of this
believer at his worst, then of all them together at their best.

And this the Lord does abundantly declare in Scripture, holding forth,
Conformed


1. The verity of it. 2. The equity of it.
The verity is manifest, As to the verity.


1. From the Lords expressions. 2. From the Lords actions relating thereunto.
The Lords expressions confirming the same are,

First those terms of infamy, and appellations of contempt, 1. By divine
expressions.
whereby in the Scripture he does brand and vilify the men of the world.

Secondly those titles of honor, and names of excellency whereby he does
advance and magnify the least of those little ones, that believe in him.

For the unbelievers and men of the world, Vilifying the world.
the Lord brands them to their everlasting contempt, with these and the like
appellations: as that they are the seed of the Serpent, slaves of Satan,
children of wrath, dogs, swine, vipers, yea davils; and all these for this
purpose, to declare how unworthy and vile they are, in the account and
estimation of God; namely, more vile then the basest of vermin which they
tread upon: no creature in the world so contemptible as they are, except the
devils, who are therefore worse then unbelievers, because they made these so
bad as they are; and upon the same account unbelievers are worse then the
vilest of creatures, because by their sin they have made the creatures so
miserable as they are.

But on the other side we find in Scripture the Lord intituling the meanest
believer with terms of the highest honor and reputation, Magnifying the
Saints. Exodus 19.^. Jer. 31.9. Romans 8.27. Malach. 8.17.
as calling them his Jewels, his peculiar treasure, his sons, his firstborn,
his heirs annexed with his Son Christ; purposely to represent their dignity,
and his estimation of them.

Now let it be considered, that all these expressions and appellations,
vilifying the unbeliever, and magnifying the Saints, were inspired by the Lord
himself, and penned by his Secretaries, enrolled in his eternal word,
published by his messengers; and all by his appointment, who as he is greater
then the greatest, and wiser then the wisest, and better then the best, so he
is too great, and too good, to deny, or unsay, what he has spoken, or not to
maintain the truth thereof against all gainsayers.

Secondly, as the verity is thus manifest in the Lord his expressions, so also
by his actions, wherein his high valuation of them is declared: in his actions
relating unto

1. Their redemption. 2 By divine actions. In redemption Temporal. Psalm.
126.15.
2. Their remuneration.
First, their redemption may be considered, first as temporal; secondly, as
eternal.

First, their temporal redemption from temporal dangers. O how precious in
the sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints. God so values their persons
and liberties, that he will give all the material world, and the choicest of
all the things and persons therein, for the purchase of them, witness the
Prophet, Isarah 43.4. Because thou wast precious in my sight, and honorable, I
gave Egypt for thy ransom, and Ethiopia and Seba for thee: which are the
places where the greatest abundance of all the worlds riches, treasures and
pearls were to be found. And lest we should conceive, that the Lord did repent
of the price he had given for them, and would do so no more, the Lord adds
more in the next verse, for says the Lord, so do I value and prise thee still,
that I will give man also for thee, yea people (and that in ^eat number) for
thy life: whereby it is most evident and plain that the Lord esteems one of his
people at a higher price then all Egypt, Ethiopia and Seba, yea, then men or
people; and as the late Comment glosseth upon that Text, God more esteems of
one of his faithful then a whole world of wicked ones: which is the very
observation that I am proving unto you.

Secondly, the price and expense which the Lord was willing to lay out for
their eternal redemption, Eternal.
does more abundantly verify this; for, says the Apostle, 1 Pet. 1.19. Ye
were not redeemed with silver or gold, but with the invaluable treasure of the
blood of the Lord Jesus. And the Lord does not account them overbought, or dear
at that rate; but professes himself well pleased, and abundantly satisfied in
the purchase: Matthew. 3.17.
yea the Lord Jesus himself rejoices to give his blood for them, Isa. 53.
whence it follows infallibly from the actions of God in their redemption, in
laying out so great a price for their purchase, That one believer in Gods
estimation is of more worth then all the world besides.

Secondly, the Lord declares his high valuation of the worth of the meanest
believer, Actions of divine remuneration.
by the actions of his high and gracious remuneration of their worth, declaring
thereby that they are not only more worthy then this world, but (in a Gospel
sense) also worthy of the world to come: so says our Savior, Luke 20.35. They
are accounted worthy of the world to come, and the resurrection of the dead,
yea, worthy of the kingdom of God, 2 These. 1.5. yea, to be clothed with the
most beautiful Robes of glory, Revel. 3.4. They shall walk with me, in white,
for they are worthy.

Seeing therefore we have it under Gods hand in the Text, and in other
Scriptures he has attested it, both by his expressions in vilifying the world,
and magnifying the believer above them; as also in the actions of redemption,
and remuneration of them; it remains a most certain and undoubted verity, That
the Spirit of God sets a far higher price and valuation upon the meanest
believer, then the whole world besides.

Secondly, as the Scriptures hold forth the verity, Demonstrated by the equity
in respect of the world 1. Vilifying God.
so also do they declare the equity of God in this vilifying the world, and
magnifying the believer.

1. The equity of the Lord in this vilifying the world appears thus; because
the world does so much vilify God, undervaluing him, not only to the world,
but preferring their sins before him, yea, hating him (as the adulterer does
his wife for his harlot) in compatison of them, James 4.2. Ye adulterers and
adulteresses, know ye not that the love of the world is enmity to God? they
deifie the world and vilify God, whilst on^ makes his belly his God, Phil.
3.19. another says to the wedge of gold, thou art my confidence, Job 31.24. a
third sacrifices to his own net, Habac. L. 16. and so deifieth himself.

Is it not therefore equal that God should undervalue the world, to the
meanest of his Saints, that undervalue him to the worst of their sins? They
that despise the Lord shall be despised, 1 Samuel 2.30.

2. Do not the unbelieving world account his Saints the filth and scumme of the
world, 2 His people.
and all things in it, 1 Cor. 4.13. rendering them the vilest people in the
earth, as the Jews did Paul, Acts 22.22. saying, Away with them from the earth,
it is not meet that such fellows should live? do they not thus vilify them for
the Lord's sake, and the true worth that is in them? and therefore it is equal
and just with God, to undervalue the whole world to the meanest of his Saints,
for the evil that is in them that do thus vilify his Saints for the good that
is found in them? what measure they mete is measured to them again, Matthew. 7.2.

Again, In respect of the Saints. Magnifying God.
it is equal with God to magnify the meanest believer above the world,
because the meanest believer magnifies God, and preferres the Lord above ten
thousand worlds; they esteem all things in the world as dross and dung in
comparison of him: were it not for such, God should have but little glory in
the world be but little thought on, or esteemed: these are they alone that
extol his name and glory above others, and therefore he esteems all the world
as dross and dung in comparison of them, and values them above all others.
They that honor him shall be honored, 1 Samuel 2.30.

Lastly, Their real worth.
the meanest Saint in the world is found to be of more true and real worth,
then all the world besides. I would not be mistaken in this, for I acknowledge
that worth is a sovereign attribute of God, and that primarily and absolutely
it belongs to him; but yet, derivatively and in part it is attributed to the
Saints, who as the Apostle speaks, 2 Thessalonians. 1.11. (when they are called of God
to the says) are (thereby) made worthy of that calling, by fulfilling them
with all the good pleasure of his goodness, and the work of faith with power;
as if he had said, filled with all divine and humane worth, and all the worth
of heaven and earth is communicated unto them, either by imputation, or
infusion.

First, all the divine worth and merit of heaven, Imputed. John. 1.16
I mean the merits and worth of our Lord Jesus is imputed to them: by which
imputation they are so interested into it, that they receive it fully grace for
grace.

Secondly, all humane and spiritual worth is imparted to them, Imparted.
being filled with the holy Ghost, Acts 4.31. Filled with all the fruits of
righteousness to the praise and glory of God, Phil. 1.11. They are blessed
with all spiritual blessings, Ephesians. 1.3. enriched in all things, in all
knowledge, wisdom, patience, humility, so that they are not destitute of any
gift, 1 Cor. 1.5, 7.

These previous imparted graces make the believer (how mean soever in other
respects) much more worthy then all the world that wants them. Christ by
descending into Jordan, raised it above the bounds of a corporal has, to have
the honor to become a spiritual laver.

Pliny says that dedication of any thing to sacred uses, Plin. Praefat. not.
hist.
enhanses the price of its and we all know that things consecrated, as beasts,
or clothes, under the law, had greater worth and honor put upon them thereby,
then either silver or gold had that wanted it.

Every believer is a chosen vessel, and c^nsecrated to God; Paul being such is
better then all in the ship with him; and Noah better then all in the Ark, or
in all the world besides; in as great degree, as the richest diamond does
excel in dignity ten thousand pebbles.

Unbelievers are not worth one farthing in Gods esteem, nay, they are worse
then naught, or a mere nonentity; for it had been good for them if they had
not been born: take them at their best in all worldly excellencies and
perfections, and if the Lord may set the price of all, he tells you they are
digni damnatione, worth no more then damnation.

Now then, seeing they are so vile, and the meanest believer so worthy, by
reason of imputed and imparted worth into him; may not the Lord in equity and
justice, prefer the meanest Saint before a world of them? there being a
greater distance (in respect of worth and dignity) between the meanest and
poorest believer in the world, and the worldling, (what confluence of parts,
honors, and other enjoyments soever he enjoys) then there is between the
most glorified Saint in heaven, and the weakest believer on earth: because the
difference between the believer, is only graduall; every believer in time will
grow up to be such; but the difference between the former is essential, and so
they differ in nature and kind.

All that now remains is the application and improvement of this truth upon out
selves suitable to our present occasion; which that I may the better perform, I
shall first apply it in relation to the person whose Funeral this day we
desire to solemnize, and then to the rest of the auditory here met on this
occasion.



1. If it be so that the meanest Saint is of more worth then all the world,
thence it follows necessarily, that the loss of one of them, is a greater
loss, and more to be lamented, then the loss of a thousand others, (how great
soever they be in other respects.) If the daughters of Israel must weep for
Saul, 2 Samuel 24.16.
well may David say, woe is me for thee, my brother Jonathan; if there be cause
to let fall a drop for the one, surely there is cause that our eyes should gush
forth in a flood for the other.

2. If this be one evidence that the Lord values his Saints, namely, that he
honors them, and remembers their faith and other graces (to their praise) many
hundred years after they are dead, and asleep in their graves; then surely it
is a duty which we also owe to all Saints after they are dead, to speak good of
their names, and to perperuate the memory of their worth and graces in the
hearts and ears of others that survive them. The anointing of dead corpse
preserves them from putrefaction: a good name is this precious ointment,
wherewith God has anointed the corpse before us above others, and does
therefore call us all forth, and warrant me especially, to bring true and
honorable testimony of his worth this day.

3. If God so values the meanest Saints, how much more did he esteem this
honorable person, whose graces made him (not only more worthy then all
unbelievers in the world, but also) more conspicuous and eminent then the
greatest number of true believers in the church? whereof if any doubt, or has
hitherto been ignorant, he will now certainly be convinced and assured, if he
shall please to remember with me, 1. His honorable birth. 2. His gracious
life. 3. His blessed death.


But before I enter the relation of either of them, I have a double petition to
present to the Auditory.

And my first address is to his Right worshipful, mournful, A petition 1. To
his Lady and her children.
and lamenting Lady, with her children, who have called me to a work so
difficult, and so far above my power, as to delineate and represent the
effigies and beauty of his life and conversation, which, indeed, was in heaven,
whilst he was here on earth.

This must be the work of some divine Apelles, and not mine; for how can the
Sun be enlightened by a star, or the fountain be watered by its own stream?

And therefore I humbly petition your worships to expect no such thing from me,
as that I should give either your selves or the Auditory satisfaction, in
declaring either the greatness of your loss, or the excellency of his desert.

Alas, you your selves neither do not can yet conceive or understand your own
loss, much less the want which the Church of God will find of him many years
hereafter.

And for the expression of his deservings, whence is it, that when your selves
begin to remember and make mention of one or two of them, you presently stop
and forbear to proceed, and after a long pause in the midst of your discourses,
looking one upon another, conclude with sights and sobs, and tears in all your
eyes, but only to signify with these gestures, what you cannot utter with
your words?

Years, I confess, are the best Orators at Funerals, and speak much more
effectually then any verbal language can express; yet you having jointly
expressed what you can thereby, still confess all of you come short in the
proportion to his deserts: how think you then that it is possible for me alone
to satisfy both you and the whole Auditory also by my words; especially
considering that it is one property that belongs to things that deserve
admiration, that they cannot be expressed?

All that I hope to effect herein, is to manifest by what I shall speak, that I
really intended his honor, though I actually perform no more then he that
undertook to represent the beams and body of the Sun, only by making a prick
or dot of gold with his pen, in a fair sheet of paper; or that Limner, who
having undertaken to draw a most beautiful picture, finding his skill
insufficient, cast a vail over the face of it, to cover his own ignorance, as
well as the beauty of the piece.

My second petition is to the rest of the Auditors, 2. To the Auditory.
the sum whereof is, that they would not receive the testimony I shall
deliver concerning him, as arising only from the strength of mine affection to
his person, but rather from the conscience of that duty, which I owe to the
glory of God and the good of his peoples souls therein: for although I must
ever acknowledge him to have been the Lords great instrument of good to me, and
all mine, and therefore do desire all of you that ever have received any
benefit by my poor labors in this place, to join with the in thankfulness to
the Lord for him, (as the chief instrument thereof;) yet rather then I would
speak one syllable in this place which I did not either know to be true, on
mine own knowledge, or believe it to be so from the testimony of unquestionable
witnesses of the same, I would have totally stopped my mouth, and imposed an
absolute silence thereon.

Only let me further entreat you to consider, that if the most of you, by some
days or hours (occasional) enjoyment of his presence in his life time,
discerned so much worth in him, Near 200 persons met his corpse almost 20 miles
from his house, and many thousands attended his Funeral.
that drew so great a company of the chiefest persons in the country to go so
long a journey before, and to come again so far now to honor his dead corpse
to the grave: then you may easily guess, that I, who had the happiness to be
so near him, and to be intimately acquainted with him, and his family for 30
years together, must needs have more perfect understanding and approved
experience of his faith, holmesse, and constant gracious temper, then others
could: and therefore what of a truth I know, and undoubtedly discerned in him,
I dare not conceal; for veritatem celare, est aurum sepelire, to conceal truth
is to bury gold, yea, the gold of grace, which is much more precious then the
gold of Ophir; which being truly (though sparingly) discovered, will give us
all cause to say of his life and death, Eusebius. in vita constant.
as is reported of Constantine, felix nativitas, felicior vita, felicissima
mers, his birth was good, his life better, and his death most glorious of all.

Now for the honor of his birth, In his relation to his birth.
I place it not in the the ancient lines of his pedigree, or the Antiquity of
the Family, the continued descent of to many noble ancestors. Although it be
true that from his progenitors he was one of the Top-branches amongst our
Suffolkcedars: and although I acknowledge to be thus descended, and better both
then the commonalty, is a singular blessing of God to the persons upon whom it
is conferred, as appears by the Lords own words to David, in 2 Samuel 7.9. I have
made thee a name like the name of the great men of the earth; yea, if they be
gracious, great men are a great blessing to others also, as Solomon's words
import, Eccles. 10.17. Blessed art thou, O land, when thy prince is the some of
nobles and not of an upstart Family: Yet this is no other blessing but what is
common to the worthless world, as well as to the worthiest believe, and so it
can have no great excellency in it; all noble blood without grace being
tainted: Gain was of the elder house, and Abel of the younger.

It is my purpose therefore to show how the Lord honored him in his birth,
more then any unbeliever, which was by his second birth, Genere nobilis,
sanctitate nobilior.
whereby he received soul-nobilitie, and became heir to the second Adam, whose
hens are born not of blood nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of
man, but of God, John 1.13. And this his second birth was eminently honorable
and remarkable above other in three particulars.

1. In the time of his conversion. 2. In the matter of his humiliation. 3. In
the foundation of his faith.
1. For the time of his conversion, it was when he was young; 1. The time of
his conversion.
the Lord began to cast in the seed of regeneration when he was at school, the
very time when others of his rank and quality give up themselves to the
greatest degrees of licentious wantonness, and immoderare excesses; pretending
that the heat of nature, and strength of the lusts of youth, are their
discharges for the same: but at that very time did the Lord sease on him, who
from that day, with Abel, did offer his first fruits unto God. O how eminently
and emphatically excellent it is for young Gentlemen to bear Christ's yoke in
their youth, when the world haunts them, and nature prompts them, and Satan
baits the flesh and blood of such men with most desirable things! O then to be
crucified and mortified, is glorious, Lam. 3.27.

2. The matter of his humiliation was eminently remarkable; 2. Occasion of his
humiliation.
for whereas usually in the conversion of young men, the Lord humbles them, by
charging upon their consciences some notorious actual sin, it was otherwise
with him; for living more innoceutly then (for the most part) young Gentlemen
do, upon a time hearing that Text opened, Psalm. 51.5. Behold I was born and
conceived in sin, etc. where the greatness and odiousness of original
sin was pressed; it pleased the Lord so deeply to affect his heart thereby,
as that ever after it was a means to abase all high thoughts of himself through
his whole life, and he was much more solidly and constantly broken for it, then
for all the fruits of it, yea, hereby much preserved from them: for as they
that are once stung with scorpions, Plin. not. hist. 1.7.
are ever after privileged from being stung with wasps and hornets; so he that
is first deeply humbled for the root, mother and nurse of corruptions, shall
feldome have cause after to be wounded with the guilt of actual transgressions.

3. For the foundation of his faith, 3 Foundation of his faith.
it was more remarkable then the rest; for whereas most men ground their faith
upon that which can only be the proof of it, I mean the evidences of their
love so God; and others (being better taught) upon the discovery of the
all sufficiency of Christ's merit, revealed in the Gospel; and a third sort,
upon the general offer tendering Christ unto them: his faith was not only
built generally upon the evidences of Gods love to him; but particularly upon
the Gospel, as it is the law of faith, held forth unto him in that Text, John
3.22. This is the command we have received from him, that we believe in the
name of his Son; whence the preacher urging that in the Gospel there was not
only granted a liberty to believe in Christ, if we pleased, but a necessity
imposed, that required us to believe whether we will or no; it pleased the Lord
so to overpower his heart with the authority of the precept, that he durst not
refuse it, but submitted unto it; and so his confidence was in pure obedience
to God: which being the most evangelicall and sublime reception of Christ,
namely, upon no other ground, but the Lord his authoritative will, was that
which produced this honorable second birth in him, wherein his faith was more
established, then most believers usually are all the days of their lives.

Secondly, In relation to his life.
that his life was as gracious as his birth was remarkable, you will certainly
conclude, if you compare the most exact descriptions of a gracious life,
mentioned in the Scripture, with his practice after his conversion.

Whether you define a gracious life in David's words, Psalm. 119.1. Blessed are
they that are undefiled in their way, etc. or in the practice of Zacharias,
Luc. 1.74. Serving God in holiness and righteousness all the days of our
lives: or with Paul, Acts 24.16. living always with a clear conscience both
toward God and man: you shall find his life a copy or counterpane of them all.

As first, In duties of piety.
for duties of piety to God, whether you instance in secret or public
exercises of Religion; he did so earnestly devote himself unto them, that for
my part (amongst persons of his quality) I think he has left very few
supersours therein behind him, if any equals.

I remember I have read it related, to the everlasting praise of the Lord
Harrington, so famous for piety, that it was his course to pray twice every day
in secret, twice with some choice friends and servants, besides his Family
duties.

But I am assured by those that seriously observed this gracious Knight, 1
Private.
that it was his practice to humble his soul before the Lord in secret thrice
every day, and sometimes oftener, if he could gain opportunity; beside Family
duties, and other days of extraordinary humiliation, which he greedily laid
hold on when occasion was offered.

This I can testify from mine own experience, that for many years together,
when I was first acquainted with him, I seldom visited him, or he me, but if
any convenient place could be found, we might not part except we had prayed
together.

Nor was he more frequent in secret prayer, then constant in secret reading the
Scriptures; but never without prayer before and after, for the blessing of the
Lord thereon: afterward he read other choice Authors, of which he had store;
but of late he took singular delight in reading Mr. Baxter his Treatise of the
Saints everlasting rest, and preparation thereunto; which (since his death) I
perceive was nothing else but the gracious event of divine providence, sending
it as a guide to bring him more speedily and directly to the possession of that
rest.

For the sanctification of the Sabbath so was it his delight, that for the most
part, he arose the first in the family that day, 2 Public.
and then would call his children and others up, that they might have time to
prepare themselves for a more reverent attendance upon the Lord in his public
ordinances; and for himself he ordinarily spent much time upon his own heart
every Sabbath morning, before he came to the congregation.

And for his estimation of, and constant attendance upon the ministration of
the word publicly dispensed, it was so eminent and reverent, Ministry of the
word.
that I verily believe, whoever in the congregation have been loosers by his
death, we of the minislery have the greatest loss: if the hearers put on
blacks, the preachers have cause to mourn in sackcloth; for the godly ministers
had not a more faithful and cordial friend, and well-wisher of his quality in
the land: none so earnestly and frequently prayed for them, none so highly
prized their calling and labors as he did; he was fully of his mind, who
openly professed, he had rather fall with the Ministry of England, then stand
in greatest power with their enemies.

When some talked of mortal bloody times, and dark black days coming upon us:
he replied, that those would be dark black days indeed, when the lights of the
ministry were extinguished, then the shortest life would be accounted the best.
This made him so exceeding cautelous and serious, when any place belonging to
his presentation was vacant, that he would spend many days in fasting and
prayer to be directed therein: professing many times solemnly unto me, that his
spirit did more tremble to set his hand and seal to a Presentation, then to any
other writing or deed whatsoever; lest (said he) I should thereby bring the
loss of the peoples souls to be required of me or my posterity, through my
negligence therein. And therefore when by all his own care, and advice of
friends, such an one could not be procured, that for his sufficiency and
abilities could give his own conscience satisfaction, then he left it wholly to
the better sort of the people in that place, to choose their own Minister and
Pastor.

In his personal attendance upon the word taught, what the Apostle James
requires in a blessed hearer, was his punctual practice, for he was swift to
hear; he could never satisfy his own conscience, if he were not present to
join with the congregation before there was one word spoken, or one petition
sent up to the Lord: his constancy in this course is notoriously known to you
all.

After the congregation was dismissed, the first thing which he did usually,
after he came within his own doors, was immediately to betake himself to his
closet, to beg a blessed dew from heaven, to water the seed sown in his heart
that day.

And he that exceeded others in his diligence and reverence in other duties of
piety, Sacrament
did exceed himself in his conscientious preparation unto, and fruitful
improvement of the Lords Supper: for the most part he would spend a fortnight,
never less than a week before the Sacrament, in his closet, in reading,
praying, and examination of his spiritual estate, with other duties of
preparation tending thereunto; and what he practiced himself in this kind, he
constantly called upon others under him to do the like.

Neither did this his singular piety in the things of God, Duties to man.
make him (as it is in very many others) the more remiss or regardlesse in the
performance of the duties of equity, or charity, in his deportment to men; but
on the other side rendered him much more exact and accurate in them all: for
consider him in his carriage toward others in their several relations to him,
and you shall have cause to conclude his life as gracious in performing the
duties of righteousness unto all his relations, as it was in the exercise of
holiness, and the worship of God, and all acts of immediate communion with God.

Consider him as pater-familias, Relative graces. Master of family.
the governor and master of a family, and it may be truly affirmed of him
(whilst he was a housekeeper) which the prophet David professes of himself,
Psalm. 101.5, 6. That he walked in his integrity in the midst of his house: he
permitted to known profane person to stand before him, or wait upon him; but
his eyes were ever fixed upon those that were faithful in the land, that they
might serve him. He had at one time tenor more such servants of that eminency
for piety and sincerity, that I never yet saw their like at one time, in any
family in the nation; whose obedience joined to their governors care, produced
so rare an effect, that truly they made his house a spiritual church and
temple, wherein were daily offered up the spiritual sacrifices of reading the
Word, and prayer, morning and evening, of singing Psalms constantly after
every meal, before any servant did rise from the table: the chiefest of them
did usually, after every Sermon they heard, call the rest into ( that place of
most disorder in other houses) the Buttery, and there repeated the Sermon unto
them, before they were called to the repetition of it in their masters presence.

In the relation of an husband, Husband.
he seemed to me to imitate the practice of the Lord Jesus to his church, in
his conjugall love, protection, and full contentation and delight in her,
until he became a pattern and mirror of matrimonial faithfulness and
sweetness: and as it was said by one of the Rabbis concerning Methusalah's
wife, that she had nine husbands in one, for age and years; so I may say of
his Lady, she had nine husbands in him alone, for hus amtable carriage and
graces.

What manner of parent he was, let his children themselves, Father.
in their hearts, lives, and filial deportments, declare; or do you receive
the relation from me, as I have heard it from them: namely, that he performed
not only the part of an earthly father, in the manifestation of all paternall
bowels, and tender affection to their bodies; but also executed the office of
an heavenly father to their souls, by a continual industry, and serious study
for their education in the most exact and strict way of pure and paternall
Religion: witness his daily droppings in of most spiritual counsels, and
gracious instructions; the grand scope and end whereof was, to stir up and
incite them to a strict watchfulness over themselves, and a close walking with
God; and many times (after the giving of such directions unto them severalty)
he would take them into his closet, and there pray over them, and for them.

If at any time they had offended him, so singular was his moderation and
wisdom toward them, that he would never reprove them, much less correct them
in his displeasure, but still waited the most convenient time, until which
time they seldom discerned that he was angry by any other effect but his
silence. And on the other side, he was so ready to encourage them in any acts
of well-doing, that usually all his extraordinary respects and savours to them,
were dispensed rather as rewards of their duty, then the fruits of his bounty;
still professing before them (as he has many times of late to me, upon our
conference concerning the extraordinary blessings of God upon them in their
travells abroad and returns home again) that he took infinite more content in
beholding one grain of grace, and evidence of true regeneration in his
children, then if their estates and gains abroad had been multiplied an hundred
fold, if withal they had returned profane, or no more then merely civilized,
without the power of godliness.

Again, Pater patria.
consider him as a public person, as he was pater patria, a father of his
country: which name he did deserve, as well as Curtius, Claudius, or the
Decii: for although he did not in every particular what is said of them,
devoverunt, se pro toto terrarum orb, they did devote themselves for the
defense of the whole earth; yet for his country, and the defense of the just
liberties thereof, he did not refuse voluntarily to expose himself to a gulf
of hazard and sufferings: witness his suffering under the imposition of
ship money, coat and conduct-money, and the loan; for refusing whereof he was
long time imprisoned in the gate house, and afterward confined for a long time
in Lincolnshire, above sixscore miles from the place of his own usual abode.

Witness also his fidelity and integrity in the discharge of that greatest
trust of all, Parliament man.
I mean his service to his country as Knight of the shire, and member of the
Parliament, unto which place he was constantly chosen on every occasion; not
that he had a patent for the place, as some of his enemies (in respect of his
constant election thereunto and out of envy at the peoples honoring him did
cast out; but out of the experience and confidence they had of his resolution,
and care to discharge the trust that was committed unto him: whereby it came to
pass, that no sooner was one to be chosen, who should be entrusted with the
power over the lives and estates of his country, but presently the thoughts,
eyes, and resolutions of all men, were fixed upon him, and all cried for a
Barnardiston, a Barnardiston. Which trust he received upon him, not out of any
popular ambition, to advance his own greatness; nor out of any self-end, to
raise his own estate by exhausting the public treasury, or to enrich himself
by other men's ruin; nor out of lofty arrogancy, that he might dominear and
trample upon his neighbors in the country, under pretense of the privilege
of a Parliament man; much less to abuse that place to an impunity, and
sheltring of himself in riot, excess, pride, and lasciviousness: but out of a
mind and conscience devoted to the service of the church and commonwealth
therein; beyond which neither fear, favor, or flattery, could draw him to act,
or vote at all, absolutely refusing to be defiled with the Kings portion,
Absaloms sacrifices, or Achitophels policies or treacheries.

2. As all these graces, and their exercises in his gracious life, Personal
graces.
had their tabernacle in the Sun, were open and manifest in his course toward
others; so also his personal virtues and perfections, which, as so many rich
jewels and mineralls in the earth, lay couched in his heart (as the cabinet of
their habits) could not in respect of their noble actings, be so much hid, but
that like the beams of the Sun from under a cloud, they brake forth and did
shine out with so great splendor and luster, that the blindest eye could not
but discover them: as to give you an account of one or two.

1. The graciousnesse of his speech, so free from the least unsavourinesse,
beasting or passion, that on the other side, nothing but love, sweetness, and
^odesty, as so many pure streams, flowed from the pure fountain of his heart,
still ministering grace to the hearers; so far from the least appearance of
lightness or excessive mirth, that in thirty years together none ever heard
one syllable tending to any wanton expression, that might offend the chastest
mind or ear, to be breathed out of his mouth; but as the Poet affirmed, vernas
eff^at ab ore rosas, his tongue dropped honey, and his breath was as sweet and
savoury as in the spring.

2. Unto this I may add the gravity and reverend awfulnesse of his presence,
especially in execution of Justice: of which I may say, Greg. orat de laud
Basilii.
as it was of Basils countenance, whilst he was performing holy exercises,
namely, that so much divine majesty and luster appeared therein, that it made
the Emperor Valens tremble to behold it. And in like manner his severe
deportment was so effectual, that it banished from his presence all those
scurrilous and sordid gestures and practices, which the impudency of too many
of his quality fear not to act in the sight of God and their betters.

3. Lastly, there was in him a blessed conjunction of those things that rarely
meet in any other, I mean both an admirable facility and easiness to be
entreated, with a great yieldingnesse of spirit, even to inseriours, when any
good might be done thereby; and yet also a strong resolute unmovablenesse and
steadfastness of mind, in opposing all evil in whomsoever, superior or other,
in the cause of the Lord: so that he was truly that which is reported of
Athanasius, Magnes and Adamas; Nazianzen.
a loadstone for his sweetness in drawing on good, an adamant for his courage
and stoutnesse in suppressing evil. In regard of the former, I may say as it is
said of Titus, he was delicia humani generis, the delights of mankind; and in
respect of the latter, he was Nathaniel, a true Israelite without guile.

The observation of these things in him, rendered him (not only to me, but) to
all that were intimately conversant with him (like Chemnitius) caput Veneris,
and gloria Christianorum, Melchier Ad in zira chem.
the beauty of grace, and the glory of Christianity; which, as so many precious
jewels, adorned him, and presented him gracious and honorable to all men
whilst he lived, and being dead, ( as so many redolent flowers stuck upon his
hearse) give such a pleasant and odoriserous savor in the nostrill of all
spectatours, that the memory of them shall ever remain in the hearts and mouths
of all future generations, who shall understand thereby how the Lord was
pleased to honor him, first with a spiritual birth, and after with a gracious
life, and last of all with a most blessed death, which now in the next place
falls under our consideration.

And surely if their death be blessed that die in the Lord, and rest from their
labors, their works following them, Revel. 14. if it be a blessed death to
depart in peace with Simeon, Luc. 2. our eyes beholding the salvation by
Christ: if it be a blessed death to die as Paul did, Phil. 4. having finished
our course, and kept the faith; or with Jacob, blessing our children in the
arms of our dearest Joseph: then the consideration of the particulars
following, which attended his death, will manifest to all that his death was as
blessed as his life was gracious, or his birth honorable.

The first whereof was his careful preparation thereunto, His death blessed.
for the space of two years before, when he made his last will and testament,
and writ it with his own hand, upon this very ground (as he there expresses it)
that after he had so set his house in order, he might have nothing in the world
to look after, or look upon, but his blessed Savior, and Salvation by him. In
which last Testament of his, he expresses so much assurance and confidence of
the Lords everlasting grace and love unto him, as if at the same time, with
Simeon, he had embraced the Lord Jesus in his arms.

In the disposal of the several portions to his posterity, he does withal
annex and twist in so many heavenly counsels, and precious instructions,
tending to their everlasting inheritance, that it rather resembled our Saviors
Testament, conveighing the legacies of the covenant of grace, or a heavenly
Sermon, then any political instrument to dispense only earthly possessions.

A second observable thing in his death was, his gracious welcome of the
messenger of it. As soon as ever there appeared on his side a small swelling,
in which none but himself conceived any danger, Gracious courage in sickness.
he taking me to walk with him, presently fell into discourse of the worth and
immortality of the soul, of the manner of its subsistence and actings when it
was separated, of the joys of the other world, and the vanity and emptiness
of all things in this, as the things most suitable to his present condition: and
herewith he was so deeply and spiritually affected, that at our parting he
expressed himself in this manner unto me;

Sir, I now much wonder that any man that fully believes these things to be
realities, and not mere notions ( being in my condition) should be unwilling to
die: for my own part, I will not be so flattered with any carnal content, as
to be desirous to live longer in this world, where there is little hope left,
that the Lord has any more work or service for me to do, except it be to
suffer for keeping a good conscience, in witnessing against the apostasies and
impieties of the times: and therefore now it is a great favor of God to be
sent for speedily.

Which passage I note, because it was one of the last I had with him before his
removal to London; and also because I have certain intelligence, he made the
same profession to others, after he came under the Physicians hands.

Where another thing is remarkable; for his pains and infirmities growing so
fast upon him, that he was thereby debarred the benefit of public ordinances,

He one Sabbath morning observing the persons in the Family were he lodged,
preparing themselves to join with the congregation of that place, fell into a
great passion of sorrow, and wept very sore, and with David, poured out his
very heart, because he had gone with the multitude, and led them to the house
of God, but now was necessitated to want the benefit of that which his soul so
much thirsted for.

Hereupon he gave himself so much the more earnestly to the exercise of secret
reading the Scripture, meditation and prayer, so long as his strength would
hold out: but one wave followed another so fast, that he was disable thereby to
be so frequent and constant in those secret duties of communion with the Lord,
as he desired: for which he made many complaints to his sons, and others, as
they came about him.

The week before he died, he was persuaded in respect of the extremity of his
pain, once or twice to go to bed before Family prayer: but the night following
being again persuaded to it, he told them he would not be entreated to do so
any more: for he said, he was sure that he slept the worse those two nights for
the want of it; spiritually using that proverb, whet it no let.

The day before his death, his children being about him, as Jacobs were, he
blessed them all with his prayers for them, and gave these his last counsels
unto them:

First, he admonished them to take heed of worldliness and vainglory; showing
what a vast difference there was between a gracious humble man, and a proud
graceless man, both in the estimation of God and man.

Secondly, persuaded them to live in love and unity together, yet so as they
should ever count it their duty to watch over one another, and never be afraid
to tell one another of their faults lovingly, and not to be mealy-mouthed, as
his expression was.

Thirdly, that they should take heed of timorousness, and shirking from the
truth, by reason of the oppofitions of the times against the Scripture-power of
godliness, showing the danger of complying with man against God.

Fourthly, he commended them unto the word of Gods grace, and the word of grace
unto them, requiring them to be constant in reading the Scriptures, and to join
prayer thereto for a blessing before and after.

After these counsels, one of his sons (telling him how much he hoped the
words of a dying parent would be regarded by them) desired him to deal
impartially with each of them, and discover unto them what evils he had noted
each of them most prone unto, and what duties he had observed any of them most
negligent in. Which he did with so much plainness, that one of his brothers
standing by, desired him to use the same fidelity to him: which he did
accordingly. A piece of affection rarely found expressed with wisdom.

All that I shall therefore now add further, Peaceable and joyful departure.
is nothing else but the signification of that abundant ravishing peace and joy
that he departed withal; wherewith his heart was so filled that he could not
hide it, but declared it to all that inquired after it at several times.

First, to his second son, who observing him to grow faint, did desire him to
cheerful: to whom he answered, Son, I thank the Lord I am so cheerful in my
heart, that I could laugh whilst my sides ache.

Then to his brother then present, and inquiring how he found himself, he
answered to the same effect, saying, O brother, blessed be God, I have
abundance of ravishing joy within me.

The same answer he gave to his eldest son, who being called unto his father,
and inquiring how it was with him, his father fell into an earnest prayer, That
the Lord would be pleased to give him a happy deliverance out of this world,
and a glorious meeting with his Savior. Which prayers of his the Lord so
graciously answered, that as long as he had any use of speech, he acknowledged
the sense of this inward joy; and after these words were uttered I have peace
within, I have peace within, he spoke no more, but lying for a while as it were
in a slumber, at last he opened his eyes again, and lifting up his hands to
heaven, fell a asleep in the Lord. Whereby it is manifest that this departure
out of this life was as comfortable, as his entrance into it was honorable, or
his adode in it gracious and acceptable both to God and all his people.

If any shall (as some of you may) object against this relation as partial,
saying, I have only held out the flowers, but hid the weeds; declared all his
graces, and concealed his vices; I shall return a threefold answer thereunto.

First, it is not true to affirm that I have mentioned all his graces; for I
have omitted diverse, wherein he was as eminent as in any I have named. I might
instance in his charity to the poor, wherein I have been altogether silent;
because the backs and bellies of so many, whom he annually clothed, and who for
so long a time have been refreshed by him, will proclaim it aloud to your eyes
and ears. Yea, so far was his heart drawn out in this kind to the relief of
the poor, that it has extended his hand by his last testament, as far as the
poor in new England, unto whom he has given a very considerable sum, for the
relief of their miseries and necessities.

Secondly, If I had mentioned all his graces, and concealed his vices, yet my
text, yea, and also the whole chapter is both my pattern and warrant therein;
for throughout the chapter, the faith and graces of the Saints are by the
Spirit of God recorded to their praise, without mentioning any of their
infirmities.

Thirdly, but in the third place, although I must acknowledge he was a man, and
so weak and imperfect in every grace, yea a finfull man, and so subject to like
passions and temptations that other men are: yet so free and pure was his life
from any scandalous sin, or any other actual evil course, that for thirty
years together I remember nor he was soiled with any spot which might give
occasion to any to suspect his eminent integrity and sincerity, but his heart
was yet upright before God; a thing very rare in the world.

And now the application of the doctrine, in relation to the dead, being
finished, it remains that I next improve it upon the present Auditory: and
therein I shall direct my speech 1. To his Lady, children and posterity. 2. To
the rest of the Gentry, and those of chief quality present.


First, Uses. To his relation. Comfort.
to his right worshipful Lady and posterity; his truth of the Lords valuation
of the meanest Saint above the whole world, speaks you a world of comfort in
the depth of your present sorrow; nay, it expells all sorrow from your mourning
hearts, and tears from your eyes; for how can ye grieve and mourn without hope
for him whom the Lord values above the world? he who mourns with this hope,
mourns with comfort, yea with more comfort then this world contains.

I know where hearts have been knit together, they cannot be rent asunder
without pain. I find no fault with natural affection; Christ wept for Lazarus,
David for Jonathan: yet teas (as one says wittily) should drop like precious
water out of a limbeck, not run like common water in a river: let nature have
its course, when Religion has set bounds to it.

When news was brought to Xenophon (as he was offering sacrifice) of his sons
death, Val. Max. lib. 5. c. 10.
he put off his crown from his head and wept; but after he understood how
valiantly he died, and worthy of such a father, he put on his crown again, and
finished his begun sacrifice. Upon the first notice of your fathers death, you
might put off your joy, and melt in tears; but now you have heard how
graciously he lived, how blessedly he died, take comfort to your souls, and
offer sacrifices with joy and thanksgiving. Bona mors quae vitam non perimit,
August. Ser. 35. de Diverse.
sed adimit restituendam. The consideration of the loss of friends cuts us,
but our hope of receiving them again heals us: the Egyptians mourned 70 days
for Jacob, and Joseph his son mourned but 7. Genesis 50.3. the reason, they
mourned without hope, but Joseph believed his fathers present glory and future
resurrection, and this gave him comfort.

The same glory he now enjoyes with Jacob, who whilst he was alive, lived in
near neighborhood to God; his conversation was in heaven, and now his soul is
there also, where it dwells in God, and God in it. Why should you mourn for his
joy, and wear blacks when he is clothed in white robes of glory? he is singing
there, whilst we are weeping here; he is triumphing whilst we are sighing. If
you weep with those that weep on earth, rejoice also with him that rejoices in
heaven.

I have also a word of exhortation from this truth to you of his nearest
relation; Exhortation.
you have heard it proved that the Lord sets a higher price upon the meanest
believer then all the world besides; you have the experience of it in the Lord
his honoring your father in his life and death; and I believe you esteem it
none of your least honors, that you are descended from also honorable a root,
and that upon very good ground, for to be heirs of so many promises and
prayers, which he pa^ up to the Lord for you, is an invaluable treasure and
portion.

Moses, when it was put to his choice, whether he would deny his Hebrew
pedigree, and he reputed an Egyptian, even the son of Pharaoh's daughter, and
thereby have hopes of a kingdom, or on the other side, lose all the riches of
Egypt, by declaring himself of the posterity of Abraham: saw cause enough to
make choice of the latter rather then the former: in like manner I am persuaded
you see more ground to glory that you are descended from your fathers loins
(who was so gracious) then if you had been born heirs to the greatest Potentate
of the earth, if he were graceless.

O therefore that now it might be your great care to see that your behavior in
the world may be worthy of so good a father. Beware you do not degenerate from
his practice or principles; but le your conversation to God and mad be such,
that you may be a crown to his head, that was so great a glory to yours. Robora
parentum referunt liberi: as sickly children argue the parents weakness; so a
gracious posterity like pure streams, demonstrate the purity of the fountain
from whence they are derived.

Childrens grace and piety is not only a comfort to parents whilst they live,
but also a glory unto them when they are dead: so was Eliakim, of whom you may
read, Isa. 22.22. where the Spirit of God affirm that he was a throne of glory
to his fathers house. I saw a letter which one of you (since your fathers
death) wrote from London to your brother in the country, wherein was this
expression, viz. that he ballancing his fathers gain and glory which now he
enjoyed in heaven, against the greatness of his own loss by his death on
earth, he professed, that if he might have him alive again with a wish, he
durst not desire it. I liked the expression exceeding well, because it
preferred his fathers glory above his own content. And therefore as you rejoice
in the increase of your fathers glory in heaven, so labor the augmentation of
it in earth, in being with Eliakim, a throne of glory to your fathers house.

Which you shall effect if (with the Rechabites) you shall strictly and
punctually observe and follow all his holy commands and blessed examples, after
his departure: in so doing both the Lord himself, and all his people shall do
to you, as the Lord Isaiah 22. promises they should do to Eliakim, viz. hang
the glory of his fathers house upon him.

Abraham was a good father, and the Jews did much glory in him; but Abraham
could not glory in the Jews as his children, because they did no the works of
Abraham their father. In like manner you had an honorable father, and you
justly glory in him; O let him also have cause to glory in you, whilst the
world may take notice, that you both walk in the steps of his faith, and do
also his works. Let me therefore exhort every one that has any of his blood in
his veins, and bears his name before the world, that you would become his
representatives the world; that he being dead in his own body, yet he may live
and walk in you: Collect the jewels of his graces, set them in rows on the
breast plate of your heart, and so carry his image about the world in your
lives, that all spectatours that knew your father, when they behold your
conformity to him, may say, Surely this is that renowned Sir Nathaniel
Barnardiston, or one very like him.

All this I speak unto you in this day of the sad obsequies of your father,
that I may engage you all, who are the branches of this noble vine, to become
fruitful boughs, laden with such clusters, the fruit whereof may glad the
heart of God and man.

And for that end I commend unto you (next after the reading of the Bible)
above all other books, the reading and remembrance of the history of your
fathers life and graces; the volume of his counsels and directions written in
your hearts: use all diligence in the daily observation of the solid
principles, and divine rules, legible in his example and practice.

Boleslaus the fourth King of Poland used to hang his fathers picture in a
plate of gold about his neck; Cromerus lib. 5.
and when he was to speak or act any thing or importance, did usually pull it
out, view, and kiss it, wishing he might do nothing unworthy of his name. The
like do you in bearing his name for a remembrance before the world, until the
reflection on his perfections, ( as so many rich diamond, casting forth their
beauty upon your actions) cause you to answer those great expectations of piety
and sincerity, which your birth, education, and profession, have raised in the
hearts and minds of all spectatours.

Conceive, I beseech you, that every one that looks upon you, does speak unto
you as the people of Rome used to speak at the creation of their Consuls,
praesta nomen tuum, make good your name.

By this course you shall in some measure make up the couatreys great loss in
the death of your father, and make way for your friends to comfort those
sorrowful hearts that mourn for his death. Ambros. in obit. Theo.
As Ambrose in his Funcrall oration for Theodosius, thus cheared up his
mourning subjects; my friends (said he) let his comfort you in the death of
Theodosius the father, because he lives in his son Honorias; so I may say, Let
this comfort thee, O Suffolk in the loss of his worthy Patriot, that his
graces yet survive in his son.

Nay, if you shall severally and joincly second your fathers piety integrity
and zeal for the cause of God and your country, I may then add that
consolation to your lamenting neighbors, which Eusebius reports of
Constantines children, after their fathers departure; they lived so holily,
that the people said they had now may Constantines for one before, they had
Constantine multiplied: so we also hereby may say we have may Sir Nathaniels
for one, or Sir Nathaniel multiplied and enlarged, whilst his children that
inherit his lands and estate, do also succeed him in his virtues and graces;
who account it he highest honor of their family, that Religion be continued in
a succession and multiplication therein. And truly (Gentlemen) if it was
esteemed the great honor of the Family of the Curii in Rome, Aeliax. lib. 3.
that there arose out from that stock three excellent Orators, one succeeding
the other; what height of excellency must it needs be thought, that the power
of Regligion and holiness is made successive in your stock from generation to
generation?

The next application is to those in the Auditory whom the Lord by his
providence has raised by their birth, 2 Use to Gentlemen.
breeding and education, estate, parts, or offices above the rest: Gentlemen (I
mean) that account themselves, and are also accounted by others of an higher
rank and quality then other: whose presence here is occasioned by their
respect and estimation of his noble Knight, now to be interred.

To you I have a word of instruction from the doctrine already proved, which I
am not willing to omit, because I see the greatest prophet that was born of
woman, John the Baptist, when he perceived such Auditors come unto him, which
were not usually before him, took then occasion to apply himself unto them,
Matthew. 3. His practice shall be my warrant and encouragement to address my
speech unto you at this time.

Gentlemen, I would instruct and direct you how you may be good as well as
great, and become honorable before God hereafter, as you are before men
already; and the only way is this, to add the nobility of grace to the
nobility of nature: for seeing the meanest believer is of more reputation with
God then all the world besides, it does follow, that the way to true honor is
to become a true believer.

By faith the elders obtained a good report: not only a crown of glory after
their death; but estimation and honor from God whilst they lived, as is
manifest the whole chapter before my Text. Faith makes the meanest believer of
more worth than an Emperor. Jacob a plain man, by faith became a Prince; yea,
a Prince with God. Deo servire est regnare, to serve God is to be a King.

You therefore that would be esteemed worthy and precious, must become
gracious. Oh how excellent and precious does godliness make those men in the
eyes of the Lord, whom birth and estate have made honorable in the estimation
of men! Religion does ennoble their spirits, and advance their mind unto the
heavens: and as a precious Jewel set in gold makes that much more conspicucus
which was beautiful before; so holiness adds to the splendor of birth and
estate, the enemelings of grace and glory. Be therefore humbly entreated to
crown the emmency of your bi^th and fortunes, with the glory of spiritual
excellencies.

I am the more carnest and serious at this time, because the present pattern
before you shows it possible and seasible for you: and, oh! that his death
might cause you to imitate him, whose l^^e was a light to guide you in the way.
I know that many Gentlemen think that a strict and holy life is only for such
as have little to do, or to take to in the world. He only is to live by faith
that has nothing else to live on: but for those who are born to great things
in the world, it is too low for them to stoop to Christ's yoke.

Nay some of them (who are not ashamed of their oaths, blasphemies, beastly
uncleanness, swinish excesses, but glory in them, yet) account sanctification
of Subbath, hearing the Word, constancy in prayer, to be their disgrace; and
esteem it a disparagement to their credit to be accounted godly and religious:
and therefore purposely act that which they know is profane and impious, lest
they should be esteemed holy or conscientious. Thus Augustine in his
Confessions lib. 2. cap. 19. pudebat me non fu^sse impudentem, etc. I was
ashamed of my modest, and blushed that I was not past blushing. And Salvian
even with tears complains of the Gentlemen of his time, Oh! Deprov. lib. 4.
says he, such contempt and disgrace is put upon religion, ut cogantur esse
mali, ne vide antur viles, they are compelled to be evil, least they should be
esteemed base for religions sake. I wish that this sin of contempt and scorn
put upon religion, had been buried in Salvian's days: but are there not very
many still of these great ones, that think that their attendance upon the Lord
Jesus in his Ordinances, is a condescension of their greatness, and abstain
from religious performances merely in point of honor, as too low a service for
their Lordships, Ladyships and Worships? The CENTVRION thought his house too
mean and unworthy to receive Christ into it; but these men think Christ house
too mean and unworthy to receive them.

Do any of the rulers believe? do the Knights, Esquires and Gentlemen follow
the Lord Jesus? and why do they not? oh! it is not for their place, credit,
reputation so to do. Oh! accursed pride and hellish loftiness! is it the
highest honor of the glorified Angels to be Christ his servants, and
ministering spirits to attend his members? and is it the highest glory of the
Trinity to be accounted holy, gracious, pure, abundant in goodness? and shall
sinful dust and ashes, because of a little precedence in birth, or estate,
account holiness, purity, goodness, their dishonor and disparagement?

It was the saying of Ignatius, antiquit as mea, nobilitas mea solus Christus,
Christ is my only nobility, and antiquity: but these say, my nobility and
antiquity is mine only Christ: and therefore think the only way to cast down
themselves, is to exalt Christ; whereas you may thoroughly be convinced by the
truth proved unto you, that he only way to exalt your selves is to exalt Christ
above your selves, who raises the meanest of his saints to a greater worth
then all the world besides.

You see, Gentlemen, that neither the Lord Jesus, nor his servants do envy
your honor, or greatness, much less disparage it; but rather desire the
advancement of it, in the true way of preferment to glory, without which it had
been better for you to have been born and brought up in a cave, or den, and
layn all your to have lived in your Palaces, and been sed at your fullest
tables: for

1. Motives.
All your births and high estates (at the best) are no better things then the
Lord bestows on his greatest enemies, and if not accompanied with grace and
improved for God, they are greatest miseries. For these expose you to more
temptations then poorer men: as our Savior Mat. 19. and the Apostle 1 Timothy 6.
affirms, they are nothing else then fuel to feed your Justs, and
provocations to a more impudent and uncontrouleable course of sins. Who would
boast in such a garment, which how rich and pompous soever it appears without,
yet within fills the body with adayly brood of nastie sores, and crawling
vermin? Such are most men's estates.

2. The higher your places are, the more notorious and conspicuous are your
vices. Gre^mens offenses are no more hid then the spots in the Moon, or a sore
in the face, which is a greater deformity, then a wound or sore in another
part of the body. Nazianz. orat. 1 de fug. says that nobilis improbitatis not
am effugere non potest, nisi multum antecellit, a great man shall never avoid
the brand of Impiety, except he much excel in sanctity. Oh how deformed then
are they in the sight of God, who improve their power to a vicious infecting of
themselves and those that converse with them!

3. Consider that of our Savior, Luc. 12.48. where God gives much, be looks
for much again: the move your talents, the greater your account. Honor,
birth, estate, are great blessings in themselves. Great men may be far
greater instruments of service for God and his Church then other, because they
have far more power and advantages by their places, to defend themselves, and
encourage others, in promoting the glory of Christ. As God made not flowers for
toads and spiders for to draw poison out of them, but for bees to suck honey
from them: so neither did he create honors and estates for his enemies, that
being in honors they should have no understanding, Psalm. 49.20.
but live like beasts that perish; but for his servants, that will improve them
for their Lords advantage.

There is a day coming (Gentlemen) when the Lord will not only call you to an
account for the principal of the talents of honor and greatness, but for the
interest also. 'Twill not be your returning them in the napkin, by saying, you
have not abused them, to the dishonor of God and prejudice of those under you;
but you must return them multiplied and improved to the uttermost, in honoring
the Lord with them: wherein if you fail, the more shame and contempt will fall
on you, by how much you are trusted now with a greater measure of power and
greatness above others. If all rational men have branded Domitian, who (being
a king) spent his time in catching flies; oh! how much more will the Lord pour
out confusion upon those who improve their places in spending whole years, and
consuming nights and days in completing their lust and methodizing their
sinful ways to an exactness: and profunditie of voluptuousness! Amos 9.7
these courses render his Soul an Ethiopian and Black-more, whose body is
clothed in Joseph's parti-colcured coat, or the rich arras of Egypt.

4. Consider the only way to improve your greatness for you higher honor is to
contemn it, yea loose it, and deny it for the Lord and his service. Thus Moses
improved the honor, title and dignity to be styled Pharaoh's ^on, even by
refusing it: it was therefore that he was raised to the title and dignity to
be called Pharaohs God, Gen, 7.1. Thus the 24. Elders Apocal. 4.10. improve
their honors by falling down before him that sits on the Throne, and casting
their Crowns at his feet: thus our Lord Jesus improved his honor in obedience
to his Fathers pleasure, namely, when he was in he form of God, and knew it was
to robbery to be equal with God, yet made himself of no reputation, and
humbled himself to the death of the Cross; and therefore God highly exalted
him, and gave him a name above every name, Phil. 2.8, 9. and if you shall be
persuaded to do so with your honors for Christ as he did with his honor for
you, namely to despise it for is cause and the cause of religion, and humble
your selves, and take upon you the form and work of his servants, he will
highly exalt you, and not only write upon you the name of the city of God, but
the name of God himself; yea, he will write upon you his new name, and grant
you to sit with him in his Throne, Apoc. 3.12, 21. as he overcame, and sat
with his Father in his Throne. Which the Lord in his due time bring us all
unto, by making the meanest as well as the greatest of us, through faith,
partakers of the merit and worthiness of our Lord Jesus, and so of higher
estimation with God then all the world besides.

FINIS.

