W R

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
31. Aug. 1695. By the Lords Justices, A PROCLAMATION For a Public
THANKSGIVING.
Tho. Cantuar. J. Summers C. S. Pembroke C. P. S. Shrewsbury.


WHereas We having a deep and serious Consideration of the War in which His
Majesty, together with most of the Princes and States of Europe, was and still
is Engaged against the French King, did by Proclamation, bearing Date the Three
and twentieth Day of May last, Appoint a General Fast to be kept throughout
this Kingdom, for Imploring the Blessing and Protection of Almighty God in the
Preservation of His Majesty's Sacred Person, and Prosperity of His Arms both at
Land and Sea, which has been observed accordingly: And forasmuch as it has
pleased Almighty God (of his infinite Goodness) in Answer to the Prayers humbly
and devoutly Offered up to him, to Grant to the Forces of His Majesty, and His
Allies, so great Success in Taking the Town and Castle of Namur, and to Protect
His Majesty's Sacred Person from the many Dangers to which He was so frequently
Exposed during that Siege. We therefore Adoring the Divine Goodness, and duly
Considering that such Great and Public Blessings, do call for Public and
Solemn Acknowledgments, Have thought fit, and by the Advice of His Majesty's
most Honorable Privy Council, do hereby Appoint and Command, That a General
Thanksgiving to Almighty God for these his Mercies be Observed throughout the
Cities of London and Westminster, and elsewhere within the Weekly Bills of
Mortality, on Sunday the Eighth day of September next, and in all other Places
throughout this Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick upon
Tweed, on Sunday the Two and twentieth day of September next. And for the
better and more orderly Solemnizing the same, We have given Directions to the
Right Reverend the Bishops of this Kingdom, to Compose a Form of Prayer
suitable to this Occasion, to be Used in all Churches and Chapels, and other
Places of Public Worship, and to take Care for the timely Dispersing of the
same throughout their respective Diocesses. And We do strictly Charge and
Command, That the said Public Days of Thanksgiving be Religiously Observed by
all His Majesty's Loving Subjects, as they tender the Favor of Almighty God,
and upon Pain of Suffering such Punishment as His Majesty can justly inflict
upon all such who shall Contemn or Neglect the same.

Given at the Council Chamger at Whitehall, the Nine and twentieth Day of
August, 1695. In the Seventh Year of His Majesty's Reign.
LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb,
deceased; Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1695.


